 DOI: 10.1039/C6NR00959J
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 10160-10165


Wangen
Zhao
,

Daocheng
Pan
* and 

Shengzhong (Frank)
Liu
*

Key Laboratory for Applied Surface and Colloid Chemistry, National Ministry of Education; Shaanxi Engineering Lab for Advanced Energy Technology; School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an 710062, China

State Key Laboratory of Rare Earth Resource Utilization, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 5625 Renmin Street, Changchun, Jilin 130022, China

Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian, 116023, China

Received
2nd February 2016
, Accepted 14th April 2016
First published on 14th April 2016
Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTSSe) semiconductors have been a focus of extensive research effort owing to low-toxicity, high abundance and low material cost. Yet, the CZTSSe thin film solar cell has a low open-circuit voltage value that presents challenges. Herein, using GeSe2 as a new Ge source material, we have achieved a wider band gap CZTSSe-based semiconductor absorber layer with its band-gap controlled by adjusting the ratio of SnS2:GeSe2 used. In addition, the Cu2Zn(Sn,Ge)(S,Se)4 thin films were prepared with optimal Ge doping (30%) and solar cells were fabricated to attain a respectable power conversion efficiency of 4.8% under 1.5 AM with an active area of 0.19 cm2 without an anti-reflection layer.

Kesterite-type CZTSSe semiconductor materials, due to their superior characteristics including optimal bandgaps of 1.0–1.5 eV, a large absorption coefficient over 104 cm−1, non-toxicity, and all the elements being abundant in the Earth’s crust, have been recognized as a promising candidate material for low-cost high-efficiency solar cells. There have been extensive research efforts devoted to studying this material, particularly for photovoltaic applications. Significant progress has been made, with the solar cell efficiency being steadily increased. However, there are a couple of bottlenecks, such as the low open-circuit voltage value and a low tolerance in compositions based on a CZTSSe absorber layer, that have prevented the cell efficiency from surpassing that of its close cousins – the CIGSSe thin film solar cells.

It is known that the band gap of the CZTSSe absorber layer can be fine-tuned by substitution of the metallic or chalcogen sites by adjusting the Ge/Sn or the S/Se ratio. To attain a larger band-gap, a higher atomic ratio of S/(S + Se) is needed. The main challenge is that vacancies of the S sites (defects) can be easily developed owing to its rather light atomic weight. Therefore, partial replacement of the metal atoms maybe a better way to widen the bandgap. In fact, there is a recent report using variations of Zn/Cd substitution in a Cu2ZnSnS4 thin film solar cell to achieve an efficiency over 9%, demonstrating the feasibility. Unfortunately, Cd is recognized as an extremely toxic element, making its use restricted for commercial applications. Hence, enlargement of the bandgap by utilizing other metal atoms is required, and adjusting the Sn/Ge ratio turns out to be a more advantageous route.
In our previous research, a solution-based method with a facile and low-toxicity sol–gel process was utilized to prepare CZTSSe thin films. However, the efficiency of the CZTSSe thin film solar cell with a rather “perfect” grain morphology (large and densely packed grain) was surprisingly low, especially for the open circuit voltage value. Therefore, success in achieving controlled Ge doping may help to resolve the issue.
In the process of preparing CZTS precursor solutions, SnS2 and SnSe2 are used to prepare the precursor solution. When they are dissolved in a S(Se)/hydrazine solution, a metal chalcogenide complex Sn2Sx(Se)6−x2− is formed as the MCC ligand. As the Ge element is located in the same group as Sn in the periodic table, it is expected to have similar properties in reaction with Sx2− or Sex2− (polysulfide ions). In fact, by dissolving GeSe2 in a S(Se)/hydrazine solution, (N2H5)4–Ge2SxSe(6−x) is indeed formed and its well-defined structure has been determined. The introduction of Ge can effectively adjust the band gaps, improving the electrical properties of the absorber layer and the device performance. Herein, this solution method was further developed, in which GeSe2 was employed as the source of Ge, to adjust the band gaps of CZTGSSe thin films and acquire a semiconductor absorber layer with wide band gaps. Finally, the photovoltaic properties of fabricated CZTGSSe thin film solar cells were investigated.

As reported previously, SnS2 was used as the Sn source to replace the most commonly used SnCl2·2H2O. The CZTSSe thin film was prepared using a solution process. GeSe2 was employed for the below advantages. Up to now, GeCl4/GeI4 has been commonly used as a Ge source. However as it introduces other impurity elements and GeCl4/GeI4 is also sensitive to water, it is desirable to find an alternative source. Herein, GeSe2 is introduced for the first time as a new Ge source. Its apparent benefits include solving of the unicity and instability of Ge salts. Secondly, GeSe2 can be used to substitute SnS2 in part or completely, realizing a bandgap-graded CZTGSSe absorber layer for thin film solar cells. Thirdly, the introduction of the Ge element expands the bandgap of the CZTSSe-based semiconductor material and enhances the open circuit voltage of the assembled photovoltaic device.

The preparation process for the precursor solution is illustrated in Fig. 1, in which the bright black precursor solution obtained at the end is ready to be used for depositing CZTGS nano-crystalline thin films. The as-prepared films were produced in a glove box, filled with nitrogen with the water and oxygen concentration controlled to below 5 ppm, on a Mo-coated soda-lime glass (SLG) substrate using spin-coating, followed by a sintering process at 320 °C (determined using TGA analysis, as seen in ESI Fig. 1) on a heat plate for 1 min to burn off organic ligands and the solvent, to generate the CZTGS nano-crystalline film. The spin-coating/sintering process was repeated seven more times to increase the thin film thickness to ∼1.2 μm as is desired for solar cells.
To induce grain growth and decrease grain boundary defects, a selenization process was developed by loading the to-be-annealed films into a partially closed cylindrical graphite box (with a hole in the lid) placed in a rapid thermal annealing furnace. After several pump/purge cycles to eliminate the air, the furnace was heated rapidly at ∼8 °C s−1 to the target temperature with an active nitrogen flow and pressure of ∼1 atm. As a CZTGS selenizition process has been proven to be a challenge, it may be a major obstacle for possible future manufacture processing.
A FE-scanning electron microscope was employed to study the surface morphology of the thin films. Fig. 2 shows top-view images of CZTGSSe thin films with a different Ge content (from 20% to 80%). It can be seen that under the same selenization conditions, when the content of Ge is within 20%–40%, the CZTGSSe grains are shown to be well crystallized. When the GeSe2 content exceeds 60%, certain cracks and holes developed. When it is further increased to 80%, the CZTGSSe thin film becomes discontinuous. This phenomenon was also reported by Ito's group. They attributed it to a mismatch of the thermo-expansion coefficient between the absorbing layer with a high incorporation of Ge and the Mo substrate. In addition, cross-sectional FE-SEM images are exhibited in ESI Fig. 2. It can be seen that all the absorbing layer thin films (with a different Ge content) displayed a bilayer structure. With a Ge content of 20% and 40%, the upper large-grained layer reveals densely packed grains and good crystallinity, while the CZTGSSe thin films with a Ge percentage of 60% and 80% showed poor continuity, which is consistent with the previous top-view images.
Not only the grain morphology but also the phase purity of a thin film is vital to the solar cell device performance. X-ray diffraction (XRD) is commonly used to verify the phase purity.Fig. 3(a) shows the XRD patterns of the CZTGSSe thin films with different Ge concentrations. It is clear that the CZTGSSe thin films are of a kesterite phase with no obvious binary or ternary phases. In addition, with increase of the Ge content from 40% to 80%, the crystallinity of the CZTGSSe thin film is weakened, as demonstrated by the reduced (200) diffraction peak, indicating that Ge doping made the film less crystallized. This may also stem from the mismatch of the thermo-expansion coefficient between the absorbing layer and substrate.
Raman spectroscopy is a powerful tool for studying molecular symmetry and chemical bonding properties. Fig. 3(b) exhibits the Raman spectra of the CZTGSSe thin films with different Ge concentrations. It was found that the peak positions shifted to higher wave numbers with the increasing Ge content. Raman shifts are caused by the vibration of chemical bonds, and different chemical bonds have different force constants, which produces characteristic signals. It is presumed that the blue shift in the Raman peaks was caused by the differences in the force constant between Ge–S(Se) and Sn–S(Se), indicating that successively more Ge replaced the Sn in the crystal lattice. It is known that the Raman peaks of pure CZGSe lie at 180, 206 and 224 cm−1, very close to the characteristic Raman peak positions of pure CZTSe, which are located at 172, 195 and 234 cm−1. In the present work, an as-prepared thin film was treated using the selenization process at a high temperature of 530 °C, leading to a large proportion of S being replaced by Se. As only a small fraction of S remained in the film, only the first two strong Raman peaks were clearly identified for the present CZTGSSe thin film at 173–176 and 196–201 cm−1, while the third peak was not as obvious. Moreover, the percentage of Ge was analyzed for the CZTGSSe films with a different Ge content as reported in ESI Fig. 3. It appears that the Ge/(Ge + Sn) ratios in the selenized CZTGSSe thin films remained relatively consistent, no matter how much Ge was used in the feedstock. The thin films also exhibited a poor-Cu content (Cu/(Zn + Sn + Ge) = 0.8–0.9) and rich-Zn content (Zn/(Sn + Ge) = 1.05–1.27) as seen in Table 1 in the ESI. Based on the above discussion, it is clear that GeSe2 is a good substitute for SnS2 in the fabrication of CZTGSSe thin films. For solar cells, 30%-Ge-substituted CZTGSSe thin films were investigated. Fig. 4 (left) shows a cross-sectional image of the as-prepared CZTGS thin film. Small CZTGS grains (<100 nm) and the thickness profile are clearly visible with an average thickness value of ∼1.2 μm. As evaporation and decomposition of the solvent and organic ligands are inevitable, the as-prepared films always show some voids and leaks. The high temperature selenization treatment was proven to be effective in promoting crystal growth and eliminating voids and leaks. Fig. 4 (right) shows the temperature profile used for the heat treatment. The temperature was increased quickly to 530 °C within about a minute, accounting for a rate of ∼8.5 °C s−1. The temperature was then retained for 9 min to allow selenium to diffuse into the lattice and cause the nanocrystals to grow larger. The inset of Fig. 4 (right) displays a photograph image taken from a piece of 2 × 2 cm2 selenized CZTGSSe thin film. Its color was uniform and has no apparent chromatic aberration from bare eyes.
XRD was used to make certain that the film is free from impurity phases. Compared with the as-prepared CZTGS film, the XRD peaks of the selenized CZTGSSe thin film are more visible after the heat treatment (as seen in Fig. 5(a)). All the peaks in the selenized thin films are assigned to the tetragonal kesterite CZTGSSe. As XRD has limitations in identifying the presence of partial secondary and ternary phases e.g. Cu2S(Se), ZnS(Se) and Cu2SnS(Se)3 due to their similar lattice structure, complementary Raman spectroscopy was used to verify the film quality. It has been established that the Raman mode appearing at around 340 cm−1 is due to a CZT(1−x)GxS alloy for x = [Ge]/([Sn] + [Ge]) = 0–0.30. Furthermore, Agrawal's group reported that the Raman spectrum of 30% Ge doped CZTGSSe was very similar to that of the pure CZTSSe without obvious peak shifts.Fig. 5(b) provides the Raman spectra of the as-prepared CZTGS film with a Raman peak at 340 cm−1 and the selenized CZTGSSe (with 30% Ge) thin film, which are consistent with the values reported by Agrawal's group. The chemical composition of the absorber layer also plays a vital role in the device performance. It is widely known that a Cu-poor and Zn-rich film (Cu/(Zn + Sn) ≈ 0.8 and Zn/Sn ≈ 1.2) has been used for a device with record-high efficiency, as this forms shallow defects. Therefore, in the present study, the raw material composition was designed so as to achieve the above atomic ratios. Meanwhile, precautions were taken to avoid large variations caused by the high volatility of S, Se, and Sn during the heat treatment. Fig. 5(c) presents an energy dispersive X-ray spectrum and chemical composition. It was found that the selenized CZTGSSe thin film has Cu/(Zn + Sn + Ge) = 0.88 and Zn/(Sn + Ge) = 1.07, which is well within the range of the desired ratios. Fig. 5(d) presents the SEM-EDS line scan of the CZTGSSe thin film on a glass substrate. It exhibits that the Sn content is relatively high at the thin film surface, likely caused by the diffusion of Sn toward the interface.
For estimating the band gap value of the CZTGSSe thin film with 30% Ge doped, the optical reflection spectrum is shown in Fig. 6(a). The band gap was calculated to be 1.26 eV, an appropriate value for high efficiency solar cells. Fig. 7(a) and (b) display the top-view image of the selenized CZTGSSe thin film with 30% Ge content and the cross-section image of the completed CZTGSSe solar cell device, respectively. This shows that the CZTGSSe grains are ∼500–600 nm in size with some smaller nanocrystals inlaid in the grain boundary. Well-defined grains are clearly seen with apparent corner edges. Meanwhile, a double-layer view was resolved for the finished CZTGSSe device, with a smaller-particle-layer accounting for almost half of the entire absorber layer. The resultant kesterite CZTGSSe layers were used to fabricate solar cell devices by depositing a 50 nm thick n-type CdS layer using a chemical bath, followed by sputtering to form a 70 nm thick i-ZnO and 300 nm thick ITO transparent conductive electrode (TCE) stack. Thermal evaporation was used to deposit a layer of aluminum through a shadow mask to complete the cell. Fig. 8 (left) illustrates a schematic structural diagram of the final device (Mo/CZTGSSe/CdS/ZnO/ITO/Al) with a conventional structure. The J–V measurements for the CZTGSSe thin film solar cell are shown in Fig. 8 (right). The fabricated CZTGSSe solar cell shows an active area efficiency of 4.8% with an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.39 V, which is slightly increased compared to a CZTSSe based thin film solar cell, and a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 29.3 mA cm−2 and fill factor (FF) of 42%. The relatively low fill factor (FF) and the short circuit current density (Jsc) are caused by a rather high shunt conductance, as seen in ESI Fig. 4. The shunt conductance is far higher than that of high efficiency (>8%) CZTSSe solar cells (<1 mS cm−2). Poor grain crystallinity has led to too many voids that are detrimental to the device performance. The absorber layer needs to be optimized to attain higher efficiency. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum of the CZTGSSe cell and the calculated current density curve are shown in Fig. 9. The calculated Jsc of the CZTGSSe and CZTSSe thin film solar cells is 28.1 and 27.6 mA cm−2, respectively, slightly lower than that obtained from the J–V curve.

Copper(II) acetate monohydrate (Cu(Ac)2·H2O, 99%), zinc acetate (Zn(Ac)2, 99.99%), tin(IV) chloride (SnCl4, 99%), an ammonium sulfide solution ((NH4)2S, 40–48 wt%), 1-butylamine (CH3(CH2)3NH2, 99%), thioglycollic acid (HSCH2COOH, 98%), cadmium sulfate (CdSO4, ACS), sodium diethyldithiocarbamate trihydrate (NaS2N(CH3)2·3H2O ACS), selenium pellets (Se, 99.9%), thiourea ((NH2)2CS, ACS), an ammonia solution (NH3·H2O, 25%), and ethanol absolute (AR) were purchased from Aladdin. Germanium diselenide (GeSe2, 99.99%) was purchased from J&K chemical. All chemicals and solvents were used as received without any further purification.


Firstly, for five separate vials, 2.0 mmol (64 mg) of S powder was loaded into each glass vial with 2.0 ml (∼20 mmol) of 1-butylamine under magnetic stirring at room temperature. A dark red solution was formed a few seconds later. Then, 0.8 mmol, 0.7 mmol, 0.6 mmol, 0.4 mmol and 0.2 mmol of SnS2 and correspondingly 0.2 mmol, 0.3 mmol, 0.4 mmol, 0.6 mmol and 0.8 mmol of GeSe2 were respectively added into the butylamine/S solution. Continuous stirring guaranteed complexation between the Sx2− ions and metal sources (Sn and Ge). In addition, 0.6 mL of thioglycolic acid (TGA) was added to protect the metal ions from precipitation, providing a light yellow solution. Finally, 1.2 mmol of zinc acetate, 1.65 mmol of copper acetate monohydrate, and 5.0 mL of ethanol were mixed into the above vials to provide metal sources, forming a homogeneous and bright black CZTGS precursor solution after stirring for ∼30 min. The CZTGS precursor solution was centrifuged at 12000 rpm for 5 min and the supernatant was placed into a clear bottle for preparation. All of the procedures were conducted under air. (The synthetic process for SnS2 was detailed in a previous paper).


CZTGS precursor thin films were spin-coated on Mo-based soda-lime glass (SLG) with a thickness of 1.1 mm at a speed of 2500 rpm for 15 s, then subjected to a sintering process at a temperature of 320 °C on a hot ceramic plate for 1 min to break down the organic ligands and the solvent. The as-prepared CZTGS nanocrystal thin films with a thickness of ∼1.2 μm were built up by repeating seven times the spin-coating/sintering cycle. Subsequently, the as-prepared CZTGS thin films were annealed in a tube furnace under a Se-containing nitrogen flow at atmospheric pressure. Two of the as-prepared thin films were selenized in a graphite box with a volume of ∼8 cm3 with approximately 0.4 g of Se pellets at a temperature of 530 °C for 9 min to acquire optimal thin films. The whole solar cell devices were completed using a series of depositions of buffer layers of a CdS thin film (∼60 nm) and transparent conducting layers (i-ZnO and ITO with a thickness of 70 nm and 300 nm, respectively). Following this, a patterned Al/Ag top contact electrode was deposited with thermal evaporation through a shadow mask. No anti-reflection layer was applied. The nine cells on one substrate were separated by mechanical scribing using a pointed and hard needle. The active area of the device is 0.19 cm2, excluding the area of the Al/Ag grid electrode (∼5%).


The thickness of the thin films was investigated using a step profiler (AMBIOS, XP-100). The XRD patterns were recorded using a Bruker D8 X-ray diffractometer with a Cu Kα radiation (40 KV, 40 mA) source (λ = 0.15405 nm). The data were collected at room temperature from 10 to 80 degrees of 2θ by continuous scanning with an equivalent step size of 0.02 degrees. The superficial and cross-sectional SEM images were obtained using a Hitachi S-4800 with a high voltage of 20 KV and a current of 15 μA, and the chemical compositions were analysed using an energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analyzer (Bruker AXS XFlash detector 4010) attached to a Hitachi S-4800. Raman spectra of the samples were recorded with a Renishaw RM1000. A 532 nm solid-state laser was chosen as the excitation light source. J–V curves were measured with a Keithley 2400 source meter and a solar simulator (Abet Sun 2000; AAB class) with the light intensity calibrated to 100 mW cm−2 with a Newport optical power meter. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements were conducted using a Zolix SCS100 QE system equipped with a 150 W xenon light source and a lock-in amplifier.


In conclusion, we have developed a new Ge source, GeSe2, for fabricating CZTGSSe thin films. The Ge was added into the CZTSSe thin films successfully, achieving adjustment of the Ge content of the CZTGSSe thin films. The morphology and crystallinity were also investigated with the increasing percentage of Ge content. In addition, the successful introduction of Ge enhances the band gaps of CZTSSe-based semiconductor materials, which is favorable for improving the open circuit potential of solar cell devices.


This study was financially supported by the National University Research Fund (GK261001009), the Changjiang Scholar, Innovative Research Team (IRT_14R33), the Overseas Talent Recruitment Project (B14041) and the Chinese National 1000-talent-plan program.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The XRD patterns, chemical component analysis, top-view and cross-sectional images, and XPS of CZTGSSe thin films with different Ge content are exhibited. See DOI: 10.1039/c6nr00959j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016