 DOI: 10.1039/C7CP07326G
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 5117-5127


Poomani
Ram Kumar
,

Ebrahim M.
Mothi
*,

Mohan
Ramesh
 and 

Arunkumar
Kathiravan
*

Centre for Scientific and Applied Research, PSN College of Engineering and Technology, Melathediyoor, Tirunelveli – 627 152, India. E-mail: mothichem@gmail.com

Functional Materials Division, CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute, Karaikudi 630 003, Tamil Nadu, India

National Centre for Ultrafast Processes, University of Madras, Taramani Campus, Chennai – 600 113, Tamil Nadu, India. E-mail: akathir23@gmail.com

Received
30th October 2017
, Accepted 18th January 2018
First published on 18th January 2018
In this work, Zn-porphyrin with a hydantoin anchor (ZnPHy) was designed and synthesized for dye-sensitized solar cell (DSC) applications. The synthesized ZnPHy was well characterized using IR, NMR and mass spectral techniques, and satisfactory results were obtained. Cyclic voltammetry, UV-visible absorption, steady-state fluorescence, time-resolved fluorescence and transient absorption spectroscopic techniques were employed to elucidate the electrochemical and photophysical properties of ZnPHy. The obtained properties revealed that the synthesized ZnPHy can be used as a photosensitizer for DSC applications. The nature of ZnPHy binding onto the TiO2 surface was investigated using ATR-FTIR and UV-Vis absorption measurements. The amount of adsorbed ZnPHy on TiO2 surface was reasonably fit using the Langmuir adsorption isotherm, with a binding constant value of 1.03 × 105 M−1. Time-resolved measurements were used to elucidate the rate of electron injection and the regeneration and recombination kinetics for ZnPHy/TiO2 film. The ZnPHy showed a high electron injection rate with a ϕinj of 99%. Intriguingly, the rate of electron recombination is much slower than the rates reported for carboxyl-based Zn-porphyrins. Such a high electron injection and slow electron recombination rate are beneficial to produce long-lived electrical current in a photovoltaic device. Thus, the ZnPHy-sensitized TiO2 electrode showed the best photovoltaic performance, with the short-circuit photocurrent density (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (ff) of 3.49 mA cm−2, 0.6 V and 0.52, respectively, yielding an overall conversion efficiency (η) of 1.01%. For comparison, the ZnCOOH-sensitized electrode was also fabricated under the same conditions and yielded the η value of 0.84%. Hence, the hydantoin moiety could be a potential alternative anchoring group for DSC applications.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) are predominantly selected as an alternative choice to conventional silicon solar cells owing to their low-cost production and high power conversion efficiency (PCE). The dynamic electron cycle of a DSC involves the promotion of electrons from the ground state of the dye to the excited state upon photoexcitation, followed by injection of the excited electrons to the conduction band (CB) of the semiconductor. The electron is finally returned to the oxidized dye from the counter electrode by a redox shuttle to complete the circuit. As a key component of DSCs, dyes play a vital role in light harvesting, electron injection, regeneration and recombination, largely influencing the final power output. Three classes of dyes have proven to be effective in DSCs: ruthenium complexes, porphyrins and metal-free organic dyes, showing certified PCE values of 12%, 13% and 14%, respectively.

Typical DSCs consist of three major components (semiconductor, sensitizer and redox mediator), some of which can be photophysically or electrochemically tuned to optimize the device performance. It is necessary to understand that altering any single component of the DSC architecture will entail optimization of all other peripheral components to compensate. Among the components, the dye sensitizers play a pivotal role in light harvesting and PCE; extensive efforts have, therefore, been focused on developing new and superior dye sensitizers. Porphyrins are among the most widely studied sensitizers due to their intense absorption in Soret and Q bands that allow efficient harvesting of solar energy in a broad spectral region. However, immobilization of the porphyrin molecules onto the surface of semiconductor nanoparticles is crucial for initiating the electrical current via injection of electrons from the dye into the conduction band of the semiconductor. This immobilization can usually be achieved by the addition of an anchoring group to the dye. The most frequently used anchors in DSCs are carboxylic acid and cyanoacrylic acid groups. However, carboxylic acid is prone to dissociating from the TiO2 surface during cell operation. To improve the long-term durability of DSCs, other robust anchoring groups have been preferred.
In this juncture, Imahori et al. have reported hydroxamic acid as an anchoring group for the first time in cobalt-based DSCs. The porphyrin dye with the hydroxamic acid anchoring group exhibited a power conversion efficiency (η) of 6.4%, which is close to that of YD2-o-C8, a representative porphyrin dye with a conventional carboxylic acid anchoring group. Guo et al. reported a hydantoin acceptor as a high-performance anchoring group for DSCs. The hydantoin-based sensitizer achieved a photovoltaic efficiency of 7.66%, compared to 4.90% for the sensitizer containing the conventional cyanoacrylic acid as anchoring group. Moreover, the time-dependent adsorption and desorption data indicated that the hydantoin-based anchor had much stronger adsorption ability and better long-term stability. These observations stimulated us to develop a hydantoin anchor-based porphyrin sensitizer.
In this work, we describe the synthesis and the photophysical, electrochemical and electron injection/recombination dynamics of hydantoin anchor-based porphyrin. To determine the potential energy levels, cyclic voltammetry, differential pulse voltammetry, UV-vis and fluorescence spectroscopy were used. The most imperative factors that influence the efficiency of solar cells are the electron injection and electron recombination processes. The former process initiates the electrical circuit in the solar cell, while the later one decreases the efficiency of electron collection. To probe both processes, time-resolved techniques were employed.

Hydantoin, fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)-coated glass with sheet resistance of 12 Ω sq−1, TiO2 (P25), and chloroplatinic acid hexahydrate were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich India Pvt. Ltd, India. N719 dye was purchased from Solaronix SA, Switzerland. 5-(4-Carboxyphenyl)-10,15,20-triphenylporphyrinato–zinc(II) [ZnCOOH] was purchased from TriPorTech GmbH, Germany. The solvents used for photophysical studies were HPLC grade. Poly(ethylene glycol) (MW = 200) and poly(ethylene oxide) (MW = 1 × 105) were acquired from Alfa Aesar India Pvt. Ltd, India. Commercially available chemicals, namely, pyrrole (Avra), propionic acid (Loba), benzaldehyde, nitrobenzene (Rankem), and zinc acetate dihydrate (CDH), were used as received unless otherwise mentioned. Silica gel (100–200 mesh) for column chromatography was procured from Molychem. Pyrrole and reagent-grade solvents were distilled prior to use. Dichloromethane for electrochemical experiments was distilled over P2O5 and kept over activated 3 Å molecular sieves for more than 24 h before use.


Infrared (IR) spectra were recorded on a BRUKER VERTEX 70 attenuated total reflection-Fourier transform infrared (ATR-FTIR) spectrometer. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy was performed on a BRUKER spectrometer operating at 400 MHz for 1H and 100 MHz for 13C, at ambient probe temperature with spectra calibrated to either the internal tetramethylsilane (TMS) standard or to a residual protio solvent. Electron ionization-mass spectra (EI-MS) analyses were acquired using a JEOL GC Mate-II mass spectrometer photomultiplier tube (PMT) detector. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) and differential pulse voltammetry (DPV) were recorded using a Bio Logic SP-50 electrochemical analyzer. A three-electrode single-compartment cell system comprising a glassy carbon working electrode, a platinum wire counter electrode, and Ag/AgCl reference electrode was employed for the experiments. The glassy carbon electrode was polished with Al2O3 paste, cleaned thoroughly in an ultrasonic water bath, and washed with ethanol before each measurement. CV measurements were carried out using ZnPHy (1 mM) in CH2Cl2 containing 0.1 M tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate (TBAPF6) with a scan rate of 0.10 V s−1 at 298 K. DPV was measured with a pulse width of 100, pulse height of 10, and scan rate of 2 V s−1. For both measurements, the samples were degassed by bubbling research-grade nitrogen for 15 min for each measurement.

UV-Vis absorption spectra of samples were recorded using a CARY 100 Bio UV-Visible spectrophotometer. The fluorescence spectral measurements were carried out using Fluoromax-4P spectrofluorometer (Horiba Jobin Yvon). For fluorescence studies, a very dilute solution was used to avoid spectral distortions due to the inner-filter effect and emission reabsorption. Time-resolved picosecond fluorescence decays were obtained by the time-correlated single-photon counting (TCSPC) technique with a microchannel plate photomultiplier tube (Hamamatsu, R3809U) as detector and femtosecond laser as an excitation source. The second harmonics (400 nm) output from the mode-locked femtosecond laser (Tsunami, Spectra Physics) was used as the excitation source. The instrument response function for the TCSPC system is ∼50 ps. The data analysis was carried out by the software provided by IBH (DAS-6), which is based on deconvolution technique using nonlinear least-squares methods. Femtosecond fluorescence decay was collected using the fluorescence up-conversion femtosecond setup (FOG 100, CDP, Russia). The sample was excited using the second harmonic (400 nm) of a mode-locked Ti-sapphire laser (Tsunami, Spectra Physics). The instrument response function of the apparatus is 300 fs. The femtosecond fluorescence decays were fitted using a Gaussian shape for the excitation pulse. Transient absorption experiments were carried out using nanosecond laser flash photolysis (Applied Photophysics, UK). The third harmonic (355 nm) of a Q-switched Nd:YAG laser (Quanta-Ray, LAB 150, Spectra Physics, USA) with 8 ns pulse width and 150 mJ pulse energy was used to excite the samples. The transients were probed using a 150 W pulsed xenon lamp, a Czerny–Turner monochromator, and Hamamatsu R-928 photomultiplier tube as detector. The transient signals were captured with an Agilent Infiniium digital storage oscilloscope, and the data were transferred to the computer for further analysis. For laser flash photolysis studies, samples were purged with argon gas for about 45 min prior to the laser irradiation.
Fluorescence quantum yield (ϕF) of the ZnPHy was calculated by using the following eqn (1):
ϕF = (AR/AS)(IS/IR)(ηS/ηR)2ϕR
(1)
where the subscripts S and R refer to the samples and the reference, respectively.
A is the absorbance at the excitation wavelength, I is the integrated emission area, and η is the solvent refractive index. ZnTPP (ϕ = 0.03) in benzene was used as a standard.


The FTO glass substrates were cleaned in detergent solution, distilled water, acetone and isopropyl alcohol under ultrasonic bath for 20 min each, then subjected to UV treatment. The blocking layer of TiO2 was deposited by spin coating of TiO2 complex (TiO2 complex was prepared by mixing 20 μL of titanium isopropoxide in 1:1 ratio ethanol and DI water (20 mL), to which 200 μL of H2O2 was added slowly) on the FTO glass at 4000 rpm and sintering at 500 °C for 30 minutes. Then, TiO2 paste of ∼8 μm was coated by doctor blade technique and sintered at 500 °C for 30 minutes. Then, TiCl4 treatment was carried out, followed by calcination at 500 °C for an hour. The TiO2-coated glass was immersed in 0.3 mM of ZnPHy overnight, and the unadsorbed dye molecules were washed with THF, followed by drying under N2 flow. PEO-PEG/alkali iodide gel electrolyte (0.5 M DMPII, 0.05 M iodine, and 0.5 M TBP in acetonitrile) droplet was dropped on the dye-coated TiO2 film and sandwiched with platinum-coated counter electrode (platinum-coated counter electrode glass was prepared as follows: 0.05 M solution of chloroplatinic acid in isopropyl alcohol was spin coated on cleaned FTO glass and heated at 420 °C for 30 minutes). In order to avoid shorting, the two electrodes were separated by hot melt polymer film (thickness 25 mm) (Meltonix-1170-25) with an active area of 0.19 cm2. Current–voltage measurements were performed under solar simulator illumination of 100 mW cm−2 with the optical filter of AM 1.5 G (Sciencetech (SS 1.6 K, AAA)).


4-(Methylidene-2,4-imidazolidinedione)benzaldehyde was synthesised according to the literature procedure.


4-(Methylidene-2,4-imidazolidinedione)benzaldehyde (1 g, 4.6 mmol) was added to 100 mL propionic acid and heated to 140 °C for 30 min, followed by the addition of benzaldehyde (1.4 mL, 13.7 mmol), freshly distilled pyrrole (1.28 mL, 18.4 mmol), and 3 mL nitrobenzene. The reaction mixture was stirred at 140 °C for another 30 min. After cooling, it was filtered and washed with water/methanol mixture (50:50 v/v). The obtained dry residue was purified by column chromatography (silica, CH2Cl2/hexane, 1:1, v/v) to yield the desired compound as the second fraction, which was further recrystallized (CH2Cl2/hexane) to afford a purple solid, with yield: 20 mg (0.027 mmol, 0.6%), m.p. > 300 °C; Rf(CH2Cl2/n-hexane, 1:1 v/v, silica) 0.5; 1H NMR (500 MHz, CDCl3): δ = 9.30 (d, 2H, J = 4.6 Hz, βH), 9.04 (d, 2H, J = 4.0 Hz, βH), 8.90 (d, 4H, J = 4.7 Hz, βH), 8.84 (s, 1H, NH), 8.64 (s, 2H, NH and CH), 8.30 (d, 6H, J = 6.0 Hz, o-Ph), 8.26 (d, 2H, J = 8.1 Hz, o-Ph), 7.80 (m, 11H, p,m-Ph), −2.62 (s, 2H, inner-NH); MS (EI, 70 eV, 250 °C): m/z: 724.80 [M+˙] (calcd: 724.26).


Porphyrin PHy (20 mg, 0.027 mmol) was dissolved in 150 mL CH2Cl2; to this, zinc acetate (24 mg, 0.11 mmol) in 20 mL methanol was added. The resulting mixture was stirred at 50 °C for 2 h. After removal of solvents in a rotary evaporator, the obtained dry residue was purified by column chromatography (silica, CH2Cl2/hexane, 1:1, v/v) followed by recrystallization (CH2Cl2/hexane) to afford a purple solid, yield: 15 mg (0.019 mmol, 69%), m.p. > 300 °C; Rf(CH2Cl2/n-hexane, 1:1 v/v, silica) 0.4; 1H NMR (500 MHz, CDCl3): δ = 9.42 (d, 2H, J = 4.5 Hz, βH), 9.14 (d, 2H, J = 4.4Hz, βH), 8.99 (m, 4H, βH), 8.94 (s, 1H, NH), 8.63 (s, 2H, NH and CH), 8.33–8.22 (m, 8H, o-Ph), 7.82–7.74 (m, 11H, p,m-Ph); 13C NMR (176 MHz, CDCl3 + CD3OD): δ = 150.0, 143.2, 134.5, 132.5, 131.5, 127.1, 126.2, 120.6. MS (EI, 70 eV, 250 °C): m/z: 788.18 [M + 2H+˙] (calcd: 788.18).


The ZnPHy was synthesized according to the route shown in Scheme 1 through a mixed condensation approach by using 1 equiv. of 4-(methylidene-2,4-imidazolidinedione)benzaldehyde, 3 equiv. of benzaldehyde and 4 equiv. of pyrrole in boiling propionic acid containing nitrobenzene. The desired porphyrin was eluted as a slow-moving second fraction from silica column chromatography. The corresponding zinc porphyrin, ZnPHy, was obtained in 69% yield by the reaction of PHy with zinc acetate in DCM/methanol mixture. Both free base and zinc porphyrins were well characterized by infrared (IR), 1H NMR and mass spectral methods, and the spectral data agree well with the proposed structures (Fig. S1–S5, ESI). In the 1H NMR spectra, the resonance at around 8.63 ppm is characteristic of vinylic CH proton, and the corresponding m/z peaks in the mass spectra confirmed the linking of the hydantoin acceptor with the porphyrin. Further, the typical broad singlet resonance in the 1H NMR observed at −2.62 ppm assigned to inner NH protons of the free base porphyrin is absent in the corresponding spectrum of ZnPHy, confirming the insertion of zinc atom in the porphyrin core.


Probing the photophysical properties of ZnPHy in solution is very important for further investigations on the electron injection/recombination dynamics and photovoltaic performance of ZnPHy-sensitized TiO2 films. Hence, steady-state and time-resolved absorption and fluorescence spectroscopic techniques were employed to unveil the photophysical properties of ZnPHy in THF solvent (Table 1). UV-vis absorption and emission spectra of ZnPHy in THF solvent are shown in Fig. 1.

Parameters
ZnPHy

a Potential was measured vs. Ag/AgCl and converted to a normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) by the addition of +0.2 V in order to compare the potential of TiO2 and that of the redox shuttle referred to NHE.


λ
max (nm)
424, 558, 597

ε (M−1 cm−1)
3.89 × 105

λ
emi (nm)
603, 654

ϕ
S

0.07

τ
S (ns)
1.85

τ
T (μs)
23

E
(0,0) (eV)
2.09

E
(ox)
 (V)
0.72

E
(ox)* (V)
−1.37
ΔGinj (eV)
−0.87
ΔGreg (eV)
−0.32
ΔGrec (eV)
−1.22
The absorption spectrum exhibited features typical of the ZnTPP ring, with absorption peaks at 424 nm (the “Soret” band, corresponding to the S0 → S2 transition) and at 558 and 597 nm (the “Q bands”, corresponding to the higher vibrational mode Q(1,0) and the lowest energy vibrational mode Q(0,0) of the S0 → S1 transition). The fluorescence spectrum of ZnPHy was also typical of the ZnTPP chromophoric group, with two emission maxima observed from the Q(0,0) and Q(1,0) excited states at 603 nm and 654 nm, respectively. These results imply that the electronic structure of the porphyrin core is not perturbed by the hydantoin substituent at the meso-phenyl group. Typically, porphyrin molecules are very prone to forming aggregates in solution. Hence, in order to understand the aggregation behavior of ZnPHy in solution state, we have measured the absorption spectrum of ZnPHy at different concentrations (1 × 10−6 M to 1 × 10−4 M) in THF solvent by using UV-Vis spectrophotometer. At higher concentrations, the Soret absorption band is saturated, so we have analysed the aggregation behaviour at the Q-band region. Within the concentration range used, we could not see any peak shift or broadening of the spectra (Fig. S6, ESI). This clearly indicates that ZnPHy is not aggregated in THF solution. To calculate the extinction coefficient, we have used concentrations in the range of 1 × 10−6 M to 3 × 10−6 M. Concurrently, Beer–Lambert law was also obeyed for ZnPHy within this concentration range of 1 × 10−6 M to 3 × 10−6 M, and the molar extinction coefficient of ZnPHy was found to be 3.89 × 105 M−1 cm−1 at 424 nm.
For an efficient dye-sensitized device, electron injection processes from the excited dye to the conduction band of TiO2 are likely to take place in the time scale of 0.1–1 ps. Thus, the dye should hold the lifetime of the singlet excited state beyond >1 ns. Therefore, we have measured the fluorescence decay of ZnPHy using a time-resolved fluorescence technique, since this technique is more expedient for capturing the singlet lifetime of the dye.
The fluorescence decay of ZnPHy (Fig. 2) was fitted with a single exponential function [F(t) = Aexp(−t/τ], and the lifetime was found to be 1.85 ns. The relatively longer fluorescence lifetime (in ns) of ZnPHy may have influence on the electron injection efficiency and power conversion efficiency, as seen in carboxyl anchor-based Zn-porphyrin (ZnTCPP). Further, efficient electron injection is possible not only from the dye singlet state but also from the triplet excited states. Such triplet states are typically formed by intersystem crossing from the singlet excited state and are longer lived and less energetic than the corresponding singlet state. Generally, triplet state lifetimes range from nanoseconds to milliseconds (dependent on the solvent/electrolyte environment) for porphyrin molecules. Therefore, laser flash photolysis experiments were carried out to record the triplet-state lifetime of ZnPHy using the third harmonic output from the Nd-YAG laser. The sample was degassed for about 30 min prior to measurements. Transient absorption spectra of degassed ZnPHy in THF measured at several delay times, from 1 μs to 40 μs, after excitation at 355 nm are shown in Fig. 3a. The transient absorption spectra showed two pronounced bands at 420 nm and 470 nm, which were assigned to the ground-state bleaching and triplet-state absorption, respectively. The triplet of ZnPHy was further verified by measuring the transient absorption spectrum without Ar gas purging. It was observed that the triplet of ZnPHy is completely quenched. It is well known that the triplet state of organic molecules is generally quenched by oxygen. Based on this, we have confirmed that the peak at 470 nm is solely due to triplet state. The triplet-state lifetime of ZnPHy obtained from the kinetic trace at 470 nm was found to be 23 μs (Fig. 3b). The obtained lifetime is very slow, and such a slow electron injection from triplet state cannot occur, as singlet injection is very fast (10–100 ps). However, the electron injection from triplet state does occur in inorganic metal complexes, since intersystem crossing from the singlet to triplet state of such complexes are as fast as 1 × 1013 s−1.

To determine the electrochemical properties of ZnPHy, cyclic and differential pulse voltammetry were conducted in CH2Cl2 with tetrabutylammoniumhexafluorophosphate (TBAPF6) as the supporting electrolyte. As seen from Fig. 4, ZnPHy showed two consecutive redox waves corresponding to one-electron electrochemical oxidation and reduction. Both oxidation and reduction potentials are cathodically shifted compared to ZnTPP. Interestingly, the oxidation potentials showed higher cathodic shift (320 mV), while the reduction potentials exhibited lower cathodic shift (120–170 mV). These results are in line with previous studies, which revealed a large influence of substituent effect on the oxidation potentials. Further, the effect of hydantoin moiety is clearly observed in the frontier orbital energy levels. The estimated HOMO–LUMO gap for ZnTPP from the electrochemical data is 2.20 eV. In the case of ZnPHy, a reduction in the HOMO–LUMO gap (2.00 eV) is observed, which is possibly a result of conjugative interaction of the hydantoin group with the porphyrin π-system. On the other hand, the E1ox of ZnPHy (calculated versus NHE) is more positive than the redox potential of the (I/I3)− couple (0.4 V versus NHE), assuring efficient dye regeneration. The zero–zero transition energy (E0–0) of ZnPHy (2.09 eV) is estimated from the intersection of normalized UV-Vis absorption spectra and emission spectra. The excited oxidation potentials (Eox*) can be calculated by Eox* = E1ox − E0–0. The corresponding Eox* value of ZnPHy is −1.37 V, and this value is much more negative than the conduction band potential of TiO2 (−0.5 V versus NHE), ensuring an efficient electron injection process from the excited dye into the conduction band of TiO2.

Driving forces for electron injection (ΔGinj) from the dye excited state to the CB of TiO2, dye regeneration (ΔGreg) from the redox (I3/I)− shuttle (0.4 vs. NHE) and electron recombination (ΔGrec) from the CB of TiO2 to the dye radical cation (Eox) were determined from the following eqn (2)–(4), and values are shown in Table 1.
ΔGinj = Eox* − ECB
(2)
ΔGreg = E(I3/I−) − Eox
(3)
ΔGrec = ECB − Eox
(4)
The obtained ΔG values (Table 1) are negative, which indicates that all of the processes are thermodynamically feasible and, most importantly, electron injection and regeneration are the dominant processes rather than recombination for the ZnPHy/TiO2 system.

A primary process in the development of DSCs is the adsorption of dye on the TiO2 semiconductor, so it is very important to study the binding properties between ZnPHy and TiO2. In order to understand the binding as well as light-harvesting properties of ZnPHy on the TiO2 surface, ∼4 μm TiO2 films were prepared from a commercially available TiO2 paste (Solaronix SA, Ti-Nanoxide HT/SC series), and they were sensitized in 0.3 mM of the ZnPHy in THF at room temperature for 1 h. The normalized UV-vis absorption spectra of the ZnPHy deposited on transparent TiO2 film is shown in Fig. 5. The saturated Soret band absorption is not shown here. The Q band absorption of the adsorbed dyes on TiO2 appears a bit broader and shows modest shift with respect to the corresponding solution spectrum. The broadening of the absorption bands is attributed to the strong electronic coupling of ZnPHy on TiO2.

Generally, deprotonation and aggregation (H or J type) has been observed when dyes are anchored on TiO2 surface. The H-aggregates may result in blue shift of the absorption peak, while J-aggregates mainly lead to red shift of the absorption peak. However, ZnPHy exhibited a diminutive shift, which indicates less aggregation on the TiO2 surface, and this limited aggregation is beneficial for improving solar cell performance. Moreover, the loading of ZnPHy on TiO2 films depends on the concentration of the ZnPHy in the dye bath, as is evident from the UV-Vis spectra shown in Fig. S7a (ESI). The absorption of the ZnPHy-sensitized TiO2 films increased gradually with the dye bath concentration, and there were no significant spectral differences for different dye loads on TiO2, suggesting that between the adsorbed molecules, there is no significant interaction. Concurrently, at higher concentrations (2–5 × 10−4 M), the loading of ZnPHy became saturated (Fig. S7b, ESI).
The increase in absorbance of TiO2 films with increasing ZnPHy concentration (1 × 10−5 M to 1 × 10−4 M) due to equilibrium binding is well described by the Langmuir adsorption isotherm model. The equilibrium binding constant and surface coverage can be calculated from the following eqn (5),
[ZnPHy]eq/Γ = 1/KadΓ0 + [ZnPHy]eq/Γ0
(5)
where [ZnPHy]
eq is the equilibrium sensitizer concentration, Γ0 is the saturation coverage, and Γ is the equilibrium coverage at a defined molar concentration. The plot of [ZnPHy]eq/Γ versus [ZnPHy]eq is shown to be linear (Fig. S8, ESI). From this linear plot, the binding constant and surface coverage values of 1.03 × 105 M−1 and 8.48 × 10−12 mol cm−2, respectively, were determined. The obtained higher binding constant value indicated that ZnPHy is strongly adsorbed on the TiO2 surface. On the other hand, the typical surface coverage value of well-packed porphyrin molecules on TiO2 surface is about 10−8 to 10−12 mol cm−2. However, the obtained surface coverage value of ZnPHy indicates lower dye surface coverage on TiO2 surface. Under similar experimental conditions, ZnCOOH exhibits a relatively higher surface coverage value of 5.26 × 10−10 mol cm−2 than ZnPHy. Generally, higher surface coverage dyes may yield lower electron injection efficiency, and lower surface coverage dyes have higher electron injection efficiency, which is responsible for the higher JSC and therefore superior solar cell performance. Hence, based on the results, it is believed that the ZnPHy may show better solar cell performance than ZnCOOH.

Further, the FT-IR technique was employed to investigate the adsorption mechanism of ZnPHy/TiO2 film. Fig. S9 (ESI) shows the FT-IR spectra of ZnPHy and ZnPHy/TiO2. For ZnPHy powder, the peak around 3250–3050 cm−1 could be assigned to N–H stretching vibration (νN–H). The peak at 1775 cm−1 can be attributed to the frequency of carbonyl (CO) stretching vibration (νCO) of the hydantoin acceptor. Furthermore, the sharp peak at around 1700 cm−1 of ZnPHy is the hybrid peak of another CO stretching vibration and carbonyl influenced by hydrogen bonding. The band emerging at around 1455 cm−1 is attributed to C–N stretching vibration (νC–N) of amide. Notably, the intensities of νN–H, νC=O and νC–N are significantly decreased in the FT-IR spectra of ZnPHy/TiO2. Based on the previous report by Guo et al., we ascribed the decrease of νN–H, νC=O and νC–N to the bridging bidentate coordination adsorption mechanism for ZnPHy on TiO2 surface.

The current and voltage performance of ZnPHy-sensitized TiO2 electrode was measured at 100 mW cm−2 under simulated AM 1.5 G solar light. Fig. 6a shows the current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the ZnPHy/TiO2 electrode. We have prepared three electrodes, which were tested under the same conditions. The data given below are the average values obtained from the electrodes. In all the electrodes, the active area used is 0.19 cm2. The obtained short-circuit photocurrent density (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC), and fill factor (ff) of the solar cell based on ZnPHy are 3.49 mA cm−2, 0.6 V and 0.52, respectively, yielding an overall conversion efficiency (η) of 1.01%. For comparison, the ZnCOOH-sensitized electrode (Fig. 6a) was also fabricated under the same conditions and yielded η value of 0.84%. Fig. 6b shows the dark current curve of the ZnPHy- and ZnCOOH-sensitized electrodes. Under the dark conditions, the higher onset bias for the dark current curve of these electrodes reveals the better suppression of electron recombination and thereby higher VOC for the both electrodes. On close inspection of Fig. 6b, the onset bias values for the dark current of the ZnPHy- and ZnCOOH-sensitized electrodes are found at 570 and 544 mV, respectively. This result clearly reveals that replacing the COOH group with hydantoin moiety improves not only the VOC but also the power conversion efficiency.

In general, the efficiency of solar cell performance is evaluated by using two experimental values, open-circuit voltage (VOC) and short-circuit current (JSC). In an ideal case, the energy gap between the conduction band of TiO2 and redox mediators corresponds to VOC. Short-circuit current is the photocurrent without load in an external circuit. In order to achieve a higher photocurrent, the rate of three competitive reactions is important: (i) the electron injection must be faster than the relaxation of the excited-state sensitizer; (ii) the regeneration must be faster than the recombination; and (iii) the transport of electrons must be faster than the recombination. To understand these processes on the ZnPHy/TiO2 electrode, we have employed time-resolved absorption and fluorescence techniques.

At high surface coverage, a dye–dye interaction is an additional route for deactivation of the excited state of the dye that reduces the electron injection efficiency. So, it is suggested that a relatively low optical density of dye/TiO2 films is used for electron injection studies. In the present work, a TiO2 film with low absorbance of ZnPHy was prepared for the photophysical studies so that an efficient electron injection process can be achieved. As expected, the fluorescence of ZnPHy on TiO2 surface was completely quenched (spectrum not shown here); this fluorescence quenching may occur due to several reasons: energy transfer from the dye to TiO2, dye-to-dye energy transfer, self-quenching due to aggregation, or electron transfer from the excited singlet state of ZnPHy to TiO2. There is no spectral overlap between the emission spectrum of ZnPHy and the absorption spectrum of TiO2, so energy transfer between ZnPHy and TiO2 cannot be responsible for the quenching of ZnPHy. Moreover, the absorption maximum of the ZnPHy does not shift too much when adsorbed on TiO2; hence, in all aspects, the contribution of dye aggregation is insignificant. Therefore, dye-to-dye energy transfer or self-quenching due to dye aggregation may be excluded. Based on the results, we conclude that the fluorescence quenching is exclusively due to electron injection from ZnPHy to TiO2.

Moreover, the excited-state oxidation potential of ZnPHy is more negative than the conduction band (CB) potential of TiO2, guaranteeing a positive driving force for electron injection from the excited ZnPHy to TiO2. In order to substantiate this conclusion, time-correlated single-photon counting (TCSPC) measurements were performed because, as previously reported by several groups, including ours, the use of TCSPC measurement has been a convenient technique to monitor the quenching dynamics and to determine the rate of electron injection in dye/TiO2 systems.
The measured time-resolved fluorescence decay of ZnPHy/TiO2 is shown in Fig. 7. The observed fluorescence decay is completely quenched when compared to ZnPHy in neat solvent. We assigned this quenching to the very fast electron injection from the singlet state of ZnPHy to the TiO2 conduction band. To ascertain if this quenching is solely due to electron transfer, we employed an innocent oxide, namely, ZrO2. Since this oxide has a lower conduction band edge (−2 V vs. SCE), it is energetically out of reach by the excited state of ZnPHy and presents similar surface chemistry compared with that of TiO2. Moreover, the use of ZrO2 prevents electron injection from an excited dye into the metal oxide and therefore, the energy of the excited state is radiatively degenerated before the dye relaxes to the ground state. Fig. 7 shows the fluorescence decay of ZnPHy/ZrO2. In fact, the excited-state fluorescence decay of ZnPHy on a ZrO2 surface is best fitted by a biexponential fitting function, which yields lifetimes of 0.24 and 1.05 ns. It is apparent from this observation that the quenching of ZnPHy fluorescence on the TiO2 surface is consistent with efficient electron injection. However, the lifetime for the ZnPHy-sensitised TiO2 sample was difficult to differentiate from the laser instrument response (50 ps) and hence, no fitting could be obtained. This result strongly suggests that photo-induced electron injection occurs faster, and such fast processes cannot be resolved by the TCSPC method. Hence, femtosecond fluorescence upconversion has to be employed to measure the electron injection kinetics for ZnPHy/TiO2.

Fig. 8 depicts the fluorescence decay of ZnPHy on TiO2 (measured using fs up-conversion setup in a 100 ps time window upon excitation at 420 nm). The emission was monitored at λem = 590 nm. The decay of ZnPHy in the presence of TiO2 is very fast, and it can be fitted to a biexponential function with τ1 = 3.2 ps (35%) and τ2 = 19.1 ps (65%). As an approximate value, we consider the average lifetime τav (here the value is 13.5 ps) as a representative value for the electron injection time (τinj).
In order to calculate the rate of electron injection, one cannot completely exclude the presence of aggregates on TiO2 film. The fluorescence of ZnPHy adsorbed on zirconia shows biexponential decay due to aggregation; however, in the case of ZnPHy adsorbed on titania, both the aggregation and electron injection processes result simultaneously. Therefore, if we assume the same aggregation in both cases (zirconia vs. titania), the rate of electron injection from the excited state of ZnPHy into the conduction band of TiO2 can be evaluated using the following relation (eqn (6)):
(6)
The calculated rate for the electron injection between ZnPHy to TiO2 is 7.19 × 1010 s−1.
The quantum yield of electron injection from ZnPHy to TiO2 is given by the following eqn (7),
ϕinj = kinj/(τ−1 + kinj)
(7)
where
kinj (=1/τinj) is the rate constant for electron injection and τ is the excited-state lifetime in the absence of injection. Using τ = 1.85 ns and kinj = 7.19 × 1010 s−1, we obtained ϕinj = 99.3%. Thus, photons absorbed by ZnPHy are quantitatively converted to conduction band electrons.


In order to gain deeper insight into the recombination and regeneration dynamics of ZnPHy/TiO2, transient absorption (TA) studies in the microsecond timescale were performed. This measurement was mainly performed to obtain the radical cation absorption of ZnPHy, as well as the rate of recombination and regeneration kinetics.Fig. 9 shows the TA spectra of ZnPHy/TiO2 at 1 μs, 5 μs and 10 μs timescales. Fig. 9 clearly reveals that the TA spectra do not show significant resemblance to contributions from the triplet state, indicating that the charge-separated state consists of ZnPHy˙+ and the injected electron in the conduction band of TiO2. Therefore, the charge injection dominates other photophysical deactivation pathways of the excited state due to the high quantum yield of electron injection. The TA spectrum of ZnPHy/TiO2 shows a new and broad band in the range of 600–800 nm. In order to assign this band as radical cation absorption, here we provide some literature as well as experimental evidence. Mohammed et al. reported a ZnTMPyP radical cation at 740 nm for electron transfer process between ZnTMPyP and graphene. Durrant et al. also reported the ZnTCPP radical cation absorption at 720 nm for the electron transfer between ZnTCPP and TiO2 film. Further, to visualize the spectral features of the oxidized porphyrin, the ZnPHy was chemically oxidized by the addition of one equivalent of nitrosonium tetrafluoroborate in THF. Fig. S10 (ESI) shows the spectral changes for ZnPHy. New and broad absorption bands with peak maxima at 680 nm and at 850 nm were apparent for the ZnP˙+ species. Based on this spectral evidence and previous reports, we unanimously assigned the new band maximum at 740 nm to the cation radical of the ZnPHy.

Further, the rate for recombination and regeneration kinetics has been determined by monitoring decay at 740 nm, since these are considered to be crucial for DSC performance. Generally, in the absence of redox electrolyte (I/I3−), the injected electron has no other leeway than recombining with the oxidized sensitizers, revealing a longer decay time (τrec). Meanwhile, in the presence of redox electrolyte, the injected electron could be regenerated by the electrolyte, showing a faster decay process (τreg). Fig. 10 shows the TA kinetics of ZnPHy/TiO2 in the presence and absence of electrolyte. In the absence of electrolyte, the rate of electron recombination has been determined (krec = 1/τ = 1/5.15 μs) and was found to be 1.94 × 105 s−1. Intriguingly, the rate of electron–cation recombination is five orders of magnitude lower than the electron injection rate, which clearly reveals that electron injection is the dominant process in ZnPHy/TiO2. In the presence of an electrolyte, dye regeneration by I− has a large control on DSC performance by maximally reducing the electron recombination with oxidative dyes. As a result, the decay time (0.56 μs) for dye regeneration is much faster compared to the recombination time. Thus, it allows a better collection of photogenerated electrons into an external circuit.

In summary, we have designed and synthesized a porphyrin sensitizer with hydantoin moiety as an anchor for TiO2 semiconductor. Photoexcited electron injection, recombination and regeneration kinetics of ZnPHy/TiO2 were investigated using time-resolved fluorescence and absorption techniques. The electron injection quantum yield and rate of electron injection were calculated and found to be 99% and 7.19 × 1010 s−1, respectively. Based on the overall results, ZnPHy exhibits a two-fold benefit for application in DSCs: high quantum yield of electron injection and slow electron recombination. Thus, ZnPHy yields the best conversion efficiency of 1.01% under standard global AM 1.5G solar light illumination conditions compared with ZnCOOH-sensitized electrode (0.84%). The improved PCE of the ZnPHy electrode is due to better suppression of electron recombination, as revealed by dark-current measurements. These preliminary results provide a base for further device optimization and analysis on the molecular design of porphyrin derivatives to achieve higher PCE values. Such investigations on developing novel porphyrins for further efficiency–structure correlations are currently underway in our laboratory.


There are no conflicts to declare.


A. K. thanks DST-SERB, India, for a generous grant for the project [Grant No. CS-316/2012, Dt. 04/12/2012]. M. R. gratefully acknowledges the Department of Science and Technology (DST) for awarding INSPIRE Faculty [DST/INSPIRE/04/2015/002860] and Director, CSIR-CECRI, for implementation of the award. EMM is grateful to DST-SERB, India, for funding (SB/FT/CS-157/2012). PRK thanks PSN CET for a fellowship. We acknowledge IIT, SAIF for the NMR and MS-EI facilities, NRC, IISc for the NMR facilities.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: NMR and mass characterization and additional figures. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cp07326g
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2018