 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA00229G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3995-4002


Chen
Wang
,

Chang
Li
,

Shanpeng
Wen
*,

Pengfei
Ma
,

Yang
Liu
,

Roderick C. I.
MacKenzie
*,

Wenjing
Tian
 and 

Shengping
Ruan


State Key Laboratory on Integrated Optoelectronics and College of Electronic Science & Engineering, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, P. R. China. E-mail: sp_wen@jlu.edu.cn

State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, P. R. China

Faculty of Engineering, The University of Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham, NG7 2RD, UK. E-mail: Roderick.Mackenzie@nottingham.ac.uk

Received
8th January 2017
, Accepted 12th January 2017
First published on 16th January 2017
Metal oxide contact layers such as ZnO and TiOx are commonly used in third generation solar cells as they can be solution processed and have a relatively high conductivity. It is well known that by ultraviolet (UV) light-soaking such devices, their overall device efficiency can be boosted. This improvement in efficiency is due to high energy UV light exciting hot carriers which then fill the trap states in the metal oxide film. Unfortunately, UV causes degradation of the active layer and thus must be filtered out if long lifetimes are to be achieved. In this work, we use plasmonically excited metal nano-structures embedded in a ZnO metal oxide layer to generate hot charge carriers from visible light alone, thus removing the need for UV light soaking. Using this approach, the solar cells also exhibit better charge transport/recombination properties as well as enhanced light trapping behavior. We demonstrate that the power conversion efficiency of a low-bandgap thieno[3,4-b]thiophene/benzodithiophene (PTB7) based solar cell can be increased from 7.91% to 9.36%.

Plasmonic nanostructures such as metallic nanoparticles (MNPs) have recently attracted considerable interest due to their ability to support localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR). By exploiting size-function relationships the optical properties of the nanoparticles can be easily tuned, making them suitable for optoelectronic applications such as photo-detectors and solar cells. In particular, the highly confined LSPR modes provide a feasible strategy for bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells (OSCs) to achieve better optical absorption without increasing the thickness of the organic layer. It is well known that when integrated into OSCs, these metal nano-particles can act as sub-wavelength antennae facilitating near-field electromagnetic-field concentration or light scattering centers by far-field photon re-emission, consequently enabling more light to be trapped inside the active layer and enhancing its absorption.

Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that suitably designed MNPs can also convert incident photons directly into charge carriers. The first report of this was by Zhao et al., who observed an anodic photocurrent when illuminating a bi-layer of TiO2-film/gold (or silver) nanoparticles with green light. This phenomenon was later attributed to plasmon-induced hot-electron formation. Key to this process is fast charge transfer between the nano-particles and the semiconductor to avoid recombination/relaxation events. N-type metal-oxides such as ZnO and TiOx have been shown to permit fast charge transfer. In addition, these N-type metal-oxides are also regarded as very attractive materials for the electron transport layer (ETL) in solar cells. However, one drawback of using these materials for the ETL is that they have many structural defects, such as Zn/Ti/oxygen vacancies, and therefore have many mid-gap trap states, which through recombination reduce the overall cell efficency. It has been reported that continuous UV light soaking can help fill states and result in enhanced device performance. However, using UV light has the drawback of damaging the device and prematurely degrading the active layer, which is incompatible with the search for long lifetime third generation solar cells. A more attractive approach would be to plasmonically sensitize the metal-oxide layer, by embedding metal nano-particles within the ETL matrix. This would enable hot charge carriers to be generated from low energy visible light, which would then be able to fill defect states and eliminate the need for UV light soaking.
Recently Choy et al. demonstrated that by embedding gold (Au) nanospheres within a TiO2 matrix, charge carrier trap states could be filled, and the overall electrical properties of the film could be improved. However, when this material system was used as the ETL in an organic solar cell, only a modest increase in cell efficiency was observed. This was probably because the spherical shape of nano-particles is not optimal for electric field enhancement. Furthermore these nanospheres only measured 15 nm which reduced their ability to scatter light. Embedding suitable nano-particles into the ETL to combine hot-electron generation and also light scattering effects thus would be attractive. Since these two effects have different requirements of the nano-particle size, the selected nano-particles should be adjustable in multiple dimensions. A sphere’s isotropy determines that it has only one dimension to regulate. By contrast, anisotropic nanorods provide two dimensions that can be tuned, so as to act as light scattering centers as well as active elements for hot-electron generation.
So in this work, we synthesized anisotropic Au nanorods (AuNRs) to embed in a ZnO transport layer. These NRs exhibit a highly localized electric-field stemming from the longitudinal resonance mode. Furthermore, the short sides of NRs can easily be tuned to meet the requirements of hot-electron generation from visible light. Meanwhile, the long sides of NRs can offer sufficient cross-section area for light scattering. This provides a good platform for improving the electrical properties of ZnO without sacrificing its light scattering effects. We found that after soaking the cells with visible light overlapping the plasmon resonance energy of the nanorods, the cells exhibited high average mobility values and lower charge carrier recombination rates. We attribute this to better charge extraction through the modified ZnO transport layer. This leads to a boost in efficiency from 7.91% to 9.36%. Thus we present a general strategy for ETL design which improves both the electrical and optical properties of third generation solar cells.


Fig. 1 depicts the device structure and chemical structure of organic materials and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of nanoparticles. The synthesis of the nanoparticles is described in the ESI. High-resolution TEM (HR-TEM) analysis showed that the ZnO NPs had a diameter of around 5 nm, while the as-prepared AuNRs exhibited relatively uniform shapes with an average length of 50 nm and a diameter of 20 nm. Corresponding transverse and longitudinal plasmon resonance peaks were located at 515 nm and 691 nm, respectively (Fig. S1, ESI). It has previously been reported that light scattering is the dominant process in large plasmonic nanostructures (>50 nm) while the non-radiative decay of plasmons via the emission of hot charge carrier to the neighboring semiconductor can dominate in small ones (<30 nm). Therefore by tuning one side of the NP to be ∼50 nm it will be able to scatter light efficiently, while the shorter side will be able to assist in hot carrier generation. AuNR colloid (0–4 wt%) was mixed with the ZnO solution before being spin-coated onto a PTB7:PC71BM layer to form ≈35 nm thick ZnO/AuNR composite films.


Fig. 2 depicts an AFM image of a ZnO film with and without AuNRs; it can be seen that there is little change in the morphology due to the addition of the AuNRs. The root-mean-squared (RMS) surface roughness of the film slightly increased upon addition of the nanorods from 2.24 nm to 2.86 nm, which suggests that incorporating AuNRs has a minimal influence on the formation of the ZnO layer and guarantees its interfacial properties as an optical spacer.
To characterize the ZnO/AuNR layer, we performed photoluminescence (PL) measurements to confirm that the AuNRs can generate hot charge carriers after surface plasmon excitation which will in turn fill the ZnO trap states. Fig. 3a shows the PL spectrum produced by exciting a pure ZnO film with a 350 nm source, while Fig. 3b shows the PL spectrum produced after exciting a ZnO film with embedded AuNRs. In both Fig. 3a and b, one curve is shown where the sample was not light soaked before the measurement, and one curve where the sample was light soaked with visible light containing no UV component. For the neat ZnO film (Fig. 3a), a broad band emission with maximum at 527 nm can be seen, which is ascribed to defect emission owing to the low processing temperature of our ZnO NPs. This can be attributed to a mid-gap trap level at −5.32 eV that corresponds to the singly ionized oxygen vacancy (V+). The introduction of AuNRs (2 wt%) into the ZnO layer did not significantly change the emission level. Both samples were then placed under solar irradiation (λ > 410 nm) for 5 min as pre-illumination. It can be seen from Fig. 3b (red line) that the defect emission of the composite film was effectively quenched after plasmon excitation, while the same treatment for the neat ZnO film did not lead to the reduction of PL intensity. This behavior verified that the LSPR-excited AuNRs encouraged the trap filling in ZnO without the aid of UV light.
We then fabricated two types of solar cells, one with pure ZnO as the ETL (denoted as the reference device) and one with ZnO embedded with AuNRs (denoted as the plasmonic device). Fig. 4 plots the current density–voltage (J–V) curves produced by the cells under AM 1.5G illumination. Before recording the J–V curves, the cells were placed in front of the aforementioned solar simulation (with no UV component). It can be seen that the maximum PCE of reference devices was 7.91% with an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.741 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 16.36 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 65.2%, which is comparable to those of previously reported studies based on PTB7:PC71BM. More detailed statistical performance parameters can be found in Table 1. It can be seen that the plasmonic devices exhibited better performances. The optimal concentration of AuNRs was 2 wt%. The best performance was mainly improved by the increase in JSC from 16.36 to 17.76 mA cm−2 and the fill factor from 64.2% to 70.5% respectively. The VOC was only slightly improved. As a result, a PCE of 9.36% was obtained with the champion device. This is among the highest efficiencies reported for the PTB7:PC71BM system. By measuring 10 optimized devices, we obtained the following figures of merit: VOC at 0.742 ± 0.004 V, JSC at 17.73 ± 0.22 mA cm−2, FF at 69.8 ± 0.5% and PCE at 9.18 ± 0.13%. We noted that when the AuNR concentration was further increased to 4%, the cell efficiency decreased. Our experiments indicate that excess AuNRs may act as recombination centers that decrease the charge carrier lifetime and extraction efficiency (vide infra). The quantum efficiency of the device containing 4% AuNRs is plotted in the ESI (Fig. S2, ESI); this shows that the 4% device also has a lower EQE across the entire spectrum, supporting the fact that the decrease in efficiency is due to an electrical effect. It is also worth noting that even without the light soaking, the plasmonic device performance was improved, but only by a modest amount mainly due to a slightly improved photocurrent. We attribute this to the enhanced light absorption induced by the LSPR effect.
AuNR concentration
Pre-illumination

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Max.
Aver.
0 wt%
Yes
0.738 ± 0.002
16.40 ± 0.37
64.1 ± 0.9
7.91
7.76
1 wt%
Yes
0.740 ± 0.002
17.22 ± 0.23
68.6 ± 0.4
8.89
8.74
2 wt%
Yes
0.742 ± 0.004
17.73 ± 0.22
69.8 ± 0.5
9.36
9.18
4 wt%
Yes
0.738 ± 0.003
17.29 ± 0.29
68.1 ± 0.3
8.80
8.69
0 wt%
No
0.737 ± 0.002
16.53 ± 0.25
64.7 ± 0.5
8.05
7.89
2 wt%
No
0.738 ± 0.002
17.36 ± 0.16
65.0 ± 1.0
8.48
8.37
In order to obtain a more comprehensive understanding of photocurrent enhancement, we measured the external quantum efficiency (EQE) from the devices, as shown in Fig. 5. It can be seen that the EQE was uniformly enhanced over a broad spectral region from 350 to 700 nm with a maximum EQE value for the plasmonic device up to 78%. EQE-integrated JSCs for these devices were comparable to the actual measured JSCs, further confirming our observation. The EQE enhancement is broad and uniform; this implies that the ZnO/AuNR composite ETL mainly improved the electrical performance of solar cells. Otherwise, a more wavelength dependent change in the EQE spectra would be expected if the improvement were mainly due to optical effects. The significantly higher FF of 69.8 ± 0.5% of plasmonic devices also suggests efficient charge transport and suppressed carrier recombination in the cells, which is consistent with better charge carrier extraction properties.
To study how plasmonic enhancement affected the overall device mobility, we used the space charge limited current (SCLC) method to investigate three types of devices; (a) hole-only devices (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTB7:PC71BM/Au); (b) electron-only devices with a pure ZnO ETL (ITO/TiOx/PTB7:PC71BM/ZnO/Al); and (c) electron-only devices with a ZnO/AuNR ETL (ITO/TiOx/PTB7:PC71BM/ZnO/Al). The results are plotted in Fig. 6. Note that all devices reported in this section were light soaked before being measured.
From Fig. 6a, it can be seen that ZnO/AuNR devices exhibit a higher electron current density than their pure ZnO counterparts, suggesting that the presence of AuNRs aids electron extraction. We calculated a corresponding increase in average device mobility from 2.76 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 to 3.81 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. From Fig. 6b, the hole mobility was calculated to be 4.11 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, this is in agreement with previously reported values. These results suggest that the carrier transport inside the devices became more balanced upon the inclusion of the AuNRs and thus reduced the effect of space charge that usually adversely affects the electrical performance of the device. We take the view that the improved charge transport and extraction can be attributed to the plasmonically excited hot-electrons in AuNRs filling the trap states in ZnO and improving its mobility.
Measuring the mobility in disordered materials is notoriously difficult, as the mobility changes as a function of carrier density, and hence as a function of measurement conditions. Different measurement techniques are also known to produce different values of mobility. Therefore, to check that the ZnO/AuNR device really does have better charge transport properties and to aid comparison with previously published experimental data we performed Transient Photo Current (TPC) measurements. Fig. 7 shows the normalized TPC transients from devices with a ZnO ETL, a ZnO/AuNR ETL and a device with no ETL. It can be seen that in all cases a typical TPC trace is observed, which is characterized by an initial plateau where charge transport dominates the transient and trap states are filled, followed by a sloped region, which is dominated by charge carrier detrapping from trap states. It is notable that the plasmonic device had a shorter pre-transit period than the other two non-plasmonic devices, we attribute this to better charge carrier extraction from the device. We estimate the charge carrier mobility using μ = d2/τiV, where d is the active layer thickness, τi is the transit time and V is the built-in voltage. The transit time (τi) was found to be 1.37, 1.26 and 1.09 μs for bare Al, ZnO/Al and ZnO(AuNRs)/Al, respectively. ZnO/AuNR based cells had the highest carrier mobility, giving a value of 1.06 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. We again attribute this to free carriers being able to leave the device more quickly when trap states in ZnO have been filled by plasmonically generated charge carriers.
Next, to examine how the addition of AuNRs affected charge carrier recombination in the device, we performed photoinduced charge carrier extraction by linearly increasing voltage (photo-CELIV) measurements, as shown in Fig. S4. In the photo-CELIV experiment, an optical pulse is applied to a device, then at time tdelay after the pulse the charge carriers are extracted by applying a linearly increasing negative voltage transient. By varying tdelay the decay rate of photoexcited charge carriers can be studied.

Fig. 8 plots the photoexcited charge extracted from the device as a function of tdelay. We fit this curve with the carrier recombination dynamic model expressed by the equation:
in which n(0) is the initial photo-generated carrier density and τ is the carrier recombination lifetime. We estimated n(0) to be 9.78 × 1015 cm−3 for the ZnO device vs. 1.36 × 1016 cm−3 for the ZnO/AuNR (2 wt%) device and tau (τ) to be 91.2 μs for the ZnO device vs. 124.9 μs the ZnO/AuNR (2 wt%) device. The higher n(0) value clearly suggests that solar cells with AuNRs can generate more free-carriers after photo-excitation, which is consistent with its higher observed JSC. Prolonged τ also suggests that the photo-generated carriers can survive much longer without recombination in plasmonic devices.
One reason to embed anisotropic AuNRs into the ZnO ETL was to encourage trap filling in the ETL and boost its mobility. Another motivation for putting this layer in the cell was to use the AuNRs to back-scatter light and enhance light trapping. The higher n(0) derived from photo-CELIV analysis has suggested more efficient photon-to-carrier conversion. Therefore we finally examine how the nanorods change the optical properties of the devices. Fig. 9 depicts the UV-vis absorption of the PTB7:PC71BM/ZnO film without and with AuNRs. A small increase in absorption in the region from 500 to 700 nm was observed after depositing the ZnO/AuNR composite film, which reflects some near-field coupling of LSPR into the adjacent active layer. It is possible that the plasmons will decay via near field coupling; by performing detailed electromagnetic modelling of the NP and surrounding medium the exact magnitude of each loss path could be identified.
The reflection spectra (R) of plasmonic device were also measured and compared with those of pure ZnO one, and are shown in Fig. 10a. The plasmonic device showed a relatively lower reflectance than the pristine one. The derived absorption spectra (A = 1 − R) are plotted in Fig. 10b. It can be seen that the plasmonic device has enhanced light trapping in a broad range between 370 and 720 nm. This enhancement is more obvious between 480 and 580 nm than the other regions, which corresponds to the transverse absorption band from the longer side of AuNRs. It is possible that the introduction of the nanorods has changed the refractive index of the ZnO layer, and thus the modal distribution of the light within the device, and this could be the root cause for the increase in light absorption. To rule this out, the complex refractive index of the active layer and the ZnO layers (with and without nanorods) was measured and a transfer matrix model was used to calculate the change in the distribution of photons in the device caused by the introduction of the nanorods. It was found that the photon density increased by only 1.4% in the active layer of the plasmonic device, which is not enough to account for the observed optical enhancement (full results in the ESI). This optical enhancement should mainly originate from the plasmonic light scattering as well as some near-field effect of AuNRs.
If the EQE spectrum of the device is normalized by the absorption spectrum (IQE = EQE/A), one can calculate the internal quantum efficiency (IQE). This is a measure of how efficient the generation and transport/recombination processes are within the device while excluding changes in absorption between cells.Fig. 10b also plots the IQE spectra for both the plasmonic and non-plasmonic device. The plasmonic device shows a significantly higher IQE spectrum than the non-plasmonic device. This further supports our assertion that the main reason for the increase in the device efficiency is due to trap filling.
Finally, we use net photocurrent density (Jph) versus effective voltage (Veff) analysis to estimate the effect AuNRs have on charge generation and charge collection under operating conditions. Jph is calculated as Jph = JL − JD, in which JL and JD are the current density collected under illumination and in the dark, respectively. Veff is determined as Veff = V0 − Va, where Va is the applied bias voltage and V0 represents the compensation voltage at which Jph equals zero. The Jph–Veff curves for the devices are shown in Fig. 11a. These traces can conceptually be divided into three regions by the maximum power point and short circuit current point. In the low Veff region (Veff < 0.26 V), Jph is proportional to the effective voltage, the electric-field dependent carrier drift plays an important role in this region. The higher Jph of plasmonic devices again suggests more efficient charge extraction and collection. Then, as the voltage increased, the rate of increase of Jph becomes slower as field-dependent exciton dissociation starts to dominate. Then Jph get saturated, under these circumstances, exciton dissociation and carrier drift are no longer a limitation and the saturation photocurrent density (Jph,sat) is only limited by the charge carrier generation rate (Gmax). Thus one can write Jph,sat = qGmaxL, in which q is the elementary charge and L is the thickness of the active layer (∼95 nm in this work). The Gmax values of the reference and plasmonic device are 1.12 × 1028 m−3 s−1 (Jph,sat = 170.3 A m−2) and 1.22 × 1028 m−3 s−1 (Jph,sat = 184.7 A m−2), respectively. We attribute the noticeable increase in Gmax to light scattering which stems from AuNRs. By normalizing Jph with Jph,sat as shown in Fig. 11b, we can estimate the charge collection efficiency (Pc,m) under maximum power conditions and the exciton dissociation efficiency (Pc,sc) under short circuit conditions. The Pc,m shows an increase from 75.8% to 82.9% by the introduction of the nanorods, comparing well with the measured improvement in IQE.

In conclusion, we have used a plasmonically functionalized ZnO electron transport layer containing AuNRs to capture photons in the visible region and convert them to hot charge carriers. These hot charge carriers filled trap states in the ZnO layer, which improved the extraction efficiency of the device. This effect is analogous to the light-soaking effect often observed in organic solar cells, but with the advantage of not needing damaging UV light to perform the activation. The solar cell efficiency was eventually increased from 7.91% to 9.36%.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51303061, 11574110), the Project of Science and Technology Development Plan of Jilin Province (Grant No. 20140204056GX), the Project of Science and Technology Plan of Changchun City (Grant No. 13KG49), Opened Fund of the State Key Laboratory on Applied Optics, and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant No. 2014T70288, 2013M541299).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Supplementary figures. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta00229g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017