 DOI: 10.1039/C0JM02091E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 10862-10868

Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical Terms


Byoungchoo
Park
*,

Yoon Ho
Huh
 and 

Mina
Kim


Department of Electrophysics, Kwangwoon University, Seoul, 139-701, Korea. E-mail: bcpark@kw.ac.kr; Fax: +82 2943 3208; Tel: +82 2940 5237

Received
2nd July 2010
, Accepted 8th September 2010
First published on
9th October 2010

We herein report on the photovoltaic (PV) effect of a polymer bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) layer consisting of poly(3-hexylthiophene) : methanofullerene mixed with a surfactant additive. The mixed surfactant is poly(oxyethylene tridecyl ether) (PTE). Excellent performance was achieved by using the surfactant as an additive in the PV layer, thereby increasing the short-circuit current density and fill factor. These increases led to a power conversion efficiency of 4.51 ± 0.16%, which was higher than that (3.89 ± 0.08%) of the reference device without the surfactant. This improvement can be attributed to the increased dissociation efficiency of the bound e–h pairs, which may be due to the oriented PTE surfactant molecules at interfaces between the phase-separated BHJ domains. These results suggest that a PV layer mixed with a PTE surfactant additive is a promising functional composite material for use in polymer PV cells.

Recent high-profile studies of polymer solar cells (PSCs) have generated intense research interest, following reports of photo-induced electron transfer from conjugated polymers (donor) to fullerenes (acceptor). Of particular interest to the efficient photo-induced charge generation of a polymer photovoltaic (PV) layer is the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) structure, which is composed of interpenetrating channel-like domains of separated polymer and fullerene phases within the composite PV layer. Using the BHJ structure, together with pre- and/or post-thermal annealing of the PV layers of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM), PSCs with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3∼4% have been achieved. One advantage of using such PSC technologies is the greatly reduced costs of high-speed solution-coating, such as the roll-to-roll technique. However, for many practical applications, PSCs need to be more efficient. For the improvement of the performance of PSCs, there are two major factors that must be considered. One is the mobility of the charge carrier, which depends on the crystalline ordering of the PV layer. The other is the exciton dissociation, which mainly takes place at the interfaces between the donor and acceptor. Recently, small amounts of bad solvent such as alkanedithiol or 1,8-diiodooctane were introduced into the blended PV solution as a “processing additive”, which resulted in the improved performance of PSCs via the induction of fine phase-separation of the polymer and fullerene domains with improved mobilities. Efficiencies of 5∼7% have been reported for PSCs fabricated using the “processing additive”. However, relatively little progress has been made to date in controlling the dissociation of bound excitons (or e–h pairs) at the interfaces between the phase-separated domains in the BHJ structure (BHJ interfaces), which may hinder the fabrication of efficient PSCs. Hence, in order to engineer the interface to improve the efficiency of PSCs further, the BHJ interfaces must also be optimized. With this aim, we focused our research on the interfacial layers between the phase-separated domains.

In the study described herein, we introduced poly(oxyethylene tridecyl ether) (PTE) as a ‘surfactant additive’ into the PV layer of P3HT:PCBM, whose chemical structures are shown in Fig. 1. Because of the different hydrophobicities of the donor of P3HT and the acceptor of PCBM, some PTE surfactant molecules in the PV layer may form interfacial layers at the BHJ interfaces. Due to the low highest-occupied-molecular-orbital (HOMO, −8.1 eV) and high lowest-unoccupied-molecular-orbital (LUMO, −2.1 eV) levels with the dipolar characteristics of PTE, it is expected that the PTE surfactant could change the electrical properties of the BHJ interfaces. In this study, it is demonstrated that an efficient PSC could be obtained using ca. 0.1 wt% of the PTE surfactant mixed with a 1.20:0.88 (P3HT:PCBM) blended PV solution by increasing the dissociation efficiency.

In the experiments, P3HT (Aldrich), as the electron donor, PCBM (Rieke Metals, Inc.), as the electron acceptor, and PTE (C13H27(OCH2CH2)12OH, Aldrich) as the surfactant additive were used as received from the manufacturer. The blended PV solution was made by adding P3HT (1.20 wt%), PCBM (0.88 wt%), and PTE surfactant (0.1 wt%) to a solvent of 1, 2-dichlorobenzene. An ITO layer (80 nm, 30 ohm/square) on glass substrate was used as the anode. After routine cleaning of the substrate using ultraviolet-ozone treatment, the blended PV solution was spin-coated on top of the ITO, precoated with poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene): poly(4-styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS, Clevios PVP. Al 4083, H. C. Starck Inc.) buffer layers. The PV layer was about 85 nm thick. For the interlayer, a ca. 1 nm thick Al:Li alloy (Li: 0.1 wt%) layer was formed on top of the PV layer using thermal deposition (0.5 nm s−1) at a base pressure below 2.7 × 10−4 Pa. A pure Al (ca. 50 nm thick) cathode layer was then formed on the interlayer under the same vacuum conditions. Thus, the device structure consisted of the sequence [ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM:PTE/Al:Li (ca. 1 nm)/Al] (sample cell). The active area of the fabricated device is 3 mm × 3 mm. For comparison, we also fabricated a reference PSC with the sequence [ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Al:Li/Al]. We also fabricated another reference PSC that had a PTE interfacial layer (ca. 1∼2 nm) on the PV layer, i.e. [ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/PTE/Al:Li/Al], by spin-coating a PTE solution (0.1 wt% in distilled water) on top of the PV layer. The thickness of the PTE interfacial layer was monitored using ellipsometry. After coating, all films were baked at 120 °C for 3 min (pre-thermal annealing). After the device had been fabricated, PSCs were annealed at 150 °C for 10 min to induce crystallization of the PV layer (post-thermal annealing). The boiling point of the PTE was higher than 205 °C; the PTE thus remained in the PV layer even after thermal annealing, in contrast to a typical “processing additive”. It should also be noted that, apart from the differences in the PV layers as described, all the PSCs were fabricated using exactly the same method as that used for the sample cell. The optical properties of the PV layers were investigated with a Cary 1E (Varian) UV-vis spectrometer. The photoluminescence (PL) emission spectrum from the PV layer was recorded using a fiber spectrophotometer (HR4000CG-UV-NIR, Ocean Optics Inc.) equipped using excitation at 442 nm light from a He-Cd laser at room temperature. Atomic force microscopy (AFM, Nanosurf easyscan2 FlexAFM, Nanosurf AG Switzerland Inc.) topographic images of the surfaces of the PV layers formed on flat glass substrates were obtained by scanning in the static force mode. During the measurements, a contact mode was used with a cantilever (CONTR-10 point probe-silicon, Nanoworld, Inc.). The performance of the PSCs was measured under an illumination intensity of 100 mW cm−2 generated by an AM 1.5G light source (Newport, 96000 Solar Simulator). The photocurrent–voltage (J–V) characteristics were measured with a source meter (Keithley 2400) and calibrated by using a reference cell (Bunkoh-keiki, BS-520). The incident photon-to-current collection efficiency (IPCE) spectra were measured using an IPCE measurement system (Titan Electro-optics Co., QE-IPCE 3000).


It is also noted that the PV effects of the PSCs were verified using another system of tests in the Solar Cell Center, Energy Division, Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST), which used an AM 1.5G solar simulator (1600 W, Yamashita Denso YSS-200A solar simulator equipped with a KG-3 filter, Japan) that was adjusted with a standard PV reference cell (a monocrystalline silicon solar cell, calibrated at NREL, Colorado, USA) with a Keithley 2400 source-measure unit. The efficiencies measured by KIST were 94.76 ± 1.77% of those measured in our lab. This correction was applied to the set of studied PSCs to obtain corrected efficiencies.


Firstly, the optical characteristics of the PV layers were observed using UV-vis absorption spectroscopy. Fig. 2(a) and 2(b) show the normalized absorption spectra of the PV layers after thermal annealing at 150 °C for 10 min. It is clear from the figures that the PV film of P3HT:PCBM is represented by strong absorption spectrum with a peak at around 507 nm. This absorption in the visible region can be attributed mainly to the P3HT polymer, because PCBM shows strong absorption in the UV region. The improvement in the crystalline ordering of P3HT after thermal annealing can be confirmed by the three pronounced vibronic absorption peaks (ca. 600 nm). The absorption spectra of the P3HT:PCBM layers (Fig. 2(a) and 2(b)) are almost identical to those of the P3HT:PCBM/PTE (stacked PTE (1∼2 nm) on the P3HT:PCBM PV layer) and P3HT:PCBM:PTE (mixed PTE into the P3HT:PCBM PV layer) layers, which indicates that the addition of a PTE surfactant additive barely alters the optical absorption characteristics related to the structural crystalline ordering of the P3HT:PCBM layer.


Next, we obtained the AFM topographic images and grain distributions of the surfaces of the PV layers. Fig. 3(a) shows the AFM images of a 5 × 5 μm scanned area for the P3HT:PCBM layer. The surface of the as-prepared P3HT:PCBM film is fairly smooth with a root mean square (rms) roughness of 3.1 nm. After annealing at 150 °C for 10 min, the surface roughness of P3HT:PCBM increased to 3.9 nm. The grain distributions obtained from the height threshold of the AFM images are shown in the inset of each of the AFM images. The grains of the P3HT:PCBM layer have an average area of 0.079 μm2 before annealing and 0.163 μm2 afterwards. The figure clearly shows that the annealed samples had a much coarser texture than the as-prepared samples. The coarser surface is a characteristic of polymer reorganization, which in turn promotes the formation of a more ordered structure and also increases the carrier mobility, which could lead to higher efficiencies of the devices. Fig. 3(b) shows the AFM images obtained from the P3HT:PCBM/PTE layer. Compared with the surface of the P3HT:PCBM layer, it is clear that a similar surface with an almost identical surface roughness (rms roughness of 2.2 nm before annealing and 3.0 nm afterwards) was formed on the P3HT:PCBM/PTE layer. This finding is in contrast to that observed by AFM in relation to the orientational behavior of the PTE surfactant on a polymer film; there was no ‘spike’ orientation of PTE on the PV film in our study. The average area of the grains in the P3HT:PCBM/PTE layer was 0.064 μm2 before annealing and 0.156 μm2 afterwards. Similar results were also observed on the surface of the P3HT:PCBM:PTE layer, as shown in Fig. 3(c). The surfaces of the as-prepared and the annealed layers had rms roughnesses of 3.1 and 4.2 nm, respectively. The average area of the grains of the P3HT:PCBM:PTE layer was 0.062 μm2 before annealing and 0.182 μm2 afterwards. In common with the surface morphology of the P3HT:PCBM layer, the annealed samples had a much coarser surface texture than the as-prepared samples. It is therefore clear that the surface morphology of the P3HT:PCBM layer is almost identical to that of both the P3HT:PCBM/PTE layer and that of the P3HT:PCBM:PTE layer, which indicates that the addition of a small amount of PTE surfactant into the P3HT:PCBM PV layer hardly has any affect on the surface morphologies and grain size distributions of the PV layer.


Next, we investigated the effect of the PTE surfactant additive on the performance of the current density-versus-voltage (J–V) characteristics of the PSCs. Fig. 4(a) shows the dark current characteristics of the PSCs. All the devices show an excellent rectification ratio and thus good coverage of the PV layers. However, the PSCs under test showed small but clear differences in current flow, which implied that there were some differences in the flow of charge carriers through the PV layers. In order to understand the PV effect of the devices, J–V curves under illumination were also obtained (Fig. 4(b)). For the reference PSCs with the P3HT:PCBM active layer, fairly good PV performance was observed, with an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.61 ± 0.01 V and a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 11.11 ± 0.17 mA cm−2 with a fill factor (FF) of 57.34 ± 1.11%. This corresponds to a PCE of 3.89 ± 0.08%, which is comparable to that reported in previous studies. For the other reference device with the P3HT:PCBM/PTE structure, the PCE was improved to 4.18 ± 0.24% with a VOC of 0.63 ± 0.01 V, a JSC of 11.22 ± 0.29 mA cm−2, and a FF of 59.77 ± 1.09%. This improvement may be attributed to the improved collection of electrons at the cathode as a result of a reduction in the potential barrier between the PV layer and the cathode, due to the interfacial dipole effect of the PTE molecules. In contrast, for the sample PSCs with the P3HT:PCBM:PTE active layer, the VOC was found to be 0.64 ± 0.01 V and the JSC and FF increased further, to 11.58 ± 0.27 mA cm−2 and 61.12 ± 1.54%, respectively. Thus, the efficiency of the sample PSCs with the P3HT:PCBM:PTE layer also further increased to 4.51 ± 0.16%, leading to an improvement in PCE of up to ca. 16% compared with the reference device with the P3HT:PCBM layer. These values are the averages and standard deviations obtained from 4∼7 individual PSCs on independent substrates for the device configurations studied. This excellent PV performance of the sample PSCs with the PTE surfactant additive was also evaluated by measuring the incident photon-to-current collection efficiency (IPCE) spectra. The observed IPCE spectra of the PSC devices are shown in Fig. 4(c). Each cell shows the well-known spectral response of its BHJ composite, all of which are in good agreement with the absorption spectra of the PV composites (Fig. 2(b)). This indicates that the photocurrents are generated mainly by dissociated excitons produced by absorbed photons in the P3HT. As shown in the figure, the sample PSCs with the P3HT:PCBM:PTE layer have the highest IPCE over the entire spectrum, with a maximum of ca. 63.5% at 470 nm, which corresponds to the highest JSC of the sample PSC.

In order to provide a better comparison of the annealed PSCs, we have also shown the device performance of the as-prepared PSCs. The PCE of the device before thermal annealing was rather poor (PCE = 1.86 ± 0.07 with a VOC of 0.66 ± 0.02 V, a JSC of 4.92 ± 0.19 mA cm−2, and a FF of 57.65 ± 3.15% for the P3HT:PCBM, PCE = 1.86 ± 0.09 with a VOC of 0.65 ± 0.02 V, a JSC of 5.06 ± 0.36 mA cm−2, and a FF of 56.34 ± 3.59% for the P3HT:PCBM/PTE, and PCE = 2.05 ± 0.11 with a VOC of 0.65 ± 0.01 V, a JSC of 5.76 ± 0.48 mA cm−2, and a FF of 54.71 ± 3.07% for the P3HT:PCBM:PTE active layer), due to the small-scale phase separation of the P3HT polymer. However, it is the PV cell with the P3HT:PCBM:PTE that shows the higher value of PCE. It is thus evident that the PTE additive makes an important contribution to the PV effect in the BHJ structure even prior to thermal annealing. We note that, prior to annealing, the Vocs of the PSCs with the P3HT:PCBM, P3HT:PCBM/PTE, and the P3HT:PCBM:PTE active layers were identical (ca. 0.65 V). However, after thermal annealing, the Vocs of the PSCs decreased unexpectedly. These decreases in Voc of the annealed PSCs may be explained by the diffusion or migration of the Li atoms from the interfacial layer of Al:Li (1 nm) into the PV layer that occur during thermal annealing. This diffusion or migration of Li atoms may reduce the strength of the electric field between the PV layer and the metal cathode, and it is this reduction in electric field that causes a decrease in the built-in electric field and in Voc. In addition to this decrease in Voc after annealing, it may also be noted that the decreases in Voc of the P3HT:PCBM/PTE and P3HT:PCBM:PTE active layers are much less than that found in the P3HT:PCBM layer. This result may be explained in terms of the protective nature of the PTE interfacial layer in shielding the PV layer from the diffusion or migration of Li atoms into it through the interaction between the –OH groups of the PTE and Li atoms (–OH:Li).

In order to identify the origin of the improvement of the sample PSCs, the mobility of the charge carriers and the electrical performance of the PV layers were investigated, as shown in Fig. 5. The mobilities of the charge carriers were observed using the time-of-flight (TOF) technique by irradiation of a pulse laser light (355 nm, Nd-YAG laser, pulse width; 4 ns) through the ITO electrode at room temperature. The sample was subjected to a large (10∼50 V) applied bias and the resulting photocurrent was measured using a digital oscilloscope (TDS420, Tektronix). Electron or hole photocurrents were measured selectively by changing the sign of the applied bias. The samples were stored in an inert gas environment prior to their measurement under environmental conditions. Fig. 5(a) and 5(b) show representative TOF transients of holes and electrons for the P3HT:PCBM:PTE layer (1.14 μm thick). The carrier mobilities were determined from the carrier transit times (tTs), which could be evaluated from the intersection of two asymptotes in the logarithmic representations of the TOF transients (insets in the figures). The film of P3HT:PCBM:PTE was found to have a hole mobility of ca. 1.1 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and an electron mobility of ca. 6.8 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. These values are nearly the same as those (hole mobility: ca. 1.8 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and electron mobility: ca. 4.3 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 at E = 2.6 × 105 V cm−1) found in the reference layer (1.14 μm) of P3HT:PCBM without the PTE additive. It may be noted that these observed values are nearly the same as those of a typical P3HT:PCBM layer. It is therefore clear that the addition of the PTE surfactant does not alter the mobilities of the holes and electrons in the P3HT:PCBM-based PV layer. These results indicate that the improvement in the sample PSCs cannot be explained in terms of the mobilities of the charge carriers. Given that the mobilities and the UV-vis absorption (Fig. 2(b)) results with the AFM observation (Fig. 3) show no significant differences between the P3HT:PCBM and P3HT:PCBM:PTE layers, it is plausible to suppose that the increased efficiency of the sample PSCs may originate from the interfacial properties of the BHJ interfaces. In the P3HT:PCBM:PTE PV layer, due to the oriented PTE molecules at the BHJ interface, the dipole effect of the hydroxyl (–OH) groups of the PTE molecules can induce changes in charge carrier flow through the BHJ interfaces.


In order to investigate the charge carrier flows of the PV layers with PTE surfactant, the flowing current density versus applied electric field (J–E) characteristics for hole-only and electron-only devices were observed, as shown in Fig. 6(a) and 6(b), respectively. To estimate the hole-flowing characteristics, we tested hole-only devices with structures of [ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Au], [ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/PTE/Au], and [ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM:PTE/Au]. The hole-only device with the P3HT:PCBM/PTE active layer (Fig. 6(a)) shows a reduced hole-current flow. This reduced current indicates that the PTE interfacial layer on the PV layer can block the hole current. Furthermore, in the hole-only device with the P3HT:PCBM:PTE active layer, the hole current reduced still further. This greatly reduced current indicates that not only the PTE molecules at the electrode interfaces but also the PTE molecules at the BHJ interfaces, i.e., the PTE interfacial layers in the PV layer, can block the hole current efficiently. To estimate the electron transfer, we also tested electron-only devices with structures of [Al/P3HT:PCBM/Al:Li (1 nm, 3.1 eV)/Al], [Al/P3HT:PCBM/PTE/Al:Li/Al], and [Al/P3HT:PCBM:PTE/Al:Li/Al]. In contrast, the electron-only device with the P3HT:PCBM/PTE active layer (Fig. 6(b)) shows a somewhat increased electron-current flow. It is interesting to note that the electron-only device with the P3HT:PCBM:PTE active layer shows a greatly increased electron-current flow, which indicates that the PTE interfacial layer in the PV layer can increase the electron current rather effectively. These results indicate clearly that flows of charge carriers can take place selectively through the PTE interfacial layer in the PV layer; blocking holes and causing electrons to flow.


In order to investigate the effect of the selective flow of charge carriers through the PTE interfacial layer on the dissociation of bound e–h pairs or excitons, we then also observed the J–V characteristics under reverse bias at 100 mW cm−2 using simulated AM 1.5G conditions. Fig. 7 shows the photocurrent (Jph) as a function of the effective applied bias VEFF = V0 - V, where V is the applied bias. Jph is obtained by correcting the current under illumination for dark current, i.e., Jph = Jlight − Jdark, and V0 is the bias for which Jlight = Jdark. At large reverse bias (VEFF > 10 V), Jph is saturated for all devices with a saturation photocurrent (Jsat) of ca. 134 A m−2, which indicates that the maximum generation rates (Gmax, given as Jsat = e·Gmax·L, L = 85 nm) are ca. 9.8 × 1027 for all P3HT:PCBM, P3HT:PCBM/PTE, and P3HT:PCBM:PTE films. Thus, the e–h pair generation in the films of P3HT:PCBM, P3HT:PCBM/PTE, and P3HT:PCBM:PTE are nearly identical. At the short-circuit condition (V = 0 or VEFF = V0), the dissociation efficiency for the total bound e–h pairs into free carriers for the P3HT:PCBM:PTE film is ca. 94%, which is slightly higher than that (ca. 93%) for the P3HT:PCBM (or P3HT:PCBM/PTE) film. In contrast, for the P3HT:PCBM (or P3HT:PCBM/PTE) film at maximum power output (V = 0.4 V), the dissociation efficiency is only about 68%, while the dissociation efficiency of the P3HT:PCBM:PTE film is still around 75% at maximum power output bias. It is clear from these results that the addition of the PTE surfactant into the PV layer causes the dissociation efficiency of the film to increase by about 7% at maximum power output bias. This increase can be attributed to the reduced recombination loss of the generated charges by the selective flow of charge carriers through the PTE interfacial layer in the PV layer. Thus, this reduced recombination confirms the advantage of the PTE additive in the BHJ structure.


In order to investigate the photophysical characteristics related to the extent of phase separation and exciton dissociation, PL was measured for the PV layers studied. Because the PL data obtained from the PV active layers provide further evidence of the formation of P3HT polymer crystallites, any changes in phase separation and/or morphology of the active layer may be observed by monitoring the PL emission.Fig. 8 compares the PL spectra of the P3HT:PCBM, P3HT:PCBM/PTE, and P3HT:PCBM:PTE PV layers before (pristine, dashed curve) and after (solid curve) thermal annealing at 150 °C for 10 min. With excitation at 442 nm, at which P3HT shows strong absorption, the PL of the P3HT can be seen in the range 600∼850 nm. The PL emission peak at around 660 nm (1.88 eV) was assigned to the pure electronic transition and the peak at around 720 nm (1.72 eV) was assigned to the first vibronic band. It is well known that the presence of PCBM in a blend PV layer gives rise to PL quenching and that this PL quenching is less effective in an annealed PV film, where the phase separation between donor and acceptor is greater. In common with previous findings, Fig. 8 shows that prior to thermal annealing (dashed curves), the low intensities of the PL spectra, corresponding to small-scale phase separation for the as-prepared layers of P3HT:PCBM, P3HT:PCBM/PTE, and P3HT:PCBM:PTE, are almost identical. This finding suggests that PL intensity does not change on addition of the PTE additive into the P3HT:PCBM layer. It also implies that the average interfacial distance between the P3HT and PCBM domains is almost identical for all three PV layers. Even for this identical phase separation with poor charge transport and/or collection (due to small-scale phase separation), the addition of PTE to the pristine PV layer of P3HT:PCBM produced an improved PV performance, which clearly implies that the addition of PTE makes an important contribution to exciton dissociation. Following thermal annealing, the intensities of the PL spectra obtained from the annealed PV layers became stronger than those of the untreated ones, as shown in the Fig. 8. This suggests that the photoinduced electron transfer from the P3HT to the PCBM is less efficient after annealing. We also found that the PL intensities of the three annealed PV layers were almost identical, indicating an almost identical increase in the phase separated domains after thermal annealing for the three PV layers. The PL results therefore also imply that the origin of the improved photocurrent and PV efficiency of the PV layer with the PTE additive lies in an increased exciton dissociation, resulting in a PCE peak value of over 4.5% as a consequence.


Next, we investigated the surface wettability of the studied PV films by measuring the water contact angle (Attension Theta, KSV Instruments LTD). Fig. 9(a) and 9(b) show two examples of observations of water drops on P3HT and PCBM surfaces, respectively. The measured contact angles were ca. 111° for the P3HT surface and ca. 87° for the PCBM surface. This indicates that the water wettability of the P3HT is low as a result of its hydrophobic alkyl side-chain, while that of the PCBM surface is moderate as a result of its hydrophilic acid group. However, in stark contrast to the contact angle (which was unchanged from the uncoated value at ca. 111°) for the PTE-coated P3HT surface (Fig. 9(c)), the contact angle for the PTE-coated PCBM surface increased to ca. 100° (Fig. 9(d)). This finding implies that the coated PTE surfactant was oriented normal to the PCBM surface, i.e. the hydroxyl polar head group (–OH) of PTE was anchored to the PCBM surface, while its alkyl chains protruded outwards, causing an increase in contact angle. It may therefore be considered that when the some of the PTE additive is positioned at the BHJ interfaces, the PTE molecules may become oriented normal to the interface, with the hydroxyl group being directed towards the PCBM domain. It should be noted that the contact angle of the P3HT:PCBM:PTE layer was about 111°, almost the same as that of the P3HT:PCBM/PTE layer (110°), and thus it may also be considered that the orientation of the PTE molecules at the air-side surface of the PV layer may be similar to that of the alkyl side-chain of the P3HT polymer.


Our results enable us to propose a mechanism of charge dissociation (Fig. 10). In the reference device with the P3HT:PCBM/PTE structure (upper panel of Fig. 10), the PTE molecules form an interfacial layer between the PV layer and the cathode. With this structure, the PSCs show improvements in PCE of up to ca. 7%, which is attributed to the selective collection of electrons and blocking holes at the Al cathode. In contrast, in the sample device with the P3HT:PCBM:PTE structure, some of the PTE molecules mixed into the PV layer can be oriented at the BHJ interfaces between the phase-separated P3HT and PCBM domains of the heterojunction, as well as at the interfaces between the PV layer and the cathode or the PEDOT:PSS layer. In this model (lower panel of Fig. 10), the oriented PTE molecules between the phase-separated P3HT and PCBM domains can effectively block holes from the P3HT domains (Fig. 6(a)) and draw electrons to the PCBM domains (Fig. 6(b)), thereby preventing any undesirable charge recombination at the BHJ interfaces. Using this structure, the PSCs show clear improvements in PCE by up to ca. 16%. Therefore, the surfactant PTE at the BHJ interface provides a barrier against the recombination of photo-excited e–h pairs, leading to the increased dissociation efficiency afforded by interface engineering of the BHJ structure.


In conclusion, we have reported on the use of a P3HT:PCBM-based PV layer mixed with a surfactant PTE additive to create efficient PSCs. We have shown that PSCs that have a mixed PTE surfactant additive are more efficient than conventional ones. A high efficiency (4.51 ± 0.16%) was obtained for devices with a 1.20:0.88 (P3HT:PCBM) ratio mixed with 0.1 wt% of PTE surfactant, yielding improvements in PCE of up to 16%. This improvement may be attributed to the increased dissociation efficiency of bound e–h pairs at the BHJ interfaces between the P3HT and PCBM domains. A combination of the PTE surfactant additive reported here with high-performance PV materials offers the potential for the development of a new generation of highly efficient PSCs.


The present Research was supported by the Converging Research Center Program through the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (2010K001064) and by technology development project of new and renewable energies of the Ministry of Knowledge Economy of the Republic of Korea (2010).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010