 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA00769A
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4971-4980


Hongwei
Zhu
,

Fei
Zhang
*,

Yin
Xiao
,

Shirong
Wang
* and 

Xianggao
Li
*

School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300354, China. E-mail: lixianggao@tju.edu.cn; wangshirong@tju.edu.cn; zhangf890206@tju.edu.cn

Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin), Tianjin 300072, China

Received
24th January 2018
, Accepted 23rd February 2018
First published on 24th February 2018
The stability of perovskite solar cells is still one issue that needs to be solved, though remarkable success has been achieved since its first report in 2009. In this work, two thiadiazole derivatives (1,3,4-thiadiazolidine-2-thione, TDZT and 1,3,4-thiadiazolidine-2,5-dithione, TDZDT) were added into a perovskite precursor to modulate CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite crystal growth. Thiadiazole derivatives can allow the size of the CH3NH3PbI3 crystals to exceed 800 nm and can reduce the grain boundaries. The defect density, calculated using the space charge limited current (SCLC) method for perovskite, was 7 times lower when a certain amount of TDZDT was added. As a result, we obtained a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 19.04% accompanied by excellent stability under humidity and heat. The unsealed devices retained 91.2% of their initial PCE after 1200 h in 65 ± 5% relative humidity at room temperature under dark conditions, and over 90% of their initial PCE after 840 h of aging in 30% relative humidity and ambient air at 60–75 °C under dark conditions. The result showed that these thiadiazole derivatives can effectively suppress the defects, thus improving the efficiency and stability of the perovskite solar cells.

Hybrid organic/inorganic perovskites have attracted much attention in the photovoltaic community due to their excellent unique properties such as high electron/hole mobility, long diffusion lengths and wide spectral absorption range, pushing their performances to a record power conversion efficiency (PCE) beyond 22% (ref. 1). The perovskite materials were first reported for use in solar cells in 2009 and their efficiency was only 3.8%. A promising strategy to solve this problem was to use a solid-state hole-transport layer, first reported in 2012. The solid state perovskite solar cells (PSCs) were fabricated using 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) as the hole transporting material (HTM) and the PCE was 9.7% with a stable performance over a timescale exceeding 500 hours under ambient conditions. From then on, more and more progress has been made on PSCs in device fabrication, new materials development and theoretical research, but stability is still a main issue that limits their commercial applications. Therefore, controlling the quality of CH3NH3PbI3 crystals to allow the preparation of a stable active layer and to improve the stability of the PSCs has become the focus of research. One commonly used method is to add some compounds, such as solvents, organic acids, organic metals, polymers, fullerenes, or nanoparticles into the perovskite precursor or anti-solvent. Xie et al. introduced a ternary solvent system of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)/g-butyrolactone (GBL)/N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) to fabricate uniform MAPbI3 films with less surface roughness; the efficiency was 18.6% and the corresponding stability was improved. Zhang et al. employed α-bis-PCBM as a template agent for the anti-solvent processing to fabricate perovskite films. The efficiency of the α-bis-PCBM based PSCs was 20.8% and they maintained 90.1% of their initial PCE after 44 d without encapsulation (40% RH). Hou et al. added terephthalic acid into the perovskite precursor solution forming sheet-shaped perovskite films; the efficiency was improved to 18.51% and the devices had a good thermal stability. Bi et al. used poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) as a template to control perovskite nucleation and crystal growth. PMMA can enable heterogeneous nucleation and can slow down the perovskite crystal growth, resulting in smooth perovskite films with fewer defects and larger oriented grains, thus making the PCE of the PSCs exceed 21%. Sun et al. added 2-pyridylthiourea into the precursor solution to make a high efficiency PSC (18.2%), and the PCE only decreased 8% after 30 days in 55 ± 5% relative humidity without encapsulation.

In order to explore the relationship between the structure and the performance, thus suppressing the defects and hysteresis and improving the stability of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite cells, we combined a one-step fast crystallization method with two thiadiazole derivatives, namely 1,3,4-thiadiazolidine-2-thione (TDZT) and 1,3,4-thiadiazolidine-2,5-dithione (TDZDT) in the perovskite precursor as shown in Fig. 1. The effects of the thiadiazole derivatives on the crystallinity and morphology of the perovskite films were characterized using IR, XRD, AFM, SEM and contact angles. The defect density of the perovskite was calculated using a space charge limited current (SCLC) method; the perovskite solar cells with thiadiazole derivatives obtained a higher PCE and better stability than the control cells without any additives. The efficiency of TDZDT-containing CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite-based cells was up to 19.04% with less hysteresis.

The two thiadiazole derivatives (TDZ), TDZT and TDZDT, are five membered heterocyclic containing S-donor and N-donor materials, which can interact with PbI2 to form a coordination compound that can control the growth of the perovskite crystal. Infrared spectroscopy was used to investigate the interaction between TDZ and PbI2 or PbI2·CH3NH2I in the perovskite precursor. Fig. 2 shows the IR spectra of TDZ, TDZ·PbI2 and TDZ·PbI2·CH3NH2I. The CS and N–H stretching vibrations in TDZ lie at about 720 cm−1 (ref. 19) and 3500 cm−1 (ref. 20), respectively. In these spectra, the stretching vibrations are all shifted to a lower wavenumber, which means that there are interactions between TDZ and PbI2·CH3NH2I or PbI2. The stretching vibrations of N–H and CS in TDZT appear at 3460 cm−1 and 725 cm−1; however, both of these stretching vibrations in TDZT·PbI2 are shifted to a lower wavenumber of 3454 and 715 cm−1, respectively. This is due to the interaction between the lone pair electrons on the N and S atoms and the PbI2 which confines the vibration of the N–H and CS bond. The stretching vibration of CS is blue-shifted more than that of N–H due to the stronger donor electron ability and stronger reaction with PbI2, resulting from the increased electron cloud density around the sulfur atom at the double bond conjoined with the sulfur atom. The N–H and CS stretching vibrations of TDZT·PbI2·CH3NH2I are shifted less than those of TDZT·PbI2 at 3456 and 719 cm−1, owing to the existence of CH3NH2I which can react with PbI2, decrease the electron cloud density around the Pb atom and reduce the interaction between PbI2 and TDZT. When using TDZDT, similar results are obtained. The N–H and CS stretch are further shifted to a lower wavenumber (as shown in Table S1) due to the stronger reaction with PbI2 resulting from the two CS bonds in TDZDT.

In order to investigate the influence of the thiadiazole derivative on the crystallinity and surface morphology of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite film, two different thiadiazole derivatives with different concentrations (0 mg mL−1, 0.3 mg mL−1, 0.6 mg mL−1, 0.9 mg mL−1, 1.2 mg mL−1, 1.5 mg mL−1 and 3 mg mL−1) were added into the perovskite precursor solution, followed by a one step fast crystallization method to fabricate a perovskite film on a TiO2 layer. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the different thiadiazole derivative-containing perovskite films are shown in Fig. 3. All the films exhibited typical diffraction peaks for MAPbI3 crystals (diffraction peaks at 14.2°, 24.9° and 28.4° assigned to the diffraction peaks of the (110), (202), and (220) Miller indices, respectively) as shown in Fig. 3a and b, so adding the thiadiazole derivatives into the perovskite precursor does not change the crystal structure of MAPbI3. The peak of the thiadiazole derivative-containing perovskite films at 14.2° is stronger compared with the pristine perovskite film, which shows that the thiadiazole derivatives can improve the crystallization of perovskite and make a high quality film with fewer defects. With increasing thiadiazole derivative concentration, the peak intensity at 14.2° becomes higher up to 0.6 mg mL−1, and becomes a little lower when exceeding 0.6 mg mL−1 (as listed in Table S2). The two materials showed similar results and a perovskite precursor solution of 0.6 mg mL−1 thiadiazole derivatives shows the highest peaks.
Combined with the above infrared and XRD characterization, the process of the TDZ-modulated growth of the perovskite crystal films is illustrated in Fig. 3c. Firstly, lead iodide, methylamine iodine and TDZ are dissolved in a DMF/DMSO mixed solvent. Since the N and S atoms in the TDZ all contain lone pair electrons which can serve as Lewis bases, they can react with the Lewis acid, PbI2, to form a relatively stable intermediate, TDZ·PbI2. The mixed solution was dropped onto a titanium dioxide substrate and spin-coated. During spin-coating, the TDZ·PbI2 intermediate gradually dissociates and PbI2 is slowly released by the introduction of the anti-solvent chlorobenzene. Then PbI2 and MAI form small perovskite crystals, thereby controlling the speed of perovskite crystal crystallization. We investigated the Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy of a perovskite film based on a precursor with or without TDZ before annealing (as shown in Fig. S3). No infrared absorption peak of TDZ was observed and the EDS data in Fig. S4 also shows that there is no TDZ in the perovskite film due to the absence of an S atom, indicating that the anti-solvent chlorobenzene can also extract the residual TDZ that covers the perovskite surface or that is inserted in the grain boundary.
When dropping liquid onto a solid substrate, there will be a certain angle at the line of three-phase contact that is described by one of the most commonly used physical equations, namely Young’s equation (eqn (1)).
cosθγlv = γsv − γsl
(1)
where
γlv is liquid surface energy, γsv is solid surface energy and γsl is solid–liquid surface energy. From the equation we know that when γlv and γsl are the same, the solid energy will decrease with increasing contact angle. Solid surface energy is important for the prediction of film surface energy, and the decease of solid surface energy indicates that the film has better hydrophobicity. The contact angles between the different thiadiazole derivative-containing perovskite films (0 mg mL−1, 0.3 mg mL−1, 0.6 mg mL−1, 0.9 mg mL−1, 1.2 mg mL−1, 1.5 mg mL−1 and 3 mg mL−1) and water were investigated. The contact angle between water and the pristine perovskite film was 49.76° and the contact angles increased when adding some thiadiazole derivatives into the perovskite film as shown in Fig. S1 and S2. The results show that the perovskite surface energy becomes smaller than that of the pristine perovskite, indicating that thiadiazole derivatives can improve the perovskite film hydrophobicity. When the added concentration of TDZDT or TDZT is 0.6 mg mL−1, the contact angles become 70.51° and 65.70°, respectively, as shown in Fig. 4.

To explore the influence of the thiadiazole derivatives on the morphology of the perovskite film, we used scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) to investigate the morphological changes of the perovskite films based on no additive, 0.6 mg mL−1 TDZDT and 0.6 mg mL−1 TDZT. Fig. 4 shows the top view SEM images of the perovskite films with different additives. In the pristine perovskite film, the size of the CH3NH3PbI3 crystal is small with some clear grain boundaries, and these factors may reduce the efficiency and stability of the perovskite film. In contrast, the perovskite films with the thiadiazole derivatives have a larger and more uniform crystal size with fewer defects. When TDZDT was added, the CH3NH3PbI3 crystal size exceeded 800 nm. In addition, AFM morphology images of the different perovskite films are shown in Fig. S5., and the small root mean squared (Rms) roughness values of the pristine, TDZT- and TDZDT-containing perovskite films are 18.5 nm, 14.2 nm and 6.7 nm in a random area of 10 × 10 μm2, respectively. This demonstrated that the thiadiazole derivatives can make perovskite films more smooth. Perovskite precursors with no additive, 0.6 mg mL−1 TDZDT and 0.6 mg mL−1 TDZT were separately used to prepare the light-absorbing layers of the perovskite solar cells. As shown in the cross-sectional SEM images of the corresponding PSCs (Fig. 7a–c), TDZDT- or TDZT-containing devices presented fewer grain boundaries and a larger perovskite crystal size.
The durable XRD tests of the perovskite films with and without the thiadiazole derivatives had also been conducted to check the thermal stability and humidity stability of the corresponding perovskite films. The films were exposed to 30% relative humidity at 65 °C, and 65 ± 5% relative humidity at room temperature without encapsulation under dark conditions, respectively. From Fig. 5a we can see that after 30 days a peak at 12.4° assigned to PbI2 appears, indicating that the perovskite film is partly decomposed. The ratio of PbI2 to perovskite (2θ = 14.2°) of the pristine control perovskite increases faster than those of the TDZT-containing and TDZDT-containing perovskite films after 60 days. The TDZDT-containing perovskite film turns out to be the most stable one in these stability test conditions. We can also see the color change of the perovskite film before and after the exposed stability testing for 60 days. The control film undergoes severe decomposition at the edges where the color becomes yellow; meanwhile, the color of the TDZT-containing film changes a little and the TDZDT-containing film almost doesn’t change. The thermal stability of the corresponding films shows similar results, indicating that the thiadiazole derivative-containing films are more stable than the pristine film. The better stability is attributed to the thiadiazole derivatives suppressing the defects in the perovskite film and reducing the erosion sites (Fig. 5d–f).
To investigate the influence of the morphology changes and the defect state reduction on the carrier properties of the perovskite films, steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra were obtained. When gathering the PL and TRPL spectra, the perovskite films without additive, with 0.6 mg mL−1 TDZDT and with 0.6 mg mL−1 TDZT were fabricated on mp-TiO2-coated FTO glass and FTO glass, respectively. As shown in Fig. 6a, the PL spectrum intensity of the thiadiazole derivative-containing perovskite films has decreased compared with that of the pristine perovskite. The reduced PL intensity is due to better electron injection into the mesoporous TiO2, which is consistent with the higher Jsc of the corresponding PSCs.Fig. 6b shows TRPL decay measurements, and the stretched exponential decay lifetimes were obtained by fitting the data with a biexponential decay function. The TDZDT-containing and TDZT-containing perovskite films respectively show fast and slow phase lifetimes of τ1 = 14 ns and τ2 = 275 ns, and τ1 = 11 ns and τ2 = 92 ns. In contrast, the pristine perovskite film gave values of τ1 = 7 ns and τ2 = 62 ns for these lifetimes. This indicates a lower defect concentration, and hence superior electronic quality, for the TDZDT-containing and TDZT-containing perovskite films, which is consistent with the higher Voc of the corresponding PSCs.
The space charge limited current (SCLC) measurement was used to calculate the defect density and hole mobility of the corresponding perovskite films. The structure for SCLC measurement requires one charge injection contact and one injection-limit contact. Therefore, the structure of FTO/perovskite/Au was used as shown in Fig. 6c, and the I–V characteristics of the different devices are shown in Fig. 6d. In the double logarithmic coordinate system, the SCLC curve can be divided into three sections: the first section, namely the ohmic regime, in which the curve slope is 1; the second section, namely the trap-filling regime, in which the curve slope is over 3; the third section, namely the trap-free SCLC regime, in which the curve slope is 2. We calculated the trap-state density using the trap-filled limit voltage eqn (2):
(2)
where
ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, εr is the relative dielectric constant, VTFL is the intersection voltage of the trap-filled limit and ohmic regime, e is the elemental charge, and L is the thickness of the perovskite film (about 600 nm). The trap densities of the pristine, TDZDT-containing and TDZT-containing perovskite films are estimated to be 4.73 × 1016 cm3, 6.63 × 1015 cm3 and 9.95 × 1015 cm3, respectively. The trap density of the pristine perovskite film is consistent with the result reported by an other group, which is 5.17 × 1016 cm3. From the calculated results we concluded that the thiadiazole derivatives can reduce the trap density in the perovskite films and improve the film quality, which is consistent with the result of the TRPL measurement. We also calculated the mobility of the different perovskite films using the Geurst’s SCLC model (3)

(3)
where
ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, εr is the relative dielectric constant, V is the base voltage, L is the thickness of the perovskite film and J is the current density. The mobility values were estimated to be 3.06 cm2 V−1 S−1, 10.27 cm2 V−1 S−1 and 5.64 cm2 V−1 S−1 for the pristine, TDZDT-containing and TDZT-containing perovskite films, respectively. The hole mobility of the perovskite film is consistent with the result reported by an other group, which was 2.5 cm2 V−1 S−1. The improved mobility will contribute to the higher Jsc of the corresponding PSCs.

Solar cells with the following structure were fabricated: Au/spiro-OMeTAD/perovskite/mesoporous TiO2/compact TiO2/FTO. The cross-sectional SEM images of the devices based on the pristine perovskite, TDZDT- and TDZT-containing perovskite are shown in Fig. 7a–c. From the images, we can see clear multilayered sandwiched structures with large perovskite crystals. The J–V characteristics of the pristine , TDZDT-containing and TDZT-containing perovskite layer-based PSCs under AM 1.5 G illumination with a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2, are shown in Fig. 7d. The short circuit current (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF) and PCE of the different PSCs are listed in Table 1. The pristine perovskite device obtained a PCE of 15.61% with a Jsc of 21.23 mA cm−2, Voc of 1.04 V, and FF of 0.71. When the TDZDT and TDZT were added, the devices exhibited significant improvements in Jsc, Voc and FF. The device based on TDZT-containing perovskite presented a higher PCE of 17.89%, with a Jsc of 22.48 mA cm−2, Voc of 1.09 V, and FF of 0.73. The device based on TDZDT-containing perovskite gave the highest efficiency (19.04%), with a Jsc of 22.77 mA cm−2, Voc of 1.10 V, and FF of 0.76. A total of 80 PSCs were prepared with different thiadiazole derivative-containing perovskite films. As shown in Fig. 8a–c, the PSCs with the thiadiazole derivatives also show better reproducibility. We ascribed the improvement in Jsc with the thiadiazole derivatives to be mainly due to higher mobility, improved perovskite film quality and larger grain size. The formation of larger perovskite crystal grains can reduce the number of grain boundaries and the carrier recombination. Improved interfacial contact, a lower defect concentration, fewer grain boundaries and less carrier recombination resulting from the larger grain size could contribute to higher Voc and FF values.
Sample

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
Hysteresis loss (%)
Pristine (backward)
1.04
21.23
0.71
15.61
7.86
Pristine (forward)
1.01
21.10
0.68
14.18
TDZT (backward)
1.09
22.48
0.73
17.89
0.43
TDZT (forward)
1.08
22.47
0.71
17.23
TDZDT (backward)
1.10
22.77
0.76
19.04
0.07
TDZDT (forward)
1.10
22.76
0.75
18.78
The hysteresis effect is a commonly observed phenomenon in PSCs. From the J–V curves in Fig. 7d and the photovoltaic parameters in Table 1, we can see that the hysteresis can be inhibited by adding the thiadiazole derivatives. The hysteresis loss of pristine, TDZT- and TDZDT-containing PSCs was calculated using eqn (4).
(4)
When the hysteresis loss is larger, the hysteresis effect is more obvious. The hysteresis loss of the devices based on the TDZT- and TDZDT-containing perovskite decreased from 7.86% for the pristine PSCs to 0.43% and 0.07%, respectively. The origination of hysteresis in PSCs is reported to be due to the trap state of charge carriers, ion charge carriers, ion migration and ferroelectricity. All of these are related to the crystal size and defect density in the perovskite film. The TDZ-containing perovskite films, especially the TDZDT-containing films, have the largest crystals, lowest defect density and highest carrier mobility, so the TDZDT-containing PSCs have negligible hysteresis.
The incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) was used to simulate the absorption range of the perovskite solar cell with the different thiadiazole derivative-containing perovskite films, and the IPCE spectra is shown in Fig. 7e. The integrated current densities from the IPCE of the pristine, TDZDT-containing, and TDZT-containing perovskite layer-based PSCs are 19.45 mA cm−2, 21.83 mA cm−2 and 21.32 mA cm−2, respectively. The results match well with the Jsc values obtained from the photocurrent–voltage (J–V) measurements. The stabilized power outputs from the devices based on the control pristine, TDZDT-containing, and TDZT-containing perovskite layer-based PSCs are 15.44%, 18.91% and 17.56%, respectively (Fig. 7f), and this is consistent with the obtained PCEs from the J–V curves.
The stability of the perovskite solar cells is an important factor hindering their application and very few investigations achieve stability under both prolonged heat and high humidity stress, along with a high PCE. Pristine, TDZDT-, and TDZT-containing perovskite-based PSCs without encapsulation were left exposed in 65 ± 5% relative humidity and ambient air at room temperature under dark conditions, and in 30% relative humidity ambient air at 60–75 °C under dark conditions, respectively. The J–V curves of the corresponding PSCs were measured every five days and the results are shown in Fig. 8d and e, S6 and S7. It is clear that, although the TDZT-containing perovskite-based devices give better stability than that of the pristine control perovskite devices, the TDZDT-containing perovskite-based devices present a further increase in stability. The TDZDT-containing and TDZT-containing perovskite-based cells maintain 91.2% and 74.6% of their initial PCE, respectively, after 1200 h of aging in 65 ± 5% relative humidity and ambient air at room temperature without encapsulation. Meanwhile, the PCEs of the pristine control perovskite-based devices decreased to 40.7% of their initial values. The corrosion of the perovskite film by water firstly acts on the defects such as the grain boundary and the pinhole in the perovskite film. The improved humidity stability is mainly due to the larger grain size, reduced defects and increased hydrophobicity. We also investigated the thermal stability of the different thiadiazole derivative-containing perovskite-based PSCs. The devices were left exposed in 60 °C in the first 360 hours and then in 75 °C in the later 480 hours. The pristine perovskite solar cells present the poorest stability and their PCE is decreased by 63.5% after 840 h. In contrast, the TDZDT-containing perovskite-based cells maintain 90.2% of their initial PCE after 840 h, indicating that the thiadiazole derivatives can improve the thermal stability of the PSCs. Previous studies have revealed that the thermal degradation of perovskite is related to the ion migration in perovskite. By suppressing the defects in the perovskite film, the ion migration can be significantly suppressed. The thiadiazole derivatives can suppress the defects in the perovskite films, resulting in a suppressed ion migration, thus improving the thermal stability of the PSCs.

In conclusion, we have demonstrated that PSCs with improved device performance and stability can be made by adding thiadiazole derivatives into the perovskite precursor in a combined one step fast crystallization method. The thiadiazole derivatives can control crystal growth and suppress defect density. The defect density of the TDZDT-containing perovskite decreased from 4.73 × 1016 cm3 for the pristine perovskite to 6.63 × 1015 cm3. The high quality and low defect density perovskite films can simultaneously enhance the efficiency and stability of the PSCs. The PCE of the TDZDT-containing CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite-based solar cells is 19.04%, and the devices presented excellent humidity and thermal stability in 65 ± 5% relative humidity at room temperature under dark conditions, and in 30% relative humidity at 60–75 °C under dark conditions, respectively. This work provided a new method for controlling the morphology and suppressing defect density of the perovskite layer to make high efficiency and high stability PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2016YFB0401303), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21676188) and the Key Projects in National Science Foundation of Tianjin (16JCZDJC37100).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta00769a
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
§ Current address: Chemistry and Nanoscience Center, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado 80401, United States.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018