 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA10875C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 5618-5626


Harrison Ka Hin
Lee
,

Jiaying
Wu
,

Jérémy
Barbé
,

Sagar M.
Jain
,

Sebastian
Wood
,

Emily M.
Speller
,

Zhe
Li
,

Fernando A.
Castro
,

James R.
Durrant
 and 

Wing Chung
Tsoi
*

SPECIFIC, College of Engineering, Swansea University, Bay Campus, Swansea, SA1 8EN, UK. E-mail: w.c.tsoi@swansea.ac.uk

Department of Chemistry, Centre for Plastic Electronics, Imperial College London, London, SW7 2AZ, UK

National Physical Laboratory, Hampton Road, Teddington, TW11 0LW, UK

Received
12th December 2017
, Accepted 18th December 2017
First published on 18th December 2017
Photovoltaic cells are attracting significant interest for harvesting indoor light for low power consumption wireless electronics such as those required for smart homes and offices, and the rapidly-growing Internet of Things. Here, we explore the potential of solution processable, small molecule photovoltaic cells as indoor power sources. By optimizing the solvent vapour annealing (SVA) time for the photovoltaic layer, a balance between its crystallization and phase separation is obtained, resulting in a record power conversion efficiency (PCE) of over 28% under fluorescent lamps of 1000 lux, generating a maximum power density of 78.2 μW cm−2 (>10% PCE under AM1.5G). This high indoor performance surpasses that of silicon based photovoltaic cells, and is similar to that of gallium arsenide photovoltaic cells. Besides, the ratios of the voltage at the maximum power point (MPP) to the open circuit voltage are similar from indoor lighting to one sun conditions, which is unique and allows a less power consuming method to track the MPP for a broad range of light intensities (potentially attractive for wearable photovoltaics). New insight into the effect of SVA on the indoor and one sun performance is provided using advanced optoelectronic characterization techniques, which show that the mobility-lifetime products as a function of charge carrier density can be correlated well with the performance at different light levels. Our results suggest that organic photovoltaic cells could be promising as indoor power sources for self-sustainable electronics.

Organic photovoltaic (OPV) cells using solution processable small molecule donors have been receiving more attention in recent years due to the following unique features over polymer donors. Unlike polymers which have a batch-to-batch variation in molecular weight distribution during synthesis which can lead to poor device reproducibility, small molecules have a well-defined structure and thus a monodisperse molecular weight which allows easier purification and better reproducibility. Moreover, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of such cells can now exceed 11%, approaching the highest PCEs (over 13%)

Although the main market of PV is for outdoors, the potential of PV, especially low-cost PV, for harvesting energy from indoor light is becoming very attractive because of the rapid growth in potential applications, including local powering of low power consumption electronic devices, and charging batteries. One of the exciting opportunities is to harvest indoor light to provide power for electronics used for Internet of Things (IoT) with wireless internet connection, which the industry forecasts tens of billion devices will be connected by 2020. IoT allows communication between small electronic devices via networks, in which wireless electronic devices (containing sensors, actuators, etc.) are one of the key components and can lead to next generation smart homes/offices, retail sectors, and manufacturing lines. For these devices, with typically low power consumption (up to milliwatts), harvesting sufficient energy from the indoor ambient environment (with normal illuminance from 200 lux to 1000 lux) is a key challenge for wireless devices with unattended operation for months or ideally years. It has been suggested that harvesting ambient light using PV devices installed indoors is a particularly attractive solution to deal with this challenge. Due to the much narrower spectrum (mainly in the visible region) and lower intensity of indoor light (usually emitted by fluorescent lamps or LEDs) compared with one sun irradiation, the performance of PV devices can be quite different between these two lighting regimes.
Different types of PV devices including silicon, III–V semiconductor, dye-sensitized, organic and perovskite PV cells have been studied under indoor lighting conditions, with some of them showing promising indoor performance. Among them, a wide bandgap III–V semiconductor PV cell, GaInP, has demonstrated the highest performance to date, with an open-circuit voltage (VOC) approaching 1.2 V, generating 92.7 μW cm−2 under 1000 lux fluorescent lamps. There have been some studies of OPV devices for indoor applications. Steim et al. showed that the shunt resistance, RSh, is more critical than the series resistance, RS, to the performance under low light conditions and suggested that a minimum RSh of 85 kΩ cm2 is required for low light level applications. Later, Lechêne et al. further explored how RSh and the reverse saturated current, J0, affect the low light performance and concluded that the absolute value of RSh required varies for different systems depending on the ratio of J0 to short-circuit current density (JSC). There are also some demonstrations using OPV for indoor applications including charging a super-capacitor and powering wireless sensor nodes. Recently, OPV devices with respectable one sun performance have been shown to yield more than 22% PCE when tested under LED illumination. However, despite these advances, the indoor performance of PV devices is still far from the theoretical limit of 50% PCE for fluorescent lamps and ca. 60% PCE for LED lighting.
Recently, a promising OPV system has emerged using a solution processable blend of a small molecule donor and a fullerene acceptor, namely benzodithiophene terthiophene rhodamine:[6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (BTR:PC71BM), and the molecular structure of BTR is available in Fig. S1, showing attractive performance under one sun, with the optimum active layer thickness at 250 nm with a fill factor (FF) up to 77% and a PCE of 9.3%. The active layer thickness can be further increased to 400 nm without a significant drop in efficiency, attributed to significantly suppressed bimolecular recombination. More importantly, it has a high external quantum efficiency (EQE) across the visible spectrum and a high VOC under one sun, both essential requirements for efficient indoor PV device. Therefore, we envision that it is a potentially promising material system for indoor PV applications, as evaluated in the study reported herein.
The system BTR:PC71BM, like other small molecule:fullerene systems, requires additional processing treatment to obtain its best device performance. In this case, solvent vapour annealing (SVA) of the blend films is a common additional step used to achieve high efficiency. Engmann et al. have demonstrated the importance of choosing the correct solvent for SVA: a solvent in which the active material is moderately soluble, such as tetrahydrofuran (THF), is more suitable for optimizing device performance than a good solubility solvent, such as chloroform (CF). Although several studies have looked at the morphological changes of BTR:PC71BM films with and without SVA, the influence of SVA on the optoelectronic properties of the devices is still unclear.
In this work, we study the effect of the SVA time (using THF) on the BTR:PC71BM layer and the resulting device performance under one sun and indoor lighting conditions, from 100 lux to 2000 lux which include most of the indoor environments. We find that the optimised BTR:PC71BM cell can achieve an outstanding PCE of over 28% under indoor lighting (together with an attractive PCE under solar illumination). Additionally, the Vmax to VOC ratio is stable from low light to high light levels, which is beneficial as it simplifies the tracking of the MPP. Moreover, SVA has a significantly weaker effect on the PCE of the devices under 1000 lux illumination than that under one sun. The effect of SVA time on the performance of the devices is correlated with the film morphology of the BTR:PC71BM studied by ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) absorption, grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD), atomic force microscopy (AFM), and photoluminescence (PL). Furthermore, optoelectronic characterization including photocurrent, charge extraction (CE), and transient photovoltage (TPV) measurements over a range of light levels provides significant insight into the effect of SVA time on the device performance, particularly the difference between indoor lighting and one sun conditions.

BTR and PC71BM were purchased from 1-Material and Solenne BV, respectively. CF and anhydrous THF were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)-poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS), Clevios P VP AI 4083, was purchased from Heraeus. All materials were used as received without further purification.


Indium tin oxide (ITO) glass substrates (15 Ω □−1) were cleaned sequentially with detergent (Hellmanex), deionized water, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol in an ultrasonic bath. BTR and PC71BM (1:1 weight ratio) were dissolved in CF with a total concentration of 40 mg ml−1 on a 60 °C hotplate and stirred overnight in a nitrogen filled glovebox. PEDOT:PSS was first spin-coated (4000 rpm for 60 s) on plasma cleaned ITO glass substrates in air followed by 150 °C annealing on a hotplate for 10 minutes. After transferring the samples into the nitrogen filled glovebox, the blend solution was spin-coated onto the PEDOT:PSS coated substrates at an optimized speed of 1500 rpm for 15 s resulting in ca. 220 nm active layer thickness measured using a profilometer. SVA treatment was performed in a sectioned Petri dish where 1 ml THF was put in a section to ensure a similar surface area exposed to the environment. The THF filled Petri dish was covered with a lid for at least 2 minutes before the SVA treatment of the active layer. The samples were placed in the other sections of the Petri dish with the active layer facing up for different exposure times as specified in the main text. Finally, 30 nm of calcium and 100 nm of aluminium were thermally evaporated onto the active layer in an evaporator at a base pressure of 2 × 10−5 mbar, forming devices with an active area of 0.15 cm2. All devices were encapsulated with glass slides with the aid of UV-epoxy before measurements. Current density–voltage (J–V) characterization was performed using a Keithley 2400 sourcemeter under both the solar simulator (Newport 92193A-1000) with an intensity of ca. 90 mW cm−2 and fluorescent lamps (Osram L18W/827). The lux levels of the fluorescence lamps were measured using a luxmeter, (LX-1330B). The intensity calibration was mentioned in a previous study. EQE spectra were obtained using a QEX10 Quantum Efficiency Measurement System.


The UV-Vis absorbance spectra were measured in the range 200–1000 nm using a Perkin Elmer Lambda 750 spectrophotometer. BTR:PC71BM blend films with and without SVA treatment were prepared directly on quartz substrates and a quartz substrate was used as a reference sample for calibration. GIXRD measurements were carried out using a Bruker D8 Discover instrument with a CuKα beam (wavelength is 0.15418 nm) at 40 kV and 40 mA, and scan parameters of 0.1 s per step at 0.01° of 2θ step size. A FluoroMax-4 spectrofluorometer (Horiba Scientific) was used to measure the photoluminescence spectra of BTR:PC71BM blend films on quartz substrates in the range 560–1000 nm using an excitation wavelength of 532 nm. The integration time was 0.2 s. The entrance and exit slits were 5 nm. Diffraction gratings with 1200 g mm−1 were used for the excitation and emission monochromators. The spectrum of the lamp was measured using a photodiode located between the sample and the excitation monochromator, and corrected with a calibration file (R1c: corrected lamp spectrum). The emission spectrum S1 was corrected with a calibration file (S1c: corrected emission spectrum) and further divided by the corrected reference signal R1c. The data in the manuscript show the S1c/R1c signal. AFM was performed with an AIST-NT CombiScope in non-contact mode using a Budget Sensors Multi75Al-G probe with a tip radius < 10 nm. Surface height profiles were levelled by fitting each line with a second order polynomial, before evaluating the root mean square (RMS) roughness values. The corrected photocurrent Jph (V) was measured from the difference in the J–V response between the dark response Jdark (V) and the light response Jlight (V) by pulsed illumination to avoid overheating of the samples. The pulsed illumination was generated by a ring of 12 white LEDs with a fast-switching metal oxide field effect transistor. The one sun equivalent illumination was calibrated by matching the value of JSC obtained under AM1.5G illumination. The light was switched on for approximately 2 ms to allow the current to reach the steady state and a much longer time was used after switching off the light to allow the device to cool down. The potential bias was applied using a Keithley 2400 sourcemeter, and the voltage across the device was measured using a Tektronix TDS3032B Oscilloscope with a 1 MΩ input impedance. Charge extraction was used to determine the average charge carrier densities in devices at different illumination levels and under different biases (open circuit and short circuit conditions in this study). The desired light intensity was provided by the ring of 12 white LEDs. The device was held at open circuit under an initial bias with a background light level and then switched to short circuit with the light off simultaneously. The voltage transient was acquired with a DAQ card connected to a Tektronix TDS3032B Oscilloscope. The voltage transients were converted into current transients through the Ohms law. The total charge for the calculation of n was extracted by integrating the current transients. For the TPV measurements, the device was held under open circuit conditions under different background light intensities controlled by the ring of white LEDs. A small additional optical excitation provided by a pulsed Continuum Minilite Nd:YAG laser at 532 nm with a pulse width of <10 nm was applied to the device under measurement. This small excitation generated a small voltage decay transient which was captured using an oscilloscope. The decay was fitted with a mono-exponential model to obtain the small perturbation carrier lifetime and finally to be used to estimate the total charge carrier lifetime within the device.


The effect of active layer SVA time (from 0 minutes to 30 minutes) on the performance of BTR:PC71BM cells was investigated under both AM1.5G and indoor lighting conditions. Fig. 1a shows the corresponding J–V characteristics of BTR:PC71BM devices under AM1.5G and the device parameters are listed in Table 1. The variation of each device parameter with the SVA time is shown in Fig. S2. The VOC values of the devices with no SVA and 0.5 minutes SVA are the highest (approaching 1 V), and it decreases gradually with SVA time, saturating at about 0.92 V from 10 minutes SVA onward. The drop in VOC could be correlated with the improved crystallinity (see Section 2.2) of BTR in the blend films upon SVA, as improved crystallization could raise the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of the donor, and thus reduce the VOC. The JSC and FF increase with SVA time until an optimum time, and then decrease. Moderate SVA times of 2 minutes and 5 minutes result in the highest JSC and FF of 13.3 mA cm−2 and 79.1%, respectively. Overall, the PCE mainly follows the trend of the JSC and FF with SVA time, with the efficiency peaking at 10.5% (2 minutes SVA) under AM1.5G.

SVA time (min)

J
SC (mA cm−2) [μA cm−2]

V
OC (V)
FF (%)

P
max (mW cm−2) [μW cm−2]
PCE (%)
0
11.6 [118.1]
0.994 [0.856]
51.6 [67.4]
5.97 [6.8]
6.6 [24.2]
0.5
11.8 [117.8]
0.995 [0.859]
53.5 [66.3]
6.26 [66.3]
7.0 [23.8]
1
13.0 [127.0]
0.966 [0.815]
68.9 [73.6]
8.65 [74.8]
9.6 [27.0]

2


13.3 [133.1]

0.945 [0.791]


75.1 [75.2]


9.42 [78.2]


10.5 [28.1]

5
12.5 [121.8]
0.928 [0.755]
79.1 [77.7]
9.19 [71.0]
10.2 [25.3]
10
11.5 [108.8]
0.923 [0.747]
75.4 [75.6]
7.98 [60.9]
8.9 [21.8]
30
9.7 [98.1]
0.922 [0.754]
61.9 [73.7]
5.54 [53.5]
6.2 [19.3]
Next, we move on to discuss devices tested under an array of fluorescent lamps which mimics a typical indoor environment. Fig. 1b shows the J–V curves of 0 minutes, 2 minutes, and 30 minutes SVA obtained under 200 lux and 1000 lux. The device with 2 minutes SVA shows the highest PCE of 26.2% (200 lux) and 28.1% (1000 lux), generating a maximum power output density (Pmax) of 14.6 μW cm−2 and 78.2 μW cm−2, respectively. The record high performance can be explained based on our previous work. Firstly, the bandgap of BTR is about 1.8 eV corresponding to the absorption onset of ca. 700 nm (see Fig. 2a for the absorbance spectra) which is the ideal energy gap to harvest indoor light such as fluorescent lamps and visible LEDs. This is further confirmed by Fig. 1c which shows that the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the devices with 0 minutes, 2 minutes and 30 minutes SVA overlap well with that of the fluorescent lamps (also shown in Fig. 1c) and has a peak EQE of 78.6% at 515 nm for the device treated with SVA for 2 minutes. Note that the spectrum of the device after 30 minutes SVA shows the lowest EQE and the spectrum for 0 minutes (no SVA) shows an intermediate EQE, consistent with the values of JSC. Secondly, a high VOC under one sun and a low diode ideality factor η (obtained by measuring the VOC as a function of light intensity) are both beneficial to low light performance. Even if devices behave like an ideal diode (η = 1), there is still an unavoidable voltage drop of 0.15 V to 0.25 V when the light intensity is reduced from one sun to indoor lighting conditions, independent of the absolute magnitude of the voltage. The BTR:PC71BM studied herein exhibits a relatively high VOC under one sun (up to 1 V), which minimizes the fraction of the voltage loss at low light intensity. In addition, all the BTR:PC71BM devices measured herein (independent of SVA time) have η values close to the ideal (see Fig. S3 for each device parameter at different light intensities), further enhancing the low light level voltage output.
To compare the effect of SVA time on the device performance under AM1.5G and 1000 lux, the PCE under AM1.5G and 1000 lux with different SVA times was normalised to the peak PCE (at 2 minutes SVA), as shown in Fig. 1d. Interestingly, for a short SVA time (0 minutes or 0.5 minutes), the PCE under one sun has only around 65% of the peak efficiency whereas the PCE under 1000 lux fluorescent lamps maintains 86% of the peak efficiency. To investigate this difference, device parameters under 1000 lux were compared to those under one sun for different SVA times, as shown in Fig. S2. From this figure, it is apparent that the FF is the main parameter which exhibits the most significant enhancement from AM1.5G to 1000 lux (also less VOC reduction as shown in Fig. S2b). In order to elucidate the origins of the enhanced performance obtained under low level irradiation, and why this enhancement is dependent upon SVA time, we have further investigated the films and devices in terms of their film morphology and optoelectronic properties in the following sections.

To understand the effect of SVA time on the film morphology and how the morphology correlates with the device performance, UV-Vis absorption, GIXRD, PL and AFM measurements on the BTR:PC71BM blend films were performed. Fig. 2a shows clearly that the low energy optical absorbance peaks increase in strength with increasing SVA time, along with a red shift observed for both the main peak (from 554 nm to 566 nm, whose strength increased by 31%) and the shoulder (around 617 nm) after 30 minutes SVA. This is consistent with an increase in the crystallinity of the BTR phase. This assignment is directly supported by the corresponding GIXRD data (Fig. 2b; see Fig. S4a and S4b for a full range and a zoomed-in plots), which has a diffraction peak at 2θ = 4.78 (corresponding to an interlayer spacing of 1.85 nm) whose magnitude increases with increasing SVA time (an approximately 8-fold increase from 0 minutes to 30 minutes). The enhancement in absorbance and greater crystallization can explain the increase in device efficiency for devices with SVA time up to 2 minutes.

To explain the decrease in device efficiency for SVA times longer than 2 minutes, we consider the PL quenching and surface topography of the blend films with different SVA times. The PL intensity (Fig. 2c and S4c for a zoomed-in plot) of the blend film (measuring PL from BTR) increases significantly with longer SVA times: more than 120 times larger when comparing samples with 30 minutes to 0 minutes SVA (for 0 minutes SVA, PL is too weak to be accurately measured). The PL quenching efficiencies are calculated by 1 − PLblend/PLneat for 0 minutes, 2 minutes, and 30 minutes (see Table S1), where PLblend is the maximum PL intensity of the BTR:PC71BM blend film and PLneat is the maximum PL intensity of the BTR neat film. The PL quenching is very efficient for short SVA times (>99% for both 0 and 2 minutes SVA) but decreases to 45% for 30 minutes SVA. This indicates that long SVA times result in a substantial loss of exciton separation efficiency, explaining the observed drop in JSC and EQE. Note that the PL peak position is slightly blue shifted (to 732 nm for 30 minutes SVA) with longer SVA times. The much stronger PL quenching with increasing SVA time is further supported by the corresponding AFM images of the blend films, which show an increase in domain size and RMS roughness (0 minutes: 0.69 nm, 2 minutes: 0.85 nm and 30 minutes: 2.82 nm) for longer SVA times. As the domain size increases (indicating more phase separation) due to an increase in crystallization, PL is quenched less efficiently. The PL and AFM results agree well with the decrease in device efficiency when the films are over-treated with SVA. Therefore, we propose that the optimum SVA time (2 minutes) represents a balance between the above two opposing effects, i.e. increase in crystallization with SVA and decrease in PL quenching for long SVA.

To understand the effect of SVA time on device performance more quantitatively, optoelectronic characterization was performed to probe the dynamics of charge generation and collection. To gain insight into the impact of SVA time on photocurrent generation, corrected photocurrent measurements were performed in far reverse bias and are shown in Fig. 3a. By applying a high reverse bias, photogenerated charge carriers are more efficiently extracted by the strong electric field. In principle, if the bias is high enough, all photogenerated charge carriers can overcome recombination resulting in collection without any loss. It can be seen that the device without any SVA process is able to generate the highest photocurrent: in excess of 16.4 mA cm−2, compared to 14.3 mA cm−2 for 2 minutes SVA and 10.5 mA cm−2 for 30 minutes, and the corresponding maximum electron–hole pair generation rates are available in Table S2. However, the Jph of the 0 minutes SVA device possesses a higher bias dependence, which is distinct from the 2 minutes and 30 minutes cases. The large drop in Jph from 2 minutes to 30 minutes correlates well with the reduced PL quenching efficiency in Table S1. However, for the device without SVA, the high Jph at far reverse bias is not maintained at short circuit condition. For all three devices, under short circuit conditions, current loss due to non-geminate recombination appears negligible, as evidenced by the linear behaviour of short circuit photocurrent with light intensity (see Table S2 and Fig. S5) and direct measurements of charge densities and recombination lifetimes as detailed below. As such, the loss of photocurrent for the 0 minutes SVA device most likely results from field dependent geminate recombination losses; such field dependent recombination losses have been reported previously to be more severe in more amorphous blends.

The improved FF under low light condition implies a more efficient charge carrier collection process. The efficiency of the charge carrier collection process is indicated by the ratio of charge carrier drift length Ldr to active layer thickness: , here μ is the charge carrier mobility, τ is the charge carrier lifetime and Vint is the internal voltage within the device. The higher this ratio, the better the collection should be for a given device. The collection efficiency of the devices under an electric field can thus be correlated with the μτ product. Fig. 3b shows the experimental determination of the μτ product over a range of charge carrier concentrations (by changing the light intensity) from measurements of average drift mobility measured from charge extraction data at short circuit (see Fig. S6) and charge carrier lifetime measured from transient photovoltage decays at open circuit (see Fig. 3c). Note that the 2 minutes SVA device presents the highest mobility among the three devices, ranging from 1 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 to 4 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. Near the one sun operating conditions (the charge carrier concentration at the MPP is around 1 × 1016 cm−3 for all three types of devices), the μτ products rank 2 minutes > 30 minutes > 0 minutes, which correlates well with the FF under AM1.5G.
On the other hand, the charge carrier collection for devices with different SVA times under low light intensity is different from one sun. Due to much stronger negative dependence on the charge carrier density for the device without SVA, the μτ product is superior to that of the SVA treated devices when the charge carrier density is lower than 2 × 1015 cm−3 (this is around 1% sun irradiation and equivalent to indoor lighting conditions). The slopes in Fig. 3b for the three devices could be qualitatively interpreted as the difference in the improvement of the FF measured under AM1.5G to indoor light, the steeper the slope the more the improvement observed in FF (see Fig. S2). The difference in the dependence of the μτ product upon light intensity is mainly governed by the increase in charge carrier lifetime with increasing charge carrier density as shown in Fig. 3c, while the drift mobility is relatively invariant (see Fig. S6).
Electronic energy level disorder, often observed by the presence of band edge tail (shallow trap) states, can lead to differences in the dependence of carrier lifetime upon charge density. The distribution of these tail states can be derived from charge carrier density versus VOC measurements. A typical expression of n as a function of V is n = n0exp(γV), where the constant γ quantifies the dependence of charge carrier density upon quasi-Fermi level splitting, γ ≈ 19 V−1 for ideal semiconductors, with smaller values indicating increasingly broad distributions of tail states. Here we find that in Fig. 3d the device with 2 minutes treatment shows the largest γ (γ = 12.8 V−1) indicating the least energetic disorder, whilst the device without treatment shows the most disordered (γ = 9.4 V−1) among the three. Also, note that the γ value obtained for the 2 minutes SVA treated BTR:PC71BM devices is among the highest reported for bulk heterojunction OPV systems.

A plot of the Pmax at different illuminance can be useful to determine the cell size needed to obtain a certain power requirement in an indoor environment in which the light level is usually fixed and stable. Fig. 4a shows the Pmax obtained by the BTR:PC71BM device with 2 minutes SVA at different illuminance (corresponding J–V curves are available in Fig. S7). The plot of Pmax against the illuminance shows nearly linear proportionality. We further compare the OPV performance with published values for inorganic PV technologies tested under indoor conditions. Note that it may not be ideal to compare the results obtained from different research groups as the light sources could be different and there is no international standard developed for indoor PV testing. Obviously, the OPV device reported here not only outperforms polycrystalline-silicon (p-Si) and amorphous-silicon (a-Si) PV cells but also behaves comparably to gallium arsenide (GaAs) PV cells. Moreover, our results also approach the highest indoor performance reported using gallium indium phosphide (GaInP) as the active material.

Since the absolute power generated under an indoor environment is somewhat lower, a MPP tracking method used for outdoors may not be suitable for indoor applications. The fractional-voltage method is perhaps more appropriate for indoor applications, which employs a pre-set voltage fraction in a circuit to track the MPP and thus consumes much less power compared to the MPP tracking method used for outdoors. The voltage fraction is defined by the ratio of the voltage at the MPP (Vmax) to the VOC, and could vary significantly for different light levels since this ratio is closely related to the FF, which changes substantially with the light intensity. We have extracted these ratios for the BTR:PC71BM device with 2 minutes SVA as shown in Fig. 4b. The ratios are surprisingly stable from 100 lux to 2000 lux and even up to AM1.5G illumination which can be attributed to the high and stable FF throughout this broad range of light levels (see Fig. S3). Although in most typical cases PV cells may either be used outdoors or indoors, some applications, such as PV cells integrated wearable electronics, may require efficient function under both conditions. This result suggests that circuit design for both indoor and outdoor use can be significantly simplified for the OPV system studied herein.
In the real world, manufacturing larger devices is necessary. Such a device is usually prepared by up-scalable methods and prefers an inverted device structure. Inverted cells based on the optimised active layer was fabricated and compared to the normal device structure as shown in Fig. S8. Overall, the J–V characteristics show an s-shape with a similar JSC but a lower VOC. We believed that these could be due to some vertical phase segregation especially for the rather thick active layer used in this system. More understanding and optimisation of the inverted device structure of this system is needed. On the other hand, there are some developed methods and procedures for up-scaling polymer-based PV cells. Several printing techniques such as gravure, flexographic, slot-die, inkjet and spray coating have been demonstrated in various types of polymer-based active layers in organic electronic devices. Thanks to the high tolerance to the viscosity of the solution and the solvents used for some of the techniques including slot-die, inkjet, and spray coating, the knowledge for up-scaling the polymer-based active layer could possibly be transferred to solution-processable small molecule:fullerene devices although they could have lower viscosity.
Finally, we estimate the charging time of a battery which is probably embedded in the electronics for energy storage which could be charged using indoor PV devices. Here, we simulated a plot of charging time for three typical sizes of rechargeable batteries (button, AAA, and AA) based on our device data under different illuminance, assuming operation in a business card size module with consideration of practical losses. Details of the simulation can be found in the ESI. For example, under 1000 lux, for a button size battery, it requires from less than one day to a few days to be fully charged depending on the capacity of the battery. Although the charging time seems long, the battery can eventually be kept fully charged for long term operation if the power output of the indoor PV cell is higher than the average power required for the electronics.

We have studied the performance of BTR:PC71BM devices with SVA times ranging from 0 minutes to 30 minutes under different lighting conditions. With a moderate treatment time of 2 minutes to 5 minutes, we obtain a PCE over 10% with up to 79% FF under AM1.5G illumination and 78.2 μW cm−2 power density generated under fluorescent lamps at 1000 lux, corresponding to a record PCE of 28.1% among OPV. The devices exhibit a unique stable ratio of Vmax to VOC from indoor lighting to one sun irradiation, indicating that the low power consumption fractional-voltage method is ideal for tracking the MPP over a broad range of illumination for these devices (potentially attractive for wearable PV). The effect of SVA treatment on the device performance for both AM1.5G and 1000 lux correlates well with the film morphology (a balance between enhanced crystallization and increased phase separation), and charge generation and collection dynamics, particularly the dependence of the mobility-lifetime product on charge carrier density. We discover that even in the existing OPV materials, there are already highly promising material systems for indoor applications, which points out the importance of the selection rules utilised here. Furthermore, advanced optoelectronic characterization techniques will be useful to understand device physics at low light levels. OPV could lead to low cost and novel indoor applications (e.g. which require flexible and/or light-weight PV) not allowed by most other PV technologies.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors would like to acknowledge the funding support from the Welsh Assembly Government funded Sêr Cymru Solar Project, EPSRC (grant no. EP/M025020/1), the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement no. 663830, the National Research Network in Advanced Engineering Materials (grant no. NRN093), and the Welsh Assembly Government Sêr Cymru II fellowship scheme.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta10875c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018