 DOI: 10.1039/C9SE00153K
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 1739-1748


Manish
Pandey
*,

Gaurav
Kapil
,

Kazuhiko
Sakamoto
,

Daisuke
Hirotani
,

Muhammad Akmal
Kamrudin
,

Zhen
Wang
,

Kengo
Hamada
,

Daishiro
Nomura
,

Hyo-Gyoung
Kang
,

Hideaki
Nagayoshi
,

Masaki
Nakamura
,

Masahiro
Hayashi
,

Takatoshi
Nomura
 and 

Shuzi
Hayase
*

Division of Green Electronics, Graduate School of LSSE, Kyushu Institute of Technology, 2-4 Hibikino, Wakamatsu, Kitakyushu, 8080196, Japan. E-mail: manish.iitp12@gmail.com; hayase.syuzi859@mail.kyutech.jp; mpandey@ms.naist.jp

Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1, Komaba, Tokyo, 153-8904, Japan

FUJICO CO. LTD., 4-31 Makiyamashinmachi, Tobata, Kitakyushu, 804-0054, Japan

Power System Department, Corporate R&D Division, USHIO INC, 1194, Tosa, Besshomachi, Himeji, Hyogo, 671-0224 Japan

CKD Corporation, 2-250, Ouji, Komaki, Aichi 485-8551, Japan

Received
11th March 2019
, Accepted 24th April 2019
First published on 25th April 2019
A p–i–n type flexible perovskite solar cell (PSC) employing PEDOT:PSS as a hole transport material was fabricated implementing a synergistic approach to tune the composition and morphology of perovskite films. This was accomplished by the optimization of methylammonium–formamidinium double-cation perovskite, Pb(SCN)2 additive and different anti-solvents to make hysteresis-free flexible PSCs. The PSCs reported exhibit a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 16.13% with excellent mechanical stability, retaining >90% of the PCE after 1000 bending cycles at a radius (R) of 6 mm. This PCE is amongst the highest reported values for flexible inverted PSCs fabricated on PEDOT:PSS. Although PSCs on rigid conducting glass substrates have been reported to exhibit >20% PCE, long-term stability is of great concern because of poor encapsulation. Solution processability of PSCs gives the freedom to develop them on flexible substrates, which is suitable for commercialization of PSCs. Herein, a novel encapsulation technology of sealing flexible PSCs inside cylindrical glass tubes (R = 8 mm) is being demonstrated. Encapsulated flexible devices retained 90% of the PCE after 6000 hours under ambient conditions.

Organolead triiodide perovskite-based solar cells (PSCs) have gained immense attention from the scientific community in the past few years due to the rapid increase in power conversion efficiency (PCE) from 3% to 23.3%. More specifically, they are expected to be utilized as next-generation solar cells for portable and wearable electronics owing to their high power density and flexibility. There are two kinds of device structures widely used in PSCs, mesoporous or planar n–i–p structures utilizing n-type semiconductors such as titanium dioxide (TiO2) and planar inverted p–i–n structures employing p-type semiconducting polymers such as poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS). Mesoporous TiO2 based PSCs are still leading in terms of efficiency due to their ability to form thick perovskite films for strong light absorption with high-quality interfacial contacts by reducing interface recombination. These structures are well established in achieving PCE over 20%; however, they require high-temperature annealing at 450 °C which makes them not suitable for fabrication on flexible plastic substrates such as polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and polyethylene naphthalate (PEN). In contrast to these n–i–p type PSCs, inverted planar device architectures in the p–i–n configuration can be fabricated below 150 °C with the ability to demonstrate hysteresis-free high PCE. Nevertheless, a lot of efforts are still going on in regular (n–i–p) and inverted (p–i–n) structures to reduce the processing temperature and hysteresis.

In 2013, Docampo and co-workers demonstrated the first flexible inverted PSC with a PCE of ∼6% employing the inverted structure which involved the low-temperature solution processing of PEDOT:PSS as the hole transporting material (HTM) and fullerene as the electron transporting material (ETM). However, the PCE of PSCs utilizing the same HTM and ETM is not up to the mark to date. Nowadays, the efficiency of flexible PSCs has reached >17% by employing several approaches such as demonstrating superior low-temperature processable charge extracting layers. Despite the various advantages of flexible PSCs, their inherently low transmittance and high resistance are hitches in the fabrication of high-quality charge transporting layers on flexible substrates. Besides, the low-temperature processing requirement further limits the deposition of thin films with superior quality, which affects the resultant PCE. It is worth noting here that reported efficiencies for inverted flexible solar cells lag far behind, and apparently, the effort to optimize the PCE has been demonstrated for rigid glass substrates to a certain extent.
PSCs are heterojunction devices where the quality of each interface is responsible for improved charge carrier extraction, however, the morphology and composition of the perovskite layer are the most crucial factors affecting the overall PCE. Therefore, optimizing the composition and morphology of the perovskite film has gained a lot of attention among the scientific community on rigid substrates and these things have not been yet fully utilized for flexible substrates; rather efforts have been made to exploit different electron and hole selective layers compatible for deposition on flexible substrates. Mixing MAPbI3 (methylammonium lead iodide) and FAPbI3 (formamidinium lead iodide) is an effective approach to obtain the desired band gap for perovskite absorber films at a low temperature of ∼100 °C, popularly known as mixed cation perovskites. FAPbI3 possesses an ideal band gap (∼1.4 eV) according to the Shockley–Queisser limit, however the film formation of pure FAPbI3 needs annealing at ∼150 °C due to the formation of a non-perovskite yellow (δ) phase at lower temperature. It has been demonstrated that addition of a small fraction of MA+ into FAPbI3 would stabilize the perovskite phase and is now the well-accepted recipe for the fabrication of high efficiency PSCs as well. The present work reports a similar strategy of fabrication on flexible substrates to achieve higher efficiencies with step by step presentation of contribution by different components of flexible PSCs.
The PCE of PSCs is limited by their small grain size and low crystallinity as a result of a large amount of radiative recombination arising from the high density of grain boundaries. However, there exist various effective strategies where the grain size of perovskite layers can be effectively increased by 200 nm to a few micrometers by incorporating the additive lead thiocyanate (Pb(SCN)2) into the perovskite precursor. As a result, the density of grain boundaries decreases, concomitantly increasing the photogenerated carrier lifetime (τ) due to the passivation of grain boundaries by the formation of excess PbI2. At the same time, grain sizes relatively larger than the film thickness of the perovskite are sufficient for transporting charge carriers at extracting interfaces, and therefore smoothness and the absence of pin-holes in perovskite films are of utmost importance. The control of such morphological features of the perovskite mostly relies on the deposition techniques and conditions of perovskite films. 1-step method based coating is the simplest and most viable approach for achieving high PCE, where the role of anti-solvent seems to be very critical as it speeds up heterogeneous nucleation as discussed in detail previously.
In this present work, keeping all the interfacial layers same for charge extraction in the device, the above effective strategies were synergistically utilized to improve the efficiency of flexible PSCs. Therefore, all compositional and morphological engineering processes of the perovskite layer were carried out on flexible substrates considering the possibility of any changes in the film formation arising from the rheological behavior of different solutions at different interfaces, and can vary from case to case. The different optimization steps adopted were as follows: (1) optimization of perovskite composition using the MA and FA mixture, (2) optimization of additives to tune the grain size of the perovskite and (3) the effects of different anti-solvents were explored taking the morphology into consideration and it was observed that all 3 steps improved the overall efficiency of the flexible devices from ∼10% to 16.13%. The efficiency achieved in this work is among the best-reported values of inverted flexible PSCs under similar device architectures using the most conventional HTM (PEDOT:PSS) and ETM (C60). The observed changes in the perovskite films have been successfully characterized and correlated with the changes observed in electrical properties by utilizing different characterization techniques such as absorption spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), and photoluminescence (PL) and time resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements.
Considering the stability of flexible PSCs, albeit significant improvement in PCE and efficient charge extracting materials for flexible substrates has been made in recent years, the short lifetime of these devices and toxicity arising from hydrolysable lead-based perovskites have still been major obstacles in the commercialization of this technology so far. Recently, lead-containing perovskite layers have been replaced by lead-free materials to produce PSCs. However, the poor stability of highly efficient lead-based as well as lead-free PSCs has not yet been fully addressed. Therefore, understanding the effect of encapsulation on the stability of lead-based systems would be helpful for future encapsulation of lead-free systems as well. Performances of these devices are extremely sensitive when operated or stored under an ambient atmosphere; therefore, the preparation of flexible modules with adequately long operating lifetime needs adequate attention. Moreover, long-term stability of these flexible devices also needs to be tested under constant strain and performance should be ascertained as well and performance through bending cycles should not be tested alone while considering real time applications into account. Although encapsulation of flexible PSCs has been demonstrated using plastic barrier materials to impede the ingress of moisture and oxygen for over 500 hours, these encapsulation strategies are rather incompetent considering real-time applications where the device needs to function in the presence of strong wind and rain. Therefore, in the present work, flexible substrates were encapsulated in cylindrical glass tubes of radius 8 mm under a nitrogen atmosphere (with H2O and O2 concentrations of <0.1 ppm). The flexible devices were inserted in the bent state to follow the curved surface of the tube to test the operational stability not only against atmospheric air but also when kept under constant strain. The stability test measurement of the cylindrically encapsulated flexible PSC has shown very efficient stability retaining 90% of its PCE under a long-term operation of 6000 h. To our knowledge, the present stability test result is the longest durability test of any PSC, and the results obtained are among the best-reported values so far presented for flexible PSCs and are considerably higher even compared to encapsulated rigid substrates.

We fabricated the inverted PSC structure on a flexible ITO/PET substrate with a perovskite layer sandwiched between PEDOT:PSS as a HTM and C-60 as an ETM, and it is schematically shown in Fig. 1a together with the calculated energy levels. The absorption spectra of FA and MA mixed perovskites are shown in Fig. 1b, and it is observed that the absorption is red shifted with an increase in FA concentration (0 to 30%), which agrees with previous reports, leading to a higher photocurrent in comparison to a monovalent cation-based perovskite absorber, MAPbI3. Similarly, a red shift in the steady state photoluminescence spectra was also observed as shown in Fig. S1, which confirms the mixing of both the cations in the perovskite crystal structure. The XRD patterns of the films prepared using the FA and MA mixture are shown in Fig. 1c. The diffraction peak (100) at 2θ = 14.1° of MAPbI3 continuously shifts to lower angles with an increase in FA amount owing to the relatively larger ionic radius of FA in comparison to MA, which corresponds to the increase in the size of the crystal lattice going to the cubic or quasi-cubic phase. It is worth mentioning that this gradual shift in the diffraction peak also confirms the presence of both FA and MA in the crystal lattice. The enlarged view of the 110 peak shows that this peak gradually shifts from 14.1° for X = 0 to 14.01° for X = 0.4. Moreover, the absence of any peaks related to pure FAPbI3 and MAPbI3 lattices confirms the absence of any phase segregation in the perovskite thin films.

There are reports that in the 1-step coating method the use of toluene as an anti-solvent results in better perovskite film formation, and therefore, to begin with, the focus was put on the perovskite composition and toluene was used as the anti-solvent. Solar cells using FA and MA mixtures were fabricated with X = 0 to X = 0.3 and optimized. The current voltage (J–V) characteristics were measured under 1 sun as shown in Fig. S1 with device parameters given in Table S1. The best PCE (11.13%) was obtained with X = 0.2 (20% FA) in comparison to pure MAPbI3 (9.78%) as shown in Fig. 1d. This enhancement of PCE is mainly attributed to the significant increase in the short-circuit current density (JSC) and fill factor (FF) with the FA and MA mixture, because of the increase in the red-shifted absorption (Fig. 1d). Similarly, a red shift was also observed in the corresponding incident photon to electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) with FA addition as shown in Fig. S2. The full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the peak corresponding to (110) is increased with FA amount, which suggests a decrease of grain size and overall crystallinity of the FA rich films owing to the presence of the α-phase of FAPbI3 which is thermally unstable and converts into the δ-phase, hampering the single-phase crystallinity. However, this increase in PCE resulting from 20% FA incorporation could be due to increased τ as shown in Fig. S2 and red-shifted absorption as discussed above. The solar cell with a higher amount of FA (30%) addition shows a decrease in photovoltaic performance because of increased radiative recombination, which could be assigned to the poor crystallinity and a shorter τ as shown in Fig. S2. Therefore, as a result the best performance was obtained for FA0.2MA0.8PbI3, which is selected to probe the effect of other factors.
It has been reported that the use of Pb(SCN)2 additive in the perovskite precursor tends to increase the grain size of the perovskite and improve the performance of PSCs. In our case, the concentration of this additive is varied from 3 to 6 wt% with respect to PbI2 in the perovskite precursor solution in mixed cation perovskite composition, that is FA0.2MA0.8PbI3. The grain sizes of the perovskites were observed from the SEM images shown in Fig. 2. The grain size ∼100–250 nm of the perovskite film increases to ∼1–2.5 μm with 3 wt% Pb(SCN)2, and further increases to ∼3–5 μm with 6 wt% Pb(SCN)2. In comparison to the FA0.2MA0.8PbI3 without Pb(SCN)2, the intensity of the (110) diffraction peak (2θ = 14.02°) of the perovskite shows a remarkable increase with Pb(SCN)2, which indicates the high crystallinity of the films as shown in Fig. S3. It is also worth mentioning here that films fabricated with this additive led to the formation of excess PbI2 as a bi-product due to the mechanism involved in the formation of a larger grain size as reported by Ke et al., the diffraction peak of PbI2 was also observed at (2θ = 12.66°) reflecting its presence at grain boundaries or on the surfaces of the perovskite film, and the PbI2 presence can be seen in the SEM image (Fig. 2) as well.
The dark and J–V characteristics of the flexible PSCs based on FA0.2MA0.8PbI3 with varying amounts of Pb(SCN)2 additive are shown in Fig. 3a, and the box chart of photovoltaic parameters is illustrated in Fig. S4 and Table S2. Consistently higher values of JSC with an increase of open circuit voltage (VOC) were observed in the devices with Pb(SCN)2 in comparison to the devices without it, and this results in the increase of the overall PCE, which can be attributed to the enhancement in the electrical properties of the perovskite film with enlarged grain size and fewer grain boundaries. As shown in Table S2, the optimized value of Pb(SCN)2 concentration is found to be 3 wt% resulting in the increase of average PCE of the flexible PSCs to 12.50 ± 0.38% with JSC = 19.02 ± 0.34 mA cm−2, VOC = 0.903 ± 0.009 V and FF = 0.721 ± 0.01 with the best PCE of 12.79%. The enhancement in JSC with the incorporation of Pb(SCN)2 was also confirmed by the higher IPCE (Fig. 3b). It is interesting to notice that a little broader IPCE spectrum was observed with the addition of Pb(SCN)2. Since Pb(SCN)2 addition does not change the absorption wavelength range as reported by others, to further understand the mechanism of this enhancement, PL and TRPL measurements were conducted on the FA0.2MA0.8PbI3 perovskite films with and without Pb(SCN)2 as shown in Fig. S5. In PL there was no significant difference in the peak wavelength, however, higher PL intensity in the films with additive was obtained which resulted in the increased τ and hence IPCE. The enhanced τ value for pure FA0.2MA0.8PbI3 perovskite is 8.23 ns only, whereas the films prepared with 3 wt% Pb(SCN)2 additive show significantly improved τ up to ∼60–70 ns. Therefore, the large grain size of the perovskite reduces photogenerated carrier recombination. The decrease in the overall PCE of the devices fabricated with a higher amount of Pb(SCN)2 additive is attributed to the formation of an inhomogeneous film as well as due to the formation of excess PbI2 nanorod-like structures at the interface which is in agreement with earlier reports. The observed values of JSC of the fabricated devices with and without Pb(SCN)2 are also in good agreement with the integrated JSC obtained by integrating the IPCE as shown in Fig. 3b.
The choice of anti-solvent for dripping is the crucial step to control the morphology of the perovskite films during film preparation through the 1-step deposition method. To probe the same, the effects of different anti-solvents such as ethyl acetate (ETAC), chlorobenzene (CB) and toluene (TOL) on optimized mixed cation composition with Pb(SCN)2 were examined. Irrespective of the grain sizes produced by dripping different anti-solvents, the distribution and uniformity of films produced also play a major role in solar cell activity. The different antisolvents employed in the study have a major effect on the grain sizes and surface roughness of the films as observed from SEM and AFM images shown in Fig. S6, however, the thickness of the films does not change with anti-solvents and lies at around ∼450–475 nm. The SEM and AFM images revealed that ETAC based films possess the highest surface uniformity. On the other hand, the grain size followed the trend TOL > CB > ETAC. To examine the difference further, PL and TRPL measurements were carried out for all the films as shown in Fig. 4. The increasing PL intensity with decrease in FWHM (41.95°) for the case of films prepared with ETAC followed by TOL (42.27°) and CB (42.73°) indicates a better LUMO to HOMO transition with fewer trap energy levels resulting in decreased non-radiative recombination, which is the signature of a better performing absorber layer for solar cells. Interestingly, a blue shift was noticed with the films prepared with TOL, when compared to films fabricated using CB. The PL peak is further blue shifted with ETAC employed films, which is an indication of reduced thermal losses or existence of fewer energy levels between the conduction band minimum (CBM) and valence band maximum (VBM) in comparison to TOL and CB based films. The observed value for τ was 124.1 ns for ETAC dripped films in comparison to 60.5 ns for toluene and 40.5 ns for CB dripped films. The increase of τ in the case of ETAC based films clearly suggests uniform, pin-hole free films with well distributed grain sizes, which is an important criterion for better solar cell performance.
It has already been reported that the anti-solvent has a major effect on the photovoltaic characteristics due to the changes in the morphology of the perovskite thin film. Therefore, to evaluate the effect of morphology change on solar cell performance the dark and J–V characteristics of the flexible PSCs were obtained as shown in Fig. 5a with photovoltaic parameter details in Table 1. The perovskite thin films prepared with ETAC as the anti-solvent yielded an average JSC of 21.02 mA cm−2, VOC of 0.92 V and FF of 0.78. The average PCE of the devices containing a perovskite layer dripped with ETAC was significantly high being 15.04 ± 0.46% and it reached up to 16.13% in comparison to 12.44 ± 0.30% (12.84) for TOL and 10.12 ± 0.85% (10.96) for CB dripped perovskite-based flexible PSCs. The IPCE spectra and integrated JSC of the flexible PSCs prepared with different anti-solvents are shown in Fig. 5b, where integrated JSC obtained is in good agreement with the obtained JSC from I–V measurement of the devices. The IPCE values for devices prepared with ETAC exceeded 80% in the range of 420 to 780 nm and reached up to maximum 85% around 720 nm. The IPCE has uniformly increased in the entire wavelength region in comparison to TOL and CB based solar cells. This increase can be either due to the difference in film thickness or is the effect of different rates of charge recombination leading to different open circuit voltages (VOC) and hence JSC. As it was mentioned earlier that the film thickness was negligibly affected by the anti-solvent used, the uniform IPCE increment can be answered by the reduction in voltage loss with ETAC employed films. This reduced recombination loss or voltage loss in the case of ETAC dripped films is well reflected in the least series resistance (4.26 ± 0.35 Ω) and improved fill factor (0.78 ± 0.015).
Anti-solvent

J
SC
 (mA cm−2)

V
OC
 (V)
FF

R
S
 (Ω)
PCE (%)

a Values in brackets represent a maximum.
b Values in the brackets represent a minimum.

Ethyl acetate
21.02 ± 0.52 (21.76)
0.92 ± 0.025 (0.968)
0.78 ± 0.015 (0.799)
4.26 ± 0.35 (3.63)
15.04 ± 0.46 (16.13)
Toluene
19.03 ± 0.39 (19.70)
0.90 ± 0.009 (0.918)
0.72 ± 0.015 (0.736)
6.09 ± 0.95 (5.18)
12.44 ± 0.30 (12.84)
Chlorobenzene
16.16 ± 1.34 (17.68)
0.85 ± 0.008 (0.862)
0.74 ± 0.02 (0.775)
5.67 ± 1.03 (4.62)
10.12 ± 0.85 (10.96)
It has been reported that inverted (p–i–n) device structures exhibit low hysteresis in the forward and reverse scan. To precisely examine the PCE of the flexible device, we measured the steady-state current density at a forward bias of 0.75 V (corresponding to the maximum power point) as shown in Fig. 5c and the device yielded a stabilized current density of 20.5 mA cm−2, and output PCE of 15.42%. To our knowledge, this PCE is among the highest PCE observed in inverted flexible PSCs with conventional PEDOT:PSS and C60 charge extracting layers and is comparable to the best reported values using various ETLs and HTMs as well (see Table S3). The prepared devices were almost hysteresis free as shown in Fig. S9 and S10. As performance reproducibility is of high concern for researchers, reproducibility of the devices was tested by fabricating more than 50 devices in 4 different batches as shown in Fig. 5d, indicating high reproducibility of the flexible device.
Harsh bending conditions are of great concern for practical applications of flexible PSCs to qualify for portable and wearable electronics applications. To examine this, the mechanical flexibility and durability of the flexible PSCs were measured. The same flexible PSC was bent once across the cylindrical tubes of different radii (r = 10, 8, 6, 4 and 2 mm) as shown in Fig. 6a. The PCE of the device showed no decrease up to 4 mm and retained 92% of the initial PCE at 2 mm in comparison to the performance without bending. Zardetto et al. extensively examined the conductivity of the ITO electrode on a different flexible substrate and found substantially increased sheet resistance for bending radii of <4 mm due to crack formation on ITO films because of its brittle nature. Therefore, this retardation of PCE is due to the decrease in the conductance of the ITO layer which takes place when bent at radii < 4 mm. As a consequence, the bending of PET/ITO/perovskite results in crack formation as already reported. Therefore, the decrease in PCE when bent at radii of <4 mm is attributed to crack formation of ITO electrodes which is also confirmed for our case as shown in Fig. S11.
To further examine the effect of bending, flexible PSCs were tested via multiple-cycle bending at different radii (r = 10, 8 and 6 mm). Bending up to 1000 cycles was performed on devices prepared using different anti-solvents (ETAC and toluene) as shown in Fig. 6b. Devices prepared with ETAC showed excellent bending performance maintaining >90% efficiency of the initial value up to 1000 bending cycles at different radii (10, 8, and 6 mm). On the other hand, the PCE of the devices prepared with toluene decreases substantially exhibiting <20% of the original value after 400 bending cycles at r = 6 mm. These superior bending results in the present case must be attributed to the quality of the perovskite film since the thicknesses of the other ETM and HTM layers and PET/ITO substrates were the same. Therefore, this high quality bending performance in the flexible PSCs can be ascribed to the high quality perovskite films prepared with ETAC as anti-solvent and the role of anti-solvent is very important to prepare compact hole free perovskite films to exhibit high mechanical flexibility as discussed above. Bending PET/ITO/perovskite up to 1000 cycles retained >90% of the efficiency (comparison table of the recent reports can be seen in Table S4).
Our research group has previously shown the advantages associated with cylindrical type solar cells where they can harvest light from all directions and are beneficial for a number of applications. The main aim of the stability test was to investigate the durability of cylindrically encapsulated flexible PSCs (will be called encapsulated from now) as shown in Fig. 7. It is worth mentioning that the flexible PSCs with dimensions 2 × 2 cm were inserted and placed carefully in the cylindrical tube to follow its curvature (r = 8 mm) so that the device stability can be observed under strain as well. To make a relative comparison, both kinds of devices (encapsulated and non-encapsulated) were also left under an ambient laboratory atmosphere, in the temperature range of 22–30 °C and at relative humidities of 40 to 80%. The J–V characteristics of both were periodically measured at different intervals up to 6000 h, until the preparation of this report. The J–V parameters for the encapsulated and non-encapsulated device recorded are shown in Fig. 7. The performance of the devices without encapsulation started to degrade within 24 hours and degraded up to 25% of their initial value in 133 h, <50% of the initial value in 342 h and reached 0 in ∼1000 h. On the other hand, encapsulated devices retained almost 100% of the initial values up to ∼4200 h, and 90% of their initial PCE values were retained up to 6000 h (Fig. 7a). This performance retained over a period of 6000 h is the highest durability measured for pure 3D perovskite based solar cells. Recently, the use of 2D/3D mixed perovskite layers has been found to be promising in improving the stability, and Nazeeruddin and co-workers demonstrated that when 2D/3D perovskite is used in combination with carbon based electrodes, a stability of over 1 year can be easily achieved. Therefore, the device stability even in the bent state suggests the promising future of flexible PSCs for wearable electronics.
Flexible PSCs are indeed promising candidates for roll-to-roll production to be utilized in wearable and printable power sources. However, the present cylindrical encapsulation is intentionally done for futuristic power sources to utilize flexible cells in shapes similar to fluorescent lamps where they will be capable of harvesting light from all directions with high resistance towards strong wind and snow. Apart from this, the installation of such cells would occupy small space and the output power could be utilized for farming land and remote sensing machines. Moreover, to realize such devices for practical usage, long term stability test under the presence of high temperature and humidity is under consideration and will be reported separately.

Compositional engineering of double-cation (FAXMA1−XPbI3) perovskite and the use of Pb(SCN)2 additive in the perovskite precursor solution are demonstrated in inverted flexible PSCs. It was found that FA and MA cation mixture-based PSCs exhibited an increased absorption edge towards a longer wavelength increasing the overall current density in comparison to only MA based PSCs leading to a maximum PCE of 11.13 ± 0.36%. Further increase in solar cell performance to 12.50408 ± 0.38% was achieved with the use of Pb(SCN)2 additive in the optimized FA0.2MA0.8PbI3 perovskite layer, due to the significant increase in the grain size, concomitantly prolonging τ. Moreover, in the optimized perovskite composition with the additive, the effects of different antisolvents such as ethyl acetate, toluene and chlorobenzene were also examined. The films prepared with ethyl acetate displayed a pin-hole free, dense and smooth surface enabling a better interfacial contact with the ETM (C60) layer, which further led to a hysteresis free PCE of 15.04 ± 0.46% with a maximum up to 16.13%, the best reported value for flexible solar cells prepared on PEDOT:PSS. The bending test of the flexible devices revealed that the uniform film exhibited high durability against bending, retaining >90% of the original PCE. The stability of the encapsulated device in the form of cylindrical tubes revealed that the device retained ∼90%, suggesting no ingress of humidity and oxygen through it. These results clearly reflect that flexible PSC cells can be rolled in different shapes and can be made printing compatible that would be capable of producing high output power and in different kinds of shapes towards futuristic power sources.


PET-ITO substrates with resistance 60 Ω □−1 were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. PET-ITO substrates were etched from one side with the mixture of zinc powder (Wako, JAPAN) and diluted HCl (Wako, JAPAN) followed by the removal of the residual dried zinc powder with water using cotton buds. All substrates were sequentially washed in a soap solution, ethanol (Wako, Japan) and distilled water, followed by drying in a vacuum oven at 60 °C overnight. PEDOT:PSS (Clevios™ PVP AI 4083) was used as received, and is filtered with PVDF filters (pore size 0.45 μm) before coating on the substrates. All the solvents to prepare the perovskite precursor solution and anti-solvents for dripping were anhydrous, and purchased from Sigma Aldrich (USA).


The flexible substrates were mounted on rigid glass substrates from edges which can facilitate easy spin coating and make them flat to get uniform films. An oxygen plasma treatment of 15 min on cleaned substrates was done, prior to coating PEDOT:PSS (Clevious Clevios™ PEDOT:PSS PVP AI 4083). The PEDOT:PSS was spin coated at 4000 rpm for 50 s followed by annealing on a hot plate at 145 °C for 30 minutes. The films were then transferred to a glovebox equipped with constant nitrogen flow (O2 < 0.1 ppm and H2O < 0.1 ppm), for the perovskite layer coating. 1.3 M precursor solution was prepared by mixing various ratios of FAI, MAI, and PbI2 (all from Tokyo Chemical Industry, Japan) in the mixture of N,N-dimethylformamide/dimethyl sulfoxide (4:1). For Pb(SCN)2 additive containing precursor solutions, Pb(SCN)2 was added separately to the perovskite precursor solutions in the required amount and the weight ratio was kept at 3, 4.5 and 6 wt% with respect to the weight of PbI2. The solutions were stirred for 1 h at room temperature. 100 μl of perovskite solution was dropped and spun at 1000 rpm for 10 s followed by 4000 rpm for 30 s, and 600 μl of antisolvent was dripped at the 5th s during the second spin rate. The substrates were annealed on a hot plate at 105 °C for 10 minutes. On the top of the perovskite film fullerene (C60) (nanom purple SC) (25 nm), bathocuproine (BCP) (Sigma-Aldrich, 99%) (5 nm) and silver electrodes (Ag) (120 nm) were sequentially deposited by thermal evaporation (10−4 Pa).


XRD measurements were performed in the out-of-plane mode with a Rigaku smart lab X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (1.5418 angstrom) operated at 45 kV (200 mA). Absorbance spectra were recorded with a Shimadzu UV-2550 spectrophotometer. SEM images were taken with a JEOL EOS (6701). PL and TRPL measurements were performed in ambient air with a Hamamatsu fluorescence lifetime spectrometer C11367 equipped with a Hamamatsu picosecond light pulser (C10196). Perovskite samples were illuminated from the film side with a continuous laser beam having 465 nm wavelength. The thickness of each thin film was measured by interference microscopy (Nikon Eclipse LV-150). AFM images were taken using a JEOL SPM 5200 having Olympus (OMCL-AC200TS-C3) probes operated in tapping mode to investigate the surface morphology. The J–V characteristics of the flexible devices were measured in an ambient atmosphere with a solar simulator (KHP-1, Bunko-Keiki) under AM 1.5 illumination adjusted to the output intensity of 100 mW cm−2 using a spectroradiometer, and were also confirmed using a reference silicon solar cell (BS-520 S/N 007, Bunko-Keiki, Japan). IPCE spectra were recorded using the same instrument under short circuit conditions. The device area exposed to light was 10 mm2 using a black metal mask, however, in the case of the cylindrically encapsulated device the area for the respective device was calculated with an optical microscope and used without any mask. Bending test measurements were performed by bending the solar cells across the cylindrical rods having different radii (10, 8, 6, and 4 mm) with electrodes along the curvature of the rod


The connections to flexible solar cells were first made with the titanium wire, and the titanium wire was bent in a spiral shape away from the device so that the flexible substrates can bend and follow the periphery of the cylindrical tube (radius 8 mm) as shown in Fig. 7e. Later, under a nitrogen atmosphere having oxygen and H2O values <0.1 ppm, the cylindrical glass tubes were sealed using a flame with titanium terminals left out at the edge for connections.


MP, GK, KS and SH conceived the idea and designed all the experiments. MP fabricated all the devices and the samples for characterization. MP, DH, KH and MAK conducted the photoluminescence and absorbance measurements. MP and MAK conducted the XRD measurement. MP and ZW performed the SEM measurement. DN, HGK and HN fabricated and optimized the cylindrical glass tube. MN, MH, KS and TN encapsulated the device and performed the electrical measurement. MP and GK analyzed all the results and wrote the manuscript. SH supervised the project.


The authors declare no competing financial interests.


This research was financially supported by S-Innovation.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9se00153k
‡ Present address: Laboratory for Organic Electronics, Division of Materials Science, Nara Institute of Science and Technology, 8916-5 Takayama-cho, Ikoma, Nara 630-0192, Japan.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019