 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM33787H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24373-24379

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Guoqiang
Ren
,

Eilaf
Ahmed
 and 

Samson A.
Jenekhe
*

Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195-1750, USA

Department of Chemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195-1750, USA. E-mail: jenekhe@u.washington.edu

Received
13th June 2012
, Accepted 27th July 2012
First published on 30th July 2012
We report the solution-phase self-assembly of nanowires of a series of six oligothiophene-functionalized naphthalene diimides (NDI-nTH and NDI-nT) and their use as electron acceptors in all-nanowire bulk heterojunction organic solar cells. The dimensions and detailed morphology of the nanowires varied greatly with molecular structure of the NDI molecules and the solution concentration and solvent composition. Nanowires of NDI-3TH have typical dimensions of 80–250 nm in width, 2–10 μm in length, and 14.2–15.3 nm in thickness. Significant red-shift and enhancement of optical absorption in the low energy region (>600 nm) were observed in the nanowire suspension compared with solution and thin film, suggesting an increased supramolecular order in the nanowires. All-nanowire bulk heterojunction solar cells fabricated using NDI-3TH nanowires as electron acceptor and poly(3-hexylthiophene) nanowires as donor had a power conversion efficiency of 1.15%. External quantum efficiency of the photovoltaic cells showed that the n-type organic semiconductor nanowires contributed significantly to light harvesting. Our results represent the first demonstration of all-nanowire organic solar cells and show that non-fullerene n-type organic semiconductor nanowires can be effectively incorporated into bulk heterojunction solar cells.

Organic photovoltaic cells have been demonstrated as a promising new class of solar energy conversion devices and therefore of broad current interest. The active layer of the typical organic solar cell is composed of a phase-separated blend of two components – a polymer semiconductor that acts as an electron donor (p-type) and hole-conducting phase, and a fullerene-based semiconductor that serves as an electron acceptor (n-type) and electron-conducting phase – necessary for efficient photoinduced charge transfer and separation. Because of the relative small exciton diffusion lengths in organic semiconductors (10–20 nm), control and fine-tuning of the nanoscale morphology of the active layer blend or bulk heterojunction (BHJ) film have been critical to improving photoconversion efficiency in organic photovoltaics. Various approaches have been demonstrated in the control of the nanomorphology of BHJ films, including thermal/solvent annealing, processing additives, and the use of polymer semiconductor nanowires. The concept of using organic semiconductor nanowires as either the donor or acceptor component of BHJ solar cells has been explored and demonstrated to have several advantages. Self-assembled nanowires (NWs) offer a rational approach to the control of the nanoscale morphology of the phase-separated BHJ film. The typical dimensions of assembled polymer semiconductor NWs have widths of 10–30 nm (and lengths of μm) which are perfectly matched to the exciton diffusion lengths. Assembled, π-stacked, organic semiconductors generally have high carrier mobilities and high absorption coefficients due to the increased crystallinity and supramolecular order. The use of self-assembled nanowires allows avoidance of the difficulties of controlling blend phase separation kinetics, thermodynamics, and related phenomena such as domain coarsening and time-dependent instability.

p-Type polymer semiconductor nanowires have been extensively studied as the donor components of BHJ polymer solar cells. Examples include the use of NWs assembled from poly(3-butylthiophene) (P3BT), poly(3-pentylthiophene) (P3PT), poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), and block copolymers (e.g. poly(3-butylthiophene)-b-poly(3-octylthiophene) (P3BT-b-P3OT), and poly(3-hexylthiophene)-b-poly(3-cyclohexylthiophene) (P3HT-b-P3cHT)). Typical dimensions of these p-type polymer nanowires are 10–18 nm in width and >10 μm in length. The length of these polymer nanowires has been varied from 200 nm to >5 μm while the width is in the range of 13–16 nm using block copolymers with different block compositions.
Non-fullerene n-type organic semiconductors are actively being pursued as an alternative class of electron acceptors to replace fullerene derivatives in organic solar cells. Polymer semiconductors have been demonstrated as electron acceptors in organic solar cells with efficiencies of about 1–2% PCE. Self-assembly of n-type polymer semiconductor has been exemplified with poly(benzobisimidazobenzophenanthroline) (BBL) nanoribbons with average widths of ∼200 nm to ∼1 μm and thicknesses of ∼10 to 50 nm. In the case of small-molecule organic semiconductors, various molecular structures have been synthesized and used in organic solar cells, such as perylene diimides and naphthalene diimides. Self-assembled small molecule nanostructures have also been explored, but their dimensions are usually quite large (>500 nm) in width to be useful in BHJ solar cells. Although NWs have been assembled from various n-type organic semiconductors, however, only one example of the use of NWs of an n-type organic semiconductor as the acceptor in BHJ solar cells has been reported. Nanoribbons of N,N′-dioctyl-3,4,9,10-perylenedicarboximide (PTCDI-C8) of widths 100–200 nm and lengths several μm when blended with P3HT could give BHJ devices with an efficiency of 1.03% PCE. To date BHJ solar cells incorporating organic semiconductor nanowires as both the electron donor and the electron acceptor components have not been explored or demonstrated.
In this paper we report a systematic study of the solution-phase self-assembly of nanowires, morphology, and photovoltaic properties of a series of n-type organic semiconductors, oligothiophene-functionalized naphthalene diimides (NDI-nTH, NDI-nT), whose molecular structures are shown in Fig. 1a. We show that highly crystalline nanowires (NWs) with width of 80–250 nm can be readily assembled from all naphthalene diimides, NDI-nTH and NDI-nT, in dichloromethane (DCM) solution. The morphology of the n-type organic semiconductor NWs was investigated by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) imaging, electron diffraction, and AFM imaging. By utilizing the n-type organic semiconductor NWs as acceptor and poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) NWs as donor, we could explore the new concept of an all-nanowire BHJ solar cell (Fig. 1b). Such all-nanowire BHJ solar cells comprised of P3HT NWs:NDI-3THs NW blends had a power conversion efficiency of 1.15% and external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra that demonstrate light harvesting by both donor (P3HT) and acceptor (NDI-3TH) nanowires.

The synthesis and characterization of the series of oligothiophene-functionalized naphthalene diimides (NDI-nTH and NDI-nT) were reported elsewhere. Six NDI-nTH and NDI-nT samples were investigated, including NDI-2TH, NDI-3TH, NDI-4TH, NDI-2T, NDI-3T, and NDI-4T. Regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) (Mw = 35.4 kDa, PDI = 2.45) was purchased from Rieke Metals. 1,3,5-Tris(1-phenyl-1H-benzimidazol-2-yl)benzene (TPBI, sublimed) was purchased from Luminescence Technology Corp. (Taiwan). Anhydrous dichloromethane (DCM, ≥99.8%, contains 50–150 ppm amylene stabilizer) and methanol (≥99.8%) were obtained from Sigma Aldrich and used as received.


P3HT NWs and NDI-nTH (or NDI-nT) NWs were prepared separately via solution-phase self-assembly approaches. To assemble P3HT NWs, 3 mg mL−1 P3HT was dissolved in DCM at 80 °C under vigorous stirring overnight. The solution was then cooled at room temperature and left for two days to allow undisturbed assembly of P3HT NWs. The 1D nanostructures of NDI-nTH or NDI-nT semiconductors were prepared via solvent exchange by adding a non-solvent (methanol) into solutions of the n-type organic semiconductor. Briefly, 1 mg mL−1 NDI in dichloromethane (DCM) solution was prepared and stirred until complete dissolution at room temperature (20 °C). Methanol was then added into the NDI solution in DCM drop by drop by using a pipette under vigorous stirring. The addition of methanol ceased when aggregates of nanostructures were visually observed. The quantity of methanol added into each NDI solution varied with different NDIs. For example, 0.2 mL of methanol was added to 1 mL of 1 mg mL−1 NDI-3TH solution in DCM. The resulting suspension of NDI NWs was centrifuged to obtain a precipitate of NDI NWs. The NWs were dried and re-dispersed in a mixed solvent of DCM/methanol with the same volume ratio as that of the mixed solvent used for the assembly of NWs.


Blends of P3HT NWs and NDI-nTH (NDI-nT) NWs were prepared by mixing the respective suspensions at 1:1 wt/wt. Solar cells were fabricated on indium tin oxide (ITO) glass substrates. ITO substrates (10 Ω □−1, Shanghai B. Tree Tech. Consult Co., Ltd, Shanghai, China) were cleaned sequentially with acetone, deionized water and isopropyl alcohol in an ultrasonic bath, and blown with nitrogen until dried. A 40 nm PEDOT:PSS (Clevios P VP AI 4083) layer was spin-coated on top of the ITO and dried at 150 °C for 10 min under vacuum. A 15 nm P3HT electron-blocking buffer layer was spin-coated onto the PEDOT:PSS from a 8 mg mL−1 P3HT/ortho-dichlorobenzene (ODCB) solution. The P3HT buffer layer was aged in a Petri dish for 5 min and thermally annealed at 150 °C for 5 min. The P3HT NWs:NDI-nTH (or NDI-nT) NWs blend suspension was then spin-coated on top of the P3HT buffer layer for 18 s in a glovebox to make a BHJ active layer of ∼80 nm. The active layer was annealed at 150 °C for 10 min. The substrates were then loaded in a thermal evaporator (BOC Edwards, Model 306) to deposit a 3 nm TPBI hole blocking layer and a 80 nm Al cathode layer under high vacuum (8 × 10−7 Torr). Four solar cells, each with an active area of 9 mm2, were fabricated per ITO substrate.

Current–voltage characteristics of the non-encapsulated solar cells were obtained using an HP4155A semiconductor parameter analyzer in ambient laboratory air. The illumination (AM1.5 at 100 mW cm−2) was provided by a filtered Xe lamp and calibrated using a calibrated Si diode from the National Renewable Energy Lab (NREL, USA). External quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured using a QEX10 solar cell quantum efficiency measurement system (PV Measurements, Inc.), and was calibrated with a NREL-certified Si diode before measurement.

Samples for atomic force microscopy (AFM) imaging (5 × 5 μm area) were prepared by spin-coating a dilute suspension of NDI-3TH NWs onto silicon wafer. A dimension 3100 SPM (Veeco Instruments Inc.) instrument operating in tapping mode was used to for the AFM imaging. Samples for bright-field transmission electron microscope (BF-TEM) imaging were prepared by drop-casting suspensions of the NWs in DCM/methanol onto TEM grids (Electron Microscope Sciences, Inc.) and drying in vacuum. An FEI Tecnai G2 F20 TEM operated at 200 kV was employed, with a 0.031 mm2 aperture for selected area electron diffraction (SAED). Images were slightly defocused to enhance the phase contrast and were acquired with a CCD camera and recorded with Gatan DigitalMicrograph software.

UV-vis absorption spectra were recorded with a Perkin-Elmer model Lambda 900 UV/vis/near-IR spectrophotometer from both suspensions of the NWs and the neat films of the NWs spin-coated on top of glass substrates.

We have previously demonstrated that one of the n-type organic semiconductors investigated here, NDI-3TH, can self-assemble into single-crystalline nano/microwires via the solvent exchange method, in which methanol (a non-solvent) is added into a solution of NDI-3TH in dichloromethane and the resulting mixture is left for an extended period of time (2 weeks). The resulting NDI-3TH nano/microwire had widths of 100 nm to 20 μm and equally polydisperse length (1–300 μm), making them not ideal for bulk heterojunction solar cells. In the present study we investigated the self-assembly of nanowires from all 6 NDI-nTH and NDI-nT materials and aimed to achieve narrower widths. We thus reduced the concentration of the NDI solutions in dichloromethane (DCM), applied vigorous stirring during the assembly process, and shortened the assembly time. For instance, a 1 mg mL−1 NDI-3TH solution in DCM was prepared at room temperature (20 °C). Under magnetic stirring, methanol was added into the same solution drop by drop by using a pipette. The addition of methanol ceased when aggregates of nanowires were visually observed. This solution was set aside for one day and used for further investigation. We note that the conditions were different from previously reported for the assembly of NDI-3TH nano/microwires, in which a more concentrated solution (5 mg mL−1) and longer assembly time were used.

Bright-field transmission electron microscope (BF-TEM) imaging was used to investigate the morphology of the NDI nanowire suspensions drop-cast on copper grids. A representative TEM image of NDI-3TH NWs is shown in Fig. 2a. The NDI-3TH nanostructures are seen to have well-defined 1D nanowire morphology with 80–250 nm (average 168 ± 45 nm) width and 2–10 μm length as measured from the magnified image shown in Fig. 2b. To obtain the thickness of NDI-3TH NWs, a diluted suspension of NWs was spin-coated on top of silicon wafer and an AFM height image was obtained (Fig. 2c). An average thickness of 14.2–15.3 nm was measured for the NDI-3TH NWs, indicating these NDI-3TH nanowires are actually belt-like.
The selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of a collection of NDI-3TH NWs showed three strong Debye–Scherrer diffraction rings, corresponding to d-spacings of 0.90 nm, 0.46 nm and 0.34 nm, respectively. (Fig. 2d) We note that the d-spacing of 0.34 nm matches the observed slipped π-stacking distance (d-spacing of 0.335 nm) between two NDI-3TH molecules along the a-axis in the single-crystal X-ray diffraction structure. This confirms the fact that the formation of NDI-3TH NWs is driven by π-stacking. The d-spacing distance of 0.90 nm is very close to the distance of b/2 (b = 1.8779(3) nm). However, further attempt to determine the molecular packing details of these NDI-3TH NWs failed due to the inability to obtain single-wire SAED pattern and the significant electron beam damage of the nanowires. Nevertheless, these NDI-3TH NWs are highly crystalline in nature and may be beneficial for device applications.
The effects of solution concentration and the amount of non-solvent added on the morphology of NWs were also explored (Fig. 3). NDI-3TH NWs prepared from 5 mg mL−1 NDI-3TH solution (with 0.3 mL methanol added into 1 mL solution) had width of 250–600 nm, and these NWs appeared polycrystalline as observed from both TEM image and the SAED (Fig. 3a). NWs prepared from 1 mg mL−1 NDI-3TH solution in DCM with high methanol addition (0.6 mL methanol added to 1 mL solution) showed even broader width range of 100–1500 nm, with polycrystalline morphology (Fig. 3b). In both cases, these NWs are bundled together and are hard to separate from each other. We note that the morphology of NDI NWs assembled via solvent exchange is largely dependent on the assembly conditions, as contrasted with polymer NWs assembled from solution-phase self-assembly whose morphology is usually insensitive to temperature and concentrations. We also note that the large difference in the morphology of NDI NWs obtained under different conditions is likely to affect their optical and photovoltaic properties.
Nanowires of other NDI-nTH and NDI-nT materials were assembled by following the same approach as described above for NDI-3TH NWs and TEM images of NDI-2TH (Fig. 4a), NDI-4TH (Fig. 4b), NDI-2T (Fig. 5a), NDI-3T (Fig. 5b), and NDI-4T (Fig. 5c) were recorded. The width of NDI-2TH and NDI-4TH NWs are 0.5–1.0 μm and 160–560 nm, respectively. In the case of NDI-nT NWs, the width varied from 80–660 nm in NDI-2T NWs to 180–500 nm in NDI-4T NWs. In the case of NDI-3T, although NWs with sharp needles are commonly observed, a rare nanosheet with width larger than 3 μm is seen as well. Based on the TEM images of these NDI NWs, we conclude that the size of oligothiophene unit appended to the naphthalene diimide core also plays a critical role in the control of the morphology of assembled nanostructures.

To prepare poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) NWs, we adopted the whisker method by which polymer semiconductor nanowires with well-defined morphology can be readily assembled from a selective marginal solvent. At elevated temperature (80 °C), the solvent is a good solvent for the polymer and polymer solution can be made. Upon cooling, the solvent becomes a poor solvent for the polymer and nanowires self-assemble spontaneously in solution. The P3HT nanowires assembled in this way have typical dimensions of ∼15 to 18 nm in width, 3–7 nm in thickness, and >10 μm in length.


We used optical absorption spectroscopy to characterize the optical properties of the NDI-nTH and NDI-nT NWs. The normalized absorption spectra of NDI-3TH solution in DCM, neat thin film, suspension of NWs in DCM/methanol, and thin film of NWs are compared in Fig. 6a. Two absorption peaks (∼380 nm and 610 nm) are observed in the UV-vis spectrum of NDI-3TH in dilute DCM solution (∼1 × 10−6 mol L−1), and they are respectively red-shifted to 400 nm and ∼680 nm in the thin film. The absorption intensity of the low-energy band in the range of 600–800 nm significantly increases in the solid state, indicating strong π–π stacking between NDI molecules. When NWs are formed, both the high-energy and low-energy absorption peaks in the absorption spectra of the nanowire suspension and nanowire film are further red-shifted compared with those of the NDI-3TH neat film. The relative intensity of the low-energy band to that of the high-energy band in the nanowire suspension and nanowire film increases to near unity, indicating enhanced ability to absorb photons of the solar spectrum. The increase in the absorption intensity of low-energy band may be attributed to the increased molecular order and preferential molecular alignment in NWs.

The absorption spectrum of suspensions of NWs of each NDI-nTH and NDI-nT is summarized in Fig. 6b and the spectra are normalized with respect to the high-energy peak in the range of 340–410 nm. In the case of NDI-nTH NWs, the high-energy absorption peak is in the 340 to 410 nm region. This high-energy peak red-shifts from 340 nm in NDI-2TH NWs, to 400 nm in NDI-3TH NWs and 410 nm in NDI-4TH NWs, respectively. In the case of NDI-nT NWs, the high-energy absorption peak ranges from 330 nm in both NDI-2T NWs and NDI-4T NWs to 360 nm in NDI-3T NWs. An additional absorption feature at ∼380 nm shows up in the optical absorption spectrum of each NDI-nT nanowire suspension. A sharp peak is observed in the optical absorption spectrum of NDI-2T nanowire suspension, but the peak diminishes into an absorption shoulder in the absorption spectra of suspensions of NDI-3T NWs and NDI-4T NWs. The low-energy absorption peak above 600 nm varied significantly for NWs of each NDI material. In the 600–1000 nm spectral region, NDI-3T and NDI-4T NWs show similar absorption profile and intensity, but NDI-2T NWs show much enhanced absorption with two peaks located at 760 and 860 nm. In the case of NDI-nTH NWs, their absorption intensity is generally higher than that of NDI-nT NWs. In particular, NDI-3TH NWs showed the most prominent absorption peak in the low-energy region. We note that the observed difference in the absorption spectra of NDI NWs may result from the different morphology (width and length) of NWs, in addition to the intrinsic absorption properties of the NDI molecules. We expect the observed difference in the absorption spectra of NWs of the series of NDI materials, especially the absorption bands in the low-energy region, will affect the photovoltaic properties of solar cells made from such NWs.

We fabricated and investigated all-nanowire bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells comprised of P3HT NWs as the donor component and NDI NWs as the acceptor component. The device structure was: ITO/PEDOT:PSS (40 nm)/P3HT (15 nm)/active layer (∼80 nm)/TPBI (3 nm)/Al (80 nm), where the P3HT and TPBI thin films acted as the electron-blocking and hole-blocking buffer layers, respectively, and the active layer was composed of P3HT NWs:NDI NWs (1:1 wt/wt) blend films. We note that the nanowire morphology of P3HT and NDI components of the active layer survived the blending as a suspension, as exemplified by the TEM images of the drop-cast P3HT NWs:NDI-3TH NWs blend thin films (Fig. 7). Four unencapsulated solar cells with an area of 9 mm2 each were fabricated and tested under AM1.5 solar illumination at 1 sun (100 mW cm−2) in ambient air. The current density (J)–voltage (V) curves in the dark and under illumination are shown in Fig. 8a for the P3HT NWs:NDI NWs devices. The photovoltaic parameters of the solar cells, including the open circuit voltage (Voc), the short-circuit current density (Jsc), fill factors (FF), and maximum/average power conversion efficiency (η,% PCE) are collected in Table 1.

Acceptor

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF

η
max (PCE%)

η
ave (PCE%)

a Solar cells were made from blends of P3HT NWs and NDI NWs with 1:1 wt/wt.

NDI-2T
0.65
0.0076
0.20
0.001
0.001 ± 0.000
NDI-3T
0.59
1.25
0.56
0.41
0.407 ± 0.006
NDI-4T
0.52
0.44
0.33
0.075
0.069 ± 0.007
NDI-2TH
0.47
0.89
0.41
0.17
0.12 ± 0.03
NDI-3TH
0.81
2.95
0.48
1.15
1.11 ± 0.05
NDI-4TH
0.74
0.27
0.37
0.07
0.05 ± 0.02
Among all the NDI NWs, NDI-3TH NWs and NDI-3T NWs showed the best photovoltaic properties. In the case of P3HT NWs:NDI-3TH NWs solar cells, a high Voc of 0.81 V, Jsc of 2.95 mA cm−2, and FF of 0.48 were observed, which translate to an average PCE of 1.11%. We note that this efficiency represents a 54% enhancement in photovoltaic efficiency compared with previously reported conventional BHJ blend film of P3HT:NDI-3TH with identical device structure (0.72% PCE). The observed improved power conversion efficiency of the all-nanowire BHJ solar cells can be understood to result from a combination of factors, including the formation of a well-defined nanomorphology consisting of a bicontinuous, percolated nanowire network of donor and acceptor nanowires, increased surface area, and high crystallinity, which facilitate the charge separation, transport and collection. In the case of P3HT NWs:NDI-3T NWs photodiodes, an average PCE of 0.41% was calculated from a Voc of 0.59 V, a Jsc of 1.25 mA cm−2, and a FF of 0.56. Notably, NDI-2TH showed an average PCE of 0.12% in the all-nanowire BHJ solar cells whereas a photovoltaic effect was not observed in conventional P3HT:NDI-2TH BHJ solar cells due to the unusual macrophase-separated morphology with dendritic NDI-2TH phase. All-nanowire BHJ devices based on NDI-2T, NDI-4T, or NDI-4TH showed very poor photovoltaic efficiencies (<0.1% PCEs). The reason for the poor photovoltaic properties of some of these NDI-nT and NDI-nTH is probably because of ambipolar charge transport properties, which could make the majority carrier in some of them holes. We note that the power conversion efficiency of the P3HT NWs:NDI NWs BHJ solar cells may be further improved by optimization of the electronic energy levels and electron mobility of the NDI molecules as well as via device optimization techniques such as solvent/thermal annealing and/or film aging.
The external quantum efficiency (EQE) or action spectrum of each of the all-nanowire BHJ (P3HT NWs:NDI NWs) solar cell is presented in Fig. 8b. A maximum EQE of 16% and 7% was obtained in the NDI-3TH NWs and NDI-3T NWs solar cells, respectively. The Jsc calculated by integration of the IPCE spectrum over the solar spectrum shows values of 2.79 mA cm−2 and 1.13 mA cm−2 for NDI-3TH NWs and NDI-3T NWs devices, respectively. The slight difference between the measured and calculated Jsc may be attributable to the spectral mismatch between the solar simulator and the actual solar spectrum, and the possible degradation of unencapsulated devices during measurement in air. The EQE spectrum of P3HT NWs:NDI-3TH NWs solar cells shows that photons with wavelength up to ∼800 nm in the near-IR region of the solar spectrum are harvested; this clearly demonstrates that the non-fullerene acceptor, NDI NWs, harvests photons in the near IR and generates excitons which dissociate at the interface with P3HT NWs.

We have investigated the solution-phase self-assembly and morphology of nanowires of a series of 6 oligothiophene-functionalized naphthalene diimides (NDI-nTH and NDI-nT). Well-defined nanowires, whose size and detailed morphology varied with the molecular structure of the NDIs, the solution concentration, and solvent/non-solvent ratio, were successfully assembled. In the case of NDI-3TH, NWs with 80–250 nm width, 2–10 μm length, and 14.2–15.3 nm thickness were obtained. A comparison of the optical absorption spectra of neat thin films and nanowire films of NDI-3TH showed a significant red-shift and enhancement of intensity of the low energy absorption band (∼600 nm) in the nanowire films, indicating a stronger molecular order in the nanowires. Bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells made from blends P3HT NWs as the donor and NDI-3TH NWs as the acceptor showed a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 1.15%, and a broad EQE spectrum ranging from 300 to 800 nm. Our results demonstrate, for the first time, that all-nanowire organic solar cells can be fabricated by using nanowires of p-type and n-type organic semiconductor as building blocks.


This report is based on research (excitonic solar cells) supported by the U.S. DOE, Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Materials Science, under Award no. DE-FG02-07ER46467. The synthesis and assembly of nanowires of the n-type oligomer semiconductors was supported by the ONR (N00014-11-1-0317). Part of this work was conducted at the University of Washington NanoTech User Facility, a member of the NSF National Nanotechnology Infrastructure Network (NNIN).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012