 DOI: 10.1039/C3CP53352B
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 19057-19064
Naveen Kumar Elumalai, Chellappan Vijila*, Rajan Jose*, Kam Zhi Ming, Amitaksha Saha and Seeram Ramakrishna
National University of Singapore, 117576, Singapore
Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), 3 Research Link, 117602, Singapore. E-mail: c-vijila@imre.a-star.edu.sg
Universiti Malaysia Pahang, 26300 Pahang, Malaysia. E-mail: rjose@ump.edu.my
Nanyang Technological University, 639815, Singapore
Received 26th June 2013, Accepted 24th September 2013
First published on 24th September 2013
This article addresses simultaneous improvements in the photovoltaic performance and operational stability of organic photovoltaic devices (OPVs) in the inverted configuration when nanostructured ZnO characterized by a lower density of localized surface atomic energy states is employed as an electron transport layer. Two sets of devices with the configuration ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag are employed in the present study. A difference in the density of localized energy states in the band gap of ZnO was produced by altering the crystallinity by annealing the ZnO at two temperatures, viz. 160 and 240 °C. The devices are characterized by scanning electron microscopy, X-ray diffractometry, current–voltage (I–V) measurements as functions of temperature and illumination intensity, incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectroscopy, and charge extraction by linearly increasing photovoltage (CELIV) spectroscopy. The devices fabricated using the ZnO nanostructures annealed at 240 °C have shown remarkably higher power conversion efficiency (PCE) and IPCE values than the other device. From I–V measured as a function of photon flux and temperature we show that the device with higher PCE is characterized by a lower depth of localized energy states by a factor of two than the other device. The implications of the lower trap depth was also evaluated using CELIV and the corresponding charge mobility obtained differed by a factor of three between the two sets of devices. The device with lower equilibrium concentration at the interface has three fold higher charge mobility and 40% enhanced photoconversion efficiency. The stability of the devices was evaluated with and without encapsulation under simulated sunlight (AM 1.5) following the ISOS-D-1 (shelf) and the ISOS-L-1 protocols; the device with higher PCE also showed higher operational stability. The findings in this study are expected to provide new directions in fabricating organic–inorganic heterojunction devices with high performance and stability.

Organic photovoltaics (OPVs) have attracted considerable attention because of their advantages of being low-cost, lightweight, flexible, environmentally friendly, and having power conversion efficiency (PCE) as high as ∼10%. The photoactive layer of these cells typically consists of a physical blend of a p-conjugated polymer as an electron donor and a fullerene derivative as an electron acceptor. In particular, the bulk heterojunctions (BHJs) developed between poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and phenyl-C61-butyric acid methylester (PCBM) are interesting for OPV owing to their excellent hole and electron conducting properties, desirable absorption cross section, and atmospheric stability.

One of the most challenging problems in OPV despite its advantages as a deployable technology is to unite high efficiency and operational stability. Consequently, two device structures are proposed viz., conventional and inverted geometries. In the conventional geometry, a physical blend of the P3HT:PCBM, the photoactive layer, is sandwiched between transparent indium tin oxide (ITO) and aluminum (Al) electrodes. The photoexcited and subsequently separated electrons and holes are collected at the Al and ITO electrodes, respectively. However, the conventional structure is sensitive to oxygen and humidity because the low work function of the Al layer makes it easily oxidizable, thereby imposing severe restrictions on the operational stability of the device. Degradation of the device performance over a period of time depends also on the following factors: (i) poor atmospheric stability of the photoactive layer, (ii) diffusion of metal ions from electrodes to the active layer, (iii) accumulation of the charge carriers at the photoactive layer–electrode interface, and (iv) changes in the morphology of the nanoscale photoactive layer. Although several reports have addressed the issue of atmospheric stability by means of physical encapsulation using transparent plastics, protecting the device from permeation of reactive oxygen and moisture, this method does not prevent intrinsic reactions that occur inside the device. Therefore, improving the device stability before encapsulation is the primary issue to be solved. The device stability is improved in the inverted geometry by reversing the charge collection; however, at the expense of the PCE which is ∼4.2% in the state-of-the-art inverted device, compared with ∼5.2% in the state-of-the-art normal device.
In the inverted geometry, the photoactive layer is sandwiched between the ITO and a high work function metal such as Au or Ag with proper choices of electron and hole transport layers (ETLs and HTLs). The photogenerated electrons in the active layer are collected by the ITO coated with the ETL while the holes are collected by the high-work function metal coated with or without the HTL. The long-term operational stability of the inverted OPV stems from relatively insensitive electrodes to oxygen and humidity.
Frequently used ETLs in the inverted geometry include TiOx, ZnO, Cs2CO3, LiF, and Ca. Among them, ZnO is the most promising material owing to its low work function, high electron mobility and optical transparency, and environmentally friendly nature. The photostability of ZnO is one of the major factors to ensure a prolonged device lifetime. Krebs et al. investigated the effects of concentrated sunlight on the performance and degradation mechanism of inverted cells employing ZnO nanoparticles as the ETL. They performed photo I–V measurements with and without UV light under various conditions to explain the disappearance and the re-appearance of the inflection point of the I–V curves. The study reveals that desorption of surface oxygen molecules in the ZnO ETL by the photoelectrons leads to enhanced recombination and performance degradation during operation. The desorbed oxygen is re-adsorbed in an ambient atmosphere during night thereby reversing the performance of the device. Recently, Kuwabara et al. studied the effect of UV light irradiation on the photovoltaic characteristics of inverted polymer solar cells containing the sol–gel ZnO ETL. They point out that formation of micro-crystals during UV-irradiation degrades the performance of ZnO based inverted OPVs. All the above studies have been carried out to understand the performance optimization as well as stability of ZnO based inverted OPVs and related mechanisms. However, the effects of processes across the ZnO–photoactive layer interface, especially during charge transport, on the stability of the device under long term operation have not been addressed before.
The charge transport across an OPV interface depends on the energy level alignment of donor and acceptor materials with respect to the Fermi level of metal oxides. Many studies have been carried out to understand the charge transport at the interfaces using ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) and Kelvin probe microscopy. In these studies, a few monolayers of organic materials are deposited on metal oxides or vice versa and the interfaces are evaluated using UPS measurements. The effect of interfaces and its impact on charge transfer at the heterojunction in an actual working device is not well explored.
It is widely understood that charge transport through nanostructured metal oxide semiconductors, such as ZnO, is different from the corresponding bulk material because of localized energy states, also known as trap states, in the band gap of the former. These trap states, which exponentially decrease from the bottom of conduction band to the top of the valence band, have detrimental effects on the charge transport through the nanostructured materials. We have recently shown that chemically similar nanomaterials of different crystallinity have different density of trap states in the band gap and that the materials of high crystallinity are characterized by high electron mobility and diffusivity. By the term crystallinity, we mean the crystal perfectness, which is normally enhanced by the size of the crystal. In the present study, a difference in the density of localized energy states in the band gap of ZnO was produced by altering the crystallinity by annealing the ZnO film at two temperatures, viz. 160 and 240 °C. Two sets of OPVs in the inverted configuration ITO/ZnO/PCBM:P3HT/MoO3/Ag (Fig. 1) were fabricated using the above two ZnO nanostructures. The device with lower depth of localized energy states, obtained by annealing the ZnO film at 240 °C, showed 40% enhanced photoconversion efficiency and remarkably higher device stability compared to the other device. Charge extraction by linearly increasing photovoltage (CELIV) experiments showed that the enhanced performance in the device resulted from a three-fold higher charge mobility compared to the other device. The findings in this study are expected to provide new directions in fabricating BHJ devices with high performance and stability.

Inverted OPVs (IOPVs) of device architecture ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag were fabricated by spin coating solution processed ZnO (∼40 nm) onto pre-cleaned, pre-patterned ITO coated glass substrates. The ZnO precursor solution for spin coating was prepared by dissolving zinc acetate di-hydrate [Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O, Alfa Aesar, 99.9%, 0.6 g] and ethanolamine (NH2CH2CH2OH, Sigma Aldrich, 99.5%, 0.15 g) in 2-methoxyethanol (CH3OCH2CH2OH, Aldrich, 99.8%, 5 mL) under vigorous stirring for 24 h in air. One millilitre of ammonia (NH3) was then added to the above solution and stirred for 2 h. The solution was then filtered using a 0.25 μm PVDF filter to remove any insoluble impurities. The ZnO thin films (∼40 nm) were produced by spin coating the prepared precursor solution onto the cleaned ITO substrates at 3500 rpm for 90 s. The substrates with spin casted ZnO films are then annealed at 240 °C (device A) or 160 °C (device B) in air for 3 h. The ZnO thin films thus formed were washed mildly with isopropyl alcohol and blow dried in air. The annealed ZnO thin films were subjected to UV-ozone treatment for 10 min in a glove box. The crystal structure of the ZnO films was studied by the X-ray diffraction technique using a Bruker General Area Detector Diffraction System (GADDs) employing a CuKα target and 2D detector. Morphologies of the ZnO films on ITO were studied using a field emission scanning electron microscope (JEOL FEG JSM 6700F) operating at 10 kV.

On ITO/ZnO films, a mixture of P3HT and PCBM dissolved in the ratio of 1:0.8 in 1, 2-dichlorobenzene solution was spin coated onto the prepared ITO/ZnO layer. The thickness of the blend layer was ∼200 nm. The films were then annealed at 120 °C for 10 min. The hole transporting MoO3 layer of thickness ∼5 nm was then thermally evaporated onto the above films in a vacuum chamber with a base pressure of ∼10–7 mbar. Finally, the silver (∼100 nm) electrode was deposited onto the MoO3 layer at a pressure ∼10–5 mbar. Both devices were annealed at ∼70 °C for 10 min in a cryostat chamber at the pressure of ∼10−5 mbar.
The devices were then cooled to room temperature and the photovoltaic characteristics are measured using a source meter (Keithley 2400, USA) at AM1.5G illumination employing a solar simulator (SANEI Electric XES-301S, Japan) in a glove box. The temperature and illumination intensity dependent current–voltage characteristics are measured in a continuous helium flow cryostat maintained at a pressure of ∼10−5 mbar. For the photocurrent measurements we used a source meter (Keithley 2400, USA). White light of intensity calibrated to a maximum of ∼100 mW cm−2 inside the cryostat was used as the illumination source. The area of the devices was ∼0.04 cm2. The incident ratio to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the devices was studied by using a set-up consisting of Stanford Research 830 lock-in amplifier integrated with a Newport 150 W Xenon white light lamp through a 237 Hz mechanical chopper wheel and Cornerstone monochromator (130 1/8 m).
The carrier mobility and equilibrium carrier concentrations in the devices were measured using CELIV measurements. The CELIV measurement set-up was composed of a pulse generator (SRS-DG535), a function generator (SRS-DG345) and a digital oscilloscope (AgilentInfinium1 GHz). The devices were encapsulated in a plastic encapsulant sealed with an epoxy resin for the CELIV measurements. The CELIV measurements were done in the dark by applying a linearly increasing voltage under reverse bias pulse with a slope of A = Vmax/tpulse. The voltage pulse width (tpulse) was fixed at 20 μs and the amplitude (Vmax) was varied from 0.5 to 3.5 V. Upon application of a reverse biased linearly increasing voltage pulse to the device, the resultant output has a rectangular-shaped transient with a plateau corresponding to the capacitor displacement current (j0) and the current (Δj) due to the equilibrium carriers from the photoactive layer. The mobility of the equilibrium charge carriers was calculated using the relation μ = 2d2/3Atmax2; where d is the film thickness and tmax is the time taken to reach the maximum extraction current and A is the rate of change of applied voltage for the extraction of charges.
The dark stability of the devices was evaluated using the testing protocol ISOS-D-1 (shelf). The devices are un-encapsulated and exposed to ambient conditions. The samples are then tested at regular intervals (5 days) under simulated sunlight (1 sun AM 1.5G) at room temperature. The photo-stability of the devices under constant illumination was evaluated as per the protocol ISOS-L-1 for a period of 430 h.

Fig. 2 shows the SEM images of the films annealed at the two temperatures; the films were homogeneous and without any cracks. The particles of the films annealed at 160 °C were of size 7–10 nm whereas the others were in the 15–20 nm range. Fig. 3 shows the XRD patterns of the ZnO nanostructures annealed at the two temperatures 160 and 240 °C, all the peaks of which are indexed for the ZnO hexagonal phase with Wurtzite crystal structure [space group C6V (P63mc)] having lattice parameters a = b = 3.25 Å and c = 5.2 Å (JCPDS card no. 0-3-0888). The XRD peaks of the sample annealed at 240 °C were more intense and sharper than that annealed at 160 °C thereby indicating higher crystallinity for the former as expected.
Fig. 4 shows the current–voltage (J–V) characteristics for the devices A and B at 1 sun conditions. The best performing device A fabricated using ZnO films of higher crystallinity (240 °C) showed ∼30% higher short circuit current density (JSC ∼10.9 mA cm−2) compared to the other (∼8.4 mA cm−2). A less pronounced enhancement (7%) in the open circuit voltage (VOC) was also observed for the device A, however, the fill factor of both devices remained practically similar ∼60% (Table 1). Following the above enhancements in JSC and VOC, the photovoltaic conversion efficiency (PCE) of the device A was ∼40% higher (3.8%) compared with that of the device B (2.70%). To substantiate the observation of J–V measurements, quantum efficiencies of the two devices were evaluated. Fig. 5 shows the IPCE spectra of the two devices. The device A recorded a maximum quantum efficiency of ∼78% at 550 nm against ∼58% by the other device. Both devices followed a similar IPCE pattern except for a 20% increase in IPCE for the device A. Thus, the device A shows enhanced photovoltaic performance in which the only variant is the degree of crystallinity in its ETL compared with the other.
Device
VOC (V)
JSC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Average
Best
Average
Best
Average
Best
Average
Best
Device A
0.56
0.57
10.5
10.9
61.6
61.6
3.6
3.8
Device B
0.52
0.54
8.2
8.4
59.8
60
2.5
2.7
As noted before, the band gap of n-MOS is characterized by an exponentially decreasing distribution of trap states, the depth of its distribution (trap depth, Δ) depends on the degree of crystallinity. The magnitude of Δ could be evaluated from the J–V curve measured as a function of temperature (T) and photon flux (Φ) as given by
(1)
where
Jo(Φ) is a pre-exponential factor that includes the density and mobility of photo-generated carriers as well as electric field and kB is the Boltzmann constant.Fig. 6 shows the ln J vs. 1/T curves of device A (Fig. 6A) and device B (Fig. 6B) for Φ of 100 mW cm−2 from the slope of which Δ could be calculated. Insets of Fig. 6 show the Δ as a function of Φ for the corresponding devices. Typically, Δ is ∼12 and ∼22 meV at Φ = 100 mW cm−2 for the devices A and B, respectively; i.e., the device B presents a trap depth higher by a factor of two than the other. In other words, traps are shallow in the device A and deep in the device B as expected.
In order to understand the role of ZnO interlayer on Δ and its effect of VOC and subsequent operational stability of the OPVs, we evaluated the dependence of VOC on temperature for varying Φ. Assuming a Langevin-type recombination, the VOC of the OSCs follows the relation:
(2)
where
Eg is the effective band gap, i.e., Eg= Eg,LUMO (acceptor) – Eg,HOMO (donor), e is the elementary electronic charge, NC is the effective density of states, and n and p are the electron and hole densities, respectively. Considering the above equation when the temperature is lower, the VOC of devices tends to approach effective band gap Eg, when the contacts are perfectly ohmic. In this case, the interfacial barriers are low and the interfaces allow only the carriers of one sort to move across while blocking the others. On the other hand, when the contacts are non-ohmic, the VOC is determined by the work function difference of the electrodes. For non-ohmic contacts, the charges tend to accumulate owing to increased barrier height. Fig. 7A and B shows the dependence of VOC on temperature as a function of Φ for both devices. In Fig. 7A, the VOC increases linearly with decrease in temperature. This trend can be attributed to a decrease in phonon scattering with decreasing temperature in both the active layer and the ZnO interface. In Fig. 7B, the VOC increases with decrease in temperature up to 180 K, then it saturates. It has been reported that the decrease in resistivity of ZnO as a function of temperature is highly dependent on the ZnO nanostructure. As both the devices have the same active layer, the difference in trend as observed in Fig. 7 can be attributed to the difference in resistivity, which is a product of electron–phonon scattering, which in turn is dependent on the crystallinity of the ZnO nanostructure. The change in trend clearly indicates that the trap states affect the VOC when the temperature is decreased. The VOC of the device A obtained by extrapolating the VOCvs. T graph at T = 0 K, following eqn (2), is ∼0.85 to 0.9 V, which is much greater than the difference in work functions between the electrodes (0.6–0.7 V). The VOC in device A is therefore determined by Eg whereas the ohmicity of the contacts gets disrupted at lower temperature in device B owing to the trap states that form an energetic barrier. The deep trap states affecting the VOC in freshly prepared devices at lower temperature are considered to be chemical reaction sites, as noted by Krebs et al., during their long term operation under actual working conditions, which will be discussed in detail in the later part of this article.
The effect of the difference in Δ between the two sets of devices on the charge transport kinetics at the ZnO–P3HT:PCBM was studied using the CELIV technique. The CELIV is a versatile technique well-known in organic electronics for its efficacy in directly evaluating the mobility μ in materials enabling dispersive transport. In this technique, a linearly increasing voltage ramp field is applied at one of the electrodes and the corresponding current transient is obtained from which the mobility μ and equilibrium carrier concentration n is determined. Furthermore, CELIV also enables the study of the relaxation of the charge carriers in the density of states (DOS), thereby enabling simultaneous measurement of time-dependent μ and n.
Fig. 8 shows the CELIV transients observed for the devices A and B. The characteristic maximum Tmaxi.e. the peak of the transients is translated towards a higher time scale in device B whereas it is at a faster time scale in device A. This indicates that the charges are collected faster/efficiently without accumulation in device A.
The charge mobility (μ) was extracted from the CELIV transients and shown in Fig. 9. The μ of the device A (∼1.3 × 10−3 to 8 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) was nearly higher by an order than that of the device B (∼2 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1). The enhanced mobility in the device A is attributed to its lower Δ than the other device. The observed higher mobility μ suggests that the carriers in the device A are transported efficiently on account of its lower trap depth. On the other hand an opposite process occurs in device B in which the charge carrier mobility is reduced by an order owing to larger trap depth.
Fig. 10 schematically explains the mechanism of the enhanced μ in the device A. The ZnO ETL in device A, in which a higher μ was observed, has a shallow trap with lesser density of localized states. Upon photoexcitation, the mobile carriers reaching the ETL undergo trap filling and more electrons than that of defects reach ITO. As the trap depth is lower by a factor of two in the device A, the amount of electrons undergoing direct hopping through the conduction band with higher mobility is obviously high. The electrons in the deep trap states eventually contribute to recombination thereby lowering the JSC as experimentally observed. Other factors such as (1) nano-morphology and distribution of the ZnO nanoparticles, (2) blend/photoactive layer percolation between the interstitials of the ZnO interlayer and (3) energy level alignment between the ZnO and PCBM, is expected to contribute to the difference in the charge transport mechanism.
The carrier build up at the band gap and the ETL–photoactive layer interface would have detrimental effects on the stability of the device for long term operation as it would adversely affect the chemical integrity of the photoactive layer. To understand the effect of the carrier build up on the stability of the device for long term operation, device stability was studied under dark ambient conditions following the ISOS-D-1 (shelf) protocol and constant illuminated conditions following ISOS-L-1 (laboratory simulations) over a period of 700 h (30 days). Fig. 11 summarizes the results of the device stability test. Fig. 11a is the normalized PCE of the un-encapsulated devices measured under ISOS-D-1 (shelf) protocol as a function of time that shows that the devices A and B are air-stable retaining ∼81% and ∼78% of their original efficiency even after 30 days of exposure to ambient conditions. This result indicates that the trap states or defect states existing inherently in the device B have not contributed significantly to device degradation. Its air-stability is quite similar to that of the device A, which is characterized by a lower trap depth. The air-stability of both devices is in close agreement with reports on inverted OPVs employing ZnO ETLs prepared by spray coating methods.Fig. 11b is the normalized PCE of the devices as a function of time under ISOS-L-1 (laboratory simulations) conditions. The devices A and B retained ∼64% and ∼48% of their original efficiency after 400 h of constant illumination, respectively. This significant difference in PCE of the devices under constant illumination reveals the consequences of the observed differences in trap depth and carrier relaxation. The device in which the carriers are relaxed decay faster than the other. Another possible source of device instability is electron doping of ZnO based devices upon long term UV irradiation thereby resulting in the formation of several recombination channels, which is expected to be similar for both devices. Therefore, the observed difference in the device stability arises as a consequence of the trap depth in both the devices. The shallow is the trap depth the higher is the device stability. Therefore, this study provides insights into one another source of device instability for long term operation of organic solar cells.

In conclusion, removal of localized energy states in the band gap of the electron transport layer employed in an inverted organic solar cell greatly enhances the operational stability of the device in addition to enhanced photovoltaic parameters. This conclusion has been drawn using inverted OPVs with two variants of ZnO, in terms of their crystallinity, as the electron buffer layer. The ZnO annealed at high temperature ∼240 °C (device A) showed improved photovoltaic performance compared to the one annealed at 160 °C (device B). We have evaluated the depth of electronic traps in the two devices and found that the one with a higher crystallinity is characterized by a trap depth lower by a factor of two compared to the other. Moreover, the ohmicity of the interfacial contact at the ZnO–PCBM interface is much more stable for device A than the device B. CELIV studies showed that the charge mobility of the device A is an order higher than the device B. Although both devices retained ∼80% of their original efficiency even after 30 when tested under Protocol ISOS-D-1, the device A showed remarkable air stability under constant illumination. Under the testing protocol ISOS-L-1, the devices A and B retained ∼64% and ∼48% of their original efficiency after 400 h of constant illumination, respectively. Our experiments using the charge extraction by linearly increasing voltage showed that the charges are efficiently transported in the device A, whereas they are relaxed at the deep trap states in the other device. High electrical conductivity of the photoactive–electron transport layer interface in the device A resulted in a VOC that approached the ideal limits. On the other hand, the depleted conductivity of the device B leads to build up of space charges at the electrode thereby making the contact non-ohmic and leading to higher series resistance. In such cases, device performance decayed over time. Thus, the present study provides innovative ways to improve the stability of the organic photovoltaic devices for long term operation.


Naveen Kumar acknowledges Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE) and Mechanical Engineering Department of National University of Singapore for providing research support and scholarship for the work. This project is supported by A-STAR-JST Strategic International Cooperative Programme (1st joint grant call – project number 1021630071).

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2013