 DOI: 10.1039/C6RA01830K
(Paper)
RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 17029-17035

Xiaoyu Zhang,
Yu Zhang*,
Hua Wu,
Long Yan,
Zhenguang Wang,
Jun Zhao,
William W. Yu and 
Andrey L. Rogach*

State Key Laboratory on Integrated Optoelectronics and College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China. E-mail: yuzhang@jlu.edu.cn; andrey.rogach@cityu.edu.hk

Department of Physics and Materials Science and Centre for Functional Photonics (CFP), City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR, China

College of Material Science and Engineering, Qingdao University of Science and Technology, Qingdao 266042, China

Department of Chemistry and Physics, Louisiana State University, Shreveport, LA 71115, USA

Received
21st January 2016
, Accepted 2nd February 2016
First published on 9th February 2016
We explore two strategies to improve the performance of hybrid solar cells fabricated using poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and colloidal PbSe nanocrystals, which have reached a 1 sun power conversion efficiency of 2.9%. Using an atomic passivation strategy towards inorganic ligand-capped nanocrystals, the electron mobilities of PbSe quantum dot films are improved from 1.95 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1 to 1.15 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1. Employing ultrasmall PbSe nanocrystals allows us to adjust their bandgaps towards the type II heterojunction with P3HT, thus achieving efficient charge separation and transfer between the polymer/inorganic constituents. The device performance dropped to half after 10 days' storage, and the P3HT/PbSe interface was found to play a primary role in this efficiency degradation.

Solution-processed polymer-based solar cells have been widely studied due to the prospects of low-cost scalable roll-to-roll manufacturing and high optical absorbance of conjugated polymers. In these devices, the polymer acting as an electron donor is commonly blended with the fullerene derivative acting as an electron acceptor. However, fullerene-based acceptor materials usually exhibit a weak absorbance, which limits device performance. In order to address this issue, employment of inorganic semiconductor nanocrystals (NCs) as acceptor materials with easily tunable bandgaps to replace the fullerene derivative has attracted much attention in recent years. Since the first conjugated polymer-NC solar cell was reported by Alivisatos and co-workers in 2002, hybrid solar cells (HSCs) of this kind have been widely investigated, and continuous increase in their power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) has been achieved, which is enabled by both new device architecture and improvements in materials. For example, Yang et al. fabricated HSCs based on aqueous CdTe NCs and poly(p-phenylenevinylene), with a PCE of 4.7%. Xue et al. achieved a PCE approaching 5% for HSCs based on CdSe NCs and a low band-gap polymer PCPDTBT. Recently, Ma et al. reported the PCE of 5.5% by employing PbSxSe1−x alloy NCs and optimizing device architecture of HSCs.

Comparing to fullerene derivatives, semiconductor NCs possess several advantages as acceptor materials, such as large absorption coefficients and easily tuned energy levels. At the same time, achieving high charge mobilities in semiconductor quantum dot films is often a challenge, which has been addressed in the recent years by designing short inorganic-based ligands or treatment with halides. Till now, most of the reported HSCs were based on the combination of conducting polymers and cadmium chalcogenide NCs, and thus were able to harvest only visible light. To better utilize the near-infrared (NIR) region of the solar spectrum, lead chalcogenide NCs such as PbS and PbSe were introduced into HSCs. Benefiting from the large bulk Bohr radius in lead chalcogenides, the quantum confinement in these colloidal NCs allows the bandgap and the absorption edge to be tuned across the entire NIR spectrum. PbSe NC-based solar cells have previously shown stable performance without encapsulation for over 50 days in ambient conditions. Furthermore, PbSe NCs have been reported to exhibit a multiple exciton generation (MEG) effect, which has been confirmed for the solar cell with a peak external quantum efficiency of 114%. Not only the MEG effect has been observed in several kinds of NC materials, but it has also been demonstrated in PbS, PbSe, PbTe and CuInSe2 NC-based solar cells, meaning that these nanoscale materials have great potential to exceed the Shockley–Queisser limit and approach the Ross–Nozik limit. Another reason for using PbSe rather than PbS NCs is related to the possibility of realization of an efficient type-II heterojunction between P3HT and a polymer, as PbSe NCs possess deeper-lying HOMO energies than the same sized PbS NCs.
Even though high mobility values up to 0.3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 10 cm2 V−1 s−1 have been reported for holes and electrons in PbSe NC films, rather modest PCE values been achieved so far in the related devices. In this work, we addressed this issue for the HSCs employing polymer poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and PbSe NCs. By using monovalent halide anions to replace the surface ligands of PbSe NCs, we enhanced the electron mobility of PbSe films. Through tuning the NC bandgap via the quantum size effect, type II band-offsets were realized between PbSe NCs and P3HT polymer. In order to explore the potential of the type II heterojunction, we employed a layer by layer processed planar junction structure, and achieved PCE values of up to 2.9%, a ten-fold increase compared to the previously reported value of 0.26% for P3HT/PbSe NC based devices.

PbSe NCs were synthesized following the previously reported method. Lead(II) oxide (Aladdin, 99.99%, 0.892 g), oleic acid (Alfa Aesar, 90%, 5 ml) and 1-octadecene (Alfa Aesar, 90%, 12 ml) were loaded into a three-neck flask equipped with a condenser, magnetic stirrer, thermocouple, and heating mantle. The reaction mixture was heated to 180 °C under N2 flow for 1 h until the solution turned colorless. After the solution was cooled to 90 °C, 8 ml of 1.0 M Se–tributylphosphine was rapidly injected into the reaction flask. The NCs were grown at 75 °C for a desired time (ranging from 180 to 460 s) to achieve the average quantum dot size ranging from 2.3 to 2.9 nm, with the position of the first excitonic maximum (a measure for the NC bandgap) ranging from 1.50 eV to 1.35 eV as listed in Table 1. The reaction was rapidly quenched by injection of 50 ml of methanol, the PbSe NCs were purified by precipitation in octane/methanol and in octane/butyl alcohol, dissolved in octane and stored in a N2-filled glove box for the device fabrication.

NC diameter (nm)
Exciton energy (eV)
VOC (V)
JSC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
2.9
1.35
0.38 ± 0.02
14.1 ± 2.3
36 ± 5
1.94 ± 0.3
2.6
1.42
0.55 ± 0.01
11.5 ± 1.6
40 ± 5
2.52 ± 0.4
2.3
1.50
0.59 ± 0.01
4.89 ± 0.9
32 ± 3
0.93 ± 0.2

ZnO NCs used for the fabrication of the electron transport layer were synthesized based on the previously reported method. Zinc acetate (Aldrich, 99.99%, 0.4403 g) and 30 ml of ethyl alcohol were loaded into a 250 ml three-neck flask and heated to 75 °C under N2 flow until a clear solution was obtained. The reaction solution was cooled to room temperature, and 10 ml of a sodium hydroxide (Alfa Aesar, 98%, 0.2 g)/ethyl alcohol solution was injected into the flask. The solution was stirred for 4 h, ZnO NCs were purified by precipitation in hexane and in ethanol/hexane, dissolved in ethanol and stored in a N2-filled glove box for the device fabrication.


Patterned ITO substrates were cleaned with soap, deionized water, ethanol, chloroform, acetone, and isopropanol followed by treatment with oxygen plasma. A thin layer of PEDOT:PSS (∼40 nm) was deposited on the ITO substrate, followed by annealing at 150 °C for 10 min in air. The substrate was transferred into a N2-filled glove box, and a P3HT layer (∼40 nm) was deposited by a spin-coating of 15 mg ml−1 P3HT solution in methylbenzene, followed by annealing at 100 °C for 10 min. Multiple PbSe NC layers (∼80 nm total thickness) were fabricated by layer-by-layer spin-coating. For each single layer, PbSe NC solution (12 mg ml−1) in octane was spin-cast onto the substrate, and a cetyltrimethylammonium bromide solution (CTAB, 10 mg ml−1 in methanol) was then applied to the substrate for 30 s, followed by three rinse-spin steps with methanol. For the respective treatment of PbSe NCs with ethanedithiol (EDT) its 0.02 vol% solution in acetonitrile has been used. ZnO layers (20 nm) were fabricated by a spin-coating of a solution (6.5 mg ml−1) of ZnO nanoparticles. Al electrodes (100 nm thick) were thermally evaporated onto the films through a shadow mask at a pressure of 10−6 mbar. The nominal device areas were defined by the overlap of the anode and cathode and constituted 4 mm2.


Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra were measured on a Bruker Tensor 27 spectrometer. Absorption and photoluminescence (PL) spectra were collected on a Perkin-Elmer Lambda 950 UV-vis spectrophotometer and a Perkin-Elmer LS50B spectrofluorimeter, respectively. Current–voltage characteristics of the solar cells in the dark and under light were measured using a Keithley 2612B source meter. The 1 sun illumination from the solar simulator was determined using a calibrated single-crystalline silicon reference cell.


Electron acceptors for solar cell applications require high electron mobilities. Ligand exchange is an efficient strategy in reducing the inter-particle distance and enhancing carrier transportation, and the most commonly employed one is the EDT treatment, which would replace the long organic chains (8–18 carbons) on NC surface by short organic ligands (∼0.5 nm). Recently, another strategy for the surface ligand exchange on colloidal quantum dots has evolved, which involve halide anions like Br− offering even shorter interparticle distances. The success of this so-called atomic-ligand passivation has been already demonstrated for a number of NCs. In this work, we applied both strategies, EDT and bromide (using CTAB) treatments to improve the electron mobilities of PbSe NC films. FTIR spectra shown in Fig. 1a indicate the complete removal of the oleate ligands for both EDT and CTAB treated PbSe NC films, whose C–H vibrations at 2922 cm−1 and 2852 cm−1, and COO− vibrations at 1545 cm−1 and 1403 cm−1, were all eliminated as a result of the treatment. To estimate the influence of different ligand treatments on the electron mobilties of PbSe NC films, electron-only devices in configuration of ITO/PEI/NCs/PEI/Al were fabricated and characterized. The PEI (polyethylenimine) is a polymer containing aliphatic amine groups, which is commonly employed in reducing the work function of a conductor material. Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of devices based on PbSe NCs with a CTAB or EDT treatment are presented in Fig. 1b, testifying the greatly improved charge transport properties for the CTAB treated NC films. Based on the space charge-limited current (SCLC) model and the Mott–Gurney law, the charge mobility μ can be calculated from:
where
εoεr (εr = 250 here) is the dielectric permittivity of the PbSe NC film; L is the thickness of the PbSe NC film; J is the current density; and V is the applied voltage. From the fitting of the J–V curves of Fig. 1b based on the above expression, the electron mobility of PbSe NC films increased from 1.95 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1 (EDT treatment) to 1.15 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 (CTAB treatment). These values were smaller than previously reported mobilities for PbSe NC films, which was due to the smaller sizes of NCs we have employed.

HSCs benefit from the type II heterojunction between the donor/acceptor constituents. As commonly used polymer components of HSCs like P3HT have a higher lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy than that of PbSe NCs, they can easily serve as donor transferring electrons to NC acceptors, while the ability for photoexcited holes to be transferred from PbSe NCs to P3HT may present a shortcoming for certain NC sizes. We have used ultrasmall PbSe NCs (size range 2.3–2.9 nm) with the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy levels around −5.4 eV to ensure formation of the type II band-offset in contact with P3HT. This is proven by solution-state PL quenching measurements which are a common method to examine the energy level arrangement at the NC-polymer interface. The comparison of PL intensity for bare PbSe NCs and blends of PbSe NCs with P3HT (1:1 wt%) in the NIR region is presented in Fig. 2a for two NCs sizes, namely 2.6 and 2.9 nm. PL quenching has been observed for both NC sizes, indicating the efficient hole transfer from NCs to P3HT. The PL quenching was stronger for smaller (2.6 nm) PbSe NCs than for the lager (2.9 nm) ones, due to the larger difference between the respective HOMO energies in the former case. The electron transfer from the photoexcited state of P3HT to the LUMO of PbSe Ns can be estimated from the quenching of the emission of P3HT in the visible spectral region, as presented in Fig. 2b. Compared to the PL intensity of P3HT solution, PL quenching was observed for P3HT blended with PbSe NCs of the both sizes, 2.6 nm and 2.9 nm. Taken together, these results point out on the formation of a type II band-offset between ultrasmall PbSe NCs and P3HT, being energetically favorable for the efficient exciton dissociation at their interface.
To explore the potential of the type II heterojunction between P3HT and PbSe NCs, a planar junction configuration was employed, with the corresponding HSC device structure shown in Fig. 3a. The energy level alignment of this device (based on values provided in ref. 36 and 54) is shown in Fig. 3b. As PbSe NCs have large exciton diffusion length on the order of 100 nm, PbSe films with the thickness of 80 nm were fabricated. The PEDOT:PSS and the ZnO NC films were used as the hole/electron extraction layers, and at the same time electron/hole blocking layers, respectively. Absorption spectra of P3HT, ZnO NCs, and PbSe NCs with different particle sizes employed in this study are presented in Fig. 3c and d. The average particle sizes of PbSe NCs referred to in this work have been estimated from the sizing equation of ref. 64 based on the position of the first excitonic maximum in their absorption spectra as in Fig. 3d.
J–V curves for the HSCs based on PbSe NC films treated with EDT or CTAB are shown in Fig. 4a. The EDT treated devices exhibited a short-circuit current (JSC) of 10.62 mA cm−2, open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.38 V, fill factor (FF) of 40%, and PCE of 1.62%. The CTAB treated devices exhibited a JSC of 11.51 mA cm−2, VOC of 0.56 V, FF of 45%, and PCE of 2.90%. All these parameters have been improved as a result of the CTAB treatment as compared to the EDT, manifesting in a 79% improvement of PCE. The JSC of a planar solar cell is commonly associated with the mobility of the active layer material, with a higher mobility resulting in a higher JSC. Nearly 5-fold increase in the electron mobility for the CTAB treated PbSe NC film as compared to that of the EDT treated NC film (Fig. 1b) may be responsible to the higher JSC for this kind of cells. In a traditional heterojunction diode solar cell, the VOC is determined by the difference in the location of the Fermi levels between the electron donor and the electron acceptor film (the built-in junction potential, Vbi). The properties of the electron acceptor in HSC under study depend on both NC size and the surface chemistry, and their surface modification with different ligands may result in different kind of electronic conductivity. PbSe NC film showed ambipolar conductance after EDT treatment, but performed as n-type semiconductors after CTAB treatment, so that different kinds of devices can be obtained when combining them with p-type P3HT films. Fig. 5b shows energy band diagrams for P3HT/PbSe NC heterojunctions where PbSe NC films are either intrinsic (EDT treatment) or n-doped (as a result of CTAB treatment). For the EDT-treated films, the Fermi level (EF) is positioned midway between the HOMO and LUMO of PbSe NCs. For the n-type CTAB-treated NC film, the EF would shift up and get close to the LUMO of PbSe NCs. The Vbi here is the difference in the location of Fermi levels between P3HT and PbSe NC film. Since the EF in P3HT is close to its HOMO and independent of the doping of PbSe NC films, the Vbi-CTAB value is higher than Vbi-EDT, which causes the difference in VOC values in the related solar cell structure studied here (Fig. 4a).
To evaluate the HSC performance as a function of size and thus the optical bandgap of PbSe NCs, a series of devices employed CTAB treated NCs with three different sizes and thus the location of first excitonic peaks of 1.35 eV (2.9 nm diameter), 1.42 eV (2.6 nm), and 1.50 eV (2.3 nm) were fabricated. The J–V characteristics of these solar cells are presented in Fig. 4b, with the average photovoltaic parameters out of 16 devices summarized in Table 1. A fundamental trade-off between the VOC and JSC was observed for devices employing NC of different sizes. The VOC increased from 0.38 to 0.59 V for NCs whose first excitonic maximum changed from 1.35 to 1.50 eV, while the JSC decreased from 14.1 to 4.9 mA cm−2. The bandgap of PbSe NCs changes with the NC size due to the quantum confinement, with smaller NCs possessing larger bandgaps. For n-type PbSe NC films, an increase in the bandgap of the NCs shifts the NC Fermi level up, which causes an increase of the Vbi values, resulting in higher VOC. At the same time, smaller PbSe NCs suffer from the reduced absorption in the NIR region of the solar energy, resulting in a lower JSC. Besides, the loss of current may also originate from lower mobilities of smaller PbSe NCs. Reduced mobilities have been reported as a result of decreasing PbSe NC sizes, which may be a result of more interparticle hops needed for a photogenerated charge to traverse the film, increased surface area, and/or increased depth of localized trap energies as the band edges move farther away with confinement. We have also performed SCLC measurements on our samples to address this point; as shown in Fig. 4d, the mobilities for 2.9, 2.6, and 2.3 nm PbSe NC films are 2.24 × 10−5, 1.11 × 10−5, and 4.23 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. As a result, we have achieved the highest photovoltaic performance for HSCs employing PbSe NCs with the intermediate size of 2.6 nm.
Stability of HSCs were evaluated by measuring J–V curves of the devices employing 2.6 nm PbSe NCs stored in a N2-filled glove box for a period of up to 30 days. Variations of photovoltaic performance parameters during this period of time are summarized in Fig. 5. While VOC only experienced slight degradation, other parameters decreased rapidly. The PCE of the device reduced below 50% of the initial value after 10 days of storage. Since PCE values for devices without PbSe NC layers (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:ZnO/ZnO/Al) remained unchanged even after 80 days, the efficiency loose in our devices was most probably related to the PbSe/ZnO or P3HT/PbSe interfaces. For the PbSe/ZnO interface, fewer intragap states exist in the contact region, and devices based on these two materials have also shown stability over 50 days. Thus we make a conclusion that it was the P3HT/PbSe interface which played a primary role in the device efficiency degradation.

By using monovalent halide anions to replace the surface ligands of PbSe NCs, we enhanced the electron mobility of PbSe quantum dot based films. We designed a type II heterojunction solar cells employing very small PbSe NCs and P3HT, where both the high electron mobility of the PbSe NC film and the improved charge transfer efficiency between the P3HT polymer and NCs resulted in a PCE of 2.9%, which is very close to that of a P3HT and (6,6)-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) based device. This indicates an ample potential of PbSe NCs as an electron acceptor component in the hybrid polymer/nanocrystal solar cells.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51272084, 61306078, 61225018, 61475062), the Jilin Province Key Fund (20140204079GX), Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education (20130061110046), the Opened Fund of the State Key Laboratory on Integrated Optoelectronics (IOSKL2014KF14), and the Research Grant Council of Hong Kong S. A. R. (T23-713/11).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016