 DOI: 10.1039/C1CP21762C
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 20999-21008

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Chuan-Pei
Lee
,

Jen-Chieh
Lin
,

Yi-Chun
Wang
,

Chen-Yu
Chou
,

Min-Hsin
Yeh
,

R.
Vittal
 and 

Kuo-Chuan
Ho
*

Department of Chemical Engineering, National Taiwan University, No. 1, Sec. 4, Roosevelt Road, Taipei, 10617, Taiwan. E-mail: kcho@ntu.edu.tw; Fax: +886-2-23623040; Tel: +886-2-23660739

Corning Research Center Taiwan, Hsinchu 31040, Taiwan

Institute of Polymer Science and Engineering, National Taiwan University, No. 1, Sec. 4, Roosevelt Road, Taipei, 10617, Taiwan

Received
31st May 2011
, Accepted 26th August 2011
First published on 20th October 2011
Novel sub-micro sized hexagonal clubs of ZnO (HC-ZnO), which are coated as a scattering layer (SL) for the photoanode of a DSSC, are synthesized. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the ZnO clubs show clear peaks corresponding to wurtzite crystal phase of ZnO. Scanning electron microscopic (SEM) images show that each club has two opposite hexagonal faces (parts) of unequal dimensions. High resolution transmission electron microscopic (HR-TEM) image of a single ZnO club reveals that the ZnO is single crystalline and has wurtzite crystal structure; the image indicates a lattice spacing (d) of 0.26 nm; this is ascribed to the (002) planar spacing of the hexagonal ZnO. A solar-to-electricity conversion efficiency (η) of 3.36% is achieved for the cell with the double layer (DL) film, which is 16% higher than that of the cell with only transparent layer (TL) of commercial ZnO (2.89%) and far higher than that of the cell with SL (0.05%). The η of the cell with the DL (3.36%) could further be improved to 4.28% through the modification of the DL surface with TiOx. Incident photo-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) curves, UV–vis absorption spectra, energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectra, and electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) are also used to substantiate the results.


Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are important devices, as they are expected to provide an answer to many environmental and energy problems. ZnO has been investigated as a promising alternative photoanode material for DSSCs since the inception of research on TiO2-based DSSCs; this trend is to be attributed to the facts that both TiO2 and ZnO have same electron affinities and almost the same band gap energies, i.e., ∼3.2 eV and ∼3.3 eV, respectively, but ZnO has much higher electron diffusivity than TiO2. Moreover, by virtue of the diverse morphologies of ZnO, probably richer than those of any material known today, several designs of photoanodes can be expected with it for DSSCs. Unlike the crystalline structure of TiO2, the crystalline structure of ZnO is conductive to anisotropic growth, making it a prime candidate for DSSCs. ZnO has a high electron mobility of 115–155 cm2 V−1 s−1, fabication of its nanostructure is rather simple and its structure can be easily modified (e.g., sheet-like, plate-like, rose-like, star-like, needle-like, dumb bell-like, tube-like, etc.);ZnO has a large excitation binding energy (60 eV), is available with low-cost and is stable against photocorrosion. However, the power conversion efficiency (η) of ZnO-based cells is still lower than that of TiO2-based cells.

The low conversion efficiency of ZnO-based systems is most likely due to the dissolution of ZnO to Zn2+ by the adsorbed acidic dye, followed by the formation of agglomerates (insulating layer) of Zn2+ and dye molecules (such as N3, N719, and black dye), and eventually followed by the blocking of the injected electrons from the dye molecules to the semiconductor by the insulating layer. The agglomerates are thus detrimental to the performance of a ZnO-based DSSC, because they fill up nanopores of the ZnO electrode and reduce the electron injection efficiency of the dye adsorbed to the ZnO layer. In order to avoid the formation of Zn2+/dye agglomerates or complexes and thereby to improve the stability of ZnO in acidic dye solution, many core–shell structures have been developed by coating a buffer layer on the ZnO surface. SiO2 has been demonstrated to be a very effective shell material on ZnO, in which it prevents the formation of Zn2+/dye aggregates through a strong interaction between Si4+ and O2− ions.TiO2 is also a representative material that may be used for the surface modification of ZnO to prevent the surface ZnO molecules from being dissolved, thereby to prevent the formation of Zn2+/dye agglomerates. Besides the protective effect of the TiO2 shell, the TiO2 shell is also believed to play a role in suppressing the recombination rate by passivating the recombination sites on the ZnO surface and by forming an energy barrier that prevents photoinjected electrons from approaching the ZnO surface. In a related set of experiments, amorphous Al2O3 was also studied as a coating material on ZnO nanowires. Al2O3 shell has the capacity to passivate the recombination sites on the surface of ZnO nanowires; however it could simultaneously lower or block electron transfer at the semiconductor–electrolyte interface.
Strategies to improve the efficiency of a ZnO-based DSSC also include designing of new dyes that are suitable for the ZnO photoelectrode, and developing of ZnO photoelectrode with new architectures. Up to date, photoelectrodes based on ZnO nanoparticles (ZnONP),ZnO nanowires (ZnONW),ZnO nanosheets (ZnONS),nanorods,nanotubes, nanobelts, nanoflowers, and nanorings have been prepared by various techniques, such as sol–gel synthesis, hydrothermal/ solvothermal growth, physical or chemical vapor deposition, low-temperature aqueous growth,chemical bath deposition, and electrochemical deposition. The energy conversion efficiencies of DSSCs based on these types of photanodes range from 0.5%–5.2%. The rationale in the use of different structures of ZnO lies in the fact that even in the absence of a dye, the morphological variations bring about considerable changes in the photoelectrochemical properties of the DSSCs; for example, a ZnO nanosheet electrode exhibits two times higher steady-state photocurrent than the ZnO nanoparticle electrode. Besides, Yoshida et al. have recently developed a method for the cathodic electrodeposition of ZnO from aqueous zinc salt solution in the presence of oxidants and water-soluble dye molecules; they could obtain ordered porous ZnO nanostructures, suitable for DSSCs. Efficiencies as high as 5.6% have been obtained using these electrodeposited ZnO films, in combination with the organic dye D149.
In the present work, we have synthesized sub-micrometre-sized hexagonal clubs of ZnO (HC-ZnO), each showing two opposite hexagonal faces (parts) of unequal dimensions. We have prepared three types of DSSCs consisting of photoanodes, one with only a transparent layer (TL) of commercial ZnO (C-ZnO), the other with a double layer (DL) of this TL and a scattering layer (SL) of the synthesized ZnO clubs, and the third one with only the SL, however with a TL on the non-conductive side of the substrate. It is demonstrated that the DSSC with the photoanode consisting of the DL, i.e. TL plus SL, renders an efficiency of 3.36%, compared to that of the cell with only TL (2.89%). It is also shown that this improved efficiency (3.36%) could further be increased to 4.28% through the surface modification of the double layer with a very thin layer of TiOx. To the best of our knowledge, this kind of novel structure of ZnO has not been synthesized previously.


Lithium iodide (LiI, synthetical grade), and iodine (I2, synthetical grade) were obtained from Merk; 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP, 96%) and tert-butyl alcohol (tBA, 96%) were obtained from Acros; Ti(IV) tetraisopropoxide (TTIP, >98%), acetonitrile (ACN, 99.99%), acetylacetone (AA, >99.5%), ethanol (99.5%), and isopropyl alcohol (IPA, 99.5%) were obtained from Aldrich. Zinc nitrate with 6-hydrate crystal (Zn(NO3)2·6H2O, 99.5%) was obtained from J. T. Baker.



HC-ZnO were synthesized by a hydrothermal process. Briefly, 0.2 M zinc nitrate aqueous solution (20 mL) was mixed with 0.2 M triethanolamine (TEA, 99%, Riedel-de Haën) aqueous solution (20 mL) under stirring for 10 min and shaking for 2 min. The obtained solution was transferred to a teflon-lined vessel (Model No.: 4744, Parr Instrument Company, USA), heated to 110 °C in an oven at a rate of 5 °C min−1 and aged for 1 h. The as-prepared colloidal solution was then centrifuged at a rate of 6000 rpm for 10 min. The ZnO colloids precipitated at the bottom of the centrifuge tubes were redispersed in ethanol by sonication for 20 min. This procedure of centrifugation and sonication was repeated several times. Finally the resultant ZnO colloids were dispersed in 5 mL of ethanol in a container, and the container was sealed and kept at room temperature. This colloidal solution was used as the stock solution to prepare the scattering layers of photoanodes. We designate this colloidal solution as HC-ZnO solution.

Commercial colloidal ZnO (C-ZnO) powder (4.23 g, Degussa VP AdNano®ZnO20) with an approximate nanoparticle size of 20 nm was thoroughly mixed with 20 mL solution of EtOH and DI-water (v/v = 70/30). This colloidal solution was stirred for 3 days to obtain a well-dispersed suspension of 20 wt% ZnO; this paste (designated as C-ZnO) was used for preparing the transparent ZnO film.

A fluorine-doped SnO2 conducting glass (FTO, 7 Ω sq.−1, transmittance ≥80%, NSG America, Inc., New Jersey, USA) was first cleaned with a neutral cleaner, and then washed with DI-water, acetone, and IPA, sequentially. Various transparent ZnO layers with different thicknesses could be obtained with C-ZnO on FTO substrates by using a doctor blade technique. A few drops of the HC-ZnO colloidal solution were dripped onto the prepared transparenent ZnO film to obtain a double layer of ZnO, consisting of a TL with the commercial ZnO and a SL with the HC-ZnO. To prepare only a scattering film of ZnO, a few drops of HC-ZnO colloidal solution were dropped onto a bare FTO glass. A portion of 0.4 × 0.4 cm2 was selected on the coated FTO glass as the active area by removing the side portions by scrapping. The ZnO film was gradually heated to 450 °C in an oxygen atmosphere, and subsequently sintered at that temperature for 30 min. Three FTO glasses with double layers were further treated with EtOH solutions (5 mL) containing 30, 60 and 90 μL of TTIP to obtain Ti-modified ZnO photoanodes (the photoanodes are designated hereafter as TTIP-30, TTIP-60 and TTIP-90). After sintering at 450 °C and cooling to 80 °C, the ZnO film was immersed in a 3 × 10−4 M solution of N719 (Solaronix S.A., Aubonne, Switzerland) in ACN and tBA (volume ratio of 1:1), at room temperature for 0.5, 1, 3, 6, 12 and 24 h. The thus prepared ZnO/dye electrode was placed on a platinum-sputtered conducting glass electrode (ITO, 7 Ω sq.−1, Ritek Corporation, Hsinchu, Taiwan), keeping the two electrodes separated by a 25 μm-thick surlyn® (SX1170-25, Solaronix S.A., Aubonne, Switzerland). The two electrodes were then sealed by heating. A mixture of 0.1 M LiI, 0.6 M DMPII (Solaronix S.A., Aubonne, Switzerland), 0.05 M I2, and 0.5 M TBP in 3-methoxypropionitrile (MPN, Fluka)/ACN (volume ratio of 1:1) was used as the electrolyte. The electrolyte was injected into the gap between the electrodes by capillarity; the electrolyte-injecting hole was previously made in the counter electrode with a drilling machine, and the hole was sealed with hot-melt glue after the injection of the electrolyte.


Surface of the DSSC was illuminated by a class A quality solar simulator (PEC-L11, AM1.5G, Peccell Technologies, Inc.) and the incident light intensity (100 mW cm−2) was calibrated with a standard Si cell (PECSI01, Peccell Technologies, Inc.). Photoelectrochemical characteristics of the DSSC were recorded with a potentiostat/galvanostat (PGSTAT 30, Autolab, Eco-Chemie, the Netherlands). The set of equipments mentioned here was shown in our recent report.

Film thickness was determined using a surface profilometer (Sloan Dektak 3030). Crystal phase of the ZnO particles was found out using X-ray diffraction technique (XRD, MO3XHF, MAC). Morphologies of the ZnO films were observed and their elemental analysis was made using a scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Nova NanoSEM 230, FEI Ultra-High Resolution FE-SEM with low vacuum mode) equipped with a mode for in situ energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectra. The structure of the HC-ZnO was characterized using high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM, Tecnai F20 G2, Philips) and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns. For UV absorption spectra, dye was dissolved from the ZnO film into 0.1 M NaOH aqueous solution and the corresponding spectra were obtained using an UV–vis spectrophotometer (V-570, Jasco, Japan).
Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were obtained by the above-mentioned potentiostat/galvanostat equipped with an FRA2 module, under a constant light illumination of 100 mW cm−2. The frequency range explored was 10 mHz to 65 kHz. Applied bias voltage was set at the open-circuit voltage of the DSSC between the ITO-Pt counter electrode and the FTO-ZnO-dye working electrode, starting from the short-circuit condition; the corresponding AC amplitude was 10 mV. The impedance spectra were analyzed using an equivalent circuit model. Incident photo-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) curves were obtained at short-circuit condition. The light source was a 450 W Xe lamp (Oriel Instrument, model 6266) equipped with a water-based IR filter (Oriel Instrument, model 6123NS); light was focused through a monochromator (Oriel Instrument, model 74100) onto the photovoltaic cell. The monochromator was incremented through the visible spectrum to generate the IPCE (λ) as defined bleow,
IPCE (λ) = 1240(JSC/λφ)
(1)
where
λ is the wavelength, JSC is short-circuit photocurrent (mA cm−2) recorded with a potentiostat/galvanostat, and φ is the incident radiative flux (W m−2) measured with an optical detector (Oriel Instrument, model 71580) and power meter (Oriel Instrument, model 70310).



Fig. 1a, b, and c show the SEM images of hydrothermally synthesized ZnO at different temperatures (25 °C, 60 °C and 110 °C); the corresponding XRD patterns are shown in Fig. 1d. When the aging temperature is low (25 °C), the ZnO formation seems to be incomplete and only flakes appear (Fig. 1a). Fig. 1b shows blocks of ZnO, with some regularity in the shape of the blocks. Fig. 1c shows the perfect form of the ZnO obtainable under these experimental conditions. The blocks are regular in shape and possess a definite structure. XRD pattern in Fig. 1d–I confirms the fact that ZnO is not formed at temperature 25 °C. Formation of ZnO begins at 60 °C, as can be understood from the tiny peaks of wurtzite crystal phase of ZnO, corresponding to 100, 002, 101, 102, 110, and 103 planes of ZnO (Fig. 1d–II) (JCPDS, Joint Committee on Powder Diffraction Standards card file 36-1451). The formation of ZnO is complete at 110 °C, as all the XRD-peaks of wurtzite appear distinctly in Fig. 1d–III.

Through a raising-temperature process (5 °C min−1) from 25 °C to 110 °C, a novel HC-ZnO structure could be obtained as shown in Fig. 2a. Hexagonal clubs of ZnO (HC-ZnO) with opposite faces of unequal dimensions can be seen in the figure; each club has an average diameter of 100 nm at thinner part and 300 nm at thicker part and an average length of 250 nm at shorter part and 600 nm at longer part (these measurements were made by magnifying the SEM image of ZnO clubs in a computer). We believed that this type of nanocrystals can be used as the scattering layer in the photoanode of a ZnO-based DSSC, because it is well known that larger TiO2 particles can be used as a scattering layer in a TiO2 based DSSC. The structure of the ZnO club could also be confirmed by the TEM image as shown in Fig. 2b. The HR-TEM image of an hexagonal club of ZnO (HC-ZnO) (shown in Fig. 2c) reveals that the HC-ZnO is single crystalline in wurtzite crystal structure with a lattice spacing (d) of 0.26 nm, corresponding to the 002 plane of the hexagonal ZnO; this implies that the growth of the HC-ZnO took place along the c-axis. The inset shows the corresponding selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of an HC-ZnO; the 002 diffraction spots can be seen in the SAED pattern. In addition, the crystal structure of the HC-ZnO was characterized by using XRD technique. The XRD in Fig. 2d shows clear peaks corresponding to the wurtzite crystal phase of ZnO. To investigate the formation mechannism of HC-ZnO, the aging time for the synthesis of HC-ZnO was reduced from 1 h to 30 min. The synthesized material was observed by SEM and shown in Fig. S1a. Though hexagonal particles were formed, only a few hexagonal clubs of ZnO with opposite faces (HC-ZnO) were fomed at this aging time (Fig. S1a). The incomplete structure of HC-ZnO can be seen in Fig. S1b. Based on these observations, we propose that a hexagonal particle forms first, and then another small hexagonal particel grows on it. Thus, at longer aging time of 1 h the HC-ZnO shows two opposite hexagonal faces (parts) of unequal dimensions. When the initial reagent of zinc nitrate was replaced with zinc acetate a belt-like structure of ZnO was obtained as shown in Fig. S2a. It's corresponding EDX data is shown in Fig. S2b.
For comparative purpose, the commercial ZnO (C-ZnO) was analyzed by SEM and XRD. Fig. 3a shows the SEM image of the C-ZnO; irregular and shapeless mass of C-ZnO appears in the figure. Even in the inset of the figure, which shows the magnified version of C-ZnO, the ZnO particles are irregular in shape without distinct borders. The average size of these C-ZnO nanoparticles was estimated to be about 20 nm (Fig. 3a), and thus they could not be considered for use as a scattering layer, unlike the synthesized HC-ZnO. The crystal phase of this C-ZnO was however found to be wurtzite (Fig. 3b).

To further study the application of the HC-ZnO for DSSCs, we fabricated three types of ZnO-based photoanodes, one, consisting of only a transparent layer (TL) of 15 μm of C-ZnO with an average particle size of 20 nm, the second consisting of only a scattering layer (SL) with HC-ZnO (however with a transparent layer of C-ZnO on the non-conductive side), and the third consisting of a double layer (DL) of TL/SL (Scheme 1a). Scheme 1a shows the ZnO photoanode with the DL structure, (b) illustrates the scattering effect, and (c) shows the photoanode with only a SL (with the TL on the non-conductive side). In the case of the photoanode with only a scattering layer (Scheme 1c), the transparent layer was applied at the non-conductive side, in order to maintain the same thickness of the film as that of the film of photoanode with a DL; this was done to avoid the thickness effect of light transmission. The dependence of power conversion efficiency (η) on the film thickness is shown in Fig. 4a in the case of the DSSC with only TL, and its dependence on the sensitization time is shown in Fig. 4b. It can be seen in Fig. 4a that the optimal thickness of the film is 15 μm; the corresponding cell efficiency is 2.89%. In the case of TL-ZnO photoanode, it has been observed that the immersion time of the sensitizing dye is a key factor for the functioning of the DSSC. We have analysed the effect of immersion time with the dye N719, and the result is presented in Fig. 4b. In the case of N719 dye solution, there is a critical time of immersion beyond which the cell yields lower efficiency. Upon longer immersion time, a systematic decay of the cell efficiency can be observed. Based on these results, the immersion time was set to 1 h for the N719 dye.

Deterioration of the cell efficiency with increasing immersion time is attributed to partial dissolution of ZnO in the presence of N719 dye and to consequent formation of Zn2+-dye aggregates. The photovoltatic performance of DSSCs based on TL-ZnO, DL-ZnO and SL-ZnO is displayed in Fig. 5a. Table 1 summarizes the measured and calculated values obtained from Fig. 5a. The thicknesses of the ZnO films can be observed in the SEM images of Fig. 5c and d, which show the cross-sectional views of the films of DL-ZnO and SL-ZnO. It can be seen in Table 1 and Fig. 5a that SL-ZnO can significantly improve the power conversion efficiency (η) of a DSSC. Fig. 5b illustrates the IPCE spectra of DSSCs with ZnO-based photoanodes consisting of TL, DL, and SL structures. The broad IPCE curves, covering almost the entire visible spectrum from 400 to 800 nm exhibit maximum values of 70% and 55% for the cells with DL-ZnO and TL-ZnO, respectively; the DSSC with only SL shows IPCE values close to zero. These values are in consistency with the corresponding JSC values of the cells (Table 1). The higher IPCE values for the cell with DL-ZnO than those of the cell with TL-ZnO are attributed to the light scattering effect in the former case due to its SL-ZnO. This higher IPCE values rendered a higher JSC (10.80 mA cm−2) to the cell with DL-ZnO, compared to that of the cell with TL-ZnO (9.55 mA cm−2) and thereby a higher η to the former cell. The η achieved by the DSSC with DL film (3.36%) is 16% higher than that of the cell with TL alone (2.89%) and remarkably higher than that of the cell with SL alone (0.05%). The enhancement in the cell efficiency for the best cell is due the increase in the corresponding values of JSC, VOC, and FF, with reference to those values of the DSSC with TL. The JSC of the cell with 5.5 μm of SL-ZnO film is only 0.24 mA cm−2, which is much lower than the JSC values of the cells with 15 μm TL-ZnO film and 15 μm TL-ZnO/5.5 μm SL-ZnO film. As mentioned above, the SL-ZnO acts as a light scattering layer; this scattering effect improves the light-harvesting ability of the DL-ZnO photoanode. However, the question arises, whether or not the efficieny increased owing to the thicker film in the case of the cell with DL (total film thickness: 20 μm), with reference to the film in the case of the cell with only TL (total film thickness: 15 μm), and owing to consequent higher dye-loading in the former case. Fig. 4a clearly shows that increase in the thickness of ZnO beyond 15 μm rather decreases the cell efficiency. Considering the obsevation in Fig. 4a, and considering the fact that these ZnO clubs even as an individual layer can not render any significant cell efficieny (η = 0.05%, Table 1), we propose that the enhancement of the cell efficieny for the best cell is owing to the scattering effect of the ZnO clubs. Moreover, in terms of surface termination, the HC-ZnO reported here can be considered as an intermediate between nanoparticles and nanowires. Yoshida et al. indicated that different dye molecules have their preferred coordination on different crystal faces. The dye-sensitized HC-ZnO film was almost colorless (image not shown); this implies that the dye had not or weakly adsorbed on these ZnO clubs. Therefore, we infer that the crystal surfaces of ZnO clubs are unfavorable for dye anchoring. This is most probably the reason for the very poor efficiency (0.05%) of the cell with HC-ZnO-only as the electron transport layer; interestingly this is the fact, despite that the HC-ZnO appear to have a 1-D structure, which usually is associated with better charge transfer and lower resistance, as compared to these parameters of ZnO particles.
Photoanodes

V
OC/mV

J
SC/mA cm−2

FF


η (%)
15 μm TL
520
9.55
0.58
2.89
5.5 μm SL (15 μm TL on the non-conductive side)
455
0.24
0.49
0.05
15 μm TL/5.5 μm SL
526
10.80
0.59
3.36


Fig. 6a shows the photocurrent-voltage curves of the DSSCs with ZnO-based photoanodes, consisting of DL structures and treated with various amounts of TTIP; the curves were obtained at 100 mW cm−2 light intensity and in the dark. The photovoltaic parameters of these cells are listed in Table 2. The open-circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF), and short-circuit current density (JSC) of the DSSC with the photoanode, consisting of bare DL without TTIP treatment are 526 mV, 0.59, and 10.80 mA cm−2, respectively, and the corresponding overall power conversion efficiency (η) is 3.36%. It can be seen in the table that the overall power conversion efficiencies of the DSSCs with the treatments of TTIP-30 and TTIP-60 are higher than that of the DSSC without any treatment of TTIP, due to substantial increases of VOC, JSC, FF for the improved cells, compared to these values of the cell without TTIP-treatment. The DSSC with TTIP-90 is an exception, where the values of VOC, JSC, and FF show decreases, with respect to those of other cells. Fig. 6b shows the UV–vis spectra of the dyes desorbed from ZnO films consisting of DL structures and treated with various amounts of TTIP. The spectra clearly show that the dye-adsorption is lesser for all the TTIP treated ZnO films than that of the bare ZnO film; the decrease in dye adsorption in the case of TTIP treated C-ZnO films is due to the decreased ZnO surface area available for dye-loading in the presence of TTIP (Partial pores of the C-ZnO films could be blocked after TTIP treatment). Fig. 7a shows the SEM image of ZnO film treated with TTIP-60; the film appears to be smoother than that without any treatment (inset of Fig. 3a), indicating the modification of ZnO surface with TiOx due to the treatment of TTIP. EDX was used to further confirm this observation (Fig. 7c), which shows the presence of Ti along with Zn and O. Table 2 shows that JSC's of the cells with TTIP-30 and TTIP-60 show slight increases, with reference to that of the cell without TTIP; this implies that in spite of decreased dye-adsorption for the cells with TTIP, they show increased JSC's. These higher JSC's are probably due to the protective effect of the TiOx shell, i.e., protection to the ZnO from being dissolved by the acidic dye for the formation of Zn2+/dye aggregates. Top-view SEM images of the dye coated DL films without and with TTIP-60 are shown in Fig. S3; the figure also contains relevant magnified versions. The SEM images clearly show that the ZnO crystals have been modified with TiOx. The TiOx shell is also believed to play a role in suppressing the recombination rate by passivating the recombination sites on the ZnO surface and by forming an energy barrier that prevents the injected electrons from approaching the ZnO surface; this prevention of formation of Zn2+/dye aggregates enables higher JSC. The explanation for higher VOC in the case of a ZnO based DSSC with titania treatment can be obtained considering the report of Law et al.; the authors suggested the formation of a radical energy field between ZnO core and TiO2 shell and consequent decrease of electron concentraton at the ZnO surface and decrease of the rate of recombination in the pertinent DSSC. The reduction in dark currents in Fig. 6a for the cells with TTIP-30 and TTIP-60 is in consistency with this report.

Photoanodes

V
OC/mV

J
SC/mA cm−2

FF


η (%)
15 μm TL/5.5 μm SL
526
10.80
0.59
3.36
15 μm TL/5.5 μm SL treated with TTIP-30
560
11.00
0.59
3.64
15 μm TL/5.5 μm SL treated with TTIP-60
575
11.50
0.65
4.28
15 μm TL/5.5 μm SL treated with TTIP-90
496
8.25
0.52
2.14
It can be seen in further discussions that the electron life time is longer in the case of ZnO-based photoanode with TTIP-60 treatment than that in the case of photoanode without such treatment; this is also a reason for the higher JSC of the DSSCs with TTIP treatment. The overall favorable effects for the increases of JSC's and VOC's in the case of the cells with TTIP-30 and TTIP-60 have apparently over-compensated the detrimental effect of less-dye adsorption in their case. Besides, excessive amount of TTIP (TTIP-90) could result in a lesser porosity for the corresponding ZnO film (as can be seen in Fig. 7b); this reduced porosity is unfavorable for dye adsorption, as well as for the diffusion of the redox couple (I−/I3−) in the film. This is the reason for the inferior performance of the DSSC with TTIP-90.


Fig. 8a shows the Nyquist plots of electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) of the DSSCs with ZnO-based photoanodes, consisting of DL structures without and with TTIP-60 treatment. The equivalent circuit is shown as the inset in Fig. 8a. The Nyquist diagram features typically three semicircles that in the order of increasing frequency are attributed to the Nernst diffusion within the electrolyte (Rdiff), the electron transfer at the ZnO/dye/electrolyte interface (Rct2), and the redox reaction at the platinum counter electrode (Rct1). Here, the Rdiff is virtually overlapped by Rct2 due to relatively short length for I− ion diffusion caused by the thin spacer (25 μm thick) used by us. Identical semicircles at high frequency region indicate, as expected, that the ZnO-based photoanode with TTIP-60 treatment does not affect the Rct1 values. It can be seen in Fig. 8a that Rct2 value decreases in the case of cell with TTIP-60, with reference to the Rct2 value of the cell without TTIP-60; this decrease of Rct2 value is consistent with the increase of JSC value of the cell with TTIP-60, with respect to that of the cell without TTIP-60. The Bode phase plots of EIS spectra, as shown in Fig. 8b, display the frequency peaks of the charge transfer process at different interfaces for the two kinds of cells, i.e., with and without TTIP-60. The characteristic low frequency peaks (fmax) are located at 41.88 Hz for ZnO photoanode without TTIP-60, and at 23.07 Hz for the phtoanode with TTIP-60. The electron lifetime for recombination (τe) in a ZnO-based DSSC is determined by fmax value, where τe = (2 π fmax)−1. Therefore, ZnO-based photoanode with TTIP-60 treatment shows longer electron lifetime.

Systematic work is in progress in this laboratory for increasing the performance of ZnO-based DSSCs, by utilizing dyes of high extinction coefficients and of hydrophobic side chains that could hinder the formation of Zn2+/dye agglomerates.

In this study, we have synthesized hexagonal clubs of ZnO (HC-ZnO) with opposite faces of unequal dimensions. Perfect ZnO hexagonal clubs could not be formed below the temperature of 110 °C. The ZnO clubs show clear peaks corresponding to the wurtzite crystal phase; the ZnO of the club is single crystalline with a lattice space (d) of 0.26 nm, corresponding to the 002 plane of the hexagonal ZnO, and implies that the growth of the HC-ZnO took place along the c-axis. The synthesized ZnO clubs were used as light-scattering layers (SL) for photoanodes of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). An η of 3.36% was achieved for the cell with a double layer (DL) film, consisting of a commercial transparent layer (TL) and the SL; this efficiency is 16% higher than that of the cell with the bare transparent layer (2.89%) and remarkably higher than that of the cell with bare SL (0.05%). The improvement in JSC in the case of the cell with double layer is verified to be due to the scattering layer of the synthesized ZnO clubs (IPCE). The η could further be improved to 4.28% with the modification of the double layer structure of ZnO with TiOx (precisely using 60 μL of TTIP, EDX spectra, Fig. 7c). The improvement in efficiency with the treatment of TTIP is explained to be essentially due to the decrease of attack by acidic dye on the ZnO and due to the energy barrier of TiO2 on ZnO clubs (dark currents in Fig. 6a). The increase of VOC in the cases of TTIP-30 and TTIP-60 treatments is validated by corresponding decreases in dark currents (Fig. 6a). The increase in the JSC and VOC for the cell with TTIP-60 treatment is due to longer electron lifetime in the modified ZnO photoanode, as compared to that of the unmodified ZnO photoanode (Fig. 8b). The inferior performance of the cell with the treatment with 90 μl of TTIP is understood to be due to lesser porosity for the corresponding ZnO film (Fig. 7b).


This work was supported in part by the National Research Council of Taiwan under grant numbers NSC 96-2120-M-002-016, NSC 97-2120-M-002-012 and NSC 98-2120-M-002-003. Some of the instruments used in this study were made available through the financial support of the Academia Sinica, Nankang, Taipei, Taiwan.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fig. S1, page S-II shows SEM images of synthesized HC-ZnO at the aging time of 30 min. Fig. S2, page S-III shows SEM images of synthesized ZnO with a raising-temperature process (5 °C min−1) from 25 °C to 110 °C, using zinc acetate as the initial reagent. Fig. S3, page S-IV shows the top-viewed SEM images of the dye coated ZnO double layer (a) without and (b) with TTIP treatment. (c) and (d) are the magnified SEM images of (a) and (b), respectively. See DOI: 10.1039/c1cp21762c
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2011