 DOI: 10.1039/D0TA03030A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 12080-12088


Yang
Cao
,

Weiwei
Li
,

Zhen
Liu
,

Zhiqiang
Zhao
,

Zhenyu
Xiao
,

Wei
Zi
 and 

Nian
Cheng
*

Energy-Saving Building Materials Collaborative Innovation Center of Henan Province, Xinyang Normal University, 237 Nanhu Road, Xinyang, 464000, China. E-mail: chengnian@foxmail.com

College of Physics and Electronic Engineering, Xinyang Normal University, 237 Nanhu Road, Xinyang, 464000, China

Received
17th March 2020
, Accepted 6th June 2020
First published on 8th June 2020
Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) nanoparticles have been demonstrated to be a potential hole transporting material for low temperature paintable carbon electrode based perovskite solar cells, yet the reported power conversion efficiency is not satisfactory. Hot injection synthesized CZTS nanoparticles are usually capped with long chain oleylamine, which hampers the charge transportation between CZTS nanoparticles. It is reported that replacing the long chain oleylamine with short chain organic ligand can promote the charge transportation of CZTS nanoparticles. Here, we have demonstrated that CZTS nanoparticles with hexanethiol modification exhibit superior charge transportation properties, which results in better hole extraction capability of the CZTS nanoparticles. Therefore, power conversion efficiency of MAPbI3 perovskite solar cells employing CZTS hole transporting layer and low temperature paintable carbon electrode is boosted from 14.27% for pristine CZTS nanoparticles to 16.62% for the modified CZTS nanoparticles. When FAPbI3 is used as alternative light absorbing layer, a champion power conversion efficiency of 17.71% is obtained, which is among one of the highest PCEs for perovskite solar cells employing an inorganic hole transporting layer and a carbon electrode.

Perovskite solar cells have experienced a rapid development in recent years with power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) skyrocketing from the initial 3.8% to a certified 25.2%. Due to their high PCEs, easy fabrication process and low cost, perovskite solar cells have shown great potential in commercialization. Stability problem is a big obstacle in commercializing perovskite solar cells. Although long term stability tests of above 1000 h have been demonstrated in the traditional perovskite solar cells, the organic hole transporting layer and noble metal electrodes in these solar cells might cause potential instability when the perovskite solar cells are stressed by light soaking, temperature, and humidity.

Carbon materials are low cost and chemically stable, the work function of carbon is compatible with the valence band of the perovskite light absorbing materials, leading to efficient extraction of the photo-generated holes. Therefore, carbon materials can serve as promising counter electrode in perovskite solar cells. Hole transporting material (HTM) free perovskite solar cells using carbon electrodes have demonstrated superior stability compared with the traditional perovskite solar cells, however, state of the art PCEs of HTM free perovskite solar cells are reported to be slightly above 16%, which lag far behind the traditional solar cells employing hole transporting layer and a metal electrode. The main reasons for this inferior performance are (1) insufficient hole selectivity of the carbon electrode and (2) poor interface contact between the carbon electrode and perovskite films.
Inserting a hole transporting layer between the perovskite film and the carbon electrode might be helpful to facilitate hole extraction, suppress interfacial charge recombination and result in superior PCEs and stability. In this regard, Kerttu Aitola et al. employs press transferred single walled carbon nanotube film as counter electrode, together with Spiro-OMeTAD as hole transporting layer. The fabricated perovskite solar cell demonstrates a PCE of 16.6% in the reverse scan mode and superior stability compared with perovskite solar cell employing Spiro-OMeTAD and Au electrode. Later, PCE is further enhanced to 19.2% by Huiyin Zhang et al. using Spiro-OMeTAD and a self-adhesive macroporous carbon electrode. After aging for 80 h under illumination in nitrogen atmosphere, the fabricated solar cell can retain 94% of its initial performance. Thermal evaporated CuPc has also been demonstrated to be an efficient hole transporting layer for carbon electrode based perovskite solar cells, which demonstrate PCEs around 16.1–17.5% together with excellent stability. Xin Wu et al. fabricates perovskite solar cells employing CuSCN HTM and carbon nanotube network electrode, which can deliver a PCE up to 17.58% and retain over 80% of its initial performance after 1000 h of continuous illumination. Although high PCEs are reported for these solar cells, their fabrication processes are rather complicated compared with the low temperature paintable carbon electrode based HTM free perovskite solar cells.
Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) nanoparticles have been demonstrated to be a potential HTM for low temperature paintable carbon electrode based perovskite solar cells, which can enhance the PCE by 50% compared to the HTM free perovskite solar cells. However, the obtained PCE (PCE = 12.98%) is still quite low due to the long chain insulating ligands capped on the surface of the CZTS nanoparticles synthesized using the commonly adopted hot injection method, which might block the charge transportation between the neighborhood CZTS nanoparticles. Replacing the long chain ligand with short organic ligands or inorganic ligands has been demonstrated to increase the carrier mobility of the modified CZTS nanoparticles films. Christoph J. Brabec et al. has reported that “ligand free” CZTS nanoparticles can be an effective, cheap, and non-toxic hole transport layer for inverted planar perovskite solar cells with a PCE of 15.4%.  However, the polar CZTS nanoparticle ink cannot be used to fabricate CZTS hole transporting layer above the perovskite film.
Here, we report an efficient strategy to enhance the charge transportation of CZTS nanoparticles film using hexanethiol modification. The modified CZTS nanoparticles are employed to fabricate hole transporting layer above the perovskite film in the n–i–p structured perovskite solar cells together with a low temperature paintable carbon electrode. Under the same conditions, PCEs of carbon electrode based MAPbI3 perovskite solar cells are boosted from 14.27% for the pristine CZTS to 16.62% for the modified CZTS. A champion PCE of 17.71% is also demonstrated using FAPbI3 as an alternative light absorbing layer.

CZTS nanoparticles are synthesized via the commonly used hot injection method, which is described in detail in our previous report. The obtained CZTS nanoparticles are washed with n-hexane and ethanol for 6 times in order to remove the oleylamine ligand from the surface of the CZTS nanoparticles as much as possible. The purified CZTS nanoparticles are divided into two portions. One is directly dried in a vacuum oven for further use, and referred as pristine CZTS (p-CZTS) in the following text. The other is added into a mixture of 3 mL n-hexane and 1 mL hexanethiol, stirred for 24 h, then washed with n-hexane and methanol under centrifuge, and finally dried under vacuum. The hexanethiol modified CZTS nanoparticles are referred as modified CZTS (m-CZTS) in the following text.


FTO glass is thoroughly washed with deionized water and ethanol in an ultrasonic bath, dried at 70 °C, and ultraviolet-ozone treated for 15 min. SnO2 electron transporting layer (Alfa Aesar, diluted 1:5 with deionized water) is spin-coated onto the FTO glass at 4000 rpm for 30 s, and annealed on a hotplate at 180 °C for 30 min. The obtained SnO2 film is further treated under ultraviolet-ozone for 15 min. To prepare MAPbI3 film, 461 mg PbI2 and 159 mg MAI are dissolved into 78 mg DMSO and 900 μL DMF, the obtained perovskite solution is spin-coated onto the SnO2 film at 1000 rpm for 10 s, and then 4000 rpm for 30 s in a glovebox, 450 μL chlorobenzene is dripped onto the perovskite film after spinning at 4000 rpm for 6 s. The obtained perovskite film is further annealed at 100 °C for 10 min. To prepare FAPbI3 film, 1.3 M PbI2 solution in DMF and DMSO (DMF:DMSO = 95:5) is spin-coated onto SnO2 at 1500 rpm for 30 s, and then annealed at 70 °C for 1 min, after cooling down to room temperature, a mixture solution of FAI:MABr:MACl (60 mg:6 mg:6 mg in 1 mL IPA) is deposited onto the PbI2 film at 1300 rpm for 30 s, and annealed at 150 °C for 15 min in the ambient air. CZTS hole transporting layer is prepared by spin-coating CZTS nanoparticles ink (200 mg CZTS in 1 mL hexanethiol) at 4000 rpm for 30 s, followed by annealing at 100 °C for 60 min. The low temperature paintable carbon electrode is doctor-bladed onto the CZTS film and annealed at 100 °C for 30 min.


XRD of the CZTS nanoparticles is conducted on SmartLab 9 kW, Rigaku with Cu Kα radiation. Raman spectrum of the CZTS nanoparticles is obtained using Renishaw inVia Raman microscope. TEM image of the CZTS nanoparticles is observed using Hitachi S4800. FTIR and XPS spectra of the CZTS nanoparticles are measured using Nicolet IS-50 infrared spectrometer and Thermo Scientific K-Alpha 0.5 eV respectively. Planar view SEM images are observed using Tecnai G2 F20. Current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the devices are measured using Keithley 2450 sourcemeter under a simulated AM1.5 sunlight (1000 W m−2, XEF-300 solar simulator), effective area of the solar cell is 0.04 cm2. IPCE spectrum is measured using QE-R system (Enli Technology Co., Ltd) under AC mode. Photoluminescence (exciting at 481.5 nm) and time-resolved photoluminescence (exciting at 481.5 nm and emission at 760 nm) are measured using an Edinburgh Instrument (FLS2100).


XRD patterns of the p-CZTS and m-CZTS nanoparticles are presented in Fig. 1a. Both the p-CZTS and m-CZTS exhibit three major diffraction peaks located at 28.7°, 47.8°, and 56.5°, which correspond to the characteristic (112), (220), and (312) diffraction peaks of kesterite CZTS (JCPDS PDF #26-0575). Since XRD alone is not sufficient to confirm the phase purity of kesterite CZTS due to similar X-ray diffraction patterns of CZTS, ZnS, and Cu2SnS3, Raman spectrum measurement is further carried out. As can be seen in Fig. 1b, deconvolution of the measured Raman spectrum is comprised of two peaks, a stronger peak at around 334 cm−1 and a weaker peak at 282 cm−1. Both the two peaks can be assigned to CZTS according to ref. 19 and 20. Therefore, the synthesized nanoparticles in our experiment are confirmed to be single phase of kesterite. TEM images for the p-CZTS and m-CZTS nanoparticles are presented in Fig. 1c and d. The CZTS nanoparticles exhibit a roughly spherical shape with particle size ranging from 10 nm to 20 nm. Since surface modification with hexanethiol will not change the crystal structure and phase purity of the m-CZTS nanoparticles, XRD pattern, Raman spectrum and TEM image of the m-CZTS are nearly the same as those of the p-CZTS.

Ligand capped on the surface of the CZTS nanoparticles are studied using FTIR measurements, the corresponding results are displayed in Fig. 2a. The peaks at 2922 cm−1 and 2850 cm−1 are attributed to antisymmetric and symmetric stretching mode of C–H. The peaks at 1631 cm−1, 1460 cm−1, and 1120 cm−1 are attributed to N–H, CH3, and C–N, respectively. After hexanethiol modification, peaks corresponding to N–H and C–N from the m-CZTS nanoparticles are suppressed compared with the p-CZTS nanoparticles, indicating partial replacement of the long chain oleylamine with hexanethiol. XPS measurement is further carried out to study the chemical composition of the CZTS surfaces. Fig. 2b presents the XPS survey spectra of the p-CZTS and m-CZTS nanoparticles. Peaks corresponding to Cu, Zn, Sn, S, and N are clearly identified in both samples. High resolution core level XPS spectra of Cu 2p, Zn 2p, Sn 3d, S 2p, and N 1s regions are presented in ESI Fig. S1. Peaks locating at 931.9 eV and 951.7 eV with a binding energy splitting of 19.8 eV correspond to Cu 2p3/2 and Cu 2p1/2. Peaks locating at 1021.6 eV and 1044.7 eV correspond to Zn 2p3/2 and Zn 2p1/2. Peaks locating at 486.2 eV and 487.2 eV correspond to Sn 3d5/2 and 3d3/2. Peaks locating at 161.5 eV and 162.7 eV correspond to S 2p3/2 and S 2p1/2. No obvious shift of the binding energy of Cu, Zn, Sn, and S can be detected in the m-CZTS compared with p-CZTS nanoparticles. Peaks corresponding to N 1s are clearly observed for both p-CZTS and m-CZTS nanoparticles. The calculated atomic percentages of Cu, Zn, Sn, and S from the XPS measurement are 21.5%, 7.7%, 14.7%, and 56.1% respectively for p-CZTS, which are nearly the same as m-CZTS (see ESI Table S1). When N is taken into account, the atomic percentage of N decreases from 6.8% in p-CZTS to 4.1% in m-CZTS, while atomic percentage of S slightly increases from 52.3% in p-CZTS to 53.1% in the m-CZTS. This phenomenon suggests that oleylamine capped on the p-CZTS is partially replaced by hexanethiol, which is consistent with the FTIR result.
The schematic device structure in our study is presented in Fig. 3a. It consists of a transparent conductive oxide substrate (FTO), a thin SnO2 electron transporting layer, a perovskite light absorbing layer, a CZTS nanoparticles hole transporting layer, and a low temperature paintable carbon electrode. The CZTS hole transporting layer is prepared by solution spin-coating and the carbon electrode is prepared via doctor-blading, which can be easily modified for preparing large modules of perovskite solar cells. The corresponding band level alignment of our perovskite solar cells is presented in ESI Fig. S2. The conduction band level and valance band level of CZTS are both slightly higher than those of perovskite light absorbing material, which favors hole extraction from perovskite to CZTS and at the same time can effectively block the electron transportation. Planar view SEM image of the MAPbI3 perovskite film is shown in Fig. 3b, the perovskite film is compact and dense, which fully covers the underlying SnO2 electron transporting layer. SEM images of the CZTS hole transporting layer spin-coated onto the MAPbI3 films are presented in Fig. 3c and d. Both the p-CZTS and m-CZTS nanoparticles can fully cover the underlying perovskite films. As can be seen in ESI Fig. S3, the p-CZTS nanoparticles form a smooth layer above the perovskite film with an estimated thickness of 160 nm. XRD patterns of the perovskite films covered with CZTS nanoparticles are presented in ESI Fig. S4. Characteristic diffraction peaks corresponding to MAPbI3 are observed in the two films, which are similar to the reference MAPbI3 film without hole transporting layer.
Current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the MAPbI3 perovskite solar cells employing CZTS hole transporting layer and low temperature paintable carbon electrode are recorded. The characteristic photovoltaic parameters, i.e. open circuit voltage (Voc), short circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (PCE), are extracted and summarized in Fig. 4. The hole transporting layer free carbon electrode based perovskite solar cells are fabricated as a reference, which exhibit an average Voc of 0.935 V, Jsc of 19.89 mA cm−2, FF of 57.67%, and PCE of 10.73%. When p-CZTS nanoparticles are used as hole transporting layer, the resulting carbon electrode based perovskite solar cells show an average Voc of 1.051 V, Jsc of 21.10 mA cm−2, FF of 64.36%, and PCE of 14.27%, due to reduced charge recombination rate in the perovskite solar cell when CZTS nanoparticles hole transporting layer is introduced. When the m-CZTS nanoparticles are used as hole transporting layer, the resulting average Voc slightly increases to 1.067 V, at the same time, Jsc and FF are further boosted to 22.97 mA cm−2 and 67.83%, the corresponding PCEs can reach 16.62%, which is enhanced by 16.47% compared with solar cells employing p-CZTS hole transporting layer.

J–V curves of the typical perovskite solar cells are presented in Fig. 5a and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. It is quite clear that our solar cells employing CZTS hole transporting layers exhibit negligible hysteresis in both reverse scan mode and forward scan mode. The calculated hysteresis indexes (HI, HI = 100% × abs(PCEreverse − PCEforward)/PCEreverse) are 1.9% and 1.3% for p-CZTS and m-CZTS, respectively.J–V curves of hole transporting layer free perovskite solar cells are also presented, which exhibit a large hysteresis (HI = 27.6%). Steady state output current density at maximum power point is recorded, and the results are shown in Fig. 5b. During the whole test period, perovskite solar cells are biased at 0.735 V, 0.793 V and 0.850 V for devices without hole transporting layer, with p-CZTS hole transporting layer, and with m-CZTS hole transporting layer, respectively. As a reference, perovskite solar cell without hole transporting layer can deliver an average output power density of 10.07 mW cm−2 from 50 s to 250 s. When CZTS nanoparticles are used as hole transporting layer, the output current density of p-CZTS based perovskite solar cell is very steady, and the average output power density is calculated to be 14.19 mW cm−2 in the period from 50 s to 250 s, corresponding to a steady state PCE of 14.19%. For m-CZTS based perovskite solar cell, the output current density slightly decreases with increasing illumination time (less than 6%), and the average output power density is calculated to be 15.84 mW cm−2 in the period from 50 s to 250 s, corresponding to a steady state PCE of 15.84%. Long term stability of the perovskite solar cells is also tested, and the results are presented in Fig. 5c. For better comparison, the hole transporting layer free carbon electrode based perovskite solar cells are also tested. It is quite clear from Fig. 5c that all the three types of perovskite solar cells demonstrate excellent long term stability. The CZTS nanoparticles can form a compact hole transporting layer above the perovskite light absorbing layer, which can protect the perovskite film from water intrusion (see ESI Fig. S5); at the same time, CZTS is chemical stable and will not react with the perovskite film. The above two factors might contribute to better stability of the perovskite solar cells employing CZTS hole transporting layer and carbon electrode. On the whole, perovskite solar cells employing CZTS hole transporting layer and carbon electrode demonstrate excellent stability under light illumination and long term storage, and m-CZTS hole transporting layer can ensure better photovoltaic performances.

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
w/o CZTS reverse
0.988
20.05
59.52
11.79
w/o CZTS forward
0.953
18.70
47.86
8.53
p-CZTS reverse
1.023
20.59
65.99
13.90
p-CZTS forward
1.027
20.69
66.69
14.17
m-CZTS reverse
1.127
23.16
63.18
16.49
m-CZTS forward
1.127
23.15
64.05
16.71
Conductivity of the p-CZTS and m-CZTS films are measured and the current–voltage curves from the two Ag electrodes are presented in Fig. 6a using the schematic device structure in the inset. The resistances are calculated from the inverse slope of the current–voltage curves. For p-CZTS and m-CZTS films, the calculated resistances are 3.52 × 106 Ω and 1.86 × 106 Ω, respectively. Therefore, the m-CZTS film is more conductive than the p-CZTS film. Charge carrier mobilities of the p-CZTS and m-CZTS films are studied using space charge limited current (SCLC) model. Hole only devices with the structure ITO/CZTS/MoO3/Ag are fabricated. J–V curves of the hole only devices are presented in Fig. 6b. In the SCLC region, the relationship between J and V is given by equation: , where ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, εr is the relative dielectric constant of CZTS (εr = 6.7),μ is the carrier mobility, and L is the thickness of the device (L = 160 nm). Hole mobilities of 1.9 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 5.5 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 are extracted for p-CZTS and m-CZTS films respectively through fitting the quadratic part of the measured J–V curves from 1.0 V to 2.0 V, which are in good agreement with the reported values. The p-CZTS nanoparticles are capped with long chain insulating oleylamine, which blocks the charge transportation between CZTS nanoparticles, thus hole mobility of p-CZTS is quite low. When the long chain oleylamine is partially replaced by short chain hexanethiol, the distance between CZTS nanoparticles is shorten, resulting in better charge transportation. Therefore, hole mobility of the m-CZTS is increased, this enhanced hole mobility is in consistent with the decreased resistance from the current–voltage curves, and can contribute to better hole transportation across the CZTS hole transporting layer.
Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra are further carried out to characterize the charge extraction capabilities of the p-CZTS and m-CZTS films. The MAPbI3 film exhibits a strong emission peak at around 760 nm in Fig. 6c, which originates from the radiative recombination of the MAPbI3 perovskite. When p-CZTS nanoparticles hole transporting layer is deposited onto the MAPbI3 film, the PL intensity is greatly quenched to 12% of the bare MAPbI3 film, indicating a large amount of the photo-generated holes are extracted by the p-CZTS layer. When m-CZTS nanoparticles are employed as hole transporting layer, the PL intensity is further quenched to only 1.1% of the bare MAPbI3 film, indicating better hole extraction capability of the m-CZTS compared with p-CZTS. TRPL spectra are presented in Fig. 6d. It is quite clear that PL intensity of the perovskite/m-CZTS film decays faster than MAPbI3 and MAPbI3/p-CZTS films, which is consistent with the steady state PL results. Therefore, PL and TRPL results confirm that the m-CZTS exhibits better hole extraction capability compared with p-CZTS, which originates from the better hole transport capability of the m-CZTS films and can contribute to enhanced photovoltaic performances as discussed in the previous context.
To further confirm the universal application of CZTS nanoparticles as a potential hole transporting material for perovskite solar cells, we have fabricated perovskite solar cells with a structure of FTO/SnO2/FAPbI3/CZTS/Carbon. The FAPbI3 light absorbing material is prepared using the two-step sequential deposition method. Statistical photovoltaic parameters from 15 samples for each kind of perovskite solar cells are summarized in ESI Fig. S6 and Table S2. Compared with MAPbI3, the employment of FAPbI3 perovskite can further boost the performances of the corresponding perovskite solar cells. Therefore, FAPbI3 perovskite solar cells have demonstrated average PCEs of 15.14% and 17.16% for p-CZTS and m-CZTS hole transporting layer respectively. Champion J–V curves of our solar cells employing m-CZTS hole transporting layer are presented in Fig. 7a, which demonstrate a Voc of 1.095 V, Jsc of 23.80 mA cm−2, FF of 63.93%, PCE of 16.66% in the reverse scan measurement, and a Voc of 1.095 V, Jsc of 23.90 mA cm−2, FF of 67.67%, PCE of 17.71% in the forward scan measurement. As can be seen, PCE from the forward scan is larger than that from the reverse scan mode, which is known as inverted hysteresis according to references and has also been reported in perovskite solar cells employing Cu2MSnS4 (M = Zn, Co, Ni) hole transporting layers together with Au electrodes. Although several mechanisms have already been proposed, such as charge extraction barrier at the perovskite and charge transporting layer interfaces, ionic migration and accumulation in perovskite induced by external pre-poling, and polarization of c-TiO2/perovskite interface, the origins of inverted hysteresis are still not fully understood. In our study, FAPbI3 perovskite solar cells employing p-CZTS hole transporting layer show dominantly normal hysteresis, while those employing m-CZTS hole transporting layer exhibit dominantly inverted hysteresis, as can be seen in ESI Fig. S7. The only difference between these two types of solar cells is the CZTS hole transporting layer. Therefore, the inverted hysteresis phenomenon observed in our experiment might originate from the charge accumulation and interfacial polarization at the FAPbI3/CZTS interface due to different electric properties of the p-CZTS and m-CZTS films. Yet, further study is needed to give a more convincing explanation for this phenomenon, which is beyond the scope of this study.
The steady state output current density at the maximum power point (voltage bias is 0.850 V) corresponding to our champion J–V curve is presented in Fig. 7b. The output current density is quite stable, and an average PCE of 16.70% can be obtained. Typical IPCE spectrum of our FAPbI3 perovskite solar cells using m-CZTS hole transporting layer is presented in Fig. 7c and the integrated Jsc is calculated to be 23.10 mA cm−2, which is consistent with the measured Jsc (23.16 ± 0.41) in ESI Table S2. As far as we know, the reported champion PCE in this manuscript is among one of the highest PCEs for perovskite solar cells employing an inorganic hole transporting layer and a carbon electrode (see ESI Table S3). Besides, our CZTS hole transporting layer is prepared using solution processing method, and the carbon electrode can be easily prepared using a modified commercial conductive carbon paste via doctor-blading, therefore, our method is highly advantageous and can be feasibly adopted to fabricate large perovskite solar modules.

In summary, hot injection synthesized CZTS nanoparticles are modified using hexanethiol. The long chain oleylamine capped on the CZTS nanoparticles is partially replaced by the short chain hexanethiol, which is confirmed by FTIR and XPS measurements. The modified CZTS nanoparticles exhibit higher charge carrier mobility and hole extraction capability of the modified CZTS hole transporting layer is enhanced. Therefore, power conversion efficiency of MAPbI3 based perovskite solar cell is boosted from 14.27% for solar cell employing pristine CZTS hole transporting layer to 16.62% for solar cell employing modified CZTS hole transporting layer, at the same time, perovskite solar cell employing CZTS hole transporting layer demonstrate excellent stability. When FAPbI3 is used as light absorbing layer, a champion power conversion efficiency of 17.71% is obtained, which is among one of the highest PCEs for perovskite solar cells employing an inorganic hole transporting layer and a carbon electrode.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work receives financial support from Doctoral Scientific Research Foundation of Xinyang Normal University and Nanhu Scholars Program for Young Scholars of XYNU, Key Project of Henan Province Colleges and Universities Plan (No. 19A430022).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta03030a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020