 DOI: 10.1039/D1TC05803G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 3929-3936


Sourava Chandra
Pradhan
,

Jayadev
Velore
,

Anders
Hagfeldt
* and 

Suraj
Soman
*

Photosciences and Photonics Section, Chemical Sciences and Technology Division, CSIR-National Institute for Interdisciplinary Science and Technology (CSIR-NIIST), Thiruvananthapuram 695019, India. E-mail: suraj@niist.res.in

Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad-201002, India

Department of Chemistry – Ångström Laboratory, Uppsala University Box 523, SE-75120 Uppsala, Sweden

Received
3rd December 2021
, Accepted 7th February 2022
First published on 8th February 2022
Copper-based metal complex redox mediators proved to be an efficient, futuristic electrolyte for dye-sensitized solar cell (DSC) applications addressing many critical issues of conventional iodide/triiodide electrolytes. However, copper redox mediators being bulkier than conventional iodine electrolytes impose movement restrictions contributing to unfavourable charge transfer processes. In the present manuscript, we analyzed the impact of TiO2 particle size (20 nm and 30 nm) on the photovoltaic parameters of DSCs using an organic D35 dye and an alternate copper redox mediator, Cu[(tmby)2]2+/1+. DSC photoanodes with 20 nm TiO2 particles realized a lower power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 6.32 ± 0.07% in comparison to 7.36 ± 0.12% efficiency achieved using DSCs made with 30 nm TiO2 particles. The improved PCE using 30 nm TiO2 particles is associated with the enhancement in short circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit potential (Voc) and the fill factor (FF). Furthermore, comprehensive analysis of various charge transfer processes at discrete interfaces in these devices reveals collective enhancement in light-harvesting, dye regeneration and charge collection efficiency that ultimately contributed to achieving 16% improvement in PCE using 30 nm TiO2 particles.

Third-generation solar cells have garnered tremendous attention in recent years as a potential light-harvesting option, mainly due to their capability to work under diffused/artificial light conditions. Among the various types of third-generation photovoltaic (PV) technologies, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) are considered as one of the most promising cost-effective PV technology. They have fascinated researchers since their invention by Brian O′ Regan and Michael Grätzel due to their lower production cost, ease of fabrication, transparency, flexibility, and aesthetics. Promising power conversion efficiencies (PCE) above 14% have already been reported for DSCs under one sun illumination (100 mW cm−2). In recent times, DSCs have emerged as one of the most brilliant photovoltaic technologies for indoor photovoltaics (IPV), even surpassing GaAs solar cells with power conversion efficiencies >30% under artificial light illumination (1000 lux, CFL).

In DSCs, dye absorbs light, and correspondingly electron–hole pairs are created. The excited electrons are then injected into the semiconductor (TiO2) and collected through the working electrode. Meanwhile, the oxidized dye is reduced by the electron-rich species present in the electrolyte. The cycle completes as the oxidized species in the electrolyte gets re-reduced at the counter electrode. The output current primarily depends upon the light-harvesting capability of the sensitizer and the voltage constitutes the Fermi energy difference between TiO2 and the redox potential of the electrolyte. Since the Fermi level of TiO2 offers fewer opportunities for modification, Voc of DSCs can be increased more readily by employing electrolytes with positive redox potentials. Unfortunately, conventional I−/I3− redox electrolyte offers minimal flexibility to tune the redox potential (0.4 V vs. NHE), limiting DSC's open-circuit potential. One of the redox complexes that successfully fulfilled the shortcomings of the I−/I3− redox shuttle was cobalt-based metal complex redox mediators (Co3+/Co2+). Unlike I−/I3−, Co3+/Co2+ offers modulation of redox potential through structural changes carried out on the peripheral organic ligands attaining a voltage close to 1 V. However, the reorganization energy is relatively high for cobalt redox mediators since Co(III) has a high spin state, and Co(II) has a low spin state necessitating a minimum driving force of 400–500 meV for efficient dye regeneration, limiting further improvement in Voc. A significant advancement in voltage gain was achieved recently with the introduction of copper electrolytes where merely 100 mV driving force was sufficient enough for efficient dye regeneration leading to Voc > 1 V from a single junction device. Recently, using Cu[(tmby)2]2+/1+ Hagfeldt and co-workers achieved an outstanding Voc of 1.24 V from a single junction device leading to a power conversion efficiency of 13.5%. Fabrication of efficient copper-based DSCs requires an entirely new set of innovative materials and optimized device architectures. One such critical device engineering parameter involves the use of mesoporous titanium dioxide particles with variable particle sizes. In standard I−/I3− electrolyte based DSCs, mesoporous TiO2 with an average particle size of 20 nm is commonly used as an active layer, which provides a balance between dye uptake and charge transport. However, in copper electrolyte DSCs, mesoporous TiO2 with an average particle size of 30 nm is primarily preferred over 20 nm. Ferdowsi et al. used TiO2 particle sizes of 20 nm and 30 nm with the [Cu(tmby)2]2+/1+ electrolyte and newly synthesized sensitizers L156 and L224, which showed improvement in efficiency. Cao et al. also observed an improvement in PCE by replacing 20 nm TiO2 particles with 30 nm TiO2 particles under one sun illumination using the copper electrolyte. Though the difference between 20 nm and 30 nm TiO2 particles is minimal, it critically alters the surface area and porosity, which further influences the charge transfer process at the TiO2/electrolyte interface. For instance, larger size TiO2 particles are considered to be favourable for charge transport supported by higher recombination resistance and longer diffusion length using an N719 dye and an I−/I3− electrolyte. Similarly, better porosity for 30 nm particles faciliates easy movement of alternative bulky electrolytes. Unlike I−/I3− redox mediators, Cu2+/Cu1+ ions are bulky with a higher tendency for interfacial recombination. Thus a slight change in porosity or surface area may substantially influence photovoltaic parameters. Moreover, a detailed investigation on the gain in PCE using mesoporous TiO2 of variable particle sizes is not explored in detail for DSCs using copper electrolytes. In the present study, we carried out a comprehensive interfacial analysis of DSCs fabricated using 20 nm and 30 nm TiO2 particles along with the organic D35 sensitizer and Cu[(tmby)2]2+/1+ redox mediator. Chart 1 shows the molecular structure of the D35 dye and Cu[(tmby)2]2+/1+ electrolyte and the energy level diagram of TiO2, dye and electrolyte.

Current density–voltage (J–V) characterization was carried out under one sun illumination (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2). Fig. 1 shows the J–V and IPCE plots for DSCs fabricated using 20 nm and 30 nm TiO2 particles and the resultant photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1 employing a D35 sensitizer and [Cu(tmby)2]2+/1+ electrolyte. DSCs with 20 nm particles delivered an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 928 ± 2 mV, a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 9.95 ± 0.09 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 0.68 ± 0.01, leading to a power conversion efficiency (η) of 6.32 ± 0.07%. Under similar conditions, DSCs with 30 nm particles exhibited a Voc of 948 ± 3 mV and Jsc of 10.96 ± 0.10 mA cm−2 and FF of 0.71 ± 0.01 realizing an improved η of 7.36 ± 0.12%. DSCs with 30 nm TiO2 particles showed 16% improvement in PCE with respect to devices fabricated using 20 nm TiO2 particles. This enhancement in PCE is mainly attributed to the 10% improvement in current density and minor gains in Voc and FF. The improvement in efficiency was also observed for photovoltaic measurements carried out under indoor 1000 lux warm white CFL illumination (Fig. S1 and Table S1, ESI). IPCE onset for both the devices extended up to a wavelength of 640 nm with IPCEmax at 470 nm. The Jsc obtained by integrating IPCE was found to be 9.22 mA cm−2 for 20 nm and 10.05 mA cm−2 for 30 nm TiO2 particles. The improvement in Jsc was also reflected in the IPCE spectra, where DSCs using 30 nm TiO2 particles showed a higher absorption profile in the visible region with a relatively more improvement from 500 nm to 600 nm. IPCE is given by the relation,

IPCE = ηLHE × ηinj × ηreg × ηcc
(1)
where
ηLHE is the light-harvesting efficiency, ηinj, ηreg and ηcc denote injection, regeneration and charge collection efficiency. A more detailed analysis of each of these parameters is discussed in the following sections.

Device

V
oc (mV)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF

η (%)
20 nm
928 ± 2
9.95 ± 0.09
0.68 ± 0.01
6.32 ± 0.07
30 nm
948 ± 3
10.96 ± 0.10
0.71 ± 0.01
7.36 ± 0.12

Light-harvesting efficiency (LHE) demonstrates the capability of the device to absorb light and is the first step in the photon to electrical energy conversion process. During this process, light is absorbed, and electron–hole pairs are created. In DSCs, the sensitizer/dye serves the role of a light harvester; thus, the absorption capability and molar extinction coefficient of dyes primarily determine the light-harvesting capability.

Light-harvesting efficiency is given by eqn (2)
LHE = 1 − 10−abs
(2)
where abs is the absorbance.
Fig. 2 shows the LHE of dye soaked TiO2 electrodes using 20 nm and 30 nm TiO2 particles as a function of wavelength. The LHE of the dye-soaked electrodes with 30 nm TiO2 particles marginally red-shifted. The redshift in LHE particularly at higher wavelengths (>500 nm) can be attributed to better light scattering induced by the higher particle size and roughness provided by 30 nm particles. Fig. S2, ESI shows the surface profile AFM images for 20 nm and 30 nm TiO2 particles. From the AFM image, the roughness was found to be 129 nm for TiO2 films with 20 nm particles, whereas the roughness value for 30 nm TiO2 films was found to be 339 nm. Larger roughness contributed towards higher dye loading for 30 nm TiO2 particles (1.3 × 10−7 mol cm−2 for 30 nm and 1.2 × 10−7 mol cm−2 for 20 nm). Thus the larger-sized particles with higher roughness improved the scattering and dye intake thereby contributing towards better LHE for devices fabricated using 30 nm TiO2 particles, particularly in the red region.


The most critical process that determines the performance of DSCs is the back electron transfer/recombination at the TiO2/electrolyte interface. At this interface, the injected electrons in the conduction band (CB) and sub-bandgap states of TiO2 recombines with the oxidised species/holes present in the electrolyte. Recombination is more prominent in copper electrolyte-based devices since the redox potentials of CuI/CuII systems are more positively placed than the conventional iodide electrolyte, resulting in larger driving force for recombination. Thus minor alterations at a TiO2/electrolyte interface remarkably impacts the rate of recombination in copper electrolyte based DSCs. We first analyzed the location of CB in both 20 nm and 30 nm devices using charge extraction measurement. Fig. 3 shows Voc as a function of extracted charge for DSCs with 20 nm and 30 nm TiO2 particles, respectively. As apparent from Fig. 3, at analogous charge density, Voc for a 30 nm device is lower than that for a 20 nm one, which indicates that the CB of TiO2 using 30 nm TiO2 particles shifted towards more positive potentials compared to 20 nm. After locating the CB of TiO2, the recombination at the TiO2/electrolyte interface using transient photovoltage decay and open-circuit voltage decay (OCVD) were measured (Fig. 4). Employing these two perturbation techniques, we estimated the lifetime, which provides the information on recombination. Both measurements revealed that devices fabricated using 30 nm TiO2 particles achieved higher lifetime than devices fabricated using 20 nm TiO2 particles. Similar results were also obtained from electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurement (Fig. S3, ESI). 30 nm particles possess relatively higher dye loading than 20 nm particles, which blocks the TiO2 surface more effectively from the oxidized Cu(II) species, leading to reduced interfacial charge recombinations. Nevertheless, the CB of TiO2 in 30 nm devices are also placed at lower potentials than 20 nm, which aids in reducing recombinations as a result of a lower recombination driving force. Owing to the improved lifetime, DSCs fabricated using 30 nm TiO2 particles showed higher Voc and fill factor than the devices fabricated using 20 nm TiO2 particles.

Recombination from the sub-bandgap states of TiO2 also cannot be ignored for devices using the [Cu(tmby)2]2+/1+ electrolyte with a positive redox potential of 0.87 V vs. NHE that leads to non-ideality. We estimated the ideality factor from the Vocvs. light intensity plot (Fig. 5) using the relation,
(3)
where
I is input light intensity, m is the ideality factor, kB is Boltzmann's constant and T is the temperature. Using eqn (3), m was found to be 2.11 and 2.18 for devices fabricated using 20 nm and 30 nm TiO2 particles. It is to be noted that the ideal value of m is 1. The non-ideal value in both cases indicates recombination from sub-bandgap states. The extent of non-ideality is nearly similar; thus, the recombination from sub-bandgap states is likely to be identical for both 20 nm and 30 nm TiO2 particles.


The injection and regeneration studies were carried out using photo induced absorption measurements (PIA). Fig. 6 shows the PIA spectra of dye-soaked electrodes and copper electrolyte filled devices. For dye-soaked electrodes, the ground state bleaching was detected at around 580 nm; meanwhile, the absorption of the oxidised D35 dye was observed beyond 800 nm wavelength, showing effective injection of electrons to TiO2 dye excited state. The PIA spectrum of devices fabricated with both the 20 nm and 30 nm TiO2 particles overlap with each other, indicating similar injection. The absorption spectra of the oxidised D35 dye were quenched by the addition of the electrolyte, suggesting effective regeneration of oxidized dye ground state. Moreover, faster regeneration can be anticipated qualitatively for devices using 30 nm TiO2 particles with respect to devices using 20 nm TiO2 particles, as the extent of absorption quenching is more in the former case.

Dye regeneration can also be influenced by the slower diffusion of ions present in the electrolyte, particularly in DSCs employing alternative redox electrolytes due to the molecular bulkiness of the transition metal complexes. We carried out intensity-dependent Jsc measurement and current transient measurements to explore the mass transport limitation in these devices. Fig. 7(a) shows Jsc as a function of light intensity. Current density is related to the irradiation intensity by the relation, Jsc ∝ Iα where α is a constant. α = 1 suggests ideal relationship between Jsc and input light intensity. Using 20 nm and 30 nm TiO2 particle, α was found to be unity which suggest that both the devices are free from mass transport limitation irrespective of the difference in the size of the TiO2 particles being used in respective devices. This is applicable to devices using dyes of similar architecture as D35. This may not hold the same using bulky dyes or while employing co-sensitized approach. Fig. 7(b) displays the current transient measurement for DSCs fabricated using photoanodes having 20 nm and 30 nm TiO2 particles. Current transient measurements were carried out under one sun illumination (100 mW cm−2, AM 1.5G). Once the light is irradiated, the current response of the device reached a maximum current (Jmax) followed by a decay reaching to a saturation (Jsat) current over the passage of a few seconds. As apparent from Fig. 7(b)Jmax and Jsat are nearly equal using the present dye–electrolyte combination (D35-[Cu(tmby)2]2+/1+), which further confirms that devices fabricated with both 20 nm and 30 nm TiO2 particles are free from mass transport limitations.

Once electrons are injected, they must be collected at the respective electrodes to generate current. The ratio of the number of electrons injected to the number of electrons collected determines the charge collection efficiency (ηcc). For efficient charge collection, diffusion length (Ln) must be longer than the thickness of TiO2.Fig. 8 shows diffusion length (Ln) and charge collection efficiency (ηcc) as a function of LED current. Diffusion length (Ln) and charge collection efficiency (ηcc) were estimated from eqn (4) and (5),

(4)
(5)
where
L is the thickness of TiO2, τd is the transport time and τn is the lifetime. The lifetime and transport time were determined from transient photovoltage decay and transient photo current decay measurements. Transient photo current decay is given in Fig. S4, ESI.

As shown in Fig. 8(a), for devices fabricated using 20 nm and 30 nm TiO2 particles, the diffusion length is three times longer than the thickness of the TiO2 film (∼4 μm irrespective of the particle size), which is large enough for efficient charge collection. Ln remains approximately constant irrespective of light intensity while DSCs with 30 nm TiO2 particles showcased a longer diffusion length than DSCs fabricated using 20 nm TiO2 particles. Longer diffusion length in 30 nm TiO2 particles can be attributed to the improved lifetime which resulted in comparatively better charge collection efficiency for 30 nm TiO2 particle based devices (Fig. 8(b)).

We systematically studied the effect of a photoanode comprising of 20 nm and 30 nm TiO2 particles, respectively, employing Cu[(tmby)2]2+/1+ as the redox mediator with an organic D35 sensitizer. The device fabricated using 30 nm TiO2 particles showed an improvement in PCE compared to the device fabricated with 20 nm TiO2 particles under full sun and indoor illumination. The improvement in PCE is attributed to the enhancement of the current density (Jsc), open-circuit potential (Voc) and fill factor (FF). The gain in Voc and FF is mainly attributed to the improved lifetime. The diode quality factor (m) was found to be non-ideal for DSCs using both 20 nm and 30 nm TiO2 particles, indicating the possibility of recombination from surface states. To provide a more detailed justification on enhancement in Jsc, we analysed parameters such as ηLHE, ηinj, ηreg and ηcc. LHE was marginally improved at higher wavelengths for photoanodes using 30 nm TiO2 particles as a result of higher roughness, better dye loading and improved scattering. The PIA result suggests better regeneration for devices fabricated using 30 nm TiO2 particles. Furthermore, devices fabricated using 20 nm and 30 nm TiO2 particles were free from mass transport with an ideal α value of 1. Devices fabricated using 30 nm TiO2 particles realized longer lifetime and diffusion length contributing to a better charge collection efficiency. In a nutshell, the collective enhancement in LHE, dye regeneration, and charge collection efficiency assisted in bringing higher Jsc, Voc, FF and improved PCE for devices fabricated using 30 nm TiO2 particles employing the D35 sensitizer and Cu[(tmby)2]2+/1+ as the redox mediator.


The solvents and materials used for device fabrication were of HPLC grade purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, Merck, GreatCell Solar and used without further purification. D35 organic dye and [Cu(tmby)2]2+/1+ copper complexes were obtained from Dyenamo AB (Stockholm, Sweden). 20 nm 18 NRT TiO2 paste was obtained from GreatCell Solar and 30 nm TiO2 paste was obtained from Dyenamo AB.


Working electrode preparation starts with cutting of FTO glasses (TEC15, GreatcellSolar) into 1.5 × 1.5 cm2 pieces. Thereupon FTO glasses were sonicated in a detergent for 30 minutes followed by gentle scrubbing in water and again sonication in deionized (DI) water for 30 minutes, followed by sonication in IPA and acetone for 15 minutes each. To further remove any other organics, processed FTOs were annealed at 500 °C for 15 minutes in a muffle furnace followed by UV-ozone cleaning. A compact TiO2 blocking layer was created over FTO using TiCl4 treatment followed by annealing at 500 °C for 30 minutes. TiCl4 treatment includes dipping cleaned FTO in 53 mM TiCl4 bath for 30 min at 70 °C followed by rinsing of FTO using DI water and ethanol. Following this, either a 20 nm TiO2 particle layer (18NRT, GreatcellSolar) or 30 nm (Dyenamo, Sweden) was deposited by screen printing with a total thickness of 4 μm. Further TiO2 coated substrates were annealed at 325 °C for 5 minutes, 375 °C for 5 minutes, 400 °C for 5 minutes and 500 °C for 15 minutes. Again, TiCl4 treatment was performed on electrodes followed by annealing at 500 °C for 30 minutes to create a compact TiO2 post-blocking layer over mesoporous TiO2. The electrodes were then kept inside the dye bath overnight. The dye solution consists of 0.2 mM D35 (Dyenamo, Sweden) in 1:1 acetonitrile and tert-butanol. For counter electrodes, predrilled 1.5 × 1.5 cm2 FTO glasses (TEC8, GreatCell Solar) were sonicated in detergent, DI water, and ethanol for 45 minutes and consequently annealed at 500 °C for 15 minutes. Prior to PEDOT [poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene)] deposition, electrodes were treated using UV–O3 for 15 min. Preparation of the PEDOT counter electrode involves electropolymerisation of 3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene (EDOT) from a micellar aqueous solution of 0.1 M sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 0.01 M EDOT. The electrodes were assembled using a 30 μm Surlyn spacer and heat pressing at 110 °C. [Cu(tmby)2]2+/1+ electrolyte, which consists of 0.20 M Cu(I), 0.04 M Cu(II), 0.1 M LiTFSI, and 0.6 M 4-tert-butylpyridine in acetonitrile, was injected through the predrilled holes and the holes were subsequently sealed using a cover glass.


Photocurrent voltage (J–V) characteristics were determined using an Oriel Class-AAA solar simulator (Model PVIV-94043A) equipped with a Keithley 2440 power source. The intensity of irradiation was measured using a certified calibrated Si solar cell. The photovoltaic results reported are from the data obtained from 8 devices, and the error was estimated using the standard deviation method. Indoor light measurement was carried out inside a dark box with warm white CFL as the illumination source. The indoor J–V responses were recorded using a Dyenamo potentiostat (DN-AE05). The intensity of light was measured using a radiometrically calibrated Ocean optics Jaz spectrometer. A circular black mask of areas 0.1256 cm2 (smaller than the active area) was used during the J–V measurements to minimize the contribution of light falling outside the active area. The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) of devices was determined under the DC mode using a 300 W Xenon lamp integrated with a Newport monochromator and power meter, controlled using Oriel software. Both current transient and open-circuit voltage decay (OCVD) measurements were carried out under AM 1.5G illumination. For current transient measurements, the lamp was sequentially switched on and switched off at intervals of 10 seconds, and the photocurrent response was recorded using an Autolab PGSTAT302N by applying 0 V across the device. In OCVD measurement, the device was illuminated for 30 seconds, and then the light was switched off, and the photovoltage decay was recorded. Furthermore, from the photovoltage the decay lifetime was calculated. Photo induced absorption spectroscopy (PIA) was performed using a Dyenamo DN-AE02. It uses a 1 W blue light-emitting LED (λ = 470 nm) as a pump and a 20 W tungsten halogen lamp as a probe. The transmitted light through the sample falls on the monochromator and is detected using a UV enhanced Si detector connected to a lock-in amplifier (SR830) via a current amplifier. The PIA spectra of the devices were recorded using excitation from a LED, which has a square wave with a modulation frequency of 9.3 Hz. For PIA measurement the TiO2 thickness of devices was 4 μm. Transient photovoltage decay, transient photocurrent decay, and charge extraction were measured using a Dyenamo Toolbox set-up (DN-AE01). It generates light using a white LED, and current or voltages response is recorded using a digital acquisition board. For transient photovoltage and photocurrent decay, small amplitude square wave perturbations involving different light intensities are given to the device, and the response is recorded at open circuit and short circuit respectively. In charge extraction measurements, the device is illuminated to attain Voc, simultaneously the light is switched off and the device is short-circuited, and the current response is recorded. Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) of DSCs were carried out under dark conditions with perturbation of amplitude 10 mV, frequency ranging from 100 mHz to 100 kHz using an Autolab (PGSTAT302N). For the LHE study, absorption of dye soaked electrodes were carried out using an Ocean Optics Jaz spectrometer. For dye loading study dye desorption was performed using 0.1 M NaOH in ethanol and absorption of desorbed dye solutions were recorded using an Ocean Optics Jaz spectrometer.


The manuscript was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.


There are no conflicts to declare.


S. S. gratefully acknowledges financial support from the SERB CRG project (CRG/2020/001406) and CSIR-FIRST project (MLP65). S. C. P. thanks CSIR, Government of India, for providing Senior Research Fellowship and J. V. thanks DST-SERB (DST/SERB/F/481) for research fellowships.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional data analysis. See DOI: 10.1039/d1tc05803g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022