 DOI: 10.1039/D1NR08483F
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 5204-5213


Pengyun
Zhang
,

Ningxia
Gu
,

Lixin
Song
*,

Xiang
Chen
,

Pingfan
Du
,

Leying
Zha
,

Wei-Hsiang
Chen
 and 

Jie
Xiong
*

College of Textile Science and Engineering, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou, 310018, China. E-mail: lxsong12@zstu.edu.cn; jxiong@zstu.edu.cn

School of Science, Huzhou University, Huzhou, 313000, Zhejiang, China

Received
28th December 2021
, Accepted 5th March 2022
First published on 7th March 2022
In recent years, organic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted massive attention because of their high power conversion efficiency (PCE). However, it is difficult to prepare perovskite films with good performance in open air due to the poor stability of perovskite materials in high humidity, which is seriously hindering the practical application and development of PSCs. Herein, ethyl acetate (EA) is introduced into the perovskite precursor to enhance the crystallinity of perovskite for fabricating high efficiency stable devices in the atmospheric environment. Interestingly, volatile EA, which is often used as an anti-solvent, could quickly evaporate and accelerate the nuclei formation during perovskite crystallization. More impressively, the Lewis base nature of EA can form strong chemical bonding interactions with perovskite to passivate the defects during crystallization. As a result, the EA-modified perovskite film demonstrates dense and defect-less morphology with large grain size (the maximum achieves 0.9 μm). The EA-treated device has a dramatic efficiency of 19.53% and negligible hysteresis of the photocurrent. Furthermore, both the temperature and humidity resistances of EA-modified PSC are significantly improved. The normalized PCE of the EA-modified device without encapsulation can still retain over 80% of its initial value after being stored in 60% relative humidity (RH) in the dark for 500 hours. This contribution provides a promising channel for facilitating the commercialization of PSCs.

Over the decade, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of laboratory-scale organometallic halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has significantly achieved 25.7%. Nevertheless, the solution-based fabrication process of perovskite films usually results in forming plentiful defects and traps at the grain boundaries (GBs), particularly on surfaces. These defect sites are more reactive toward moisture in the atmospheric environment, leading to the accelerated decomposition of perovskite and reducing the performance of the ultimate device. Thus, the crucial low efficiency and instability issues of PSCs under realistic operation conditions are still urgent problems that need to be overcome for their commercialization.

Nowadays, many efforts in enhancing the photovoltaic performance and stability of devices have been studied using various modification methods. Among them, additive engineering commits to ameliorate the morphology and charge transportability of the perovskite layer, consequently improving the efficiency and stability of ultimate PSCs. Furthermore, it is figured out that the uncoordinated Pb sites at the surface can be effectively passivated by electron donors or Lewis bases through the medium of chemical interaction, which could saturate the lead coordination sphere to control nucleation and reaction processes of perovskite grains. However, for avoiding the erosion of oxygen and gaseous water, most of these devices were fabricated in nitrogen or other inert gases-filled gloveboxes, which is expensive as well as inapplicable for industrial manufacturing. These greatly increase the cost of preparation and do not comply with the concept of green chemistry. Hence, finding a simple approach to fabricate PSCs with high efficiency and stability under air conditions (without glove box) is essential for their application.
In this work, the above goal is realized by directly introducing a kind of green antisolvent, ethyl acetate (EA), into the perovskite precursor without the additional cost. EA is usually used as an anti-solvent, which exhibits quick volatilization and good miscibility with precursor solvent but is insoluble for raw perovskite. Especially, we employed the EA antisolvent and EA additive to quickly remove the residual solvent from the precursor solution and act as a driving force to accelerate the supersaturated state at the same time during the perovskite crystallization process. Finally, the modified perovskite film becomes homogenous and dense, which is beneficial for its performance. This strategy allows an entire process of crystallization management by adding the antisolvent into the perovskite precursor, which begins its influence at the initial step of crystallization. EA has a higher volatility than the precursor, N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), which can quickly evaporate and accelerate the nuclei formation during perovskite crystallization. More impressively, the Lewis base nature of EA can form strong chemical bonding interactions with perovskites to passivate the defects during crystallization. Among many types of anti-solvents, EA has not only a lower boiling point than chlorobenzene or toluene but also lower toxicity than dichloromethane, chloroform and diethyl ether. These comprehensive advantages make it widely useful for preparing perovskite films.
Consequently, the EA-modified perovskite film displays smooth, flat and defect-less morphology with enlarged dimensional grains (the maximum achieves to 0.9 μm). These high-quality perovskite layers can significantly enhance their light absorption capacity and directly improve the short-circuit current of PSCs. The passivated traps and defects at the surface or GBs caused via the addition of EA could also improve the photovoltaic performance, particularly the open-circuit voltage (Voc) of the device. The optimized PSC possesses a dramatic PCE of 19.53% and demonstrates negligible hysteresis of the photocurrent. Besides, the temperature and moisture stability of the EA-modified perovskite film are both significantly enhanced. The normalized efficiency of the EA-modified device (non-encapsulated) could still retain 80% of its initial value after being placed in 60% relative humidity (RH) for 500 hours in the dark. Overall, this green, simplified and low-priced method for fabricating PSCs with high efficiency and better stability in the atmospheric environment without a glove box facilitates its commercial applications.

The fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) etched glasses (substrates) were purchased from Advanced Electronic Technology Co., Ltd. Titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) (75 wt% in isopropanol) solution was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. The perovskite materials (PbI2 and CH3NH3I (MAI)) were purchased from Kunshan Sunlaite New Energy Technology Co., Ltd. Ethyl acetate (EA) was purchased from Shanghai Macklin Biochemical Technology Co., Ltd. 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis (N,N-di-p-methoxy-phenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD) powder was purchased from Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corporation. Other materials were provided by Aladdin Reagent (Shanghai) Co., Ltd.


FTO-etched glass substrates were cleaned by ultrasonic treatment with acetone, ethyl alcohol and isopropyl alcohol for 20 minutes, successively. After drying at 110 °C, FTO-etched glass substrates were treated with ultraviolet (UV) ozone for 20 minutes to eliminate the organic compounds from their surfaces. Then, the TiO2 solution, which is used as an electron transport layer (ETL) was spin-coated on the FTO-etched substrate. After increasing the temperature to 450 °C at 5 °C min−1, the substrate needed to be continuously annealed for 40 minutes. The pristine perovskite precursor solution was prepared by dissolving 461 mg of PbI2 and 159 mg of MAI in 0.6 mL N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) solvent. Then, 1 vol% EA, 5 vol% EA and 10 vol% EA were added as additives to the precursor solution, successively. After the perovskite precursor solution was heated at 60 °C and stirred at 300 rpm (revolutions per minute) for 30 minutes, the perovskite precursor solution (with or without EA) was spin-coated on the TiO2 layer at 2000 rpm for 8s and 4000 rpm for 22 s in turn. Specifically, EA was also used as an anti-solvent in this production process. After annealing at 100 °C for only 5 minutes, the EA-modified perovskite film could completely evaporate its solvents, additives and anti-solvents. Afterward, the solution of Spiro-OMeTAD was spin-coated on the perovskite layer at 4000 rpm for 25 s as a hole transport layer (HTL). Finally, a thickness of approximately 65 nm of the Ag electrode was deposited on the top of HTL by thermal evaporation. The complete structure of the device is clearly presented in Fig. S1. Notably, these simplified processes of fabricating high efficiency and stable perovskite solar cells (PSCs) were entirely in air environment (T ≈ 25 °C and RH ≈ 50%) without a glove box, thence greatly reducing the manufacturing costs.


The morphologies of perovskite (MAPbI3) films were studied using scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Ultra55, ZEISS). Fourier Transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) on the samples was performed using the Thermo Scientific Nicolet iS20 instrument. The crystal structures of MAPbI3 films were recorded using X-ray diffraction (XRD, Thermo ARL-X'TRA) with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å). The UV-Vis absorption spectrum was recorded using a UV-visible spectrophotometer (UV-Vis, Lambda 900). The transient-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) were collected by PG2000-Pro-EX spectrophotometer (Shanghai Ideaoptics Corporation) and transient fluorescence spectrometer (FLS980, Edinburgh Instruments), respectively. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the PSCs were measured using a source meter (Keithley 2400-SCS) under AM 1.5 illumination with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed on an electrochemical workstation (Zennium Pro). Water-contact-angle images of MAPbI3 films were measured using a contact-angle instrument (Krüss Optronic).


As is well known, the morphology of the perovskite film has an important influence on its properties. Generally, the normal volatilization rate of the precursor leads to slow nucleation of perovskite in the fabrication process of pristine perovskite precursors. Thus, several pinholes and traps commonly appear on the surface of the pristine film with many small grains, as displayed in Fig. 1a. To significantly reduce the defects and traps in the perovskite film at grain boundaries (GBs) and surface, we introduced a volatile and low-cost Lewis base, ethyl acetate (EA), into the perovskite (MAPbI3) precursor as a crystallization and morphology modification aid. EA has a lower boiling point (77.2 °C) and faster evaporation rate than N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, 152.8 °C). Furthermore, EA is miscible with the precursor solution (DMF) but insoluble in perovskite materials. During the spin-coating process of the EA-modified perovskite precursor, the suitable concentration (5 vol%) of EA additive could accelerate the volatilization rate of the precursor, facilitating the supersaturated state during the crystal formation and promoting a quicker nuclei formation of perovskite. Consequently, the perovskite film demonstrates a flat, dense, smooth and defectless morphology with abundant enlarged grains, fewer GBs and preferable surface coverage, as illustrated in Fig. 1b. Notably, the preparation conditions of two kinds of perovskite films, such as the relative humidity (RH) or spin coating speed, are exactly the same except for the absence or presence of EA.

Besides, EA contains an ester –COOR functional group (there is a double bond between carbon and oxygen) as demonstrated in Fig. S2. As a result, EA can be used as a crystallization-inducing reagent. Furthermore, Fig. 2 shows the schematic illustration of defect-passivation between EA and perovskite. After adding EA into the MAPbI3 precursor, EA with Lewis base properties will undergo a chemical bonding reaction with the perovskite (Pb2+). It is precisely because of this chemical bond that it fills in defects and assists in crystallization, especially at the surface, finally obtaining a high-quality perovskite film. During the annealing step, the volatile EA as an additive could undergo rapid evaporation with the solvent and thus the annealing time required is greatly shortened (at 100 °C for only 5 minutes). This greatly simplifies the preparation process.
To more directly demonstrate the accelerated nucleation effect of perovskite, the optical images of perovskite films without and with EA are indicated in Fig. S3. These samples just went through the spin-coating step (before annealing). The color of perovskite film deepens after the EA doping, illustrating the rapid nucleation of some perovskite seeds. These results reveal the better morphology modulation of EA-modified perovskite film. Moreover, to measure the distinct effects on perovskite film by different concentrations of EA, the top-view SEM images of perovskite films doped with different concentrations of EA are shown in Fig. S4. After adding a little of EA (1 vol%), the modification effect of the perovskite film morphology is not obvious, but the film has become considerably compact with some larger grain sizes and fewer pinholes, as displayed in Fig. S4a. On the other hand, as the concentration of EA further increases to 10 vol%, the perovskite film exposes the significantly improved average grain size but some rugged grains already appear. These rugged grains seriously weaken the performance of PSCs, as indicated in Fig. S4b. Therefore, the optimal concentration of EA is 5 vol%. The detailed grain size distribution histograms of the perovskite films doped with different concentrations of EA are illustrated in Fig. S5. The larger grain sizes of the optimal EA-modified perovskite film are crucial for higher performance (current) and stability of ultimate devices. In addition to the surface morphology of the perovskite film, the completeness of cross-sectional morphology also plays a critical role in the photovoltaic performance of PSCs. Therefore, the cross-sectional SEM analysis of the devices was performed, as shown in Fig. S6. Notably, the perovskite layers with and without EA have the same thickness of about 500 nm. The small grains in pristine perovskite film are fragmented with many cracks and pinholes. By contrast, the EA-modified perovskite film indicates the relatively integral grains with dense GBs. This implies that the higher cross-sectional quality of the EA-modified perovskite layer is also caused by the EA additive and this better morphology could lead to higher performance (voltage) and stability of devices.
In order to confirm the conjecture that the Lewis base nature of EA can form strong chemical bonding interactions with perovskite to passivate the defects during crystallization, the Fourier Transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) on the samples was performed. As exhibited in Fig. S7, the fundamental stretching band ν(CO) of pure EA appears at 1761.6 cm−1. However, for the EA + PbI2 solution, the peak intensity for the CO bond of EA might be weakened by the coordinate bonding between the O atom and Pb2+, suggesting that EA with Lewis base properties undergo a chemical bonding reaction with the perovskite. Furthermore, the crystallinity of perovskite films was carefully detected using XRD and the data are shown in Fig. 3a. It reveals that the peaks at 14.08°, 28.49° and 31.91° correspond to the reflections from the (110), (220), and (310) planes of the orthorhombic space group (I4/mcm), respectively. For EA-modified perovskite film, stronger diffraction peaks are observed. Fig. S8 displays the higher magnification patterns of XRD analysis around the (110) crystal plane and the EA-modified perovskite film has a narrower full width of half maximum (FWHM). These results indicate that the crystallization of perovskite is significantly improved and further verify our hypothesis that EA could effectively assist in crystallization.
It is well known that the better absorbance of the perovskite film could directly enhance the short circuit current (Jsc) of PSCs. Therefore, ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) spectra were recorded, as shown in Fig. 3b. The EA-modified perovskite film shows a higher absorbance than pristine perovskite film. The main reason for the improved light-harvesting capacity of EA-modified perovskite film is its higher quality (enlarged grain size) when the thicknesses of the perovskite layers are equal, as exhibited in Fig. 1b and Fig. S6. Furthermore, UV-Vis spectra of various concentrations of EA-modified perovskite films are presented in Fig. S9. Apparently, the improved absorbance can be observed by the addition of a small amount of EA (1 vol%). However, excessive additives result in the falling of absorbance, which is in accordance with the SEM outcomes shown in Fig. S4.
The PL spectra (Fig. 3c) evaluate the charge carrier recombination dynamics of the two kinds of perovskite films. It can be noticed that the PL intensity of EA-modified perovskite film is significantly enhanced compared with that of the pristine film. This obvious PL enhancement provides powerful evidence of the suppressed non-radiative recombination. Moreover, the time-resolved PL (TRPL) decay curves of two perovskite films were employed to investigate more about their photoelectric properties. As exhibited in Fig. 3d, the EA-modified MAPbI3 film demonstrates longer non-radiative charge decay lifetimes, indicating the reduction in trap-mediated bulk or surface recombination and realizing higher transport capability during the PSC operation. The fitted parameters of the TRPL spectra are plotted in Table 1. All experimental data are well-fitted to the biexponential decay function I(t) = I0 + A1e(−t−t0/τ1) + A2e(−t−t0/τ2). Where A1 and A2 are decay amplitudes, τ1 is related closely to non-radiative recombination and τ2 is a component of radiative recombination from perovskite. Moreover, the average decay lifetime can be obtained from the equation . These TRPL results imply that the higher quality of EA-modified perovskite film can decrease the trap-assisted recombination and thus increase the average decay lifetimes from 363.12 ns to 592.65 ns. This suppressed non-radiative recombination could result in less energy loss and hence increase the open-circuit voltage (Voc) of the ultimate PSCs.
Samples

A
1 (%)

τ
1 (ns)

A
2 (%)

τ
2 (ns)

τ
avg (ns)
Pristine
37
44.67
63
384.83
363.12
EA
32
67.29
68
619.50
592.65
For assessing the performance of EA-modified perovskite film-based PSCs, the photovoltaic properties of the devices, including J–V curve, hysteresis, maximum steady-state photocurrent and external incident-photon-conversion efficiency (IPCE) were measured and plotted, as shown in Fig. 4. Fig. 4a shows the J–V curves in both forward and reverse scan directions with the same scan rates. Table 2 lists the photovoltaic parameters of the two devices. The data shown in the figure and table, indicate that the pristine device displays a typical short circuit current (Jsc) decay in the forward scan, its Jsc is greatly decreased but the open-circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF) are dropped slightly. The main reasons for the great difference (higher hysteresis) between the reverse scan and forward scan of the pristine device are lower crystallinity, more defects and space-charge buildup in the pristine perovskite film. By contrast, there is no obvious hysteresis (H = 0.04) of photocurrent observed for EA-doping perovskite-based devices upon the changes of the sweep direction. The hysteresis index (H) is defined by the equation . Moreover, Fig. 4b demonstrates the detailed information of J–V hysteresis for 30 PSCs. The lower hysteresis index exhibits the effective defect passivation and narrower deviation reveals better reproducibility of the EA-modified PSCs. The improved perovskite film quality with a uniform surface and GBs could effectively suppress the surface charge trap states and simultaneously strengthen the charge transport of the device.
Samples

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

H

Pristine forward
18.72
0.96
72.66
13.06
0.14
Pristine reverse
20.74
0.98
74.68
15.18
EA forward
22.84
1.09
75.33
18.75
0.04
EA reverse
23.05
1.10
77.01
19.53
It is confirmed from Fig. 4a that the highest PCE of the EA-modified PSC achieves 19.53%, following that, the Jsc, Voc and fill factor (FF) are all remarkably enhanced, but the PCE of the pristine device only yields 15.18%. Besides, the J–V curves of PSCs doped with various EA concentrations are shown in Fig. S10a and the photovoltaic parameters are summarized in detail in Table S1. After doping with a little amount of EA, the PCE of the device is enhanced. However, the photovoltaic performance of PSCs is decreasing because of the poor quality of the perovskite film and the low light absorbance caused by excessive EA. Moreover, thirty individual devices of all kinds of PSCs were also estimated to examine the statistical distributions and repeatability of PCE, as exhibited in Fig. S10b. The EA-modified perovskite-based PSCs exhibited obvious improvement in both efficiency and repeatability, which is according to the improved absorbance and reduced non-radiative recombination.
The stabilized PCE and maximum steady-state photocurrent are measured under a maximum power point of 0.92 V for 300 s to inspect the steady output of the optimal EA-treated device, as displayed in Fig. 4c. It is clear that the current density curve of the EA-treated PSC is stabilized at 21.63 mA cm−2. Its corresponding PCE is 18.90%. In contrast, the maximal steady-state photocurrent and stabilized PCE of the pristine device only yield 18.51 mA cm−2 and 13.31%. Its lower stabilized PCE and photocurrent are consistent with the J–V characteristics.Fig. 4d reveals the IPCE spectral of PSCs without and with EA. The improved IPCE of the EA-modified device is mainly due to the better film quality and better light absorption.
For investigating the trap-assisted recombination phenomena and charge transfer performance of PSCs, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurement was employed and the results are presented in Fig. 5a. The insert figure shows the equivalent circuit model composed of the series resistance (Rs) and the charge transfer resistance (Rct). Rs is the series resistance including wires contact and materials. The combination of Rct and CPE relates to the high-frequency arc in the impedance spectra, which is associated with the charge transport resistance at heterojunction interface and associated capacitance.Table 3 lists the equivalent circuit of corresponding parameters. Lower Rs and higher Rct are realized for EA-modified perovskite film-based PSC, suggesting the more efficient charge transfer at the interfaces during device work. These results determine the fact that the interfacial combination is remarkably suppressed by applying EA, and the suppressed electron–hole recombination can efficiently improve the Voc of PSCs. To deeply understand the defect states of PSCs, the space charge limited current (SCLC) measurements were employed and the data is revealed in Fig. 5b. The trapping state density (Ntraps) is recorded from the dark J–V curves of electron-only devices. The defect density is calculated from the following equation . Where ε, ε0, L and VTFL are vacuum permittivity, the relative dielectric constant (∼28.8), the thickness of perovskite film (∼500 nm) and trap-filling limit voltage, respectively. It could be estimated that the Ntraps is impressively reduced from 3.75 × 1015 cm−3 for the pristine device to 2.61 × 1015 cm−3 for the EA-modified PSC. The detailed parameters are plotted in Table 4. It is deduced that the EA-treated device reveals lower trap recombination and defect density than the pristine device, mainly on account of improved perovskite surface morphology, passivated defects and enhanced interface features of the EA-modified perovskite film. The defect density statistical collections of 30 sets of samples from the two types of PSCs are indicated in Fig. S11. The results indicate that EA-based devices have lower Ntrap and smaller deviation, suggesting their better quality and reproducibility.
Samples

R
s (Ω)

R
ct (Ω)
Pristine
15.15
1252.46
EA
12.07
1605.14
Samples

V
TFL (V)

N
trap (cm−3)

μ
e (cm2 V−1 S−1)
Pristine
0.294
3.75 × 1015
5.08 × 10−2
EA
0.205
2.61 × 1015
7.70 × 10−2
The mobility (μ) of the perovskite in space charge limited current regime is calculated by the equation , where J is the current density, and V is the base voltage. As shown in Fig. 4c and Table 4, the electron mobility in the pristine and EA-passivated perovskite is estimated to be 5.08 × 10−2 and 7.70 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 S−1, respectively. The increased electron mobility is mainly due to the Lewis base nature of EA that can form strong chemical bonding interactions with perovskite to passivate the traps and defects. Additionally, the decreased Ntrap and improved charge transport contribute to the high FF of the ultimate PSCs. Moreover, the light intensity-dependent Voc for two kinds of devices was investigated to analyze the charge carrier recombination details, as revealed in Fig. 5d. The slope of Vocversus log-scaled light intensity is kT/q. Here, k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the kelvin temperature, and q is the elementary charge. The slope of PSCs treated with EA is 1.42 kT/q, which is lower than that of the pristine device (1.96 kT/q). This result implies that the trap-state density of the EA-modified device is effectively suppressed.
Apart from the outstanding photovoltaic performance, excellent temperature and moisture resistance of the perovskite film are also crucial for applicability, specifically for its commercialization. To study the role of EA in perovskite stability, the normalized PCE of two PSCs (un-encapsulated), which were placed for 100 hours in the dark at 85 °C was measured and the data are shown in Fig. 6a. The normalized PCE of the EA-modified device still maintains 80% of its initial value, which is better than that of the pristine device (18%). The insets in Fig. 6a indicate the optical photos of perovskite films after heat treatment. The pristine film experienced rapid degradation after 100 hours and was nearly degraded into PbI2 at the edge (yellow part). By contrast, the EA-modified perovskite film has no significant change. These results illustrate the outstanding high-temperature stability of the EA-modified perovskite film.
Furthermore, the perovskite films with or without EA were placed under 60% RH in the dark for different durations to survey their resistance to humidity. The insets in Fig. 6b indicate that the water-contact-angle of perovskite films increased from 65.58° (pristine) to 77.37° (EA-modified). The larger angle of the EA-modified MAPbI3 film indicates the improved moisture resistance ability. These significant enhancements are in accordance with the ameliorated surface morphology as exhibited in Fig. 1b. To investigate the humidity resistances of the ultimate device, the normalized efficiency is revealed in Fig. 6b. After the non-encapsulated PSCs were placed under 60% humidity for 500 hours in the dark, the normalized PCE of the EA-modified device could maintain 81% of its initial value, which is better than that of the pristine device (19%). Consequently, the high-quality perovskite film could be realized through EA additive, afterward enhancing the efficiency and long-term stability of the ultimate device.

In conclusion, a novel method to fabricate high-efficiency and stable perovskite solar cells in an open-air environment without a glove box was accomplished by introducing the volatile ethyl acetate into the perovskite precursor. On the one hand, the volatile EA could quickly evaporate and accelerate the nuclei formation in perovskite crystallization due to its low boiling point and rich functional groups that can react with perovskites. On the other hand, the Lewis base EA can form strong chemical bonding interactions with perovskites to passivate the defects during crystallization. As a result, the EA-modified perovskite film exhibits dense and defect-less morphology with enlarged grains (the maximum size achieves 0.9 μm). The passivated traps, increased crystallinity and ideal surface morphology of the perovskite film could significantly enhance the photovoltaic performance of PSCs. The optimized device realizes a dramatic PCE of 19.53% and negligible hysteresis of the photocurrent. Moreover, both, the temperature and moisture stability of the EA-modified device are remarkably improved. The EA-modified perovskite film reveals no obvious degradation after being placed for 100 hours in the dark at 85 °C. The normalized PCE of the EA-modified device (un-encapsulated) can still retain 81% of its initial value after being placed in RH ≈ 60% for 500 hours in the dark. Overall, this strategy provides a practical route for facilitating the commercialization of PSCs arising from its eco-friendly, no-additional additive and simplified fabrication.


The authors declare no competing financial interests.


Pengyun Zhang: Conceptualization, data curation, writing – original draft. Ningxia Gu: Formal analysis, methodology. Lixin Song: Supervision, writing – review & editing. Xiang Chen: Investigation. Pingfan Du: Resources, funding acquisition. Leying Zha: Validation. Wei-Hsiang Chen: Methodology, Software. Jie Xiong: Funding acquisition, Project administration.


The financial support of this work is provided by Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (LQ19E030020, LY21F040008); the Fundamental Research Funds of Zhejiang Sci-Tech University (2021Q001); the Applied Basic Research Project of China National Textile and Apparel Council (J201801).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See https://doi.org/10.1039/d1nr08483f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022