 DOI: 10.1039/C3TA01229H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3680-3687

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Ming-Chung
Chen
,

Yi-Shiang
Chiou
,

Jian-Ming
Chiu
,

Abebe
Tedla
 and 

Yian
Tai
*

Department of Chemical Engineering, National Taiwan University of Science and Technology, 43 Keelung Road Sec.4, Taipei-106, Taiwan. E-mail: ytai@mail.ntust.edu.tw; Fax: +886-2-2737-6644; Tel: +886-2-2737-6620

Received
24th November 2012
, Accepted 10th January 2013
First published on 10th January 2013
This work describes a simple process to improve the stability of small molecule organic photovoltaics (OPVs) that use poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) as the hole transport layer (HTL), without reducing the power conversion efficiency (PCE). We investigated the effect of self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) on the degradation of electrical properties caused by the diffusion of indium through the matrix commonly used in OPV devices. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy depth profiles suggested that the acidic PEDOT:PSS etched the indium from the indium tin oxide (ITO) electrode, which resulted in indium diffusion into and chemical interaction with the active layer. Such behavior was responsible for the deterioration of the device. By inserting a self-assembled monolayer (SAM) with carboxylic acid functional groups at the interface between the ITO and PEDOT:PSS layers, such diffusion could be significantly suppressed. The PCE of the pristine OPV diminished to zero at 49 days post-fabrication under ambient conditions. However, the PCE of the SAM-modified device was reduced by only 30% over the same period, and only to 48% after 98 days. Moreover, the SAMs improved the interfacial electrical properties between the ITO and PEDOT:PSS layers, which maintained the PCE of the device. Our findings suggest a simple approach to improve the stability of OPVs that utilize PEDOT:PSS as the HTL.

Photovoltaics have been extensively studied due to their potential as economical sources of energy. Among them, organic photovoltaics (OPVs) have attracted significant attention over the past few decades, owing to their potential advantages such as low cost, mechanical flexibility, large-area fabrication, and easy processes. In addition to the versatile polymer semiconductors, OPVs can employ small organic molecules as active materials. There are two advantages to such low-molecular-weight semiconductors. First, they have defined structures and compositions, and are easily purified, which makes it easier to achieve reproducible characteristics in OPV devices. Second, for tandem OPV devices in which several single cells are fabricated in a stacked configuration, the vacuum deposition of small molecules can easily achieve precise control of the layer thickness. As a consequence, the device stacking can be optimized with respect to optical interference effects. Many small molecule organic semiconductors are commercially available on a large scale. In particular, metal-phthalocyanine compounds, such as copper phthalocyanine (CuPc), and their derivatives have been extensively studied in OPV applications due to their exceptional thermal stabilities, strong optical absorption, and high hole mobilities. There have been numerous studies concerned with the constitution of heterojunction OPVs that used both solution processes and the vacuum deposition of small molecules (such as CuPc) as electron donors, materials having high electron affinity (such as fullerene, C60) as electron acceptors, and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) as the HTL. With such combinations, OPVs of relatively high efficiency can be achieved.

However, in addition to higher power conversion efficiency (PCE), a longer device lifetime—a drawback of current organic devices—is necessary to realize the commercialization of such OPVs with full success. Compared to the research into efficiency improvement, efforts toward the augmentation of device lifetimes have been limited. The poor lifetimes of OPVs are believed to result from two types of degradation, extrinsic and intrinsic. Extrinsic degradation is induced by external triggers such as oxygen and water; a major cause resulting in the oxidation of the organic materials found in the charge transport layers or active layers. In contrast, intrinsic degradation is due to changes in the characteristics of the device layers or interfaces, caused by internal modifications of the materials used in the OPVs. Although the mechanisms of such degradations are not yet well understood, a major cause of intrinsic degradation that has been addressed is the deterioration of the electrodes. Numerous studies have been reported on this issue. Kawano and Adachi demonstrated the improved stability of OPVs through incorporation of a C60/LiF interlayer between the active layer and the cathode. Jeon et al. investigated the degradation of OPVs with Al and LiF/Al cathodes using time of flight-secondary ion mass spectroscopy (TOF-SIMS). They also found that degradation could be suppressed by replacing the cathode with an organic interlayer/Al bilayer structure. The most commonly used hole transport layer (HTL) for OPVs is PEDOT:PSS. PEDOT:PSS plays two important roles: it improves hole transport and injection to the electrode, and smooths the indium tin oxide (ITO) anode surface. Owing to its high stability and water solubility, which allow facile preparation of the HTL through a conventional solution process, PEDOT:PSS is a better candidate HTL material than other conducting polymers. However, this polymer suffers from a drawback. Using the Rutherford backscattering technique, Jong et al. showed that PEDOT:PSS etched indium out of the ITO anode due to its strongly acidic nature (pH: ∼1). This led to the diffusion of indium into the HTL, and consequently, caused the degradation of organic devices. Efforts have been made to reduce the corrosion of the ITO by PEDOT:PSS. Wu et al. introduced a pH-neutral PEDOT:PSS/acidic PEDOT:PSS double layer as the HTL. The pH-neutral PEDOT:PSS layered on the ITO suppressed indium diffusion into the polymer, while regular acidic PEDOT:PSS beneath the active layer allowed effective hole injection. Additionally, various metal oxides such as NiO, WO3, or MoO3 have been introduced as hole transport layers in OPVs to replace PEDOT:PSS. However, some metal oxides with promising hole transport properties, such as NiO, are toxic. Studies on the influence of indium diffusion, as a result of the PEDOT:PSS etching, on the lifetime of OPVs are still limited, particularly for small molecule OPVs.
On the other hand, the self-assembled monolayer (SAM) technique has been extensively studied owing to the fact that such a technique provides a unique opportunity to manipulate the physical and chemical properties of a variety of substrate surfaces. For instance, the modulation of consequent Fermi-level pinning by SAMs affects the electrical and electronic properties of the underlying substrate materials. SAMs can also alter other physical properties, such as the surface energies and chemical reactivities of substrates. In addition, SAMs have been employed as electrode modifiers in organic electronics to improve device performance since they enhance charge transfer, band alignment, and the interfacial adhesion between various oxide and metal electrodes and the adjoining organic layers.
Herein, we demonstrate an approach that inserts a SAM in between the PEDOT:PSS and ITO layers to prevent indium diffusion. By inserting SAMs with carboxylic acid (–COOH) groups in the interface between the ITO and PEDOT:PSS layers, such diffusion could be significantly suppressed. As a result, the lifetime of the OPV was greatly improved. Moreover, the overall PCE of the OPVs modified by SAMs was maintained or even slightly improved, depending on the type of SAM.

Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) was purchased from HC Starck (Clevios PVP AI 4083). Copper phthalocyanine (CuPc) was purchased from Aldrich. The molecules employed in the fabrication of SAMs were terephthalic acid (B2C), benzene-1,2,4,5-tetracarboxylic acid (B4C), and benzenehexacarboxylic acid (B6C), which were obtained from Aldrich. Bathocuproine (BCP) and fullerene (C60) were purchased from UniRegion Bio-Tech (UR), and ITO (sheet resistance: 15 Ω □−1) was acquired from Merck.


ITO substrates used as the anode electrodes were cleaned sequentially by sonication with detergent, deionized water, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol for 30 min each, and treated with UV/ozone for 20 min. Thereafter, the ITO substrates were immersed in 1 mM EtOH solutions of the respective SAM molecules (B2C, B4C, or B6C) for 24 h. The substrates were then removed, rinsed thoroughly with fresh EtOH, and dried under a stream of N2 gas. PEDOT:PSS (∼30 nm) was spin-coated onto the ITO with and without SAM modifications, and then annealed at 180 °C for 3 min in a glove box under a nitrogen atmosphere. It is noteworthy that for the pristine device, the PEDOT:PSS was spin-coated on the ITO surface immediately after the UV/ozone treatment, in order to avoid changes of the work function and other surface properties of the bare ITO surface. A CuPc (∼20 nm) layer was then thermally deposited (1.0–1.2 Å s−1) on top of the PEDOT:PSS, followed by the deposition of a C60 layer (∼40 nm) at the same rate. Afterwards, we deposited BCP (∼7 nm, 1.0 Å s−1) as a hole-blocking layer on top of the C60 layer. Finally, aluminum (Al; ∼100 nm) was thermally evaporated on top of the BCP as the cathode electrode. The defined area of the OPV was 2 × 2 mm2. To avoid the effects of water vapor, the OPV devices were encapsulated with glasses and sealed with UV glue (Crcbond no. 195513) under N2 atmosphere in a glove box.


The work functions of the ITO with and without SAM modification were determined using a Riken Keiki AC-2 photoelectron spectrometer (AC2) in air. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the OPV devices were measured using a Keithley 2400 source under both dark conditions and illumination with an AM1.5G solar simulator at 100 mW cm−2, referenced to a standard silicon cell. For the lifetime tests, all devices were stored in the dark under ambient conditions. X-ray photoelectron (XP) depth profiles were obtained with a VG-Thermo Theta Probe X-ray photoelectron spectrometer equipped with an argon sputtering gun. The surface morphologies of the devices were probed using a Veeco atomic force microscope (AFM) operated in tapping mode.

The stabilities of the devices were evaluated with a shelf-life method. The pristine and SAM-modified OPVs were stored in a dry box in the dark under ambient atmosphere at room temperature. The humidity inside the dry box was controlled at 40–45% RH during the entire experiment.

The chemical structures of CuPc, C60, and the three kinds of SAMs (B2C, B4C, and B6C) are shown in Fig. 1(a). To understand the effects of SAM modification on the performance of the OPVs, we fabricated four different devices, one with a bare ITO surface and three with B2C, B4C, and B6C SAM-modified ITOs. The device structure is presented in Fig. 1(b), and the energy diagram of the OPVs in this study is shown in Fig. 1(c). AC2 measurements demonstrated that the work functions of the SAM-modified ITO surfaces were intermediate between the bare ITO (4.8 eV) surface and the PEDOT:PSS (5.1 eV). The recorded values were 4.9 eV, 5.0 eV, and 5.1 eV for B2C, B4C, and B6C, respectively. These results suggested that SAM modification did not affect the band alignment of the whole device. C 1s XPS spectra of the different SAMs on the substrates suggested that the B2C molecule was bound on the surface with one –COOH group anchored on ITO to form a carboxylate bond and the other one oriented towards vacuum [ESI, Fig. S1(a)]. The B4C and B6C molecules were each attached to the ITO surface by two –COOH groups [ESI, Fig. S1(b) and S1(c)]. The XPS results suggested that the number of –COOH groups bound on the ITO surfaces would be in the following order: B6C > B4C > B2C. To confirm this assumption, we measured the contact angles (CA) for these three SAM-modified ITO surfaces. The contact angle of the bare ITO surface treated only with UV/ozone is shown as a reference; the results are presented in Fig. S2 in the ESI. Since –COOH is a strongly hydrophilic functional group, a decrease in the CA with respect to an increase in the number of –COOH groups would be anticipated, as demonstrated in Fig. S2.

To fabricate the OPV devices, we annealed the ITO substrate at 180 °C after the PEDOT:PSS was spin-coated on the ITO surface. To confirm the retention of the BxC SAMs on the ITO surface after annealing, we performed XPS on BxC SAM-modified ITOs before and after 180 °C annealing (Fig. S3). Insignificant changes were observed in the XPS spectra before and after annealing. Thus, we concluded that the annealing process did not damage the SAMs.

Fig. 2 shows the current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics of the pristine and SAM-modified OPVs. The corresponding device parameters, such as short-circuit current (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), and PCE are given in Table 1. From the table, it is clear that the parameters that dominated the OPV efficiencies were Jsc and FF. The order of PCEs was consistent with the order of those two parameters. For the FF, which affects the device performance, the trend might be explained by the effects of series resistance (Rs). The variation in FF indicates a change in the effective Rs, possibly due to the variation of the electrical properties of the interface between the ITO and PEDOT:PSS layers upon the insertion of the SAMs.

J
SC [mA cm−2]

V
OC [V]
FF [%]
PCE [%]
PEDOT:PSS/ITO
4.11 ± 0.01
0.48 ± 0.01
49 ± 1
1.00 ± 0.01
PEDOT:PSS/B2C/ITO
3.96 ± 0.02
0.52 ± 0.01
46 ± 1
0.96 ± 0.01
PEDOT:PSS/B4C/ITO
4.41 ± 0.02
0.50 ± 0.01
52 ± 1
1.14 ± 0.02
PEDOT:PSS/B6C/ITO
4.21 ± 0.03
0.49 ± 0.01
50 ± 1
1.02 ± 0.01
To confirm the assumption that the SAMs changed the electrical properties between ITO/PEDOT:PSS, we measured the resistivities of the ITO/PEDOT:PSS interface with and without SAMs. Fig. 3 shows the experimental J–V curves for the ITO/PEDOT:PSS interfaces of pristine and SAM-modified structures; the inset depicts a schematic of the measured structure. Using the slopes of the J–V curves, we compared the electrical properties of the different structures. The interfacial resistivities of the pristine and various SAM-modified devices were B2C > ITO > B6C > B4C. This result corresponded to the order of the Jsc as well as the FF values in Table 1. The variation of the interfacial electrical properties for pristine and different SAM-modified devices was possibly due to two reasons: the discrepancies of the ITO surface energy and surface roughness (Fig. S4) upon SAMs modification. Both properties affected the contact of the ITO and PEDOT:PSS layers.
The OPV with the best performance was obtained using B4C as the modifier, with Jsc = 4.41 mA cm−2, FF = 52.0%, and PCE = 1.14%, which were improved by 14% over the pristine device (4.11 mA cm−2, 49.0%, and 1.00%, respectively). We believe that the B4C modified OPV gave the best device performance because of the optimization of ITO electrode surface energy and surface morphology, which resulted in the best contact with the PEDOT:PSS layer on top. Thus, the modification reduced the PEDOT:PSS/ITO interfacial resistances, and as a result, increased the PCE.
Since different BxC SAMs resulted in different contact angles of ITO surfaces which might affect the surface morphologies of the PEDOT:PSS layers on top, we performed AFM measurements to investigate such an effect. Fig. S5(a)–(d) presents the AFM images of PEDOT:PSS spin-coated on pristine and SAM-modified ITO and their corresponding surface roughness. It is demonstrated that PEDOT:PSS exhibited similar surface morphology and roughness on pristine and different SAM-modified ITO surfaces.
To investigate the stabilities of the pristine and SAM-modified OPVs, we performed shelf-life tests on the devices for 98 days. The decay curves for PCE, Jsc, Voc, and FF are shown in Fig. 4. Each result was the average of three individual experiments. There was a clear difference in the shelf lives between the pristine and SAM-modified OPVs. The PCE of the pristine device gradually decayed to 80% (T80) in the first 21 days, and the B2C-modified device showed a similar decay over the same period. B4C- and B6C-modified OPVs demonstrated better stability, with T80 values of 28 days. However, after 28 days, the pristine OPV exhibited a rapid decay to 50% (T50) and deteriorated to zero within 49 days after the fabrication of the device. In contrast to the pristine OPV, the SAM-modified devices exhibited steady decay rates even after 63 days past device construction. The B2C-modified device demonstrated an accelerated decay after 70 days, and reached T50 at around 84 days. Thereafter, it decayed to around 15% at 98 days. The B4C- and B6C-modified devices exhibited much higher stability. They retained 53% and 62% of the original efficiencies, respectively, 98 days after device fabrication. From Fig. 4(b)–(d), it is suggested that the decay of the device performance was primarily due to the deterioration of Jsc and FF, since the decay profiles of those two parameters for various devices were rather similar to the decay curves of the PCE. Notably, Voc for all the devices remained the same during the entire period of the test, suggesting that less degradation occurred at the interface between CuPc and C60.
To understand the decay mechanism in the OPVs and the role that the SAMs played in the suppression of degradation, we obtained XPS spectra and depth profile measurements. Fig. 5 shows the In 3d and S 2p XPS spectra of freshly prepared and 28 days PEDOT:PSS/ITO, and 28 days PEDOT:PSS/B6C/ITO. The In 3d XPS spectrum of the PEDOT:PSS/ITO (fresh) sample in Fig. 5(a) showed no In signal. Since the thickness of the PEDOT:PSS was over 30 nm and the XPS detection limit was only 5–10 nm, it is likely that In underneath the PEDOT:PSS could not be detected. However, to our surprise, a significant In 3d double peak was observed in the PEDOT:PSS/ITO (28 days) sample, which strongly suggested that a certain amount of In diffused into the PEDOT:PSS. In contrast, the PEDOT:PSS/B6C/ITO (28 days) sample exhibited only an insignificant In 3d signal, which implied that In diffusion could be significantly suppressed upon SAM modification. The S 2p spectra of the corresponding samples are shown in Fig. 5(b). The two peaks near 164.0 eV and 168.3 eV represent the sulfur signals from PEDOT and PSS, respectively. All three samples exhibited similar spectral configurations of S 2p, suggesting a modest chemical reaction between the diffused indium and the PEDOT:PSS. The atomic ratios of all elements in the pristine and the three SAM-modified samples [PEDOT:PSS/BxC/ITO (28 days), x = 2, 4, 6] are given in Table 2. On pristine ITO, 1.7% In was detected within the PEDOT:PSS, while only 0.4% was determined within the polymers on the SAM-modified ITOs. Thus, we assumed that using BxC-SAMs (x = 2, 4, 6) could help prevent the metal from diffusing into the organic layers. It was noteworthy that the Sn to In ratio within the PEDOT:PSS was much less than that in an ITO substrate. This is because In2O3 dissolves more readily than SnO2 in the acidic PEDOT:PSS, as can be predicted via the relative solubilities of these two metal oxides in an acidic medium.
C
O
In
Sn
S
PEDOT:PSS/ITO
66.1
24.9
1.7
0.4
6.9
PEDOT:PSS/B2C/ITO
66.1
23.5
0.4
0.0
9.9
PEDOT:PSS/B4C/ITO
66.3
23.3
0.4
0.0
10.0
PEDOT:PSS/B6C/ITO
67.4
22.3
0.4
0.0
9.9
To further understand the behaviors of In diffusion, we recorded XPS depth profiles on both pristine (CuPc/PEDOT:PSS/ITO) and SAM-modified [CuPc/PEDOT:PSS/BxC (x = 2, 4, 6)/ITO] samples after 28 days storage, and the results are shown in Fig. 6. Magnifications of the depth profiles of the CuPc layers are given in the insets. From Fig. 6(a), it is clear that a considerable amount of In (red circles) was detected within the CuPc layer, which confirmed that indium diffused not just into the HTL, but also further into the CuPc layer, despite the separation of the ITO and CuPc layers by a 30 nm thick layer of PEDOT:PSS. By contrast, no significant In signals were detected within the CuPc layer in the SAM-modified samples. The relative quantities of the indium within the CuPc layers for the pristine and SAM-modified samples are shown in Table 3. Indium (19.86) was measured in the CuPc layer of the pristine sample, but it was significantly reduced (<0.80) in the presence of BxC-SAMs as the ITO modifiers. Similar depth profiles of the devices 91 days after fabrication are provided in the ESI. The same trend was observed from Fig. S6, as in Table 3 a significant amount of indium diffused into the CuPc layers for pristine and B2C-modified devices (26.95 and 19.48, respectively), while only modest quantities of In were detected in the CuPc layers of B4C- and B6C-modified devices (3.60 and 2.66, respectively). Moreover, the order of the indium quantities within the CuPc layers for the pristine and SAM-modified samples was fairly consistent with the order of the shelf lives for the corresponding OPVs, which further confirmed that the degradation of the devices was mainly due to indium diffusion into the active layer.
28 days after fabrication
91 days after fabrication
PEDOT:PSS/ITO
19.86
26.95
PEDOT:PSS/B2C/ITO
0.80
19.48
PEDOT:PSS/B4C/ITO
0.00
3.60
PEDOT:PSS/B6C/ITO
0.030
2.66
Next, we investigated the chemical interactions between the diffused indium and the CuPc layer. Fig. 7 shows the C 1s, N 1s, In 3d, and Cu 2p XPS spectra of the CuPc layers in the pristine and SAM-modified samples (28 days). The thicknesses of the CuPc layers were ∼10 nm. The C 1s spectra of all BxC-modified samples in Fig. 7(a) could be fitted by two peaks centered at 285.0 eV and 286.5 eV, which could be assigned as C–N bonding in CuPc and C–C bonding in the aromatic rings, respectively. However, the C 1s spectrum of the pristine sample in Fig. 7(a) exhibited an extra peak at around 284.2 eV. Since this peak is in the lower binding energy region, we propose that the lower binding energy shift was caused by electron donation from a metal species (indium, in this instance) to the carbon in CuPc. A similar result was observed in the N 1s spectra in Fig. 7(b). The pristine sample demonstrated a broader peak in the lower binding energy region (around 399 eV), compared to the SAM-modified samples, which suggests an In–N dipole-induced interaction.Fig. 7(c) shows the Cu 2p XPS results. All the spectra, including those of the pristine and SAM-modified samples, exhibited the same chemical shifts and profiles, which suggested that no In–Cu interaction took place in the CuPc layer of the pristine sample. From Fig. 7(a)–(c), it is suggested that, in the pristine sample, the indium diffused into the CuPc layer and interacted with it via the formation of In–C bonds and In–N dipole interactions. Such behavior was not observed in the SAM-modified samples. Finally, in the In 3d spectra [Fig. 7(d)], no indium signal could be detected in the CuPc layers of the SAM-modified samples, which further confirmed our supposition. Thus, we proposed that the interactions of In and CuPc might result in the quenching of excitons and an increase in charge recombination, as In can act as a charge-trapping center. This would result in the deterioration of the Jsc and the FF of the device and, therefore, decrease the lifetime of the OPV.

In summary, we investigated the degradation of a CuPc-based OPV. XPS depth profile results suggested that the decay of the device was due to indium diffusion into the active layer and interaction with CuPc molecules. Such diffusion was caused by etching of the ITO by PEDOT:PSS. By inserting SAMs with carboxylic acid (–COOH) groups in the interface between the ITO and the PEDOT:PSS, we suppressed indium diffusion. As a result, the lifetime of the OPV was greatly improved. The shelf-life test results showed that the T50s of SAM-modified devices were longer than 98 days, which was more than twice that of the pristine OPV (T50 = 49 days). Moreover, the PCEs of the OPVs modified by the SAMs with four and six –COOH were improved. Our findings suggest a simple approach to significantly improve the lifetime of OPVs using PEDOT:PSS as the HTL without reducing PCEs.


The authors are grateful to Yi-Ling Yang for useful discussions, and NTUST and the Center for Condensed Matter Science of NTU for technical support. This project was financially supported by Academia Sinica, Taiwan, and the National Science Council, Taiwan., Taiwan.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta01229h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013