 DOI: 10.1039/D1TA09756C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 1821-1830


Junming
Qiu
,

Qisen
Zhou
,

Donglin
Jia
,

Yunfei
Wang
,

Shuang
Li
 and 

Xiaoliang
Zhang
*

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China. E-mail: xiaoliang.zhang@buaa.edu.cn

Received
14th November 2021
, Accepted 20th December 2021
First published on 21st December 2021
CsPbI3 inorganic perovskite shows high potential for single-junction or tandem solar cells due to its suitable bandgap energy (Eg = ∼1.7 eV), but defect-assisted nonradiative recombination and unmatched interfacial band alignment within the inorganic perovskite solar cells (PSCs) to a large extent affect its photovoltaic performance. Herein, the derivatives of cinnamic acid (CA) are applied for the surface functionalization of inorganic perovskites for efficient and stable PSCs. Extensive theoretical calculations and experimental studies reveal that the molecular structure of CA-based molecules significantly affects the surface functionalization of perovskites, therefore determining the photovoltaic performance of PSCs. Benefiting from the surface defects passivation of perovskites and instrumental interfacial dipole within the PSCs induced by the surface functionalization of perovskites using 4-aminocinnamic acid (CA-NH2) molecules, the charge carrier recombination was substantially suppressed, resulting in PSCs with a power conversion efficiency of up to 19.03%. Moreover, after the surface functionalization, PSCs also show good stability. Extensive theoretical calculations were performed to fundamentally understand the surface functionalization using CA-NH2 molecules on the surface properties of inorganic perovskites and electronic interactions between CA-NH2 molecules and perovskites.

Lead halide perovskite materials have attracted great attention due to their excellent optoelectronic properties, high defect tolerance and solution processability. Especially, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of over 25% was obtained for organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs), which is comparable to silicon solar cells. The state-of-the-art PSCs are generally fabricated using organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites, which may suffer from long-term stability due to deprotonation and volatilization of organic groups in perovskites, such as methylammonium (MA+) and formamidinium (FA+) cations. Currently, inorganic perovskites have gained intensive research interest due to their superior stability under illumination and heat conditions. In particular, all-inorganic cesium lead triiodide (CsPbI3) perovskite with a suitable bandgap energy (Eg) of ∼1.7 eV is very promising for high-performance single-junction or tandem solar cells. However, the formation of the black-phased α-CsPbI3 perovskites usually requires a high annealing temperature (>300 °C), and the black-phased perovskites easily transform into yellow-phased (δ-CsPbI3) non-perovskites, which have impeded studies on efficient inorganic PSCs. Applying dimethylammonium iodide (DMAI) as an additive during the preparation of CsPbI3 perovskites has become one of the most feasible strategies to obtain high-quality and stable black-phased CsPbI3 perovskites at a relatively low temperature. Zhao et al. adopted DMAI as a volatile additive to prepare thermodynamically stable β-CsPbI3 at a relatively low temperature of ∼210 °C, which significantly promoted the development of CsPbI3 PSCs. Subsequently, with further efforts made on the surface engineering and additive engineering of CsPbI3 perovskites, the efficiency of CsPbI3 PSCs was boosted to over 20%.

CsPbI3 perovskites generally suffer from high surface defect density due to complicated preparation processing, which to a large extent influences the photovoltaic performance and stability of PSCs. Defects in perovskite films could generate charge trap states, serving as non-radiative recombination centers and resulting in undesired energy loss in PSCs. Moreover, defects could accelerate the degradation of perovskites, rendering PSCs prone to moisture and oxygen attack. Importantly, the energy-level alignment at the device interface is equally essential for PSC performance by regulating the charge extraction. The unmatched or imperfect interfacial band alignment could also result in interfacial energy losses in PSCs.
Therefore, numerous strategies including the formation of 2D/3D perovskite top interface, dye molecular modification, and Lewis base small molecular modification have been attempted to minimize the non-radiative recombination and improve PSC performance. One of the most effective methods for defect passivation of perovskites and tuning the energy-level alignment is to introduce a dipolar interlayer into PSCs, for instance, functionalizing the perovskite surface through specific functional molecules. Such advantages have been demonstrated in organic solar cells (OSCs) by introducing a cathode interlayer with interfacial electric dipole, poly[(9,9-bis(3′-(N,Ndimethylamino)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)] (PFN). Similarly, extensive efforts were also made on PSCs to facilitate the charge carrier extraction of PSCs. For instance, Zuo et al. introduced different self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) onto the SnO2 surface and found that the 4-pyridinecarboxylic acid could significantly diminish the trap states of perovskites, thereby facilitating interfacial charge transfer through proper interfacial interactions. Besides, Hagfeldt et al. used quasi-3D azetidinium lead iodide (AzPbI3) as a secondary layer on the top of primary 3D perovskite films and elucidated a new passivation mechanism owing to the effect of surface dipoles. Recently, we also found that 3-(1-pyridinio)-1-propanesulfonate molecules could form a chemical bridge between poly(triarylamine) (PTAA) and perovskites, thus minimizing the interfacial recombination. A dipolar interlayer between the perovskite layer and charge transport layer was demonstrated to be a feasible and effective method to optimize the energy-level alignment and/or passivating interfacial defects of PSCs. Nevertheless, the method has been rarely adopted on inorganic perovskites, which may be derived from the intricate surface chemistry of inorganic perovskites. Moreover, it is significant to further consider the chemical nature of interlayers beyond the simplified model of an interfacial dipole for the fundamental understanding of interfacial structure, energy bands, and device operation mechanism.
Herein, derivatives of cinnamic acid (CA) with different functionalized groups were applied to the surface functionalization of CsPbI3 inorganic perovskites. A combination of theoretical calculations and experimental studies were carried out to clarify the interplay between the CA-based molecules and inorganic perovskites. The results revealed that the molecular structure of CA-based molecules significantly affected the surface functionalization of perovskites, thus determining their photovoltaic performance. As a result, the 4-aminocinnamic acid (CA-NH2) molecule with a high dipole moment showed improved surface functionalization of perovskites due to its abundant electron and strong nucleophilicity. The carboxylic group of the CA-NH2 molecule could coordinate with the uncoordinated Pb2+ ions of perovskites by forming a strong coordinated bonding, thus significantly reducing surface defects on perovskites. Meanwhile, a negative interfacial dipole was formed between the perovskite layer and hole transport layer, facilitating the interfacial charge transfer and minimizing interfacial recombination. Finally, inorganic PSCs with the CA-NH2 functionalized perovskite surface showed an impressive efficiency of up to 19.03%. Furthermore, the operating stability of PSCs was also largely improved owing to enhanced hydrophobic properties and effective chemical anchoring of CA-NH2 passivation.

CsPbI3 perovskite film was prepared using a one-step spin-coating approach under dry air conditions (relative humidity (RH): 15 ± 5%) with DMAI as volatile additives in the perovskite precursor solution. As shown in Fig. 1a, the spin-coated perovskite precursor film was firstly dried at a low temperature (∼70 °C), followed by annealing at ∼210 °C to obtain the black-phased perovskite films. Notably, the low-temperature annealing process is an indispensable procedure for the preparation of high-quality perovskite films due to better management of the evaporation of residual DMSO solvent and crystallization of the intermediate phase. Then, the isopropanol solutions with different CA-based molecules were spin-coated on the top of pristine perovskite films, followed by annealing at 100 °C to conduct the surface functionalization of perovskites. For the CA-based molecules, the electron-withdrawing/donating groups at the para position of the benzene ring may significantly affect the chemical nature of molecules. Thus, the CA-based molecules with different functionalized groups, such as 4-nitrocinnamic acid (CA-NO2), 4-trifluoromethylcinnamic acid (CA-CF3), cinnamic acid (CA), 4-methoxycinnamic acid (CA-OCH3) and 4-aminocinnamic acid (CA-NH2), were applied to functionalize the surface of perovskites (Fig. 1b).

To gain more details concerning the effect of functionalized groups on the molecular dipole moment (μmol) of these CA-based molecules, theoretical calculations were first carried out using density functional theory (DFT) to calculate and visualize the electrostatic potential (ESP) maps of CA-based molecules. A gradual change in color from light red to dark red was observed for these molecules, which indicated the enhancement of the abundance of electrons around the COO− group. The enhanced electron-donating ability of functional groups may result in an improved defect passivation effect of perovskites. Moreover, μmol of these CA-based molecules is presented in Fig. 1c. The results reveal that μmol of CA-based molecules strongly depends on the electron-donating ability of functionalized groups at the para position of the benzene ring, and CA-NH2 presents the highest μmol among these molecules with a value of 8.401 debye (D). Such high μmol of CA-NH2 may be an ideal surface functionalizing molecule for perovskites due to its high potential to provide an extra strong interface electric field, which could significantly influence the redistribution and transfer of surface charge.
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was adopted to investigate the surface morphology of perovskite films without and with surface functionalization using CA-based molecules, as shown in Fig. 1d. It can be seen that CA-based molecules show a negligible effect on the grain sizes and surface morphologies of perovskite films. Both pristine and surface-functionalized perovskite films exhibit inhomogeneous crystal grains ranging from 300 to 600 nm with some pinholes. In particular, the relatively blurred morphology is observed for CA-NH2-based perovskite film, which may be induced by the inferior conductivity of CA-NH2 molecules, suggesting that a uniform and gauzy functionalization layer of CA-NH2 molecules may be formed on the top of the perovskite film. Meanwhile, CA-NH2 molecules may also show better affinity with the perovskites than other CA-based molecules.
The perovskite film was further characterized to identify the effect of surface functionalization with CA-based molecules on the physical properties of perovskites. Fig. S1 shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of pristine and surface-functionalized perovskite films using CA-based molecules. The samples exhibit identical characteristic diffraction peaks at 14.22° and 28.82° in XRD patterns, demonstrating the formation of β-CsPbI3 perovskites. Meanwhile, intensities of the diffraction peaks of pristine and surface-functionalized perovskite films are comparable, which verifies that the crystallinity of these perovskite films shows no obvious changes after the surface functionalization. Fig. S2 presents the light absorption spectra of these perovskite films, which show that the absorption edges of these samples are located at ∼737 nm, suggesting that an Eg of 1.68 eV was obtained for β-CsPbI3 perovskites. The perovskite film with fewer defects generally shows higher photoluminescence (PL) intensity in the PL spectrum due to less non-radiative recombination of charge carriers, and thus PL spectra of these perovskite films were tested. As expected, the CA-NH2-based perovskite film exhibits the highest PL intensity among these perovskite films, which suggests that the CA-NH2 molecule is an optimal choice for the surface functionalization of CsPbI3 perovskites (Fig. 1e).
To study the surface-functionalized perovskite films for photovoltaic applications, the solar cell device was fabricated using a planar device structure of glass/fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)/TiO2/perovskite/2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD)/Ag (Fig. 2a), in which TiO2 and spiro-OMeTADwere used as electron and hole transport layers, respectively. The photovoltaic performance of unencapsulated PSCs was measured under AM1.5G 100 mW cm−2 illumination. Fig. 2b shows the photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves of PSCs without and with the surface functionalization, and the photovoltaic parameters, such as open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF) and PCE, are summarized in Table 1. The statistical photovoltaic parameters are displayed in Fig. 2c and S3. A moderate PCE of 16.15% was obtained for the PSC without any surface functionalization. For devices with surface functionalization of perovskite films, their performance varies with the molecular structure of CA-based molecules. Compared to the pristine device, the devices with surface functionalization using CA, CA-OCH3 and CA-NH2 molecules with μmol higher than 5 D showed enhanced PCEs of 16.48%, 18.30% and 19.03%, respectively. On the contrary, the devices with surface functionalization using CA-NO2 and CA-CF3 molecules with μmol lower than 5 D showed relatively low PCEs of 14.64% and 15.97%, respectively. As the statistical parameters presented in Fig. S3, other parameters show a similar trend with the PCE, which indicates that the device performance is highly reproducible and heavily dependent on the μmol of CA-based molecules. Among these CA-based molecules, CA-NH2 molecules may show the best surface functionalization effect of perovskite films, thus resulting in the highest efficiency of PSCs. Therefore, we mainly focused on the understanding of the effect of surface functionalization of perovskite films using CA-NH2 molecules on the optoelectronic properties of perovskites and the operation of PSCs. After the surface functionalization of perovskite films using CA-NH2 molecules, the device efficiency was largely improved to 19.03% with a Voc of 1.16 V, Jsc of 20.13 mA cm−2 and FF of 81.5%. The improved PCE in CA-NH2-based PSCs mainly results from enhanced Voc and FF, which may be attributed to diminished charge recombination induced by defects and accelerated interfacial charge transfer that will be discussed in detail in the following section. The effect of the concentration of CA-NH2 on device performance was further screened, which revealed that the optimized concentration of CA-NH2 was 5 mM (Fig. S4 and Table S1). When the concentration of CA-NH2 is too high, the CA-NH2 molecules may be aggregated and thus introduce nonradiative recombination and a high charge transport barrier at the interface. It is worthy to note that even though higher performance was obtained in CA-NH2-based PSCs, when recording the J–V curves with different voltage scanning directions, the device also shows somewhat of hysteresis in the J–V curves (Fig. 2d and Table S2), which may be caused by the unbalanced charge transport or ion migration within the devices. As shown in Fig. 2e, a stable PCE of 18.3% with a photocurrent density of 18.9 mA cm−2 was recorded for the CA-NH2-based PSC. Whereas the stable output of pristine PSC gradually declines with illumination (Fig. S5), which may be due to a large number of trap states in the perovskite films. Fig. 2f shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the pristine and CA-NH2-based PSCs, which suggests that both devices possess high EQE values in the visible wavelength region. The photocurrent density was also integrated from EQE spectra and Jsc values of 19.77 and 19.90 mA cm−2 were calculated for the pristine and CA-NH2-based PSCs, respectively, which is in good agreement with the results of J–V measurements.
Sample

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a Average parameters were calculated from 12 devices.

Pristine
1.08 (1.06 ± 0.02)
19.80 (19.66 ± 0.56)
75.5 (75.3 ± 2.74)
16.15 (15.72 ± 0.51)
CA-NO2
1.02 (1.01 ± 0.03)
19.44 (19.34 ± 0.48)
73.8 (72.3 ± 3.33)
14.64 (14.13 ± 0.97)
CA-CF3
1.08 (1.06 ± 0.02)
19.90 (19.74 ± 0.20)
74.3 (74.1 ± 2.06)
15.97 (15.47 ± 0.50)
CA
1.10 (1.08 ± 0.02)
19.94 (19.87 ± 0.22)
75.1 (75.2 ± 2.32)
16.48 (16.12 ± 0.48)
CA-OCH3
1.12 (1.11 ± 0.02)
20.18 (20.07 ± 0.91)
80.9 (79.9 ± 1.41)
18.30 (17.77 ± 0.95)
CA-NH2
1.16 (1.13 ± 0.03)
20.13 (20.18 ± 0.19)
81.5 (81.6 ± 1.40)
19.03 (18.64 ± 0.39)
To understand the interaction between the CA-NH2 molecules and perovskites, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were conducted on pristine and CA-NH2-based perovskite films. As shown in Fig. 3a, after introducing CA-NH2 molecules into the perovskite, the stretching vibration of COO− in CA-NH2 at 1504 cm−1 shifts to 1560 cm−1, suggesting a strong bonding between CA-NH2 molecules and perovskites. The full XPS spectra of pristine and CA-NH2-based perovskite films are displayed in Fig. S6a. After the surface-functionalization of perovskite films using CA-NH2 molecules, new feature peaks are observed at 400.1 and 532.1 eV (Fig. 3b), which are ascribed to the characteristic N 1s and O 1s signals CA-NH2 molecules. The O 1s peak for the pristine film in the XPS spectra may have been derived from the adsorbed oxygen/moisture. Meanwhile, two peaks at 138.2 and 143.1 eV of the pristine film are corresponding to Pb 4f 7/2 and Pb 4f 5/2, respectively (Fig. 3c). After surface functionalization, these two peaks are slightly upshifted to 138.3 eV and 143.2 eV, further indicating the chemical interaction between CA-NH2 molecules and the undercoordinated Pb2+ on the perovskite surface.
To deeply understand the causes of improved photovoltaic performance in CA-NH2-based PSCs, the charge carrier dynamics in the perovskite films and full solar cell devices were studied in depth. Theoretically, the perovskite films with fewer defects in the film will have a higher PL intensity and longer charge lifetime due to diminished charge carrier recombination. Compared with the pristine perovskite film, the CA-NH2-based perovskite film shows a higher PL intensity in the spectra, likely due to good surface defect passivation of perovskite films (Fig. 1e). To gain more insight into charge carrier dynamics within the perovskite films, time-resolved PL (TRPL) measurements were carried out, as shown in Fig. 3d. The PL decay curve was fitted using a biexponential decay function, which reveals that the PL lifetime with values of 36.06 and 112.23 ns was calculated for pristine and CA-NH2-based perovskite films, respectively (Table S3). The extended PL lifetime in the CA-NH2-based perovskite film suggests that the defects in the perovskite film may be largely decreased, substantially suppressing non-radiative recombination.
Transient photovoltage (TPV) characterizations were also conducted to get more insight into the charge collection and recombination within the PSCs (Fig. S7 and Table S4). The results reveal that the CA-NH2-based PSC possesses a slower charge recombination rate (longer charge carrier lifetime) than that of the pristine PSC, which is consistent with PL and TRPL results of perovskite films. The electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) of PSCs was further measured to evaluate the charge transport within the PSCs, which showed that the recombination resistance (Rrec) was substantially increased in CA-NH2-based PSCs (Fig. S8 and Table S5), suggesting reduced charge carrier recombination within the CA-NH2-based PSCs.
To quantify the defect density in the perovskite films, the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) measurement was performed. Fig. 3e shows the relevant SCLC curves measured for the electron-only device with a structure of FTO/TiO2/perovskites/PCBM/Ag. The trap density (Nt) was calculated using the following equation,
(1)
where
e, ε0, ε, VTFL and L are the elementary charge, vacuum permittivity, the relative dielectric constant, trap-filled limit voltage and the thickness of the perovskite film, respectively. The results show that the VTFL of pristine and CA-NH2-based devices were determined as 0.98 and 0.73 V, respectively, and the Nt of the pristine and CA-NH2-based devices were calculated to be 1.30 × 1016 to 9.66 × 1015 cm−3, respectively. The decreased VTFL and Nt in the CA-NH2-based device can be explained by good coordination between CA-NH2 molecules and uncoordinated Pb2+ on the perovskite surface, reducing the dangling bonds on the perovskite surface. Generally, the surface defects of perovskites could generate charge trap states, which serve as non-radiative recombination centers for charge carriers, leading to undesired energy losses of PSCs. Therefore, benefiting from effective surface passivation of perovskites using CA-NH2 molecules, the defect density of perovskites was significantly reduced, which may result in enhanced Voc and FF in CA-NH2-based PSCs and thus improved photovoltaic performance.

Notably, the mismatching energy-level alignment between the perovskite and charge transport layers could also lead to undesired Voc losses. Fig. S9 shows the energy-level diagram of each functional layer within the PSCs, which was obtained based on the ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) and light absorption results (Fig. S2). From the UPS results presented in Fig. S10, it can be found that the work function (WF) of the perovskite surface decreases to 4.20 eV from 4.48 eV after the surface functionalization using the CA-NH2 molecules, and the valence band minimum (VBM) also shifts toward the higher energy for CA-NH2-based perovskite films, indicating a reduced energy barrier between the perovskite and spiro-OMeTAD. The shifts of WF and VBM in CA-NH2-based perovskite films could be associated with the formation of functionalized negative dipole capping layer as proved by Abate et al.
To confirm the formation of the negative interfacial dipole on the surface of functionalized perovskite films, systematic experimental measurements were performed. Considering that surface functionalization could alter the interfacial electronic properties, the work function of pristine and CA-based perovskite films was measured using scanning Kelvin probe microscopy (SKPM). The perovskite film that was partly treated with CA-based molecules was used for SKPM measurements, and the architecture employed in this test is displayed in Fig. S11a. As shown in Fig. 3f and S11, the contact potential difference (CPD) of these perovskite films are all similarly increased after the surface functionalization using CA-based molecules, which results in decreased WF of the perovskite film. Among these samples, CA-NH2-based perovskite film shows a more uniform surface potential distribution and a maximal reduction of WF, with a value of 406.1 meV, which reveals that compared to other CA-based molecules, CA-NH2 molecules could form a better arrangement at the perovskite surface and provide a stronger microscopic electric dipole on the perovskite surface. The XPS valence band spectra were further measured (Fig. S12), which revealed that the gap between the VBM and Fermi level of the perovskite film was increased from 0.70 eV to 0.93 eV after the surface functionalization using CA-NH2 molecules. These results are in good agreement with the results from UPS and SKPM measurements that after the surface functionalization using CA-NH2 molecules, better energy level alignment between the perovskite and hole transport layer was formed.
The built-in electric field plays an important role in the charge collection of inorganic PSCs due to the relatively small crystalline grain within perovskite films. The high Vbi is beneficial to efficiently collect holes and repel electrons at the heterointerface, thereby reducing the interfacial recombination. Therefore, the capacitance–voltage (C–V) measurements of PSCs were conducted to obtain the Mott–Schottky curves, and the built-in potential (Vbi) of PSC devices can be calculated using the Mott–Schottky equation,
(2)
where
C, A, e, ε, ε0, and NA are the measured capacitance, device area, elementary charge, the relative dielectric constant, vacuum permittivity and carrier density, respectively. As presented in Fig. 3g, compared with the pristine PSC, an enhanced Vbi of 0.9 V was obtained for CA-NH2-based PSC, which could be derived from the interfacial negative dipole within the PSC, thus facilitating the charge carrier extraction. Overall, as schematically presented in Fig. 3h and i, the improved photovoltaic performance in CA-NH2-based PSCs is attributed to diminished defect-assisted charge carrier recombination and improved energy-level alignment, which results from effective defect passivation of perovskites and instrumental interfacial dipole through surface functionalization using CA-NH2 molecules.

To further understand the effect of CA-NH2 on the surface functionalization of perovskites, theoretical calculations were carried out. The PbI2-terminated perovskite with an iodine vacancy (VI) was adopted to simulate the interaction between the CA-NH2 molecule and the perovskite surface. The perovskite surface passivated with the iodine atom (I, named I-based system) and the surface-functionalized perovskite using CA-NH2 molecule (named CA-NH2-based system) were studied to compare the effect of the pristine iodide atom and CA-NH2 molecule on the surface properties of perovskites. The calculated results show that compared with the adsorption energy of −2.11 eV in the I-based system, the adsorption energy in the CA-NH2-based system was increased to −4.02 eV, which indicates that the CA-NH2 molecules could strongly anchor on the perovskite surface forming a stable structure and well-coordinate with the perovskites (Fig. S13). Meanwhile, the influence of the surface functionalization using CA-NH2 molecules on the WF value was also investigated, which revealed that the surface functionalization of perovskites using CA-NH2 molecules could lower the WF of perovskites (Fig. S14). These calculated results are in good agreement with the experimental results of FTIR, XPS and SKPM analysis that CA-NH2 molecules could form strong bonds on the perovskite surface to functionalize its surface.
To further study the electronic interactions and electron transfer of these systems, the Bader charge analysis was implemented.Fig. 4a and b exhibit the differential charge density distributions of the perovskite surface passivated with the I or the CA-NH2 molecule, respectively, where the cyan isosurface and yellow isosurface indicates electron depletion and accumulation, respectively. The results show that 0.558 e− can be transferred from the perovskite to the I, while more charge with a value of 0.832 e− can be transferred from the perovskite to the CA-NH2 molecule. This is consistent with the formation of the negative dipole at the interface of CA-NH2-based perovskites. These important results reveal that the strong coordinated bonding between the CA-NH2 molecule and Pb2+ ions at the perovskite surface can be formed, and such a desired binding mode demonstrates these molecules could form an interfacial negative dipole layer, facilitating charge transport through the heterointerface.
The projected density of states (PDOS) of the ideal perovskite surface (system I), perovskite surface with VI (system II) and the perovskite surface passivated with the CA-NH2 molecule (system III) were further calculated, as shown in Fig. 4c. The partial electron density at the conduction band minimum (CBM) of these systems was also visualized to intuitively observe the formation and passivation of defect states (Fig. 4d and S15). Compared with the ideal perovskite surface, the perovskite surface with VI generates some trap states close to the CBM and the localized charge distribution of the uncoordinated Pb2+ ions was observed, which indicates that the VI can be regarded as an n-type defect and introduce shallow defect states near CBM. However, after passivating the perovskite surface with CA-NH2 molecules, the PDOS of the system and electron density distribution of CBM are overall recovered and comparable with the ideal perovskite surface. The trap states are thoroughly eliminated through the passivation of uncoordinated Pb2+ ions using CA-NH2 molecules. Therefore, we conclude here that the CA-NH2 molecule can be well anchored on the perovskite surface through the strong coordination bond between the carboxylic group of CA-NH2 molecules and the uncoordinated Pb2+ ions of perovskites. Meanwhile, the trap states in the perovskites caused by VI can be well passivated by CA-NH2 molecules without introducing impurity states in the bandgap regions.
The stability of perovskite films and PSCs without and with surface functionalization was also examined. Due to that, the phase stability of inorganic perovskites is sensitive to moisture and oxygen, good surface defect passivation of perovskites could eliminate the access of moisture or oxygen attacking perovskites, thereby improving the stability of perovskites and PSCs. The water contact angles of pristine and CA-NH2-based perovskite films were first tested (Fig. 5a). After the surface functionalization using CA-NH2 molecules, the water contact angle of the perovskite film was increased, which may have resulted from the reduced hydrophilicity for CA-NH2 molecules. The perovskite films were stored under ambient conditions (25 °C and RH of 35 ± 5%) and the light absorption spectra of these films were monitored with the storage. The CA-NH2-based perovskite film has no significant difference in the spectra with the storage (Fig. S16). Meanwhile, with the storage, the pristine perovskite film gradually changes into the yellow phase from the dark phase, whereas no obvious phase transition was observed in CA-NH2-based perovskite films (Fig. 5b). These important results suggest that the CA-NH2-based perovskite film shows better stability than pristine perovskite films, which may result in improved device stability of PSCs.
To verify the above ratiocination and fundamentally understand the stability of PSCs with surface functionalization of perovskite films, the device stability was measured by maintaining unencapsulated PSCs under ambient conditions (25 °C and RH of 35 ± 5%). Benefiting from the hydrophobic properties of CA-NH2 molecules and effective defect passivation of perovskites, the CA-NH2-based PSC exhibits good stability that 91.1% of initial efficiency was maintained after storage for 500 h, whereas 64.5% of the initial efficiency was maintained for the pristine PSCs (Fig. 5c). The operational stability of unencapsulated PSCs was also tested under continuous 100 mW cm−2 illumination and ambient conditions with an RH of 35%, as shown in Fig. 5d. The CA-NH2-based PSC also exhibits better stability than pristine PSCs. For the CA-NH2-based PSC, 90% of initial efficiency was maintained after continuous illumination for 90 h, while the efficiency of the pristine PSC without surface functionalization dropped to 63.3% of the initial efficiency. Therefore, after surface functionalization of perovskite films with CA-NH2 molecules, the phase stability of perovskites and device stability of PSCs was overall improved.

In summary, the CA derivatives were successfully applied for the surface functionalization of inorganic perovskites for efficient PSCs. Extensive theoretical calculations and experimental studies revealed that CA-NH2 molecules with a higher molecular dipole moment could form a strong coordinated bonding between CA-NH2 molecules and uncoordinated Pb2+ ions of perovskites to effectively passivate surface defects of perovskites. Meanwhile, an interfacial negative dipole layer was built on the perovskite surface to tune the surface energy levels of perovskite films. Consequently, benefiting from the surface functionalization of perovskites using CA-NH2 molecules, defect-assisted charge carrier recombination was substantially suppressed and the energy-level alignment within the PSCs was improved, indicating that inorganic PSC with a high PCE of up to 19.03% and good stability was obtained. This work highlights the importance of molecular structure on the surface functionalization of inorganic perovskites. Meanwhile, this work also provides important physical guidance to improve optoelectronic properties of inorganic perovskites by surface functionalization to realize high-performance inorganic PSCs or other optoelectronic devices.


J. Qiu and X. Zhang conceived the idea and designed the experiments. J. Qiu fabricated the solar cells and carried out most of the characterizations. J. Qiu and Q. Zhou characterized the performance of the films and materials. J. Qiu, D. Jia and Y. Wang contributed to the first-principles DFT calculations. S. Li contributed to the writing – review & editing of the manuscript. All authors contributed to manuscript development, and have approved the final version of the manuscript.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51872014), the Recruitment Program of Global Experts, Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities and the “111” project (B17002). This work was also supported by the HPC of Beihang University.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta09756c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022