 DOI: 10.1039/D0TC02499F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 12516-12526


Yuli
Yin
,

Wenxia
Zhang
,

Zhi
Zheng
,

Ziyi
Ge
*,

Yi
Liu
*,

Fengyun
Guo
,

Shiyong
Gao
,

Liancheng
Zhao
 and 

Yong
Zhang
*

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001, China. E-mail: yongzhang@hit.edu.cn

The Molecular Foundry, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California 94720, USA. E-mail: yliu@lbl.gov

Ningbo Institute of Materials Technology and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Ningbo, 315201, China. E-mail: geziyi@nimte.ac.cn

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, China

Received
25th May 2020
, Accepted 3rd August 2020
First published on 3rd August 2020
The rational molecular design and structural modification of quasi-two-dimensional fused perylene diimide (quasi-2D FPDI) acceptors have received growing attention for application in non-fullerene organic solar cells (NF-OSCs). Herein, we designed and synthesized two pairs of FPDI acceptors, one in the form of FPDI–π-bridge–FPDI with the π-bridge being either an axisymmetric thiophene (T) or a centrosymmetric thienothiophene (TT) unit, and the other being the corresponding ring-fusion counterpart. Four small molecule acceptors, namely T-FPDI, TT-FPDI, FT-FPDI and FTT-FPDI, were paired with a common PTB7-Th polymeric electron donor as active materials for a comparative study of the effects of linkers and ring fusion on their photovoltaic performances. The T-FPDI-based NF-OSC exhibited a decent power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 5.50%, while a higher PCE of 7.17% with a simultaneous enhancement in the open circuit voltage (Voc), the short-circuit current density (Jsc) and the fill factor (FF) was achieved for the TT-FPDI-based solar cells. The solar cells based on the ring-fused FT-FPDI and FTT-FPDI acceptors displayed PCEs of 6.75% and 7.66%, respectively, both higher than those of the corresponding non-fused counterparts. Notably, the trade-off between the Jsc and Voc, commonly observed in fullerene OSCs, is alleviated in these systems. It is also worth noting that the NF-OSCs based on these FPDI acceptors do not need any solvent additives. This successful molecular engineering based on novel quasi-2D FPDI building blocks may inspire the development of emergent electron acceptors for high performance additive-free NF-OSCs.

Organic solar cells (OSCs) have progressed rapidly during the past decade with record high power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) reaching over 17% for single junction cells, making them viable candidates for commercial applications. The efficiency leap is largely due to the steady development of active materials, including both non-fullerene acceptors and matching polymer donors. In particular, the emergence of small molecule non-fullerene acceptors (SMAs) is notable, thanks to the advances in rational molecular design incorporating different building blocks. Perylene diimide (PDI) and its derivatives are one of the most widely investigated motifs for non-fullerene acceptors. Their features, such as ease of functionalization, high electron affinity, suitable optoelectronic properties, and excellent thermo-stability, have established their competitiveness as ideal non-fullerene electron acceptors. One of the key challenges in this effort, however, lies in maintaining the balance between strong crystallinity, nanoscale phase separation and efficient charge transport ability in blend films because of the strong propensity of aggregation related to the rigid polycyclic aromatic PDI core. Encouragingly, we and other groups have discovered that a fused perylenediimide dimer (FPDI) with a quasi-two-dimensional (quasi-2D) geometry provides an effective way to address this challenge because the strong aggregation tendency of PDI units can be significantly suppressed without adversely weakening the charge transport ability of the non-fullerene acceptors in such a quasi-2D FPDI unit. It has been shown that when two pairs of isomeric PDI and FPDI acceptors were used as SMAs for solar cells, both the FPDI acceptors showed significantly higher PCEs relative to the PDI acceptors under the same device conditions. These structural differences in the building blocks underlie the more favorable morphology compatibility and the higher electron mobility of FPDI-based SMAs in the active layer than those of PDI-based SMAs. It is thus imperative to explore further structural variations in FPDI-based SMAs to delineate the structure–property relationship for constructing high-efficiency NF-OSCs.

Incorporating a conjugated linker or bridge to connect two, three or four PDI moieties in either a twisted two-dimensional or a three-dimensional geometry has become an effective strategy to modulate optical absorption, the energy level, charge transport and crystallinity. A series of quasi-2D FPDI systems and efficient SMAs were developed by adopting various linkers, such as bithiophene, spirobifluorene, and triphenylamine, among others (Fig. 1). These acceptors exhibited a marked performance improvement, underscoring the effectiveness of the linker regulation strategy to optimize the acceptor properties for a higher photovoltaic performance. Furthermore, the symmetry of the linkers has also been shown to have an impact on the optoelectronic performance of organic semiconductors. One typical example has been demonstrated by Pei et al. in isoindigo-based materials, which showed that centrosymmetric linkers can result in tighter and more linear backbones, which are more favorable in forming a lamellar phase and achieving high mobility compared to the zigzag backbones formed by the axisymmetric ones. Chen and co-workers found that the molecular symmetry also played a significant role in NF-OSCs, as shown by the fact that axisymmetric acceptors exhibited a much higher Jsc and PCE than the centrosymmetric ones due to the larger transition dipole moment and a well-developed fibrillary network. Despite these examples showing that linker symmetry and backbone curvature have profound impact on intermolecular interactions, charge transport, and photovoltaic properties, such effects remain unexplored in FPDI-based acceptors.
On the other hand, ring-fusion of PDI with an aromatic unit attached on the bay position has been shown to be an effective method for improving the device efficiency over traditional PDI systems. Xia et al. studied the photovoltaic behavior of two star-shaped FPDI electron acceptors with non-fused and fused structures (Fig. 1), which indicated that ring-fusion played a positive role in enhancing the device performance, consistent with the empirical molecular design of traditional PDI acceptors. Interestingly, another pair of conceptually similar FPDI acceptors, in which two FPDI moieties were fused with the bithiophene bridge (Fig. 1), provided a counter example in which a non-fused BT-FPDI device shows a higher efficiency than fused fBT-FPDI one. These results inspired us to further investigate the effectiveness of ring fusion engineering for designing quasi-2D FPDI acceptor systems, taking into consideration the symmetry of linkers. Herein, two pairs of fused and non-fused acceptors based on FPDI building blocks and linkers with different symmetries were synthesized, and their photovoltaic performances as SMAs were evaluated to understand such structural effects on molecular packing, charge transport, and device efficiency.

The chemical structures of T-FPDI, TT-FPDI, FT-FPDI and FTT-FPDI are shown in Fig. 2. T-FPDI and TT-FPDI were synthesized based on a palladium-catalyzed Stille coupling reaction in toluene, and the fused analogues, FT-FPDI and FTT-FPDI, were then obtained through a photocyclization dehydrogenation reaction in high yields (over 80%). The synthetic details of these SMAs are described in Scheme S1 (ESI). All the SMAs showed good solubilities in common organic solvents (e.g. dichloromethane, chloroform and chlorobenzene) at room temperature.

The optical properties of T-FPDI, TT-FPDI, FT-FPDI and FTT-FPDI in chlorobenzene (CB) solution and in the spin-coated film state were investigated by UV-vis absorption spectroscopy, and the results are shown in Fig. 3 and Table 1. In solution, T-FPDI and TT-FPDI displayed similar absorption profiles with two pronounced absorption peaks located at 394 nm and 544 nm, attributable to the localized π–π* transition and the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) transition, respectively. As expected, a significant bathochromic shift of about 15–20 nm could be clearly observed in the spectra of the fused counterparts. Two well-resolved 0–1 and 0–0 transition peaks centered at 530 nm and 580 nm for FT-FPDI, and 530 nm and 586 nm for FTT-FPDI (Fig. S1a, ESI), respectively, were in accordance with an extended π conjugation due to ring fusion. Higher maximum extinction coefficients (εmax) were determined to be 1.58 × 105 M−1 cm−1 at 580 nm for FT-FPDI and 1.78 × 105 M−1 cm−1 at 586 nm for FTT-FPDI (Table 1). Of note was that the absorption spectrum of FTT-FPDI showed a slight bathochromic shift (∼10 nm) relative to that of FT-FPDI in chlorobenzene solution, which resulted from the elongation of the π-conjugation length. The absorption spectra of the four SMAs in the thin film state revealed a trend similar to that in the dichloromethane solution, though minimal red-shifts (∼5–8 nm) of the absorption peaks were observed, hinting that the intermolecular aggregation was significantly suppressed despite the large π surface after ring annulation (Fig. 3a). From the absorption onsets of the thin films, the optical bandgaps of T-FPDI, TT-FPDI, FT-FPDI and FTT-FPDI were determined to be 1.89 eV, 1.85 eV, 2.0 eV, and 1.99 eV, respectively. The four SMA films showed strong and broad absorption profiles in the region of 300–600 nm, complementary to that of the polymer donor (PTB7-Th) film which was in the range between 500 and 800 nm, a welcoming feature to achieve a favorable photovoltaic performance. These optoelectronic properties clearly illustrated that the combined linker-regulation and ring-fusion strategy could greatly modulate the intra- and intermolecular interactions and the optical properties of the FPDI molecules, which may in turn play critical roles in achieving satisfactory charge transport and device performances in the NF-OSCs.
SMAs

λ (nm)

ε
solmax (M−1 cm−1)

λ
filmonset (nm)

E
optg (eV)
LUMO (eV)
HOMO (eV)
Solution
Film

a Measured by cyclic voltammetry.
b Calculated from the electrochemical LUMO energy and the optical band gap.

T-FPDI
394/544
395/540
1.20 × 105 (544 nm)
657
1.89
−4.09
−5.98
TT-FPDI
394/544
396/540
1.16 × 105 (544 nm)
672
1.85
−4.06
−5.91
FT-FPDI
407/530/580
410/540/588
1.58 × 105 (580 nm)
620
2.0
−4.04
−6.04
FTT-FPDI
419/530/586
427/541/590
1.78 × 105 (586 nm)
624
1.99
−4.01
−6.0
The electrochemical properties of the FPDI derivatives were studied by cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements of the samples in the thin film state, and the energy levels and the CV curves of these materials are provided in Fig. 3b and Fig. S1b (ESI). It can be seen that T-FPDI, TT-FPDI, FT-FPDI, and FTT-FPDI show reversible reduction peaks with the corresponding onset potentials at −0.31 V, −0.34 V, −0.36 V and −0.39 V versus the ferrocene/ferrocenium (Fc/Fc+) redox couple, respectively, suggesting strong electron-accepting abilities (Fig. S1b, ESI). On the basis of the onset potentials and the optical band gaps, the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO)/the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy levels of T-FPDI and TT-FPDI were calculated to −5.98/−4.09 and −5.91/−4.06 eV, respectively (Fig. 3b). The fused counterparts showed slightly increased LUMO energy levels (−4.04 eV for FT-FPDI and −4.01 eV for FTT-FPDI) relative to those of T-FPDI and TT-FPDI, which should result in a high Voc for the NF-OSC devices.
To further understand the difference between the molecular geometries and the energy levels of these FPDI SMAs, theoretical calculations were carried out by applying density functional theory (DFT) at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level using the Gaussian 09 package. Long swallow-tail alkyl chains were replaced with methyl groups to simplify the simulation. These calculations indicated the significant impact of the ring-fusion on the preferential conformation and the distribution of the frontier molecular orbitals, as shown in Fig. 4. The FPDI unit showed dihedral angles of ∼20° (θ1 and θ4 shown in Fig. 4) between the two PDI subunits in all four molecules, which could effectively suppress the aggregation of PDI units. Additional non-planar twisting was observed in the conformation of both T-FPDI and TT-FPDI molecules, located between the FPDI and axisymmetric thiophene (T) or the centrosymmetric thieno[3,2-b]thiophene (TT) subunits. The dihedral angles between the two subunits in T-FPDI were calculated to be 54.5° and 66.3° (θ2 and θ3 shown in Fig. 4), slightly higher than those in TT-FPDI (60.0° and 52.6°), implying that the conjugated backbone with the centrosymmetric linker may tend to form a more planar backbone and highly ordered solid-state packing. After ring-fusion, such repulsion was significantly eased, as indicated by the small dihedral angles (θ2/θ3 6.3°) in FT-FPDI, and in the case of FTT-FPDI, such dihedral angles were almost 0°. Although it was apparent that the ring fusion eased the steric repulsion between FPDI and the central T or the TT unit, it had little impact on the conformation of the FPDI units at each end of the molecules, as indicated by the fairly significant twisting and the dihedral angles (θ1 and θ4 ∼ 20°). Such twisting dictated the intermolecular interactions and prevented these molecules from aggregation despite their large π surfaces, which was consistent with the UV-vis absorption studies.
The electron distribution of frontier orbitals of the fully fused SMAs (FT-FPDI and FTT-FPDI) was also significantly altered in comparison to that of the non-fused SMAs (T-FPDI and TT-FPDI). As shown in Fig. 4, there was little delocalization between the two FPDI units in the LUMO wave functions of T-FPDI and TT-FPDI. In contrast, the electron density was more spread across the overall π system in the fused FT-FPDI and FTT-FPDI, indicating enhanced electron delocalization between the two FPDI units. Based on the modeling, a wider energy band gap and higher lying LUMO levels were predicted for the fused FT-FPDI and FTT-FPDI, which were in accordance with the experimental results.
The NF-OSC devices were fabricated and characterized using the conventional configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/photoactive layer/PDINO/Al, where PTB7-Th was used as the polymer donor, FPDI-based SMA molecules as the electron acceptor, and PDINO as the electron transport layer. Similar to what we found previously, the optimal active material compositions were based on a PTB7-Th:SMA weight ratio of 1:1.5 and a total concentration of 20.0 mg mL−1 in chlorobenzene (CB). To achieve the best device performance, the device fabrication conditions were carefully optimized by tuning different thermal annealing (TA) temperatures and solvent additives, as shown in Tables S1 and S2 (ESI). The best TA temperature was at 100 °C for 10 min for all four devices, and a further increase in the temperature decreased the photovoltaic performance (Table S1, ESI). A small amount of solvent additives is generally introduced to realize the desired nanoscale morphology in PDI-based blends, which however may adversely affect the device replicability and the long-term device stability. As shown in Table S2 (ESI), amongst all the additive-treated devices, those with 0.5% DIO (volume ratio) exhibited the highest performance, which was essentially equivalent to that of the additive-free devices, suggesting that such additives were not necessary for these devices and coincided with the recently reported quasi-2D FPDI-based SMAs. The characteristic current density–voltage (J–V) curves of these optimized devices based on the PTB7-Th and SMA blends are shown in Fig. 5a, and the corresponding key photovoltaic parameters have been summarized in Fig. 5b and Table 2. The optimized thickness of each device was 92–98 nm (see the ESI for details). The device based on T-FPDI yielded a PCE of 5.50%, with a Voc of 0.780 V, a Jsc of 13.4 mA cm−2, and a relatively low FF of 53.0%. When TT-FPDI was used as the SMA, the FF and PCE values of the corresponding device increased to 62.9% and 7.17%, respectively, with slightly enhanced Voc (0.791 V) and Jsc values (14.4 mA cm−2). Notably, the photovoltaic performances based on the fused acceptors (FT-FPDI and FTT-FPDI) were significantly enhanced with simultaneously increased Voc and Jsc values relative to those of the non-fused counterparts (T-FPDI and TT-FPDI), which could be ascribed to the upshifted LUMO levels and the enhanced light absorption upon ring fusion engineering (Fig. 5b). For the FT-FPDI based devices, the Voc value increased to 0.805 V, together with an FF of 58.2% and an enhanced Jsc of 14.4 mA cm−2, leading to a PCE of 6.75%. The champion PCE value of 7.66% was achieved for the PTB7-Th:FTT-FPDI based additive-free device with a Jsc of 16.5 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.822 V, and an FF of 56.4%. According to the equation Eloss = Eg − eVoc (Eg is the optical bandgap of PTB7-th), the energy losses of the devices based on the ring-fused FPDI acceptors (0.775 eV for FT-FPDI and 0.758 eV for FTT-FPDI) were smaller than those of the non-fused FPDI acceptors (0.800 eV for T-FPDI and 0.789 eV for TT-FPDI, as shown in Table 2).
SMAs

V
oc (V)

J
sc
 (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

E
loss (eV)

μ
h (cm2 V−1 s−1)

μ
e (cm2 V−1 s−1)

μ
h/μe

a The values in parentheses are calculated from EQE.

T-FPDI
0.780
13.4(13.1)
53.0
5.50
0.800
1.99 × 10−4
8.22 × 10−5
2.42
TT-FPDI
0.791
14.4(13.8)
62.9
7.17
0.789
2.02 × 10−4
1.04 × 10−4
1.94
FT-FPDI
0.805
14.4(13.7)
58.2
6.75
0.775
4.93 × 10−4
2.33 × 10−4
2.12
FTT-FPDI
0.822
16.5(15.9)
56.4
7.66
0.758
5.67 × 10−4
4.11 × 10−4
1.38
The external quantum efficiencies (EQEs) of the PTB7-Th:SMAs optimized devices have been plotted in Fig. 5c. The integrated currents of the devices were in good agreement with those obtained from the J–V measurements (Table 2). The optimized FT-FPDI and FTT-FPDI devices exhibited higher integrated currents than the corresponding non-fused SMA devices, which was consistent with the higher EQE values in the range from 360 to 700 nm for the fused SMA devices. The improved EQE response corroborated well with the enhanced absorption ability of SMAs upon ring fusion and improved charge transport. To examine the exciton dissociation and photoinduced charge-transfer properties, steady-state photoluminescent (PL) spectra of both the pristine and blend films were recorded (Fig. 5d). The emission peak at 759 nm of the pristine PTB7-th film was almost completely quenched (>95%) in all four blend films, indicating efficient charge transfer of the photo-generated electrons from PTB7-Th to SMAs. In addition, the fused acceptor-based blend films showed a slightly higher PL quenching efficiency (96.4% for FT-FPDI and 98.0% for FTT-FPDI) relative to that of the non-fused FPDI acceptors (95.8% for T-FPDI and 96.3% for TT-FPDI), suggesting more efficient exciton dissociation at the D/A interfaces that also contributes to the higher PCE (Fig. 5d).
To investigate the charge transport properties of the devices, charge carrier mobilities were examined in the blend thin films. The hole (μh) and electron (μe) mobilities were estimated by the space charge limited current (SCLC) method and the corresponding charge carrier mobilities are listed in Table 2. For the optimal PTB7-Th:T-FPDI blend, the calculated μh and μe values were 1.99 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 8.22 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, with a μh/μe ratio of 2.42. When using TT-FPDI to replace T-FPDI in the blend films, the respective hole and electron mobilities were enhanced to 2.02 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 1.04 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 with a more balanced μh/μe ratio of 1.94, which also correlated with the improvement of FF in the solar cells. The fused FPDI acceptors displayed further improved charge transport properties in the blend films relative to the non-fused FPDI acceptors. As shown in Table 2, the PTB7-Th:FT-FPDI blend exhibited an electron mobility of 2.33 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 while the PTB7-Th:FTT-FPDI blend exhibited the highest electron mobility of 4.11 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. Both the blends showed higher hole transport mobilities, with the PTB7-Th:FTT-FPDI blend displaying a more balanced μh/μe ratio of 1.38. In addition, the charge generation/extraction properties of these devices were further investigated from the plots of the photocurrent density Jph = JL − JD, where JL and JD are the photocurrent densities under light and dark conditions, respectively, versus the effective applied voltage Veff = V0 − Vbias, where V0 is the voltage at which Jph = 0 and Vbias is the applied external voltage bias. The photocurrent of all the NF-OSCs was saturated at a large reverse bias (Veff = 1–2 V), implying that almost all the photogenerated electron–hole pairs were dissociated and the generated free carriers were collected at the electrodes. The corresponding saturation photocurrents (Jsat) increased in the order of T-FPDI, TT-FPDI, FT-FPDI and FTT-FPDI, in accordance with the overall charge transport efficiency of the corresponding blends. The different overall charge collection probabilities P(E,T), determined by the ratio of Jph/Jsat under the short-circuit and maximum power conditions, were calculated to be 86.8%, 92.4%, 87.8%, and 91.0% for the T-FPDI, TT-FPDI, FT-FPDI and FTT-FPDI devices, respectively. This result indicated that the TT-FPDI and FTT-FPDI acceptors with a centrosymmetric linker were more efficient in charge extraction than the axisymmetric acceptors (T-FPDI and FT-FPDI). The maximum exciton generation rate (Gmax) of the solar cells was further calculated according to the equation Jsat = qLGmax. As depicted in Fig. 6a, the NF-OSCs based on the non-fused T-FPDI and TT-FPDI acceptors showed Gmax values of 9.26 × 1027 m−3 s−1 and 9.89 × 1027 m−3 s−1, respectively, whereas higher Gmax values of 9.90 × 1027 m−3 s−1 and 1.07 × 1028 m−3 s−1 were observed for the respective fused FT-FPDI and FTT-FPDI-based devices (Fig. 6a). The higher Gmax values observed for the fused FPDIs than those of the non-fused ones suggest that ring fusion facilitates more efficient exciton generation and charge collection, which also correlates well with the more complementary absorption feature of the donor–acceptor blends.
To gain deeper insight into the effect of the linker-regulation and ring-fusion strategies on charge recombination of the optimized devices, the dependence of Voc and Jsc on the light intensity (Plight) was carefully examined. The slopes of the Voc–Plight curves provided key information on the related recombination mechanism. As shown in Fig. 6b, the slope of the T-FPDI-based device (1.25 kT q−1) was larger than that of the TT-FPDI-based device (1.18 kT q−1), suggesting a more pronounced trap-assisted recombination in the PTB7-Th:T-FPDI-based device. On the other hand, the slope of the fully fused SMA (1.22 kT q−1 for FT-FPDI and 1.12 kT q−1 FTT-FPDI) based devices was closer to the ideality factor (1 kT q−1) relative to that of the non-fused devices, revealing that the trap-assisted recombination was significantly suppressed in the active layers containing ring-fused FPDIs. The correlation between Jsc and Plight was further investigated according to the power-law equation of Jsc ∝ PSlight. Generally, if the bimolecular recombination is completely suppressed in the devices under short-circuit conditions, the power law index (S value) will approach 1. As shown in Fig. 6b, the fully fused FT-FPDI and FTT-FPDI-based devices showed S values of 0.95 and 0.98, respectively, while those of the T-FPDI and TT-FPDI-based devices were more deviated from unity, indicating greater bimolecular recombination in the non-fused SMA-based devices. These results are consistent with the observed lower current density and the photovoltaic performance of the non-fused FPDIs.
Atomic force microscopy (AFM) height and phase images were acquired to examine the surface morphology and phase separation of the four active layers. The relevant images and the root-mean-square surface roughness (Rq) of all the blends are shown in Fig. 7. As revealed by the height images, the Rq values of the T-FPDI-, TT-FPDI-, FT-FPDI-, and FTT-FPDI-based additive-free blends showed slight variations but were overall around 1 nm. The comparable smooth surface roughness between the non-fused acceptors and the fused counterparts suggest the absence of severe aggregation in the blends regardless of the linker length and ring-fusion, which are consistent with the thin film UV-vis results.
Grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) measurement was performed to reveal the crystallinity and stacking behavior differences between the neat and blend films based on the four SMAs. The 2D GIWAXS patterns, together with the in-plane (IP) and out-of-plane (OOP) line-cut profiles of the neat and blend films, are shown in Fig. 8. All the neat and blend films displayed similar diffusive diffraction patterns with slightly more intensity in the OOP direction, indicating a random distribution of the crystallites with some preference towards edge-on orientation. The in-plane line-cuts of the neat films indicated two peaks at q 0.32 Å−1 and 1.27 Å−1 for T-FPDI, q 0.35 Å−1 and 1.24 Å−1 for TT-FPDI, q 0.32 Å−1 and 1.25 Å−1 for FT-FPDI, and q 0.31 Å−1 and 1.29 Å−1 for FTT-FPDI, corresponding to an inter-lamellar d-spacing of 19.6 Å, 18.0 Å, 19.6 Å, and 20.3 Å in the face-on oriented crystallites and an alkyl halo d-spacing of 4.95 Å, 5.07 Å, 5.03 Å, and 4.87 Å, respectively. Ring-fusion slightly enhanced the crystallinity of the FT-FPDI and FTT-FPDI neat films relative to that of the non-fused acceptors, as evidenced by the appearance of a higher order peak (d-spacing of 8.6 Å) in the IP direction (Fig. 8b). The OOP line-cuts of the neat films revealed multiple high order peaks, corresponding to the edge-on lamella stacking of these acceptors (Fig. 8c). These features in the pristine films were still maintained in the blend films with the polymer donor PTB7-Th, suggesting the preservation of the molecular packing order in the blend. Despite these diffractive features, the thin films are in general quite amorphous considering the broad peak width and the weak peak intensity, indicating that intermolecular stacking in the FPDI derivatives is greatly suppressed despite the ring fusion and the large π-surfaces. These findings are consistent with the UV-vis results and the AFM studies.

In summary, a series of FPDI-based small molecule acceptors with different symmetry linkers were designed and synthesized for NF-OSCs. When using a centrosymmetric TT unit to bridge two quasi-2D FPDI units, the resulting TT-FPDI and FTT-FPDI acceptors displayed narrower band gaps and higher electron mobilities relative to those bridged by an axisymmetric thiophene unit. The ring-fused acceptors show red-shifted absorption which is more complementary to the donor material, upshifted LUMO levels that are more beneficial for higher Voc, and slightly higher crystallinity compared to the non-fused counterparts although intermolecular aggregation remains significantly suppressed due to the overall twisted, nonplanar geometry of the FPDI units. The devices based on TT-FPDI as electron acceptors exhibited a higher PCE than the T-FPDI based devices. The photovoltaic performance could be further improved by the synergistic effect of linker regulation and ring-fusion engineering, and the highest PCE of 7.66% was achieved in the ring-fused FTT-FPDI-based device without any additive treatment. This work demonstrated that integrating the effect of linker regulation and ring-fusion is a viable approach for improving the photovoltaic performance of quasi-2D FPDI-based electron acceptors.


The authors declare no competing financial interest.


The authors acknowledge the support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21644006 and 51403044) and Natural Science Foundation of Heilongjiang Province of China (No. E2018036). Part of this work was carried out as a user project at the Molecular Foundry, and the GIWAXS studies were conducted at the Advanced Light Source, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, all supported by the Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, of the U.S. Department of Energy under contract no. DE-AC02-05CH11231. Y. Yin acknowledges the support from the China Scholarship Council under Grant No. 201906120179. Y. Zhang acknowledges the support from the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Harbin Institute of Technology).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0tc02499f
‡ Both authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020