 DOI: 10.1039/C8TC01780H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 7046-7053


Renlong
Li
,

Gongchu
Liu
,

Ruihao
Xie
,

Zhenfeng
Wang
,

Xiye
Yang
,

Kang
An
,

Wenkai
Zhong
,

Xiao-Fang
Jiang
,

Lei
Ying
*,

Fei
Huang
* and 

Yong
Cao


State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, P. R. China. E-mail: msleiying@scut.edu.cn; msfhuang@scut.edu.cn

Received
16th April 2018
, Accepted 11th June 2018
First published on 13th June 2018
A new acceptor–donor–acceptor type small molecule acceptor, namely IDT-HN, has been developed, which consists of a newly developed 2-(3-oxo-2,3,5,6,7,8-hexahydro-1H-cyclopenta[b]naphthalen-1-ylidene)malononitrile as the peripheral electron-withdrawing group and indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene as the electron-donating core. Compared with the reference molecule (IDT-IC) that bears phenyl-fused indanone as the end groups, IDT-HN exhibited an elevated lowest unoccupied molecular orbital level. By utilizing IDT-HN as the electron acceptor and a wide bandgap conjugated polymer, PBDB-T, as the electron donor, optimized devices exhibited an impressively high power conversion efficiency of up to 10.22% with simultaneously improved open-circuit voltage, short-circuit current and fill factor. The improved photovoltaic performance can be attributed to the widened and intensified absorption spectra, improved electron mobility, more ordered π–π packing structure, and the symmetric carrier transport mobility of the IDT-HN-based blend in comparison to those obtained from devices based on the reference molecule IDT-IC. These results indicate that the cyclic alkyl moiety incorporated into the peripheral groups plays a critical role in improving the performance of the corresponding solar cell devices. In addition, the power conversion efficiency of the devices remains at 91% of its optimum performance with a film thickness of 250 nm, indicating its great potential for future practical application.

In the past two decades, solution-processed organic solar cells (OSCs) with bulk heterojunction (BHJ) structures have attracted much academic and industrial interest, primarily due to their extensive advantages such as mechanical flexibility, low-cost production, chemical versatility, and solution processability for the fabrication of large-area devices. For the electron-accepting material component, the recently emerged non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs) have shown the especially promising characteristics of better absorption, easily tunable energy levels, and facile accessibility. The specific merits of such small-molecule NFAs include well-defined molecular structures and molecular weights, and they can be prepared in high purity that can avoid batch-to-batch variations. Recently, benefiting from the development of NFAs, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of OSCs has been improved to over 13%.

Small-molecule acceptors (SMAs) with acceptor–donor–acceptor (A–D–A) type molecular structures (such as 3,9-bis(2-methylene-(3-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)-indanone))-5,5,11,11-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-dithieno[2,3-d:2′,3′-d′]-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]-dithiophene, ITIC and its derivatives) have been extensively used in OSCs to achieve high performance. To maximize the PCE, much work has focused on the modification of the powerful electron-withdrawing end group 2-(3-oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-inden-1-ylidene)malononitrile (INCN) using chemical methods to improve the short-circuit current (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC), and fill factor (FF), as the PCE is the product of these parameters. However, it remains a great challenge to simultaneously improve all of these parameters, because in many cases, the molecular properties and film morphology have opposite impacts on these factors. For instance, to achieve a higher JSC, various electron-deficient units (such as fluorine atoms) have been introduced into the phenyl moiety of INCN to enhance the intramolecular charge transfer effect and broaden the absorption spectrum of the SMAs. Although JSC can be greatly improved when the modified SMAs are incorporated into OSCs, the corresponding VOC decreased due to the decreased lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy level of the acceptor. Alternatively, to achieve a higher VOC, electron-donating groups (such as methyl and methoxy) have been introduced into the phenyl moiety of INCN to elevate the LUMO level of the SMAs; however, the corresponding absorption spectra of the SMAs are blue-shifted, which is not favorable for the conversion of solar photons to electrons. Regarding the aforementioned two parameters, the achievement of a high FF is particularly challenging as it depends on multiple factors including the morphology of the BHJ layer, balance of charge carrier mobility, recombination of charge carriers, and so forth.
Very recently, we reported an A–D–A-type acceptor, 2,2′-((2Z,2′Z)-((4,4,9,9-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-4,9-dihydro-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene-2,7-diyl)bis(methanylylidene))bis(3-oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-cyclopenta[b]naphthalene-2,1-diylidene))dimalononitrile (namely IDT-N, Fig. 1a), consisting of indacenodithiophene (IDT) as the electron-rich core and naphthyl-fused indanone (N) as the electron-withdrawing end groups. Comparing IDT-N with the previously reported IDT-IC (2,2′-((2Z,2′Z)-((4,4,9,9-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-4,9-dihydro-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b']dithiophene-2,7-diyl)bis(methanylylidene))bis(3-oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-indene-2,1-diylidene))dimalononitrile), which has phenyl-fused indanone (INCN) as the end groups, the performance of the device based on PBDB-T:IDT-N (8.99%) was higher than that of the device based on PBDB-T:IDT-IC (6.11%), mainly due to the improved JSC and FF. However, the VOC was decreased from 0.88 V to 0.79 V, which limited the photovoltaic performances. Recently, Yang et al. demonstrated that cyclic chains adopt preferential conformations in the crystals of π-conjugated polymers, which can promote the molecular self-assembly and packing properties, and thus lead to more ordered micro-structures that enhanced the absorption of light by the film and the balance of electron/hole transport that can simultaneously improve JSC and FF. In this respect, it seems rational that the LUMO levels of SMAs can be enhanced upon introducing cyclic alkyl chains into the benzene unit of the electron-withdrawing INCN moiety that can lead to a higher VOC, and the JSC and FF would be simultaneously improved.
In this work, we introduced a cyclic alkyl chain into the benzene unit of the end group INCN to synthesize a new end group moiety, HN (2,3-oxo-2,3,5,6,7,8-hexahydro-1H-cyclopenta[b]naphthalen-1-ylidene)malononitrile. Using HN as the electron-withdrawing end group, a new small-molecule, IDT-HN, 2,2′-((2Z,2′Z)-((4,4,9,9-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-4,9-dihydro-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene-2,7-diyl)bis(methanylylidene))bis(3-oxo-2,3,5,6,7,8-hexahydro-1H-cyclopenta[b]naphthalene-2,1-diylidene))dimalononitrile (Fig. 1a), was synthesized. The LUMO energy level was up-shifted compared with the reference molecule IDT-IC when using INCN as the end group, which can be attributed to the electron-donating nature of the cyclic alkyl substituent that is favorable for VOC. Importantly, IDT-HN showed a broadened and intensified optical absorption as compared to the counterpart molecule IDT-IC due to the more ordered molecular chain arising from stronger intermolecular interactions among the end groups, which is favorable for JSC. Furthermore, IDT-HN exhibited a higher electron mobility (μe) and a more balanced electron/hole transport in the blend film than those of IDT-IC, due to the enhanced intermolecular interactions and the optimized film morphology, which was beneficial for suppressing charge recombination to improve the FF. Finally, the devices based on IDT-HN and the polymer PBDB-T (Fig. 1a) demonstrated a significantly improved PCE of 10.22%, with simultaneously improved VOC, JSC, and FF values, compared with the corresponding OSCs with IDT-IC as the acceptor. It is noteworthy that the improved FF value of 76.41% is distinctly higher than that of most previously reported high-performance NF-OSCs. Thus, these results endorse the introduction of cyclic alkyl chains into SMAs as a promising strategy to design higher-performance NF acceptors.

Details of the synthesis of the molecule IDT-HN and the end group HN are provided in the ESI (Scheme S1). The novel electron-withdrawing moiety HN was synthesized via several steps using low-cost N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) and cyclohexanone as the starting materials. The targeted compound IDT-HN was obtained by Knoevenagel condensation reaction of the intermediate compound (IDT-CHO) and the electron-withdrawing moiety (HN) in 90% yield. The molecular structure of IDT-HN was characterized by 1H and 13C nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS). IDT-HN proved to be very soluble in common organic solvents, such as chloroform, chlorobenzene, and o-dichlorobenzene. Thermogravimetric analysis revealed the good thermal stability of IDT-HN, with the decomposition temperature of 363 °C, defined as 5% weight loss (Fig. S1a, ESI). Differential scanning calorimetry analysis revealed no obvious thermal transition characteristics in the temperature range from 30 to 280 °C for IDT-HN under a nitrogen atmosphere (Fig. S1b, ESI).


In order to explore the possible influence of the terminal groups of the cyclic alkyl chain (HN) on the geometric properties of the A–D–A-type small molecules, density functional theory (DFT) calculations using Gaussian 09 software at the ωB97X-D/6-31G* level were carried out to evaluate the molecular geometry of the ground state of the two acceptors. To facilitate the calculations, the long alkyl chains of the two acceptors were replaced with methyl groups, respectively. Fig. 2a and b depicts the geometry-optimized structures of the two acceptors (IDT-IC and IDT-HN) as observed from the top and side views; both acceptors were predicted to show a coplanar configuration in the conjugated backbone moiety. Furthermore, on the basis of the optimized ground state structures, natural transition orbital (NTO) analysis was performed by using the time-dependent (TD) DFT functional at the ωB97X-D/6-31G* level. Fig. 2c depicts both the occupied and unoccupied NTOs with the largest contribution to the S0–S1 transition for the molecule IDT-HN, and with π-electron delocalization occurring over the entire backbone. On the other hand, the corresponding molecule IDT-IC also exhibits a coplanar backbone configuration with NOTs well-distributed over the backbone under the same calculation conditions (Fig. S2, ESI).


As shown in Fig. 1b, in chloroform solution, both IDT-IC and IDT-HN show strong and broad optical absorption in the region of 500–700 nm. The maximum extinction coefficient of IDT-HN (1.72 × 105 M−1 cm−1) is higher than that of IDT-IC (1.40 × 105 M−1 cm−1). In thin films (Fig. 1c and Fig. S3b, ESI), both acceptors show red shifted and broadened absorption profiles compared with the corresponding solution spectra, which can be attributed to the more pronounced π–π intermolecular interactions in the film state. The absorption peaks of the IDT-HN and IDT-IC films are 671 and 680 nm with the corresponding extinction coefficients of 1.28 × 105 and 1.07 × 105 cm−1, respectively. Compared with the main optical absorption of IDT-IC (from 500 to 740 nm), IDT-HN showed a wider and more intense absorption (from 480 to 740 nm) with the absorption edge at the same position (around 740 nm), and much stronger π–π intermolecular interactions. The broadened absorption and enhanced extinction coefficient of IDT-HN are favorable for harvesting solar photons and thus would result in an improved JSC. Both acceptors have the same optical bandgap of 1.68 eV, as calculated from the absorption onsets of the thin films. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements were performed to probe the frontier molecular orbital energy levels of the acceptors, with ferrocene/ferrocenium (Fc/Fc+) as the reference (Fig. S5, ESI). The HOMO/LUMO levels were estimated using the following equations: HOMO = −e[Eox − E(Fc/Fc+) + 4.8] (eV) and LUMO = −e[Ered − E(Fc/Fc+) + 4.8] (eV), where Eox and Ered are the onsets of oxidation and reduction, respectively, and the potential of the Fc/Fc+ redox couple was determined as around 0.3 V relative to a Ag/Ag+ reference electrode. In this regard, the HOMO/LUMO levels of IDT-IC and IDT-HN were estimated to be −5.84/−3.95 and −5.92/−3.86 eV, respectively. The LUMO level of IDT-HN is higher than that of IDT-IC due to the electron-donating nature of the cyclic alkyl group. IDT-IC and IDT-HN exhibited a comparable LUMO offset of about 0.4 eV with copolymer PBDB-T, which can guarantee the driving force for efficient exciton dissociation. We also note that the recorded electrochemical band gap (ECVg) of IDT-HN (2.06 eV) is slightly higher than that of IDT-IC (ECVg = 1.89 eV), while they have nearly identical optical band gaps (Fig. 1c). This observation can be understood since the optical band gap relates to the exciton energy, which determines the onset of vertical interband transitions, while the electrochemical band gap is the minimal energy needed to generate an electron–hole pair. Another reason that may cause the different ECVg values between the two compounds might be attributed to the contact between the film of IDT-HN and the electrode, since the cyclic alkyl chains of IDT-HN have large steric hindrance that may increase the injection potentials of electrons during the measurements, thus leading to a deeper HOMO and shallower LUMO energy level of IDT-HN than those of IDT-IC.


With the broadened and intensified absorption and elevated LUMO energy level, it is reasonable to expect that IDT-HN would show a better photovoltaic performance than that of IDT-IC (Fig. 1a). We fabricated OSCs with a conventional configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/PFN-Br/Ag, in which poly[(9,9-bis(3-((N,N-dimethyl)-N-ethylammonium)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)] (PFN-Br) functioned as an efficient cathode interlayer to facilitate electron extraction from the active layer. The details of the device optimization processes of the OSCs, including the donor/acceptor ratios, active-layer thickness, and solvent additives, are provided in Tables S4 and S5 (ESI). The optimized performance was achieved when using chlorobenzene as the processing solvent with a donor:acceptor weight ratio of 1.5:1 and an active-layer thickness of around 100 nm with 0.5% DIO (1,8-diiodooctane) as the solvent additive.

The optimized current density–voltage (J–V) curves and external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves of the OSCs based on PBDB-T:IDT-IC and PBDB-T:IDT-HN are shown in Fig. 3, and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. The optimized IDT-HN-based device exhibited an impressively high PCE of 10.22% with a VOC of 0.93 V, a JSC of 14.43 mA cm−2, and a FF of 76.41%. Compared with the IDT-IC-based device, the IDT-HN-based device simultaneously exhibited an enhanced VOC and JSC, which can be attributed to the up-shifted LUMO level and wider and stronger absorption of IDT-HN. Note that the device also showed a significantly increased FF of over 76%, which is among the highest values of reported NF-OSCs so far. In the EQE spectra, the IDT-HN-based device shows a wider and stronger photoresponse than that of the IDT-IC-based device, which can likewise be ascribed to the stronger absorption of IDT-HN, and which is favorable for achieving a high JSC. The EQE responses were consistent with the measured JSC values of the devices. The integrated photocurrents were 11.40 and 14.13 mA cm−2 for the PBDB-T:IDT-IC and PBDB-T:IDT-HN devices, respectively, which are very close to the values of 11.94 and 14.43 mA cm−2 obtained from the J–V characterization, respectively (Table 1). It is also worth pointing out that the EQE response of the device based on IDT-HN slightly red-shifted as compared to that of the device based on IDT-IC when processing with the DIO additive (Fig. 3b), which can be understood as the UV-vis absorption of the PBDB-T:IDT-HN blend film red-shifting as compared to that of the PBDB-T:IDT-IC blend film (Fig. S4, ESI).
Active layer

V
OC (V)

J
SC (Jcalc) (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Ref.

a The JSC values in parentheses were calculated by integrating the EQE spectrum with the AM 1.5G spectrum.

PBDB-T:IDT-IC
0.88
11.94 (11.40)
57.90
6.11
This work
PBDB-T:IDT-N
0.79
15.88 (15.17)
71.91
8.99

33

PBDB-T:IDT-HN
0.93
14.43 (14.13)
76.41
10.22
This work
The dependence of the device performances of the IDT-HN-based OSCs on film thickness (from 65 to 250 nm) was also measured to evaluate their potential for practical applications. The devices were fabricated by carefully tuning the spin-coating speed and the concentration of the blended solution (Table S5, ESI). As shown in Fig. S7 (ESI), PCE dramatically increased from 8.52% to 10.22% as the film thickness increased from 65 to 100 nm, respectively, after which the PCE values slowly decreased with film thickness. It is also worth noting that a PCE of 9.29% was obtained at a film thickness of 250 nm, indicating the great potential for fabricating thick film devices that are compatible for the high-throughput roll-to-roll printing technique.

To probe the charge transfer between the donor and acceptor materials, we measured the photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the pure IDT-IC, IDT-HN, and PBDB-T and optimized PBDB-T:IDT-IC and PBDB-T:IDT-HN blend films, as shown in Fig. 4. Clearly, more effective photoinduced charge transfer occurred between PBDB-T and IDT-HN compared with that between PBDB-T and IDT-IC, which is beneficial for achieving a higher JSC in OSCs. This result is consistent with the significantly enhanced JSC obtained from the J–V characterization of the IDT-HN-based devices.

Transient photocurrent (TPC) measurements were performed to probe how the introduction of cyclic alkyl chains into the end group affected the charge extraction time during the operation of the OSC devices. The measurements were carried out at 0 bias, and the results are shown in Fig. 5a. The charge extraction time was measured to be 0.28 and 0.19 μs for the PBDB-T:IDT-IC and PBDB-T:IDT-HN devices, respectively. The shorter charge extraction time for the IDT-HN-based device indicates more efficient charge extraction from the photoactive layer, which is favorable for improving the current density and thus the overall photovoltaic performance.
The light-intensity (Plight) dependence of JSC and VOC was measured to elucidate the charge recombination mechanism of the studied devices, wherein Plight was varied from 5 to 100 mW cm−2 (Fig. 5). The power-law dependence of JSC on illumination intensity can be expressed as JSC ∝ (Plight)S, in which S, the exponential factor, tends to unity when the bimolecular recombination of the charge carriers is weak. The extracted S values for the IDT-IC- and IDT-HN-based devices are 0.98 and 0.99, respectively (Fig. 5c), indicating that less bimolecular recombination occurred in the IDT-HN-based device, which can be expected to improve JSC and FF. In addition, the relationships between VOC and Plight are shown in Fig. 5d. The slope of VOCversus the natural logarithm of Plight gives the value of kBT/q. Here kB, T, and q are the Boltzmann constant, temperature (K), and elementary charge, respectively. For the device based on PBDB-T:IDT-HN, the obtained slope is 1.23kBT/q, which is lower than the value of 1.41kBT/q obtained from the device based on PBDB-T:IDT-IC. Typically, when an additional mechanism such as trap-assisted recombination is involved, a stronger dependence of VOC on Plight, with a slope greater than kBT/q, can be observed. Thus, the lower slope for the IDT-HN-based device demonstrates the reduced trap density and suppressed trap-assisted recombination, which is consistent with the obtained higher current density.
The exciton dissociation and charge-collection behavior of the studied devices were investigated by measuring the photocurrent density (Jph) versus effective voltage (Veff), as shown in Fig. 5b. Under the short-circuit condition, the exciton dissociation capacity was evaluated by determining the exciton dissociation probability (Pdiss = Jph/Jsat, where Jsat is the saturation photocurrent density). Pdiss was 98% for the IDT-HN-based device, much higher than the value of 91% for the IDT-IC-based device, indicating that the former undergoes more efficient exciton dissociation and charge collection.

The charge carrier mobilities of the pristine IDT-IC and IDT-HN films and the PBDB-T:IDT-IC and PBDB-T:IDT-HN blend films were measured using the space-charge limited current (SCLC) method. The electron-only and hole-only mobilities were evaluated by using devices with ITO/Al/BHJ film/Ca/Al and ITO/PEDOT:PSS/BHJ film/MoO3/Ag architectures, respectively. The current–voltage (J1/2–V) curves and the corresponding mobility parameters are summarized in Fig. 6, Fig. S6, and Table S3 (ESI), respectively. The electron mobility of the IDT-HN film (2.79 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) is higher than that of the IDT-IC film (1.35 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1), which can be mainly attributed to the improved intermolecular interactions and better π–π stacking, as inferred from GIWAXS measurements (see below), thus ensuring effective charge carrier transport to the electrodes. Relative to the PBDB-T:IDT-IC blend film (hole mobility, μh = 9.64 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1; electron mobility, μe = 2.42 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1; μh/μe = 3.98), the PBDB-T:IDT-HN film possesses higher mobilities (μh = 1.04 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1; μe = 4.05 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) and also more balanced hole/electron mobilities (μh/μe = 2.57), which are favorable for suppressing bimolecular recombination and increasing the FF values.


The internal physical mechanisms of blend films are known to be closely related to their morphological features. Therefore, atomic force microscopy (AFM) and grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) were used to investigate the effects of end-group modulation on the film morphology. As shown in Fig. S8 (ESI), the IDT-HN-based blend film exhibited a mostly uniform and smooth surface with a relatively low root-mean-square (RMS) roughness value of 2.72 nm. For the IDT-IC-based blend film, a higher RMS roughness (RMS = 5.11 nm) and larger surface aggregates were observed. Moreover, it is noted that these blend films processed with and without DIO additive exhibited quite similar surface topographies associated with similar root-mean-square values, implying that the utilization of a solvent additive has trivial effects on the surface morphology of these blend films.

Two-dimensional GIWAXS patterns of the neat films and the blends were captured to investigate the characteristics of molecular ordering (Fig. 7). One can clearly note that the neat film of IDT-IC exhibited a diffused lamellar packing (100) ring and a low-intensity π–π stacking (010) reflection peak at 1.77 Å−1 in the in-plane (IP) direction, implying the formation of a predominant “edge-on” orientation (Fig. 7). In contrast, the film of IDT-HN showed a pronounced lamellar diffraction (100) peak at 0.35 Å−1 with an interlamellar distance of 17.7 Å in the IP direction and a high-intensity π–π stacking (010) peak at around 1.76 Å−1 with a d-spacing of 3.6 Å in the out-of-plane (OOP) direction, indicating the formation of a predominant “face-on” orientation. For the blends, the diffraction signals showed a (100) peak at 0.31 Å−1 and a π–π stacking (010) peak at 1.7 Å−1, which can be attributed to the highly ordered polymer PBDB-T. It should be noted that the (010) peaks (q = 1.77 Å−1) in the out-of-plane direction and the (100) peak (q = 0.3 Å−1) in the in-plane direction were slightly enhanced for the film processed with DIO additive (Fig. 7b and e) compared to that of the film processed without DIO additive (Fig. S9a and c, ESI). This observation indicated that the blend films processed with DIO additive prefer to form the face-on orientation relative to the substrate, which is consistent with the improved short-circuit current density of the devices. Moreover, compared with the IDT-IC-based film processed with 0.5% DIO additive, the IDT-HN-based film (processed with 0.5% DIO) also showed a stronger intensity of the (100) peak in the IP direction and of the π–π stacking (010) reflection peak in the OOP direction, suggesting a stronger ordering of the face-on orientation of both acceptor and donor. Such ordering is known to be beneficial for the charge transport in OSCs, the results therefore correlating well with the device characteristics. This finding confirms that the HN end group can induce a more favorable molecular orientation and film morphology, and thereby result in better device performance.

In summary, a novel A–D–A-type small-molecule acceptor, denoted as IDT-HN, with IDT as the core and incorporating HN as a new electron-withdrawing end group, was designed and synthesized. The resulting IDT-HN exhibited a broadened and intensified optical absorption, enhanced electron mobility, elevated LUMO energy level, and more ordered molecular packing as compared to the INCN-end-capped counterpart compound IDT-IC. The device based on PBDB-T:IDT-HN exhibited an impressively high PCE of 10.22% that obviously outperforms that of 6.11% obtained from the IDT-IC-based device, which can be attributed to the simultaneously enhanced photovoltaic parameters as a result of the improved absorption, up-shifted LUMO energy level, the achievement of more ordered π–π packing of molecules, the higher exciton dissociation efficiency, and more balanced charge transport of the former. It is also worth noting that the PCE remains over 9% at a film thickness of 250 nm, illustrating great potential for future practical applications. These findings indicate that introducing cyclic alkyl chains to the end groups of small-molecule acceptors is an effective way to enhance the absorption, elevate the LUMO level, and optimize the film morphology.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (No. 2014CB643501), Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 91633301, 51673069, 21634004), the Science and Technology Program of Guangzhou, China (No. 2017A030306011 and 2017A050503002), and the Foundation of Guangzhou Science and Technology Project (201707020019). L. Y. gratefully acknowledges the Pearl River S&T Nova Program of Guangzhou (Grant 201710010021) for its valuable contribution.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Details of the experimental section, device fabrication and characterization, carrier mobility measurements, other figures and tables. See DOI: 10.1039/c8tc01780h
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018