 DOI: 10.1039/C8TC02243G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 8051-8059


Ermioni
Polydorou
,

Martha
Botzakaki
,

Charalampos
Drivas
,

Kostas
Seintis
,

Ilias
Sakellis
,

Anastasia
Soultati
,

Andreas
Kaltzoglou
,

Thanassis
Speliotis
,

Mihalis
Fakis
,

Leonidas C.
Palilis
,

Stella
Kennou
,

Azhar
Fakharuddin
,

Lukas
Schmidt-Mende
,

Dimitris
Davazoglou
,

Polycarpos
Falaras
,

Panagiotis
Argitis
,

Christoforos A.
Krontiras
,

Stavroula N.
Georga
 and 

Maria
Vasilopoulou
*

Institute of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, National Centre for Scientific Research “Demokritos”, 15310, Agia Paraskevi, Attiki, Greece. E-mail: m.vasilopoulou@inn.demokritos.gr

Department of Physics, University of Patras, 26504 Patras, Greece

Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Patras, 26504 Patras, Greece

Department of Physics, University of Konstanz, 78457 Konstanz, Germany

Received
9th May 2018
, Accepted 1st July 2018
First published on 4th July 2018
Atomic layer deposited hafnium oxide is inserted between the zinc oxide electron transport material and the photoactive blend to serve as an ultra-thin passivation interlayer in organic solar cells with an inverted architecture. The deposition of hafnium oxide significantly improves the surface properties of zinc oxide via effective surface passivation and beneficial modification of surface energy; the latter leads to improved nanomorphology of the photoactive blend. As a result, lower recombination losses and improved electron transport/collection at the cathode interface are achieved. A simultaneous increase in open-circuit voltage, short-circuit current density and fill factor is obtained leading to a power conversion efficiency of 6.30% in the ALD-modified cell using a poly(3-hexylthiophene):indene-C60-bisadduct blend as the photoactive layer; this represents a 25% improvement compared to 5.04% of the reference device. Moreover, the incorporation of the passivation interlayer yields a significant stability enhancement in the fabricated solar cells which retain more than 80% of their initial efficiency (T80 lifetime) after 750 hours while the reference cell exhibits a T80 equal to 250 hours.

Solar cells represent a promising approach to reduce our reliance on fossil fuels by directly converting sunlight into electricity. Although silicon-based devices and the recently emerged organic–inorganic perovskite solar cells are indisputably among the most effective solar-to-electricity conversion technologies, organic solar cells (OSCs) are competitive candidates because they have the potential to deliver significantly reduced large-scale manufacturing costs. Moreover, with the development of non-fullerene acceptors, remarkable device efficiencies above 13% have been recently achieved. Further efficiency enhancement and improved environmental stability can be obtained by effectively manipulating interfacial recombination losses through the development of effective charge transport interlayers and surface passivation methodologies.

OSCs of the inverted architecture exhibit higher efficiencies and prolonged lifetimes compared to their conventional counterparts mainly due to a more favorable vertical distribution of donor and acceptor phases and improved stability of the high work function metals used as the top anode electrodes. Zinc oxide (ZnO) is commonly used as electron transport layer (ETL) deposited on the transparent bottom cathode electrode due to its intrinsic n-type conductivity, low work function and high transparency. However, surface defects present on ZnO act as recombination centers for photogenerated carriers resulting in severe loss in both photovoltage and photocurrent thus deteriorating the device performance. In addition, they constitute adsorption sites for environmental oxygen and water molecules which are detrimental for device stability. Therefore, effective surface defect passivation of ZnO has become essential in simultaneously boosting the power conversion efficiency (PCE) and lifetime of OSCs. Among the most efficient passivation methodologies is the insertion of appropriate interfacial modifiers, such as conjugated polyelectrolytes (CPEs), alcohol/water-soluble conjugated polymers, self-assembled monolayers (SAMs), small molecules, and ionic liquids (ILs), on the interface between ZnO and photoactive blend. In addition, polar solvent, or gas plasma treatment of ZnO surface, prior to the deposition of the photoactive blend represent effective ways to address the surface defects related issue and suppress defect-assisted Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) interfacial recombination.
Atomic layer deposition (ALD) has been established as a versatile technique to formulate high-quality metal oxide films such as aluminum (Al2O3) and zirconium (ZrO2) oxides which have found broad application as effective passivation layers in silicon (Si) photovoltaics. In addition, they have been incorporated as ultrathin interfacial layers to passivate interface trap states at the mesoporous TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). Recently, high efficiency and humidity resistant planar perovskite solar cells have also been developed using an ALD ultrathin Al2O3 overlayer on the perovskite surface. In the field of OSCs, our group has introduced the application of ALD Al2O3 and ZrO2 as ultrathin passivation/modification interlayers deposited either on ZnO, or titanium dioxide (TiO2) ETL, to allow for effective surface passivation of the latter oxides and efficiency enhancement in inverted devices. Atomic layer deposited Al2O3 was also used by others to improve electron transport in OSCs with a conventional architecture.
Hafnium oxide (HfO2), is an inert, wide bandgap, transparent metal oxide with a high dielectric constant and a large refractive index which also has its own merits as a passivation coating in Si photovoltaics and DSSCs. Although systematic work on HfO2 has been performed by several groups working in the aforementioned photovoltaic fields, its application in organic (as well as in perovskite) solar cells has not yet been exploited to the best of the authors’ knowledge. In this work, we present the first application of an ALD-grown ultrathin (<1 nm) HfO2 film as passivation interlayer directly deposited on the ZnO ETL to allow for efficiency and stability enhancement in OSCs using photoactive layers consisting of poly(3-hexylthiophene):indene-C60-bisadduct (P3HT:IC60BA) blends. The ALD HfO2 passivated cells exhibited PCEs of 6.30% which represents a 25% enhancement compared to that of the reference cells without the ALD interlayer (having a PCE of 5.04%). Furthermore, intentionally unencapsulated devices using the ALD HfO2 passivation methodology showed high stability with a T80 lifetime equal to 750 h while the T80 of the reference devices was 250 h. The efficiency enhancement is considered as the synergistic outcome of the effective surface defect passivation and the beneficial modification of surface energy of ZnO resulting in (i) reduced recombination losses and improved electron transport at the cathode interface, and (ii) better photoactive blend nanomorphology after the incorporation of the thin dielectric interlayer. The improved stability stems from the passivation of surface defects of ZnO which act as adsorption sites for environmental oxygen and water. The latter act as corrosion agents for the photoactive blend thus deteriorating the device lifetime.

The preparation procedure of ZnO films on fluorine doped tin oxide conducting substrates (FTO, purchased from Solaronix-TCO10-10) has been reported elsewhere. In brief, an amount of a 0.5 mol L−1 ZnO sol–gel (prepared using zinc acetate dihydrate, purchased from Sigma Aldrich, in ethanolamine and 2-methoxyethanol) was spin coated on pre-cleaned and oxygen plasma treated FTO at 6000 rpm for 40 s, pre-heated on a hot-plate at 80 °C and finally annealed at 250 °C for 10 min. The same procedure was repeated after the samples were cooled down to 60 °C to obtain a 50 nm thick ZnO film that serve as the electron transport layer in OSCs of the inverted architecture. The deposition of the HfO2 layer was performed with a Savannah-100 ALD system by Cambridge-Nanotech/USA. The precursor used was tetrakis dimethylamido hafnium (Hf(NMe2)4) while H2O was used as the oxidant/co-reactant. The deposition temperature was set at 250 °C and the growth rate was 0.94 Å per cycle. P3HT:IC60BA solutions (17 mg mL−1 in P3HT and 17 mg mL−1 in IC60BA, where P3HT was purchased from Rieke metals and IC60BA was purchased from Ossila) in 1,2-dichlorobenzene were spin-coated at 800 rpm for 30 s inside an argon filled glove box. The films were left to dry for 20 min and subsequently were annealed at 150 °C for 10 min. Finally, a molybdenum suboxide (MoOx) film with a thickness of 20 nm was deposited to serve as the hole transport layer. The devices were completed with a 150 nm thick aluminum anode which defined, through a shadow mask, the active area to be equal to 12.56 mm2.


Photoemission electron spectroscopy measurements were performed using a Leybold EA-11 electron analyser. The excitation source was an unmonochromatized Mg Kα line at 1253.6 eV (12 kV with 20 mA anode current) for the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and the He I (21.22 eV) for the ultra-violet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) measurements. Photoluminescence (PL) spectra of ZnO were obtained using a Horiba Jobin-Yvon iHR320 spectrometer equipped with a He–Cd laser (325 nm, 3.81 eV) as the excitation source. The spectrometer was calibrated with an accuracy of 0.06 nm using the 365.015 nm Hg line. The steady-state PL spectra of P3HT on ZnO were detected by means of a Horiba-Fluoromax spectrometer upon excitation at 540 nm. The PL dynamics of P3HT were measured via the Time-Correlated Single Photon Counting (TCSPC) method (Fluotime Picoquant). The system consists of a 60 ps pulsed diode laser at 470 nm used as the excitation source. The PL of P3HT samples was collected and passed through an analyzer, placed under magic angle conditions, and a monochromator and was detected by a microchannel-plate photomultiplier (Hamamatsu R3809U-5X). The PL dynamics were detected at 650 and 720 nm corresponding to the high energy shoulder and the main peak of the P3HT steady-state PL spectrum. The overall Instruments' Response Function (IRF) was ∼100 ps. The decays were analyzed by a multi-exponential function convoluted with the IRF of the system which is considered as a Gaussian function leading to a final resolution of less than 50 ps. The quality of the fitting was judged through the χ2 parameter which was close to unity. The average lifetime was finally calculated through the equation  where τi and Ai are the various PL decay channel lifetimes and their associated pre-exponential factors, respectively. UV-vis absorption, transmittance and reflectance measurements were taken using a Perkin Elmer Lambda 40 UV-vis spectrophotometer. Fourier transform infra-red (FTIR) transmission spectra of ZnO films were obtained using a Bruker Tensor 27 spectrometer with a DTGS detector. Films thicknesses were measured with an Ambios XP-2 profilometer. Surface topography of thin films was evaluated using atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements with an NT-MDT AFM microscope operated in tapping mode. Capacitance–voltage (C–V) measurements were performed using an Agilent 4284A LCR meter. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of OSCs were measured with a Keithley 2400 source-measure unit. The illumination source was a Xe lamp equipped with an AM 1.5G filter. External quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements were recorded using an Autolab PGSTAT-30 potentiostat equipped with a 300 W Xe lamp and an Oriel 1/8 monochromator.


The passivation methodology proposed here refers to the deposition of an ultra-thin ALD HfO2 layer on top of the ZnO electron transport material which was initially verified by XPS measurements. Fig. 1a presents the Hf 4f core-level XPS peaks of a ZnO sample covered with six cycles of ALD HfO2 (with a nominal layer thickness of 0.56 nm). The Hf 4f7/2 and Hf 4f5/2 doublet appears at binding energies (BEs) of 16.9 eV and 18.5 eV with a spin–orbit splitting 1.6 eV corresponding to HfO2. These findings suggest the formation of an HfO2 layer on top of ZnO. Moreover, the Zn 2p3/2 core-level XPS peaks are identical and located at 1021.6 eV in both, as-deposited and covered with 6 cycles of ALD HfO2 (referred to as ZnO/ALD HfO2) ZnO samples (Fig. 1b). The passivation effect of ALD HfO2 on ZnO was further investigated using PL spectroscopy. Fig. 1c presents the PL spectra of ZnO samples obtained at room temperature after excitation at 325 nm. The spectrum of the as-deposited sample presents a sharp band at 375 nm which is assigned to band-to-band emission of the oxide and a broad band of high intensity in the visible wavelength region attributed to native point defects such as oxygen vacancies (VO), zinc vacancies (VZn), zinc interstitials (Zni), etc. (Fig. S1, ESI). Remarkably, the deposition of 6 cycles of ALD HfO2 interlayer reduces dramatically the intensity of the defect related band which clearly implies the suppression of surface defect states of ZnO and their associated recombination. This was previously partially attributed to the intercalation of hydrogen within the ZnO lattice. Hydrogen radicals coming from water, used as one of the precursors in the ALD process (i.e. the oxidant) diffuse and probably bound with oxygen atoms of ZnO (interstitial hydrogen) or substitute oxygen vacancies by forming VO–H complexes (substitutional hydrogen), thus causing a passivation effect (chemical passivation). Such hydrogenation-induced chemical passivation is expected to reduce the density of interface traps, in a similar manner as with the termination of dangling bonds in Si. Besides chemical passivation, the deposition of HfO2 is expected to also cause a field effect passivation induced by the fixed charges present at the HfO2 layer; these are mainly positive charges associated with oxygen vacancies V2+O. Such positive charges can repel excess holes from the hafnium oxide/ZnO interface, leading to reduced interface recombination. Therefore, it is expected that the ALD HfO2 film would provide an improved passivation effect on n-type oxide materials like ZnO because the surface trap states and the concomitant interfacial recombination are dominated by the density of excess holes (excess minority carriers). Note that the energy bandgap and the visible transmittance of ZnO are not altered upon ALD modification (Fig. S2, ESI).

In addition, UPS measurements provide evidence that the work function (WF) of ZnO (estimated from the high binding energy cut-off region of the UPS spectra presented in Fig. 1d) remains nearly unaffected at 4.1 (±0.1) eV upon ALD HfO2 coverage. However, the valence band onset shifts from 3.3 to 3.6 eV below the Fermi level followed by significant suppression of the UPS spectrum intensity at 5.0 eV upon ALD oxide deposition. The deeper valence band maximum of ZnO/ALD HfO2 (7.7 eV) compared to as-deposited ZnO (7.4 eV) would facilitate hole blocking at the ZnO/photoactive blend interface.

The effect of ALD HfO2-induced surface passivation of ZnO on OSCs performance was evaluated in devices with an inverted architecture shown in Fig. 2a; the chemical structures of P3HT and IC60BA used in the photoactive blend are also shown. Fig. 2b demonstrates the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics under 1.5 AM simulated solar illumination of devices using 6 cycles of ALD HfO2 as passivation interlayer which delivered optimum device performance compared to interlayers grown under different deposition cycles (2, 4, 6, 8 and 10) (Fig. S3, ESI). The corresponding performance parameters and statistics of the same devices are summarized in Table 1.

ETL

J
sc (mA cm−2)

J
sc(EQE) (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
sh (Ω cm2)
ZnO
9.95 (±0.12)
10.00
0.78 (±0.01)
0.65 (±0.01)
5.04 (±0.20)
3.9
4835
ZnO/ALD HfO2
10.80 (±0.14)
10.93
0.81 (±0.01)
0.72 (±0.01)
6.30 (±0.19)
1.5
7698
The reference device exhibits a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 9.95 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.78 V and a fill factor (FF) of 0.65 thus yielding a PCE of 5.04%. Simultaneous enhancement of the performance parameters is obtained in the passivated device. In particular, Jsc significantly increases to 10.80 mA cm−2 while Voc and FF also increase to 0.81 V and 0.72, respectively, thus giving rise to a high PCE of 6.30% which is 25% improved compared to the reference cell. Moreover, dark J–V characteristics obtained in the same devices (Fig. 2c) evidenced overall improved diode quality and lower reverse saturation current J0 for the passivated device compared to the reference one.
The latter can explain the enhancement in Voc which is proportional to the logarithm of (1/J0), a solar cell parameter which depends on charge recombination. Therefore, the enhanced Voc results from reduced recombination losses at the ZnO/photoactive layer interface upon HfO2 passivation. Defect states of ZnO located inside the oxide's bandgap (Fig. S1, ESI) may act as recombination centers for photogenerated electrons and holes (Fig. 2d) thus reducing the device Voc as well as the current generation and electron transport efficiency (which explains the low Jsc) in the reference device. In addition, the series resistance (Rs) extracted from the dark current decreases significantly while the shunt resistance (Rsh) increases in the passivated device suggesting improved contact between the photoactive layer and the ZnO ETL, which facilitates charge-carrier extraction/collection and enhances Jsc and FF.

The enhanced photocurrent generation efficiency in the passivated device was further supported by the improved photon-to-electron conversion efficiency evidenced by EQE measurements (Fig. 3a). This improvement could be attributed to enhanced exciton dissociation and electron extraction at the cathode interface upon HfO2 passivation of the ZnO surface. It could also be associated with a better nanomorphology of the photoactive blend (a decrease in the domain size which increases the donor:acceptor interfacial area), an effect which is discussed below in detail. The lower reflectance measured in the passivated device leading to an overall improved internal quantum efficiency (IQE) of the latter compared to the reference cell (Fig. S4, ESI) also contributes to the observed enhancement in photocurrent. Notably, the short-circuit photocurrent densities calculated from the integration of EQE curves (Table 1) match closely with the experimental values indicating that the measured data are quite accurate. The reduced recombination losses in the ALD HfO2 containing cell were also evidenced by the dependence of Jsc on the light intensity presented in Fig. 3b. The Jsc does not scale exactly linearly with incident light intensity but, instead, a power law relationship regarding the dependence of Jsc on light intensity (Jsc ∼ intensityb) can be easily used. An exponent b of 0.93 is found for the reference cell which increases to 0.98 for the passivated cell. This increase indicates that reduced trap-assisted, monomolecular, recombination processes occur in the ALD modified cell leading to an enhanced electron transport/extraction, a result that may in part be attributed to an improvement in the nanomorphology of the photoactive layer followed by enhanced (or more balanced) charge mobility in the ALD passivated cell. The enhanced electron transport/extraction was further supported by the increase in current density obtained in electron-only devices (adopting the structure: glass/FTO/ZnO/P3HT:IC60BA/Al) incorporating the ALD interlayer. The corresponding J–V characteristics are shown in Fig. 3c in a semi-logarithmic plot indicating a significant enhancement in the device electron current density upon ALD passivation. Electron mobilities for P3HT:IC60BA-based devices with a HfO2-modified ZnO layer were enhanced relative to those for devices with an un-modified ZnO layer. A zero-field mobility for the P3HT:IC60BA blend of 2.2 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 and a Poole–Frenkel field activation factor of 0.0021 (cm V−1)1/2 were obtained resulting in an electron mobility μ = 5.6 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 at an electric field E = 0.2 MV cm−1. The calculated blend mobility was a factor of 5 higher than that of the reference ZnO device (μ = 1.2 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1). The improvement suggests that a more efficient electron transfer occurs at the HfO2-passivated ZnO interface, enhancing electron extraction.

In addition, Mott–Schottky analysis of the complete devices is shown in Fig. 3d which presents the 1/C2–V plots. The C–V characteristics were extracted at 1 kHz. It is clearly observed that the device built-in potential (Vbi) (estimated at the intersection point with the voltage axis) is increased upon ALD passivation which can facilitate exciton dissociation and enhance charge separation and electron collection. The enhancement in Vbi is also associated with the observed increase in the device Voc.

The stability enhancement represents a key factor for the successful commercialization of OSCs. Therefore, we also evaluated the effect of ALD HfO2 modification on the device stability by monitoring the variation of performance parameters over time in intentionally unencapsulated devices (Fig. 4a–d). The devices were kept in dark inside a nitrogen-filled desiccator between measurements which were performed under ambient conditions i.e., temperature 22 °C, relative humidity of 20%. As shown in Fig. 4, the parameters of the reference device degrade more rapidly compared to the passivated cell. The PCE of the reference sample decreases to 80% of its initial values (T80 lifetime) in about 250 h while the device ceases to operate after 1200 h. A three-fold increase in T80 lifetime is obtained in the ALD passivated device which retains more than 80% of its original PCE after 750 h while it remains functional after 1500 h (retaining 60% of its initial PCE).

The significant stability improvement in the ALD modified device is assigned to the effective passivation of surface defects of ZnO upon coating with the ultra-thin HfO2 layer. In principle, the majority of these surface defects are oxygen vacancies (VO) which constitute active sites for the adsorption of environmental oxygen and water molecules (Fig. 4e). During the ALD process, Hf4+ and O2− species diffuse into the near surface region of ZnO lattice. It has been previously reported that Hf4+ may act as an “oxygen binder” thus reducing the number of VO in ZnO films. This was attributed to the much lower standard electrode potential (SEP) of Hf4+ (which is equal to −1.72 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode, SHE) compared to Zn2+ (−0.76 V vs. SHE). In other words, the diffusion of Hf4+ into the lattice could strengthen Zn–O bonds more effectively, thus decreasing the VO concentration and resulting in higher stability of the ALD modified cell. Furthermore, the water molecules that are already adsorbed on the ZnO surface probably participate in the reaction with the tetrakis dimethylamido hafnium precursor to form the first monolayers of HfO2 during the first ALD cycle. Therefore, they are removed from ZnO and no longer act as corrosion agents for the photoactive organic overlayer.

Steady-state PL spectra of P3HT films coated on as-deposited and ALD-modified ZnO substrates revealed significant quenching of steady-state photoluminescence in the latter case (Fig. 5a). This indicates that the electron injection rate from P3HT to ZnO is enhanced upon ALD passivation. The enhanced electron accepting capability of passivated ZnO samples has also been reported elsewhere. However, despite the overall decrease in the PL intensity the higher energy peak (centered at 650 nm) is slightly strengthened compared to the lower energy peak (at 720 nm) of P3HT deposited on the ALD passivated ZnO as shown in Fig. 5b where the normalized PL spectra of P3HT on different ZnO samples are presented. To explain this observation one should take into account that deep trap states that exist inside the as-deposited ZnO bandgap (Fig. S1, ESI). Assuming a Gaussian distribution for the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of P3HT the deep trap states of ZnO are expected to be nearly aligned with the tail states in the HOMO of P3HT (Fig. 5c). Therefore, significant recombination of photogenerated holes on the lower states of P3HT HOMO and significant back electron transfer may occur, thus decreasing the rate of higher energy decay transitions and their contribution to the overall PL of P3HT coated on the as-deposited ZnO sample. That recombination path is probably suppressed upon ALD passivation thus strengthening the higher energy (lower wavelength) PL intensity peak of P3HT as illustrated in Fig. 5c. However, other explanations such as reduced interchain interactions in P3HT due to altered thin film nanomorphology upon ALD modification (see Discussion below) are also possible.

TRPL measurements were also performed to elucidate the exciton dissociation efficiency at the ZnO/P3HT interfaces. The excitation source was a 470 nm picosecond laser; the detection wavelength was either 650 nm (Fig. 5d) or 720 nm (Fig. S5, ESI). The fluorescence lifetime (τ) of P3HT in each case (Table S1, ESI) was calculated through a three-exponential fitting of the TRPL semi-log decay curves. A small increase in the exciton lifetime is observed upon ALD modification of ZnO. In particular, the average exciton lifetime was estimated to be 0.14 ns (irrespective of the detection wavelength) for P3HT coated on the as-deposited ZnO while it increased to 0.19 ns for detection at 650 nm or to 0.16 ns for detection at 720 nm. Although the differences are not significant, the small increase in average exciton lifetime in the ALD-modified sample is safely assigned to the passivation of surface states of ZnO that act as recombination centers thus causing a fast quenching of photogenerated carriers in P3HT. Note that, a faster electron injection to ZnO upon ALD modification confirmed by the steady-state PL spectra of P3HT on different ZnO substrates is usually related to a decrease in average exciton lifetime, while passivation of surface trap states of ZnO upon ALD coating is expected to increase the fluorescence lifetime. In our case, it becomes evident that both phenomena i.e. faster electron injection from P3HT to ZnO and surface passivation take place simultaneously. Therefore, exciton lifetime slightly increases upon ALD coating of ZnO.
The experimental evidence presented thus far supports the potential of an ultra-thin ALD HfO2 interlayer inserted between the ZnO ETL and the photoactive blend to passivate the defect states of ZnO resulting in reduced recombination losses of photogenerated carriers thus enhancing the device Jsc and Voc. AFM measurements revealed that the deposition of the ALD interlayer had no profound effect on the surface topography and root-mean-square (RMS) roughness (which was found 15.72 nm for the as-deposited and 15.66 nm for the ALD-modified ZnO) of the oxide substrates (Fig. 6a and b). However, a substantial change in the photoactive blend nanomorphology was observed when it was coated on the ALD passivated ZnO. As shown in Fig. 6c and d, the P3HT:IC60BA blend exhibits a finer nanomorphology with a smaller donor:acceptor phase separation scale and an increased 3D interpenetrating network between donor:acceptor phases when deposited on the ALD passivated ZnO. In other words, ALD HfO2-modification of ZnO induces a finer phase separation of P3HT and IC60BA and a more favourable photoactive blend nanomorphology for effective exciton dissociation. The donor domain size is closer to the exciton diffusion length (for P3HT on the order of 10 nm), indicating that the P3HT excitons generated in the bulk have a high probability to reach an interface between the donor polymer and the fullerene acceptor to dissociate into free carriers. The reduced phase segregation scale after ALD HfO2-modification of ZnO, in synergy with the increased ordering of P3HT (as revealed from UV-vis absorption spectra taken in P3HT:IC60BA blends deposited on un-modified and ALD HfO2-modified ZnO, Fig. S6, ESI), favour exciton dissociation and electron–hole separation and facilitate hole transport, thus positively affecting both FF and Jsc.
Moreover, the RMS roughness of the photoactive blend deposited on the ALD modified ZnO (9.56 nm) is lower compared to that of the reference P3HT:IC60BA film (17.19 nm) which indicates that the physical contacts at the ZnO/ALD HfO2/P3HT:IC60BA interfaces are smoother thus leading to reduced shunting (i.e. recombination) pathways and improved charge transport. This alteration in the nanomorphology of the photoactive blend derives from the significant decrease of the surface energy of ZnO from 53.70 to 42.85 mJ m−2 upon ALD coating (Fig. S7 and Table S2, ESI). As the ALD-modified ZnO reduces its surface energy and becomes more hydrophobic, the photoactive blend exhibits improved adhesion to the oxide substrate which has a beneficial effect on the nanomorphology of the resultant film. These results clearly demonstrate that the direct deposition of an ultra-thin ALD HfO2 interlayer on the ZnO electron transport material is a promising approach in simultaneously enhancing the performance and stability of organic solar cells with an inverted architecture.

In summary, our work offers insight into the passivation effect of an ultra-thin ALD HfO2 interlayer on ZnO used as the electron transport material in OSCs with an inverted architecture. The primary effect is the suppression of trap states in ZnO leading to lower recombination losses of the photogenerated carriers thus boosting the photovoltage and photocurrent in devices using the P3HT:IC60BA as the photoactive blend. In addition, a decrease in the surface energy of ZnO gives rise to an improved nanomorphology of the photoactive blend which increases the device FF. As a synergistic result, an improved PCE of 6.30% is obtained in the ALD passivated cells, which represents a 25% enhancement compared to the reference devices. The reduction of surface trap states of ZnO upon ALD modification is also correlated to the improved stability of the ALD passivated device which exhibits a T80 lifetime equal to 750 h when stored in the dark. Our results suggest that the application of an ultra-thin ALD HfO2 passivation interlayer opens feasible and potential opportunities to fully exploit ALD as a technique enabling an overall improvement in performance and lifetime of OSCs and related devices, such as perovskite-based ones.


There are no conflicts to declare.


IKY Scholarship Programs, Strengthening Post-Doctoral Research Human Resources Development Program, Education and Lifelong Learning,co-financed by the European Social Fund – ESF and the Greek government is acknowledged. A. F. acknowledges postdoctoral funding from Alexander von Humboldt Foundation.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: UV-vis absorption, transient photoluminescence, contact angle, and additional device measurements. See DOI: 10.1039/c8tc02243g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018