 DOI: 10.1039/C9TC06293A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 3217-3225


Chengbo
Li
,

Aili
Wang
,

Lisha
Xie
,

Xiaoyu
Deng
,

Kejun
Liao
,

Jin-an
Yang
,

Yong
Xiang
 and 

Feng
Hao
*

School of Materials and Energy, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, 610054, China

Center for Applied Chemistry, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China. E-mail: haofeng@uestc.edu.cn

Received
17th November 2019
, Accepted 17th January 2020
First published on 18th January 2020
The morphology and optoelectronic properties of perovskite films are the key to high-performance perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Here, a facile non-destructive interface ethanol/chlorobenzene (EtOH/CB) post treatment was established for the lateral grain growth of MAPbI3 perovskite films and fabrication of efficient solar cells. The alcoholic treatment leads to perovskite grain coarsening and a secondary growth in the average grain size from 38.88 μm to 89.59 μm. The enlargement of the perovskite crystals induced a notable defect passivation and attenuated charge recombination centers as confirmed by photoluminescence, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, and photocharge extraction by a linearly-increasing voltage. Accordingly, inverted planar PSC devices showed an 18% enhancement in the overall power conversion efficiency using this alcoholic post-treatment under ambient fabrication conditions. Our results demonstrate a versatile strategy for the lateral growth of perovskite photovoltaics and beyond.

Recently, organic–inorganic halide hybrid perovskite-based solar cells (PSCs) have shown an extraordinary high power conversion efficiency (PCE) up to 25.2%. The near-exponential growth in photovoltaic performance is largely benefited from the superior optoelectronic properties of perovskites, such as strong optical absorption, high electron mobility, tunable components in both cations and anions, long carrier diffusion length and bipolar charge transport. Although great progress has been achieved in the past few years, a key issue in the field of hybrid perovskite films today is that the optoelectronic properties of such films heavily depend on the processing conditions. Subtle changes in the processing conditions of perovskite films can result in significant changes in the physical and optoelectronic properties of the film, thus leading to uncontrollable film quality and poor reproducibility of photovoltaic devices. In fact, the perovskite films deposited by anti-solvent technology rely heavily on the solvent atmosphere of the local environment and operational skills. Therefore, the anti-solvent-free scalable coating method developed in recent years has proven to be a reliable deposition technology. Mai et al. prepared high quality perovskite films via a one-step blade coating. Also, different surface terminations of grains can result in large variations in the electron trap density on these surfaces. In this regard, interface passivation has been widely explored to improve the photoelectric performance and long-term stability of PSCs. Several post-treatments have been undertaken to improve the quality of perovskite films in various architectures of perovskite devices, such as solvent vapor of N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), H2O, and hydrobromic acid–dimethyl sulfoxide (HBr–DMSO) post annealing.

The grain boundaries of polycrystalline particles are considered to be defect sites that cause non-radiative recombination loss. Forming a perovskite thin film of large grain size with less grain boundary and high orientation spread within a grain has been demonstrated to suppress the charge trapping defects and reduce hysteresis in PSC devices. Solvent post-treatment is one of the most efficacious and simplest ways to improve crystal morphology. Primarily, Huang et al. found that crystallization and grain size can be ameliorated by introducing solvent vapor of DMF during the reaction of PbI2 with CH3NH3I (MAI) and the crystal growth of MAPbI3, resulting in the inhibition of defect traps. Wu et al. proposed an innovative method for preparing MAPbI3 films with large grains and high orientation to obtain excellent photovoltaic performance by combining gas blowing and H2O post-treatment. Alan J. Heeger et al. reported alcohol-vapor solvent post treatment on MAPbI3 films, aiming to improve the crystal growth and increase the grain size of the MAPbI3 crystal, thus resulting in decreased charge carrier recombination, enhanced charge carrier diffusion length, and suppressed dark currents. However, the vapor post treatment method is not highly reproducible and the resultant film is not uniform due to its sensitivity to solvent vapor. Dynamic spin coating can disperse the solvent on the substrate and increase the solvent evaporation rate to reduce the dissolution and therefore inhomogeneous crystallization of perovskite films is achieved.
In this work, we report a facile non-destructive interfacial ethanol/chlorobenzene (EtOH/CB) post-treatment to deposit highly oriented MAPbI3 films with an ordered large grain size and reduced defect density. The alcohol ratio in the post-synthesis treatment has been systematically investigated and optimized in the crystalline behavior of the perovskite films, including the crystallinity, orientation and grain size distribution. A lateral grain coarsening and secondary growth process leads to enlargement of the grain size to a maximum of 89 μm using the alcoholic post-treatment. Benefitting from the enlarged crystal grain size, more than 18% improvement in the photovoltaic performance is observed in the corresponding devices. It is further proved that a notable passivated defect density of the perovskite film and attenuated charge recombination, and improved charge-carrier extraction are associated with the enlargement of perovskite grain size revealed by photoluminescence and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy.

MAPbI3 films were prepared using the hot casting method in a 30–40% RH nitrogen atmosphere in this study. Post-treatment passivation was achieved by continuous dynamic spin coating on the surface of the perovskite film as shown in Fig. 1a. The details of the treatment are shown in the Experimental section. The as-deposited perovskite film is modified by EtOH/CB solution with various alcohol ratios. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was first carried out to study the correlation between grain size, grain orientation and crystallinity of perovskite films with ethanol contents as shown in Fig. 1b. Strong intensity peaks at 14.09°, 20.20° and 40.63° can be assigned to the (110), (200) and (224) planes of the orthorhombic MAPbI3 perovskite crystals. The diffraction peaks of perovskites upon alcohol treatment are similar to those of the control film, except the (200) peak which gradually shifts to a higher diffraction angle as the ethanol concentration decreases. Notably, the 30% EtOH/CB treated sample showed a peak shift in comparison with the control film (Fig. 1c). Moreover, the XRD patterns of the perovskite films directly deposited on the FTO substrate are shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). The results indicated that the slight shift was mainly due to the introduction of strain by secondary lateral growth. Lattice strain generally exists in perovskite films. The peak intensity ratio of (200)/(110) was further calculated to reflect the crystal orientation of MAPbI3 as shown in Fig. 1d. The (200)/(110) ratio significantly improved from 6.5 for the control film in the absence of the alcohol post-treatment, to a maximum value of 18.4 for the 30% EtOH treated film. The nucleus tends to be rearranged through the Ostwald ripening process to obtain thermodynamic stability, thus promoting the transformation of the crystal orientation to the (h00) orientation after alcoholic post-treatment. Such a high (200)/(110) ratio indicated that the MAPbI3 films showed a preferred orientation on the (200) crystalline plane compared to the other planes, which has been recognized to be a more favored electronic transporting pathway in the perovskite crystal structure as theoretically calculated. Therefore, the (200)/(110) ratio denotes the highly ordered orthorhombic crystal structures of MAPbI3 films, which is favorable for the charge transfer process in the perovskites. Therefore, the EtOH/CB treatment can convert the perovskite film into a strong orthorhombic (200) orientation through an orientation propagation process. The perovskite interface would come into contact with the corner of the inorganic framework for the (100) direction, and nevertheless, the interface would come into contact with the edge of the inorganic framework for the (110) direction. The schematic diagram of different orientations is shown in Fig. S2 (ESI). As well known, different orientations at the interface may influence charge recombination and charge-carrier extraction. The sharper diffraction peak of the perovskite film treated by 30% EtOH also indicated a larger crystallinity, as derived from the integration area of the diffraction peaks in Fig. 1b. These results indicated that the alcoholic treatment after the hot coating process can simultaneously increase the crystallinity, orientation and crystalline grain size of the as-deposited MAPbI3 film.


Fig. 2a–e shows the optical microscopy (OM) morphology of MAPbI3 perovskite layers post-treated with different concentrations of ETOH. The grain size distribution is obtained by sampling 50 grains on five images using a Nano Measure software. It can be clearly observed that the average grain size was increased from around 38.88 μm of the pristine MAPbI3 film, to 55.72 μm for EtOH 100%, 54.36 μm for EtOH 50%, 89.59 μm for EtOH 30% and 40.30 μm for CB 100% treated films, respectively (Fig. 2f–j). In addition, the scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of pristine and 30% EtOH post-treated films are shown in Fig. S3 (ESI), which coincides with the grain size in the OM images. The grain size showed an obvious dependence on the EtOH ratio in the post-treatment solution, which gradually increased when decreasing the EtOH content from 100 to 30%, and the perovskite layer post-treated with pure CB showed a comparable grain size to the pristine film. A lateral grain coarsening and secondary growth mechanism was therefore used to explain the grain size enlargement in our study, in which EtOH played a critical role in the post-treatment process. It was reported that the polarity index (p) of EtOH and CB is 4.3 and 2.7, respectively. The MAPbI3 thin films treated with a specific ratio of polarity alcohol (30% EtOH) showed the largest grain size as compared with those of the control and other polarity alcohol solvent. Therefore, we speculated that post-treatment with different polarities plays a crucial role in the secondary growth of the perovskite film. The grain size is one of the controlling parameters for the diffusion length and the carrier recombination rate in the perovskite films. Small grain sizes are directly correlated with more grain boundaries in the perovskite layer, which have been widely recognized as the main source for the charge trap sites and are thus susceptible to cause hysteresis behavior and instability of the PSC devices when inhaled by water molecules. Therefore, the alcoholic solvent dynamic spin coating is demonstrated to coarsen the grain size and heal the defects around the grain boundaries.Fig. 2k shows the surface-induced local crystal oriented secondary growth, which is surface modification inducing post-crystallization grain growth in the whole perovskite film. The driving force (ΔF) of the secondary grain growth comes from the existence of one or a set of crystal texture, and the minimization of the surface free energy will grow larger in orientation to minimize the system free energy. Surface energy anisotropy (ΔF) can be expressed as below:
ΔF =  − γmin
(1)
where
 is the average surface energy per unit area associated with the original normal grain matrix. γmin means that this grain has an orientation, which minimizes the energy associated with the top and bottom surfaces. Obviously, due to the post alcohol treatment, the grain with an orientation of the (h00) plane can minimize the surface energy of the film and obtain a driving force of ΔF. Thus, the perovskite grains are able to continuously grow in the lateral direction to reduce the energy of the whole system. The lower the surface energy, the larger the grain growth. Therefore, the film post-treated with 30% EtOH/CB which minimizes the surface energy induces secondary grain-oriented growth to a maximum average grain size of 89.59 μm. This shows that by appropriately controlling the surface energy, post alcohol treatment is a powerful strategy for precisely controlling the grain size of perovskites.

In order to study the effect of the alcohol post-treatment on the optoelectronic properties of the as-prepared perovsktie films, ultraviolet and visible spectrophotometry (UV-vis) absorption measurements were first carried out and the spectra are presented in Fig. 3a. All the films showed panchromatic absorption extending the entire visible region, with a similar absorption intensity in the range from 550 nm to 750 nm. Interestingly, films subjected to 30% EtOH post-treatment showed a slightly enhanced absorption intensity in the range of 350 to 550 nm, mostly associated with the enlarged grain size as shown in Fig. 2. The photoluminescence (PL) intensity of the MAPbI3 films was increased by a factor of 2 after 30% EtOH post-treatment as shown in Fig. 3b. Such an enhancement is mainly due to the improved crystallinity of the film as shown in Fig. 1d, thus leading to an increase in the PL yield and decrease of indirect recombination. Meanwhile, the time-resolved PL (TRPL) measurement in Fig. 3c revealed an increased average carrier lifetime from 32.80 ns for the pristine MAPbI3 films to 57.32 ns for the 30% EtOH treated films. The details of the fitting parameters can be found in Table S1 (ESI). The Mott–Schottky C–V measurement is further employed to investigate the carrier transport characteristics as shown in Fig. 3d and the fitting values are tabulated in Table S2 (ESI). The Mott–Schottky model is described as:
(2)
where
C is the capacitance of the MAPbI3/PC61BM heterojunction, q is the elementary charge, ε is the static permittivity, ε0 is the dielectric constant of MAPbI3, N is the carrier density, Vbi is the energy barrier of this heterojunction and A is the the active area. With the Mott–Schottky curves, the net doping density of the MAPbI3 absorber is calculated to be 2.85 × 1014 and 5.71 × 1014 cm−3 for the control and 30% EtOH treated device, respectively. Clearly, the net doping density of the perovskite absorber increases by a factor or two with 30% EtOH post treatment. This increase can thus decrease the series resistance (Rs) in the device by increasing the conductivity of the MAPbI3 film. The Vbi of the MAPbI3/PC61BM heterojunction also increased from 0.284 to 0.309 V after the alcohol treatment. The trap state density (nt) is also evaluated based on the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) method using an electron only device structure of FTO/SnO2/perovskite/PC61BM/Ag in the dark. The nt values are calculated from the relationship of VTFL = entd2/2εε0, where VTFL represents the onset voltage of trap filled limit, e is the electric charge (1.602 × 10−19 C), d is the thickness of the active layer (800 nm, negligible change in thickness before and after treatment as shown in Fig. S4, ESI), ε0 is the vacuum permittivity (8.854 × 10−14 F cm−1) and ε is the dielectric constant. As can be seen in Fig. 3e–f, VTFL decreased from 0.963 V for the pristine perovskite film to 0.713 V for the 30% EtOH post-treated film, implying an electron trap density (ne) value of 1.17 × 1016 cm−3 and 8.63 × 1015 cm−3, respectively (Table S3, ESI). Also, as shown in Fig. S5 (ESI), the hole trap density (nh) of the 30% EtOH post-treated perovskite is calculated to be 8.11 × 1015, which is lower than the pristine film (9.45 × 1015). The estimated nt of ∼1016 cm−3 is in good agreement with the reported value. Therefore, the presented alcohol post treatment will significantly increase the net doping density of the MAPbI3 film, decreasing the charge-transport resistance, enhancing the depletion field, and accelerating the charge collection and transport, which are beneficial for the device performance.

Inverted planar devices with a configuration of FTO/NiOx/perovskite/PC61BM/Ag (Fig. 4a) were assembled under 30–40% RH nitrogen atmosphere and the corresponding photovoltaic performances are presented in Fig. 4b. The pristine device showed a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 15.15%, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 19.92 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.04 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 73.41% under reverse scan. All the photovoltaic parameters increased notably upon post-treatment with a PCE of 18.00%, along with a Jsc of 21.50 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.04 V, and an FF of 80.52%. It should be noted that the devices showed negligible hysteresis. The effect of the EtOH concentration on the device performance has been investigated and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are displayed in Fig. S6 and Table S4 (ESI). 30% EtOH treated devices showed the maximum PCE, which was mainly associated with the largest grain size and passivated defects as aforementioned. To check the reproducibility of the alcohol post-treatment, 45 devices were fabricated for each concentration and the statistical distributions of the photovoltaic parameters are shown in Fig. S7 (ESI). It is clear that the PCE improvement in the alcohol treated device mainly originated from the Jsc and FF enhancements. The steady-state current density and stabilized power output of the champion device were measured at a maximum power point for 200 s, as shown in Fig. 4c. The steady-state current density reached 17.58 and 19.64 mA cm−2 for the control and post-treated device, respectively. The corresponding stabilized power outputs were 15.1% and 16.3%, respectively. To further investigate the origin of the improved current density, the incident photon conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the devices was measured as shown in Fig. 4d. Both the devices showed panchromatic absorption covering the entire visible region. A notable enhancement in the short wavelength range of 350 to 550 nm in the 30% EtOH treated device was observed, which was in line with the UV-vis absorption spectra as shown in Fig. 3a. The integrated current densities for these two devices were 19.96 and 21.08 mA cm−2, respectively, which matched well with the Jsc extracted from the J–V curve, thus confirming the negligible mismatch with the standard AM 1.5G spectrum and the accuracy of our J–V measurements. Large area devices (1 cm2) were also fabricated to verify the viability of the alcoholic treatment for large-area device fabrication. As shown in Fig. S8 (ESI), the EtOH post-treated devices showed a PCE of 16.39%, a Jsc of 21.10 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.03 V, and an FF of 75.10% under reverse scan and the pristine device showed a PCE of 14.05%, a Jsc of 19.77 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.04 V, and an FF of 68.43% under reverse scan. Compared with the photovoltaic performances of small size devices, only a slight decrease of FF is observed, which is mainly due to the poor lateral transport of the FTO substrate and the limitations of the spin coating preparation method. However, the alcoholic post-treatment showed significant improvement in the Jsc and FF in the 1 cm2 device, mainly due to the enlargement of the deposited perovskite crystal size and reduction of the grain boundaries. In addition, the stability of the device based on MAPbI3 and 30% EtOH treated MAPbI3 was also evaluated. The devices were stored in a nitrogen glovebox without any encapsulation and tested in a 40 RH% constant humidity environment. Fig. S9 (ESI) showed the normalized PCE as a function of time. The normalized PCE for the MAPbI3 device gradually decreased to 80% of its initial value after 408 h. However, the alcoholic treated MAPbI3 device maintained 86% of its initial value. It is well recognized that the interface degradation is important for the device stability, which will further cause a sharp increase in charge recombination and charge transfer loss leading to the deterioration of device performance. We infer that the improvement of the device stability in the alcoholic treated device is related to the decrease of trap density and the suppression of interfacial recombination via EtOH post-treatment.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is further utilized to elucidate the charge transport characteristics within the device. The Nyquist plots presented in Fig. 5a and b were measured under AM 1.5G irradiation with different applied biases. Two semicircles were clearly observed in the Nyquist plots to characterize the impedance spectra of the solar cells. A resistance–capacitance (RC) equivalent circuit was used to fit the spectra as shown in the inset of Fig. 5b. A semicircle in the high frequency regime is correlated with the charge recombination process, and a semicircle at a low frequency regime is correlated with slow dielectric and ionic relaxation in perovskite films. The fitting results revealed a much larger recombination resistance (Rrec) and a smaller charge transfer resistance (Rtr) in the 30% EtOH post-treated device than that of the control device as shown in Fig. 5c and d, manifesting an improved charge transport and reduced charge recombination in the alcohol post-treated device. To determine the charge carrier mobility during the operation of photovoltaic devices, photo CELIV (charge extraction by a linearly-increasing voltage) plot was measured (Fig. 5e) and the mobility can be described:
(3)
where
d is the thickness of the device, A is the voltage rise speed, tmax is the time at the maximum Δj of the extraction peak, and j0 is the displacement current of the capacitance. Photoexcited electrons and holes recombine in the extracted or in the absence of an external electric field through the built-in electric field. The area above j0 is the extracted photo-generated carrier concentration except for the equilibrium carrier concentration. The charge carrier mobility is calculated by the maximum peak (Δj) current density (see the details in Table S5, ESI). The charge carrier mobility was estimated to be 2.23 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the 30% EtOH post-treated device, which was slightly higher than 1.84 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the control device. In solar cells, one of the main parameters determining the conversion efficiency is the reduction factor of the Langevin recombination , which can be estimated from the saturated current at the extraction maximum

(4)
where
βL is the Langevin coefficient of recombination and β is the coefficient of bimolecular recombination. Since the photo-CELIV is designed not to extract electric charges by the built-in electric field, the extracted electric charge in Fig. 5f is generated by the unrecombined electric charges. Charge area is proportional to the extracted curve. Therefore, the more extracted charge in the alcohol treated device indicated a slower charge recombination.


In conclusion, high quality perovskite films with larger grain sizes were obtained upon alcohol post-treatment. During the post-treatment, we observed grain coarsening and secondary growth in the average grain size in the perovskite films. The enlargement of the perovskite crystals induced a notable defect passivation of the perovskite film and attenuated charge recombination centers from various characterizations. Our results suggest that alcohol post-treatment is a facile and versatile strategy for the lateral growth of grain size and photocurrent enhancement in the PSCs. Accurately controlling the grain size of perovskite or even perovskite single-crystals with surface energy modulation and orientation tunability in hybrid perovskite film deposition provides a new direction for future research. We believe that this promising methodology will be easily applicable to other perovskite depositions, and will be conducive to the practical applications of perovskite related photovoltaic technology and beyond.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China NSFC (51702038) and the Recruitment Program for Young Professionals.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9tc06293a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020