 DOI: 10.1039/D0NR07000A
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 22645-22657


Manish Kumar
Mohanta
 and 

Abir
De Sarkar
*

Institute of Nano Science and Technology, Phase 10, Sector 64, Mohali, Punjab – 160062, India. E-mail: abir@inst.ac.in; abirdesarkar@gmail.com

Received
29th September 2020
, Accepted 22nd October 2020
First published on 23rd October 2020
In this work, we explored the interfacial two-dimensional (2D) physics and significant advancements in the application prospects of MoSSe monolayer when it is combined with a boron pnictide (BP, BAs) monolayer in a van der Waals heterostructure (vdWH) setup. The constructed vdWHs were found to be mechanically and dynamically stable, and they form type-II p–n heterojunctions. Thus, the photogenerated electron–hole pairs are spatially separated. In the BX/MoSSe vdWHs, the BX monolayer serves as excellent donor material for MoSSe, having an ideal donor band gap of ∼1.3 eV. The small value of the conduction band offset (CBO) between the individual monolayers in the vdWHs makes it an excellent candidate for solar energy harvesting in excitonic solar cells, where the power conversion efficiencies were calculated to be 22.97% (BP/MoSSe) and 20.86% (BAs/MoSSe). Also, more than four-fold enhancement in the out-of-plane piezoelectric coefficient (d33) was observed in the MoSSe-based vdWH relative to that in the MoS2-based vdWH owing to the intrinsic built-in vertical electric field in MoSSe. This is consistent with the out-of-plane piezoelectricity brought about by the alteration in symmetry at the metal–semiconductor Schottky junction, which has been observed experimentally [M.-M. Yang, Z.-D. Luo, Z. Mi, J. Zhao, S. P. E and M. Alexe, Nature, 2020, 584, 377–381]. The results obtained in this work provide useful insights into the design of nanomaterials for future applications in nano-optoelectronics, more efficient excitonic solar cells, and nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS). Furthermore, this work demonstrates outstanding potential for the application of these vdWHs in superfast electronics, including low-power digital data storage and memory devices, where the tunnel current between the source and drain is effectively tunable using a normal electric field of small magnitude serving as the gate voltage.

The era of two-dimensional materials began with the groundbreaking discovery of the one-atom-thick carbon sheet graphene in 2004. However, the semi-metallic band gap of graphene hinders the realization of its practical implementation. Therefore, attention has been diverted to two-dimensional (2D) materials with intrinsic semiconducting properties. Among several new 2D materials that have fascinated the scientific community, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDC), h-BN, phosphorene, and MXenes have stimulated considerable research interest due to their intriguing electronic, optical, and mechanical properties. Their diverse applications in energy storage devices, photocatalysis, photovoltaics, optoelectronics, and nano-electronics have been explored.

Among TMDCs, MoS2 monolayer has been widely studied both theoretically and experimentally in the fields of nano-optoelectronics, photocatalysis, valleytronics, piezotronics, and photovoltaics. Various experimental fabrication techniques for synthesizing defect-free MoS2 monolayers are well known. On the other hand, the quest for new materials with novel properties surpassing those of the materials traditionally employed in several applications are being conducted in parallel, both theoretically and experimentally. The Janus structure of TMDC has drawn a good of attention since the experimental realization of Janus MoSSe monolayer structures. In Janus structures, the mirror symmetry along the z-direction is broken, which results in an intrinsic out-of-plane dipole moment and a polarization along the z-axis. Contrary to TMDC monolayers, only Janus TMDC structures show out-of-plane piezoelectricity, as reported by Dong et al., which is potentially utilizable in piezotronics via gating effects. Also, previous theoretical work reveals various intrinsic properties, such as electronic and optic properties, which have been studied over the years with and without external perturbation. Theoretically, Janus MoSSe structures have been predicted to be direct band gap semiconductors which can be modulated via external strain, the number of layers, and interlayer coupling. Theoretical results have revealed the potential for application of these structures in various fields, such as photocatalysis, piezoelectric devices, anode materials for lithium-ion batteries, and spintronics; however, few reports are available on photovoltaic and digital electronics applications.
One-atom-thick boron pnictide monolayers (BP, BAs) whose electronic properties are analogous to those of graphene began to capture attention soon after the successful synthesis of BP thin films. They are direct band gap semiconductors with carrier mobilities ∼103 cm2 V−1 s−1 with novel electronic, optical, and piezoelectric properties. They were found to be excellent donor materials for MoS2 and bilayer CdS in previous reports of solar energy harvesting via excitonic solar cells, with power conversion efficiencies of >20% for MoS2/h-BP and >27% for bilayer CdS/h-BP. Also, theoretical reports on heterostructures involving these pnictide monolayers have shown great potential in piezotronics, thermoelectric and photovoltaics, and photocatalysis.
In this work, hybrid structures comprising of Janus MoSSe and boron pnictide (BP, BAs) monolayers have been designed where the constituent monolayers are held together by van der Waals interactions. Extensive first-principles calculations have been conducted to shed light on the intrinsic electronic, optical, mechanical, and piezoelectric properties of the structures for diverse applications in device-based nano-optoelectronics, memory devices, and energy conversion from solar (mechanical) energy to electricity in excitonic solar cells (nano piezotronics). This work highlights the immense scope for expanding the horizons of the Janus MoSSe monolayer for future applications via hybridizing it with boron pnictide monolayers at 2D interfaces. All the findings presented in this work are based on a single stacking configuration, which ensures optimum results.

First-principles calculations were performed using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP). The hybrid functional (HSE-06) was used to obtain accurate band dispersions and band gaps of the materials; for all other cases, the GGA-PBE exchange–correlation functional was used. The DFT-D3 method was adopted to incorporate van der Waals corrections. A fine k-mesh of 16 × 16 × 1 was used for structural optimization and the calculation of different properties. A vacuum thickness of 40 Å was introduced to avoid interactions between the periodic images. The kinetic energy cutoff for plane-wave expansion was set to 500 eV, and a tolerance for the force convergence criteria of 0.02 eV Å−1 and an energy convergence of 1 × 10−8 eV were adopted to relax the heterostructure. Density functional perturbation theory (DFPT) was used to obtain the piezoelectric coefficients. Phonopy code was used to plot the phonon dispersion curve using a supercell-based approach.


MoSSe can be experimentally constructed from MoS2 (MoSe2) monolayers, where the top layer of sulfur (selenium) atoms is substituted by selenium (sulfur). The van der Waals heterostructures (vdWHs) were computationally designed in the following way. The BP/MoS2 vdWH was constructed first owing to the similarity of the lattice constants of BP (∼3.21 Å) and MoS2 (∼3.19 Å). Then, the bottom sulfur atomic layer was replaced by selenium atoms. This approach is suitable for understanding the role of selenization without affecting the electrostatic interaction between the top atomic sulfur layer in MoS2 and the BP layer in BP/SMoSe vdWH. It facilitates a systematic comparison with the existing literature, e.g., BP/MoS2. Similarly, BAs/MoSSe vdWH was constructed. BAs have a lattice constant of 3.39 Å. BX/SeMoS vdWH was also designed, where SeMoS was constructed from MoSe2 monolayer, as provided in the ESI in Fig. S3. The equilibrium interlayer distance between the two monolayers can be calculated by varying the interlayer distance, and the corresponding interlayer binding energy curve is plotted in Fig. 1(a). The interlayer binding energy was calculated using eqn (1) by employing different van der Waals corrections, as shown in Fig. S1; however, the minima occurred at nearly the same interlayer distance. Hence, we adopted vdW-D3 for our calculations, which is an improvement upon DFT-D2 and accounts for three-body interaction effects.

Ebinding = (EBX/MoSSe − EMoSSe − EBX)/A
(1)
where
EBX/MoSSe, EMoSSe, EBX are the total energy of the combined system, isolated MoSSe, and BX monolayers within the supercell and A is the area of the interface. The final optimized structures of BP/MoSSe and BAs/MoSSe were obtained with interlayer distances of 3.58 Å and 3.6 Å and interlayer binding energies of −20.57 meV Å−2 and −23.64 meV Å−2, respectively, which are close to the vdW interaction energy of −20 meV Å−2.


The elastic constants (Cij) were obtained from the quadratic strain-energy relationship under the application of ±2% strain to the system. The elastic constants of the monolayers and vdWHs are provided in Table 1. The mechanical stability was confirmed via the satisfaction of the Born-Huang stability criteria.

Systems

C
11


C
12


C
66

Born-Huang stability criteria
BP
157.48
28.3
64.51

C
11 > |C12|, C22 > 0, C66 > 0, C11C22 − C122 > 0
BAs
142.26
21.16
55.38
MoSSe
149.557
44.06
52.75
BP/MoSSe
323.9
72.28
125.8
BAs/MoSSe
368.38
89.31
139.54
Using the above elastic constants, the 2D layer modulus, Young's modulus (Y), Poisson ratio (ν), shear modulus (G), intrinsic strength (σint), and bending modulus (D) were derived using the equations provided in the ESI and are tabulated in Table 2. It can be seen that the elastic constants of the vdWHs are approximately equal to the sum of those for the individual monolayers. The Young's moduli of these vdWHs are comparable to those of h-BN (276 N m−1) and graphene (342 N m−1). The bending modulus was calculated in this vdWH to be ∼100 eV, which is comparable to those of other vdWHs, such as HfN2/WSe2 (124.57 eV), graphene/MoS2 (252 eV), and graphene/BX (∼95 eV), calculated using the same formalism. The absence of imaginary frequencies (refer to Fig. S2 in (ESI)) in the first Brillouin zone confirms its dynamic stability, while the exothermic/negative binding energy affirms its thermodynamic stability and the feasibility of realizing the van der Waals interface experimentally.
System

γ
2D (N m−1)

Y (N m−1)
ν

σ
int (N m−1)

D (eV)
BP/MoSSe
198
307.77
0.22
34.19
90.88
BAs/MoSSe
228.84
346.72
0.24
38.52
103.38

To explore the promising applications of the constructed heterostructure, the electronic properties were studied first. The electronic band gaps of MoSSe and BX (X: P, As) were calculated to be 1.55 eV, 0.9 eV, and 0.75 eV, respectively, using the GGA-PBE functional, which are in excellent agreement with previous reports. The BP, BAs, and Janus MoSSe monolayers are direct band gap semiconductors with band edges located at the high symmetry K-point of the hexagonal Brillouin zone. The HSE06 hybrid functional was used to obtain accurate band dispersions of the vdWHs, which are plotted in Fig. 2. Unlike BP/MoS2, both BP/MoSSe and BAs/MoSSe were found to be indirect band gap semiconductors of 1.38 eV and 1.10 eV, respectively. The projected band structures, as shown in Fig. 2, demonstrate that the BX/MoSSe heterostructures form staggered type-II band alignments, where the conduction band minimum (CBM) is contributed by MoSSe while the valence band maximum (VBM) is contributed by the BX layer. Slight differences in the electronic band structures of vdWH compared to those of the individual monolayers calculated using HSE-06, as shown in Fig. S4 in the ESI, arise due to the vdWH interactions and interlayer coupling. The CBM lies between Γ → K in both the vdWH, which is similar to previous reports on MoSSe/WSSe and MoSSe/nitride vdWH. The conduction band offset (CBO) (ΔEc) and valence band offset (VBO) (ΔEv) between the individual monolayers are 0.01 eV (0.096 eV) and 0.82 eV (1.37 eV) for BP/MoSSe (BAs/MoSSe), respectively, which were calculated from the electronic band structures obtained using HSE06; a schematic of the band edges is illustrated in Fig. 2(b). Hence, the photogenerated electrons will migrate to the conduction band of the MoSSe monolayer, while the holes will remain in the BX monolayer. Hence, the rate of electron–hole recombination will be minimized and the lifetimes of the electrons and holes will be extended, which is the bonus of forming type-II vdWH. The very small CBO in both the heterostructures is useful in designing excitonic solar cells with optimum solar-to-electrical power conversion efficiency. Furthermore, the large ΔEv can serve to confine the electrons in the MoSSe monolayer and the holes in the BX monolayer, thereby facilitating the formation of indirect excitons with prolonged lifetimes, which is utilizable in optoelectronic devices. For a direct comparison, the electronic band structures of BP/MoS2 and BP/MoSe2 have been plotted in Fig. S5. The charge carrier mobility plays an important role in device applications. The charge carrier mobilities in TMDCs are known to be less than 500 cm2 V−1 s−1, which limits their applications in superfast electronics.

To address the kinetics of migration of electrons and holes, the charge carrier mobility of vdWH is calculated below. Because the valence band edge in vdWH is contributed by the BX layer and occurs at a high symmetry K-point, the effective mass of the holes can be easily calculated. The carrier mobilities of the holes were calculated (refer to Table 3) using the deformation potential theory by Lang et al. with the formalism given by:
(2)
where
C is the elastic modulus as provided in Table 1, Ei is the deformation potential (DP) calculated from the slope of the variation in the band edges with infinitesimal uniaxial strain along a particular direction, as shown in Fig. S6,T = 300 K, and m* is the carrier effective mass. The hole mobilities of the BX/MoSSe vdWHs are very high because of the steep energy–momentum dispersion around the VBM in the h-BX monolayers in the constructed vdWHs. The charge carrier mobilities in the vdWHs calculated in this work far exceed that of a MoSSe-based vdWH reported earlier. The increase in mobility in the vdWHs compared to the constituent individual monolayers (MoSSeelectron ∼ 73 cm2 V−1 s−1; BXhole ∼ 16 × 103 cm2 V−1 s−1) can be clearly seen from the increase in the elastic constants in the vdWHs, which was observed in other reports as well. Detailed analysis of the lattice vibration is presented elsewhere.

Monolayer
Direction
Carrier type
|m*/m0|
|Ei|

μ (×103)
BP/MoSSe

K → Γ
Hole
0.215
2.51
19.58

K → M
Hole
0.309
2.51
13.62
BAs/MoSSe

K → Γ
Hole
0.194
2.31
32.57

K → M
Hole
0.274
2.31
23.06
Upon replacing an S atom with a Se atom in MoS2 monolayer, the band gap becomes indirect in BX/MoSSe (Fig. 2), as compared to BP/MoS2, where the band gap is direct. This is caused by interlayer interactions resulting in the asymmetric electrostatic potential in MoSSe, which can be seen in Fig. S7. Further, for a direct comparison with the band structure in BX/SMoSe, the electronic dispersion of BX/SeMoS is plotted in Fig. S3. BP/SeMoS forms a type-II band alignment with a direct band gap, where the individual monolayers contributing to the band edges switch with respect to BP/SMoSe, i.e., the CBM (VBM) is contributed by the BP (SeMoS) monolayer. The band alignment changes from type II in BAs/SMoSe to type I in BAs/SeMoS, as shown by a comparison between Fig. 2 and Fig. S3. The transition from type-II to type-I by interchanging S and Se in MoSSe was observed in other reports as well. This electronic dispersion behavior is elucidated in terms of electrostatic interaction in the following section. Type-I band edge alignment is suitable for applications in electronic devices, such as light-emitting diodes (LEDs), as both the electrons and holes lie in the same layer, such as the BA monolayer in the MoSSe/BAs heterobilayer, thereby facilitating fast recombination of electrons and holes. Also, type-I band alignment is convertible into type-II under the application of strain or an electric field, as demonstrated in earlier reports.

To obtain a detailed understanding of the equilibrium structure and charge transfer process, the deformation charge density was plotted. The individual monolayers have different work functions. Upon forming, the heterostructure charge transfer process occurs in response to the realignment of the Fermi energy level to attain an equilibrium, as schematically shown in Fig. 3(a and b). As a result, electrons will flow from the BX monolayer to MoSSe due to the higher electrostatic potential in the former, as shown by the work functions of the individual monolayers presented in Table 4. Hence, the accumulation and depletion of electrons will occur at the MoSSe and BX layers, respectively; this can be visualized in the plane average charge density difference plot shown in Fig. 3(c), which is obtained as

(3)
where
ρ is the plane average charge density of the heterostructure and individual layers. The redistribution of charges leads to a built-in electric field point from BX to MoSSe. A similar effect can be observed in the 3D-isosurface of the deformation charge density, as plotted in the inset of Fig. 3(c), where yellow and cyan colors represent charge accumulation and depletion, respectively.

Systems
BP
BAs
MoSSe
BP/MoSSe
BAs/MoSSe
Work function (eV)
4.87
4.61
5.53
5.18
5.06
The electrostatic potentials in BP/SeMoS and BP/SMoSe are plotted side by side in Fig. S7 for a systematic comparison. Upon constituting the vdW heterobilayer, the energy levels in the individual monolayers adjust themselves in an absolute vacuum scale in response to the changes in electrostatic potential occurring mainly at the interface. The band edges may realign upon changing the interface, for example, from BX/SMoSe to BX/SeMoS. As a result, the band edges may switch or the type II band alignment may change to type I, as noted in a preceding section. From the plane averaged electrostatic potential of MoSSe, it can be seen that the electrostatic potential energy on a sulfur atom is higher than that on a selenium atom, resulting in a built-in electric field from Se to S within MoSSe, which aids electron–hole separation. Furthermore, the electric field is induced in vdWH from BX to MoSSe. The effective built-in electric field in the system changes considerably from SMoSe to SeMoS, as indicated by a different potential drop, ΔV, in Fig. S7. A higher built-in electric field caused by a higher electrostatic potential difference in BP/SMoSe relative to BP/SeMoS facilitates electron–hole separation in the individual monolayers in BP/SMoSe and, in turn, prolongs the carrier lifetimes. The differences in the electronic properties between these two cases are discernible in this work and in other Janus MoSSe-based vdWHs as well.

The optical absorption coefficients of both heterostructures were obtained from the frequency-dependent dielectric function, ε(ω), using the following formula;

(4)
where
ε1(ω) is the real part and ε2(ω) is an imaginary part of the complex dielectric function. The absorbance spectra of the individual monolayers plotted in Fig. S8 (in the ESI) and the BX/MoSSe heterostructures, in Fig. 4(a), reveal strong absorbance in the visible light region of the solar spectrum. The absorbance spectra in the heterobilayer in Fig. 4a arise from the superposition of the same for the individual monolayers plotted in Fig. S8, as expected. The optical absorption coefficient ∼105 cm−1 is on the same order as those of previously reported MoS2, BN/MoS2, InSe/Ca(OH)2, and MoS2 (WS2)/BSe. Further, the BX/MoSSe heterostructure forms a p–n junction where MoSSe and BX act as an acceptor (n-type) and donor (p-type) respectively. The small CBO between the two constituent monolayers in the vdWHs is shown in Fig. 2; strong absorption in the visible light region and very high charge carrier mobility can be helpful in designing efficient excitonic solar cells comprising ultrathin BX/MoSSe vdWHs. The power conversion efficiencies (PCE) (η) of the BX/MoSSe heterostructures were calculated using Scharber et al.'s formalism given by;

(5)
where
βFF = 0.65 is the fill factor, Voc = Edg − ΔEc − 0.3 is the open-circuit voltage, 0.3 eV is an empirical parameter accounting for energy losses and JSC represents the short circuit current in the limit of 100% external quantum efficiency as given by . Due to the moderate band gaps (Edg) of BP (1.39 eV) and BAs (1.21 eV), with CBOs (ΔEc) of 0.01 eV and 0.096 eV, the boron pnictide is the perfect donor material for MoSSe (Edg and CBO were taken from the band structure of vdWH using HSE06). The PCEs were calculated to be 22.97% and 20.86%, respectively, as shown in Fig. 4. The calculated η values in this work are comparable to those of BP/MoS2 (20.42%), bilayer CdS/BP (27%), phosphorene/MoS2 (22.1%), TiNF/TiNCl (22%), GeSe/SnS (18%), and ZrS3/MoSeTe (16%). Additionally, recent work by Xie et al. demonstrated that BAs/InTe heterointerfaces are promising tandem solar cells, with 30% solar-to-electrical energy conversion efficiency. This high solar-to-electricity energy conversion efficiency obtained in this work by an interfacial hybridization of a Janus MoSSe monolayer with boron pnictide monolayers will help experimentalists design improved excitonic solar cells and broaden the applicability of the Janus MoSSe in the field of photovoltaics. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) was calculated with a fill factor of 65%, which accounts for thermalization, transmission, recombination, etc.


In this section, we quantitatively address the effects of choosing a suitable substrate for the optimization and enhancement of the out-of-plane piezoelectric coefficients in the vdWHs. In our previous theoretical reports on vdWHs, induction of out-of-plane piezoelectricity was demonstrated by combining in-plane piezoelectric monolayers, i.e. in GaN/BP (d33–40 pm V−1) and MoS2/BP (d33–3 pm V−1). In this work, MoSSe acts as a substrate for BX monolayers, which have out-of-plane polarization due to the broken inversion symmetry along the z-direction. The mechanism underlying the emergence of piezoelectricity in van der Waals heterostructures is the broken inversion symmetry along the z-direction. Charge redistribution at the interface, as shown in the inset of Fig. 3c, is reflected in the plane-average charge density difference Δρ (e Å−1) at the MoSSe/BX interface (∼ 0.25 × 10−3 e Å−1) as compared to ∼1 × 10−3 e Å−1 at the GaN/BP interface. Moreover, the opposite signs of Δρ on either side of the interface in Fig. 3c indicate charge polarization. The charge polarization may vary with the application of strain. The change in polarization per unit of applied strain gives the measure of the piezoelectric coefficient.

Recent experimental findings on metal–semiconductor heterostructures have demonstrated the emergence of an out-of-plane piezoelectric coefficient (d33–16.3 pm V−1) in Au/niobium (Nb)-doped SrTiO3 arising from its built-in electric field. This is similar to our earlier studies on semiconductor-semiconductor heterojunctions, i.e., GaN/BP and MoS2/BP. Also, this work demonstrates a superior pathway for designing atomically thin structures comprising two monolayers only, where a large out-of-plane piezoelectric coefficient can be induced, as compared to recent experimental findings where seven monolayers of MoS2 were grown on Al2O3/silicon wafers to realize a reasonable d33 of ∼3–10 pm V−1. The piezoelectric stress tensors (eik) of the vdWHs were calculated first using density functional perturbation theory (DFPT). Combining the relation between the piezoelectric stress (eik) and elastic stiffness coefficients (Cjk), the piezoelectric strain tensor dij was evaluated using the formula:
eik = dijCjk
(6)
where
i = 1, 2, 3 represents the x, y, and z-directions for 2D materials. The calculated out-of-plane piezoelectric constants |d33| are 14.91 pm V−1 and 7.63 pm V−1 for the MoSSe/BP and MoSSe/BAs respectively, as shown in Fig. 5. The high values observed in the heterostructures correspond to the vertical polarization induced by the BX layers and the intrinsic perpendicular polarization of MoSSe. The emergence of out-of-plane piezoelectricity in the vdW heterostructures has been reported in previous work. For comparison, the out-of-plane piezoelectricity of BP/MoSSe (d33–14.91 pm V−1) reported in this work is ∼4.5 times larger than that in the MoS2/BP vdWH (d33–3 pm V−1) due to the built-in out-of-plane polarization in the MoSSe monolayer. Although the Janus MoSSe multilayer shows out-of-plane piezoelectricity d33 = 5.24 pm V−1, it is difficult to synthesize, whereas that for monolayer MoSSe is calculated to be 4.26 pm V−1. This work quantitatively shows the generation of high piezoelectricity in vdWHs if both the constituting materials have intrinsic in-plane piezoelectricity and one of them shows an out-of-plane dipole moment. Although the piezoelectric stress tensors (e33) of the two vdWHs are nearly the same, the lower elastic stiffness (C33) in BP induces a higher d33 in BP/MoSSe, as . Additonally, the higher built-in electric field arising from the higher electrostatic potential difference (ΔV) between the individual monolayers in BP/MoSSe relative to BAs/MoSSe, as shown in Fig. S7 in the ESI, induces a higher piezoelectric coefficient in the BP/MoSSe heterobilayer compared to BAs/MoSSe. This is consistent with earlier analysis. The piezoelectric and elastic stiffness coefficients (eik/dij) of both the heterostructures were directly obtained using VASP and are provided in Table S1 in the ESI.


The electronic properties can be effectively tuned via the external electric field (E-field), in addition to strain. The evolution of the band dispersion under the vertical electric field has been investigated in this section. The electric field was applied along two directions (+z and −z) perpendicular to the interface, as schematically shown in Fig. 6(a). The positive(negative) E-field is directed from MoSSe (BX) to BX (MoSSe) monolayer. The electric field was applied within the range shown in Fig. 6(b), where the alteration in the electronic band gap with the strength of the electric field is also presented.

The application of an electric field (E) changes the electrostatic potential in the constituent monolayers of the interface and also changes the electrostatic potential across the interface. As a result, the energy levels or band edges contributed by the individual monolayers of the heterobilayer shift with respect to each other, which may alter the relative alignment between the band edges.
First, the built-in electric field is already along the negative z direction (BX to MoSSe). It polarizes the BP/MoSSe heterobilayer, resulting in −ve ( + ve) charges on the MoSSe (BP) monolayer at the interface. The band edges of BX lie at higher energies relative to MoSSe.
The +E field (or electric field along the +ve z direction) is opposite to that of the built-in electric field. It induces charge polarization at the interface and the electrostatic potential difference across the interface along the opposite direction. Therefore, it raises (lowers) the electrostatic potential in the MoSSe (BX) monolayer with respect to the absolute vacuum, which in turn elevates (lowers) the band edges of MoSSe (BX) monolayer simultaneously. The role of the −E field is just the opposite, as schematically shown in Fig. 7a, while the actual band structure is provided in Fig. 7b.
For a small magnitude of +E-field, the band edges of the BX monolayer lie in between those of MoSSe, which brings about type-I band alignment and the band gap of the heterostructure reaches the same as that of BP (0.9 eV). It remains type-I for a broad range of applied electric fields because of the large valence band offset. With the further increase in the electric field, the VBM of BP lies below the VBM of MoSSe, forming type-II band alignment again. The band gap starts decreasing continuously with increasing magnitude of the electric field, and the heterostructure shows a metallic state for an electric field greater than 0.3 V Å−1. The nearly free electron gas (NFEG) states appear for the high electric field, as the unoccupied states have parabolic dispersion at high energies near the vacuum level. For an electric field of +0.32 eV Å−1, the CBM of the BP layer shifts below the Fermi level, whereas the VBM of MoSSe shifts above the Fermi level; hence, the electrons are prone to tunneling directly from the VBM of MoSSe to the CBM of the BP layer, i.e., band to band tunneling transport, which is robust against thermal fluctuations and is highly desirable in a tunnel field-effect transistor.
In contrast, the negative E-field can reinforce the built-in electric field, enhancing the original charge polarization at the interface and the electrostatic potential difference across the interface. With the application of the electric field along the opposite direction, the band edges of BX and MoSSe shift upwards and downwards, respectively. Hence, the band gap decreases continuously with increasing intensity of the electric field, and the heterostructure shows metallic behavior at −0.15 V Å−1. In this case, there is no intermediate band alignment observed between type-II and type-III. To further reveal the intrinsic physical mechanism underlying the band gap dependence on the electric field, we present the variation in the electronic band structure with the applied electric field in Fig. 7(b). The band dispersion of the individual monolayers is found to remain intact under the application of the electric field. As the −E field is favorable along the direction of the built-in electric field, a smaller magnitude of the electric field is needed to close the band gap. On the other hand, a higher magnitude of the electric field along the positive z direction is required to close the band gap. The +E field counteracts the built-in field and charge polarization first. Then, further increasing the magnitude of the +E field reverses the electrostatic potential difference and charge polarization at the interface relative to the original interface.
In TMDCs, the valence band undergoes large spin splitting due to strong spin–orbit coupling (SOC), which plays an essential role in both spin/valleytronics devices. The SOC effect is more prominent in the MoSSe monolayer, whereas it is negligible in BP on account of the light elements B and P. The spin splitting is maximum at the valence band in MoSSe; however, the VBM is contributed by BP in the vdWHs. Hence, upon including SOC, the band alignment remains type-II, which is shown in Fig. S9. However, SOC was included to study the BP/MoSSe vdWH where the out-of-plane electric field was applied, and the results are presented in Fig. 8. Compared with Fig. 7, the band gap modulation behavior under the application of the electric field upon including SOC remains the same.
Based on the electric field-tuned electronic properties, we designed a field-effect tunneling transistor prototype based on the BX/MoSSe heterostructure comprising a source, drain, and top/bottom gates. The electric field can be applied between the top/bottom gates, while the tunneling current can be collected through the drain. The heterostructures will serve as a channel between the source and drain. When the electric field is high enough to make the heterojunction metallic, a large tunneling current (Isd) will flow, which can be labeled as the ON state. Meanwhile, in the semiconducting state, it will provide large resistance, thereby limiting the source to the drain current, which can then be regarded as the OFF state. Hence, by controlling the input of the electrical signal, the desired output signal (“0” or “1”) will be obtained, which can be used in the data storage device to store the obtained signal. The electric fields required to drive the transition from the semiconducting state (OFF) to the metallic (ON) state in the BX/MoSSe vdWHs are less than +0.3 V Å−1 and −0.1 VÅ−1, which are very small compared to the previously reported HfN2 monolayer (∼0.5 V Å−1), InSe monolayer (1 V Å−1), and black phosphorous/MoS2 (−0.5 V Å−1), and comparable to InSe bilayer (∼0.3 V Å−1) and InSe/BP (∼0.25 V Å−1). Thus, it can be integrated into flexible low-power memory devices.

In conclusion, two type-II heterostructures, BX/MoSSe (X = P, As), comprising the recently synthesized MoSSe Janus monolayer and BX monolayer, have been designed. Their mechanical and dynamical stabilities and exothermic interfacial binding energies confirmed their experimental feasibility. Their structural, electronic, and optical properties have been thoroughly investigated, and their promising potential for applications in different fields has been investigated. Both heterostructures were found to be indirect band gap semiconductors with intrinsic type-II band alignments. The VBM and CBM of the heterostructures are contributed by the BX and MoSSe monolayers, respectively, which aids the separation and segregation of electrons and holes in the two different monolayers. The high carrier mobility ∼103 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is very much sought after in nanoelectronics, is attributable to the sharp band dispersion near the VBM in the BX monolayer. The BX monolayers were found to be excellent donor materials for MoSSe. Due to the suitable donor band gaps of the donor BX monolayers and the small conduction band offset between BX and MoSSe along with the high optical absorbance in the visible region, the BX/MoSSe heterostructure is a suitable candidate in excitonic photovoltaics applications. The power conversion efficiencies of the BX/MoSSe heterostructures were predicted to be 22.97% and 20.86%. The out-of-plane piezoelectricities (d33) in the BX/MoSSe vdW heterostructures were found to be 14.91 pm V−1 and 7.63 pm V−1, which exceed those of the previously reported BP/MoS2 vdWH due to the presence of intrinsic perpendicular polarization in the MoSSe monolayer. External perturbation such as an electric field was noted to alter the band structure considerably; hence, a field-effect tunneling transistor prototype has been proposed where the source to drain current (Isd) can be modulated effectively through a small magnitude of the vertically applied electric field (<+0.3 V Å−1, −0.1 V Å−1) provided by gating. This work focusses on the exploration of intrinsic properties, such as electronic, optical, mechanical, piezoelectric, and optoelectronic properties, in the BX/MoSSe vdWHs and provides deep insight into their futuristic applications in advanced nanoelectronics, optoelectronics, piezotronics, photovoltaics, low-power digital data processing, and memory devices.


The authors declare no competing financial interest.


This work has been financially supported by grant no. 09/1129(0007)/2017-EMR-I from Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), India, and grant no. SR/NM/NS-1125/2016 from Department of Science and Technology (Nanomission), Government of India. We remain thankful to the Institute of Nano Science and Technology (INST), Mohali, and Centre for Development in Advanced Computing (C-DAC), Pune, India for providing supercomputing facilities on the in-house HPC cluster and PARAM-YUVA-II respectively. The support and the resources provided by PARAM-Shivay Facility under the National Supercomputing Mission, Government of India at the Indian Institute of Technology, Varanasi are gratefully acknowledged.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0nr07000a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020