 DOI: 10.1039/D3EE00601H
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2023, Advance Article 

Zhihao Zhang
,
Yuanfang Huang,
Can Wang,
Yiting Jiang,
Jialun Jin,
Jianbin Xu,
Zicheng Li,
Zhenhuang Su,
Qin Zhou,
Jingwei Zhu,
Rui He,
Da Hou,
Huagui Lai,
Shengqiang Ren*,
Cong Chen,
Xingyu Gao,
Tingting Shi,
Walter Hu,
Fan Fu,
Peng Gao and 
Dewei Zhao*

College of Materials Science and Engineering & Engineering Research Center of Alternative Energy Materials & Devices, Ministry of Education, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China. E-mail: rensq@scu.edu.cn; dewei.zhao@scu.edu.cn; dewei_zhao@hotmail.com

CAS Key Laboratory of Design and Assembly of Functional Nanostructures, and Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Nanomaterials, Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences Fuzhou, Fujian 350002, China

Siyuan Laboratory, Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Vacuum Coating Technologies and New Energy Materials, Department of Physics, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China

Laboratory for Thin Films and Photovoltaics, Empa-Swiss Federal Laboratories for Materials Science and Technology, Ueberlandstrasse 129, CH-8600 Duebendorf, Switzerland

Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF), Zhangjiang Laboratory, Shanghai Advanced Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201204, China

State Key Lab of ASIC & System, Microelectronics Department, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China

Precision Medicine Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China

Received
24th February 2023
, Accepted 5th June 2023
First published on 6th June 2023
The kinetics of solvent–antisolvent interactions play very important roles in perovskite crystallization, and potentially influences the p-type self-doping in tin (Sn)-based perovskites but has not drawn any attention. Moreover, most of the frequently used antisolvents in Sn-based perovskites are toxic, weakening the strong motivation of developing environment-friendly perovskite light absorbers and devices. Herein, for the first time, we report a green diethyl carbonate (DEC) as an antisolvent, which is more compatible with the fabrication of Sn-based perovskites than the toxic chlorobenzene (CB). Time-driven steady-state absorption spectra reveal that the retarded kinetics of solvent–antisolvent interactions during antisolvent treatment with DEC slows down the crystallization of FASnI3, enabling preferred crystal orientation and less high-dimensional extended defects. More importantly, this specific crystallization enables the heterogeneous distribution of Sn/I vacancies throughout the perovskite film, leading to a gradient distribution of p-type self-doping, i.e., reduced p-type self-doping at the upper surface, but gradually increased p-type self-doping from the upper surface to the bottom surface. The resulting gradient of the band structure of the perovskite film facilitates carrier transport and suppresses reverse charge accumulation at both interfaces. Consequently, a green-antisolvent-fabricated Sn-based device with a champion efficiency of 14.2% and excellent operational stability is achieved.

In the fabrication of less-toxic tin (Sn)-based perovskite solar cells (PSCs), the widely used antisolvents are toxic, contradicting the primary intention of using Sn-based perovskites as absorbers. Meanwhile, the effects of the kinetics of solvent–antisolvent interactions on crystallization and the consequent change in the amount and distribution of defects are very likely to change the p-type self-doping of Sn-based perovskite absorbers, which requires confirming and an in-depth study on its effects on interfacial energetics and carrier dynamics. Herein, we have found that a green antisolvent diethyl carbonate (DEC) is more compatible with the fabrication of Sn-based PSCs than the toxic chlorobenzene (CB). DEC enables retarded kinetics of solvent–antisolvent interactions that slows down FASnI3 crystallization, leading to the preferred orientation and reduced high-dimensional extended defects. This also enables a preferential distribution of p-type self-doping in FASnI3 films, i.e., reduced p-type self-doping at the upper surface, but gradually increased p-type self-doping from the upper to the bottom surface. The resulting gradient of the band structure facilitates interfacial energetics and generates an extra built-in electric field to provide a stronger driving force for charge separation, significantly improving the charge transfer and mitigating reverse charge accumulation. The resulting PSC achieves a champion efficiency of 14.2% with excellent operational stability.


Lead (Pb) halide perovskites possess outstanding photovoltaic properties, including high absorption coefficients, tunable bandgaps, high carrier mobilities, and long carrier lifetimes. Despite the efficiency of state-of-the-art Pb-based perovskite solar cells (PSCs) at the lab scale is approaching 26%, they still have two concerns, i.e., soluble heavy metal Pb and non-ideal bandgaps for single-junction solar cells. To address these challenges, tin (Sn)-based perovskites with less toxicity and more ideal bandgap (1.2–1.4 eV) have become the most promising among Pb-free perovskites for photovoltaic applications.

Most of the Sn-based perovskites are grown via one-step antisolvent-assisted solution methods. Nevertheless, the amount of antisolvents used is large, and most of the antisolvents employed to date have been unfortunately toxic, such as the widely used chlorobenzene (CB). Undoubtedly, the use of toxic antisolvents contradicts the primary intention of using Sn-based perovskites as light absorbers. Dealing with these massive amounts of toxic antisolvents will increase manufacturing costs and raise environmental and health concerns, seriously hampering the development of Sn-based PSCs. However, most of the reported green antisolvents (e.g., ethanol, ethyl acetate, etc.) have failed to fabricate high-quality Pb-based perovskite films due to the difficulties in controlling the morphology and crystallization. It is even more challenging to employ ideal green antisolvents for the growth of Sn-based perovskite films due to their extremely fast and uncontrolled crystallization, resulting in undesirable crystal orientation and numerous high-dimensional extended defects. So far, no attention has been paid to this problem in Sn-based PSCs. Therefore, searching for green antisolvents especially tailored for fabricating high-quality Sn-based perovskites is in increasing demand.
The quality of the perovskite film fabricated using antisolvent treatment is closely related to the intrinsic properties of the antisolvent itself. Antisolvents with various physicochemical properties, including boiling point, miscibility, dielectric constants, etc., can lead to distinctive kinetics of solvent–antisolvent interactions to regulate the crystallization, potentially influencing the amount and distribution of defects as well as self-doping of perovskite absorbers. Such issues have been neglected in previous studies on exploring antisolvent alternatives. For Sn-based perovskites, the unwanted p-type self-doping caused by Sn vacancies often leads to high background carrier density and low device efficiency. This also makes the Sn-based perovskite film preferentially featuring a more p-type surface with a high work function, leading to interfacial energetic mismatch. Hence, an ideal green antisolvent for Sn-based perovskites is highly desirable to regulate the crystallization and thus control the defect distribution and amounts, which is expected to simultaneously alleviate the detrimental p-type self-doping and manipulate the interfacial energetics of perovskite/charge transport layers for better energetic matching at both interfaces.
Herein, for the first time, we report an appropriate green antisolvent diethyl carbonate (DEC) for preparing high-quality Sn-based perovskite films. The retarded kinetics of solvent–antisolvent interactions enabled by the DEC antisolvent slows down the crystallization of the (NH2)2CHSnI3 (FASnI3) perovskite, thereby leading to preferred crystal orientation and reduced high-dimensional extended defects. More interestingly, a preferential distribution of p-type self-doping in the FASnI3 film is formed, i.e., reduced p-type self-doping at the upper surface (near the perovskite/C60 interface), but gradually increased p-type self-doping from the upper surface to the bottom surface (near the PEDOT:PSS/perovskite interface), evidenced by the heterogeneous distribution of Sn/I vacancies throughout the perovskite film. This resulting gradient of the band structure of the perovskite film facilitates interfacial energetics and generates an extra built-in electric field to provide a stronger driving force for charge separation, significantly improving the charge transfer and mitigating the reverse charge accumulation. These enable us to achieve a champion efficiency of 14.2% of DEC-fabricated FASnI3 devices with outstanding operational stability. This work unveils the subtle effects of the kinetics of solvent–antisolvent interactions on the crystallization and the consequent p-type self-doping changes of Sn-based perovskites, and provides a brand-new and universal choice of antisolvents for low-toxicity and low-cost fabrication of Sn-based PSCs.

The antisolvent speeds up the heterogeneous nucleation by creating instantaneous local supersaturation on the spinning substrate. The interaction between the solvent and antisolvent significantly influences the crystallization and then the final morphology of perovskite films. As illustrated in Fig. 1b, DEC achieves evidently slower crystallization than CB during the antisolvent treatment. To rationalize this observation, the kinetics of solvent–antisolvent interactions was assessed via time-driven steady-state absorption spectra, i.e., recording the variation of absorbance at a characteristic wavelength (430 nm in this work) as a function of time, when the freshly spin-coated intermediate perovskite films from N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF)/dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) were treated with CB or DEC in a standard cuvette. Herein, we fitted the kinetic traces with a bi-exponential function and deduced the corresponding time constants. The results of time-driven steady-state absorption spectra can be separated into two stages (Fig. 1a): Stage I, a steep rise of the absorbance upon the addition of the antisolvents, which indicates an accelerated heterogeneous nucleation and growth process to different extents accompanying fast solvent extraction. When the solvent extraction reaches a state of equilibrium, the fast component (τ1) is followed by an approximate plateau suggesting the completion of nucleation and local crystal growth; Stage II, a small additional increase that occurs on a slow component (τ2) only slightly contributes to the total increase in absorbance, which originates from the slow diffusion of residual solvents out of the film and the slow growth of large crystals resulting in enhanced light scattering.

As illustrated in Fig. 1c and d, the two antisolvents exhibit different kinetic behaviors of the relative absorbance in terms of the increment and the time constant. It is observed that after the injection of CB into the cuvette, a fast increase in the absorption at a wavelength of 430 nm occurs and rapidly saturates within 10 s (τ1 = 5.6 s), followed by an additionally slow increase (τ2 = 5.1 s). Interestingly, after the injection of DEC into the cuvette, there is a relatively slow increase in the absorption at a wavelength of 430 nm, and the saturation time prolongs to about 30 s (τ1 = 11.4 s) with a reduced additional increase (τ2 = 2.7 s). The prolonged τ1 and reduced τ2 of the DEC-treated sample demonstrate that compared with CB, DEC as the antisolvent can slow down the exchange between the solvents and antisolvents and leave or keep less residual solvents in the films, thus enabling a slower and thorough growth of FASnI3 perovskite crystals. This change is neatly illustrated in the UV-vis absorption spectra of the spin-coated intermediate perovskite films over time during the antisolvent treatment (Fig. 1e and f), where the DEC-treated sample shows a much lower absorbance within 30 s compared with the CB one, but a similar absorbance at 50 s and after annealing (Fig. S1, ESI).
To find out the reason behind the different kinetics of solvent–antisolvent interactions induced by CB and DEC, we compare the physicochemical properties of several green antisolvents which have been tried in this work in Table S1 (ESI). Obviously, an antisolvent with a high boiling point of around 130 °C and good miscibility with DMF/DMSO is necessary for high-quality film formation of Sn-based perovskites. Under the prerequisite of a high boiling point, applying an antisolvent with different dipole moments or dielectric constants can change the kinetics of the solvent–antisolvent interactions. More detailed selection relies on the availability of more kinds of green antisolvents for the fabrication of high-quality Sn-based perovskite films.

The effects of different kinetics of solvent–antisolvent interactions on the crystallization process were confirmed using X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns (Fig. 2a). Both FASnI3 films fabricated using CB or DEC as an antisolvent (CB-fabricated films or DEC-fabricated films, hereafter) show identical characteristic peaks corresponding to the (100), (102), (200), (122), and (222) facets at 14.0°, 24.4°, 26.4°, 33.7°, and 41.1°, respectively. No obvious change in the diffraction peak intensity is found between the CB- and DEC-fabricated films, except for the (102) facet of the DEC-fabricated film being intensified significantly which manifests a highly preferred orientation and enhanced crystallinity. Grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) images of these two films are shown in Fig. 2b and c. Both films exhibit continuous Debye–Scherrer rings in all planes indicating the random growth of crystal grains in these FASnI3 films. Similarly, the DEC-fabricated film exhibits a relatively higher diffraction intensity in the (102) plane in the qz direction, indicating the preferred vertical orientation with respect to the substrate, which is conducive to enhancing the carrier transport in the resulting devices.

We then performed scanning electron microscopy (SEM) measurements to investigate the influence of the above kinetics on the surface morphology of perovskite films. As shown in Fig. 2d, the CB-fabricated film exhibits small grains with numerous grain boundaries that belong to high-dimensional extended defects. Although the uniformity of the grains is not improved obviously, the DEC-fabricated film shows a better surface morphology with a larger average grain size and fewer grain boundaries (Fig. 2g and Fig. S2, ESI). Furthermore, the cross-sectional SEM images of these two corresponding devices also confirm the enlarged grains in the DEC-fabricated film in the horizontal direction (Fig. 2e and h). Generally, the high-dimensional extended defects as deep-level defects act as the nonradiative recombination centers, and the carriers trapped by them also accelerate moisture-, oxygen-, and light-induced degradation in PSCs under operating conditions. Accordingly, the reduced high-dimensional extended defects present in the DEC-fabricated film are expected to be beneficial for the enhancement of open-circuit voltage (VOC) and operational stability of the devices.
The reduced high-dimensional extended defects and enlarged grain size of DEC-fabricated film are further confirmed in Fig. 2f and i. The atomic force microscopy (AFM) results show a smaller roughness of the DEC-fabricated film than that of the CB one, indicating that DEC antisolvent treatment smoothens the surface and suppresses the formation of grain boundaries, which improves the interfacial contact for more efficient carrier transfer/transport.

Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) measurement was carried out at zero bias voltage to investigate the energetics transformation of the upper surface of the perovskite film (Fig. 3a and b). The surface potentials extracted from the statistical distribution (Fig. S3, ESI) are 245 and 122 mV for the CB- and DEC-fabricated films, respectively. A decrease by ∼0.12 V in the average surface potential for the perovskite films after the substitution of CB with DEC indicates a decrease in work function by ∼0.12 eV, which leads to a transformation into less p-type (more n-type) perovskite at the upper surface and makes the Fermi level located further away from the valence band edge. The shallower Fermi level of the DEC-fabricated film under dark conditions tends to exhibit a larger gap between the splitting of the electron quasi-Fermi level (Efn) and hole quasi-Fermi level (Efp) under light illumination, i.e., a larger quasi-Fermi level splitting contributes to a higher VOC value for the resultant devices. This observation is further confirmed by the ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) results shown in Fig. 3c. The work function was calculated to be 4.49 eV for the CB-fabricated perovskite surface and 4.31 eV for the DEC-fabricated perovskite surface, implying that the 0.18 eV lower work function of the latter agrees with the trend of KPFM results.

We measured the cross-sectional KPFM of all the devices at negative bias voltage to get the electrical potential distribution in the whole bulk perovskite film and reveal the possible energetics transformation beneath the upper surface of the perovskite film. Our device for this measurement has a structure of glass/ITO/poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene)-poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS)/FASnI3/C60/bathocuproine (BCP)/Ag/MgF2, where MgF2 acts as a buffer layer for the sample preparation to prevent slippage of the cantilever tip at a “cliff” (Fig. S4, ESI). Fig. 3d and g show the cross-sectional KPFM images of the CB- and DEC-fabricated devices. Their corresponding potential profiles of the selected regions of the ITO/hole transport layer (HTL)/perovskite/electron transport layer (ETL)/electrode are shown in Fig. 3e and h. A sharp distinction between the potentials of the perovskite layer of the CB- and DEC-fabricated devices is observed, i.e., almost no potential gradient in the whole bulk perovskite film of the CB-fabricated device while a significant potential gradient in the whole bulk perovskite film of the DEC-fabricated device. This suggests a gradient distribution of p-type self-doping, i.e., gradually increased p-type self-doping from the upper surface (near the perovskite/C60 interface) to the bottom surface (near the PEDOT:PSS/perovskite interface).
Such a gradient distribution of p-type self-doping is also reflected by the energy level diagram. All the metrics essential for drawing the energy levels extracted from the UPS results (Fig. S5, ESI) are summarized in Table S2 (ESI). The optical bandgaps of both perovskites are determined to be 1.38 eV from their Tauc plots (Fig. S6, ESI). Accordingly, we illustrate the energy level diagram of the CB- and DEC-fabricated PSCs in Fig. 3f and i by combining the potential distribution from the cross-sectional KPFM results. For the CB-fabricated film, no obvious band bending occurs due to the homogeneous Fermi level distribution enabled by the constant p-type self-doping across the entire FASnI3 film. The charge extraction force mainly originates from the energy offset at the electron-selective or hole-selective interfaces, and the carriers in the perovskite can be easily trapped by the bulk defects. By comparison, for the DEC-fabricated film, the Fermi level difference caused by the gradient distribution of p-type self-doping enables downward band bending at the upper surface and upward band bending at the bottom surface. The distinctive band bending is expected to generate an extra built-in electric field in the FASnI3 absorber to facilitate the carrier transport and reduce the reverse charge accumulation at the perovskite/charge transport layer, suppressing the likely nonradiative charge recombination at the bulk defects.

We further evaluated the effect of the distinctive band-bending behavior on carrier dynamics in the DEC-fabricated device. Their dark density–voltage (J–V) curves are shown in Fig. 4a, where the reverse saturation current density (J0) values are calculated to be 1.4 × 10−5 mA cm−2 for the CB-fabricated device and 6.2 × 10−8 mA cm−2 for the DEC-fabricated device. The significant reduction of J0 indicates a totally lower carrier density in the DEC-fabricated perovskite film, which is attributed to its less p-type self-doping at the upper surface and in the bulk close to the upper surface. In contrast, the more p-type self-doping of the CB-fabricated perovskite film at the same location causes high carrier density (especially holes) in the corresponding devices, reflected by the higher J0 value. Hence, the reduced carrier density decreases the leakage current and charge recombination in the DEC-fabricated PSCs, facilitating the improvement of the VOC.

Considering the carrier accumulation at the interface would affect the carrier extraction and then the capacitance, the capacitance–voltage (C–V) curves were measured. By fitting the Mott–Schottky plots (Fig. S7, ESI), the width of the depletion layer and carrier density at both interfaces can be extracted from the linear regime of the plots, which are directly and inversely proportional to the slope values of the fitting lines, respectively. The slope value of the DEC-fabricated device is 1.55 times higher than that of the CB-fabricated device, implying a wider depletion layer and lower carrier density at both perovskite/transport layer interfaces in the DEC-fabricated device. Furthermore, the larger built-in potential (Vbi) of the DEC-fabricated PSC resulting from the extra built-in electric field in the absorber can suppress the reverse carrier transport at both interfaces and provide a stronger driving force for charge separation, which contributes to the improved VOC.
Drive-level capacitance profiling (DLCP) measurements were carried out at a low alternating current frequency to reveal the spatial distribution of the free carrier density throughout the perovskite films (Fig. 4b). At the upper surface, the DEC-fabricated film has a substantial decrease in carrier density compared with the CB-fabricated film (from 8.0 × 1015 cm−3 to 4.1 × 1014 cm−3), further verifying the weakened p-type self-doping at the upper surface of the DEC-fabricated film. In the whole profiling distance, the DEC-fabricated film has a lower carrier density with a narrower distribution range than the CB-fabricated film, which implies its superior ability of carrier transfer to enhance VOC and short-circuit current density (JSC) in the device, consistent with the dark J–V and Mott–Schottky results. More importantly, the obvious difference in the distribution range of the carrier density between the CB- and DEC-fabricated films suggests that they have different degrees of self-doping caused by defects, most likely, of various kinds with different spatial distributions.
Cross-sectional KPFM measurements under illumination and the open-circuit (OC) conditions were performed to study the real-time charge distributions in the complete devices. Charge carriers are unextractable under the OC conditions (split quasi-Fermi level) and might accumulate at a contacting selective heterointerface of the opposite polarity. It is known that the photovoltaic devices with a relatively ideal band alignment would have a homogeneous electric-field distribution with little charge accumulation across the interface of the perovskite layer and transport layers. Fig. 4c and d illustrate the charge density distribution of the complete cross-sections of the CB- and DEC-fabricated devices. The CB-fabricated device shows severe electron accumulation at the perovskite/HTL interface and hole accumulation at the perovskite/ETL interface, manifesting poor carrier transport caused by the inferior band alignment. Thanks to the distinctive behavior of band bending of the DEC-fabricated film, the electric-field distribution becomes more homogeneous with suppressed carrier accumulation at both interfaces, suggesting improved carrier transport. The above results are consistent with our predictions based on the energy level diagrams (Fig. 3f and i).

To gain more insights into the origins of the distinctive p-type self-doping in the DEC-fabricated perovskite film, we measured the time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) to obtain their depth profiles of elements (Fig. 5a). The intensities of Sn and I signals for the CB-fabricated film exhibit a negligible change in the vertical direction. In contrast, the DEC-fabricated film has an obviously increasing intensity of the I signal but an extremely slow-growing intensity of the Sn signal. These results cause different Sn/I ratios throughout these two films (Fig. 5b), where the Sn/I ratio of the CB-fabricated one remains almost unchanged (generally homogeneous Sn/I distribution) while that of DEC-fabricated one gradually decreases from the upper surface to the bottom surface (heterogeneous Sn/I distribution). We attribute the difference to the kinetics of solvent–antisolvent interactions regulating different crystallization processes. Considering the excessive Sn-based additives in our perovskite precursor, we infer that a Sn-rich/I-poor condition exists throughout the CB-fabricated film, whereas a Sn-rich/I-poor condition exists near the upper surface and it gradually transformed into a relatively Sn-poor/I-rich condition from the upper to the bottom surface of the DEC-fabricated film.

This finding inspires us to perform density functional theory (DFT) calculations to obtain the formation energies of vacancy defects in FASnI3 under different chemical potential conditions (Sn-poor/I-rich, moderate, and Sn-rich/I-poor). According to previous studies, A-site or B-site vacancies (Sn vacancies (VSn) and FA vacancies (VFA) for FASnI3) tend to cause p-type doping while X-site vacancies (iodide vacancies (VI) for FASnI3) prefer causing n-type doping. In other words, the different chemical potential conditions at the upper and the bottom surfaces of the perovskite films may enable different amounts and distribution of vacancies (Fig. 5c and d), eventually leading to a subtle change in the doping type throughout the films. Fig. 5e shows the formation energies of the vacancy defects as a function of the Fermi level position at the chemical potentials of I-rich/Sn-poor, moderate, and I-poor/Sn-rich. Under Sn-poor/I-rich and moderate conditions, the VSn with the lowest formation energy dominates in the FASnI3 perovskite, which leads to a relatively high degree of p-type characteristics. The low formation energy of VSn in FASnI3 comes from the energetically unfavorable s–p antibonding coupling, where the fully occupied antibonding state between Sn-5s and I-5p coupling does not gain energy significantly and thus tends to break a weak bond and easily forms a vacancy. On the other hand, under Sn-rich/I-poor conditions, the formation energy of VSn increases while that of VI decreases. This change induces fewer VSn and more VI in the FASnI3 perovskites, which weakens the p-type characteristics and thus results in fewer p-type (more n-type) characteristics. Based on the above results, it is reasonable to infer that the p-type self-doping gradient originates from the heterogeneous distribution of Sn/I vacancies throughout the DEC-fabricated film, i.e., the amounts of VSn increase but the amounts of VI decrease from the upper surface to the bottom surface (Fig. 5d). In contrast, the constant p-type self-doping comes from the comparatively homogeneous distribution of Sn/I vacancies throughout the CB-fabricated film (Fig. 5c). These findings are consistent with an obvious difference in the distribution range of the carrier density between these two films in DLCP results.
Despite the different distribution of vacancy defects in the CB- and DEC-fabricated films, the overall defect density of the DEC-fabricated film is still lower than that of the CB-fabricated film, evidenced by thermal admittance spectroscopy (TAS) results (Fig. 5f). The DEC-fabricated film has a lower defect density at both the shallow-level (interior vacancies) and the deep-level (surface vacancies and high-dimensional extended defects) than the CB-fabricated film. The reduced deep-level defects suppress the nonradiative recombination in devices, which can also be verified by the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved PL (TRPL) results (Fig. S8, ESI).

We then fabricated the devices by using CB and DEC as antisolvents to prepare FASnI3 absorbers and compared their corresponding device performance, in which the device has a structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/FASnI3/C60/BCP/Cu. The J–V curves of the champion DEC- and CB-fabricated PSCs with their corresponding photovoltaic parameters under reverse voltage scan are shown in Fig. 6a. The detailed photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table S3 (ESI). The CB-fabricated PSC delivers a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 12.1% with a VOC of 0.72 V, a JSC of 23.2 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 72.5%, while the DEC-fabricated PSC exhibits a PCE of 14.2% with a VOC of 0.80 V, a JSC of 24.2 mA cm−2, and a FF of 73.5%. The substitution of CB with DEC as an antisolvent leads to obvious enhancement in both VOC and JSC, which we attributed to the improved carrier dynamics as discussed above and thus leads to a substantial gain in efficiency. To the best of our knowledge, the DEC-fabricated PSC in this work is the first green-antisolvent-fabricated device and also exhibits one of the highest PCEs of the Sn-based PSCs reported to date (Fig. 6b).

The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra revealed that the DEC-fabricated PSC exhibits better ability for light harvesting and charge collection than the CB-fabricated PSC (Fig. 6c). The main improvement results from the enhancement at a short wavelength of 450–500 nm and a long wavelength of 850–910 nm of the DEC-fabricated PSC, which implies the increased absorption at the perovskite bottom and upper region, respectively. Because the incident depth of the short-wavelength light is shorter, that is, absorbed at the bottom region, while the incident depth of the long-wavelength light is longer, that is, absorbed at the upper region, when light is incident from the ITO side. Meanwhile, the EQE-integrated JSC values for the CB-fabricated PSC (22.8 mA cm−2) and the DEC-fabricated PSC (23.5 mA cm−2) agree well with the JSC values from their J–V curves. The overall low EQE of the Sn-based PSCs (in most regions, below 80%) can be caused by the high intrinsic defect density of Sn-based perovskites (relative to that of Pb-based perovskites), which leads to severe losses of charge carriers. The CB- and DEC-fabricated PSCs both exhibit good reproducibility (Fig. 6d). The stabilized power outputs (SPO) at the maximum power point (MPP) were recorded as 11.4% and 13.7% for the CB-fabricated PSC and DEC-fabricated PSC, respectively, under constant illumination for 500 s (Fig. 6e).
The operational stability of these encapsulated devices was tested by MPP tracking under continuous illumination in air. The DEC-fabricated PSC maintains 95% of its initial efficiency after 200 h of operation, while the CB-fabricated one maintains only 70% of its initial efficiency (Fig. 6f). We attribute the improved operational stability of the DEC-fabricated PSC to the suppression of carrier accumulation at both perovskite/C60 and PEDOT:PSS/perovskite interfaces and the reduction of the trapped carriers by high-dimensional extended defects under illumination.

We have demonstrated that a green antisolvent DEC is more compatible for the fabrication of Sn-based PSCs than CB. The antisolvent treatment with DEC effectively retards the kinetics of solvent–antisolvent interactions, which slows down the crystallization of FASnI3 perovskites and thus enables the preferred crystal orientation and reduced high-dimensional extended defects. As a result, a gradient distribution of p-type self-doping, i.e., reduced p-type self-doping at the upper surface, but gradually increased p-type self-doping from the upper surface to the bottom surface, is formed in the DEC-fabricated film, which originates from the heterogeneous distribution of Sn/I vacancies throughout the perovskite film. The resulting gradient of the band structure of the perovskite film considerably facilitates carrier transport and suppresses the reverse charge accumulation at both interfaces. Consequently, we achieve the first green-antisolvent fabricated Sn-based PSC with a champion efficiency of 14.2% and excellent operational stability. This work provides in-depth insights into the kinetics of solvent–antisolvent interactions regulating the crystallization and self-doping distribution in the perovskite films, beneficial for exploring antisolvent substitutes in the future. The distinctive characteristics of the DEC-fabricated films also manifest the potential of DEC for the fabrication of high-performance inverted p-i-n PSCs with various bandgaps.


D. Z. and Z. Z. conceived the idea. Z. Z. designed most of the experiments and performed characterization studies, analyzed all the data, and prepared the manuscript. Y. H. and Z. Z. fabricated the films and devices and performed various characterization studies. C. W. conducted the test based on an electrochemical potentiostat. J. X., Z. L., and Q. Z. assisted in data analysis. J. J., Y. J., J. Z., R. H., D. H., H. L., S. R., and C.C. helped with device fabrication. Z. S. and X. G. performed the GIWAXS measurement. W. H. helped with cross-sectional SEM measurement. T. S. did the theoretical calculation. D. Z., P. G., T. S., and F. F. coordinated the work. D.Z. directed and supervised this project. All authors discussed the results and commented on the manuscript.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 62005188, 62174112, and 61929102), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (no. YJ201955, YJ2021157, and ZYGX2022YGRH002), and the Engineering Featured Team Fund of Sichuan University (2020SCUNG102). The authors would also thank the beamline BL14B1 at Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF) for providing the beam time and help.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3ee00601h
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023