 DOI: 10.1039/C3TA14539E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5675-5681


Guanghui
Zhang
,

Shenlong
Jiang
,

Yue
Lin
,

Wenzhen
Ren
,

Hongbing
Cai
,

Yukun
Wu
,

Qun
Zhang
,

Nan
Pan
,

Yi
Luo
 and 

Xiaoping
Wang
*

Department of Physics, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, P. R. China. E-mail: xpwang@ustc.edu.cn

Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale, Department of Physics, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, P. R. China

Synergetic Innovation Center of Quantum Information & Quantum Physics, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026, China

Received
6th November 2013
, Accepted 28th January 2014
First published on 10th March 2014
The properties of the electron donor–acceptor interface play a crucial role in the photovoltaic performance of the core–shell nanorod array solar cells (NRASCs). In this paper, all-inorganic solid-state ZnO/CdTe and ZnO/CdS/CdTe core–shell NRASCs have been fabricated by a simple low temperature and low cost solution-based process. We investigate the influence of the CdS interfacial layer with different thicknesses on the performance of the solar cells. It is found that inserting such an interfacial layer can significantly improve the short-circuit current density and the open-circuit voltage of the device. The overall power conversion efficiency of the ZnO/CdS/CdTe core–shell NRASC with a 4 nm thick CdS interfacial layer can reach 0.72% under AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2), which is three times that of the ZnO/CdTe NRASC. The improvement in the performance is attributed to the designed graded energy band alignment of ZnO/CdS/CdTe and the passivation of surface defects of the ZnO nanorod by the CdS interfacial layer, which can result in the enhanced carrier separation and collection. The result clearly demonstrates that the performance of all-inorganic core–shell photovoltaic devices can be greatly improved with uncomplicated interface engineering.

Fabrication of advanced nanostructured photovoltaic devices with acceptable efficiency using low cost processing is a promising alternative for large scale application of solar energy. In this regard, well aligned one-dimensional core–shell nanowire or nanorod (NR) arrays have attracted significant attention for application in photovoltaic devices since this kind of architecture allows light absorption in the axial direction and carrier separation in the radial direction, providing the reduction of carrier recombination before charge separation and direct pathways for efficient charge carrier transport. This is due to the fact that the minority carrier diffusion length is only required to be large as compared with the diameter of the NRs in NRASCs. Especially, the n-type ZnO NR array has been widely used as the electron transport component in hybrid solar cells, dye-sensitized solar cells and quantum dot sensitized solar cells because of the high electron mobility and facile synthesis processing. Due to their weak absorption in the solar spectrum, various semiconductors such as CdS, CdSe, CdTe, CuInS2, PbS have been used to sensitize ZnO NR arrays in liquid- or solid-state quantum dot sensitized solar cells or semiconductor sensitized solar cells.

Among these inorganic semiconductors, p-type CdTe is exceptionally promising for photovoltaics because of the nearly ideal band gap for single-junction photovoltaics (∼1.5 eV) and high optical absorption coefficient (∼1 μm thick CdTe can absorb almost all light with a wavelength shorter than 850 nm). Moreover, a type-II energy band alignment will be formed between CdTe and ZnO, which can nicely facilitate the separation of the electron–hole pairs. In addition, without electrolyte erosion, the solid-state core–shell nanorod array solar cells (NRASCs) formed by inorganic materials such as ZnO/CdTe or TiO2/CdTe are much more stable than the liquid-state photoelectrochemical devices. Although the solar cell based on the sintered CdTe/ZnO nanoparticle thin-film has been reported, there are few reports of ZnO nanorod/CdTe core–shell photovoltaic devices, and the performances of the reported devices are not as high as expected yet. With an electrochemical deposition method, Wang et al. aligned ZnO/CdTe core–shell nanocable arrays on an indium tin oxide substrate and constructed a photoelectrochemical device with a photocurrent of ∼5.9 mA cm−2. Briscoe et al. fabricated a solid-state core–shell NRASC by coating ZnO NRs with a conformal film of CdTe nanoparticles. Despite the fact that the device can absorb 80% of the incident light at the absorption peak, the short-circuit current is only 0.19 mA cm−2, indicating the poor carrier separation and collection due to the defective interfaces and low quality of materials in the devices.
It has long been known that the interfacial properties between the core and the shell (p–n junction) of the NR play a crucial role in the energy band alignment and the carrier separation, which can therefore drastically influence the performance of the solar cells. In this paper, we fabricated a series of all-inorganic solid-state ZnO/CdTe core–shell NRASCs by depositing a p-type CdTe layer on the hydrothermally grown ZnO NRs. We focus on how a thin interfacial layer of CdS (as shown in Fig. 1), which acts as an interfacial passivation component and simultaneously forms a graded band alignment between the ZnO core and CdTe shell, can improve the performance of the NRASCs. Both the interfacial CdS layer and the CdTe shell were fabricated by a simple low temperature and low cost solution-based successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) method. The photovoltaic performances of ZnO/CdS/CdTe NRASCs with different CdS layer thicknesses of 0, 2, 4 and 8 nm were systematically investigated. We found that, after inserting the interfacial layer, the short-circuit current density increases from 4.74 mA cm−2 for ZnO/CdTe NRASCs to 6.82 mA cm−2 for ZnO/CdS/CdTe NRASCs, meanwhile the open-circuit voltage increases from 165 mV to ∼300 mV. More importantly, the overall power conversion efficiency of the ZnO/CdS/CdTe NRASC with a 4 nm interfacial CdS layer can reach 0.72% under AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2), which is three times that of its ZnO/CdTe counterpart.

ZnO NR arrays were synthesized using a two-step seeding and hydrothermal growth procedure on patterned fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass substrates. The sheet resistance of the FTO is 15 Ω cm−2. The 2 × 2 cm2 FTO slides were cleaned sequentially in deionized water, ethanol and acetone by ultrasonic agitation, and then dried with high-purity nitrogen. A ZnO nanocrystal seed layer was fabricated by spin coating the sol–gel precursor containing 0.75 M zinc acetate dihydrate in 2-methoxyethanol with a 1:1 ratio of zinc acetate to ethanol amine at 1200 rpm, and subsequently annealed in air in a tube furnace at 400 °C for 10 min. ZnO NR arrays were then hydrothermally grown from the seed layer in a solution containing 30 mM zinc nitrate and 30 mM hexamethylenetetramine at 92 °C for 90 minutes.


Both the CdS layer and the CdTe shell were deposited using the successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) method. Cd(NO3)2·6H2O and Na2S·9H2O were used as the sources for cadmium (Cd) and sulphur (S) ions, respectively. Tellurium (Te) ions were prepared using Te powder reduced by NaBH4 with N2 protection. The Te2− solution and the deposition of CdTe were protected under a N2 atmosphere to prevent the oxidation of Te2− in air.

The precursor solutions were prepared at a concentration of 0.1 M. Typically, during each cycle of the CdS SILAR deposition process, the substrate was immersed into the Cd2+ solution for 15 s and rinsed with deionized water; followed by immersion in the S2− solution for 15 s and rinsing (with deionized water). ZnO/CdS core–shell NR arrays with different CdS layer thicknesses were obtained by altering the SILAR cycles. The process of CdTe shell deposition is similar to that of CdS. After 60 cycles of SILAR deposition, CdTe fully filled the interspace of ZnO or ZnO/CdS NRs.
After CdTe deposition, the samples were placed on a hot plate at 150 °C for 2 min, immediately followed by immersion into a 60 °C solution of saturated CdCl2 in methanol, rinsing with 1-PrOH and subsequently annealed in air in a tube furnace at 400 °C for 10 min.

ZnO/CdTe and ZnO/CdS (2, 4, 8 nm thickness)/CdTe core–shell NR arrays were synthesized and annealed. Then the solar cells were fabricated by thermally evaporating 100 nm Au on the top of these NR arrays through a shadow mask to form a 2 × 2 mm2 top electrode.


The morphologies of bare ZnO, ZnO/CdS, ZnO/CdTe and ZnO/CdS/CdTe NR arrays were observed using a FEI Sirion 200 scanning electron microscope (SEM). The detailed microstructure and energy dispersive X-ray spectrum (EDX) of ZnO/CdS NRs were recorded using a JEOL-2010 Transmission electron microscope (HRTEM/TEM) operating at 200 kV. The crystal structure of each sample was characterized using a PHILIPS X'PERT PRO X-ray diffractometer (XRD) with a Cu Kα line (λ = 1.54184 Å). UV-vis absorption spectra were obtained using a U-4100 spectrophotometer (HITACHI). Photoluminescence (PL) was collected using a Fluorolog3-TAU. Ultrafast transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy was performed with a 25 fs Ti:sapphire laser system. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy measurement was carried out at room temperature using a CHI 660A electrochemical workstation (Shanghai Chenhua Instruments Co., China).

For solar cell performance testing, all current density–voltage (J–V) curves were measured under ambient conditions using a Keithley 2400 sourcemeter. AM 1.5G simulated sunlight illumination of 100 mW cm−2 was obtained using a 94023A Oriel Sol3A solar simulator (Newport) and calibrated with a reference solar cell. Incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra were characterized using a commercial QE/IPCE Measurement Kit (Newport) with no light bias.


Fig. 2(a) shows the cross-sectional SEM image of a bare ZnO NR array on the FTO substrate. It is clear that the ZnO NR arrays were grown on an ∼80 nm ZnO nanocrystal film with an average size of about 20 nm. The film acts not only as a seed layer but also as an insulating layer to prevent the CdTe from directly contacting with the FTO. The ZnO NRs, nearly vertically aligned to the substrate, have a diameter between 40 and 80 nm and a length of about 360 nm. After depositing CdS by SILAR, the ZnO NRs are covered by a thin but dense CdS nanocrystal layer to form the ZnO/CdS core–shell NRs. The morphology of the ZnO/CdS core–shell NR array is shown in Fig. 2(b), which is very similar to that shown in Fig. 2(a). The CdTe nanocrystal layer was subsequently deposited via SILAR onto the bare ZnO and the ZnO/CdS NR arrays, forming the ZnO/CdTe core–shell and ZnO/CdS/CdTe core-double shell NR arrays. It is found that 60 cycles of CdTe SILAR deposition can fully fill the interspace of the ZnO and ZnO/CdS NRs. To improve the interfacial contact of the core–shell structures and the crystallinity of shell layers, the samples were further treated with CdCl2 and annealed in air at 400 °C for 10 min. Fig. 2(c) and (d) show the cross-sectional SEM images of the ZnO/CdTe and ZnO/CdS (8 nm)/CdTe NR arrays, respectively, from both of which a very compact film with few voids can be observed.


Fig. 3(a) reveals the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the bare ZnO, ZnO/CdS (8 nm) NR arrays as well as the annealed ZnO/CdTe and ZnO/CdS (8 nm)/CdTe core–shell NR arrays. For the bare ZnO sample, except several diffraction peaks of the FTO substrate, only the ZnO (002) peak can be found, suggesting that the ZnO NRs grew dominantly along the c-axis orientation. The result for the ZnO/CdS (8 nm) sample is very similar to that of the bare ZnO, because the thickness of the CdS interfacial layer is too thin to be detected. After the deposition of the CdTe layer to the ZnO and ZnO/CdS NRs and annealing, three new diffraction peaks are observed at 23.74, 39.40 and 46.42°, which can be indexed to the (111), (220) and (311) planes of zinc-blende (ZB) CdTe (JCPDS file no. 65-1085), respectively. No signal from the oxide phase, such as CdO or TeO2, can be detected. Moreover, we find that the thin CdS passivation layer on the core ZnO NRs has a negligible effect on the crystallinity of the CdTe shells, while the average grain size of the CdTe shell is found to be about 9 nm for the as-prepared sample and increases to 21 nm after the annealing process. In order to know whether the oxidation of CdTe occurs during the process of CdCl2 treatment and annealing in air, we carried out the XPS measurement and observed the signal of Te oxide in the XPS spectra (ESI Fig. S1).

Fig. 3(b) shows the UV-vis absorbance spectra of bare ZnO, ZnO/CdS (with 2, 4, 8 nm thickness), annealed ZnO/CdTe and ZnO/CdS (2, 4, 8 nm)/CdTe NR arrays. As seen, the bare ZnO NR array has an absorption edge at ∼380 nm. After modification with a thin CdS layer, the absorption edge red-shifts to ∼500 nm and the absorption tail increases with the thickness of the CdS layer. For both the ZnO/CdTe and ZnO/CdS/CdTe core–shell NR arrays, the obvious absorption starts from 850 nm, which is consistent with the band gap of bulk CdTe. Note that the ZnO/CdS/CdTe samples with the CdS layer of different thicknesses have almost the same absorption spectra, indicating that the CdTe layer is the dominant component for the light absorption in the above mentioned core–shell nanostructures.
The detailed microstructure of the CdS passivation layer is further investigated by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and EDX. Fig. 3(c) shows a low-magnification TEM image of a single ZnO/CdS (8 nm) NR, from which one can observe a ZnO core with a diameter of ∼50 nm covered by a thin, uniform and dense CdS shell (light contrast in the figure). Fig. 3(d) shows the zoomed in high-resolution TEM image of the selected area as indicated in Fig. 3(c). As seen, the core ZnO NR grows along its c-axis with a perfect single crystal wurtzite structure. This NR of high-quality can provide direct pathways for electron transport and collection by the FTO electrode, leading to the improvement of NRASC efficiency. In addition, a polycrystalline CdS conformal layer with a thickness of ∼8 nm can be found around the surfaces of ZnO, and the d-spacing of its lattice fringes is estimated to be ∼0.315 nm, matching well with the spacing of the (101) planes of ZB CdS. The grain size of the 8 nm-thick as-deposited CdS layer is about 4 nm. The EDX spectrum of the sample shown in Fig. 3(e) indicates that the nanostructure is composed of Zn, O, Cd and S elements, and the atomic ratio of Cd to S is close to 1. Note that the Cu and C signals in the EDX spectrum are from the TEM grid and the covered amorphous carbon film.
In order to investigate the effect of interfacial CdS modification on the performance of the solar cells, a series of NRASCs were fabricated by evaporating the 100 nm-thick Au film on top of the ZnO/CdTe and ZnO/CdS/CdTe NR arrays as top electrodes with 2 × 2 mm2 size. The photovoltaic performances of four types of ZnO/CdS/CdTe NRASCs with the different CdS layer thicknesses of 0, 2, 4 and 8 nm are comparatively investigated. Fig. 4(a) and (b) show the typical current density–potential (J–V) curves and the incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra of these NRASCs. The J–V curves were measured in the dark (hollow curves) and under AM 1.5G illumination of 100 mW cm−2 (solid ones). The dependence of the NRASCs performance, such as the short-circuit current density Jsc, open-circuit voltage Voc, fill factor FF and power conversion efficiency η, on the thickness of the CdS modification layer is summarized in Fig. 4(c) and (d). The detailed information is listed in Table S1 (ESI).
Obviously, as seen in Fig. 4(a) and (c), one can find that the interfacial CdS modification can significantly improve the efficiency of NRASCs. In particular, Jsc first increases apparently from 4.74 mA cm−2 for the ZnO/CdTe NRASC to 6.82 mA cm−2 for the ZnO/CdS (2 nm)/CdTe NRASC and then remains invariable for the ZnO/CdS (4 nm)/CdTe and the ZnO/CdS (8 nm)/CdTe NRASCs. This is consistent with the results estimated from the IPCE spectra in Fig. 4(b). By comparing the absorption results of Fig. 3(b) and the IPCE spectra of Fig. 4(b), we can conclude that the CdTe layer is truly the dominant absorption material to contribute the photon-to-electron conversion. Also from Fig. 4(c), one can find that Voc is only 165 mV for the ZnO/CdTe NRASCs, but it increases to 203 mV for the ZnO/CdS (2 nm)/CdTe NRASCs and can even reach 312 mV for the ZnO/CdS (4 nm)/CdTe or ZnO/CdS (8 nm)/CdTe NRASCs. As seen in Fig. 4(d), the overall power conversion efficiency of the ZnO/CdS (4 nm)/CdTe NRASCs can reach up to 0.72%, which is three times the value of the ZnO/CdTe counterparts, while the fill factor of the NRASCs is insusceptible to the thickness of the CdS layer. The comparison between ours and several previous reports on inorganic one-dimensional ZnO (or TiO2)/CdTe core–shell solar cells is listed in Table S2 (ESI).
The origins of the increased Jsc and Voc for ZnO/CdS/CdTe NRASCs with thin CdS interfacial layer can be understood by the schematic energy band alignment of the ZnO/CdS/CdTe system, as shown in Fig. 1. In principle, the photon to current conversion in a solar cell has three processes including the photon absorption, the electron–hole pair separation and transport, and the carrier collection by the electrodes. As a consequence, the incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) is determined together by the efficiency of each of these processes, i.e., IPCE = ηabsorption × ηseparation × ηcollection. Because the ZnO/CdTe and the ZnO/CdS/CdTe NR arrays have similar crystalline quality (Fig. 3(a)) and absorption ability to light (Fig. 3(b)), it is reasonable to consider that both NRASCs have the same light absorption efficiency ηabsorption. However, after inserting the CdS interfacial layer between the ZnO core and the CdTe shell, the graded energy band alignment of the ZnO/CdS/CdTe nanostructure can prompt the electron injection from the CdTe shell to the ZnO core through the CdS layer, resulting in the improvement of electron–hole pair separation efficiency ηseparation. Generally, the time-resolved photoluminescence characterization is frequently used to investigate the ultrafast charge separation and transfer in the hetero-nanostructures. However, it is difficult to implement such an experiment due to the nearly complete quenching of the luminescence of the CdTe layer in our core–shell samples. Instead, we resort to ultrafast transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy to examine the charge separation and transfer behaviour of the annealed ZnO/CdTe and ZnO/CdS/CdTe NR arrays. The femtosecond pump-probe measurements were performed using a 25 fs Ti:sapphire laser system. Each sample was excited by 437 nm pump light and the excited-state absorption (ESA) signals were probed at 550 nm. The result is shown in Fig. 5. It is found that the recovery of the ESA signal for the annealed ZnO/CdS (2, 4, 8 nm)/CdTe NR arrays (within 200–300 ps) is faster than that for the annealed ZnO/CdTe NR arrays (∼500 ps), suggesting accelerated electron transfer from the CdTe shell to the ZnO core when the CdS layer is sandwiched in between. This observation indicates that the graded energy band alignment of the ZnO/CdS/CdTe system can prompt the electron separation and injection from the CdTe shell to the ZnO core after introducing the CdS interfacial layer.
On the other hand, due to the similar chemical properties of oxygen and sulfur atoms, the Cd2+ cations and S2− anions in solution are prone to occupy Zn and oxygen vacancies respectively during the SILAR process. Therefore, the thin CdS interfacial layer can effectively passivate the surface defect states of the ZnO NR and consequently reduce the electron–hole recombination during the charge carrier transport to the electrodes, leading to the enhancement of the carrier collection efficiency ηcollection. In order to evaluate the passivation effect of CdS on the ZnO NR, PL measurement (excitation at 325 nm) was carried out at room temperature on the pristine ZnO and ZnO/CdS (with 2, 4, 8 nm thickness) NR arrays and the results are shown in Fig. 6. As seen, a near band edge (NBE) emission at 375 nm and a broad peak of deep level emission (DLE) centred at 565 nm can be found for all the NR array samples. However, we observed a significant quenching effect of PL when the ZnO arrays are covered with the CdS layer, indicating that charge separation is possible at the interface of ZnO/CdS. Moreover, we find that the ratio of IDLE/INBE decreases with increasing the thickness of CdS from 0 to 4 nm and get saturated at 8 nm, as shown in the inset of Fig. 6. Considering that the origin of DLE is generally attributed to the intrinsic surface defects of ZnO such as the oxygen vacancy and the zinc vacancy, this observation implies indeed that the thin CdS layer can passivate the surface of the ZnO NR. Furthermore, it can be seen from the variation of IDLE/INBE (the inset of Fig. 6) that the 2 nm-thick CdS layer can only partially passivate the surface traps of the core ZnO NR while the 4 nm layer is thick enough to well passivate the surface of the ZnO NR, which is consistent with the variation tendency of Voc (Fig. 4(a) and (c)).
Moreover, we also carried out the impedance spectroscopy measurement. The results are shown in ESI Fig. S2, and the series resistance Rs and the shunt resistance Rsh of NRASC can be estimated and are summarized in Table S3. As seen, the series resistance of all NRASCs is kept about 250 Ω and shows little dependence on the thickness of the CdS, implying that the inserted ultrathin CdS layer between the ZnO core and the CdTe shell will not contribute more resistance. Meanwhile, we find that the shunt resistance increases drastically after inserting the CdS layer. The result indicates clearly that the CdS layer can passivate the surface of ZnO and consequently suppress the charge recombination at the interface as well as reduce the capture of electrons by the defect traps, leading to the improvement of FF and Jsc of the NRASC (Figure.4(c) and (d)).
Generally, the open-circuit voltage Voc of an inorganic solar cell is dominated by the difference of the quasi-Fermi levels of n-type and p-type components. Previous studies show that the surface defects on ZnO NRs enable their surface quasi-Fermi level to shift downward because of the electron trapping by the surface deep level states. Considering that the surface defects of the ZnO NRs can be passivated by the CdS layer in our case, we believe that the increased Voc of the ZnO/CdS/CdTe NRASCs originates from the surface passivation of the ZnO NRs, as the decrease of the trap states can upshift the surface quasi-Fermi level of ZnO NRs. As seen in Fig. 4(c), we observe that the Voc of the ZnO/CdS/CdTe NRASCs increases to 203 mV with a 2 nm CdS interfacial layer and saturates at 312 mV for 4 nm CdS layers. This demonstrates that the 4 nm CdS layer is thick enough to passivate the whole surface of the ZnO NRs while the 2 nm thick CdS layer can only partially passivate the core ZnO NRs, which is well consistent with the result shown in Fig. 6.
Finally, it is worth mentioning that we have tried multiple assembling and annealing steps for deposition of CdTe to reduce the pinhole of the CdTe layer, and found that the shunt resistance of NRASC can increase by about 30% as compared to that prepared by the aforementioned method. Moreover, we find that the power conversion efficiency of the devices can be further improved by increasing the ZnO nanorod length, as seen in ESI Fig. S3 and Table S4, indicating that the photovoltaic performance of NRASCs designed by us can be further improved by an optimal process.

In summary, all-inorganic solid-state ZnO/CdS/CdTe core–shell NRASCs have been successfully fabricated by depositing a thin CdS interfacial layer and a thick p-type CdTe shell layer subsequently onto the ZnO NRs with a simple low temperature and low cost solution-based SILAR method. The effect of the CdS interfacial layer between the ZnO core and the CdTe shell has been systematically investigated. It is found that both Jsc and Voc of the ZnO/CdS/CdTe NRASCs have been significantly increased, and the power conversion efficiency of the ZnO/CdS/CdTe NRASCs with the 4 nm thick interfacial CdS layer can reach as much as three times of that for the ZnO/CdTe NRASCs. The Jsc improvement is attributed to the graded energy band alignment of the ZnO/CdS/CdTe system and the passivation of surface defects of the ZnO NRs, which result in the enhanced electron–hole pair separation at the interface and increased carrier collection at the electrodes. The increased Voc is due to the upshift of the quasi Fermi level of the ZnO NR after the surface passivation. The results unambiguously demonstrate that the performance of all-inorganic core–shell photovoltaic devices can be much improved with proper interface engineering. Moreover, we believe that the photovoltaic performance of the ZnO/CdS/CdTe core–shell NRASCs can be further optimized by tuning the length of the ZnO NR and the optimal process.


This work is supported by MOST of China (2011CB921403), NSFC (under Grant no. 11374274, 11074231, 11004179 and 21121003) as well as by the Strategic Priority Research Program (B) of the CAS (XDB01020000).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta14539e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014