 DOI: 10.1039/D2NR05649F
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2023, 15, 6025-6051


Yu
Liu
,

Hongze
Zhu
,

Lei
Xing
,

Qingkai
Bu
,

Dayong
Ren
* and 

Bin
Sun
*

College of Electronics and Information, Qingdao University, Qingdao 266071, PR. China. E-mail: qdusun@qdu.edu.cn

College of Physics, Qingdao University, Qingdao 266071, PR China

College of Computer Science and Technology, Qingdao University, Qingdao 266071, PR. China

State Key Laboratory of High Performance Ceramics and Superfine Microstructure, Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200050, PR. China. E-mail: rendayong@mail.sic.ac.cn

Weihai Innovation Research Institute of Qingdao University, Weihai 264200, PR. China

Received
12th October 2022
, Accepted 26th February 2023
First published on 28th February 2023
The rapid development of flexible/wearable electronics requires novel fabricating strategies. Among the state-of-the-art techniques, inkjet printing has aroused considerable interest due to the possibility of large-scale fabricating flexible electronic devices with good reliability, high time efficiency, a low manufacturing cost, and so on. In this review, based on the working principle, recent advances in the inkjet printing technology in the field of flexible/wearable electronics are summarized, including flexible supercapacitors, transistors, sensors, thermoelectric generators, wearable fabric, and for radio frequency identification. In addition, some current challenges and future opportunities in this area are also addressed. We hope this review article can give positive suggestions to the researchers in the area of flexible electronics.
Yu Liu
Miss Yu Liu received her bachelor's degree from Qingdao University in 2020. At present, she is a postgraduate student in Prof. Sun's group at Qingdao University. Her current research interests focus on flexible electronics based on the inkjet printing technology.
Dayong Ren
At present, Dr Dayong Ren is an assistant research fellow at the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He received his Bachelor's degree in Material Physics in 2011, and PhD in Materials Science and Engineering in 2016 under the supervision of Prof. Hao Jiang and Prof. Chunzhong Li from East China University of Science and Technology. His research focuses on flexible and printed electronics. Dr Ren has published 20 papers in numerous prestigious journals.
Bin Sun
Bin Sun received his Ph.D. degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Qingdao University in 2014. At present, he is a Professor at College of Electronics and Information, Qingdao University. His research interests focus on fabricating low dimensional functional nanomaterials and their applications.

Flexible/wearable electronics are now drawing tremendous attention due to their ability to function reliably even when undergoing large deformation, as well as their wide range of applications, including electromagnetic shielding, smart displays, electronic skins, soft robots, human–machine interfaces, and implantables. For example, wearable electronics with excellent air-permeability can be comfortably worn on the human skin to capture electrophysiological signals such as pulse, respiratory, and sweat, which can identify potential health hazards. Despite recent advances in additive-manufacturing, traditional methods, such as sputtering, evaporative deposition, and electroless plating processes still have several drawbacks, including multi-stage procedures, high-cost equipment, and hazardous waste production. Moreover, most wearable devices are made of traditional electronic components and circuits on rigid substrates, which severely limit functionality and comfort when worn. Among these state-of-the-art methods, printing technologies are regarded as attractive candidates. The advent and improvement of printed electronics have facilitated the manufacture of flexible/stretchable electronics. It is reported that the market for printed electronics has reached ≈7.8 billion US dollars in 2020, and it is expected to rise to ≈20.7 billion US dollars by 2026. Printed electronics have attracted great interest in commercialization because of the ability to manufacture large-scale, low-cost electronic devices on a variety of substrates. For instance, flexible hybrid electronic (FHE) in the field of printing electronics is rapidly developing and widely used. FHE takes advantage of the different strengths of silicon-integrated circuits and flexible printing technologies. Therefore, it has more extensive applications in many emerging areas such as wearable medical devices and industrial and agricultural sensing.

The traditional printing and reproduction industry is now gradually transforming to digitalization, networking, and integration. Recently, among printing methods, inkjet printing has drawn increasing attention as an emerging technology with superior digital capability and high depositing resolution, which has grown exponentially over the last half-century. Inkjet printing is a fully digital printing process without the tedious procedures of the traditional printing process; therefore, it is of high time efficiency and low cost. During the printing course, the print nozzles are controlled by the computer and perform translational movements, and due to the elaborate control of droplet deposition and the introduction of functional ink based on nanomaterials (such as metals, two-dimensional (2D) materials, perovskite, and biomaterials), inkjet printing is able to achieve structures with a thickness from several nanometers to dozens of micrometers on various substrates, such as paper, polymers, textiles, ceramic, and skin with high adaptability, and demonstrate great potential in energy transforming, sensing, display, biomedicine, and so on (Fig. 1).Table 1 is the comparison between inkjet printing and other printing technologies. It can be seen clearly that although inkjet printing is not outstanding in terms of print resolution and scalability, it maintains a comprehensive balance between these parameters. As an example, the viscosity of the ink used for inkjet printing is approximately 1–20 centipoise, similar to the viscosity of water, to maintain good ink jet properties. These advantages endow inkjet printing with higher efficiency, better printing quality, shorter production cycle, richer information sources, and easier information transfer than the existing commercial printing methods. Namely, inkjet printing technology offers several advantages for fabricating wearable electronics, such as a lightweight, environmentally friendly, and cost-effective production process, which meets the needs of “real” wearable applications.
Printing speed (m2 s−1)
Minimum dot size (μm)
Minimum layer thickness (μm)
Viscosity of ink (cP)
Ref.
Flexographic printing
∼10
20
∼1
50–500

33 and 34
Gravure printing
0.5–20
30
1–8
102–103

34 and 35
Offset printing
7–70
10–50
<0.5
102–104

34 and 36
Inkjet printing
10−3–10
1–50
0.5–3
1–20

33–35

Screen printing
10−3–5
>20
5–100
500–5000

34

In terms of the process of squeezing ink droplets out of the nozzles, inkjet printing can be divided into continuous inkjet (CIJ) and drop-on-demand (DOD) printing (Fig. 2). The CIJ printing has a single nozzle with a pair of charging electrodes, a pair of deflecting electrodes, and an ink recycler in front of the nozzle. In the printing process, the piezo-vibrator breaks up the continuous jet stream into individual ink droplets. Every single ink droplet can be selectively charged by the charging electrodes with an appropriate voltage pulse. The deflection electrodes are connected to the high-voltage DC power to generate a deflecting electric field. When the charged droplets pass through the deflection electrodes, they will deflect according to the applied electric field. Therefore, the deposition position of the ink droplets can be easily controlled by tailoring the charging voltage, which can be calculated by linear regression of the visualized deflection of droplets. While the uncharged droplets are not deflected when they pass through the electromagnetic field and go directly into the ink collector, where they can be used again after filtering. The whole process is shown in Fig. 2a. However, DOD printing can realize the deposition of the ink droplets on the designated location through the digital driver under ambient conditions. The micrometer-scale resolution of inkjet printing makes it control the pattern's features precisely. Compared to CIJ printing, the DOD removes a lot of mechanical accessories such as the ink pump, ink recovery device, charging electrode, and high-pressure deflection area. As shown in Fig. 2b, the imported graphic information containing complexly-patterned architectures designed using computer software in advance generates a digital driving signal and applies pressure on the ink-cartridge through the piezo-transducer, which can push the ink out of the nozzle. As a result, the ink droplet will fall onto the substrate as required to form the graphic. According to the ink-driven modes, DOD technology can be subdivided into thermal-bubble and piezoelectric types. In the case of the thermal bubble driving model, the electro-heating element in the print head heats up to produce an ink bubble that squeezes the ink at the nozzle hole forcing a drop of the ink out of the nozzle. In the piezoelectric model, the piezoelectric element in the nozzle undergoes deformation, squeezing the ink and forcing it to flow down the nozzle. In order to improve the printing speed, arrayed nozzles are usually adopted in commercial or laboratory-used printers.
In this review, based on the working principle of inkjet printing, we summarized the recent advances of inkjet printing technology, as well as the application in the field of flexible electronics, including supercapacitors, transistors, sensors, photodetectors, thermoelectric generators, wearable fabric, radio frequency identification, and so on. Furthermore, some future challenges and opportunities for real applications are also discussed.

In thermal bubble inkjet printing, the printhead is usually a straight metal bar with 2 or more rows of nozzles, and the ink in the cartridge fills all the nozzles. Fig. 3a shows the principle of thermal bubble inkjet printing technology. During the printing process, a thin-film resistor is used to instantly electrically heat the ink to over 300 °C, in an area less than 5 μL in the ink ejection area. The heated ink forms countless tiny bubbles that gather at a very fast rate (less than 10 μs) to become a large bubble and expand, forcing the ink droplets to eject from the nozzle. As heat is removed from the fluid layer by evaporation, the bubble temperature and pressure both decrease. When the pressure of the bubble is below the ambient pressure, the bubble collapses and draws the ink at the nozzle, backwards, instantly forming a thin neck. If the neck is thin enough, the fluid head will detach. The separated fluid forms spherical droplets under surface tension, then these droplets fall down onto the substrate. At the same time, in the next operating cycle, the ink in the chamber is refilled into nozzles by capillary forces and gravity.

Due to the random nature of the vapor bubble in the nucleation process and the instability of the droplet, which may cause a breakup of the ink droplet in the sprayer, the velocity of the droplet varies slightly between each other, generally known as droplet jitter. Droplet jitter can lead to droplet volume variation, satellite-liked drop formation, and droplet placement errors on the receiving substrate, which greatly limit the applications of inkjet technology where high-precision is required. Traditionally, multiple-exposures are often used to capture the droplets in flight. However, the low sampling rate makes it impossible to accurately measure the jitter of each drop. Wang et al. proposed a simple model to interpret the cause of droplet jitter by using a laser-based measurement system to study the jitter. The location of the bubble nucleation is restricted by pits and cavities, so heterogeneous nucleation can easily occur. Also, any bubbles formed by nuclei and heterogeneous sites will grow and collapse without coalescing. In their experiments, when the voltage or pulse width was low, the energy applied to the liquid layer was found to be not sufficient to induce homogeneous nucleation, so heterogeneous nucleation occurred. The randomness of the vapor bubble nucleation process can lead to jittering and instability of the ink droplets. As a result, by increasing the voltage or pulse width, they found that the jitter can be reduced from >10 μs to about 1 μs because the jitter was greater at lower energies. When measuring the ink jitter at the same energy, the decrease in voltage means that the input power is decreased. This led to a reduction in heating rate, and heterogeneous nucleation and the ink droplet jitter became more intense. In addition, due to the superimposed effects of ink instability, a printhead structure, and other factors, they found the response of droplet jitter to frequency to be very complex in the frequency response experiments and further simulations and experiments are required.
It is worth noting that with the development of technology, researchers are now devoting their efforts to promoting thermal bubble inkjet printing. Lu et al. designed TaN-based heating resistors with chopsticks-shaped structures. These heating resistors could be heated to 1100 °C in just 1.8 μs. Due to the high power of the heating resistors, the working time was greatly reduced and the frequency was effectively increased. For instance, under the condition of 12 V at 40 kHz, the inkjet chip could efficiently print with 10 nozzles at the same time. To maximize the use of ink in the chamber and increase the printing frequency, Peng et al. designed an H-shape structure including a flow restrictor and two narrow channels into the chamber. They found that after passing through the narrow channel (20 μs), the maximum flow rate of the ink can be increased by 39%. At an inkjet printing frequency of 40 kHz, the volume of the ink droplet was about 13.1 pL. Besides, they proposed the possibility of a hemispherical chamber for thermal bubble inkjet printing. After simulation, it was found that using the hemispherical chamber inkjet head, high-frequency printing of 30 kHz and a significant volume ratio of the droplet to the chamber (14.9%) could be achieved.

According to the principle of thermal bubble inkjet printing, one can see that the choice of materials for ink formulations can be limited because many materials in the ink deteriorate at locally high temperatures, and some inks with a boiling point below 300 °C cannot be foamed. In 1984, Professor Bogy and Talke designed a piezoelectric inkjet using the electromechanical coupling and energy conversion properties of piezoelectric ceramics. Later, printer manufacturers such as Epson have been researching and improving this technology, which promoted the commercialization of piezoelectric inkjet.

Piezoelectric inkjet printing belongs to the DOD method that can work at normal temperature. The shape of the piezoelectric transducer changes in response to an applied voltage, which generates a pressure pulse to the ink chamber simultaneously, causing droplets to be ejected drop by drop from the nozzle to the desired position. As shown in Fig. 3b, piezoelectric inkjet printing can be divided into squeezing, pushing, shearing, or bending modes. In the squeezing mode, the piezoelectric actuator is a radially polarized ceramic tube with a diameter of about 1 mm. When a voltage pulse is applied to the inner and outer surfaces of this actuator, the actuator contracts, and the ink inside the tube is ejected from the nozzle. In the pushing mode, there is a diaphragm between the piezoelectric actuator and the ink. The piezoelectric actuator pushes the diaphragm up and down under the action of the electric field, and then the ink drops are ejected from the nozzle. In the shearing mode, the electric field is perpendicular to the direction of polarization, which causes the piezoelectric ceramic to make a shearing motion without lengthening or shrinking. Adjacent actuators interact to eject the ink droplets. In the bending mode, one side of the chamber is a conductive film that is connected to a piezoelectric ceramic plate. This piezoelectric ceramic plate is deformed by the application of a voltage, causing the film to bend toward the chamber. This applies pressure to the liquid inside the chamber, causing ink droplets to be ejected from the nozzles. Among the aforementioned modes, the bending mode has been the most common and most studied.
Jiao et al. investigated the effect of ink properties and voltage parameters on the formation of piezoelectric inkjet droplets. In their works, by observing the droplet formation of sodium alginate, alcohol, and gelatin inks, stable single droplet ejection of these inks has been achieved by adjusting the driving voltage amplitude and ejection frequency. As the voltage amplitude increased, the inkjet stability, velocity, and droplet diameter increased. The voltage frequency had no significant effect on the velocity and diameter. However, when the voltage frequency was 8 kHz or above, continuous ejection of droplets may coalesce and the printing results were affected. Moreover, Kang et al. studied the inkjet performance through piezoelectric voltage and ink temperature. It was found that the cooled ink increased the viscosity and decreased the inkjet velocity, obviously, thereby reducing the satellite-liked droplets. As a result, the cooled ink stabilized the inkjet jet. The droplet velocity also increased upon increasing the piezoelectric voltage, which can lead to the formation of satellite-like droplets. Therefore, the right voltage and ink temperature are important for the stability of the ink droplet jet.

In this section, from the aspect of functional nanomaterials, recent advancements in inkjet printing for flexible/wearable electronics, such as supercapacitors, transistors, sensors, photodetectors, thermoelectric generator, wearable fabric, and radio frequency identification have been summarized.


The rapid growth of portable and wearable electronics has created a demand for the development of high-performance and miniaturized energy storage devices with excellent flexibility and high power output. In recent years, micro-supercapacitors (MSCs) have received a lot of attention for their excellent performance such as fast charging and discharging, high power density, low maintenance, and long cyclic life. MSCs, as highly promising miniaturized energy storage devices have been the subject of extensive theoretical and experimental research. However, manufacturing MSCs with all the merits is still a challenge. Although various methods such as stencil filtering, photolithography, mask-free patterning, and laser patterning, can partially meet the requirements, the long procedures and material wastage inevitably limit the production of high-performance MSCs.

Printed MSCs with in-plane interdigital configurations are considered as promising options to meet these needs, particularly with the blooming of 2D materials. Li et al. fabricated flexible all-solid-state MSCs using inkjet printing technology, as shown in Fig. 4a. Here the molybdate tetrahydrate salt precursor/graphene oxide ((NH4)6Mo7O24/GO) aqueous inks were inkjet printed on polyamide (PI) films and converted to MoO3/reduced graphene oxide (rGO) hybrids by heat treatment under air atmosphere. As shown in Fig. 4b and c, the as-printed MSC had a wide voltage window of 0–0.8 V, as well as excellent flexibility. Most importantly, the inkjet printing technology showed its potential for flexible, and wearable energy storage electronics.
Furthermore, Zhou et al. used 2D titanium carbide (Ti3C2Tx) MXene and rGO as electrodes to fabricate a robust and stretchable high-performance MSC. In this structure, the hybrid electrode combined the outstanding electrochemical and mechanical properties of Ti3C2Tx with the mechanical stability of rGO. The results showed that the Ti3C2Tx/rGO composite electrodes with thevincorporated 50 wt% rGO demonstrated not only excellent electrochemical performance but also could mitigate cracks generated even under large strains. In addition, Cheng et al. inkjet printed flexible planar MSCs with unique loose and porous nanofiber-like structures with the assistance of electrochemical deposition and inkjet printing. The capacitor's electrodes are manufactured by inkjet printing. First, the PET substrate was fixed on a Printing platform and preheated to 50 °C. Then, the interdigitated Ag electrodes were inkjet printed on the PET substrate. Finally, the resultant electrodes were annealed at 120 °C for 1 h. Due to the porous nanofiber-like structure, the area capacitance of the flexible planar MSCs was significantly increased to 46.6 mF cm−2, which is one of the highest values ever reported for MSCs. In addition to the excellent electrochemical properties, the prepared MSCs also exhibited excellent mechanical flexibility and robustness. The MSCs still showed 86.8% capacitance retention even under the bent 180° test 1000 times, as shown in Fig. 4d.
In addition to silver electrodes, Li et al. used inkjet printing to fabricate ultrathin MoS2/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) electrodes for flexible in-plane MSCs. In this method, MoS2 nanosheets were uniformly dispersed in isopropanol to form a highly concentrated ink, which was adaptive for inkjet printing. The PEDOT:PSS ink was firstly printed on the PI substrate according to the pre-designed interdigital electrode to improve the electrode conductivity. Afterward, MoS2 inks with different layers were printed to explore the optimal electrochemical parameters. The capacitance retention of this MSC at different bending radii and charge–discharged cycling stability was then measured. As an example, the CV curves do not change significantly even at diverse bending radii (such as r = ∞, 7.3, 6.7, 5.5, 4.5, and 3.8 mm). This phenomenon indicates superior mechanical stability under various bending states. Besides, the capacitance retention of such MSCs remained at about 85.6% even after 10000 cycles, and the GCD (galvanostatic charge–discharge) curves of the MSCs at a current density of 10 μA cm−2 were up to 8000 cycles (Fig. 4e), indicating the good cycling stability and revealed the great potential for wearable flexible electronic devices.
From microelectromechanical systems and robotics to sensing microsystems and wearable electronics, microscaled energy storage devices are attractive and in high demand. However, the fabrication of high-energy MSCs using existing printing technologies still remains a challenge. In 2019, by introducing latex polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) as an aqueous ink for making dielectric capacitors, Poulin et al. found that the dielectric properties of the printed microcapacitors can be optimized by introducing polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) into PVDF. In this case, PVA has a high dielectric breakdown strength and prevents the coalescence of PVDF nanoparticles. Well-dispersed PVDF nanoparticles provide a large electric displacement under high electric fields. Thus apart from mechanical robustness, as well as dielectric stability over time, a high discharged energy density of 12 J cm−3 can be achieved at 550 mV m−1.

Inkjet printing is a promising candidate technique for the large-area fabrication of flexible/stretchable transistors. Inks based on functional polymers and metal oxides can be inkjet-printed to enable large-scale manufacturing of transistors on various types of substrates. However, the limitation of 2D material-based inks, the bottom-gated structure, and the unsatisfied current on/off ratio of thin film transistors (TFTs) hinder the application of printed 2D TFTs. In the research for TFTs with high current ratios, Jewel et al. introduced a stable and effective method for preparing nitrogen-doped graphene (NDG) inks for inkjet printing. The author used highly conductive nano-silver ink to print the source, drain, and grid electrodes. The channel region is stacked by the NDG film and molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) through multiple printing processes, forming a 100% inkjet-printed vertical two-dimensional active heterostructure, and finally, an inkjet-printed barium titanate (BaTi3) ink with a thickness of 2 microns was used as the dielectric of the transistor. The resultant fully inkjet-printed MoS2-NDG transistor displayed a current on/off ratio of 1200.

Recent developments in inkjet printing have proven it to be a viable method for depositing large areas of oxide nanolayers at a low cost. However, the main drawback of this method is that it usually requires post-deposition annealing (PDA) of the printed layer at relatively high temperatures (>200 °C), which exceeds the tolerance for most flexible substrates. To reduce the PDA temperature, ultraviolet (UV) annealing is considered an effective candidate for PDA. Bolat and coworkers achieved the application of yttrium aluminum oxide (YAlOx) dielectrics in flexible transistors by inkjet printing and UV annealing at 150 °C on a flexible polyimide substrate. By using YAlOx as a metal–insulator–metal (MIM) type capacitor dielectric, it was observed that increasing the Y incorporation can increase the dielectric constant and decrease the leakage current of the dielectrics. By using low-boiling point graphene and hexagonal-boron nitride (h-BN) inks, Carey et al. fabricated washable, flexible heterostructured field-effect transistors (TETs) working under ambient environments by direct printing on various substrates (PET and polyester textile). The printed TETs on PET achieved average field-effect mobility (μn) = 150 ± 18 cm2 V−1 s−1, while the TETs on polyester textile demonstrated an average field-effect mobility for holes (μh) and electrons (μe) up to 91 ± 29 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 22 ± 10 cm2 V−1 s−1, as well as performance stability after at least 20 washing cycles.
In order to reach the purpose of mass production of transistors, scale-up yields, and manufacturing efficiency, great efforts have been made in this area. Bao et al. provided a simple, inexpensive, and scalable route for printing stretchable transistor arrays based on single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNT) on a large scale. As shown in Fig. 5a and b, the soft stretchable FET arrays were fabricated by layer-to-layer deposition and direct patterning of different intrinsically stretchable materials via inkjet printing. The stretchable transistor arrays were made entirely from inkjet-printed solutions of polymers and carbon nanotubes. Because of the intrinsically stretchable material used in the production process, the electrical properties of the device were not seriously degraded when it was subjected to mechanical stretching. As shown in Fig. 5c, when stretched in a direction perpendicular to the current flowing across the channel up to 20% strain, the drain–source current (Ids) of the transistor remained constant. On the other hand, some current degradation was found when the stretching was performed parallel to the current flow direction. It was thought mainly due to irreversible contact damage, which is supported by the fact that the current remained unchanged after relaxing the device to 0% strain (called “back to 0%” in the curve).
In addition, these transistors with double-layer capacitive dielectric can mimic the synaptic behavior of neurons, which allows them to be used in conformal brain-machine interfaces and other wearable bioelectronics. Due to the digital and maskless nature of inkjet printing, it can be easy to be generated in large areas (Fig. 5d). Compared to other skin electronics, it can operate at low voltages and has high transconductance due to the ionic nature of the gate dielectric. These properties allow it to mimic the behavior of synaptic neurons and have the potential to interface with neurons in vivo in the future in the form of artificial synapses.
Wang et al. proposed that desirable capabilities, such as high mechanical deformability, enhanced skin compatibility, and high energy density, could be obtained using intrinsically stretchable polymer materials. Based on this viewpoint, they printed an array of stretchable transistors with an unprecedented device density of 347 transistors per square centimeter. The stretchable electronic device could be constructed using this transistor array, as shown in Fig. 6a, including active matrices for sensor arrays and elements of the analog and digital circuits. At 100% strain, the transistors showed a stable performance (i.e., mobility) both under the stretching direction and perpendicular to stretching, as shown in Fig. 6b and c. The mechanical stability of this transistor array was investigated by cyclically stretching in the parallel to channel direction (left) and perpendicular to the channel direction (right), respectively. This stretchable transistor array showed unprecedented mechanical stability when repeatedly stretched to 100% strain 1000 times in directions parallel and perpendicular to the channel. It provided a generic platform for combining intrinsically stretchable polymers, enabling the design of next-generation stretchable skin electronics. Based on these transistor arrays, stretchable circuits for skin electronics have then been constructed (Fig. 6d). It can be seen that when gradually stretched to 100%, the transfer curve has only a small shift, revealing the capability for logical operations (Fig. 6e).

Through a doping process, a P-type semiconductor with holes as the majority carriers is formed on one side of the semiconductor, while an N-type semiconductor with electrons as the majority carriers is formed on the other side. Near the intersection of these two semiconductors, a thin layer called the P–N junction is formed due to carrier diffusion and drift. When applying a forward bias, a large forward current can be formed in the P–N junction. When in reverse bias, the resulting reverse saturation current is very small, the property called the unilateral conductivity of the P–N junction. The diode can be fabricated just by a P–N junction and two electrodes. The diode can ensure unilateral conductivity, namely, allowing the current to flow in a fixed direction and not in the other direction, which is determined by the P–N junction inside the diode. Diode is one of the most widely used electronic devices, which is commonly used in rectifying circuits, switch circuits, limiter circuits, etc.

By combing inkjet printing and transfer printing processes, Park et al. fabricated top anodes of inverted polymer light-emitting diodes (PLEDs) on rigid glass and flexible polyethylene naphthalenediate (PEN). In this case, PEDOT:PSS ink was formulated and a fully customizable pattern was acquired using inkjet printing. The Ag bottom cathode of the polymer light-emitting diode is also manufactured by inkjet printing technology. The resultant all solution-processed inverted PLEDs (a-PLEDs), and partially solution-processed inverted PLEDs (p-PLEDs) showed almost the same turn-on voltage (about 2.2 V), which was defined at 1 cd m−2, as shown in Fig. 7a. Particular, for the a-PLEDs, the current efficiency curve decreases by about 10% when the luminance range was less than 1000 cd m−2 and by about 20% when the luminance range was greater than 1000 cd m−2, after 100 bending cycles, as shown in Fig. 7b. As is known, various negative differential resistance (NDR) or negative transconductance (NTC) devices based on van der Waals heterojunctions have anti-ambipolar characteristics. They have an inverse V-transfer curve in contrast to the typical V-transfer curve of an ambipolar field-effect transistor (FET). Kim combined a mixture of indium oxide and SWCNT into a P–N heterojunction to fabricate a gate-tunable diode by inkjet printing. Herein, by modification of the surface conditions, inkjet printing of P–N heterojunctions with partially overlapped semiconductors was achieved. The resulting devices with P–N junctions and electrodes entirely formed by inkjet printing exhibited an anti-ambipolar behavior with negative transconductance. Fig. 7c and d shows the transmission characteristics (ID–VG) of the field-effect transistors (FETs), illustrating the distinct P-type and n-type behavior, respectively. Fig. 7e shows the transfer characteristics of a gate-tunable diode on a semi-logarithmic scale. The drain current (Id), which was modulated by the gate bias (VGS), increased until the current reached a maximum and then decreased as VGS increases, demonstrating an opposite property to the behavior of a bipolar transistor. Kim also fabricated a ternary inverter using N-type indium oxide (InO) and P-type SWCNT to form a P–N heterojunction. The partially overlapped P–N heterojunction was reliably formed by inkjet printing of semiconductor ink. Through the selective material deposition of inkjet printing, the characteristics of anti-ambipolar FET and ternary inverter can be systematically studied according to the number of printed semiconductor layers. In this work, the middle-logic voltage in the ternary inverter could be modulated by changing the density of the SWCNT network in the anti-ambipolar FET channel through inkjet printing. As the number of SWCNT printed layers increases, middle-logic voltages are lowered.
2D semiconductors have been attracting increasing interest. However, the full potential of 2D transistors remains to be determined. Therefore, a critical assessment and objective prediction of the fundamental merits and technological limits of 2D transistors are needed. Liu et al. proposed that some parameters (such as carrier mobility and contact resistance) may often be misestimated or misunderstood, and not be the most reliable performance metrics for benchmarking 2D transistors. They suggested that the saturation or on-state current density, particularly in the short-channel limit, provides a more reliable measurement for evaluating the potential of 2D semiconductors.

Flexible sensors, representing the electrical “ears”, “nose” or “eyes” of information processing systems, are being used in many industries and our daily lives. Sensors are often used to provide real-time information acquisition and make many relative technologies more cost-effective, reliable, and secure. Until now, with the development of nanotechnology, multiple flexible sensors such as mechanical sensors, humidity sensors, temperature sensors, and gas sensors, have been profoundly fabricated, based on various nanomaterials and structures, to meet the needs of potential applications.

Printing technology is a blooming field for flexible sensors, which has dynamically responded to these demands. Printed electronics are manufactured using additive printing processes, i.e., the deposition of materials directly onto a substrate in a patterned manner, or more formally, the electronic science and technology of manufacturing electronic devices and systems based on traditional printing techniques. The fabrication of sensors by inkjet printing has received a lot of interest in recent years, because of their promise of flexible and multifunction electronics over large areas. As a low-cost manufacturing technology, inkjet printing is capable of depositing functional materials with the micron-level resolution, which allows the technology to be used for the fabrication of deformable sensors, and they can be used for indoor or outdoor applications, anthropometric and other biomedical devices, as well as the relatively mature applications in environment, agriculture, room monitoring, and so on. In this section, sensors via inkjet printing technology from the design viewpoint of integrated circuits and systems have been summarized, as well as the possible application areas.

As is known, the moisture present in the human body contains a lot of biological information, which is of significance for human life. Hence, developing humidity sensors to detect and continuously monitor in real-time the content of the vapor on the human skin and the surrounding environment is necessary. With the rapid development of wearable electronics, humidity sensors are gradually developed in many potential applications for human body-related (HBR) humidity detection. As an example, exhaled humidity and skin surface humidity can be detected in a non-contact mode to monitor body health.

In 2007, Panhuis et al. inkjet-printed a CNT-biopolymer humidity sensor on a PET substrate. They found that the resistance fell to ∼2 MΩ (from 350 MΩ) when the sensor was exposed to an ambient environment. The change in resistance was rooted in the change in conductive pathways among the CNT networks due to mechanical swelling of the biopolymer matrix in the presence of a moisture environment. This work has been regarded as the first time generation of a flexible humidity sensor using inkjet printing. Molina-Lopez et al. introduced the possibility that electrodepositing a thicker metallic nickel layer on inkjet-printed patterns on PET films during their experiments to fabricate the capacitive humidity sensor. Also, they found that the Ag ink demonstrated better adhesion on PET than on PI, regardless of pre-treatment with oxygen plasma, which on the contrary was helpful to increase the smoothness of the edges of the as-printed lines.
Peng and coworkers used a commercial printer Epson 2100 to print PEDOT:PSS suspension on a flexible PEN substrate to prepare transparent interdigital electrodes. The inkjet-printed flexible transparent humidity sensor was fabricated by introducing a humidity-sensitive film based on Ti3C2/Ag hybrid and an adhesive layer based on polydiallyl dimethyl ammonium chloride (PDDA). This sensor revealed an ultrahigh sensitivity (106800%), a rapid response (80 ms), and excellent bending resistance. Craciun et al. presented an all-graphene humidity sensor on PET with flexibility, transparency, and compatibility, as shown in Fig. 8a. After 2000 bending cycles, the sensor maintained identical performance compared with its initial states (Fig. 8b), demonstrating good properties. Lee et al. constructed a high-sensitivity humidity sensor by using two Ag electrodes inkjet printed on PET substrates, and a graphene (G)/methyl red (M-R) composite layer was deposited between the two Ag electrodes by an electrohydrodynamic (EHD) inkjet printing technique. The humidity sensor had a resistance sensitivity of 96.36% and a capacitance sensitivity of 2869500% against humidity, and response and recovery times of 0.251 s and 0.35 s respectively. In addition, Sulaiman et al. investigated a fully flexible inkjet-printed capacitive humidity sensor by mixing graphene oxide (GO) with polyacrylic acid (PAA) as a sensing material (Fig. 8c). It was found that for all samples the increasing capacitance was linear up to 60% RH and then increased rapidly at higher humidity levels, as shown in Fig. 8d and e.

Human body temperature can reflect human health very visually and conveniently. To date, the development of flexible wearable temperature sensors regarding temperature monitoring has received increasing attention, and scientific research on it has become more and more mature. As for inkjet printing in this field, remarkable progress has been achieved.

Tokito et al. presented a full inkjet-printed flexible PEDOT:PSS-based temperature sensor, as shown in Fig. 9a. This sensor demonstrated high humidity stability, due to the bilayer passivation in the form of a fluorinated polymer (CYTOP) layer and a hydrophilic polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) layer, which showed a superior barrier effect against humidity. Therefore, under the environmental humidity of 30% RH to 80% RH, a high sensitivity of −0.77% °C−1 can be maintained from 25 °C to 50 °C. Under 5000 bending cycles with a bending radius of 5 mm, no significant change in resistance was found, indicating the excellent performance of the sensor (Fig. 9b and c). Also, the sensor could respond quickly and stably when attached to the skin or removed, as well as the capability for breath monitoring. Bahadir et al. inkjet printed a CNT/PEDOT:PSS temperature sensor directly on textile substrates (Fig. 9d and e). It demonstrated a low electrical resistance of 242.6 ± 21 kΩ after being printed 10 times. Besides temperature sensitivity of −0.31 ± 0.03% °C−1 from room temperature to 50 °C, the as-prepared temperature sensor exhibited good mechanical stability with a resistance change of 0.3% after a repetitive bending process of 1000 cycles (Fig. 9f). Additionally, they found that the effect caused by bending can be minimized when these wearable sensors were placed on the torso area of the garment.

Mechanical sensors are the most common sensors in our life, which can convert mechanical deformations into electrical signals, and are widely used in many fields such as soft robotics, human–machine interaction, and human motion monitoring/detection, and they can maintain desirable properties under deformation, compared to their traditional rigid counterparts. With the advanced technology, more and more mechanical sensors, such as strain sensors, pressure sensors, and tactile sensors, based on inkjet printing were fabricated.

Pan et al. fabricated a bimodal e-skin that can sense bending strain and pressure using the all-inkjet-printing technique (Fig. 10a). This e-skin was based on a microcracked metal film and a sandwich capacitor structure. For the strain sensor, a high gauge factor (4000) and good stability (over 4500 cycles) can be achieved (Fig. 10b and c). The pressure sensor showed an excellent capability to detect a tiny pressure of 2 Pa, as well as high stability of over more than 5700 cycles (Fig. 10d). Interestingly, the strain sensor and pressure sensor did not interfere with each other. In order to acquire high sensitivity, Sun et al. provided a flexible sensor using inkjet printing. Herein, conductive ink based on Ag nanoparticles can be directly jetted onto flat or patterned UV-curable polyurethane acrylate (PUA) substrates, respectively. As a single-layer strain sensor, besides an ultrahigh sensitivity (maximum gauge factor of >1100) and favorable durability of over 1000 stretching/releasing cycles, it also exhibited a fast response time (≈90 ms) (Fig. 10e). Meanwhile, by combining flat and patterned PUA/Ag composite films, it can be further upgraded as a durable double-layer pressure sensor.
Sometimes, inkjet printing can be adopted by combing it with other techniques. Kordas et al. presented piezoresistive strain sensors based on stretchable roll-to-roll screen-printed silver electrodes on polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) substrates and inkjet-printed SWCNT micropatterns. By adjusting the surface wetting and inkjet printing parameters, well-defined microscopic line patterns of the nanotubes with a low sheet resistance could be achieved. This sensor had high sensitivity and a gauge factor of up to 400, responding to bending down to a radius of 1.5 mm.
By directly inkjet printing a conductive Ag nanoparticle layer onto the PDMS substrate and followed by encapsulation with a VHB tape, Wang et al. fabricated a resistive pressure sensor (Fig. 10f). After systematically investigating the effect of the substrate stiffness and thickness on the characteristics, a pressure sensor with a sensitivity of up to 0.48 kPa−1 was obtained. Owing to the high sensitivity and low fabrication cost of inkjet printing, this sensor can be adopted to disposable wearable sensor applications, for detecting acoustic vibration and measuring arterial pulse waveforms (Fig. 10g).
As a promising pressure-sensing element, the paper has attracted wide attention due to its foldability/bendability, as well as the high porosity for breathing, which is of significance for wearable electronics. However, it is difficult for paper-based tactile sensors to achieve high sensitivity and a wide sensing range simultaneously. To overcome these limitations, Kim and coworkers recently designed a resistive tactile sensor using stacked mulberry paper and carbon nanotubes (CNTs) as the pressure-sensing element, here inkjet printing was performed by covering the CNTs on both sides of the mulberry paper. When the pressure was applied, a significant change in the contact area between the sensing layer and electrodes was introduced, due to the rough surface and a fiber-networked structure of the mulberry paper. This contact-area change led to a distributed stress, followed by the sensitivity and sensing range of pressures. As a result, the tactile sensor demonstrated sensitivity values of 6.67, 2.80, and 1.19 kPa−1 to pressure ranging from 0.05 to 100 kPa, 100 to 300 kPa, and 300 to 900 kPa, respectively.
Ag nanoparticles (AgNPs) are now widely used as electrodes, interconnect, pressure sensors, and resistance sensors, because of their good electrical conductivity and chemical stability. Tavakoli et al. found that coating a thin layer of eutectic indium gallium (EGaIn) on an inkjet-printed Ag nanoparticle layer can increase the electrical conductivity by six-orders of magnitude and obviously improved the tolerance to tensile strain. This performance was achieved through a room-temperature “sintering” process. In this process, the liquid phase EGaIn alloy was combined with Ag nanoparticles to form continuous conductive traces. The printed circuit is flexible enough to operate during deformation and can support more than 80% of the strain through moderate electromechanical coupling.

Harmful gases are hazardous to human health, hence it is necessary to detect them in real-time and provide an alert to people who could be potentially exposed to such gases. From the early coal mines to nowadays industrial manufacturing and national defense, there is a wider range of needs for gas sensors with safety, operating easiness, portability, low cost, as well as high sensitivity to specific target analytes. With the advances in printing technology, multiple functional material-based gas sensors with optimized structural designs have paved the way in this area.

During the process of inkjet printing flexible PEDOT:PSS-based ammonia (NH3) sensors, Guo et al. found that with controllable droplet spacings (DS), narrower and thinner local regions can be formed between adjacent ink drops in the fabricated line structures, as shown in Fig. 11a and b. With increasing of DS from 25 mm to 40 mm, it became more and more pronounced, leading to line structures of non-even morphologies. On detecting NH3, the sensitivity was in direct proportion to the DS value (Fig. 11c). It is believed that when the PEDOT:PSS sensor was exposed to a low concentration of NH3 analytes, the adsorption of the NH3 molecules will cause a hole depletion regions. The volume of the depletion layer in the narrower and thinner region was much larger than that in the wider droplet region, which significantly affected the carrier transport, resulting in enhanced sensitivity.
Recently, Hayashi et al. used full inkjet printing of molecularly imprinted gas-selective materials on photographic paper to produce a matrix of gas sensors (Fig. 11d). In their experiments, a combination of insulating inks and commercial silver inks was adopted to fabricate the electrode matrix consisting of 36 interdigital electrodes in a high-density layout with the internal structure (Fig. 11e). Then, molecular-imprinted polymer (MIP) inks were printed on the electrode matrix along with carbon black ink to complete the sensor production. As the concentration of the propenoic acid (PA) vapor increased, the rate of change of the sensor resistance increased accordingly. The sensor was not only reproducible and recoverable but could detect relatively low PA vapor concentrations (3 ppm). Apart from a fast response (200 s) and recovery (180 s) times, good long-term stability has been illustrated. During the process that the sensor matrix was exposed to 3 ppm PA vapor for one month, the gas response remained stable at about 22.5%, as shown in Fig. 11f.

In the information age, photo detection is now a fundamental technology in modern science and technology. Photoelectric detectors convert incident photons into electrical signals and are used in a wide range of scientific research and industrial applications such as optical interconnections, optical communications, and environmental monitoring.

As an innovative preparation process, inkjet printing demonstrates a great advantage in fabricating flexible photodetectors, due to its merits such as effectiveness in materials, free of the mask, and patterned deposition, endowing it excellent mechanical properties overcome its rigid counterparts.
Song and coworkers reported creating large-scale single-crystal perovskite films with controlled thickness. To realize this purpose, a seed printing approach has been utilized. Firstly, perovskite solution droplets were selectively inkjet printed on the substrate to generate patterned perovskite seeds. Secondly, the substrate with perovskite seeds was placed inversely on the target substrate containing the saturated perovskite solution. Perovskite single-crystal films have consequently been formed as the perovskite seeds grew. They found that the perovskite seeds were able to suppress random nucleation, and the perovskite single-crystal film with high crystal quality only grew in the seed region. In addition, by controlling the concentration of the printed perovskite solution, the perovskite seed size and the film thickness can be precisely tailored from hundreds of nanometers to dozens of micrometers. Furthermore, it was observed that single-crystal perovskite films could be synthesized on various substrates. Recently, flexible photodetectors with high quality based on print large-scale perovskite films have been presented by the same group. In their experiments (Fig. 12a), a soluble polyethylene oxide (PEO) layer was employed firstly as a substrate, and then the perovskite inks were directly inkjet printed onto the PEO layer. After the dissolution of the PEO layer and evaporation of the perovskite solution, large-scaled perovskite film could be generated, which can be prepared on flexible substrates such as polyethylene PET film. Taking the MAPbBr3-based perovskite film as an example, compared to that without PEO, this perovskite crystal can completely be covered on the substrate's surface and rendered stronger absorbance to the ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) spectra (Fig. 12b), and a clear increment in the photoluminescence (PL) lifetime. As a result, the photodetector based on this method demonstrated a responsivity up to ∼1036 mA W−1 (35.3 mW cm−2, 3 V) (Fig. 12c). Also, stability was presented. After continuously 15000 bending and recovering cycles, the photodetector maintained over 96.8% of the initial photocurrent, as shown in Fig. 12d.
By embedding interlacing ZnO nanowires (NWs) and Ag NWs network in thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU) substrate via inkjet printing, He et al. fabricated a transparent, stretchable, and wrappable photodetector. In this case, the TPU substrate provided a high UV transparency (absorption <5% from 300 to 400 nm), thus UV light from all directions was able to reach ZnO NWs without being blocked, and a 360° omnidirectional detection capability was realized for this device, as the photoresponse vs. angles of incidence (AOI, ϕ) (Fig. 12e). Moreover, the photodetector can be flexed and stretched to a high degree. Even being bent or stretched, the photocurrent remained, as shown in Fig. 12f. After a repeating stretched and released process for 100 cycles (60% strain), the damping was only 5% and 16% of its original value along the x (lateral direction of the active ZnO NW channels) and y (longitudinal direction of the active ZnO NW channels) axes, respectively (Fig. 12g), as well as high stability after being bended-recovered for 100 cycles.

Radio frequency identification (RFID) is a technology that uses electromagnetic fields to automatically identify and make tags that can be attached to objects. Wang et al. presented a reliable and low-cost method for synthesizing high adhesion, low resistivity, and flexible metal antennas for RFID tags on paper substrates by inkjet printing combined with surface modification and electroless deposition (ELD) techniques. Considering that inkjet printing ink can be easily penetrated into the interior of porous materials, leaving only a small amount of diluted ink on the surface, surface treatment was introduced to improve porosity, reduce the ink penetration, and increase the adhesion of the active layer to the substrate. After surface treatment, the copper layer was continuously and compactly adhered to the modified paper substrate, as shown in Fig. 13a and b. The resultant metal antenna for RFID tags demonstrated a low resistivity of 2.58 × 10−8 Ω m. Importantly, the RFID tags maintained a reliable reading range even after over 1000 times of bending and mechanical stress, as shown in Fig. 13c. Demir et al. proposed the use of chipless tags for RFID, which are based on the Latin alphabet. As the response frequency of letters using standard fonts would be relatively weak and smooth, special slits were designed to improve the letters’ distinguishability without sacrificing their legibility. The as-designed samples can be used to produce words that were also suitable for RFID applications due to their strong and unique scattering characteristics. Particularly, these labels manufactured by inkjet printing render them both flexible and inexpensive. In addition, an authentication method that extends chipless RFID to chipless authentication was presented by Ali and colleagues. In that work, an Epson C88+ printer was used to print JS-B25P silver conductive ink on the polyethylene terephthalate (PET) film. Contrary to the classical image-based authentication approach, these labels could be entirely hidden and were difficult to be replicated, due to the random nature of inkjet printing, demonstrating the potential for confidentiality and the product integrity of high-end luxury products.

Furthermore, by combining origami with inkjet printing, Paulino et al. created Miura-Ori patterned frequency-selective surfaces (FSSs) multilayer structures that featured the unprecedented capability of on-the-fly reconfigurability to diverse specifications (e.g. multiple bands, broadband/narrowband bandwidth, wide angle of incidence rejection), which can be reconfigured over continuous-state ranges from folded to unfolded configurations on cellulose paper. The use of a highly porous substrate along with the “bridge-like” structures allows the realization of truly flexible resonant elements that maintain high conductivity even for large bending angles (Fig. 13d–f), further enhancing the states of reconfigurability.

Our life is benefitted from the increasing development of modern electronics. However, as a two-edged sword, it brings electromagnetic interference (EMI) pollution and radiation issue, which cause harmful effects on the operation of electronics and human health. Hence, high-performance EMI-shielding devices are strongly desired.

EMI shielding capability is strongly dependent on the conductivity, permittivity, and permeability of EMI-shielding materials, which influent the results of absorption and reflection losses. Datar et al. developed an rGO-based ink for EMI shielding using reduced graphene oxide and Ni/Fe3O4 composite materials. This ink takes absorption as the main shielding mechanism of EMI shielding and can be coated on the surface of objects. In the experiment, they tested the viscosity and density of the ink and found that the viscosity of the synthetic ink was equivalent to that of the ink used in the inkjet printer, indicating that the new ink could be used in the inkjet printer and screen printing. Then, they found that when magnetic nanoparticles (Ni and Fe3O4) were respectively added to decorate rGO, the shielding efficiency was significantly enhanced, and it increased with the increasing concentration of such particles, as well as the thickness of the polymer matrix. This ink could absorb electromagnetic waves up to 25 dB, which is more than 99% of the total radiation and can be introduced for commercial applications. Considering the drawback of water-soluble ink based on MXene sheets, such as the weak stability resulting in the form of satellite droplets and jetting deflection, and the agglomeration of MXene sheets at the edges of the droplets (coffee ring effect) during evaporation because of the lack of interactions with the substrate, Demirel et al. provided a method to synthesize MXene (Ti3C2Tx) ink for inkjet printing (Fig. 14a). Here the tandem repeats synthetic proteins from squid ring teeth were introduced as binders. It was found that the synthetic protein-based binders can control the aggregation of the MXene sheets even when the high-viscosity solvent (dimethylsulfoxide, DMSO) evaporated rapidly on the heated substrates (70 °C), rendering a uniform deposition of Ti3C2Tx among printing area. The stability of the printed patterns has also been improved. The as-printed MXene patterns on PET films revealed a high electrical conductivity of 1080 ± 175 S cm−1. As the electrode, it can be assembled in a LED circuit. Stability was retained during the bending of the radius of curvature of 5 mm and only a little deterioration at the maximum radius of curvature of 3.6 mm, as shown in Fig. 14b and c, occurred. Based on the good electrical performance, the EMI shielding capabilities of the inkjet-printed MXene electrodes were tested. The shielding efficiency reached 50 dB with the film thickness of 1.35 μm (Fig. 14d), indicating the potential of such protein-based MXene inks as the EMI shielding materials for printed electronics.

The thermal applications include thermal management such as thermal conduction, thermal insulation, and the resultant thermal heater and thermoelectric generator, which are tightly related to human daily life. As an example, a high amount of thermal heat can be generated during the operation of electronics, which will seriously affect the working performance and even the operating life of electronics. Thus, it is important to dissipate this unnecessary thermal heat. On the contrary, thermal heat can be used as thermotherapy for some chronic diseases such as arthritis. In this section, recent progress in this area based on inkjet printing is highlighted.

Moon et al. studied the thermal conductivity of laser-sintered printed ink lines based on Ag nanoparticles by assessing the in situ electrical resistance. By applying the Wiedemann-Franz law to 2D heat conduction equations, they found that the thermal conductivity (K) of the sintered ink was in direct proportion to the sintering temperature and laser intensity. Namely, by increasing the sintering temperature, the surface diffusion mechanisms made Ag NPs to aggregate, leading to a decreased porosity among them, and thus electron paths have been constructed.
Fujie et al. designed a flexible induction heater integrated with inkjet-printed Au wiring and flexible biodegradable poly(D,L-lactic acid) (PDLLA) thin film (Fig. 15a), followed by a transfer process. The electrical property of the sample was not adversely affected during 30 bending and releasing processes (radii ∼1, 1.5, 2.5, 8.2, and 14.5 mm, respectively), as shown in Fig. 15b. As for the heat generation, they observed that this heater can repeatedly generate heat by eddy currents and radiate heat into the environments continuously without any heating storage in the device itself. Due to these advantages, it could be applied to in vivo thermotherapy. After attaching this device to the surface of the hepatic lobe in a beagle dog and operating it to increase the temperature (Fig. 15c) (which was powered by a transmitter coil), the histopathological analysis demonstrated that there was no tissue damage to the hepatic lobe, as shown in Fig. 15d.
Thermoelectric (TE) materials are capable of converting thermal energy to electricity and have wide applications in the fields such as power plants and space exploration equipment. For the thermoelectric devices, the high efficiency is a relatively high thermoelectric figure of merit (ZT), and ZT = σS2T/k, where σ is electrical conductivity, S is the Seebeck coefficient, T is the absolute temperature, and k is thermal conductivity.
Although highly-efficient thermoelectric materials have been known since the 1950s, their application has been limited to a few niche areas. This can be partly attributed to the high manufacturing cost and the limitations of current commercial manufacturing technologies. Printing technology can offer a potential way to generate thermoelectric materials at a lower price, allowing for the fabrication of custom generators, and providing device performance comparable to that of commercial counterparts.
Tittonen et al. reported a flexible thermoelectric device based on large-area inkjet printing of graphene films (Fig. 15e). After exfoliating from bulk graphite using ultra-sonic assisted liquid phase exfoliation, the graphene was dispersed in isopropyl alcohol (IPA) and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) to form the ink. After inkjet printing and subsequent annealing to remove PVP, the graphene films showed a positive Seebeck coefficient of ≈41 μV K−1 because P-type doping by atmospheric oxygen/moisture could permeate the nanoporous graphene network. Also, a rather low thermal conductivity of 1.00 ± 0.25 W m−1 K−1 was measured at room temperature, as shown in Fig. 15f. As a result, a thermoelectric power factor at ≈230% improvement was achieved. The as-printed thermoelectric device could be fixed onto nonplanar surfaces or for harvesting energy from body heat in wearable applications. Under periodic and repetitive mechanical stress, the thermoelectric performance of a single leg was investigated. As shown in Fig. 15g, it maintained stability against mechanical deformation during continuous deformation of 10000 bending cycles. Besides, at a bend radius of less than 4 mm, the resistance change of the film was within 10% (Fig. 15h), indicating its potential for flexible thermoelectronic applications.
Using highly-aligned carbon-nanotube yarns (CNTYs) as a substrate and with the assistance of picoliter scale inkjet printing, Kim et al. recently fabricated wearable thermoelectric generators with high performance. Firstly, CNTYs with a length of 5 mm were spun from the as-synthesized CNTs and wound onto a 3D elastomeric substrate. Then, an alternate-doping into P- and N-type using 4-hydroxycarbazole (H-carbazole) and 1,3-bis(diphenylphosphino) propane (dppp) was introduced, respectively, via inkjet printing, while the undoped regions at the top and bottom were adopted as electrodes. Finally, after handling the problem of electrical shorting by placing silicone rubber spacers, an CNTY-based thermoelectric generator with 600 P–N pairs was assembled from 10 sets of the above configuration. In their experiments, the key factor was precisely selective but homogenous doping of P-and N-type dopants onto the surfaces of CNTYs, while preventing their mixing, hence inkjet printing with a droplet volume of a few picoliters was introduced to realize this goal, by minimizing the amount of dopant ink and ensuring high-spatial doping resolution. The as-fabricated thermoelectric generator can be woven or wound around a 3D structured target substrate to convert waste heat to electricity in the through-plane direction. As the CNTY regions between the doped regions acted as interconnects, it resulted in the P- and N-type legs connecting electrically in series but thermally in parallel, the thermoelectric generator legs and the heat source could be directly contacted without air gaps, enabling it to minimize the parasitic heat loss, thus maximizing the temperature differences. The thermoelectric generator has negligible contact resistance, and the performance was in proportion to the number of P–N pairs. At ΔT = 25 K, the thermoelectric generator with 600 P–N pairs demonstrated the maximum output voltage and output power of 1.5 V and 1.2 mW, respectively, as shown in Fig. 15i. Additionally, it showed outstanding flexibility and durability. No obvious changes occurred in the device resistance and output voltage even after 3000 bending cycles (Fig. 15j). Due to the high performance of this thermoelectric generator, it can be used to harvest thermal heat from the human body (Fig. 15k), and this as-harvested heat can be adopted for powering wearable electronics, such as LEDs, as shown in Fig. 15l.

Functional inks and consequent inkjet printing on textiles to embed passive electronics and sensors offers a new way for allowing for scalable fabricating of wearable electronic textiles. Noguchi et al. compared the printing results between inkjet printing and screen printing on textiles, they found that the sample prepared via inkjet printing have higher air permeability. However, due to the rough and porous surface, it still remains challenging to form continuous electrically conductive pathways by direct inkjet printing, particularly for ink with one-dimensional (1D) nanoparticles that can hardly form electrically conductive percolation. For this reason, an interfacial layer is usually required to provide suitable surface conditions for inkjet printing. Bordes et al. found that by aforehand coating wood-derived cellulose nanofibrils (CNFs) with glycerol on woven cotton fabrics, the Ag nanoparticle-based ink droplet settling on the substrate can be improved, as shown in Fig. 16a and b. The CNF/glycerol coating enabled it to maintain the inter-cohesion between the Ag nanoparticles in the as-printed fabrics, preserving the printed path conductivity. As a result, the inkjet-printed circuit worked well even when the fabric was largely bent or folded several times (Fig. 16c). Jur et al. reported a new inkjet printing process for depositing particle-free reactive silver inks on polyester fabrics, knitted fabrics, woven and nonwoven fabrics. By inkjet printing the reactive ink based on silver salt for several passes with in situ heating at 80 °C, and a subsequent annealing at 140 °C, cubic face-centered silver extracted from the solution and uniquely coated onto the fiber surfaces, as shown in Fig. 16d. When the fiber diameter in the textile was larger than the ink droplet, the ink drop would spread longer in length along the fiber, while when the fiber diameter was smaller than the ink droplet, the droplets tended to reside at the junctions of the fibers rather than spreading longitudinally along the fiber length. This technique can conformally coat individual fibers of the textiles without altering the feel, texture, durability, and mechanical properties of the fabric, through the formation of a conductive network within the fabric structure. As an example, after more than 10000 bending cycles, no significant resistance changes were observed in the fabric coated with the particle-free functional ink, as shown in Fig. 16e.

The prosperity of 2D materials such as graphene and MXene paves the way in this area, because of the large width-to-thickness ratio, making it easier to connect to each other and achieve conductive percolation compared to that in 1D nanoparticles. Gogotsi et al. developed a method to formulate conductive and additive-free aqueous Ti3C2Tx MXene inks that can be directly inkjet printed on a variety of substrates. There were only two components contained in the nontoxic ink: delaminated, single-layered Ti3C2Tx MXene flakes (active material) and water (solvent). They found that the high surface area of hydrophilic cotton-based textiles could accelerate the evaporating rate of the ink, and the Ti3C2Tx could fully coat the surface of a single yarn on the fabric surface (Fig. 16f), thus a uniform Ti3C2Tx film and a subsequent conductive pathway were constructed. In addition, the ink with large-sized MXene flakes (L-Ti3C2Tx inks) demonstrated a higher conductivity compared to that with the small-sized MXene flakes (S-Ti3C2Tx inks), because of the reduced intersheet contacts per unit length for the former. The inkjet-printed circuits after only one print pass had a good electrical conductivity, which can act as the wire to light three LEDs (powered by a 9 V battery), as shown in Fig. 16g. Furthermore, using these Ti3C2Tx inks, symmetrical MSCs with interdigitated electrode configuration were inkjet-printed on a cotton-woven fabric. Herein, the S-Ti3C2Tx inks and then the L-Ti3C2Tx inks were consecutively inkjet printed on the textiles, where S-Ti3C2Tx flakes facilitated ion transport into the bulk of the electrode and the L-Ti3C2Tx flakes offered sufficient electrical conductivity to achieve high performance, current collector-free MSCs. With an interspacing between the electrode fingers of 250 μm, the MSCs were tested in the PVA/H2SO4 gel electrolyte only by directly connecting alligator clips to the as-printed MXene contact points. The MSC demonstrated good electrochemical performance. The areal capacitance of 294 mF cm−2 at 2 mV s−1 and 145 mF cm−2 at 10 mV s−1 were achieved (Fig. 16h). After long-term cycling (over 10000 CV cycles at 50 mV s−1), the capacitance retention was ≈98% and the coulombic efficiency was over ≈99% for each cycle (Fig. 16i).

Flexible solar cells have garnered significant interest in recent years. Thanks to recent advances in printing technologies, the production of solar cells using inkjet printing technology is becoming a reality. Inkjet printing provides rapid and precise deposition combined with excellent control over the formation of solar cells. Perovskite is a well-known semiconductor material for solar cells. Inkjet printing provides scalable and cost-efficient deposition of perovskite on a wide range of substrates and in arbitrary shapes. Paetzold et al. fabricated a triple-cation (methylammonium, formamidinium, and cesium) perovskite (TCP) solar cell using inkjet printing technology (Fig. 17a) The inkjet-printed perovskite layers featured a columnar crystal structure, free of horizontal grain boundaries, which extended over the entire thickness (>1 μm), high power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) (>21%), and stabilized power output efficiencies (>18%) (Fig. 17b).

Other solar cells types, such as silicon solar cells (Si), Cu-based chalcogenides (Cu(In,Ga)Se2/Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4) thin film solar cells (TFSC), dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC), and organic solar cells (OSC), can also be fabricated using inkjet printing technology. Hasan et al. used a plant-extracted dye (from Caesalpinia pulcherrima) as a photosensitizer instead of a ruthenium dye to produce the DSSCs. It was found that the inkjet-printed graphene counter electrodes demonstrate a ∼0.9% conversion efficiency and a comparable ∼1.1% efficiency using platinum (Pt) counter electrodes. When used with inorganic ruthenizer 535-bisTBA (N719) dye, the graphene counter electrodes revealed a ∼3.0% conversion efficiency, compared to ∼4.4% obtained using Pt counter electrodes.
Transparency is also important for perovskite solar cells due to its possibility for a variety of applications, such as tandem cell configuration and building-integrated photovoltaics. In considering the contradiction between transparency and efficiency, Etgar et al. introduced a new method to adjust the overall transparency of the solar cells using the inkjet printing islands of transparent pillars at specific locations and variable array densities. The results indicated that the printed solar cell demonstrated a 10.6% efficiency and slightly reduced (19%) average transparency. Moreover, Chen et al. fabricated an ultra-thin and ultra-flexible Ag mesh on a PDA-modified PET substrate using inkjet printing technology. It was found that Ag meshes with different line widths had different transmission spectra and sheet resistance, as shown in Fig. 17c. The 300 μm Ag mesh demonstrates a high transmittance of up to 89.9% and outstanding sheet resistance (Rs) of 9 Ω sq−1. Therefore, the resultant solar cells showed a superior power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 10.24%, excellent short circuit current density (Jsc) of 15.04 mA cm−2, high open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.95 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 71.7%, which matches well to the corresponding PCE value (10.34%) of the polymer solar cells with ITO/PET electrodes (Fig. 17d). After bending for 1500 cycles, the PCE was still maintained at 81%, further demonstrating its excellent mechanical durability (Fig. 17e). Even after 30 days, the PCE was measured to be 83% of the initial PCE (Fig. 17f), which revealed the great operational reliability of the solar cell.

Catalysts are the core of most chemical reactions because they can convert raw materials into value-added products. Inkjet printing technology provides the possibility to develop high-efficient catalytic processes. For example, the contact situation between the catalyst and the reactant significantly affects the efficiency of the catalyst. Therefore, improving the structure which is used for better contact is an important direction to promote catalytic efficiency. Tremiliosi-Filho et al. fabricated inkjet-printed membrane electrode assemblies (MEAs) and invested in the effect of the deposition substrate. It was observed that the printing process could ensure, simultaneously, excellent contact between the catalyst layer and the Nafion and carbon substrates even before pressing. Printed with platinum-supported catalyst inks, the membrane showed good properties in fuel cells. Li et al. developed patterned catalysts using inkjet printing to control the growth of the grown SWNTs. After printing the catalyst precursor on the substrate, SWNTs were grown from these areas using the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process. Besides the challenges such as improving resolution and uniformity in this patterning method, it was found that properties of the inks and the substrates, such as surface tension, and volatility, as well as the viscosity of the inks and the surface properties of the substrates, are the key factors for patterning.


Inkjet printing technology is showing great potential in multiple areas ranging from photovoltaics and display technology to biomedicine. Particularly, with the development of flexible/wearable electronics, due to the simplicity of the process, short processing time, low material consumption, high resolution, and non-contact fabrication, inkjet printing technology demonstrates a large potential for the mass-production of such devices in both laboratory research and industrial manufacturing and is now widely studied.

There are a variety of inks for inkjet printing, which can be roughly divided into four categories according to electrical functionality. Conductive inks, such as Ag, Au, PEDOT:PSS, rGO, MXene, which are mostly used to make conductive wires and electrodes due to the high electrical conductivity. Inks like barium titanate and yttrium aluminium oxide (YAlOx) can be adopted as dielectric ink, which is common in the manufacture of field effect transistors and capacitors. Semiconductor-based inks such as metal oxides, SWCNT, perovskite, and indium oxide, are always used to fabricate transistors, P–N junctions, and sensors. Although certain viscosity is always required to ensure the inks are ejected smoothly due to the performance limitations of thermal foaming and piezoelectric inkjet printers, the viscosity of the inkjet printing ink (ranging from 1 to 20 cP) is the lowest compared with other printing methods. The size of the smallest dot in inkjet printing is also the smallest among all current printing technologies, which means it has the highest accuracy compared to other printing technologies.
Inkjet printing can be executed on almost all substrates. Based on the physical properties, the substrates can also be divided into several types. There are loose and porous substrates such as cotton yarn, polyester fabric, knitted fabric, woven and non-woven fabrics, woven cotton fabric, carbon nanotube yarn (CNTY); Stretchable substrates including PDMS, TPU; flexible substrates such as PET, PI, thin PEO layer and flexible PEN, as well as the most commonly used substrates such as paper, and photo paper. Other materials without flexibility and elasticity, such as rigid glass, fluorine-doped tin oxide coated glass, and UV-cured PUA substrate can also be used as inkjet printing substrates. Sometimes, surface modification of the substrate is required to improve the high porosity, reduce ink penetration and increase the adhesion between ink and the substrate.
However, in addition to the significant advances, great challenges can still be met for inkjet printing as a new emerging technology. First, to manufacture multifunctional devices, various inks with different contents and functions should be synthesized, to meet the demand of the rapid advances in nanotechnology. Secondly, quality defects in inkjet digital printing should be amended, which include the color reproduction, paper flatness, sharpness of graphic edges, back striping, dirty ink dots, and white lines, although it is glad to see that achievements have been made, such as rendering a functional coating on the surface of the substrate. The coating allows precise regulation of the relative amount between penetration and diffusion of a single drop of ink. Besides, deficiencies exist due to non-uniform manufacturing/curing, ambient humidity/temperature effects, and uncontrollable deposition conditions, especially in low-production setups. By machine learning models to interpret variables and output high-confidence predictions of the signal, it is possible to print objects with minimal production effort using a suitable inkjet printer while still extracting reliable data. This allows inkjet printing to be used at home by those in isolated/restricted environments, poor communities, resource-starved environments, or hobbyists. In addition, problems of low resolution, slow printing speed, low throughput, and possible nozzle clogging still exist. As an example, in photodetector arrays, each photodetector serves as a pixel of image sensors, and it is better to embed more pixels in the matrix. Nevertheless, the relatively low resolution of inkjet printing still hinders further application in this field. However, the market of electronic products is still big and growing, which means that understanding and optimization of inkjet printing processes is important. Apart from flexible electronics, inkjet printing is extensively used in many fields such as photovoltaics, water purification, and anti-counterfeiting technology, indicating the broad prospect of this technology.

There are no conflicts to declare.


This study was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province (ZR2020ME193).


† These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023