 DOI: 10.1039/C4NR06677D
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7072-7077


Xuegong
Yu
,

Lifei
Yang
,

Qingmin
Lv
,

Mingsheng
Xu
*,

Hongzheng
Chen
 and 

Deren
Yang
*

State Key Lab of Silicon Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, P. R. China. E-mail: mseyang@zju.edu.cn

State Key Lab of Silicon Materials, Department of Polymer Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, P. R. China. E-mail: msxu@zju.edu.cn

Received
12th November 2014
, Accepted 2nd January 2015
First published on 5th January 2015
The graphene–silicon (Gr–Si) Schottky junction solar cell has been recognized as one of the most low-cost candidates in photovoltaics due to its simple fabrication process. However, the low Gr–Si Schottky barrier height largely limits the power conversion efficiency of Gr–Si solar cells. Here, we demonstrate that electric field doping can be used to tune the work function of a Gr film and therefore improve the photovoltaic performance of the Gr–Si solar cell effectively. The electric field doping effects can be achieved either by connecting the Gr–Si solar cell to an external power supply or by polarizing a ferroelectric polymer layer integrated in the Gr–Si solar cell. Exploration of both of the device architecture designs showed that the power conversion efficiency of Gr–Si solar cells is more than twice of the control Gr–Si solar cells. Our study opens a new avenue for improving the performance of Gr–Si solar cells.

The fascinating properties of graphene (Gr), such as high carrier mobility, high optical transparency and tuneable work function, make it an attractive candidate for application in optoelectronic and photovoltaic devices. Recently, there is growing interest in incorporating Gr with silicon (Si) to develop Gr–Si solar cells, in which the Gr film forms a Schottky junction with Si functioning for carrier separation. The Gr–Si solar cells can be fabricated by simply placing a Gr film onto a Si substrate at room temperature, and thus it is considered as a potential low-cost alternative to the conversional p–n junction silicon solar cells. The first Gr–Si solar cell with an efficiency of 1.5% was demonstrated in 2010 by Li et al. Subsequently, considerable progress has been achieved and the efficiency of the Gr–Si solar cell by employing a pristine monolayer graphene has reached nearly 4%. However, such an efficiency remains much lower than that of crystalline Si solar cells. One of the main drawbacks of the Gr–Si solar cell is its low Gr–Si Schottky barrier height, which causes a large leakage current and low open circuit voltage of the solar cell. This problem could be partially addressed by chemically doping the Gr film, which leads to tuning of its work function and in turn improving the efficiency of the Gr–Si solar cell. For instance, an efficiency of 8.6% has already been reported for the monolayer Gr–Si solar cell by doping the Gr film with bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)amide [(CF3SO2)2NH] (TFSA). However, the volatile oxide chemically doped Gr film is generally not stable, resulting in severe efficiency degradation for solar cells in few days and is not suitable for practical application. Recently, a novel hybrid heterojunction and solid-state photoelectrochemical solar cell based on graphene woven fabrics (GWFs) and silicon with an embedded solid electrolyte (polyvinyl alcohol + HNO3) was demonstrated. The solid electrolyte not only chemically doped the GWFs, but also provided an additional photoelectrochemical channel for carrier separation/transport, resulting in an 11% efficiency solar cell. The solid electrolyte shows potential to achieve a more stable doping effect for graphene–silicon based solar cells.

In this work, we demonstrate other new approaches to doping Gr films, manipulating its work function and in turn improving photovoltaic performances of the Gr–Si solar cells by means of electric field doping. Our results show that the efficiency of Gr–Si solar cells can be significantly improved either by connecting the Gr–Si solar cell to an external power supply or by polarizing a ferroelectric polymer layer integrated in the Gr–Si solar cell.

The monolayer Gr film was produced by a copper (Cu) catalyzed low pressure CVD (LPCVD) method at 1000 °C, using CH4 (20 sccm) as the carbon source and H2 (40 sccm) as the reduction gas. The traditional PMMA-based wet process was used for Gr film transfer. Graphene oxide (GO) powder with an average flake size of ∼1 μm and a thickness of ∼0.8 nm was obtained from XFNANO. Vinylidene fluoride-tetrafluoroethylene copolymer P(VDF-TrFE) powder with a composition of 70% VDF and 30% TrFE in molar ratio was obtained from Kunshan Hisense Electronics. P(VDF-TrFE) solution (0.2 wt%) was prepared by dissolving P(VDF-TrFE) powder in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) at 60 °C and stirring for 12 h under N2 gas protection.


N-type <100> single c-Si wafer with a resistivity of 1–3 Ω cm was used as the substrate. To optimize the Gr–Si interface, an ultrathin GO layer (∼2.4 nm) was deposited on the Si surface by the layer-by-layer (LBL) assembling technique as described in our previous work. Then, a monolayer Gr film was transferred onto the Si substrate and the front electrode (Ag, ∼200 nm) was formed by thermal evaporation through a mask, defining a device active area of 9 mm2. Afterwards, an insulating layer (HfO2, ∼10 nm) was deposited on the Gr film by the atomic layer deposition (ALD) technique followed by transferring a second Gr film onto it. Finally, a gate electrode was formed on the second Gr film and the backside electrode was formed using an InGa eutectic alloy to complete the device fabrication.


An N-type <100> single c-Si wafer with a resistivity of 1–3 Ω cm was used as the substrate. After depositing the ultrathin GO layer on the Si surface as described above, a P(VDF-TrFE) layer was then formed by the spin-coating technique. The spin rate and time were 1000 rpm and 30 s, respectively. Then the Si substrate was subjected to thermal annealing at 140 °C for 1 h to crystallize the P(VDF-TrFE) film. Afterwards, the front electrode (Ag, ∼200 nm) was formed by thermal evaporation through a mask defining a device active area of 9 mm2. Finally, a monolayered Gr was transferred onto the P(VDF-TrFE) layer and the backside electrode was formed using an InGa eutectic alloy to complete the device fabrication.


The performances of the Gr–Si solar cells were measured using a Keithley 2400 source meter and a solar simulator under AM 1.5G conditions at an illumination intensity of 100 mW cm−2, calibrated by a standard Si solar cell. For the external electric field doped Gr–Si solar cell, a gate voltage (Vg) was applied between the top Gr film and the bottom Gr film with an external power supply and the performance of the Gr–Si solar cell was measured at the same time. For the internal electric field doped Gr-P(VDF-TrFE)-Si solar cell, a polarization voltage (Vp) was applied between the Gr film and the Si substrate for 10 min to polarize the P(VDF-TrFE) film. Then, the performance of the Gr-P(VDF-TrFE)-Si solar cell was measured after removing the polarization voltage.



Fig. 1a shows the fabrication process and the structure of the external electric field doped Gr–Si solar cell. Note that there are two layers of the Gr film involved in this architecture. The bottom Gr film forms Schottky junction with the Si substrate, whereas the top Gr film is used as a transparent gate electrode for manipulating electrically-doping of the bottom Gr film. The operation principle of the solar cell is schematically shown in the inset in Fig. 1b. As shown in Fig. 1b, we recorded the current density–voltage (J–V) curves under illumination and at different gate voltages (Vg). It can be seen that when a negative Vg was applied between the top and bottom Gr films, the bottom Gr film was p-type doped and the photovoltaic performance of the solar cell was progressively enhanced as the Vg was varied from 0 V to −3 V. Particularly, the open circuit voltage (VOC), short circuit current density (JSC), and the fill factor (FF) of the solar cell were increased from 0.30 to 0.40 V, 14.0 to 23.3 mA cm−2, and 0.29 to 0.34, respectively (see Table 1). The efficiency of the Gr–Si solar cell was enhanced from 1.23% to 3.19%, indicating that the electric field doping is quite beneficial for the performance of the solar cell. We propose the energy band diagram of the Gr–Si solar cell in equilibrium before and after electric field doping in Fig. 2. After the Gr film was electrically-doped, its work function (WGr) was increased, which in turn increased the Gr–Si Schottky barrier height (ΦB = WGr − χSi) and the built-in potential (qVbi = WGr − WSi) near the Si surface. Note that the VOC of the solar cell is positively correlated with the built-in potential (Vbi). Therefore, the increase of the Vbi resulted in the increase of the VOC of the solar cell. Meanwhile, a larger Vbi widens the depletion region width (WDr ∝ ) and allows a more efficient collection of electrons and holes, which resulted in an increased JSC of the solar cell. Furthermore, as the Gr film was p-type doped, its conductivity was improved and contributed to the increase of the FF of the solar cell.


V
g (V)

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF

η (%)
0
0.30
14.01
0.29
1.23
−1
0.34
16.78
0.30
1.70
−2
0.36
20.39
0.33
2.45
−3
0.40
23.27
0.34
3.19
To verify the effect of electric field doping on the Gr–Si junction addressed above, we performed capacitance measurement as a function of the bias voltage (C − VB). On the basis of the expression 1/C2 = 2(VB − Vbi)/(qεND), the extrapolated value of 1/C2 to the abscissa corresponds to the Vbi and the carrier density (ND) can be extracted from the slope.Fig. 3 shows 1/C2 − VB curves of the Gr–Si solar cell at Vg = 0 V and −3 V. The carrier density of the Si substrate was extracted to be about 2 × 1015 cm−3, which matches the range given by the wafer supplier. Furthermore, the Vbi was found to be increased from about 0.42 V to 0.60 V as the Vg was varied from 0 V to −3 V, which consequently led to the enhancement of the VOC of the Gr–Si solar cell (see Fig. 1b and Table 1). The results reflect that the connecting of the Gr–Si solar cell to an external power supply can dope the Gr film and tune the work function of the Gr film. On the other hand, it should be mentioned that if the Vg was increased to a certain level, leakage current through the dielectric film could occur. This could cause additional power consumption for our solar cell. Noticing this, we tried to control the leakage current under a low level (10−6–10−5 A cm−2) by using a high K material (HfO2) and controlling the gate voltage (Vg) under a low value (≤3 V). In such a case, the power consumption of the external power supply is less than 5% of the power generating by the solar cell if it works at its maximum power point. We also note that there is similar work using external electric field doping to improve the efficiency of the CNT (carbon nanotube)-Si solar cell by applying an ion liquid as the insulator. However, it is difficult to handle the ion liquid and it cannot be integrated into the devices for practical application.
Another route to electrically-doping the Gr film is to utilize an internal electric field generated by the ferroelectric dipoles of a ferroelectric material, which can be easily integrated into the solar cell. The ferroelectric polymer P(VDF-TrFE) is a good candidate because it displays a high transparency (>98%) in the visible wavelength range. The structure and working principle of the Gr-P(VDF-TrFE)-Si solar cell are shown in Fig. 4. The P(VDF-TrFE) layer was sandwiched between the GO layer and the Gr film. When a positive polarization voltage (Vp) was applied between the Gr film and the Si substrate, the P(VDF-TrFE) layer was polarized and induced net dipole moment pointing from the fluorine side to the hydrogen side of the P(VDF-TrFE) chains. The generated electric field is non-volatile since the P(VDF-TrFE) layer can maintain a long-term polarization. This electric field can effectively dope the Gr film and enhance the performance of the Gr–Si solar cell, similar to the mechanism discussed above.
Since the crystallinity of P(VDF-TrFE) is critical for its ferroelectric properties, we annealed the P(VDF-TrFE) film at 140 °C for 1 h. The sharp diffraction peak at 2θ = 20° in the XRD pattern (Fig. 5a) suggests that the ferroelectric phase (β-phase) is highly crystalline. The P(VDF-TrFE) film after crystallization is actually discontinuous and consists of individual rod-like crystalline grains with a length of ∼200 nm and a height of ∼15 nm as visualized by AFM (Fig. 5b). Fig. 6a shows the J–V curves of the Gr-P(VDF-TrFE)-Si solar cell under illumination measured after polarization with different Vp. The photovoltaic performance of the solar cell was greatly enhanced with the change of the Vp from 0 V to 4 V. Particularly, the VOC, JSC, FF, and the efficiency of the solar cell were increased from 0.45 to 0.50 V, 14.8 to 21.3 mA cm−2, 0.30 to 0.39 and 2.01% to 4.13%, respectively (see Table 2). However, as the Vp was further increased from 4 V to 5 V, no more enhancement for the Gr-P(VDF-TrFE)-Si solar cell could be achieved, indicating that the P(VDF-TrFE) film might reach its maximum polarization in the present study and its electrically-doping effect on the Gr film could be saturated. These results suggest that the electric field doping induced by the P(VDF-TrFE) polarization can effectively improve the performance of the Gr–Si solar cell. Fig. 6b shows the dark J–V characteristics in the semi-logarithmic scale of the Gr-P(VDF-TrFE)-Si solar cell after having applied different Vp. The ΦB derived from the measurement was found to be increased from 0.79 V to 0.83 V as the Vp was varied from 0 V to 4 V. This change is consistent with the change of the VOC of the Gr-P(VDF-TrFE)-Si solar cell.

V
p (V)

V
oc (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF

η (%)
0
0.45
14.8
0.30
2.01
2
0.48
17.54
0.35
2.98
4
0.50
21.25
0.39
4.13
5
0.50
21.92
0.38
4.14
To obtain more convincing evidence of the P(VDF-TrFE)-induced electric field doping effect on the Gr film, we performed Hall measurements of the Gr-P(VDF-TrFE)-Si sample which was polarized at different Vp. As shown in Fig. 7, the sheet resistance of the Gr film decreased from 680 to 540 Ω □−1 and the carrier density of the Gr film increased from 5 × 1012 to 8.4 × 1012 cm−3 with the increase of Vp from 0 V to 4 V. In the case of Vp being higher than about 3.5 V, the changes of the sheet resistance and carrier density of the Gr film became negligible. This phenomenon is consistent with the observation of the Gr-P(VDF-TrFE)-Si solar cell performance in Fig. 6a.
Owing to the linear band structure of the Gr film, the change of the work function of the Gr film (ΔWGr) can be related to the change of its carrier density (Δn) as in eqn (1)
(1)
where
vF is the Fermi velocity (1.1 × 106 m s−1) and h is the Planck constant (6.626 × 10−34 J s). It is found that the work function of the Gr film was increased by 0.06 eV as the Vp was increased from 0 V to 4 V, which is in line with the change of the Gr–Si barrier height (0.04 eV) and that of VOC of the Gr-PVDF-Si solar cell (0.05 V). These results clearly indicate the electric field doping effect of the Gr film induced by polarization of the P(VDF-TrFE) film and its significant influence on the performance of the Gr-PVDF-Si solar cell. The stability of the Gr-P(VDF-TrFE)-Si solar cell has also been checked (see Fig. S2). The solar cell was stored in a loft drier. The storing temperature and humidity were typically 25 °C and 10%, respectively. It can be seen that the efficiency of the Gr-P(VDF-TrFE)-Si solar cell (after polarization at 5 V) slightly decreased from 4.14% to 3.88%, losing 6% of its original value, which is less than that of HNO3 doped device, ∼50% of its original value. Note that the efficiency of the Gr-P(VDF-TrFE)-Si solar cell degraded as a result of slight reduction of the JSC. The reason for degradation needs more experiments to clarify.

Although the absolute efficiency of our Gr–Si solar cells in the present study is not the same high as that reported in the literature, we have shown for the first time that the new device architectures, i.e., the employment of a top-gate to the basic Gr–Si solar cell and the incorporation of a ferroelectric polymer layer into the basic Gr–Si solar cell, can significantly enhance the performance of the Gr–Si solar cells through electric field doping. We believe that the power conversion efficiency would be further improved by interface engineering and control of the graphene quality.

In summary, we have demonstrated that the performances of Gr–Si solar cells can be improved by means of electric field doping either by connecting the Gr–Si solar cell to an external power supply or by polarizing a P(VDF-TrFE) ferroelectric layer integrated in the Gr–Si solar cell. The electrical doping led to increase of the work function of the Gr film and the Gr–Si Schottky barrier height. Meanwhile, the sheet resistance of the electrically-doped Gr film became smaller. As a result, the power conversion efficiencies of the Gr–Si solar cells were more than twice as compared to the control cells. Our study suggests how one can manipulate the work function of a graphene film and a graphene-based Schottky barrier height and would open a new avenue for developing high efficiency Gr–Si solar cells.


This work is partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos. 61422404, 61274057 and 51472219), by the Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (Youth Talent Program: R4110030), the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in the University (NCET-12-0494), the Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education (20130101110123), and the Program for 14th China-Japan S&T Cooperation (2013DFG52800).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4nr06677d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015