 DOI: 10.1039/D0EE02859B
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 5059-5067


Kyoungwon
Choi
,

Junwoo
Lee
,

Hyuntae
Choi
,

Guan-Woo
Kim
,

Hong Il
Kim
* and 

Taiho
Park
*

Department of Chemical Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), 77 Cheongam-Ro, Nam-gu, Pohang, Gyeongbuk 37673, Republic of Korea. E-mail: hongilkim@postech.ac.kr; taihopark@postech.ac.kr; Fax: +82-54-279-8298; Tel: +82-54-279-2394

Received
5th September 2020
, Accepted 27th October 2020
First published on 27th October 2020
Special attention should be devoted to the stability of the perovskite solar cells, which is a major limitation affecting their commercialization. The stabilities against moisture and light have been substantially improved by optimizing the charge-transporting layer and utilizing encapsulation techniques; however, thermal stability has not yet been secured. Herein, we report a novel approach involving metal oxide nanoparticles infiltrated by hole-transporting materials to enhance device stability. Unlike conventional methods that prevent the thermal decomposition of perovskite, we intend to eliminate the main cause of efficiency drop by dissipating the heat accumulated inside the device. In particular, we observe that metal oxide nanoparticles can effectively reduce the device temperatures and maintain the morphology of hole-transporting materials because of their high thermal conductivity and porous scaffold structure. The experiments demonstrate that our devices without encapsulation retained 91% of their initial efficiency after 31 days at 85 °C and 85% relative humidity, which is the condition to simulate a real operating environment. These results show significant potential for the development of highly stable perovskite solar cells with reasonable efficiency.

Organic–inorganic halide perovskites have outstanding properties such as high absorption coefficient, tuneable bandgaps, and high charge carrier mobility; therefore, solar cells that use organic–inorganic halide perovskites as light absorbers are more efficient than other types of solar cells. However, the commercialization of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) is impeded because moisture, light, and heat can easily degrade perovskites. In particular, the heat accumulated inside the PSCs degrades perovskites and adversely affects the morphology of hole-transporting materials (HTMs). In this study, we introduce a novel strategy involving HTM-infiltrated metal oxide nanoparticles to alleviate this stability issue. We test several HTMs and find that our approach is effective regardless of HTM types. In addition, the thermal behaviour of Al2O3@HTM is systematically investigated using an infrared thermal imaging camera, time-domain thermoreflectance method, and synchrotron-based grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering analysis. This study is the first report to discuss how to effectively remove the heat, which is the main cause of perovskite decomposition. Notably, the Al2O3@dopant-free HTM based device without encapsulation retains 91% of its initial efficiency under harsh conditions after 31 days. Our finding has not been described in previous studies, so it can provide new insights that will help guide the development of highly stable PSCs.


Solar cells constitute an important technology for generating sustainable energy solar power. The emerging solar cells are diverse depending on the structure of the device or the material used and include dye-sensitized, organic, quantum dot, and perovskite solar cells (PSCs). PSCs are the only ones among these devices with demonstrated certified power conversion efficiency (PCE) > 25%, attributed to outstanding optoelectronic properties. However, the commercialization of PSCs is impeded because moisture, light, and heat easily degrade perovskites. Thus, numerous approaches intended to prolong the device lifetime are reported from previous studies. Strategies to develop highly stable PSCs include: developing aging-stress resistant material; decreasing the degradation rate of perovskite by passivating defects; and blocking the inflow of external substances and controlling the leakage of internal organic substances. Although these strategies are effective in improving the stability against moisture and light, the impact on thermal aging is minor. Therefore, further improvements are required to enhance the thermal stability of PSCs, which is the most difficult aspect to alleviate.

Recently, the use of inorganic or dopant-free materials and further avoiding charge-transporting layers have been considered desirable strategies for improving the thermal stability of PSCs. Each of these strategies achieve a lifetime stability of 1000 h, but accelerated aging tests have been conducted under different conditions, rendering the expectation of actual lifetime impossible. Only a few studies have monitored unencapsulated devices under extreme conditions similar to a real operating environment, and they have still not secured long-term stability of the order of hundreds of hours. Previously, we achieved the remarkably stable unencapsulated PSCs using passivation materials and dopant-free polymers. Unfortunately, most studies, including ours, have only focused on solving the situation in which perovskite degradation occurs. Under operation conditions, sunlight will increase the temperature of devices and change the morphology of hole-transporting materials (HTMs), thereby reducing in photovoltaic performance. Hence, releasing the heat accumulated inside the device and minimizing heat-induced morphology transition is crucial to obtain highly stable PSCs.
Heat dissipation is an effective strategy for increasing the lifetime of electronic devices including fluorescent lamps, light-emitting diodes (LEDs), and Si photovoltaics. For organic electronics, the distance from active layers to surfaces is very short, with the heat variation in each layer relatively small compared to inorganic electronics. Unlike the expectation that heat sinks are useless because of low thermal gradients, some studies reveal that heat dissipation is also effective in organic electronics. Although heat dissipation is a potential strategy for increasing the thermal stability of PSCs, research on heat release in PSCs remains currently unavailable.
In general, thermal conduction is generated by the transfer of lattice vibrations and the movement of electrons, so metals and crystals show high thermal conductivity. Among them, aluminium oxide nanoparticles (Al2O3 NPs) exhibit relatively high thermal conductivity (20–30 W m−1 K−1) and electrical insulation, enabling their use as a cooling filler within devices. Recently, some research groups applied the Al2O3 layer as an encapsulation material for protecting perovskites from external moisture and oxygen. However, investigation on heat dissipation effects by HTMs after incorporating Al2O3 NPs is unreported.
Here, we employ HTM-infiltrated Al2O3 NPs to elevate the stability of planar PSCs and investigate the device performance. The heat dissipation impact of the Al2O3 NPs was examined using an infrared thermal imaging camera (IR camera) and a time-domain thermoreflectance (TDTR) method. To optimize the thickness of the porous layer, we fabricated devices with varied concentrations of Al2O3 NPs and demonstrated efficiencies of 21.2% and 19.9% for Al2O3@spiro-OMeTAD and Al2O3@asy-PBTBDT, respectively. Interestingly, the devices containing Al2O3 NPs yielded very high open-circuit voltage (VOC) values of approximately 1.19 V with Spiro-OMeTAD and 1.16 V with Asy-PBTBDT. In a previous study, our group systematically analysed and reported the importance of a dopant-free HTM for highly stable PSCs and developed it as a green solvent processable HTM. This study is a step forward and suggests a strategy to secure the humidity and thermal stability of highly efficient planar PSCs regardless of HTM types. Furthermore, experiments demonstrated that our PSCs lacking encapsulation appreciably maintain their initial efficiency under a harsh condition. Our findings offer an understanding of heat dissipation in PSCs for the first time and provide new insights with potential to guide the development of highly stable planar PSCs.

The photo-thermal response of each component layer was monitored using an IR camera under 1 sun illumination (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) for 2 hours (Fig. 1a). The initial temperature was set to 20 °C (ambient air) for all layers prepared on the glass substrate and subsequently raised by light irradiation. Over time, the temperature difference emerged between the layers, with the highest temperature of 74 °C in the perovskite layer ascribed to its excellent light absorption (Fig. 1b). Prolonging the irradiation time will produce higher temperature in the perovskite layer. Thus, the temperature of PSCs in a real environment may attain a temperature above 75 °C due to the high intensity and continuous exposure to sunlight. The temperature rise within PSCs directly accounts for decreased performance. To alleviate this problem, a new architecture involving Al2O3 NPs (<50 nm particle size, Fig. S1, ESI) stacked on the perovskite layer, before deposition of the HTM is proposed (Fig. 1c), and Fig. 1d displays a cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the PSC from the HTM-infiltrated Al2O3 NPs. Hereinafter, we denote the HTM-infiltrated Al2O3 NPs as Al2O3@HTM. Considering ideal operation of PSCs, porous Al2O3 scaffolds dissipate the heat from the perovskite layer to the environment and holes are effectively transported through the HTM region. Furthermore, additional expected benefits of the Al2O3 NPs include: blocking the influx of external moisture and oxygen, suppressing back recombination, and preventing a morphological change of HTMs.

The time-dependent cooling test was conducted at temperatures decreasing from 85 to 20 °C to verify the heat dissipation effect of Al2O3 NPs. Samples corresponding to the glass/perovskite/HTM (Spiro-OMeTAD, conventional HTM) and the glass/perovskite/Al2O3@HTM were prepared for a comparative analysis of the heat transfer property. Both sample types were heated to 85 °C on a hotplate to simulate the temperature rise by sunlight, and then cooling effects were monitored after moving samples to the 20 °C plate (Fig. 2a and Fig. S2, ESI). The significant difference in the surface temperature of two samples is clearly visible. The rate of decreasing the temperature is accelerated after incorporation of Al2O3 NPs, suggesting a potential for use as thermally conductive fillers for these materials.
The same test was performed in temperature-controlled surrounding environment to check the heat dissipation effect in practical usage. Compared with the plate experiment, all samples showed slow heat dissipation. However, the same temperature reduction effect was observed after the incorporation of Al2O3 NPs (Fig. S3, ESI). Moreover, IR thermal image measurements in the surrounding environment with different temperatures were conducted to understand the relation between the temperature of the surrounding environment and heat dissipation rate. As the surrounding temperature increased, the heat transfer slowed down due to the low thermal gradient (Fig. S4–S7, ESI).
To elucidate the improved thermal behaviour of the HTM, the through-plane thermal conductivities (TCs) of the Al2O3@HTM made using different concentrations of Al2O3 NPs were measured using a TDTR. Samples were prepared on a glass substrate and gold with high thermoreflectance was deposited on the samples. This thin metal layer absorbs the heating laser and converts temperature excursions at the surface into the intensity change of the probing laser. Over time, the decrease in the surface temperature of all samples due to heat diffusion was monitored (Fig. S8, ESI). The TC was calculated by multiplying the thermal diffusivity obtained by the TDTR method, the specific heat, and the density of the sample (Fig. S9, ESI). The TC of the pure Spiro-OMeTAD is 0.135 W m−1 K−1. At 0.5 wt% Al2O3 NPs concentration, the TC of the Al2O3@HTM increases to 0.234 W m−1 K−1, with the TC increasing further as the concentration of Al2O3 NPs increases (Fig. 2b). The higher TC of the HTM with Al2O3 NPs compared with the pure HTM suggests that incorporation of Al2O3 NPs effective forms pathways for heat dissipation.
We inferred that the enhanced thermal behaviour of the Al2O3@HTM is due to the presence of the thermally conductive Al2O3 NPs. Therefore, the morphology and microstructure of the conventional HTM with porous Al2O3 scaffolds made using different concentrations of Al2O3 NPs were investigated by atomic force microscopy (AFM) and SEM. The roughness (RRMS) of the HTMs calculated from the height images are ≈6.92, ≈8.05, ≈8.67, and ≈8.89 nm for Al2O3 NPs concentration of 0, 0.5, 1.0, and 1.5 wt%, respectively (Fig. 2c). The increasing roughness as the concentration of Al2O3 NPs increases is attributed to more Al2O3 NPs exposed to the HTM surface. The cooling test and the TDTR results indicate that these externally exposed Al2O3 NPs effectively improve the thermal behaviour of HTMs.
The cross-sectional SEM images demonstrate that sufficient heat dissipation pathways are formed with a concentration of 0.5 wt% Al2O3 NPs, with the paths 0.3 wt% revealed as insufficient (Fig. S10, ESI). The low concentration of Al2O3 NPs formed thin Al2O3 scaffolds, thereby heat dissipation pathways could not reach to the upper part of the HTM (Fig. S11, ESI). When the concentration of Al2O3 NPs was very high, the film thickness increased, but no pinholes, where the perovskite layer was exposed, were found (Fig. S10e and f, ESI). Further, the cross-sectional elemental mapping obtained using energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) analysis is presented in Fig. S12 (ESI). The Al signal corresponds to the Al2O3 NPs, indicating that Al2O3 NPs are uniformly distributed between perovskite and HTM. Because the Al2O3 scaffold thickness increases and the relative HTM region decreases as the concentration of Al2O3 NPs increases, optimizing the concentration of Al2O3 NPs is essential for producing efficient PSCs with enhanced thermal behaviour (Fig. S13, ESI).
Therefore, we fabricated PSCs using different concentrations of Al2O3 NPs to evaluate their performances. A mixed-cation perovskite was adopted as a light absorber and prepared by anti-solvent engineering. Statistical analysis of PSCs using a conventional HTM (doped Spiro-OMeTAD) is displayed in Fig. 3a, b and Fig. S14a (ESI). The short-circuit current (JSC) and fill factor (FF) of the PSCs gradually decreased due to the insulation property of the Al2O3 and the increased thickness of the HTMs, while the VOC increased from 1.14 V to 1.19 V at 0.5 wt% concentration of Al2O3 NPs. This result suggests that infiltrated Al2O3 NPs in the Spiro-OMeTAD prevented back recombination at the perovskite-HTM interface. At optimized conditions, the champion device with the Al2O3@spiro-OMeTAD exhibits a JSC of 22.7 mA cm−2, VOC of 1.19 V, FF of 78.8%, and a PCE of 21.2% under reverse scan, while the control device showed relatively higher photovoltaic performance, achieving a JSC of 23.8 mA cm−2, VOC of 1.14 V, FF of 78.3%, and a PCE of 21.3% (Fig. 3c). Moreover, the suppressed back recombination due to the Al2O3 NPs reduced the hysteresis behaviour in the fabricated device compared to the reference device.
The maximum power point (MPP) tracking efficiency and incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) were measured to evaluate the device performance (Fig. S14b and c, ESI). A bias of 0.95 V was applied for the PSC containing the Al2O3@spiro-OMeTAD, yielding a stabilized PCE of 20.0%. The calculated JSC values from the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum are 22.8 and 22.0 mA cm−2 for Spiro-OMeTAD and Al2O3@spiro-OMeTAD, respectively. These are slightly lower than that measured from the J–V curve because the IPCE measurement was conducted under low intensity monochromatic light with less light scattering. In addition, the hole mobility (μh) of the Spiro-OMeTAD with and without 0.5 wt% of Al2O3 NPs was measured using the space charge limited current method for the hole-only device (Fig. S15, ESI). The μh value of doped Spiro-OMeTAD is 9.49 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, whereas that of Al2O3@spiro-OMeTAD is 6.35 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. This decrease in mobility reduced the JSC but maintained the same order of the μh, producing a reasonable JSC for a highly efficient PSC.
The response of JSC and VOC was investigated under different light intensities varying from 100 to 11 mW cm−2. Fig. S16a (ESI) shows the dependence of JSC on light intensity with logarithmic scales. We found that the slope (α) of all samples is close to 1, indicating that there is no large barrier on charge transfer at the interface even though insulating Al2O3 NPs were introduced. The VOC value as a function of light intensity is also plotted with semi-logarithmic scales (Fig. S16b, ESI). It is known that the deviation of the slope from the value of (kTq−1) reflects the trap-assisted recombination. The slope is determined to be 1.62 and 1.29 kTq−1 for the device based on Spiro-OMeTAD and Al2O3@spiro-OMeTAD, respectively. This significantly smaller slope of the device with Al2O3@spiro-OMeTAD indicates suppressed recombination at the interface by adopting Al2O3 NPs.
To understand the carrier dynamics of PSCs with different HTMs, steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements were performed. Compared to the perovskite film without HTM, a decrease in the PL intensity is more pronounced when the perovskite contacted the HTM, suggesting that the efficient charge extraction occurs at the perovskite-HTM interface. As presented in Fig. S17a (ESI), the PL peak intensity of perovskite films showed no significant difference with or without Al2O3 NPs, indicating that the incorporation of Al2O3 NPs does not inhibit charge extraction at the interface. For an in-depth study on the charge transfer rate, the transient PL decay of the perovskite films in contact with different HTMs was investigated. The TRPL spectra of each sample were fitted using a bi-exponential equation involving a fast decay time (τ1) and slow decay time (τ2) components. τ1 is attributed to the quenching of free carriers at the interface near the HTM layer, while τ2 is assigned to charge recombination in the perovskite. Although the Al2O3 NPs were introduced on the perovskite layer, no significant difference exists in τ1 from 3.21–3.65 ns (Fig. S17b and Table S1, ESI). These results indicate well-maintained charge extraction, consistent with the static PL data.
The interfacial properties in the PSCs were further explored using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) to analyse the internal resistance and the charge transfer process. The EIS measurements were performed for two device configurations at a bias of VOC and in the dark. Fig. S17c and d (ESI) shows the Nyquist plots for the devices and the corresponding equivalent circuit model. This circuit comprises the series resistance (Rs), the contact resistance (Rco), and the recombination resistance (Rrec). The Rco in the high-frequency region corresponds to the charge transfer resistance and the Rrec in the low-frequency region is attributed to the recombination resistance at the interface of the perovskite/charge-transporting layer. In the Nyquist plots, the PSC containing Al2O3 NPs showed a slightly higher Rs value (16.4 Ω) than the reference device (14.2 Ω), and this additional resistance is probably due to the thicker HTM layer. Interestingly, with the incorporation of Al2O3 NPs, the diameter of the second semicircle significantly increased, indicating high recombination resistance at the interface. The Al2O3@HTM based PSC exhibited a recombination resistance (219.6 Ω) higher by a factor of 1.48 than the control PSC (148.1 Ω), while Rco decreased from 9.7 to 6.1 Ω supporting the observation that the PSC with Al2O3 NPs yields higher VOC than that without Al2O3 NPs.
Device stability is the main issue impeding the practical utilization of PSCs and the use of Spiro-OMeTAD requiring additional dopants is a prominent obstacle. We conducted stability tests of encapsulated devices with doped Spiro-OMeTAD under various conditions (i.e., 85 ± 5% relative humidity (RH), white LED, and 85 °C) to validate whether encapsulation is effective for improving the stability of PSCs (Fig. 3d). Our results demonstrate that encapsulated devices exhibit excellent humidity and light stability, maintaining >90% of their initial efficiency after 1000 hours, because the encapsulation glass blocks the ingress of moisture and oxygen that promote decomposition of perovskites. However, a drastic PCE drop occurred at high temperature because of a morphological change in the doped Spiro-OMeTAD, and not perovskite degradation (Fig. 3e and Fig. S18, ESI). The cause of rapid morphological changes in the HTM was investigated by comparing the thermal behaviour of the unencapsulated and encapsulated devices (Fig. S19, ESI). The temperature response clearly differs for two devices with confirmation that encapsulation inhibits heat release due to the poor transfer of air between the device and the encapsulation glass, thereby adversely affecting the HTM. These results suggest that heat is more important than moisture among factors affecting the long-term stability of the device.
Previously, our group reported unencapsulated PSCs involving a polymeric HTM (Asy-PBTBDT) (Fig. S20, ESI) instead of Spiro-OMeTAD, which showed remarkably high thermal stability. As shown in AFM images (Fig. S21a and b, ESI), the morphology of Spiro-OMeTAD was largely deformed after thermal annealing, due to the dopants used to improve device performances. In the case of Asy-PBTBDT, the morphological change is not as severe as that of Spiro-OMeTAD, but some unwanted chain motion is caused by heat (Fig. S21c and d, ESI). Therefore, we adopted the Asy-PBTBDT as the dopant-free HTM and introduced Al2O3 NPs to maximize the stability of PSCs. We fabricated dopant-free PSCs containing Al2O3@asy-PBTBDT. However, the polymeric HTM film is relatively thinner than the Spiro-OMeTAD film, and so, when 0.5 wt% of Al2O3 NPs are used, too many particles are exposed from the HTM, causing a low PCE (Fig. S22a, ESI). Therefore, we reduced the concentration of Al2O3 NPs to 0.1 wt% and confirmed that a heat transfer path is formed even for a dilute solution using cross-sectional SEM measurements (Fig. S22b, ESI). Good dispersion of Al2O3 NPs in the PSC was verified through EDS elemental mapping (Fig. S23, ESI). Moreover, by measuring the IR thermal image and conductivity, the heat dissipation effect of Al2O3 NPs was confirmed, regardless of the HTM type (Fig. S24–S30, ESI).
The J–V curves of champion devices measured under reverse and forward bias are presented in Fig. 4a. As with the Spiro-OMeTAD based devices, the PSC with Al2O3 NPs showed less hysteresis and a high VOC of 1.16 V compared with the device containing pure Asy-PBTBDT. To measure the MPP tracking efficiency, the PSC using the Al2O3@asy-PBTBDT was monitored for 100 s under the applied voltage bias of 0.95 V. Fig. S31a (ESI) shows a stable power output of 17.7% with a current density of 18.6 mA cm−2 for the device, while the JSC values calculated from the EQE spectra are 22.1 and 21.5 mA cm−2 for PSCs with Asy-PBTBDT and Al2O3@asy-PBTBDT, respectively (Fig. S31b, ESI). Additional TRPL measurements were conducted to comprehend the charge carrier dynamics of Asy-PBTBDT based PSCs. The incorporation of Al2O3 NPs did not significantly affect the fast decay component and produced the same value, while the slow decay time increased from 12.27 to 16.58 ns (Fig. S31c and Table S2, ESI). Furthermore, the μh of the Al2O3@asy-PBDTBDT (7.22 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) is similar to that of pure Asy-PBTBDT (9.37 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) (Fig. S31d, ESI). Although we adopted the same polymeric HTM (Asy-PBDTBDT), the μh slightly differs from our previous results because the polymer shows batch to batch variation. All results indicate that our strategy produces the same effect on electrical properties regardless of the HTM type.
To investigate the effects of Al2O3 NPs and dopant-free HTMs on the stability of PSCs, we monitored the stability of unencapsulated PSCs with different HTMs. All devices were stored in airtight containers under mild (25 °C and 20 ± 5% RH) and harsh (85 °C and 85% RH) condition. The harsh condition is not a standard test condition, but it is designed to simulate heat dissipation in a real operating environment (see ESI and Fig. S32). Fig. 4b shows that all devices retained >96% of their initial PCE for 210 days under the mild condition. By contrast, the difference in the efficiency decrease between devices is evident under harsh conditions (Fig. 4c). The degradation of PSCs using Al2O3 NPs is significantly retarded for PCE drop and device appearances. The colour of the device using Asy-PBTBDT or Al2O3@asy-PBTBDT did not significantly change after aging, whereas the device using Spiro-OMeTAD shows decomposition into yellow PbI2 near the gold electrode. Interestingly, for Al2O3@spiro-OMeTAD, although doped Spiro-OMeTAD was used as the HTM, the degradation was less pronounced and it started only sparsely. This is expected because Al2O3 NPs prevents the inflow of moisture and oxygen when used as an interlayer.
Consequently, the devices with Al2O3@spiro-OMeTAD and Al2O3@asy-PBTBDT retained ∼54% and ∼91% of the initial PCE after 31 days (Fig. S33a and b, ESI), while the device with Spiro-OMeTAD kept only ∼28% of the initial PCE after 5 days at 85 °C and 85% RH (Fig. S33c, ESI). Notably, the PSC using only Asy-PBTBDT retained ∼74% of the initial PCE after 14 days, and after this point, it showed lower stability the device based on Al2O3@spiro-OMeTAD (Fig. S33d, ESI). Cooling tests revealed that the heat transfer decreased over time at high temperatures, but PSCs employing Al2O3 NPs showed better device stability than control ones because the continuous heating and the rapidly heated bottom layer could form a thermal gradient enabling heat dissipation through Al2O3. In addition, the moisture barrier ability of Al2O3 NPs further improved the stability of PSCs against high humidity. As a result, our PSC demonstrated that heat dissipation is an effective strategy for securing device stability without encapsulation (Table S3, ESI).
To find an additional rationale for the stability enhancement of PSCs with Al2O3@asy-PBTBDT, we conducted grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) measurements. Prior to analysing the peak intensity depending on the thermal aging, a pristine Al2O3 film was prepared and used as the reference for determining materials causing peaks in the GIWAXS images. In the Al2O3 film without the polymeric HTM, π–π stacking peaks (010) were not observed along the in-plane and out-of-plane directions (Fig. S34, ESI). This result indicates that the distinct peak in the GIWAXS images is caused by the Asy-PBTBDT polymer. The GIWAXS measurement was performed by applying heat of ∼150 °C to the sample stage to observe the in situ morphological change of the polymeric HTM caused by external heat. The GIWAXS images of each HTM and the corresponding in-plane and out-of-plane direction profiles are displayed in Fig. 5. Interestingly, morphological change of the Asy-PBTBDT film was observed after the annealing process. Compared with the pristine film, the annealed films exhibit stronger peak intensities for lamellar crystals along the in-plane direction (100) and π–π stacking along the out-of-plane direction (010) (Fig. 5a–c). This indicates that the polymer chain underwent long-range segmental motion that eventually caused the morphological change. In contrast, scattering peaks of the Al2O3@asy-PBTBDT film hardly changed after thermal aging, most likely due to effective heat dissipation and the fixed morphology by incorporation of Al2O3 NPs (Fig. 5d–f). Presumably, Al2O3 NPs can assist the polymeric HTM in maintaining the morphology under thermal aging and secure the thermal stability of PSCs.

In summary, we systematically investigated the effects of the Al2O3 NPs that can be used as thermally conductive materials. The Al2O3 NPs dissipated heat, which adversely affects the perovskite and HTMs, from the device efficiently. The HTM-infiltrated Al2O3 NPs exhibited excellent thermal properties including stable morphology of the HTMs at high temperature. Since the Al2O3 is an insulator, we optimized the concentration of Al2O3 NPs to minimize the efficiency reduction of PSCs. Consequently, two PSCs with efficiencies of 21.2% for the Al2O3@spiro-OMeTAD and 19.9% for the Al2O3@asy-PBTBDT were demonstrated. Notably, the Al2O3@asy-PBTBDT based device without encapsulation retained 91% of its initial efficiency under a harsh condition similar to a real operating environment after 31 days. We suggested the importance of heat dissipation in PSCs for the first time. Our findings are unprecedented and propose ways to achieve high thermal stability of PSCs with minimal efficiency reduction.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


2D-GIWAXS measurements were performed at a synchrotron radiation on the beam line 3C at the Pohang Accelerator Laboratory (PAL), Korea. This work was supported by POSCO financial support (No. 2019Y085), Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education (2020R1A6A3A01098217), the Center for Advanced Soft Electronics under the Global Frontier Research Program (Code No. 2012M3A6A5055225) and the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant (Code No. 2018R1A2A1A05079144) funded by the Korea government (MSIP).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ee02859b
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020