 DOI: 10.1039/C8NR05698F
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 890-900


Jun-Seok
Yeo
,

You-Hyun
Seo
,

Chan-Hee
Jung
 and 

Seok-In
Na
*

Carbon Convergence Materials Research Center, Institute of Advanced Composite Materials, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, 92 Chudong-Ro, Bongdong-eup, Wanju-gun, Jeonbuk 55324, Republic of Korea

Professional Graduate School of Flexible and Printable Electronics, LANL-CBNU Engineering Institute-Korea, Chonbuk National University, 664-14, Deokjin-dong, Deokjin-gu, Jeonju-si, Jeollabuk-do, 54896, Republic of Korea. E-mail: nsi12@jbnu.ac.kr

Research Division for Industry and Environment, Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute, 29 Geumgu-gil, Jeongeup-si, Jeollabuk-do 580-185, Republic of Korea

Received
15th July 2018
, Accepted 11th October 2018
First published on 12th October 2018
Solution-processable graphenes (represented by reduced graphene oxides, rGOs) have shown promising abilities as HTLs in perovskite solar cells (PeSCs). However, there has been no attempt to systematically tailor the characteristics of rGOs to the specifications of PeSCs. Furthermore, the applications of rGO HTLs have been limited to the spin-coating system, which is incompatible with roll-to-roll manufacturing. Here, with the aid of a polymer–graphene hybrid structure and a controllable synthesis method, we successfully developed a much more feasible rGO HTL and demonstrated highly efficient, stable, and printable p–i–n planar PeSCs with facile one-step processing. The characteristics of the developed polyacrylonitrile-grafted rGOs (PRGOs) were optimized by varying the synthesis conditions including the γ-radiation intensity (200, 400, and 600 kGy) and the concentration of the acrylonitrile (AN) precursor (2, 4, and 6 wt%). It is revealed that the PRGO synthesized with a lower AN concentration and a higher irradiation intensity (PRGO_2-600) is the most suitable one for PeSC HTL. PRGO_2-600 effectively raises the average power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of PeSCs by ∼36% compared to those of conventional PeSCs using PEDOT:PSS HTL. The comprehensive investigations confirm that the enhanced device efficiency stems from (1) the favorable interlayer characteristics of the PRGO itself and (2) the well-crystallized perovskite layer grown on the PRGO. In addition to the PCE, thechemically inert PRGOs can also maintain their electrical properties over time and retard the decomposition of perovskite films, thereby prolonging the operation time of PeSCs in the atmosphere. More importantly, the applicability of the PRGO HTL is clearly verified even in the roll-to-roll compatible slot-die coating system, exhibiting comparable performances to those of the spin-coating system.

Since the advent of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PeSCs), the research community has devoted a lot of effort toward the enhancement of the PeSC device performance, which has impressively led to an increase in the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of over 20%. This advance has gradually shifted the focus of PeSC research toward the reliability and cost-effectiveness of PeSCs in order to more quickly realize their market entry. From this point of view, instead of the mesoscopic n–i–p structure, the planar p–i–n structure has begun to attract attention due to its simple device-architecture, and hysteresis-less behavior with regard to current–voltage characterization. The facile and low-temperature processability of p–i–n PeSCs is also advantageous for applications in flexible electronics and large-scale manufacturing with roll-to-roll coating systems.

A variety of strategies have been employed to achieve successful conversion from a mesoscopic n–i–p structure to a planar p–i–n structure without sacrificing device performance. The planar p–i–n PeSCs, which have similar device structures to those of organic solar cells (OSCs), require a uniform perovskite film for efficient performance, due to their planar heterojunction and their relatively thin interlayers covering the perovskite film. Thus, the conditions of precursor solutions, film-deposition, and post-treatment have been investigated and optimized for film uniformity while maintaining an ideal perovskite stoichiometric composition and film crystallinity. In particular, to manipulate the subtleties of stoichiometric crystallization from the premixed precursor solution, which offers facile one-step and roll-to-roll compatible processing, many research groups have employed solvent additives, surface modification of the underlying film, anti-solvent/air quenching, and molecular interaction among precursor and solvent molecules to engineer the film growth from premixed perovskite solutions.
In addition to morphological engineering, the interfacial characteristics of p–i–n PeSCs have been investigated to efficiently reverse the device polarity. Since an early version of a p–i–n PeSC was reported in 2013, which adopted the same interfacial materials as OSCs, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) has been recognized as the general hole-transporting layer (HTL). Although the existing PEDOT:PSS interlayer is simply processable and highly effective for the performance enhancement of OSCs, it is not fully compatible with planar PeSCs. For example, planar PeSCs based on PEDOT:PSS suffer from a low open-circuit voltage (VOC) (0.85–0.90 V), mostly stemming from the restricted work-function (WF) of PEDOT:PSS. In addition, the hydrophilic surface of PEDOT:PSS enriched with –SO3− groups adversely affects the morphology of the perovskite, resulting in tilted and small grains around the interface of perovskite/PEDOT:PSS. Additionally, polar solvents for perovskite precursors such as dimethylformamide (DMF) and dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) can partially dissolve the surface of PEDOT:PSS, which may lead to a performance fluctuation and degradation in PeSCs. More importantly, stability has been a major issue for devices based on PEDOT:PSS because of its highly hygroscopic and acidic nature. To address these issues, various alternative materials including NiOx, CuSCN, and organic molecules have been developed and studied to improve the energy-level alignment and to further stabilize the interfaces between the perovskites and the interlayers. Although the importance of the perovskite morphology for device performance is noted above, not all alternative HTLs guarantee an optimal perovskite morphology on their surfaces due to their different surface properties and chemistries. Furthermore, some alternative interlayers indispensably require high temperature treatments and the use of harsh solvents, restricting their processing window for their use in flexible applications. Consequently, to achieve the highest potential of p–i–n planar PeSCs, the ideal characteristics of interfacial materials can be summarized as follows: (1) a simple solution and roll-to-roll processability under low-temperature conditions for the purpose of up-scalability and for usage in flexible applications; (2) a high WF and high electrical conductivity; (3) solvent resistance to the solvents of perovskite precursors for reliable performance; (4) a suitable surface energy and chemical composition for desirable crystallization kinetics and for uniform coverage of the perovskite film.
Recently, reduced graphene oxides (rGOs) have been regarded as a new class of promising HTL materials as they meet most of the above-listed requirements. Because rGOs inherit the excellent properties of graphenes, they exhibit two-dimensional (2D) crystalline, highly conductive, non-diffusive, and chemically stable features. Furthermore, rGOs can be cast into 2D crystalline and robust films from a colloidal solution without any post treatments. These features can realize the use of rGOs in low-cost, flexible, and large-area applications through solution-processing. Indeed, we previously demonstrated that rGO HTLs could guarantee flexible and large-area p–i–n planar PeSCs with high and stable performances. These promising results were explained by the multiple roles of rGOs as interfacial modifiers and crystallization inducers of the perovskite overlayers.
Although previous studies validated the potential of rGOs as HTLs in p–i–n PeSCs, no attempt has been made to systematically tailor the properties of rGOs to the specifications of perovskite devices. Furthermore, until now, rGO HTLs have been derived from spin-coating processing, which is a low throughput batch system. This can be attributed to the rGO properties such as colloid and low dispersibility (0.3–1.0 mg ml−1), which will be a major hurdle to roll-to-roll compatible processing. Therefore, in order to enhance the feasibility of rGOs as HTLs in p–i–n planar PeSCs, the investigation and development of rGOs, which are fitted to PeSCs and compatible with scalable roll-to-roll processing, are urgently necessary. In addition, given the potential for commercialization, the viability of the developed rGO should be explored in a real and simple one-step route for the perovskite film such as the N-cyclohexyl-2-pyrrolidone (CHP) additive system without additional processes.
In the present study, we report a systematic approach for the modulation of the properties of rGO to optimize it for use in highly efficient, stable, and printable PeSCs. First, to enhance the processability of rGO, the rGO basal planes were functionalized with a polyacrylonitrile (PAN) polymer. PAN, an aliphatic polymer, is a promising grafting polymer for rGO HTL because of its good binding ability, chemical stability, and hole-transporting ability. Next, to optimize the characteristics of PAN-grafted rGOs (PRGOs) for use as HTLs in p–i–n planar PeSCs based on CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3), we systematically controlled the following synthesis conditions: (1) the reduction degree of PRGOs by changing the radiation intensity, and (2) the grafting degree of the PANs on PRGOs by changing the concentration of the precursor, i.e., acrylonitrile (AN). A series of the as-synthesized PRGOs were compared with each other with a focus on their surface composition, dispersibility, electrical conductivity, and WF, because these factors influence the characteristics of PRGO not only as an interfacial modifier but also as a crystallization template for perovskite films. After the optimization study of PRGOs as HTLs, the characteristics of the PEDOT:PSS and the PRGO were analyzed in terms of their device performances, charge-carrier dynamics, and influences on the morphology of the overlying perovskite films. We found that the superior device performances of the PRGO-based PeSCs were attributed to both the HTL functions of PRGOs and the improved quality of crystalline perovskites grown on PRGO films. Finally, we demonstrated the compatibility of PRGO HTLs with roll-to-roll compatible processing, i.e., the slot-die system. Fully-printed PeSCs based on a PRGO HTL performed more efficiently than PeSCs based on the conventional polymer HTL, PEDOT:PSS.


Fig. 1 illustrates the synthesis procedure of PRGOs from GOs. First, to introduce active sites for grafting on rGO nanosheets, styryl groups were functionalized on GOs (FGOs) through a carbodiimide-mediated coupling reaction. Second, as a grafting monomer, acrylonitrile (AN) was added into the FGO dispersed in N,N′-dimethylformamide (DMF), and the concentration of AN was controlled from 2 to 6 wt%. Finally, for the reduction of GOs, the mixture solution was exposed to γ-irradiation, and the intensity of irradiation was controlled from 200 to 600 kGy. The irradiation-induced reduction of GOs and the graft polymerization of rGOs allow the mass production of highly dispersible rGOs without the use of any harsh chemicals including reducing agents, and without the use of high temperature processes. Furthermore, we could systematically tune the characteristics of PRGOs by controlling the intensity of irradiation and the concentration of AN.

A series of as-synthesized PRGOs were investigated with regard to their chemical, electrical, and morphological properties. To begin with, the chemical composition of PRGOs was explored through X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) to compare the reduction degree and the graft degree of the different PRGOs depending on the synthesis conditions. As shown in Fig. 2a, the oxygen contents of PRGOs were highly dependent on the intensity of irradiation; for example, at a fixed AN concentration (2 wt%), the atomic concentration of oxygen decreased from 13.1 at% for PRGO_2-200 to 8.3 at% for PRGO_2-600. This result indicates that γ-irradiation could effectively deoxygenate GOs. The GO reduction induced by γ-irradiation may result from the decomposed DMF molecules. Specifically, the radiolytic DMF molecules with radicals, where their amount is proportional to the absorbed dose, could react with the oxygen components of GOs such as ketone and carboxyl groups. Meanwhile, it was found that nitrogen contents were related to both the irradiation intensity and the concentration of the AN monomer; a higher irradiation intensity and higher AN concentration led to a higher nitrogen content in PRGOs. Thus, PRGO_2-200 and PRGO_6-600 exhibited the lowest and the highest nitrogen contents, respectively. Given that two bands (2243 cm−1 for νCN and 1447 cm−1δC–H) corresponding to the PAN were clearly observed in the Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra of PRGOs (Fig. S1a), the nitrogen signals in the XPS spectra of PRGOs were likely to be from the grafted PAN on the PRGO. Thus, it can be deduced that an increase in irradiation intensity and AN concentration, which facilitated the radical vinyl polymerization of the ANs, would elevate the degree of PAN grafting on the PRGO.
These tailored chemical characteristics of PRGOs systematically affect their electrical characteristics. The electrical conductivities (σ) and WFs of PRGOs are evaluated and summarized in Table 1. As expected from the relationship between irradiation intensity and reduction degree, the σ of PRGOs increased with irradiation intensity. In contrast, increasing the grafting degree of the PAN, which could be achieved by increasing the monomer concentration, gradually reduced the σ of PRGOs due to the insulating property of the aliphatic PAN. Although intensive irradiation also promoted an increase in the grafting degree of the PAN, it did not remarkably degrade the σ of PRGOs. Thus, the highest and the lowest σ of PRGOs were obtained from PRGO_2-600 (1.16 S cm−1) and PRGO_6-200 (0.002 S cm−1), respectively. Notably, as listed in Table 1, the conductivity of PRGO_2-600 was comparable to those of non-grafted rGOs (RFGOs), which were converted from FGO through irradiation without AN monomers. On the other hand, in both cases, an increase in the grafting and reduction degree of PRGOs enhanced their WFs. The highest and the lowest WFs were observed in PRGO_6-600 and PRGO_2-200, respectively. Notably, all the WFs of PRGOs surpassed the WFs of RFGOs as listed in Table 1. This finding implies that the WFs of PRGOs were more dependent on the grafting degree of the PAN than on the reduction degree of the graphitic planes. The CN bonds in the PAN play critical roles in improving the WFs of PRGOs because the highly electron-withdrawing CN groups with electronegative nitrogen and triple covalent bonds promote electron-deficiency in the rGO planes.
Types
RFGO
PRGO
Conditions
200
400
600
2-200
2-400
2-600
4-200
4-400
4-600
6-200
6-400
6-600

σ (S cm−1)
1.26
1.34
1.41
0.65
0.83
1.16
0.16
0.45
0.95
0.002
0.31
0.83
WF (eV)
4.7
4.66
4.66
4.68
4.74
4.78
4.80
4.82
4.82
4.84
4.86
4.88
In addition to their electrical properties, the morphological features (including processing aspects) of PRGOs were modulated by their chemical features. Because the film morphology of solution-processed graphene sheets is closely related to their dispersibility in solvents, we confirmed the dispersibility of the respective samples. Fig. 2b shows the plots of UV-vis absorbance at 269 nm vs. the concentration of various rGOs in DMF. All suspensions followed the Beer–Lambert law, and the extinction coefficients (ε) of the respective rGOs were calculated from their linear slopes. There was no significant difference between the ε of GO (49.3 ml mg−1 cm−1) and FGO (48.7 ml mg−1 cm−1), implying that the functionalization of styryl groups on GO surfaces rarely changed its dispersibility. Meanwhile, as expected, the radiolytic process for the reduction of FGOs without grafting significantly deteriorated their dispersibility; the ε of RFGOs ranged from 6.8 to 13.1 ml mg−1 cm−1, and ε decreased as the radiation intensity increased. In contrast, the presence of the grafted PAN on rGO surfaces, i.e., PRGOs, could effectively improve the rGO dispersibility; the ε of PRGOs ranged from 28.3 to 47.2 ml mg−1 cm−1. The trend of ε of PRGOs was similar to that of the grafting degree as observed in the XPS (nitrogen content). It is worth noting that despite the reduced form of the PRGOs, their ε values were compatible with those of the GOs. Indeed, all PRGOs exhibited a high dispersion concentration (>10 mg ml−1) and high dispersion stability (>6 months) at 10 mg ml−1 concentration. The enhanced dispersibility of PRGOs would come from the high solubility of PAN in DMF, and the reduced van der Waals interaction between graphene sheets due to the bulky PAN. As shown in the AFM images (Fig. 2c), the grafting PAN made the PRGO single sheet thicker than the rGO single sheet commonly reported in the literature. In addition, their thickness gradually increased with the grafting degree: 2.1 nm for PRGO_2-600, 2.4 nm for PRGO_4-600, and 2.7 nm for PRGO_6-600. These thicker PRGO sheets provide evidence that the interlayer distance between rGO sheets can be extended by the insertion of the PAN outlayer.
From the above analytical results, it is clear that the characteristics of the resultant PRGOs could be readily modulated by varying the quantitative synthesis conditions such as irradiation intensity and AN concentration. In this simple manner, rGO can be tailored as an ideal interfacial layer in PeSCs. More importantly, with the aid of grafting PAN, rGOs with higher WFs and much better processability can be realized without compromising on electrical conductivity. Consequently, the development of PRGO and the synthesis method thereof could promote the feasibility of rGOs in PeSCs in terms of both high performance and low cost with scalable roll-to-roll manufacturing.
To directly reveal the potential of PRGOs as HTLs in planar PeSCs based on MAPbI3 and the effect of their synthesis conditions on the device performance, we systemically compared the device performances of various PRGOs. All photovoltaic parameters of various devices including VOC, short-circuit current–density (JSC), fill factor (FF), and PCE are summarized in Table 2. As Fig. S4 and S5 reveal that the crystallinity and morphology of the perovskite films did not seem to depend on the type of underlying PRGO, it is reasonable to explain that the changes in the device performance mostly originate from the characteristics of the PRGOs themselves. Therefore, we investigated the device performance by focusing on PRGO characteristics such as WF, conductivity, and film roughness. First, we explored the dependence of the device performance on irradiation intensity; the irradiation intensity was controlled with a given AN concentration (4 wt%), and the devices employing PRGO_4-200, PRGO_4-400, and PRGO_4-600 were compared. Fig. 3a presents the representative current–density–voltage (J–V) curves, and statistics of the PCEs of the respective devices. The devices exhibited higher PCEs with higher irradiation intensity, and thus, the highest average PCE (10.1%) and the lowest average PCE (9.2%) were observed in the devices with PRGO_4-600 and PRGO_4-200, respectively. The difference in the PCEs mostly originated from the differing FF of the respective devices, where the FF of the PRGO_4-600 device was 9.4% higher than that of the PRGO_4-200 device. Considering that the observed FF trend is consistent with that of the conductivity of PRGO as observed in Table 1 and the higher conductive PRGO led to lower series resistances (RS) of the devices (Table 2), improved FF of the devices would be due to the improved conductivity of the PRGO interlayers.

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
sh (kΩ cm2)
PEDOT:PSS
0.88
13.0
70.3
8.1 (max.: 9.5)
2.0
2.4
GO
0.89
10.2
35.8
3.3 (max.: 3.7)
15.0
1.3
PAN
0.92
11.0
41.0
4.1
—
—
FGO
0.75
11.8
49.0
4.4
—
—
RFGO-600
—
—
—
0.0
—
—
PRGO_1-600
0.22
15.0
26.0
0.8
—
—
PRGO_4-200
0.95
14.8
65.9
9.2 (max.: 10.3)
2.3
3.8
PRGO_4-400
0.93
15.4
66.2
9.5 (max.: 10.4)
2.2
2.3
PRGO_4-600
0.92
15.5
72.1
10.1 (max.: 11.2)
1.3
2.0
PRGO_2-600
0.96
15.8
72.6
11.0 (max.: 11.6)
1.6
2.3
PRGO_4-600
0.92
15.5
72.1
10.1 (max.: 11.2)
1.7
2.0
PRGO_6-600
0.91
15.3
65.5
9.1 (max.: 9.7)
1.7
0.8
Next, with a given irradiation intensity (600 kGy), we investigated the dependence of the device performance on the AN concentration; the devices employing PRGO_2-600, PRGO_4-600, and PRGO_6-600 were compared. As shown in Fig. 3c, a lower AN concentration of the PRGO induced a higher device performance. The device with PRGO_2-600 showed the highest averaged PCE of 11.0%, but the device with PRGO_6-600 showed the lowest averaged PCE of 9.1%. These PCEs have a closer relationship with VOC and FF than JSC. Although PRGO_6-600 exhibited 0.1 eV higher WF than that of PRGO_2-600, the VOC of the device with PRGO_6-600 was inferior to that of PRGO_2-600. It was found that the apparently deviated shunt resistances (RSh) between the devices (2.3 kΩ cm2 for PRGO_2-600 and 0.8 kΩ cm2 for PRGO_6-600) led to a different FF and VOC of the devices. Considering that the non-uniform contacts between the active layer and HTL can deteriorate the ability to shunt leakage current within the devices, the rougher surface of PRGO_6-600 would be the detrimental factor for FF and VOC. Meanwhile, the slightly decreased conductivity of PRGO_6-600 compared to that of PRGO_2-600 did not influence the FF of the devices because RS showed similar values regardless of the devices (1.6 Ω cm2 for PRGO_2-600 and 1.7 Ω cm2 for PRGO_6-600).
The above device investigation confirms that PRGOs synthesized with the lowest AN concentration and the highest irradiation intensity are more suitable to PeSCs as HTLs. Consequently, it can be determined that PRGO_2-600 is the optimized HTL for planar PeSCs under our experimental conditions. To prove the superiority of this PRGO_2-600 HTL in PeSCs, we carefully analyzed the device performance of PeSCs employing PRGO_2-600 by comparing them with the PeSCs employing conventional PEDOT:PSS. Fig. 4a presents the representative J–V curves of the respective devices with PCE statistics. Photocurrent–voltage hysteresis was negligible in both cases of PeSCs as shown in Fig. S6, representing the reliable evaluation of our planar PeSCs. Encouragingly, the PRGO_2-600 device clearly surpassed the PEDOT:PSS devices as follows: PeSCs with PRGO_2-600 had an average PCE of 11.0% (max. 11.6%) with a VOC of 0.96 V, a JSC of 15.8 mA cm−2, and a FF of 72.6%, whereas the PEDOT:PSS devices showed a relatively poor average PCE of 8.1% (max. 9.5%) with a VOC of 0.88 V, a JSC of 13.0 mA cm−2, and a FF of 70.3%. The relatively increased PCE of the PRGO_2-600 device resulted from the significant improvement in VOC and JSC compared to those of the PEDOT:PSS device. The enhanced JSC could be elucidated by comparing the external quantum efficiencies (EQEs) of the PEDOT:PSS and the PRGO_2-600 PeSC as shown in Fig. 4b. The PRGO-based device exhibited a higher spectral-response in the entire wavelength region from 300 to 800 nm than that exhibited by the PEDOT-based device. Meanwhile, the differences in internal quantum efficiencies (IQEs) between them were significant in the wavelength range of 300–600 nm, but not noticeable in the wavelength range of 600–800 nm. Thus, it could be summarized that the enhanced EQE in the range of 300–600 nm is closely related to the corresponding IQE enhancement, and the enhanced EQE in the range of 600–800 nm mostly comes from the enhanced absorption efficiency (Fig. S8), respectively. In general, the literature reports have explained that the QEs for incident photons with shorter wavelengths would be related to the layers adjacent to the glass substrate (e.g. the HTL/perovskite interface) due to the relatively shallow penetration depth of short wavelength photons. Consequently, the higher QEs of the PRGO-based device over the range of 300–600 nm can be interpreted as indicating the facile charge transfer between the PRGO and the perovskite. As is also evident from the time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) (Fig. 3d), the charge transfer occurring at the PRGO/perovskite interface was much faster than that occurring at the PEDOT/perovskite interface; the average PL lifetime (τave) of the PRGO sample was 2.24 ns, which is quite a reduced value compared to τave (4.91 ns) of the PEDOT sample. Furthermore, as confirmed by the analysis of the VOC dependence on the light intensity (Fig. 4e), the recombination strength of the PRGO device was not significant. The slope of the VOC–light intensity for the PRGO device was near unity (1.36 kT q−1), which indicates that the PRGO device dominantly follows the ‘bimolecular recombination’ without significant trap recombination. This is partially elucidated by the hybrid structure of PRGOs possessing graphene sheets and the aliphatic polymer. According to the literature reports, the well-established basal plane with delocalized holes and the insulating (wide bandgap) polymers with high WFs could simultaneously facilitate selective hole-transfer and suppress undesirable electron-leakage at the HTL/photoactive layer. In contrast, the PEDOT device exhibited a strong VOC dependence on light intensity with a slope of 2.02 kT q−1, implying that the photogenerated charge-carriers in the PEDOT device tend to be recombined through ‘trap-assisted recombination’ rather than bimolecular recombination. Therefore, the outstanding JSC of the PRGO device including FF primarily originated from the favorable charge-transfer ability of the PRGO with minimized recombination strength.
Next, a question to arise is why the VOC (0.96 V) of the PRGO device exceeded the VOC (0.88 V) of the PEDOT:PSS device even though the WFs of the PRGO and the PEDOT:PSS were similar to each other as shown in Fig. S7b. A high WF is normally recognized as a crucial factor for the HTL to efficiently align the energy level and to establish Ohmic contact between the anode and the active layer in photovoltaics. Also, the difference in WFs of the respective contacts induces built-in voltages (Vbi) across the diode, thus leading to a higher VOC. To more precisely investigate the difference in VOC between the two devices, we estimated their Vbi from the capacitance–voltage with Mott–Schottky plots under dark conditions. As shown in Fig. 4f, the Vbi values of PEDOT:PSS and PRGO devices were obtained as 0.82 and 0.96 V, respectively. As expected, the PRGO device exhibited high Vbi. In contrast, even though the PEDOT:PSS had enough WF to be a favorable HTL in the PeSCs, neither high VOC nor Vbi could be achieved. In our previous report, it was found that the abundant –SO3− on the PEDOT:PSS could break the stoichiometry and the crystallinity of the adjacent perovskites through undesirable chemical interactions (especially –SO3− ∼ –NH3+) with the perovskite precursors. These non-stoichiometric perovskite films have various anti-site and vacancy defects, thereby leading to a prolonged PL lifetime, severe recombination, and a loss in the built-in potential. On the other hand, a chemically robust RGO could guarantee well-defined stoichiometric and crystalline perovskite films, supporting a fast charge transfer with a negligible photovoltage loss. Consequently, the VOC of the PeSCs could be maximized by incorporating the PRGO HTL, where the RGO template and the grafted PAN raised the WF of the RGO without deteriorating the crystallization of the overlying perovskites.
To further ascertain the influence of the underlying HTL on the crystalline morphology of the perovskite films and on the resultant device performances, we carefully investigated the film-morphologies of the perovskites grown on different HTLs. Fig. 5a and b present the top-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the respective MAPbI3 films. The sizes of the perovskite grains between the PEDOT:PSS and PRGO samples were apparently different; enlarged grains of 200–400 nm in size were observed in the MAPbI3 film on the PRGO, whereas the MAPbI3 on the PEDOT:PSS was composed of small grains of 50–200 nm in size. Considering the film thickness (∼250 nm) used in this study, there were few in-plane grain boundaries in the MAPbI3 film on the PRGO HTL. This implies that the probability of the photo-generated charge carriers being recombined by grain boundaries would be low, because the charge carriers should vertically travel to the respective contacts to be collected. However, in the case of PEDOT:PSS HTLs, the area of grain boundaries would be enlarged in both the in-plane and out-of-plane directions, which could activate the recombination of charge carriers within perovskite films. Also, as shown in the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns (Fig. 5c), the (110) reflection due to the crystalline MAPbI3 perovskite was much stronger in the case of the PRGO compared to that of the PEDOT:PSS despite their similar film thicknesses. This improved crystallinity could also be correlated with the higher absorption efficiency of the PRGO sample as shown in Fig. S8; the MAPbI3 film on the PRGO shows a typical perovskite absorption spectrum with a higher intensity around its band-edge than that of the PEDOT:PSS. Finally, in order to clarify the morphological changes, the crystal orientations of the perovskite films that were grown on the PEDOT:PSS and the PRGO were analyzed by using 2D grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS). Fig. 5d presents the circular cuts along with the azimuthal angles at q(110) for the MAPbI3 perovskite films, which were extracted from the 2D GIWAXS patterns. In the case of the PEDOT:PSS, the perovskite film exhibited a distributed azimuthal feature with no noticeable dependence of the peak intensity on its circular angle, implying a randomly ordered crystal orientation. In contrast, the perovskite film based on the PRGO showed an apparently concentrated azimuthal feature with intensive peaks at 45° and 135° azimuthal angles. Given the relationship between the crystal planes, the intensive peak of the (110) planes at 45° and 135° could correspond to the (100)-oriented planes for the substrate. The above results indicate that the perovskite film on the PRGO possesses not only superior crystallinity but also an ordered crystal orientation with (100)-preference compared to that of the PEDOT:PSS/perovskite film.
These combinatorial investigations led us to the conclusion that the PRGO HTL simultaneously serves as an interfacial layer and a crystalizing template for the perovskite film, which is responsible for the observed improvement in PCEs. The characteristics of the PRGO as an interfacial layer, which can be optimized by their synthesis conditions, can guarantee fast charge-extraction from the photo-active layer with minimized recombination. Furthermore, despite the subtleties of stoichiometric crystallization from the premixed CH3NH3I/PbI2 solution for one-step processing, the chemically robust PRGO surface could establish stoichiometric MAPbI3 films with minimal defects, promoting better and ordered crystallinity. However, in the case of PEDOT:PSS, the populated –SO3H group on its surface is likely to hinder the CH3NH3I/PbI2 precursors from participating in perovskite formation. It could violate the stoichiometry and retard the favorable crystallization in the vicinity of the PEDOT:PSS surface, leading to randomly oriented and defective perovskite structures. Thus, PeSCs based on PEDOT:PSS suffered from severe radiative recombination and relatively inefficient charge extraction. This is why the non-diffusive and chemically stable features are other prerequisites for the HTL of the PeSCs in addition to electrical characteristics.
Next, to gain insight into the effects of PRGOs on the long-term stability of PeSCs, we looked into the changes in PCEs of PEDOT:PSS and PRGO-based PeSCs as a function of exposure time to an ambient atmosphere. A device-stability test was performed without encapsulation of the cells according to the ISOS-D-1 protocol. As shown in Fig. 6a, the PCE of the reference device employing PEDOT:PSS HTL was consistently degraded, and thus, the photovoltaic characteristics of the PEDOT:PSS devices showed a complete failure after 216 hours of storage. Encouragingly, following the same period of storage, the devices with PRGOs still exhibited favorable PCEs, retaining 60% of their initial values. It is generally recognized that the instability of PEDOT:PSS devices originates from their significant hydrophilicity mostly due to the above-mentioned –SO3H groups. On the other hand, PRGOs, which inherit the features of the chemically inert graphene sheets, possess excellent hydrophobicity. As shown in Fig. 6b, a comparison of the water contact angles between the PEDOT:PSS and PRGO surface confirms this claim. This difference in hydrophobicity resulted in the deviated stability of the respective electrical conductivities as provided in Fig. 6c; the conductivity of PRGO was maintained regardless of the storage time, whereas the conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS promptly deteriorated just after exposure to the atmosphere, which would degrade the charge-extraction ability of the interfacial layer. More importantly, for the perovskite devices, the decomposition of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskites could be accelerated by the hydrophilic PEDOT:PSS surface with –SO3H. The abundant hydroxyl groups, the high acidity, and the hygroscopic properties of the PEDOT:PSS can induce undesirable deficiencies in perovskite components such as CH3NH3+ and I− ions by converting them into highly volatile forms (CH3NH2 and I2). From this point of view, the chemical inertness of graphitic PRGOs could effectively retard the decomposition of the perovskites to moisture and oxygen in the atmosphere.
Finally, it is important to verify the broader feasibility of this PRGO from a commercial standpoint. Therefore, we fabricated PeSCs employing the PRGO HTL with our scalable slot-die printing system as shown in Fig. 7a. The respective layers including PRGO, MAPbI3, and PC61BM were sequentially printed under ambient conditions, and all experimental conditions except for the coating method were identical to those used in the spin-coating system. As shown in Fig. 7b, the printed PeSC using the PRGO showed a remarkably high PCE of 11.6% with a VOC of 0.97 V, a JSC of 17.3 mA cm−2, and a FF of 68.8%. This performance is superior to the reference device with the PEDOT:PSS, which exhibited a low PCE of 8.4% with a VOC of 0.91 V, a JSC of 12.6 mA cm−2, and a FF of 72.8%. This successful demonstration clearly reveals that the PRGO HTL can be adapted to the scalable roll-to-roll process by preserving both of its roles as an interfacial layer and a crystallization template for the perovskite overlayer. The viability of the colloidal PRGO in scalable applications could be attributed to the grafted PAN, which could act as a polymeric binder in the deposition of graphitic sheets to result in uniform, crystalline, and robust rGO films.

We successfully developed a much more feasible rGO HTL through a controllable synthesis route to simultaneously demonstrate highly efficient, stable, and printable p–i–n planar PeSCs with simple one-step processing. The attractiveness of the approach proposed in this study is that it allows one to readily modulate the rGO characteristics by varying quantitative synthesis conditions such as irradiation intensity (200, 400, and 600 kGy) and the concentration of AN precursor (2, 4, 6 wt%). The controllable degree of the reduction and the PAN grafting could systematically change the resultant properties of the PRGO including its surface composition, dispersibility (morphology), σ, and WF. Among the various as-synthesized PRGOs, the sample produced with a lower AN concentration and a higher irradiation intensity i.e., PRGO_2-600, was the best for a PeSC as a HTL. The optimized PRGO effectively enhanced the average PCEs of PeSCs by roughly 36% compared to those of conventional PeSCs employing the PEDOT:PSS. The comprehensive analyses verified that the improved device efficiency originates from (1) the favorable interlayer characteristics of the PRGO itself and (2) the well-developed perovskite layer grown on the PRGO. Specifically, the electrical properties of the PRGO including a high σ and WF could promote fast charge extraction through the PRGO/MAPbI3 interface, and the chemically robust surface of the PRGO could assist in the improved and ordered crystallization of the perovskite films from the pre-mixed (one-step) solution. In addition to device efficiency, the chemically inactive PRGOs could not only maintain their electrical properties over time but could also effectively retard the decomposition of the MAPbI3 films, which eventually prolonged the operation time of PeSCs in the atmosphere. Finally, the feasibility of the PRGO HTL was apparently extended to up-scalable processing, i.e., the slot-die coating system, with PCEs comparable to those of the spin-coated PeSCs. Our above accomplishments led us to conclude that the developed and tailored PRGO is an outstanding material to demonstrate the highest potential of p–i–n planar PeSCs with facile one-step processing, and to ensure the spread of solution-processable graphenes in practical perovskite solar cells.


There are no conflicts to declare.


J.-S. Yeo and Y.-H. Seo contributed equally to this work. This work was supported by the Korea Electric Power Corporation (CX72170050).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8nr05698f
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019