 DOI: 10.1039/C4PY00095A
(Paper)
Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 4480-4487


Lie
Chen
,

Shaojie
Tian
 and 

Yiwang
Chen
*

Institute of Polymers/Department of Chemistry, Nanchang University, 999 Xuefu Avenue, Nanchang 330031, China. E-mail: ywchen@ncu.edu.cn; Fax: +86 791 83969561; Tel: +86 791 83969562

Jiangxi Provincial Key Laboratory of New Energy Chemistry, Nanchang University, 999 Xuefu Avenue, Nanchang 330031, China

Received
22nd January 2014
, Accepted 8th March 2014
First published on 11th March 2014
A ter(ethylene oxide) (TEO) functionalized copolymer donor and fullerene acceptor, namely poly{4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-alt-4,6-thieno[3,4-b]thiophene-2-carboxylic acid 2-[2-(2-methoxy-ethoxy)-ethoxy]-ethyl ester} (PBDTT-TT-TEO) and [6,6]-phenyl C61 butyric acid 2-[2-(2-methoxy-ethoxy)-ethoxy]-ethyl ester (PCB-TEO), respectively, are explored to manipulate the self-assembly nanoscale morphology and enhance the stability of the photoactive layer in polymer solar cells. Compared with the copolymer PBDTT-TT, TEO side chains induce more ordered molecular packing in PBDTT-TT-TEO, leading to an improvement in the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the device from 3.6% for PBDTT-TT:PCBM (PCBM is (6,6)-phenyl-C61 butyric acid methyl ester) to 4.1% for PBDTT-TT-TEO:PCBM. Directly blending PBDTT-TT-TEO with PCB-TEO , for use as the active layer, does not afford high device performance due to the discontinuous morphology of blend film caused by the poor solubility of PCB-TEO. However, precisely controlling the loading of PCB-TEO in the PBDTT-TT-TEO:PCBM blend greatly promotes the PCE of the device, because the TEO modified fullerene can serve as an effective compatibilizer to manipulate the miscibility between the polymer donor and acceptor and achieve a favorable heterojunction morphology by a cooperative assembly effect. The device with 5% loading of PCB-TEO achieves the highest PCE of 4.8%, with a short circuit current (Jsc) of 12.18 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.722 V and a fill factor (FF) of 55.0%, approximately a 33% improvement in PCE over the PBDTT-TT:PCBM device. In addition, the PCB-TEO compatibilizer located at the interface of the donor and acceptor strengthens the interaction of PBDTT-TT-TEO with PCBM, consequently improving the morphological and device stabilities.

Polymer solar cells (PSCs) have attracted much attention due to their potential applications in making large-area, lightweight and flexible photovoltaic devices through roll-to-roll printing. Bulk hetero-junction (BHJ) polymer solar cells, whose photoactive layer is composed of an interpenetrating network of electron donor materials and electron acceptor materials, have been one of the most successful device structures to date. Recently, a power conversion efficiency (PCE) over 7% has been effortlessly reached in the research field of PSCs. The nanomorphology of the active layer is one of the most important factors that influences the efficiency of polymer solar cells. In optimized BHJ polymer solar cells, phase separation of the donor (D) and acceptor (A) materials should be on the same length-scale as the exciton diffusion length to facilitate efficient exciton harvesting and separation. Therefore, local conjugated polymer ordering, acceptor agglomeration and the phase separation between the donor and acceptor are directly correlated to the performance of the devices.

The addition of chemical additives, thermal annealing treatments, and solvent annealing are among the frequently-used post-treatments for controlling the morphology in polymer–fullerene BHJ solar cells. Beyond these post-treatments, chemical structural modification of the active layers is regarded as an effective strategy for developing a desirable microphase separation morphology of the active layers. Previous studies have found that the incorporation of alkoxy side chains into active layers, especially ter(ethylene oxide) (TEO) chains, presents several advantages over alkyl groups. Firstly, alkoxy chains do not cause a disadvantageous steric twist of the conjugated polymer out of planarity, which is beneficial to transport charge and can lead to higher carrier mobility. Secondly, TEO derivatives can generally lead to good crystallinity, which is quite important to optimize the morphology of the active layers. Besides, polymers loaded with alkoxy chains have good solubility in common solvents, such as chloroform, chlorobenzene and orthodichloro-benzene, which makes it convenient and possible to use them in organic solar cells.
The lifetime of solar devices also importantly affects their commercialization. In fact, most PSC devices show poor stability and often undergo macrophase segregation of the blend components, especially after a prolonged exposure to heat. However, the morphology of the D–A blends is normally very sensitive to the fabrication procedures and the heating process, and cannot be maintained over long operation times. Several strategies for improving the morphological stability of polymer solar cells have been developed. Exploring thermo-cleavable polymers is one of the useful solutions to improving the stability of PSCs, but it involves complicated synthetic routes and large costs, limiting its applications in large-area solar cells. Using crosslinkable materials to cross-link the active layer is another approach for device stability improvement. However, the existence of these cross-linkable moieties reduces the probability that molecules come into close contact with each other, thereby lowering the mobility of electrons in the material.
To simultaneously achieve the favorable and stable morphology of the active layer, herein, the TEO functionalized copolymer donor PBDTT-TT-TEO and fullerene acceptor PCB-TEO are explored (Schemes 1 and 2). The copolymer poly{4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-alt-4,6-thieno[3,4-b]thiophen-2-yl-2-ethylhexan-1-one} (PBDTT-TT) without TEO side chains was also synthesized for comparison. We hoped that the cooperative assembly of the donor and acceptor via interchain interactions between the TEO side chains could construct a microphase separation nanostructure with promoted stability for highly efficient PSCs. Unexpectedly, directly blending PBDTT-TT-TEO with PCB-TEO as the active layer only affords a 2.8% PCE in the resulting device due to the discontinuous morphology of the blend film caused by the poor solubility of PCB-TEO. However, an appropriate amount of PCB-TEO as a compatibilizer incorporated into the PBDTT-TT-TEO:PCBM blend can dramatically improve the device performance and stability, because PCB-TEO, which is chemically similar to the segments in PBDTT-TT-TEO and PCBM, can be located at the interface of the donor and acceptor to manipulate the miscibility between the polymer and fullerene and achieve a favorable and stable BHJ morphology by a cooperative assembly effect. The device with 5% loading of PCB-TEO achieves the highest PCE of 4.8%, approximately a 33% improvement in PCE over the PBDTT-TT:PCBM device.

The synthetic routes of copolymers PBDTT-TT-TEO and PBDTT-TT are outlined in Scheme 1. 4,6-Dibromo-thieno[3,4-b]thiophene-2-carboxylic acid was reacted with TEO via an esterification reaction to yield the monomer 4,6-dibromo-thieno[3,4-b]thiophene-2-carboxylic acid 2-[2-(2-methoxy-ethoxy)-ethoxy]-ethyl ester (TT-TEO). In the presence of a catalytic amount of Pd(PPh3)4, TT-TEO was reacted with 2,6-bis(trimethyltin)-4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene (BDTT) to afford the polymer PBDTT-TT-TEO through Stille coupling. PBDTT-TT was also synthesized following the same method as PBDTT-TT-TEO. The structures of the monomer TT-TEO and copolymers have been confirmed by 1H NMR, as shown in Fig. S1 and S2. Compared with PBDTT-TT, copolymer PBDTT-TT-TEO shows the characteristic resonance peaks of TEO from 3.2 to 4.0 ppm, indicating the successful synthesis of the copolymer. The molecular weights were estimated by gel permeation chromatography (GPC) using tetrahydrofuran as the eluent, and the related data are summarized in Table 1. PCB-TEO was synthesized from PCBM by two steps according to the literature, and the synthetic procedures are provided in Scheme 2. The structure of PCB-TEO was also verified by 1H NMR, and the data are shown in Fig. S3. Unfortunately, PCB-TEO shows relatively poor solubility in common organic solvents, especially in chlorobenzene and orthodichlorobenzene.

Polymer

T
d (°C)
Molecular weight Mn (kg mol−1)
Polydispersity index (PDI)

λ
max (nm)

E
optg/ECVg (eV)

E
HOMO (eV)

E
LUMO (eV)

a 
E
HOMO = −(Eox + 4.8) eV and ELUMO = −(Ered + 4.8) eV. The electrochemical band gap (ECVg) was calculated from the formula, ECVg = ELUMO − EHOMO.

PBDTT-TT
364
20.5
3.1
696
1.61/1.87
−5.09
−3.22
PBDTT-TT-TEO
366
21.3
2.8
701
1.58/1.85
−5.07
−3.23
The thermal properties of the copolymers were determined by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) under a nitrogen atmosphere at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 (Fig. S4). The temperature at 5% weight loss was chosen as the onset point of decomposition (Td). Similar to the polymer PBDTT-TT, PBDTT-TT-TEO shows little weight loss when heated up to 366 °C, suggesting that the introduction of TEO chains into the PBDTT-TT does not influence the thermal stability of the polymer. Evidently, this is sufficient for its applications in BHJ solar cells and other optoelectronic devices.

Fig. 1 shows the UV-vis absorption spectra of the PBDTT-TT and PBDTT-TT-TEO films. The absorption spectrum of the PBDTT-TT film shows maximum absorption at 696 nm, while the PBDTT-TT-TEO film shows the highest peak at 701 nm. The slightly red shifted band of PBDTT-TT-TEO indicates that PBDTT-TT-TEO possesses a longer efficient conjugation length than PBDTT-TT. This is because the TEO side chains can reduce the detrimental steric twist of the polymer out of planarity, which is beneficial for the π–π stacking.
Electrochemical cyclic voltammetry (CV) has been widely employed to investigate the electrochemical behavior of polymers and estimate their highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy levels. The HOMO and LUMO energy levels of the polymers were calculated from the onset oxidation potential and the onset reduction potential according to equations reported in the literature. Fig. S5 shows the cyclic voltammogram curves of the two copolymers. PBDTT-TT and PBDTT-TT-TEO possess almost identical electrochemical redox characteristics. For PBDTT-TT, the onset potential for oxidation is located around 0.27 V versus Ag/AgNO3, which corresponds to a highest occupied molecular orbital of −5.09 eV. The LUMO energy level of PBDTT-TT is calculated to be −3.22 eV based on the onset potential for reduction at around −1.60 V. Using similar methods, the HOMO and LUMO energy levels for PBDTT-TT-TEO are −5.07 and −3.23 eV, respectively. From the results, we can draw the conclusion that PBDTT-TT-TEO has a relatively narrower band gap than PBDTT-TT, which is in line with the results of the UV-vis spectra.
Because polymer chain packing can affect exciton dissociation, recombination and charge transport, the crystalline structures of the donor–acceptor films blended with different amounts of additive were observed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurement. Fig. S6 shows the XRD patterns of PBDTT-TT and PBDTT-TT-TEO. Both polymers show crystalline diffraction peaks at a low angle (∼5.0°), which is attributed to a lamellar structure. The crystalline diffraction peak of PBDTT-TT-TEO is slightly sharper than that of PBDTT-TT, meaning that PBDTT-TT-TEO has a more ordered molecular packing structure, which is consistent with the UV observation.
To determine the photovoltaic properties of the TEO functionalized copolymer, BHJ devices based on PBDTT-TT-TEO:PCBM are fabricated, and the device based on PBDTT-TT blended with PCBM is also provided for comparison. The configuration of the device is glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/copolymer:PCBM/LiF/Al. Fig. 2 shows the I–V curves for solar cells under simulated AM 1.5 G radiation (100 mW cm−2); the optimized photovoltaic properties are summarized in Table 2. All of the devices based on PBDTT-TT-TEO:PCBM with different weight ratios perform better than those based on PBDTT-TT:PCBM. The best PCE of 4.1% is obtained from the device based on PBDTT-TT-TEO:PCBM at a weight ratio of 1:2, together with a short-circuit current (Jsc) of 11.63 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.727 V and a fill factor (FF) of 48.1%, while the device based on PBDTT-TT:PCBM (1:2, w/w) obtains an inferior PCE of 3.6%, with a Jsc of 11.09 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.726 V and a FF of 44.5%. The improved PCE is related to the enhanced Jsc and FF, which should arise from the more ordered molecular packing structure of PBDTT-TT-TEO, resulting in more efficient carrier transport in the active layer.
Photovoltaic (PV) devices
Blend ratio polymer:PCBM

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)

R
s
 (Ω cm2)

R
sh
 (Ω cm2)
PCE (%)

a All values represent averages.
b Series resistance (Rs).
c Shunt resistance (Rsh).

PBDTT-TT:PCBM
1:2
0.726
11.09
44.5
15.8
187.6
3.6
PBDTT-TT-TEO:PCBM
1:2
0.727
11.63
48.1
15.2
197.8
4.1
PBDTT-TT:PCBM
1:1.5
0.735
11.39
40.8
99.6
254.4
3.4
PBDTT-TT-TEO:PCBM
1:1.5
0.741
11.44
43.1
12.9
216.8
3.7
To further improve the PCE, the device based on PBDTT-TT-TEO blended with PCB-TEO containing the same functional group was fabricated. Using this approach, the cooperative assembly of the TEO chains in both the donor and acceptor develops the ordered microphase-separation nanomorphology for PCE enhancement. Unexpectedly, the devices based on PBDTT-TT-TEO:PCB-TEO only obtained a low PCE of 2.8% with a dramatically reduced FF (Fig. 3 and Table 3). The poor performance can be ascribed to the discontinuous film morphology caused by the poor solubility of PCB-TEO in organic solvents, as revealed by atomic force microscopy (AFM) observation (Fig. S7).
PV devices

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)

R
s
 (Ω cm2)

R
sh
 (Ω cm2)
PCE (%)

a Weight ratio of the total amount of PCB-TEO and PCBM (blended with BDTT-TT-TEO).
b Series resistance (Rs).
c Shunt resistance (Rsh).
d All values represent averages..

3% PCB-TEO
0. 729
11.72
54.2
128.6
390.6
4.5
5% PCB-TEO
0.722
12.18
55.0
17.8
469.4
4.8
10% PCB-TEO
0.722
11.03
50.2
11.1
265.4
4.0
100% PCB-TEO
0.725
10.69
36.1
8.6
104.9
2.8
Using a compatibilizer has been proven to be an effective approach to improve the formation of the D–A nanoscale interpenetrating network. Since the PCB-TEO did not perform satisfactorily as an acceptor in the PSCs owing to its poor solubility, it could be used as a compatibilizer in PBDTT-TT-TEO:PCBM blends to modify the nanostructure of the active layer. Considering that PCB-TEO contains the same segment as both PBDTT-TT-TEO and PCBM, the compatibility between the immiscible PBDTT-TT-TEO and PCBM can be enhanced via PCB-TEO, preferentially located at the donor and acceptor interface to span the heterojunction itself, consequently ensuring good miscibility in the system. The solar cell performance of the PBDTT-TT-TEO:PCBM:PCB-TEO ternary system is provided in Table 3 and Fig. 3. As expected, with the addition of an appropriate amount of PCB-TEO into the PBDTT-TT-TEO:PCBM blend, the PCE of the device dramatically increases and the device with 5% loading of PCB-TEO achieves the highest PCE of 4.8%, with a Jsc of 12.18 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.722 V and a FF of 55.0%. Compared to the PBDTT-TT:PCBM device, the PCB-TEO compatibilizer promotes approximately a 33% improvement in PCE, a 24% improvement in FF and a 10% improvement in Jsc. The enhanced FF is associated with the remarkably improved Rsh from 197.8 Ω cm2 (without a PCB-TEO compatibilizer) to 469.4 Ω cm2 (with a PCB-TEO compatibilizer). Further increasing the loading of PCB-TEO to 10% results in a sharp decrease in the overall parameters (PCE = 4.0%, FF = 50.2%, Jsc = 11.03 mA cm−2), except for the almost unchanged Voc which is mainly determined by the difference between the HOMO of the donor and the LUMO of the acceptor. In addition, PCB-TEO was also incorporated into the PBDTT-TT:PCBM blends without TEO for comparison, and the corresponding performance is shown in Table S1 (Fig. S8). Due to the lack of TEO in the PBDTT-TT donor, the PCB-TEO compatibilizer cannot serve the same role on PBDTT-TT as on PBDTT-TT-TEO. Therefore, the device only delivers a PCE of 3.2% for 3% loading of PCB-TEO and 2.7% for 5% loading of PCB-TEO.
From the device performance, it can be concluded that incorporation of TEO into the donor and acceptor can result in an improved PCE by enhancing the Jsc and FF. Fig. 4 shows the UV-vis spectra of the blend films of PBDTT-TT:PCBM, PBDTT-TT-TEO:PCBM and PBDTT-TT-TEO:PCBM with different amounts of PCB-TEO. Compared with PBDTT-TT:PCBM, PBDTT-TT-TEO:PCBM shows an obviously enhanced absorption intensity at 740–800 nm, owing to the better arrangement favored by the TEO segment. When a small amount (3% to 10%) of PCBM is replaced by PCB-TEO, the absorption intensity further increases, and the blends with 5% and 10% of PCB-TEO present the strongest absorption at the solar flux region. This is because the PCB-TEO preferentially located at the donor and acceptor interface favors more ordered arrangements via the interaction between the same TEO side chains. The enhanced absorption peaks should be responsible for the enhanced Jsc.
No obvious distinction between X-ray diffraction patterns can be seen in Fig. 5 when blending the two polymers with PCBM. However, slightly increasing the loading of the PCB-TEO additive from 3% to 10% causes the crystalline diffraction peak at a low angle to become sharper and move to a higher angle. The result indicates that the cooperative assembly between PBDTT-TT-TEO and PCB-TEO can enhance the crystallinity of the polymer crystallites and cause tighter packing of the lamellar structure. The self-aggregation tendency induced by cooperative assembly of the TEO side chains is essential for transport of the holes and electrons.
To gain a deeper insight into the morphologies of the active layers, the surfaces of the donor–acceptor blends have been studied by AFM (Fig. 6). The PBDTTT-TT-TEO:PCBM film reveals a rough surface morphology with a root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of 1.12 nm at a 1 μm × 1 μm scan size. This obvious phase separation may produce poor contact between the active layer and the electrode, and yield unfavorable conditions for charge separation and transport. With the addition of 3% PCB-TEO into the film, a better surface morphology with a reduced RMS roughness of 0.93 nm is developed, while the best-optimized morphology can be acquired with a RMS roughness of 0.51 nm for the film with 5% PCB-TEO. As shown in Fig. 6, the miscibility of PBDTTT-TT-TEO and PCBM is greatly enhanced, and PCBM is well dispersed in the polymer matrix with the addition of 5% PCB-TEO to the blend. The smooth and homogenous morphology can provide a nano-scale bi-continuous network of donor and acceptor materials for efficient charge dissociation and transportation, leading to a high PCE. The smoothest film with a RMS roughness of 0.36 nm is obtained from the blend with 10% loading of PCB-TEO. However, too much PCB-TEO leads to a large phase separation, as revealed by Fig. 6. Therefore, a sharp decrease in PCE is seen. For PBDTT-TT:PCBM, without the cooperative assembly of TEO side chains, adding only 3% PCB-TEO into the active layer produces a predominantly macrophase aggregation (Fig. S9).
The morphologies of the PBDTT-TT-TEO:PCBM and PBDTT-TT-TEO:PCBM:PCB-TEO (5% PCB-TEO) films are further investigated by planar transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (Fig. 7). The bright and dark parts represent the polymer-rich and PCBM-rich domains, respectively. The big PCBM clusters can be clearly distinguished from the dark areas in the TEM image of the PBDTT-TT-TEO:PCBM blend (Fig. 7). In contrast, adding 5% PCB-TEO into the blend induces a homogeneous morphology of the polymer and PCBM with equal domain size. Therefore, from the device performance, light absorption and morphology, it is determined that incorporation of a TEO side chain into the active layer obviously improves the degree of ordering in the blend film. More importantly, by precisely controlling the loading of PCB-TEO, it can serve as an effective compatibilizer to manipulate the miscibility between the donor and acceptor and the scale of the phase separation in the PBDTT-TT-TEO:PCBM blend by a cooperative assembly effect, consequently achieving a favorable BHJ morphology and improving the device performance. A schematic illustration of the cooperative assembly structure of PBDTT-TT-TEO:PCBM:PCB-TEO is depicted in Scheme 3.
Since the PCB-TEO compatibilizer favors good miscibility of PBDTT-TT-TEO and PCBM via interaction with the TEO side chains and fullerene, a good morphological stability of the blends is also anticipated. Fig. 8 shows the variation in device performance with PBDTT-TT:PCBM (1:2 w/w), PBDTT-TT-TEO:PCBM (1:2 w/w) and PBDTT-TT-TEO:PCBM:PCB-TEO (1:1.90:0.10 w/w) annealed at 150 °C for different times in a glove box under a N2 atmosphere. The inert atmosphere is introduced to exclude the influence of humidity and oxygen and allow us to focus on the influence of a morphological change on the device performance under elevated temperature. PBDTT-TT based devices show a rapid degradation in the PCE, especially during the first 1 h (less than 70%), and only 25% of the PCE remains after annealing for 8 h. However, both the PBDTT-TT-TEO based devices show better stability. The PBDTT-TT-TEO:PCBM device maintains 56% of the PCE and the device composed of PBDTT-TT-TEO and PCBM with 5% PCB-TEO maintains 75% of the PCE after heating for 8 h. Fig. 9 shows optical images of the morphology changes of the PBDTT-TT:PCBM, PBDTT-TT-TEO:PCBM and PBDTT-TT-TEO:PCBM (5% PCB-TEO) films before and after annealing at 150 °C for 8 h. All of the films have a homogeneous morphology without large PCBM crystals before thermal treatment. However, after annealing at 150 °C for 8 h, numerous needle-like PCBM crystals appear over all of the regions in the PBDTT-TT based samples. This kind of large-scale macro-phase separation is the main reason for the deterioration of the device performance. In the thermally annealed PBDTT-TT-TEO:PCBM film, there are still some PCBM crystals. Nevertheless, for the PBDTT-TT-TEO:PCBM:PCB-TEO (5%) blend, due to the PCB-TEO compatibilizer located at the interface of the donor and acceptor to strengthen the interaction of PBDTT-TT-TEO with PCBM, the formation of large PCBM crystals is found to be greatly suppressed, consequently leading to the enhanced thermal stability of the devices.

In summary, we have presented a novel approach by combining TEO functionalized copolymer donor PBDTT-TT-TEO and fullerene acceptor PCB-TEO to manipulate the self-assembly nanoscale morphology and enhance the stability of the photoactive layer in polymer solar cells. Compared with the PBDTT-TT:PCBM blend, the PCE of the PBDTT-TT-TEO:PCBM based device is improved from 3.6% to 4.1%, due to more ordered molecular packing induced by TEO side chains. However, directly blending PBDTT-TT-TEO with PCB-TEO as the active layer affords poor performance due to the discontinuous morphology of the blend film. Nevertheless, incorporation of an appropriate amount of PCB-TEO as a compatibilizer into the PBDTT-TT-TEO:PCBM blend can effectively improve the device performance. The device with 5% loading of PCB-TEO achieves the highest PCE of 4.8%, with approximately a 33% improvement in PCE, a 24% improvement in FF and a 10% improvement in Jsc. PCB-TEO, chemically similar to the segments in PBDTT-TT-TEO and PCBM, can be located at the interface of the donor and acceptor to manipulate the miscibility between the polymer and fullerene and achieve a favorable and stable BHJ morphology by a cooperative assembly effect. In addition, good miscibility of the donor and acceptor helped by PCB-TEO greatly improves the morphological stability of the blends and the thermally stability of the device. All of these features indicate that cooperative assembly of a TEO functionalized copolymer and fullerene is a promising approach to develop photoactive layers in polymer solar cells with a well-defined and stable morphology.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51273088 and 51263016).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4py00095a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014