 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA06035A
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 20597-20603


Taotao
Chen
,

Guoqing
Tong
*,

Enze
Xu
,

Huan
Li
,

Pengcheng
Li
,

Zhifeng
Zhu
,

Jianxin
Tang
,

Yabing
Qi
* and 

Yang
Jiang
*

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, Anhui 230009, P. R. China. E-mail: apjiang@hfut.edu.cn

Energy Materials and Surface Sciences Unit (EMSSU), Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate University (OIST), 1919-1 Tancha, Onna-son, Kunigami-gun, Okinawa 904-0495, Japan. E-mail: GUOQING.TONG@OIST.jp; Yabing.Qi@OIST.jp

Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices, Soochow University, Suzhou, 215123, P. R. China

Received
6th June 2019
, Accepted 19th August 2019
First published on 19th August 2019
MXenes have been demonstrated as a potential candidate in the field of photovoltaics and energy storage owing to their high transmittance, metallic conductivity and tunable work function. In this work, we introduce a two-dimensional (2D) structure of Ti3C2-MXene nanosheets into all inorganic CsPbBr3 solar cells as an interlayer to realize a better interfacial energy level alignment, which helps to eliminate the energy level mismatch, accelerate the hole extraction and reduce the recombination at the interface of perovskite/carbon electrode. In addition, the functional groups such as O existing in the surface of Ti3C2-MXene nanosheets also provide strong interactions between the MXene and under-coordinated Pb atoms, which remarkably reduces the deep trap defects in the CsPbBr3 films. The device with the Ti3C2-MXene interlayer shows an impressive initial power conversion efficiency of 9.01% and long-term stability for over 1900 hours in a moisture environment and more than 600 hours under thermal conditions.

Hybrid perovskite materials, an unprecedented development of inorganic perovskites, in the past five years have attracted many investigators' attention and been considered as promising candidates in optoelectronic devices owing to their high mobility, long carrier diffusion length and strong absorption coefficients in the visible spectrum. To date, many processing technologies have been used including solution methods, vapor deposition, anti-solvent procedures,etc., to improve the quality of inorganic perovskite films in order to achieve higher efficient devices. Although the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of inorganic perovskite solar cells (PSCs) is still lower than that of organic–inorganic hybrid PSCs, the stability of inorganic PSCs is better than that of their hybrid counterparts. However, large recombination and energy level mismatch exist at the perovskite film/carbon electrode interface, which will impede the carrier transfer and affect the performance of devices due to the hole transport layer (HTL)-free feature and lower work function of the carbon electrode. Therefore, the carrier recombination and work function modulation are the bottlenecks for HTL-free devices in practical applications.

Some strategies (i.e., interface modification, organic HTL layer and gradient architecture) were used to reduce the trap defects and recombination. Although much progress has been achieved, there are still many issues to be resolved such as the instability and/or high cost of organic HTLs, the control of the gradient architecture and light capture after interface modification. Up to now, high efficiency devices based on an organic HTL, for example, spiro-OMeTAD, PTAA, P3HT, PEDOT:PSS and so on, suffer from poor stability because these hydrophilic/acidic organic materials are sensitive to moisture and can also deteriorate the quality of perovskite crystallites. In addition, a gradient bandgap can well separate the electron–hole carriers and simultaneously passivate the defects whereas introducing more than three kinds of absorption layers into the devices will involve complicated steps and make it difficult to control the component of each layer. To avoid the recombination at the interface, modification is proposed in both hybrid and inorganic PSCs by introducing a second phase (i.e., excess PbX2, organic molecules, polymers, etc.) into the grain boundaries, which passivates the vacancies and defects originated from under-coordinated Pb atoms and Pb–I antisites, respectively. However, the second phase located at the grain boundaries and/or the surface affects the light harvesting of the perovskite films. Thus, it is urgent to find an interlayer between the carbon and perovskite film to overcome these drawbacks and develop devices with high efficiency and long-term stability.
In recent years, MXenes as a new class of two-dimensional (2D) structure materials show great potential in the field of supercapacitors, batteries and field-effect transistors owing to their layer architecture with a high specific surface area, hydrophilic surface, outstanding chemical stabilities and environment friendly properties. An MXene with a layered structure can be obtained by chemically etching A from raw MAX phase powder, where M stands for a transition metal (e.g., titanium or vanadium), A is an A-group element such as aluminum, tin, etc., and X is carbon and/or nitrogen. Similar to graphene, MXenes also show specific properties, i.e., high transmittance and metallic conductivity, which makes it possible to serve as a window layer. In addition, the tunable work function (2.14–5.65 eV) of MXenes can adjust the barrier height of junctions at the interface, which can effectively accelerate the carrier extraction. Based on this extraordinary performance, the application of MXenes in solar cells has also attracted much attention. For example, Guo et al. reported a high efficiency perovskite solar cell by adding Ti3C2-MXene into MAPbI3 precursor solution, which helps to decrease the crystallization rate and accelerate the charge transfer. Furthermore, Yang and co-workers developed a novel SnO2–Ti3C2 MXene electron transport layer to enhance the electron extraction and carrier mobility, which shows an impressive enhancement of PCE from 17.23% to 18.34%.
Here, we develop a novel architecture that integrates Ti3C2-MXene into a CsPbBr3 film to construct a HTL-free inorganic PSC (FTO/TiO2/CsPbBr3/Ti3C2-MXene/carbon) for the first time. The improved work function alignment ensures a lower energy barrier between the CsPbBr3 film and carbon electrode by the Ti3C2-MXene interlayer uniformly coated on the perovskite absorption layer. Compared with the conventional devices, the presence of Ti3C2-MXene can fast extract the hole carriers and effectively block the electron transport to the counter electrode simultaneously. Finally, the CsPbBr3/Ti3C2-MXene based solar cell shows a high initial PCE of 9.01% accompanied by a long-term stability for more than 1900 h.

Two-dimensional Ti3C2-MXene nanosheets are obtained by exfoliation of raw Ti3AlC2 powder with HF solution, and more details are described in the Experimental section. The X-ray diffraction patterns of the raw Ti3AlC2 powder and as-prepared Ti3C2-MXene nanosheets are presented in Fig. 1a. Sharp diffraction peaks of the raw material indicate good crystallinity of Ti3AlC2. After removing Al by HF treatment, the accordion-like structure of the etched powder can be clearly seen in Fig. 1d. After intercalation, sonication and centrifugation treatment, the highest intensity peak assigned to (002) indicates the successful synthesis of single layer Ti3C2-MXene nanosheets. The broadened Raman bands of Ti3C2-MXene (Fig. 1b) after chemical etching suggest that multiple surface functional groups co-exist in the MXene nanosheets. To further evaluate the component and the surface properties of Ti3C2-MXene, surface X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is conducted. The Ti3C2-MXene surface, as seen in Fig. 1c and S1, is terminated by –OH, –F or O groups. The high-resolution spectrum of O 1s is shown in Fig. S1b, and the peaks at 532.8 eV, 532.0 eV and 531.3 eV correspond to Al2O3, Ti–OH and Ti–O bonds. The peaks located at 529.8 eV and 533.7 eV indicate the existence of TiO2 and H2O. In Fig. S1a, the peaks at 286.5 eV, 284.6 eV and 281.7 eV of C 1s correspond to C–O, C–C and C–Ti bonds. In parallel, the signals, as shown in Fig. S2c, at 455.05 eV and 458.5 eV, 455.9 eV and 461.3 eV, and 456.8 eV and 462.8 eV are attributed to Ti–C, Ti(II) and Ti–O, respectively. Different from the raw Ti3AlC2 powder (Fig. S2), the top-view SEM images in Fig. 1d and S3 display an accordion-like 2D layer structure of as-prepared Ti3C2-MXene with a thickness of around 2 μm. The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of the as-prepared Ti3C2-MXene nanosheets in Fig. 1e presents fewer flat and uniform layers with a lateral size of 100–200 nm after etching and post-treatment. The corresponding selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern in Fig. 1f displays a hexagonal symmetry structure, which demonstrates that the Ti3C2-MXene nanosheets show a few highly crystalline layers.

Good dispersion of Ti3C2-MXene nanosheets in the solvent (Fig. 1c, inset) is beneficial for spin-coating and film formation. Fig. 2c schematically illustrates the formation of CsPbBr3/Ti3C2-MXene based solar cells. The CsBr and PbBr2 thin films are firstly deposited on the FTO/c-TiO2 substrate to produce the CsPbBr3 absorption layer after post-annealing treatment. Then the Ti3C2-MXene nanosheet dispersion solution is spin-coated on the surface of the CsPbBr3 film to form the MXene interlayer. After simple heating, the carbon electrode is coated by blade coating. Fig. 2d depicts the XRD diffraction patterns of the CsPbBr3 film with/without the Ti3C2-MXene film. In the pristine CsPbBr3 film, five typical X-ray diffraction peaks located at 15.18°, 21.55°, 30.64° and 37.76° can be observed clearly and assigned to (100), (110), (111), (200) and (211) cubic structures, which indicates that the CsPbBr3 film prepared by vapor deposition is in the cubic phase (Fig. 2a). It is worth noting that a small diffraction peak at 8.9° suggests the presence of the MXene on the top surface of the CsPbBr3 film. The corresponding UV-vis spectra of the CsPbBr3 film with/without Ti3C2-MXene in Fig. 2e give the same cut-off wavelength of ∼530 nm, which means that there is no obvious change in the optical bandgap. Noticeably, the improvement of light absorption of CsPbBr3/Ti3C2-MXene in the visible region is attributed to light scattering and reflection. The MXene interlayer is fully covered on the surface of the inorganic perovskite layer (Fig. 2f), which enables to improve the light scattering, leading to an improvement of light capture.
To gain further understanding of Ti3C2-MXene as an interlayer in the devices, we construct a planar solar cell with the architecture of FTO/c-TiO2/CsPbBr3/Ti3C2-MXene/carbon (Fig. 2c), where the TiO2 acts as the electron transport and hole blocking layer. The CsPbBr3 film is defined as a light harvesting layer to generate electron/hole carriers under illumination. The Ti3C2-MXene thin film serves as an interlayer to eliminate energy level mismatch in order to accelerate the hole extraction. A typical cross sectional SEM image in Fig. 3a and b shows a continuous and uniform CsPbBr3 film with high crystallinity. An approximate thickness of 300 nm ensures sufficient light harvest and can also effectively mitigate the recombination between the CsPbBr3 layer and carbon electrode, reducing the leakage path in the devices. Additionally, the full coverage and high crystallization of the CsPbBr3 film shown in Fig. 3c ensure a high light harvest. Fig. S4 shows the atomic force microscope (AFM) images of the CsPbBr3 film, which show an ultra-smooth surface with a roughness of 18.6 nm. High quality and smooth surfaces are beneficial for the deposition of the Ti3C2-MXene film with a free distance to construct a good contact with the CsPbBr3 layer. As illustrated in Fig. 3d and e, the photo-generated electrons will be quickly transported to the TiO2 layer under illumination, leaving the holes in the perovskite. In turn, the holes are accumulated in the perovskite film and then pass to the carbon electrode. However, carrier recombination can be found at the interface of CsPbBr3/carbon because there is no energy barrier for the electron transfer. Thus the large recombination at the interface results in a leakage and will significantly reduce the photocurrent. Additionally, the work function of Ti3C2-MXene and carbon is determined by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS). It is worth noting that the Ti3C2-MXene film shows a higher work function (4.5 eV) than the carbon electrode (4.3 eV) (Fig. 3f and S5), which can lower the valence and conduction bands of the CsPbBr3 film at the CsPbBr3/Ti3C2-MXene interface and effectively facilitates the hole transfer without any barrier. Simultaneously, the better match of the energy level alignment between the CsPbBr3 film and carbon electrode impedes the electron transport to the counter electrode because of the conduction band shifting upwards.
Additionally, the surface passivation of inorganic perovskite by Ti3C2-MXene is another important part. The polycrystalline nature of the perovskite films in both hybrid and inorganic materials will produce a large number of trap sites, especially for halide and cation defects, which will generate under-coordinated Pb atoms. Interestingly, during the etching of the MXene, a large number of various functional groups such as –OH, –F and O exist in the surface of Ti3C2-MXene (Fig. 1b), which may provide strong interactions between the MXene and under-coordinated Pb atoms in CsPbBr3. This passivation offers a direct conducting channel between CsPbBr3 and Ti3C2-MXene, resulting in high speed transport to the electrode. Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements are conducted to evaluate the carrier lifetime of the CsPbBr3 film with/without the Ti3C2-MXene and carbon electrode. The TRPL curves contain two lifetime components: one is fast decay and the other one is a slow decay component, which can be fitted with a biexponential function. The average lifetimes (τave) of samples are calculated as follows:
where
A1 and A2 are the amplitudes, and τ1 and τ2 represent the fast and slow components, respectively. As presented in Fig. S6 and Table S1, an increased lifetime is achieved after introducing Ti3C2-MXene into the CsPbBr3 film with an average lifetime of 5.582 ns, which can be explained by the passivation of functional groups. In contrast, assembled with a carbon electrode, the CsPbBr3/Ti3C2-MXene/carbon sample shows a shorter lifetime than its counterpart without the Ti3C2-MXene interlayer, which indicates that carriers can be extracted fast from the perovskite and transport to the carbon electrode. For further evaluation of the traps in the perovskite film, we conducted a space-charge limited current (SCLC) experiment under different biases with a structure of FTO/perovskite/Au, as shown in Fig. 3g and h. The typical cross sectional SEM image in Fig. 3i shows that the CsPbBr3 film has a thickness of 300 nm. The defect density (Nτ) for the devices with/without Ti3C2-MXene can be calculated using the following equation:
where
VTFL and Nτ are the trap filled limit voltage and the trap density, respectively. ε and ε0 are the dielectric constant of CsPbBr3 perovskite (ε = 16.46) and the vacuum permittivity (ε0 = 8.8 × 10−12 F m−1), respectively.e is the electron charge and L is the thickness of the CsPbBr3 film in the devices. According to the above equation, we can estimate that the VTFL of the devices with/without the Ti3C2-MXene interlayer is 0.44 V and 0.24 V, respectively. The corresponding defect density values are 8.06 × 1015 cm−3 and 4.84 × 1015 cm−3 for the inorganic CsPbBr3 and CsPbBr3/Ti3C2-MXene films, respectively. These results show an improved quality of the CsPbBr3 film after introducing the Ti3C2-MXene interlayer between the CsPbBr3 film and carbon electrode. Furthermore, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was conducted to further understand the carrier transport and recombination in the inorganic PSCs. As seen in Fig. S7, the Nyquist plots of the samples display large semicircles and could be fitted by an equivalent circuit (inset of Fig. S7). Rs and Rrec are defined as the series resistance of devices and charge-recombination resistance, respectively. It is found that the device with the MXene layer shows a higher recombination resistance (Rrec) of 454.8 ohm than the pure carbon electrode device with an Rrec of 391.5 ohm (seen in Table S2), which means that the carrier recombination is successfully suppressed in the Ti3C2-MXene based device because of low defect trap density and fast extraction of carriers in the device. In contrast, an Rs of 2.4 ohm in the Ti3C2-MXene based device is lower than that without the MXene (5.2 ohm), which benefits the improvement of performance such as the fill factor of the devices.

The photovoltaic performances of the CsPbBr3 films with/without the Ti3C2-MXene interlayer are depicted in Fig. 4a and the corresponding parameters are listed in Table 1. The device shows a poor PCE of 8.21% with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.423 V, a short-circuit current (Jsc) of 7.96 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 72.48% under reverse scanning and 7.11% under forward scanning. The lower efficiency may result from the large recombination at the interface. In contrast, the improved performance of the device with a higher PCE of 9.01% (Voc of 1.444 V, Jsc of 8.54 mA cm−2 and FF of 73.08%) under reverse scanning and 7.85% under forward scanning is achieved after inserting the Ti3C2-MXene film into the device. The improvement of Jsc comes from the reduced trap defects and recombination at the interface of CsPbBr3/carbon electrode. A little deviation between forward and reverse scanning indicates that the hysteresis effects from the traps will inevitably exist in the CsPbBr3 and titanium oxide thin films. In addition, the external quantum efficiencies (EQEs) of the devices presented in Fig. 4b show a broad plateau of over 70% between 350 and 525 nm. The corresponding integrated photocurrent densities are 6.55 mA cm−2 (without Ti3C2-MXene) and 7.39 mA cm−2 (with Ti3C2-MXene), respectively, which are in agreement with the current density extracted from J–V curves. The steady PCE of the CsPbBr3/Ti3C2-MXene PSC approaches 8.62% under a bias voltage at the maximum power point for 120 s (Fig. 4c), which is close to the value from J–V curves and ensures the stability of the devices. Furthermore, the devices with Ti3C2-MXene show a higher reproducibility with a narrow PCE distribution, and the corresponding results are summarized in Fig. S8 and Table S3.
Device

V
oc [V]

J
sc [mA cm−2]
FF [%]
PCE [%]
CsPbBr3-forward
1.387
7.10
72.18
7.11
CsPbBr3-reverse
1.423
7.96
72.48
8.21
CsPbBr3/Ti3C2-MXene-forward
1.371
8.22
69.62
7.85
CsPbBr3/Ti3C2-MXene-reverse
1.444
8.54
73.08
9.01
Stability is an important parameter of PSCs, which reflects the lifetime and performance of devices in practical applications. It is affected by intrinsic properties (i.e., phase transition, ion diffusion and decomposition) and environmental conditions such as light induced, thermal attacks and moisture. Different from conventional hybrid PSCs with poor stability in moisture environments, their inorganic counterparts present an outstanding performance against humidity and thermal attacks (Table S4). In order to evaluate the stability of CsPbBr3/Ti3C2-MXene based devices, we conduct stability testing both in a moisture environment (RH ∼ 45%) and under thermal conditions (T = 80 °C) without encapsulation. As shown in Fig. 4d and S9–S10, the CsPbBr3/Ti3C2-MXene devices retain 80% of the initial efficiency in the moisture environment for more than 1900 h, showing an excellent humidity tolerance. In parallel, the devices keep 80% of the initial PCE even after aging for over 600 h under thermal conditions (at 80 °C). These results demonstrate that the 2D Ti3C2-MXene shows great potential in accelerating hole extraction and improving the performance of inorganic PSCs.

In summary, we introduced a 2D Ti3C2-MXene material as an interlayer into all inorganic perovskite solar cells (CsPbBr3/Ti3C2-MXene PSCs). The presence of 2D Ti3C2-MXene between the CsPbBr3 layer and carbon electrode provides an improved energy level alignment and accelerates the hole extraction to achieve a high efficiency carrier transport with low recombination at the interface. Remarkably, the functional groups in Ti3C2-MXene can well passivate the perovskite grains and reduce the trap defects in the CsPbBr3 film, improving the perovskite film quality. A high initial PCE of 9.01% is obtained for the CsPbBr3/Ti3C2-MXene solar cell with excellent humidity and thermal stability for more than 1900 h and 600 h, respectively. Our results provide an effective approach to achieve high efficiency and stable all inorganic PSCs through introducing an interlayer to reduce the energy level mismatch and surface defects simultaneously.


There are no conflicts to declare.


We acknowledge the National Natural Science Foundation of China No. U1632151, and the Open Project of Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices (No. KJS1802), and the Key Research and Development Project of Anhui Province of China (Grant No. 1704a0902023). G. T. and Y.·B. Q. acknowledge the funding support from the Energy Materials and Surface Sciences Unit of the Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate University, the OIST R&D Cluster Research Program, and the OIST Proof of Concept (POC) Program.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta06035a
‡ T. Chen, G. Tong and E. Xu contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019