 DOI: 10.1039/C7CP03551A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 21033-21045


Md Arafat
Mahmud
,

Naveen Kumar
Elumalai
*,

Mushfika Baishakhi
Upama
,

Dian
Wang
,

Vinicius R.
Gonçales
,

Matthew
Wright
,

Cheng
Xu
,

Faiazul
Haque
 and 

Ashraf
Uddin
*

School of Photovoltaic and Renewable Energy Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia. E-mail: n.elumalai@unsw.edu.au; a.uddin@unsw.edu.au

School of Chemistry, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia

Received
26th May 2017
, Accepted 10th July 2017
First published on 12th July 2017
Here we report a small molecule oxidant 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyano-quinodimethane (F4TCNQ) doped, low cost 2′,7′-bis(bis(4-methoxyphenyl)amino)spiro[cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophene-4,9′-fluorene] (FDT) hole transporting layer (HTL) for efficient mixed organic cation based MA0.6FA0.4PbI3 (MA = methyl ammonium, FA = formamidinium) perovskite solar cells (PSCs), fabricated via a highly reproducible controlled nucleation assisted restricted volume solvent annealing method, having full temperature compatibility with flexible substrates. The optimized (1 wt%) F4TCNQ doped FDT HTL based devices (F-FDT devices) demonstrate simultaneous enhancement of photovoltaic performance and device stability as well as significant reduction in photo-current hysteresis, as compared to conventional bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)amine lithium (Li-TFSI) additive based FDT HTL devices (L-FDT devices). Adding to the merits, F-FDT PSCs exhibit about 75% higher device stability compared to conventional L-FDT devices during the course of three weeks. Mott–Schottky analysis and in-depth charge transport characterization were carried out using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) of the fabricated devices to understand the superior performance of the F-FDT devices. In addition, detailed polaronic intensity characterization of the doped HTL films was performed via ultraviolet-visible near-infrared (UV-vis-NIR) spectroscopy to investigate the underlying mechanism. Mitigated photocurrent hysteresis in the F-FDT devices has also been examined in terms of the inherent electrode polarization phenomenon. Furthermore, the superior device stability of the F-FDT PSCs has been probed in terms of variation in electronic properties, surface wettability, crystallinity, and microstrain dislocation density, and a detailed picture of the underlying mechanism behind stability enhancement is presented.

In recent years, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have drawn special attention in the photovoltaic research arena due to their high power conversion efficiency (PCE) coupled with nominal fabrication cost via a solution processed route. In particular, low temperature processed PSCs have demonstrated immense potential for cost-effective mass production of solar cells in a roll-to-roll process with flexible substrates. Still, the material costs of the conventional hole transporting layers (HTLs) like poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,5,6-trimentlyphenyl)amine] poly(triarylamine) (PTAA) or 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD) are relatively higher than those of the other thin film layers of a PSC, owing to their (conventional HTL's) lengthy synthesis routes, involving a costly sublimation process for purification. In this regard, a number of attempts have been undertaken to synthesize new and cost-effective HTLs for replacing PTAA or Spiro-OMeTAD in PSCs. Among the reported HTLs, a molecularly engineered 2′,7′-bis(bis(4-methoxyphenyl)amino)spiro[cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophene-4,9′-fluorene] (FDT) HTL demonstrates the most comparable device performance with reference to PTAA or Spiro-OMeTAD based PSCs. Besides, the synthesis cost of FDT is about one-fifth of the expense associated with Spiro-OMeTAD and it (FDT) can be dissolved in less toxic toluene solvent (in place of chlorobenzene), which make it a good alternative to conventional HTLs for PSC.

Despite being a remarkable endeavor towards low cost HTLs for PSCs, the reported study with a FDT HTL incorporates 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) and bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)amine lithium (Li-TFSI) as additives, which have adverse effects on the device stability of PSCs. TBP has been reported to decompose the perovskite layer by forming a PbI2 complex with aging, while the hygroscopic nature of the Li-TFSI salt can trigger incompletely reversible water-induced perovskite decomposition with time. The migration of Li-TFSI from the bottom to the top surface of the HTL film also opens up pinhole channels which accelerate water induced perovskite degradation. In this regard, the non-hygroscopic, small molecule oxidant, 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyano-quinodimethane (F4TCNQ), bids fair to be a more compatible HTL additive along with FDT, as compared to conventional Li-TFSI/TBP additives. Although, the F4TCNQ additive has been previously incorporated into Spiro-OMeTAD, poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and PTAA HTLs for enhanced device stability, all these studies have reported slightly lower initial photovoltaic performance of F4TCNQ based devices in comparison with Li-TFSI/TBP based PSCs. Thus, it necessitates further research efforts to secure simultaneous enhancement of the initial device performance and long-run device stability with F4TNCQ doped HTL films. In particular, it is an intriguing prospect to investigate PSCs based on a F4TCNQ doped FDT HTL, which is economically more lucrative and offers conceivable beneficial role in the enhancement of device stability, since F4TCNQ does not corrode the perovskite layer with aging. Besides, it is yet to explore the charge transport characteristics, electrode polarization and device degradation phenomena of PSCs, incorporating FDT as the HTL. Our current work is aimed at contributing to these knowledge gaps.
In this work, we have reported a small molecule oxidant F4TCNQ doped FDT HTL for an efficient (highest PCE: 14.70%) mixed organic cation based MA0.6FA0.4PbI3 (MA = methyl ammonium, FA = formamidinium) perovskite device, having full temperature compatibility with flexible substrates. The photovoltaic performance of optimized F4TCNQ doped FDT HTL devices has been compared with those of conventional Li-TFSI/TBP doped FDT based PSCs. Enhanced device performance with the F4TCNQ additive has been investigated with charge transport analysis with electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and Mott–Schottky characterization of fabricated devices along with p-type polaronic intensity characterization of doped HTL films by ultraviolet-visible near-infrared (UV-vis-NIR) spectroscopy measurements. The photocurrent hysteresis phenomena of F4TCNQ and Li-TFSI/TBP doped FDT devices have been quantitatively compared and the variation in hysteresis characteristics of the two devices has been studied in terms of their inherent electrode polarization mechanism along with frequency-dependent capacitive spectra analysis. A systematic, three week long degradation study has been conducted to comprehend the device stability of the fabricated PSCs. Enhanced device stability with F4TCNQ doped FDT devices has been investigated with surface wettability and polaronic intensity characterization of doped HTL films, crystallinity, microstrain and dislocation density analysis of aged perovskite layers from XRD spectral fitting and impedance spectroscopy and Mott–Schottky characterization of aged PSCs.

ITO/glass substrates were cleaned sequentially with Hellmanex III, DI water, acetone and isopropanol with a duration of 10 minutes for each. A sol–gel processed ZnO electron transporting layer (ETL) was fabricated on top of the ITO/glass substrate via a process reported in our earlier works. In brief, 0.48 M sol–gel ZnO solution was prepared by dissolving zinc acetate dihydrate in 2-methoxyethanol with an additive, ethanolamine, under vigorous stirring for 24 hours. The ZnO precursor solution was spin coated on the ITO/glass substrate at 4000 rpm for 60 s and then annealed on a hotplate at 140 °C for half an hour. The mixed organic cation based perovskite (MA0.6FA0.4PbI3) precursor solution was prepared using PbI2 (1 M), MAI (0.6 M) and FAI (0.4 M) powder in anhydrous DMF (N,N-dimethylformamide) solvent and the solution was stirred at 70 °C for 24 hours. The perovskite precursor solution was filtered using 0.45 μm PTFE (polytetrafluoroethylene) filter and deposited on the ETL coated substrates with pipettes for spin-coating. A dry N2 gas stream was blown over the central part of the film dynamically (during the spinning at 2500 rpm) after 9 s of the commencement of spin-casting using a nucleation aided gas-assisted method. After the spin-coating, the substrates were annealed at 100 °C for 10 minutes on the hotplate using the RVSA method. In brief, a glass slide was placed on top of the substrates during the annealing session, which acted as a confining barrier for methyl amine gas to escape from the perovskite surface, thus preventing thermal degradation of perovskite on the alkaline ZnO film. For the Li-TFSI/TBP doped FDT HTL, 100 mM FDT in toluene was doped with 17.5 μL Li-TFSI (520 mg ml−1 in acetronitrile) and 28.8 μL TBP, while for the F4TCNQ doped FDT HTL, 100 mM FDT in toluene was doped with different wt% of F4TCNQ. Both the HTL precursor solutions were spin coated on the perovskite film at 3000 rpm for 30 s. Finally, a 100 nm Ag layer was deposited on the HTL coated substrate by thermal evaporation with an evaporation rate of 2 Å s−1 under a vacuum condition of 1 × 10−6 mBar. The device area was fixed to be 0.045 cm2 with the use of a metal mask. So, the overall device structures were ITO/solgel ZnO/MA0.6FA0.4PbI3 perovskite/F4TCNQ or Li-TFSI/TBP doped FDT/Ag (Fig. 1(A)).


The current–voltage characteristics of the devices were measured on a NREL calibrated Keithley 2400 Source Meter under 100 mW cm−2 (AM 1.5G) simulated sunlight using a black, non-reflective aperture (0.045 cm2) mask over the cells to avoid overestimation of the device current densities associated with the active device area. For optical characterization like transmittance, reflectance and absorbance measurements, a UV-vis-NIR spectrometer (Perkin Elmer – Lambda 950) was used. X-ray diffraction (XRD) with CuKα radiation was performed by step-scanning with a step size of 0.02 degree. The contact angle measurement was made using a Ramé-hart contact angle goniometer (Model 200) and the contact angles were determined using the DROPimage advanced software. The impedance analysis was conducted with an Autolab PGSTAT-30 equipped with a frequency analyzer module in the frequency range from 1 MHz to 1 Hz. The AC oscillating amplitude was as low as 20 mV (RMS) to maintain the linearity of the response.


We have conducted an optimization study to find the optimum concentration of the F4TCNQ dopant in the FDT HTL for the MA0.6FA0.4PbI3 perovskite device. Table S1 (ESI) shows the average photovoltaic performance of MA0.6FA0.4PbI3 PSCs having different concentrations (wt%) of the F4TCNQ dopant in the FDT HTL. As observed from Table S1 (ESI), 1 wt% concentration of F4TCNQ in the FDT HTL is the optimum doping ratio that provides the highest average power conversion efficiency (13.63%) among all the devices under optimization study. For further referencing to this optimized F4TCNQ doped (1 wt%) FDT based PSC, we will term it as the F-FDT device. The Li-TFSI/TBP doped FDT HTL device will be referred to as the L-FDT device.


Table 1 lists the average and the best performance of the fabricated L-FDT and F-FDT devices in both FB-SC (forward bias to short circuit) and SC-FB (short circuit to forward bias) directions at a scan rate of 0.05 V s−1. The average values are presented with the respective standard deviation values of ten samples from a random batch. From Table 1, F-FDT devices demonstrate about 15% higher average PCE (L-FDT: 11.85%, F-FDT: 13.63%) compared to L-FDT devices. The variation in the J–V parameters (Jsc, Voc, FF and PCE) of the fabricated PSCs is shown with the statistical box-charts presented in Fig. S1 (ESI). The J–V parameters of L-FDT and F-FDT devices are also tabulated in Tables S2 and S3 (ESI), respectively for facilitating numerical comparison. The J–V curves of the best performing L-FDT and F-FDT PSCs in both FB-SC and SC-FB directions (scan rate: 0.05 V s−1) are presented in Fig. 1(B) and (C), respectively. Qualitative observation of Fig. 1(B) and (C) reveals that both the PSCs demonstrate some degree of photo-current hysteresis, which will be investigated quantitatively in the subsequent section. From Table 1, the best performing F-FDT device exhibits a PCE of 14.72% in the FB-SC direction, whereas the champion L-FDT PSC exhibits 12.89% PCE in the same scan direction. We have also measured the stabilized PCEs of the best performing L-FDT and F-FDT PSCs at maximum power point (MPP), since the stabilized PCE at MPP is a crucial parameter for the comprehension of device performance of PSCs exhibiting hysteresis phenomena.Fig. 1(D) and (E) depict the stabilized PCE and stabilized current density of the best performing L-FDT and F-FDT devices at MPP as a function of time. The numerical values of stabilized current density and PCE from Fig. 1(D) and (E) are listed in Table S4 (ESI). From Fig. 1(D) and (E) and Table S4 (ESI), the F-FDT device demonstrates a stabilized efficiency of 13.33% and stabilized current density of 18.68 mA cm−2 at MPP. Conversely, the stabilized efficiency and current density values (at MPP) for the L-FDT PSC are about 11.87% and 18.35 mA cm−2, respectively, which are lower as compared to the F-FDT device. It is worth mentioning that all the stabilized efficiencies at MPP are within the range of 91–92% of the PCE value obtained in the FB-SC scan direction, which are consistent with the reports of earlier perovskite literature.
Device
Average/best
Open circuit voltage, VOC (mV)
Short circuit current density, JSC (mA cm−2)
Fill factor, FF (%)
Efficiency (%)
Series resistance, RS (Ω cm2)
Shunt resistance, RSh (Ω cm2)
L-FDT
Average
920.37 ± 14.90
20.87 ± 0.63
61.70 ± 1.09
11.85 ± 0.27
9.17 ± 0.89
1114 ± 72
Best (FB-SC)
969.51
21.18
62.79
12.89
9.18
1112
Best (SC-FB)
961.33
19.86
52.17
9.96
17.06
842
F-FDT
Average
935.64 ± 11.24
20.54 ± 0.26
70.87 ± 1.00
13.63 ± 0.43
4.62 ± 0.40
1220 ± 151
Best (FB-SC)
959.78
21.60
71.00
14.72
4.50
1337
Best (SC-FB)
903.85
20.09
65.40
11.88
7.20
1188
From Table 1, about 15% higher average PCE with F-FDT devices mainly originates from about 14.90% higher average FF values in them compared to L-FDT PSCs, since the other two J–V parameters (Jsc and Voc) are not significantly different for both devices. The enhancement of the average FF value for F-FDT devices comes along with nearly 50% lower average series resistance (RS) and about 10% higher average shunt resistance (RSh) in them (F-FDT devices) compared to L-FDT devices. From the dark J–V curves of the PSCs, presented in Fig. 1(F), the relatively high dark injection current of the F-FDT device in the forward bias region (applied bias >0.5 V) is consistent with their lower average series resistance, RS, value compared to L-FDT devices. The leakage current of the F-FDT device is also lower than that of the L-FDT device in the reverse bias region below −0.5 V, which is consistent with the enhanced average shunt resistance, RSh, value in F-FDT PSCs compared to L-FDT devices. The higher forward dark injection current for the F-FDT device is indicative of higher p-type conductivity and more efficient hole extraction capability of the F-FDT HTL compared to the L-FDT film. Similarly, the lower leakage current of the F-FDT PSC in the reverse bias region also indicates the more effective electron blocking capability of FDT films doped with the F4TCNQ additive, compared to those with Li-TFSI/TBP additives. Thus, the F-FDT HTL film acts more efficiently as a hole extraction and an electron blocking layer (EBL) simultaneously, which ensures enhanced p-type properties in F-FDT HTL films, resulting in a superior FF value in F-FDT devices compared to L-FDT PSCs.
To investigate the enhanced p-type properties of the F-FDT HTL film, we have checked the polaronic intensity of both the HTL films by UV-vis-NIR spectroscopy measurements. In general, an enhanced sub-bandgap absorption profile of the HTL film indicates its augmented polaronic intensity, which can be attributed to the improved p-type conductivity of the respective HTL film. Fig. 2(A) presents the absorption profiles of pristine FDT, L-FDT and F-FDT films on glass substrates. As observed from Fig. 2(A), the absorption onset of the pristine FDT film is around 430 nm. With the incorporation of the Li-TFSI/TBP or F4TCNQ additive into pristine FDT, a polaronic band appears in the 480–560 nm wavelength region (inset of Fig. 2(A) for amplified view of the sub-bandgap region), which can be attributed to a FDT+ polaron. Such a sub-bandgap HTL polaron has also been previously reported with Spiro-OMeTAD and P3HT HTLs. As observed from Fig. 2(A), the polaronic intensity of the FDT+ polaron is relatively high for the F-FDT HTL film compared to the L-FDT film in the aforementioned polaronic (480–560 nm) band region. This augmentation in polaronic intensity of the F-FDT film can be attributed to the sub-bandgap absorption of the ionized F4TCNQ dopants, which broadens the density of states distribution in pristine FDT due to the low permittivity and long-range Coulomb potential of F4TCNQ molecules. Thus, the augmented polaronic intensity of the F-FDT film is correlated with the enhanced p-type properties of the F-FDT film compared to the L-FDT film, which ensures more efficient charge extraction and enhanced device performance for the F-FDT device.

To delve further into the charge transport properties of the fabricated devices, we have conducted EIS analysis of both L-FDT and F-FDT PSCs. EIS is a useful characterization technique to gain insight into the electronic properties of PSCs that govern the charge extraction and carrier recombination phenomena.Fig. 2(B) displays the Nyquist plots of L-FDT and F-FDT PSCs at an applied bias of 900 mV under dark conditions. The experimental data were fitted with an equivalent electronic circuit model previously reported for a ZnO ETL based perovskite device. The equivalent circuit model (Fig. S2, ESI) consists of a series resistance, RSE, along with two parallel R–C components. From Fig. S2 (ESI), the symbols RSE, RC, CC, RRec and Cμ refer to the resistance originating from the wire connection and metal contact, contact resistance at the perovskite/ETL or the perovskite/HTL interface, bulk capacitance, recombination resistance and chemical capacitance respectively. Table 2 tabulates the fitted values of various electronic parameters from the Nyquist plots presented in Fig. 2(B). From Table 2, the contact resistance, RC, in the F-FDT PSC is about 48% times lower (L-FDT: 1.35 Ω cm2, F-FDT: 0.70 Ω cm2) compared to the L-FDT device. Since the ETL (solgel ZnO) and perovskite (MA0.6FA0.4PbI3) films remain constant for both the PSCs, any variation in the contact resistance at the perovskite/ETL or the perovskite/HTL interface originates from the HTL layer. Thus, in line with the augmented polaronic intensity of the F-FDT film, the lower RC value in the F-FDT device reaffirms the enhanced hole transporting property from the perovskite film to the neighboring F-FDT HTL film, which conforms to the higher average FF value in F-FDT PSCs compared to L-FDT devices. Relative to the L-FDT device, the lower contact resistance (RC) of the F-FDT PSC from EIS analysis is also consistent with its lower series resistance (RS) value from J–V characterization.

Device

R
SE (Ω cm2)

R
C (Ω cm2)

R
Rec (Ω cm2)

C
C (μF cm−2)

C
μ (μF cm−2)
L-FDT
1.49
1.35
81.00
1.28
0.11
F-FDT
1.43
0.70
84.15
1.22
0.12
Apart from lower contact resistance, the F-FDT PSC also exhibits slightly higher recombination resistance, RRec, than the L-FDT device (F-FDT: 84.15 Ω cm2, L-FDT: 81 Ω cm2). The higher recombination resistance in the F-FDT device indicates suppressed recombination phenomena in it, compared to the L-FDT device, which is also consistent with its higher value of shunt resistance (RSh) from the J–V curve. To investigate the reduced recombination phenomena in the F-FDT device, we have performed Mott–Schottky analysis of our fabricated PSCs to calculate their respective flat-band potentials (VFB), which provide significant insight into the trap-assisted recombination phenomena of PSCs.Fig. 2(C) and (D) depict the Mott–Schottky curves of L-FDT and F-FDT PSCs, respectively at 10 kHz frequency under dark conditions. As observed from Fig. 2(C) and (D), the flat-band potentials for both the PSCs are almost similar (L-FDT: 0.93 V, F-FDT: 0.94 V). Nearly identical flat-band potentials of L-FDT and F-FDT PSCs confirm that the trap-state distributions at the perovskite/ETL or the perovskite/HTL interface for the two devices are not significantly different. Thus, the suppressed recombination phenomena in the F-FDT device can be attributed to the reduced leakage current (from dark J–V curve in Fig. 1(F)) in it (F-FDT device) due to the enhanced electron blocking capability of the F-FDT HTL film, compared to the L-FDT HTL. To probe further into the origin of the mitigated recombination phenomena in the F-FDT device, we have investigated the frequency dependent capacitive response (Fig. 2(E)) of both the PSCs in the dark. In general, the low frequency (below 1 kHz frequency) capacitance in the dark is related to the electrode polarization process associated with the ion migration to the external electrodes. The intermediate frequency (1–10 kHz frequency) capacitance is associated with the accumulation of charge carriers at the trap states at the perovskite/ETL or the perovskite/HTL interface, while the high frequency (over 10 kHz) capacitance is connected with the bulk properties of the intrinsic perovskite layer. As observed from Fig. 2(E), the capacitive responses of both the PSCs are almost similar in the intermediate and high frequency regions, whereas the L-FDT device demonstrates a higher capacitance value in the low frequency region as compared to the F-FDT device. Since the high frequency response is almost identical for both the devices, it can be confirmed that the diverse dipolar mechanisms like ionic off-centering or MA+/FA+ or PbI6 octahedra reorientation are almost similar in both the devices, rendering similar intrinsic bulk perovskite properties in L-FDT and F-FDT devices. Nearly identical capacitive spectra of L-FDT and F-FDT PSCs in the intermediate frequency region also suggest that the trap-assisted recombination phenomena at the perovskite/ETL or the perovskite/HTL interface are not substantially different for the two devices under study, which is consistent with their close-ranged flat-band potentials from Mott–Schottky characterization (Fig. 2(C) and (D)). Thus, the suppressed recombination phenomena in the F-FDT device can be attributed to the low electrode polarization process in the F-FDT device, which can be comprehended by its smaller values of low frequency capacitance than those of the L-FDT device from frequency-dependent capacitive spectra. Since the electrode polarization process in PSCs is related to the migration of ions to the external electrodes, we hypothesize that the increased ion migration process in the L-FDT PSC is connected with the migration of Li-TFSI towards the Ag electrode (anode), which has been reported as a major drawback of Li-TFSI based HTL films in previous perovskite literature. It is anticipated that migrating Li-TFSI ions open up pinhole channels on the top surface of the L-FDT HTL film, which can provide a shunting path between the perovskite and Ag electrode, resulting in increased recombination phenomena in the L-FDT device. On the contrary, as suggested by the low electrode polarization process from frequency dependent capacitive spectra, the F4TCNQ molecule does not exhibit a similar ion migration process to the Li-TFSI dopant, which ensures low carrier recombination, efficient charge transport properties and enhanced device performance in the F-FDT device.

As observed earlier from the J–V curves of the L-FDT and F-FDT PSCs in both FB-SC and SC-FB directions (Fig. 1(B) and (C)), both the devices exhibit some degree of photo-current hysteresis. To determine the degree of hysteresis quantitatively for both the PSCs, we have calculated their hysteresis index (HI) using the following formula:

(1)
where
 and  denote current densities at an applied bias of half the open circuit voltage  in the FB-SC and SC-FB directions, respectively. Table S5 (ESI) lists the values of HI for L-FDT and F-FDT PSCs calculated from J–V measurements in both FB-SC and SC-FB directions at a scan rate of 0.05 V s−1. From Table S5 (ESI), F-FDT PSCs demonstrate lower HI values (L-FDT: 0.10, F-FDT: 0.07) compared to L-FDT devices, denoting that the degree of hysteresis is less in F-FDT PSCs. To investigate the variation in hysteretic behaviour of our fabricated PSCs, we can refer back to their frequency-dependent capacitive responses, presented in Fig. 2(E). As mentioned in the previous subsection, the L-FDT device demonstrates higher electrode polarization phenomena due to the migration of Li-TFSI ions towards the external electrode, which is comprehended by higher values of low frequency capacitance in the L-FDT device from the capacitive spectra. The migrating Li-TFSI ions can modulate the local electric field of the PSC and alter the required time for reaching the steady state condition in each scan direction, leading to photocurrent hysteresis phenomena. The smaller low frequency capacitance values in the F-FDT device are thus congruent with its smaller HI value (Table S5, ESI) and the concomitant low hysteresis phenomenon compared to L-FDT PSCs.


We have conducted a systematic degradation study of L-FDT and F-FDT PSCs to assess the device stability. In our work, un-encapsulated L-FDT and F-FDT samples were stored for 3 weeks in a N2 filled glovebox maintaining the protocols stated in earlier perovskite degradation studies under dark conditions and photovoltaic performance was evaluated at regular intervals in a humidity controlled (35–40% relative humidity) ambience at room temperature. Fig. 3(A)–(D) depict the normalized PCE, JSC, VOC and FF values of L-FDT and F-FDT PSCs, respectively from the day of fabrication up to 21 days. Day-wise PCE, JSC, VOC and FF values of L-FDT and F-FDT devices are tabulated in Tables S6 and S7 (ESI), respectively. As comprehended from Fig. 3(A), the F-FDT PSC retains about 89% of its initial PCE even after 3 weeks, whereas for the L-FDT device, PCE drops down to 51% of the commencing PCE during the same time range, which denotes about 75% higher stability for the F-FDT PSC. From Fig. 3(B)–(D), Tables S6 and S7 (ESI), about 75% higher device stability for the F-FDT device originates from about 9.40% higher normalized JSC values, nearly 18% higher normalized VOC values and close to 36% higher normalized FF values retained in the F-FDT PSC compared to the L-FDT PSC in the course of 3 week long degradation study.

To investigate the variation in normalized JSC values retained in aged L-FDT and F-FDT PSCs, we have conducted XRD measurements of aged (3 weeks) perovskite films underneath L-FDT, F-FDT and pristine FDT HTL films (Fig. 4(A)). As observed from XRD spectra, the aged perovskite film underneath the L-FDT HTL film shows a distinct (001) PbI2 diffraction peak, whereas the corresponding PbI2 peak is absent for aged perovskite films along with F-FDT and pristine FDT HTL films (Fig. 4(A)). Apart from the PbI2 peak, aged MA0.6FA0.4PbI3 perovskite underneath the L-FDT HTL film also exhibits some intermediate perovskite phases at diffraction angles of 16.15° and 20.25° (labelled with the symbol ‘Δ’ in Fig. 4(A)), which indicates that the perovskite underneath the L-FDT film is partially decomposed with aging. Conversely, the absence of PbI2 or any other intermediate perovskite phase peak in aged MA0.6FA0.4PbI3 films with F-FDT and pristine FDT HTLs implicates that the F4TCNQ dopant does not play any adverse role in perovskite degradation with time. Since the water induced perovskite decomposition with aging has been reported in previous perovskite literature, we have conducted contact angle measurements of water droplets on L-FDT and F-FDT HTL films to investigate the relation of the hydrophilicity of the films with the perovskite decomposition. Fig. 4(B)–(D) show the contact angles of water droplets on pristine FDT, F-FDT and L-FDT HTL films, respectively. The contact angle measurement was done at three different spots of the respective surfaces for confirming the accuracy of the characterization. Table S8 (ESI) lists the values of contact angles on three different HTL films in both left and right directions. From Table S8 (ESI), the average values of contact angles on L-FDT, F-FDT and pristine FDT HTL films are 77.8° ± 1.1°, 87° ± 0.5° and 81.8° ± 0.6°, respectively. As comprehended from Table S8 (ESI), the F-FDT HTL film is the least hydrophilic of the three films, which ensures that the water induced perovskite degradation phenomenon is the lowest in the F-FDT PSC. In contrast, heightened perovskite decomposition in the L-FDT device can be attributed to the more hydrophilic nature of the Li-TFSI dopant, which is expected to absorb higher content of water particles with aging. Thus, the suppressed perovskite decomposition in the F-FDT PSC from XRD analysis is consistent with the low hydrophilicity of the F-FDT HTL film, compared to the L-FDT HTL from contact angle characterization. Apart from its higher hydrophilicity, the Li-TFSI additive can also induce water-channelling pinhole pathways in the underlying perovskite film with time, resulting in partial perovskite decomposition into its PbI2 and intermediate phase constituents (Fig. 4(A)), which explains the lower normalized JSC values retained in aged L-FDT devices, compared to F-FDT PSCs. However, it is worth mentioning from Fig. 3(B) that the L-FDT PSC demonstrates relatively higher normalized JSC initially up to day 8, compared to the F-FDT PSC. The relatively high initial normalized JSC of the L-FDT PSC can be attributed to the Li-TFSI-assisted initial oxidation of the FDT HTL film under illumination (during J–V measurement), as reported for a Li-TFSI doped Spiro-OMeTAD HTL in previous perovskite literature. The initial oxidation of the L-FDT HTL film increases its conductivity and contributes to the higher normalized JSC of the L-FDT PSC up to 8 days. However, with aging, the L-FDT HTL film absorbs higher content of water due to its higher hydrophilicity, which invokes water induced perovskite decomposition and causes the lower normalized JSC value of the L-FDT PSC subsequently, as compared to the F-FDT PSC.
To comprehend the enhanced normalized VOC value maintained in the aged F-FDT PSC, we have conducted Mott–Schottky characterization of aged (3 weeks) L-FDT and F-FDT devices. Fig. 5(A) and (B) depict Mott–Schottky curves of 3 week-aged L-FDT and F-FDT PSCs at 10 kHz frequency under dark conditions. As observed from Fig. 5(A) and (B), the aged F-FDT PSC demonstrates considerably higher flat-band potentials (L-FDT: 0.62 V, F-FDT: 0.83 V) compared to aged L-FDT PSCs, although the flat-band potentials for both the devices were nearly identical under fresh conditions (Fig. 2(C) and (D)). In general, the flat-band potential, Vfb, of a PSC refers to the potential required for compensating for the energetic difference between the quasi-Fermi level of perovskite and that of the ETL/cathode electron selective contact and is mathematically expressed as:
Vfb = EFn − EP
(2)
where
EFn and EP denote the quasi-Fermi level of the ETL/cathode contact and the perovskite film, respectively. Thus the lowering of flat-band potential in a PSC is related to the spatial variation in the quasi-Fermi level of perovskite and the ETL/cathode contact, which decreases the energetic offset between EFn and EP in accordance with eqn (2). In general, spatial variation of the perovskite Fermi level is correlated with trap-assisted carrier recombination phenomena at the perovskite/ETL or the perovskite/HTL interface. Hence, the higher flat-band potential of the aged F-FDT device implicates that the trap-assisted recombination phenomenon is more suppressed in it, compared to the aged L-FDT PSC. To probe further into the trap-assisted recombination characteristics of the aged devices, we have investigated the frequency dependent capacitive spectra of aged L-FDT and F-FDT PSCs under dark conditions (Fig. 5(C)). From Fig. 5(C), the aged L-FDT PSC demonstrates a higher capacitive response in the intermediate frequency region, compared to the aged F-FDT device, which denotes that the trap state distribution at the perovskite/ETL or the perovskite HTL interface is higher in the aged L-FDT device. To investigate the origin of increased interfacial trap state distribution in the L-FDT device, we have calculated the microstrain and dislocation density of aged perovskite films underneath pristine FDT, L-FDT and F-FDT HTL layers from XRD spectral fitting. To facilitate the relative comparison, the thickness of all the films (perovskite and HTL) and the experimentation setup (X-ray radiation intensity and substrate size) were kept identical, so that the same volume fraction was considered for each XRD measurement. Fig. 5(D) and (E) depict the variation in microstrain and dislocation density, respectively, among the aged perovskite films underneath the three HTL films in our study. Table S9 (ESI) tabulates all these XRD fitting values for numerical comparison. As observed from Fig. 5(D) and (E) and Table S9 (ESI), aged perovskite with the L-FDT HTL demonstrates higher microstrain and dislocation density values, pertaining to all the perovskite peaks except for the (202) peak, as compared to aged perovskite with pristine FDT and F-FDT HTLs. In general, for nano-crystalline structures like perovskite, microstrain refers to the quantitative measure of the local deviation of atoms with reference to their equilibrium position at the crystalline lattice, caused by the presence of porosities or point defects and expressed mathematically as the following:

(3)
where
ε, θ and β denote the microstrain, Bragg diffraction angle and full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the film diffraction peak at a diffraction angle of 2θ, respectively. Thus, higher microstrain values of the aged perovskite layer with the L-FDT HTL are signatures of the greater point defects and film porosities in it, as compared to pristine FDT and F-FDT HTL based aged perovskite films. In line with the increased microstrain, the dislocation density of the aged perovskite film with the L-FDT HTL is the highest of three for most of the characteristic peaks [Fig. 5(E) and Table S9, ESI]. In general, dislocation density quantifies the imperfection in a crystalline lattice, pertaining to the misplacement of the lattice in one part of the crystalline structure with reference to the other and is expressed by Williamson and Smallman's equation:

(4)
where
δ, n and d refer to the dislocation density, mathematical factor (value being unity for minimum dislocation density) and individual crystallite dimension (as calculated from the Debye–Scherrer equation), respectively. Higher values of dislocation density of the L-FDT based aged perovskite film therefore indicate greater crystalline disorientation in it compared to the other aged films. Thus, increased point defect, film porosities and crystalline disorientation in aged perovskite with the L-FDT HTL lead to increased trap state formation in it, which are not demonstrated in the F-FDT HTL based aged perovskite film. We hypothesize that such trap state formation is caused by diverse dipolar mechanisms like ionic off-centering, MA+/FA+ or PbI6 octahedra reorientation or the misplacement of iodide ions (I−) on MA+/FA+ antisites, which are consistent with the partial decomposition of the perovskite film (with L-FDT HTL) into its constituent intermediate phases (Fig. 4(A)) in the aging process. Nevertheless, these interfacial trap states act as carrier recombination centres, which result in enhanced carrier recombination phenomena in the aged L-FDT device, as compared to the aged F-FDT PSC. Therefore, the L-FDT PSC retains a lower normalized VOC value than the F-FDT PSC with aging.

The most prominent contributing factor in enhanced device stability with the F-FDT device is its significantly higher normalized FF value compared to the L-FDT device, in the course of 3 week-long degradation study. Since, the FF value of a PSC is related to the charge transfer and charge extraction properties from the photoactive perovskite layer to the charge selective contacts, we have investigated the effect of aging on perovskite crystallinity and p-type conductive properties of HTL films. Fig. 5(F) shows the variation in the relative normalized peak intensity of aged perovskite films underneath pristine FDT, L-FDT and F-FDT HTL films, which (peak intensity) essentially represents the perovskite crystallinity. As observed from Fig. 5(F), the aged perovskite film along with the L-FDT HTL demonstrates relatively low perovskite crystallinity compared to those with pristine FDT and F-FDT HTL for most of the characteristic peaks. The enhanced crystallinity of the aged perovskite film with pristine FDT and F-FDT HTL affirms that, unlike LiFTSI/TBP additives, the F4TCNQ dopant does not demonstrate any adverse effect on the charge transfer capability of the perovskite layer with aging. The higher perovskite crystallinity of the F-FDT based aged perovskite film is also consistent with the absence of any constituent intermediate phase or PbI2 in such a perovskite film (Fig. 4(A)), which ensures more efficient charge transfer process to the neighbouring charge selective contacts even with aging and thus contributes to a higher normalized FF value maintained in aged F-FDT PSCs.
Apart from the aging effect on perovskite crystallinity, we have also investigated the p-type polaronic properties of aged HTL films to comprehend the enhanced normalized FF value maintained in F-FDT PSCs in the course of degradation study. In general, with aging of PSC, the weak chemical interaction at the ZnO/perovskite interface facilitates the migration of iodide ion (I−) to the HTL film. In line with previous studies with Spiro-OMeTAD and P3HT HTL, in our case, the migrating I− ions can reduce the p-type polaronic or conductive properties of the FTD+ polaron by forming a neutral complex (FTD-I) according to the following possible chemical reaction:
FDT+ + I− = FDT − I
(5)
To investigate the effect of migrating I
− ions on the polaronic properties of aged HTL films under our study, we have characterized the absorption spectra of pristine FDT, L-FDT and F-FDT HTL films in response to an external I− ion treatment of the HTL films (Fig. 5(G)). The HTL films were treated with 0.05 mM MAI solution in 2-propanol as an abundant source of I− ions to replicate the aging-induced I− migration phenomena and concomitant effect on the polaronic intensity of the HTLs. As observed from Fig. 5(G), the absorption intensity in the polaronic (480–560 nm) band region for the MAI treated L-FDT HTL film is lower than those of pristine FDT and F-FDT HTL films, treated with MAI solution in an identical manner. The lower sub-bandgap absorption in the MAI treated L-FDT film implicates that the p-type polaronic or conductive properties of the L-FDT HTL film reduce more intensely owing to the aging-induced I− migration process, as compared to the F-FDT HTL. In addition to the reduced sub-bandgap absorption, the absorption intensity related to the band-to-band transition is substantially lower in the MAI treated L-FDT film (Fig. 5(G)), which suggests that the intrinsic properties of the FDT HTL are significantly altered in the aging process. In contrast, the MAI treated F-FDT HTL film demonstrates higher p-type polaronic properties and enhanced intrinsic stability against the aging mechanism, which ensures superior charge extraction properties of the aged F-FDT HTL film and results in the higher normalized FF value retained in the aged F-FDT PSC, compared to the L-FDT PSC.

Therefore, the enhanced device stability of the F-FDT PSC, compared to the L-FDT device, can be briefly explained with a schematic illustration presented in Fig. 6. Due to the less hydrophilic nature of the F-FDT HTL film (Fig. 4(C) and (D)), the water induced perovskite degradation is lower in the F-FDT PSC (Process-1 in Fig. 6(B)), compared to the L-FDT PSC (Process-1 in Fig. 6(A)). Besides, unlike the Li-TFSI additive, the F4TCNQ dopant does not open up water channeling pathways to the underlying perovskite layer (Process-2 in Fig. 6(A)), which is evident from the absence of any intermediate phase or PbI2 peak in the aged perovskite film underneath the F-FDT film (Fig. 4(A)), as opposed to the aged perovskite layer with the L-FDT film. Hence, the aged F-FDT PSC demonstrates a higher normalized JSC value compared to aged L-FDT devices. The aged perovskite film underneath the F-FDT HTL also demonstrates lower point defects, film porosities and crystalline disorientation (Fig. 5(D)–(F)), which reduces the trap-assisted carrier recombination in the aged F-FDT PSC, compared to the L-FDT PSC (Process-3 in Fig. 6(A)). Suppressed recombination phenomena in aged F-FDT PSCs are correlated with the enhanced normalized VOC value retained in them compared to aged L-FDT PSCs. Moreover, despite the neutralizing chemical reaction between migrating I− ions and the FDT+ polaron (Process-4 in Fig. 6(B)), the polaronic intensity of the FDT+ polaron and the material intrinsic stability are higher (Fig. 5(G)) in the aged F-FDT HTL film, compared to the aged L-FDT film (Process-4 in Fig. 6(A)). Therefore, aged F-FDT PSCs exhibit substantially high normalized FF values compared to L-FDT devices. Thus, overall, F-FDT devices demonstrate higher device stability compared to their L-FDT HTL based counterparts.

In summary, we have fabricated a small molecule oxidant F4TCNQ doped, low cost FDT (F-FDT) HTL for an efficient (highest PCE: 14.70%) mixed organic cation based MA0.6FA0.4PbI3 perovskite device via a controlled nucleation assisted RVSA method, having full temperature compatibility with flexible substrates. The optimized (1 wt%) F-FDT HTL based PSCs demonstrate about 15% higher average PCE compared to conventional Li-TFSI/TBP doped FDT (L-FDT) HTL devices. Enhanced photovoltaic performance of F-FDT PSCs has been found to be correlated with the superior hole extraction and electron blocking capability of the F-FDT HTL, as compared to the L-FDT HTL film. F-FDT PSCs also demonstrate a lower degree of photocurrent hysteresis than L-FDT devices due to suppressed electrode polarization phenomena in F-FDT PSCs. Adding to the merits, F-FDT PSCs also exhibit 75% higher device stability with reference to L-FDT devices in the course of three week long systematic degradation study. The enhanced stability of F-FDT devices has been found to originate from the low hydrophilicity, higher intrinsic material stability and augmented polaronic intensity of the aged F-FDT HTL film, as well as mitigated point defects and crystal disorientation of the aged perovskite film along with the F-FDT HTL, relative to the L-FDT HTL. Thus, the F-FDT HTL bids fair to be a cost effective alternative to conventional Li-TFSI/TBP based HTLs, which can facilitate simultaneous enhancement of device performance and stability of PSCs for commercial viability.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by Future Solar Technologies Pty. Ltd for this research work. Author V. R. G. thanks ARC for an Australian Laureate Fellowship attributed to Scientia Prof. J. Justin Gooding (School of Chemistry, UNSW-Sydney). The authors would also like to acknowledge the endless support from the staff of Photovoltaic and Renewable Energy Engineering School, Electron Microscope Unit (EMU) and Solid State and Elemental Analysis Unit under Mark Wainwright Analytical Center, UNSW.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cp03551a
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017