 DOI: 10.1039/D1EE00832C
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3420-3429


Wei
Chen
,

Renjun
Guo
,

Haodong
Tang
,

Kerstin S.
Wienhold
,

Nian
Li
,

Zhengyan
Jiang
,

Jun
Tang
,

Xinyu
Jiang
,

Lucas P.
Kreuzer
,

Haochen
Liu
,

Matthias
Schwartzkopf
,

Xiao Wei
Sun
,

Stephan V.
Roth
,

Kai
Wang
*,

Baomin
Xu
* and 

Peter
Müller-Buschbaum
*

Physik Department, Lehrstuhl für Funktionelle Materialien, Technische Universität München, James-Franck-Straße 1, 85748 Garching, Germany. E-mail: muellerb@ph.tum.de

Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Joint Laboratory for Photonic-Thermal-Electrical Energy Materials and Devices, and Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China. E-mail: wangk@sustech.edu.cn

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, and Shenzhen Engineering Research and Development Center for Flexible Solar Cells, Southern University of Science and Technology (SUSTech), 518055 Shenzhen, China. E-mail: xubm@sustech.edu.cn

Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY, Notkestraße 85, 22607 Hamburg, Germany

Key Laboratory of Energy Conversion and Storage Technologies (Southern University of Science and Technology), Ministry of Education, Shenzhen 518055, China

KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Department of Fibre and Polymer Technology, Teknikringen 56-58, SE-100 44 Stockholm, Sweden

Heinz Maier-Leibnitz Zentrum (MLZ), Technische Universität München, Lichtenbergstraße. 1, 85748 Garching, Germany

Received
4th August 2020
, Accepted 23rd April 2021
First published on 24th April 2021
PbS quantum dot (QD) solar cells demonstrate great potential in solar energy conversion with a broad and flexible spectral response. Even though long-term storage stabilities of QD solar cells were reported in literature, the operation stability from a more practical aspect, to date, has been not yet investigated. Herein, we observe the structure degradation process of a PbS QD-ink based solar cell during the device operation. Simultaneously to probing the solar cell parameters, the overall structure evolutions of the QDs in both, active layer and hole transport layer of the solar cell are studied with grazing-incidence small- and wide-angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS/GIWAXS). We find a spontaneous decrease of the QD inter-dot distance with an increase in the spatial disorder in the active layer (PbX2–PbS QDs, X = I, and Br) during the operation induced degradation. Consequently, the structure disorder-induced broadening of the energy state distribution is responsible for the decrease in open-circuit voltage Voc leading to the device degradation. These findings elucidate the origin of light-soaking as well as the structure degradation of QD ink-based solar cells and indicate that the stability of the device can be realized by the positional stabilization of the QDs in the QD solid.

Colloidal PbS quantum dots (QDs) are promising in terms of their optoelectronic properties, which render them of interest in QD solar cells. Based on operando X-ray scattering experiments in combination with optoelectronic studies, we elucidate the origin of light-soaking as well as the structure degradation of colloidal PbS QD ink-based solar cells and indicate that the stability of the device can be realized by the positional stabilization of the QDs in the QD solid.


Colloidal PbS quantum dots (QDs) are promising in various solution-processed thin-film optoelectronic devices, including light-emitting diodes, photodetectors, and photovoltaics due to the tunable bandgap of the QDs in a broad spectral range. In PbS QD based solar cell fabrications, the solution-phase ligand-exchange engineering enables to use QDs as ink (QD-ink). This QD-ink can be applied directly to form a solid film via just a single-step deposition as the active layer with strong electronic coupling properties. Therefore, the fabrication process is even simpler than the conventional layer-by-layer process. The high efficiency of QD-ink based solar cells is realized by a refined surface engineering and the modifications of the QDs for a high-quality active layer. The modified QDs in the QD-ink are supposed to have an ideal inorganic outer layer, which is normally formed by lead halides, or perovskites. Through the refined ligand engineering, the dangling bonds on the surface of the QDs are eliminated by these inorganic ligands, and the dispersity of the QD-ink is also improved by the modifications on the QD facets. Moreover, the lead halide component provides a suitable dielectric matrix to sustain an efficient energy transport configuration between two neighboring QDs according to the carrier hopping theory. By these efforts, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of QD solar cells, to date, already reached 13.8%.

The QD-ink based solid formation process is described as a self-organization process of the QD particles from a solution state to a dry state. The inter-dot distance-dependent tunneling process of the charge carrier dominates the energy transport of the strongly-coupled QD solid. The carrier transport rate exponentially decays as a function of the surface-to-surface distance of the QDs in a strongly-coupled QD solid. Besides surface treatments before the deposition, the final stacking situation of the QDs, specifically for the inter-dot distance and the distribution, can also determine the charge carrier transport of the QD solid after the deposition. Consequently, an ideal QD-ink based QD solid as active layer is supposed to have a small average QD inter-dot distance as well as a narrow inter-dot distance distribution. Therefore, narrow-distributed energy states could be achieved. To evaluate the inner structure of the thin-film architecture and the corresponding structure parameters, grazing-incidence small-angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS) is a well-established approach to study the QD layout in QD solid films nowadays. Previous studies suggested that different surface treatments and different deposition processes both influenced the stacking configurations of the QDs and the final device performances. Moreover, grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) is a powerful method to probe the crystal structure of the QDs.
As reported in the literature, QD-ink based solar cells showed a good storage stability as well as operation stability over a long time scale. However, a relatively prominent change of the device performance normally happened in an initial short operation time (approximately 20 min), which was described as the “light soaking” effect. Since the electronic coupling of the QDs and their energy transport are sensitive to the QD inter-dot distance, we assume that the device degradation, in the initial burn-in stage, can also be caused by a variation of the stacking configuration of the QD solid.
In this work, we present an operando GISAXS/GIWAXS study following the initial structure degradation of PbS QD solar cell (performed at synchrotron beamline P03, PETRA III). The operando measurement is designed to rule out influences from ambient conditions, including moisture, oxygen, and temperature, and reducing the impact of the intrinsic degradation of the electron transport layer (ETL) on the device performance. Therefore, in this work, we focus on the structure degradation of QD layers in the solar cell, including the hole transport layer as well as the active layer, and findings are correlated to the real-time device performance. Moreover, static studies, including GISAXS and GIWAXS of the independent QD layers are carried out to distinguish the structure degradation from the specific layers. In addition, optoelectronic studies are also introduced to understand the underlying mechanism of the device degradation.
PbS QDs are synthesized according to the previous work by Zhang et al., and the size and spectral information are shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). The QD-ink and solar cell fabrication mainly follow previous work by Liu et al. Detailed information is given in the Experimental section (ESI). As an indication of the successful ligand exchange of the QDs in the solution phase, QDs transferring automatically from an octane phase to an N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) phase is recorded by photographs as shown in Fig. S2 (ESI). The Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectra of the QD solids with and without the ligand exchange are also provided. The active layer of the solar cell is made of the QD-ink (PbX2 capped PbS QDs, X = I, Br), while, the hole transport layer is made of a 1,2-ethanedithiol (EDT) treated QD solid (EDT-QD solid). To reduce the impact of ambient conditions, such as temperature, oxygen, and moisture, the device is installed inside of a vacuum chamber (10−2 mbar) with a temperature control system to keep the chamber at a constant temperature of 15 °C during the illumination induced burn-in. Moreover, to reduce potential influences from the ETL on the device performance and the structure degradation of the active layer, we use a tin oxide layer (SnO2) instead of the conventionally used zinc oxide layer (ZnO) as the ETL of the devices for the operando measurement, since SnO2 exhibits better stability against illumination than ZnO. Under a stable illumination (100 mW cm−2), generated by a solar simulator, the device operating parameters and the inner structure of the QD solids are simultaneously recorded by an IV analyzer (Keithley Meter source) and the GISAXS detector, respectively. The operando measurement schematic is illustrated in Fig. S3(a) (ESI). The GISAXS detector (Pilatus 1M) is installed at a large sample-detector distance (SDD, 2324 mm) to record the structure variation in the QD superlattice scale. The real photograph of the operando setup can be found in Fig. S4 (ESI). Due to the higher photon energy (11.6 keV), small thickness of the hole transport layer, and selected incidence angle (0.4°), the X-ray beam can penetrate both QD layers, reaching the bottom electrode layer as sketched in side view in Fig. S3(b) (ESI). Moreover, as seen from the top view, the X-ray footprint is located extremely close to the top electrode (<0.1 mm). A GIWAXS detector (Pilatus 300 K) is also installed with a short SDD (95.7 mm) to study the structure changes of the crystal lattice. In addition, static in-house GISAXS/GIWAXS measurements are also performed to confirm that the overall structure changes mainly originate from the active layer (QD-ink layer) rather than from the hole transport layer (EDT-QD layer), although both layers are made from the same batch of QDs with the same size but different surface treatments. Afterward, the spatial disorder-induced energy states variation of the QD-ink layer before and after the degradation is probed with steady-state absorption spectra and charge carrier dynamics study by transient absorption spectroscopy (TAS). The findings are all in a good agreement with the GISAXS analysis.
The device architecture is provided in Fig. 1(a), in which the thicknesses of the QD layers in the X-ray scattering volume from the top to the bottom are determined to be (45 ± 3) nm for the EDT-layer and (254 ± 10) nm for the QD-ink layer. The thicknesses are (30 ± 2) nm for the SnO2 layer or (35 ± 2) nm for the ZnO layer as the transport layer and (140 ± 3) nm for the indium tin oxide (ITO) layer on glass, which is used as the substrate for the solar cells. The thicknesses are estimated by a profilometer and the error values are derived from a set of different measurements. Fig. 1(b) illustrates the cross-section image of the device architecture in the X-ray scattering volume and is described as EDT-QD layer/QD-ink layer/SnO2/ITO. Fig. 1(c) demonstrates the device working principle in which the QD-ink layer acts as the active layer generating bound charge carriers (excitons) under illumination. The excitons disassociate immediately into free charge carriers, electrons, and holes, and diffusive randomly inside of the QD solids. The EDT-QD layer acts as the hole transport layer blocking electrons, while the SnO2 or (ZnO) layer acts as the ETL. The energy diagram is built up according to references using similar materials and fabrication protocols. The device operation parameters of the target solar cells before the operando experiment are given in Table 1. Notably, to verify the quality of the QD layers, the device performance of the ZnO based solar is also presented with a thicker QD-ink layer of (322 ± 12) nm resulting in a PCE of 9.4%. The current densities for both solar cells are in a good agreement with the empirical relation between active layer thicknesses. The lower fill factor (FF) of the SnO2 based devices are supposed to be due to the higher recombination of the charge carriers, which probably originates from the discrepancy of the intrinsic work functions between the SnO2 layer and QD active layer. The device performance evolution during the operando experiment of the SnO2 based device is shown in the current density–voltage (J–V) mapping over time, as seen in Fig. 1(d). The open-circuit voltage Voc drops dramatically at the initial 10 min burn-in phase and then gradually decreases towards a stable value. Consequently, the PCE of the device gradually decreases from 7.0% to 6.3% with the FF decreasing slightly from 48.7% to 45.8%, and a quite stable short circuit current density Jsc performance, which slightly changes from 23.2 mA cm−2 to 22.8 mA cm−2. As an example, the J–V curves before and after the operando degradation experiment are shown in Fig. 1(e). To reproduce the universality of the device degradation, an additional degradation experiment is performed on a reference cell (called cell B) and the normalized degradation parameters as shown in Fig. 1(f–i). The results indicate that the variations of Jsc and FF of the devices (cells A and B), are very limited during the entire 90 min operation induced degradation, which suggests a stable interface configuration for the charge carrier extraction from the active layer as expected. Notably, further batches of solar cells, including a champion cell with PCE = 9.27%, also reveal a similar degradation behavior in the burn-in test as indicated in Fig. S5 (ESI). Besides the degradation induced changes of the structure on the electronic relevant length scales (<10 nm), which are mainly studied with GISAXS/GIWAXS, the microscopic surface morphologies of QD layers are separately studied by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) before and after the degradation process. The SEM results are presented in Fig. S6 (ESI), and they suggest an excellent surface stability of the QD layers. Thus, a major device degradation induced by changes in the interface on the microscopic scale can be ruled out. Moreover, additional FTIR data (Fig. S7, ESI) of the QD solids that underwent the same degradation treatment demonstrate a chemical stability of the materials. Notably, to EDT-PbS QD solid, the specific peak from “free carboxylate” at 1700 cm−1 vanished after the burn-in test attributing to the “re-bonding” of the group to the surface of PbS QDs. However, the re-bonding is unlikely to have significant influence to the device performance since the intensity variation is limited (in a noise intensity level) and the variation features (such as relatively stable Jsc) of the device performance during the burn-in test rules out the degradation contribution from the EDT-PbS QD layer. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) data of the QD solids, as seen in Fig. S8 (ESI), suggests a stable halide ligand treatment-induced binding energy. Notably, instead of the PbX2 matrix, the PbS QDs on the film surface suffer from a slight oxidation only, which is indicated from the peak shift of Pb 4f and O 1s signals towards higher energy values (PbSO3 transforms into PbSO4). However, the oxidation effect of the solar cell in our test conditions (vacuum) is supposed to be limited in its influence to the Voc due to several reasons: No blue-shift of the absorption is observed in the spectra of both, the QD-ink layer and the EDT-QD layer after the burn-in aging. Moreover, oxygen-induced degradation of the solar cells causes commonly an increased Voc in the initial stage. In contrast, in the present study we find a similar solar cells degradation in vacuum conditions and in nitrogen atmosphere concerning the tendency of the Voc evolution.
Device

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)
SnO2 based device
23.2 ± 0.01
0.63 ± 0.01
0.48 ± 0.01
7.0 ± 0.1
ZnO based device
26.5 ± 0.01
0.60 ± 0.01
0.59 ± 0.01
9.4 ± 0.1
Concerning the J–V curve, the slight current fluctuations observed during the degradation are supposed to correlate with the intrinsic properties of the QD solar cell in a fast current–voltage scanning mode (1 cycle s−1), as also found in literature. For comparison, the ZnO based solar cell burn-in results are also provided (Fig. S9, ESI), which demonstrates a similar degradation process lead by the decrease of the Voc as seen in the SnO2 based devices. However, the degradation of Jsc, as well as FF, are more prominent than those in the SnO2 based devices, which is possibly attributed to the intrinsic degradation of ZnO layer or the interface induced degradation between the ZnO layer and the QD-ink layer. To essentially understand the device degradation, we associate operando experiments as well as independent burn-in tests to specific QD solids in order to differentiate the degradation contributions in the QD solar cells.
The real-time 2D GISAXS data of QD layers have been recorded with a data acquisition frequency of ∼1 min−1 in the first 5 min, 5 min−1 between 5–60 min, 10 min−1 in range of 60–90 min, to rule out radiation damage (by the intense X-ray beam). X-ray radiation damage tests were performed before the operando experiment to rule out potential structure damage from the X-ray exposure as seen in Fig. S10 (ESI). Fig. 2(a–c) presents selected GISAXS data measured at different device operation times (t = 0, 30, 90 min), which indicates a stable layout of the QDs in the device without significant changes in the scattering patterns. Azimuthal integrations of the scattering intensity as a function of q are shown in Fig. 2(d). The overall inter-dot distance and the distance distribution of the QDs are investigated by the corresponding modeling, in which spherical models are used to fit the scattering from the QDs and the intensity as described by the equation below.
I(q) ∝ P(q)S(q) + Aq−n
(1)
In this equation, I(q) is the intensity distribution, P(q) denotes the form factor (assuming a spherical shape of the QDs) and S(q) denotes the structure factor, which reflects the inter-dot distance of the spheres. The term Aq−n represents a scattering contribution from potential QD aggregates described by a power-law function. Selected modeling curves are shown for the beginning (t = 0 min) and end (t = 90 min) of the operando experiment (Fig. S11, ESI) and illustrate the changes in the structure. The modeling parameters are shown in Fig. 2(e and f). Accordingly, during the burn-in phase, the QD inter-dot distance decreases rapidly from (2.96 ± 0.01) nm to (2.92 ± 0.01) nm in the initial stage (t < 10 min) of the device degradation process before the value stabilizes at (2.91 ± 0.01) nm. The error bars give an estimate of the modeling tolerance. The smaller QD inter-dot distance indicates an increased electronic coupling configuration between neighboring QDs during the degradation. However, the distribution width of the inter-dot distance is found to increase simultaneously (Fig. 2(f)), indicating that the spatial disorder of the QDs increases. Notably, for strongly-coupled QD solids, the increased spatial disorder means that more QDs are potentially touching each other and thereby dimerize, aggregate, or facet-align, which can provoke local relaxations the excitons and broaden the overall energetic states. Moreover, the peak intensity as derived from the modeling, increases at the beginning (t < 20 min) due to a uniform structure variation in the scattering volume, before it gradually decreases with further structure variations occurring continuously and slowly.
To study changes in the crystal structure, GIWAXS measurements are selectively carried out at different operation times (t = 0, 32, 62, and 92 min). The 2D GIWAXS data at the beginning and the end of the degradation are shown in Fig. 3(a) and (b). 2D GIWAXS patterns at 32 and 62 min can be found in Fig. S12 (ESI), which shows “split peaks” at around q = 2.1 Å−1 and q = 2.4 Å−1 appearing during the operando experiment. The corresponding azimuthal integrations are shown in Fig. 3(c). The peaks at q = 2.13 Å−1 and q = 2.46 Å−1 are assigned to the Bragg peaks (222)ITO and (400)ITO of the ITO layer, which both do not change significantly during the entire degradation process. Besides, the sharp peaks at q = 2.09 Å−1 and q = 2.41 Å−1 are supposed to originate from the lattice anchoring (or passivation) effect of PbX2 with a uniform lattice distance on the facets of the PbS QDs. The X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) pattern of the pure QD-ink layer (Fig. S13, ESI) indicates merged (200) peaks from both, PbS and PbX2. The anchoring effect can be still recognized from the diffraction pattern of the (210)PbX2 peak. The results match well with the GIWAXS. Moreover, the lattice compression of the QD solid can be seen from the peak shift towards higher q values for both Bragg peaks of the QDs ((111)PbS and (200)PbS) as well as the PbX2 outer layer of the QDs. The shift in the initial stage (t < 30 min) can be attributed to the re-arrangement of the QD stacking as was seen with GISAXS. In the period between t = 30 min and t = 60 min, the crystal lattice distances are supposed to be stable. Further lattice compression is found at t = 90 min. This continuous compression is attributed to the structure transition of PbX2, from a less-crystalline state to a more crystalline state, which is indicated by the emerging of sharp diffraction peaks in the XRD data of the QD-ink layer after the burn-in test. The overall compression effect is supposed to responsible for the further slow device degradation. While the initial significant degradations are more related to the changes of the structure as observed with GISAXS.
Static GISAXS/GIWAXS measurements are performed under the same degradation conditions as the operando experiment to separate the contributions of the individual QD layers (EDT-QD layer and QD-ink layer) on glass substrates. The 2D GIWAXS data for the QD-ink layer before and after degradation are seen in Fig. 3(c) and (d). The 2D GIWAXS patterns for EDT-QD layer before and after the degradation are presented in Fig. S14 (ESI). According to the peak splitting, the lattice compression found in the operando experiment is confirmed to be contributed by the QD-ink layer, as seen in Table 2. The EDT-QD layer demonstrates good lattice stability against illumination in a 90 min burn-in test. The lattice compressions in QDs are from all lattice directions and mainly happen in the QD-ink layer rather than in the EDT-QD layer. This effect is attributed to the presence of the surface passivation layer since the QD-ink layer stoichiometrically contains a high amount of PbX2. The effective compression of PbX2 capped QDs is supposed to occur due to the surface anchoring effect, as indicated in Fig. 3(f). The PbX2 arrangement gradually follows the lattice template of facets of PbS QDs. A further indication is, that the measured lattice distances in the QD-ink layer are all moving towards the lattice distances of the EDT-QDs. Notably, the EDT-QDs has no inorganic passivation layer and the lattice distances of the QDs are closer to that of the intrinsic PbS QDs than the surface inorganically treated QDs in the QD-ink layer.
111 (EDT-QD) (Å−1)
200 (EDT-QDs) (Å−1)
111 (QD-ink) (Å−1)
200 (QD-ink) (Å−1)
Fresh
1.838 ± 0.003
2.117 ± 0.004
1.795 ± 0.011
2.093 ± 0.006
Aged
1.837 ± 0.004
2.118 ± 0.005
1.821 ± 0.013
2.117 ± 0.006
Variation
∼0.001
∼0.001
∼0.026
∼0.024
The static GISAXS results of the individual QD solids are shown in Fig. 4(a–f). As illustrated in Fig. 4(c), the azimuthal integrations suggest that the EDT-QD solid also exhibits an excellent structure stability against degradation with a stable inter-dot distance of the QDs of (2.93 ± 0.01) nm as deduced from the modeling. In contrast, a change in the QD inter-dot distance and the distribution width is found in the QD-ink layer during the degradation test as shown in Fig. 4(f). According to the modeling, the inter-dot distance decreases from (2.95 ± 0.01) nm to (2.91 ± 0.01) nm with an increased distance distribution width, from 10.0% to 10.9%. Notably, the slight differences between the scattering data obtained from synchrotron and in-house (Ganesha SAXS machine) GISAXS measurements are attributed to different instrument configurations, including the different resolution function, photon energy, X-ray beam size, footprint length, and penetration depth.
Based on the structure variations, the increased spatial disorder of the QDs can broaden the energy state distribution in the QD-ink layer, which is further confirmed from the absorption spectra of the QD-ink layer, before and after the degradation, as shown in Fig. S15 (ESI). The slightly smeared first exciton peak of the QD-ink layer originates from a disordered coupling. As a consequence, TAS results confirm a more significant tail state distribution in the QD-ink layer after the burn-in aging. In contrast, the EDT-QD layer exhibits a stable absorption behavior before and after the degradation test, which is in good agreement with the GISAXS analysis. As a result, the structure evolution of the QDs in the solar cell device is confirmed and the structure degradation is schematically illustrated in Fig. 5(a) and (b). The QD hole transport layer remains stable during the entire degradation test, which suggests a stable interface for the hole transport and extraction. The observed changes in the scattering are mainly attributed to the QD-ink layer of the device in the operando measurement. To explain the changes, the initial arrangement of the QDs is determined by a single-step spin-coating deposition, which suggests a “fast-freezing” layout formation process. Therefore, a long-ranged ordered QD layout is supposed in the fresh sample, causing a prominent scattering peak. During the initial degradation, the QDs shift to a short-ranged ordered layout, exhibiting more spatial disorder, as seen in the operando experiment. This change in the QD-ink layer is due to maximizing the entropy of the ensemble becoming regionalized since QDs are not ideally spherical, neither monodisperse in the particle size but polyhedral with facets. During the burn-in test, the structure disorder broadens the energy state distribution of the QD-ink layer, as indicated by the smeared first exciton peak in the absorption spectra. Notably, the broadened energy states can reduce the effective quasi Fermi level (EFn) of electrons, which leads to a reduced Voc of the device. Consequently, the energy diagrams of the device before and after degradation are illustrated in Fig. 5(c) and (d). In the fresh sample, QDs have a narrow energy state distribution (seen from the absorption) due to their uniform coupling configuration to their neighboring QDs. Thus, the effective quasi Fermi level of the QD-ink layer can stay at a higher position. After the burn-in test, the inhomogeneous coupling from the QD aggregate analogies broadens the energy state distribution, which is confirmed from the larger total bleaching peak shift of the QD-ink layer after the burn-in test, as seen in Fig. S16 (ESI). The structure variation-induced band tails provoke the Voc loss of the device performance found in the initial operation of the solar cell. Moreover, the overall smaller inter-dot distances of the QDs in the QD solid support a higher charge carrier mobility, which compensates the current loss from the energetic disorder resulting in a relatively stable Jsc of the solar cell during the burn-in test. The device performance degradation simulation verification is performed based on SCAPS, by which we have successfully re-produced the J–V curve changes before and after the burn-in test via introducing a broadened energy state distribution as well as an increased charge carrier mobility to the QD-ink layer establishment as seen in Fig. S17 (ESI). The modeling results are in a very good agreement with the experimental observations.

In summary, we report an operando GISAXS/GIWAXS study of PbS QD solar cells, by which the structure degradation of the QD layers, as well as the device performance degradation, are studied simultaneously. The GISAXS analysis indicates that the solar irradiation provides a condition for spontaneously decreasing the inter-dot distance of QDs in the active layer in combination with increasing the spatial disorder. While changes in the structure of the QDs in the hole transport layer are ruled out from further static GISAXS studies. Moreover, the GIWAXS measurements confirm the overall lattice compression during the degradation process. Interestingly, we find that the Voc simultaneously decreases and exhibits a quite similar temporal evolution as that of the QD inter-dot distance in the active layer. The Jsc and FF of the devices undergo only minor changes. We conclude that the spatial disorder of the QD-ink layer broadens the energy state distribution, which is confirmed from changes in the spectral studies and corresponding simulations. It is responsible for the loss of Voc during the burn-in phase. These findings enrich the present understanding of the “light-soaking” effect of QD solar cells by introducing the device structure degradation in the burn-in test. The discussion indicates that the stability of the device can be further improved by a positional stabilization of the QDs in the QD solid.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by funding from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under Germany's Excellence Strategy – EXC 2089/1 – 390776260 (e-conversion), TUM.solar in the context of the Bavarian Collaborative Research Project Solar Technologies Go Hybrid (SolTech), the Center for NanoScience (CeNS) and the International Research Training Group 2022 Alberta/Technical University of Munich International Graduate School for Environmentally Responsible Functional Hybrid Materials (ATUMS). W. C., R. G., N. L., J. T., and X. J. acknowledge the funding support from the China Scholarship Council (CSC) and K. S. W. from the Hans Böckler Stiftung. K. W. thanks for funding support from National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61875082), Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Joint Laboratory (No. 2019B121205001). B. X. acknowledges the National Key Research and Development Project funding from the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (Grant No. 2016YFA0202400 and 2016YFA0202404, and the Peacock Team Project funding from Shenzhen Science and Technology Innovation Committee (Grant No. KQTD2015033110182370). Parts of this research were carried out at the light source PETRA III at DESY, a member of the Helmholtz Association (HGF). The authors acknowledge the technical support from Dongsheng He and Yang Qiu in SUSTech CRF.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ee00832c
‡ These authors contributed equally to the work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021