 DOI: 10.1039/C6NR07076K
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 19654-19661


Yafei
Wang
,

Shibin
Li
*,

Peng
Zhang
,

Detao
Liu
,

Xiangling
Gu
,

Hojjatollah
Sarvari
,

Zongbiao
Ye
,

Jiang
Wu
,

Zhiming
Wang
 and 

Zhi David
Chen
*

State Key Laboratory of Electronic Thin Films and Integrated Devices, and School of Optoelectronic Information, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC), Chengdu, Sichuan 610054, China. E-mail: shibinli@uestc.edu.cn; zhichen@engr.uky.edu

Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, and Center for Nanoscale Science & Engineering, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky 40506, USA

Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, University College London, Torrington Place, London WC1E 7JE, UK

Institute of Fundamental and Frontier Sciences, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, 610054, China

Received
7th September 2016
, Accepted 1st November 2016
First published on 2nd November 2016
While most work carried out to date has focused on the solvent annealing of perovskite, in the present work, we focused on the solvent annealing of lead iodide. Based on the two-step spin-coating method, we designed a screening method to search for an effective solvent annealing process for PbI2. PbI2 films were annealed in diverse solvent atmospheres, including DMF, DMSO, acetone, and isopropanol (IPA). We found that the solvent annealing of PbI2 in the DMF, acetone, and IPA atmospheres resulted in dense PbI2 films, which impeded the complete conversion of PbI2 to CH3NH3PbI3. Surprisingly, employing the DMSO solvent annealing process for PbI2 led to porous PbI2, which facilitated the complete conversion of PbI2 to perovskite with larger grain sizes. Solar cells fabricated using the DMSO solvent annealing process exhibited the best efficiency of 18.5%, with a fill factor of 76.5%. This unique solvent annealing method presents a new way of controlling the perovskite film quality for highly efficient solar cells.

Organic/inorganic trihalide lead-based perovskite solar cells have attracted much attention because of their superb photovoltaic performance and low-cost solution processes. Since the first report of perovskite solar cells in 2009, their power conversion efficiency (PCE) has increased from 3.8% to today's 21%. In order to achieve more efficient photoelectric conversion, device structures, recombination mechanisms, interface engineering, and materials synthesis need to be studied.

For the fabrication of low-cost and high-quality perovskite solar cells, solution-based processes are widely used. There are two main solution-based synthesis methods for the fabrication of perovskite thin films: the one-step solution process and the two-step sequential deposition method.
The first solid-state perovskite solar cell was reported by Park's group in 2012, which actually triggered perovskite solar cell research activities. In 2013, a two-step sequential deposition method was proposed to produce high-quality perovskite films. In order to control the morphology better, Park et al. investigated the influence of MAI concentrations on the morphology of perovskite grains. Moreover, they modified the above sequential deposition method through replacing dipping with spin-coating in the second step. Then, cuboid CH3NH3PbI3 crystals with controllable sizes were achieved. Park's group also fabricated FAPbI3 solar cells via a two-step spin-coating method in 2014. Generally, the two-step sequential deposition method can be easily used to achieve a controllable morphology of perovskite films. However, in the two-step method, it is difficult for PbX2 to be completely transformed into perovskite. Although a consistent conclusion has not yet been reached on the effects of residual lead iodide on the defects, it is accepted that residual lead iodide does negatively affect the efficiency, which is a more serious issue in the two-step deposition method.
Meanwhile, solvent engineering and solvent annealing have been used to improve the morphology of films and to decrease the residual lead iodide. Seok et al. reported a mixed-solvent engineering process for the fabrication of efficient perovskite solar cells with a certified power conversion efficiency of 16.2%. In this procedure, a mixed solvent of GBL and DMSO was used in a one-step spin-coating process followed by toluene drop-casting, leading to uniform and dense perovskite layers. Park et al. also fabricated highly reproducible perovskite solar cells via mixed-solvent (DMSO/DMF) engineering in the one-step deposition method, wherein, diethyl ether was used to remove the DMF solvent in this process. An average power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 18.3% and the best efficiency of 19.7% were attained. Solvent annealing was introduced for perovskite fabrication in 2014 by Huang et al. In their investigation, DMF was used as an annealing solvent for perovskite and led to an increase in the CH3NH3PbI3 grain sizes and crystallinity. In order to obtain better quality perovskite films, different solvents and methods were adopted in the solvent annealing. These investigations improved the grain growth, crystallization, and morphology. Compared to the mixed-solvent process, solvent annealing is more suitable for surface morphology modification. The vapors eliminate grain boundaries so that the film morphology is improved. Therefore, solvent vapor annealing effectively improves the crystallinity and morphology of perovskite films.
Regarding solvent annealing processes, most works so far have focused on annealing perovskite films in solvent atmospheres, but in this work, we focused on the studies involving the annealing of PbI2 films instead of perovskite. We designed a screening method to search for an effective solvent annealing process, which led us to discover a new solvent annealing process. PbI2 annealing in DMSO solvent in the first step led to a best solar cell with a PCE of 18.5% and a fill factor of 76.5%. During the screening, we studied different annealing atmospheres of lead iodide films on the crystallinity and morphology of both PbI2 and perovskite layers.

In previous reports, solvent annealing was carried out on perovskite, which is important for controlling the quality of perovskite films. However, we studied the solvent annealing of PbI2 instead of perovskite. As shown in Fig. 1(a), we designed a screening method for identifying the most efficient solvent annealing process for PbI2. PbI2 films were fabricated using a two-step heating process, in which in the first step PbI2 films were heated at 45 °C for 5 min and then in the second step heated to 100 °C for 5 min. As shown in Fig. 1(a), there are four annealing processes: (1) first step thermal annealing, second step thermal annealing (TA-TA); (2) first step thermal annealing, second step solvent annealing(TA-SA); (3) first step solvent annealing, second step solvent annealing (SA-SA); (4) first step solvent annealing, second step thermal annealing (SA-TA). Thermal annealing (TA) was carried in nitrogen. We considered four solvents: DMF, DMSO, acetone, and IPA and three processes in which solvents were involved. In considering three processes and four solvents, we therefore had 12 experimental cases.

We first used DMF as the annealing solvent. The absorption spectra of PbI2 and perovskite prepared using these four annealing processes were measured and the results shown in Fig. 1(b) and (c). Fig. 1(b) shows that the three absorptions (0.703, 0.713, 0.737) at ∼550 nm for PbI2 films obtained using the SA-TA, SA-SA, and TA-SA processes are slightly larger than that (0.682) of the PbI2 films prepared using the TA-TA processes. This suggests that a first step annealing in DMF at 45 °C improves the optical absorption at a wavelength of ∼550 nm. Based the above annealed PbI2 films, perovskite films were obtained by reaction with MAI, as described in the Experimental section. Fig. 1(c) shows that the absorptions (0.361, 0.363) of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite films prepared from PbI2 films using the DMF SA-TA, and DMF SA-SA processes are larger than that (0.254) of the perovskite films prepared from PbI2 films using the TA-TA and DMF TA-SA processes. Thus, the two best processes were: DMF SA-TA and DMF SA-SA. The DMF SA-SA process resulted in the largest absorption of perovskite, but its baseline was higher than for the other three processes. This was caused by stronger light scattering due to the rough surface of the perovskite. The rough surface of the perovskite was induced by the PbI2 films obtained by using the DMF SA-SA process, which might be due to the higher temperature annealing in DMF in the second step. It is known that a rough surface of perovskite is not good for solar cells. Therefore, the DMF SA-SA process cannot be used and instead we selected the DMF SA-TA process. Fig. 1(d) presents supporting evidence, where it can be seen that the XRD main peak (001) of the PbI2 film prepared in the DMF SA-TA process is much larger than that prepared in the TA-TA process. As shown in Fig. 1(e), the forward and reverse scan J–V curves exhibit different I–V hysteresis behaviors of perovskite solar cells for each annealing method using DMF solvent. With the lower temperature (45 °C) solvent annealing (SA-SA, SA-TA), the perovskite solar cells show smaller hysteresis than for the devices fabricated with TA-TA or TA-SA processes. The reduction of hysteresis is due to the better crystallization of lead iodide and perovskite. The improved morphology of perovskite films also contributes to the suppression of hysteresis.
In principle, right after spin-coating, the PbI2 films are wet with DMF and there are still many PbI2 molecules or clusters in the DMF solution. Lower temperature annealing may result in a precipitation of PbI2 due to slow evaporation of DMF, so that the crystal grains increase slowly. In the two-step annealing, the preliminary crystal grains are formed during the lower temperature annealing in the first step, while in the second step, the remaining DMF solvent is removed quickly at the higher temperature annealing because the evaporation rate of DMF at 100 °C is much larger. It is clear that the lower temperature annealing in the first step determines the major crystallization of PbI2, while the higher temperature annealing in the second step may just slightly modify the PbI2 crystal grains. Therefore, we believe that solvent annealing in other atmospheres at a lower temperature in the first step might affect the crystallization and morphology of PbI2 more effectively than that at a higher temperature in the second step. Therefore, we chose the SA-TA process for all the other atmospheres (DMSO, acetone, and IPA), as marked by a star in Fig. 1(a).
Using the SA-TA process for PbI2, we studied the effects of our four different solvent atmospheres (DMF, DMSO, acetone and IPA) on the surface morphology of PbI2 and perovskite films, as shown in Fig. 2. Among all the processes, the DMF SA-TA process resulted in the largest crystals of PbI2, but these had a very rough surface. We also observed that the film was very dense. The surface morphologies of the PbI2 films prepared in TA-TA, acetone SA-TA, and IPA SA-TA were similar, being smoother with smaller crystal grains than in the DMF and DMSO SA-TA processes. It was particularly interesting to see that PbI2 films prepared in DMSO SA-TA were porous. The surface morphologies of the perovskite films after the conversion of PbI2 to perovskite are shown in Fig. 2(f)–(j). There are two groups. TA-TA, DMF SA-TA, and DMSO SA-TA resulted in larger cuboid crystal grains of perovskite films, with the DMSO SA-TA process resulting in the largest crystal grains. Acetone SA-TA, and IPA SA-TA produced smaller crystal grains with smoother morphologies of perovskite films.
As shown in Fig. 3(a), the XRD studies show that the main peak (001) of the PbI2 film prepared in DMF SA-TA is the largest, while that prepared in the acetone SA-TA, IPA SA-TA, and TA-TA processes are lower, and that prepared in DMSO SA-TA is the lowest. These findings are consistent with the SEM images in Fig. 2(a)–(e). This suggests that the DMSO SA-TA process results in the nearly complete conversion of PbI2 to perovskite. UV-vis absorption studies showed that absorptions of PbI2 films prepared in all the solvent annealing processes were slightly larger than from the absorption of the PbI2 film prepared in the TA-TA process (see Fig. 3(b)). In Fig. 3(c), we present photos of PbI2 and perovskite films processed in various processes, where it can be seen that the surfaces of the DMF SA-TA and DMSO SA-TA processed samples look like fog or clouds, suggesting stronger light scattering. This observation is also consistent with the higher baselines of the UV-vis absorptions for the DMF SA-TA and DMSO SA-TA processed samples in Fig. 3(b).
After conversion of PbI2 to perovskite, XRD studies were carried out and the results shown in Fig. 3(d), where it can be seen that the main peak (110) of the perovskite film prepared in DMSO SA-TA is the largest, while the main peaks (110) of the perovskite films prepared in TA-TA, DMF SA-TA, and IPA SA-TA are lower, and the main peak (110) of the perovskite film prepared in acetone SA-TA is the lowest. Regarding the crystal grain sizes, the DMSO SA-TA process was the best. In addition to crystal quality, another important issue is the remaining PbI2 after conversion to perovskite. As shown in Fig. 3(d), the main peak (001) at 12.4° of PbI2 indicates the remaining PbI2. The peak (001) of PbI2 for the sample prepared in DMSO SA-TA is much lower than the same peak for the samples prepared by the TA-TA, DMF SA-TA, acetone SA-TA, and IPA SA-TA processes. The UV-vis studies of perovskite in Fig. 3(e) show that the absorptions (0.327) at ∼770 nm of the perovskite films prepared in DMSO SA-TA and DMF SA-TA are much larger than those (0.268) of the perovskite films prepared in the TA-TA, acetone SA-TA, and IPA SA-TA processes. It is interesting to note that at wavelengths of <500 nm, the absorption of the DMSO SA-TA processed sample was much lower than that of the other samples. We believe that the remaining PbI2 helped the absorptions in the other samples. Because of the little remaining PbI2 in the DMSO SA-TA processed sample, the absorption at wavelengths of <500 nm should be much less. This is consistent with the XRD results presented in Fig. 3(d). The current (J)–voltage (V) curves of the samples processed in the different solvent annealing atmospheres are shown in Fig. 3(f). It can be seen that the DMSO SA-TA processed sample exhibits the best power conversion efficiency (PCE), which was 17.1%. Table 1 shows some parameters (PCE, FF, VOC, and JSC) of devices fabricated using TA-TA, DMF SA-TA, DMSO SA-TA, acetone SA-TA, and IPA SA-TA processes. It can be seen clearly that the FF of the DMSO SA-TA processed sample reached 78.1, which is much better than that of the other annealing processed samples. The VOC and JSC of the device treated by DMSO SA-TA process were 1.04 V and 20.68 mA cm−2, which are quite high compared with the other devices.
Employing different solvent annealing processes

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
TA-TA
1.04
18.12
74.3
14.0
DMF SA-TA
1.03
18.11
71.7
13.4
DMSO SA-TA
1.06
20.68
78.1
17.1
Acetone SA-TA
1.01
17.59
65.1
11.6
IPA SA-TA
1.02
21.54
68.3
15.0
It is very interesting to understand why the DMSO SA-TA process can produce solar cells with the highest PCE. A schematic solvent vapor annealing mechanism is shown in Fig. 4. In TA-TA, DMF SA-TA, acetone SA-TA, and IPA SA-TA, PbI2 cannot be completely converted to perovskite because PbI2 films are dense, which prevents the MAI solution from diffusion through the PbI2 films. Only the DMSO SA-TA process resulted in a porous PbI2 film, as shown in the SEM image in Fig. 2(c). We noted that Yi et al. reported solar cells based on bilayer porous PbI2 films obtained using PbI2 solutions of mixed DMF/DMSO without solvent annealing, albeit we did not see their paper until we finished most of our experiments. Also, our method is obviously different from theirs because we used DMSO solvent annealing. The porosity on the surface of our PbI2 samples was also more than that of their samples. Because of its porosity, the MAI solution can easily diffuse through the PbI2 film and react with PbI2 more completely. During DMSO vapor annealing, DMSO molecules break the crystal lattice of PbI2 films because of their strong binding ability with Pb2+. In the first step low temperature annealing of the PbI2 film in DMSO, DMSO molecules attach to the DMF solvent and are tightly bound to Pb2+ ions. The DMSO-PbI2 complexes exist until the beginning of the high temperature (100 °C) annealing process in the second step. As the DMSO is released during this heating step, pores gradually form in the PbI2 film. Consequently, MAI can penetrate into the PbI2 layer deeply through the porous structure. At the same time, these pores provide enough space for the perovskite grain growth. The grains increase freely in every directions. Finally, a dense perovskite film with large grain sizes and without residual PbI2 is obtained. Cross-sectional SEM analysis showed that the grain sizes of the perovskite based on the DMSO SA-TA process are larger and more like cuboid crystals, as shown in Fig. 4(b) and (c), which may greatly enhance charge extraction. The larger grains forming the capping layer may perfectly connect the HTM directly with the perovskite coated on m-TiO2, resulting in less boundaries in the transport path of the carriers. On the contrary, perovskite films based on the TA-TA annealing process exhibit smaller grains and more grain boundaries, as shown in Fig. 4(b).
To probe the charge transport properties of the solar cells, we performed electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), and the results are presented in Fig. 4(d). Two semicircles were obtained in the Nyquist plots. By fitting with a simple equivalent circuit model, we investigated the charge transport process in the photovoltaic devices. Based on the previous reports, R1 represents the contact resistance, which was obtained from the intercept in the x-axis of the high frequency curve. We observed that the values of R1 for these two devices were almost identical in the vicinity of 60 ohms, indicating that the DMSO SA-TA process had little effect on the contact resistance. The first semicircle in the high frequency range was mainly attributed to the transfer resistance (R2). The device fabricated from the DMSO SA-TA process exhibited a lower value of R2, probably due to a better film coverage and charge-transfer ability. This result is consistent with the above discussion about the larger grain size and less lead iodide residue increasing the carrier transport performance. The second arc was related to the recombination resistance (R3). The curve of this recombination resistance for the sample treated by the DMSO SA-TA process showed a clearly larger value than that for the sample treated by the TA-TA process. A larger recombination resistance indicates a lower recombination loss, which is also attributed to bigger grains and fewer boundaries. Generally, carriers can be more easily collected when the charges do not need go through too many boundaries, which always act as carrier-trapping centers. This analysis clearly suggests that the DMSO SA-TA process based solar cells should exhibit excellent efficiency.
We carried out extensive experiments with different m-TiO2 particle diameters, volume of annealing solvent, and the spin-coating speed to explore the optimum experimental parameters. The results are included in the ESI.
After optimization, we fabricated the devices with the structure as follows: fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD (HTM)/Au contact. Under 1 illumination intensity of 100 mW cm−2, the best performance device based on DMSO solvent annealing exhibited a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 22.86 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1057 mV, and an FF of 0.765, resulting in a PCE of 18.5% for reverse scan (see Fig. 5(a)). We observed that the hysteresis between the reverse and forward scan was negligible too. The effective improvement of the crystallinity and grain size of perovskite films were the reasons for the enhancement of the photoelectric performance. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra were measured, as shown in Fig. 5(b). It can be seen that the perovskite with DMSO solvent annealing shows a wide photo response from 360 nm to 760 nm, which reaches the highest value of 94%. The estimated JSC value was about 22 mA cm−2, which was in good agreement with the JSC values from the J–V measurement.
The parameters of the solar cells, including PCE, FF, JSC, and VOC, were quite reproducible. Fig. 5(c)–(f) exhibit the histograms of the PV parameters. Most PCEs were between 14% and 18%, with an average of ∼16%. The fill factor (FF) was mostly in the range of 76 and 78, while JSC was mostly in the range from 18 to 21 mA cm−2, and VOC in the range from 1.04 to 1.07 V. DMSO solvent vapor annealing indeed improved the performance of the perovskite solar cells reproducibly. To the best of our knowledge, for the two-step method, our PCE is the third highest reported after Seok et al. and Grätzel et al. It should be noted that in our method we did not use PbBr2 and FAI, and if these two components were used, the PCE would be higher than 18.5%.

Based on solvent annealing, PbI2 films were annealed in different solvent atmospheres, including DMF, DMSO, acetone and isopropanol (IPA). We found that solvent annealing of PbI2 in the DMF, acetone, and IPA atmospheres caused dense PbI2 films, which prevent PbI2 from complete conversion to CH3NH3PbI3. Unlike the above processes, employing the DMSO solvent annealing process for PbI2 resulted in porous PbI2, which facilitated the complete conversion of PbI2 to perovskite with larger crystal grains. Solar cells fabricated using the DMSO solvent annealing process exhibited the best efficiency of 18.5%, with a fill factor of 76.5%.


PbI2, CH3NH3I, titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate), and spiro-OMeTAD were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Titanium dioxide nanoparticles (20 nm particle size) and the solvents, 2-propanol (IPA, 99.5%) and DMF, DMSO, and acetone, were provided by Dyesol and Kelon, respectively.


FTO glass substrates were cleaned sequentially in alkaline detergent, acetone, ethanol, and DI water for 15 min each, followed by drying with a N2 flow. A compact layer of TiO2 was deposited via spray pyrolysis at 450 °C from a precursor solution of titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) in ethanol (volume ratio 1:39). The films were annealed at 500 °C for 20 min and then cooled down to room temperature. The mesoporous TiO2 scaffold was spin-coated at 5000 rpm for 30 s and then annealed at 500 °C for 30 min, in which the pristine paste was diluted in ethanol (weight ratio, 2:7). CH3NH3PbI3 was synthesized using the two-step spin-coating method, and the following experiments except for gold deposition were carried out in a glove box in nitrogen. PbI2 solutions in DMF (1 M) were first spin-coated onto the substrates at 3500 rpm and 5000 rpm for 3 s and 5 s, respectively. The films were annealed in nitrogen (called thermal annealing) or in different solvent atmospheres (DMF, IPA, DMSO, and acetone) at 45 °C for 5 min and then annealed at 100 °C in N2 (thermal annealing) or in different solvent atmospheres as above for 5 min. The volume of the solvent dropped on the surface of the hot plate was 60 μl. During the second spin-coating process, 200 μl solution of CH3NH3I in isopropanol (8 mg ml−1) was loaded on PbI2 films for 45 s, and then spun at 4000 rpm for 20 s and finally dried at 100 °C in N2 for 5 min. The substrates were subsequently covered with a 72.3 mg ml−1 solution of spiro-OMeTAD in 1 ml chlorobenzene with 28.8 μl of added 4-tert-butylpyridine, 17.5 μl of a stock solution of 520 mg ml−1 lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulphonyl)imide in acetonitrile, and 29 μl of 520 mg ml−1 tris (2-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)-4-tert-butylpyridine) cobalt(III) bis (trifluoromethylsulphonyl) imide in acetonitrile. This solution was spin-coated at 4000 rpm for 30 s. Finally, 80 nm of a gold film was deposited using thermal evaporation.


X-ray diffraction (XRD) diagrams were carried out using a Bede D1 system with Cu Kα radiation. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were obtained using field emission fitting SEM (FEI-Inspect F50, Holland). The UV-vis absorption spectra were measured by an ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) spectrophotometer (Schimadzu UV-3101 PC). Current–voltage measurements were carried out using Keithley 2400 under AM 1.5G illuminations (1000 W m−2) from a solar simulator (Newport Oriel Solar 3A Class AAA, 64023A). The AM 1.5G sun light (100 mW cm−2) was calibrated using a standard Si-solar cell (Oriel, VLSI standards). EIS measurements were measured with an electrochemical workstation (chi660d). The applied voltage perturbation had an AC amplitude of 35 mV with a frequency from 1 MHz to 100 Hz. The impedance parameters were simulated by fitting the impedance spectrum using Z-view software.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 61474016 and 61405026, 61371046, 61421002, 6157031208, 61471085, and National Higher-education Institution General Research and Development Fund (ZYGX2014J044), Projects of International Cooperation of Sichuan Province (no. 2014HH0041). This work was also partially supported by the University of Kentucky and Advanced Semiconductor Processing Technology, LLC.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6nr07076k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016