 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA10588B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6974-6980


Li
Chen
,

Xiaoyin
Xie
,

Zhihai
Liu
* and 

Eun-Cheol
Lee
*

Department of Chemical Technology, Jilin Institute of Chemical Technology, Jilin 132022, China

Department of Bio-Nano Technology, Gachon University, Gyeonggi 461-701, Republic of Korea. E-mail: zhliu@gachon.ac.kr

Gachon Bio-Nano Research Institute, Gyeonggi 461-701, Republic of Korea

Flexible Division, Zhangjiagang Kangde Xin Optronic Material Co. Ltd., Jiangsu 215634, China

Department of Nano-Physics, Gachon University, Gyeonggi 461-701, Republic of Korea. E-mail: eclee@gachon.ac.kr

Received
9th December 2016
, Accepted 14th March 2017
First published on 14th March 2017
Low temperature processed, metal-oxide free planar perovskite solar cells (PSCs) were fabricated on glass and polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrates using polyetherimide (PEI) modified poly(3,4-ethylenedioxylenethiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) as the cathode. The modification by PEI significantly changed the work function of PEDOT:PSS from −5.06 to −4.08 eV, yielding better electron transportation. The rigid cell on the glass substrate exhibited a high power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 12.42% without significant hysteresis and comparable to the PCE of PSCs with metal oxide cathodes. Moreover, the stability in air was higher by 32% than that of the devices with metal-oxide cathodes. The flexible device on the PET substrate exhibited a PCE of 9.73% and good bendability. Our results indicate that the flexibility of the PEDOT:PSS/PEI cathode is promising for use in large-scale roll-to-roll production of PSCs.

Organic–inorganic hybrid halide perovskite (CH3NH3PbX3, X = Cl, Br, or I)-based thin film photovoltaic devices have recently generated significant attention owing to their high power conversion efficiency (PCE) and ease of fabrication. As a new type of absorber, perovskites have advantageous characteristics, such as a high light absorption coefficient, high carrier mobility, direct band gap, and long carrier diffusion length. Efficiency of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has been rapidly improving during the past three years, with the highest reported PCE exceeding 20%, suggesting a significant commercial potential.

Depending on the locations of electrodes, PSCs are categorized into regular and inverted ones. The best PCE of regular PSCs is higher than that of inverted ones. In both types of devices, metal oxide materials were used as electrodes or carrier-transporting layers; in regular devices, fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) and TiO2 have been used as the cathode and electron transporting layer, respectively. Because metal oxides, such as FTO, TiO2, and ITO, are rigid and fragile, it is very difficult to fabricate flexible PSCs, either with regular or inverted structures. Furthermore, a high sintering temperature of 500 °C is required for forming TiO2 layers in PSCs, which can damage plastic flexible substrates. Thus, new methods of fabricating flexible and low processing temperature PSCs are required for large-scale roll-to-roll production of PSCs.
Various types of electrodes and electron transporting layers with suitable flexibility and low processing temperature have been considered for fabricating flexible PSCs. Recently, transparent graphene and silver nanowire-based electrodes have been suggested for regular PSCs. Inverted PSCs, featuring a transparent graphene electrode with the PCE of 15.5%, were developed by Yan and colleagues. Besides graphene and silver nanowires, highly conductive poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) is also a good candidate for replacing the metal oxide-based electrode, because of its high transparency and flexibility. PEDOT:PSS has already been used as the anode material in PSCs. High-conductivity PEDOT:PSS was used by Sun and coworkers as the anode replacing ITO in inverted PSCs, and PCEs of 10.6% and 8.1% were obtained for rigid and flexible devices, respectively. Hybrid PEDOT:PSS/Ag mesh anodes were used for fabricating rigid (regular) and flexible (inverted) PSCs with high PCEs of 9.6% and 14.0%, respectively. On the other hand, PEDOT:PSS is also a promising material for use as a cathode. In organic solar cells, PEDOT:PSS has already been used as the cathode material replacing ITO or metal. However, high-conductivity PEDOT:PSS as the cathode material in PSCs has not been studied yet. Since the difference between regular and inverted PSCs is in using different hole or electron transport materials and different electrodes, it is very important to determine the effect of using PEDOT:PSS as the cathode in PSCs.
In this work, we fabricated metal-oxide free regular PSCs featuring a high-conductivity PEDOT:PSS cathode; this cathode is transparent, flexible, and requires a relatively low processing temperature of 120–140 °C. As the surface modifiers, polyetherimide (PEI)-based materials were widely used to tune the cathode work function for better collection of electrons. Here, using PEI, the work function of the PEDOT:PSS electrode changed from −5.06 to −4.08 eV, owing to the formation of a surface dipole. The changed work function is more suitable for electron collection, owing to the improvement in alignment of energy levels. The simple structured PSCs on the glass/PEDOT:PSS/PEI substrate exhibited an average PCE of 12.42%, which was higher than that of PSCs that use PEDOT:PSS as the anode and comparable to that of regular devices using metal oxide electrodes (ITO or FTO). Moreover, the stability in air of our devices was over 30% higher than that of control devices with the FTO/TiO2 cathode. A flexible PSC on the polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate was also successfully fabricated. The device fabricated on the flexible PET substrate exhibited a PCE of 9.73% with good bendability, indicating that using PEDOT:PSS/PEI bears the promise to ensure roll-to-roll production of flexible PSCs.

The PEDOT:PSS films were fabricated by spin coating PEDOT:PSS (Clevios PH 1000, Germany) aqueous solution with 5 wt% ethylene glycol (Aladdin, China) on pre-cleaned glass or PET substrates. The PEDOT:PSS films were then annealed at 140 °C for 20 min to fully remove the remaining solvent. In the case of the PET substrate, the annealing temperature of 120 °C was used for protection, following previous studies.


The PSCs were fabricated on the pre-rinsed glass or PET substrates, as follows: glass or PET/PEDOT:PSS/PEI/perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3)/spiro-OMeTAD/Au. PEI (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) was prepared in 2-methoxyethanol (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) with a weight concentration of 0.4%. The PEI solution was then spin-coated on the PEDOT:PSS films at 5000 rpm for 1 min. Then, the samples were annealed at 100 °C for 10 min in air. The following depositions of the perovskite layer, the spiro-OMeTAD layer, and the Au electrode were the same as for the reference PSCs. All of the studied PSCs had an effective working area of 0.1 cm2, which was defined by a shadow mask. A detailed description of the fabrication of the reference FTO/TiO2 and ITO/PEDOT:PSS-based PSCs is provided in the ESI.


The conductivities of the films were measured using a four-point-probe system with a current source-meter (Keithley 2400, USA). The thicknesses of the films were measured using a surface profilometer (Dektak 150, Veeco, USA). The transmittance and absorbance spectra were analyzed using ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) spectroscopy (Perkin Elmer Lambda 750, USA). The topographic images of the layers were acquired in air, using an atomic force microscope (AFM, Veeco, USA) in the tapping mode. The work functions were measured using an ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscope (UPS). The He I (21.22 eV) radiation line from a discharge lamp was used, with an experimental resolution of 0.15 eV. The cross-sectional images were obtained using an SU8020 scanning electron microscope (SEM, Hitachi, Japan) operated at an acceleration voltage of 8 kV. The photoluminescence (PL) was measured using a spectrometer (FLS920, Edinburgh Instruments, UK). The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the devices were measured for an irradiation intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (AM1.5). The incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) was measured using a Solar Cell IPCE measurement system (Solar Cell Scan 100, Zolix, China).


The sheet resistance of the high-conductivity PH1000 PEDOT:PSS film on the glass substrate was approximately 80 ohm sq−1. The thickness of the PEDOT:PSS film with the conductivity of approximately 2500 S cm−1 was 55 nm, similar to previous findings. The thickness of the PEI film was approximately 10 nm (by AFM). As shown in Fig. 1(a), the PEDOT:PSS film exhibited a smooth surface with a root mean square (RMS) roughness of only 1.15 nm. After spin-coating by PEI, the PEDOT:PSS film was uniformly covered by the PEI material, yielding a homogenous morphology with a much rougher surface, with a new RMS roughness of 13.03 nm (Fig. 1(b)). Such a significantly increased RMS roughness might be due to island-like PEI on the PEDOT:PSS film. However, we cannot rule out the possibility that some fraction of PEDOS:PSS is washed away during spin coating of PEI. Due to the insulating properties of PEI, the conductivity of the PEI-coated PEDOT:PSS film was 2160 S cm−1, which was 13.6% lower than that of bare PEDOT:PSS (2500 S cm−1). Contact angle measurements were performed to investigate the film's wettability. Fig. 1(c) and (d) show that the PEI-coated PEDOT:PSS film exhibits a higher contact angle (25.6°) compared to the non-coated PEDOT:PSS film (10°). The results are also consistent with the AFM images of PEDOT:PSS spin-coated with PEI. This substantial change in the wettability of the PEI-coated PEDOT:PSS film is likely to reduce the film's hygroscopicity. Therefore, PEI coating prevents the water in the PEDOT:PSS film from reaching the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite film.

The UPS spectra in Fig. 2(a) show the calculated work functions of the PEDOT:PSS and PEDOT:PSS/PEI films. As can be seen, the work function of the bare PEDOT:PSS film is −5.06 eV, much lower than the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite (−3.75 eV). As a result, transportation of electrons into the PEDOT:PSS film is difficult, owing to the mis-matched energy levels. When a thin layer of PEI was spin-coated onto the surface of the PEDOT:PSS film, the work function of the PEDOT:PSS/PEI film dramatically changed to −4.08 eV, a value that is suitable for transportation of electrons from the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite film. The tuning function is owing to the formation of push-back surface dipoles after the introduction of PEI. The work functions of the PEDOT:PSS and PEDOT:PSS/PEI films were consistent with previously reported ones. In Fig. 2(b), the PEI-coated PEDOT:PSS film exhibits a similar transparency as the PEDOT:PSS film, with over 85% transmission for wavelengths in the 400–850 nm range, which ensures sufficient absorption of light by CH3NH3PbI3 owing to the transparent electrode. Because the PEDOT:PSS/PEI film is very thin (∼65 nm), the transmission is higher than that obtained using the FTO/TiO2 cathode. As shown in Fig. S1, the overall transmission of the FTO/TiO2 cathode is approximately 80%, owing to the use of thicker FTO and TiO2 films (thicker than 200 nm). The schematic in Fig. 2(c) shows that the metal oxide free PSCs use a simple structure of glass (or PET)/PEDOT:PSS/PEI/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au. Fig. 2(d) shows the diagram of energy levels for the device with electrons transported to the PEDOT:PSS/PEI layer and holes transported to the spiro-OMeTAD/Au side; the energy level alignment between the PEDOT:PSS film and CH3NH3PbI3 is improved by tuning the work function of the PEDOT:PSS film from −5.06 to −4.08 eV, using PEI.
To further demonstrate the electron transport properties, steady state PL and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) were measured for bare perovskite, FTO/TiO2/perovskite, and PEDOT:PSS/PEI/perovskite films. As shown in Fig. 3(a), a significant quenching effect was observed using FTO/TiO2 or PEDOT:PSS/PEI at the wavelength of 770 nm, owing to the transport and collection of electrons. From bi-exponential fits to the TRPL spectra in Fig. 3(b), the PL lifetimes of the FTO/TiO2/perovskite and PEDOT:PSS/PEI/perovskite devices were estimated to be approximately 128 and 167 ns, respectively, consistent with previously reported values. These results of the PL and TRPL measurements confirm the superior electron collection characteristics of the PEDOT:PSS/PEI device when compared with those of the FTO/TiO2 device.
The morphology of the perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) films was characterized by SEM, and the results are shown in Fig. 4(a). The perovskite film on the PEDOT:PSS/PEI substrate consisted of grains with an average size of approximately 300 nm, with the size of some grains exceeding 500 nm. The pinhole free perovskite film with a 100% surface coverage was obtained and confirmed by inspecting the SEM images (Fig. 4(a)). The UV-vis absorption spectrum in (Fig. 4(b)) suggests that the perovskite film exhibits strong absorption for wavelengths in the visible range (400 nm to 700 nm). The excellent absorption of the perovskite film further ensures the superior performance of the PSCs. The low and high magnification side views of the fabricated PSCs are shown in Fig. 4(c) and (d), and suggest homogeneously dense films for all layers, confirming good interfacial contact in PEDOT:PSS/PEI-based devices. From the high-magnification SEM image in Fig. 4(d), the thicknesses of the perovskite and spiro-OMeTAD films are approximately 480 and 300 nm, respectively.
We investigated the J–V characteristics and IPCE of the PSCs with the PEDOT:PSS/PEI cathode on the glass substrate, and the results are shown in Fig. 5(a) and (b). The cell had an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.95 V, a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 17.88 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 73.1%, yielding a significantly high PCE of 12.42%. On a reverse scan, the cell exhibited a similar PCE of 12.55%, with a Jsc and FF of 17.95 mA cm−2 and 73.6%, respectively (Table S1). Henceforth, the forward-scanning device parameters will be used for analysis. The PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS cathode exhibited no obvious hysteresis in their performance for scan rates under 10 mV ms−1. The Jsc calculated from the IPCE measurement (in Fig. 5(b)) was 17.78 mA cm−2, which was consistent with the J–V result. For reference, PSCs based on the FTO/TiO2 and ITO/PEDOT:PSS substrates were also fabricated, and the results are shown in Fig. S2 and S3. The median and standard deviations of photovoltaic parameters of 22 solar cells (11 samples with two cells) for each experimental group are listed in Table 1 and depicted in Fig. S4. From Fig. S5, the thicknesses of perovskite layers on FTO/TiO2 and ITO/PEDOT:PSS substrates were measured to be 450 and 490 nm, respectively. The regular PSCs based on the FTO/TiO2 substrate exhibited a Voc of 1.01 V, a Jsc of 19.42 mA cm−2, and an FF of 73.3%, yielding a PCE of 14.38%. On the other hand, the inverted PSCs fabricated on the ITO/PEDOT:PSS substrate exhibited a PCE of 13.45%, with a Jsc, Voc, and FF of 19.21 mA cm−2, 0.931 V, and 75.2%, respectively. The performance of our reference PSCs was similar or comparable to the ones reported previously. The PCE of the PEDOT:PSS/PEI-based PSCs (12.42%) was only 13.6% and 7.7% lower than those of the FTO/TiO2 and ITO/PEDOT:PSS-based devices, i.e., 14.38% and 13.45%, respectively. The lower Jsc of the PSCs with the PEDOT:PSS cathode (17.88 mA cm−2), compared to those of the FTO and ITO electrodes (19.42 mA cm−2 and 19.21 mA cm−2, respectively), might be because of their higher sheet resistance (85 ohm sq−1) compared to those of the FTO and ITO electrodes (<15 ohm sq−1). The relatively weak electron transport properties of the PEDOT:PSS/PEI device (based on the PL and TRPL analysis in Fig. 3(a) and (b)) might be another reason.
Device configuration

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
PEDOT:PSS/PEI-
0.95 ± 0.01
17.88 ± 0.23
73.1 ± 0.9
12.42 ± 0.14
FTO/TiO2-
1.01 ± 0.01
19.42 ± 0.37
73.3 ± 1.5
14.38 ± 0.39
ITO/PEDOT:PSS-
0.93 ± 0.01
19.21 ± 0.17
75.2 ± 0.8
13.45 ± 0.12
To investigate the stability of the fabricated devices, the PSCs were encapsulated using UV epoxy and glass slide covers. Then, the samples were stored and tested in air for 7 days under the humidity of 30–40%, similar to previously reported test procedures. As shown in Fig. 6, after 7 days of storage and testing, the PCEs of the FTO/TiO2 and ITO/PEDOT:PSS-based PSCs degraded by 22% and 27%, respectively. However, the PCE of the PEDOT:PSS/PEI-based PSCs decreased only by 15% (from 12.42% to 10.58%), which is 32% less than the degradation ratio of the reference FTO/TiO2-based device. The stability of our reference regular PSCs with FTO/TiO2 and inverted ones with ITO/PEDOT:PSS was comparable to previously reported values, and was assessed using a similar testing method. The strong degradation of the ITO/PEDOT:PSS-based inverted device was attributed to the acidic nature of PEDOT:PSS that gradually etched the ITO electrode and decomposed the perovskite layer. On the other hand, for the regular FTO/TiO2-based PSCs, owing to the high sensitivity of TiO2 to UV exposure, degradation occurred owing to the deep electron traps in the FTO/TiO2-based devices. In our case, the use of FTO (or ITO) and TiO2 was avoided; thus, there was no UV or etching induced performance degradation. Since PEI was inserted between the PEDOT:PSS film and the perovskite layer, perovskite decomposition by PEDOT:PSS was prevented. As discussed above, the PEI layer also protected the perovskite layer from water. As a result, the PSCs fabricated by our metal oxide free process were marked by improved stability.
In addition, based on the high-conductivity PEDOT:PSS electrode, flexible PSCs were also fabricated on the PET substrate with the same effective working area. As is shown in Fig. 7(a), our PET/PEDOT:PSS-based devices exhibited good flexibility. The PSCs had a PCE of 9.73%, with the Jsc, Voc, and FF of 17.15 mA cm−2, 0.95 V, and 59.7%, respectively. This PCE was higher than the values (8.1–9.2%) for certain flexible PSCs, but lower than the values (11.5–14.0%) for other flexible PSCs. However, we note that the absolute values of the PCE may not be a perfect criterion for comparing the performances of flexible electrodes because the PCE is also strongly affected by other factors. The PCE of our flexible device was 22% lower than that (12.42%) of the rigid device. This relative degradation in the PCE was slightly lower than the 24–25% degradation for previously reported flexible devices. The degradation was mainly owing to reductions in Jsc and FF, which may be caused by the rougher PET substrate and higher series resistance of the flexible devices. From Fig. S6(a) and (b), the RMS roughness of the PET substrate is 4.9 nm, which is much higher than that (1.1 nm) of the glass substrate. The 3-dimensional (3D) AFM images in Fig. S6(c) and (d) indicate that the rigid glass substrate has a smoother surface than the curved PET substrate. Furthermore, the contact angle measurement in Fig. S7 shows that the PET surface is more hydrophobic than glass. The AFM and contact angle results indicate that the formation of PEDOT:PSS layers is affected by the substrate, which might be a reason for the performance degradation when using the flexible substrate.Fig. 7(b) shows the results of the bendability test (the bending radius was approximately 3 mm), performed on one of our flexible PSCs with the original PCE of 9.73%. After 500 bends, the sample's PCE was 6.75%, corresponding to the degradation of up to 31%, similar to previous studies. The bending degradation may be attributed to the rigid and fragile properties of the perovskite material rather than to the properties of the PEDOT:PSS/PEI electrode. After bending, micro-sized flaws are likely formed in the perovskite layer and further destroy the Au electrode. The performance of flexible PSCs indicates the high future potential of roll-to-roll production.

In summary, low temperature processed, metal-oxide free PSCs were successfully fabricated using PEI-modified PEDOT:PSS as the cathode. After being modified by a thin PEI layer, the work function of PEDOT:PSS dramatically changed from −5.06 eV to −4.08 eV, which enabled well-aligned energy levels in PSCs with the PEDOT:PSS cathode. As a result, the PSCs on the PEDOT:PSS/PEI substrate exhibited a significantly high PCE of 12.42% without obvious hysteresis. The performance of our devices is comparable to that of metal oxide-based PSCs, while the stability is higher. The device fabricated on the flexible PET substrate exhibited a slightly lower PCE of 9.73% with good bendability. These results demonstrate that the use of PEI-modified PEDOT:PSS as the cathode has high potential for commercialization of organic–inorganic hybrid halide PSCs.


This work was supported by the Department of Education of Jilin Province (Funding No. 2015-434), and Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning (Grant No. 2016R1A2B2015389).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental, additional figures and table. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta10588b
‡ Li Chen and Xiaoyin Xie contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017