 DOI: 10.1039/C3TA13750C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 15348-15354


Chao
Xie
,

Xiujuan
Zhang
*,

Kaiqun
Ruan
,

Zhibin
Shao
,

Sunny Singh
Dhaliwal
,

Liu
Wang
,

Qing
Zhang
,

Xiwei
Zhang
 and 

Jiansheng
Jie
*

Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices, Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123, P. R. China. E-mail: jsjie@suda.edu.cn; xjzhang@suda.edu.cn

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, Anhui 230009, P. R. China

University of Waterloo, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1, Canada

Received
18th September 2013
, Accepted 15th October 2013
First published on 16th October 2013
Graphene/Si hole array (SiHA) Schottky junctions show great promise as high-efficiency, cost-effective solar cells. However, their applications are still limited by the severe surface recombination of the nano-hole SiHA and inferior device stability arising from volatile oxidant doping. Here, we demonstrate the construction of high-efficiency graphene/SiHA devices with enhanced device performance and stability. The micro-hole SiHA fabricated by photolithography and reaction ion etching (RIE) possesses a smooth surface, thus ensuring a low surface recombination velocity. Also, the light harvesting of the micro-hole SiHA could be readily tuned by adjusting the hole depth. Introduction of the micro-hole SiHA, along with the use of AuCl3 for graphene doping, gives rise to a high power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 10.40% for the graphene/SiHA devices. Additionally, the device stability is substantially improved and shows a relatively low degradation ratio after storing in air for 3 months. It is expected that the graphene/SiHA devices will have important applications in new-generation Si solar cells.

Silicon (Si) is the most popular material in commercial solar cell applications because of its high carrier mobility, abundant material resources, non-toxicity, long-term stability, and well-established manufacturing techniques. Despite its advantages and continuing advances, commercial Si based solar cells have not yet been extensively applied due to their high cost and complex fabrication processes. Therefore, there is growing interest in developing Si-based photovoltaic devices with lower cost and simpler processing techniques. Optically active micro/nano-structure arrays, such as Si nanowire array (SiNWA), Si pillar array (SiPA), Si hole array (SiHA), Si nanocone array (SiNCA),etc. have been demonstrated to be effective as light trapping layers for enhancing light harvesting. In comparison with the conventional bulk crystalline Si solar cells, the use of Si micro/nano-arrays offers an alternative way to fabricate the solar cells with less Si materials. Furthermore, these array structures can increase the interfacial area, facilitate fast charge transport, and enhance the charge collection by shortening the travel paths of minority carriers. Consequently, they also give rise to a high photovoltaic efficiency.

Inspired by the rapid progress in two-dimensional (2D) atomic layered materials, recently, a new type of Schottky junction solar cell that combines graphene films and crystalline Si has been developed. Conventional metal/Si Schottky devices usually suffer from low light transparency from the metallic electrode and interface metal diffusion. As a result, the devices show poor photovoltaic performance and short device lifetime as well. In contrast to the metallic electrodes, graphene possesses superior properties in terms of high optical transmittance, good mechanical flexibility, low sheet resistance, and outstanding chemical/physical stability with tunable work function. More importantly, the major process for the fabrication of graphene/Si solar cells can be accomplished via a solution transfer process at room temperature in air. Therefore, graphene/Si Schottky junction solar cells have emerged as promising candidates for high-performance and cost-effective photovoltaic applications. The latest progress also demonstrates a high power conversion efficiency (PCE) of over 10% for the graphene/Si Schottky junction solar cells, which is fast approaching the value of crystalline Si solar cells. Nevertheless, there are still some drawbacks in current graphene/Si solar cell research that limits their wide applications: (i) pristine graphene films in the devices were usually doped with volatile oxidants like HNO3 to enhance the conductivity. This results in poor device stability in air. Therefore a more persistent doping method is desirable to further improve the device stability. (ii) An additional organic electron blocking layer or antireflection layer was requisite in previous reports for achieving a high device efficiency. This will inevitably increase the device complexity and cause the degradation of the device stability/reproducibility. (iii) It is proven that the use of an electrochemically etched SiHA could offer higher effective junction area, while retaining the light trapping capability in graphene/Si devices as compared to the conventional SiNWA or SiPA. However, the electrochemically etched SiHA usually exhibits rough sidewalls, probably originating from an anisotropic etching in the solution. The existence of dense surface states will result in a high carrier recombination at the surface. Therefore an improved method for the fabrication of the SiHA with controllable surface roughness is much desired.
Herein, we present the construction of high-efficiency graphene/SiHA Schottky junction solar cells with exceeding device stability. A micro-hole SiHA was fabricated via a more sophisticated route in a reactive ion etching (RIE) system, offering rational control to the SiHA surface as well as the hole structures. By tuning the light absorption of the SiHA, along with the use of AuCl3 doping, an optimum efficiency of 10.40% was achieved for the graphene/SiHA solar cells in the case of without introduction of any electron blocking or antireflection layer. More importantly, as a result of persistent AuCl3 doping, the devices exhibited outstanding stability: storing in air for 3 months only led to a moderate degradation of device performance. Our results demonstrated the great potential of the graphene/SiHA solar cells for future low-cost, stable, and highly efficient photovoltaic applications.

The micro-hole SiHA in this study was fabricated by combining conventional photolithography and RIE techniques. The step-wise process is illustrated in Fig. 1. At first, UV photolithography was conducted on a Si wafer by using a positive photoresist (AR-P 5350) in a mask aligner (SUSS-MicroTec, MJB4). The rotation rate for the spin-coating of the photoresist was 3500 rpm, leading to a photoresist thickness of ∼1.2 μm. After UV exposure and photoresist development, holes with a diameter of 6 μm and a period of 8 μm were generated on the photoresist film. Afterwards, the Si substrate was loaded into an Oxford (Plasmalab 80 Plus) RIE system and the Si etching was performed at a radio-frequency power of 120 W. A mixed gas of SF6 (36 sccm) and O2 (6 sccm) was used as the reaction gas. The hole depth was adjusted by controlling the etching duration, and an etching duration of 3, 5, 8, and 10 min corresponded to a hole depth of 3.8, 6.4, 10.2, and 12.8 μm, respectively. Fig. 2 depicts the typical scanning electron microscope (SEM, FEI/Quanta 200 FEG) images of the as-prepared SiHA with a hole depth of ∼12.8 μm. Significantly, the as-prepared SiHA shows a smooth hole surface in contrast to the rough sidewalls of the SiHA fabricated by the electrochemical etching method (ESI, Fig. S1). As we will discuss later, this feature is important for reducing the surface charge recombination and consequently improving the device efficiency.

To construct the graphene/SiHA solar cells, n-type Si substrates (orientation 〈100〉, resistivity 1–10 Ω cm) with 300 nm thick SiO2 insulating layers were first protected by adhesive tapes with opening windows of 3 × 3 mm2, which defined the effective work areas of the devices. Then the SiO2 layers within the window areas were removed by a buffered oxide etch (BOE) solution. Afterwards, the SiHA was patterned within the window areas through the above-mentioned RIE etching method. In order to suppress the surface charge recombination, the SiHA was further functionalized with monolayer methyl groups via a two-step chlorination/alkylation method according to previous reports. Ti/Au (10 nm/50 nm) electrodes, which served as electrical contacts for graphene films, were deposited on the SiO2 layers near the exposed window areas by using electron beam evaporation. The cleaned PMMA-supported monolayer graphene films, which were prepared at 1000 °C on Cu foil substrates by using a mixed gas of CH4 (40 sccm) and H2 (20 sccm) via a chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method, were then transferred onto the substrates and dried at 100 °C for 10 min, followed by removing the PMMA layers using acetone. Few-layer graphene (FLG) films were obtained by repeating the transfer process. The layer number of graphene films was optimized to be 4 layers considering the tradeoff between optical transmittance and electrical conductivity. Eventually, indium–gallium (In–Ga) alloy was pasted on the rear side of the Si substrates to serve as an ohmic contact to n-Si. To reduce the sheet resistance and enhance the work function of graphene films as well, the films were doped by directly spin-coating 10 mM AuCl3 solution (in nitromethane) on the top surface. It has been reported that the Au ions could be reduced to Au atoms by accepting electrons from graphene films. During the reduction reaction, the hole concentration in graphene films will be increased, which is normally known as p-type doping, leading to reduced sheet resistance and enhanced work function of graphene. In this work, the sheet resistance of 4-layer graphene films before doping was ∼300 Ω □−1, while it was further reduced to ∼80 Ω □−1 after doping. The 4-layer FLG films after doping were characterized by Raman spectroscopy (Jobin Yvon/Labram HR800) with a 633 nm laser at a beam size of 2 μm and their transmittances were measured using a spectrometer (Perkin-Elmer/Lambda 750) equipped with an integrating sphere. The photovoltaic characteristics of the solar cells were evaluated by using a Keithley 2612 source meter in an ambient environment. A Newport 91160 solar simulator equipped with a 300 W xenon lamp and an air mass (AM) 1.5 filter was used to generate simulated AM 1.5 G solar irradiation (100 mW cm−2).

Raman spectrum tests on AuCl3 doped 4-layer FLG reveal an obvious G-band shift from ∼1576.9 cm−1 before doping to ∼1591.1 cm−1 after doping due to the phonon stiffening effect by charge extraction (ESI, Fig. S2(a)). This result is consistent with previous investigation and associates with the strong p-type doping effect of AuCl3 on graphene. Meanwhile, the 2D-band to G-band ratio, I2D:IG, changes slightly from 2.11 before doping to 1.95 after doping, indicating that the AuCl3 does not cause the degradation of graphene quality. Fig. S2(b) in the ESI shows the transmittance of the 4-layer FLG, from which one can see that the transmittance slightly decreases from 86.6% to 84.2% at 550 nm after AuCl3 doping, which could be ascribed to the enhanced light scattering of Au nanoparticles formed on the graphene surface.


Fig. 3(a) displays the schematic illustration of the graphene/SiHA Schottky junction solar cell. Obviously, in comparison with the SiNWA or SiPA, the SiHA with a flat top surface can provide better support to the graphene film and consequently a higher effective Schottky junction area. The hole structure also warrants a strong light harvest capability for the SiHA, which is superior to the planar Si-based devices.Fig. 3(c) depicts representative current versus voltage (I–V) curves of the graphene/SiHA Schottky junction in the dark, and the corresponding lnJ–V (J is the current density across the graphene/SiHA interface) curves are plotted in Fig. 3(d). It is seen that the device exhibits excellent rectifying behavior with rectification ratio as high as ∼1 × 104 within ± 0.8 V and a low turn-on voltage of ∼0.4 V by virtue of the formation of the Schottky junction. Note that the forward current is remarkably improved after doping the graphene film with AuCl3, leading to an increased rectification ratio of over 2 × 104. The decrease of graphene sheet resistance upon doping is responsible for this result. Furthermore, based on the lnI–V curves in the dark (inset in Fig. 3(d)), the diode ideality factor (n) is estimated to be 1.57 and 1.34 before and after graphene doping, respectively. The lower n reveals a lower interface recombination in graphene/SiHA devices after doping. To provide more insights into the effect of AuCl3 doping on the characteristics of the Schottky junction, we further estimated the barrier height of the graphene/SiHA Schottky junction. The diode characteristics of the Schottky junction could be described by thermionic emission theory of majority carriers over a zero bias barrier, ΦBH, from the SiHA to graphene:
(1)
where
e is the elementary charge, kB is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature. The saturation current density JS(T) is defined by,

(2)
where
A* is the effective Richardson constant, which is 252 A cm−2 K−2 for n-Si.JPristineS = 6.82 × 10−5 mA cm−2 and JDopedS = 7.46 × 10−6 mA cm−2 before and after AuCl3 doping, respectively, could be deduced from the lnJ–V plots in Fig. 3(d). Therefore, based on eqn (2), the barrier height of the graphene/SiHA Schottky junction can be estimated to be 840.7 meV and 898.9 meV before and after doping, respectively. The increase in the barrier height after graphene doping could be attributed to the doping-induced shift in the graphene work function, which enlarges the built-in electric field and is beneficial to a higher open circuit voltage (VOC) in the solar cell.


Fig. 3(e) depicts the J–V characteristics of the graphene/SiHA Schottky junction device with a Si hole depth of 12.8 μm under AM 1.5 G illumination. Notably, the graphene/SiHA device exhibits a pronounced photovoltaic behavior, with a VOC of 0.46 V, a short circuit current density (JSC) of 27.79 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.472, yielding a PCE of 6.02% before AuCl3 doping. Upon AuCl3 doping, the device shows a substantial improvement in photovoltaic performance; the VOC, JSC, and FF are further increased to 0.52 V, 31.56 mA cm−2, and 0.634, respectively, giving rise to a much-enhanced PCE of 10.40%. The VOC has increased by ∼60 mV, which is mainly attributed to the increased graphene work function and decreased interface recombination after AuCl3 doping. This result is in good agreement with the 58.2 meV increase in Schottky barrier height deduced from Fig. 3(d). On the other hand, the decrease of graphene sheet resistance, which can result in a smaller series resistance (RS) in circuit, takes the responsibility of the increase in JSC. RS and parallel resistance (RP) of a solar cell can be approximately estimated as the inverse of the slopes of the J–V curve at VOC and JSC, respectively. From Fig. 3(e), it is revealed that the RS has dropped from 5.40 Ω cm2 to 2.54 Ω cm2 after doping, whereas the RP has risen from 3050 Ω cm2 to 3112 Ω cm2. The increased RP further confirmed the decrease in interface recombination after AuCl3 doping, as mentioned above. The smaller RS and larger RP are favorable to achieve a higher FF.Fig. 3(f) shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the graphene/SiHA solar cell, revealing a large EQE value of above 70% over a wide range from 450 to 850 nm after doping. And the highest EQE of 80% is achieved at 680 nm. In contrast, the device before AuCl3 doping shows a much lower EQE of 70% at 680 nm. This result is consistent with the change of JSC. The large EQE value also proves that the carrier transfer and collection are more efficient in the device after doping. It is noteworthy that the power conversion efficiency of the present 4-layer FLG/SiHA solar cell is much larger than our previous reports on HNO3 doped 4-layer FLG/planar Si devices (4.24%) and 4-layer FLG/SiHA devices (7.65%) in the absence of an organic electron blocking layer. For the SiHA-based devices, considering the closed doping effect of HNO3 with AuCl3, the remarkable enhancement of the efficiency in the present work can be mainly attributed to the improvement in hole morphologies and structures: the top surface as well as the sidewalls of the micro-hole SiHA fabricated by photolithography and dry etching methods are much smoother than those of the nano-hole SiHA fabricated via an electrochemical etching method. Therefore the surface recombination arising from the surface roughness is effectively suppressed. On the other hand, because of the 2D plane structure of the graphene film, only the top surface of the SiHA can contact directly with graphene and contribute to the effective Schottky junction area. In this work, the hole density of the micro-hole SiHA is not as high as that for the nano-hole SiHA in previous work. This also leads to an increase of the effective Schottky junction area. Meanwhile, the light absorption capability of the micro-hole SiHA is comparable to that of the nano-hole SiHA through tuning the hole depth (discussed below). For these reasons, the micro-hole SiHA based devices show improved photovoltaic performance. On the other hand, although the effective Schottky junction area is larger in the graphene/planar Si device, the enhanced light absorption of the micro-hole SiHA can give rise to a much promoted device performance.
Efficient light harvesting is essential to a high-performance photovoltaic device. It is known that the light absorption of the micro/nano-structured arrays mainly depends on the array dimensions such as NW/hole height, NW/hole diameter, and NW/hole density. So, in order to assess the impact of light absorption capability of the SiHA on device performance, the micro-hole SiHAs with various hole depths of 3.8, 6.4, 10.2, and 12.8 μm were investigated in this study. For simplifying the analysis, we only tuned the hole depth, while keeping the hole diameter and density unchanged, so that the effective Schottky junction areas would be the same for all the devices with different hole depths. Therefore, the change of device performance can be solely attributed to the variation of SiHA light absorption. Fig. 4(a) depicts the photovoltaic characteristics of the graphene/SiHA solar cells with various hole depths. One can see that the device performance enhances with increasing hole depth; the JSC increases dramatically from 20.19 mA cm−2 for the device with a 3.8 μm thick SiHA to 31.56 mA cm−2 for the device with a 12.8 μm thick SiHA, while the change in VOC and FF is not so obvious (Table 1). The EQE curves in Fig. 4(b) also reveal the same trend with the JSC, that is, the EQE values rise with increasing hole depth. The EQE for the 12.8 μm thick SiHA is 80% at 680 nm, while it decreases to 73%, 67%, and 61% for 10.2, 6.4, 3.8 μm thick SiHAs, respectively. The promotion of the JSC and EQEs can be ascribed to the enhanced optical absorption of the SiHA with deeper holes. Fig. 5 depicts the light absorption spectra of the SiHA with various hole depths, along with polished planar Si for comparison. The 12.8 μm thick SiHA exhibits the most efficient optical absorption of above 80% over the visible and near-infrared (NIR) wavelength, in contrast to the lower value of ∼60% for the 3.8 μm thick SiHA and ∼50% for planar Si. In this work, the deepest hole for the micro-hole SiHA is 12.8 μm thick due to the limitation of the RIE technique (low etching rate and isotropic etching for Si), therefore we did not know the performance of devices with deeper holes. However, according to our previous studies on nano-hole SiHAs and SiNWAs, it is believed that there must be an optimum depth for the micro-hole SiHA based devices; deeper holes would be helpful for further efficiency promotion. Nevertheless, if the hole depth is over the optimum value, the device performance will deteriorate due to the enhanced surface recombination. Considering the large light absorption of the 12.8 μm thick micro-hole SiHA, it is expected that the optimum hole depth should be closed to or just a little bit higher than 12.8 μm.
Hole depth

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
3.8 μm (doped)
0.50
20.19
0.624
6.30
6.4 μm (doped)
0.49
24.32
0.662
7.89
10.2 μm (doped)
0.51
27.96
0.646
9.21
12.8 μm (doped)
0.52
31.56
0.634
10.40
12.8 μm (doped, after 1 week)
0.50
30.38
0.635
9.65
12.8 μm (doped, after 1 month)
0.48
29.70
0.588
8.38
12.8 μm (doped, after 3 months)
0.46
28.87
0.559
7.42
For practical applications, the air stability of a solar cell is critical. In previous investigations, volatile oxidants such as HNO3 and SOCl2 were widely used as the dopants for improving the p-type conductivity of graphene films. Although the doping effect of the volatile oxidants is very pronounced, it is not persistent and the efficiencies of the graphene/Si solar cells decline steeply, even only a few minutes, after doping. Therefore, a more persistent doping method is much demanded for promoting the air stability of graphene/Si solar cells. In contrast to the volatile oxidants, AuCl3 doping was demonstrated to be much more stable because of its nonvolatile property and the hygroscopic nature of Cl− ions. In this study, we further investigate the air stability of the graphene/SiHA solar cell by storing it in air without any encapsulation and then detecting its device performance over time, as shown in Fig. 6. The photovoltaic performance of the device slightly decreased to 9.65%, 92.8% of the original value after 1 week, while a larger decrease is observed after 3 months as a result of the reduced VOC, JSC, and FF (Table 1). The resulting PCE of the solar cell after 3 months is 7.42%, about 71% of the original value. The reduced sheet conductance and work function of graphene are the result of the subdued AuCl3 doping effect over time, which is the main reason for the device performance decay. Although the device performance decreases somewhat over time, it is still much more stable than previous studies on volatile oxidant doped graphene/Si solar cells, as shown in Table 2, revealing the great potential of AuCl3 doped graphene/SiHA devices for long-term, air stable solar cell applications. Besides 10 mM AuCl3, AuCl3 with higher concentrations (15 mM and 20 mM) were also utilized to achieve doping of graphene in graphene/SiHA solar cells. Nevertheless, their device efficiencies (∼9%) were lower than that obtained with 10 mM AuCl3. This result could be attributed to the enhanced light scattering by Au nanoparticles at high concentration AuCl3 doping.
Device structure
Dopant
Original
After ∼1 week
Degradation ratio
Graphene/SiHA solar cell (this work)
AuCl3
10.40%
9.65%
7.2%
Graphene/planar Si solar cell (ref. 16)
HNO3
5.47%
2.96%
45.9%
Graphene/planar Si solar cell (ref. 16)
SOCl2
5.95%
3.29%
44.7%
Graphene/planar Si solar cell (ref. 16)
H2O2
5.12%
2.37%
52.9%
Graphene/planar Si solar cell (ref. 16)
HCl
4.93%
3.19%
35.3%
Graphene/SiNWA solar cell (ref. 17)
HNO3
6.85%
4.46%
34.9%
Graphene/SiHA solar cell (ref. 17)
HNO3
7.65%
2.57%
66.4%

In summary, we demonstrated the construction of high-efficiency, air stable graphene/SiHA Schottky junction solar cells. A photolithography-based dry etching method was utilized to fabricate the micro-hole SiHA with smooth top and side surfaces. So, the surface recombination, which is a main issue for the nano-hole SiHA, could be effectively suppressed. By increasing the hole depth, the light harvest capability of the SiHA was significantly improved, giving rise to an optimum PCE of 10.40% for the device with a 12.8 μm thick SiHA. Moreover, a more persistent doping method, i.e., AuCl3 doping, was adopted in this work to replace the conventional volatile oxidant doping method. As a result, the device exhibited a higher durability and can retain the high performance even after storing in air for 3 months. Considering the simple device architecture and solution processed capability, it is believed that using the graphene/SiHA is a viable technique for high-efficiency, low-cost silicon solar cells.


This work was supported by the National Basic Research Program of China (2012CB932400, 2013CB933500), the Major Research Plan of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 91233110, 91027021), and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (nos 51172151, 51173124).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: A typical cross-sectional view SEM image of the electrochemical-etched SiHA; transmittance and Raman spectra of 4-layer FLG before and after AuCl3 doping. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta13750c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013