 DOI: 10.1039/C4CP00298A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 6033-6040


Yi-Fang
Chiang
,

Jun-Yuan
Jeng
,

Mu-Huan
Lee
,

Shin-Rung
Peng
,

Peter
Chen
*,

Tzung-Fang
Guo
*,

Ten-Chin
Wen
,

Yao-Jane
Hsu
 and 

Ching-Ming
Hsu


Department of Photonics, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan. E-mail: petercyc@mail.ncku.edu.tw; guotf@mail.ncku.edu.tw

Advanced Optoelectronic Technology Center (AOTC), National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan

Research Center for Energy Technology and Strategy (RCETS), National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan

Department of Chemical Engineering, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan

National Synchrotron Radiation Research Center, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan

Department of Electro-Optical Engineering, Southern Taiwan University, Tainan 701, Taiwan

Received
8th November 2013
, Accepted 30th January 2014
First published on 31st January 2014
A low temperature (<100 °C), flexible solar cell based on an organic–inorganic hybrid CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite–fullerene planar heterojunction (PHJ) is successfully demonstrated. In this manuscript, we study the effects of energy level offset between a solar absorber (organic–inorganic hybrid CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite) and the selective contact materials on the photovoltaic behaviors of the planar organometallic perovskite–fullerene heterojunction solar cells. We find that the difference between the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite and the Fermi level of indium-tin-oxide (ITO) dominates the voltage output of the device. ITO films on glass or on the polyethylene terephthalate (PET) flexible substrate with different work functions are investigated to illustrate this phenomenon. The higher work function of the PET/ITO substrate decreases the energy loss of hole transfer from the HOMO of perovskite to ITO and minimizes the energy redundancy of the photovoltage output. The devices using the high work function ITO substrate as contact material show significant open-circuit voltage enhancement (920 mV), with the power conversion efficiency of 4.54%, and these types of extra-thin planar bilayer heterojunction solar cells have the potential advantages of low-cost and lightweight.

Cost-affordable and sustainable photovoltaic materials are vital for the future contribution of renewable solar energy supplies to satisfy global energy demand. Low-cost devices such as dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs), organic bulk heterojunction solar cells (OPVs) and other solution process compatible devices are considered as potential candidates for the future emerging photovoltaic technologies. It is important to develop new photovoltaic devices that fulfill the requirements of containing thin-film absorbers, nontoxic and earth-abundant materials, a low-energy manufacturing process with affordable cost for effective sustainability. Organic–inorganic hybrid organometal halide perovskites, which found applications in thin film field-effect transistors, have recently drawn massive attention because of their photovoltaic applications and excellent performances as light absorbers and carrier transporters. Photovoltaic devices based on these materials delivering power conversion efficiency (PCE) between 12 and 15% have been reported recently. With an optical band gap of around 1.5 eV, organometal halide perovskites are intrinsically optimal solar absorbers for high efficiency according to the Shockley–Queisser limits. Moreover, their high extinction coefficient over the visible spectrum and low exciton binding energy make them superior light harvesters for photovoltaic applications within the nano-scale. It was estimated that an optimized efficiency of 20% is expectable for perovskite based solid-state solar cells in a perspective report. One merit of the perovskite solar cell is the high output voltage close to the optical band gap which reduced the energy redundancy that exists in most excitonic solar cells like OPVs or DSCs. Since perovskite shows ambipolar conduction and works as either an electron or a hole transporter, it allows versatile design of device architectures. For example, Bi et al. used perovskite as an electron transporter to form a junction in contact with various hole transport materials (HTMs). Lee et al. deposited perovskite on the surface of meso-structured Al2O3 layers where Al2O3 acts as a non-injecting electrode scaffold and perovskite as electron transport medium, respectively. Kim et al. compared the perovskite cells composed of TiO2 and ZrO2 as hosting electrodes and showed that charge accumulation in perovskite is mainly responsible for the photovoltaic function. A two-step deposition technique for preparing perovskite thin films showed that the non-injecting ZrO2 mesoscopic host with a higher photovoltage and a longer electron lifetime indicates the intrinsic transport characteristics of the perovskite material itself. Recently, a highly efficient thin film flat junction without mesoscopic nanostructure has been reported, implying a relatively long electron diffusion in perovskite. In these cases, the absorber/HTM contact acts as a selective interface to facilitate hole injection while the perovskite layer remained as an electron-transporting medium. In contrast, Etgar et al. observed that the perovskite can play the role of a light harvester and a hole conductor by applying it in contact with an electron acceptor (TiO2) to realize a charge separation junction. Our previous results also demonstrated that the perovskite/fullerene interface has a similar function to dissociate excitons as the planar donor–acceptor junction and the perovskite served as a light absorber and a hole transporting phase. Another category of device architecture is a structure analogous to DSCs in which the perovskite layer behaved as a light absorbing pigment. A thin layer of the light harvester is sandwiched between electron and hole transporters where both electron and hole transfer can take place at the selective contacts. Charge separation characteristics of perovskite and various kinds of hole transport materials have been scrutinized lately and showed extremely high yield for many HTMs. A critical issue remaining to be tackled for the perovskite absorber is the balance between light absorption and charge collection. From the optical properties, it seems that a very thin layer within a few hundred nanometers is capable of saturating light harvesting. Providing the charge diffusion length is longer than this feature size, the mesoporous electrode that is intended to increase optical cross section may not be required. Various device structures used in an attempt to reduce the electrode surface area, such as nanosheets, nanorods, nanowires, nanofibers, have been realized and delivered promising photovoltaic conversion efficiency. Moreover, high performance PHJ perovskite solar cells have been realized using either the solution process or the vapor deposition method. These results suggested that the thin film PHJ is a suitable device configuration for organic–inorganic perovskite based materials. Some of the most recent solar cells using organometal halide perovskites are summarized in Table 1 with the device architectures, the role of perovskite, and their photovoltaic performances outlined. It is worth noting that the ratio of voltage output versus the optical band gap for efficient perovskite devices is close to 65–69%, which is fairly high in the emerging photovoltaic devices.

Device structure
Function of perovskite

V
OC (mV), JSC (mA cm−2), efficiency (%)

V
OC/Eg (%)
Note: nc: nanocrystalline, A: absorber, ETM: electron transport material, HTM: hole transport material, TF: thin film, sht: sheet.a Current work.
TiO2 (nc)/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
A+ETM
888, 17.6, 9.7
59.2
TiO2 (nc)/CH3NH3PbI3/PTAA/Au
A+ETM
997, 16.5, 12.0
64.4
Al2O3 (nc)/CH3NH3PbI2Cl/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
A+ETM
980, 17.8, 10.9
63.2
TiO2 (nc)/CH3NH3PbI2Cl/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
A+ETM
800, 17.8, 7.8
51.6
TiO2 (TF)/CH3NH3PbI2Cl/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
A+ETM
640, 7.13, 1.8
41.3
TiO2 (nc)/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
A+ETM
993, 20.0, 15.0
64.4
TiO2 (TF)/CH3NH3PbI2Cl/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
A+ETM
1070, 21.5, 15.4
69.0
ITO/PEDOT/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Al
A+HTM
600, 10.32, 3.9
38.7
TiO2 (sht)/CH3NH3PbI3/Au
A+HTM
630, 16.1, 5.5
40.6
ITO/PEDOT/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Al
A+HTM
920, 7.93, 4.54
61.3
Recently, we have proposed the design of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite–fullerene planar-heterojunction hybrid solar cells that used an extremely thin absorber with a thickness of 30 nm. By judicious selection of electron acceptor materials, we found that the charge separation between CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite and fullerene derivatives is very efficient and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level of the acceptor layer dominates the photovoltage output. We observed that the higher LUMO level increases the open-circuit voltage (VOC) and the efficiency of the device, which is a result of decreased charge separation energy cost. Although the efficiency is not as high as those devices made of mesoporous electrodes (which mainly due to the lower optical cross section) or thicker thin film devices, the facile, simple and low-temperature processes are advantageous for cost viable solar cells using plastic substrates. Our interesting results avoid using a high temperature procedure, which is inevitable for devices using mesoscopic oxide as host electrode or metal oxide underlayer as selective blocking layer in cell structure. In this report, we further improve the photovoltaic performances through judicious selection of energy level matching on contact materials. Using the substrate with lower energy loss between the light absorber and contact material, we remarkably increased the VOC from 0.50 to 0.92 V, with PCE enhanced to 4.54%.

The precursor solution of methyl ammonium iodide (CH3NH3I) and lead iodide (PbI2) was prepared as reported elsewhere.


The two indium-tin-oxide (ITO) substrates are glass/ITO from RITEK Corp (15 Ω □−1, denoted as the ITO-1) and the flexible polyethylene terephthalate (PET)/ITO from Optical Filters Ltd (15 Ω □−1, denoted as the ITO-2). Another nickel-doped ITO (Ni-ITO) substrate was prepared by sputtering a 15 nm thin film from a Ni doped-ITO target onto the ITO-1 substrate. ITO structures were patterned, cleaned, and spin coated with conductive polymers, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) (Baytron P, Bayer AG, Germany). The ethylammonium lead iodide (CH3NH3PbI3) extra-thin perovskite layer is deposited on ITO/PEDOT:PSS surfaces by spin coating. The glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS substrates were pre-heated at 60 °C for 5 min then spin-casting CH3NH3PbI3 in γ-butyrolactone solution (14.9 wt%) at 6000 rpm for 30 seconds. The preheating treatment of the substrate ensures the evaporation of the solvent in a fast manner and inhibits the coarsening of the crystals. The coated layer was annealed at 100 °C for 15 min to receive dark brown CH3NH3PbI3 thin film. The fullerene (C60) (30 nm) (>99.5%, Aldrich), [6,6]-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) (> 99%, Solenne, Netherlands), bathocuproine (BCP) (Aldrich) (10 nm) and aluminum (Al) (100 nm) were deposited on the substrate inside a vacuum chamber (10−6 Torr) by thermal evaporation. C60 or PCBM is an acceptor layer forming a junction with CH3NH3PbI3 where the charge separation takes place. The thin BCP film acts as an exciton- or hole-blocking layer (EBL or HBL). C60 or PCBM and BCP layers are sequentially evaporated on the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite. The device was completed by thermal evaporation of Al as a negative electrode. The energy level diagram of the device (PCBM as the acceptor) is illustrated in Scheme 1(a). The configuration of the device architecture and a photo of the flexible device fabricated on the PET/ITO (ITO-2) substrate are illustrated in Scheme 1(b).

We used a quartz crystal to monitor the thickness for the evaporation process. The active area of the device is 0.06 cm2 defined by a mask. All the procedures are implemented inside a nitrogen-filled glove box with oxygen and moisture levels less than 1 ppm except for casting the PEDOT:PSS layer (in atmosphere).

Device characteristics, current density–voltage (J–V) curves, were measured in a nitrogen-filled glove box using a Keithley 2400 source meter under the standard 1 Sun AM 1.5 G simulated solar irradiation (100 mW cm−2) from Newport 91160A 300 W Solar Simulator (Class A). The simulated solar irradiance is corrected by a Si diode (Hamamatsu S1133) equipped with a Schott visible-color glass filter (KG5 color filter). The series resistance (RS) and parallel resistance (RP) are calculated by the method reported by Waldauf et al. The incident photon to electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra were recorded using a system composed of a 300 W xenon light source (Oriel), an Oriel Cornerstone 130 1/8 m monochromator, a Keithley 2400 source meter, a chopper (Stanford research system Inc.) and a Lock-in amplifier (SR510, Stanford research system Inc.). UV-vis spectra were recorded using a spectrometer (U4100, Hitachi). The high-resolution scanning electron microscopy (SEM) imaging was performed using a FEI Quanta 400. The work functions of ITO-1 and ITO-2 were measured by UV photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) using a He source of incident energy 21.21 eV (He I line) in National Synchrotron Radiation Research Center, Taiwan.



Fig. 1(a) shows the current–voltage (J–V) characteristic curves of hybrid organic solar cells made of different positive electrodes, glass/ITO (ITO-1) and PET/ITO (ITO-2), respectively, with C60 derivatives as electron acceptors under AM 1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2 simulated solar irradiation. Their detailed photovoltaic characteristics are given in Table 2. In Fig. 1(a), the device with the ITO-1 as the positive electrode and C60 as the electron acceptor (device 1) delivered a VOC of 0.60 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 6.12 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 0.52, and a PCE of 1.93%. However, in device 2 (ITO-2 as the positive electrode and C60 as the electron acceptor), it shows a dramatically enhanced power conversion efficiency of 3.62%, which is higher than that of device 1 due to its higher VOC of 0.84 V and JSC of 8.18 mA cm−2. It is encouraging that the photovoltaic activity is enhanced with a significant improvement in the PCE using the flexible plastic PET/ITO (ITO-2) substrate, especially higher VOC and JSC. To address the relationship between work function and VOC in a more systematic manner, we use a substrate with chemically doped Ni-ITO (device 3) which possesses higher work function than ITO-1. The result is presented in Fig. 1(a) showing a relatively higher VOC than the device made of ITO-1. This demonstrates that the manipulation of ITO work function by intentional chemical doping could effectively influence the voltage output. To avoid the influences of morphology on the photovoltaic performance, we performed the SEM imaging (Fig. S1, ESI) of perovskite coated on the two substrates to show that the difference in the morphology is minor. The UV-vis absorption spectra (Fig. S2, ESI) showed that the perovskite loading is slightly higher on the PET/ITO substrate resulting in a general higher short-circuit current in devices made of ITO-2 with respect to ITO-1. The SEM images and UV-vis spectra are available in the ESI.

Device

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)

R
S (ohm cm2)

R
P (Mohm)
Device 1: perovskite/C60 (30 nm) (ITO-1)
0.60
6.12
0.52
1.93
1.93
2.91
Device 2: perovskite/C60 (30 nm) (ITO-2)
0.84
8.18
0.53
3.62
6.09
33.24
Device 3: perovskite/C60 (30 nm) (Ni-ITO)
0.80
6.20
0.51
2.51
6.99
10.58
Device 4: perovskite/PCBM (30 nm) (ITO-1)
0.75
4.80
0.59
2.12
6.12
62.81
Device 5: perovskite/PCBM (20 nm) (ITO-1)
0.68
6.57
0.69
3.10
2.44
1.44
Device 6: perovskite/PCBM (30 nm) (ITO-2)
1.06
6.20
0.47
3.13
18.76
80.48
Device 7: perovskite/PCBM (20 nm) (ITO-2)
0.92
7.93
0.62
4.54
8.60
1.43
In general, VOC of solar cell devices can be regarded as the different quasi Fermi level measured at the terminal under light illumination (VOC = EF,n − EF,p). The origin of VOC in organic planar or bulk heterojunction solar cells is typically described either by the difference between the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of the donor and the LUMO level of the acceptor (ΔED–A = HOMOD − LUMOA) or by the work function difference (Δϕelectrodes) defined by the metal–insulator–metal (MIM) model. For electrodes that form ohmic contact with the active layer, VOC is mainly determined by the donor–acceptor interface energy gap (HOMOD − LUMOA). It has been reported that the work function of cathode metal has only marginal effects on the change of VOC unless surface modification layers are inserted between the acceptor and the cathode. For non-ohmic contact, VOC is mainly controlled by the work function difference between the electrodes as predicted by the MIM model. However, it is worth noting that some other effects such as morphology control or the oxidation potential of the donor conjugated polymers could have influences on the voltage as well. In our previous study, we found that the LUMO level of the acceptor can manipulate the voltage value of perovskite–fullerene planar junction cells, which is expected from the interface energy gap model that VOC is governed by ΔED–A. An extra high voltage (1.3 V) device has been realized by judicious selection of perovskite and hole conducting materials based on this reasoning. A recent study on the doping effect of organic–inorganic perovskite showed that appropriate doping can enhance the conductivity of HTM together with the output voltage due to the lowering (more positive shift) of the redox potential in 2,2′7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenyl-amine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD). This also shows that the energy gap after charge separation can significantly dominate the voltage performance.
In this study, we used two ITO substrates and observed significant variation in the photovoltaic performances. We suspected that the main difference in the two materials is the energy level of the work function. To understand the phenomenon, we conducted the UPS to determine the work functions of ITO-1 and ITO-2 as presented in Fig. 2. The ITO-1 and ITO-2 were probed using a UV source (21.21 eV, He I line). We observed the signal indicating the edge of the Fermi level (Ei) that started at 1.11 eV and 1.62 eV with the cut-off energy (Ecut-off) of 17.52 eV and 17.63 eV for secondary electrons in Fig. 2 for ITO-1 and ITO-2, respectively. For each sample, the work function is calculated from the UPS spectra by subtracting the energy of the incident beam with the width of the emitted electron between the onset of low-energy secondary electrons and the Fermi edge. The work function is estimated by the following equation:
ϕ = 21.21 − (Ecut-off − Ei)
The work functions of ITO-1 and ITO-2 were found to be 4.8 eV and 5.2 eV, respectively. From the UPS measurements, it is found that the ITO-2 has a higher work function of 0.4 eV than ITO-1. The hole transfer from the HOMO of perovskite to the highly conductive PEDOT:PSS with a very small difference in work function, and the interface is considered to be ohmic without barrier for hole injection. Since the work function of ITO-2 is 0.4 eV higher than ITO-1, it results in closer alignment between the photovoltaic active layer and contact material and reduces the energy loss of hole transfer between the HOMO level of perovskite and the Fermi level of ITO-2. We attributed the increased VOC in the ITO-2 device to this reduced energy gap. Lo et al. have reported that the VOC values of organic photovoltaic devices are governed by the work function differences between electrodes if the Δϕelectrodes value between the two contact materials falls within a certain range (0 to −3 eV). On the other hand, the influences of the anode contact work function on the output VOC have been identified with hole selective and non-selective contacts recently. They found that the VOC increases as the anode work function becomes larger. Considering our device using perovskite as a donor, in comparison with these reports, we found a similar tendency for the dependencies of VOC on the work function of contact materials (ITO-1 and ITO-2) used in the anode. Our results suggested that the redundancy of hole injection into the contact electrode can be effectively reduced by choosing a conducting material with a Fermi level close to the HOMO level of perovskite. The photovoltaic action is the capability to separate photoinduced charges and accumulate them with different chemical potentials asymmetrically. As reported by Kim et al., perovskite has high capacitance and the ability to accumulate charges itself leading to controlling the quasi Fermi level upon illumination. Examining those high VOC photovoltaic devices based on perovskite materials as summarized in Table 1, if the perovskite acts as an absorber and a charge (either electron or hole) carrier, the voltage output is expected to be high since some charge transfer energy loss is saved compared to the sensitization or donor–acceptor type devices. For the current type of device architecture, we believe it is important to select energetic favorable contact materials with work function well aligned to the HOMO of perovskite to maximize the energy output. One credit of our current study using the organometallic perovskite material in the OPV-like structure is its superior high voltage output compared with the other emerging photovoltaic technologies, such as OPV or DSCs, which suffered from high exciton binding energy (in OPV) or charge transfer driving force (in DSCs). The perovskite material is known for its very low exciton binding energy, which is advantageous for charge separation. Our results further suggested that the energy level of contact materials could have strong impacts on the deliverable energy of photoinduced charges. The strategy and design of this novel layer architecture manifested that applying a perovskite absorber in an OPV-like structure can significantly reduce the gap between optical bandgap and photovoltage output, which exists as the major deficit in OPV.
Our previous studies have reported that applying the acceptor material with a relatively high LUMO level in a planar CH3NH3PbI3-based PHJ could increase the magnitude of VOC and the efficiency. It is noted that the photovoltaic performance of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite/C60 or C60 derivatives PHJ is controlled by the energy level position offset of the donor and the acceptor (ΔED–A). Thus, for further enhancing the efficiency of device 2, we use PCBM (with a higher LUMO level compared with C60) to replace C60 in the application of the devices using ITO-2 as a positive electrode. Fig. 1(b) presents the J–V characteristic curves of hybrid organic solar cells made of PCBM as the acceptor in the PHJ using the ITO-1 and ITO-2 as positive electrodes. The corresponding photovoltaic performances are summarized in Table 2. Device 4 applying PCBM (its LUMO level of −3.9 eV is higher than that of C60, −4.5 eV) as the acceptor and ITO-1 as the positive electrode exhibits a VOC of 0.75 V, a JSC of 4.8 mA cm−2, and a FF of 0.59, corresponding to a PCE of 2.12% under standard AM 1.5 simulated solar irradiation. It can be observed that applying an acceptor with a higher LUMO level could elevate the magnitude of VOC from 0.60 V to 0.75 V comparing device 1 and device 4. A similar phenomenon is expected for device 2 and device 6 that use ITO-2 as anode material. The device using ITO-2 as a positive electrode and PCBM as an acceptor resulted in a higher VOC, JSC, and PCE of 1.06 V, 6.2 mA cm−2, and 3.13%, respectively, whereas a lower FF of 0.47. The poor FF may be caused by the larger RS due to the thicker thickness of PCBM for device 6. For this reason, the thickness of PCBM was reduced to 20 nm as the acceptor for device 7, which exhibits a VOC of 0.92 V, a JSC of 7.93 mA cm−2, and a FF of 0.62, leading to a maximum PCE of 4.54% as shown in Table 2. This phenomenon can also be confirmed in device 5 as shown in Fig. 1(b) and Table 2. Accordingly, these results demonstrated that the significant enhancement in VOC and PCE of the CH3NH3PbI3/C60 or derivatives could be obtained not only from the energy level offset between of the HOMO level of the donor (CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite) and the LUMO level of the acceptor (C60 or PCBM), but also from the selective positive electrode with the larger work function. It is impressive that VOC of device 6 (1.06 V) using PCBM as an acceptor and ITO-2 as a positive electrode was much higher than that of device 1 (0.6 V) using C60 as an acceptor and ITO-1 as a positive electrode. It is the first time that the highest VOC of 1.06 V and a PCE of 4.54% were achieved in the planar CH3NH3PbI3-based PHJ on flexible substrates.
To investigate other influences of these two ITO electrodes on the enhanced photovoltaic performance of device 2, the optical properties of ITO-1 and ITO-2 were investigated using a UV-vis spectrometer. Fig. 3 presents the transmission spectra of the ITO-1 and ITO-2 substrates. It can be observed that the transmittance of the ITO-1 is similar to the ITO-2 up to 80% at the UV-vis to near-IR wavelength. However, there is a slight redshift of the transmission toward the visible range for ITO-2. The transmission loss in ITO-2 cuts off the IPCE response in the blue part as shown in Fig. 4, where we do observe inferior photon to electron conversion ability in the short wavelength region (<450 nm). Furthermore, the enhanced JSC and PCE can be proved in the measured IPCE response as shown in Fig. 4. In Fig. 4, the maximum peak of 43% at 500 nm in device 7 higher than that in device 5, agrees with the photovoltaic performance in Fig. 1(b) and Table 2. It is interesting to highlight that devices using ITO-2 not only yielded high voltage but current as well. This is probably due to the large work function difference between the two contact materials that provide a stronger electrical field across the photoactive layer, thus an enhanced driving force for charge collection. Alternatively, if we view the perovskite material as an intrinsic semiconductor with the Fermi level positioned near the middle of the band-gap, the high work function ITO will form a Schottky barrier with perovskite. This band offset acts as a surface field, which reduces the charge recombination at the contact interface and might be advantageous for current collection.
Obviously, the light harvesting efficiency of our thin absorber is still far from the optimal scenario. Improvement in the thin film deposition route for thicker film (>100 nm) is expected to increase its performance. Energy level engineering of contact materials or surface modification of electrodes shall be effective to further enlarge VOC, charge separation and collection. These topics are required to be addressed in future studies for improving this type of planar junction device. During the preparation of this manuscript, we are aware of a very recent accomplishment on a mesoscopic sensitization-type flexible device with an efficiency of 2.62%. Our results showed that even in an extra-thin OPV-like bilayer structure, flexible perovskite devices could still aim higher for their photovoltaic performances. We believe the low temperature process of this device architecture is advantageous for cost-affordable photovoltaics and tandem design with other solar cells.

In conclusion, we have successfully demonstrated the fabrication of the all-solid-state, hybrid, donor–acceptor, CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite/C60 PHJ solar cells at low temperature on a flexible substrate with tunable VOC. We study the effects of the contact material energy matching with the organometal halide perovskite material on the photovoltaic response of bilayer donor–acceptor type extremely thin absorber (ETA) solar cells. Applying ITO substrates with different work functions, we can achieve the higher VOC to enhance the PCE of the device. The higher work function of PET/ITO substrate leads the smaller energy loss for charge collection between the selective contact (ITO) and the absorber (perovskite). By changing the work function of the ITO layer, we can minimize the energy loss at the interface between perovskite and ITO that resulted in the improved output voltage and overall power conversion efficiency. The VOC increases significantly to more than 0.9 V with efficiency enhanced to 4.54% compared to our previous published results (0.6 V and 3.9%). Our results represent the guidelines to systematically improve this type of ETA bilayer junction photovoltaic device and a promising process for low-cost photovoltaic devices.


During the revision of this paper, some highly relevant articles on this topic were published:

(1) P. Docampo, J. M. Ball, M. Darwich, G. E. Eperon and H. J. Snaith, Efficient organometal trihalide perovskite planar-heterojunction solar cells on flexible polymer substrate, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2761.
(2) D. Liu and T. L. Kelly, Perovskite solar cells with a planar heterojunction structure prepared using room-temperature solution processing techniques, Nat. Photon., Published online: 22 December 2013, DOI: 10.1038/nphoton.2013.342.
(3) J. You, Z. Hong, Y. (Michael) Yang, Q. Chen, M. Cai, T. B. Song, C. C. Chen, S. Lu, Y. Liu, H. Zhou and Y. Yang, Low-temperature solution-processed perovskite solar cells with high efficiency and flexibility, ACS Nano, Published online: 5 January 2014, DOI: 10.1021/nn406020d.

P. Chen thank for the financial support from the National Science Council (NSC) of Taiwan (NSC102-2113-M-006-010). The author, T.-F. Guo, would like to thank the National Science Council (NSC) of Taiwan (NSC102-2682-M-006-001-MY3) for financially supporting this research. Funding from the Research Center for Energy Technology and Strategy (RCETS) and the Advanced Optoelectronic Technology Center (AOTC) of National Cheng Kung University is acknowledged.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4cp00298a
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2014