 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA09493G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2563-2571


Kiryung
Eom
,

Uisik
Kwon
,

Shankara S.
Kalanur
,

Hui Joon
Park
* and 

Hyungtak
Seo
*

Department of Energy Systems Research, Ajou University, Suwon 16499, Republic of Korea. E-mail: huijoon@ajou.ac.kr; hseo@ajou.ac.kr

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Ajou University, Suwon 16499, Republic of Korea

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Ajou University, Suwon 16499, Republic of Korea

Received
2nd November 2016
, Accepted 16th December 2016
First published on 16th December 2016
The band alignment in heterojunction solar cells, including perovskite solar cells (PSCs), is critically related to power conversion efficiency (PCE) improvement as it has a significant effect on the control of photocarrier transport. In the present study, in an attempt to identify the correlation between the energy band structure of PSCs and their PCEs, we analyzed the energy-band structures of both p–i–n type and n–i–p type PSC devices, especially those having the most widely utilized planar and mesoporous (mp) structures, by using spectroscopic approaches. Two types (planar and mp) of perovskite solar cells were fabricated. The PCEs were measured and found to be 12.5% for the planar structure and 14.7% for the mp structure. To investigate the physicochemical origin of such PCE differences depending on the cell type, comprehensive band alignment and band structure analyses at the actual cell stacks were performed using UV-vis and XPS depth measurements. Both planar and mp structures showed negative conduction band offset (CBO) for the efficient electron transfer and positive valence band offset for hole transfer. Especially, the perovskite/mp-TiO2 interface with a negative CBO has a widely distributed 3-dimensional junction with a graded electronic band structure. In the present study, we identify the electron transport mechanism and its relevance to the band alignment and its effect on PCE by comparing two different perovskite solar cell structures and, furthermore, examine the unique junction formation caused by the mp-TiO2 nanostructure.

In recent years, solar cell technology utilizing organometal trihalide perovskite materials, ABX3 (e.g. A = Cs+, CH3NH3+ (methylammonium, MA), or HC(NH2)2+ (formamidinium, FA); B = Pb or Sn; X = I, Br or Cl), as light absorbers has attracted great attention due to their properties such as a direct optical bandgap, broadband light absorption, bipolar transport, and a long carrier diffusion length. This was originally seen in the utilization of MAPbI3 as a visible-light sensitizer on a mesoporous (mp)-TiO2 layer of photoelectrochemical cells, which had a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of only 3.8%, but the further replacement of their solution-based organic electrolytes with solid-state hole transport layers (HTLs) such as 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-4-methoxyphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (Spiro-MeOTAD), poly-triarylamine (PTAA) and poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT), and the ongoing optimization of the individual layers of solar cell devices with perovskite crystal structures have led to the development of present-day high-performance solid-state perovskite solar cell (PSC) architectures, with a PCE in excess of 20%.

Most recent perovskite solar cell (PSC) devices have either an n–i–p-type or p–i–n-type configuration, in which a perovskite photoactive layer is formed on an electron transport layer (ETL) such as TiO2 and ZnO or an HTL such as poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) and NiO, respectively, prepared on a transparent conducting oxide (TCO) electrode such as fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) or indium tin oxide (ITO). In general, p–i–n-type devices have simple planar structures, which can be prepared by low-temperature solution-based processes, such that the technology can be applied to flexible devices. In particular, this configuration has been known to be beneficial in that it compensates for the relatively short hole diffusion length effect in perovskite and thus enables the attainment of a better charge balance, and moreover, [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM), revealed to passivate the charge trap states on the surface and grain boundaries of the perovskite crystals, thus reducing the recombination of charge carriers, can be easily spin-cast onto the photoactive layer as the ETL in this architecture. Consequently, suppressed hysteretic current (I)–voltage (V) characteristics have been reported with this architecture. In the case of n–i–p-configuration devices, mp-TiO2 is typically inserted between a compact TiO2 ETL and a perovskite photoabsorber to increase their interfacial area by forming a composite nanostructure, and thus this approach is advantageous for adjusting the flux of electrons towards the TCO electrode to attain a better charge balance. The PSCs, directly constructed on compact TiO2 without mp-TiO2, often exhibit significant hysteretic behavior. Therefore, optimizing the device architecture by understanding the charge transport and recombination behaviors within the device, especially at the interfaces between individual layers, can be considered essential to the design of high-performance PSCs with negligible hysteretic behavior.
In various types of solar cell devices, interfacial states such as the chemical and electronic structures between the individual layers have been widely investigated with the aim of improving performance. For example, in copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS) thin-film and oxide-heterojunction solar cells, it is well known that the degree of intermixing of the components and the number of defect and trap sites at the junction interface significantly affect carrier transport and recombination. Moreover, the electronic structure at the heterojunction interface, such as the conduction band offset (CBO) and valence band offset (VBO), was shown to be crucial to determining the output voltage and photocurrent of most solar cell devices. However, for PSCs, only a few reports have been published regarding the surface energy-band structures and interfacial charge interactions between the perovskite photoabsorber and its adjacent layers. Even in those studies, the bandgap of each layer was roughly estimated by individually analyzing its potential by cyclic voltammetry or electronic structures of only a few specific layers (e.g. perovskite with an ETL:perovskite with C60 fullerene in a p–i–n configuration, or that with TiO2 in an n–i–p configuration) were analyzed by photoemission spectroscopy (PES). Furthermore, approaches to systematically investigate the difference between the interfacial states of n–i–p and those of p–i–n configurations with a full description of the energy-band structures, which affect the performance of the final device, are very few in number.
In this study, in an attempt to determine the correlation between the energy-band structure of PSCs and their PCEs at the stacked cell level, we analyzed the energy-band structures of the overall device structures of both p–i–n-type and n–i–p-type PSC devices, especially those with the most widely utilized planar and mp structures, respectively, by using depth profile X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), with which we can directly access the interface of each layer. Consequently, we could analyze the performance difference between p–i–n-type and n–i–p-type PSC devices from the viewpoint of their electronic structures.

An FTO substrate was sequentially cleaned with acetone, isopropyl alcohol (IPA), and then deionized water with ultrasonication for 20 min. The FTO substrates were then treated with oxygen plasma for 2 min before use. For the TiO2 blocking layer, 0.15 M titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) (75 wt% in IPA, Aldrich), filtered using a 0.45 mm PVDF filter, was deposited on the FTO substrate by spin-casting and then annealed at 500 °C for 30 min. This TiO2 layer prevents direct contact between the FTO and the perovskite photoactive layer. The mp-TiO2 layer was formed by spin-casting TiO2 paste (Dyesol), diluted in ethanol (3.5:1 w/w), on a Bl-TiO2/FTO substrate, followed by annealing at 500 °C for 30 min. Methylammonium iodide (CH3NH3I) was synthesized by reacting hydroiodic acid (HI, 10 mL, 57% in water, Sigma Aldrich) and methylamine (CH3NH2, 24 mL, 33% in ethanol, Sigma Aldrich) in a 500 mL round-bottom flask at 0 °C for 2 h with magnetic stirring. The solution was evaporated at 60 °C for 30 min. After drying, the synthesized chemical was washed three times with ethanol and diethyl ether. Then, the final product, CH3NH3I powder, was dried at 60 °C for 24 h under vacuum. CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solution was prepared by dissolving PbI2 (Sigma Aldrich) and CH3NH3I (1:1 molar ratio) in a solvent mixture of γ-butyrolactone (GBL) and dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) (7:3 v/v) of various concentrations (0.2–0.6 M and 1.1 M) in an N2 atmosphere. The solution was stirred at 70 °C for at least 12 h before use. Then, the solution was spin-cast onto an mp-TiO2/Bl-TiO2/FTO substrate at 1000 rpm for 10 s and then 5000 rpm for 20 s. During the second spin-casting step, 1 mL of toluene was applied to the substrate to achieve a uniform perovskite layer. Then, a 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9-spirobifluorene (Spiro-MeOTAD) solution was spin-coated onto the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite layer at 1000 rpm for 20 s. A Spiro-MeOTAD solution was prepared by dissolving 36 mg of Spiro-MeOTAD in 1 mL of chlorobenzene with 14.4 μL of 4-tert-butyl pyridine and 17.5 μL of lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (Li-TFSI, Sigma Aldrich) solution (520 mg Li-TFSI in 1 mL acetonitrile, Sigma Aldrich, 99.8%). Finally, 80 nm of gold was thermally evaporated at a base pressure of 3 × 10−6 Torr. The active area of the PV cell was about 0.06 cm2.


ITO glass was sequentially cleaned using acetone, IPA, and then deionized water with ultrasonication for 20 min. The ITO substrates were treated with oxygen plasma for 2 min before use. A PEDOT:PSS, to act as a hole-transporting layer, was spin-coated at 3000 rpm for 60 s and then annealed at 150 °C for 30 min. A CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite layer was formed by applying the same method as that used to fabricate a TiO2-based perovskite solar cell. PCBM (20 mg mL−1 in chloroform) was then spin-cast on top of the perovskite layer as an ETL at 1000 rpm for 20 s. Both the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite and the PCBM layers were prepared in a glovebox. Finally, the samples were transferred into a thermal evaporator and LiF (0.5 nm)/Al (60 nm) were thermally deposited at a base pressure of 3 × 10−6 Torr. The active area of the PV cell was about 0.06 cm2, corresponding to the area where the ITO and Al electrodes overlap.


A solar simulator (PEC-L01, Peccell Technologies, Inc.) with an AM 1.5 G filter was used to apply 100 mW cm−2 of illumination to the PV cells, with the intensity being calibrated by using a Si photodiode, equipped with an infrared cut-off filter (KG5) to reduce spectral mismatch. The J–V characteristics were obtained by using an Ivium Technology Ivium Compactstat with which we scanned the J–V curves at a scan rate of 0.02 V s−1. Over 30 devices were measured for each condition. SEM images were obtained using a Hitachi S-4800. The bandgaps and optical properties were evaluated by using a UV-vis spectrometer (Cary 5000, Agilent, USA). The VB edge states were characterized by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, theta probe base system, Thermo Fisher Scientific Co., USA). XPS depth profiling was applied to investigate the buried interface and bulk region under the conditions of an Ar ion gun power of 2 kV and 1 μA on a raster area of 1 mm2, yielding an equivalent sputtering rate of 0.2 nm s−1 of SiO2. All the binding energies of the XPS data were calibrated with reference to the C–C bond in C 1s (284.5 eV).


Different types of perovskite solar cells were fabricated: one with an n–i–p type mp structure using TiO2 as the ETL (Fig. 1(a)) and the other with a p–i–n type planar structure using PEDOT:PSS as the HTL (Fig. 1(b)). Tables 1 and S1 summarize the solar cell performance including the short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (PCE), measured under AM 1.5 G simulated sunlight (at 100 mW cm−2 intensity). Each type of PSC was optimized for each of the processing conditions. The average PCE of the mp structure was 13.2% (Jsc = 22.43 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.98 V, and FF = 0.61) while the maximum PCE was 14.7% (Jsc = 22.56 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.02 V, and FF = 0.64). The average PCE of the planar structure was 11.2% (Jsc = 18.48 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.89 V, and FF = 0.68) while the maximum PCE was 12.5% (Jsc = 19.63 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.88 V, and FF = 0.73). Therefore, the PCE of the mp structure was higher by an average of 2% to 3% relative to a planar structure.


V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
Fill factor
PCE (%)
mp structure
1.02
22.56
0.64
14.68
Planar structure
0.88
19.63
0.73
12.51

Fig. 2 represents the absorbance spectra and extracted optical bandgaps of individual layers consisting of PSCs. From Fig. 2(a), we can see that the perovskite layer acting as the light absorber with a small bandgap at ∼1.6 eV absorbs a broad range of visible light with a wavelength of 300 to 800 nm and a relatively high absorption at 300 to 500 nm. All of the layers other than the perovskite layer exhibited a large bandgap with light absorption at a wavelength <300 nm, which enables incident light transmission down to the perovskite layer. The optical bandgap was extracted from the absorbance data by using the Tauc plot (vs. hν) model where α is the absorption coefficient (cm−1), hν is the photon energy (eV), and n is 1/2 (direct bandgap: perovskite, electron transport layer (ETL), and hole transfer layer (HTL)) or 2 (indirect bandgap: TiO2) depending on its bandgap type (Fig. 2(b)–(f)). Typical MAPbI3 perovskite has its bandgap at ∼1.55 eV, making it ideal for a solar cell absorber with a high absorption coefficient. The bandgap of MAPbI3 perovskite was measured and found to be at 1.6 to 1.62 eV, which is similar to that quoted in previous reports (Fig. 2(b)). The bandgaps of PCBM (ETL) and PEDOT:PSS (HTL) in the planar structure were measured and found to be 1.86 and 1.9 eV, respectively. The bandgap of Spiro-MeOTAD used as the HTL in the mp structure was extracted at 3 eV. In the case of TiO2 (Fig. 2(d)), two distinctive layers, namely, mp-TiO2 and blocking layer (Bl)-TiO2 have 3.26 and 3.4 eV bandgaps, respectively. These optical bandgaps (listed in Table 2), determined from UV-vis analysis, generally coincide well with the other results.
PEDOT:PSS
Perovskite (MAPbI3)
PCBM
Spiro_MeOTAD
mp-TiO2
Band gap (eV)
1.9
1.6
1.86
3
3.26
XPS depth analysis was performed to investigate the interfacial chemical and electronic states (Fig. 3 and 4). In order to probe the interfaces by using XPS depth profiling, each original solar cell structure was separated into four types of stacks: (1) PCBM/perovskite and (2) perovskite/PEDOT:PSS on FTO for the planar solar cells and (3) Spiro-MeOTAD/perovskite and (4) perovskite/mp-TiO2 on FTO for the mp-structure-based solar cell. The purpose of separating each solar cell into these stacks was to investigate each interface at a high depth resolution at the controllable etching time. Since XPS depth profiling of the entire solar cell structure essentially requires a high Ar sputtering rate, it is very challenging to acquire a sufficient number of depth points to probe the thin surface region effectively without incurring sputtering-induced physical damage. The Ar sputtering rate was fixed to 0.2 nm s−1 (as referenced to SiO2) and the thickness of all the individual layers for XPS depth profiling was set to 100 nm.
In Fig. 3(a), which shows the planar structure, the high C 1s fraction of PCBM with a C60 fullerene based structure is observed from 0 s of sputtering time. From 150 s, the C 1s fraction is reduced but the Pb 4f and I 3d fractions in the MAPbI3 perovskite layer increase. In this transitional region, 150 to 210 s of sputtering time is regarded as being the PCBM/perovskite interface reference point and 270 s with the highest I 3d fraction is defined as being the bulk reference point of the perovskite layer. From 400 s, the FTO layer, which appears as a O 1s fraction, increases while all of the other elemental fractions diminish. In Fig. 3(c), I 3d in perovskite appears from 0 s of sputtering time and diminishes at 60 s when the PEDOT:PSS layer is present. Fig. 3(b) and (d) represent the VB edge spectra of each layer in two interfaces consisting of the planar structure. The VBM of PCBM (at the 30 s sputtering rate) was measured at a binding energy (BE) of 1.59 eV while that of the buried perovskite (at the 270 s sputtering rate) in the PCBM/perovskite was 0.4 eV. It is surprising that the surface perovskite in a perovskite/PEDOT:PSS stack (Fig. 3(d)) also showed the same VBM at 0.4 eV as the bulk perovskite. The identical VBM energies of the bulk and surface perovskite indicate the strong surface/bulk electronic structure robustness under air ambient exposure although the bonding chemistry may differ between the surface and bulk perovskite. However, except the center position of perovskite for both samples with 0.4 eV of VBM, VBMs show a systematic transition along the junction depth from 0.4 eV to 0.97 eV in the PCBM/perovskite interface and to 1.2 eV in the perovskite/PEDOT:PSS interface (see Fig. S1 for the VBM value plot as a function of sputtering time). This confirms that there is a gradually changing band-bending of mixed phases (more like a mixture not compound) across the extended interface region depending on the kind of heterojunction material in the junction. This interface width and VBM variation largely affect the distribution of the junction E-field to change the carrier injection probability.
By combining the optical bandgap and VBM values, a detailed electronic structure and band alignment can be suggested. First, perovskite has a bandgap at 1.6 eV and a VBM at 0.4 eV of BE with a p-type character acting as the absorber to create photo-excited electron–hole pairs. The VBM of PEDOT:PSS at a BE of 0.76 eV indicates its strong p-type character, making it suitable for hole transport. In contrast, PCBM as an ETL shows its n-type characteristics with its bandgap at 1.86 eV and VBM at 1.59 eV. The PCBM acts as an acceptor layer to deliver the electrons injected from the perovskite into the LiF/Al electrode. In the same way as with the planar type, the mp structure was also analyzed by separating the upper (Spiro-MeOTAD/perovskite) and lower parts (perovskite/mp-TiO2) as shown in Fig. 4. In Fig. 4(a) and (b), the VBMs are assigned at a 0 s sputtering time for Spiro-MeOTAD and at a 180 s sputtering time for the perovskite bulk. The VBM of the perovskite was measured at 0.35 eV with the BE differing from that in the planar structure by only 0.05 eV. The VBM of Spiro-MeOTAD as a p-type HTL was measured at 0.9 eV. It should be noted that lead and iodine are consistently outstanding at the atomic fraction <10% at sputtering time between 0 and 100 s indicating the significant spatial overlap of Spiro-MeOTAD and the perovskite layer. This suggests that there is considerable interfacial mixing between two layers and iodine as a reactive anion might lead to the iodine doping effect in the Spiro-MeOTAD layer to some extent. The XPS depth profile results for perovskite/mp-TiO2, the key component in the mp structure, are shown in Fig. 4(c). While the I 3d and Pb 4f states are observed for sputtering times of 0 to 120 s, Ti 2p and O 1s in the TiO2 were noted at a constant fraction from 120 s, indicating the existence of a TiO2 bulk region. Therefore, the perovskite layer at 0 s, the perovskite/TiO2 interface at 60 to 120 s with the diminishing I 3d fraction, and the TiO2 bulk region were assigned at a sputtering time of 240 s with nearly constant Ti 2p and O 1s atomic fractions. It should be noted, in particular, that iodine is consistently outstanding at an atomic fraction >10% at sputtering times between 120 s and 400 s through the TiO2 to the FTO layer. This suggests that iodine is highly diffusive through the TiO2 layer, which might lead to a small iodine doping effect in the TiO2 bulk. The typical VB edge spectrum of TiO2 reveals n-type characteristics with an EF level close to the CB minimum. This was also confirmed in the present study, based on a separate UPS analysis of the TiO2 film (see Fig. S2 for the UPS data of the TiO2 layer in the ESI). However, Fig. 4(d) shows that the VBM of TiO2 at a sputtering time of 240 s is 0.77 eV, which is approaching that of the VBM with p-type characteristics. To investigate whether the origin of this significant change in the VB edge states of the buried TiO2 is (1) Ar sputter damage or (2) the iodine doping effect, XPS depth analysis was performed on the mp-TiO2 single layer on the FTO substrate under the same Ar sputtering conditions as those used for the stack depth analysis to exclude the iodine doping effect in the perovskite. It was found, from the Ti 2p spectra before and after Ar sputtering, that Ar ion sputtering invokes preferential O etching in TiO2, leading to reduced Ti oxidation states (i.e., O-poor TiOx) as the Ar sputtering progresses (see Fig. S3 in the ESI). This sputter damage is unavoidable even under the mild sputtering conditions used in the study and hinders the precise band alignment determination at the perovskite/TiO2 interface. Therefore, we intentionally fabricated a perovskite/mp-TiO2 double-layer structure to investigate its interfacial band alignment using non-destructive XPS analysis without any physical damage during depth profiling while controlling the mixing ratio of perovskite in the TiO2 matrix. Fig. 5(a) represents the non-destructive XPS analysis scheme for the perovskite/mp-TiO2 interface. While the concentration of perovskite is varied from 0.2 to 0.6 M, the amount of perovskite crystals, grown on the surface of the mp-TiO2, increases and the pores of mp-TiO2 are filled by perovskite (see the SEM images of samples with different perovskite concentrations in Fig. S4 and schematics in Fig. 5(a)) as suggested in other studies. This scheme suggests that the sample with 0.6 M perovskite has the equivalent interface close to the perovskite layer while the 0.2 M perovskite has the equivalent interface close to the mp-TiO2 layer in the actual cell stack. As the perovskite concentration increases, the VBM values determined by XPS analysis shift from a high BE (0.48 eV) to a low BE (−0.96) eV. This suggests that the VBM is determined by the separate VB state contribution of each phase (i.e., n-type TiO2 or p-type perovskite). The optical bandgap results (Fig. 5(d)), being a function of the perovskite concentration, also revealed that the mean-field bandgap is compromised by each bandgap: 1.9 eV at 0.6 M, close to the bandgap of the perovskite, and 3.0 eV at 0.2 M, close to the bandgap of mp-TiO2.
In order to achieve the CBO (ΔEC) and VBO (ΔEV), Kraut theory was applied. The measured optical bandgap (EG) and VBM values attained from XPS depth analysis are used in the following eqn (1) and (2):
ΔEV = EbottomVB − EtopVB + [(EtopCl − EinterfaceCl) + (EinterfaceCl − EbottomCl)]
(1)
ΔEC = EbottomG − EtopG + ΔEV
(2)
where top and bottom represent the stacking order for XPS depth analysis,
ECl is the binding energy of each element for the bulk and interface, EG is the bandgap, and EVB is the VBM binding energy. Fig. 6 shows the constructed band alignment diagrams based on the calculated band offsets. In the case of the planar structure (Fig. 6(a)), the p–i–n-based structure allows light to be incident onto the transparent ITO first, reaching perovskite through p-type PEDOT:PSS. The VBO value at the PEDOT:PSS/interface was determined at 0.29 eV and the CBO at the perovskite/PCBM interface was not outstanding. The critical role of the band offset has been well recognized in the field of thin-film solar cells, particularly in the case of CIGS solar cells and PSCs, since it controls the carrier combination and determines Voc. The results of previous studies suggest that the CBO of CIGS solar cells should be in the range of 0–0.4 eV to obtain a good PCE and, theoretically, the PSCs are supposed to have a CBO of 0 to 0.3 eV and a VBO of 0 to 0.2 eV to attain a good PCE. The VBO of the planar structure PSC was high at 0.29 eV enough to act as an energy barrier to hinder efficient hole transfer at the interface and, therefore, holes eventually recombine with electrons unless they overcome the energy barrier. Meanwhile, the perovskite/PCBM interface does not have the CBO so that electrons are not hindered by at least interfacial energy barrier but can diffuse easily. In the case of an mp structure PSC (Fig. 6(b)), the VBO value at the Spiro-MeOTAD/perovskite interface was found to be 0.36 eV, which is similar to the planar structure. Therefore, the band offset in each PSC type is not markedly different and this also suggested that there should be a significant difference in defect associated sub-gap states responsible for the carrier recombination at the interface depending on the PSC type.

Furthermore, at the perovskite/mp-TiO2 interface, a graded junction would be expected based on the inherent structural geometry of its interfacial chemistry and, therefore, the value of EF also gradually shifts from that of the bulk perovskite to that of the Bl-TiO2. Because perovskite fills up the porous structures in the mp-TiO2, a 3-dimensional graded junction is formed at the interface, making it possible to control the flux of transported electrons. Unless a flux balance between an electron and a hole is established, the PCE in PSCs decreases due to carrier recombination and trapping at the trap sites. The thickness of the mp-TiO2 is about 170 to 200 nm, which is similar to the electron and hole diffusion lengths, such that the mesoporous structure generates 3-dimensionally distributed junctions at the interface. At such junctions, electrons can be transported by a hopping-like process from the perovskite to the mp-TiO2 without any CBO-induced energy barriers. These junctions in the mp structure are regarded as having an electron hopping mechanism that is similar to that in nanoparticle-based and mp-TiO2-based DSSC solar cells. In consequence, electrons can move through widely distributed junctions to the Bl-TiO2 layer by subsequent tunneling with an appropriate CBO without carrier trapping or recombination. This interfacial structure finally (1) controls the electron flux to minimize the carrier recombination and (2) alleviates the hysteresis issue, commonly found in PSCs, with less charge trapping. By comparing these two types of PSCs, the importance of engineering the interfacial band alignment and structure is clearly demonstrated and this characterization strategy can be an effective approach for further improving the PCE of PSCs.

Two types (planar- and mp-structure) of perovskite solar cells were fabricated. Each PCE was measured and found to be 12.5% for the planar structure and 14.7% for the mp structure PSCs, revealing a PCE difference of around 2%. To investigate the physiochemical origins of such PCE differences and hysteresis issues, comprehensive band alignment and band structure analyses were performed using UV-vis and XPS depth analysis. From these spectroscopic measurements, the optical bandgap and VBM of the individual layers and interfaces in the PSC were obtained. In particular, because of the Ar-ion sputter damage issue for the mp-TiO2 layer upon XPS depth profiling, perovskite/mp-TiO2 model interface samples were fabricated with different mixing ratios and then evaluated. The CBO of ETL/perovskite and VBO of HTL/perovskite in the planar structure were measured and found to be 0 and 0.29 eV, respectively. While the VBO in the mp structure was found to be 0.36 eV, which is similar to that of the planar structure, the perovskite/mp-TiO2 interface has a widely distributed 3-dimensional junction with a graded electronic band structure without any CBO energy barrier. Therefore, photo-excited electrons formed in the perovskite move by hopping between the perovskite and the mp-TiO2 through multiple junction tunneling with minimized carrier recombination until they reach the Bl-TiO2. This study identified the electron transport mechanism and its impact on PCE in two different PSC structures and, furthermore, revealed the unique junction formation and its advantages for application to high PCE applications due to the mp-TiO2 nanostructure.


This research was supported by the Basic Science Program through the National Research Foundation (NRF) (NRF-2015R1A2A2A01003790 and NRF-2014R1A1A2056403) funded, respectively, by MEST and ICT, Republic of Korea.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta09493g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017