 DOI: 10.1039/C4NR06865C
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 3539-3547


Xiyun
Tao
,

Peng
Ruan
,

Xiang
Zhang
,

Hongxia
Sun
 and 

Xingfu
Zhou
*

College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering and State Key Laboratory of Material-Oriented Chemical Engineering, Nanjing Technology University, Nanjing 210009, P. R. China. E-mail: zhouxf@njtech.edu.cn; Fax: +86-25-83172270; Tel: +86-25-83172270

Received
20th November 2014
, Accepted 9th January 2015
First published on 12th January 2015
The morphology of nano-titania has a significant effect on the photoelectric properties of dye-sensitized solar cells. In this study, microsphere assembly of a TiO2 mesoporous nanosheet constructed by nanocuboids was conducted via a simple hydrothermal process. The XRD pattern indicated that the hierarchical mesoporous microspheres are anatase phase with decreased (004) peaks. Raman spectrum shows enhanced Eg peaks at 143 and 638 cm−1 caused by the symmetric stretching vibration of O–Ti–O of the (101) crystalline facet in anatase TiO2. FESEM and TEM images show that well monodispersed TiO2 microspheres with a diameter of 2 μm are assembled by TiO2 mesoporous nanosheets with exposed (101) facets. The oriented attachment of TiO2 nanocuboids along the (101) direction leads to the formation of mesoporous titania nanosheets. The UV-Vis spectrum shows that the mesoporous TiO2 nanosheets have high scattering ability and light absorption by dye. Quasi-solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells that incorporate these microspheres into the top scattering layers exhibit a prominent improvement in the power conversion efficiency of 7.51%, which shows a 45.8% increase in the overall conversion efficiency when compared with the spine hierarchical TiO2 microspheres (5.15%). There is the potential application for microsphere assembly of mesoporous TiO2 nanosheets in quasi-solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells with excellent stability.

Solar energy has the greatest potential as a renewable source of energy, which can be attained by direct or indirect methods. The earliest solar cell emerged in 1839 in the Becquerel Laboratory, and shortly thereafter, different types of cells based on monocrystalline, polycrystalline silicon, and amorphous silicon were developed. The dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC), as a new photovoltaic device, has been attracting extensive attention due to its unique advantages of low cost, high efficiency of light-to-electricity conversion, environmental friendliness, and ease of preparation processing. To obtain a higher efficiency, each part of the DSSC, including dye, photoanode, counter electrodes and electrolytes, has been studied in-depth. Among a number of semiconductor materials, TiO2 is most suitable for the preparation of DSSCs because of its stable chemical properties and optimal combination with dye. TiO2 is the main part of the photoanode and assumes the role of loading dye and electron collector and transmitter.

Photoanode optimization of DSSCs is always ongoing by researchers, and recent advances have been made in the investigation of the microcosmic structure of TiO2. To enhance the photocurrent of DSSCs, different morphologies have been synthesized, such as TiO2 nanowires, nanotubes, nanorods, and nanospheres. Superior photoanode film should possess four main characteristics: specific crystalline facet, high surface area, effective electron transport, and high light-scattering ability. Dye molecules normally adhere to the surface of TiO2 film by physical adsorption, and TiO2 film can absorb more dye if it has highly exposed (101) facets and a high surface area. Thus, the photoanode can absorb more sunlight. Compared to a disorganized polycrystalline interface, the electrons can undergo efficient transfer in a one-dimensional or crystal interface of the TiO2 film, which improves the electron transport efficiency of the DSSCs. In addition, the introduction of a light-scattering layer on TiO2 film can capture sunlight efficiently by increasing the optical path and reducing the loss of light, which also results in an increase in photocurrent. Fang et al. obtained a higher photoelectric conversion efficiency after introducing anatase TiO2 microspheres into the top light-scattering layer.
The electrolyte is an integral part of the sandwich structure in DSSCs. A liquid electrolyte is used by researchers in most DSSC studies. A quasi-solid electrolyte has the advantages of less volatility and high stability compared with the traditional liquid electrolyte. However, the disadvantage of a quasi-solid electrolyte is that it has a low photoelectric conversion efficiency. This is mainly due to poor electron migration during oxidation–reduction in a solid electrolyte with a higher viscosity. In addition, the electron transport impedance between the photoanode and electrolyte interface is larger. A few researchers have studied new and efficient quasi-solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells. Kang incorporated polyoxyethylene PEO and nano-crystalline TiO2 into a quasi-solid electrolyte. Dai prepared quasi-solid electrolyte by adding the gelling agent of a liquid crystal (4-cyano-4′-heptyloxy biphenyl) into the traditional liquid electrolyte and obtained a high-efficiency quasi-solid DSSC.
Herein, we synthesized the microsphere assembly of a mesoporous TiO2 nanosheet constructed with nanocuboids by the hydrothermal route. The XRD data indicates that the hierarchical mesoporous microspheres are anatase TiO2. FESEM and TEM show that hierarchical microflowers are monodispersed and formed by spine-shaped TiO2 mesoporous nanosheets, which are further constructed with 10 nm wide and 20 nm long TiO2 nanocuboids with exposed (101) facets. UV-Vis tests show that the microspheres have high light scattering and dye adsorption ability. Quasi-solid-state DSSCs using microsphere assembly of mesoporous TiO2 nanosheets as the scattering layers exhibited a prominent improvement in the power conversion efficiency.

All chemicals were analytical-grade reagents and used as received without further purification. Tetrabutyl titanate and acetonitrile were obtained from Shanghai Lingfeng Reagent Co., Ltd (China). Acetic acid and hydrofluoric acid were obtained from Shanghai Shenbo Chemical Co., Ltd (China). Lithium iodide and 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) were purchased from Shanghai Jingchun Reagent Co., Ltd (China). 1,3-Dimethyl-imidazolium iodide and guanidine thiocyanate were obtained from Dalian Rainbow Light Solar Technology Development Co., Ltd (China). Ethanol was obtained from Wuxi Yasheng Chemical Co., Ltd (China). Iodine was obtained from Shanghai Shisihewei Chemical Co., Ltd (China). 4-Cyano-4′-heptyloxy biphenyl (LC) was purchased from Alfa Aesar. Deionized water was used in all experiments.


1.0 mL of tetrabutyl titanate was slowly dissolved in 30 mL of acetic acid with agitation for 10 min at room temperature. The mixture was transferred into a Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave (80 mL capacity). The autoclave was sealed and maintained at 423 K for 12 h in an oven and then slowly cooled to ambient temperature. After the hydrothermal reaction, the precipitate in the bottom of the autoclave was collected. The precipitate was washed with deionized water twice and then washed with ethanol. After purification with deionized water and ethanol, the sample was dried in the oven at 353 K in an air atmosphere. The product was further calcined at 773 K for 2 h.


The fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass substrate was cleaned with detergents, deionized water, and absolute ethanol using an ultrasonic cleaning machine, and then was treated with 40 mM TiCl4 aqueous solution at 343 K for 30 min. A certain amount of TiO2 powder was mixed with ethyl cellulose and dispersed in a mixed ethanol and terpineol solution. The mixture was ground in an agate mortar for at least 30 minutes to prepare a screen-printable TiO2 paste. Subsequently, the paste was deposited onto the FTO glass using the screen-printing method, followed by sintering of the program process. Afterwards, TiO2-coated glass was immersed in aqueous solution containing 40 mM TiCl4 at 343 K for 30 min to obtain a modified film before sintering at 723 K for 30 minutes. When the calcinations were finished, the film was cooled to 353 K and then immersed in a 0.3 mM ethanol solution of N-719 dye for 24 h. After that, the dye-sensitized film was immediately washed with ethanol and oven dried at 353 K. The solar cell was assembled into a sandwich-type device by placing a Pt/FTO counter electrode on the dye-sensitized photoanode separated by a hot-melt gasket. For the preparation of quasi-solid-state electrolyte, 0.1 M iodine, 1 M 1,3-dimethyl-imidazolium iodide (DMII), 0.5 M 4-tert-butyl-pyridine (TBP), and 0.1 M lithium iodide were added to acetonitrile solution in turn and stirred to form a homogeneous solution. 4-Cyano-4′-heptyloxy biphenyl was added to the above liquid electrolyte, and the mass fraction of 4-cyano-4′-heptyloxy biphenyl was 30%. The final solution was uniformly dissolved using ultrasound. The quasi-solid electrolyte was dissolved by heating and was then injected through the hole drilled on the Pt counter electrode. The hole was then sealed using a hot-melt gasket.


The product was analyzed by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) on a Bruker-D8 Advance X-ray diffractometer, with monochromatized Cu Kα incident radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å) at 40 kV and 40 mA. The XRD patterns were recorded at 2θ in the range of 20°–80° with a scanning increment of 0.05° and a scan speed of 0.2° second per step. A Horiba Jobin-Yvon LabRAM ARAMIS Raman spectrometer was used to obtain the Raman spectra of the sample with a 532 nm-wavelength laser. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM, FEI, Quanta 200) and field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, Hitachi S-4800 with an acceleration voltage of 30 kV) were used to investigate the morphology of the samples. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) were carried out on a JEM-2010 UHR instrument (JEOL, Japan) using an acceleration voltage of 200 kV.

The photocurrent–voltage characteristics of the quasi-solid-state DSSCs were measured using a Newport Oriel solar simulator and Keithley 2420 source meter (USA) under air mass (AM) 1.5 G simulated solar light with an illumination intensity of 100 mW cm−2. Before the measurement, the solar simulator was calibrated using a standard silicon solar cell. The active area of the quasi-solid DSSCs was 0.16 cm2. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements of the quasi-solid DSSCs were recorded using an electrochemical workstation (CHI660C, CH Instruments) under 100 mW cm−2 illumination. The dye-absorbed TiO2 film was immersed in 10 mL of 0.1 M NaOH solution in a water and ethanol mixture with a volume ratio of 1:1 overnight, and the concentration of the desorbed dye was measured with a PerkinElmer UV/Vis spectrophotometer (model Lambda 950). The diffuse-reflectance absorbance spectra of the TiO2 films were synchronically recorded on the same UV/Vis spectrophotometer.

The morphology and structure of the as-prepared microsphere assembly of mesoporous TiO2 nanosheets were investigated by FESEM and are shown in Fig. 1. Fig. 1a shows a panoramic FESEM image of the as-prepared TiO2 microsphere assembly of mesoporous TiO2 nanosheets. The obtained sample is well dispersed and exhibits a well-defined microspheric shape. The size of the microspheres is uniform with an average diameter of approximately 2 μm. The individual microsphere in Fig. 1b was selected from Fig. 1a, and we can see that the surface of the microsphere has a thorn-like structure. Combined with the enlarged view of the microsphere surface in Fig. 1c, it can be seen that there are a large number of spiny mesoporous nanosheets emanating from the center of the microsphere. In Fig. 1d, a region of the microsphere is further magnified, which clearly shows that the spinous structure of the TiO2 nanosheets are porous in the surface layers; the thickness of the mesoporous TiO2 nanosheets is approximately 20 nm.

The micronanostructures of spine-like hierarchical TiO2 microspheres were further examined by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and are shown in Fig. 2. Fig. 2a reveals that there are a large number of TiO2 nanoparticles dispersed at the surface and inner portion of the thorn-like mesoporous nanosheet. In addition, the number of pores existing in the nanosheets was determined by careful observation. The microsphere diameters are approximately 2 μm, which is consistent with the SEM results. Fig. 2b is the further enlarged HRTEM image of the blue square marked in Fig. 2a, which is a mesoporous structure that is randomly distributed in the TiO2 nanosheets. The pore diameters are approximately 3 nm, 8 nm and 14 nm, which is consistent with the results of the nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms and the corresponding pore size distribution of the TiO2 microspheres in the following Fig. 3. The TEM image shows that the microspheres are sparsely assembled by the thorn-like mesoporous TiO2 nanosheets. Fig. 2c is the further enlarged HRTEM image, from which we can see the lattice fringes of these small granules. The small regular cuboids in the thorn-like structure can be clearly seen in Fig. 2c, and it can be concluded that the thorn-like structure is formed by the assembly of these small uniformly shaped nanocuboids. The lattice spacing of all the small cuboids is 0.35 nm, which corresponds to the anatase TiO2 (101) crystal facet. The HRTEM results indicate that the (101) facet is exposed in the surface of the mesoporous TiO2 nanosheets. Fig. 2d is the HRTEM image of an individual mesoporous TiO2 nanosheet and nanocuboids that have detached from the TiO2 nanosheet. The area outlined with blue dots on the lower left part of the image shows that TiO2 nanocuboids are in an oriented attachment and formed single crystalline nanobelts, which serve as the rigid edge of the mesoporous TiO2 nanosheet. Interestingly, some nanocuboids with a length of approximately 20 nm and a width of approximately 10 nm detached from the TiO2 nanosheet and are clearly observed in Fig. 2d, which further confirms that the building blocks of the mesoporous nanosheet are TiO2 nanocuboids. According to SEM results, the thickness of the TiO2 mesoporous nanosheets is approximately 20 nm. The lattice spacing of 0.35 nm shown in Fig. 2d further confirms the anatase TiO2 (101) crystal facet that is mainly exposed in the surface of the TiO2 nanocuboid building blocks. The lattice spacing of the (101) plane of the anatase phase may be directly related to the crystal growth of the mesoporous TiO2 nanosheets. The adjacent anatase nanocuboids coalesced in a manner that is called “oriented attachment”, thus leading to the formation of anatase TiO2 nanosheets in the [101] direction. This suggests that when the oriented attachment occurs in the [101] direction, the (101) plane will be exposed so that optimal dye absorption will occur.
To further study the porous structure and pore-size distribution of the as-obtained products, nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms were measured to ascertain the specific surface area and pore size of the TiO2 microspheres. Fig. 3 shows the nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms of the TiO2 microsphere assembly of the TiO2 nanosheets. The nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherm of the TiO2 samples was determined to be type IV according to the Brunauer–Deming–Deming–Teller (BDDT) classification. The isotherm exhibits a linear absorption in the low range of relative pressure (<0.7 P/P0). However, in the high relative pressure range of 0.7–1.0 P/P0, the curve exhibits a hysteresis loop. The hysteresis observed in these isotherms is indicative of the existence of abundant mesoporous structures in the architectures according to IUPAC classification. The plot of the pore-diameter distribution was determined from the desorption branch of the isotherm using the Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) method. The pore size is not uniform, as seen from the inset of Fig. 3, which shows that the TiO2 nanosheets contain small pores (peak pores of approximately 2.58 nm, 7.97 nm, and 13.68 nm) with a Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area of 123 m2 g−1.
The phase compositions of the spiny hierarchical TiO2 microspheres were examined by X-ray diffractometry and are revealed in Fig. 4a. Fig. 4b shows the Raman spectra of the TiO2 microspheres. All the diffraction peaks in the XRD pattern correlate with anatase TiO2 (JPCDS file No. 21-1272). As can be seen in Fig. 4a, the characteristic peaks of the microspheres are located at the 2θ values of 25°, 37°, 48°, 54°, 55°, 63°, 69°, 70°, and 75°, which correspond to the (101), (004), (200), (105), (211), (204), (116), (220), and (215) crystal planes of anatase TiO2, respectively. TiO2 nanocuboids in the [001] direction and the [100] direction can be evaluated from the full width at half-maximum of the (004) and (200) diffraction peaks, respectively. The intensity of the (004) diffraction peak decreased in the XRD pattern of Fig. 4a. This implied that the crystal growth of the titania nanocuboids does not occurs along the [001] direction, which further confirms that the oriented attachment occurred in the [101] direction and is consistent with the TEM results. The XRD analysis provides the average thickness of the crystalline face stack rather than the true lengths of the long and short axes that can be determined from the TEM images. The intensity of the (200) Bragg peaks was enhanced in Fig. 4 when compared with (004) diffraction peaks, which indicates that the thickness of the TiO2 nanocuboids in the [100] direction was increased. From the SEM observation, the thickness of the mesoporous TiO2 nanosheets is approximately 20 nm.
The Raman spectroscopy results for the mesoporous TiO2 nanosheets are shown in Fig. 4b. All the peaks appearing at 143, 395, 515, and 638 cm−1 were attributed to the typical anatase TiO2 phase. The Eg peaks at 143 and 638 cm−1 were mainly caused by the symmetric stretching vibration of O–Ti–O of the (101) crystalline facet in anatase TiO2, the B1g peak at 394 cm−1 is caused by the symmetric bending vibration of O–Ti–O, while the A1g peak at 514 cm−1 is caused by antisymmetric bending vibration of O–Ti–O. The intensity of the A1g (515 cm−1) and B1g (395 cm−1) peaks in the Raman spectra increases when the (001) facets are highly exposed. On the contrary, the intensity of the Eg (143 cm−1 and 638 cm−1) peaks increased, indicating that a high percentage of (101) facets were exposed. The enhanced Eg peaks at 143 and 638 cm−1 and the decrease of A1g (515 cm−1) and B1g (395 cm−1) peaks indicated the high percentage of exposed (101) facets, which were consistent with the TEM results and the following high dye absorption.
We fabricated three kinds of quasi-solid DSSCs using the spine hierarchical TiO2 microspheres (sample) and commercial P25 particles as the photoanode. The current (I)–voltage (V) curves were measured under simulated solar light irradiation with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The results are shown in Fig. 5, and the details are summarized in Table 1. As shown in Table 1, quasi-solid DSSCs fabricated with P25 display an open-circuit voltage of 0.69 V, a short-circuit current density of 13.86 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 64%, resulting in a light-to-electric energy conversion efficiency of 6.11%. Simultaneously, the quasi-solid-state DSSC based on spine hierarchical TiO2 microspheres has a Voc, Jsc, FF, and η of 0.64 V, 11.58 mA cm−2, 69%, and 5.15%, respectively. The obtained microsized sample shows a slightly low conversion efficiency than that of the P25 nanoparticles due to its large diameter (2 μm) that hinders electron transfer, which was further confirmed by the following EIS investigation. Interestingly, the dye absorption of the obtained TiO2 microspheres is higher than that of P25. It is well-known that the dye absorption ability of anatase TiO2 (101) facets is the highest among all the crystalline facets. The higher dye loading is mainly attributed to the highly exposed (101) facet and the mesoporous structure. Thus, the microspheres of TiO2 mesoporous nanosheets are a good candidate to act as light scattering materials. A better photovoltaic performance was achieved using the sample as a top scattering layer. The optimized solar cell obtained an open-circuit voltage of 0.68 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 17.16 mA cm−2, a fill factor of 64%, and a higher light-to-electric energy conversion efficiency of 7.51%. The optimized solar cell shows a 45.8% increase in overall conversion efficiency compared with the microspheres of TiO2 mesoporous nanosheets.
DSSCs

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF

η (%)

C (10−7 mol cm−2)
P25
13.86
0.69
0.64
6.11
0.93
Sample
11.58
0.64
0.69
5.15
1.33
P25 + Sample
17.16
0.68
0.64
7.51
1.19

Fig. 6 shows the UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectra of different TiO2 photoanode films. The curve apparently shows that the reflectance spectra of the microsphere assembly of mesoporous TiO2 nanosheets film is much higher than that of commercial P25 film in the near-infrared regions and visible light regions from 400 nm to 800 nm. Furthermore, the light scattering ability of the DSSC was improved when the microsphere assembly of mesoporous TiO2 nanosheets was used as the top scattering layer. The optical path of the incident light in the DSSC was increased, and the light capture efficiency improved due to the higher diffusion capacity of the obtained microsized samples and the sheet-like structure. When the incident light collides with the TiO2 microspheres, the light strongly scatters, which increases the light path length in the TiO2 films and enhances the chance of dye sensitizers contacting with the incident light, thus improving the performance of the solar cell.
The EIS measurement has been regarded as a helpful technique to investigate the kinetics of the electrochemical and charge transfer processes of DSSCs. The charge transfer at the Pt counter electrode, electron transfer, and recombination in TiO2 photoanode films and the diffusion of redox couples in the electrolyte solution can be surveyed by the EIS spectra. In a general way, the small semi-circle in Fig. 7a in the high frequency region is attributed to the redox reaction between the electrolyte and Pt interface; the large semi-circle in the middle frequency is ascribed to electron transfer at the interface of the TiO2–dye–electrolyte. The insert of Fig. 7a is the equivalent circuit model calculated with ZsimDemo 3.20 software that was used to optimize the obtained EIS plots. The electron transfer resistance at the interface of the TiO2–dye–electrolyte for the spine TiO2 microspheres is larger than that of P25 nanocrystals, which caused a low applied current in the quasi-solid-state DSSCs. The electron transfer at the interface of the TiO2–dye–electrolyte using the spine TiO2 microspheres as a scattering layer is smaller than that of the P25 nanocrystals and the obtained sample, which implies that the bi-layer structure of the photoanode reduces the charge transfer resistance at the TiO2–dye–electrolyte interface. It is likely that this occurred because the TiO2 microsphere is beneficial for the infiltration of the quasi-solid quasi-solid-state electrolyte.

Fig. 7b displays Bode phase plots corresponding to the EIS results. The frequencies of the two peaks from the high to low region are representative of the charge transfer of the electrodes and the TiO2–dye–electrolyte interface, respectively. The electron lifetime (τr) of the DSSCs was calculated according to the following equation:
(1)
where
fmax signifies the maximum frequency of the frequency peak. The results are listed in Table 2. The higher values of τr indicate that the electron recombination reaction between the photogenerated electrons and I3− is effectively blocked. From Table 2, the electron lifetime (τr) of the bi-layer structured device is 11.09 ms, which is higher than 9.13 ms of P25, demonstrating the weak charge recombination in the double layer and the effective electron transfer when compared with P25. As is well known, an extended electron lifetime is beneficial for DSSCs to achieve improved power-conversion efficiency.

DSSC
Phase (°)
Frequency (Hz)

τ
r (ms)
Sample
12.75
21.23
7.50
P25
13.10
17.44
9.13
P25 + Sample
9.23
14.36
11.09

Fig. 8a displays the SEM image of quasi-solid state electrolyte prepared by adding an appropriate amount of 4-cyano-4′-heptyloxy biphenyl to the liquid electrolyte. As can be seen from the SEM image, the mixed electrolyte solution exhibited rod-like structures when 4-cyano-4′-heptyloxy biphenyl was added that cause the liquid electrolyte solution to turn into a solid state electrolyte. The upper inset in Fig. 8a is a physical digital photo of the quasi-solid state electrolyte, and it shows that the liquid crystal electrolyte does not flow downward after inversion, indicating that the electrolyte has been cured into the solid state. In order to study the stability of quasi-solid electrolyte for dye-sensitized solar cells, an encapsulated battery with a large area of 2 cm × 2 cm was exposed to natural conditions for a month to test its photovoltaic properties every week. The change of photovoltaic parameters with time is plotted in Fig. 8b, where it can be seen that the efficiency of the cell is low at the beginning due to the inability of the solid electrolyte to fully penetrate into the film. The battery performance increased with the time increase, and the parameters stabilized after four weeks, indicating good stability of quasi-solid electrolyte in the natural environment.

In summary, we prepared a novel type of microsphere organization of TiO2 mesoporous nanosheets via a one-step hydrothermal method. The anatase TiO2 microspheres were monodispersed, and the building block of the microsphere is mesoporous TiO2 nanosheets. TiO2 mesoporous nanosheets were further assembled by crystalline anatase nanocuboids with the (101) facet highly exposed in the surface. Considering the excellent light scattering and dye absorption property of the hierarchical microspheres, we prepared a double-layer photoanode using the microspheres as the top light-scattering layer. In addition, solidified electrolyte was prepared by adding liquid crystals of 4-cyano-4′-heptyloxy biphenyl into electrolyte solution. The quasi-solid-state DSSC using the spine hierarchical TiO2 microspheres as the top light-scattering layer obtained a power conversion efficiency of 7.51%. The research results indicate that the spine hierarchical microspheres of TiO2 mesoporous nanosheets have a potential application in quasi-solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells with excellent stability.


This research was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China (no. U1162108, no. 51272104), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province Office of Education (BK20131409),Natural Science Foundation of the Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions of China (no. 11KJA150002), Qing Lan project of Jiangsu Province, the Financial Foundation of State Key Laboratory of Materials-Oriented Chemical Engineering and A Project Funded by the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015