 DOI: 10.1039/D1CP02436A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 20163-20173


Rui
Xiong
,

Rong
Hu
,

Yinggan
Zhang
,

Xuhui
Yang
,

Peng
Lin
,

Cuilian
Wen
,

Baisheng
Sa
* and 

Zhimei
Sun
*

Key Laboratory of Eco-materials Advanced Technology, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350108, P. R. China. E-mail: bssa@fzu.edu.cn

College of Materials, Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Theoretical and Computational Chemistry, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, P. R. China

School of Materials Science and Engineering, and Center for Integrated Computational Materials Science, International Research Institute for Multidisciplinary Science, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, P. R. China. E-mail: zmsun@buaa.edu.cn

Received
1st June 2021
, Accepted 12th August 2021
First published on 12th August 2021
2D van der Waals (vdW) heterostructures as potential materials for solar energy-related applications have been brought to the forefront for researchers. Here, by employing first-principles calculations, we proposed that the PtS2/GaSe vdW heterostructure is a distinguished candidate for photocatalytic water splitting and solar cells. It is shown that the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure exhibits high thermal stability with an indirect band gap of 1.81 eV. We further highlighted the strain induced type-V to type-II band alignment transitions and band gap variations in PtS2/GaSe heterostructures. More importantly, the outstanding absorption coefficients in the visible light region and high carrier mobility further guarantee the photo energy conversion efficiency of PtS2/GaSe heterostructures. Interestingly, the natural type-V band alignments of PtS2/GaSe heterostructures are appropriate for the redox potential of water. On the other hand, the power conversion efficiency of ZnO/(PtS2/GaSe heterostructure)/CIGS (copper indium gallium diselenide) solar cells can achieve ∼17.4%, which can be further optimized up to ∼18.5% by increasing the CIGS thickness. Our present study paves the way for facilitating the potential application of vdW heterostructures as a promising photocatalyst for water splitting as well as the buffer layer for solar cells.

Solar energy is a major source of inexhaustible free energy, solar-to-hydrogen and electrical energy conversion to replace fossil fuels with renewable, environmentally friendly and sustainable energy has attracted particular attention. The discovery of high efficiency photocatalytic and photovoltaic materials is the key challenge to make effective use of solar energy. Many great efforts have been made to this end. For example, TiO2 has been extensively investigated as a photocatalyst for water splitting. The ZnO/CdS/CIGS (copper indium gallium diselenide) film has been regarded as the best-developed solar cell with a high power conversion efficiency (PCE). However, the confined abilities of light-harvesting of TiO2 and the toxicity of Cd significantly limit their applications. Hence, the discoveries and developments of suitable photocatalytic and photovoltaic materials are long-term ongoing hot topics.

Thanks to the discovery of graphene, there has been an increase in research interest in two-dimensional (2D) materials. Since then, a large number of 2D materials have been successfully synthesized or theoretically predicted, such as silicene, graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4), hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), black phosphorene (BP), transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs), transition metal carbides (MXenes), 2D metal-oxide and 2D III–VI monolayers MX (M = Ga, In; X = S, Se, Te). Among them, 2D III–VI monolayer MX has attracted great attention due to its high stability, and fascinating photocatalytic and photovoltaic properties. Recently, a GaSe monolayer has been fabricated via mechanical exfoliation from its bulk phase, which has been predicted to be a potential material for photocatalysts and optoelectronic devices. It is highlighted that the GaSe monolayer exhibits excellent properties, such as infrared-to-ultraviolet tunable optical activity, tunable magnetism by hole doping and adjustable electronic characters by varying the number of layers or applying strain. Nevertheless, the indirect and large band gap (∼2.9 eV) nature of GaSe monolayers limits their optical absorptance in the ultraviolet light range, which covers only ∼4% energy range of the solar radiation spectrum. Furthermore, the relatively fast electron–hole recombination time also hinders its performance. Therefore, finding an efficient way to improve the photocatalytic and photovoltaic efficiency of the GaSe monolayer is of great interest and importance for its further applications.
Binding two or more 2D materials together vertically via long-range weak van der Waals (vdW) interactions to form vdW heterostructures is an effective way to tune the electronic structures and achieve high performances. It is worth noting that the GaSe-based vdW heterostructures have been investigated extensively, because it not only comprehensively displays the advantages of their building layers, but also exhibits some novel properties. For instance, experimentally, a large lattice misfit GaSe/MoSe2 heterostructure has been manufactured through two-step chemical vapor deposition (CVD), which can separate the photogenerated charge carriers between layers very well. Theoretically, the As/GaSe heterostructure shows more competitive photocatalytic performance than its isolated monolayers. Moreover, in our previous work, group III-VI (MX, M = Ga, In and X = S, Se, Te) vdW heterostructures were constructed, and our results show that the GaSe/InS, GaSe/GaS and GaSe/GaTe heterostructures exhibit extraordinary properties in the field of photocatalytic water splitting and solar cells. On the other hand, as a new member of the 2D TMDCs family, the PtS2 monolayer, which has been mechanically exfoliated from the bulk phase recently, shows potential applications in flexible nanoelectronics, optoelectronic devices, and photocatalytic water splitting as a building block for vdW heterostructures. Therefore, the photocatalytic and photovoltaic properties of the vdW heterostructure combining GaSe and PtS2 together is anticipated.
In this paper, the photocatalytic and photovoltaic properties of PtS2/GaSe heterostructures were evaluated by using first-principles calculations. The lattice dynamical stability, strain (inner-layer and vertical strain) dependent electronic structure and band edge position, optical absorption coefficient, and the generation process of H2 on the surface of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure were systematically investigated. Under strain, the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure can transform from type-V to type-II, which is beneficial for the separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs. The band edge positions of PtS2/GaSe heterostructures are suitable for the redox potential of water with excellent visible-light optical absorption. Furthermore, PtS2/GaSe heterostructures were designed as a buffer layer for the CIGS-based solar cell, which possesses a higher PCE value than CdS. These findings will accelerate the design of vdW heterostructures as an efficient candidate for solar energy applications.

The density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed in the form of Projector Augmented Wave (PAW) methods and generalized gradient approximation (GGA) in conjunction with the Perdew, Burke, and Ernzerhof (PBE) functional, as carried out by the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) and dealt with by the ALKEMIE platform. The Grimme's DFT-D3 approach was employed, which is a widely known correction for dealing with the long-range vdW interaction. The kinetic energy cut-off was set to 600 eV. All the atomic positions and lattice parameters were fully relaxed until the total energy and atomic forces achieved were 10−5 eV and 0.01 eV Å−1, respectively. A vacuum space of 25 Å along the z-direction was used to avoid the interactions between the adjacent slabs. In the first Brillouin zone, the 11 × 11 × 1 k-point grids generated by Monkhorst–Pack methods were selected for geometry optimizations and static calculations. More accurate electronic structures were calculated using the Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof (HSE06) hybrid functional with 25% Hartree–Fock exchange energy. The Phonopy code was applied to calculate the phonon spectra with a 4 × 4 × 1 supercell. The hot carrier lifetime was calculated from the nonadiabatic molecular dynamic (NAMD) simulations by using the graphics processing unit (GPU) accelerated PWmat code. It ignores the feedback from carrier movement to the nuclear movement, which is the so-called classical path approximation (CPA). The carrier (electron/hole)–phonon coupling constant CP can be calculated by giving a pair of input electronic states for all phonon modes

(1)
where
i1 presents the CBM (VBM) state to compute the carrier–phonon coupling, i2 is the adiabatic conduction band (valence band) states (more than 20) near the band-edge. In our NAMD simulation, standard ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) was first performed to obtain nuclear trajectories, and then the nuclear trajectories are used in the time-dependent Schrödinger's (TD-DFT) equation for the time evolution of the wave function. In this method, the TD-DFT is reformulated using a density matrix formalism (called the P-matrix method), which allows one single time evolution to explain a statistical assemble, including much branching of the wave function trajectory. This makes the simulation efficient without the need for repeated stochastic simulations. Following the TD-DFT equation, the equation of motion for the density matrix can be written as

(2)
and

Vij(t) = δijξi(t) − i〈ϕi(t)|∂j(t)/∂t〉
(3)
where
Vij implicitly includes the effect of the electron–phonon coupling. τij is the decoherence time between i and j. Overall, both the detailed balance and decoherence effect are considered in the simulation.

The carrier mobilities μ of 2D materials were calculated as follows:
(4)
where
e, ħ, KB, m* and T are the electron charge, reduced Planck constant, effective mass, Boltzmann constant and temperature, respectively. C2D = (∂2(E − E0)/∂ε2)/S0 stands for the elastic modulus, where E and E0 represent the total energies after and before applying uniaxial strain (ε), and S0 is the equilibrium area. E1 is the deformation potential constant, which can be defined by El = ∂Eedge/∂ε.

The one-dimensional solar cell capacitance software (SCAPS-1D) was used to simulate the photovoltaic response of the single-junction solar cell, which is based on the Poisson equation, the continuity equations of electrons and holes and the basic semiconductor equations as follows:
(5)
(6)
(7)
where
ε0 and εr are the permittivity values in vacuum and materials, respectively, φ represents the electrostatics, q is the electronic charge, and p and n are hole and electron concentrations. N+D and N−A are respectively the ionized donor and acceptor density, and ρdef stands for the charge defect density. Jn(Jp) is electron (hole) current density, and Un (Up) and Gn(Gp) are the electron (hole) recombination and generation rate, respectively. μe(μh) is the electron (hole) mobility and EFn(EFp) is the electron (hole) Fermi levels. The electronic parameters effective mass (m*), conduction band density of states (Nc), valence band density of states (Nv), and thermal velocity (Vth) were calculated from the DFT simulation results as follows:

(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
where
k is the wave vector, h is Planck's constant, and me and mh stand for the electron and hole effective mass, respectively. We assumed the radiative recombination coefficient and carrier concentration for the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure were 1.0 × 10−10 cm3 s−1 and 1.0 × 1019 cm−3, respectively, which could replicate the behavior of the actual device performance. As for CIGS and ZnO, the parameters were taken from previous literature or SCAPS-1D.


Before the construction of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure, we firstly studied the geometric characteristics and electronic structures of the PtS2 and GaSe monolayers. The optimized lattice constants of the PtS2 and GaSe monolayers are 3.58 Å and 3.79 Å, respectively. The corresponding band structures are illustrated in Fig. 1(a and b). Obviously, both PtS2 and GaSe monolayers are indirect band gap semiconductors with HSE06 band gaps of 2.58 eV and 2.78 eV, respectively. Our results coincide with previous literature reports, indicating that the calculation methods and results are reasonable.

Based on the above results, we built the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure by perpendicularly combining the monolayers together, and the top and side views of the atomic structure are plotted in Fig. 2(a and b). The lattice mismatch between the PtS2 and GaSe monolayer is 5.5%, which is smaller than the limit value of 8% for GaSe-based heterostructures, implying the feasibility to build PtS2/GaSe heterostructures. To address the stability of PtS2/GaSe heterostructures, the binding energy (Eb) was calculated, which can be defined as
(12)
where
EPtS2/GaSe is the total energy of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure,  and EfixGaSe are the total energies of the PtS2 and GaSe monolayers constrained in the corresponding heterostructure lattice constants, respectively, and A is the interface area. A negative value of −19.67 meV Å−2 is obtained, which is close to other typical vdW heterostructures, such as InSe/GaTe, InSe/InTe, and PtS2/MoS2. Due to the interlayer coupling interactions, the equilibrium lattice constant of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure is 3.68 Å, which is between the PtS2 and GaSe monolayers. The equilibrium interlayer distance (dlayer) is 2.92 Å, as shown in Fig. 2(b). In addition, according to eqn (6), Eb as a function of the interlayer distance is displayed in Fig. 2(c). Clearly, the negative value of Eb can be achieved in a wide range of interlayer distances and the evolution of Eb follows the typical Lennard-Jones-type potential. Furthermore, the phonon dispersion curve was calculated to explore the structural stability of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure, as shown in Fig. 2(d). A very limited imaginary frequency (−0.04 THz) was observed from the phonon dispersion curve, indicating that the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure is stable from the lattice dynamic point of view. Such a small imaginary frequency could be eliminated by depositing the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure onto a proper substrate or applying small strain. Additionally, the ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulation with a canonical ensemble Nose–Hoover thermostat (NVT) at 400 K was performed to evaluate the thermal stability of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure. As shown in Fig. S1 (ESI), it can be seen that both the evolution of total energy and temperature are fluctuating in a narrow window and the atom only vibrated slightly around the equilibrium positions, which indicates the high thermal stability of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure. The stability of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure indicates that it may be synthesized experimentally in the near future.

After confirming the stability of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure, we next investigated the electronic structure. Fig. 3(a) shows the projected up-layer and down-layer band structure of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure. Clearly, the VBM and CBM of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure locate at different positions between the Γ and M point, resulting in the feature of the indirect band gap. The calculated HSE06 band gap is predicted to be 1.81 eV, which is much smaller than the isolated monolayers, indicating that the excited electron can be excited more easily from VBM to CBM. Furthermore, the CBM is entirely contributed by the PtS2 monolayer, while the VBM is dominated by both the PtS2 and GaSe monolayer, which can be further confirmed from the band-decomposed charge density as shown in the inset of Fig. 3(a). Such type-V band alignment can facilitate the separation of electron–hole pairs. From the partial density of states plotted in Fig. 3(b), it can be found that the CBM state is mostly dominated by the Pt-d and S-p orbitals in PtS2, while the VBM is formed by the hybridization of Ga-p, Se-p, Pt-d and S-p. The electronic occupied states near the Fermi level are consistent with the projected band structure and band-decomposed charge density analysis. Therefore, we can consider the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure to be suitable for the applications of photocatalysis and optoelectronics.
It is noted that strain is an effective way to modulate the electronic structure of materials in condense matter physics. Herein, we studied the electronic structure of the heterostructure under both biaxial compressive and tensile strains. The biaxial strain can be defined as Δa/a, where a is the equilibrium lattice constant and Δa presents the difference of lattice constants under strain. Firstly, we calculated the binding energy (Eb) of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure under different biaxial strains according to eqn (12), as described in Fig. S2 (ESI). Interestingly, all the calculated Eb of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructures with/without strain are negative, indicating that the heterostructure is energetically favorable. To understand the contributions to the electronic structure from different layers of the heterostructure, the layered projected band structures of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure under a biaxial compressive strain of 5% (−0.05) and a tensile strain of 5% (+0.05) are presented in Fig. 4(a and b), respectively. Herein, the red and blue balls represent the contribution of up-layer (PtS2) and down-layer (GaSe), respectively. Interestingly, when the biaxial compressive strain is applied (Fig. 4(a)), the valence band contributed by the GaSe monolayer shifts toward the Fermi level and exceeds that from the PtS2 monolayer. As a result, the VBM of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure is only contributed by the GaSe monolayer. This phenomenon indicates that the type-V PtS2/GaSe heterostructure can transform to type-II under moderate biaxial compressive strain. On the other hand, under the biaxial tensile strains (see Fig. 4(b)), the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure maintains the characteristics of type-V. The band gap reduces to 1.25 eV due to the fact that both CBM and VBM are moving toward the Fermi level, which portends that both PtS2 and GaSe monolayers are sensitive to biaxial tensile strain. The evolution of band gap with the biaxial strain is illustrated in Fig. 4(c). Interestingly, the band gap firstly increases to a maximum value of 2.05 eV and then decreases to 1.15 eV with the application of biaxial compressive strain, while it monotonically decreases with the biaxial tensile strain (decreases to 1.0 eV). This tunable band gap feature demonstrates that the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure has potential in future flexible electronic devices. In addition to biaxial strain, we also adjusted the interlayer coupling by changing the interlayer distance. It is worth mentioning that the interlayer distance along the z-direction can be changed by applying perpendicular pressure through the scanning tunneling microscopy tip.Fig. 4(d and e) exhibit the projected up-layer and down-layer band structure with different interlayer distances. Clearly, when the distance is reduced to 2.52 Å, the projected band structure is similar to the situation under biaxial tensile strain, and the band gap decreases to 1.61 eV. Excitingly, in the case of 3.52 Å, the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure can also be changed from type-V to type-II. Compared to the type-V heterostructure, the type-II heterostructure can separate the photo-induced electron–hole pairs more efficiently, which is beneficial for solar energy applications. Fig. 4(f) gives a full insight into the relationship between band gap and interlayer distance of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure. The band gap remains at a minimum value of 1.61 eV as the interlayer distance changes from 1.92 to 2.32 Å, then increases linearly in the range of 2.32 to 3.12 Å, and finally reaches a maximum value of 1.87 eV. The reason for this phenomenon is that the interlayer distance alters the charge transfer at the interface of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure, thereby adjusting the interlayer coupling interaction.
In the following, we analyzed the charge density difference to better understand the charge transfer between the PtS2 and GaSe monolayers. The charge density difference can be determined by
Δρ = ρPtS2/GaSe − ρPtS2 − ρGaSe
(13)
where
ρPtS2/GaSe, ρPtS2 and ρGaSe correspond to the charge density of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure, and the PtS2 and GaSe monolayers, respectively. According to the 3D isosurface of the charge difference density as described in Fig. 5(a), a larger number of electrons transfer at the vdW interface, and the charge consumes in the GaSe surface, while it accumulates in the PtS2 regions. Moreover, planar-averaged charge density differences along the z-direction at different interlayer distances are plotted in Fig. 5(b). Obviously, the charge transfer from GaSe to PtS2 increases with the decrease of the interlayer distance, demonstrating that the interaction between GaSe and PtS2 becomes stronger. The charge transfer results in the formation of a built-in electric field between the GaSe to PtS2 monolayers, which can efficiently drive the photogenerated electrons and holes moving in opposite directions, consequently extending the recombination lifetime of the electron–hole pair. To assess the hot carrier lifetime, we calculated the carrier energy evolution with time of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure from the NAMD simulations, as shown in Fig. 5(c). It is interesting to note that an excited hot-electron (hot-hole) will cool down to the CBM (VBM) if it exceeds 2000 fs, which is higher than that of the g-C3N4 monolayer. To elevate the hot carrier relaxation time, we fitted the energy decay curves through  and calculated the relaxation time τ by τ = aτ1 + (1 − a)τ2. The calculated relaxation times of hot electronics and holes are 438 and 8133 fs, respectively, which are comparable with the GeH/a-TiO2 heterostructure.

Carrier mobility is another critical parameter for solar energy applications. Herein, an orthorhombic lattice of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure was used to calculate the carrier mobility in different directions, as shown in Fig. S3(a) (ESI). The band structure eigenvalues of the orthorhombic PtS2/GaSe heterostructure were used to calculate the effective mass m* (Fig. S3(b), ESI). By fitting total energy shift and band edge position as a function of the uniaxial strain, we have obtained the elastic modulus (C2D) and deformation potential constant (El) of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure, as plotted in Fig. S3(c and d) (ESI), respectively. From Table 1, the electron and hole carrier mobilities along the y direction in the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure are 5654.2 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 3998.25 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, which are much higher than those of the GaSe monolayer (866 cm2 V−1 s−1) and PtS2 monolayer (1107 cm2 V−1 s−1). The high carrier mobility further ensures that the photogenerated electrons and holes can transfer quickly in the heterostructure, which is very beneficial to the redox reactions and photoelectric conversion process.
Direction
Carrier type

E
1 (eV)

C
2D (Nm-1)

m*/m0

μ (cm2 V−1 s−1)

x

e
4.230
100.4
0.34
682.03
h
1.770
100.4
1.09
379.00

y

e
1.110
100.4
0.45
5654.20
h
0.600
100.4
0.99
3998.25
Since the optical performance is another significant parameter for photo energy application materials, we investigated the optical absorption coefficient (α) of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure, which can be calculated by the following expression:
(14)
where
ε1 and ε2 are the real part and imaginary parts of the dielectric function, respectively. The calculated optical absorption coefficients of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure, and the PtS2 and GaSe monolayers are illustrated in Fig. 6(a). It is clearly observed that the optical absorption of the PtS2 monolayer is mainly in the visible and ultraviolet light regions, while that of the GaSe monolayer is in the ultraviolet areas. Accordingly, the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure demonstrates promising light absorption in the visible and ultraviolet light areas. It is noteworthy that the absorption peak of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure is red-shifted, which is due to the electron state hybridization on the interface of the heterostructure, and such a red shift can promote the absorption of solar light. To further understand the electron state hybridization, we have added the band structures of PtS2 and GaSe monolayers constrained in the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure lattice constants, as plotted in Fig. S4 (ESI). The band structure of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure is very different to the overlay of the constrained band structures of the PtS2 and GaSe monolayers. Interestingly, strong electron hybridization can be found around the top valence band in the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure. This phenomenon is due to the electron state hybridization from the interlayer coupling between the PtS2 and GaSe monolayers in the heterostructure, which slightly reduces the band gap of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure as well. Moreover, to understand the influence of interlayer distance on the optical absorption coefficients, the optical absorption coefficients of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure with different interlayer distances are represented in Fig. 6(b). Interestingly, the optical absorption coefficient increases with the decrease in interlayer distance in both the visible light and near-ultraviolet regions, attributing to the decrease of the band gap.

In the following, we discuss the photocatalytic properties of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure. There are two requirements for a photocatalyst for water splitting. First, the band gap of the photocatalyst should be at least 1.23 eV. Second, the CBM and VBM energy level should be suitable for the redox potential of water, which corresponds to −4.44 eV for the hydrogen reduction potential (H+/H2) and −5.67 eV for the oxidation potential (O2/H2O), respectively. The calculated band edge alignments of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure with different strains and interlayer distances are summed up in Fig. 7(a and b), respectively. Insightfully, the CBM (VBM) energy is 0.04 eV (0.55 eV) higher (lower) than the redox potential of H+/H2 (O2/H2O), which proves that the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure is a potential photocatalyst for water splitting. In addition, the band edges of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure are also catered to the redox potential of water in a wide range of biaxial compressive strain and interlayer distance for better performances.
Considering that the thermodynamics of the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) determines the rate of hydrogen production, the generation process of H2 and hydrogen reduction half reactions on the PtS2 surface of PtS2/GaSe heterostructures has been illustrated in Fig. 8. To achieve a better understanding, we have also considered the 5 possible absorption sites on the PtS2 surface, as shown in Fig. S5 (ESI). It is worth mentioning that except for site 4, all the other H adatoms will move to site 5 after fully atomic position relaxations, and the corresponding absorption energy of site 4 and 5 are −2.63 and −2.66 eV, respectively. According to Fig. 8(a), the separated H adatoms tend to migrate closer with a chemical driven force of −0.36 eV. Herein, the value of −0.36 eV is defined as the energy difference between the two neighboring H atoms and two isolated H atoms on the PtS2 surface by setting the total energy of the two completely separated H atoms on the surface to 0. And as the H atoms further aggregate to form H2 molecules, the system heat releases from −0.36 to −1.60 eV. The downhill feature of the energy profile demonstrates H2 can be favorably generated on the PtS2 surface. Moreover, the produced H2 molecule can be easily moved away from the surface of the PtS2 since the absorption energy is only 0.06 eV (from −1.60 to −1.54 eV). We also investigated the hydrogen evolution reduction (HER) on the PtS2 surface as the catalytic performance of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructures, as plotted in Fig. 8(b). There are only two steps for hydrogen reduction with one intermediate state of H*. In the first step, a proton and an electron form the H* species. In the second step, two H* transform into a H2 molecule. The calculated Gibbs free energy difference (ΔG) of these two steps is 0.97 and 0.23 eV, respectively, which is lower than those for the MoSe2/SnSe2 and WSe2/SnSe2 heterostructures without a Se defect. Our results indicate that it is energetically favorable to generate H2 molecules on the surface of PtS2/GaSe heterostructures.
On the other hand, we have also evaluated the optoelectronic properties of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure by constructing a ZnO/(PtS2/GaSe heterostructure)/CIGS solar cell, the schematic diagram of which is plotted in Fig. 9(a). Herein, the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure is used as the buffer layer, while CIGS is the absorber layer. The property parameters used in the simulation are listed in Table S1 (ESI). It should be noted that the defect effects were not taken into consideration in this simulation. The carrier mobility is the average value of these along with the x and y directions as mentioned before. Fig. 9(b) illustrates the band alignment of the ZnO/(PtS2/GaSe heterostructure)/CIGS solar cell. A small spike-like band alignment can be observed at the interface of (PtS2/GaSe heterostructure)/CIGS, which is due to the different electronic affinity of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure and CIGS. This small spike can act as a barrier for hole supply, thereby reducing the recombination.Fig. 9(c) shows the current–voltage and external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the single junction device. We can see that the short-circuit current (Jsc) and open-circuit voltage (Voc) can achieve 34.76 mA cm−2 and 0.62 V, which is higher than the typical ZnO/CdS/CIGS single-junction device (32.82 mA cm−2 and 0.61 V). This phenomenon can be explained by the fact that the band gap of the PtS2/GaSe heterostructure (1.81 eV) is much smaller than that of the CdS (2.45 eV), and as such more incident photons can pass through the buffer layer and be absorbed by the CICS layer. The EQE result further substantiates the hypothesis, since the EQE of ZnO/(PtS2/GaSe heterostructure)/CIGS is larger than that of the ZnO/CdS/CIGS. Moreover, the PCE of the ZnO/(PtS2/GaSe heterostructure)/CIGS single-junction solar cell can reach ∼17.4% (shown in Fig. 9(a)), which is higher than that of the ZnO/CdS/CIGS (16.39%) and recently reported AZO/WSeTe/W(S/Se)2 (16.32% and 16.04%) solar cell devices. To fully understand the absorbing layer thickness effect on the ZnO/(PtS2/GaSe heterostructure)/CIGS single-junction solar cell, the Jsc, Voc, PCE and fill factor (FF) as functions of CIGS thickness are plotted in Fig. S6 (ESI). Obviously, Jsc, Voc, PCE and FF initially increase with an increase of thickness and are then saturated when the CIGS thickness reaches about 3 μm, and then increase slightly with the increase of thickness. It is noteworthy that the maximum PCE can achieve up to ∼18.5% when the CIGS thickness reaches about 3 μm. Furthermore, the Jsc, Voc, PCE and FF as functions of donor concentration are illustrated in Fig. S7 (ESI) as well. The PCE of the ZnO/(PtS2/GaSe heterostructure)/CIGS solar cell can reach the maximum value when the donor concentration is 1 × 1019, which further confirms that the property parameters are reasonable in our simulation.

In conclusion, based on density functional theory calculations, we have systematically investigated the electronic structures and photocatalytic properties towards water splitting as well as the optoelectronic properties for PtS2/GaSe heterostructures. Our results show that PtS2/GaSe heterostructures are a natural type-V heterostructure, which can be turned into type-II heterostructures under strain. The indirect band gap of PtS2/GaSe heterostructures can be varied in a wide range from 2.05 eV to 1.0 eV by external strain. Moreover, the band edge positions of PtS2/GaSe heterostructures are suitable for the redox potentials of water, even in a wide range of biaxial compressive strains and interlayer distances, which are beneficial for water splitting. Especially, the outstanding optical absorption coefficients in the range of visible and ultra violet light are observed. Our theoretical findings not only clarify the high photocatalytic and optoelectronic performance of PtS2/GaSe heterostructures but also accelerate the design of novel GaSe-based vdW heterostructures.


The authors declare no competing financial interest.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21973012 and 51872017), the National Key Research and Development Program of China (Materials Gnome Initiative No. 2017YFB0701701), the Natural Science Foundation of Fujian Province (Grant No. 2020J01351 and 2020J01474), the Fujian Provincial Department of Science & Technology (Grant No. 2021H6011), the Scientific Research Project of Jinjiang Science and Education Park of Fuzhou University (Grant No. 2019-JJFDKY-01 and 2019-JJFDKY-02), and the “Qishan Scholar” Scientific Research Project of Fuzhou University.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Solar cell simulation parameters; mobility fitting data; CIGS solar cell simulation results. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cp02436a
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2021