 DOI: 10.1039/C5NR07494K
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 8547-8552


Sivaramapanicker
Sreejith
,

Reinack
Hansen
,

Hrishikesh
Joshi
,

R. Govindan
Kutty
,

Zheng
Liu
,

Lianxi
Zheng
,

Jinglei
Yang
* and 

Yanli
Zhao
*

Division of Chemistry and Biological Chemistry, School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 21 Nanyang Link, 637371, Singapore. E-mail: zhaoyanli@ntu.edu.sg

School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 639798, Singapore. E-mail: mjlyang@ntu.edu.sg

Center for Programmable Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, 639798, Singapore

Department of Mechanical Engineering, Khalifa University, Abudhabi, 127788, United Arab Emirates

Received
27th October 2015
, Accepted 10th December 2015
First published on 10th December 2015
Photoactive materials that are triggered by the irradiation of light to generate an electrical response provide an ecofriendly platform to afford efficient power sources and switches. A chemical assembly of well-known elements with aligned carbon nanotube bundles is reported here, which was employed to form an efficient photo-induced charge transfer device. The primary elements of this device are ultra-long multi-walled carbon nanotube (MWCNT) bundles, polyaniline (PANI) thin film coating, and CdSe quantum dots (QDs). Highly ordered and horizontally aligned MWCNT bundles were coated with PANI to enhance charge transfer properties of active QDs in this platform. The obtained device (CdSe-MWCNT@PANI) constructed on a silicon base exhibits highly efficient power conversion capabilities owing to the aligned MWCNT bundle assisted enhanced charge transport pathways generated within the device. The device also shows a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 9.81 mA cm−2 and an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.46 V. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the device is 5.41%, and the current response is quite stable, highly responsive, and reproducible.

Developing heterogeneous photoactive materials has been the focal point of ecofriendly energy conversion in recent years. The interfacial properties of photoactive devices and charge transport pathways can be easily tuned according to the heterogeneous nature. However, the challenge of building intimate contact at the interface belies this advantage. The applicability of these photoactive materials can be extended to several fields such as signal rectifying diodes, solar cells, and semiconductor diodes. Photo-induced current generation has been one of the most promising substitutes for chemical power to overcome immanent drawbacks like pollution and toxicity. The properties of photoactive cells including short circuit current density (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), efficiency, as well as shunt and series resistance are vital to characterize these cells. An ideal or perfect photoactive cell should possess high shunt resistance, low series resistance, a FF of about 1, high efficiency, as well as high Jsc and Voc. Therefore, developing novel photoactive cells through chemical and physical modifications of advanced materials aims at achieving the above listed characteristics.

Quantum dots (QDs) are ideal materials for photo-induced electrical applications due to their high absorption coefficient and tunable band gap. CdSe has been used in several photovoltaic cells as the source of electrons. The CdSe size can be tuned from 1.5 nm to 4.5 nm to vary the band gap from 3.2 eV to 4 eV. CdSe offers excellent control of the band gap with size when compared to other QDs. An efficient directional transport of charges from these dots is pivotal for an efficient photoactive cell. Various strategies have been employed over the years to facilitate this transport such as depositing/integrating dots within 1D and 2D structures, adding a conductive layer to conduct charges effectively and sometimes embedding these dots into a mesoporous matrix.
Multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) serve as a perfect material to direct the charges out of the depletion area in order to transport these photo-induced charges. MWCNTs have been known to transport charges in a photovoltaic cell very effectively, hence they can be used as a universal transport material. The limitation of using MWCNTs is their low affinity to charge transfer from QDs and their hydrophilic nature. Moreover, an efficient photoactive device demands a highly aligned and ordered configuration of the synthesized MWCNTs to minimize the resistance among the tubes. High internal resistance due to misalignment of tubes immensely contributes to the series resistance of the device, which in turn reduces the FF. Polyaniline (PANI) is a highly conducting polymer and a carrier for holes. A thin film of PANI at the interface between MWCNTs and CdSe QDs would facilitate the charge transport and increase the MWCNT affinity. The charge (hole) transport properties of PANI can also be simultaneously exploited to develop a new pathway for the extraction and conduction of charges.
In this paper, the properties of ultra-long fiber bundles were exploited, where MWCNT attached on the silicon wafer was spin-coated with PANI and then CdSe QDs were drop-cast to form the hybrid device CdSe-MWCNT@PANI. This heterogeneous device exhibited enhanced photo-switch properties. The micrographs from electron and optical microscopy were obtained for morphological characterization of the device as well as its constituent elements. Spectra obtained from Raman spectroscopy were used to assess the vibrational modes and surface properties. The static and dynamic electrical properties of the device were then studied to test its electrical efficacy. This work highlights the enhanced photoelectrical performance of the device in zero bias state, where even the electrodes were of similar potential. Further modifications of this device in accordance with the charge transfer mechanism of the device can lead to the development of advanced devices suitable for practical use.

Three elements, i.e., MWCNTs, a PANI coating and CdSe QDs were assembled chemically to form a photoactive material CdSe-MWCNT@PANI exhibiting charge transport capabilities. The illustration (Fig. 1) elucidates the procedure to construct the aforementioned device. The construction of this device comprises two steps, including (A) the preparation of the device framework consisting of a silicon wafer and aligned MWCNTs and (B) the coating of PANI and deposition of CdSe QDs. The method for the preparation of the device involves facile synthesis procedures, such as spin coating and drop-casting. However, the procedure for the preparation of aligned MWCNTs was intricate, since it was quite essential to ensure the synthesis of highly aligned MWCNTs required for efficient conduction of charges in the device. The length of the MWCNTs was about 1 cm, which was optimized to ensure the highly aligned arrangement of the bundles to reduce the series resistance of the device. The detailed procedure for the fabrication of the device is given in the Experimental section. The size of the photoactive region of the current device was ca. 10−3 cm2 as shown in Fig. 1a. The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of CdSe QDs (Fig. 2a) shows a uniform distribution of the QDs. HRTEM images for the CdSe QDs were also obtained (Fig. S1 in the ESI), which clearly indicated that the particle size was less than 4 nm and the morphology was uniformly spherical.

The absorption spectrum of the CdSe QDs (Fig. S2 in the ESI) exhibited distinct peaks at 600 nm and 500 nm. The absorption spectrum (Fig. S2A) also showed a broad range of absorption in the visible region, indicating its applicability as a photoactive material. The broad absorption band in the spectrum could be explained by the scattering of light on the surface of QDs as well as by a broad particle size distribution. The particle size distribution was computed from the absorption spectrum (Fig. S2C), which evidently corroborates the assumption of a broad size distribution. The fluorescence spectrum of CdSe QDs was also recorded to characterize the emissive properties of the QDs (Fig. S2B). CdSe showed a distinct emission at 600 nm when excited at 514 nm. The energy gap (Eg) for CdSe QDs was computed to be about 3.9 eV.
The optical images of MWCNTs (Fig. 2b and c) display a perfectly parallel alignment of nanotubes with no intermingling. Such an arrangement contributes to reduce the internal series resistance and enhance the conductivity. The highly ordered nanotubes were carefully deposited on the silicon wafer so as to minimize the distortion (Fig. 2d) in alignment. A PANI coating was then applied over the aligned MWCNTs via a spin-coating technique in order to enhance the conductivity of this device and also to serve as a host for CdSe QDs. The CdSe QDs were deposited over the PANI coated MWCNTs (MWCNT@PANI) by a facile drop-cast technique (Fig. 2f). The field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) images were obtained to characterize the morphology of the device during various stages of fabrication (Fig. 2d–f).
Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) mapping onto the SEM images of CdSe-MWCNT@PANI was carried out to confirm the deposition of CdSe QDs (Fig. 2g–j). The observations clearly indicate the presence of CdSe QDs on the entire surface of MWCNT@PANI. The EDS spectrum showing the presence of various elements in the device was also obtained (Fig. S3 in the ESI), where silicon showed high intensity as it was the base for the device. Raman spectra of the individual materials and their combinations were obtained to assess the distortions and changes in the vibrational modes. Raman spectra (400–3000 cm−1) of heterogeneous assemblies containing MWCNTs exhibited distinct characteristic bands of bundled MWCNTs (Fig. S4A in ESI) including the G band at 1580 cm−1 (in-plane vibration of the C–C bond), the D band at 1342 cm−1 (disorder in the carbon system) and its overtone at 2680 cm−1 (G′ band). The Raman spectrum of the final assembly (CdSe-MWCNT@PANI) was a clear addition of individual spectra from MWCNT@PANI and CdSe-MWCNT with no shifts in the vibrational bands, indicating that there was no perturbation of vibrational modes due to the introduction of PANI and CdSe QDs. The Raman spectrum (100–450 cm−1) excited at a wavelength of 488 nm was obtained to confirm the presence of CdSe on the surface of the device. A peak attributed to the longitudinal optical (LO) phonon at 207 cm−1 and its overtone at 411 cm−1 (2LO) were evident in the spectrum (Fig. S4B in the ESI). Contact angle measurement was carried out with aligned MWCNTs and MWCNT@PANI (Fig. S5 in the ESI) to depict the increase in the hydrophilicity of MWCNTs after the PANI coating. The decrease in the contact angle after spin coating of PANI expounds the increase in affinity to serve as a host for CdSe QDs.
The steady state properties of the device were computed from the current density (J) vs. voltage (V) plot. Table 1 shows the comparison for the properties of various photo-induced charge transfer devices based on CdSe and highlights the advantage of the present device over other reported ones. The parameters are computed via well-established theories and formulas provided in the ESI. The Voc, Jsc and FF values were comparable to many of the devices and also better than previously reported CdSe based photocurrent generation devices. On the other hand, the efficiency of the device was remarkably high compared to most of the devices. The I–V plots (Fig. 3) for CNT-CdSe@PANI under dark and white light illuminated conditions (white light intensity of 20 mW cm−2) were highly symmetric and did not exhibit any rectifying properties, unlike semiconductor photodiodes. A significant change in the current value was observed at a voltage of ca. 2.5 V in the forward as well as reverse bias, and the differences between the dark and light currents were ca. 100 μA and ca. 160 μA at this voltage, respectively. I–V curves under dark and illuminated conditions were plotted (Fig. 3b and c), showing a decrease in FF from dark to light conditions but simultaneously having a remarkable rise in Jsc and Voc values. Though a loss in FF indicates a transition to a non-efficient current generation process, the overall power output (or optimum) under the dark conditions is very low. This observation further supports the photoactive nature of the device. The shunt resistance (Rsh) under these two conditions was calculated from the low voltage region of reverse bias to be ca. 11.5 kΩ and ca. 10.5 kΩ respectively, which are moderately high to offset the loss of current to a certain extent. The ideality factor (n) was not constant over the voltage scan, though it was averaged around 1.65 (n > 1) for the voltage range of 0–1.5 V, indicating the nonlinear behavior of the device due to a leakage current at the interface or a lack of high Rsh in the device. At some voltage values, the n value was found to be ca. 0.64 (e.g. 2.6 V), which could be attributed to the presence of non-ohmic resistance. However, this non-ohmic behavior may be the result of a high voltage applied onto the system. At 0 V, the n value was 1.16, which indicated a fairly linear behavior.
No
Device

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)
1
P-CdSe with ZnS
5.85
0.51
0.25
1.02
2
CdSe-sensitized
3.15
0.60
0.51
1.17
3
CdSe/CdS/ZnO
13.5
0.60
0.30
2.41
4
MWCNT@PANI-SH@QD
8.41
0.60
0.47
2.58
5
CdSe nanoparticle
12.95
0.37
0.26
1.25

6


CdSe-MWCNT@PANI


9.81


0.46


0.52


5.41

The most important characteristics of a photoactive material are its transient properties, as these explicate the dynamic nature of the device and also provide an insight into the charge transport mechanism occurring within the device. The chronoamperometric plot (Fig. 4) for the device showed high reproducibility, stability and uniform photocurrent generation capacity. The on/off cycle could last for 100 s each, and the entire experiment was carried out for over 16 min. The photocurrent was highly reproducible and was averaged at ca. 9.5 mA in the illuminated state. The cycling time was much higher than the sampling time (ca. 100 μs), which eliminates the possibility of current generation from external effects. The plot of the current response around 100 s and 200 s (inset in Fig. 4) indicates a smooth on/off of the device without any overshoots or undercuts that are generally caused by structural/morphological defects. Such a stable and reproducible behavior was observed for every cycle over the 16 min span.
The initiation and decay of the photocurrent response was a fairly vertical plot (current vs. time), which exudes the high response time of the device. The photocurrent response at 0 V was compared for three devices (CdSe-MWCNT@PANI, CdSe-MWCNT and MWCNT@PANI). This comparison evidently depicted the importance of CdSe, because no current was recorded without these QDs. Moreover, this also highlights the exclusive charge injection process within the CdSe QDs and not in the base silicon. The chronoamperometric plot of CdSe-MWCNT without PANI showed a very low current, which was neither uniform nor reproducible, indicating the significance of PANI coating. The reason may be due to the low affinity of MWCNTs without the PANI coating, resulting in internal recombination of the electron–hole pair and inadequate transport of charges. The electrical response can be substantially improved by providing an external bias as evidenced from the I–V plot (Fig. 3).
The key to behave as an efficient photo-switch device is a potent charge extraction process. The incipient charges generated by the irradiation should be effectively extracted before they undergo internal recombination or reach the intermediate energy bands resulting in decreased efficiency. The charge transfer mechanism of this device was developed on the basis of the computed characteristics and several charge transfer theories. Three schemes were proposed (Fig. S6A–S6C in the ESI) to highlight the function of each element of the device. The presence of CdSe QDs on the surface of the device was vital to ensure the electron–hole pair generation. Several HOMO (highest occupied molecular orbital) and LUMO (lowest unoccupied molecular orbital) energy states that were present in the CdSe QDs owing to the wide particle size distribution were exposed to white light irradiation in order to generate several electron–hole pairs for creating an imbalance in the electrical equilibrium (charge injection). This step was common in all the three schemes indicated by the electron–hole pair on the vertical energy bar. The photoactive CdSe in its dark state carries a small direction electric field inside its depletion region.
As MWCNTs and PANI are well known conductors, they expand the vicinity of the minute electric field within the QDs and facilitate electron transfer. Theoretically, MWCNTs alone should be sufficient to conduct the charges and generate current (Fig. S6B in the ESI), but such a device would have very low efficiency and performance, primarily because the low hydrophilicity of MWCNTs would cause inadequate deposition of CdSe QDs and then insufficient charge transfer capabilities. The dotted arrows in the scheme indicate transport pathways that are highly resistive or kinetically slow, whereas solid arrows indicate highly conductive and feasible transport pathways. An intermediate conducting material, such as PANI, has to be inserted to facilitate this charge transport (Fig. S6C in the ESI). PANI acts as a charge mediator at the interface of CdSe and MWCNTs, which further contributes to the generation of photo-induced charge transfer (photocurrent) from the device. The uniform distribution of CdSe over the highly aligned MWCNT bundles was the primary reason for effective charge transport. The MWCNTs were used for the enhancement of the electric field, and therefore the length of MWCNTs did not cause a significant change in response as long as the CdSe QDs were uniformly distributed and the bundles were highly aligned. Fig. 5 illustrates the mechanism proposed for the charge transport in this device, which shows proof of efficient and conductive charge extraction pathways that were modified/created by the integration of MWCNTs and PANI coating. The present strategy of using aligned MWCNT bundles with indicated modifications was well reflected by the high efficiency and performance of the device.

In summary, we report a chemical assembly of well-known elements on the surface of carbon nanotube bundles to form a multi-component device exhibiting enhanced photo-induced charge transfer (photo-switch) capabilities. The CdSe QDs possess a broad particle distribution to serve as a source of electron–hole pairs induced by white light irradiation. The interfacial properties of this device were enhanced by introducing a PANI film, and charge transport was conducted by highly ordered MWCNT bundles. The device shows the following characteristics as a result of the modifications: (a) power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 5.41%, (b) Jsc and Voc values of ca. 9.81 mA cm−2 and 0.46 V respectively, (c) a highly reproducible and stable current response, and (d) highly responsive and uniform on/off characteristics. The PCE of the device is quite high as compared to the reported devices with similar interfaces and structures. The open circuit voltage is comparable to most of the photoactive cells. The stable and highly reproducible current response from the device along with other electrical properties evidently highlights the pre-eminence of this device. The device shows promising potential for further development of highly efficient photocurrent-generating devices either by constructing a larger device or by fabricating an array of similar sized devices.


The ultra-long MWCNTs were synthesized using a reported procedure. In a typical process, a layer of Al2O3 over 1 nm of Fe was sputtered onto a silicon wafer. The catalyst coated small pieces of silicon wafer (1.5 × 1 cm) were inserted into the quartz tube of a CVD furnace and annealed at high temperature. The growth of MWCNTs was initiated by ethylene gas. Highly aligned MWCNT sheets with outer tube diameters of about 20 nm were subsequently obtained. Subsequently, a silicon base was added at the end of these tubes and a shear force was applied on the bundles to cause the nanotubes to align horizontally on the silicon base. The length of the horizontally aligned nanotube bundles was about 1 cm.


In a typical synthesis, PANI (MW = 50000) was spin-coated onto the surface of aligned MWCNTs to form MWCNT@PANI. CdSe suspension (2 mg mL−1) in water was drop-cast onto the as-prepared MWCNT@PANI device to form CdSe-MWCNT@PANI.


This research was supported by the National Research Foundation (NRF), Prime Minister's Office, Singapore under its Campus for Research Excellence and Technological Enterprise (CREATE) Programme–Singapore Peking University Research Centre for a Sustainable Low-Carbon Future, as well as the NTU-A*Star Silicon Technologies Centre of Excellence under program no. 11235100003. This research was also supported by MOE-Singapore Tier 1 Grant RG10/14. We thank http://www.designs4research.com for the graphical representation.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional synthesis and characterization details. See DOI: 10.1039/c5nr07494k
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016