 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA02417J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15039-15048


Jung-Yao
Chen
,

Yu-Cheng
Chiu
,

Chien-Chung
Shih
,

Wen-Chung
Wu
 and 

Wen-Chang
Chen
*

Department of Chemical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan 10617. E-mail: chenwc@ntu.edu.tw; Fax: +886-2-23623040; Tel: +886-2-23628398

Department of Chemical Engineering, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan 70101

Received
3rd April 2015
, Accepted 11th June 2015
First published on 11th June 2015
We fabricated dual functional electrospun (ES) nanofibers by a coaxial electrospinning technique for enhancing the organic photovoltaic (OPV) device efficiency. The nanofibers contained poly[2,7-(9,9-dihexylfluorene)-alt-4,7-(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)] (PFBT) nanoparticles as the luminescent solar concentrator (LSC) and Ag nanoparticles for the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) effect. Aligned- and crossed-fiber architecture patterns were fabricated to compare the effects of the architecture on the OPV efficiency. The plasmonic-enhanced LSC ES nanofibers with crosslinked poly(methacrylic acid) could be directly integrated into the conventional OPV configuration without sacrificing the coverage area of the active layer. In addition, the in situ reduction of Ag nanoparticles simultaneously enhanced the exciton generation of PFBT and the active materials with the SPR effect. The dual functional ES nanofibers with a crossed-pattern embedded into OPV devices provided significant light harvesting through down conversion and enhanced exciton generation. They led to PCE values of 4.11 and 7.12% for P3HT (poly(3-hexylthiophene)):PC61BM ([6,6]-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester) and PTB7 (polythieno[3,4-b]-thiophene-co-benzodithiophene):PC71BM ([6,6]-phenyl C71-butyric acid methyl ester) ([6,6]-phenyl) photovoltaic cells, respectively, which are 18% enhancements compared to their parent devices. This interface-modification approach using plasmonic-enhanced LSC ES nanofibers provides a new approach for enhancing the OPV device performance.

Organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices have attracted extensive scientific interest for renewable energy conversion due to their advantages of low cost, low fabrication temperature, and mechanical flexibility. It is essential to improve the optical thickness while keeping the physical thickness of the bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) layer for harvesting sufficient incident photons, due to the comparatively low charge carrier mobility (usually less than 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) of photo-active polymers. However, it remains a challenge to use thin polymer films to create a more efficient light trapping and coupling environment for high performance OPV devices.

Optical management strategies, such as surface plasmon resonance (SPR) and luminescent solar concentrator (LSC), have been used to improve the OPV device performance by enhancing light harvesting in the active layer. For example, metallic nanostructures, such as Au or Ag, have been employed to improve the OPV device power conversion efficiency (PCE) by 10–25% via the enhancement of the localized surface plasmon resonance (SPR) effect. Besides, high optical concentrations have also been realized with LSCs consisting of specific fluorescent dyes embedded in or coated on a transparent waveguide. In the device, the fluorescent dye is absorbed in the low yield region and converted into a spectral range suitable for the active layer. In addition, various device geometries have been provided to efficiently harness solar energy. For example, single- and tandem-waveguide organic solar concentrators with quantum efficiencies exceeding 50% could reduce the practical cost of photovoltaic power. The dye-dispersed matrix in the inter-electrode gaps prolongs the stability but also substantially improves the shortcut current. However, LSCs are usually located in the non-active zone, which significantly reduces the OPV area, especially for the devices attached on the edge of the LSC. The down conversion layer is usually placed in front of a solar cell and results in reflection loss at the air-down converter interface. Besides, a main factor limiting the LSC efficiency is the internal losses due to the overlap between the absorption and emission spectra of the dye. Thus, reducing the cover area and self-absorption loss of a LSC could be crucial for practical applications.
Electrospinning (ES) is a versatile assembly method for fabricating uniform and ultrafine nanofibers with different patterns via various geometric collectors. Also, ES nanofibers serve as a matrix for functional materials, such as metallic nanoparticles, conjugated polymers and quantum dots, for diverse applications in optoelectronic devices. The instinctive geometry confinement provided by the nanofibers could manipulate the nanostructure and crystal orientation of the constituents. For example, the aggregation domain in poly(9,9-dioctylfluoreny-2,7-diyl)/poly(methyl methacrylate) ES nanofibers was much smaller than that in the spin-coated film and it led to a higher photoluminescence efficiency. Poly(vinyl alcohol)-based ES nanofibers embedded with a controlled alignment of silver nanoparticles produced the SPR effect to 4-mercaptobenzoic acid molecules with an enhancement factor of 109. Au nanorods were incorporated into poly(acryl amide) uniaxially-aligned ES fibers for optical waveguiding applications with a photon-to-plasmon conversion efficiency of 70%. Nevertheless, the integrated dual functions of the SPR effect and LSC effect in ES nanofibers for enhancing BHJ OPV device performance have not been reported yet, to the best of our knowledge.
In this study, ES nanofibers, consisting of poly[2,7-(9,9-dihexylfluorene)-alt-4,7-(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)] (PFBT)/Ag/poly(methacrylic acid) (PMAA), were fabricated and embedded in OPV devices using an active layer of P3HT (poly(3-hexylthiophene)):PC61BM ([6,6]-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester) or PTB7 (polythieno[3,4-b]-thiophene-co-benzodithiophene):PC71BM ([6,6]-phenyl C71-butyric acid methyl ester) ([6,6]-phenyl), as shown in Fig. 1. The effect of aligned or crossed-fiber patterns on the OPV characteristics were explored. PFBT and Ag nanoparticles resulted in LSC and SPR effects, respectively. Dual functional ES nanofibers with two light harvesting materials were produced using the core–sheath electrospinning technique. The in situ reduction of Ag nanoparticles simultaneously enhanced the exciton generation of PFBT and the active layer with the SPR effect. The crosslinked PMAA provided a solvent-resistant matrix for LSC without changing the conventional OPV configuration. Our dual functional nanofibers present a new approach to enhance OPV devices with a combination of two light trapping effects (SPR and LSC) whilst maintaining the active area coverage.

PFBT was synthesized using a Suzuki coupling reaction reported previously, with a number-average molecular weight (Mn) and polydispersity index of PFBT of 5360 and 1.68, respectively. Silver nitrite (AgNO3, TCI (Tokyo, Japan)) and poly(methacrylic acid) (PMAA) (Mv ∼ 180000, Scientific Polymer Products, USA) were used as received. Tetrahydrofuran (THF), dimethylformamide (DMF), ethyl glycol (EG, anhydrous, 99%) and diiodooctane (DIO) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Missouri, USA) and used as received. P3HT (Mw ∼ 50000, 90–95% regioregular, Reike Metals Inc. (Lincoln, NE)), PTB7 (Mw > 50000, Lumtec, Taiwan), PC61BM (99.7%, Nano-C (Massachusetts, USA)) and PC71BM (99.7%, Nano-C (Massachusetts, USA)) were used without further purification.


A two-fluid coaxial ES technique with a modified collector was employed to produce core/shell nanofibers, similar to our previous report. Two syringes containing core and shell solutions were connected to a separate needle, and the needles were placed one inside the other to form a two-fluid coaxial ES system. The core and shell polymeric solutions were fed into the coaxial capillaries by two syringe pumps (KD Scientific Model 100, USA). The feed rate of the core flow was fixed at 0.1 mL h−1, while the shell flow was operated at 1.0 mL h−1 for all of the ES nanofibers. The tip of the core needle was connected to a high-voltage power supply (chargemaster CH30P SIMCO, USA). The spinning voltage was set at 14–15 kV and the working distance (the distance between the tip of the needle and collector) was fixed at 13 cm. The stable cone-jet spinning mode in the ES process was monitored by a CCD camera (XLi 3M USB 2.0 CCD camera, USA) and Macro video zoom lens (OPTEM MVZL, USA) for obtaining uniform and aligned nanofibers. All the ES experiments were carried out in air. The nanofibers could be stretched across the collector gap (4 cm in length and a gap width of 1 cm) to form a parallel array and crossed pattern by transferring two layers of uniaxially aligned composite nanofibers onto the same substrate, as shown in Fig. 1.


First, PFBT nanoparticles were prepared through reprecipitation. 0.4 mg mL−1 of PFBT was dissolved in THF and then dropwise precipitated into a poor solvent (H2O/DMF = 1:1) at 50 °C to evaporate the THF. Following this, for the shell solution 220 mg mL−1 of PMAA was dissolved in the above solution containing 0.144 mg mL−1 (named as PFBTNF-LO) or 0.288 mg mL−1 (named as PFBTNF-HI) of PFBT nanoparticles. With the help of EG as a crosslinker in the core part, the crosslinked nanofibers could be produced after thermal treatment at 200 °C.


For the preparation of the SPR AgNFs, 300 mg mL−1 of AgNO3 was dissolved in EG (core solution) and 220 mg mL−1 of PMAA was dissolved in the H2O/DMF mixed solvent system (shell solution). The as-spun nanofibers were further annealed at 200 °C for 20 min to reduce the Ag ions with the help of EG and were named as AgNFs.


PFBT-LO/AgNF and PFBT-HI/AgNF ES nanofibers were obtained using 300 mg mL−1 of AgNO3 dissolved in EG as the core solution and PFBT nanoparticles/PMAA dissolved in the H2O/DMF mixed solvent system as the shell solution, which contained 0.144 mg mL−1 or 0.288 mg mL−1 of PFBT nanoparticles, respectively. Further thermal treatment at 200 °C for 20 min simultaneously reduced the Ag ions and crosslinked the PMAA with the help of EG, which served as a solvent, reducing agent and crosslinker.


The material characterization of PFBT is described in the following section. The 1H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrum was obtained using a Bruker Avance DRX-400 MHz spectrometer. Size exclusion chromatography (SEC) was performed at 40 °C in THF (1.0 mL min−1) using a JascoGPC-900 system equipped with a set of Waters Ultrastyragel 7 mm columns (linear, 7.8 mm × 300 mm) and two Shodex KF-804 L columns (linear, 8 mm × 300 mm). The Mn and polydispersity index values were calculated on the basis of polystyrene standards. The morphology of the studied nanofibers was characterized using the following instruments. Field-emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) images were taken using a microscope (JEOL JSM-6330F) operated at an accelerating voltage of 10 kV. Fluorescence optical microscope images were obtained using a two photon laser confocal microscope (Confocal) (Leica LCS SP5). Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectroscopy was performed with a time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) spectrometer (Picoquant, Inc.). A pulse laser (380 nm) with an average power of 1 mW operating at 1 MHz for 260 ns was used for excitation. UV-visible absorption spectra and steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra were recorded on a Hitachi U-4100 spectrophotometer and Horiba Fluorolog-3 spectrofluorometer (Jobin Yvon), respectively. Transmission electron microscope (TEM) images and selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns were obtained using a microscope (FEI Tecnai G2 20) operated at 200 keV to observe the distribution and crystallographic orientation of the nanostructured Ag particles in the prepared AgNFs. Atomic force micrographs were obtained with a Nanoscope 3D Controller AFM (Digital Instruments, Santa Barbara, CA) operated in the tapping mode at room temperature.


To measure the two-terminal resistances of the AgNFs, aligned composite nanofibers were prepared using the above ES process and deposited on the silicon wafer with a 200 nm-thick SiO2 layer. Note that the wafer was first cleaned with toluene, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol, and then dried by a N2 stream. Top-contact electrodes were defined by 100 nm-thick Au through a regular shadow mask with a channel length of 2.5 mm. The electrical conductivity of the nanofibers was calculated from the slope of the current (I)–voltage (V) curve using a Keithley 4200-SCS semiconductor parameter analyzer (Keithley Instruments Inc., Cleveland, OH, USA), with a remote PreAmp (4200-PA) in a N2-filled glove box at room temperature. The scanning voltage was applied from −50 V to 50 V with a stepwise voltage of 1 V.


All the bulk-heterojunction photovoltaic cells were prepared using the same procedures, as described in the following section. The glass-indium tin oxide (ITO) substrates (obtained from Luminescence Technology Corp., Taiwan, 7 Ω sq−1) were first patterned using a lithographic process, then cleaned with a detergent, ultrasonicated in acetone and isopropyl alcohol, and then subsequently dried on a hot plate at 120 °C for 5 min. ES nanofibers were deposited on the ITO substrate using the rectangular metal gap to prepare the aligned and crossed fiber patterns, as shown in Fig. 1. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxy-thiophene):poly(styrene-sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS, Baytron P VP AI4083) was passed through a 0.45 μm filter and then spin-coated at 3500–5000 rpm on the ITO/nanofibers, which were then dried at 140 °C for 20 min in an ambient environment. The active layer of the P3HT:PC61BM blend (1:0.8, w/w) in anhydrous DCB (17.5 mg mL−1) was spin-coated at 1000 rpm on top of the PEDOT:PSS layer. The as-cast film was kept in a Petri dish to control the drying rate in a nitrogen atmosphere. After that, the device was annealed at 140 °C for 10 min in a N2-filled glove box. For the PTB7/PC71BM photovoltaic cells, 10 mg mL−1 of PTB7 and 15 mg mL−1 of PC71BM were dissolved in CB with 3% DIO to promote the morphology. The above solution was spin-coated at 1000 rpm on top of the PEDOT:PSS layer for 2 min and then treated with methanol for 1 min to remove the impurity. Subsequently, Ca (30 nm) and Al (100 nm) were deposited on the device by thermal evaporation under a high vacuum (<10−6 torr) with an active area of 4 mm2. The current density (J)–voltage (V) measurements of the photovoltaic devices were conducted by a computer-controlled Keithley 2400 (Keithley Instruments Inc., Cleveland, OH, USA) source measurement unit (SMU) with a Peccell solar simulator (an illumination of AM 1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2). The illumination intensity was calibrated by a standard Si photodiode detector with a KG-5 filter. In addition, the external quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured by using a Xe lamp in combination with a monochromator (Oriel Inc., USA).



Fig. 1 shows the schematic diagram of the coaxial ES process to prepare three kinds of electrospun nanofibers, PFBTNF, AgNF and PFBT/AgNF, with aligned- or crossed-fiber patterns. The prepared LSC nanofibers with low and high PFBT compositions are named as PFBTNF-LO and PFBTNF-HI, respectively. In addition, the aligned- (A-) and crossed- (C-) fiber patterns were used to probe the effects of the pattern on the OPV performance, denoted as C-PFBTNF-LO, A-PFBTNF-HI and C-PFBTNF-HI.

By precisely controlling the solvent polarity, PFBT nanoparticles with an average diameter of 13.33 ± 4.18 nm could be obtained by precipitation through the process of dissolving in a good solvent, THF, and then slowly dropping into a poor mixed solvent system (H2O:DMF = 1:1) (Fig. S1 in the ESI). Through the Förster energy transfer between 9,9-dihexylfluorene (F) and 2,1,3-benzothiadiazole (BT), PFBT shows a high stock-shift characteristic and suppresses the reabsorption loss. PFBT was chosen to absorb the low yield region of the BHJ (300–450 nm) and subsequently emit a spectral range suitable for the absorption of BHJ (450–650 nm) through the Förster energy transfer, as shown in Fig. 2.

Fig. 3 shows the SEM images of the nonwoven PFBTNF-HI treated with different crosslinking times and subsequently immersed into water (the good solvent for PMAA) to confirm the degree of crosslinking. With 5 min of crosslinking, PFBTNF-HI shows a flat structure (Fig. 3a) after being extracted into water. By extending the crosslinking time to 10 min, the ES nanofibers could maintain a cylindrical shape but still tended to stick together, as shown in Fig. 3b. After crosslinking for 20 min, solvent-resistant cylindrical ES nanofibers with an average diameter of 550 nm were obtained even after immersing in water for 20 min (Fig. 3c). Meanwhile, the hydrophilic properties of PMAA cause a high adhesion with indium tin oxide (ITO), which keeps the pattern intact. By precisely controlling the concentration of the PFBT solution and the volume of the mixed solvent system, evenly-distributed nanoparticles within the nanofibers could be obtained. The TEM image shows that the PFBT nanoparticles are well-dispersed in PFBTNF-HI with a uniform size of around 5 nm, as shown in Fig. 4a, which is consistent with the SEM image (Fig. S1 in the ESI).
Furthermore, the patterned LSC ES nanofibers were incorporated into OPV devices with a sandwich configuration of ITO/nanofibers/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/Ca/Al, as shown in Fig. 5. The corresponding current density (J)–voltage (V) characteristics of the devices with PFBTNF-LO and PFBTNF-HI are illustrated in Fig. 6, and summarized in Table 1. For the P3HT:PC61BM photovoltaic cells, the control cell without the ES nanofibers reached a PCE of 3.49% with an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.63 V, short circuit current (Jsc) of 8.21 mA cm−2, and fill factor (FF) of 0.675. The PCEs of the devices with the aligned nanofibers showed an obvious improvement from 3.49% (the reference cell) to 3.70% (A-PFBTNF-LO) and 3.96% (A-PFBTNF-HI) with Jsc values of 8.21, 8.92, and 9.40 mA cm−2, respectively. This improvement in Jsc is attributed to the down conversion effect of PFBT, which exhibits a high stock-shift characteristic through the Förster energy transfer to suppress the reabsorption loss. That is, the cylindrical LSC embedded in the OPV effectively absorbs the low absorption region (300–450 nm) and radially re-emits a spectral range similar to the absorption of the active layer (450–600 nm). However, the device performance using the embedded C-PFBTNF-HI crossed-fiber pattern is similar to that of the control cell (Table S1 and Fig. S2 in the ESI). The relatively high series resistance (Rs) in the crossed-fiber pattern is probably a result of the high variation in the vertical altitude and it hinders the formation of a smooth film. To further elucidate the decreased PCE of the OPV devices with the LSC crossed-fiber pattern compared to that with the aligned-fiber pattern, the surface structure of the P3HT:PC61BM active layer was analyzed by AFM. The obvious difference between the two patterns is that the fused joint originates from two nanofibers crossing each other. Estimated from the cross-section analyses of the AFM images (Fig. S3 in the ESI), the single and fused nanofibers coated with PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PC61BM show different vertical altitudes of 103 nm and 166 nm, respectively. Simultaneously, the roughness would be gradually increased from 1.71 to 3.96 nm for the P3HT:PC61BM layer near the single and fused fibers. The higher vertical altitude change from the fused joint of the nanofibers probably accounts for the higher surface roughness of the active layer near the nanofibers, leading to deterioration of the device performance. Note that C-PFBTNF-HI is a nonconductive nanofiber, which can not reduce the bulk resistance of the device through the crossed-fiber pattern as in our previous report, but sacrifices the light trapping effect instead. Thus, the PCE of the photovoltaic device using C-PFBTNF-HI is lower than that using A-PFBTNF-HI due to its higher surface roughness.
Device

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (—)
PCE (%)

a The average value of the PCE, which was calculated from at least 10 cells.
b The reference device is the device without any ES nanofibers. The abbreviations of A- and C- are the ES nanofibers with the architectures of aligned- and crossed- patterns, respectively.


P3HT:PC

61

BM

Reference
0.63
8.21
0.675
3.49 ± 0.07
A-PFBTNF-LO
0.62
8.92
0.669
3.70 ± 0.03
A-PFBTNF-HI
0.63
9.40
0.668
3.96 ± 0.07
C-PFBTNF-HI
0.63
8.57
0.656
3.54 ± 0.09
C-AgNF
0.63
8.82
0.691
3.84 ± 0.06
C-PFBT-LO/AgNF
0.62
9.43
0.681
3.98 ± 0.08
A-PFBT-HI/AgNF
0.63
9.40
0.690
4.09 ± 0.06
C-PFBT-HI/AgNF
0.63
9.45
0.691
4.11 ± 0.09

PTB7:PC

71

BM

Reference
0.76
12.07
0.659
6.05 ± 0.09
A-PFBTNF-LO
0.75
12.75
0.660
6.31 ± 0.06
A-PFBTNF-HI
0.76
12.84
0.671
6.55 ± 0.10
C-AgNF
0.76
12.91
0.660
6.44 ± 0.03
C-PFBT-LO/AgNF
0.76
13.04
0.669
6.63 ± 0.09
C-PFBT-HI/AgNF
0.76
13.88
0.675
7.12 ± 0.06

Core and shell solutions of AgNO3 in EG and PMAA in the H2O/dimethylformamide (DMF) mixed solvent system were used to prepare the AgNFs with the SPR effect, where EG was the reducing agent for forming Ag nanoparticles. Note that the theoretical weight percent of Ag in AgNF is 8 wt% based on the total fiber weight. Only the crossed-fiber pattern of AgNFs was implemented here because of its higher conductivity compared to the aligned one, as in our previous report, leading to a higher PCE.

As shown in our previous report, the coaxial core–sheath ES technique with the Ag precursor and shell polymer as the core and shell solutions, respectively, could be employed to prepare the highly conducting Ag-containing nanofibers with a SPR effect. The exciton generation of the active layer is increased by the presence of Ag nanoparticles, however, they could also function as traps for the polarons in its locality. Therefore, Ag nanoparticles covered by dielectric materials are an essential tactic for suppressing the contact with the active layer. In this study, Ag-containing nanofibers, named as AgNFs, utilized AgNO3 dissolved in EG as a substitute for Ag(NH3)2+ and PMAA as a shell polymer for crosslinking.
To track the Ag reduction as well as the morphological evolution in the AgNF textiles, UV-visible absorption spectra were measured since different shapes of Ag nanostructures exhibit the SPR bands at various frequencies. As shown in Fig. 7a, there is a broad signal indicating that the silver ions could be effectively reduced by EG, even though the as-spun nanofibers are stored at room temperature. The intensity of the SPR signal abruptly increases after the AgNFs are annealed at 200 °C, showing that more Ag ions are reduced and the Ag nanoparticles are growing with the increased annealing time. This indicates that the Ag nanoparticles embedded in the plasmonic ES nanofibers can be directly manufactured via thermal treatment. Besides, the broadband SPR signal of the AgNFs, ranging from 300 to 700 nm, illustrates its broad wavelength range for absorption enhancement. The inset figure shows the SAED pattern of the corresponding AgNFs. The ring pattern indicates that the crystallinity of the Ag nanoparticles is lower than that of our previous Ag/polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) ES nanofibers. It has been reported that PVP with nitrogen can form the N–Ag coordinating bond, which suppresses the growth of {100} facets through selective absorption and desorption. However, the carboxylic acid group of PMAA may form a strong intramolecular hydrogen bond, which inhibits the oxygen interacting with the Ag surface and, thus, forms amorphous silver nanoparticles. In Fig. 4b, the TEM image shows that the Ag nanoparticles in the AgNFs have a diameter of 4 nm and are uniformly dispersed within the nanofibers. It indicates that the in situ reduction of Ag nanoparticles can be fully covered by the PMAA, preventing direct contact with the active layer during the following OPV fabrication. Furthermore, the electrical characteristics of the AgNFs were investigated using a two-terminal electrical measurement. As shown in Fig. 7b, the I–V curve of the AgNFs is nonlinear at the lower bias, which probably results from the inter-grain boundary of the Ag nanoparticles or the PMAA component blocking the electron transportation at a low voltage bias, but the nanofibers become conductive at a higher bias. The calculated conductivity of the AgNFs is 4.48 × 105 S m−1, similar to our previous report, which can effectively reduce the bulk resistance of the OPV device. Compared to the reference device, the P3HT:PC61BM OPV device using the C-AgNF crossed-pattern nanofibers shows an improvement in the PCE (3.84%) and Jsc (8.82 mA cm−2) due to the high conductivity and the SPR effect, similar to our previous report. The detailed OPV performance and the corresponding current density (J)–voltage (V) characteristics of the devices are also shown in Fig. 6 and Table 1.

The LSC and SPR dual functional nanofibers, crossed-fiber patterns C-PFBT-LO/AgNF and C-PFBT-HI/AgNF, were fabricated through the coaxial ES system with PFBT nanoparticles/PMAA as the shell and AgNO3 dissolved in EG as the core, while the aligned dual functional nanofibers, A-PFBT-HI/AgNF, were also prepared for comparison. The combination of two light harvesting strategies (LSC and SPR) could be realized through the coaxial ES system using PFBT and Ag nanoparticles, respectively, as the morphology confirmed (TEM image, Fig. 5c). Both the PFBT and Ag nanoparticles retained their original sphere shapes and were well-dispersed in the ES nanofibers. The emission properties of fluorescence molecules can be strongly modified when they are surrounded by a metal nanostructure. To probe the plasmonic-enhanced PL of PFBT, PL measurements are not feasible due to the difficulty in the quantitative collection of the ES nanofibers. A complementary approach using a confocal image of a single nanofiber was performed instead. Fig. 8a and b show the confocal images of PFBTNF-HI and PFBT-HI/AgNF. As shown in the above TEM image (Fig. 4a), the nanofibers composed of PFBT nanoparticles result in discretely fluorescent spheres in the confocal image. The PL intensities of the two different kinds of nanofibers, PFBTNF-HI and PFBT-HI/AgNF, are 14.81 a.u. and 29.01 a.u., respectively, while the corresponding quantum yields are 27.5 and 31.4%, respectively. Furthermore, to elucidate the effect of the silver nanoparticles on the LSC nanofibers, the recombination kinetics of the PFBT exciton through time-resolved PL (TRPL) were examined, as shown in Fig. 8c. All profiles could be fitted to single exponential decay functions to obtain the exciton lifetimes (τ). The fitted lifetime of PFBTNF-HI is 2.74 ns and it decreases to 2.3 ns for PFBT-HI/AgNF after being surrounded by silver nanoparticles. This suggests that the coupling between the plasmons and excitons leads to an increased exciton recombination rate. The Ag-containing ES nanofibers of PFBT-HI/AgNF provide a SPR effect, not only for PFBT, but also for the P3HT:PC61BM film. UV-visible absorption and the corresponding enhancement ratio of the P3HT:PC61BM active layer with and without Ag-containing ES nanofibers were used to elucidate the SPR effect for the active layer, as shown in Fig. 9a. The spectra show that the absorption intensity of the active layer with C-PFBT-HI/AgNF is enhanced over the whole range compared to the pristine P3HT:PC61BM. Besides, the emission intensities of the P3HT:PC61BM film after incorporating C-AgNF and C-PFBT-HI/AgNF are also enhanced, as shown in Fig. 9b. The significant change in the PL intensity of the P3HT:PC61BM film suggests an energy transfer between the Ag and photo-active layer. Such a metal-enhanced fluorescence further suggests the role of SPR in the enhanced exciton generation in P3HT:PC61BM.

The OPV devices using plasmonic-enhanced ES nanofibers, crossed-pattern nanofibers C-PFBT-LO/AgNF and C-PFBT-HI/AgNF, exhibit PCEs of 3.98 and 4.11% with Jsc values of 9.43 and 9.45 mA cm−2, respectively, leading to a remarkable 18% enhancement in the PCE. It is worth mentioning that the device with Ag-containing nanofibers (C-PFBT-HI/AgNF) shows a better OPV performance with the crossed pattern compared to that with the aligned one (A-PFBT-HI/AgNF), which is in contrast to the results with the device with the nonconductive PFBTNF-HI. Note that the Voc (generally 0.63 V) and FF (in a range of 0.67 to 0.68) values of all the nanofiber-containing OPV devices show an insignificant difference. Thus, the increase in the PCE is mainly attributed to the improvement in Jsc from the plasmonic-enhanced LSC ES nanofibers.
These plasmonic-enhanced LSC ES nanofibers can also be implemented in the high PCE photovoltaic cell using PTB7:PC71BM as the active layer. After incorporating PFBTNF-LO and PFBTNF-HI into the photovoltaic cells, the PCE improves from 6.05% to 6.31 and 6.55% with Jsc values of 12.75 and 12.84 mA cm−2, respectively. Moreover, the OPV devices with C-AgNF, C-PFBT-LO/AgNF and C-PFBT-HI/AgNF exhibit PCE values of 6.44, 6.63 and 7.12% with Jsc values of 12.91, 13.04, and 13.88 mA cm−2, respectively. The above results indicate that the plasmonic-enhanced LSC ES nanofibers are a promising candidate for enhancing the OPV device performance.

Fig. 9c shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) results of the studied P3HT:PC61BM OPV devices using the prepared ES nanofibers. The EQE values of all the OPV devices increased after employing C-AgNF and C-PFBT-HI/AgNF, covering a wide-range of wavelengths from 300 to 800 nm. Furthermore, the integrated photocurrent densities from the EQE spectra of the reference, C-AgNF, and C-PFBT-HI/AgNF are 8.27, 8.80 and 9.47 mA cm−2, respectively. The enhancement is a consequence of the improved charge carrier mobility, light harvesting from LSC, and the enhanced exciton generation rate due to the SPR effect from the studied ES nanofibers. All the integrated current density values are in good agreement with the measured photocurrent densities (within 5% error), indicating that the obtained photovoltaic characteristics are reliable. Note that the EQE enhancement has a highly-enhanced absorption region located at 600–800 nm, which is consistent with the UV-visible absorption characteristics. The dual functional ES nanofibers can also be implemented in PTB7:PC71BM OPV devices with proof in the EQE results (Fig. S4 in the ESI).

We have successfully prepared plasmonic-enhanced LSC ES nanofibers using a coaxial electrospinning technique with PFBT and Ag nanoparticles for LSC and SPR effects, respectively. The ES nanofiber matrix, crosslinked PMAA, provides a solvent-resistant matrix for plasmonic-enhanced LSC ES nanofibers without changing the conventional OPV configuration. The in situ reduction of the Ag nanoparticles simultaneously enhanced the exciton generation of PFBT and the active material with the SPR effect. The dual functional ES nanofibers allow significant light harvesting and exciton generation, leading to a remarkable 18% enhancement in the PCE for both P3HT:PC61BM and PTB7:PC71BM photovoltaic cells. The developed dual functional nanofibers provide a novel approach to integrate plasmonic-enhanced LSC ES nanofibers into OPV devices with a combination of two light trapping methods (SPR and LSC), whilst maintaining the active area coverage.


This work was financially supported by a grant from the Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan. The authors thank Mr Ying-Chiao Wang, Mr Chi-Huang Chang, and Prof. Chun-Wei Chen in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National Taiwan University, for facilitating the TRPL and EQE experiments. We also gratefully acknowledge the Instrumentation Center (sponsored by the Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan) and the Technology Commons in College of Life Science, National Taiwan University, for the confocal experiments.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta02417j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015