 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA10630D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1349-1355


Junlei
Tao
,

Nasir
Ali
,

Kang
Chen
,

Zhaoxiang
Huai
,

Yansheng
Sun
,

Guangsheng
Fu
*,

Weiguang
Kong
* and 

Shaopeng
Yang
*

Hebei Key Laboratory of Optic-electronic Information and Materials, National-Local Joint Engineering Laboratory of New Energy Photoelectric Devices, College of Physics Science and Technology, Hebei University, Baoding 071002, P. R. China. E-mail: fugs@hbu.edu.cn; kongwg@sustc.edu.cn; spyang@hbu.edu.cn

Department of Physics, The State Key Laboratory of Silicon Material, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China

Received
5th November 2018
, Accepted 11th December 2018
First published on 13th December 2018
Interface modifying layers (IMLs) play a pivotal role in the improved performance of perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Herein, we report a new IML based on Bphen:Cs2CO3:BCP (BCB), which is inserted at the interface of phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) and a Ag electrode. Consequently, the efficiency of PSCs is significantly improved by 5% (from 17.57% to 18.29%), mainly due to the increased open circuit voltage (VOC). It is revealed by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) that the work function of Ag is reduced from 4.68 eV to 3.90 eV, after being modified by BCB due to the formation of a strong negative interfacial dipole at the Ag/BCB interface. The decreased work function of Ag improves the ohmic contact between PC61BM and Ag, facilitating carrier extraction and suppressing the charge recombination at the interface of PC61BM and the Ag electrode. As a result, the reverse saturation current of the final PSC is decreased by approximately one order of magnitude, which is consistent with a larger VOC. Our work provides a comprehensive understanding of the interface between a metal electrode and an electron transporting layer (ETL), and hence paves a way towards better interfacial engineering and highly efficient solar cells.

Since the advent of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) in 2009, their power conversion efficiency (PCE) has grown unprecedentedly from 3.8% to 22.7% in the space of just a few years. The motivation behind this rapid growth of PSCs is their excellent photoelectrical properties such as a wider and tunable light absorption range, longer carrier diffusion length, low exciton binding energy, etc. PSCs are normally assembled with a regular configuration based on a mesoporous scaffold or an inverted structure based on planar stacked layers. Inverted planar PSCs have gained considerable attention because of their facile and low-temperature solution-processability. In inverted planar PSCs, phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) has been widely utilized as an electron transport layer (ETL) due to certain advantages like efficient electron extraction, elimination of the notorious photocurrent hysteresis, and passivation of the charge trap states on the surface of the perovskite films. Several studies have shown that materials of fullerene can effectively eliminate hysteresis in PSCs by trap passivation and ion-migration blocking in perovskite surfaces and grain boundaries, and rapid charge transfer between fullerenes and perovskites. However, it comes with a large electron contact barrier (ΔEe) at the interface of PC61BM and the metal electrode due to the high work function (Φ) of metal electrodes (e.g., Ag). Since the diffusion length of electrons is shorter than that of holes in perovskite solar cells, a large ΔEe will result in severe interfacial carrier accumulation, resulting in deteriorated device performance. To overcome this problem, interface modifying layers (IMLs), such as LiF, poly{N1-(4-{9,9-bis[3-(dimethylamino)-propyl]-7-methyl-9H-fluoren-2-yl}benzyl)-N2-[2-({2-[(4-methyl-benzyl)amino]ethyl}amino)ethyl]ethane-1,2-diamine} (PN4N), perylene diimide (PDINO), bathophenanthroline (Bphen), bathocuproine (BCP), etc., have been introduced between PC61BM and the metal electrode. Such IMLs can decrease the ΔEe by lowering the electrode's Φ with the assistance of a negative interfacial dipole, and consequently, all the photovoltaic parameters, such as the short-circuit current density (JSC), fill factor (FF), and open-circuit voltage (VOC), are substantially promoted. Among these IMLs, Bphen and BCP are extensively utilized in various optoelectronic devices. However, the ΔEe is still large enough to degrade the device performance when pure Bphen or BCP is used as the IML. This issue was partially resolved with the introduction of a bilayer i.e. BCP and an additional layer of (poly[(9,9-bis(3′-(N,N-dimethylamino)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)] (PFN), amino perylene diimides (PDIN) or zirconium acetylacetonate (ZrAcac)) into the organic solar cell (OSC) architecture [reference]. However, this bilayer strategy involved more layers with nanoscale thickness, and hence led to high cost and expensive device architectures. Recently, Yang et al. developed Bphen:Cs2CO3 (BC) as an IML to replace Bphen. The film coverage of Bphen:Cs2CO3 on PC61BM was larger than Bphen alone and therefore contributed a stronger negative interfacial dipole when in contact with the Ag electrode. Consequently, the electron contact barrier was slightly decreased, which caused an increase in the PCE of PSCs. It is therefore expected that a minimized electron contact barrier is crucial to fully explore the potential efficiency of PSCs.

In this article, we provide a facile and effective method to minimize the ΔEe between PC61BM and the Ag electrode. Bphen:Cs2CO3:BCP (BCB) is developed as an IML material, where BCP (10 wt%) is used as an n-type dopant. A smaller energy difference between the Fermi level and the LUMO level of BCB induced by n-type doping is obtained with respect to that of BC, which is evidenced by our absorption spectra as well as by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS). As we use BC and BCB as an IML to modify the work function of Ag (i.e., ΦAg = 4.68 eV), the work functions of BC (ΦBC) and BCB (ΦBCB) are decreased to 4.03 eV and 3.9 eV, respectively. The smaller values of ΦBCB than ΦBC are attributed to the stronger negative interfacial dipole (−0.78 eV) formed at the interface of BCB/Ag than that (−0.64 eV) at the interface of BC/Ag. As a result, the electron extraction barrier (ΔEe) between PC61BM and the Ag electrode is reduced from 0.27 to 0.13 eV for Ag/BC to Ag/BCB, respectively, and an approximate ohmic contact is formed at the interface of PC61BM and Ag/BCB. It is evident by steady photoluminescence (PL), time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) and dark current density–voltage (J–V) measurements that charge transfer is more efficient between PC61BM and Ag/BCB than PC61BM and Ag/BC. Finally, PSCs with the configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/PC61BM/BC/Ag and PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/PC61BM/BCB/Ag were fabricated, which yielded best efficiencies of 17.57% and 18.29%, respectively. The enhanced efficiency is mainly derived from the increased VOC. Moreover, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements suggested that the charge transfer resistance (RCT) at the interfaces is reduced from 250 Ω to 215 Ω. The reverse saturation current density (J0) is deceased from 3.40 × 10−8 mA cm−2 to 8.16 × 10−9 mA cm−2 for Ag/BCB to Ag/BC, which is consistent with the VOC increase.

The energy barrier ΔEe at the interface of PC61BM and the metal electrode is defined by the energy difference between the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level of PC61BM and the Fermi level of the metal electrode. As mentioned above, to eliminate the ΔEe achieving an ohmic contact, the work function (Φ) of the electrode should be as small as possible. Therefore, an efficient IML, i.e., BCB, is used to reduce the Φ of the Ag electrode (as shown in Fig. 1a). Compared to BC (control) which has been introduced by Yang et al., BCB contributes a stronger negative interfacial dipole, wherein BCP (10 wt%) is used as an n-type dopant. Fig. 1b shows the molecular structures of Bphen and BCP, where BCP has a similar molecule structure to Bphen but with two methyls serving as the electron-donating groups (as highlighted by the red solid circle). The electron-donating groups result in electron levels closer to the LUMO level of BCB, resulting in an upward shift of the Fermi level. This upward shift of the Fermi level in BCB increases the energy difference between the Fermi levels of BCB and Ag, which enhances the charge transfer at the BCB/Ag interface; hence, the interfacial dipole is promoted. In addition, BCB produces an ultra-smooth perovskite/PC61BM/IML film, with a root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of 1.55 (as shown in Fig. S1). The ultra-smooth film could result in a good interface contact between the perovskite/PC61BM and the Ag electrode precluding the formation of leakage current.


Fig. 2a shows Tauc plots of the absorption spectra of BCB and BC films, which are deposited on quartz. The band gaps of BCB and BC are determined by the intersection of the dotted line and the baseline. It is suggested that BCB and BC possess similar band gaps of ∼3.5 eV but with a much stronger absorption tail below the band gap, as depicted in the inset of Fig. 2a. From the near-band-edge absorption spectra of BCP (shown in Fig. S2a in the ESI), it can easily be predicted that the enhanced absorption tail of BCB is not due to the BCP aggregation upon phase segregation during the crystallization process of BCB. The absorption tail below the band gap of BCB is assigned to the electron transition from the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level to the impurity levels induced by doped BCP. To further explore the role of BCP, ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) measurements are carried out, as shown in Fig. 2b. In UPS, the Fermi level EFi.e., −(hν − E0); where, hν = 21.22 eV is the energy of the UV photon source and E0 is the secondary electron cutoff. The Fermi edge (Fig. 2b, left) represents the energy difference (ΔE) between the HOMO and the Fermi level. Likewise, Fig. 2c shows the energy-level diagram of the BC and BCB whose Fermi levels match with that of Ag. Moreover, in Fig. 2c, the ΔE is determined to be 2.06 eV for BC, while it increased up to 2.2 eV for BCB. The larger ΔE for BCB suggests a shift in the Fermi level toward the LUMO, hence, verifying our prospect that BCP serves as an n-type dopant in BCB. As mentioned above the interface modifying layers can regulate the work function of the metal electrode by the formation of an interface dipole. As shown in Fig. 2c, the work function of BCB/Ag (i.e., 3.9 eV) is lower than that of BC/Ag (4.04 eV), which indicates that the interface dipole at the BCB/Ag interface is stronger than that at the BC/Ag interface. The interface dipole induces a variation in the effective work function Φeff of Ag according to eqn (1):
Φeff = Wfelec + ID
(1)
and therefore, the
Φeff of Ag (modified by BC and BCB) is decreased from 4.68 eV to, respectively, 4.04 and 3.9 eV. The reduction in the effective work function of Ag causes a steeper decrease of the energy band in PC61BM as shown in Fig. 2d. As a result, the electron extraction barrier ΔEe (i.e., the energy difference between the Fermi level of the electrode and the LUMO of the PC61BM) is effectively decreased from 0.27 eV to 0.13 eV. Such a decrease in ΔEe benefits efficient electron extraction. At the same time, the hole blocking ability is improved because the hole extraction barrier ΔEh (i.e., the energy difference between the Fermi level of the electrode and the HOMO of the PC61BM) is increased from 2.06 eV to 2.20 eV. Consequently, the carrier recombination possibility at the interface of PC61BM/BCB/Ag is decreased in comparison with that at the PC61BM/BC/Ag interface, which is favorable to enhance the performance of the devices.


Fig. 3a–c show the physical model of the carrier dynamics based on the UPS results. In PSCs, the carrier recombination losses occur mainly at the perovskite/PC61BM interface. To decrease the carrier losses, one strategy is the abrupt collection of the electrons in PC61BM, which are transferred from the conduction band of the perovskite. Generally, the charge transport efficiency is determined from the energy barrier (ΔEe) in terms of charge carriers crossing the PC61BM/Ag junction. Therefore, reducing the ΔEe is of high significance to reduce the carrier recombination loss in PSCs. It is evident from Fig. 3a–c that the ΔEe induced by Ag/BCB (i.e., 0.13 eV) is much smaller than those of bare Ag (i.e., 0.78 eV) and Ag/BC (i.e., 0.27 eV); therefore, more efficient electron extraction is expected. To confirm our expectation, we performed a dark current density–voltage (J–V) measurement based on an electron-only device: ITO/SnO2/perovskite/PC61BM/IML/Ag. In this measurement, the magnitude of the current is exponentially related to the interface contact barrier ΔEe and a larger ΔEe corresponds to a much smaller current. It is shown in Fig. 3d that negative bias corresponds to current injection from Ag while positive bias corresponds to current injection from ITO. It can be observed from Fig. 3d that the magnitude of the current injected from Ag/BCB is obviously larger than that injected from Ag/BC and is even comparable to that from Ag/SnO2. These observations confirm that the ΔEe at the contact between PC61BM and Ag/BCB is smaller than that at the contact between PC61BM and Ag/BC. It has been reported that the ΔEe can be neglected when it is far smaller than 0.3 eV and the current in such a scenario is solely due to the space charge limited current (SCLC). The electron mobility of the perovskite can be calculated using eqn (2).
(2)
Here,
εr is the dielectric constant of the perovskite, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, d is the thickness of the perovskite film, μ is the mobility, and V is the voltage drop across the device. From eqn (2), the electron mobility in the perovskite with BCB as the IML is calculated to be μ = 1.95 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 S−1. In contrast, the electron mobility in the perovskite with BC as the IML is only 7.17 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 S−1 due to the smaller injected current limited by a larger ΔEe.

To further evaluate the carrier extraction efficiency for Ag with different IMLs, steady photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved PL (TRPL) spectra are obtained, as shown in Fig. 3e and f. For the control device, the perovskite film is deposited on quartz and covered by 30 nm thick PC61BM and 100 nm thick Ag (abbreviated as perovskite/PC61BM/Ag). The PL peaks of the perovskite/PC61BM occur at 765 nm which is in line with previous reports. Since the perovskite films exhibited a similar film morphology and crystallinity (as shown in Fig. S3), the PL quenching is attributed to the interfacial charge transfer. A smaller ΔEe favors efficient charge transfer and therefore a more pronounced PL quenching. It is shown in Fig. 3e that BCB induces a stronger PL quenching than BC, indicating that BCB possesses a smaller ΔEe than BC. Fig. 3f shows the TRPL spectroscopy results of perovskite/PC61BM with different IMLs. All the TRPL curves show a fast decay (τ1) in the first stage and then a slow decay (τ2) in the second stage. The fast decay (τ1) in the magnitude of tens of nanoseconds is due to the interfacial charge transfer process. A smaller value of τ1 is indicative of a faster rate of charge transfer. On the other hand, τ2 in hundreds of nanoseconds is dominated by the free carrier lifetime inside the perovskite. A larger value of τ2 is associated with larger crystal size and fewer deep level defects in the perovskite film. By fitting the TRPL curves at different stages with eqn (3), we can respectively get τ1 (from the pink dashed lines in Fig. 4c) and τ2 (from the green dashed lines in Fig. 4c) for the perovskite films covered by different IMLs:
(3)
The PL decay parameters are tabulated in Table S1. From Fig. 3f, it can be seen that there is little difference in τ2 (i.e., 160 ns) for all the perovskite films, suggesting that the quality of the perovskite films is almost the same in this experiment. The main difference in TRPL curves comes from the change in τ1, which decreases from 21.21 ns (for perovskite/PC61BM/Ag) to 16.33 ns (perovskite/PC61BM/BC/Ag) and 10.74 ns (perovskite/PC61BM/BCB/Ag), respectively. This fact further demonstrates that Ag/BCB is in the favor of more efficient electron extraction than Ag/BC and is in good agreement with our dark J–V curve and steady PL measurements.

Fig. 4a shows the configuration of the perovskite solar cells fabricated in this article, where MAPbI3 is an active layer sandwiched between TAPC and PC61BM while the BCB layer is present between PC61BM and the Ag electrode. Similarly, Fig. 4b shows the cross-sectional SEM image of the inverted structured PSC based on BCB. The thickness of the perovskite and PCBM layers is ∼350 nm and 30 nm, respectively. Likewise, Fig. 4c shows the J–V curves of the PSCs based on different IMLs. It is to be noted that the perovskite solar cell based on BC or BCP only yields a PCE of 17.57% or 16.50% (for detailed PV parameters see Table 1). A champion PSC with PCE = 18.29% is obtained when BCB containing 10 wt% of BCP is used. The poor performance of PSCs based on BCP could be due to osmotic damage of the BCP layer by hot Ag atoms during the Ag deposition, which results in direct contact between PC61BM and Ag. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the related devices is shown in Fig. 4d. The integrated JSC from EQE curves (i.e., 21.81 mA cm−2 for BC, 22.14 mA cm−2 for BCB) is consistent with that for BCB (i.e., 22.34 mA cm−2 for BC, 22.63 mA cm−2) derived from J–V measurements. Moreover, J–V curves of PSCs based on different IMLs are also measured in different voltage scan directions, which are shown in Fig. S4. BCB based perovskite solar cells eliminated hysteresis, which can be attributed to the reduction of interfacial charge accumulation. The histogram of the efficiencies for the PSCs based on BC or BCB is shown in Fig. S5, indicating a good reproducibility.
Device with different IMLs

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
Average PCE (%)
Best PCE (%)

R
S (Ω cm2)

n


J
0 (mA cm−2)
None
20.53
1.034
67.9
13.75 ± 0.67
14.42
7.04
BCP
21.37
1.042
74.1
15.90 ± 0.60
16.50
5.40
BC
22.34
1.054
74.6
17.03 ± 0.54
17.57
4.61
2.08
8.16 × 10−9
BCB
22.63
1.062
76.1
17.91 ± 0.38
18.29
4.25
2.33
3.40 × 10−8

Fig. 4e shows the dark J–V curves of the PSCs based on BC and BCB. In the classical model, solar cells are often described by a metal–semiconductor–metal device structure. The dark current density is given by eqn (4).
(4)
where
J0 and n represent the dark saturation current density and the diode ideality factor, respectively. J0 is directly related to the recombination rate of the carriers, and therefore a larger recombination loss will have a larger J0. Furthermore, the ideality factor n is associated with carrier transport and recombination processes in solar cells. For an ideal diode n is 1, where only direct recombination between electrons and holes is present in the diode. J0 and n can be obtained from the y-axis intercept by extrapolation and the slope of the line, respectively, according to eqn (4), where exp[qV/nkT] ≫ 1. As shown in Fig. 4e, the J0 for BCB based PSCs (in the range of 10−9 mA cm−2) is nearly one order of magnitude smaller than that for BC (10−8 mA cm−2), where n for BCB and BC-based PSCs is calculated to be 2.08 and 2.33, respectively. The decreased J0 and n are directly related to the decreased carrier recombination possibility in PSCs induced by BCB.

Additionally, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) of the PSCs based on different IMLs was carried out, whose Nyquist diagrams are shown in Fig. 4f. The internal series resistance RS consists of the sheet resistance (RSheet) of the PSCs, and the charge transfer resistance (RCT) at the interface between the perovskite and ETL and the interface between the ETL and the electrode. The size of RCT represents the quality of the interface contact, and the RCT for PSCs based on BC and BCB is measured to be 236 Ω and 198 Ω, respectively. Again, this finding indicates that BCB can effectively improve the interface contact, thereby reducing the generation of interfacial carrier recombination; finally, the electron extraction ability is effectively improved.
In addition to the PCE, the stability of the PSCs is another important aspect for the practical application of PSCs. The unencapsulated PSCs based on BC or BCB were tested under ambient conditions (humidity about 30–40% and room temperature) in the dark (as shown in Fig. S6). The results showed that the BC-based PSCs retained 85% of their initial PCE value for 200 hours, while the BCB-based PSCs retained approximately 90% of their initial PCE value. Apparently, PSCs based on BCB exhibited slightly improved stability. And it might be caused by formation of a better smooth surface blocking the Ag atom and moisture diffusion to the perovskite layer.

In summary, perovskite solar cells using Bphen:Cs2CO3:BCP as an IML were successfully fabricated. In comparison to the reference device (i.e., PSCs based on BC), the efficiency of PSCs based on Bphen:Cs2CO3:BCP was increased from 17.57% to 18.29% by 5%. Bphen:Cs2CO3:BCP as an IML can effectively improve the ohmic contact between PC61BM and the Ag electrode by further reducing the work function of Ag. The electron extraction efficiency was promoted that led to reduced charge recombination at both the perovskite/PC61BM and PC61BM/Ag interfaces. Our work is helpful to provide an understanding about the origin of the charge recombination losses at the interface between a metal electrode and an electron transport layer (ETL) and thus, provides a new strategy of interface engineering to achieve efficient perovskite solar cells.


To prepare the perovskite precursor solution, MAI (methylammonium iodide, HeptaChroma) and PbI2 (Sigma) powder were mixed in anhydrous DMF (dimethylformamide, Aladdin):NMP (N-methyl pyrrolidone, Aladdin) (3:2) with a molar ratio of 1:1. The solutions were stirred overnight at 70 °C and filtered with 0.45 μm PVDF filters before device fabrication. TAPC was purchased from Heraeus, Germany. Bathocuproine (BCP) was purchased from Luminescence Technology Co. and the phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) was purchased from Solarmer Materials Inc. Bathophenanthroline (Bphen) (99%) was received from Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Co. Cs2CO3 (99.995%) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.


Devices were fabricated with the structure ITO/TAPC/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/IML/Ag. The patterned ITO glass substrates (10 Ω □−1) were cleaned by sequential sonication in detergent, deionized water, acetone, isopropanol and anhydrous alcohol for 15 min at each step. Then the precleaned ITO substrates were exposed to Ultraviolet-Ozone (UVO) irradiation for 20 min. TAPC solution (10 mg ml−1 in chlorobenzene) was spin-coated onto the ITO substrates at 4000 rpm for 40 s and then annealed at 120 °C for 20 min. Subsequently, the perovskite precursor solution of CH3NH3I and PbI2 was deposited onto TAPC/ITO substrates by a consecutive two-step spin-coating process at 1000 rpm and at 4000 rpm for 5 and 30 s, respectively. At the final spin-stage, toluene as an anti-solvent was dripped onto the substrate. After this the perovskite-precursor coated substrate was annealed at 105 °C for 10 min. Afterward, the PC61BM (20 mg ml−1 in chlorobenzene) was deposited by spin-coating at 1500 rpm for 30 s. The IMLs (BCP, Bphen:20wt%Cs2CO3, and Bphen:20wt%Cs2CO3:10wt%BCP) with 0.5 mg ml−1 in ethanol was spin-coated at 3000 rpm for 30 s without further annealing. Finally, the Ag metal electrode was deposited by thermal evaporation through a shadow mask which determined the cell area to be 10 mm2 at a pressure of ca. 3 × 10−4 Pa.


The current density–voltage characteristics (J–V) were measured inside a N2-glovebox using a Keithley 2400 source-meter under the illumination of AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2). Similarly, the EQE measurements were performed using a CrownTech quantum efficiency measurement system (QTesT 1000ADX) in air. Likewise, absorption spectra were recorded on a UV-vis spectrophotometer (Hitachi, U-3900H). The variation of the morphology was characterized using an atomic force microscope (AFM, Bruker, MultiMode 8). Photoluminescence (PL) spectra were determined using a fluorescence spectrofluorometer (F-7000, Hitachi). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed with an electrochemical workstation (CHI660E, Chenhua Co. Ltd, Shanghai). The HOMO level was measured by ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy (UPS, AXIS Ultra, DLD Kratos). Time-resolved PL was measured using an FLS920 (Edinburgh Instruments) fluorescence spectrometer.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was sponsored by the Natural Science Foundation of Hebei Province, China (E2017201188), the Applied Basic Research Major Program of Hebei Province, China (18964303D), and the Fund of Hebei Science and Technology Bureau (No. 16211241).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta10630d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019