 DOI: 10.1039/D0TA01279C
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 8238-8243


Luozheng
Zhang
,

Xianyong
Zhou
,

Jiaming
Xie
,

Shi
Chen
,

Sanghoon
Bae
,

Jeehwan
Kim
 and 

Baomin
Xu
*

SUSTech Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, Guangdong Province 518055, China

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, Guangdong Province 518055, P. R. China. E-mail: xubm@sustech.edu.cn

Shenzhen Engineering Research and Development Center for Flexible Solar Cells, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, Guangdong Province 518055, China

Department of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

Received
2nd February 2020
, Accepted 5th April 2020
First published on 8th April 2020
Defect-passivation functional groups have been extensively explored in perovskite solar cells (PSCs) in recent years; however, most of these groups were organic, and the integration of inorganic functional groups with organic matrixes bearing other functions has rarely been reported. Here, to demonstrate the effectiveness of this integration, the combination of an inorganic group, K+ ion, and an organic conjugated polyelectrolyte (CPE) matrix which serves as a hole transporting material (HTM) is attempted. The resulting CPE material TB(K) presents much stronger abilities for defect-passivation and hole-extraction, and thus yields a much increased power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 20.01% and increased long-term stability when applied to inverted PSC devices compared with its control polymer TB(Na), where only the inorganic cations are varied from a defect-passivation group to a common one.

After ten years of explosive growth, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have reached a new record power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 25.2%, which surpasses that of most traditional solar cells based on multicrystalline silicon, CuInGaSe, and CdTe. This great progress is believed to have been achieved based on devices with a regular n–i–p configuration, while PSCs with an inverted p–i–n structure still lag behind, and thus a large quantity of research has been devoted to improving their efficiency as well as their long-term stability. As a typical hole transporting material (HTM) in inverted devices, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) could erode its underlying conductive layers, like fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) or indium tin oxide (ITO), due to its acidic dopant PSS, leading to poor stability. Thus various alternatives have been widely explored, including organic and inorganic ones. Among these, special attention has been paid to conjugated polyelectrolytes (CPEs) because of their high hydrophilicity and wettability to the superjacent perovskite layer, which it is supposed will be compatible with the ready casting of perovskite solution during future industrial fabrication processing. The mechanical flexibility of CPEs also means they will be promising HTMs once PSCs are integrated into wearable devices. A CPE was first introduced as an HTM in 2015, where superior long-term stability and a higher PCE of 12.51% were demonstrated. Thereafter, a number of CPE materials were designed and investigated as HTMs. Polythiophene with COONa sidechains, a CPE based on benzene and thiophene units with SO3Na sidechains, a CPE composed of benzothiadiazole and benzene units with SO3Na sidechains, and a CPE constructed from fluorine and triphenylamine units with SO3Na sidechains were successively reported. We noticed that sidechains of SO3Na and COONa were frequently chosen to provide the polymers with water/alcohol solubility; however, no other featured functions were designed or even mentioned for these sidechain groups, and a PCE of only 16.6% was obtained. The situation changed in 2017, when an organic cation, methylammonium ion (MA+), was incorporated for the first time, and the corresponding CPE material, P3CT-COOMA, accomplished a high PCE of 19.6% owing to its improved solubility and outstanding defect-passivation ability. In 2019, our group reported a CPE named TB(MA) whose PSC device yielded a PCE of 19.76%, which is the highest PCE so far realized for CPE based PSCs. Moreover, the defect-passivation superiority of MA+ ions over Na+ ions was quantitatively demonstrated for the first time. These results suggest that defect-passivation capability and any other functions beyond solubility should also be borne in mind when one designs a CPE material, especially at the current stage when no CPE materials reaching a PCE of 20% have been released.

Meanwhile, with the continuous pursuit of high efficiency and stability in recent years, defect-passivation has attracted more and more attention, and consequently various functional groups with defect-passivation effects have emerged. Nevertheless, most of these groups are organic, while the inorganic groups are very limited even though a remarkable performance enhancement has often been attained. Furthermore, the materials bearing these functional groups predominantly served as purely defect passivators, and a combination with other functions like charge transportation has rarely been reported. Therefore, it would be very desirable if inorganic groups could be integrated with organic matrix materials, even organic charge transporting materials, and then more extensive applications could definitely be expected. As mentioned above, we have proved that a copolymer constructed with benzene and thiophene as the main chain units could be a decent HTM, and its CPE analog TB(MA) has shown better performance than PEDOT:PSS. As a result, a copolymer based on benzene and thiophene units could be a promising matrix to demonstrate the feasibility of integration with inorganic defect-passivation groups. On the other hand, as a typical inorganic group, the K+ ion, which has gradually begun to flourish in the last two years, has shown a strong passivation effect when doping charge transporting materials or perovskite layers with inorganic potassium halides or hydroxide. As a consequence, the alliance of K+ with a copolymer could set an example for the integration of inorganic functional groups with organic substrates, and is expected to exhibit exciting properties.
In this work, we incorporate K+ into organic materials for the first time and a CPE HTM based on a copolymer of benzene and thiophene units (noted as TB(K), Fig. 1a) is designed and synthesized as a demonstration. Thanks to its outstanding defect-passivation and hole-extraction abilities, TB(K) presents a much superior photovoltaic performance to its analogue TB(Na) with Na+ as the cation. PSC devices based on TB(K) display a very high PCE of 20.01%, which is the first report for CPE based PSCs with a PCE of over 20%, and increased long-term stability relative to those TB(Na) devices. These results indicate that K+ could be explored in organic charge transporting materials, and more importantly inorganic functional groups could also cooperate with organic matrixes to broaden their functions and their corresponding applications.
The molecular structures of CPE polymers TB(Na) and TB(K) are shown in Fig. 1a, and they were synthesized through similar procedures to those reported, except that the MA ion was replaced by an Na or K ion. Their work functions were characterized by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) and calculated to be 5.09 eV and 5.10 eV for TB(Na) and TB(K) film coated on ITO glass, respectively (Fig. S1), suggesting that both of them could work as HTMs and efficiently extract photogenerated holes from the perovskite layer in view of their matched energy levels. As an HTM layer in an inverted PSC, its light transmittance should be as high as possible in order to let the light pass through this layer and subsequently be absorbed by the perovskite as much as possible. As shown in Fig. 1b, the two HTM layers exhibit almost the same transmittance across the whole range of visible light, and the top values are around 91–92%, very close to that of ITO glass. After rinsing with N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), the solvent used to prepare the perovskite precursor solution, the transmittance does not obviously change, suggesting that the HTM layers are apparently robust and suffer no obvious damage. The morphologies of the HTM layers are displayed in Fig. 1c and d, and the root-mean-square (RMS) roughness is 4.45 nm and 4.42 nm for the TB(Na) and TB(K) films, respectively. All the above-mentioned results may indicate that TB(Na) and TB(K) share very similar properties. However, when it comes to wettability, which is crucial to the upper perovskite film, the observation changes. The contact angle for CPE film is decreased from 13.9° for TB(Na) to 8.6° for TB(K) (Fig. S2), probably due to the higher polarity of –SO3K in TB(K) relative to –SO3Na in TB(Na), which stems from the larger electronegativity difference between K and O compared with that between Na and O. This increased hydrophilicity indicates that the substitution with K could enhance the wettability of CPE and the perovskite precursor solution could easily spread out to yield a film, benefiting its future application in large-scale film-fabrication processing.
Subsequently, the perovskite films on the HTM layers were investigated before fabricating PSC devices. The film was deposited by spin-coating an FA0.85MA0.15Pb(Br0.15I0.85)3 precursor solution with a one-step strategy using chlorobenzene as an antisolvent; the details can be found in the experimental section. As shown in Fig. 2a and b, the morphologies of perovskite layers atop the two CPEs are very similar, with almost the same grain size according to the scanning electronic microscopy (SEM) images. Although a better wettability of TB(K) is supposed to result in a perovskite film with smaller grains, the K+ was believed to be able to benefit the growth of perovskite grains, and thus the balance between these two effects leads to the similar grain size for the two perovskite films. Nevertheless, the film on TB(K) is slightly smoother with an RMS value of 12.2 nm compared with that of 13.9 nm for the film on TB(Na) (see the AFM images in Fig. 2c and d), which is also demonstrated by the cross-sectional images of ITO/HTM/perovskite films in Fig. S3a and b. This smoother surface of the TB(K)/perovskite film could probably benefit the contact with its upper film and thus provide the resulting PSC device with a lower serial resistance and a higher shunt resistance. The absorbance of perovskite films is illustrated in Fig. 2e, where the perovskite film on TB(K) absorbs more light, which should result from its increased film thickness (350 nm and 395 nm for the films on TB(Na) and TB(K), respectively, Fig. S3c and S3d). The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of ITO/TB(K)/perovskite also shows stronger peak intensities for the same reason (Fig. 2f).
PSC devices based on the two HTMs with a configuration of ITO/CPE/FA0.85MA0.15Pb(Br0.15I0.85)3/PCBM/C60/BCP/Ag were fabricated, where PCBM is [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester and BCP is 2,9-dimethyl-4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline. The current density vs. voltage (J–V) characteristics of their champion devices are shown in Fig. 3a. The photovoltaic parameters, open-circuit voltage (VOC), short-circuit current density (JSC), fill factor (FF) and PCE, are summarized in Table 1, and their statistical distributions are charted in Fig. 3b and c. The VOC, JSC, FF and PCE values are 1.06 V, 22.03 mA cm−2, 78.10%, and 18.30%, respectively, when TB(Na) is adopted as the HTM, whereas all of them increase to 1.10 V, 22.72 mA cm−2, 80.01%, and 20.01%, respectively, for the device based on TB(K). The stabilized outputs at the maximum power point (MPP) were also tested, where the current density and PCE were 21.02 mA cm−2 and 17.62%, respectively, for the TB(Na) device measured at 0.93 V, and the corresponding values were 21.81 mA cm−2 and 19.31%, respectively, for the TB(Na) device at 0.95 V, exhibiting the same state of variation as that from J–V characterization. We also conducted external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements to verify the J–V results. As shown in Fig. 3e, light in the wavelength range of 300–800 nm could be efficiently harnessed by both PSC devices based on the two HTMs, and maximum EQE values of over 85% and 88% could be reached for the TB(Na) and TB(K) devices, respectively, yielding the corresponding integrated current densities of 21.43 mA cm−2 and 22.15 mA cm−2, which are within the allowed error range of 5% relative to those extracted from J–V measurement, and consequently confirm the validity of our photovoltaic characterization.
HTM

V
OC [V]

J
SC [mA cm−2]
FF [%]
PCE [%]

R
S [Ω cm−2]

R
sh [Ω cm−2]

a The average values with a standard deviation are calculated from 15 devices.
b In parentheses are the values of the champion devices.

TB(Na)
1.06 ± 0.01 (1.06)
21.39 ± 0.57 (22.03)
78.48 ± 1.32 (78.10)
17.80 ± 0.46 (18.30)
62.36
1.63 × 104
TB(K)
1.08 ± 0.02 (1.10)
22.29 ± 0.43 (22.72)
78.81 ± 1.27 (80.01)
19.03 ± 0.60 (20.01)
50.37
3.99 × 104
To uncover the reason for the enhancement in PSC performance after K+ replacement, we conducted several related experiments, including steady-state photoluminescence (SSPL), time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) and thermal admittance spectroscopy (TAS). The SSPL and TRPL measurements were carried out on films of ITO/CPE/perovskite. As shown in Fig. 4a, once Na+ is substituted with K+, the intensity of the PL peak is drastically lowered, signifying that TB(K) has a much stronger hole-extraction ability and/or the perovskite layer contains more defects. The red shift of the PL peak is also a sign that more defects exist in the perovskite film on TB(K). By fitting the TRPL spectra (Fig. 4b) with a bi-component exponential decay model, the time-constants for the fast decay (τ1) are 8.67 ns and 5.20 ns for the TB(Na) and TB(K) based films, respectively, while those for the slow decay (τ2) are 49.30 ns and 22.00 ns, respectively (Table S2). Since the fast decay represents the charge extraction by the charge transporting layer, the smaller time-constant definitely further demonstrates the stronger hole-extraction ability of TB(K). Meanwhile, the slow decay stems from non-radiative recombination in the perovskite layer. Therefore, the reduced τ2 means that the concentration of defects in the perovskite film is increased after introducing K+. As for the TAS test, it is widely used to quantitatively evaluate the distribution of trap states, and is carried out based on exactly the same device configuration as PSC. The integrated trap densities are summarized in Table S3, where the concentration of deep traps is obviously reduced but that of shallow traps is slightly increased after introducing K+. Since the deep traps are recognized to arise from the defects on the surface of perovskite film, the remarkably decreased number of defects indicates that the interface of CPE/perovskite is defect-passivated due to the presence of K+. As we know, there is a tolerance factor requirement that one material has to meet if it is to be a perovskite crystal. The ionic radii of Na+ and K+ are 95 pm and 133 pm, respectively, and the Goldschmidt tolerance factors of MPbI3 based on M = Na and M = K are calculated to be 0.65 and 0.73, respectively. As a consequence, both Na+ and K+ ions cannot be used to form a perovskite crystal. But with a closer value to the tolerance factor requirement (0.8–1.0), KPbI3 is closer to perovskite in the respect of crystal lattice than NaPbI3. Therefore, the interface of CPE/perovskite for TB(K) could be more ordered than that for TB(Na), leading to fewer defects and more efficient hole-extraction at the TB(K)/perovskite interface as well as a resultant better photovoltaic performance. This is also implied by the increased shunt resistance (Rsh) value (Table 1) which reflects the suppressed charge recombination at the CPE/perovskite interface. On the other hand, the concentration of shallow traps, which are believed to come from these defects in the bulk of the perovskite layer, is raised, agreeing well with the conclusion from the PL assessment. This increased concentration may be attributed to the greater number of grain-boundaries existing in the perovskite film atop the TB(K) layer, as illustrated in Fig. S3c and S3d. To sum up the above evaluation results, we can see that the hole-extraction ability and the defect-passivation at the interface of CPE/perovskite could apparently be improved after replacing Na+ with K+. Although the number of defects in the bulk of the perovskite film suffers a slight increase, the sharply reduced surface defects mean the total concentration of defects has decreased by 16.5%, and therefore the photovoltaic performance is reasonably remarkably enhanced to a superior PCE of 20.01%, which is much higher than the previous record (19.76%) for PSC devices based on CPE HTMs.
The stability of the devices was also surveyed. As can be seen in Fig. 3f, the TB(K) device could maintain 84% of its original PCE after storage in air with a relative humidity of 60%, which is better than for its counterpart based on TB(Na). Since the defects could act as active centers for degradation, the fewer defects for the TB(K) device may render it more stable than its control device based on TB(Na).

In summary, K+ ions and a copolymer based on benzene and thiophene units were chosen as an example to demonstrate the practicability of combining inorganic functional groups with organic matrixes for the first time, and thus a CPE HTM with K+ was intentionally designed. The resulting polymer TB(K) possessed superior abilities of hole-extraction and defect-passivation, and all of the photovoltaic parameters were improved compared with its control polymer, yielding a PCE as high as 20.01% and prolonged long-term stability. Our results confirmed the benefits of choosing K+ as the cation in the design of organic charge transporting materials, and gave a significant indication of the broad future for the design and application of integrated inorganic functional groups and organic substrates in optoelectronic devices.


The synthesis of polyelectrolyte is available in the ESI section.


2,9-Dimethyl-4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline (BCP) was purchased from Ying Kou You Xuan Trade Co., Ltd. Lead iodide (PbI2) was purchased from TCI Company. Methylamine iodide (MAI), lead chloride (PbCl2), lead bromide (PbBr2), methylamine bromide (MABr), formamidinium iodide (FAI), and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) were acquired from the Xi'an Polymer Light Technology. Anhydrous chlorobenzene (CB, 99.8%), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), anhydrous N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) and isopropyl alcohol (IPA) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Company.


The FA0.85MA0.15Pb(Br0.15I0.85)3 precursor solution was prepared by mixing MABr (0.15 mmol), FAI (0.85 mmol), PbI2 (0.85 mmol) and PbBr2 (0.15 mmol) powder in 593 μl of DMF and 148 μl of DMSO.


The perovskite films were fabricated by the antisolvent extraction approach in an N2 glove box. Patterned ITO coated glass substrates were sequentially cleaned in detergent, deionized water, acetone, and isopropanol. The substrate was then desiccated using an oven, before being treated in an ultraviolet-ozone chamber for about 20 min. TB(Na) and TB(K) solutions (dissolved in mixed solvents IPA/H2O = 1/1v/v, 5 mg mL−1) filtered through a 0.45 μm filter tip were spin-coated at 4000 rpm for 50 s on ITO glass, respectively. After that, TB(Na) and TB(K) films were kept at 110 °C for about 20 minutes. Subsequently, the substrates were shifted to the nitrogen-filled glove-box, where an ≈350 nm-thick perovskite layer was prepared on the surface of the HTM layer through a one-step solution casting approach at around 4000 rpm for 30 seconds. During the spin-coating, 150 μl of chlorobenzene was dropped onto the spinning substrates; after that, the perovskite films were baked at 65 °C for 10 min and 100 °C for about 15 minutes. After cooling to room temperature, PCBM (dissolved in CB, 20 mg mL−1) was spin-coated over the perovskite layer at 1000 rpm for another 30 s, and then C60 (30 nm), BCP (8 nm) and the metal silver (100 nm) electrode were successively thermally evaporated in a vacuum chamber at a pressure lower than 4 × 10−4 Pa with a shadow mask. The photoactive area of the devices was 0.06 cm2.


The J–V measurement of the devices under AM1.5G solar 100 mW cm−2 simulated illumination (Enlitech Solar Simulator SS-F7-3A) was performed on a computer-controlled Keithley 2400 Source Measure Unit in air (about 50% humidity) at room temperature without encapsulation using a shadow mask. Light intensity was calibrated with a standard silicon solar cell 91150. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured under ambient atmosphere at room temperature using a DSR100UV-B spectrometer with an SR830 lock-in amplifier. The steady-state PCE was measured by monitoring the current with the largest power output bias voltage and recording the value of the photocurrent. A xenon lamp was used as the light source.


There are no conflicts to declare.


L. Z. Z. and X. Y. Z. contributed equally to this work. This work is supported by the Centers for Mechanical Engineering Research and Education at MIT and SUSTech. The authors would like to appreciate the help on PL measurement from Mr Renjie Zhong and Mr Qingshan Cao.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta01279c
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020