 DOI: 10.1039/C3EE40457A
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1766-1771

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Yuan
Zhang
,

Xuan-Dung
Dang
,

Martijn
Kuik
,

Sarah R.
Cowan
,

Peter
Zalar
,

Chunki
Kim
 and 

Thuc-Quyen
Nguyen
*

Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry and Department of Physics, University of California at Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA. E-mail: quyen@chem.ucsb.edu

Received
8th February 2013
, Accepted 18th April 2013
First published on 22nd April 2013
White light photoconductive atomic force microscopy (pc-AFM) was employed to evaluate nanoscale open circuit (Voc) at high light intensities (up to 200 sun) of three donor:acceptor blends comprising two widely studied polymers and one small molecule donor material. By varying the work function of electron extraction contacts, the Voc observed in nanoscale measurements reveals a unified dependence on the electrode work functions regardless of the blend materials; in line with earlier macroscopic measurements at 1 sun. At high light intensities, an agreement between the nanoscale and bulk Voc is observed. Nonetheless, light intensity dependent Voc measurements suggest that under high light intensities, the Voc obtained by pc-AFM exhibits contact-limited behavior.

Organic bulk heterojunction solar cells (BHJ-SCs) have been demonstrated great potential for efficient light-harvesting and energy conversion applications. Open-circuit voltage (Voc) is a key parameter dictating the power conversion efficiency of BHJ-SCs. One fundamental question that has received much attention is what limits the Voc. Understanding the Voc maximal helps clarifying the loss mechanisms, thus beneficial for the enhancement of Voc. This is technically challenging due to required extreme conditions (e.g. low temperature or high irradiation intensity) without damaging the sample. Photo-conductive atomic force microscopy (pc-AFM) offers a unique, non-destructive technique that allows to probe the Voc in BHJs under high light intensities at microscopic levels. By taking advantage of pc-AFM, we measured the maximal Voc along side the light intensity dependence of the BHJ based on three widely used donors, namely P3HT, PCDTBT and a small molecule, DPP(TBFu)2. The measured Voc exhibits a unified dependence of the electrode work function at various light intensities regardless of the energetics of materials. Our results provide a framework of utilizing pc-AFM for characterizations of energy-conversion materials at a new regime.


Organic photovoltaics (OPVs) are an emerging alternative energy technology that can potentially be fabricated as lightweight, flexible and low-cost modules. Polymer and small molecule bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells have reached a power conversion efficiency (PCE) up to 9.2%, and 7.4%, respectively. Small molecule donor materials have become more attractive lately due to their monodispersity and ease of synthesis and purification.

The performance of a solar cell is mainly reflected in three important observables, namely the short-circuit current (Jsc), fill factor (FF) and open-circuit voltage (Voc). It has been shown that the Jsc is mainly sensitive to the absorption and morphology of the active layer. FF is the maximal obtainable power divided by the Jsc and Voc, and expresses the performance quality of the device and is heavily influenced by recombination. The Voc in OPVs has been the subject of many studies since it has been suggested to depend on many, sometimes competing mechanisms. The optical gap formed by the donor's highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the acceptor's lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) serves as the upper limit to the Voc in an OPV device. This upper limit is not observed due to the formation of a lower-energy bound charge transfer state at the donor:acceptor interface, resulting in significant Voc losses. Since various recombination mechanisms depend differently on carrier density, the behavior of the Voc is governed by external factors such as temperature and light intensity. Finally, the choice of materials used for electrical contacts influences the Voc significantly. Typically, the contact materials used in OPVs are chosen to be Ohmic with the active layer. This implies that their work function (WF) aligns with HOMO of the donor and the LUMO of the acceptor in order to maximize the internal electric field over the active layer, facilitating efficient charge extraction. Non-Ohmic contacts lead to hindered charge extraction/injection, invoking undesired mechanisms such as charge buildup and surface recombination that further reduce the Voc due to interfacial band bending.
The response of the Jsc and Voc on light intensity is a popular and straightforward diagnostic measurement to confirm the buildup of space charge or to discern between trap-assisted and bimolecular recombination mechanisms. The typical domain of the light intensity for these measurements ranges only about 2 orders of magnitude below 1 sun (1–100 mW cm−2). Low light intensity measurements are often hindered by the presence of parasitical device currents rendering the result less sensitive to the incident light and thus less accurate. The response of these parameters at higher light intensities, however, has not been investigated thoroughly. In practice, high light intensity up to 1000 sun can be achieved using solar concentrators. Thus, it is useful to investigate the behavior of solar cell parameters in a high light intensity regime, serving as a possible validation for current descriptive models for the operation of OPVs. Rand et al. predict that for very high light intensities the Voc will saturate to a maximum, constrained by the maximum optical energy gap minus the binding energy of the bound electron–hole pair at the donor:acceptor interface. A practical concern of adopting this technique is the associated Joule heat and resultant damages to the sample, thus complicating the analysis. An alternative way to examine the Voc limit is by analysis of the temperature dependence of the Voc. Rauh et al. and Lee et al. have observed the saturation of the Voc along with the reduction of Voc losses at low temperatures, depending on the light intensity used. To this end, photoconductive atomic force microscopy (pc-AFM) is a fitting method to investigate in this high light intensity regime. Recent work of Kaake et al. has also shown the powerfulness of pc-AFM as an analytical tool to understand the effect of impurity on OPV performance. Contrary to other approaches, white-light irradiation is used to achieve light intensities of about 200 suns. Due to the relatively small size of the AFM tip and focused light spots, this light intensity has been shown to be non-destructive to the sample.
In this contribution, we employ pc-AFM to investigate the Voc based on two conjugated polymers; poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and poly[N-9′′]-hepta-decanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole) (PCDTBT) and an organic small molecule, 3,6-bis(5-(benzofuran-2-yl)thiophen-2-yl)-2,5-bis(2-ethylhexyl)pyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-dione (DPP(TBFu)2) blended with [6,6] phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC70BM) as the acceptor (see Fig. 1a). Details of the experimental setup for pc-AFM are described elsewhere.

Samples used for pc-AFM have a general device structure of indium-tin-oxide (ITO)/BHJ/AFM tip. Different WFs of ITO substrates were obtained by either coating with poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) or by treatment with a self-assembled monolayer (SAM). The latter treatment involved chemical modification of the ITO using 3-aminopropyltrimethoxysilane (APTMS) or just H2O–NH3 activated solution, leading to a WF of 4.3 and 4.6 eV, respectively (for short, the SAM-modified ITO is called APTMS-ITO and ITO treated with H2O–NH3 is called activated-ITO). The AFM tips were coated with various metals (Ag, Au, or Pt) by thermal evaporation. The Voc was determined from nanoscale current–voltage (I–V) characteristics under white light irradiation. All measurements were done under nitrogen environment.



Fig. 1b schematically shows the operational difference between the bulk and pc-AFM solar cell measurements. The solid and dashed lines display the energies of the donor and acceptor, respectively. The major distinction can be found at the electrodes: the devices used for the pc-AFM are inverted to the typical bulk OVP device. Under irradiation the AFM tip collects dissociated holes (here defined as the hole extraction contact), and electrons are collected by the bottom contact (here defined as the electron extraction contact). Thus, the operation of the pc-AFM can be compared to that for inverted BHJ solar cells. It is noteworthy to mention that values of the WF of metal electrodes in Fig. 1b are taken from UPS measurements under ultrahigh vacuum while the pc-AFM measurements using the same metals were performed in N2 atmosphere. Therefore, there might be a WF deviation due to pillow effects.



Fig. 2 shows the light intensity dependence of the Voc (in semi-log scale) for P3HT:PC70BM, DPP(TBFu)2:PC70BM and PCDTBT:PC70BM devices using a Au coated tip, and three different bottom electrodes: ITO/PEDOT:PSS (4.9 eV), activated ITO (4.6 eV) and APTMS-ITO (4.3 eV). As mentioned, due to the relatively deep WF (5.1 eV) of the Au tip, the photocurrent flows toward the Au tip and thus a negative Voc is observed. For a direct comparison to bulk measurements, we reverse the negative sign in the Voc plots. For the three BHJ devices utilizing different electron extraction contacts (ITO/PEDOT:PSS, activated ITO, and APTMS-ITO), a similar trend of the change in Voc with increasing the light intensity is observed: the Voc increases linearly with the increase in light intensity (Plight) in semi-log scale and saturates at a given Plight. Here the light intensity for the Voc saturation is denoted as Psat and the values are provided in Table 1. The light intensity dependence of the Voc and Psat vary for different donor materials as well as with the electron extraction contact WF. For instance, with APTMS-ITO substrates (4.3 eV), the observed Voc maximum is on average larger than when using PEDOT:PSS or activated ITO substrates. This is likely due to a larger WF difference between the AFM tip and bottom electron extraction contact.


V
oc maximum (V)

V
oc in bulk device (V)
ΔVoc (V)

P
sat (mW cm−2)

a Value is taken from ref. 44.
b Value is taken from ref. 2.
c Value is taken from ref. 1.

P3HT:PC70BM
0.92
0.61
0.2
18000
PCDTBT:PC70BM
0.85
0.88
0.13
4200
DPP(TBfu)2:PC70BM
0.87
0.92
0.0
100
In the regime from 1 sun to Psat, with APTMS-ITO electron extraction contact, the slope of the Vocversus log(Plight) plots (log–log scale) in Fig. 2a–c is 0.15 kBT/q, 0.15 kBT/q, and 0.02 kBT/q using a linear fitting for P3HT:PC70BM, PCDTBT:PC70BM, and DPP(TBFu)2:PC70BM, respectively (kBT/q is the thermal voltage). Psat shows a clear dependence on the chosen donors. For example, the DPP(TBFu)2:PC70BM blend shows a low Psat at 100 mW cm−2 (1 sun), when compared to P3HT:PC70BM with a Psat of 18000 W cm−2 (180 suns). For the same group of BHJ films, we do not see an obvious correlation between Psat and the WF difference of hole and electron extraction contacts and these observations are system dependent.

Next, we compare the maximum Voc for various BHJs using APTMS-ITO as the bottom substrate. The values obtained from pc-AFM (see Table 1) are comparable to the Voc of bulk devices characterized at 1 sun. It is interesting to note that the nanoscale Voc observed on P3HT:PC70BM has a maximum Voc of 0.92 V, ∼0.3 V larger than what is observed in the bulk measurement. This result suggests that the present loss mechanisms that mask the observation on the limit of Voc to certain degree are more visible by using pc-AFM. As a result, it allows to probe the maximal Voc at high light intensities. It should be noted that the observation of a saturating Voc agrees with the predictions of Rand et al. and also with the experimental findings by Rauh et al. and Lee et al. based on temperature dependent bulk device measurements. However, the limiting effect on the Voc seems to be stronger than the previous reports. A possible explanation could be due to surface recombination that starts to play a dominant role in contributing to the Voc loss at high light intensities.

To ensure the reliability of the measurements, we compare the influence of the scan history. Fig. 3 shows the Voc and the Isc measured by pc-AFM as a function of Plight under the direction from low intensity to high (forward) or from high intensity to low (backward). For the three BHJs, we do not observe a noticeable difference in these two parameters by pc-AFM in the forward and backward scans, confirming that there is no photo-degradation at high light intensities. One would argue that under such a high light intensity, exciton-charge annihilation (ECA) is likely to play a significant role for the loss of photo-induced carries, severely affecting the Voc. It is observed that when ECA contributes to the carrier losses, the Jsc typically exhibits a quadratic dependence on the light intensity and at higher intensities, the saturation of Jsc becomes more pronounced when losses mechanisms take visible effects. The Jscversus light intensity plotted in log–log scale in Fig. 3 shows a slope of 0.79, 0.79, and 0.7 for P3HT:PC70BM, PCDTPT:PC70BM and DPP(TBFu)2:PC70BM, respectively using a power law fitting. In addition, the Jsc in the studied systems all display an evident linearity over the whole irradiation range. Based on these results, ECA is unlikely to be a dominant factor for the loss mechanisms contributing to saturation of the Voc by pc-AFM at high light intensities.

Fig. 4a compares the obtained Voc maximum of the three blends as a function of electron extraction contact (cathode) WF under 20000 mW cm−2 (200 sun) irradiation using a Au coated tip. Raising the electron extraction contact WF leads to an obvious increase of the Voc maximum, consistent with bulk measurements. Between systems, the same Voc dependence on the electron extraction contact WF is observed by pc-AFM. More importantly, the slope of unity indicates that in the nanoscale measurements, the Voc is mainly dictated by the electron extraction contact WF and is not a result of Fermi level pinning at organic/metal interfaces. A similar trend of the Voc maximum versus electron extraction contact WF is observed by pc-AFM in the low light intensity regimes for all three systems (Fig. S1 in ESI). To further examine the influence of WF on the Voc, we replaced the Au tip with a lower WF, Ag-coated tip (4.6 eV). Using the Ag-coated tip, we observe a Voc maximum of approximately −0.30 V for both small molecule and polymer blends when using the APTMS-ITO electron extraction contact (4.3 eV) (Fig. S2 in ESI). For comparison, we also reverse the sign of the hole and electron extraction contacts WF difference by replacing APTMS-ITO (4.3 eV) with ITO/PEDOT:PSS (4.9 eV) (while keeping the Ag tip as ground). As a result, we observe a positive Voc of +0.27 V with a changed sign regardless of the active materials studied (Fig. S3 in ESI). The value of Voc along with its sign correlates with hole and electron extraction contacts WF differences, which well corresponds with observations of the electrode WF-limited Voc when using non-Ohmic contacts. These results also agree with numerical simulations.

Although the three donor materials show distinct HOMO energies, the observed maximum Voc is nearly identical in the pc-AFM measurements (see Table 1). To explain this observation, energetics of the three blends are diagrammed in Fig. 4b along with the WFs of Au (5.1 eV) and APTMS-ITO (4.3 eV) electrodes. The density of states (DOS) for the HOMO and LUMO are schematically depicted at the energetic position of the HOMO and LUMO centers with the values estimated by cyclic voltammetry. The effective Fermi levels (quasi-Fermi levels) of the donor (EFp) and acceptor (EFn) are depicted by the dotted lines in Fig. 4b and they refer to the energetic states created due to the equilibrium displacement after photogeneration of charge carriers. For simplicity, we consider the regime of light intensity ranging from 1 sun to Psat. With increasing light intensity, one would expect an enlargement of the carrier density that simultaneously shifts EFp and EFn towards their respective HOMO and LUMO center. Based on this notion, we correlate the magnitude of the Voc observed by pc-AFM to the energy difference of EFp and EFn, given by (EFp − EFn)/q where q is the elementary charge. After increasing the light intensity to a certain point, the resultant EFp or EFn may approach the energetic position of the electrodes. In this situation, a further increase of Voc with the light intensity could be impeded by the metal WF and the light intensity where this occurs is Psat. Based on this diagram, it helps rationalizing the similarity of the Voc maximum for the three different blend systems. However, one may not rule out another contribution to the Voc saturation such as the presence of strong surface recombination at extremely high light intensities.


To conclude, we employ pc-AFM to study the light intensity dependence of the Voc for different organic bulk heterojunctions. We observe a universal behavior for the saturation of Voc at high light intensities. The light intensity where saturation occurs strongly depends on the contact materials and photoactive layers. When enlarging the difference of the electrodes' WF, we observe an increase in the Voc and the Voc sign agrees with the chosen contacts. When using an Au tip, the Vocversus electron extraction contact WF dependence exhibits a slope of unity under various light intensities, indicating that the nanoscale Voc is contact-limited regardless of the active material. Based on this, the fact that a similar Voc maximum is observed for different BHJ systems using a Au tip and APTMS-ITO substrate can be rationalized. The high light intensity measurements using pc-AFM provide a useful framework for nanoscale characterization of organic solar cell materials and devices.


This work is supported by the Center for Energy Efficient Materials, an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the US Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences under Grant no DESC0001009. TQN thanks the Camille Dreyfus Teacher Scholar and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Research Fellow programs. We are grateful to Prof. A. Heeger, Prof. P. W. M. Blom (Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research, Mainz), Dr J. Peet (Kornaka Technologies), and Prof. G. Garcia-Belmonte (Universitat Jaume I) for helpful discussion. We acknowledge Kornaka Technologies for providing PCBTBT.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Details of device fabrication, pc-AFM measurement, hole and electron extraction contacts WF dependence of the nanoscale Voc at various light intensities. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee40457a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013