 DOI: 10.1039/C3CP55276D
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 9625-9633


Tridip Ranjan
Chetia
,

Dipankar
Barpuzary
 and 

Mohammad
Qureshi
*

Materials Science Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati, Assam, India 781039. E-mail: mq@iitg.ernet.in; Fax: +91-361-2582349; Tel: +91-361-2582320

Received
14th December 2013
, Accepted 2nd March 2014
First published on 3rd March 2014
A combination of 3-dimensional (3D) hollow mesoporous ZnO microspheres (ZnO HMSP) and vertically grown one-dimensional ZnO nanowires (1D ZnO NWs) on a fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass substrate has been investigated as a photoanode for a CdS quantum dot-sensitized solar cell (QSSC). A comparative study of the photovoltaic performance of the solar cell with devices fabricated with pristine ZnO HMSPs and ZnO NWs was carried out. The proposed photovoltaic device exhibits an enhancement in power conversion efficiency (PCE) upto ∼74% and ∼35%, as compared to the 1D ZnO NW and ZnO HMSP based solar cells. The maximum incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) for the solar cell was observed to be ∼40%, whereas for the devices fabricated with bare ZnO HMSP and ZnO NW the IPCE were only ∼32% and ∼19%, respectively. The enhanced photovoltaic performance of the solar cell is attributed to the high Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area, efficient light-scattering effects and facilitated diffusion of the electrolyte for better functioning of the redox couple (S2−/Sn2−) in the hybrid photoanode. Moreover, a faster electron transport through 1D ZnO NWs provides better charge collection from the photoactive layer, which leads to an increase in the short circuit current density of the device. The present study highlights the design and development of a new hybrid photoanode for solar harvesting.

Semiconductor quantum dot sensitized solar cells (QSSCs) are the emerging technological candidates for the next generation of solar cells. For better performance, QSSCs should ideally have a simplistic approach in terms of material synthesis and ease of electron interactions between the combinations of semiconductors. Though various high band gap electron transport materials are available for photovoltaic applications, ZnO provides excellent bulk electron mobility as well as the richest family of nanostructures thereby exhibiting its potential use in photovoltaics. However, its poor visible light absorption limits the utilization of ZnO in the solar spectral wavelength minimizing its efficient use. The absorption issue has been compensated by coupling ZnO with narrow band gap sensitizers such as dyes. Although, the performance of dye sensitized solar cells based on ZnO is superior, their usefulness is limited by the photo-degradation of the dye used under rigorous conditions. Semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) such as CdS, CdSe, PbS, CuInS2, CH3NH3PbX3 (X = Br, I) are preferable (over dye molecules) because of their high stability and high absorption coefficients, the ability to tune their absorption edge by controlling the particle size and the possibility of generating multiple electron–hole pairs per photon. A number of size- and shape-dependent morphologies of ZnO have been investigated as photoanodes for the fabrication of cost efficient solar cells, out of which one dimensional (1D) architectures have shown intriguing effects in enhancing the efficiency of the solar cells. One possible reason for this could be the availability of a direct transport pathway for photogenerated electrons along the direction of the nanowire (NW) axes and the increased electron diffusion length resulting from minimizing grain boundaries reducing the charge trapping sites.

These 1D ZnO NW networks grown on conducting glass substrates provide an insufficient exposed surface area for the adsorption of sensitizer particles; instead, the use of 3D hollow mesoporous microstructures provide a higher exposed surface area along with better light scattering effects to harvest the solar energy. The advantage of mesoporous hollow 3D microstructures is that they facilitate the electrolyte diffusion process governed by the available pores remaining after sensitization to regenerate the oxidized species, which is not the case for 1D NWs. However, the limiting factor for the 3D structures is the charge collection, wherein the photo-generated electrons interact repeatedly with the traps as they undertake a random movement through the film.
Herein, we have introduced a strategy to integrate the 1D structures and 3D microstructures in a way that their combination provides an enhanced surface area to adsorb sufficient sensitizer particles, facilitating diffusion of the electrolyte, efficient photogenerated charge collection and light scattering effects. In the present work, we have designed and successfully fabricated a novel ZnO based photoanode utilizing the advantages of both 1D ZnO NWs and 3D ZnO HMSP as shown in Scheme 1.

Zinc nitrate hexahydrate (Merck), polyethylene glycol (PEG) 200 (Merck), zinc acetate dihydrate (Merck), 2-methoxyethanol (Merck), ethanolamine (Merck), cadmium nitrate hexahydrate (Merck), hexamethylenetetramine (Merck), sodium sulphide (Merck), chloroplatinic acid (Sigma Aldrich), a triblock copolymer poly(ethylene glycol)-block-poly(propylene glycol)-block-poly(ethylene glycol) or PEG-PPG-PEG (Sigma Aldrich) and terpineol (Himedia) were used directly as received without further purification. Fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass substrates with a sheet resistance of 8–10 Ω cm−2 were obtained from Sigma Aldrich.


The ZnO microspheres were synthesized by following a reported protocol. In a typical procedure, zinc nitrate hexahydrate (10 mmol) was dissolved in 100 mL of polyethylene glycol 200 (PEG 200). The solution was then transferred into a 250 mL round bottom flask, gradually heated to 160 °C and refluxed for 6 h. The solution was then allowed to cool down to room temperature. The precipitate was collected by centrifugation at 10000 rpm and washed with ethanol and distilled water several times to remove the excess solvent and impurities. The precipitate was dried in a hot air oven at 90 °C for 24 h. The obtained brown powder was annealed at 500 °C for 4 h in a muffle furnace and white powders of ZnO HMSP were finally obtained.


The synthesis of CdS nanoparticles (NPs) was carried out by a simple precipitation method in aqueous media. Briefly a 0.5 M Na2S solution (25 mL) in deionized (DI) water was added drop wise to an equal volume of 0.5 M Cd(NO3)2·6H2O solution under vigorous stirring at room temperature. The reaction was allowed to continue for 12 h to complete the reaction and then centrifuged, washed with ethanol, DI water and dried in hot air oven at 60 °C for 12 h.


The growth of ZnO NWs was carried out on precleaned FTO substrates coated with a ZnO seed layer as reported by Gradečak et al. First, the FTO substrates were washed with soap solution and plenty of distilled water, followed by ultrasonic treatment in ethanol and isopropanol and dried under argon. The ZnO seed layer was deposited on the FTO substrates by spin coating a solution of 300 mM of zinc acetate dihydrate and ethanolamine in 2-methoxyethanol at 4000 rpm for 60 s under an inert atmosphere. The substrates were then annealed at 175 °C for 10 min under ambient conditions. The process was repeated twice to form a uniform ZnO seed layer, which offers a platform for the well aligned, uniform growth of ZnO nanowire arrays over a large area. The role of the ZnO seed layer in growing ZnO NWs is to initialize the uniform growth of 1D-oriented NWs. The seed layer also acts as a thin ZnO blocking layer that resists the direct contact between the two electrodes through electrolyte solution in photovoltaic devices. The seeded substrates were then immersed in an aqueous solution containing 50 mM zinc nitrate hexahydrate and 50 mM hexamethylenetetramine for 4 h at 90 °C to grow ZnO NWs. After cooling down to room temperature, the substrates were taken out from the solution, thoroughly rinsed with DI water and finally annealed at 200 °C for 5 min.


The ZnO NW–ZnO HMSP–CdS photoanode was prepared as follows. Zinc oxide microspheres (0.5 g) were added to a mixture of 1 mL of terpineol and 0.2 g of PEG-PPG-PEG and stirred well till a homogeneous slurry was obtained. The slurry was then coated over the ZnO NWs grown on FTO substrates by doctor blade technique. The films were then dried in air and calcined at 480 °C for 30 min to remove the polymer. The thickness of the ZnO NW–ZnO HMSP layer was measured using a surface profilometer and was found to be in the range of 12–15 μm, which was further confirmed by cross-sectional field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) analysis.

The ZnO NW–ZnO HMSP electrodes were in situ sensitized with CdS using a successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) process. Briefly, the electrodes were dipped into an ethanol solution containing Cd(NO3)2·6H2O (0.5 M) for 1 min, rinsed with ethanol, and dried on a hot plate at 70 °C. Again they were dipped into a Na2S (0.5 M) solution in methanol for 1 min, rinsed with methanol and dried at 70 °C. The amount of CdS grown onto the ZnO system was controlled by the number of repeated SILAR cycles, however, the exact concentration of CdS might vary from batch to batch. This cycle was repeated 3 times to adsorb the CdS QDs on the ZnO microspheres as well as on the ZnO NWs. Hereafter, the fabricated photoanode is represented as ZnO NW–ZnO HMSP–CdS.
A schematic of the fabrication procedure is presented in Scheme 2. The FTO substrates having bare ZnO NWs (ZnO microsphere free) and ZnO HMSP (ZnO NW free) were sensitized by CdS following the same procedure and named as ZnO NW–CdS and ZnO HMSP–CdS, respectively. In order to perform the powder X-ray diffraction (XRD), UV-Vis diffused reflectance absorption (DRS) and FESEM analyses, identical films of ZnO NW–ZnO HMSP–CdS, ZnO NW–CdS and ZnO HMSP–CdS were prepared on glass substrates.

The devices were fabricated by sandwiching the fabricated photoanodes between platinized FTO counter electrodes. The Pt counter electrode preparation was performed by spin coating a solution of chloroplatinic acid (5 mM in isopropanol) on a pre-cleaned FTO substrate. The FTO substrates were then placed in a muffle furnace at 450 °C (heating ramp of 5 °C min−1) for 15 min and cooled down to room temperature naturally. The photovoltaic cell construction was completed by injecting a drop of sulfide/polysulfide (S2−/Sn2−) electrolyte into the devices. Electrolyte solution was prepared by dissolving 2 M S and 2 M Na2S in methanol–water (7:3, v/v). The active areas of the QD sensitized ZnO films were found to be ∼1.0 cm2. The cells were ready for photocurrent and incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) measurements.


The XRD measurements were performed using a Bruker D2 X-ray diffractometer with Cu–Kα (λ = 1.54 Å) at an operating voltage of 40 kV and a current of 40 kA. The scan rate was fixed at 0.1° s−1 to record the XRD patterns within the scan range of 20–70°. The UV-Vis DRS were recorded using a JASCO Model V-650 spectrophotometer attached to a 150 mm integrating sphere with BaSO4 as the internal standard. The surface morphology and cross-sectional images of the photoanodes of the solar cells were investigated by FESEM using a Zeiss (Gemini) instrument operated at 5 kV. The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area of the as-synthesized ZnO HMSP microspheres was determined by nitrogen (N2) adsorption at liquid N2 temperature using a Beckman-Coulter SA 3100 N2 adsorption apparatus. The sample was degassed at 150 °C for 2 h prior to the N2 adsorption measurements. The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) measurements were carried out with a JEOL JEM 2100 microscope operating at 200 kV. The thickness measurements of the photoanode films of the solar cells were carried out using a Veeco Dektak 150 surface profilometer. The current density–voltage (J–V) measurements for the fabricated devices were recorded using a Keithley 2400 sourcemeter in darkness and at 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G of solar spectrum illumination. The intensity of the 450 W arc lamp of the Newport ORIEL Sol3A solar simulator was calibrated by using a standard Si photovoltaic cell. The IPCE measurements were carried out with a Newport ORIEL IQE-200 instrument fitted with a 250 W quartz tungsten halogen lamp. The lamp was calibrated with standard Si and Ge diodes. The monochromator illuminated the light on the sample through a Cornerstone monochromator, which was then passed through a chopper. The signal was amplified by a Merlin lock-in amplifier and then recorded.


The morphology of the synthesized materials was investigated by FESEM analysis. Fig. 1 shows the FESEM images of the as-synthesized 3D ZnO microspheres and the 1D ZnO NWs grown (hydrothermally) on FTO substrates. Fig. 1A shows that the ZnO microspheres have an average size dimension of 1–2 μm. Inset B to Fig. 1A represents the hollow architecture of the material which favours efficient scattering of light in the photoanode. The magnified FESEM image (shown in Fig. 1C) of a single ZnO microsphere confirms its porous nature with a high degree of uniformity of pores within the microspheres, which facilitates the electrolyte diffusion along the material. Furthermore, pore size distribution analysis was carried out by BET surface area measurements. Zhou et al. have reported the mechanism of formation of ZnO microspheres by polyethylene glycol (PEG) assisted Ostwald ripening of single crystalline ZnO NPs.Fig. 1D and E represent the low- and high-magnification FESEM images of 1D ZnO NWs grown on FTO substrates.


Fig. 2 shows the FESEM images of the as fabricated ZnO NW–ZnO HMSP–CdS photoanode. Fig. 2A represents the top view of the photoanode, wherein the left half represents the ZnO HMSP coated layer and the right half shows the bare ZnO NWs (ZnO HMSP uncoated). A magnified FESEM image at the interface of the photoanode for better clarity is presented in Fig. 2B, which shows that the ZnO NWs have retained their 1D alignment even after depositing the ZnO HMSP layer. In order to confirm the structure of the fabricated photoanodes of the devices (Scheme 1) a cross-sectional FESEM analysis of the photoanode has been carried out (Fig. 2C and D). The cross-sectional FESEM images of the photoanode show that the thickness of the ZnO HMSP layer over the ZnO NWs is ∼14 μm, while the thickness of the ZnO NW film is ∼1 μm including the seed layer which supports the results obtained from surface profilometer analysis. The retained morphology of the 1D structures of ZnO was verified by the magnified cross-sectional image of the photoanode as shown in Fig. 2D.

The powder XRD patterns for ZnO NWs, ZnO HMSPs, CdS NPs, and ZnO NW–ZnO HMSP–CdS composite are represented in Fig. 3. The XRD patterns of ZnO HMSP microspheres and ZnO NWs are the evidence of their hexagonal wurtzite crystalline phase with a P63mc space group symmetry (JCPDS Card No. 05-0664 and 036-1451). The strong appearance of a (002) diffraction peak at 34.6° confirms the well aligned 1D ZnO NWs which tend to occur along the c-axis normal to the substrate and verifies the high degree of crystallinity of the ZnO NWs. Presence of CdS NPs in the photoanode material (ZnO NW–ZnO HMSP–CdS) is confirmed by the characteristic diffraction peaks (JCPDS Card No. 06-0314). The broad and low intense peaks obtained from CdS indicate the smaller size of the particles deposited on the ZnO microspheres, which is further confirmed by TEM analysis (Fig. S3, see ESI). The estimated average crystallite size of CdS QDs (deposited on the photoanode) determined by calculating the full width half maximum (FWHM) values of the CdS planes using the Debye–Scherrer equation was found to be ∼12.5 nm. The sharp and high intensity diffraction peaks obtained for ZnO HMSP were retained after the deposition of the CdS QDs by the SILAR process, which indicates the crystalline nature of ZnO HMSP.


The N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms of the ZnO microspheres were measured and are shown in Fig. 4. The typical type IV isotherm and H3 hysteresis loops confirm the characteristic mesoporous nature of the as-synthesized ZnO microspheres, which are promising for solar cell applications.

The observed BET surface area of the as-synthesized ZnO microspheres was 70.3 m2 g−1. The Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) pore size distribution curve indicates the high degree of uniformity of pores in the range of ∼10 nm, which is in agreement with the FESEM analysis. Due to the mesoporous nature and high surface area of the ZnO microspheres they provide more adsorption sites for CdS QD sensitization and the electrolyte can readily penetrate through the holes for better functioning.

The UV-Vis absorption spectra of the samples ZnO HMSP, ZnO HMSP–CdS, ZnO NW, ZnO NW–CdS, ZnO NW–ZnO HMSP–CdS and pure CdS NPs were recorded and are presented in Fig. 5. The nanocrystalline CdS QDs absorb photon energy in the visible region (380–520 nm) as shown in Fig. 5 and are widely used as sensitizers for QSSCs. We have observed almost similar absorption profiles in the visible region for both the photoactive layers, namely, ZnO HMSP–CdS and ZnO NW–ZnO HMSP–CdS. This confirms that the adsorption of CdS QDs is confined primarily on the surface of the ZnO microspheres in the photoanode. However, far less CdS QD adsorption on to 1D ZnO NWs (across ZnO HMSP layer) cannot be nullified. The increased absorbance and red shift observed for the samples ZnO HMSP–CdS and ZnO NW–ZnO HMSP–CdS as compared to ZnO NW–CdS is due to the increased adsorption amount of CdS QDs and the subsequent growth of CdS QDs. This further indicates that ZnO microspheres provide a high surface area for better adsorption of sensitizer QDs. We have estimated the optical band gap values of CdS QDs deposited on all the photoanodes by plotting Tauc plots where (αhν)2 is plotted as a function of photon energy (hν) (Fig. S6, see ESI). The estimated band gap energy of CdS for the photoanode ZnO NW–CdS was found to be ∼2.7 eV, while for the photoanodes ZnO HMSP–CdS and ZnO NW–ZnO HMSP–CdS the values were ∼2.35 eV and ∼2.39 eV respectively indicating the smaller size of CdS QDs in ZnO NW–CdS. It should be noted that a slightly higher absorption has been observed in the UV region for ZnO NW–ZnO HMSP–CdS as compared to that of ZnO HMSP–CdS, indicating the role of ZnO NWs.

Reflectance measurements were carried out to investigate the light scattering effect of ZnO NW, ZnO HMSP and ZnO NW–ZnO HMSP films. Fig. 6 shows the diffused reflectance spectra of the respective samples. The films having a ZnO HMSP layer exhibit a much higher reflectance in the wavelength range 420–800 nm than that of the ZnO NW film. This confirms our claim of efficient light scattering by the ZnO HMSP layer in the photoanodes acting as light shields.

The electronic interactions between ZnO HMSP–CdS and ZnO NW were investigated by performing steady state and dynamic photoluminescence (PL) measurements of the samples ZnO HMSP–CdS, ZnO NW–CdS and ZnO NW–ZnO HMSP–CdS.

Previously Kamat et al. have reported that the injection of photoinduced electrons from QD sensitizer particles (e.g. CdSe, CdTe etc.) to the conduction band level of wide band gap semiconductor particles (e.g. TiO2) leads to a decrease in the PL intensity as well as to the exciton lifetime of QDs. The decreased PL intensity and exciton lifetime indicates the excited state electronic interaction between the QDs and semiconductor particles and charge separation or charge delocalisation in the system. To evaluate the electronic interactions between the ZnO NWs and ZnO HMSP–CdS layer we studied the steady state and time-resolved PL spectra for all the photoanodes. The steady state PL spectra in Fig. 7A show a significant quenching in the PL intensity for ZnO NW–ZnO HMSP–CdS as compared to ZnO HMSP–CdS and ZnO NW–CdS, indicating the inhibited recombination of photoinduced electrons and holes, and a possible excited state electronic interaction between the ZnO HMSP–CdS layer and ZnO NWs in the photoanode. A possible reason for the inhibited recombination of photoinduced electrons and holes in the photoanode could be attributed to the efficient charge migration to 1D ZnO NWs injected by the ZnO HMSP–CdS layer. The charge migration or separation effect is also explicit in the sample containing ZnO NW–CdS because of a faster photogenerated electron migration along the 1D single crystalline ZnO NWs as shown in trace b in Fig. 7A. Although we have performed the PL experiments in order to excite only the CdS QDs (rather than ZnO) at an excitation wavelength of 410 nm the effect of defect mediated visible light emission by ZnO cannot be ruled out completely. In the fluorescence spectrum of ZnO NW–CdS (trace b; Fig. 7A) the origin of the peak below 450 nm (i.e., blue emission) could be from the transitions involving Zn interstitial defect states (Zni, shallow donor) to the valance band levels while the shoulder observed in the range 450–500 nm (green emission) may be due to the transition from the conduction band to the deep defect levels of ZnO (created by oxygen vacancies). For a better understanding we carried out PL analysis of pure CdS, ZnO NW and ZnO HMSP excited at a wavelength of 410 nm (Fig. S7, see ESI). From Fig. S7 (ESI) it is clear that the fluorescence peaks for all the photoanodes in the range spanning from 500–650 nm originate from CdS QDs deposited on the photoanodes and not from ZnO. ZnO NWs and ZnO HMSPs exhibit a defect mediated emission peak at a wavelength of 448 nm with a shoulder in the range 455 nm to 480 nm. Fig. 7B represents the de-convoluted steady-state fluorescence spectra of the photoanode ZnO NW–ZnO HMSP–CdS. The strong PL emission contribution at ∼550 nm exhibits a band gap emission of CdS QDs arising from radiative excitonic recombination. The broad emission band contribution occurs at 605 nm, which could be due to the recombination of trapped carriers generated by defect states.
Further, the dynamic PL spectra of all the samples excited at 410 nm were recorded to confirm the enhanced charge separation in ZnO NW–ZnO HMSP–CdS (Fig. 8). The PL decay traces of all the samples were fitted with a bi-exponential function to calculate the exciton lifetime. The PL lifetimes (τ1 and τ2) as well as the average emission decay lifetime (〈τ〉) for the samples are tabulated in the inset to Fig. 8. The average lifetime values were calculated using eqn (1):
(1)
It is well known that the photoexcited CdS QDs exhibit electron (e−)–hole (h+) pair separation followed by charge carrier recombination via radiative or non-radiative processes. When CdS QDs are anchored to the ZnO surface, the photoexcited CdS QDs which are capable of injecting electrons into the conduction band level of ZnO via the delocalization of electron wave function because of the lower conduction band offset of ZnO, yield a substantial decrease in the exciton lifetime of the system. The faster exciton average lifetime for ZnO NW–CdS (7.75 ns) than for ZnO HMSP–CdS (8.88 ns) indicates a stronger electronic interaction between ZnO NWs and CdS QDs and a favourable photogenerated charge migration along the 1D ZnO NWs. A significant decrease in the average PL lifetime of ZnO NW–ZnO HMSP–CdS (4.97 ns) was observed compared to that of ZnO HMSP–CdS (8.88 ns). The static quenching of the PL lifetime confirms the favourable excited state electronic interaction between the ZnO NWs and ZnO HMSP–CdS layer and participation of the ZnO NWs in the efficient and spontaneous collection of photogenerated electrons from the ZnO HMSP–CdS layer.


Fig. 9A shows the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the solar cells, constructed using the combination of 1D ZnO NWs, 3D ZnO HMSPs and CdS (device 1), 3D ZnO HMSPs and CdS (device 2) and the bare ZnO NWs–CdS (device 3) with AM 1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2. The photovoltaic parameters, short circuit current density (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF) and the overall power conversion efficiency (PCE, η) of device 1 were found to be around 9.01 mA cm−2, 511 mV, 51% and 2.35%, respectively and for device 2 they were found to be around 7.11 mA cm−2, 490 mV, 44% and 1.53%, respectively, while for the solar cell made from bare ZnO NWs (device 3) the Jsc, Voc, FF and PCE were around 5.52 mA cm−2, 330 mV, 32%, and 0.59%, respectively.


Table 1 summarizes the measured and calculated values obtained from each J–V curve and the average values and standard deviations for each device configuration. The increase in Jsc from 5.52 mA cm−2 (device 3) to 7.11 mA cm−2 (device 2) is attributed to the enhanced photon absorption associated with sufficient loading of CdS QDs onto the surface of the mesoporous ZnO microspheres (ZnO HMSPs) and the excellent light scattering property of the ZnO HMSP film. As a result, a greater number of photo-generated electrons can be injected by the CdS QDs into the 3D ZnO HMSPs in device 2 as well as is the case for device 1, but not for device 3. It should be noted that the increase in the Jsc value from 7.11 mA cm−2 to 9.01 mA cm−2 for device 1 as compared to device 2 is indicative of better photogenerated charge separation in the former case due to the efficient charge collection and migration through the 1D ZnO NWs to the external circuit which reconfirms our claim made from the PL studies. The significant increase in FF from 32% (device 3) to 44% (device 2) and to 51% (device 1) is attributed to a lower recombination leading to a better charge separation, which is facilitated by the enhanced diffusion of electrolyte to regenerate the oxidized species in the respective ZnO HMSP layers by the redox couple (S2−/Sn2−). The enhancement in Voc for devices 1 and 2 over device 3 can be explained by eqn (2):
(2)
where
k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, q is the electronic elementary charge, Jinj is the flux of electron injection from CdS QDs to ZnO, ncb is the concentration of electrons on the ZnO surface in dark equilibrium, kr is the rate constant for the recombination reaction taking place at the ZnO/electrolyte interface, and [S22−] is the concentration of S22− in the electrolyte. From eqn (2) it is clear that Voc is directly proportional to Jinj and indirectly proportional to kr. The combination of 3D ZnO HMSP with 1D ZnO NW in device 1 and the presence of pristine ZnO HMSPs in device 2 enhances the surface area of the ZnO film for higher loading of CdS QDs as compared to that for the bare ZnO NWs (device 3), which clearly reveals the higher Jinj value for both the devices 1 and 2. Moreover, the CdS QDs adsorbed on the surface ZnO inhibits the direct contact of the electrolyte with the ZnO surface thereby reducing the recombination rate (kr). The combined effect of the increase in Jsc and Voc values are reflected in the increase in the overall PCE performance of device 1.

Device
Thickness (μm)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (mV)
FF (%)
PCE (η, %)
1
∼1 + 14
9.01 (8.58 ± 0.4)
511 (488 ± 17)
51 (48.5 ± 1.1)
2.35 (2.15 ± 0.2)
2
∼14
7.11 (6.76 ± 0.3)
490 (450 ± 36)
44 (41.8 ± 2.1)
1.53 (1.23 ± 0.18)
3
∼1
5.52 (4.90 ± 0.6)
330 (316 ± 13)
32 (30.6 ± 1.5)
0.59 (0.41 ± 0.1)

Fig. 9B shows the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) as a function of wavelength for the fabricated QSSCs. In principle, the IPCE of a solar cell is dependent on (i) the light harvesting efficiency, (ii) the quantum yield of electron injection and (iii) the efficiency of collecting injected electrons. From Fig. 9B, it is obvious that the IPCE values for the hybrid photoanode based QSSC (device 1, ∼40%) and the pristine ZnO HMSP photoanode based QSSC (device 2, ∼32%) are much higher than the device based on bare ZnO NWs (device 3, ∼19%) in the measured wavelength range from 370 nm to 550 nm and exhibited a red shift towards a longer wavelength of about 50 nm. These results indicate that the photoanodes having a ZnO HMSP–CdS layer have better light harvesting and scattering ability than the device with bare ZnO NWs. The better light harvesting ability is attributed to the efficient sensitization of the mesoporous ZnO film with CdS QDs and enhanced light confinement in the photoanodes of device 1 and 2 because of the hollow architecture of the ZnO microspheres. These factors lead to the better absorption of solar irradiation and an increase in the quantum yield of electron injection in the respective devices. Further, the efficient regeneration of the oxidized CdS QDs by the redox couple (S2−/Sn2−), is due to the facilitated diffusion of the electrolyte in the photoanodes of device 1 and 2 which reduces the recombination rate, increases the photogenerated charge collection and improves the IPCE values as compared to those of device 3. A similar trend as that observed for device 2 in the improvement of the IPCE value was observed for device 1 due to the effective charge separation. The increase in the charge separation and hence the higher Jsc value for device 1 compared to that of device 2 could be attributed to the faster electron collection by the 1D ZnO NWs from the ZnO HMSP–CdS layer injected by photoexcited CdS QDs. In essence, the photoanode architecture that provides a higher surface area, facilitates electrolyte diffusion for oxidation reactions, excellent charge separation and light scattering allowing us to design a photovoltaic with enhanced performance.

We have successfully designed and fabricated a new hybrid photoanode utilizing 3D ZnO HMSP in combination with 1D ZnO NWs for CdS QSSCs. Enhanced charge separation and excited state electronic interactions between the ZnO HMSP–CdS and ZnO NWs in the photoanode have been proved by performing steady state and time decay PL measurements. We have obtained a PCE of 2.35% for the hybrid photoanode solar cell, while the bare ZnO HMSP and conventional ZnO NW based solar cells have shown PCE values of 1.53% and 0.6% respectively. Hence a significant enhancement in the PCE (η) was achieved for the proposed architecture of the solar cell, i.e. ∼35% and ∼74% when compared to the pristine ZnO HMSP and conventional ZnO NW based photovoltaic devices respectively. An improved IPCE value was obtained for the hybrid photoanode based solar cell (∼40%) compared to that obtained for the pristine ZnO HMSP (∼32%) and ZnO NW (∼19%) based solar cells which confirms the better light harvesting ability of the device. Additionally, the presented work shows a way of using 3D mesoporous materials in combination with 1D structures for making efficient QSSCs.


We acknowledge the Department of Science and Technology (DST), India for financial support through: DST/SR/S1/IC-25/2009 and DST/TSP/2009/23. The use of the infrastructure and instrument facilities of the Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, India is acknowledged.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: FESEM images of the fabricated photoanodes, X-ray diffraction analysis of 1D ZnO NWs grown on glass substrates, FESEM and TEM images of the CdS QD deposited ZnO microspheres are given in the supporting information. See DOI: 10.1039/c3cp55276d
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2014