 DOI: 10.1039/C4TA02216E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 16877-16883


Lifei
Yang
,

Xuegong
Yu
*,

Mingsheng
Xu
,

Hongzheng
Chen
 and 

Deren
Yang
*

State Key Lab of Silicon Materials Department of Materials Science and Engineering Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, P. R. China. E-mail: yuxuegong@zju.edu.cn; mseyang@zju.edu.cn

Received
3rd May 2014
, Accepted 15th July 2014
First published on 16th July 2014
Graphene-on-silicon (Gr–Si) heterojunction solar cells have recently attracted significant attention as promising candidates for low-cost photovoltaic applications. However, the power conversion efficiency of Gr–Si solar cells is generally smaller than 4% without chemical doping treatments. It is mainly limited by the low work function of Gr and high density defect states at the Gr–Si interface. Here, we have reported a new structure of Gr–Si solar cells by introducing a graphene oxide (GO) interlayer to engineer the Gr–Si interface for improving device performance. It is found that the GO interlayer can effectively increase open circuit voltage and meanwhile suppress the interface recombination of solar cells. As a result, a maximum efficiency of 6.18% can be achieved for the Gr/GO/Si solar cells, which is a new record for the pristine monolayer Gr–Si solar cell reported to date. Further, it is clarified that the Gr/GO/Si solar cell is significantly more stable than the Gr–Si solar cell with chemical doping. These results show a new route for fabricating efficient and stable chemical-doping-free Gr–Si solar cells.

Widespread concern regarding energy sources has created a surge in the efforts to explore solar cells. Most of the current commercial solar cells are based on Si because Si materials have the advantages of the broad spectrum absorption range of solar radiation, abundant resources on earth, and well-developed processing techniques. However, traditional crystalline Si solar cells, based on a p–n junction, require elaborate processing conditions. To reduce high cost and improve the efficiency of Si solar cells, various technologies have been explored. Compared to p–n junction, the Schottky junction has the merits of low cost and easy fabrication, which is usually based on the contact of metals with silicon. However, the thick metal layer in a conventional Schottky junction absorbs most of the solar radiation, and therefore limits the efficiency of solar cells. Recently, a transparent conductor, such as ITO and carbon nanotube films, have been used to replace the metal film, resulting in a new type of heterojunction solar cell. Graphene (Gr), as a novel type of two-dimensional material, sheds new light in this field because of its fascinating properties such as near-zero band-gap, high electrical conductivity, ultra high mobility, high transparency and excellent chemical and physical stability.

The first Gr-on-Si (Gr–Si) heterojunction solar cell was fabricated by Li et al. in 2010, which achieved an efficiency of 1.5%. Afterwards, considerable progress has been made over the past three years. Chemical doping has been recognized as the most effective approach to enhance the performance of Gr–Si solar cells because it can increase the junction built-in potential and decrease the Gr sheet resistance through modulating the Fermi level of the Gr film. Recently, Miao et al. reported that the efficiency of Gr–Si solar cells can be improved from ∼2% to 8.6% after p-type doping of Gr films by bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)amide [(CF3SO2)2NH] (TFSA). However, it should be noted that the chemical doping of Gr is generally not stable, and therefore the corresponding solar cells suffer from degradation in efficiency within days, which is not suitable for practical applications. Excluding chemical doping, the efficiencies of pristine monolayer Gr–Si solar cells reported by various research groups are actually not higher than 4%. To improve the efficiency of Gr–Si solar cells, Feng et al. used an Si-pillar-array (SPA) to replace planar Si for improving incidental light harvest, which should accordingly favor energy conversion. However, the typical Gr/SPA hetero-junction solar cells only exhibited an efficiency of about 2.90%. The main drawback is that a large quantity of electronic states existing at the Gr/SPA interface, leads to high interface recombination probability for minority carriers.
In this work, we have reported a new structure of Gr–Si solar cells by inserting a graphene oxide (GO) interlayer between the monolayer Gr and Si for improving solar cell performance. The introduction of the GO interlayer can effectively increase the open circuit voltage and suppress the interface recombination of solar cells. The efficiencies of the Gr/GO/Si solar cells are distributed in the range of 5.10–6.18%. To the best of our understanding, this is a new record for the efficiency of pristine Gr–Si solar cells without chemical doping reported to date.

Monolayer Gr was grown by a copper-catalyzed low pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) method at 1000 °C using CH4 (20 sccm) as the carbon source and H2 (40 sccm) as the reduction gas. A traditional PMMA assisted wet transfer process was used for Gr transfer. The PMMA was spin coated onto the surface of the Gr at 4000 rpm for 30 s, followed by curing at 200 °C for 10 min. After the Gr on the backside of the Cu foil was removed by exposing to ozone for 10 min, the Cu foil was etched away using a mixture of FeCl3 and HCl solution to obtain the PMMA/Gr film. The PMMA/Gr film was rinsed in DI water 3 times, then transferred onto the target substrate, and finally the PMMA was removed using acetone. The resulting Gr films were characterized using a Raman spectrophotometer (Blucke, with a 532 nm laser) and their sheet resistances were measured with a Hall system (Lakeshore).


A single layer of GO (powder, with an average flake size of ∼1 μm and an average flake thickness of ∼0.8 nm) was obtained from XFNANO. Poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA, MW 400000–500000, 20 wt% in water) was purchased from Sigma Aldrich. After cleaning the Si wafer using the IMEC cleaning process, the GO layer was deposited on Si surface by layer-by-layer (LBL) assembling techniques, which allows precise control of thickness on the nanometer scale by varying assembling cycles. In detail, the Si wafer was first immersed in the PDDA solution (0.2 wt%, pH ∼ 9) for 15 min to assemble a layer of positively charged PDDA and then thoroughly washed with DI water. The PDDA-treated Si wafer was then immersed in the GO colloidal suspension (0.5 mg mL−1, pH ∼ 9) for another 15 min to assemble a GO layer and thoroughly washed with DI water again, thus completing an assembling cycle. After certain assembling cycles, up to five cycles in our work, the wafer was dried under nitrogen flow and the PDDA removed by 1 h heat treatment at 400 °C under forming gas. The transmittance of the GO layers deposited on glass with different assembling cycles by the same process was investigated using a UV-vis absorption spectrometer (Varian Cary 100). The thickness of the GO layer was measured with AFM (Fig. S1).


An N-type 〈100〉 single c-Si wafer with a resistivity of 3 Ω cm−1 was used as the substrate to fabricate the Gr/GO/Si solar cells. After depositing the GO layer on the Si surface, the monolayer Gr was transferred onto the top of the GO layer with the help of PMMA, and then PMMA was removed by acetone. The front contacts (Ag, 200 nm) were formed on the Gr film by thermal evaporation through a mask, while the backside contacts were formed by scratching the InGa eutectic alloy. As a reference, the Gr–Si solar cells were fabricated using a similar process, with the exception that no GO layer was introduced at the Gr–Si interface. Finally, a copper conductive tape was connected to the Ag electrode as the anode and a copper plate was attached to the InGa as the cathode, thus forming a complete solar cell (illuminated in Fig. S2a). In the measurements of photovoltaic properties, the area outside the Ag electrode was completely covered by black tape, leaving only the area inside the Ag electrode as the working area (0.085 cm2) under illumination. The performance of solar cells were measured using a Keithley 2400 source meter and a solar simulator under AM 1.5G conditions at an illumination intensity of 100 mW cm−2, calibrated by a standard Si solar cell. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the solar cells was obtained by an EQE measurement system (Oerlikon) across a wavelength range of 300–1100 nm.


The Gr/GO/Si solar cell can be illustrated as a sandwich structure consisting of a monolayer Gr sheet, a GO interlayer and an n-Si substrate, as shown in Fig. 1a. Note that we utilize a different method to fabricate solar cell devices in our experiment. The previously reported fabricating method normally uses an Si wafer with a thick SiO2 layer as the starting substrate. The SiO2 layer on Si was etched to form a Si window, which was in contact with Gr, defining the working area of the device. The metal contact was restricted on the SiO2 layer and was insulated to Si by the thick SiO2 layer between them. Different from the usual fabricating method mentioned above, we use polished Si wafers without an SiO2 layer as the starting substrate for our solar cell fabrication. This process avoids the formation and etching steps of the SiO2 layer for the formation of an Si window. The resulting devices have a leakage current in the order of μA cm−2 at reverse bias (Fig. S2b), which is comparable with the Gr–Si solar cells reported in the literature fabricated by the method discussed above. This indicates that our simple fabricating process would not cause shunt problems for the devices.

The sheet resistances of the Gr films used in our solar cells were in the range of 600–1000 Ω □−1. Fig. 1b shows the Raman spectrum of the Gr film. The intensity of the D band of the Gr film at 1350 cm−1 is very low compared to the G band, and the intensity ratio of the D band to G band is about 2.2. These characteristics indicate that the Gr film is a monolayer with high quality. The thickness of the GO interlayer can roughly be evaluated through multiplying the GO monolayer thickness by assembling cycles, e.g., 0.8 nm, 1.6 nm, 2.4 nm, 3.2 nm and 4 nm for 1 to 5 assembling cycles, respectively. The GO layers used in our experiment display transmittance in the range from 97% to nearly 100% in the wavelength range of 400–1000 nm, which is higher than that of the monolayer Gr, as illustrated in Fig. 1c. Such high transparency of the GO layers is very important for their integration into the Gr–Si solar cell without causing light absorption loss.
Fig. S3 shows the X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) of GO as-received and after one hour heat treatment at 400 °C under Ar/H2. It can be found that the relative content of carbon–carbon bonds (C–C, 284.8 eV peak) slightly increases from 67% to 70%. This indicates that the reducing extent of the GO film is quite low. On the other hand, the electrical conductivity of the GO films deposited on the SiO2 substrate was inspected before and after the annealing process. It was found that the sheet resistances of the GO films before and after annealing are both larger than 106 Ω □−1, which is beyond the measurement limit of our four-probe system. This suggests that the GO films subjected to 400 °C heat treatment for 1 h still acts as an insulator. Actually, it has been reported that an annealing process at much higher temperature in the range of 1000–1100 °C is required to lower the sheet resistance of the GO film to 104 Ω □−1. Fig. S4 compares the illuminated J–V curves of the Gr/GO/Si and GO/Si devices. It can be seen that no obvious photovoltaic effect occurs for the GO/Si device. These results indicate that the Gr/GO/Si is still a Gr–Si heterojunction device and the GO interlayer acts as an insulator layer. Thus, it is reasonable to point out that the Gr/GO/Si device is an MIS (metal-insulator-semiconductor) structure based on a Schottky junction.

Fig. 2a shows the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of a typical Gr/GO/Si (2.4 nm thick GO interlayer) and a Gr–Si solar cell. The short circuit current (JSC), open circuit voltage (VOC), and fill factor (FF) of the Gr/GO/Si device are 26.6 mA cm−2, 0.45 V and 0.52, respectively, while the corresponding values of the Gr–Si device are 21.4 mA cm−2, 0.31 V and 0.24, respectively. As a result, the power conversion efficiency of the Gr/GO/Si solar cell reaches 6.18%, nearly three times higher than the efficiency of the Gr–Si solar cell with a value of 1.57%. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the Gr/GO/Si and Gr–Si solar cells are shown in Fig. 2b. The Gr/GO/Si device shows an EQE of around 60% in the photoresponsive wavelength range from 400 nm to 950 nm, which is larger than that of the Gr–Si device within the same range. The current density calculated based on the EQE curves are 25.2 mA cm−2 and 20.3 mA cm−2 for Gr/GO/Si and Gr–Si solar cells, respectively, which are consistent with the JSC values in Fig. 2a. The higher EQE for the Gr/GO/Si solar cell can be attributed to the passivation of the GO interlayer for the Si surface, which will be explained in detail later. Fig. 2c shows the distribution of VOC, FF and efficiency for the Gr/GO/Si (2.4 nm thick GO interlayer) and Gr–Si solar cells. It can be seen that the trends reported in Fig. 2a are reproduced on all the samples. The VOC and FF of the Gr/GO/Si solar cells are in the range of 0.44–0.45 V and 0.44–0.52, respectively, which are significantly larger than those of the Gr–Si solar cells. The JSC also shows a similar trend for these two structures of solar cells. The JSC of the Gr/GO/Si solar cells are 25.3–26.6 mA cm−2, while the values of the Gr–Si solar cells are 19.7–21.4 mA cm−2. The performance improvement of the Gr/GO/Si solar cells, especially FF and VOC, finally results in efficiencies in the range of 5.10% to 6.18%, which are considerably higher than those of the Gr–Si solar cells, which are in the range of 1.18–1.57%. These results clearly show that the introduction of a thin GO interlayer can significantly improve the efficiency of solar cells. Fig. 3 shows the evolution of VOC and JSC of the Gr/GO/Si solar cells with different thicknesses of the GO interlayer. The J–V characteristics of typical Gr/GO/Si solar cells with different GO interlayer thicknesses are shown in Fig. S5. It can be seen that the JSC of the solar cells keeps nearly constant when the GO interlayer thickness is smaller than 2.4 nm, and then decreases with an increase in the GO interlayer thickness. It is easily understood that the tunneling probability of minority carriers through the GO interface is not variable in the case of GO interlayer thickness smaller than 2.4 nm, and then significantly decreases when the thickness of GO interlayer increases. However, the VOC of the Gr/GO/Si solar cells first increases with an increase in the GO thickness, and reaches a maximum value when the GO interlayer thickness is 2.4 nm. Afterwards, the VOC of the solar cells decreases with an increase in the GO interlayer thicknesses. This suggests that the VOC of the Gr/GO/Si solar cells strongly depends on the thickness of the GO interlayer. This is consistent with several previous publications.

Fig. 4 shows the energy band diagram of the Gr/GO/Si solar cell in dark conditions. According to the thermal emission theory, the majority current (electron) under a bias can be described by eqn (1).
(1)
where
A* is the effective Richardson constant (≈112 A cm−2 K−2 for n-Si), k is the Boltzmann constant, ϕB is the Schottky barrier height, the difference between the work function of graphene and the electron affinity of silicon (ϕB = WGr − χSi), T is the absolute temperature, exp(−χ−1/2δ) is the tunneling transmission probability, χ (eV) is the mean barrier height presented by the GO insulator layer, δ is the thickness of the GO insulator layer and n is the ideality factor. The work function difference between the Gr and the n-Si creates a built-in electric field in the depletion region of the Si near surface, which separates the photogenerated electron-hole pairs. Holes tunnel through the GO insulator layer and then are collected by Gr, thereby generating current Jp, which is denoted as JSC for the short-circuit condition (Jp ≈ JSC). VOC can be solved by equating Jn to Jp because these two currents with opposite direction will be equal for the open-circuit condition, as shown in eqn (2).

(2)
It is obvious that the value of VOC is dependent on the barrier height ϕB, n factor, χ−1/2δ and JSC. Through analyzing the dark lnJ–V curves, the values of ϕB and the n factor of typical solar cells are extracted (Fig. S6). The values of ϕB for the Gr/GO/Si and Gr–Si solar cells are 0.76 and 0.79 eV, respectively, while the values of n factor for the Gr/GO/Si and Gr–Si solar cells are 2.6 and 2.1, respectively. Statistically, the values of ϕB for the Gr/GO/Si solar cells (with different GO interlayer thicknesses) are in the range of 0.76–0.81 eV, while the corresponding values for the Gr–Si solar cells are 0.76–0.79 eV. These values indicate that ϕB is nearly the same for the Gr/GO/Si and Gr–Si solar cells. More importantly, the values of n factor for the Gr/GO/Si solar cells are in the range of 2.2–2.6, while the corresponding values for the Gr–Si solar cells are 1.6–2.1. It is definite that the increase in n factor for the Gr/GO/Si solar cells will lead to an increase in VOC according to eqn (2), benefitting the improvement of solar cell performance. This result is quite similar with the previously reported phenomenon on the Au/SiO2/n-Si device. Regarding the term −χ−1/2δ, it can be induced that the VOC of solar cell is expected to increase with the increase in GO interlayer thickness. However, the GO interlayer also behaves like a simple series resistance (Table S1), which decreases JSC. When the thickness of the GO interlayer is above a certain value of 2.4 nm, the VOC will decrease with the decrease in JSC.
Furthermore, it is known that the Gr–Si interface plays a very important role in the performance of the solar cell because the interfacial defects usually cause electronic states, and therefore become recombination centers for minority carriers. To passivate silicon surface states, methylated Si has been previously used in the fabrication of Gr–Si solar cells. Here, we investigated the passivation effect of the GO layer on the Si surface. Fig. 5 shows the variation of effective carrier lifetime and deep level states of the Gr–Si and GO/Si samples measured by microwave photo-induced conductance decay (MW-PCD) and deep level transient spectroscopy (DLTS) techniques, respectively. It can be seen from Fig. 5a that the average effective carrier lifetime (τeff) of the Gr–Si sample is 12 μs, while the corresponding value of the GO/Si sample is 33 μs. By assuming that the Si bulk lifetime (τbulk) is significantly larger than τeff, it can be deduced that surface recombination velocity (S) of Gr–Si is about 2000 cm s−1, while the S value of GO/Si is about 600 cm s−1, according to 1/τeff = 1/τbulk + 2S/D (D is the thickness of the Si wafer). This implies that the GO layer can effectively passivate the Si surface. Fig. 5b shows the DLTS spectra of the GO/Si and Gr–Si samples. It can be seen that there is a broad peak in the DLTS spectra of both the samples whose maximum values are located at a low temperature and at a high temperature for the GO/Si and Gr–Si samples, respectively. The broad characteristics of peaks suggest that the defects at both the GO/Si and Gr–Si interfaces cause extended defect states. The energy level of these states at the GO/Si interface corresponding to its DLTS peak position is ET = EC – 0.18 eV with an electron capture cross-section of 10−17 cm2, while the one at the Gr–Si interface is ET = EC – 0.42 eV with an electron capture cross-section of 10−15 cm2. This strongly clarifies that the introduction of the GO interlayer can modify the energy distribution of the electronic states at the Gr–Si interface from deep levels to shallow levels, therefore reducing the recombination ability of interface defects for minority carriers. The DLTS peak intensity is usually proportional to the density of interface states. It is clear that the intensity of the DLTS peak for the GO/Si sample is significantly less than that of the Gr–Si sample, indicating less interface states at the GO/Si interface. The shallow levels of electronic states with low density at the GO/Si interface are definitely beneficial for the reduction of Si surface recombination for minority carriers, which is good for the improvement of solar cell performance. It is considered that the hydroxyl and carbonyl groups existing in the GO film may have the function to saturate the dangling bond on the silicon surface, and therefore decrease the density of the surface state.
Note that the larger ideality factor of the Gr/GO/Si solar cells appears to conflict with the improvement of solar cell performances. According to the p–n junction model, a larger n factor indicates larger recombination. However, for the solar cell based on the MIS structure, the ideality factor n is not only dependent on the interface recombination, but also on the dielectric film thickness, which can be expressed by eqn (3).
(3)
where
δ is the thickness of the insulator, εi and εs are the dielectric constants of the insulating and the semiconductor, respectively, W is the depletion width of the junction and Dit is the interface states density. In our case, because GO can effectively passivate the silicon surface, interface recombination should not play a major role in the n factor of our MIS diode. Therefore, the n factor is mainly determined by the thickness of the dielectric film. With an increase in δ, the values of n and VOC increase; however, the minority carrier current tunneling through this dielectric film will decrease. Combined with the abovementioned results, we can conclude that the optimal value of n factor is 2.4–2.6 for our Gr/GO/Si solar cells.

The stability of the solar cells is critical for their practical application in photovoltaics. Fig. 6 compares the efficiency degradation of a Gr/GO/Si solar cell and chemically doped Gr–Si solar cells (data from ref. 13) after one week. The Gr/GO/Si cell is stored in the open air at a clean place. The storing and measurement temperature and humidity are typically 22 °C and 60%, respectively. It is found that the efficiency of the Gr/GO/Si solar cell slightly decreases to 5.88% after one week, which retains 95% of its original level. This implies that the efficiency of Gr/GO/Si solar cell loses only 5% of its original value, which is considerably less than that of the chemical doped devices shown in ref. 13, which was nearly 50% of its original efficiency. This clearly indicates that the stability of the Gr/GO/Si solar cell is higher than that of the chemically doped Gr–Si solar cells. For the chemically doped Gr–Si cells using volatile oxidants such as HNO3 or SOCl2, the degradation of the solar cell results from the volatilization of oxidants, which cause the doping effect of Gr. In our case, the increased stability of the Gr/GO/Si solar cell is associated with the natural doping of the Gr film because of the existence of H2O and O2 in the atmosphere. Fig. S7 shows the evolution of sheet resistance and carrier density of a naturally doped Gr film with storing time. It can be seen that the conductivity of the Gr film almost remained constant with time. This should be associated with the equilibrium state for H2O and O2 molecules between the Gr film and conditions. However, it should be noted that the efficiency of the Gr/GO/Si solar cell degrades slightly after one week because of the reduction of short-circuit current, as shown in Fig. S8. The explanation still requires more experiments for clarification.

In summary, we have introduced a GO interlayer to engineer a Gr–Si interface and improve the performance of Gr–Si solar cells. It is found that the VOC of Gr/GO/Si solar cells strongly depends on the thickness of the GO interlayer, which reaches a maximum value at an optimum thickness. The GO interlayer can modify electronic states at the Gr–Si interface from deep to shallow levels and reduces the density of the interface states. Thus, the power conversion efficiency of pristine Gr–Si solar cells can be increased by about four times with a maximum value of 6.18%. In addition, it is clarified that our chemical-doping-free Gr/GO/Si solar cells performance is significantly more stable than the previously reported chemically doped Gr–Si solar cells. This structure is believed to have the potential of developing more efficient and stable Gr–Si solar cells when combined with antireflection techniques and by utilizing multilayered graphene.


This project is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 61274057) and National Key Technology R&D Program (2011BAE03B13).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ta02216e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014