 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA03759C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11284-11291


Dikai
Xu
,

Xuegong
Yu
*,

Dace
Gao
,

Xinhui
Mu
,

Mengyao
Zhong
,

Shuai
Yuan
,

Jiangsheng
Xie
,

Wenying
Ye
,

Jiabin
Huang
 and 

Deren
Yang


State Key Lab of Silicon Materials and School of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, P. R. China. E-mail: yuxuegong@zju.edu.cn

Received
5th May 2016
, Accepted 24th June 2016
First published on 8th July 2016
Graphene/silicon (Gr/Si) solar cells have attracted interest for their potential in low-cost photovoltaic applications. Inserting a p-type organic hole transporting layer (HTL) in-between the Gr and Si would suppress carrier recombination and improve the performance of the solar cells. Here, we report highly stable and high-performance Gr/Si solar cells fabricated by using a room-temperature process. Spiro-OMeTAD was selected as the HTL for its novel electrical and optical properties. The employment of spiro-OMeTAD led to an impressive power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 13.02%. Moreover, our solar cells exhibit excellent stability with a PCE of ∼11% for over four months. These results could be encouraging for the development of Gr/Si solar cells toward practical applications. Meanwhile, this work offers a universal solution for the application of organics in Gr-based optoelectronics and photovoltaics from the viewpoint of device robustness.

Graphene (Gr), which is a two-dimensional material with superior electrical properties and high transmittance, has attracted intense interest in various fields, especially photovoltaics. Graphene/silicon (Gr/Si) solar cells are fabricated by directly transferring Gr films on top of a Si substrate by the well-known poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA)-supported wet transfer methodology. In such devices, the Gr films serve as transparent electrodes and form built-in fields with Si to separate the photo-generated carriers. The performance of Gr/Si solar cells can be greatly improved by using chemical doping technologies, and power conversion efficiency (PCE) up to 15.6% has been achieved using antireflection and interface engineering technologies. However, the chemically doped Gr/Si solar cells usually suffer from fast degradation because of reduction or evaporation of the dopants, which is apparently not suitable for practical applications. From this viewpoint, the development of pristine Gr/Si solar cells with high efficiency is important. Unfortunately, the currently reported PCE of pristine Gr/Si solar cells is lower than 10%. The interface engineering is crucial since considerable deterioration of open-circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF) would occur in Gr/Si solar cells with a non-idealized interface. Some oxide interlayers, such as aluminium oxide (Al2O3), native silicon oxide (SiOx) and graphene oxide (GO) have been used to optimize the Gr/Si interface. However, due to their insulating nature; the optimal thickness of these oxide interlayers is restricted to ∼2 nm. Either thicker or thinner interlayers would cause series degradation of performance, which would increase the complexity of device fabrication. On the other hand, Schottky junction devices comprising a structure of metal/n+-Si/p-Si were first reported by Shannon's group. The heavily doped n+-Si interlayer was generated by using antimony (Sb) implantation on the p-Si. Such an interlayer is much more conductive than the insulating oxides aforementioned. Consequently, the thickness of the n+-Si interlayer could be modulated in a wide range. In the case where a thick n+ interlayer is provided, the metal/n+/p device will simply be a p–n junction. If the thickness of the n+ interlayer is low enough, say <45 nm, the interlayer (electrons) would be fully depleted. In this case, the metal/n+/p device is still a Schottky junction. More interestingly, the effective Schottky barrier height of such a device could be enhanced by adjusting the doping level and thickness of the interlayer. This approach has been employed to improve various Schottky junction devices, such as Al/n-GaAs, metal/n-InP (ref. 20) and Au/n-InGaAs; and a lower reverse saturation current and unit ideality factor were obtained. However, molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) or ion implantation technologies were used to form these interlayers (n+ or p+ layers), which may not conform to the oft-made claim of a simple fabrication process of Schottky junction solar cells.

Based on this, we would like to offer a substitution method by using an organic p-type hole transporting layer (HTL). A suitable energy level alignment is required for the HTL. In principle, its highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) needs to be located near the valence band maximum (VBM) of Si in order to facilitate hole transport. Meanwhile, an up-lying lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) is desirable to block electron injection from the Si. Please note that for the metal/p+-Si/n-Si structured devices aforementioned, this energy barrier is completely generated by band bending near the homo-interface (p+-Si/n-Si), the height of which would be limited, but not the case when using a p-type hetero-interlayer. Therefore, such an interlayer can not only function as the p+ interlayer in the metal/p+/n device, but also offer a much larger energy barrier for electrons, which leads to the suppression of carrier recombination and enhancement of efficiency. In this study, we report high-performance Gr/HTL/Si solar cells with 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N′-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobiuorene (spiro-OMeTAD) as the HTL. Spiro-OMeTAD is selected because of its high solubility and amorphous nature, and more importantly, its novel optoelectrical properties. Firstly, the negligible HOMO (−5.2 eV) – VBM (−5.17 eV) offset and the large LUMO (−2.3 eV) – CBM (−4.05 eV) energy barrier between spiro-OMeTAD and Si offer an ideal energy level alignment for efficient hole transport and electron blockage. Secondly, the large band gap (∼2.9 eV) of spiro-OMeTAD permits almost all of the incident photons to penetrate and be absorbed by Si substrates. In addition, the spiro-OMeTAD interlayer can be fabricated by using a simple solution process, which is attractive for the development of high-efficiency low-cost Gr/Si solar cells. Meanwhile, we explore the “buried contact” technique in which the top electrodes are sandwiched in-between the Gr film and spiro-OMeTAD. In this approach, the harmful PMMA removal process is no longer necessary, and a completely room-temperature process is able to be executed for the fabrication of Gr/HTL/Si solar cells. As a result, great enhancement of PCE from 5.95% to 13.02% is obtained by the employment of the HTL. Such a high PCE is among the best of chemical-doping-free Gr/Si solar cells in the literature, which is also compatible with records of Gr/Si solar cells (doped using HNO3 or AuCl3). More importantly, in contrast to the commonly observed fast degradation of the chemically doped Gr/Si solar cells, our solar cells show excellent stability, with 93% of the original PCE after 4-month-storage under ambient conditions. To the best of our knowledge, it is for the first time Gr/Si solar cells are reported with a 4-month stable PCE of ∼11%, which shows the great potential of Gr/Si solar cells for practical applications. Our work offers an alternative way for the future design and development of Gr/Si solar cells.

The large-area monolayer Gr film was grown on a copper foil by a low pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) method at 1000 °C using CH4 (20 sccm) as the carbon source and H2 (40 sccm) as the reduction gas. The Gr film was transferred using the polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) assisted process. Firstly, the Gr film was spin-coated with PMMA in ethyl lactate and left to dry for 10 min. Then, the Gr film on the backside of Cu foil was etched away by an ultraviolet ozone cleaning process for 10 min. Next, the underlying Cu foil was etched by using aqueous ammonium persulfate ((NH4)2S2O8) solution (1 M). The resultant Gr film was cleaned with deionized water several times. After being transferred onto a SiO2 film on Si, the quality of the Gr film was analysed by using a Raman system (SENTERRA Raman microscope, Bruker) and the sheet resistance of the Gr film was measured by a four probe method.


An n-type 〈100〉 Czochralski Si wafer with a resistivity of 1–5 Ω cm and a thickness of 400 μm was employed to construct Gr/Si solar cells. Organic contamination on the Si wafer was removed by an ultraviolet ozone cleaning process for 15 min, followed by soaking the Si wafer in a diluted HF solution (1:100 v/v) to remove the native oxide layer. tert-Butyl pyridine (t-BP) and lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide salt (Li-TFSI) (520 mg mL−1 in acetonitrile) with a fixed ratio (23:14 v/v) were added into spiro-OMeTAD solutions in chlorobenzene (10–40 mg mL−1). The content of Li-TFSI was controlled by tuning the mole ratio of Li-TFSI versus spiro-OMeTAD in the range of 0–50 mol%. Then, the resultant spiro-OMeTAD solution was spin-coated on the as-cleaned Si surface (4000 rpm, 50 s). A Ag electrode (150 nm) was deposited by using thermal evaporation deposition. Then the Gr film was transferred onto the Si wafer immediately and left to dry for 10 min. The active area of the devices determined by the edge of the Ag electrode was 0.09 cm2 and the residue part (including the Ag electrode) was completely covered by masks. The back contacts of all the devices were fabricated by scratching an In–Ga eutectic alloy on the rear surface of Si.


The sectional morphology of the Gr/spiro-OMeTAD/Si interface was characterized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM, Hitachi HT7700). The performance of solar cells was measured by using a Keithley 2400 source meter and a solar simulator (94022A, Newport®) under AM 1.5G conditions at an illumination intensity of 100 mW cm−2, calibrated by using a standard Si solar cell (PVM937, Newport®). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) of devices was measured in the wavelength range of 300–1100 nm by using an EQE measurement system (QEX10, PV Measurements). The absorption spectrum of spiro-OMeTAD on glass was measured by using a UV-vis spectrophotometer (UV-4800). Four kinds of spiro-OMeTAD thin films were prepared for X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, ESCALAB_250Xi): (i) the as-prepared sample; (ii) spiro-OMeTAD thin film with Gr/PMMA coating on top; after 3-day-storage in air, the Gr/PMMA was peeled off just before measurements; (iii) naked spiro-OMeTAD thin film exposed to air for 1 day and (iv) naked spiro-OMeTAD thin film exposed to air for 3 days. The air (inert atmosphere) exposed devices were fabricated by transferring Gr films onto pre-exposed spiro-OMeTAD/Si samples correspondingly.



Fig. 1 presents the schematic band diagrams of Gr/Si solar cells without (a) and with (b) a spiro-OMeTAD interlayer. Spiro-OMeTAD is a promising p-type organic semiconductor, which has been successfully employed in photovoltaic devices such as dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and perovskite solar cells (PSCs). The high solubility and amorphous nature (glass transition temperature Tg = 121 °C) of spiro-OMeTAD endow the thin film with a smoothness and high coverage which is beneficial for homogeneous charge separation and collection in photovoltaic devices. More importantly, the energy level alignment of spiro-OMeTAD fits well with Gr/Si solar cells. Briefly, the HOMO level of spiro-OMeTAD lies at −5.2 eV, which is very close to the VBM of Si (−5.17 eV), where holes can be easily transported through. We note that poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) has been used as the HTL for Gr/Si solar cells as well. Since the HOMO level of P3HT is higher (−4.8 to −5.0 eV), smaller energy loss of holes and larger open circuit voltage (VOC) could be obtained for solar cells using spiro-OMeTAD. Meanwhile, the up-lying LUMO level (−2.3 eV) of spiro-OMeTAD generates a large energy barrier between the CBM of Si (−4.05 eV) for electrons in Si, which can block the electron injection from Si. Therefore, the spiro-OMeTAD interlayer does not only serve as an HTL but also as an electron-blocking layer (EBL), which leads to the suppression of carrier recombination at the Gr/Si interface and smaller saturation current (J0) of the solar cells. Such a carrier selective layer is more advantageous than the insulating oxide interlayers normally employed because the thickness of these oxide interlayers must be precisely controlled and hole collection is more or less hindered. Besides, the spiro-OMeTAD thin film is an ideal light window material for Si-based solar cells with a large band gap (∼2.9 eV); only a small part of incident light will be absorbed by it. All these superior features suggest that the spiro-OMeTAD is an attractive HTL material for the fabrication of Gr/HTL/Si solar cells.


Fig. 2(a) displays the schematic structures of three assembled solar cells for comparison. Device A is a spiro-OMeTAD/Si heterojunction without the Gr film atop. Device B is the conventional Gr/Si solar cell for contrast. The Gr/Si solar cell with a spiro-OMeTAD interlayer is denoted as device C. The planar-view optical and cross-sectional TEM images of a type C device are shown in Fig. 2(b) and (c). It can be clearly seen that the Si substrate was uniformly coated by a 20 nm-thick spiro-OMeTAD thin film. Fig. S1 shows a typical Raman spectrum of the as-grown Gr film. It can be seen that the intensity ratio between the 2D band and the G band in the spectrum is larger than 2, which suggests that the Gr film is a monolayer. Meanwhile, a very weak D band at ∼1350 cm−1 associated with defects appears in the Raman spectrum, indicating that the Gr film is of high quality. The sheet resistance of the Gr film is in the range of 300–800 Ω sq−1, measured by a four probe method. These characteristics indicate that the Gr film possesses excellent optoelectric properties, and is suitable for the fabrication of Gr/Si solar cells.

Fig. 3(a) compares the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of these three types of devices under illumination. Due to the poor planar conductivity of spiro-OMeTAD, only photo-generated carriers close to the Ag electrode can be collected, which yield negligible photo-current and a very low efficiency of 0.08% of the spiro-OMeTAD/Si solar cell (device A). The contrast sample (device B) shows much better performance, with an open-circuit voltage (VOC), short-circuit current density (JSC), fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 422.3 mV, 30.60 mA cm−2, 46.02% and 5.95%, respectively. Surprisingly, after the insertion of an optimized (including thickness and dopant content optimization which will be discussed later) spiro-OMeTAD interlayer between the Gr/Si interface, VOC, JSC and FF are greatly improved to the values of 547.8 mV, 33.34 mA cm−2 and 71.29%, respectively, yielding a high PCE of 13.02%. The large JSC values are associated with the antireflection effect offered by the PMMA coating on Gr which has been employed in many other studies.Fig. 3(b) displays the normal distribution of PCE for 60 pieces of Gr/Si solar cells with a spiro-OMeTAD interlayer. It can be seen that the average PCE of the solar cells is ∼11.3%. These results strongly indicate that the insertion of the spiro-OMeTAD interlayer effectively improves the performance of Gr/Si solar cells.

Fig. 4 compares the J–V curves of Gr/Si solar cells with and without an optimized spiro-OMeTAD interlayer in the dark. The dark J–V characteristics can be empirically expressed as,
J = J0[exp(qV/nkT) − 1]
(1)
where
q is the unit charge; k the Boltzmann constant; T the absolute temperature and n is the ideality factor. J0 of the conventional Gr/Si solar cell is extracted to be 3.80 × 10−6 A cm−2. Nearly 70-fold attenuation of it (5.70 × 10−8 A cm−2) is obtained with the presence of the HTL, which indicates that the carrier recombination at the interface was effectively suppressed. Furthermore, J0 is usually expressed as a function of the Schottky barrier height (ϕB) as follows.

J0 = A*T2exp(−ϕB/kT)
(2)
where
A* is the Richardson constant (for Si, ∼112 A cm−2 K−2). The corresponding Schottky barrier height increases by 0.11 eV from 0.73 eV after the insertion of the HTL, which is in line with the VOC enhancement. In addition, the improved interface quality and reduced carrier recombination are responsible for the increase of the FF.

It is worth noting that the conductivity of the spiro-OMeTAD interlayer can be modulated by the amount of dopant (Li-TFSI) in orders of magnitude. We optimized the dopant contents (CLi-TFSI/Cspiro-OMeTAD) of the spiro-OMeTAD interlayer, as shown in Fig. 5(a). The conductivity of spiro-OMeTAD without doping (neat) is poor, which results in a negligible efficiency of 0.01% for the Gr/HTL/Si solar cell. With the dopant contents increased from 10 to 50 mol%, the PCE and FF of the solar cell get a rapid promotion from 4.06% to 12.25% and from 31.80% to 70.32%, respectively. The higher EQE (Fig. 5(b)) and lower series resistance (Rs) of the solar cell (see details in Fig. S2 and Table S1) indicate better carrier transport and collection behavior as well. These large improvements are caused by the higher conductivity of the spiro-OMeTAD interlayer. Notably, further increasing the dopant content above 50 mol% results in negligible improvement of the solar cells. Several research groups have also reported performance deterioration of DSSCs when the dopant content of spiro-OMeTAD reaches a high value. This was explained by the morphology and chemical compositional change of the HTL due to the reactive and hydrophilic nature of Li-TFSI. In our case, it could be even more subtle, as the HTLs used here are only several ten nanometers thick. Consequently, the optimal content of the dopant of the spiro-OMeTAD interlayer is 50 mol%. Fig. 5(c) presents the evolution of J–V characteristics of the solar cells under illumination with the concentration of spiro-OMeTAD solutions increased from 10 to 40 mg mL−1. The thickness of the HTL was measured by using a step profiler, which is 10–12 nm, 18–20 nm, 37–39 nm and 53–59 nm, respectively. A drastic improvement in both the JSC and FF was obtained with the increase of concentration from 10 to 20 mg mL−1, and the resultant PCE of the solar cells was improved from 9.43% to 12.88%. It is understandable that when the concentration is low, the substrate might not be covered by the spin-coated HTL thoroughly, which generates shunt paths and causes lower efficiency. For a high concentration, carrier transport and collection will be hindered by the thick HTL, which results in a large Rs and lower FF of the solar cells. Meanwhile, the absorption of the HTL would be more pronounced with higher concentration, yielding a lower JSC. Thus, the trade-off between film coverage, conductivity and light shadowing effect suggests that an optimal concentration exists. Fig. 5(d) compares the EQE spectra of Gr/HTL/Si solar cells with different concentrations of spiro-OMeTAD. It can be clearly seen that the EQE spectra of the solar cells at ∼380 nm (highlighted by the light yellow bar) decrease significantly with increasing concentration, which is attributed to the light absorption of spiro-OMeTAD (Fig. S3). Light absorption of a thin HTL is usually negligible; however, it becomes dominant when the concentration is higher than 20 mg mL−1, which leads to reduction of JSC from 33.20 to 31.44 mA cm−2. Such a trend is in line with the difference of the integrated current densities calculated from the EQE spectra which decreased from 30.6 to 29.5 mA cm−2. The values of the integrated current densities are within 10% deviation of the JSC, which could be explained by the inhomogeneous carrier collection ability (holes have to travel different distances from the Gr to the outer electrodes for collection) and defect distribution on the single piece of Gr film. Meanwhile, the Rs of the solar cell gradually increased from 3.00 to 4.24 Ω cm2, which is responsible for the FF drop from 71.20% to 62.15%. As a result, the concentration of spiro-OMeTAD is optimized at 20 mg mL−1. We found that the VOC of the solar cells slightly increased with concentration. This can be explained by the prediction and experimental facts about the metal/p+/n devices in previous studies, where the Schottky barrier height increased with the thickness of the p+ layer, whereas the change in VOC in this case is small (less than 30 mV) that the performance of the solar cells is still governed by the light shadowing effect and the series resistance issue. According to the metal/p+/n model, a thicker p+ layer is beneficial for improving the Schottky barrier height as well as the VOC of solar cells. Therefore, we are hopeful that Gr/HTL/Si solar cells can be further developed by using alternative dopants or HTL materials.
Although the PCE of Gr/Si solar cells has been developed up to ∼15% in the past few years, the poor stability is still an unsolved issue, which is caused by the unstable nature of the chemical doping. Meanwhile, concern about robustness would arise when organics such as spiro-OMeTAD is employed in the solar cells. Generally, spiro-OMeTAD is vulnerable to oxygen and moisture which will cause a chemical reaction and morphology change of the thin films; then, series damage of the device takes place. From this viewpoint, the long-term stability of the Gr/HTL/Si solar cells should be examined. Table 1 compares the stability of Gr/Si solar cells in this work with those in the literature. The highest PCE was reported for Gr/Si solar cells using the violent HNO3 doping, which degraded to only half of the original PCE after 4 weeks. The fabrication of the chemical-doping-free Gr/Si solar cells could be another promising strategy, as the pristine Gr and Si are chemically stable. Unfortunately, the PCE (8.68%) reported in previous studies is not high enough. By contrast, our solar cells not only have high PCE, but also exhibit impressive long-term stability, with a low degradation ratio of 7% after 17 weeks under ambient conditions. Fig. 6 displays the detailed evolution of our solar cells in such a long time. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to report Gr/Si solar cells maintaining a PCE of ∼11% for four-month-storage. These results are encouraging for the development and application of Gr/Si solar cells in the future.
Device structures
Dopants
Original PCE
Degraded PCE
Storing time
Degradation ratio
PMMA/Gr/spiro-OMeTAD/Si (this work)
—
11.80%
10.97%
17 weeks
7.0%
TiOx/Gr/Si (ref. 5)
HNO3
14.5%
6.5%
4 weeks
55.2%
TiOx/CNT/Gr/Si (ref. 7)
HNO3
14.88%
8.44%
4 weeks
43.3%
Gr/Si micro-hole array (ref. 10)
HAuCl4
10.40%
8.38%
4 weeks
19.4%
Gr/Ag nanowires/Al2O3/Si (ref. 15)
—
8.68%
7.79%
4 weeks
10.3%
Please note that chemical doping was not used in the Gr/HTL/Si solar cells; hence, the primary factor would be whether or not the spiro-OMeTAD interlayer had degraded. To understand this, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was used and the detailed fabrication methods of the samples are described in the Experimental section. As shown in Fig. 7(a), the C-1s peak maximum of the as-prepared Li-TFSI doped spiro-OMeTAD was located at 284.2 eV. For comparison, that of the undoped spiro-OMeTAD was reported at ∼285.2 eV. ∼1.0 eV shift of the Fermi level toward the HOMO can be estimated, which is consistent with the literature. In the C-1s spectra of the air exposed samples (iii and iv), appearance of a new peak at ∼293 eV was observed, which is assigned to the carbon from –CF3 in Li-TFSI, whereas the Gr protected sample (ii) shows an almost identical spectrum to the as-prepared sample including C-1s, F-1s (Fig. 7(b)), O-1s (Fig. S4(a)) and N-1s (Fig. S4(b)) core levels, which demonstrates that the spiro-OMeTAD film was well-protected by the Gr/PMMA coating. Furthermore, signatures of Li-TFSI could be clearly seen in the F-1s spectra, where a significant increase of the F-1s peak at 689.6 eV was observed during the air exposure. An additional peak at 684.9 eV corresponding to LiF (ref. 47) was found in the 3-day sample without Gr/PMMA protection (iv), suggesting that the decomposition of Li-TFSI probably occurred during the air exposure. The O-1s region (Fig. S4(a)) can be de-convoluted into two components, which are located at ∼532 eV and ∼533 eV. The intensity of the 532 eV peak increased in the unprotected samples. At the same time, the other spiro-OMeTAD-related component showed a minor change. The N-1s (Fig. S4(b)) peak got broadened over the air exposure time, with the value of its full width at half maximum (FWHM) increased from 0.99 eV to 1.06 eV. This trend was also observed in the literature. Such an evolution of XPS spectra versus air exposure time is consistent with the work reported by Hawash et al., in which the redistribution behavior of Li-TFSI toward the top surface of the spiro-OMeTAD film was proposed. In addition, a small peak at ∼289 eV appeared in the samples (iii) and (iv), which was assumed to be the oxidized form of spiro-OMeTAD as reported in some recent studies. The C-1s peak maximum corresponding to the carbon from C–H in spiro-OMeTAD decreased in intensity, while peaks in the binding energy range from ∼285 eV to ∼287 eV (assigned as C–C, C–N and C–O in spiro-OMeTAD) do not change much. These observations suggest that the oxidation of spiro-OMeTAD may occurr after air exposure, but not for the Gr/PMMA protected samples.
Clearer evidence could be found comparing the atomic ratio changes of the unprotected samples as a function of air exposure time (Fig. 7(c)). The relative amount of fluorine, nitrogen and oxygen all got increased, among which the fluorine ratio increased very rapidly. Such a trend of atomic ratio fits the explanation of Li-TFSI accumulation near the top surface, and some gas molecules (O2, H2O, CO2, etc.) are believed to be responsible. Under this circumstance, the doping level of spiro-OMeTAD in the longitudinal direction will be increasingly inhomogeneous (heavy on top and light at bottom). The resultant Fermi level and HOMO position distribution inside the spiro-OMeTAD interlayer will also be inhomogeneous, which leads to considerable degradation of the device performance. Based on these two factors (Li-TFSI accumulation and spiro-OMeTAD oxidation), Gr/HTL/Si solar cells using the air-exposed HTLs show much lower PCE, compared with that of devices using an inert-atmosphere-stored HTL. Therefore, the Gr/PMMA coating here functions as a gas blocker, preserving the underlying organic HTL from oxidation and compositional change. This idea could be expanded to other organic devices.

In summary, we have introduced a spiro-OMeTAD interlayer as an organic HTL for Gr/Si solar cells by using a completely room temperature process. In such devices, holes can be easily transported through and electron injection from Si is blocked, associated with the ideal energy level alignment of spiro-OMeTAD. As a result, the PCE of Gr/Si solar cells increased substantially from 5.95% to 13.02% by using the spiro-OMeTAD interlayer. Moreover, XPS results demonstrated that the impermeable Gr/PMMA films protect the underlying HTL from oxidation and moisture invasion. We have reported for the first time a high PCE (∼11%) of Gr/Si solar cells maintained for four months. These developments in both PCE and stability reveal the great advantage of solar cells comprising the structure of Gr/HTL/Si, which could be encouraging for the practical application of Gr/Si solar cells.


This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61422404), Central basic scientific research in colleges and universities operating expenses, Program for Innovative Research Team in University of Ministry of Education of China (IRT13R54), and State Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Materials and Technologies (Sun Yatsen University).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Raman spectra of Gr film; method for the extraction of series resistance (Rs) of solar cells; absorption spectra of spiro-OMeTAD thin films on glass; N-1s and O-1s core level XPS spectrum of spiro-OMeTAD thin films and summarized photovoltaic parameters of solar cells. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta03759c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016