 DOI: 10.1039/D0QI00497A
(Research Article)
Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 2809-2817


Jiaqi
Zhang
*,

Hengxiang
Yang
,

Xiaoyu
Zhang
,

Maurizio
Morbidoni
,

Claire H.
Burgess
,

Rebecca
Kilmurray
,

Shouhua
Feng
 and 

Martyn A.
McLachlan
*

College of Materials Science and Engineering, Key Laboratory of Automobile Materials, Ministry of Education, Jilin University, Changchun, 130012, China. E-mail: zhangjiaqi@jlu.edu.cn

Department of Chemistry and State Key Laboratory of Inorganic Synthesis and Preparative Chemistry, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, P.R. China

Department of Materials and Centre for Plastic Electronics, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK. E-mail: martyn.mclachlan@imperial.ac.uk

Received
3rd May 2020
, Accepted 15th June 2020
First published on 16th June 2020
Here the influence of processing temperature on the properties of zinc oxide (ZnO) thin films fabricated using a carbon-free solution process is investigated. Our results show that the film processing temperature influences a wide range of structural and electro-optical properties. Films processed at 100 °C are shown to be formed of coalesced ZnO nanoparticles, whose dimensions increase with the processing temperature, accompanied by an increase in electron mobility. ZnO films processed at different temperatures were incorporated as electron transport layers (ETLs) in organic photovoltaic devices with PCDTBT:PC71BM as the active layer. We find that the ETLs processed at low temperature (100–200 °C) exhibit good device performance compared with those prepared at elevated temperatures, an effect we attribute to shifts in the work function and electrical conductivity. Interestingly a similar trend is observed when our ZnO is used as an electron injection layer in organic light emitting diodes, where the EILs processed at >200 °C show higher turn-on voltages and lower efficiencies than those annealed in the 100–200 °C range.

Organic electronics have seen tremendous progress since the first reports on organic photovoltaics (OPVs) and organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs) almost 25 years ago. This success can be ascribed to the possibility of realizing low-cost, large area devices compatible with rapid solution processing routes. However, inorganic materials are widely used in organic electronics as they enhance the stability and lifetime of devices. For example, inorganic metal oxides are commonly employed as selective charge carrier layers in OPVs and OLEDs, thanks to their good charge transport properties, easy to control nanostructure, and doping. Among the metal oxides used as electron transport layers, zinc oxide (ZnO) has shown tremendous promise owing to the combination of its direct band gap, high transparency in the visible range and high electron mobility.

There are a variety of methods to fabricate ZnO, including hydrothermal growth, pulsed laser deposition, spray pyrolysis, and sol–gel processes and the use of nanoparticles; among them, solution processing allows low-cost and large-area manufacturing. Sol–gel synthesis and the use of nanoparticles are two widely used methods for the preparation of ZnO solutions. High quality ZnO thin films with low defect density have been prepared by gamma ray irradiation of a ZnO precursor solution followed by low temperature annealing (130 °C), an in situ sol–gel conversion method. UV treatments have also been used to rapidly convert precursors into ZnO and as a means of defect passivation. Further modifications to the surface properties have been made by a complex variety of application specific modifications that result in changes in the physical, e.g. wettability and roughness, and electronic properties, e.g. work-function and electron mobility.
However, in general sol–gel methods require high-temperature annealing to completely remove organic residues and prepare pure ZnO thin films, and high-temperature processing may result in inhomogeneity of the films and also places restrictions on the use of flexible (polymeric) substrates. For colloidal nanoparticles, the synthesis route of dispersed ZnO nanoparticle solution is relatively complex, including long reaction durations followed by repeated precipitation, washing and dilution procedures. Moreover, ligand-linked nanoparticles typically require high temperature annealing, while ligand-free nanoparticles usually suffer from poor dispersion stability.
For around a decade, one aqueous processing method, using Zn(OH)x(NH3)y(2−x)+ as the precursor, has attracted interest owing to its simple and green strategy. This method enables crystallization of ZnO at low temperatures (<150 °C) exploiting metal–ammine decomposition and hydroxide condensation/dehydration processes. Additionally, the fast, low-energy kinetics of these reactions provide superior film morphologies: low surface roughness and high film uniformity. This carbon-free ZnO processing method was first reported in thin film transistors (TFTs) while recently its use in OPV devices has been explored. Because of the low reaction temperature of this method, the thermal stability issue caused by high temperature treatment is avoided in these devices.
There are two typical synthesis routes for ZnO formation by using this carbon-free chemistry. One is a two-step process: Zn(OH)2 precipitate is synthesized first and then it is solvated into aqueous ammonia to form ammine-hydroxo zinc solutions. Unlike this method that requires precipitation, washing and dilution procedures to prepare precursor solution, the other is a single-step process, which involves dissolution of ZnO powders or ZnO hydrates directly into ammonia solution. The latter method is utilized in this work. Despite the attention this process has received, there is little research investigating the influence of processing temperature. For the single-step approach processing temperature is typically limited to values below 200 °C and the influence of higher temperatures on film properties is unclear.
Here we have conducted a range of complementary measurements to investigate the influence of processing temperature from 25–450 °C on the structural, compositional, optical, surface morphological and electrical properties of ZnO films. The impact of different processing temperatures on OPV performance is first studied and we show that device performances are comparable when the processing temperature is in the range of 100–200 °C, consistent with the existing literature. However, a dramatic decrease in the OPV efficiency occurs when ZnO ETLs are annealed at 450 °C. In addition, the aqueous processed ZnO films are utilized as electron injection layers in OLEDs.

We carried out a range of complementary measurements on ZnO layers beginning with an assessment of the crystallinity using X-ray diffraction (XRD). The influence of processing temperature on crystallinity is shown in Fig. 1a. No peaks corresponding to crystalline ZnO are seen in the XRD patterns of films deposited at 100 °C. In contrast, those prepared at 200 °C show clearly the (100) and (101) diffraction peaks and evidence of the (002) peak developing. Furthermore, increasing the temperature to 450 °C results in the development of these peaks, indicating a greater degree of crystallinity consistent with the elevated processing temperature. From these XRD data a measure of crystallite size can be made using the Scherrer method, Table 1. To further examine the structure of the 100 °C film we carried out high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM), Fig. 1b. The image clearly shows the presence of nanocrystalline domains of ZnO, indexed to the Wurtzite phase of ZnO. The inset in the micrograph shows a fast Fourier transform (FFT) of the ZnO region of the image indicating the presence of multiple crystalline domains within the film. The combination of the nanoscale domain size and the low film thickness (20 nm) may explain the absence of peaks in the XRD characterization of the 100 °C films.

100 °C
200 °C
450 °C

d
(101) (nm)
N/A
31.0
52.3

d
(100) (nm)
N/A
51.6
59.0
The presence of ZnO nanoparticles in the 100 °C processed films is further confirmed by optical transmission measurements. Fig. 1c shows the transmission spectra of films prepared over the full temperature range investigated. All spectra show high transparency in the visible region, a clear absorption edge at around 370–380 nm is observed for the thermally treated films from which the optical bandgap has been calculated by the Tauc plot, Fig. 1d. The exceptionally high bandgap of the as-cast film (5.54 eV) likely originates from the precursor species Zn(OH)x(NH3)y(2−x)+. For films annealed between 100–450 °C, the measured absorption edge red shifts with increasing temperature, from 367 nm (100 °C) to 382 nm (450 °C), with a corresponding reduction in optical bandgap from 3.38 eV to 3.24 eV. The enlarged bandgap of the 100 °C processed film may originate from quantum confinement effects in this case rather than band-tailing effects seen in amorphous films.
To understand the compositional evolution with changing processing temperature, we first performed Fourier transform infra-red spectroscopy (FTIR) analysis, Fig. 2a. The as-cast film shows strong O–H stretching and N–H deformation features, indicating the presence of Zn(OH)x(NH3)y(2−x)+. In contrast, the films thermally annealed at 100–200 °C show near identical spectra with none of the O–H or N–H features being present, confirming that decomposition and conversion of the precursor has occurred at only 100 °C. We further probed the composition of the films using X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Spectra of the O 1s core levels are shown in Fig. 2b–d, with the C 1s, N 1s, and Zn 2p data given in the ESI, Fig. 1. To ensure a fair comparison among peak positions, all spectra were corrected to the ubiquitous C 1s signal at 284.8 eV. The O 1s spectra display two overlapping peaks, the lower binding energy peak assigned to Zn–O (oxide) and the higher binding energy peak assigned to O–H, the latter originating from adsorbed atmospheric moisture, dangling –O–H surface bonds and/or zinc hydroxide impurities. A systematic decrease in the intensity of the O–H, relative to the Zn–O (oxide) peak, can be observed as the temperature increases, which may point to the latter as being the most likely source of O–H; however, in contrast the N 1s spectra do not show a signal for ZnO processed between 100 and 450 °C; this is in good agreement with the FTIR results, indicating that no zinc precursor residue remains.
The surface morphology was studied using atomic force microscopy (AFM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The AFM results, Fig. 3, show smooth film surfaces at all processing temperatures. A well-defined granular structure is observed on the surface of the films thermally annealed with temperature having little impact on the size of shape of the visible features. Subtle variations in the surface root mean square (RMS) roughness are observed as the films are heated and as the film undergoes compositional modification and structural reordering.
The SEM images also indicate good spatial uniformity in all ZnO films, Fig. 4. Large area images show full coverage of all films, as shown in the ESI, Fig. 2. The as-cast film displays a ‘cloud-like’ morphology that is likely an artefact of the unreacted precursor and solvent present. After annealing, a granular morphology is seen for all films prepared; the surface roughness observed in the SEM images is in good agreement with the AFM results. The measured average grain sizes calculated from SEM images are shown as inset text in each figure, an increase in the grain size is observed as the annealing temperature is increased. It is noted that the grain size of the 100 °C treated film appears to be in the 20 nm region, in contrast to the data obtained by HRTEM. We believe that the large grains observed by SEM contain clusters of the nanocrystalline ZnO, this is supported by the lack of XRD peaks from the 100 °C annealed films which would not be anticipated with a primary crystallite size of ∼20 nm.
To investigate the behaviour of these films as n-type thin films, bottom gate, bottom contact thin film transistors (TFTs) were fabricated. Typical transfer curves and output characteristics measured under ambient conditions for several unencapsulated TFTs annealed between 100–450 °C are shown in Fig. 5a. The as-cast film was too resistive and showed no on/off behaviour, so it is not displayed here. Between 100–450 °C, lower threshold voltages and higher channel current on/off ratios are observed as the temperature increases, both indicative of improved electron transport. The turn-on voltage shifts towards more negative VG with an increase in the processing temperature which suggests that higher annealing temperatures results in higher concentrations of free carriers in the channel. Enhanced electron transport with higher annealing temperatures is also demonstrated from the calculated saturated field effect mobility, as shown in Fig. 5b. The as-cast film has very low mobility, 3.4 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1, however for films prepared at 100–450 °C, the mobility increases with the annealing temperature from 0.05 to 0.39 cm2 V−1 s−1.
The Fermi levels (EF) of ZnO films on ITO substrates were calculated from the contact potential difference measured using a Kelvin probe in air, Fig. 5b. Interestingly heating the as-cast films to 100 °C has no impact on the EF, which remains stable at −4.46 eV. Further heating to 200 °C leads to a slight reduction in the EF (−4.40 eV) and a significant shift to −4.63 eV is seen when annealing occurs at 450 °C. Native defects in ZnO (200 °C), including Zn interstitials and oxygen vacancies, may be partially recovered when the films are annealed at 450 °C, as evidenced by the enhanced crystallinity (confirmed by the XRD results); this may be the source of the differences observed in the EF. In addition, the work function shift measured using the Kelvin probe is in excellent agreement with our XPS results: the binding energy position of the Zn–O (oxide) peak shifts towards higher binding energy upon annealing at 450 °C, ESI Fig. 1. This is indicative of a shift in the Fermi level position, which we would expect to manifest itself as a rigid shift of the core levels, and is indeed what we see in the Zn–O (oxide) environment of O 1s. The same trend is also observed in the Zn 2p spectra.
To assess the quality of the ZnO film prepared as an n-type, electron transport layer (ETL) we incorporated the layers into inverted architecture OPVs with the general composition (layer thicknesses in parenthesis) of glass/ITO (140 nm)/ZnO (20 nm)/PCDTBT:PC71BM (100 nm)/MoOx (10 nm)/Ag (100 nm), as shown schematically in Fig. 6a, alongside the relevant energy levels of the materials (Fig. 6c) and molecular structure of the active layer materials (Fig. 6b). Both ZnO and the active layer were deposited from solution and MoOx/Ag was thermally evaporated. Representative current–voltage (J–V) characteristics are shown in Fig. 6d where the ZnO processing temperatures are varied over the 100–450 °C range, also included is the data for a control device prepared without ZnO.
Statistical data for all devices prepared are summarized in Table 2. From these data it is clear that the ETL processing temperature has a significant impact on device performance. Overall the best performing devices are observed at processing temperatures of 100 °C, where the champion device shows a PCE of 4.3% and average open-circuit voltage (VOC), short-circuit current (JSC) and fill-factor (FF) of 0.89 V, 8.5 mA cm−2 and 52% respectively. The device characteristics over the temperature 100–200 °C range are comparable and drop at 450 °C, consistent with our previous report where the onset of crystallization in the ETL and a change in work function result in VOC and FF losses. The mismatch of energy alignment (Fig. 6c) between the ETL and the heterojunctions leads to a reduction of the VOC. The dark J–V scans are shown in the ESI, Fig. 3. Improved hole blocking behaviour at lower processing temperatures is observed under a reverse bias. At a low positive voltage, the difference in dark J–V characteristics highlights the reduced shunt resistance (Rsh) at ZnO (450 °C), which decreases the FF. The JSC is also achieved via the calculation of the EQE spectra, ESI Fig. 4, which matched well the value obtained by the J–V scan. The reduced JSC with 450 °C ZnO may originate from the enhanced carrier recombination, which hindered the collection of photogenerated carriers. Thus, our ETL fulfils the low temperature and charge selective transport criteria of such an interlayer. Unsurprisingly poor device performance is observed when no ETL is included in the device stack, suggesting the necessity of the ZnO ETL that enables device operation. In addition, the device stability measurement was conducted under continuous illumination at 1 sunlight intensity, ESI Fig. 5. It is observed that the ZnO annealing temperature exhibits negligible influence on the environmental stability of OPVs.
Sample

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
sh (Ω cm2)
No ZnO
0.242 ± 0.049
6.61 ± 1.00
31.6 ± 2.7
0.52 ± 0.16
26.2 ± 3.2
67.7 ± 27.7
ZnO (100 °C)
0.886 ± 0.003
8.47 ± 0.72
52.1 ± 1.3
3.97 ± 0.28
18.5 ± 2.4
569.9 ± 39.0
ZnO (200 °C)
0.883 ± 0.004
8.41 ± 0.37
51.1 ± 0.6
3.86 ± 0.22
20.3 ± 0.8
607.3 ± 163.6
ZnO (450 °C)
0.591 ± 0.011
6.65 ± 0.61
36.1 ± 1.4
1.43 ± 0.08
43.1 ± 2.4
255.5 ± 51.1
OLED devices were also fabricated, incorporating ZnO films as an electron injection layer (EIL). The results are shown in the ESI, Table 1, while the J–V–L data of representative devices for each temperature are presented in Fig. 7. The trends observed in OPV devices are replicated here, with the films annealed at 100 °C and 200 °C showing similar, more efficient behaviour, and films treated at 450 °C showing higher performances than devices without any ETL but lower performances than those with the other two films. In particular, the higher turn on voltage observed when 450 °C ZnO was used confirmed what was already speculated for OPV devices, that the deep work function affects the energy level alignment at the interface. This is also evident when looking at the current and power efficiencies of the OLED devices (ESI Fig. 6): both efficiencies of devices with 450 °C ZnO are much lower and their maximum lies at higher voltages than those obtained with the films treated at 100 °C and 200 °C. This is another indication of a poor energy level alignment at the interface. A less-than-ideal energy level alignment could favour non-radiative recombination processes in defect states at the ZnO/p-PPV interface, resulting in a lower luminance as observed here for the 450 °C ZnO device.

Here we successfully fabricate ZnO thin films processed using a remarkably simple solution processing and environmentally friendly route. By carrying out a range of complementary measurements, we demonstrate the importance of processing temperature for tuning the structural, optical, compositional, surface morphological and electrical properties of the ZnO films. Using a combination of transmission electron microscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, films prepared at temperatures as low as 100 °C are confirmed to be composed of ZnO nanoparticles that are remarkably free of unreacted precursor and water residues. The ZnO particle size increases with the annealing temperature, which is supported by the XRD, SEM and UV-Vis results. Significant changes in electron mobility and work function with ZnO processing temperature are shown using a thin film transistor and Kelvin probe, respectively. To demonstrate the suitability of the films developed in device applications we have demonstrated their incorporation into OPV and OLED device platforms. Our objective was to develop a low temperature, environmentally friendly, facile solution processable charge selective interlayer for organic optoelectronic devices that has high optical transparency, good charge transport and smooth compact surface morphology. The ZnO films we have developed fulfil the criteria for OPV and OLED interlayers and for the future development of devices that will be compatible with high throughput processing.


Indium tin oxide substrates (ITO, PsiOteC UK Ltd; 12–16 Ω sq−1) were cleaned using ultrasonics and sequential washing in acetone, isopropanol and distilled water prior to being dried with compressed nitrogen gas followed by 10 minutes of UV-ozone cleaning (UVOCS).

Carbon-free aqueous zinc solutions were prepared by mixing zinc oxide powders (Sigma Aldrich) in ammonium hydroxide solution (5.0 M, Sigma Aldrich) as a solvent to a molar concentration of 0.1 M. Before spin coating, the solutions were filtered through a 0.45 μm filter. The spin coating of ZnO films was performed at 2000 rpm for 30s at an acceleration rate of 1000 rpm s−1. Four coatings were applied to achieve a compact layer. The films were preheated at a given temperature for 10 min on a hotplate after each coating. Some samples were also post annealed (Carbolite 5L RWF) at 450 °C for 1 hour under flowing air.
For OPV fabrication, PCDTBT:PC71BM, 1:2, 18 mg ml−1 blend solution in chlorobenzene was spin-coated on the top of ZnO at 2500 rpm in order to achieve a coating thickness of around 80–90 nm. Finally, the deposition of the top electrode is performed in a glovebox evaporator defining the patterned electrode by a shadow mask. The top electrode was composed of 10 nm MoO3 and 100 nm Ag, with the evaporation rate of MoO3 being 0.1–0.2 nm s−1 and deposition rate of Ag being 0.8–1.0 nm s−1.
For OLED fabrication, a green derivative of p-PPV obtained from Merck was dissolved in toluene at 10 mg ml−1 concentration and stirred overnight at 60 °C. The solution was then spun dynamically at 1500 rpm for 40 s, which resulted in 70 nm thick films. The top electrode was deposited in the same way as that of OPV devices.

XRD measurements were carried out using a Panalytical X'Pert Pro diffractometer (CuKα). The XRD instrumental broadening was confirmed to be 0.09° by a single silicon substrate. The TEM cross-section was performed using a Helios NanoLab DualBeam with sequential ion beam accelerating voltages of 30, 5 and 2 kV. TEM imaging was carried out using a JEOL 2100F at 200 kV. Great care was taken to minimize sample exposure to the electron beam.

FTIR (NICOLET iS10) was conducted in the ATR mode (Attenuated Total Reflectance). Films for XPS were deposited on ITO substrates. The XPS spectra were recorded on a Thermo Scientific K-Alpha + X-ray photoelectron spectrometer operating at 2 × 10−9 mbar base pressure. This system incorporates a monochromated, microfocused Al Kα X-ray source (hν = 1486.6 eV) and a 180° double focusing hemispherical analyser with a 2D detector. The X-ray source was operated at 6 mA emission current and 12 kV anode bias. Data were collected at 200 eV pass energy for survey and 20 eV pass energy for core level using an X-ray spot size of 400 μm2.
Optical transmission of ZnO films deposited on quartz substrates was measured using a single-beam UV–vis spectrometer (Agilent Technologies Cary 5000) without scattering calibration in order to monitor the actual light incident on the photoactive layer. Film morphology was assessed using (i) a Bruker Multimode Nanoscope AFM with image processing carried out using Gwyddion software suite, and (ii) a LEO Gemini 1525 Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope with the addition of a 5 nm layer of chromium.
Fraunhofer IPMS generation 5 substrates were used for all field effect measurements. The bottom gate n-doped silicon structures had a 230 nm thermally grown silicon dioxide dielectric layer with indium tin oxide (10 nm)/gold (30 nm) source and drain bottom contact electrodes. Devices of 20 μm channel length and 10000 μm channel width were characterized using an Agilent 4155 C analyser. Work functions were calculated from the measured chemical potential using a Kelvin probe (KP technologies, SKP 5050) in air, calibrated to a freshly cleaved highly ordered pyrolytic graphite reference (work function = 4.47 eV).


J–V characteristics were measured using a xenon lamp (1 Sun, AM 1.5 G) (Oriel Instruments) with a Keithley 2400 sourcemeter. Power conversion efficiency (PCE), open circuit voltage (VOC), short circuit current density (JSC), fill factor (FF), series resistance (Rs) and shunt resistance (Rsh) are calculated using the J–V results. Rs and Rsh are extracted from the inverse slope of the J–V curve at I = 0 and V = 0, respectively. Generally, a minimum of 5 devices were applied for each set of processing conditions. OLED devices were characterized using a Keithley 2400 sourcemeter and a Minolta luminance meter, operated using a custom-written LabVIEW script.


There are no conflicts to declare.


JZ and MAM thank Dr David J. Payne for fruitful discussions on the XPS data. JZ acknowledges the National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2019YFA0705900) funded by MOST., the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61804063), the Natural Science Foundation of Jilin Province (No. 20190201208JC), the Science and Technology Foundation of Department of Education, Jilin Province (Grant: JJKH20190136KJ) and the Open Foundation of State Key Laboratory of Inorganic Synthesis and Preparative Chemistry, Jilin University (Grant: 2019-24). MAM is grateful for continued support from the EPSRC Centre for Doctoral Training in Plastic Electronics EP/L016702/1.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0qi00497a
This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2020