 DOI: 10.1039/D0TA02706E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 9919-9926


Weidong
Zhao
,

Qingshun
Dong
*,

Jiangwei
Zhang
*,

Shi
Wang
,

Min
Chen
,

Chunyi
Zhao
,

Mingyu
Hu
,

Shengye
Jin
,

Nitin P.
Padture
 and 

Yantao
Shi
*

State Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals, Department of Chemistry, School of Chemical Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, 116024, China. E-mail: dongqs@dlut.edu.cn; shiyantao@dult.edu.cn

State Key Laboratory of Catalysis, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy Sciences, Dalian, 116023, China. E-mail: jwzhang@dicp.ac.cn

School of Engineering, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island 02912, USA

State Key Laboratory of Molecular Reaction Dynamics, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian, 116023, China

Received
8th March 2020
, Accepted 24th April 2020
First published on 24th April 2020
Low-dimensional (LD) Dion–Jacobson perovskites (DJPs) are showing great potential to solve the stability issue of perovskite solar cells (PSCs). However, it is still a challenge to simultaneously obtain high power conversion efficiency (PCE) and high stability in DJP-LD-PSCs. Here, we present an asymmetric alkyl diammonium 3-(dimethylammonium)-1-propylammonium (DMAPA2+) as a spacer cation to resolve this issue. With the small adjacent inorganic interlayer distance, PSCs based on LD (DMAPA)MAn−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1) achieve a PCE of 3.85%, the currently highest PCE for PSCs based on n = 1 LD-DJPs. The systematic study of the crystallization kinetics of DJPs with higher n values (n = 3, 4, 5) demonstrates that the perovskite quality is mainly dominated by the formation and decomposition of their intermediate phase. PSCs based on n = 4 LD-DJP (DMAPA)MA3Pb4I13, with vertical crystal orientation, hierarchical phase distribution and low trap density, yield high PCEs up to 15.16%, and excellent stability with over 90% of the initial PCE retained without encapsulation after being stored at 85 °C in air for 1000 hours and ∼80% PCE retained after 300 h of continuous operation under 1-sun illumination in air.

Organic–inorganic metal halide perovskites are emerging energy-conversion materials with amazing properties, such as high absorption coefficients, low exciton binding energy, long carrier lifetime, and high defect tolerance, thereby allowing development of highly efficient photoelectric and photovoltaic devices. For example, solar cells based on three-dimensional (3D) perovskites with the formula ABX3 (A+ = CH3NH3+ (MA+), CH(NH2)2+ (FA+), Cs+; B2+ = Pb2+, Sn2+; X− = I−, Cl−, Br−) have achieved high power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) exceeding 25%. However, currently, the intrinsic instability of 3D perovskites against moisture, light, and heat remains a major obstacle hindering the commercialization of perovskite solar cells (PSCs). In recent years, low-dimensional (LD) perovskites have been studied increasingly owing to their superior stability when compared to their 3D counterparts. Generally, there are two types of LD perovskites classified according to the organic spacer cations incorporated into the 3D perovskite framework, namely, Ruddlesden–Popper perovskite (RPP) and Dion–Jacobson perovskite (DJP) with the formulae A′2An−1BnX3n+1 and A′′An−1BnX3n+1, respectively, where A′ is a monovalent large organic spacer cation, A′′ is a divalent large organic spacer cation, and n is an indicator of the thickness of the inorganic octahedron layers between the spacer cations. Undoubtedly, the molecular structure and features of the spacer cations as well as the n value are all crucial to the PCE and stability of LD-PSCs. Generally, spacer cations can form an inherent barrier to prevent moisture and oxygen from permeating into the perovskite crystal lattice, in turn enhancing the environmental stability. However, insulating organic spacers also create an energy barrier in such quantum well LD structures whose bandgap and other optoelectronic properties are determined by the inorganic layers, in other words, mostly by the n value. Therefore, it is understandable that the PCEs of LD-PSCs can be enhanced with increasing the n value, which in turn results in a loss of devices' long-term stability as they contain more 3D phases.

Since the first report of the LD-RPP-PSC (with phenylethylammonium (PEA+) as a spacer cation, with a PCE of 4.73%) by Smith et al. in 2014, there have been several studies aimed at developing new LD perovskites and to tune their film morphology, crystallinity, orientation, and defects through various strategies, such as solvent engineering, addition of additives (e.g., ammonium thiocyanate (NH4SCN)), and tailoring organic cations. By comparison to RPPs, the adjacent inorganic layers in DJPs are thought to be linked more closely by the divalent single spacer cation with two amino groups at both ends, which can further minimize the van der Waals gap between inorganic layers and better stabilize the crystal structure. Very recently, the teams of Guo and Chen both reported that DJPs based on diamines (viz. 1,3-propanediammonium (PDA2+) and 1,4-butanediammonium (BDA2+)) were more stable than their RPP counterparts (based on PEA+ and BA+). However, the record PCEs for PSCs based on LD-DJPs with low n values (n ≤ 4) are inferior to those of conventional 3D-PSCs; a PCE of only 13.3% was reported by Guo et al. Therefore, for LD-DJP-PSCs, the ability to obtain a high PCE and high stability simultaneously is needed urgently.
Herein, we present 3-(dimethylammonium)-1-propylammonium (DMAPA2+), an asymmetric alkyl diammonium, as a divalent spacer cation for the preparation of high PCE and stable LD-DJP-PSCs. Crystal structure analysis indicates that the interlayer distance between adjacent inorganic layers in the new DJP is evidently smaller than that of RPPs reported before, which can weaken the quantum well effect, reduce the exciton binding energy, and facilitate charge transport. Surprisingly, LD-DJP-PSCs with (DMAPA)PbI4 achieve a PCE of 3.85%, which is the highest PCE for the n = 1 LD-DJP-PSCs. Moreover, LD-DJP-PSCs with higher n values (n = 3, 4, 5) for (DMAPA)MAn−1PbnI3n+1 were also fabricated and studied in detail, including the effect of crystallization kinetics on the film morphology, phase distribution, crystal orientation, and photovoltaic performance. The rapid formation and decomposition of the intermediate phase facilitate the formation of a (DMAPA)MA3Pb4I13 (n = 4) film with a vertical crystal orientation, a hierarchical phase distribution and a low trap density. Accordingly, high PCEs up to 15.16% are obtained, which is higher than that of LD-DJP-PSCs (n ≤ 4) reported so far. Moreover, DMAPA-based LD-DJP-PSCs demonstrate excellent stability, with over 90% of the initial PCE maintained without encapsulation after being stored at 85 °C in air for more than 1000 h.

Tailoring the molecular structure of the spacer cation has been proven frequently to be an effective way to improve the photovoltaic performance and stability of LD-PSCs. As shown in Fig. 1a, the DMAPA2+ cation employed here features an asymmetric molecular structure, with ammonium and dimethylamine cations on either side, which is quite different from most reported diammonium cations with symmetric structures such as PDA2+ and BDA2+. To acquire the basic crystal structure parameters and photoelectric properties of this DMAPA-based DJP, we first synthesized a (DMAPA)PbI4 (n = 1, denoted as D-1) single crystal through an anti-solvent method (see details in the Experimental section). The optical microscopy image in Fig. 1b shows that the single crystals of D-1 are dark brown rectangular plates that exhibit excellent stability as expected, without obvious deterioration, even after storage under ambient conditions for more than eight months. Subsequently, large single crystals were selected to perform single-crystal X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis, and the detailed crystallographic information data are listed in Table S1. As illustrated schematically in Fig. 1c, the D-1 crystal has a typical DJP structure with single DMAPA2+ spacer cation layers interdigitated between the inorganic [PbI6]4− layers, belonging to the orthorhombic space group Pbca, with lattice parameters of a = 18.435 Å, b = 8.6432 Å, c = 20.797 Å, and α = β = γ = 90°. Compared with the traditional RPP crystal, the I–I distance between adjacent inorganic layers is greatly reduced, from approximately 7 Å for the BA-based PRP to 4.551 Å for the present DMAPA-based DJP. This reduction is crucial for weakening the quantum well effect and reducing the exciton binding energy of LD perovskites, which are favorable for charge transport.

Generally, LD-DJPs with n = 1 are not suitable photoactive layers in PSCs due to the high exciton binding energy and sluggish charge transport stemming from the quantum-well effect, and the PCEs of the corresponding devices are usually very low, typically <2%. In this work, the D-1 perovskite thin film was prepared with DMAPAI2:PbI2 with a stoichiometric ratio of 1:1 in a carefully controlled precursor solution. As shown in the inset of Fig. 1d, the flat and uniform film have a dark red-brown color, similar to D-1 single crystals. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of the D-1 thin film in Fig. S1 shows full coverage over the substrate. Also, the XRD pattern of the D-1 thin film (on the TiO2 substrate) (Fig. 1d) is in good agreement with the simulated XRD pattern from the D-1 single crystal results. The UV-vis absorption and steady-state photoluminescence (PL) of the D-1 thin film (on the FTO substrate) were also measured. As seen in Fig. 1e, the film exhibits reasonable absorption characteristics with an absorption peak at 540 nm, with an estimated band gap of approximately 2.2 eV. Consistent with the absorption data, the D-1 thin film exhibits a strong PL fluorescence peak at 555 nm, which demonstrates its strong potential for use in optoelectronic applications. Based on the D-1 thin film, a LD-PSC was fabricated with the architecture FTO/TiO2/D-1 perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au, as shown in Fig. 1f inset. The current–voltage (J–V) curve in Fig. 1f exhibits a PCE of 3.85%, with an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.95 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 8.59 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 0.46, which is currently the highest efficiency among those reported for LD-DJP-PSCs based on RPPs or DJPs with n = 1.
Of course, a PCE <4% for the device based on D-1 is not adequate for PV application. In previous reports, the n values for LD-PSCs were mostly kept between 3 and 5, where the layered low-dimensional structure can be sustained. Meanwhile, the smaller dielectric confinement effect and exciton binding energy endow the devices with higher PCEs, ultimately achieving an effective balance of stability and efficiency. Here, we further studied the optical-electrical characteristics of DMAPA-based DJPs with higher n values, viz (DMAPA)MA2Pb3I10 (n = 3), (DMAPA)MA3Pb4I13 (n = 4), and (DMAPA)MA4Pb5I16 (n = 5), which are denoted as D-3, D-4, and D-5, respectively. The precursor solutions of the three samples were prepared by dissolving DMAPAI2, MAI, and PbI2 stoichiometrically into a mixed solvent of dimethylformamide (DMF) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) (92:8 in volume) with MACl used as the additive (5 mol%, MAI replacement). Subsequently, DJP thin films were fabricated by the hot-coating deposition process, as has been previously widely used. Cross-sectional SEM images of the D-3, D-4, and D-5 thin films are presented in Fig. 2a–c, respectively (see Fig. S2 for a wider range). The film thickness is ∼500 nm. The grains in the D-3 thin film appear somewhat stratified, where the smaller grains are located in the upper part of the thin film and the large bulky grains are at the bottom in contact with the TiO2 electron transport layer (ETL). By comparison, D-4 exhibits a more uniform distribution of grains, with evidence of large grains that have grown vertically across the film, which is desirable for LD perovskites because it facilitates charge transport across this layer. Although the grains in D-5 show better uniformity than D-3, the large pinholes in this film (Fig. 2c and S2c) can result in direct electrical contact between the hole transport layer (HTL) and the ETL, essentially shorting the device.
To date, many LD perovskites have been developed in this field, as mentioned above. However, almost invariably these so-called LD perovskites are actually mixed structures containing LD perovskite phases with different n values in complex distributions. In this context, the crystal structures of D-3, D-4, and D-5 thin films (on the TiO2 substrate) were investigated through XRD. As shown in Fig. 2d, there are diffraction peaks at 2θ < 10° for all three films, indicating the existence of LD DJP phases. According to the XRD pattern in Fig. 1d, the characteristic peak at 2θ = 8.5° can be assigned to the DJP with n = 1, while the other two peaks at 2θ = 9.5° and 11.4° are attributed to the (0k0) crystal planes of DJPs with higher n values. The strong characteristic peaks at 2θ = 14.4° and 28.6° correspond to the (211) and (421) crystal planes, respectively, and D-4 demonstrates higher peak intensities compared to the other two films, indicating that D-4 has better crystallinity and texture. It should be noted that crystallization of DJPs in this work occurs in two continuous stages, i.e., hot-casting and post annealing. Obviously, the former is more important as it can guide the latter. The crystallization kinetics of DMAPA-based DJPs during hot-casting are investigated to further determine the effect of the intermediate phase on the final crystal structure. For this purpose, the XRD patterns were recorded at different deposition durations during the hot-coating deposition process. The XRD patterns in Fig. 2e for D-4 at different deposition times of 3 s, 5 s, 7 s, 10 s, 12 s, and 14 s show a fast evolution of the film crystal structure during hot-casting. The results of the same characterization for D-3 and D-5 thin films are provided in Fig. S3. Among the diffraction peaks, the peak at 2θ = 6.9° changes most significantly but is absent in the final DJP films, which can be assigned to an intermediate phase during hot-casting. As has been reported before, the kinetics of formation and decomposition of the intermediate phase are crucial to the oriented growth of high-quality perovskite films.
To intuitively compare the evolution of the intermediate phase in the three films, we plotted the intensity change in the peak at 2θ = 6.9° in the XRD patterns recorded from 3 s to 14 s, with the normalized results shown in Fig. 2f. The D-3 film shows a parabolic trend, indicating that the intermediate phase formed gradually and then decomposed during hot-casting. By comparison, the decomposition of the intermediate phases for D-4 and D-5 thin films is both fast and monotonous. In particular, the D-4 thin film displays a faster decomposition than D-5 at the very start (3–6 s) of hot-casting, along with which the perovskite phase (at 2θ = 14.4°) is formed immediately, as illustrated in Fig. S4. Fig. S5 shows the XRD patterns for the three thin films collected at 3 s after the start of hot-casting, among which the D-4 thin film presents the strongest diffraction peak at 2θ = 6.9°, an indicator of the fast formation of a high-quality intermediate phase. As can be expected, there must be different crystallization processes competing with each other during the formation of DJPs when considering the complexity of the precursor system. It is thought that a high-quality intermediate phase can robustly guide the subsequent crystallization of perovskites more homogeneously. In other words, the formation of perovskite crystals is mainly dominated by the formation and decomposition of their intermediate phase. In the case of D-3, the precursor contains more DMAPA2+ spacer cations, possibly hindering the formation of the intermediate phase, finally resulting in relatively slow and heterogeneous formation of the perovskite phase. However, the DMAPA2+ cations are thought to have a positive effect on the formation of perovskite from the intermediate phase. By comparison to D-4, the amount of DMAPA2+ cations in the precursor of D-5 is possibly insufficient. The crystallization of the perovskite phase within D-5 is not observable (Fig. S4) during hot-casting but is mostly completed in the following post-annealing process. Thus, it can be concluded that an appropriate amount of DMAPA2+ cations is necessary for the formation of a high-quality perovskite phase.
Subsequently, the crystallographic characteristics of the three films were further investigated using grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) with a 2D area detector. GIWAXS, is a powerful tool that indicates not only the growth-preferred lattice planes but also their spatial orientation (texture), which could elucidate the difference in the crystallinity and degree of structural disorder between the three films. As shown in Fig. 2g–i, all three polycrystalline thin films contain the same dominant diffraction ring appearing at q = 10.0 nm−1, corresponding to the (211) lattice planes. However, the Bragg spots within the ring distributed at different Azimuth angles suggest that there is a substantial distinction in the preferred spatial orientation of the planes between D-4, D-3, and D-5. Unlike the discrete Bragg spots in D-3 and D-5, where some of the (211) planes are parallel to the substrate but others are formed at an angle to the substrate, the D-4 film possesses only one dominant Bragg spot with high intensity along the qz direction. This result demonstrates that most of the (211) planes in D-4 are uniformly arranged parallel to the substrate. Considering the relationship between the preferred lattice plane and the preferred crystal growth direction, we can further draw the conclusion that most of the perovskite lattice in the D-4 film grew along the qz direction into a highly ordered pattern with good crystallinity. This film provided homogeneously perpendicular-distributed perovskite slabs as optimized highways for the photogenerated excitons to transport within the bulk to adjacent electron transport layers for efficient extraction. In contrast, the crystallization of the perovskite in the D-3 and D-5 thin films has taken several different growth orientations, causing those slabs to be interlocked with each other. This increases the propensity for forming pinholes.
As a result, charge transport along such a disordered spatial arrangement is likely to encounter many unfavorable energy barriers, leading to charge recombination and poor efficiency. In addition, several Debye–Scherrer rings can be observed between q = 4–8 nm−1 in D-3 and D-5 thin films, which can be assigned to LD perovskites with smaller n values. In the D-4 thin film, the mix of various dimensional perovskite phases is greatly suppressed. It is easy to imagine that LD perovskite phases with larger bandgaps and inferior optoelectronic properties will also deteriorate the performance of D-3 and D-5 thin films. We can conclude that the phase purity and the highly ordered structure make D-4 thin films stand out PSCs.
To further determine the distributions of the LD phases (with different n values), D-3, D-4, and D-5 thin films (on FTO substrate) were characterized using ultraviolet visible (UV-vis) absorption, photoluminescence (PL), and time-resolved PL (TRPL) spectroscopies, and the results are presented in Fig. 3a–c. An exciton-like absorption edge can be observed at ∼540 nm for all three thin films, which obviously stems from the characteristic absorption for the n = 1 LD phase in the D-1 thin film, as mentioned above. For the D-3 and D-4 thin films, the absorption edges (not sufficiently distinctive) in the range of 580–680 nm are thought to be from the LD phases with higher n values, whereas such absorption behavior is absent in the case of the D-5 thin film. The exciton-like absorption edges for the three samples beyond 700 nm are from the high n value LD perovskite. Thus, we can conclude that D-3 and D-4 thin films contain multiple LD phases. For the three samples, the emission peaks shown in Fig. 3b (740–760 nm) are from the high n value perovskite. The slight redshift of the emission peaks from D-3 to D-5 is probably caused by the increase in the high n value LD perovskite. The emission peaks at ∼550 nm (Fig. 3b inset) once again confirm the existence of LD phases in D-3 and D-4 thin films. Moreover, the high n value perovskite component in the D-4 thin film exhibits a much higher fluorescence intensity than D-3 or D-5. Correspondingly, the charge-carrier lifetime in the three films was further investigated by TRPL spectroscopy (Fig. 3c), and the plots are fitted using a bi-exponential equation. As shown in Table S2, the D-4 thin film exhibits a lifetime of 34.5 ns, which is much longer than the lifetimes of 18.4 ns and 5.6 ns for D-3 and D-5 thin films, respectively. To further evaluate the trap state density of the three films, an electron-only device with an architecture of FTO/TiO2/perovskite/PCBM/Ag (PCBM: phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester) was fabricated and its electrical properties were measured using the space-charge limited current (SCLC) method. As shown in Fig. S6, the defect state density of the D-4 thin film is estimated to be 1.08 × 105 cm−3, which is notably lower than those (1.72 × 105 and 1.87 × 105 cm−3) for D-3 and D-5 thin films, respectively, which is consistent with the PL and TRPL results and indicates that the D-4 thin film has higher crystallinity with fewer defects and nonradiative recombination.
In our study, ultrafast transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy, which is more sensitive to different perovskites, was used to study the charge transfer kinetics between different phases within DJPs. TA spectra at various delay times for the DJP films (on the TiO2 substrate) are presented in Fig. 3d (D-4) and Fig. S7 (D-3 and D-5), which clearly shows the existence of LD perovskites. For the TA spectra of D-3 and D-4, the peaks at 545 nm, 586 nm, 625 nm and 654 nm correspond to the LD perovskites with n = 1, 2, 3, and 4, respectively. The fact that the characteristic peaks of LD components cannot be found in the D-5 thin film implies that this sample is mainly composed of a high n value LD perovskite despite being verified to contain a very small amount of the n = 1 component (Fig. 2d). Another important finding is that the bleaching peaks in the D-4 thin film appear to merge with each other as evinced by the higher full-width-at-half-maximum (FWHM) values when compared to the D-3 thin film. As has been reported previously, this phenomenon is probably associated with the formation of a hierarchical phase distribution, under which LD phases (n = 1, 2, 3, and 4) in the D-4 thin film have a stronger interaction than the phases in the D-3 thin film. Charge transfer behavior between the different phases can also be extracted from the TA measurements. Fig. 3e shows the dynamic change in the bleaching recovery for the D-4 thin film. The bleaching peak of the n = 1 LD phase appears at ∼0.6 ps. With the rapid decay of this signal, the peaks for the n = 2, 3, and 4 LD phases appear and decay sequentially, finally followed by a very slow decay corresponding to the n = ∞ 3D phase. The TA spectra evolution is a reflection of the strong interaction between the different phases in D-4, which indicates that the photo-generated charges are sequentially transferred from the n = 1 LD phase to other phases with higher n values, as illustrated schematically in Fig. 3h.
Planar PSCs based on D-3, D-4, and D-5 thin films with an architecture of FTO/TiO2/perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au were assembled and measured under simulated 1-sun illumination (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2). The photovoltaic parameters and statistics are presented in Fig. 4a and S8, and the average and champion photovoltaic parameters for different PSCs are summarized in Table S3. PSCs based on D-4 thin films exhibit better reproducibility and higher performance, with an average VOC of 1.05 V, a JSC of 21.78 mA cm−2, and an FF of 0.64. The average PCE of 14.68% is much higher than those of the devices based on D-3 and D-5 thin films (11.91% and 10.60%, respectively). Fig. 4b shows the current–voltage (J–V) curves of the D-4-based ‘champion’ PSC that achieves a high PCE of 15.16%, which is also higher than those based on D-3 and D-5 thin films (Fig. S9). Notably, the PCE of the PSC based on the D-4 thin film is among the highest PCEs reported for LD-PSCs with n ≤ 4. In particular, the ‘champion’ PSC based on the D-4 thin film exhibits negligible hysteresis under forward and reverse J–V scans. The steady-state output measured under 1-sun AM 1.5G solar illumination at the maximum power point voltage in Fig. 4d shows a stable output PCE of 14.6% for as long as 300 s for the PSC based on the D-4 thin film, while the performances of PSCs based on D-3 and D-5 thin films are lower (12.1% and 11.1%, respectively, in Fig. S10) by comparison. The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra and integrated short circuit current density (Jin) of the three ‘champion’ PSCs are shown in Fig. 4d and S11; the Jin of 20.8 mA cm−2 for the D-4 PSC is much higher than the 19.86 mA cm−2 and 19.60 mA cm−2 for D-3 and D-5 PSCs, respectively, which is in good agreement with the JSC values from J–V curves.
As expected, the PSC based on the D-4 thin film demonstrates excellent long-term durability when measured under severe conditions. PSCs without encapsulation were placed on a hotplate controlled at 85 °C in air, and the photovoltaic performance was measured at regular intervals. Fig. 4e shows that the PCE of our LD-PSC can retain over 90% of the initial value after aging for 1000 h. By comparison, the PCE of the device based on the 3D perovskite (Cs0.05[(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15]0.95) exhibits a notable loss when measured under the same conditions, with only 70% of the initial PCE being maintained after 500 h. The detailed J–V curves and related photovoltaic parameters of the PSCs before and after the thermal aging are shown in Fig. S12. Furthermore, the long-term stability of PSCs under continuous 1-sun AM 1.5G illumination in air was tracked through a regular J–V test for over 300 h. It can be found in Fig. 4f that the PSC based on the D-4 thin film shows better light stability than the 3D PSC. The D-4 PSC retains ∼80% of the initial PCE after 300 h. In contrast, the 3D PSC shows a faster decay trend and only retains about 50% of the initial efficiency after 300 h. The J–V curves and related photovoltaic parameters of the devices before and after the 300 h continuous illumination are shown in Fig. S13. Thus, it can be said that optimized LD-PSCs achieve a good balance with respect to high PCE and excellent stability.

In summary, to boost the efficiency of LD-PSCs with smaller n values, DMAPA2+, as a new DJP spacer cation with an asymmetric structure, is used to prepare (DMAPA)MAn−1PbnI3n+1 with different stoichiometric compositions and structures. Compared to previously reported RPPs, the interlayer distance between adjacent inorganic layers in our new DJPs is smaller, which can strengthen their interaction, weaken the quantum-well effect, reduce exciton binding energy, and facilitate charge transport. As a consequence, a PCE of 3.85% was achieved in PSCs based on (DMAPA)PbI4 (n = 1), which is the highest efficiency among those reported for LD-DJP-PSCs with n = 1. DJPs with higher n values (n = 3, 4, 5) were also fabricated and studied systematically; these materials demonstrated different crystallization behavior. It is found that the crystallinity and orientation of perovskite grains are mainly dominated by the formation and decomposition of their intermediate phases. The hierarchical phase distribution in these DMAPA-based DJPs indicates a strong interaction between different phases, leading to the transfer of photocarriers sequentially from the n = 1 phase to the other phases with higher n values. Owing to the high phase purity, oriented crystal structure, and low defect density, PSCs based on (DMAPA)MA3Pb4I13 (n = 4) achieved a high PCE of 15.16%, which is higher than those of previously reported LD-DJP-PSCs with n ≤ 4. Moreover, these PSCs demonstrated excellent stability, with over 90% of the initial PCE retained without encapsulation after being stored at 85 °C in air for more than 1000 h. In addition, ∼80% of the initial PCE is retained after 300 h of continuous operation under 1-sun illumination in air.


510 mg 3-(dimethylamine)-1-propylamine (Sigma, 98.0%) and 10 mL anhydrous ethanol were added into a round bottom flask and stirred in an ice-water bath; then, 2245.6 mg HI solution (sigma, 57 wt% in H2O) was added dropwise into the above precursor solution and stirred for another 2 h in the ice-water bath. After that, the solvent in the solution was removed by vacuum distillation, and the solid was washed with diethyl ether by stirring the solution for 10 min, which was repeated three times, and then dried at 60 °C in a vacuum oven for 48 h to finally obtain the DMAPAI2 crystal.


The (DMAPA)PbI4 single crystal was fabricated using an anti-solvent method. First, we prepared a solution containing 23.05 mg PbI2 (Alfa, 99.9985%), 17.9 mg DMAPAI2, and 5 mL DMF (Sigma, anhydrous, 99.8%) in a 10 mL sample bottle, and it was stirred at 50 °C for 2 h. Then, we put a 10 mL sample bottle with the perovskite solution into a 150 mL reagent bottle which contained 50 mL dichloromethane, and closed the lid of the reagent bottle, and placed under ambient conditions for 3 days. After that, the solution was filtered, and the solid was washed with isopropanol and dried under N2 flow; finally, the (DMAPA)PbI4 single crystal was obtained.


(DMAPA)PbI4 perovskite precursor: 179 mg DMAPAI2 and 230.5 mg PbI2 (with a molar ratio of 1:1) were dissolved in 1 mL DMF, and then heated and stirred at 85 °C for 2 h. (DMAPA)MAn−1PbnI3n+1 perovskite precursor: to prepare (DMAPA)MA2Pb3I10 sol, 119.3 mg DMAPAI2, 106 mg MAI (Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp, 99.5%), 461 mg PbI2 (with a molar ratio of 1:2:3), and 2.25 mg of MACl (Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp., 99.5%) (5% of MAI molar mass) were dissolved in a mixed solvent of 920 μL DMF and 80 μL DMSO (Sigma, anhydrous, 99.9%), followed by heating and stirring at 50 °C for 2 h. Using the same solvent, the (DMAPA)MA3Pb4I13 sol containing 89.5 mg DMAPAI2, 119.25 mg MAI, 461 mg PbI2 (with a molar ratio of 1:3:4) and 2.53 mg MACl, and the (DMAPA)MA4Pb5I16 sol containing 71.6 mg DMAPAI2, 127.2 mg MAI, 461 mg PbI2 (with a molar ratio of 1:4:5) and 2.7 mg MACl were prepared.


Fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO, Suzhou Shang Yang Solar Tech Co., Ltd., 10 Ω sq−1) was etched with Zn powder and 4 M HCl solution; the etched FTO glasses were washed with detergent, deionized water, alcohol, acetone, and isopropanol sequentially; after drying in an air oven, the FTO substrates were further cleaned with the UV Ozone surface treatment. To prepare the compact TiO2 layer, the TiO2 organic sol was spin coated on the cleaned FTO substrates with 3000 rpm for 30 s, followed by sintering at 450 °C for 2 h. LD perovskite films were fabricated by a hot-coating method. The substrates with the TiO2 compact layer were preheated at 75 °C for 10 min, and immediately transferred on the spin-coater for the deposition of the perovskite layer. The perovskite precursor was dropped on the preheated substrates, followed by a spin-coating process of 4000 rpm for 50 s. And the substrates were annealed at 120 °C for 7.5 min. 3D perovskite (Cs0.05[(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15]0.95) films were prepared according to the previous procedure. The HTM precursor was prepared by dissolving 72.3 mg Spiro-OMeTAD into 1 mL chlorobenzene, and then 17.5 μL lithium bis-(trifluoromethylsulphonyl) imide (Sigma, 99.95%) acetonitrile solution (520 mg mL−1), 28.8 μL 4-tert-butylpyridine (Sigma, 96%) and 20 μL FK 209 Co(III) TFSI salt (Dyesol) acetonitrile solution (300 mg mL−1) were added in to the above solution successively; the HTM layer was deposited atop the perovskite by spin-coating at 3000 rpm for 30 s. Finally, the Au electrode was thermally evaporated on the top of the HTM. The active area of the device was 0.09 cm2, as defined by an unreflective mask.


Sample microscopic morphologies were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, SU8020). The crystallinity of all perovskite films was examined via XRD (D/MAX-2400, Japan) analysis with Cu Kα radiation (γ = 0.1541 nm). The single crystal was analysed by single-crystal X-ray diffraction (Bruker Smart APEXII) with Mo radiation (50 KV/30 mA). The ultraviolet absorbance spectra were measured by using a UV-vis spectrophotometer (Agilent, HP-8453). Photoluminescence (PL) spectra were measured using an FLS920 fluorescence spectrometer. The time-resolved PL decay was measured using a TPL 200 (Time-Tech Spectra) and all the samples with the structure of perovskite/glass. J–V curves of PSCs were obtained using a Keithley 2450 source meter scanning the devices at 0.1 V s−1 under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2, Solar3A, Newport). The 2D GIWAXS measurements of perovskite films were performed at the BL16B1 beamline of the Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility using an X-ray with a wavelength of 1.24 Å. The transient absorption (TA) setup was based on a regenerative amplified Ti:sapphire laser system from Coherent (800 nm, 35 fs, 6 mJ per pulse, and 1 kHz repetition rate), nonlinear frequency mixing techniques and the Helios spectrometer (ultrafast Systems LLC). All the samples were excited using 370 nm light.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51773025 and 51872036), the Natural Science Foundation of Liaoning Province, China (Grant No. 20180510027), the Dalian science and technology innovation fund (2018J12GX033 and 2019J12GX032), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities of China (Grant No. DUT18ZD208 and DUT18LK48), and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant No. 2019TQ0046). The work at Brown University was supported by the US National Science Foundation (Grant No. OIA-1538893). The authors thank beamline BL16B1 at Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF) for providing the beam time.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Details of supplementary figures and tables. CCDC 1988940. For ESI and crystallographic data in CIF or other electronic format see DOI: 10.1039/d0ta02706e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020