 DOI: 10.1039/D0TA12203C
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 3918-3924


Mengyuan
Yang
,

Fei
Qin
,

Wen
Wang
,

Tiefeng
Liu
,

Lulu
Sun
,

Cong
Xie
,

Xinyun
Dong
,

Xin
Lu
 and 

Yinhua
Zhou
*

Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China. E-mail: yh_zhou@hust.edu.cn

Received
16th December 2020
, Accepted 25th January 2021
First published on 26th January 2021
Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) with high electrical conductivity and optical transmittance is regarded as a promising printable transparent electrode for organic solar cells. Intrinsically, it has a high work function because PEDOT is in an oxidized state. The oxidized state is prone to chemical reduction by polyethylenimine (PEI) or ethoxylated PEI (PEIE) or sol–gel ZnO precursors (ethanolamine contained) during work function tuning. In this work, we report zinc-ion chelated PEIE (denoted as PEI-Zn) deposited on the PEDOT:PSS electrode to reduce its work function as an efficient electron-collecting electrode. The introduction of zinc ions can effectively suppress the chemical reduction of PEDOT:PSS films by PEIE. High optical transmittance and electrical conductivity of PEDOT:PSS remain during the coating. The PEI-Zn can be as thick as 70 nm on PEDOT:PSS as an interlayer. Devices were fabricated on the low-work function PEDOT:PSS/PEI-Zn electrode. With the active layer of PM6:Y6, the cell shows a power conversion efficiency of 11.2% (open-circuit voltage of 0.81 V, short-circuit current of 21.3 mA cm−2, and fill factor of 0.65).

Organic solar cells (OSCs) have great potential for large-scale commercial applications because of their promise for light weight, excellent mechanical flexibility and easy processing. Over the last few decades, OSCs have achieved rapid progress with the development of organic photovoltaic materials, especially nonfullerene (NF) acceptors. The power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of single-junction OSCs have recently surpassed 18%, which advances OSCs towards practical applications. However, the overwhelming majority of efficient OSCs, including the state-of-the-art OSCs, were fabricated using non-solution processed electrodes, such as sputtered indium tin oxide (ITO). To realize the potential of low cost and easy processing, solution-processed printable electrodes should be preferably applied in OSCs.

Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) is one of the most popular solution-processed electrode materials due to the high transmittance in the visible range, high and tunable electrical conductivity, excellent thermal stability, and high work function. PEDOT is in an oxidized state for achieving high electrical conductivity and PEDOT:PSS has a high work function of 5.0 eV. To tune PEDOT:PSS as an electron-collecting electrode, a low-work function surface modifier or interlayer is required to deposit on it. Polyethylenimine (PEI) or ethoxylated PEI (PEIE) has been widely used to reduce the work function of conductors, such as oxides (ITO), metals, PEDOT:PSS, and graphene. When PEI is used to modify the PEDOT:PSS film, the electron lone pairs in the amine-containing polymers are prone to chemical reduction of the oxidized PEDOT, which is detrimental to optical transmittance and electrical conductivity and will result in poor device performance. Thus, an ultrathin (generally less than 10 nm) PEI layer has been adopted to modify the PEDOT:PSS. In this case, the reaction between PEI and PEDOT can be minimized. The thin PEI can only react with the top surface of PEDOT:PSS rather than the entire bulk layer. Another reaction between acidic PSSH and amine is helpful to inhibit the chemical reduction between PEI and PEDOT. However, it is challenging to print such a thin layer uniformly on a large scale. In addition, recently we have found that the amine polymers (such as PEI and PEIE) tend to react with NF acceptors (such as ITIC, IT-4F, etc.). This would also limit the application of PEI or PEIE as an interfacial layer in printable NF OSCs.
Sol–gel zinc oxide (sol–gel ZnO) is another generally used metal oxide as the electron transporting layer in the NF OSCs due to the ease of fabrication and high efficiency. However, the sol–gel ZnO precursor solution contains small-molecule amine (ethanolamine). During the film formation process, ethanolamine easily reacts with PEDOT:PSS via chemical reduction. To enable the PEDOT:PSS electrode as a printable low-work function electrode, the interfacial layer should simultaneously meet three requirements: (1) the interfacial layer shouldn't react with the PEDOT:PSS electrode and change the optoelectronic properties; (2) the interfacial layer should be compatible with the active layer materials without chemical reaction; (3) it should be compatible with blade-coating or the slot-die coating process. Recently, we reported that zinc ion chelated PEI or PEIE (denoted as PEI-Zn) can be well compatible with the NF active layer where the chemical reaction between PEI/PEIE and NF acceptors is suppressed. However, the compatibility and reaction behavior between PEI-Zn and PEDOT:PSS is still unclear.
In this work, we report that the interlayer of PEI-Zn turns PEDOT:PSS from a hole-collecting to an electron-collecting electrode. We find that the zinc ion interacts with the amine groups so as to weaken its electron-donating ability, and thus the chemical reduction between PEDOT and PEIE is suppressed. The electron-collecting electrode of PEDOT:PSS/PEI-Zn is validated in NF OSCs. The low content of Zn ion would cause poor device performance with S-shapes in the J–V characteristics. When the molar ratio of Zn-to-N increases to 15:1, the devices with blade-coated PEI-Zn on the PEDOT:PSS electrode show high performance with a PCE of 11.20%.


Fig. 1 shows the device structure of inverted OSCs (glass/PEDOT:PSS/PEI-Zn/active layer/MoO3/Ag) and the chemical structure of PEIE and PEDOT:PSS. PEDOT is highly p-doped with a doping ratio up to around 33%. This enables its high electrical conductivity and high optical transmittance. The oxidized PEDOT tends to be chemically reduced. Amine-containing low-work function interfacial materials, such as PEIE and polyallylamine, can act as the reducing agents to react with PEDOT. As shown in Fig. 1, the lone pair of electrons of the N atom in the amine group can reduce the oxidized PEDOT. When the zinc ion is introduced into the PEIE solution, the electron-donating ability of PEIE is weakened due to the coordination between zinc ions and amine groups. In our previous work, we reported that the coordination suppresses this chemical reaction between PEIE and the nonfullerene active layer and contributes to their good compatibility. Here, the coordination between PEIE and zinc ions also suppresses the chemical reduction of PEDOT:PSS by PEIE. The introduced zinc ions can interact with the amine group in PEIE, thereby inhibiting the electron donating ability of the amine group and weakening the reducibility of the amine group. In this case, PEI-Zn is expected to have good chemical compatibility with the PEDOT:PSS electrode.


Fig. 2a and b show the picture and absorption (A) spectra of the PEDOT:PSS film with or without the interface layer (PEI-Zn, PEIE and sol–gel ZnO). Note: A = 1 − T − R (T and R are the transmittance and reflectance, respectively.) The original PEDOT:PSS film is light blue. It has weak absorption in the visible spectral region. Its strong absorption mainly locates in the near-infrared region which is from the contribution of free charge carriers or alternatively to excitation of the midgap states (polaron or bi-polaron states). When a layer of the sol–gel ZnO solution is coated on the PEDOT:PSS film, the PEDOT:PSS/sol–gel ZnO film turns dark blue and the spectrum shows two apparent peaks at around 950 nm and 650 nm, which are assigned to the polaron-induced absorption (950 nm) and absorption of neutral PEDOT (650 nm). These optical features are consistent with previous reports on dedoping of PEDOT by methylamine. This suggests that the sol–gel ZnO precursor solution can strongly chemically reduce the PEDOT, even to the neutral state. This is associated with the small-sized amine (ethanolamine) in the precursor solution reacting with the PEDOT. When PEI-Zn is used as the interface layer on PEDOT:PSS, the PEDOT:PSS/PEI-Zn film is a light blue, which is similar to pristine PEDOT:PSS. Though the absorption intensity around 950 nm increases, the absorption in the visible region is almost the same as that of the pristine film which suggests that no neutralized PEDOT appears after the PEI-Zn coating. For the PEDOT:PSS coated with PEIE (30 nm), absorption in the visible region also increases. PEDOT:PSS dedoped by PEIE or PEI has been reported in the literature. Thus, the PEI-Zn displays better chemical compatibility with PEDOT:PSS than sol–gel ZnO precursors or PEIE.
In addition to the optical properties, the interaction between the PEDOT:PSS and sol–gel ZnO (or PEI-Zn) can also be reflected in their electrical properties. As shown in Fig. 2c, the sheet resistance of the pristine PEDOT:PSS film is 78 Ω sq−1. After coating with a layer of sol–gel ZnO (30 nm), the sheet resistance increased to nearly 5 times (390 Ω sq−1). After coated with a layer of PEI-Zn, the sheet resistance is 120 Ω sq−1. The sheet resistance confirms less chemical reduction by PEI-Zn compared with sol–gel ZnO. Both PEI-Zn and sol–gel ZnO coating can reduce the work function of PEDOT:PSS down to a value close to 4.1 eV. Another observation is that PEI-Zn on ITO and PEDOT:PSS delivers a similar work function, while ZnO on PEDOT:PSS delivers a lower work function than ZnO on ITO (4.1 vs. 4.4 eV). This also correlates to the chemical reduction of PEDOT:PSS that shifts up its Fermi level. To further verify the compatibility between PEI-Zn and PEDOT:PSS, the Raman spectra of PEDOT:PSS, PEDOT:PSS/PEIE and PEDOT:PSS/PEI-Zn films were also obtained (Fig. S1). The Raman spectrum band between 1400 and 1500 cm−1 arises from the Cα = Cβ stretching vibrations. Compared with the pristine PEDOT:PSS film, the main peak of PEDOT:PSS/PEIE shifts to the blue and this phenomenon corresponds to the conformation change of the PEDOT thiophene rings from a quinoid to a benzoid structure, which suggests the chemical reduction of PEDOT. The main peak of the PEDOT:PSS/PEI-Zn film shows almost no change, indicating that the structure of the PEDOT chain is similar to that of the pristine PEDOT:PSS film.
So, the PEI-Zn has good compatibility with PEDOT:PSS. The PEDOT:PSS/PEI-Zn has high conductivity, optical transmittance and low work function. Then, the PEDOT:PSS/PEI-Zn is used for electron-collection in the NF OSCs with a structure of glass/PEDOT:PSS/PEI-Zn/active layers/MoO3/Ag. The mixture of polymer PM6 and the small molecular compound IT-4F is used as the active layer. Fig. 3a shows the J–V characteristics of sol–gel ZnO and the optimized PEI-Zn interlayer on the PEDOT:PSS electrode. The reference device with sol–gel ZnO displays an extremely serious s-kink in the J–V characteristic curve and the efficiency of the reference devices is 2.69%, with an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.78 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 13.26 mA cm−2, and a very low fill factor (FF) of 0.29. When optimized PEI-Zn is used as the interlayer, the J–V curve of the device becomes normal without an S-shaped kink (device performance: VOC = 0.81 V, JSC = 17.08 mA cm−2, FF = 0.72 and PCE = 9.96%). Fig. 3b and Table 1 show the J–V characteristics and photovoltaic parameters (VOC, JSC, FF, and PCE) when different Zn-to-N molar ratios were used to optimize the layer of PEI-Zn. When the amount of Zn2+ is small, the device J–V curve has a very serious ‘S’ shape, which results from the serious reaction between the electron lone pair in the amines and PEDOT:PSS; as the amount of Zn2+ increases, the ‘S’ shape gradually disappears. When the Zn-to-N molar ratio reaches 15:1, the devices deliver the highest performance. Thermal stability and illumination stability of devices were also evaluated. To test the thermal stability, the cells were annealed at a temperature of 85 °C in a N2-filled glove-box and measured after different annealing times. Fig. S2a shows the evolution of VOC, JSC, FF, and PCE as a function of the annealing time. The PCE of the device remained at 78% of its initial value after 200 h of thermal annealing. To test the illumination stability, the cells were illuminated under white light LED illumination (100 mW cm−2) in a N2-filled glove-box and measured after different illumination times. Fig. S2b shows that the PCE of the devices remains at 94% of the original value after 200 h of light illumination.
Zn-to-N molar ratio

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
4:1
0.80 ± 0.01
13.7 ± 0.2
20.8 ± 3.1
2.3 ± 0.6
7:1
0.80 ± 0.01
12.6 ± 0.3
30.4 ± 5.8
3.1 ± 0.8
10:1
0.81 ± 0.01
15.9 ± 0.2
51.2 ± 3.4
6.6 ± 0.7
13:1
0.81 ± 0.01
16.0 ± 0.3
65.0 ± 0.6
8.5 ± 0.3
15:1
0.81 ± 0.01
17.1 ± 0.1
70.9 ± 0.5
9.8 ± 0.3
To validate whether the PEI-Zn is compatible with the large-area coating, the PEI-Zn is blade-coated on the PEDOT:PSS electrode for OSCs. The quality of blade-coated films is influenced by blade speed, solution concentration, solution dose, gap between the blade coater, and the temperature of the substrate. Our previous work shows that the thickness of PEI-Zn has almost no effect on device performance, which also makes it very suitable for preparation by blade-coating. The chemical reduction reaction of PEDOT:PSS is also influenced by the temperature. In this work, we mainly optimized the substrate temperature when blade-coating the PEI-Zn layer. Fig. 4a and Table S1 present the photovoltaic parameters as a function of substrate temperature. The deposition condition for the PEI-Zn is: using a fixed blade speed of 10 mm s−1, a fixed solution dose of 15 μL and a fixed gap of 150 μm. As the substrate temperature increases from 30 to 80 °C, VOC shows a trend of first increase and then decrease, but varies in a small range. The fluctuation of JSC is also small. The FF shows a monotonic improvement from 0.66 to 0.70. Overall, the device performance is not sensitive to the substrate temperature. The device with doctor-bladed PEI-Zn shows comparable performance to the spin-coated device. The doctor-bladed device exhibits the same VOC of 0.81 V as the spin-coated device, a comparable JSC (17.41 vs. 17.08 mA cm−2), and a slightly lower FF of 0.70 compared to the spin-coated device (0.72). This also shows that the PEI-Zn is suitable for blade-coating processing. Furthermore, we prepared both PEDOT:PSS and PEI-Zn layers by blade-coating and fabricated devices: glass/PEDOT:PSS(blade-coating)/PEI-Zn(blade-coating)/PM6:Y6/MoO3/Ag. The J–V curve of the device is provided in Fig. 4b; the average efficiency of the blade-coated device is 11.2%, with a VOC of 0.81 V, a JSC of 21.3 mA cm−2, and an FF of 0.65.

In summary, we presented zinc ion chelated ethoxylated polyethylenimine that can be a printable interlayer on PEDOT:PSS to enable it to be an efficient electron-collecting electrode. By introducing zinc ions into the PEIE solution, the electron-donating properties of PEIE are weakened. Compared with generally used sol–gel ZnO or PEI/PEIE, the PEI-Zn shows very good chemical compatibility with PEDOT:PSS. The PEDOT:PSS/PEI-Zn can simultaneously have low work function, high electrical conductivity and optical transmittance. It has been validated as an electron-collecting electrode in NF solar cells. When the active layer is PM6:IT-4F, the FF is 0.70 and the efficiency is 9.87%. When the active layer is PM6:Y6, the FF is 0.65 and the efficiency is 11.20%. These results suggest that the combination of PEDOT:PSS/PEI-Zn can be a very effective printable and flexible electron-collecting electrode. It can be widely used in organic optoelectronic devices, such as organic solar cells and organic light emitting diodes.


The polymer donor PM6 and small molecule acceptors (IT-4F and Y6) were purchased from Solarmer Materials Inc. Zinc acetate dihydrate, 2-methoxyethanol and polyethylenimine (80% ethoxylated, PEIE, 37 wt% in H2O), and ethylene glycol were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. The PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution (Clevios PH1000) was purchased from Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp. The PEI-Zn precursors were prepared as reported by us before. The PEDOT:PSS electrode solution was prepared by adding 5 wt% ethylene glycol and 0.3 wt% surfactant-340 into PH1000.


The PEDOT:PSS electrode solution was spin-coated on the glass at 1000 rpm for 1 min and annealed at 130 °C for 10 min, then patterned via laser etching. Interlayers (PEI-Zn or sol–gel ZnO solution) were spin-coated at 3000 rpm for 40 s, with thermal annealing at 150 °C for 10 min. Then, the active layer films were prepared in a N2-filled glovebox. For blade-coating of PEDOT:PSS and PEI-Zn, PEDOT:PSS was diluted in deionized water (1:0.7, volume ratio) and deposited by blade-coating on glass substrates at 45 °C and the gap height was 100 μm with a 10 mm s−1 blading speed. Then, the film was annealed at 130 °C for 10 min in air. The interlayer PEI-Zn (Zn-to-N molar ratio is 15:1) was then doctor-bladed at a 60 °C substrate temperature from its original solution with a 150 μm gap height and 10 mm s−1 blading speed.

PM6:IT-4F (10 mg:10 mg) in a chlorobenzene solution (containing 0.5 vol% DIO) was spin-coated at 1500 rpm for 60 s. PM6:Y6 (7 mg:8.4 mg) in a chloroform solution (containing 0.5 vol% CN) was spin-coated at 2500 rpm for 60 s. After thermal annealing at 100 °C for 10 min, the samples were transferred into a vacuum evaporation system (Mini-spectros, Kurt J. Lesker). 7 nm-thick MoO3 and 70 nm-thick Ag were evaporated with a metal aperture mask under a pressure of 2 × 10−7 torr. The active area of a single cell is 4.1 mm2. Before measurement, the devices with PM6:IT-4F active layers were annealed at 100 °C for 10 min in a N2-filled glove box.

Transmittance and reflectance of films were characterized using a UV-vis-NIR Spectrophotometer (UV3600, Shimadzu). The work function of films was measured using a Kelvin probe (KP020, KP technology). The sheet resistance of films was measured using a four-point probe (RTS-8). The thickness of thin films was characterized using a Profilometer (DEKTAK XT, Bruker) at room temperature in air with a stylus force of 3 mg. Thickness values were averaged over 10 different spots on each film. Raman spectra of thin films were obtained using a Horiba Scientific LabRAM HR evolution Raman spectrometer (LabRAM HR800, Horiba JobinYvon) with a 532 nm laser as the excitation source. Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics were measured inside a N2-filled glove box using a source meter (2400, Keithley Instruments) controlled using a LabVIEW program under AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) illumination with a solar simulator (Newport).


The authors declare no conflict of interest.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51973074 and 51773072), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2019M662614, 2020M682404), and the Hubei Province Postdoctoral Innovation Research Foundation, and the HUST Innovation Research Fund (Grant No. 2016JCTD111 and 2017KFKJXX012). The authors would like to thank the Analytical and Testing Center of Huazhong University of Science and Technology for providing the facilities to conduct the characterization.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta12203c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021