 DOI: 10.1039/C4TA04733H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19809-19814


Wenqing
Liu
,

Shiyong
Liu
,

Natalia K.
Zawacka
,

Thomas R.
Andersen
,

Pei
Cheng
,

Lei
Fu
,

Meirong
Chen
,

Weifei
Fu
,

Eva
Bundgaard
,

Mikkel
Jørgensen
,

Xiaowei
Zhan
,

Frederik C.
Krebs
* and 

Hongzheng
Chen
*

State Key Laboratory of Silicon Materials, MOE Key Laboratory of Macromolecular Synthesis and Functionalization, Department of Polymer Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, P. R. China. E-mail: hzchen@zju.edu.cn

Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, Technical University of Denmark, Frederiksborgvej 399, DK-4000 Roskilde, Denmark. E-mail: frkr@dtu.dk

Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences and CAS Key Laboratory of Organic Solids, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China

Received
11th September 2014
, Accepted 24th September 2014
First published on 25th September 2014
All solution-processed flexible large area small molecule bulk heterojunction solar cells were fabricated via roll-coating technology. Our devices were produced from slot-die coating on a lab-scale mini roll-coater under ambient conditions without the use of spin-coating or vacuum evaporation methods. Four diketopyrrolopyrrole based small molecules (SMs 1–4) were utilized as electron donors with (6,6)-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester as an acceptor and their photovoltaic performances based on roll-coated devices were investigated. The best power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 1.01%, combined with an open circuit voltage of 0.73 V, a short-circuit current density of 3.13 mA cm−2 and a fill factor of 44% were obtained for the device with SM1, which was the first example reported for efficient roll-coating fabrication of flexible large area small molecule solar cells with PCE exceeding 1%. In addition, roll-coated devices based on SMs 2–4 also showed good performances with PCEs of 0.41%, 0.54%, and 0.31%, respectively. Our results prove that small molecules have the potential for use in industries for large scale production of efficient organic solar cells.

Due to their potential in cheap, light weight and mass-producible devices for delivery of clean and renewable energy, organic solar cells (OSCs) have continued to be an area of immense interest. Enormous efforts, including the development of novel organic semiconductors, device architectures, and optimization of device processing conditions, have been devoted to improving the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of OSCs to exceed 9% in single junction cells and 10% in multi-junction cells. Such performances bring OSCs on a par with inorganic PV technologies such as amorphous silicon solar cells. Additionally, an extrapolated lifetime approaching 7 years has been demonstrated for a polymer-based solar cell. Despite these promising advances in the PCEs and operational stability of OSCs on a laboratory scale, in order to reach their full potential as a commercial PV technology, transfer of OSCs from the laboratory to a realistic larger scale industrial process is urgently needed. A roll-to-roll processing without the use of vacuum and high temperature has been shown to be a promising method which offers the opportunity for mass-production of OSCs. Some industrially established printing and coating methods, such as gravure printing, flexographic printing, slot-die roll coating and knife coating, have been explored as suitable film forming techniques for deposition of functional layers of OSCs.

With regard to photoactive materials, much attention has been focused on the design of various polymer donors with near ideal, optical and electronic properties, while small molecule donors possess particular advantages over conjugated polymers, such as easy synthesis and purification, well-defined molecular structures, definite molecular weights, high charge carrier mobility and high purity without batch to batch variations. Through persistent investigations by scientists, a PCE of over 8% has been achieved for small molecule bulk-heterojunction (SM BHJ) solar cells. For instance, Chen et al. achieved a PCE of 8.12% by developing a series of novel small molecule donors. Bazan et al. reported an OSC based on the small molecule donor p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 and found that a barium cathode layer can significantly enhance the fill factor (FF) of the device by increasing the charge collection at the cathode. Ultimately the PCE is improved to 9.02% and is the record value for SM BHJ solar cells.
However, due to the relatively poor film forming properties and low viscosity of small molecules, it is challenging to realize the fabrication of SM BHJ solar cells with roll-to-roll processing. So far, to the best of our knowledge, there have been rare reports on small molecule based roll-to-roll OSC devices. Zhan et al. reported the first small molecule roll-coated flexible solar cells, using S(TPA–DPP):PCBM active materials and poly(ethyleneterephthalate) (PET) with Ag grid substrates with an efficiency of 0.21%. However, this value is relatively low, and much effort is still needed to improve the performance, e.g. introduction of new donor materials.
Since first reported by Nguyen and co-workers, the diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP) unit, with two fused electron-deficient lactams, has been widely used to design high performance p-type organic photovoltaic materials. Recently, our group designed a series of small molecule donors based on the DPP unit (as shown in Fig. 1a), including direct arylation of a C–H bond (DACH) derived small molecule containing three DPP cores (Ph4Th4(DPP)3, SM1), a pyrene and DPP based linear oligomer (Py2Ph2Th4(DPP)3SM2), a DPP derivative end-capped with an ethyl thiophene-2-carboxylate moiety (DPP(CT)2, SM3), and a DPP molecule end-capped with two furan-2-carboxylate moieties (DPP(CF)2, SM4). All the designed DPP-based small molecules exhibit broad light absorptions (300–700 nm), narrow band gaps (1.61–1.71 eV), deep highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) levels (−5.33 to −5.19 eV), and excellent solution processed film-forming properties. Small area devices based on these molecules showed remarkable performances with PCEs in the range of 3–6%.
In this work, by utilizing the above DPP-based small molecules and (6,6)-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) as electronic donors and acceptor respectively, we further investigate the large-scale production of SM BHJ solar cells via roll-coating technology. We demonstrated, for the first time, efficient roll-coating fabrication of flexible large area (1.0 cm2) SM BHJ solar cells with PCE exceeding 1%. Our cells were prepared under ambient conditions without the use of spin-coating or vacuum deposition methods on a lab-scale compact roll-coater which was developed to allow direct investigation of variable parameter effects in roll-to-roll processing and also readily transferrable to roll-to-roll machines. An inverted device geometry was adopted as illustrated in Fig. 1b with a fully slot-die coated layer stack applied to a flexible PET substrate with a Ag grid/highly conductive poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) PH1000/zinc oxide (ZnO) electrode. ZnO was employed as an electron transport layer (ETL), SMs 1–4:PC61BM as the active layer, and a back PEDOT:PSS EL-P5010 layer as the hole transport layer (HTL). The final back Ag grid electrode was printed using the flexographic technique.

Unless otherwise stated, solvents and chemicals were obtained commercially and used without further purification. SMs 1–4 were synthesized according to our previous reports. PC61BM was purchased from Luminescence Technology Corp.

The PET substrate Melinex ST506 was obtained from Dupont–Teijin. The PET/Ag substrates were prepared according to the literature procedures and can be obtained freely at http://www.plasticphotovoltaics.org. Highly conductive PEDOT:PSS PH1000 from Heraeus diluted with isopropyl alcohol in the ratio 10:3 (w/w) was employed as a semitransparent conductor. The ETL was coated using a stabilized ZnO nanoparticle solution in acetone (49 mg ml−1). PEDOT:PSS EL-P5010 was used as a top HTL diluted with IPA in a ratio of 2:1 (w/w). The printable Ag back electrode used was PV410 from Dupont. The front PEDOT:PSS electrode had a sheet resistivity of 60–90 Ω square−1 and the substrate with a metal grid had a sheet resistivity of 10 Ω square−1. The sheet resistivity of the back PEDOT:PSS electrode was 60 Ω square−1 and the sheet resistivity of the top Ag electrode was 0.1 Ω square−1. The cells were encapsulated between two 15 × 15 mm2 glass slides with a UV curable epoxy resin (DELO LP655) adhesive and cured for 2 min under a solar simulator (1000 W m−2, AM 1.5G).

The mini roll coater is constructed to mimic the coating performed on full scale roll-to-roll processing equipment. As shown in Fig. 2a, the system is comprised of a single 300 mm diameter roll where to a PET/Ag substrate is attached, a slot-die coating head mounted at the top of the machine to coat the film and a syringe pump to control the flow rate of ink. The roll is driven by a servo motor allowing for a large range of web speeds and can be heated to a constant controlled temperature for drying of the coated material. The coating head is a slot-die coating head with a very small dead volume of less than 50 μL, allowing the use of a very small amount of solution for processing. We prepared active-material inks comprising a blend of SMs 1–4:PC61BM (weight ratio, 1:1) with appropriate concentration in the halogen solvent, which were then transferred from an external container to the slot-die head via a pump, and roll-coated on four stripes on the flexible PET/Ag substrate, pre-coated with ZnO and highly conductive PEDOT:PSS PH1000 (Fig. 2a). The coating was conducted at 60 °C with a web speed of 0.65 m min−1 affording a wet thickness in the range of 10–14 μm. For SM1 and SM2, the optimal solvent, total concentration, and thickness were chlorobenzene, 40 mg ml−1 and 260 nm, respectively, while for SM3, and SM4, the optimal solvent, total concentration, and thickness were chloroform, 50 mg ml−1 and 450 nm, respectively. The back PEDOT:PSS EL-P5010 was slot-die coated on the active layer with a further offset of 1 mm (to prevent shorting of the device). The coating was conducted at 70 °C with a web speed of 0.5 m min−1 affording a wet thickness in the range of 200–250 mm. After coating the active layer and PEDOT:PSS HTL, the back Ag grid electrodes were printed from a Dupont PV410 silver paste by using a patterned rubber roller (Fig. 2b) with a web speed of 1.2 m min−1. The completed solar cells were then removed from the roll and annealed at 120 °C in a hot air oven for 5 min before dividing the substrates into more than a hundred individual cells each with an active area of 1 cm2. Usually, on one piece of PET substrate, hundreds of ITO-free flexible solar cells (Fig. 2c) can be fabricated within a continuous process lasting no more than 3 h.

The light beam induced current (LBIC) experiments were carried out using a custom made setup with a 410 nm laser diode (5 mW output power, 100 μm spot size ≈ 65 W cm−2, ThorLabs) mounted on a computer controlled XY-stage and focused to a spot size of <100 μm. The short circuit current from the device under study was measured using a computer controlled source measure unit (SMU, a Keithley 2400 instrument). A custom written computer program was used to scan the solar cell devices in a raster pattern in 200 μm steps in the X and the Y directions, logging the coordinates and measured current. The results were then converted to yellow/blue colored bitmaps in 255 different hues with another custom written program. Bright yellow represents the highest absolute current extracted while blue represents the lowest current. Current profiles along selected directions were taken from these maps to visualize the relative differences in different regions. The atomic force microscopy (AFM) images were taken using a Veeco Multimode atomic force microscope in the tapping mode. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves were measured with a Keithley 2400 sourcemeter at room temperature in air. The photocurrent was measured using a KHS 575 solar simulator with an AM 1.5G 100 mW cm−2 intensity, and the light intensity was calibrated with a standard photovoltaic reference cell. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra were recorded using a Solar Cell Spectral Response Measurement System QEX10.

Devices of the four small molecules were fabricated by roll coating SMs 1–4:PC61BM blend inks on a flexible PET/Ag substrate at a 60 °C temperature. The optimization of devices was conducted by varying different donor–acceptor ratios, thicknesses and solvent additives. J–V characteristics of the devices under AM 1.5G illumination at an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 are shown in Fig. 3, and the optimized performance parameters are summarized in Table 1. The best PCEs of SM1, SM2, SM3, and SM4 were 1.01%, 0.41%, 0.54%, and 0.31%, respectively. Among the four small molecule based devices, the SM1:PC61BM device exhibited the highest short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 3.13 mA cm−2, the highest FF of 0.44 and a high open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.73 V, leading to the highest PCE of 1.01%. The device SM3:PC61BM, by contrast, delivered a lower PCE of 0.54% due to the lower FF and Voc. The SM4 based device had the lowest PCE of 0.31% with a Voc of 0.69 V, a Jsc of 1.53 mA cm−2 and a FF of 0.29. Compared with the SM4 based device, the SM2 based device gave a better FF of 0.39 while keeping a nearly identical Voc and Jsc, which contributed to a higher PCE of 0.41%.

Active layer

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
Max
Average

a Roll-coated device with SM1:PC61BM as the active layer.
b Spin-coated device with SM1:PC61BM as the active layer.


SM1:PC61BM
0.73
3.13
0.44
1.01
0.95

SM2:PC61BM
0.70
1.51
0.39
0.41
0.38

SM3:PC61BM
0.68
2.97
0.27
0.54
0.46

SM4:PC61BM
0.69
1.53
0.29
0.31
0.27

SM1:PC61BM
0.86
7.18
0.58
3.57
—
To better understand the underlying mechanism of the above device performance differences of the four small molecule based devices, the film morphologies were measured using tapping mode AFM. Fig. 4 shows the height and the phase AFM images of SMs 1–4/PC61BM blended films prepared under their respective optimized conditions. Among the four films, it is found that the SM1:PC61BM blended film (Fig. 4a and e) displayed a relatively smooth morphology with the smallest root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of 1.15 nm. The donor and acceptor mixed well, leading to uniform morphology and obvious donor–acceptor phase separation with the smallest domains in the scale of 10–30 nm, which provides large interfaces for exciton dissociation, and thus leading to the best device performance. Conversely, for the SM4:PC61BM blended films (Fig. 4d and h), the largest phase separation domains (180–200 nm) were observed, and not enough interfaces are formed for exciton dissociation, which was responsible for the lowest photovoltaic performance. As shown in Fig. 4c and g, the SM3:PC61BM blended films exhibited a smoother morphology with more interconnected domains, leading to a higher Jsc and thus a better PCE compared with that of SM2:PC61BM (Fig. 4b and f). These observations indicate that the device performances are strongly dependent on their film morphology.
We further draw a comparison between the performance of the roll-coated device on flexible PET/Ag substrates and the spin-coated device on ITO glass substrates, which were illustrated by the case of SM1:PC61BM as the active layer. The details of fabrication of spin-coated devices were reported in our previous work. Their J–V curves are shown in Fig. 5a and the performance parameters are summarized in Table 1, while their EQE spectra are shown in Fig. 5b. We found that the performance of the slot-die coated device was much lower than the spin coated device which exhibited an average Voc of 0.86 V, Jsc of 7.18 mA cm−2, FF of 0.58 and PCE of 3.57%.
In order to investigate the significant drop in PCE in the roll-coated device compared to the spin-coated device, AFM measurements were conducted to study their film morphologies under their corresponding optimum processing conditions. Compared with the film processed by roll-coating (Fig. 5c and e), the spin-coated film (Fig. 5d and f) exhibits more distinctive morphology with small phase separation and interconnected domains, providing not only interfaces for exciton dissociation but also percolation pathways for charge carrier transport to their respective electrodes, which accounts for the better device performance. Besides the morphology, the lower performance (by a factor of 4) of the slot-die coated device was reasonable, considering the much different processing conditions including solvents, blend ratios, temperature and substrates. These changes lead to different film thicknesses, morphologies and so on. We also carried out the mapping of completed devices by employing the LBIC technique and the optical image is shown in the inset of Fig. 5a, from which we rule out that defects are responsible for the low performance as the LBIC images clearly showed a good current response over the whole active region.

In conclusion, a series of DPP based small molecules, which have demonstrated fine performances of small area photovoltaic devices on a laboratory scale, were successfully utilized for the roll-coating fabrication of high efficiency flexible large area solar cells. The devices were prepared by slot-die roll coating and flexographic printing techniques on a mini roll coater without the use of spin coating or vacuum evaporation methods. Devices based on the blend films of SM1 and PC61BM exhibited an efficiency of 1.01%, which is the first roll-coating flexible SM BHJ solar cell system showing a PCE over 1%. Meanwhile, the other three molecules, including SM2, SM3, and SM4, also showed good device performance with a PCE of 0.41%, 0.54%, and 0.31%, respectively. Our efforts to fabricate SM BHJ solar cells using a roll coating process demonstrate that small molecule materials also have the potential for use in large area solar cells.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants 51261130582, 91233114, and 50990063), the Danish National Research Foundation and the Major State Basic Research Development Program (2014CB643503). This work was carried out in the Danish Chinese Centre of Organic-Based Photovoltaics with Morphological Control.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014