 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA00468H
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8805-8810


Hoyeon
Choi
,

Jihoon
Lee
,

Chang-Mok
Oh
,

Soyeong
Jang
,

Hyojung
Kim
,

Mun Seok
Jeong
,

Sung Heum
Park
* and 

In-Wook
Hwang
*

Advanced Photonics Research Institute, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju 61005, Republic of Korea. E-mail: hwangiw@gist.ac.kr

Department of Physics, Pukyong National University, Busan 48513, Republic of Korea. E-mail: spark@pknu.ac.kr

Department of Energy Science, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, Republic of Korea

Received
14th January 2019
, Accepted 20th March 2019
First published on 21st March 2019
An improved efficiency of non-fullerene acceptor-based organic solar cells based on PBDB-T:ITIC-m composites has been obtained by using post-additive soaking (PAS) treatments on pristine BHJ films. The PAS-treated BHJ films show improved carrier dynamics in charge transfer and transport, leading to increased photocurrent and fill factors in the photovoltaic devices, followed by a high power conversion efficiency of 12.3%, which is an increase of 28% compared to that of the control device. We found that this superior performance predominantly resulted from improved exciton dissociation and enhanced electron transport after photoexcitation of the ITIC-m phase.

Organic solar cells (OSCs) are a promising technology for the production of eco-friendly renewable energy and versatile applications for nascent industrial purposes, owing to their light mass, high flexibility, low cost fabrication, and other novel features. These devices have long been fabricated using bulk heterojunction (BHJ) materials composed of bicontinuous networks of conjugated polymer (electron) donors and fullerene acceptors. However, non-fullerene acceptors, which have acceptor–donor–acceptor structures, e.g., ITIC (3,9-bis(2-methylene-((3-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)-6/7-methyl)-indanone))-5,5,11,11-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-dithieno[2,3-d:2′,3′-d′]-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene), have been demonstrated in recent OSCs. ITIC and its derivatives have demonstrated record power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of over 10% to date. They are characterized by high energy levels of the lowest unoccupied and highest occupied molecular orbitals (LUMO and HOMO, respectively), and a low bandgap, which endows the resultant photovoltaic devices with high open circuit voltage (Voc) and high short-circuit current (Jsc).

Although the PCEs of non-fullerene acceptor-based OSCs are unprecedentedly high, they are still increasing owing to efforts to improve device fabrication and material synthesis. In particular, researchers are tailoring the side acceptor units of the non-fullerene acceptors to enhance the planarity of molecules, thus bestowing strong intermolecular interaction, high crystallinity, high carrier mobility, and increased light absorption in the low energy regime. However, these efforts are challenged by the overgrowth problem of self-assembled acceptor aggregates, which hampers charge separation after exciton diffusion within photoexcited acceptor aggregates. In general, the exciton diffusion length in organic conjugated materials is a few nanometers. To obtain high PCEs, the non-fullerene-based BHJ morphology should be controlled to achieve high charge separation and high carrier mobility, which may be realized by fabricating thin but highly organized organic fibers.
It has been demonstrated that the morphology of organic BHJs can be optimized by the use of processing additive (PA) treatments, in which a small amount of guest solvent (e.g., 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO)) is added to the host solvent (e.g., chlorobenzene (CB)) prior to the BHJ film casting process. We recently developed an unprecedented post-additive soaking (PAS) treatment for optimizing the morphology of fullerene-based BHJs, which involves post-spin-coating a pristine BHJ film using a specific cosolvent consisting of an activator (like the solvent additive for PA treatments, e.g., DIO) and a buffer (a poor solvent, e.g., n-hexane). We found that the PAS treatment resulted in widespread redistribution of fullerene moieties, even along the longitudinal direction of the film, which led to enhanced quenching of the photoluminescence (PL) of fullerenes, increased electron mobility, a reduction in film thickness by ∼20 nm, and ultimately a PCE enhancement of ∼30% compared to that of a control device. The redistribution of fullerenes was inferred to be enabled by the fact that the fullerene and polymer are soluble and insoluble in DIO, respectively.
Inspired by the fact that, similar to the fullerene-based BHJs for which the PAS treatment was developed, PBDB-T (poly[(2,6-4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)-benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene)]-alt-(5,5-(1′,3′-di-2-thienyl-5′,7′-bis(2-ethylhexyl)benzo[1′,2′-c:4′,5′-c′]dithiophene-4,8-dione))) and ITIC-m (which was recently developed for fabricating high performance non-fullerene-based OSCs) are insoluble and soluble in DIO, respectively, we here perform PAS treatments on non-fullerene-based PBDB-T:ITIC-m composite BHJ films. To find an optimal BHJ morphology, we tuned the amount of DIO when preparing the PAS solution (1, 0.5, and 0.25 vol% DIO, hereafter denoted as PAS 1, PAS 0.5, and PAS 0.25, respectively) by mixing DIO with a buffer of n-hexane. Prior to device fabrication, we measured the PL spectra of the PAS-treated PBDB-T:ITIC-m BHJ films, alongside the pristine film as a control. The PBDB-T:ITIC-m composite film with the smallest PL intensity of ITIC-m was found to show the best PCE of ∼12.3%, which is an increase of 28% compared to that of the pristine film. Using ultrafast spectroscopy, we clarify the exciton separation dynamics underlying the high performance of PAS-treated OSCs. From analyses, we found that this superior performance predominantly resulted from improved exciton dissociation and enhanced electron transport after the photoexcitation of the ITIC-m phase. Because our study explores very basic and fundamental issues underlying high performance organic solar cells, it should be an important contribution to the broader field of solid-state organic electronics.

A schematic of the PAS treatment is shown in Fig. 1a alongside the transmission electron microscope (TEM) images of pristine and PAS-treated PBDB-T:ITIC-m films. Notably, the BHJ film morphology is drastically changed after spin-coating the PAS solution, regardless of the amount of DIO used. The TEM and atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of films treated with PAS 1, PAS 0.5, and PAS 0.25 show no clear differences; however this is likely to be due to the limited resolution of the detector (see Fig. 1a and S1). The drastic change in morphology after the PAS treatment is in good agreement with our previous results for fullerene-based BHJ films. We note that the PAS treatment on PBDB-T:ITIC-m films enables a 3D compositional homogeneity (horizontally and vertically) without surface segregation, which is also in good agreement with our previous results for fullerene-based BHJ films (see Fig. S2). The homogeneous distribution of PBDB-T and ITIC-m after the PAS treatment may originate from the efficient redistribution of ITIC-m moieties, because ITIC-m and PBDB-T are soluble and insoluble in DIO, respectively.

To further characterize the PAS-treated BHJ films, we compared the steady-state absorption and PL spectra for pristine, PAS 1, PAS 0.5, and PAS 0.25 films (Fig. 1b and c). The shape of the absorption spectra of PBDB-T:ITIC-m films shows an overlap of the absorption bands of PBDB-T and ITIC-m, which peaked at 624 and 697 nm, respectively (see Fig. S3). The shape of the PL spectra is consistent with that of ITIC-m, peaking at 758 nm (rather than that of PBDB-T, which peaks at 677 nm (see Fig. S3)). Notably, the absorption intensity is slightly increased compared to the pristine film for the film treated with PAS 0.25, whereas it is decreased for the film treated with PAS 1 (inset of Fig. 1b). Increased absorption is indicative of increased crystallinity in organic materials, as imparted by the PAS treatment, while the decreased absorption of PAS 1 indicates removal of the ITIC-m moieties owing to the excessive DIO concentration. In Fig. 1c, it is clear that the PL spectra show a systematic decrease in intensity from pristine to PAS 1, PAS 0.5, and PAS 0.25 films. An excitation wavelength of 400 nm was used in the PL measurements, i.e., both PBDB-T and ITIC-m were photoexcited. The PL spectra give information on exciton separation, because the recombination of excitons—after photoexcitation but before arrival at the PBDB-T/ITIC-m interface—causes the PL output. A negligible PL intensity below ∼700 nm, i.e., in the PL regime of PBDB-T, is indicative of highly efficient electron transfer from PBDB-T to ITIC-m after photoexcitation of PBDB-T. In contrast, the residual PL intensity over 700 nm, i.e., in the PL regime of ITIC-m, indicates an inadequate hole transfer process from ITIC-m to PBDB-T after photoexcitation of ITIC-m (see Fig. S3). The systematic decrease in PL intensity observed in the PL spectra (Fig. 1c) is indicative of gradual enhancements in the efficiency of the hole transfer process, along with a more optimized ITIC-m morphology, owing to the PAS treatment. Because PAS 0.25 shows a lower PL intensity than PAS 0.125 (the latter showed a PL spectrum similar to that of the pristine PBDB-T:ITIC-m film), the PAS 0.25 film may show the most efficient exciton separation after photoexcitation. Normal OSCs comprising ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PBDB-T:ITIC-m/PDINO/Al were fabricated. An indium tin oxide (ITO) substrate was sequentially spin-coated with poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS), PBDB-T:ITIC-m, and perylene diimide amino N-oxide (PDINO), before being coated with an aluminum (Al) electrode using a thermal evaporator. PAS treatments were carried out on the ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PBDB-T:ITIC-m films prior to PDINO deposition. More details for the device fabrication and characterization are indicated in the ESI. The molecular structures of PBDB-T and ITIC-m and the energy-level diagram showing each component are presented in Fig. 2a. The material components' energy levels are cascaded in the diagram to show the efficient transport of electrons and holes to the cathode (Al) and anode (ITO), respectively. The current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the devices are plotted in Fig. 2b, while characteristic parameters obtained from the J–V curves are listed in Table 1. For the device fabricated using a pristine PBDB-T:ITIC-m film, the values of Jsc, Voc, the fill factor (FF), and the resultant PCE are comparable to those in the literature.

J
sc
 (mA cm−2)

V
oc
 (V)
FF
PCE (%)

a 
J
sc – short-circuit current.
b 
V
oc – open circuit voltage.
c FF – fill factor.
d PCE – power conversion efficiency.
e The average values were taken from the results of 16 devices.


Pristine

Average
15.79 ± 0.38
0.93
0.63 ± 0.03
9.12 ± 0.27
Maximum
16.02
0.93
0.65
9.55

PAS 1

Average
16.54 ± 0.43
0.92
0.65 ± 0.02
9.89 ± 0.33
Maximum
16.84
0.92
0.67
10.37

PAS 0.5

Average
17.13 ± 0.34
0.94
0.66 ± 0.02
10.72 ± 0.27
Maximum
18.24
0.94
0.68
11.63

PAS 0.25

Average
18.18 ± 0.33
0.94
0.69 ± 0.01
11.93 ± 0.25
Maximum
18.47
0.94
0.71
12.27
In contrast, the devices fabricated using PAS-treated films show superior PCEs, reaching a maximum of 12.27% for PAS 0.25, owing to enhancements in both Jsc and FF (Table 1). We note that the PAS 0.25 shows better PCE than that of conventional DIO added PBDB-T:ITIC-m solution within our experiments (see Fig. S4 and Table S1). There is a systematic enhancement in Jsc as the amount of DIO in the PAS solution varies, from 16.02 mA cm−2 for the pristine film to 18.47 mA cm−2 for PAS 0.25, which is in good agreement with the enhanced PL quenching of ITIC-m presented in Fig. 1c. From the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the devices, shown in Fig. 2c, it is evident that the increase in Jsc after the PAS treatment results from enhanced photocurrents at the photo-absorption regime of ITIC-m (above 650 nm), rather than that of PBDB-T (below 650 nm). The enhanced PL quenching and increased EQE of ITIC-m demonstrate that, after the PAS treatment, hole carriers generated by the photoexcitation of ITIC-m are better transferred to PBDB-T (and eventually to the ITO cathode) owing to the redistributed (and thereby improved) morphology of the ITIC-m phase.
The FF also influences the PCE of devices (Table 1). In tandem with the enhancement of Jsc and PCE, FF increases as the amount of DIO in the PAS solution varies, from 0.65 for the pristine film to 0.71 for PAS 0.25. To find the origin for these enhanced FF values, we measured the mobility of electrons and holes by performing space-charge limited current (SCLC) measurements, using a hole-only device of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PBDB-T:ITIC-m/MoOx/Ag and an electron-only device of ITO/ZnO/PBDB-T:ITIC-m/PDINO/Al (see Fig. S5 for details). The resulting electron mobility and hole mobility are plotted in Fig. 2d. The hole mobility is ∼2.4 × 10−4 cm−2 V−1 s−1 regardless of PAS treatment, while the electron mobility increases from 1.7 × 10−4 cm−2 V−1 s−1 for the pristine film to ∼2.4 × 10−4 cm−2 V−1 s−1 for PAS 0.25. For the PAS 0.25 film, this presents as a highly balanced mobility of holes and electrons, i.e., μh/μe = 2.36/2.40 = 0.98. This is in good agreement with previous papers, which have reported how the balanced mobility of electrons and holes leads to enhanced FF in OSCs, owing to reduced charge accumulation. In addition to charge transport, charge recombination also affects FF. To examine charge recombination, we plotted the photocurrents as a function of irradiation light intensity (Fig. S6). By fitting the data with a power law function,Jph ∝ Pα, where P and α are the power generation rate and ideality factor, respectively, we obtained α ≈ 0.969 and 0.996 for the pristine and PAS 0.25 BHJ cells, respectively. The value of α ≈ 0.996, which is closer to unity, is indicative of a reduction in the carrier recombination and space charge build-up of the PAS-treated cell. In addition, the increased FF values may be related to the film thickness, which is found to be decreased by ∼20% by the PAS treatment (Fig. 2e); thinner films show a reduced probability of non-geminate carrier recombination, leading to increased FF values. (This reduction in thickness is in agreement with our previous results for fullerene-based BHJ films.)
The hole transfer time from ITIC-m to PBDB-T after photoexcitation of ITIC-m was characterized by selectively pumping and probing the materials using femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy. The transient absorption photo-bleaching (PB) spectra of pristine and PAS 0.25 films obtained by pumping at 750 nm (i.e., thoroughly pumping the ITIC-m (see Fig. S3)) are plotted in Fig. 3a and b, respectively, while transient absorption-decays and rises probed at 675 and 530 nm (i.e., at PB regimes of ITIC-m and PBDB-T, respectively), are plotted in Fig. 3c and d. The consistent time profiles of PB-decays and rises are indicative of the fact that these PB signals may reflect the rate of hole transfer from ITIC-m to PBDB-T after photoexcitation of ITIC-m. In fitting of PB-decays using three exponential functions, the pristine PBDB-T:ITIC-m film shows time constants of 0.6 ps (32%), 3.8 ps (48%), and 75.5 ps (20%), yielding an average decay time of 17.1 ps, while the PAS 0.25 film shows 0.4 ps (27%), 2.7 ps (50%), and 27.1 ps (23%), yielding an averaged decay time of 7.7 ps. Taking these averaged decay times as averaged hole transfer times, we find that the hole transfer time from PBDB-T to ITIC-m after photoexcitation of ITIC-m is shortened by a factor of ∼2 by the PAS treatment. The shortened hole transfer time is in good agreement with the enhanced PL quenching and increased EQE of ITIC-m demonstrated previously.

In conclusion, we have successfully increased the efficiency of non-fullerene acceptor-based OSCs by using PAS treatments on pristine BHJ films. The PAS-treated BHJ films show improved carrier dynamics in charge transfer and transport, evidenced by the heightened PL quenching and increased electron mobility of the ITIC-m phase. The improved charge dynamics lead to enhanced external quantum efficiency (especially in the photo-absorption regime of ITIC-m), and increased photocurrent and FF in the photovoltaic devices, which result in a high power conversion efficiency of 12.3%—an increase of 28% compared to that of the control device. Ultrafast spectroscopic studies manifested that the rate of hole transfer from ITIC-m to PBDB-T after photoexcitation of ITIC-m is accelerated by a factor of ∼2 owing to the PAS treatment. All of these observations are in good agreements with efficient redistribution of ITIC-m by the PAS treatment.


The authors declare no competing financial interest.


This research was supported by the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (NRF-2017R1D1A1B03030669) and the GIST Research Institute (GRI) grant funded by the GIST in 2019.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta00468h
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019