 DOI: 10.1039/D0CP00336K
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 8344-8352


Camillo
Sartorio
,

Giuliana
Giuliano
,

Michelangelo
Scopelliti
,

Valeria
Vetri
,

Maurizio
Leone
 and 

Bruno
Pignataro
*

Dipartimento di Fisica e Chimica, Università degli Studi di Palermo, V.le delle Scienze Ed. 17, 90128, Palermo, Italy. E-mail: bruno.pignataro@unipa.it

Received
20th January 2020
, Accepted 17th March 2020
First published on 23rd March 2020
In this paper, we developed different three-component organic heterojunction structures supported by PET/ITO substrates with the aim to study the possible synergies and/or compromises between charge transfer (CT) and energy transfer (ET) processes in organic solar cells (OSCs). As components, we employed poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT; donor), [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM; acceptor) and poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-alt-benzothiadiazole) (F8BT) that is known to give good ET to P3HT. At first, we observed that in a planar heterojunction (PHJ) solar cell, F8BT has to be properly located in between P3HT and PCBM to get a cascade energy level configuration allowing for a better CT and power conversion efficiency. Then, we observed that by producing a P3HT:F8BT blend, the energy transfer process can be improved in the P3HT:F8BT/PCBM active layer. This may enable decreasing the thickness of the active layer while maintaining a similar PCE that is very interesting for the development of transparent OSCs. However, the P3HT:F8BT blend limits the P3HT–PCBM CT with respect to a P3HT/F8BT/PCBM PHJ, showing that a compromise between CT and ET is needed to get a higher PCE or higher transparency. By the above approach, in this paper, we developed highly transparent heterojunction structures for solar cell devices with PCEs comparable to those observed from the colorful reference P3HT/PCBM PHJ solar cells on PET/ITO substrates.

Organic solar cells (OSCs) continue to be of great interest because of their flexibility, lightness, and potential for low-cost and simple manufacturing processes. Recently, promising power conversion efficiency (PCE) values have been obtained, thanks to the development of new materials and the design of new architectures with which the highest PCE reached over 17%. In the past few years, flexible and semitransparent OSCs have aroused by far the most interest for their promising applications in wearable energy resources, building-integrated photovoltaics as windows or skylights where it is difficult to install conventional solar cells, or in new applications such as multi-junction solar photovoltaics. In addition, the employment of plastic substrates allows for the development of flexible, portable and biocompatible devices, also implementable on curved surfaces and on tissues. However, when OSCs are realized on a plastic substrate instead of glass, PCE values further decrease due to the higher surface resistivity of the electrode on the substrate and the lower light transparency of the plastic.

Thanks to the much higher performance obtained, most of the literature studies have been dedicated to OSCs with bulk heterojunction (BHJ) architectures, while contributions toward the development of planar heterojunction (PHJ) solar cells are scarce. From the processing point of view, realizing a PHJ device would allow easier scalability to large area manufacturing because of the better morphological and structural control than for the BHJ, which needs appropriate organization of donor and acceptor materials during the spin-coating or the post-production process.
Moreover, in the PHJs, the free charge carriers can benefit from a continuous pathway to the electrodes, in contrast to what happens in the BHJs where the presence of a large number of “insulated” domains does not ensure charge transport. In addition, the PHJ has the further advantage that the donor and acceptor phase contact the anode and the cathode selectively, thus favoring the correct charge extraction. Indeed, the fill factor (FF) of PHJs is usually larger compared to that of BHJs due to the spatial separation of different charge carriers at the donor/acceptor interface, resulting in a high charge carrier concentration gradient that promotes charge transport. Nevertheless, in spite of these advantages, PHJs exhibit lower PCEs than BHJs due to the restricted donor/acceptor interface, resulting in limited exciton dissociation. This suggests that the donor/acceptor interface and therefore exciton dissociation play a predominant role in the PCE. To set the following discussion into context, it is helpful to first introduce a simplified expression for the photocurrent efficiency (ηph):
ηph ∝ ηabs × ηdiss × ηout
Indeed, by considering that the number of created charges collected at the electrodes can be expressed as a function of the fraction of photons absorbed (
ηabs), the fraction of dissociated excitons (ηdiss) and the fraction of free charges that reach the electrodes (ηout), it is clear that the employment of PHJs, instead of BHJs, ensures a great advantage in relation to ηout, no significant difference in ηabs, and a considerable decrease of ηdiss. This is conventionally counteracted through the reduction of the bilayer thickness in order to increase the percentage of generated excitons near the donor/acceptor interface. However, while on the one hand this approach improves ηout, on the other hand, it leads to a reduction of ηabs. This point becomes even more relevant for future applications in transparent OSCs, where the transparency of the active layer is usually increased by simply decreasing the thickness of the active thin film.

However, this will lead to a lower PCE because less light is absorbed by a thinner layer, so a trade-off between photocurrent generation and device transmittance is needed. In this regard, the greater challenge is to improve efficiencies by developing strategies to increase light harvesting without increasing the thickness of the heterojunction.
In this respect, device engineering has played a key role, for example, with the development of tandem devices, consisting of multiple layers of different materials that usually show complementary absorption, but the fabrication of tandem devices requires complicated and expensive manufacturing. A promising alternative for combining the improved photoconversion of tandem devices with the simplicity of the typical manufacturing processes of OSCs is the realization of three-component heterojunctions. In this regard, Honda et al. reported an enhancement of the light-harvesting efficiency in P3HT:PCBM BHJ solar cells by employing near-infrared phthalocyanine molecules as the third component of the active layer. Similar results have been obtained by Huang et al. using a squaraine dye in heterojunction polymer solar cells with P3HT. They showed that the use of squaraine not only leads to increased light absorption, but also ensures improved exciton migration over long distances by Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET). Apart from extending the absorption of the active layer, the addition of a third component could allow an improvement of the heterojunction morphology, for example, by acting as a template for a better supramolecular organization. For example, in a previous work, we showed how the incorporation of small quantities of copolymers into the P3HT:PCBM heterojunction on plastic results in a good control of the phase separation process along with an enhanced PCE. Kim et al. showed how the performance of a P3HT:PCBM BHJ device is improved by morphological changes induced by the presence of F8BT, which also improves the miscibility between the donor and acceptor materials. In another study, the third component was found to generate a cascade structure of donor and acceptor energy levels, resulting in improved exciton dissociation.
In this work, we pursue the goal of improving the performance of a P3HT–PCBM plastic solar cell, by using F8BT as the third component, with the awareness of necessarily having to optimize ηdiss and ηass. In a previous work, we have already shown how it is possible to significantly improve ηdiss using gold nanoparticles, which are able to increase and localize exciton generation at the donor/acceptor interface in a PHJ. Here, we show how this challenge is also achievable without using expensive materials but by simply incorporating a polymer, which is able to induce energy transfer (ET) to the electron donor material and, at the same time, generate a cascade structure. In particular, we demonstrate that it is not sufficient to disperse the third component in the heterojunction, but it is necessary to properly engineer a multilayered structure in order to optimize its effect.
In addition, we study the effect of the position of the third component within the heterojunction in order to understand and exploit its possible double role as a “bridge” in an energy level cascade structure and as an “exciton injector” by a remarkable FRET to P3HT. Finally, we show how it is possible to employ a simple and low-cost approach consisting of three sequential solution depositions, in spite of most of the literature studies employing complicated and time-consuming thermal evaporation processes to develop multilayered functional structures.

PHJs have been prepared by using a layer-by-layer approach by means of the Langmuir–Schaefer (LS) technique. In particular, LS films have been realized by using a KSV Minitrough apparatus with ultrapure Millipore filtered water (resistivity greater than 18.2 MΩ cm) used as a subphase at a temperature of 25 °C. P3HT (regioregular 91– 94%, electronic grade, average Mn 50000–70000, Rieke Metals, Inc.) layers have been obtained by spreading over the aqueous surface 400 μL of a 0.1 mg mL−1 solution in chloroform. After solvent evaporation (about 10 min), the floating films were linearly compressed by means of two mobile barriers at a rate of 5 mm min−1. The ultrathin films were transferred onto polyethylene terephthalate coated by indium tin oxide (PET/ITO) (Aldrich, surface resistivity 60 Ω sq−1) square substrates (about 1 cm2) at a 20 mN m−1 surface pressure. In the same way, to obtain PHJs with the desired structure, PCBM (MW 911 > 99.5 purity, Ossila) and F8BT (MW 21500 with polydispersity 2.9, American Dye Source) have been deposited using a solution of 0.2 mg mL−1 in chloroform and 0.1 mg mL−1 in chlorobenzene, respectively.


Devices based on the PET/ITO/HTL (hole transport layer)/PHJ/Al structure were fabricated by spin coating on the PET/ITO substrates. The substrates were cleaned sequentially by sonication in methanol, acetone and isopropanol for 10 min each, followed by cleaning in a UV-ozone cleaner (ProCleaner Plus, Bioforce) for 20 min. The hole-transport material poly(ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate)(PEDOT:PSS, Aldrich, 1.3 wt% dispersion in H2O, conductive grade) was spin-coated onto the substrates at 4000 rpm and dried at 100 °C for 10 min on a hot plate. After this, the PET/ITO/PEDOT:PSS systems were transferred to a glovebox (MBraun, Germany) filled with N2 (<0.1 ppm of O2 and H2O), where P3HT (20 mg mL−1 in chlorobenzene), F8BT (0.5 mg mL−1 in dichloromethane) and PCBM (5 mg mL−1 in a 1:0.5 mixture of dichloromethane:acetone) solutions were sequentially deposited at 1500 rpm on PET/ITO/PEDOT:PSS. In order to allow drying, at least 15 minutes rest was allowed between the different deposition processes. In the glovebox, 100 nm Al was thermally evaporated as the cathode to complete the devices. The thickness of the P3HT and PCBM films was maintained at about 50 and 30 nm, respectively, by using so-called “orthogonal solvents” (solvents that behave as good solvents for the layer to be deposited but that do not affect the morphology of the polymer below).


UV-Vis absorption and fluorescence spectra were recorded on thin films deposited on PET/ITO substrates using a Specord S 600 (Analytik Jena, Jena, Germany) and FluoroMax-4 (HORIBA Jobin Yvon, Edison, USA) spectrofluorometer equipped with a 150 W xenon arc lamp as the excitation source, respectively.


Fluorescence lifetime measurements were performed on uniform samples of molecular layers drop-casted sequentially (one on top of the other) over a coverglass using a fluorescence lifetime imaging (FLIM) apparatus. Areas of 30 μm × 30 μm were investigated in order to obtain homogenous images. FLIM data were acquired in the time domain by means of a Leica TCS SP5 inverted microscope (Leica Microsystems) equipped with a PicoHarp 300 stand-alone TCSPC module (PicoQuant). Thus, 256 × 256 images were acquired at 400 MHz scan speed using the supercontinuum white laser source (Leica Microsystems) with an 80 MHz pulsed source. Excitation wavelength for all images was set at 475 nm, and the fluorescence signal was acquired in the 600–730 nm spectral region. Data were analyzed using the phasor approach, and SimFCS software (Laboratory for Fluorescence Dynamics, University of California, Irvine, CA) was used for data analysis. This method allows a straightforward interpretation of data without a fitting procedure giving a global view of the fluorescence decay in each pixel of an image. In the phasor analysis, single exponential lifetimes lie on the so-called “universal circle” defined as the semicircle going from point (0, 0) to point (1, 0), with a radius of 1/2. Point (1, 0) corresponds to τ = 0, and point (0, 0) corresponds to τ = ∞. FLIM calibration of the system was achieved by considering the lifetimes of P3HT samples as characterized by a 0.57 ns single exponential lifetime. This procedure allows a simple comparison between all samples avoiding artefacts or noise due to reflections and change in refraction index in the different samples. The results are fully in agreement with that previously reported. Under the selected spatiotemporal resolution, all the samples are characterized by a homogenous average lifetime.


XPS measurements (depth profiles) were carried out using a ULVAC-PHI PHI 5000 VersaProbe II, using a monochromatic Al source (Al Kα = 1486.6 eV) on a 200 μm diameter spot, 45° takeoff angle, with a dual beam charge neutralization system to compensate the charge-up effect. Surfaces were sputtered using an Ar+ ion gun (3 mm × 3 mm rastering area, 1 kV acceleration; time step 0.5 min ≡ 30 s). The sputtering rate was calibrated by using thermally oxidized SiO2 of 80 nm thickness, and, under our conditions, the surfaces have been fully sputtered at a rate of 1.37 ± 0.02 nm min−1. In order to obtain discontinuity points within the profile curves, a piecewise function fitting with NumPy and SciPy was used.


Current–voltage curves were acquired using a Keithley 2400 source meter and a halogen lamp as an illumination source, having an irradiance power of 100 mW cm−2. All measurements were performed in a glovebox system (MBraun, Germany) filled with N2 (<0.1 ppm of O2 and H2O).


In order to investigate the charge or ET processes that take place at the donor–acceptor interface, bi-component and three-component PHJs (tc-PHJs) with a different layer sequence have been realized and studied using fluorescence experiments. In particular, to realize PHJ films, we used the Langmuir–Schaefer technique as it provides a high control of thickness, morphology and structure for each deposited layer and, more importantly, ensures an accurate organization of the interface where the transfer processes occur. In addition, this technique makes it possible to employ very low quantities of materials that can be soluble even in different solvents, since each layer is deposited from the air–water interface, independently. In this regard, in a previous work, we showed how this approach allows realizing thin PHJ films of P3HT, PCBM and F8BT where a single layer has a thickness of about 4–6 nm.

It must be underlined that a quantitative description of charge transfer (CT) in a three-component system becomes even more complex when two fluorophores and two processes with opposite effects on fluorescence are involved. Indeed, the ET should induce a fluorescence quenching of F8BT (energy donor) and an increase in fluorescence of P3HT (energy acceptor), but the simultaneous CT from P3HT (electron donor) to F8BT (electron acceptor) would lead to the opposite effect. However, although the LUMOP3HT–LUMOF8BT offsets are large enough for exciton dissociation, the charge separation in the P3HT/F8BT systems is negligible with respect to the ET (Fig. 1a and c).
In fact, the separation distance between the benzothiadiazole acceptor units in F8BT and the thiophene donor units in P3HT is too long for an efficient exciton dissociation but may be adequate for ET, since the latter is a long range process. In addition, the exciton dissociation is limited at the P3HT/F8BT interface with respect to the P3HT/PCBM interface. Indeed, preliminary FLIM measurements, carried out on bi-component drop-casted systems (P3HT/PCBM, P3HT/F8BT, and F8BT/PCBM), showed that the fluorescence lifetime obtained for P3HT/PCBM is shorter than that for P3HT/F8BT. On this basis, it might seem reasonable to assume that a more advantageous three-component planar configuration should not implement a layer of F8BT at the P3HT/PCBM interface (Fig. 1d), where it would hinder the CT. F8BT would be better only in contact with P3HT (Fig. 1e) to act almost exclusively as an exciton “injector”, without affecting the CT from P3HT to PCBM.
In this way, the exciton generation into the P3HT layer would be improved along with the charge collection by PCBM. Fig. 2 shows the fluorescence spectra recorded on different planar layered systems obtained by LS on PET/ITO. Regarding the F8BT/P3HT/PCBM sequence, the F8BT film is deposited as the first layer of a tc-PHJ1 with no contact between F8BT and PCBM. The observed fluorescence of the pristine P3HT film (black line) is very weak compared to that of the pristine F8BT (purple line – scaled by a factor of 10). Indeed, in order to obtain significant signals, it is necessary to realize PHJs with an amount of P3HT 5 times higher than that of F8BT.
In this PHJ (red line), the fluorescence of F8BT (535 nm) undergoes a notable quenching (greater than 90%) due to the ET to P3HT, which simultaneously shows an intensity increase (645 nm). The deposition of the electron acceptor (PCBM) on top of the PHJ induces a weak fluorescence quenching (about 10%) of P3HT, originating from the CT (blue line). In addition, the fluorescence of F8BT remains unchanged, indicating that no further ET effectively occurs after the introduction of PCBM on the surface of P3HT. Although the use of F8BT as an interlayer between P3HT and PCBM is discouraged due to the inefficient P3HT–F8BT CT, we performed fluorescence measurements also on this system (tc-PHJ2) to better investigate the transfer process at the different interfaces (Fig. 3). Obviously, the fluorescence spectrum of the bi-component P3HT/F8BT heterojunction (red line) is identical to that reported in Fig. 2. Once PCBM is deposited on top resulting in a P3HT/F8BT/PCBM PHJ, it shows a remarkable fluorescence quenching (blue line) that is a very different behavior from that of the P3HT/PCBM interface of Fig. 2.
This highlights the critical role of the F8BT layer, which acts at the same time as a P3HT energy donor and a PCBM electron donor in agreement with the respective LUMO level positions (Fig. 1). Also, in this system, there is no fluorescence emission from P3HT (645 nm). By considering that there is no direct contact between P3HT and PCBM, this result strongly implies that the CT involves the F8BT layer.
Note that more likely the complete quenching of P3HT cannot be attributed to a limited ET process due to the dissociation of F8BT excitons by PCBM.
Indeed, as discussed above, the rapid ET (<1 ps) suggests that most of the F8BT excitons are efficiently transferred to P3HT. Thus, the presence of F8BT at the donor/acceptor interface would ensure a more efficient charge separation and this can be more likely ascribed to the presence of cascaded HOMO and LUMO energy levels, which would energetically favour the CT at the interfaces owing to the bridging effect. In particular, PCBM can provide a driving force to transfer the electrons from the LUMO of F8BT to the LUMO of PCBM, thus favouring further CT from P3HT to F8BT (Fig. 4) and therefore again to PCBM.
In Fig. 5, the analysis of FLIM measurements on different drop-casted samples (P3HT, P3HT–PCBM, P3HT–F8BT, and P3HT–F8BT–PCBM) is reported in a phasor plot.
This allowed for a fast and quantitative visualization of the fluorescence lifetime distributions of 30 μm × 30 μm areas imaged under excitation at 470 nm. Fluorescence lifetimes are mapped to a point in the phasor plot corresponding to the measured fluorescence lifetime, and the observed clouds correspond to the measured lifetime distributions.
This analysis, successfully applied on multiple systems, allows overcoming fit procedures and provides a global view of the fluorescence decays without imposing a model.Longer lifetimes are located near the origin (0 on the x axis), while shorter lifetimes are shifted on the circular line toward the bottom right intersection with the x axis (1 on the x axis). As can be seen, the measured lifetime distribution of each sample lies on the universal circle, thus indicating that under the present measurement conditions, fluorescence decays can be described on average by single exponentials.
In line with our previous results on analogous samples, the lifetime distribution of the P3HT/PCBM sample is significantly reduced with respect to that of the pristine P3HT (assumed to be 0.57 ns for calibration). This can be possibly attributed to a photoinduced charge separation at the P3HT/PCBM interface. Interestingly, the presence of F8BT at the donor–acceptor interface seems to induce a further reduction of the excited state lifetime, suggesting an improved P3HT-PCBM CT. Under the present conditions (i.e. λexc = 470 nm), the fluorescence lifetime results are below the experimental time resolution limit.
As mentioned above, it should be noted that the measured lifetime distribution of the P3HT/F8BT sample is reduced with respect to that of P3HT, but it is larger than that of P3HT/PCBM (≈0.3 ns), which is centered at about 0.4 ns. This is in agreement with the formation of a cascade effect by the proper organization of these three materials, as discussed above with regard to the steady-state emission spectra. These results clearly confirm that in the cases where both CT and ET processes occur, the third component needs to be located at the donor/acceptor interface to obtain an efficient CT thanks to the energy level alignment.
In light of this, it is desirable to realize PHJ devices to fully exploit the advantages of the ternary cascade structure, rather than realizing a BHJ where the interface control is not guaranteed. However, further investigations revealed that the mixing of P3HT and F8BT ensures a significant ET enhancement due to the larger interface of the donor/acceptor blend compared to that of the planar configuration. In particular, Fig. 6 shows the fluorescence spectra of PHJs consisting of the P3HT:F8BT blend (red line) and the P3HT:F8BT/PCBM system (blue line). In this last case, the ET is so efficient that the spectra do not show any residual F8BT emission at 535 nm. It is interesting to note that the P3HT emission band observed for only one layer of the P3HT:F8BT blend is about 14 times more intense than that of 5 layers of the pristine P3HT. In other words, to obtain the same fluorescence intensity induced by the F8BT-P3HT ET, P3HT alone would need to be employed in an amount of about 70 times higher. This result may be useful in transparent solar cells where, as mentioned above, it is customary to decrease the thickness of the heterojunction in order to improve the transparency of the active layer.

On the basis of the above results, we fabricated two kinds of photovoltaic devices, respectively, with tc-PHJ2 and P3HT:F8BT/PCBM as active layers by employing a sequential spin-coating procedure of different materials from solutions with orthogonal solvents. This approach has already been successfully applied to realize traditional bi-component PHJs but, to the best of our knowledge, this is again the first time that it is applied to realize tc-PHJ-like structures.

The devices have been developed by transferring a P3HT layer (20 mg mL−1) onto a PET/ITO substrate and by depositing on top, in sequence, layers of F8BT, PCBM and Al as the top electrode (PET/ITO/P3HT/F8BT/PCBM/Al). XPS measurements confirmed the goodness of the chemical state of the different layers. Moreover, XPS depth profiling has been carried on the device layers by following the C 1s, O 1s, S 2p and In 3d5/2 species (Fig. 7). Although the spin-coating approach could not guarantee well-defined interfaces between each layer, our analysis showed that no significant intermixing occurred between the different layers, with the P3HT and F8BT layers being about 25 nm and 6 nm in thickness, respectively. In particular, the S2p signal at the F8BT/P3HT junction shows a rising curve with the sputtering time reaching a plateau after about 6 nm. This is consistent with a clearing of the whole F8BT layer in the first sputtered 6 nm by reaching the P3HT layer with the plateau that extends for about 25 nm. This picture has been corroborated by an independent measurement of the P3HT layer, without F8BT on top, showing a S 2p constant value for a similar 25 nm thickness. Note that the P3HT layer thickness is maintained on this order for all the fabricated devices as an indication of the real orthogonality of the used solvents, thus revealing the effectiveness of our approach. Table 1 summarizes the photovoltaic parameters of the different three-component devices compared to the reference planar device with a P3HT/PCBM active layer without F8BT (PHJrif). According to the literature values, the reference device exhibits an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.48 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 0.82 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 0.38, and a PCE of 0.15%. Interestingly, all the devices incorporating F8BT show significant performance improvements due to the increase of Voc and Jsc. It is known that Voc is strictly related to the HOMO and LUMO levels of the donor and the acceptor, respectively, but this dependence becomes more complex in a three-component system, in which two materials can act as electron donors.
Active layer

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
%η
P3HT/PCBM (PHJrif)
0.48
0.82
0.38
0.15
tc-PHJ2-like structure
0.60
2.21
0.38
0.50
P3HT:F8BT/PCBM
0.57
1.99
0.30
0.35
P3HT:F8BT/PCBMthinner
0.60
0.61
0.36
0.13
The mechanism leading to an enhancement of the Voc in a three-component system is still a matter of debate, although some studies point out that the energy level alignment between the HOMO and LUMO of the three materials can induce an increase of this parameter.
In our case, a possible explanation for the enhancement of Voc values observed in all devices with F8BT involves the presence of the higher LUMO energy level of F8BT compared to that of PCBM. Regarding the Jsc, the above fluorescence measurements suggest that the improvements are due not only to the extended absorption but also to the cascaded energy structure, which would energetically favor CT at the interfaces.
However, by comparing the photovoltaic parameters of the two devices with F8BT, one can note that the tc-PHJ2-like architecture unexpectedly ensures better performance than P3HT:F8BT/PCBM, both in terms of Jsc, Voc, and FF. The highest Jsc value obtained for the tc-PHJ2, almost three times higher than that of the reference device, agrees with the above picture that a cascade energy effect with F8BT located in between the donor and acceptor systems is dominant compared to the ET process. Indeed, the more efficient ET in the P3HT:F8BT/PCBM device (Fig. 6), due to the larger P3HT:F8BT interface, does not result in better performance. From the point of view of transfer processes at the interfaces, the P3HT:F8BT/PCBM architecture could be regarded as a combination of two different architectures: tc-PHJ1 with F8BT on the bottom, in contact only with P3HT, and tc-PHJ2 with F8BT at the P3HT/PCBM interface.
In other words, all transfer processes that occur at the different interfaces contribute to the final photogenerated current, but not all the interfaces are equally efficient in terms of exciton dissociation and thus CT. As mentioned above, it is known that charge separation is not efficient at the F8BT/PCBM interfaces. Furthermore, here, we showed that when F8BT is in contact only with P3HT in the tc-PHJ1 configuration, no CT improvement is recorded. In this regard, the results are in good agreement with the fluorescence measurements revealing that F8BT needs to be located in between the donor and acceptor systems for an efficient CT.
The low FF in the P3HT:F8BT/PCBM device can be likely ascribed to an increased recombination of charge carriers due to the P3HT:F8BT mixed system, which does not show the net spatial separation of positive and negative charges as in a PHJ. Accordingly, the Voc value also decreases compared to that of the tc-PHJ2-like structure, although it remains higher than that of the device without F8BT, as discussed previously. In this regard, it is important to point out that in BHJ devices, the large donor–acceptor interface promoting exciton dissociation inhibits geminate recombination. However, the FF and the Voc values are not primarily determined by electric-field-dependent charge separation but rather by nongeminate recombination losses. For this reason, PHJ devices usually show FF and Voc values higher than those of BHJs.
The photovoltaic parameters reported in Table 1 refer to the best devices where the F8BT amount has been optimized in terms of P3HT:F8BT ratio or F8BT thickness (see the ESI). In this regard and in agreement with the literature, we found a significant dependence of Voc on the composition of the acceptors. Indeed, the Voc values increase from 0.48 V to 0.74 V depending on the F8BT to PCBM ratio.
Finally, in light of the interesting fluorescence results described above, we fabricated a photovoltaic device with an active P3HT:F8BT/PCBM layer of thickness around 15 nm. The photovoltaic parameters of this device are shown in Table 1. In this case, the higher FF and Voc values compared to the analogous device but with a higher thickness of the active layer could be due to the reduction of the effects of non-geminal recombination in the thin heterojunction layer. These results, combined with a Jsc that, despite the strong reduction of the thickness, decreased from 0.82 to 0.61 mA cm−2, led to a comparable PCE value to that obtained in the thicker reference device. Therefore, no significant reduction of the photovoltaic performance has been detected after the thinning of the device, most likely due to the improved ηdiss and ηass resulting from the addition of F8BT. The thinner device showed an increased transmittance between 350 nm and 650 nm, from 5% to 65% at the point of the maximum absorption of the heterojunction (Fig. 8).

Once both CT and ET processes occur in a three-component photovoltaic solar cell, the third component needs to be located in an appropriate position to enable an efficient CT induced by a cascade level effect. In the case of a planar solar cell made of P3HT, PCBM and F8BT, this last system allows for such an effect by placing F8BT in between the donor P3HT and the acceptor PCBM. The ET process can be improved by mixing P3HT and F8BT in an active P3HT:F8BT/PCBM layer. This may be very useful in transparent solar cells since it allows for a decreased thickness of the active layer.

However, the P3HT:F8BT blend limits the P3HT–PCBM CT with respect to a planar P3HT/F8BT/PCBM cascade level configuration and a compromise between CT and ET has to be found to get a higher PCE or transparency.
By the above approach, in this paper, we developed three-component highly transparent heterojunctions for flexible OSC devices with PCEs comparable to those observed from the colorful reference P3HT/PCBM PHJ OSCs on PET/ITO substrates.

There are no conflicts to declare.


Italian MiUR is acknowledged for funding through the program PON R&C 2007–2013 (PON03PE_00214_1 - TECLA). Aten Center (University of Palermo; project “Mediterranean Center for Human Health Advanced Biotechnologies (CHAB)” PON R&C 2007–2013) is acknowledged for hospitality and service.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0cp00336k
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2020