 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA07216C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24416-24424


Xiaolu
Zheng
,

Yulong
Wang
,

Jiahua
Hu
,

Guang
Yang
,

Zhen
Guo
,

Jianlong
Xia
,

Zongxiang
Xu
* and 

Guojia
Fang
*

Key Lab of Artificial Micro- and Nano-Structures of Ministry of Education of China, School of Physics and Technology, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, P. R. China. E-mail: gjfang@whu.edu.cn

Department of Chemistry, South University of Science and Technology of China, Shen Zhen, Guangdong 518055, P. R. China. E-mail: xu.zx@sustc.edu.cn

School of Chemistry Chemical Engineering and Life Science, Wuhan University of Technology, No. 122 Luoshi Road, Wuhan 430070, P. R. China

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Taiyuan University of Technology, Taiyuan, Shanxi 030024, P. R. China

Received
15th August 2017
, Accepted 30th October 2017
First published on 31st October 2017
Recently, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have emerged as the most promising photovoltaic devices owing to their rapidly increased power conversion efficiency (PCE). Small molecule metallophthalocyanine compounds, as thermally and chemically stable materials with high hole mobilities, are considered to be potential candidates for stable hole-selective layers (HSLs) in PSCs. In this study, a novel metallophthalocyanine derivative with a heavy palladium (Pd) atom and octamethyl substituents (PdMe2Pc) was designed and synthesized. The introduction of the heavy Pd atom endows the material with a long carrier lifetime, and without dramatically reducing its mobility. As a result, PdMe2Pc exhibits a long diffusion length (26.00 nm), which is beneficial for restraining charge recombination. Planar PSCs that employed PdMe2Pc as a HSL displayed a high PCE of 16.28% and good long-term stability. This result indicates that PdMe2Pc could be a promising HSL for PSCs with high efficiencies and high stabilities.

Organo-lead halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted tremendous attention owing to their low cost, ease of fabrication, and superior photovoltaic properties. However, despite the excellent power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) that have recently been achieved, the device stabilities are still a challenge for the commercialization of PSCs. Many studies have thus focused on this and numerous strategies have been developed and applied to improve the stability of PSCs. Such approaches include modifying the perovskite molecular structure, inserting a buffer layer between the metal electrode and the charge transport layer (CTL) (or the active layer and the CTL), and designing new dopant-free semiconductors with hydrophobic characteristics. Among these approaches, developing a hydrophobic CTL with appropriate carrier mobility is thought to be the most straightforward method to protect perovskites from degradation under humid conditions. Small molecule metallophthalocyanine (MPc) compounds, for example, copper(II) phthalocyanine (CuPc), are thus considered to be potential candidates for stable hole-selective layers (HSLs) in regular structure PSCs owing to their cost-effectiveness, good thermal and chemical stability, relatively high hole mobility, and long exciton diffusion length.

The skeletal structure of the phthalocyanine (Pc) molecule consists of an 18-π electron conjugated macrocycle. The photophysical, photochemical, and relevant photovoltaic properties of Pcs can be readily tuned by introducing suitable substituents and/or by replacing the central metal ions. Extensive efforts have been devoted to the investigation of effective devices with HSLs based on Pc, such as CuPc, zinc(II) phthalocyanine (ZnPc), nickel phthalocyanine (NiPc), cobalt phthalocyanine (CoPc), and their derivatives and so on. However, the PCEs of these cells employing neat Pc HSLs are still relatively low unless these Pc materials are combined with other p-type semiconductors with wide bandgaps and/or doped with additives. One possible reason for this phenomenon is the narrow bandgap of Pcs, which causes poor electron blocking and serious charge recombination. Tuning the bandgap of Pcs through substituents and/or by replacing the central ions is not very effective—most of the Pcs' bandgaps are still located within a narrow range (1.6–2.0 eV). Another approach to reduce the charge recombination is to improve the carrier diffusion length (LD), which is determined by the exciton or carrier lifetime (τE) and diffusion coefficient (DE)—and thus the carrier mobility, μ. Our previous work demonstrated that the CuPc modified with octamethyl-substituted functional groups (CuMe2Pc) could form a face-on molecular alignment when deposited on the perovskite surface. This provides stronger π–π interactions between the molecules, thus resulting in a significantly enhanced hole mobility and better photovoltaic performance. On the other hand, heavier atoms with 4d or 5d valence electrons, such as palladium (Pd) and platinum (Pt), could provide a stronger spin–orbit coupling between the electrons' spin and orbital angular momentum, thus increasing the intersystem crossing (isc) rate of singlet to triplet excitons. The triplet state is well-known for its long lifetime. Kroeze et al. studied a triplet material of Pd–porphyrin derivative (PdTPPC) and found that it exhibited a longer LD than the metal-free and Zn–porphyrin derivatives. Organic heterojunction photovoltaic devices (OPVs) utilizing palladium phthalocyanine (PdPc) as a donor layer displayed a PCE of 2.2%, which is higher than that of devices based on CuPc (1.6%). Pt–porphyrin derivatives were also employed in OPVs and presented a decent efficiency; however, there have only been a few reports on PSCs based on heavy atom MPcs.
Herein, we report a novel heavy atom Pc derivative, octamethyl-substituted palladium(II) phthalocyanine (PdMe2Pc), which shows promise as a HSL in PSCs. The optical, electrical and physical properties of PdMe2Pc were carefully characterized and the energy transfer process under illumination was determined by transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy. The τE of PdMe2Pc was found to be approximately 7.7 ns, which is more than twice the value for CuMe2Pc (3.4 ns). And the PdMe2Pc exhibited a longer LD than CuMe2Pc, even though the μh of PdMe2Pc is slightly lower (but still on the same order of magnitude) compared with that of CuMe2Pc. Perovskite solar cells with a regular structure of FTO/SnO2/6,6-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM)/perovskite/MPcs (M = Cu, Pd)/Au were fabricated and tested. As expected, the devices based on PdMe2Pc exhibited a higher PCE of 16.28% than those based on CuMe2Pc (15.58%).

PdMe2Pc powders were synthesized following the method reported in our previous publication. The synthesis procedure is displayed in Scheme 1 and the details can be found in the ESI. In general, this method involves a base catalyzed cyclotetramerisation reaction followed by a two-electron reduction step. The product was further purified by vacuum sublimation and characterized by elemental analysis and infrared spectroscopy (IR, Fig. S1) to ensure the adequate purity of PdMe2Pc for electronic applications. Further, to determine the thermal properties of PdMe2Pc, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was conducted and the resulting data are displayed in Fig. 1(a). Obviously PdMe2Pc is extremely stable until 500 °C, and the decomposition temperature (5% weight loss) of PdMe2Pc is 595 °C.

We first employed a density functional theory calculation to study the geometric and electronic properties of PdMe2Pc. Optimized molecular structures and Frontier molecular orbitals are shown in Fig. S2. Clearly the Kohn–Sham highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of PdMe2Pc is delocalized over the whole π-conjugated skeleton, while the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) is mainly located in the Pc ring. The calculated HOMO and LUMO energy levels of PdMe2Pc are −4.81 eV and −3.31 eV, respectively, which suggests a good energy level alignment with the energy-band of MAPbI3. However, we noted that the PdMe2Pc's HOMO level is slightly higher than the work function (WF) of the Au electrode (−5.10 eV), so we further performed ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectroscopy and cyclic voltammetry (CV) to determine the real optical and electrochemical properties of PdMe2Pc.

Fig. 1(b) shows the UV-vis spectra of PdMe2Pc measured in a 1-chloronaphthalene solution (solid line) and as a thin film (dash dot line). The solution spectrum shows a spectral envelope characteristic indicating D4h symmetry, which is typical for Pc complexes. The strong absorption peak in the near-UV region is the Soret band or the so-called B-band that is related to the  transition; a further band in the visible region is attributed to the Q-band caused by the π–π* transition . It should be noted that there are some vibrational overtone bands at shorter wavelengths, which are a common feature of MPcs. And the small peak at approximately 705 nm was speculated to be caused by the interaction between chlorine and Pc molecules; an analysis of the UV-vis spectra of PdMe2Pc dissolved in different solvents corroborated this conjecture (Fig. S3). For the film spectrum, there exist a significant peak split and peak broadening owing to the extensive excitonic coupling effect; this is often referred to as “Davydov splitting”. We estimated the optical band-gap (Eg) of PdMe2Pc using the absorption edge of this spectrum, and the calculated Eg is 1.81 eV, which is slightly higher than that of the widely used CuPc.
We then conducted CV measurements. The resulting CV curve is displayed in Fig. 1(c), and the corresponding parameters extracted from this curve and from the UV-vis spectra are summarized in Table S1. The HOMO level of PdMe2Pc estimated from the onset of oxidation wave was found to be −5.11 eV, while the LUMO level was calculated to be −3.30 eV. Fig. 1(d) shows the energy band diagram of a typical planar PSC with PdMe2Pc as the HSL. The energy levels of different layers were obtained from the literature, and the CuMe2Pc we reported in previous work was also listed for comparison. The HOMO levels of both Pcs are well matched with the valence band (VB) of the perovskite (−5.4 eV) and the WF of the Au electrode (−5.1 eV), which suggests that they both could provide sufficient driving force for the hole injection from the perovskite layer into the HSLs. More importantly, PdMe2Pc has a higher LUMO level (−3.3 eV) compared with CuMe2Pc (−3.4 eV); this means that PdMe2Pc may block the electron transport from the perovskite layer to the Au electrode more efficiently, thus further decreasing the carrier recombination at the interface.
Triplet materials often possess a longer τE compared with singlet materials. Palladium, as a heavier atom with the 4d105s0 electronic configuration than copper, is expected to enhance the isc transition of singlet to triplet excitons due to its strong spin–orbit coupling effect. We investigated the charge carrier dynamics in these two molecules via transient absorption spectroscopy, and found that PdMe2Pc exhibits a longer τE than CuMe2Pc. Fig. 2(a) and (b) show the TA spectra evolution of PdMe2Pc and CuMe2Pc in the visible and near-infrared range at the indicated delay times, respectively. The negative signal (trough) with a vibrational structure in the TA spectrum is due to the ground state bleaching, and the positive signal (peak) is attributed to the excited state absorption of photo-generated carriers or excitons in the film. Obviously both of these spectra exhibit two troughs in the corresponding Q-band absorption range of PdMe2Pc and CuMe2Pc; however, the contours of these spectra both do not match well with their respective static absorption spectra (Fig. S4). A similar effect was also observed in vapor deposited CuPc films in another study; the researchers surmised that this phenomenon may be caused by an excited state absorption peak overlapping with the bleaching trough. The peaks at approximately 535 nm are generally associated with the T1 → Tn triplet absorption of MPc analogues or (in CuMe2Pc only) with the charge transfer (CT) pathway, while the broad peaks that extend beyond the infrared range are assigned to the singlet absorption. It should be noted that although copper(II) has an unfilled d-orbital (electronic configuration of 3d94s0), the CuPc derivatives also have a triplet (tripdoublet) state of 2T, just like copper porphyrin (CuP), which can be populated by relaxing its excited singdoublet state (2S) through a ligand-to-metal CT state.
It is worth noting that a fast decay process can be observed in the first few picoseconds of the trace at 680 nm for PdMe2Pc and at 768 nm for CuMe2Pc, while the other features in the short-wavelength regions appear to be nearly static. More detailed spectra within this period are displayed in Fig. S5, and Fig. 2(c) shows their corresponding kinetic traces. Clearly PdMe2Pc undergoes more complete and prolonged relaxation kinetics than CuMe2Pc; the lifetimes of this early component were calculated to be 4.0 and 1.3 ps for PdMe2Pc and CuMe2Pc, respectively. Considering the pump wavelength (520 nm, viz. 2.38 eV) we used there, an isc of S1 → T1 or 2T is thought to be responsible for this process. For CuMe2Pc this relaxation includes a sequential decay passage of 2S1 → 2CT → 2T. This path is proved to be more rapid and efficient than the direct isc transition (isc is responsible for the S1 → T1 evolution in PdMe2Pc) because it does not require a direct flip of the electronic spin state. Similar phenomena have also been observed in CuP and CuPc derivatives.Fig. 2(d) presents the global kinetic traces of PdMe2Pc at 614 nm and of CuMe2Pc at 628 nm. We chose these wavelengths because the signals reach their maxima at these points. The time profiles at 540 nm for PdMe2Pc and 535 nm for CuMe2Pc were also extracted and are displayed in Fig. S6; we found that these signals could superimpose with their corresponding mirrored traces at 614 and 628 nm for PdMe2Pc and CuMe2Pc, respectively. Both the traces could be fitted with a triple-exponential function, and the obtained time constants for PdMe2Pc were 4.3 ps, 342 ps, and 7.7 ns; and they were 1.4 ps, 229 ps, and 3.4 ns for CuMe2Pc. The first decay time within the first few picoseconds can be ascribed to the S1 → T1 or 2T transition, as mentioned above, while the other two components correlate with the repopulation of the ground state (S0). There are two S0 repopulation branches: direct decay from S1 (faster component, 342 ps/229 ps for PdMe2Pc/CuMe2Pc), and decay from T1/2T (slower component, 7.7 ns/3.4 ns for PdMe2Pc/CuMe2Pc). These lifetimes' orders of magnitude are all in good agreement with the literature values, and evidently all the time components of PdMe2Pc are longer than those of CuMe2Pc. Except for the first one (as already explained above), the rest of the components could all be attributed to the stronger spin–orbit coupling effect introduced by the heavier Pd atom. By carefully scrutinizing the TA spectra in Fig. 2(a) and (b), we further found a distinct blue-shift in the short-wavelength region (for CuMe2Pc this shift is relatively faint), indicating that vibrational relaxation in the S1 state may also contribute to the decay process. A brief schematic diagram describing the entire transient process is shown in Fig. S7, and the fitted decay lifetimes and their corresponding transition processes are summarized in Table S2.
Although at a first glance this longer τE of PdMe2Pc might increase the LD, the large τE values for the triplet states are usually compensated for by the dramatically reduced DE. Because in this case the resonant Förster transfer for (pure) triplet state diffusion is spin-forbidden, while a Dexter mechanism which has a much shorter operating range will dominate the energy transport process. We performed space-charge-limited current (SCLC) measurements to determine the hole mobility (μh) of PdMe2Pc, and thus obtained its corresponding DE according to the Einstein relation. For non-degenerate semiconductors this relation can be given by a classical equation: D/μ = kT/q, where k is the Boltzmann coefficient, q is the charge of electrons or holes, and T is the characteristic temperature.
Before reporting on this analysis, we would like to emphasize that the PdMe2Pc deposited on the perovskite adopts a very different orientation compared with the one deposited on the FTO substrate. Fig. 3(a) shows the grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) patterns of PdMe2Pc deposited on these two substrates for different 2θ ranges. When PdMe2Pc was deposited onto the perovskite surface, the diffraction signal with the 2θ value of 5.9° disappeared while a peak at 26.2° appeared instead. This result indicates that the PdMe2Pc that was deposited onto the perovskite adopts a so-called “face-on” orientation, which has been proven to result in a higher μh compared with the “edge-on” orientation. In addition, the stronger π–π stacking of PdMe2Pc induced by the octamethyl functional groups may also increase its μh. A more detailed discussion on this unique property based on CuMe2Pc can be found in our previous publication.
With regard to the hole mobility, Fig. 3(b) displays the J–V characteristics of the SCLC; the μh of PdMe2Pc is found to be 3.42 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is slightly lower than that of CuMe2Pc (4.79 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1). The corresponding DE of PdMe2Pc was calculated to be 8.78 × 10−4 cm2 s−1 at room temperature, while it was 12.30 × 10−4 cm2 s−1 for CuMe2Pc. Given the reasons stated above, a device structure of FTO/SnO2/perovskite/PdMe2Pc/Au is applied for SCLC measurements, where the perovskite layer serves as a template. This result indicates that substituting the heavier Pd atom in the place of the central ion in planar MPc will reduce the material's mobility owing to the higher concentration of triplet excitons in the system, which is consistent with the results in the literature. However, we also noted that the values of μh for PdMe2Pc and CuMe2Pc were still relatively high and the difference between them was mostly negligible. In addition to the benefits from the molecular orientation and the enhanced π–π stacking that are mentioned above, a “heavy-metal effect” may also contribute to this phenomenon. This effect means that although the Förster mechanism for pure triplet state diffusion is optically forbidden, the enhanced spin–orbit coupling of PdMe2Pc can however lead to a substantial singlet character in its T1 state, which is enough to allow Förster-type energy transfer to occur. This singlet–triplet mixing could increase the DE and therefore the μh without significantly decreasing the τE of triplet excitons. The LD of PdMe2Pc was thus calculated to be ∼26.00 nm according to the equation LD = (DEτE)1/2; and it is longer than that of CuMe2Pc (∼20.45 nm). All the relevant parameters are summarized in Table 1.
HSL

τ
E (ns)

μ
h (cm2 V−1 s−1)

D
E (cm2 s−1)

L
D (nm)
PdMe2Pc
7.7
3.42 × 10−2
8.78 × 10−4
26.00
CuMe2Pc
3.4
4.79 × 10−2
12.30 × 10−4
20.45

Perovskite solar cells based on PdMe2Pc or CuMe2Pc were fabricated and characterized using a conventional planar device architecture of FTO/SnO2/PCBM/perovskite/PdMe2Pc or CuMe2Pc/Au. We conducted steady-state photoluminescence (PL) measurements to determine the charge extraction abilities of PdMe2Pc and CuMe2Pc before the photovoltaic characterization. Fig. 3(c) shows the PL spectra of the bare perovskite, perovskite/PdMe2Pc, and perovskite/CuMe2Pc samples. Both of the PdMe2Pc and CuMe2Pc could quench the strong peak of the perovskite effectively, which demonstrates their excellent charge separation and transmission abilities. Furthermore, the sample with CuMe2Pc exhibited a slightly lower peak intensity than that with PdMe2Pc, suggesting the hole extraction from the perovskite to CuMe2Pc is slightly more efficient than to PdMe2Pc, which is consistent with their respective μh. We also noted that the perovskite/PdMe2Pc showed a slightly blue-shifted PL with a narrower full width at half maximum (FWHM) compared with the sample with CuMe2Pc, indicating a reduced number of band-edge trap states. We conducted the dark current–voltage (I–V) analysis to further estimate the electron trap-state density in perovskite films with different MPc HTLs. The device structure used there is FTO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/PdMe2Pc or CuMe2Pc/Au. The kink point in the dark I–V curve indicates the trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL), which is proportional to the trap-state density (nt). The VTFL of PdMe2Pc obtained from Fig. 3(d) is about 0.3 V, indicating an electron trap-state density of 5.976 × 1015 cm−3, which is slightly lower than that of the CuMe2Pc-based device (VTFL = 0.4 V, nt = 7.969 × 1015 cm−3). This result is consistent with the PL measurements, and it may be related to the slightly higher LUMO level of PdMe2Pc and its longer bulk exciton LD.


Fig. 4(a) displays the cross-sectional scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of our device with PdMe2Pc as the HSL. Detailed characterizations of the cell's morphology, crystallinity, and absorption are shown in the ESI (Fig. S8–S10). In general, the perovskite layer we fabricated here is quite dense, smooth, and highly crystalline; the secondary phases aggregating at the grain boundaries (GB) were regarded to be PbI2 according to the literature and the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern (Fig. S10). On the perovskite layer, a PdMe2Pc layer was deposited by vacuum thermal evaporation. As we reported previously for CuMe2Pc, PdMe2Pc also formed particle-like grains with an average size of 20 nm; however, PdMe2Pc exhibited a more uniform film structure with full surface coverage compared with CuMe2Pc (Fig. S9). Fig. 4(b) shows the photovoltaic performance of our best-performing devices with either a PdMe2Pc or CuMe2Pc HSL. Relevant parameters including the open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF), and PCE are summarized in the inset table. The cell based on PdMe2Pc exhibited a Voc of 1.06 V, Jsc of 21.08 mA cm−2, FF of 73%, and PCE of 16.28%, while the CuMe2Pc-based device displayed a Voc of 1.01 V, Jsc of 21.46 mA cm−2, FF of 72%, and PCE of 15.58%. Clearly the PdMe2Pc-based cells exhibited a higher Voc and FF but a slightly lower Jsc than the ones based on CuMe2Pc, which is in agreement with our aforementioned discussion. The higher LUMO level and longer LD of PdMe2Pc provide a better hole-blocking efficiency and thus simultaneously suppress the electron–hole recombination at the perovskite/HSL interface and inside the HSL, leading to a higher Voc and FF; however, the triplet properties of PdMe2Pc will also affect the DE and thus reduce its μh, resulting in a slightly weaker charge extraction and lower Jsc compared with the CuMe2Pc-based cells. We collected statistical data from 39 PdMe2Pc- and 34 CuMe2Pc-based devices to further verify the catholicity of this conclusion. The devices' Voc, Jsc, FF, and PCE are presented in Fig. S11, while the relevant parameters, the series resistance (Rs) and ideality factor (A) that were calculated following the diode equation, are listed in Table S3. The PdMe2Pc-based devices clearly exhibit a higher Voc and FF than the CuMe2Pc-based ones, while the Jsc values of both are similar. In addition, the A of the PdMe2Pc-based devices was lower than that of the CuMe2Pc-based ones, indicating a lower charge recombination rate for the former devices; this interpretation is in line with our previous analyses. Fig. 4(c) presents the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum of the champion device with the PdMe2Pc HSL. The integrated current density was calculated to be 20.048 mA cm−2, which is close to the Jsc value obtained from the J–V curve. The Nyquist plot of the cells with either the PdMe2Pc or CuMe2Pc HSL is displayed in Fig. 4(d). Both devices were tested under dark with a 0 V bias. The figure clearly shows that the device based on PdMe2Pc has a larger diameter low-frequency arc, which indicates that it has a lower charge recombination rate compared with the CuMe2Pc-based device; this is consistent with the longer LD of PdMe2Pc. And the intercepts of the curve with the real axis at high frequency are equal to Rs; the PdMe2Pc-based devices exhibited a slightly larger intercept, which is in accordance with the slightly lower μh of PdMe2Pc and the devices' lower Jsc. However, we noted that the J–V hysteresis of our devices based on PdMe2Pc was still relatively large (as can be seen from Fig. S12), which may be caused by the ionic and/or electronic accumulation at the perovskite/selective layer interface(s). Considering the possible reasons for this phenomenon, three paths are thought to be helpful to tackle this problem: (1) balancing the charge extraction at the perovskite/ETL and perovskite/HTL interfaces; (2) reducing and/or passivating the traps which are mainly located near the interface and grain boundaries of the perovskite layer; and (3) reducing the ion migration.
It should be noted that the devices mentioned above all had HSLs with optimized thicknesses. We previously studied the application of CuPc and CuMe2Pc in PSCs in great detail and found that the optimized thickness of the CuPc or CuMe2Pc HSL was 60 nm. We followed this recipe and explored the optimum PdMe2Pc thickness within a narrow range solely. Fig. S13 shows the typical J–V curves of devices with various PdMe2Pc thicknesses; the relevant photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table S4. Clearly as the PdMe2Pc thickness increased the performance of the PSCs first increased and then decreased, revealing that the optimized thickness of PdMe2Pc is 60 nm. We calculated the Rs and A of devices with various PdMe2Pc thicknesses, and found that Rs first increased and then decreased as the PdMe2Pc thickness increased, while the A showed the opposite trend. In general, good-performing devices prefer lower Rs and A meanwhile; while obviously these two parameters achieved a balance in our case when the PdMe2Pc thickness is 60 nm.
Additionally, one of the primary purposes of introducing the MPcs into PSCs is to enhance the device stability. MPcs have an excellent thermal and chemical stability, which could provide efficient protection for the perovskite layer from being degraded by moisture. Fig. S14 presents the static contact angles of a water droplet on the surface of bare perovskite and perovskite/PdMe2Pc samples, for comparison the perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD water contact angle was also measured and is displayed in the same figure. We can see that the sample with PdMe2Pc exhibited a large contact angle of 97.75°, indicating a greatly improved hydrophobicity when a PdMe2Pc layer was introduced on the perovskite. We measured the long-term stability of the PSCs with PdMe2Pc or spiro-OMeTAD HSLs, and found that the device with a PdMe2Pc HSL retained over 96% of its initial PCEs after 600 h of storage (Fig. S15), while for the reference cell based on spiro-OMeTAD it retained only 81%. We also compared the devices based on different MPc HTLs (Fig. S16). They were stored outside the dry box and suffered a fluctuant relative humidity (from 40% to 100%). We can see that at such a high-humidity period the PdMe2Pc displayed better stability than the CuMe2Pc-based device. These results demonstrated the good stability of PdMe2Pc-based cells.

In summary, we synthesized and characterized a novel heavy atom MPc derivative with octamethyl substituents (PdMe2Pc). The τE of PdMe2Pc was determined to be 7.7 ns, which is much longer than that of CuMe2Pc (3.4 ns). And although triplet carriers with long lifetime are usually associated with low carrier mobilities, the strong spin–orbit coupling introduced by the heavy atom may in fact increase the mobility without significantly decreasing the carrier lifetime. As a result, the μh of PdMe2Pc (3.42 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1) is just slightly lower but still comparable with that of CuMe2Pc (4.79 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1); the LD of PdMe2Pc was thus calculated to be ∼26.00 nm, which is longer than that of CuMe2Pc (20.45 nm). This property is very favorable for HSL applications in photovoltaic devices, because longer diffusion length signifies less charge recombination. Perovskite solar cells based on PdMe2Pc displayed high photovoltaic performance (PCE of 16.28%) and good moisture stability (maintaining 96% of its initial performance after 600 h of storage in ambient air), suggesting the great potential of PdMe2Pc for use as a HSL in PSCs. Our results indicate that this low-cost, highly stable, heavy atom MPc derivative is a very promising alternative HSL material for efficient and stable PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The work at Wuhan University was supported by the National High Technology Research and Development Program (2015AA050601), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (11674252, 61376013, and 91433203) and Special Funds for the Development of Strategic Emerging Industries in Shenzhen (JCYJ20160523160822851). The work at South University of Science and Technology of China was supported by Special Funds for the Development of Strategic Emerging Industries in Shenzhen (JCYJ20170412154240645). We are grateful to Qianqian Lin for valuable discussion.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta07216c
‡ These authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017