 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA02403J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15889-15896


Byung-Seok
Lee
,

Yoonjung
Hwang
,

Hong Nhung
Pham
,

Jin Young
Kim
,

Myoung Hoon
Song
 and 

Doh-Kwon
Lee
*

Photo-electronic Hybrids Research Center, Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST), Seoul 136-791, Korea. E-mail: dklee@kist.re.kr

Nanomaterials Science and Engineering, Korea University of Science and Technology, Daejeon 305–350, Korea

School of Materials Science and Engineering, KIST-UNIST Ulsan Center for Convergent Materials, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan 689–798, Korea

Green School, Korea University, Seoul 136-713, Korea

Received
2nd April 2015
, Accepted 27th May 2015
First published on 28th May 2015
This paper aims to demonstrate the importance of the precursor film density during the development of the microstructure and photovoltaic properties of CuInSe2 (CISe) thin films prepared from nanoparticulate precursors and to provide a simple but effective means to improve the density. In order to improve the packing density of a Cu–In alloy nanocrystalline layer deposited by a doctor-blade method, a mild, wet, ball-milling technique is applied to colloidal ink without the use of organic additives or mechanical pressing. The focused ion beam milled cross-sections clearly show that the relative density of the precursor layers increases with an increase in the milling duration. The CISe thin films obtained by annealing the intermetallic layers with a relative density of 0.78 exhibit extremely low porosity on the well-faceted surface, a thicker top layer with large grains in a typical double-layered structure, a uniform and planar surface morphology, and a thinner MoSe2 layer. The transmission electron microscopy analysis also reveals that the nanocrystals in the bottom layer exist in the chalcopyrite CISe phase, forming a well-connected mesoporous network. As a result, the PV performance of low-bandgap (1.0 eV) CISe solar cells is greatly improved, rendering a power conversion efficiency as high as 9.32%. Changes in the PV parameters induced by the increase in the relative density of the precursor layer are discussed in conjunction with the improved crystalline quality and the consequent improvements in diode characteristics, such as the series resistance, shunt conductance, and recombination current.

Chalcopyrite Cu(In1−xGax)Se2 (CIGSe in general and CISe with x = 0) solar cells have been studied intensively as the most promising candidates for thin-film photovoltaic (PV) applications owing to their high performance levels with less toxic constituents. The high performance of CISe-based solar cells is essentially attributed to the attractive properties of CISe, such as a high absorption coefficient (∼105 cm−1), a tunable bandgap energy (1.0 to 1.7 eV), and an excellent material stability even under strong radiation. Recently, a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 21.7% was reported for CIGSe solar cells, thus surpassing that of polycrystalline Si solar cells on a laboratory scale. These types of high-performance CISe-based thin films are generally deposited using high vacuum techniques such as co-evaporation and sputtering. On the other hand, the cost-effective fabrication of CISe-based solar cells is considered to be another challenge to realize their widespread commercialization. In this regard, non-vacuum deposition techniques have attracted a great deal of attention in recent years as low-cost alternative deposition methods due to their high material utilization rate, low initial and maintenance cost, and compatibility with high-throughput large-scale production. Among the various non-vacuum approaches, the hydrazine-based solution deposition method has achieved the highest efficiency for CIGSe solar cells as high as 15.2%. However, safety and environmental concerns associated with the highly toxic and explosive hydrazine solvent have impeded the industrialization of this method. In an effort to use less toxic reagents, a colloidal solution approach (also known as the nanoparticle approach) has been attempted, in which various types of nanoparticles (e.g., metals, binary-to-quaternary chalcogenides, and oxides) are dispersed in a solvent to form a nanocrystal ink. By employing the nanoparticle approach, one can make use of its advantages, such as its high purity levels, good reactivity, and ease of compositional control of the nanoparticles with a defined structure. On the other hand, a low packing density of the precursor layers prepared from the nanocrystal inks may make it difficult to produce absorber films of high quality for high-efficiency solar cells. The morphology of the precursor films and in turn the sintered film quality can be improved with organic additives. In fact, the nanoparticle approach generally employs organic additives as well to control the synthetic kinetics, to enhance the colloidal stability, and for suitable viscosity for coating. However, additional steps were required to remove organic additives eventually, e.g., decomposition at a high temperature or a ligand-exchange step, which may cause carbon contamination of the final product if the removal is incomplete, thus nullifying some advantages of the nanoparticle approach. In our previous report, we demonstrated the feasibility of an organic additive-free nanoparticle route to fabricate low-bandgap CISe solar cells as a model system and promising candidate for tandem applications. Furthermore, by employing a cold-isostatic pressing (CIP) technique, it was demonstrated that the microstructure of CISe films was strongly affected by the packing density of the precursor layers. However, the CIP method is not readily applicable in large-scale production processes due to the complexity of the process.

In this work, we demonstrate that, instead of using an organic binder or mechanical pressing, ball-milling of Cu–In alloy nanocrystal ink for an extended duration leads to a great enhancement of the planarity, homogeneity, and packing density of the precursor layers. In order to investigate the influence of the particle packing density on the morphological development of the sintered CISe films and the resulting device performance, the relative density of the Cu–In alloy nanocrystal layers was systematically changed and estimated. Furthermore, the improved microstructure of CISe films induced by the increase in the precursor film density is discussed in association with the sintering mechanism. Solar cells fabricated with the sintered CISe films showed a monotonic increase in their PCE values with an increase in the milling duration, or the relative density of the precursor layer.

Ternary CISe thin films were prepared by the reactive sintering of metallic precursor films consisting of Cu–In intermetallic nanoparticles. Cu–In alloy nanoparticles were synthesized by reducing Cu2+ and In3+ ions in a precursor solution in which 5.56 mM of CuCl2 (Aldrich, 99.999%) and 6.95 mM of InCl3 (Aldrich, 99.999%) were dissolved together with 75 mM of NaBH4 (Junsei, 98%) in 100 mL of tetraethylene glycol (Aldrich, 99%). The molar ratio of Cu to In was [Cu2+]/[In3+] = 0.8, where [k] denotes the concentration of the k species in terms of the mole fraction. A detailed description of the synthetic procedure used to create the Cu–In alloy nanoparticles and their structural characterization can be found in the ESI (Fig. S1). An amount of 4 g of the as-synthesized nanoparticles was then dispersed in 25 mL of anhydrous ethanol to prepare a nanoparticle ink (colloidal solution) by ball-milling at 200 rpm using zirconia balls with diameters of 1 and 5 mm in an appropriate ratio. For a systematic study of the effect of the precursor film density on the microstructural development of CISe films, four different inks were prepared by varying the milling time from 0 to 360 h. The as-prepared colloidal solution was cast into metallic precursor films by a doctor-blade method onto Mo-sputtered soda-lime glass (SLG) substrates. The Cu–In alloy precursor films were transformed into CISe films by reactive sintering at 500 °C for 30 min in a Se-containing atmosphere under atmospheric pressure. The reactive sintering process was carried out using ca. 0.2 g of selenium pellets (99.99%, Aldrich) as a Se source 8 cm away from the films placed at the center of a conventional horizontal tube electric furnace. A 99% Ar/1% H2 gas mixture was used as a carrier gas at a flow rate of 100 sccm. The precursor films were initially annealed at 300 °C for 30 min and then, heated to the sintering temperature (500 °C) at a rate of 10 °C min−1, after which they were furnace-cooled (at a rate of ca. 3 °C min−1) after a dwelling time of 30 min. During the reactive sintering step, the temperature of the Se source was held at around 360 °C, as measured by an independent thermocouple placed directly above the Se pellets, at which the equilibrium Se partial pressure is estimated to be 2.1 × 10−3 atm. As described above, the entire process (the synthesis of the nanoparticles, the deposition of the precursor layers, and the reactive annealing) was carried out under ambient conditions without the use of highly toxic solvents or gases such as hydrazine or H2Se(g). The morphologies and chemical compositions of the metallic precursor films and the CISe films were examined by using a scanning electron microscope equipped with an energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy system (SEM/EDS; Hitachi, S-4200). In order to evaluate the porosity of the precursor films, the cross-sections were characterized using a focused ion beam (FIB)/SEM system (FEI, Nova Nanolab 200). The double-layered structure of the CISe films was analyzed in detail by transmission electron microscopy (TEM; FEI, Tecnai F20G2) operated at an acceleration voltage of 200 kV.


To evaluate the PV performance of the CISe thin films, solar cells were fabricated according to a standard procedure, as described in the previous report. Chemical etching with a KCN solution was not carried out with the as-sintered CISe films. First, a CdS buffer layer ca. 70 nm thick was deposited onto the CISe film by means of chemical bath deposition. Window layers consisting of ZnO of 50 nm and Al-doped ZnO (AZO) with a thickness of 600 nm were deposited onto the CdS layer by radio-frequency magnetron sputtering. Finally, a Ni (50 nm)/Al (500 nm) grid as a current collector was deposited through a shadow mask onto the AZO layer by thermal evaporation. The remaining active surface area, which is meant to be exposed to incident light during the characterization of the solar cells, ranged from 0.35 to 0.45 cm2. The current–voltage (j–V) characteristics of the as-fabricated solar cells were measured using a Keithley 2400 source meter in the dark as well as under the AM 1.5G 1-sun condition (100 mW cm−2). A solar simulator (Yamashita Denso, YSS-50S) equipped with a 1000 W xenon lamp and an AM 1.5G filter was employed as a light source after being calibrated using an NREL-calibrated Si solar cell. External quantum efficiencies (EQEs) were measured using a quantum efficiency measurement unit equipped with a 75 W xenon lamp and a grating monochromator (PV Measurements, Inc.). NIST-calibrated Si (G425) and Ge photodiodes were employed as references for the EQE calibration step in the spectral ranges of 300 to 1000 nm and 900 to 1400 nm, respectively.



Fig. 1 shows the typical surface morphologies (a–d) and cross-sections (e–h) of the Cu–In alloy nanoparticle layers deposited using the colloidal solutions milled for different durations. At a glance, it appears that the precursor layer deposited without milling (Fig. 1(a) and (e)) is highly porous and that the milling of the colloidal solution for 24 h resulted in an improved density of the precursor layer (Fig. 1(b) and (f)). A closer inspection reveals that the surface density increased monotonically with an increase in the milling time via 168 h (Fig. 1(c) and (g)) to 360 h (Fig. 1(d) and (h)), as shown more clearly in the inset of Fig. 1(b)–(d). A gradual decrease in the film thickness with increasing milling time is another indication of densification. However, more dramatic changes in the precursor films induced by milling can be recognized in the surface gloss and FIB cross-sectional morphology, as shown in Fig. 2. Photographs of the as-coated films (Fig. 2(a)–(d), 30 × 40 mm2 in size) show that the precursor film deposited without milling (Fig. 2(a)) reflects almost no light, while the films become increasingly glossy as the milling time increases (Fig. 2(b)–(d)). This signifies that the pores on the film surface causing the light to be scattered were gradually eliminated with an increase in the milling time. Indeed, the FIB-SEM cross-sections of the precursor films unambiguously reveal that the porosity of the Cu–In nanoparticle film was greatly reduced with the application of ball-milling, as shown in Fig. 2(e)–(h). As the milling time increased, the average particle size in the film decreased, with the size distribution becoming narrower as well. These changes are attributed to the ball-milling process, where occasional large particles and/or agglomerates of primary nanoparticles in the colloidal solution are broken, reaching a steady dispersed state. This well-dispersed state of the Cu–In nanoparticles milled for 360 h was found to be stable for more than one month.

On the basis of the FIB-SEM cross-sections, we estimated the porosity (ϕ) of the precursor layers by converting the SEM images into binary ones using an image analyzer (see Fig. S2 in the ESI). The estimated values of the relative density of the precursor layers (i.e., ρr = 1 − ϕ) were 0.49 ± 0.08, 0.60 ± 0.05, 0.66 ± 0.04, and 0.78 ± 0.04, respectively, for the films prepared with the solutions milled for 0, 24, 168, and 360 h. It was noted that the precursor films deposited with solutions milled for a longer time (e.g., 720 h) were readily exfoliated from the substrates after being dried. Thus, a subsequent heat treatment was carried out with the four samples described above, which are henceforth designated as Samples A, B, C, and D.

The reactive sintering of the Cu–In alloy precursor layers at 500 °C for 30 min in a Se-containing atmosphere led to phase transformation into chalcopyrite CuInSe2 (I2d). The X-ray diffraction patterns and, in particular, Raman spectra of the selenized films confirmed the formation of α-CISe in the chalcopyrite structure irrespective of the milling duration (see Fig. S3). Impurity phases such as CuAu-ordered CuInSe2 (ref. 24 and 25) and ordered defect compounds were not detected within the detection limit of the measurements. Fig. 3 shows the typical surface morphologies (a–d) and cross-sections (e–h) of the selenized films prepared from Cu–In alloy nanoparticles milled for different durations. It is seen from Fig. 3(a) and (e) that despite the slight coalescence near the top of the film, no continuous layer was formed in the CISe film prepared without milling (Sample A). In contrast, milling for 24 h resulted in significant grain growth up to 1–2 μm (Sample B in Fig. 3(b)). Unfortunately, however, there were several large pores (ca. 1 μm in size) found on the surface of Sample B (see also the larger surface area in Fig. S4(b)). On the other hand, the cross-section of Sample B (Fig. 3(f)) shows that this large-grained CISe layer ca. 500 nm in thickness is limited to the top of the film. The rest of the film consists of CISe nanocrystals with diameters of less than 200 nm, as is evidenced by the results of the TEM analysis, as shown below. Milling for a longer time induced further changes in the grain structure of the top layer. Sample C, milled for 168 h, was found to have a well-faceted grain structure (Fig. 3(c)), rendering a continuous CISe top layer (Fig. 3(g)). Although the surface morphology of Sample C appears to be highly dense, small pores (<100 nm in size) as well as large voids (ca. 1 μm) still remained (see Fig. S4(c)). Such structural imperfections finally disappeared on the surface of Sample D, which was milled for 360 h (Fig. 3(d), (h), and S4(d), (e)). Comparing the cross-sections of all samples, it can be recognized that the thickness of the top CISe layer with large grains gradually increases with an increase in the milling time, i.e., the relatively density of the precursor layer (ρr).

The microstructural quality of a nonvacuum-processed absorber film, which determines its PV performance to a great extent, is strongly influenced by the packing density of the precursor layer. When using nanoparticulate precursors in particular, properly managing the precursor film density is much more important to achieve a well-developed polycrystalline microstructure by sintering. Because the sintering process occurs via matter transport driven by the chemical potential gradient across and/or along the interfaces between contacting nanoparticles, the enhancement of the packing density of the nanoparticulate layer leads to a better sintered density, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 4. In practice, organic additives are added to improve the packing density of the nanoparticle layer, but this can leave behind carbon residue in the sintered films. The precursor film density can also be improved by mechanical pressing, but doing this can increase the complexity of the process. The present result demonstrates that the packing density of nanoparticulate films and in turn the sintered film density can be significantly improved by a simple, mild, wet-milling process without the use of organic additives or a mechanical press. An additional advantage of a well-packed precursor layer can be found in association with the thickness of the MoSe2 layer. As shown in Fig. 3(e)–(f), a precursor layer with a higher density tends to suppress the formation of MoSe2 during the reactive annealing process.
The ratio [Cu]/[In] of the sintered film prepared without milling (Sample A) was 0.81 ± 0.04, as measured by EDS. This value is in good agreement with the initial mixing ratio, 0.8. However, the value for [Cu]/[In] was found to increase as ρr increased, as summarized in Table S1. This observation is consistent with our previous finding, which showed that a CISe film with a better microstructure by sintering at a higher temperature tends to have a higher [Cu]/[In] value. This suggests that Cu out-diffusion (i.e., cationic unmixing) during sintering, which presumably plays an important role in the densification of the CISe film, is more pronounced in films with a high packing density.
The double-layered structure shown in Fig. 3(h) is typically observed in non-vacuum-processed thin films of CISe and its derivative materials. In order to investigate the detailed crystalline structure, TEM analysis was carried out on the cross-section of Sample D, as shown in Fig. 5. In Fig. 5(a)–(c), it is clearly observed that Sample D consists of two distinctive layers, i.e., a top layer with a well-developed grain structure (Fig. 5(c)) on a bottom layer of unsintered nanoparticles (Fig. 5(b)). The high-resolution TEM image in Fig. 5(d) of the nanoparticles in the bottom layer, designated by the dotted circle in Fig. 5(b), reveals crystalline lattice fringes with an interplanar spacing (d) of 0.332 ± 0.003 nm, which can be assigned to the (112) lattice plane of chalcopyrite CISe. In the corresponding selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern, the (033) and (−220) planes, which also belong to chalcopyrite CISe with d-spacing values of 0.171 ± 0.003 and 0.202 ± 0.003 nm, respectively were identified, thus revealing that the nanocrystals in the bottom layer are in the α-CISe phase. It is worth noting here that the bottom layer consisting of CISe nanocrystals, which forms the well-connected mesoporous network as shown in Fig. 5(a) and (b), may serve as a pathway for electronic carriers without a significant amount of collection loss, as in quantum dot solar cells. The lattice fringes and the SAED pattern of the large grains in the top layer, indicated by a dotted circle in Fig. 5(c), were also found to correspond to chalcopyrite CISe, as depicted in Fig. 5(e), thus confirming that the top layer consists of α-CISe grains.

CISe films prepared from Cu–In alloy nanocrystal inks milled for various durations were integrated into solar cells with a configuration of Mo/CISe/CdS/ZnO/AZO/Ni/Al. Fig. 6 shows the typical j–V characteristics and EQEs of the solar cells, which have power conversion efficiencies (η) close to the average values for each milling condition. In contrast to the device with Sample A (Device A), exhibiting linear shunting behavior, the device with Sample B (Device B, and so forth) worked as a solar cell despite its low efficiency. The short-circuit current density (jSC) of Device B, as high as 32.4 mA cm−2, implies that the top layer with large grain size (Fig. 3(b) and (f)) plays a critical role in generating the photocurrent. The microstructural improvement by further milling gave rise to an overall increase in the PV performance. Thus, the efficiency was improved from 3.47% (Device B) to 7.41% (Device C) and to 8.44% (Device D). Comparing the detailed PV parameters of Devices B and C (Table 1), one can recognize that the improvement in the open-circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF) is more pronounced than that for jSC. The enhancement of jSC of Device C was due to the slight increase in the EQE in the wavelength range of 550–1100 nm without a distinct difference in the bandgap energy (Eg) of ca. 1.0 eV, as demonstrated in Fig. 6(b). This suggests that the reduction in the series resistance (Rs, from 3.95 Ω cm2 to 1.58 Ω cm2), which can be attributed to the lower intergranular resistance and/or the thinner MoSe2 layer, enhanced the collection efficiency of Device C. The reduction in Rs together with the great reduction in the shunt conductance (Gsh, from 16.8 to 0.35 Ω cm2) also led to a remarkable enhancement of the FF value of Device C. Furthermore, the reduced porosity to a great extent (Fig. 3(b), (c) and S4(b), (c)) and the formation of a continuous crystalline layer (Fig. 3(f) and (g)) resulted in a significant improvement of VOC in Device C, likely due to the suppression of the recombination current, as indicated by the reduced saturation current density (j0) and diode ideality factor (n). The elimination of the small pores as well as the occasional large voids by further milling (Fig. S4(c) and (d)) led to an additional improvement, particularly in the VOC value of Device D. Indeed, upon comparison of all diode parameters between Devices C and D, the improvement was found essentially in j0 and n, thus implying that the recombination loss was considerably suppressed in Device D. There were no further improvements of Rs and Gsh in Device D as compared to Device C.


t
m/h

V
OC/V

j
SC
/mA cm−2
FF

η/%

E
g/eV

G
sh/mS cm−2

R
s/Ω cm2

n


j
0/mA cm−2
〈η〉/%

a Measured without an anti-reflection layer.
b The numbers in parentheses represent the integrated current density estimated from the EQE curve by using the AM 1.5G spectra.
c The highest efficiency obtained from each milling condition.
d The number of devices used for evaluating the mean efficiency value, 〈η〉.

0 h
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
24 h
0.318
32.4 (30.7)
0.335
3.47 (3.76)
0.99 ± 0.01
16.8 ± 1.9
3.95 ± 0.05
2.48 ± 0.11
(7.9 ± 0.4) × 10−2
3.1 ± 0.5 (7)
168 h
0.394
33.1 (31.9)
0.567
7.41 (7.62)
0.99 ± 0.02
0.35 ± 0.04
1.58 ± 0.07
1.95 ± 0.07
(3.1 ± 0.2) × 10−3
7.1 ± 0.4 (7)
360 h
0.428
34.5 (32.6)
0.572
8.44 (9.32)
1.00 ± 0.02
0.58 ± 0.02
1.73 ± 0.03
1.69 ± 0.02
(9.9 ± 0.6) × 10−4
8.4 ± 0.7 (8)

Fig. 7 shows the PV parameters, VOC, jSC, FF, and η of all devices used to calculate their mean values as a function of the relative density of the Cu–In alloy nanocrystal layers (ρr). Although the average jSC and FF values appear to be saturated in the range of ρr > 0.65, the average efficiency was found to increase monotonically with an increase in ρr throughout its entire range of variation due to the increase in VOC. In consequence, the highest efficiency achieved with Sample D was 9.32%, as shown also in Fig. S6, S7 and Table S2. With regard to the low-bandgap CISe devices fabricated using non-vacuum approaches, ∼10% efficiencies have been reported to date, as achieved with highly toxic reagents, e.g., hydrazine in a globe box or H2Se gas together with organic additives. The present efficiency value is therefore promising considering that it is achieved with low-bandgap (1.0 eV) CISe absorbers that were produced under ambient conditions (i.e., without using vacuum equipment or a globe box) without the use of hydrazine, H2Se(g), KCN, or any organic additives.

We have shown that a simple, mild, wet-milling process can markedly increase the packing density of colloidal solution-processed nanocrystalline films and in turn increase the sintered film density, thereby leading to a great enhancement in the PCE of low-bandgap (1.0 eV) CISe thin-film solar cells up to 9.32%. FIB-SEM cross-sections enabled us to unambiguously demonstrate that the relative density (ρr) of the precursor layer, consisting of Cu–In alloy nanocrystals in this case, was significantly increased by the ball-milling of the nanocrystal ink. The CISe thin films prepared by the reactive annealing of the intermetallic nanocrystal layers exhibited gradually improved microstructural features as the milling time increased. Thus, the CISe films obtained by milling for 360 h had almost no pores on a well-faceted surface while also showing a much thicker large-grained top CISe layer, a uniform and planar surface morphology, and a thinner MoSe2 layer as compared to those prepared with shorter milling times. In addition, the results of the TEM analysis clearly revealed that not only the large grains in the top layer but also the nanocrystals in the bottom layer of the sintered film exist in the chalcopyrite CISe phase and that the bottom CISe layer formed a well-connected mesoporous network. The PCE of the resulting CISe solar cells was found to increase monotonically with an increase in ρr due to the consequent microstructural improvements in the sintered films. Upon comparison of Samples B and C, the reduction in the porosity and the thickness of the MoSe2 layer as well as the increase in the packing density of the bottom layer in Sample C were deemed most likely to be related to the reduced Gsh and Rs values, which eventually led to an increase in jSC and more distinctively to the enhancement of the FF value. Comparing Samples C and D, the reduced porosity on the more uniform surface of Sample D is likely associated with the reduced j0 and n values, indicative of the suppression of recombination current, which in turn resulted in the improvement in the VOC value. Unfortunately, it was not possible to devise precursor films with a higher ρr by milling the present nanocrystal ink for a longer time due to the delamination problem. However, bandgap tuning by incorporating Ga and/or S as well as defect-chemical modification of the CISe/CdS junction are expected to improve the PV performance levels of the present devices further.


This work was supported by the internal program of Korea Institute of Science and Technology (Project no. 2E25391), by the KIST-UNIST partnership program, and by the National Research Foundation of Korea Grant funded by the Korean Government (MEST) for University-Institute cooperation program.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Description of the synthesis of Cu–In alloy nanoparticles and characterization of precursor layers and sintered films, XRD and Raman spectra, surface morphology over a larger area and composition of CISe films, diode analysis of CISe solar cells, j–V curve and EQE spectrum of the best-performing device, and j–V curves and PV parameters of all the devices used to evaluate the average efficiencies. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta02403j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015