 DOI: 10.1039/C5NR02866C
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 10595-10599


Yaoguang
Rong
,

Zhongjia
Tang
,

Yufeng
Zhao
,

Xin
Zhong
,

Swaminathan
Venkatesan
,

Harrison
Graham
,

Matthew
Patton
,

Yan
Jing
,

Arnold M.
Guloy
* and 

Yan
Yao
*

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and Materials Science and Engineering Program, University of Houston, Houston, Texas 77204, USA. E-mail: yyao4@uh.edu

Department of Chemistry, University of Houston, Houston, Texas 77204, USA. E-mail: aguloy@uh.edu

Texas Center for Superconductivity at University of Houston, Houston, Texas 77204, USA

Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Houston, Houston, Texas 77204, USA

Received
2nd May 2015
, Accepted 25th May 2015
First published on 27th May 2015
We report an effective solvent engineering process to enable controlled perovskite crystal growth and a wider window for processing uniform and dense methyl ammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) perovskite films. Planar heterojunction solar cells fabricated with this method demonstrate hysteresis-free performance with a power conversion efficiency around 10%. The crystal structure of an organic-based Pb iodide intermediate phase is identified for the first time, which is critical in controlling the crystal growth and optimizing thin film morphology.

Organic-based metal halide perovskites are a new family of optoelectronic materials that have attracted significant attention as light absorbers in efficient photovoltaic cells due to the unique combination of important characteristics such as a high extinction coefficient, long charge-carrier diffusion length, and low recombination rate along with a tunable bandgap. Significant efforts have been extended to investigate new organic-based perovskite materials such as methyl ammonium lead halides (MAPbX3), different device architectures and efficient deposition methods for perovskite solar cells, leading to a remarkable power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 20.1%. In conventional mesoscopic perovskite solar cells, a mesoporous metal oxide layer, such as TiO2 and Al2O3, is employed as an electron accepting/transporting or a scaffold layer, which requires a high-temperature (∼500 °C) annealing step in the fabrication process not only energy intensive but also incompatible with flexible plastic substrates. Planar heterojunction (PHJ) perovskite solar cells not only simplify the device fabrication but also enable low-temperature (<150 °C) solution processing. A typical PHJ perovskite solar cell has a p–i–n structure with the perovskite layer sandwiched between an electron transport layer (ETL) and a hole transport layer (HTL).

In PHJ perovskite solar cells, the quality of the perovskite layer plays an important role in obtaining high PCE. One-step deposition, two-step sequential deposition, and vapor deposition have been developed to produce high-quality perovskite films. The simplicity of the one-step solution deposition approach makes it preferable to other methods due to potential fabrication cost reduction. However, previous studies report inhomogeneous perovskite film coverage on flat substrates in the simple one-step spin-coating process, which results in insufficient light absorption, as well as an increased charge carrier recombination rate, which causes a drop in both efficiency and yield. Therefore, it is critical to optimize the film quality in the one-step deposition method with a deeper understanding of the film growth kinetics.
Solvent engineering has proven to be effective in fine-tuning the morphology of the perovskite layer in the one-step deposition for efficient solar cell devices. However, there remain two major challenges. First, when only a single solvent is used, the yield of high-quality dense film is low with a narrow processing window. Second, an intermediate phase forms during the solvent treatment step, which plays a critical role in determining the perovskite crystal growth. However, the crystal structure of the intermediate phase is still unknown.
Here we demonstrate a solvent-assisted film deposition method, using a dimethylformamide/dimethylsulfoxide (DMF/DMSO) solvent mixture, to enable a wider window for processing uniform and dense methyl ammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) perovskite films. We also determined the crystal structure of an organic-based Pb iodide intermediate phase for the first time. The novel film processing approach significantly improves the stability and reproducibility of the solvent treatment process. Moreover, the elucidation of the intermediate crystalline phase provides an improved understanding of the chemical processes involved in the film formation. Inverted perovskite/fullerene PHJ (P/F-PHJ) solar cells based on the structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/Al are fabricated via solution processing at temperatures below 120 °C, resulting in a hysteresis-free photovoltaic performance and a PCE of ∼10%.

Fig. 1(a) presents the scheme for the MAPbI3 perovskite formation process. This process mainly consists of three steps: (i) PbI2 and MAI are dissolved in mixture solvent and are then spun-cast on PEDOT:PSS coated ITO substrates at 5000 rpm; (ii) after spinning for a certain time, toluene is added as an orthogonal solvent for PbI2 layers and the formation of an intermediate phase; (iii) the film is transformed to a final perovskite phase after annealing at 100 °C for 15 minutes.
The key step in the above solvent engineering process is the formation of the intermediate phase. In previous work, the treatment process was found to be extremely sensitive to the delay time and resulted in a narrow processing window when DMF was used as the processing solvent. In this work, DMSO was chosen as a co-solvent with DMF to gain the flexibility of tuning the coordination strength since DMSO has a stronger ability to coordinate with PbI2 than DMF.Fig. 1b shows the XRD spectra of two intermediate phase films obtained from pure DMSO (thin film A) and from DMF/DMSO mixture solvents (thin film B). We observed the peaks located at 2θ = 6.61°, 8.12°, 9.63°, which agrees with previous report, however the crystal structure remains unknown. To clearly understand the structure of the intermediate phase, single crystals of the phase were recrystalized and obtained from the mother liquor that formed the thin films. Single crystal X-ray diffraction was performed and identified the crystal structure as orthorhombic with space group Cmc21 (no. 36). The crystallographic data is as follows: a = 4.621(1) Å, b = 27.484(8) Å, c = 26.923(7) Å, V = 3419.5(16) Å3; Z = 4; Dcalcd = 3.607 g cm−3. Final R indices [(I > 2σ(I)]: R1 = 0.0538, wR2 = 0.1053. The crystal structure of the intermediate phase, as shown in Fig. 1c features ribbon-like chains, [Pb3I8]2−, formed from edge-shared lead iodide octahedra (PbI6). The [Pb3I8]2− ribbons, that run parallel with the a-axis, and can be depicted as excised ribbons from the layered PbI2 structure with widths of 3 octahedral PbI6 units. The methylammonium (MA+) and DMSO molecules are located in spaces between the ribbons. The DMSO molecules do not coordinate the Pb atoms of the [Pb3I8]2− ribbons, which is different when no MA+ are present – i.e. the coordination compound PbI2(DMSO)2 is formed. Crystal data and structure refinement results, as well as atomic coordinates and equivalent isotropic displacement parameters are listed in the ESI (Tables S1 and S2, respectively). The simulated pattern based on the refined crystal structure (Fig. 1b) matches nicely with the experimental X-ray diffraction patterns of unannealed thin film samples (A&B). Upon thermal annealing the crystalline intermediate phase, MA2Pb3I8·2DSMO, liberates DMSO and reacts with the residual MAI in the thin film to form the tetragonal perovskite MAPbI3, as shown in Fig. 1b. The thermally activated transformation results in homogeneous and dense perovskite films. The presence of DMF or DMSO molecule in the intermediate phase film is further confirmed by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) (Fig. S2). For the unannealed thin films A and B, the peak located at 1020 cm−1 is assigned to SO stretching vibration of DMSO. After thermal annealing, the peaks originating from DMF or DMSO is significantly reduced, indicating the loss of solvent molecules and formation of MAPbI3. Further understanding the crystal transformation of the intermediate phase MA2Pb3I8·2DSMO will benefit the optimization of solvent engineering technique for obtaining high quality perovskite films.
In addition to the thermodynamics of the formation of intermediate phase, the kinetic aspects of the solvent treatment (ST) also significantly affect the film morphology. The parameters of detailed spin-coating process are presented in Fig. 2a. Toluene was dripped onto the film surface after a delay of 5 s (ST-5), 10 s (ST-10), 15 s (ST-15) and 20 s (ST-20) since the spin-coating step started at 5000 rpm. For the process with no treatment (NT), the spinning step continues at 5000 rpm for 30 s. Fig. 2b compares the absorption curves for two films processed with and without solvent treatment. In the visible spectrum, treated film shows a significant higher absorption coefficient over 1 × 105 cm−1 in the range of 400–500 nm. In the above band-gap region, the scattering of treated film is considerably reduced compared to NT film, indicating enhanced uniformity of ST film. Fig. 2d–h show the surface morphology of perovskite films processed at various conditions. When no solvent treatment was applied, the perovskite film presented a two-dimensional flower-like growth morphology (Fig. 2d) with crystal size between 50 to 80 μm. The gaps exist between perovskite grains will lead to reduced shunt resistance and leakage current. In comparison, as the treatment delay time increases from 5 s to 20 s, the average grain size reduces continuously from ∼7 μm to ∼3 μm (Fig. 2c). More importantly, the grains grow and merge together with much reduced gap region (darker region in Fig. 2e–h). In previously reported literature, the grain size was typically less than 1 μm. The much larger grain size reported in this work is significant in that it would enable the reduction of the overall bulk defect density and mitigate voltage hysteresis with suppressed charge trapping. Furthermore, decreasing the gaps between grains is expected to improve the quality of such large grains based perovskite films.
PHJ solar cells with a structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3 (400 nm)/[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) (50 nm)/BCP (8 nm)/Al (100 nm) were fabricated and characterized under standard air-mass 1.5 global (AM 1.5G) illumination. The J–V curves for the devices fabricated with different delay time and measured with 50 ms scanning delay in reverse direction are presented in Fig. S3a.Table 1 summarizes the extracted parameters of open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF) and PCE. In general, these devices present similar photovoltaic performance. A maximum PCE of 10.11% was obtained from device ST-10 due to the relatively higher Voc (0.83 V) and Jsc (20.2 mA cm−2) among all devices. The variations in the photovoltaic device parameters are plotted in Fig. 3a–d. For mixed solvents based devices, as the delay time increased from 5 s to 20 s, Voc of the devices increased slightly from 0.79 V to 0.83 V, and then decreased to 0.66 V. The change in Voc could be related to the grain size variation. The larger grains reduce the total grain boundary area, which is expected to reduce the charge recombination at the grain boundaries thus improves the Voc. Here it should be noted that though ST-5 film presented the largest grain size, the undesired large variation of grain size led to more unfavorable gaps between the particles, thus the ST-5 device obtained a relative lower Voc. Meanwhile, Jsc and FF of devices ST-5, ST-10 and ST-15 were not significantly affected by the delay time. In comparison to pure DMF solvent based devices, mixed solvents clearly enable a much wider processing window, which is related to the existence of the MA2Pb3I8·2DSMO intermediate phase.
Device

V
oc/V

J
sc/mA cm−2
FF
PCE/%
ST-5
0.79 ± 0.02
18.46 ± 0.41
0.61 ± 0.02
8.83 ± 0.45
ST-10
0.83 ± 0.02
19.86 ± 0.66
0.59 ± 0.02
9.75 ± 0.32
ST-15
0.74 ± 0.04
19.73 ± 0.20
0.60 ± 0.01
8.77 ± 0.48
ST-20
0.66 ± 0.05
19.26 ± 0.16
0.56 ± 0.04
7.15 ± 0.98
To investigate charge recombination in the devices, dependence of Jsc and Voc on light intensity (I) was measured between 0.02 and 1.0 Sun. The Jsc and Voc dependence on light intensity is plotted in Fig. S3b and c. For all devices, Jsc is linear with light intensity, indicating no significant charge recombination at short-circuit condition. For the Voc of device ST-5, ST-10 and ST-15, the slopes of Vocvs. ln(I) are 0.057, 0.058 and 0.054, which are close to 0.052 (2kBT/q), indicating the main recombination mechanism is monomolecular recombination. For device ST-20, the slope is reduced to 0.042 (1.6kBT/q), suggesting that recombination in this case is a combination of monomolecular and bimolecular processes. The enhanced recombination is possible due to the reduced grain size in the ST-20 film.
Photocurrent hysteresis at certain sweep delay time and scan direction have been reported as a serious issue in perovskite solar cells. The origin of photocurrent hysteresis is still under debate, which may be due to either charge traps in low quality perovskite films, ferroelectric properties of the perovskite material, and/or the electromigration of ions in perovskites. We measured the J–V curves of ST-10 using different sweep delay time (50, 100, 200, 400 ms, corresponding to scan rate of 400 mV s−1 to 50 mV s−1) and scan directions (reverse scan: from 1.0 V to −0.2 V; forward scan: from −0.2 V to 1.0 V), as shown in Fig. 3e. Interestingly, no obvious photocurrent hysteresis at measured sweep delay time and scan directions were observed. This could be attributed to the high-quality perovskite films with controlled grain growth, which benefits the charge transport and interface contact. Detailed photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table S4, and the EQE data of the device is presented in Fig. 3f. This is very different from conventional planar structure and agrees with literatures on such reverse structured perovskite solar cells.

A solvent-assisted film deposition method using a solvent mixture was developed and investigated in P/F-PHJ solar cells to enable wider processing window in forming uniform and dense perovskite films. The chemical process of the thin film deposition was studied, and a crystalline intermediate phase was identified and characterized. The morphology of the perovskite films and crystalline grain size were well controlled by the delay time in the solvent treatment process. A PCE of over 10% has been achieved for these devices without significant photocurrent hysteresis. These results provide important progress towards understanding the critical role of intermediate phases in the growth kinetics of perovskite films and a better control of the solution-processing for low-cost and highly efficient perovskite solar cells.


Y.Y. acknowledges the TcSUH Welch Professorship Award and UH Startup fund. A. M. G. acknowledges the R. A. Welch Foundation (E-1297) and the State of Texas through the Texas Center for Superconductivity at the University of Houston.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Detailed Experimental methods; photovoltaic performance of the devices; An X-ray crystallographic file (CIF). See DOI: 10.1039/c5nr02866c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015