 DOI: 10.1039/D1TC05963G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 4276-4285


Jiani
Lv
,

Wenning
Zhao
,

Wenhui
Li
*,

Jiatao
Yu
,

Mingzhe
Zhang
,

Xiuxun
Han
* and 

Tooru
Tanaka


Institute of Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, Faculty of Materials Metallurgy and Chemistry, Jiangxi University of Science and Technology, Ganzhou 341000, China. E-mail: xxhan@jxust.edu.cn; liwenhui@jxust.edu.cn

Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Saga University, Saga 840-8502, Japan

Received
14th December 2021
, Accepted 14th February 2022
First published on 17th February 2022
All-inorganic perovskites have drawn much attention because of their remarkable thermal stability. Nevertheless, their power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) are still limited by defect induced non-radiative recombination. In this contribution, we demonstrate a gradient cooling process to cool down the annealed perovskite films. As compared to the conventional cooling process, the structural defects are partially healed in the gradient cooling process, which is confirmed by improved crystallinity and reduced defect density. As a result, charge carrier transport in the perovskite film and at interfaces is evidenced to be enhanced. Benefitting from reduced defect density, thicker all-inorganic perovskite films without a dopant/additive achieve a champion PCE of 13.07% in carbon electrode based solar cells. This work provides a simple yet effective approach to further minimize the defect density in all-inorganic perovskites.

Since the first report in 2009, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have experienced incredible progress in power conversion efficiency (PCE). Up to now, the highest certified PCE of PSCs has reached 25.7%. The remarkable performance of PSCs is attributed to the extraordinary material properties of lead halide based perovskites, including low exciton binding energy, a high extinction coefficient, and long charge carrier diffusion length. However, organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites suffer from poor thermal stability due to the volatile nature of organic components, which hinders their commercial applications. In contrast, the non-volatile nature of all-inorganic CsPbX3 (X = I, Br, or mixed) perovskites endows them with remarkable thermal stability. Therefore, CsPbX3 perovskites have drawn much attention in recent years.

Currently, CsPbX3 perovskite based solar cells have achieved impressive progress. For example, Zhang et al. used a molten-salt-assisted strategy to improve the grain growth of CsPbI3 and achieved a PCE of 19.83%. By exploiting methylammonium chloride (MACl) to control the crystallization process and octylammonium iodides for surface passivation, a PCE of 20.37% was reported for the CsPbI3 perovskite. As compared to the CsPbI3 perovskite, the CsPbBr3 perovskite possesses stronger stability. However, the larger bandgap of the CsPbBr3 perovskite limits the current output of PSCs. To date, the highest PCE of CsPbBr3 PSCs has been 11.08%. The I/Br mixed CsPbX3 perovskite is a compelling choice to balance the stability and the photovoltaic performance. Very recently, a PCE of up to 20.8% was reported for CsPbI3−xBrx by surface passivation with 2-(1H-imidazol-4-yl)ethanamine. In spite of the above impressive progress made in the CsPbX3 perovskites, the control of loss in open-circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF) still lags behind that in the case of organic–inorganic perovskites, mainly due to the defect induced non-radiative recombination. Therefore, the healing of defects is critical to maximize the performance of CsPbX3 perovskites.
In CsPbX3 PSCs, the most harmful defects are mainly distributed at the grain boundaries and interfaces. Inspired by the concept of surface passivation in Si technology, various organic/inorganic agents have been employed to heal the perovskite surface. However, the insulating or weakly conductive character of these passivators hinders the charge carrier transport. Moreover, several studies reported that the passivator itself or the solvent of the passivator may induce destabilization of perovskite films. To address these issues, it is necessary to find a new method to heal defects in the perovskite films.
For both solution-processed and vacuum deposited all-inorganic perovskite films, post-annealing treatment is needed to obtain a targeted perovskite phase and high film quality, and extensive work has been carried out to explore the correlation between annealing parameters and film quality. After the post-annealing treatment, the obtained perovskite films undergo a cooling process down to the ambient temperature. However, unlike the annealing process, the cooling process is rarely studied, and is generally completed via direct quenching. During the annealing treatment, the wide existence of the structural defects is unavoidable due to the soft nature of perovskites. If the annealed film is rapidly cooled, such as by quenching, the distribution of atoms will be frozen, resulting in high defect density. Studies on other photovoltaic materials have demonstrated that a slower cooling process can reduce the defect density. Herein, we employed the CsPbI2Br perovskite, one of the most studied all-inorganic perovskites, as a light harvester and a gradient cooling strategy was exploited to cool the annealed CsPbI2Br films. The effects of the gradient cooling strategy on crystallinity, defect density, and charge carrier transport were investigated. Results revealed that healing of structural defects happened during the gradient cooling process, leading to enhanced charge carrier transport in the CsPbI2Br films and at the interfaces. As a result, both the PCE and the long-term stability of carbon electrode based devices (C-PSCs) were enhanced. Moreover, benefiting from reduced defects, the PCE was further increased to 13.07% when thicker CsPbI2Br films were used.

Titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) (TDIP, 75 wt% in isopropanol), 1-butanol (99%), lead iodide (PbI2, 99.99%), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, ≥99.9%), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, 99.8%), and isopropyl alcohol (IPA, ≥99.9%) were purchased from Aladdin. Lead bromide (PbBr2, 99.999%) and cesium iodide (CsI, 99.999%) were purchased from Alfa Aesar. Conductive carbon paste was purchased from ShangHai MaterWin New Materials Co., Ltd. All materials were used directly without any purification. To obtain the TiO2 precursor solution, 0.12 mL TDIP solution was diluted in 1 mL 1-butanol and stirred for 2 hours before use. The CsPbI2Br precursor solution was prepared by dissolving 260 mg CsI, 231 mg PbI2, and 184 mg PbBr2 into 1 mL DMF/DMSO mixing solvent (volume ratio = 2:1). The obtained mixture was stirred at 70 °C for 2 hours and filtered using a 0.45 μm PTFE filter before spin coating.


The FTO coated glass was etched with zinc powder and 2 M hydrochloric acid. The patterned FTO glass was washed successively with detergent, deionized water, acetone, and ethanol in an ultrasonic cleaner for 15 min. The dried FTO glass was treated in an UV-Ozone cleaner for 15 min before use. A compact TiO2 (c-TiO2) layer was deposited onto the FTO glass by spin-coating of diluted TDIP solution at 2000 rpm for 30 s, dried at 125 °C for 10 min, then repeated once with the same TDIP solution. Next, the c-TiO2 precursor film was sintered in air at 500 °C for 30 min. The CsPbI2Br film was prepared in a glove box filled with N2, and the O2 content was controlled to be <100 ppm. To deposit CsPbI2Br films, the perovskite precursor solution was dropped onto the FTO/c-TiO2 substrate and spun at 500 rpm for 6 s followed by 1500 rpm for 45 s. In the last 22 s of the second step, 150 μL IPA was dropped onto the substrate. After the spin-coating, substrates were annealed at 300 °C for 10 min. For the quenching strategy, substrates were quenched to ambient temperature by transferring the substrates onto a metal plate. Alternatively, substrates were cooled via the gradient cooling strategy, namely substrates were rested at 140 °C for 1 min and subsequently quenched to ambient temperature. To accomplish the fabrication of solar cells, a carbon electrode was screen-printed onto the CsPbI2Br layer.


A UV-vis spectrophotometer Shimadzu UV-2600 was used to obtain the absorption spectra of CsPbI2Br films. The X-ray diffraction measurements were conducted using a TD-3700 X-ray diffractometer (Tongda Technology Co., Ltd). The voltage and current of the Cu target X-ray tube was set to be 35 kV and 25 mA, respectively. Scanning electron microscopy images were obtained using a scanning electron microscope (Phenom Pro). Time-resolved photoluminescence measurements were performed on a fluorescence lifetime spectrometer (Hamamatsu, C12132-37) using a pulse laser as an optical excitation source (wavelength: 532 nm).

To obtain the current–voltage characteristic curves of the solar cells, the devices were illuminated using an AM 1.5G solar simulator (94023A, Newport) and intensity was calibrated to be 100 mW cm−2 on a standard Si reference cell. The current–voltage curves of devices were measured using a Keithley 4200 digital sourcemeter. The active area was defined to be 0.045 cm2 with a metal mask. External quantum efficiency spectra were recorded on a QE-R system (Enlitech) without white light bias. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy was executed on an electrochemical workstation (CHI660E, China) in the dark. The frequency ranged from 0.01 Hz to 1 MHz, and the voltage bias was 0.8 V.

The schematic preparation of CsPbI2Br films is depicted in Fig. 1a. The control CsPbI2Br films were obtained via a generally adopted annealing and quenching process: the precursor film from spin-coating was directly annealed at 300 °C for 10 min and then quenched to ambient temperature by transferring the substrate onto a metal plate. Alternatively, annealed CsPbI2Br films were cooled through a gradient cooling strategy: after annealing at 300 °C, substrates were transferred to the second hotplate at a temperature of 140 °C for 1 min, and subsequently quenched to ambient temperature. Fig. S1 (ESI) shows the temperature curves of the two cooling strategies. As for the quenching process, temperature of the sample first dropped from 300 °C to 50 °C in ∼30 s, then decreased to ambient temperature at a slower rate. In the gradient cooling process, it took about 45 s to cool the annealed sample down to 140 °C, which is slower than in the quenching process. In addition, it needed another ∼60 s to cool the sample to ambient temperature. In a word, CsPbI2Br films obtained from gradient cooling strategy will undergo slower cooling and longer duration at high temperature as compared to the quenched one, which may influence the properties of the films.

It has been reported that metal halide perovskites with metastable black phases, such as the CsPbI3 perovskite and FAPbI3 perovskite, may transform to a stable and nonfunctional yellow phase (δ-phase) when the cooling rate is too slow. Thus, X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of CsPbI2Br films were measured. As shown in Fig. 1b, both quenching and gradient cooling films exhibited strong characteristic peaks at ∼14.7° and ∼29.7° which can be well-indexed to the (100) and (200) planes of the CsPbI2Br black phase, respectively. The small peak located at ∼21° can be ascribed to the signal of the (110) plane. In the degree range where typical peaks of the yellow phase can be found, i.e. 9°–14°, no signals were detected in both films. This result suggests that the cooling rate of the gradient cooling process is high enough to avoid the unfavorable black to yellow phase transformation. Besides the effect on the phase transformation, the slower cooling rate may result in the release of stress in the films, which can be detected by shifts in XRD peaks. Thus, XRD peak positions were reexamined, and both films exhibited the same peak positions (Fig. 1b), demonstrating no difference in stress for films. Practically, it generally needs very slow cooling rate (several degrees per minutes or even lower) to release the stress. In our case, the temperature can be cooled down to ambient temperature within several minutes in both cooling processes, which should be too fast to release the stress.
Full width at half maxima (FWHM) of the XRD peaks were also calculated. For the quenched CsPbI2Br film, the FWHM of the (100) peak, (110) peak, and (200) peak were 0.119°, 0.127°, and 0.197°, respectively. However, these values were reduced to 0.103°, 0.103°, and 0.162°, respectively, for the gradient-cooled film. Generally, the diffraction peak broadening can be attributed to an increase in the micro-strain and/or a decrease in the crystallite size. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) measurements were then conducted to investigate the grain size in the CsPbI2Br films, and no obvious difference in grain size was observed (Fig. S2, ESI). Therefore, the reduced FWHM should be due to the decrease in the micro-strain. To quantitatively analyze the micro-strain in the CsPbI2Br films, XRD patterns were analyzed according to the Williamson–Hall equation:
(1)
where
β is the FWHM of the XRD peak, k is the shape factor (k ≈ 0.9 for cubic crystal), D is the average crystallite size, θ is the Bragg angle, ε is the micro-strain, and λ is the wavelength of X-ray (λ = 0.15406 nm for the Cu target). The micro-strain thereby can be obtained from the slope of βcosθ versus 4sinθ plots (Fig. 1c). The extracted ε was 0.0033 for the quenching film, and 0.0022 for the gradient cooling film. This result suggests that the gradient cooling strategy is beneficial to the release of micro-strain, which is an effective way of reducing defects.

Defect-induced traps, especially the non-radiative recombination related traps, play a key role in influencing the dynamics of photo-generated charge carriers. As a reflection of the non-radiative recombination, the lifetime of photoluminescence (PL) will be shortened. Thus, time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements were conducted to investigate the radiative and non-radiative recombination dynamics inside the perovskite films.Fig. 2a shows the PL decay curves of the CsPbI2Br films. Obviously, the gradient-cooled film exhibited prolonged PL decay. To obtain lifetimes correlating with radiative and non-radiative recombination, we used a bi-exponential function in the form of  to fit curves, where the fast decay lifetime (τ1) and slow decay lifetime (τ2) are related to non-radiative recombination and radiative recombination, respectively, and A1, A2 are their weight fractions (Table S1, ESI). For the quenched film, the extracted τ1 and τ2 are 0.50 ns and 1.55 ns, respectively. These two lifetimes were prolonged to 2.80 ns and 5.78 ns for the gradient-cooled film, respectively. In consistency with the longer τ1 and τ2, the average lifetime (τave) was also increased from 0.75 ns to 3.78 ns (Table S1, ESI), implying that the trap density in the gradient-cooled film decreased.
To quantitatively analyze the defect density in the perovskite films, hole-only devices with the configuration of glass/FTO/CsPbI2Br/carbon and electron-only devices with the configuration of glass/FTO/TiO2/CsPbI2Br/PCBM/carbon were fabricated. The trap density (Nt) in the device is directly proportional to the trap-filling limited voltage (VTFL), and can be calculated from the following equation:
(2)
where
ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, εr is the relative dielectric constant of CsPbI2Br film (εr = 1.64), and L is the thickness of CsPbI2Br film (L = 490 nm). In terms of the hole-only devices (Fig. 2b), the extracted VTFL for quenched and gradient-cooled devices were 0.65 V and 0.47 V, respectively. Accordingly, the calculated trap density of holes was 4.92 × 1015 cm−3 and 3.56 × 1015 cm−3, respectively. As shown in Fig. 2c, the VTFL of electron-only device decreased from 0.69 V for the quenched device to 0.25 V for the gradient-cooled device, corresponding to a dropping of electron trap density from 5.22 × 1015 cm−3 and 1.89 × 1015 cm−3. The above results further confirm the TRPL results that gradient cooling strategy is effective in depressing the defect density in the CsPbI2Br film.

The above results suggest that the release of the micro-strain happens during the gradient cooling process, which results in reduced defect density. To release micro-strain, post-annealing is an effective method, which is the outcome of short range atom movements driven by the thermal energy. Hereafter, we propose a model to explain the defect healing mechanism of gradient cooling. During the annealing process, the wide existence of structural defects in the CsPbI2Br films is inevitable because of the fast crystal growth and high annealing temperature (Fig. 3a). In the quenching process, the thermal energy for the ion movement is lost instantaneously, and structural defects in the film thereby are frozen (Fig. 3b). In contrast, as shown in Fig. 3c and d, ions still reserve partial thermal energy for mild movement in the gradient cooling process, and the defect annihilation has certain probability to proceed during the movement, resulting in defect healing. Based on this model, the effectiveness of the ion movement on the defect healing should depend on the temperature of the second hotplate. In the case of high temperature, too strong a thermal movement may drive ions off their lattice position, counteracting the defect healing effect, while low temperature will result in less defect healing because of the weakened ion movement. To check the above hypothesis, we changed the temperature of the second hotplate to 70 °C and 210 °C, and TRPL curves of obtained films were compared in Fig. S3 and Table S1 (ESI). As expected, both 70 °C and 210 °C films exhibited smaller τave than the 140 °C film, but were larger than the quenched film. We noted that other mild external stress may also induce similar defect healing. For example, Wu et al. reported that interstitials and vacancies recombined under the electric-field-induced ion migration, and the defect density thereby reduced.
To explore the charge carrier transport at the interface, we first carried out TRPL measurements on the TiO2/CsPbI2Br samples to reveal the electron extraction at the TiO2/CsPbI2Br interface (Fig. 4a). As detailed in Table S1 (ESI), the CsPbI2Br films on the FTO/TiO2 substrates exhibited longer lifetimes compared to their counterparts on the glass substrates. It should be due to the inferior film quality on the glass substrates (Fig. S4, ESI). A τave of 10.23 ns was obtained for the quenched film, while the gradient-cooled film exhibited a much shorter τave (0.79 ns). Clearly, gradient cooling enables a more efficient electron extraction from the perovskite layer to the TiO2 layer. Furthermore, the capacitance–voltage (C–V) curves were measured on the devices with the structure of FTO/TiO2/CsPbI2Br/carbon, and Mott–Schottky (M–S) analysis was performed:
(3)
where
C is the measured capacitance, A is the area of the device, N is the doping density, and Vbi is the built-in potential, respectively. According to eqn (3), the Vbi can be obtained from the intercept of the linear part with the x-axis of the C−2–V plot. As shown in Fig. 4b, the Vbi increased from 1.25 V to 1.31 V when gradient cooling was adopted, which can be ascribed to the reduced defect density. In the solar cells, a stronger built-in electric field is conducive to charge carrier separation and reducing charge recombination.

A series of measurements and analysis demonstrated the benefits of defect healing on charge carrier transport, which should endow the final device with superior photovoltaic performance. To prove it, we fabricated carbon electrode based PSCs with the configuration of FTO/c-TiO2/CsPbI2Br/carbon (Fig. S5, ESI). A close comparison of photovoltaic parameters (detailed in Table 1) indicated that the average FF increased prominently from 68.91% for quenched devices to 73.19% for gradient-cooled devices, along with an improvement in Voc from 1.07 V to 1.10 V. As a result, a much higher average PCE was obtained for gradient-cooled devices (11.75% vs. 10.83%). Besides, the temperature effect of gradient cooling was also investigated. As shown in Fig. S6 and Table S2 (ESI), the PCE showed a trend of quenched devices < gradient-cooled-210 °C devices < gradient-cooled-70 °C devices < gradient-cooled-140 °C devices, which is in consistency with the results of TRPL (Table S1, ESI). Fig. 5a depicts J–V characteristic curves of champion devices under two respective cooling conditions. The J–V curves obtained from different scanning directions are compared in Fig. S7 (ESI), and the hysteresis effect can be observed for both devices, which should be related to the imperfect contact between the perovskite film and the carbon electrode. The best gradient-cooled device exhibited a PCE of 12.59%, a Voc of 1.12 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 14.76 mA cm−2, and a FF of 76.18%. As for the best quenching device, the photovoltaic parameters were PCE = 11.42%, Voc = 1.10 V, Jsc = 14.77 mA cm−2, and FF = 70.30%, respectively.
Devices

J
sc [mA cm−2]

V
oc [V]
FF [%]
PCE [%]
Quenching
Average
14.62 ± 0.15
1.07 ± 0.02
68.91 ± 1.67
10.83 ± 0.38
Best
14.77
1.10
70.30
11.42
Gradient cooling
Average
14.61 ± 0.11
1.10 ± 0.02
73.19 ± 1.92
11.75 ± 0.47
Best
14.76
1.12
76.18
12.59
The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of devices were also measured and the corresponding results are shown in Fig. 5b. It should be noted that no white light bias was exerted on the devices during EQE measurements to avoid the trap filling effect. It was found that the gradient-cooled device exhibited larger EQE values compared to the quenched device, and the statistical distribution of EQE values at three typical wavelengths (400 nm, 500 nm, and 600 nm, Fig. S8, ESI) demonstrated the reproducibility of this result. Accordingly, the integrated current density (Jsc,EQE) extracted from EQE spectra were 11.49 mA cm−2 and 11.91 mA cm−2 for the quenched and the gradient-cooled devices, respectively. The discrepancy between Jsc,EQE and Jsc should be due to two reasons: (1) the shallow trap states at the CsPbI2Br film/carbon interface could be filled up by high illumination in the J–V measurements but not in the EQE measurements; and (2) the capping glass of the test fixture (Fig. S9, ESI) increases the light loss. As known, EQE is determined by both the light-harvesting ability of the perovskite film and charge carrier transport in the device. The nearly same UV-vis spectra (Fig. S10a, ESI) and light-harvesting efficiency (LHE) spectra (Fig. S10b, ESI) suggest that the difference in EQE should be due to the diversity in charge carrier transport. In order to assess the device stability, encapsulated devices were stored in the dark with humidity <30%. After 30 days, gradient-cooled devices retained ∼95% of their initial PCEs on average, while the average PCE of quenched devices dropped to ∼87% of their initial PCEs (Fig. 5c). The above results indicate that the gradient cooling strategy can enhance both device performance and long-term stability.
To further investigate the charge carrier dynamic in the device, the dark J–V curves of the fabricated devices were analyzed. As shown in Fig. 5d, the gradient-cooled device exhibited a much lower dark current as compared to the quenched device. In general, dark current is governed by charge carrier recombination in the device, whereas a low dark current is always accompanied by the suppressed recombination. Therefore, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed on the devices, which is a valuable technique for probing charge carrier dynamics in solar cells.Fig. 5e presents the Nyquist plots of the devices at a potential bias of 0.8 V in the dark, and Fig. 5f depicts the equivalent circuit used for curve fitting. The equivalent circuit contains three resistance elements, which are series resistance of electrodes (Rs), charge transfer resistance between the perovskite layer and charge transporting layers (RCT), and recombination resistance (Rrec), respectively. It was found that the Rs of the quenched and gradient-cooled devices were similar (<30 Ω, Table S3, ESI), but the former showed smaller Rrec (1188 Ω versus 9696 Ω) than the latter. This result confirms the conclusion that gradient cooling can suppress charge recombination in the device. In contrast to the trend in Rrec, the gradient cooling device exhibited smaller RCT than the quenching device (311 Ω versus 413 Ω). The above results suggest that both charge carrier recombination and transport in the device can be improved by gradient cooling, which is in consistency with TRPL and M–S results.
Next, we checked the validity of the gradient cooling strategy in fabricating thicker CsPbI2Br films. Unlike the metal electrode in traditional devices, there is no light reflection at the carbon electrode. Thus, thicker perovskite films are necessary to realize saturated light harvesting in C-PSCs. However, thick perovskite films often suffer more serious non-radiative recombination, which may result in inferior performance. As shown in Fig. S12a and b (ESI), a thicker perovskite film (∼600 nm, Fig. S11, ESI) endowed devices with increased Jsc. But this increment was offset by the decrement in FF (Fig. S12c, ESI) for the quenched devices, leading to a lower average PCE (10.60% versus 10.83%, Fig. 6a and Table S4, ESI). In contrast, gradient-cooled devices exhibited an increase in the average PCE (12.72% versus 11.75%, Fig. 6b and Table S4, ESI). Notably, the best gradient-cooled device exhibited a PCE of 13.07% (Fig. 6c and Table S4, ESI). We took a survey on photovoltaic performance of CsPbI2Br based C-PSCs in previous reports and summarized the PCEs and corresponding strategies in Table S5 (ESI). It was found that >13% PCEs were mainly realized with the aid of additives or interlayers. The champion PCE of 13.07% obtained in this work is one of the highest PCEs for pristine CsPbI2Br based C-PSCs.

To summarize, this work demonstrates that the cooling process following the post-annealing treatment plays a significant role in determining the defect density in all-inorganic perovskite films. We found that defects can be partially healed via a gradient cooling strategy, leading to enhanced charge carrier transport in the solar cell. As a result, improved photovoltaic performance and device stability were achieved. Besides, thick dopant/additive-free CsPbI2Br films with a carbon electrode demonstrated a champion PCE of 13.07%. This work provides a simple way to depress the defect density in all-inorganic perovskite films.


The authors declare no conflict of interest.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant no. 62064005), the Double Thousand Plan of Jiangxi Province (Grant no. jxsq2018101019), and the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangxi Province (Grant no. 20192ACB20006).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1tc05963g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022