 DOI: 10.1039/B819177H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4946-4951

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Laure
Biniek
,

Christos L.
Chochos
*,

Nicolas
Leclerc
*,

Georges
Hadziioannou
,

Joannis K.
Kallitsis
,

Rony
Bechara
,

Patrick
Lévêque
 and 

Thomas
Heiser


Laboratoire d'Ingénierie des Polymères pour les Hautes Technologies Université de Strasbourg, Ecole Européenne de Chimie, Polymères et Matériaux, 25 rue Becquerel, 67087, Strasbourg, France. E-mail: leclercn@ecpm.u-strasbg.fr; christos.chochos@cut.ac.cy

Department of Chemistry, University of Patras, Patras, 26500, Greece

Institut d'Electronique du Solide et des Systèmes, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, 23 rue du Loess, 67037, Strasbourg, France

Received
28th October 2008
, Accepted 5th May 2009
First published on 9th June 2009
The synthesis of a new alternating copolymer (PTBzT2-C12) based on a thiophene-benzothiadiazole-thiophene (TBzT) segment and a thieno[3,2-b]thiophene unit and its utilization as electron donor in photovoltaic bulk heterojunctions are reported. The copolymer has been obtained via a Stille cross-coupling reaction. The material's optical and electrochemical properties, in solution or in thin films, have been investigated using UV-visible absorption as well as photoluminescence spectroscopy and cyclic voltammetry. A significant red-shift of the absorption edge is observed during film formation, leading to an optical bandgap of 1.88 eV. The polymer ionisation potential is as high as 5.3 eV and makes the material particularly interesting for photovoltaic applications since it is a prerequisite for high open circuit voltages and better chemical stability. Bulk heterojunction solar cells using blends of the copolymer, as the electron donor, and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM), as the electron transporting material, have been elaborated. A power conversion efficiency of 1% is achieved with a 1:4 PTBzT2-C12:PCBM weight ratio and a 30 nm semi-transparent active layer. The open-circuit voltage is equal to 0.74 V and agrees with the expected value. It is anticipated from the copolymer optoelectronic properties, that this novel material should allow power conversion efficiencies above 5% after further optimization of the processing steps.

The development of plastic solar cells as an alternative to the expensive silicon photovoltaic devices in the pursuit for new renewable sources of electrical energy has attracted a lot of attention. Bulk heterojunction-type devices (BHJ) based on blends of regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (rr-P3HT) and soluble fullerene derivatives are among the most efficient polymer solar cells reported so far, providing power conversion efficiencies (PCE) approaching 5%. It has been demonstrated that the active layer morphology, the material's crystallinity, the polymer molecular weight, the energy bandgap as well as the charge carrier mobilities are key parameters for BHJ device optimization.

In the past few years, several groups of chemists proposed new low bandgap polymer structures as alternatives to rr-P3HT in order to improve the matching between the solar spectrum and the polymer photon harvesting properties. An efficient strategy for lowering the bandgap of conjugated polymers is based on the synthesis of so-called donor/acceptor (D/A) alternating copolymers that contain electron-rich and electron-poor building blocks. Among the various low bandgap conjugated polymers that have been synthesized following this approach,copolymers consisting of the thiophene-benzothiadiazole-thiophene (TBzT) segment with various co-monomers such as fluorene,carbazole,dibenzosilole, and cyclopentadithiophene are the most extensively studied examples. Recently, considerable progress has been achieved with the use of such narrow bandgap copolymers in polymer photovoltaics and power conversion efficiencies over 5% have been reported.
In polymer bulk heterojunction solar cells, a good balance between electron and hole mobilities is a prerequisite for high photovoltaic performances. Yet, in polymer:PCBM based devices, the hole mobility has been reported to be lower than the electron mobility, leading to space-charge limited performances. Recently, new polythiophene derivatives and analogues with various fused aromatic rings, such as thieno[3,2-b]thiophene, in their backbones have been found to show higher field-effect hole mobilities than rr-P3HT due to the formation of large crystalline domains. A promising PCE of 2.3% was achieved in devices using poly(2,5-bis(3-tetradecylthiophen-2-yl)thieno[3,2-b]thiophene) (pBTTT) as electron donor polymer.
Taking into consideration the need for both bandgap lowering and improved hole transport, we investigate in this work a new copolymer combining the TBzT segment with the thieno[3,2-b]thiophene fused ring as a promising electron donor polymer for bulk heterojunction solar cells. The synthesis, optical and electrochemical characterization, field-effect mobility measurements of poly[4,7-bis(3-dodecylthiophen-2-yl)benzothiadiazole-co-thieno[3,2-b]thiophene] (PTBzT2-C12, Scheme 1) as well as related photovoltaic device performances are described. Semi-transparent 30 nanometer thin films prepared by blending PTBzT2-C12 with PCBM in a 1:4 weight ratio led to a maximum PCE of 1% without optimization of processing parameters.

Synthesized materials were characterized by means of 1H and 13C NMR spectra, gel permeation chromatography, thermogravimetric analyses, UV-visible absorption, photoluminescence spectroscopy, and cyclic voltammetry. BHJ solar cells were elaborated using blends of PTBzT2-C12 and PCBM with various mass ratios as active layer, an aluminium layer as top cathode and an ITO covered glass substrate, coated with a thin PEDOT:PSS (poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate)) layer, as anode. Current density versus voltage (J-V) characteristics were measured under darkness and under illumination using a AM1.5 solar simulator. External quantum efficiencies were also recorded. Details about the experimental procedures and equipment can be found in the ESI.


The complete synthetic pathway for the poly[4,7-bis(3-dodecylthiophen-2-yl)benzothiadiazole-co-thieno[3,2-b]thiophene] (PTBzT2-C12) is described in Scheme 1. In order to attain a high molecular weight and easily processable copolymer, a high solubility is required. Therefore, dodecyl alkyl chains were used to substitute the thiophene units. Consequently, 3-bromothiophene has been converted to 3-dodecylthiophene 1 in good yield, by using a Kumada cross-coupling reaction with an in-situ obtained dodecyl Grignard compound. Purification of 1 by distillation and subsequently bromination in the 2 position by electrophilic addition using N-bromosuccinimide (NBS) in dimethylformamide solution afforded the 2-bromo-3-dodecylthiophene 2 in 85% yield. Lithiation of 2 with n-butyllithium in tetrahydrofuran solution followed by in-situ reaction of the lithium salt with trimethyltin chloride provided the 2-trimethyltin-3-dodecylthiophene 3. The stannyl-derivative 3 was chosen instead of the boronic acid derivative because the Stille cross-coupling reaction between the thiophene units and the 4,7-dibromobenzothiazole 4 is more effective than the Suzuki reaction. Since the high boiling point of compound 3 impedes the distillation and purification by other ways, we used this compound without further treatment. The Stille cross-coupling reaction between compounds 3 and 4 proceeded using 5 mol% of Pd(PPh3)2Cl2 as the catalytic system providing the 4,7-bis(3-dodecylthiophen-2-yl)benzothiadiazole 5 in moderate yield. Dibromination of the monomer 5 has been achieved using NBS, giving a solid compound 6 which has been purified by washing in methanol. Co-monomers 6 and 7 were then co-polymerized using the versatile and efficient Stille cross-coupling reaction, using tris(dibenzylideneacetone)dipalladium(0) (Pd2dba3) and tri(o-tolyl)phosphine (P(o-tol)3) as the catalytic system in toluene solution. The polymerization was running at 110 °C under argon atmosphere for 72 h. After purification using Soxhlet extraction, the chloroform-soluble fraction of the PTBzT2-C12 copolymer has a moderate molecular weight of Mn = 16000 g/mol and Mw = 23000 g/mol, as measured by size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) experiments based on monodisperse polystyrene standards. The polymer has an excellent thermal stability (5% of weight loss at 350 °C, measured by thermogravimetry) and is completely soluble in chloroform as well as in ortho-dichlorobenzene (ODCB).


The normalized absorption spectra of pristine PTBzT2-C12 in solution and in thin films are reported in Fig. 1. In an ODCB solution, PTBzT2-C12 presents an absorption maximum at 407 nm and a second maximum at 510 nm. For clarity, the scale has been normalized with the 407 nm absorption peak amplitude. The short wavelength absorption band is possibly due to the π–π* electronic transition of thiophene-based segments, while the second band may be attributed to the donor–acceptor internal charge transfer (ICT) between the benzothiadiazole moiety, as the electron acceptor, and the thiophene-based units, as the electron donor. Pure PTBzT2-C12 films show slightly broader absorption bands with maxima at 415 and 540 nm. The red-shift of both absorption peaks points out enhanced π-stacking interactions in the solid state. The continuous line shown in Fig. 1 leads to an optical absorption onset at 660 nm. This value corresponds to an optical bandgap of 1.88 eV. The absorption spectra of spin-coated films obtained from (40 mg/mL) PTBzT2-C12:PCBM dichlorobenzene solutions are reported in Fig. 2. The relative weight concentrations of the different solutions were 1:0.5, 1:1, 1:2 and 1:4, respectively. Normalization was performed on the absorption peak at 540 nm. As expected, the PCBM contribution (absorption peak at 330 nm) increases with the PCBM weight ratio. A slight blue shift of about 20 nm of the absorption band centred around 540 nm is observed (arrow in Fig. 2) when the relative PCBM weight ratio increases from 1:0.5 to 1:4. It is likely that this shift reflects an inhibition of the PTBzT2-C12 structural organization within the film due to the presence of a high amount of PCBM. A similar behaviour has been observed before on P3HT:PCBM blends.

The photoluminescence spectra of PTBzT2-C12:PCBM spin-coated films from dichlorobenzene solutions are presented in Fig. 3. In PTBzT2-C12:PCBM thin films, with a relative weight ratio as low as 1:0.5, complete photoluminescence quenching indicates an efficient charge or energy transfer.

Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was used to assess the ionisation potentials (EHOMO) and the electron affinity (ELUMO) of PTBzT2-C12. The energy levels were calculated using the following empirical equation: HOMO = 4.4 + (Eoxonset) and LUMO = 4.4 + (Eredonset), where the Eoxonset and Eredonset are the onset oxidation potential and the onset reduction potential versus standard calomel electrode (SCE), respectively. The first oxidation process (Eoxonset = 0.94 V versusSCE) and the first reduction process (Eredonset = −1.22 V versusSCE) were observed (Fig. 4). This corresponds to an EHOMO of 5.34 eV, an ELUMO of 3.18 eV and an electrochemical bandgap of 2.16 eV. The good reversibility of the reduction and the partial reversibility of the oxidation processes point out a pronounced chemical stability of the doped polymer. Moreover the high ionisation potential of PTBzT2-C12 in comparison to rr-P3HT should enhance the chemical stability in ambient conditions, the threshold HOMO value for air stability being estimated to 5.2 eV.

Fig. 5 compares the HOMO/LUMO positions deduced from both electro-chemical and absorption measurements with the corresponding energy levels of rr-P3HT reported in literature. As frequently observed on conjugated polymer films, and in particular on rr-P3HT, the electrochemical bandgap of PTBzT2-C12 is significantly larger than the optical bandgap. This difference can be related to the exciton binding energy, which is given by the difference between the single particle energy gap and the exciton generation energy, the latter being probed by the optical absorption measurements. Considering that the electrochemical measurements gives us a rough approximation of the electron and hole polaron energies, the exciton binding energy of PTBzT2-C12 can be estimated to 0.3 ± 0.1 eV, which is close to the values observed for other conjugated polymers.

The potential benefit of using PTBzT2-C12 instead of P3HT as donor in polymer:PCBM BHJ solar cells can be estimated by referring to the work of Scharber et al. Using the linear relationship between the open-circuit voltage and the polymer energy levels reported in that work and assuming a fill factor (FF) of 65%, an external quantum efficiency (EQE) of 65% in the absorption range of the polymer, and a negligible contribution of the PCBM absorption to the short circuit current density (Jsc), we calculated the expected performances of either P3HT or PTBzT2-C12 -based optimized devices. The energy levels for PCBM were taken from ref 5. The results are summarized in Table 1 together with experimental photovoltaic parameters that we obtained on optimized P3HT:PCBM BHJ solar cells. The P3HT based devices were elaborated in a similar environment as the PTBzT2-C12 based devices and were annealed for 15 minutes at 140 °C.

Active layer
Voc (V)

Jsc (mA/cm2)

FF (%)
PCE (%)
d (nm)
P3HT:PCBM
0.6
11.0
65
4.3
—
P3HT:PCBM*
0.6
10.5
64
4.1
100
PTBzT2-C12:PCBM
0.7
11.3
65
5.2
—
PTBzT2-C12:PCBM*
0.74
4.22
32
1
30
The good agreement between the calculated and experimental values for P3HT-based devices supports the photovoltaic performance expectations of polymer:PCBM blends using Scharber's approach. Accordingly, the calculated values obtained for PTBzT2-C12:PCBM devices show that the PCE may exceed the value obtained with P3HT devices and go above 5%. This expected performance enhancement is mostly due to the deeper HOMO level of PTBzT2-C12 which leads to a higher Voc. At this point, we would like to emphasize that such an estimation is an essential material's selection criterium and guideline for the development of new photovoltaic materials, since the mandatory optimization of the related devices necessitates prolonged investigations and significant amount of materials.
Bulk heterojunction photovoltaic cells based on PTBzT2-C12:PCBM active layers have been elaborated and characterized. The polymer:PCBM weight ratio was varied from 1:0.5 to 1:4. The average photovoltaic parameters (Voc, Jsc, PCE and FF), measured on 8 different devices per weight ratio, are given in the ESI. The best performances were obtained for a 1:4 ratio. The corresponding current density versus voltage (J-V) characteristics are shown in Fig. 6. The properties of the latter device are also reported in Table 1. A Jsc of almost 5 mA/cm2 and a PCE of 1% have been reached for this device despite the 30 nm thin active layer. The high Jsc value suggests the existence of high charge generation and collection efficiencies. An extrapolation to 90 nm films using the absorption coefficient calculated from the data of Fig. 2, leads to a Jsc of 10.5 mA/cm2 in close agreement with the expected value reported in Table 1. However, the low FF (less than 32%) turns out to be a major performance limiting factor for all devices. External quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements performed on photovoltaic devices with two different polymer weight ratios, are shown in Fig. 7. The dependence on polymer content is consistent with the observed decrease in Jsc with polymer content (see ESI). The slight blue shift of the long-wavelength edge observed for the 1:4 device is in agreement with the UV-visible absorption spectra shown in Fig. 2.
Additional 1:4 ratio devices, whose active layer thickness was increased from 30 to 200 nm, were elaborated by varying the solution concentration. The resulting average values of Jsc and PCE are found to decrease with an increasing active layer thickness while the fill-factor remains roughly constant and equal to 32%. This behaviour points out that the PTBzT2-C12:PCBM devices are currently limited by inefficient charge transport and charge collection. Preliminary mobility measurements performed on pristine PTBzT2-C12 using top contact field effect transistors have found the hole mobility to be as low as 5 × 10−5 cm2/Vs (see ESI). This low value may be responsible for space charge effects and the correspondingly low fill-factor. Various thermal treatments at temperatures up to 140 °C were applied to the device in order to enhance the polymer organisation and related carrier mobility, but without success. More profound investigations of the material's thermodynamic properties are required for further device optimization. Another way that can be explored to improve the polymer ordering in the blend is the introduction of a PCBM selective solvent. The latter approach has indeed been highlighted recently by Lee et al. with the use of 1,8-di(R)octanes as processing additives in low bandgap bulk heterojunction solar cells. These studies lie, however, beyond the scope of the present article.

A promising alternative copolymer based on the thiophene-benzothiadiazole-thiophene (TBzT) segment and the thieno[3,2-b]thiophene unit has been designed and successfully synthesized using a Stille cross-coupling reaction. The polymer exhibited a good thermal and chemical stability, as evidenced by thermogravimetric analysis and quasi-reversible cyclic voltammetry. The low optical bandgap (1.88 eV), deduced from the absorption threshold, and the high ionisation potential (measured by cyclic voltammetry) make the material interesting for photovoltaic applications. According to the current understanding of the bulk heterojunction solar cells, utilisation of our copolymer as electron donor should allow efficiencies above 5% to be reached with optimized devices. First solar cells led to a maximum efficiency of 1% using a 30 nm semitransparent active layer based on a 1:4 polymer:PCBM blend. Also a promising open-circuit voltage of 0.74 V has been achieved. However, increasing the layer thickness led to a reduction of the short-circuit current and a corresponding efficiency drop. Inefficient charge transport and charge collection are possibly at the origin of this behaviour. Moreover, the high PCBM concentration, which was required to achieve the highest efficiency, led to a blue-shift in the active layer absorption spectra, and counteracts the benefit of the relatively broad pristine polymer absorption band. Further work is necessary to optimize the film deposition procedure and the related thin film morphology.


The authors would like to thank Jérémy Bartringer for the photoluminescence measurements and Caroline Eckert for manuscript proof reading. Financial support was kindly provided by the Région Alsace (PMNA jeunes chercheurs).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Details of materials, synthesis, device preparation and characterizations. See DOI: 10.1039/b819177h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009