 DOI: 10.1039/C3TA10863E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6895-6900

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Raju
Lampande
,

Gyeong Woo
Kim
,

Julien
Boizot
,

Young Jae
Kim
,

Ramchandra
Pode
 and 

Jang Hyuk
Kwon
*

Department of Information Display, Kyung Hee University, Dongdaemoon-gu, Seoul 130-701, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jhkwon@khu.ac.kr; Fax: +82-2-961-9154; Tel: +82-2-961-0948

Department of Physics, Kyung Hee University, Dongdaemoon-gu, Seoul 130-701, Republic of Korea

Received
1st March 2013
, Accepted 11th April 2013
First published on 8th May 2013
This paper demonstrates a comparative study of transition metal oxide materials, tungsten trioxide (WO3) and molybdenum trioxide (MoO3), as an effective hole extraction and transport layer in inverted polymer bulk heterojunction solar cells. Their device performances as an anode buffer layer are investigated based on thieno[3,4-b]thiophene/benzodithiophene (PTB7) and [6,6]-phenyl C70-butyric acid methyl ester(PC70BM) photoactive layers. The fabricated device with WO3 compared with MoO3 shows improved power conversion efficiency as high as 6.67% under a simulated AM1.5G illumination of 100 mW cm−2. The excellent performance of WO3 in inverted bulk heterojunction solar cells is attributed to an efficient hole extraction, excellent electron blocking capability, smooth morphology as well as better ohmic contact between the active layer and the metal electrode.

The growing demand for organic electronic devices like organic light-emitting diodes (OLED) or organic thin-film transistors (OTFT) has triggered the interest for the development of organic solar cells such as small-molecule and polymer bulk hetero-junction (BHJ) in recent years. The favorable attributes of organic solar cells are low manufacturing cost, easy fabrication process, flexibility and lightweight. BHJ photovoltaic cells unceasingly show outstanding performances with power conversion efficiency (PCE) value already reaching 8–9%. However certain issues like highly effectual low band gap materials, proficient interfacial layers or optimized architectures are still the main hurdles for commercialization of organic solar cells. Therefore, further improvements in PCE and stability are desirable before any practical commercial applications.

Over the past few years, significant efforts have been made to improve the PCE of polymer photovoltaic cells by introducing new buffer and interconnection layers between the active layer and electrodes. Earlier, Yang Yang et al. have reported reduced performances and low ambient stability in a polymer BHJ without any interfacial layer at anode or cathode interfaces. Consequently, inserting a buffer layer in between the photoactive layer and the electrodes was demonstrated to significantly help in improving the overall performances of solar cells. Recent studies in the conventional BHJ structures have shown that a cathode interfacial layer, made of ZnO or TiOx as an electron transport layer, forms an excellent contact between the photoactive layer and the metal electrode; high transparency in the visible range, adequate conductivity of electrons and better air stability of these oxides allow improved performances and enhanced lifetime. From the anode side, a hole transport layer such as poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) is commonly used in conventional architecture; however its strong acidic nature and the low cathode work function result in potential oxidation and likewise poor performances. An alternative approach to address this concern lies in inverted structures, which provide long-term stability and comparable solar cell performances. Inverted structures also show the great advantage of vertical phase separation in the active layer and device lifetime improvement. In these structures, transition metal oxides such as MoO3, vanadium oxide (V2O5) or nickel oxide (NiO) are commonly used as interfacial layers and have been widely studied. Very recently, Antoine Kahn et al. have reported and explained the functional working, the physics, as well as the potential applications of such transition metal oxides, mentioning about their favourable electronic properties, their low optical absorption in the visible spectrum and also their high level of technological compatibility. Alan Heegar et al. have reported the effectiveness and stability of MoO3 as an anode interfacial transition metal oxide layer in BHJ devices as compared to highly conductive PEDOT:PSS. A study of transition metal oxides, comparing MoO3 with V2O5 as buffer layers in conventional BHJ structures, was presented by Yang Yang et al. They demonstrated that a MoO3 buffer layer provides much better performances over V2O5, which is furthermore highly toxic thus making it not suitable for any evaporation-, solution- or roll to roll-based polymer solar cell applications. Christoph J. Brabec et al. reported the solution processed WO3 nanoparticle based hole transport layer in conventional and inverted solar cell architecture. They illustrated the optimized performances of solar cells for different post-treatments like annealing at several temperatures and O2 plasma on a WO3 layer and then they compared the solar cell performances with a PEDOT:PSS based HTL. They also stated the application of a low temperature solution processed WO3 layer for flexible solar cell applications.
To date, the effectiveness and detailed study of thermally evaporated WO3 is not available in the solution processed inverted polymer BHJ solar cells using an anode interfacial layer.
In this study, we investigate WO3 as a transition metal oxide hole extraction layer for the inverted BHJ polymer solar cells. WO3 is well known to have interesting properties, possibly suitable for BHJ solar cell applications such as adequate electrical characteristics, high transparency, wide band-gap, and reasonable hole mobility. MoO3 was used as a buffer layer in inverted BHJ solar cells for valid comparison of device performances. The influence of such high work function and highly transparent transition metal oxides have been studied and discussed. Moreover, to check the effectiveness and reproducibility of these metal oxides in BHJ solar cells several devices have been fabricated using widely used photoactive layers and their device performance is compared.

Poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, indene-C60 bisadduct (ICBA), thieno[3,4-b]thiophene/benzodithiophene (PTB7) and [6,6]-phenyl C70-butyric acid methyl ester(PC70BM) were purchased from Luminescence Technology Corporation and used as received without further purification. All solvents 1,2-dichlorobenzene (99%, DCB), 2-methoxyethanol and monoethaloamine (MEA) were received from Sigma-Aldrich. The P3HT and ICBA were dissolved in 1,2-dichlorobenzene (DCB) at 1:0.6 concentration for 1.5 wt% and subsequently stirred overnight at room temperature in a nitrogen filled glove box. A blend solution of PTB7 and PC70BM was prepared in mixed solvents 1,2-diclorobenzene (99%, DCB) and 1,8-diiodoctane (DIO) at 97:3% and the solution concentration was 25 mg ml−1. The detailed process steps for preparation of ZnO sol–gel have been reported elsewhere. All solutions were filtered through a 0.45 μm polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) membrane filter prior to use.


The inverted polymer solar cells were fabricated on commercially available patterned Indium–Tin–Oxide (ITO) glass substrates having an active area of 0.2 × 0.2 cm2 with a sheet resistance of 15 Ω □−1. To fabricate the inverted polymer solar structure, patterned ITO coated glass substrates were cleaned sequentially with acetone, isopropyl alcohol (IPA), and deionized water and subsequently, treated in ultraviolet ozone (UVO) for 10 min. Primarily, a thin film of ZnO (∼30 nm) was spin coated onto the cleaned ITO substrates at 500 rpm followed by annealing at 150 °C for 30 min in an ambient atmosphere. Then the substrates were transferred to the nitrogen filled glove box for photoactive layer deposition. Successively, the photoactive layer of PTB7:PC70BM (∼80 nm) was spin-coated at 700 rpm on top of the ZnO layer in the nitrogen filled glove box. Afterward, the active layer coated substrates were transferred to a high vacuum pressure (∼3.0 × 10−7 Torr) thermal evaporation chamber and meanwhile a transition metal oxide layer of MoO3 and WO3 was thermally evaporated on two different devices (Device A and Device B) with a deposition rate of ∼0.3 Å s−1. Finally, devices were completed with the deposition of 100 nm Al at a rate of ∼2.5 Å s−1 by thermal evaporation without breaking the vacuum through a shadow mask. All devices were encapsulated by a transparent glass cover by using an UV curable epoxy as the sealing material in an N2-filled glove box.


All device measurements were carried out at room temperature and in an ambient environment. The photo-performance of fabricated devices was measured using a solar simulator with an Air Mass 1.5G irradiation intensity of 100 mW cm−2 and with a window slit of 4 mm2 area for illumination. A xenon light source was used to give a simulated irradiance of 100 mW cm−2 (equivalent to an AM1.5G irradiation) at the surface of the device. The External Quantum Efficiency (EQE) measurements were performed using the EQE system (Model 74000) obtained from Newport Oriel Instruments USA and a HAMAMATSU calibrated silicon cell photodiode was used as a reference diode. The wavelength was controlled with a monochromator in the range 200–1600 nm. The film thickness measurements were carried out using a surface profiler (Alpha step). The surface morphology study was done by using AFM in non-contact mode (XE-150, PSIA).


The performances of polymer BHJ solar cells strongly depend on the thickness of the photoactive layer, anode/cathode buffer layer and their surface morphology. The schematic of the inverted device structure and its energy level diagram are shown in Fig. 1. Here, we have optimized the thickness conditions of both active and buffer layers. The optimized thickness of the PTB7:PC70BM based photoactive layer was 80 nm while the thickness values for MoO3 and WO3 were found to be 10 and 5 nm, respectively. The optimal thickness of the MoO3 layer matches well with the reported optimal conditions.Fig. 2 shows the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the fabricated inverted polymer BHJ solar cell with MoO3 and WO3 as an anode interfacial layer, under simulated AM1.5G irradiation at an intensity of 100 mw cm−2. The photovoltaic characteristics were investigated for the following inverted polymer solar architectures with the two transition metal oxides here under study (i.e., MoO3 and WO3).

Device A: Glass/ITO/ZnO (∼30 nm)/PTB7:PC70BM (∼80 nm)/MoO3 (10 nm)/Al (100 nm).
Device B: Glass/ITO/ZnO (∼30 nm)/PTB7:PC70BM (∼80 nm)/WO3 (5 nm)/Al (100 nm).
The photo-characteristics of fabricated devices are summarized in Table 1. The performances of Device A with MoO3 as an anode buffer layer show a PCE of 6.48%. Device A illustrates an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.72 V, a short-circuit current (Jsc) of 13.54 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 67.44%. In contrast, Device B with WO3 as a buffer layer illustrates an improved PCE of 6.67% with a Voc of 0.72 V, a Jsc of 14.34 mA cm−2, and a FF of 64.19%. The photo-characteristics of Device B show a significant enhancement in the PCE over Device A. The major factor leading to performance improvement is mainly due to the short-circuit current enhancement. We have also evaluated the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of both fabricated inverted devices as displayed in spectra of Fig. 3. The EQE spectrum of Device B reveals a significant enhancement from 300 to 700 nm wavelength as compared with Device A. Device B shows an improved response of more than 55% from 420 to 650 nm wavelength with a maximum EQE value of 61.20% at 620 nm. Whereas, Device A exhibits an EQE of over 55% from 450 to 650 nm with a maximum value of ∼59.26% obtained at 620 nm. The absorption spectra (not shown here) of the photoactive layer show good agreement with this observed EQE spectra.
Device A
Device B

a 
V
oc: open circuit voltage, Jsc: short circuit current density, FF: fill factor, and Eff.: power conversion efficiency.


V
oc (V)
0.71
0.72

J
sc (mA cm−2)
13.54
14.34
FF (%)
67.44
64.19
Eff. (%)
6.48
6.67
We believe that the enhancement of the device performance is mainly due to the better contact at the anode side. Thus both morphological and electrical studies have been carried out to corroborate our argument. In order to investigate the morphology of these interfaces, both transition metal oxides on top of the photoactive layer (PTB7:PC70BM) were analyzed by using atomic force microscopy (AFM). Fig. 4 illustrates the AFM images of both MoO3 and WO3 cases. Cleaned bare glass substrates were used to prepare these AFM samples. Optimal thickness of 10 and 5 nm respectively for MoO3 and WO3 was thermally evaporated on top of the active layer. Granularities were observed on both studied oxide layer surfaces; however significant differences in the size and amount of grains were observed among all AFM-studied samples, showing influences of both oxide types and their relative thicknesses. First we confirmed that our predefined optimal thicknesses show smaller grain sizes, providing proof of a smoother interface. Samples with 5 and 10 nm of the MoO3 layer on PTB7:PC70BM exhibit root mean square (RMS) roughness values of 4.664 nm and 2.529 nm, respectively. In the case of 5 nm and 10 nm WO3 films, the RMS roughness was found to be 1.281 nm and 3.059 nm, respectively. Obviously, these results indicate that 5 nm WO3 deposited on the active layer exhibits better and smoother interface, as compared to 10 nm MoO3. It is also well known that a smooth surface would help to decrease both contact resistance and leakage current. Indeed, WO3 forms a worthy interface between the active layer and the metal electrode, which not only helps to decrease the contact resistance and leakage current but may also improve hole extraction and transporting characteristics of transition metal oxides. Thus, in order to investigate the quality of the ohmic contact between the photoactive layer and the metal anode, dark J–V characteristics of both Device A and Device B were carried out. Results shown in Fig. 5 are in good agreement with previous reported data.
Another expected reason explaining the increased Jsc of Device B over Device A is believed to be attributed to electrical properties, i.e. conductivity, of WO3. Thus we have fabricated hole-only devices for both transition metal oxides by using thermal deposition on patterned ITO glass substrates. The cell gap between the two horizontally patterned ITO electrodes and the final deposited area of transition metal oxides on ITO electrodes were 1.41 mm × 3.2 mm and 6.8 mm × 3.2 mm, respectively. Fig. 6 illustrates the J–V characteristics of the following device structures: ‘ITO(150 nm)/WO3(100 nm)/ITO’ and ‘ITO(150 nm)/MoO3(100 nm)/ITO’. The device with WO3 exhibits a slightly higher current density in the studied voltage range, as compared to the device with MoO3: ∼10−5 mA cm−2 for the device with WO3 and only ∼10−6 mA cm−2 for the device with MoO3. Further, the conductivity of both hole-only devices was calculated using I–V data and the estimated values were found to be ∼8.8 × 10−5 S cm−1 for the MoO3 device and ∼2.4 × 10−4 S cm−1 for the WO3 device. These estimations correlate with the already reported values, which are in the same order of magnitude. The device used for the measurement of conductivity can be used as a UV-photodetector; hence we also calculated the conductivity of both MoO3 and WO3 under AM1.5 illumination using I–V data. The estimated conductivity values are 0.11 S cm−1 and 0.35 S cm−1 for MoO3 and WO3 respectively. This enhanced conduction of WO3 as compared to MoO3 may explain for one part why WO3 seems to improve BHJ solar cells by enhancing the Jsc value.
Additionally, some explanations for the enhanced performances of cells using WO3 may also be based on the understanding of energy levels. The lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of PTB7 is known to be equal to 3.31 eV, while MoO3 and WO3 conduction energy levels are usually taken as equal to 2.3 eV and 1.6 eV respectively (see Fig. 1b). The higher energy barrier in between the PTB7 LUMO and the WO3 conduction band helps in preventing recombinations of holes and electrons at the interface between the active layer and the anode. Therefore it provides much better electron blocking properties as compared to MoO3. Moreover, the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy levels of PTB7 being equal to 5.15 eV, WO3 having a valence band of 5.10 eV seems to allow much better energy matching as compared to MoO3 which exhibits a valence band energy level of 5.3 eV. This energy level matching in between the studied photoactive layer of PTB7 and the WO3 buffer layer probably also plays an important role for explaining the better hole transporting properties of the BHJ solar cells using WO3.
Furthermore, in order to confirm the effectiveness of WO3 and MoO3, several inverted BHJ devices were fabricated using widely used photoactive layers P3HT:ICBA (Device C and Device D) and P3HT:PCBM (Device E and Device F) with optimized conditions of transition metal oxides (MoO3 and WO3). Consequently, light and dark characteristics of inverted BHJ devices were studied (light characteristics of all additional devices (see Fig. S1, S2, S4 and S5 in the ESI) and EQE (see Fig. S3 in the ESI) spectrum of Devices C and F shown in the ESI). Indeed all fabricated devices exhibit enhanced performances for WO3 as compared to MoO3. The performances of additional inverted BHJ solar cell devices for two different photoactive layers are summarised in Table 2.
P3HT:ICBA
P3HT:PCBM
WO3 (5 nm)
MoO3 (10 nm)
WO3 (5 nm)
MoO3 (10 nm)

a 
V
oc: open circuit voltage, Jsc: short circuit current density, FF: fill factor, and Eff.: power conversion efficiency.


V
oc (V)
0.86
0.86
0.58
0.59

J
sc (mA cm−2)
8.19
8.09
7.52
7.12
FF (%)
67.73
67.30
61.08
57.54
Eff. (%)
4.82
4.69
2.83
2.57
The air stability measurement is carried out for unencapsulated BHJ solar cells based on P3HT:ICBA with optimal thickness conditions of MoO3 and WO3. Fig. 7 shows the power conversion efficiency of Device C: Glass/ITO/ZnO (∼30 nm)/P3HT:ICBA (∼80 nm)/MoO3 (10 nm)/Al (100 nm) and of Device D: Glass/ITO/ZnO (∼30 nm)/P3HT:ICBA (∼80 nm)/WO3 (5 nm)/Al (100 nm) with respect to storage time in air under ambient conditions. Device D exhibits a slightly better and comparable air stability over Device C and also retains ∼78% of its original PCE values even after air storage for 700 h.

In summary, we have successfully demonstrated WO3 as an anode interfacial layer in efficient inverted polymer BHJ solar cells. The described inverted architecture using PTB7:PC70BM as the photoactive layer and WO3 as the anode buffer layer leads to an efficiency as high as 6.67%. The AFM study along with conductivity measurements reveals that the highly transparent thin layer of WO3 not only forms a smooth film surface on top of the photoactive layer but also helps to improve the electrical contact thus enhancing solar cell final performances. In conclusion, our results display comparable performances for WO3 and MoO3, hence formulating WO3 an efficient hole extraction and transport layer very promising for future organic electronic devices. Also, we believe that this study will help to provide an interesting alternative for replacing the commonly used PEDOT:PSS, which nowadays shows many drawbacks for commercialization of BHJ solar cells.


This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea Grant funded by the Korean Government (MSET) (NRF-2009-0093323).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta10863e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013