 DOI: 10.1039/C5CC07435E
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 210-213


K.
Narayanaswamy
,

A.
Venkateswararao
,

Vinay
Gupta
,

Suresh
Chand
 and 

Surya Prakash
Singh
*

Inorganic and Physical Chemistry Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Uppal Road, Tarnaka, Hyderabad-500007, India. E-mail: spsingh@iict.res.in

Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, CSIR-IICT, India

Organic and Hybrid Solar Cells, Physics of Energy Harvesting Division, CSIR-National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi-110012, India

Network Institute of Solar Energy, (CSIR-NISE) and Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), New Delhi, India

Received
4th September 2015
, Accepted 16th October 2015
First published on 16th October 2015
A new low band gap small molecule DPP–DTF with a D–π–A–π–D molecular structure composed of a dithiafulvalene (DTF) donor and a diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP) acceptor was synthesized and tested for organic solar cells. Using the DPP–DTF small molecule as an electron donor, and PC71BM as an acceptor a high power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 4.3% was achieved.

Organic photovoltaics (OPVs) have drawn immense attention in the field of energy demanding global services owing to their cheap production costs, large area and lightweight flexible panels and viability for easy solution processing methods. Although polymers are popular with a high power conversion efficiency (PCE) of ∼ 10%, small molecules have unique advantages such as well defined molecular structures with high purity, intermolecular arrangements known by crystallographic analysis, easy synthesis and purification methods, better batch-to-batch reproducibility, relatively high charge carrier mobility and a high open circuit voltage (VOC). Recently small molecules also reached the bench mark PCE of 10%, but it requires further boosting for commercial applications. However, small molecules suffer with poor film formation and morphology which can be minimized by incorporating long alkyl chains into the design and annealing the films, respectively. So far using a molecule with a push–pull architecture is the most efficient method to increase the PCE due to its narrow band gap and easy tuning of the HOMO and LUMO energy levels by simple modification of the donors (D) and acceptors (A). Recently, a variety of designs such as D–π–A, D–A–D, D–π–D, A–π–A and D–π–A–π–D were proven as high potential designs for high efficiency with linear, trigonal and X-shaped geometries.

The major challenge in achieving a higher PCE for OPVs is the increase of the short-circuit current density (JSC) which can be improved by introducing strong electron withdrawing chromophores into the molecular design leading to longer wavelength absorption, while the VOC and fill factor (ff) can be improved by interfacial engineering, morphology control of the device and selecting an efficient cathode layer. In this context, diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP) has created a range of OPVs with good efficiency owing to its NIR absorption, high molar extinction coefficients, thermal and photochemical stability, good charge transport properties and high co-planarity. DPP is mainly used as an acceptor end group or linking unit in the centre with architectures A–D–A or D–A–D and achieves a PCE of ∼ 7% which needs to be improved for commercial OPV applications by introducing suitable donors. Several small molecules have been reported with DPP in a D–A–D design with various donor units such as oligothiophene, triphenylamine, benzofuran and benzothiophene (BDT). Also, DPP has been used as an end group unit in an A–D–A design with several conjugate donor/linkers such as oligothiophene, carbazole, phenothiazine, dithienopyran, BDT, [2,2]paracyclophane, naphthodithiophene (NDT) and indacenodithiophene and it was found that electron rich units improved the donor–acceptor interactions leading to longer absorption and then higher JSC. Recently, Li and co-workers achieved promising efficiency with a high VOC by developing benzothiadiazole–triphenylamine based small molecules. Incorporation of an alkyl chain majorly influences the solubility, crystallization, molecular interactions and morphology and it depends on the nature of the alkyl chain like length, size, branching and symmetry. Yang et al. explored dithiafulvalene (DTF) as a donor unit for DSSCs and achieved a highest PCE of 8.3% due to its unique optoelectronic properties and effective charge separation but it was not used for OPVs; its alkyl chains also provide the aforementioned benefits for OPV applications.
In this context, we have designed and synthesized DPP–DTF (Scheme 1) by combining a DPP acceptor, a DTF donor and an oligothiophene π-linker in a D–π–A–π–D architecture to enhance the optical and photovoltaic properties. This small molecule displayed longer absorption wavelengths with suitable HOMO and LUMO energy levels with PC70BM to construct blends efficiently for achieving a high PCE. Interestingly, DPP–DTF has a very high thermal stability up to 290 °C when compared to reported DPP-based compounds. The synthesis strategy used to prepare DPP–DTF is demonstrated in Scheme 1 and the synthesis details are given in the ESI.DPP–DTF was synthesized in good yield via the Wittig–Horner reaction of DPP dialdehyde and DTF in the presence of P(OEt)3.

Fig. 1 illustrates the absorption spectra of DPP–DTF in dichloromethane (DCM), relevant data are compiled in Table 1, and it shows mainly two peaks. The high intensity peak in the lower energy region at 674 nm (ε = 84400 M−1 cm−1) is attributed to a charge transfer transition from the DTF donor to the DPP acceptor. The lower absorption peak at 380 nm arises from a localized π–π* transition of the conjugate back bone of the molecule. For DPP–DTF, an additional band appeared at 771 nm for the film which is attributed to strong π–π interactions in the solid state packing of the film. Absorption spectra of the blends with different ratios of PC70BM (Fig. 1) are red shifted and cover the broad region of 300–900 nm with tailing up to 1100 nm. New peaks appeared in the 300–500 nm range, originating from fullerene, and their intensity increased with increasing concentration of PC70BM. In DCM, DPP–DTF is moderately emitting in the NIR region at 740 nm. The photoluminescence (PL) is red shifted from polar to non-polar solvents while there is no change for the absorption spectra, which clearly indicates that the excited state is more polar when stabilized by polar solvents compared to the ground state (Fig. 2(a)).

λ
abs (nm) (ε × 103 M−1 cm−1)

λ
em (nm)

E
oxd (V)

E
red (V)
HOMO (eV)
LUMO (eV)

E
0–0 (eV)

a Redox potentials versus ferrocene as an external standard.
b Deduced from the oxidation potential using the formula HOMO = 4.8 + Eox.
c Deduced using the formula LUMO = 4.8 + Ered.
d Calculated from the HOMO and LUMO gap.

675 (84.4), 438 (23.5), 389 (35.4)
752
0.02 (63), 0.13 (76), 0.51 (64)
−1.55 (119)
4.82
3.25
1.57
In order to know about the charge separation and photo-induced electron transfer from DPP–DTF to PC70BM, the PL of DPP–DTF was measured in ortho-dichlorobenzene (ODCB) with increasing concentrations of PC70BM (Fig. 2(b)). The PL intensity of DPP–DTF decreased with increasing concentration of PC70BM, which clearly indicates the efficient photo-induced electron transfer to PC70BM. The PL emission of the blended film was quenched with a value of 94% efficiency relative to pure DPP–DTF in solution. Stern–Volmer quenching constants were calculated using the equation F0/F = 1 + KSV[PC70BM], where F0 and F are emission intensities in the absence and presence of PC70BM, respectively and KSV is the Stern–Volmer quenching constant. A high KSV value of 7235 M−1 obtained for the DPP–DTF donor indicates that it has a high binding affinity towards the quencher i.e. PC70BM.
In order to scrutinize the redox properties of DPP–DTF, we measured the cyclic voltammogram in DCM (shown in ESI) and it showed one quasi-reversible reduction peak attributed to the reduction of the DPP unit and multiple oxidation peaks corresponding to the removal of an electron from the DTF and oligo-thiophene units, respectively. The HOMO and LUMO energy levels of DPP–DTF are 4.82 eV and 3.25 eV vs. vacuum, respectively. The LUMO–LUMO offset of DPP–DTF and PC70BM is 0.75 eV, which is enough for efficient exciton dissociation and charge separation at the donor–acceptor interface.
TDDFT calculations performed with the most reliable method for D–A compounds, named as BMK/DGDZVP using the PCM model (DCM phase), showed the HOMO is located on the whole molecule and the LUMO is mainly located on DPP (Fig. 3(b)), which clearly indicates that the charge transfer transition arises from the DTF donor to the DPP acceptor. The computed absorption wavelengths closely match the experimental values in DCM (Table S1, ESI).
OPVs based on DPP–DTF with a configuration of ITO/MoOx/DPP–DTF:PC70BM/Al were fabricated with an active layer (100 nm) of the DPP–DTF donor and the PC70BM acceptor in different ratios, the detailed device fabrication procedure is given in the ESI and the preliminary results are compiled in Table 2. J–V curves and EQE of the devices based on DPP–DTF:PC70BM are shown in Fig. 4(a) and (b), respectively. Devices based on blend ratios of 1:1 and 1:1.5 show EQEs > 40% in the region of 320–710 nm and the latter one has a better EQE with tailing up to 850 nm, while the blend with a 1:2 ratio has a high EQE in the UV region but poor EQE in the visible region and it is consistent with the absorption spectra recorded for the thin film. The device composed of the DPP–DTF:PC70BM blend in a weight ratio of 1:1.5 gave the highest PCE of 4.30% with a JSC of 12.24 mA cm−2, VOC of 0.69 V and ff of 0.51 attributed to its highest JSC when compared to the blends with various ratios of PC70BM (1:1 and 1:2). The ratio of D and A in the active layer strongly influences the JSC and VOC. The increase of the acceptor ratio decreased the JSC and VOC and revealed that the optimum ratio for D and A is 1:1.5. The JSC calculated from the integration of the EQE spectrum is in good agreement (ca. 2% error) with the JSC obtained from the J–V curve.
Active layer (DPP–DTF:PC70BM)

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
ff
PCE (%)
1:1
0.69
10.69
0.47
3.50
1:1.5
0.69
12.24
0.51
4.30
1:2
0.64
9.93
0.43
2.70
To gain a deeper understanding about the morphology of the active layer (DPP–DTF:PC70BM) made with various ratios, which closely affect the PCE of OPVs, we investigated and compared the morphologies using atomic force microscopy (AFM) (Fig. 5). The root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of the blends (DPP–DTF:PC70BM) increases in the order of 1:1.5 (1.3 nm) < 1:1 (1.9 nm) < 1:2 (2.6 nm), clearly indicating that the D and A ratio affects the morphology and domain size of the blend. The blend DPP–DTF:PC70BM (1:1.5) might form effective bi-continuous D–A nano-scale networks which favor high JSC and PCE compared to other blends, attributed to generated excitons in the small domain of the blend efficiently reaching the D–A interface.
In conclusion, we have designed and synthesized a D–π–A–π–D type small molecule (DPP–DTF) composed of a diketopyrrolopyrrole acceptor and a dithiafulvalene donor, which showed intense absorption bands in the visible and NIR regions in solution spectra and showed a broad absorption spectrum for blends with PC70BM in different ratios. A device based on DPP–DTF showed a preliminary PCE of 4.3% for a blend ratio of 1:1.5 with PC70BM. We are further studying the optimization of blending in various solvents and with cathode alteration to improve the PCE, since the optimization of these two processes strongly influences the photovoltaic performance.
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from CSIR-TAPSUN (NWP-0054). KN thanks CSIR for providing the senior research fellowship. SPS thanks Dr Ramanuj Narayan and Dr L. Giribabu for helpful discussions.
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cc07435e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016