 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA00551J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6467-6474


Naveed Ur
Rahman
,

Wasim Ullah
Khan
,

Shaukat
Khan
,

Xiaojie
Chen
,

Javid
Khan
,

Juan
Zhao
*,

Zhiyong
Yang
,

Mingmei
Wu
* and 

Zhenguo
Chi
*

PCFM Lab, GD HPPC Lab, Guangdong Engineering Technology Research Center for High-performance Organic and Polymer Photoelectric Functional Films, State Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Material and Technologies, School of Chemistry, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, PR China. E-mail: zhaoj95@mail.sysu.edu.cn; ceswmm@mail.sysu.edu.cn; chizhg@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Received
16th January 2019
, Accepted 17th February 2019
First published on 18th February 2019
Metal halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have been studied over the past few years and high power conversion efficiency (PCE) has been achieved. However, the adverse instability remains a key factor restricting wider application of PSCs. Herein, we report, for the first time, a viable strategy to incorporate a down conversion nanophosphor Sr2CeO4:Eu3+ (SCOE) into PSCs, and more importantly SCOE enables the PSCs with improvement in photovoltaic performance and UV-light stability. The SCOE-coated PSCs achieve a high current density of 23.70 mA cm−2 and a high PCE of 18.95%, which are increased by 9% and 14.15%, respectively, when compared to those of control devices (without an SCOE layer). Moreover, the SCOE-based PSCs retain 80% of their initial PCE value after 70 hours under UV-light irradiation and retain 78% of their initial PCE value after 75 days under ambient environment with 20–25% relative humidity. These results suggest that the incorporated SCOE down conversion material is a functional component of PSCs which broadens the solar spectral response, improving photovoltaic performance, and reduces UV-light-induced photodegradation by converting UV light to visible light, prolonging the device stability.

Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have recently attracted immense research interest owing to the exceptional optoelectronic properties of organo-lead halide perovskite materials including high charge carrier mobility, high absorption coefficient and extended carrier recombination time. These excellent features have led to power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of 22.1–23.3% for perovskite solar cells. However, the insurmountable challenge for researchers is the compromised stability of PSCs under illumination and under moist conditions. Scientists have achieved considerable success in addressing the issue of long-term stability under moist conditions, however, progress regarding improvement in the light stability of PSCs is still of great importance and also in high demand. The light instability of PSC devices is mainly related to, on the one hand, decomposition of the perovskite layer due to the light illumination induced organic CH3NH3+ ions and, on the other hand, UV-light induced oxygen defects and vacancies which ultimately result in low performance. Therefore, there is high potential for improving the light stability of PSCs by decreasing the UV proportion of the incident light on the perovskite layer.

Lanthanide luminescence materials, typically known as down conversion (DC) materials, can convert high energy UV photons into low energy visible light photons. In this regard, these DC materials could be ideal candidates for extending the spectral response range of PSCs to the UV region to make use of more incident photons and also for preventing the UV decomposition of perovskite materials. In fact, these DC materials have been successfully applied in organic solar cells, quantum dot solar cells and dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) for performance improvement. For instance, a 60% improvement in PCE and enhanced stability were realized in a DSSC when coated with the DC material V570. However, the application of DC materials in PSCs for improving light harvesting and UV-light stability is a relatively new and intriguing field. The insertion of a DC material into the device architecture can not only contribute to increased light harvesting through absorption of the down-converted photons by the active perovskite layer, but also affect the charge carrier transportation and recombination process in the devices. Until now a few down conversion materials have been introduced in PSCs, among which europium (Eu)-based materials are some of the most efficient down-converting materials. For example, with the employment of down conversion CeO4:Eu3+ nanophosphors in PSCs, a 6.9% improvement of PCE was obtained while the PCE decreased by 32% within a short span of 50 min under UV-light irradiation. Another Y2O3:Eu3+ DC material was introduced in PSCs which resulted in a 5.9% increase in PCE and 60% of the initial value was retained after 24 h UV irradiation. From this standpoint, there is a high demand for effective strategies to enable simultaneous improvement in photovoltaic performance and UV-light stability of PSCs, which is still an important challenge.
In the present study, a newly synthesized Eu-based DC material (SCOE) was introduced in PSCs for increasing light harvesting and preventing UV-light induced degradation. In comparison to previously reported Eu DC materials, the SCOE material exhibited a bluer absorption spectrum in the UV region, which is beneficial for preventing the PSCs from photo-degradation caused by the UV-light and thus prolonging the device stability. Meanwhile, the neat SCOE film was introduced as a single functional layer inside the configuration of the PSCs, rather than as an external coating layer or a composite layer mixed with TiO2, which not only simplified device fabrication but also is applicable for PSCs with different configuration types. Compared to SCOE-free control PSCs, the SCOE-based PSCs showed reduced current–voltage hysteresis, and higher short-circuit current density (JSC) and fill factor (FF), enabling the PCE increase from 16.60% to 18.95%. Significantly, the SCOE-based devices showed excellent long-term stability under both UV-light irradiation and open environment conditions, demonstrating the multifunctional nature of the down conversion SCOE material.

All solvents and reagents were commercially available in pure form and used without further purification. Cerium oxide (CeO2), europium oxide (Eu2O3), and strontium carbonate (SrCO3) were purchased from Aladdin. Lead(II) iodide, dimethyl sulfoxide, lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulphonyl) imide (Li-TFSI), 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) and titanium isopropoxide were purchased from Aldrich. Methylammonium iodide and Spiro-OMeTAD were obtained from Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Co. Ltd., and acetylacetonate, N,N-dimethylformamide, ethanol and chlorobenzene were from Sinopharm. Details of device fabrication and characterization are provided in the ESI.


The europium-based down conversion Sr2CeO4:Eu3+ (SCOE) nanophosphor material was synthesized via a solid-state reaction method. The reactants were as follows: SrCO3 (A.R. grade), Na2CO3 (A.R. grade), Eu2O3 (99.99%) and Ce2O3 (99.99%). Materials in designed stoichiometric composition were thoroughly mixed and ground by using a pestle in an agate mortar. Subsequently, the well-ground mixture was transferred to an alumina crucible and calcined at 1150 °C for 3 h in an air atmosphere. Finally, the obtained SCOE nanophosphor was ground again and used for further measurements. The morphology and structure of the SCOE and PSCs (surface and cross-sectional), and the energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) spectrum of the SCOE were investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, FEI, Quanta450 FEG), X-ray diffraction (XRD, Bruker D8 advance with Cu Kα radiation), high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) (FEI Tecnai G2 Spirit), and UV-vis absorption spectra were detected using a UV-vis spectrometer (Hitachi U-3900). The photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the SCOE nanophosphors were examined using a fluorescence spectrophotometer (RF-5301PC). The roughness of the films was characterized by atomic force microscopy (AFM, Bruker Multimode 8 SPM system). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were performed by using an ESCALAB 250Xi (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The diffused reflectance spectrum (DRS) was obtained from optical diffuse reflectance measurements on a UV-visible-NIR spectrometer (Carry-5000). Cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements were carried out on an electrochemical workstation, VMP300 (Bio-Logic), by using tetrabutylammoniumhexafluorophosphate (TBAPF6, 0.1 M) in dichloromethane as the electrolyte, a platinum wire as the counter electrode, and a Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode (versus ferrocene Fc/Fc+).


The HRTEM (Fig. 1a) and SAED (Fig. 1b) analyses demonstrate the highly crystalline nature of the SCOE material, while the XRD pattern (Fig. 1c) shows the orthorhombic crystalline nature of the SCOE material with crystal diffraction peaks at 17°, 29.5°, 39.5°, 42.3°, and 53.1° and 60°, corresponding to (110) (111), (211), (221), (151) and (132) crystal planes, respectively, indicating a high degree of crystallinity. The energy dispersive spectrum (EDS) mapping confirms the presence of host materials and the dopant Eu (Fig. S1). The speciation of near-surface atoms of Sr2CeO4:Eu3+ was characterized by XPS measurement (Fig. 1d), showing a surface elemental composition of O, Ce, Sr and Eu (see Fig. S2 for details). As depicted in Fig. 1e, the UV-vis absorption spectrum of SCOE shows that the absorption of the SCOE thin film is in the range of the UV region with an absorption peak at ∼280 nm, which is in good agreement with the transmission spectrum of the SCOE thin film (Fig. S3). The down-conversion PL spectrum of the SCOE film is shown in Fig. 1f, where the characteristic peaks for Eu3+ are clearly observed at 584, 615, 654, and 704 nm, indicating electronic transitions from the excited level 5D0 → 7F1, 5D0 → 7F2, 5D0 → 7F3, and 5D0 → 7F4, respectively. The strongest emission intensity observed was from the 5D0 → 7F2 transition, indicating the absence of inversion symmetry at the Eu3+ ion site in the crystal lattice; otherwise, in the presence of inversion symmetry the dominant transition is the magnetic dipole transition 5D0 → 7F1. Besides, the PL emission of the SCOE film not only stems from the lowest 5D0 excited levels but also from higher energy levels of Eu3+ (5D1 and 5D2) with weaker intensity. CeO4 groups show low energy vibration which leads to the emission from the higher excited states of Eu3+. The weaker red emission from the higher energy levels is mainly due to the inability of CeO4 to cause multiphonon relaxation to bridge the gaps between these levels and the 5D0 level of Eu3+.


As a proof of concept, PSCs were fabricated through introduction of the SCOE material. The schematic configuration of the PSCs is shown in Fig. 2a, which consists of fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) as the anode, compact TiO2 (c-TiO2) as the electron transport layer (ETL), a thin layer of SCOE down conversion material, the (CsFAMA)Pb(BrI)3 perovskite layer, Spiro-OMeTAD as the hole transport layer (HTL) and a Ag cathode with a thickness of 560 nm, 30 nm, 150 nm, 440 nm, 80 nm and 130 nm, respectively. The energy band gap (Eg) of the SCOE nanophosphor was estimated to be 2.96 eV from the DRS measurement represented by the Kubelka–Munk function plot (Fig. S4a), while its valence band and conduction band were determined to be 7.1 and 4.2 eV, respectively, from the CV characteristics (Fig. S4b). At the same time, the energy bands of FTO, TiO2, perovskite, Spiro-OMeTAD and Au (5.1 eV) are taken from a previous report. The PSCs’ configuration can also be confirmed from the cross-sectional SEM image (Fig. S5). When the FTO side is irradiated with sunlight, the visible portion of the solar spectrum passes through FTO and SCOE layers and then the visible photons are absorbed by the perovskite layer; meanwhile, the UV photons can be absorbed by the SCOE layer and then re-emitted as low-energy visible photons which in turn are absorbed by the perovskite layer. For comparison, control PSCs without the SCOE layer were also fabricated. Fig. 2b shows the J–V curves of the devices with and without the SCOE layer, and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table 1. As shown by the J–V curves, the best-performing control device shows a JSC of 21.80 mA cm−2, open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.04 V, and FF of 73.40% in reverse scan, leading to a PCE of 16.60%. In contrast, the SCOE-based device achieves a PCE of 18.95% in reverse scan, along with a JSC of 23.70 mA cm−2, VOC of 1.06 V and FF of 75.50%. Meanwhile, as learned from the statistical histogram of 78 SCOE cells and 78 control cells (Fig. 2c), the SCOE devices present an enhancement of 11.8% in average PCE. Moreover, the SCOE-based PSCs exhibit much improved PCE compared to our previous PSCs incorporated with a samarium (Sm)-based DC material, indicating great effectiveness of the SCOE DC material, which is due to the Eu3+ ions exhibiting higher absorption efficiency and higher conversion efficiency of UV light, and thus the Eu-based DC material is expected to absorb UV light and convert it into visible light as much as possible. At the same time, it is clear that the SCOE device hardly exhibits hysteresis while the control device shows obvious hysteresis. The hysteresis index (HI) of the devices is given by formula (1):

(1)
wherein PCE
reverse and PCEforward are the PCEs determined from the reverse and forward J–V curves, respectively. According to formula (1), the HI values for the control and the SCOE-based devices are calculated to be 0.073 and 0.029, respectively, and are listed together with the photovoltaic parameters. The low HI of the SCOE-based devices suggests that the introduction of the SCOE layer is very helpful for reducing hysteresis, which is attributed to the reduced defects in the perovskite film and the decrease in the trap density.

Device
Scan

J
SC [mA cm−2]

V
OC [V]
FF [%]
PCE [%]

R
s [Ω cm−2]

R
sh [Ω cm−2]
HI
Control
Reverse
21.80
1.04
73.40
16.60
1.95
1089
0.073
Forward
21.74
1.00
71.20
15.47
SCOE
Reverse
23.70
1.06
75.53
18.95
2.04
2164
0.029
Forward
23.50
1.05
74.80
18.40
It is observed from Fig. 2d that there is a clear difference in IPCE from 300–400 nm as the SCOE device exhibits higher IPCE than the control device, which is confirmed by the increase in the integrated JSC from 21.40 mA cm−2 for the control device to 22.75 mA cm−2 for the SCOE device. The presence of the SCOE layer which converts high energy photons (UV light) to lower energy photons (visible light) accounts for the improved IPCE and integrated JSC. Stabilized power output measurements were also carried out by holding the voltage at the maximum power point. As plotted in Fig. 2e, the control device shows a steady-state PCE of 16.15% with a steady-state JSC of 20.08 mA cm−2. Meanwhile, the SCOE-based device achieves a steady-state PCE of 18.20% with a steady-state JSC of 22.06 mA cm−2. These results are in good agreement with the small hysteresis and also verify the PCE obtained from the J–V curves.

The increase in JSC and VOC for the SCOE-based device is mainly due to the following reasons. First, the SCOE nanophosphors absorb UV light and convert it into visible light which in turn is easily absorbed by the perovskite layer leading to increased light harvesting and ultimately resulting in an increase in the JSC of the device. The increased JSC can also be evidenced from the UV-visible absorption spectra of two samples, FTO/c-TiO2/SCOE/perovskite and FTO/c-TiO2/perovskite (Fig. 3a), and the former exhibits enhanced absorption in the UV region compared to the latter, demonstrating more efficient utilization of the solar light by employment of the SCOE layer. Second, previous studies have shown that the introduction of a scaffold or mesoporous layer into the PSCs provides a large interfacial contact area enabling efficient and faster dissociation of photogenerated electrons and also contributes to transport and collection of electrons. The SCOE layer on FTO/c-TiO2 leads to an increase in recombination time and carrier transmission distance from the perovskite to the ETL layer reducing charge carrier recombination occurring at the c-TiO2/perovskite interface, and also hinders the reverse electron transfer from the ETL to the perovskite layer leading to a significant increase in the FF and VOC values. The series resistance (Rs) and shunt resistance Rsh are calculated from the J–V curves (Table 1), where Rs is similar but markedly increased Rsh is observed after introducing the SCOE layer. This observation implies that shunting current is efficiently protected by the SCOE layer, which is responsible for the high FF. Furthermore, the dark current curves (Fig. 3b) indicate a higher VOC for the SCOE-based device, compared to that of the control device.

Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed to further study the internal charge carrier recombination behavior in the devices. Fig. 3c shows the Nyquist plots for the control and SCOE-based devices, measured under dark conditions at an applied bias voltage of 0.8 V. By fitting the EIS results, an equivalent circuit diagram is shown in Fig. S6. In contrast to the control device, the SCOE-based device has the highest recombination resistance (Rrec) determined using the width of the semicircles at lower frequency, which is associated with the resistance of the SCOE/perovskite interface. And the charge transfer resistance (Rs) is the resistance at higher frequency at the Spiro-OMeTAD/Au electrode. A large Rrec means that the charge-carrier recombination is suppressed at the SCOE/perovskite interface, thus promoting electron and hole extraction at this interface. The suppression of charge-carrier recombination can also be evidenced from the reduced PL intensity of the SCOE-based device, in comparison to that of the control device (Fig. 3d). Furthermore, time-resolved PL measurements of TiO2/perovskite and SCOE/perovskite films were performed (Fig. S7), and the curves can be fitted well by a single exponential decay. In comparison to the TiO2/perovskite film, the SCOE/perovskite film exhibits a shorter decay time, which suggests less trap-assisted recombination at the SCOE/perovskite interface and therefore benefiting efficient electron transfer from the perovskite to SCOE, and these findings are in good agreement with the impedance results. AFM measurements were conducted to evaluate the surface morphologies of the perovskite films when coated on either the SCOE or TiO2 layer. The morphology of the perovskite film coated on the SCOE layer is obviously smooth with a root mean square roughness of 13.4 nm, which is highly enlarged to 29.7 nm for the perovskite film coated on the TiO2 layer (Fig. S8a and b). These results are well consistent with the fact that the SCOE film exhibits lower surface roughness than the TiO2 film (Fig. S7c and d). The uniform surface morphology of the SCOE film is beneficial for the formation of a uniform perovskite film, resulting in the perovskite with a large grain size of 1.1 μm as observed from the top view of the SEM image (Fig. S9). In this regard, a good interfacial contact between the SCOE/perovskite interface is expected, enabling high VOC and FF in PSCs. Therefore, the suppressed charge recombination and efficient charge extraction, as well as a uniform perovskite film and good interface contact are advantageous for improving the VOC and FF of the SCOE-based device.

Moreover, the effect of SCOE thickness on device performance of the PSCs is investigated, as shown in Fig. 4 and summarized in Table S1. It is observed from Fig. 4a that the PCE is enhanced when the thickness of the SCOE layer increases from 0 to 150 nm, as the charge recombination chances are decreased to a certain limit with the film optimization. With further increase in the SCOE thickness, the PCE starts to decrease. The PCE drops to half of its initial value at a SCOE thickness of 235 nm and then gradually declines, which could be attributed to the high dependence of light harvesting and series resistance on the SCOE thickness in the PSCs. On the one hand, light harvesting can be enhanced by increasing the SCOE thickness to efficiently down convert the UV light into visible light. On the other hand, light harvesting is also affected by the transmission of incident light. As the SCOE thickness is increased, the transmission of light to the (CsFAMA)Pb(BrI)3 layer is decreased, as a result light harvesting is decreased (Fig. S10). The transmission spectra are consistent with the corresponding UV-vis absorption spectra with a peak at 280 nm as plotted in Fig. S11, wherein gradually enhanced absorption is observed as the SCOE thickness is increased. The thickness of the SCOE layer also affects the series resistance because it can block electron transfer from (CsFAMA)Pb(BrI)3 to the c-TiO2 layer. As the SCOE thickness increases, the series resistance is gradually increased (Fig. 4a) and leads to a decreased PCE. In detail, the JSC, VOC and FF decrease as the SCOE thickness increases from 150 to 500 nm (Fig. 4b), ascribing to decreased transmission and increased series resistance. Thereby, the optimized SCOE thickness is 150 nm for effective light harvesting, lower series resistance and better transmission of the devices.


To date, device stability is still a great issue for PSCs, and high stability is critical for their commercial applications. For unencapsulated control and SCOE devices, the moisture stability is investigated under an open environment with a relative humidity of 25–30% at a temperature of 20–25 °C. As shown in Fig. 5a, the SCOE-based PSC retains over 72% of its initial PCE after 75 days, while the control device is degraded by more than 55% in the same duration. As seen from the optical images of the perovskite films with and without the SCOE layer when freshly made and then exposed to a highly relative humidity of 85–90% at about 25 °C, the perovskite film without the SCOE layer (control sample) almost decomposes after 20 days (Fig. 5b), which is related to the unstable nature and rapid degradation in the ambient environment of the perovskite material, leading to considerably decreased absorption for the perovskite film (Fig. 5c). On the other hand, the SCOE-coated perovskite film (SCOE sample) demonstrates a relatively stable film morphology even after 20 days of exposure (Fig. 5b), and presents obvious absorption to some extent (Fig. 5d). In comparison to the control PSCs, the better device stability of the SCOE-based PSCs can also be evidenced from the PCE performance measured at room temperature in a glovebox filled with N2 (Fig. S12). The SCOE-based device retains more than 78% of its initial PCE after 75 days while the control device retains 69% of its initial PCE. These results suggest a reduced amount of traps in the SCOE-based devices and subsequently suppressed trap-assisted nonradiative recombination, contributing to improved long-term stability when compared to the control devices.


A previous study has reported that the absorption coefficient of the perovskite material in the UV region is 105 cm−1, which is comparatively larger than the 104 cm−1 in the visible region. However, the absorption of the perovskite film decreases rapidly when kept under UV light irradiation, but remains relatively stable under visible light, due to the perovskite decomposition caused by UV-light irradiation. Therefore, it is of great importance to produce PSCs with high UV-light stability. Here, to investigate the UV-light stability of the PSCs, the control and the SCOE-based PSCs were kept under continuous 365 nm UV-light irradiation for 70 h. As shown in Fig. 6a, for the case of the control PSC, it retains only 40% of its initial PCE value after 70 h of UV-light irradiation. Surprisingly, the SCOE-based PSC retains 80% of its initial PCE under the same experimental conditions, presenting excellent UV-light stability. As learned from Fig. 6b–d, both the VOC and JSC of the control PSC are quite stable against aging time, whereas the degradation rate of FF is relatively more pronounced than that of the SCOE-based PSC. The SCOE-based PSC exhibits a much more stable FF because the SCOE layer can protect the perovskite layer from UV-light-induced degradation and subsequent pinhole-induced recombination. These results are further evidenced by UV-light stability measurements for 10 control PSC cells and 10 SCOE-based PSC cells, which were all kept under 365 nm UV-light irradiation for 70 h, and the detailed results are displayed in Fig. S13 and Table S2. Therefore, the introduction of the SCOE layer, which down converts UV light to visible light and thus suppresses photodegradation of the perovskite layer, plays a critical role in the significant improvement in the photostability of the SCOE-based PSCs.


In summary, we report a facile strategy to simultaneously improve the photovoltaic performance and device stability of perovskite solar cells by employment of a novel Sr2CeO4:Eu3+ (SCOE) down conversion nanophosphor material. Due to the introduction of the SCOE layer, which can down convert a broad band of UV light to visible light for enhanced light harvesting, higher PCE (18.95%) and especially higher JSC (23.70 mA cm−2) and FF (75.53%) are realized, compared to those of the control device (without SCOE). Importantly, the SCOE-based PSCs can withstand 75 days of storage under ambient environment and 70 hours under UV-light irradiation, while retaining 80% of the initial PCE value, and the suppressed photo-loss and photo-degradation due to the SCOE layer are mainly responsible for the excellent long-term stability and UV-light stability. These results suggest that the Sr2CeO4:Eu3+ down conversion material is promising for achieving high-performance PSCs with excellent durability to meet requirements for practical applications.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the NSFC (51733010, 61605253, 21672267 and 51773230, 51672315), Joint Funds of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC)-Yunnan and Guangdong Provinces (U1702254, U1301242), Science and Technology Planning Project of Guangdong (2015B090913003), Special Fund of Guangdong Province Project for Applied Science and Technology Research and Development (No. 2017B090917001), Science and Technology Planning Project of Guangzhou City (No. 201704030020) and Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta00551j
‡ Naveed Ur Rahman and Wasim Ullah Khan contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019