 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA02868K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12447-12454


Young Yun
Kim
,

Eun Young
Park
,

Tae-Youl
Yang
,

Jun Hong
Noh
,

Tae Joo
Shin
,

Nam Joong
Jeon
 and 

Jangwon
Seo
*

Division of Advanced Materials, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT), 141 Gajeong-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34114, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jwseo@krict.re.kr

School of Civil, Environmental and Architectural Engineering, Korea University, 145 Anam-ro, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea

UNIST Central Research Facilities & School of Natural Science, UNIST, 50 UNIST-gil, Eonyang-eup, Ulju-gun, Ulsan 44919, Republic of Korea

Received
28th March 2018
, Accepted 1st June 2018
First published on 4th June 2018
As the efficiency of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) reached more than 22%, the large-area fabrication of PSCs became another issue receiving growing attention. For large-area PSCs, more reproducibility is required to precisely control the crystallization behavior of perovskites. A two-step process has been preferred to apply large-area coatings of perovskite because of its better reproducibility, but the process has suffered from slow and incomplete conversion of PbI2 to perovskite. In this paper, we propose a fast, simple, two-step method—mediator extraction treatment (MET)—for the preparation of a high-quality perovskite film. In MET, a pre-deposited PbI2–DMSO complex film is converted into a peculiar PbI2 film with a porous morphology and unusual crystallographic orientation via the removal of DMSO. PbI2 could be completely converted into MAPbI3 by a fast reaction with MAI molecules. We demonstrate that this MET process in MAPbI3-based PSCs can achieve 18.8% of the maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) using spin-coating, and 18.3% of the maximum PCE using slot-die coating with a uniform distribution in a 10 ×10 cm2 substrate at a laboratory scale. Moreover, over 18% of PCE could be achieved in only 100 s, and with room-temperature processing.

Organometallic halide perovskite materials have attracted growing attention as new light-harvesting materials due to their superior optoelectronic properties, such as high absorption coefficient, long carrier diffusion length, ambipolar charge transport and solution processability. Recent rapid progress in perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has achieved a high efficiency of over 22%, thanks to tremendous efforts in composition engineering, optimization of the interlayer, and control of crystallization. In addition to quality improvement in the perovskite film, a large-area-compatible and rapid process for the fabrication of perovskite films is currently required to achieve mass production of commercial solar modules.

Among various fabrication methods, solvent engineering and two-step sequential deposition are representative techniques for yielding perovskite films. The solvent engineering process uses a mediator such as dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) to retard the fast crystallization of the precursors to perovskite. Then, an excess amount of anti-solvent is rapidly applied to remove the mediator from the intermediate film. However, because the initial nucleation and subsequent crystal growth occur within several seconds, it is difficult to achieve high reproducibility, especially for large areas. In contrast, two-step sequential deposition employs the prior deposition of PbI2 film on the substrate and the sequential solid-state reaction of the PbI2 with methylammonium iodide (MAI) molecules for conversion to perovskite film. Thus, two-step deposition is considered to be a more controllable and reliable method for large-area application with high uniformity. However, a long reaction time of over an hour is usually needed for complete conversion of the PbI2 layer to perovskite for the two-step process, because MAI molecules must react with a compact, highly crystalline PbI2 film, starting from the surface to the inner lattices by intercalating the gaps between PbI2 crystal layers.
Several approaches have been proposed for the fast and simple fabrication of perovskite with modified two-step deposition by controlling the morphology of the PbI2 film. The morphological change in the PbI2 film into a macroscopically porous scaffold enabled faster preparation of the perovskite by providing a large surface area for the solid reaction with MAI molecules. Such a porous structure was commonly introduced by the formation of a PbI2 complex with a specific Lewis base or coordinating molecules and subsequent solvent extraction for removal of the binding molecules from the PbI2. However, the layered, crystalline PbI2 film still has a highly ordered structure. The evolution of a less-ordered structure of PbI2 is expected to be critical for the much faster preparation of a perovskite film that will be suitable for roll-to-roll production to achieve commercial PSCs.
In this paper, we propose a new two-step processing technique, namely, mediator extraction treatment (MET), suitable for a large-area, rapid roll-to-roll process. A PbI2–DMSO film was first deposited, then DMSO mediators were extracted efficiently and rapidly by optimizing the casting solvent and anti-solvent. The PbI2 film was formed within seconds, and had a porous morphology with a relatively randomized crystal orientation. These features contributed to a fast and complete conversion of PbI2 to a pin-hole-free MAPbI3 film. The corresponding solar cells had 18.8% maximum efficiency under optimum conditions. In addition, only 100 s of processing time was needed to achieve a maximum PCE of 18.1%. Moreover, the solar cells fabricated by room-temperature processing had an 18.2% maximum PCE. MET was also applied to slot-die coating on a 10 × 10 cm2 substrate to ensure large-area compatibility. The slot-die coated cells achieved a comparable maximum PCE of 18.3% with a uniform PCE distribution over the entire area of the film.

Lead iodide (PbI2, TCI) was dissolved in DMF:DMSO (9:1) with a concentration of 0.6 g mL−1. The amount of DMSO was adjusted to have a small excess molar amount over PbI2. The solution was then filtered through a 0.2 μm PTFE syringe filter to remove any aggregated particles and dust. The PbI2–DMSO films were formed by spin-casting of the solution at 2000 rpm for 30 s. The films were then immediately dipped in anhydrous 2-propanol (IPA, Sigma-Aldrich) with subsequent blowing with compressed air in order to remove excess IPA from the film. The resulting PbI2 films were dipped into a solution of CH3NH3I (MAI, Greatcell Solar Ltd.) mixed with CH3NH3Cl (MACl, Sigma-Aldrich, 25 wt% with respect to MAI) in IPA to convert them to perovskite. The films were rinsed with IPA twice to remove any excess MAI from the surface. The remaining IPA was removed by air blowing, then the perovskite films were placed on a hot plate at 100 °C. For the slot-die coating, a table-top slot-die coater (PMC-200, PEMS, South Korea) was used. A PbI2–DMSO complex (0.3 g mL−1) was deposited at a rate of 10 mm s−1 with a gap of 100 μm. The films were blown by an air-knife equipped with the slot-die coater before it was immersed in the IPA bath. The rest of the procedure was the same as that for spin-coated films.


F-doped SnO2 glasses (FTO, Pilkington TEC-15) were cleaned by ultrasonication in detergent, DI-water, and ethanol for 30 min each before use. An SnO2 layer was formed by sequential spin-coating of SnO2 nanoparticles (Alfa Aesar, 20 wt% in water) and SnCl4·5H2O (Sigma-Aldrich) solutions. First, 2.67% of SnO2 nanoparticles dispersed in water were spin-coated at 2000 rpm for 30 s. The substrates were then annealed at 150 °C for 30 min. As the next step, SnCl4·5H2O in IPA was spin-casted at 2000 rpm for 30 s. The subsequent films were annealed at 180 °C for 1 h. The perovskite layers were deposited on the substrate by the aforementioned MET or heat treatment of PbI2–DMSO. In order to fabricate the perovskite layer by heat treatment, PbI2–DMSO solution (0.6 g ml−1) was spin-coated and then annealed at 70 °C for 30 min. The resulting PbI2 films were immersed in MAI solution under the same conditions as for MET. As a hole-transporting layer, 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-4-methoxyphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD, LumTec) was spin-coated at 2000 rpm for 30 s. Spiro-OMeTAD was dissolved in chlorobenzene at a concentration of 90.9 mg ml−1, with 23 μL of bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide lithium salt (Li-TFSI)/acetonitrile (540 mg ml−1), 39 μL of 4-tert-butylpyridine (tBP, Sigma-Aldrich), and 10 μL of tris(2-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)-4-tert-butylpyridine)cobalt(III) tri[bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonamide] (FK209, LumTec)/acetonitrile (0.376 g ml−1). Au counter electrodes were deposited by thermal evaporation.


The top-view images of PbI2–DMSO, PbI2 and MAPbI3 films were obtained by using a field emission scanning electron microscope (SEM, Mira 3 LMU, Tescan) operated at 20 kV. The X-ray diffraction patterns were measured by using a Rigaku SmartLab X-ray diffractometer. GI-WAXS measurements were conducted at the Pohang Accelerator Laboratory (PAL) at beamline 6D. The incident angle for the X-rays (11.6 eV) was 0.34°, and the samples were exposed to the X-rays for 60 s. The spectra were analysed using Igor Pro 7.0 software (WaveMetrics) with GISAXSshop (Dr Byeongdu Lee, Argonne National Lab.). The J–V curves were obtained using a solar simulator (Newport, Oriel Class A, 91195A) with a voltage sourcemeter (Keithley 2400) under 100 mA cm−2 illumination under standard AM1.5G conditions. Light intensity was calibrated with an Si-reference cell certified by the NREL, USA. The samples were all masked with a metal-mask with an active area of 0.096 cm2. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured using a power source (Newport 300 W Xenon lamp, 66920) with a monochromator (Newport Cornerstone 260) and a multimeter (Keithley 2001).



Fig. 1a shows the whole procedure of MET for the fabrication of perovskite film. First, PbI2–DMSO film is deposited. DMSO has excellent solubility and a strong affinity for PbI2. Thus, uniform, pin-hole-free, and thickness-controlled films can be obtained, as previously suggested. In addition, DMSO also contributes to widening the processing window by allowing more time for the films to be dried. Freshly made PbI2–DMSO films are then immersed in a 2-propanol (IPA) bath to remove DMSO. The transparent film turns a hazy yellow within a few seconds. Then the formed PbI2 films are immersed in an MAI solution after being blown with compressed air. The yellow PbI2 films change to dark-brown MAPbI3 films, as shown in Fig. 1a. Thus, we obtained a high-quality perovskite layer by simple sequential steps employing coating and bathing, which can be applied to a roll-to-roll process at a large-area scale.

Control of crystal orientation and porosity of the PbI2 films are significant factors for achieving an efficient reaction between PbI2 and MAI, resulting in high-quality perovskite films, and they strongly depend on the composition of the casting solvents and the polarity of the anti-solvents. First, the morphology of the films obtained by various anti-solvents was monitored by a scanning electron microscope (SEM). In Fig. 1b, we can see that the PbI2–DMSO film had a smooth morphology. By dipping it in IPA, however, a porous PbI2 film is formed after only 10 s (Fig. 1c). The resulting porous morphology with a larger surface area enabled much easier diffusion of MAI molecules to the inner part of the PbI2 film. Therefore, MAI molecules can react effectively with PbI2 crystals through the pores and they completely filled the pores to give a pin-hole-free, dense MAPbI3 film (Fig. 1d). For comparison, heat treatment and extraction with other solvents were applied (Fig. S1). Chlorobenzene (CB) and water were selected as a non-polar solvent and a polar solvent with strong hydrogen bonding, respectively. A relatively smooth and flat PbI2 film was produced with the heat treatment (Fig. S1a). Extraction by a solvent with greater polarity resulted in a more porous morphology, from CB, to IPA, to water (Fig. S1c and e). The MAPbI3 films obtained by heat treatment and CB showed a pin-hole-free morphology (Fig. S1b and d), but the films obtained with water showed a rough and porous morphology (Fig. S1f). In this regard, IPA is beneficial for fabricating not only a porous PbI2 film for a rapid conversion to MAPbI3 but also a dense and pin-hole-free perovskite film.
In addition to the morphology, the crystalline characteristics of PbI2 and MAPbI3 films were monitored by X-ray diffraction (XRD). First, the XRD pattern of the PbI2 films made with different ratios of DMF and DMSO were measured (Fig. 2a). For all the samples, peaks appeared at 12.5° and 25.5°, indicating the (001) and (101) planes of PbI2. For PbI2 cast from a ratio of 8:2 (DMF:DMSO), the relative intensity of the (001) peak was much stronger than that of the (101) peak. Such crystalline behavior was previously reported for two-step sequential deposition. Remarkably, when a ratio of 9:1 (DMF:DMSO) was used as a casting solvent, the relative intensity of the (101) plane became much stronger than that of the (001) plane. The orientation of the resulting PbI2 films depended only on the ratio of solvent, not on the extraction method (dipping or spin-washing). The effect of different orientations of PbI2 film on conversion time was observed through a UV-vis spectrophotometer (Fig. 2b and S2). The conversion into perovskite was much faster for the PbI2 film prepared using the mixed solvent with a 9:1 ratio than with 8:2. As for the 9:1 mixed solvent, after only 5 s, the conversion of the PbI2 film into MAPbI3 created a high absorbance of 0.624 at 700 nm, which was similar to that of MAPbI3 prepared from an 8:2 mixed solvent after reaction for 60 s (0.635). A preferred orientation of PbI2 film along the (101) plane can be advantageous for fast conversion to perovskite. For this reason, PbI2 film was prepared using a 9:1 (DMF:DMSO) mixed solvent in this study.
The effects of different anti-solvents on the orientation of PbI2 and conversion to perovskite were also monitored (Fig. 2c and d). PbI2–DMSO film had a distinct XRD peak around 9°. After washing of the DMSO, the PbI2–DMSO peak disappeared and sharp peaks appeared at 12.5° and 25.5°, for the (001) and (101) planes of PbI2, respectively. Notably, the (001) peak was predominant in the heat-treated sample, but the (101) peak became more intense as the polarity of the solvent increased from CB, to IPA, to water. After the reaction with MAI, peaks at 14° and 28° appeared, from the (110) and (220) planes of tetragonal MAPbI3 (Fig. 2d). Remnant PbI2 peaks, the (001) peak for the heat-treatment sample and the (101) peak for the CB and water samples, could still be observed after conversion. However, in the sample treated with IPA, PbI2 peaks were totally absent in the XRD spectrum of MAPbI3. The (101)-preferred orientation and appropriate porosity of PbI2 made by IPA resulted in a fast and complete conversion. From these results, we chose IPA as the optimal solvent for MET. We also confirmed that an MAI concentration of 40 mg ml−1 was necessary for converting PbI2 completely into MAPbI3 (Fig. S3).
In order to better understand the orientation of PbI2 and MAPbI3 films prepared by the MET process, we performed a GI-WAXS study (Fig. 3). Because heat-treated PbI2 and IPA-treated PbI2 exhibited totally different crystalline behavior in XRD spectra, we chose two samples to compare the orientation of the crystal structure of PbI2 and MAPbI3 films. From now on, PbI2 and MAPbI3 samples prepared by heating will be referred to as “Heat-PbI2” and “Heat-MAPbI3”, and samples prepared by MET using IPA will be “MET-PbI2” and “MET-MAPbI3”. Fig. 3a and b represent GI-WAXS patterns of PbI2 films made by heat and MET, respectively. In Fig. S4, the azimuthally integrated line profiles were extracted from the GI-WAXS patterns. The first and second intense peaks appearing at ∼9 and ∼18 nm−1 can be assigned to the (001) and (101) planes of PbI2, respectively. MET-PbI2 film showed a stronger intensity of the (101) than the (001) peaks and heat-PbI2 exhibited the opposite tendency, which was consistent with the XRD results.
A more obvious difference was revealed in the intensity distribution of the (001) peaks along the azimuthal angles (Fig. 3c). Heat-PbI2 films exhibited a highly oriented (001) peak at 0°. In the intensity distribution of the (101) plane, a clear peak appeared at 55° (Fig. S5). When PbI2 crystals are placed parallel to the substrate, then the (001) and (101) planes will be located at 0° and 55°, respectively, due to the crystal structure of PbI2. Therefore, the heat-PbI2 film has a highly preferred crystalline structure, which is parallel to the substrate. In contrast, the MET-PbI2 film has a relatively less ordered structure with a broad orientation distribution through 0° to 90°. Two major differences in the MAPbI3 films are revealed in Fig. 3d and e. The heat-MAPbI3 sample shows a preferred orientation along the (110) direction (10 nm−1), but it has remaining PbI2 peaks at 9 nm−1 (Fig. 3f). In the MET-MAPbI3 film, there was no specific orientation along the [110] direction and no remnant PbI2 peaks. These findings are illustrated in Fig. 4.
In the heat-treated sample, PbI2 crystal lattices are packed parallel to the substrate, then converted to perovskite with a strong orientation in the [110] direction. In the MET sample, the PbI2 crystal lattices have a rather randomized orientation, and are then converted into the completely randomized orientation of MAPbI3. The difference is probably related to the efficiency of extraction of DMSO. Heat treatment evaporates DMSO slowly from PbI2. As a result, PbI2 crystals have enough time to be ordered parallel to the substrate. When DMSO was rapidly extracted with IPA, however, an initially randomly distributed PbI2–DMSO lattice structure was directly transformed into the randomly distributed PbI2 crystals without reorganization. Thus, in the MET-PbI2 film, a less-ordered structure of PbI2 with random orientation is favorable for rapid conversion into MAPbI3 by reacting with MAI molecules, which are able to penetrate into the gaps between crystals. The faster conversion of PbI2 deposited from 9:1 (DMF:DMSO) mixed solvent over 8:2 (DMF:DMSO) can also be explained in the same manner. Evaporation of DMSO is inevitably slower for the 8:2 mixed solvent due to the doubled amount of DMSO, so PbI2 films coated from the 8:2 mixed solvent tend to be aligned parallel to the substrate.
Perovskite solar cells were fabricated by MET. The structure of the devices was FTO/SnO2 NPs/MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au. Each MET procedure was optimized by correlating each treatment time with the photovoltaic performance. Fig. 5a shows the dependence of the PCE with treatment time for IPA washing of PbI2–DMSO film. The optimized time was 10 s, which was enough to fully remove DMSO from the PbI2–DMSO film. A shorter treatment time led to incomplete extraction of DMSO, whereas a longer treatment time resulted in partial dissolution of PbI2 by IPA (Fig. S6).
In terms of dipping time for MAI, although a longer immersion of the substrate in MAI solution of up to 3 min produced the best PCE value, there was only a slight difference between the average PCEs for samples with dipping times of 30 s and 3 min (Fig. 5b). A dipping time shorter than 30 s brought about a huge drop in the PCE, which was driven by the incomplete conversion of PbI2 to MAPbI3. For all the samples with different MAI dipping times, the time for IPA washing was 10 s, and the heat treatment time was 10 min. In Fig. 5c, it is surprising that even the devices without any heat treatment exhibit a 17.4% average PCE, even as high as 18.2% PCE for the champion device (Fig. 5d, D3H0). To the best of our knowledge, this is the best PCE achieved from a room-temperature-processed PSC, fabricated by two-step deposition. As the heat treatment time increased, there was a slight improvement in the average PCE of up to 18.4 ± 0.3% with a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 22.38 ± 0.38 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.09 ± 0.02 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 74.7 ± 1.7% (IPA washing time = 10 s, MAI dipping time = 3 min). The distribution of the PCEs of the optimized devices is represented in Fig. S7. To sum up, 10 s for IPA washing, 3 min for MAI dipping and 10 min for heat treatment were the optimum conditions. However, we were able to reduce the total processing time by up to 100 s to achieve around 18% of PCE, which came to 10 s of IPA washing, 30 s of MAI dipping, and 60 s of heat treatment (Fig. 5d, D0.5H1).
The J–V curves of the best cell are presented in Fig. 5e; the highest PCE of 18.8% was achieved with a Jsc of 22.0 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.12 V, and a FF of 76.3 in a reverse scan. As far as we know, this PCE is one of the highest PCEs for PSCs based on the heterojunction of SnO2/MAPbI3. From the forward scan, we obtained a PCE of 16.1%. Although the device exhibited some hysteresis behavior with a fast scan rate of 1000 mV s−1, this comes from the inherent characteristics of the device structure, as reported in previous work, not from the deposition method we propose in this work. The dark J–V curve shows good diode characteristics, without a noticeable leakage current (Fig. S8). The stabilized PCE was estimated to be 18.5% under the maximum power point at 0.885 V, which is very close to the PCE obtained from the reverse scan (Fig. 5f). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) (Fig. S9) of the best cell yields an integrated Jsc value of 22.1 mA cm−2, which is very consistent with the Jsc attained from the J–V curve. Lower PCEs were obtained from devices made by heat treatment and anti-solvent extraction other than IPA (Fig. S10).
To extend MET to large-area fabrication, we applied slot-die coating (Fig. 6a). First, the PbI2–DMSO film was coated on top of an SnO2 layer on a 10 × 10 cm2 FTO substrate by slot-die coating. Then the substrate was immersed in an IPA bath and subsequently soaked in an MAI solution. The final annealing process afforded a large-area, uniform perovskite film without noticeable pin-holes or defects (Fig. 6b). To prove the uniformity of the large-area MAPbI3 film, the 10 × 10 cm2 FTO substrate was cut into 12 parts and then spiro-OMeTAD/Au was deposited to complete the devices (Fig. S11). J–V curves of the resulting devices are shown in Fig. 6c, together with the corresponding PCEs in the inset. All the cells exhibited an average PCE of 17.3% ± 0.4% with little deviation. The champion cell made by slot-die coating had an 18.3% PCE in a reverse scan, which is comparable to that of devices made by spin coating (Fig. 6d). Thus, we demonstrated that our MET process is a rapid and desirable process for large-area perovskite solar cells via slot-die coating.

In this paper, we proposed a simple and fast process for preparation of perovskite solar cells, namely, MET. The deposition of a PbI2–DMSO complex enabled uniform, dense, and thickness-controlled coating. Washing of the DMSO mediator with IPA resulted in a porous morphology and a randomized orientation of the PbI2 film, as confirmed by SEM, XRD and GI-WAXS data. The formation of porous and relatively disordered PbI2 resulted in a fast reaction of MAI molecules with PbI2. In this way, highly uniform, dense MAPbI3 perovskite film was obtained within several minutes. The resulting perovskite solar cells exhibited an average PCE of 18.4% and a maximum PCE of 18.8%. In particular, about 18% PCE was obtained in 100 s, and even the room-temperature process produced 18.2% maximum PCE. The MET was applied to a large-area substrate using slot-die coating. Successive slot-die coating and bathing produced highly uniform perovskite films in a large area. The whole area showed a reasonable PCE and the maximum PCE was 18.3%, which is comparable to spin-coated devices. These results verified the applicability of our proposed MET to large-area roll-to-roll processes. In consideration of its simplicity, short processing time, and large-area applicability, our proposed new method, MET, can pave a new way for perovskite solar cells to be extended to practical applications utilizing a roll-to-roll process.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by a grant from the Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT), Republic of Korea (KK1802-A01), the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) and the Ministry of Trade Industry & Energy (MOTIE) of the Republic of Korea (No. 20163010012470), and the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grants funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (MSIP) of Korea (NRF-2016M3A6A7945503 and NRF-2017R1A2B2009676).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: SEM images of PbI2 and perovskite made by different conditions, time evolution of UV-Vis spectra and appearance for prolonged dipping time, XRD spectra for different concentration of MAI, azimuthally and radially integrated intensity plots calculated from GI-WAXS spectra, PCE histogram, dark J–V curve and EQE spectrum with corresponding integrated photocurrent plots for MET devices, J–V curves for solar cells made by different anti-solvents and treatment, schematic diagram for solar cells fabricated by using slot-die coating. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta02868k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018