 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA09020F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3812-3818


Seulki
Song
,

Maximilian T.
Hörantner
,

Kyoungwon
Choi
,

Henry J.
Snaith
* and 

Taiho
Park
*

Chemical Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), 77 Cheongam-Ro, Nam-gu, Pohang, Kyoungbuk, Korea. E-mail: taihopark@postech.ac.kr; Fax: +82-54-279-8298; Tel: +82-54-279-2394

Department of Physics Clarendon Laboratory, Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3PU, UK

Received
18th October 2016
, Accepted 16th November 2016
First published on 16th November 2016
We introduce 1 step pin-hole free CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite layers by using heated airflow during the nucleation stage of the perovskite. Upon employing heated air, we stimulate uniformly distributed nuclei growth, resulting in a pin-hole free planar perovskite layer. We find an optimized heated airflow of 100 °C as the optimized condition. The resulting planar device employing a conventional TiO2 electron transporting layer exhibits 17.6% average power conversion efficiency with 14.3% maximum powerpoint (MPP) efficiency. In addition, our method gives a very reproducible perovskite layer. Thus, our pin-hole free perovskite layer allows for 14.9% efficiency in a larger area device (0.71 cm2) that is generally prone to shunting paths.

Since Miyasaka et al. reported that perovskites could be excellent light absorbing materials, they have been extensively applied in solid state solar cells and their power conversion efficiency (PCE) has increased dramatically within only a few years. This achievement is quickly disrupting other solar cell technology fields, such as dye-sensitized and organic solar cells. Many published perovskite solar cells have a planar heterojunction architecture that consists of a FTO/electron transport layer (ETL)/perovskite/hole transport layer (HTM)/Ag (or Au) electrode. Recently Seok and Grätzel reported a power conversion efficiency of over 20% by employing the device architecture with a mesoporous scaffold layer, often referred to as a meso-device. These meso-devices showed less hysteresis and high PCE values. With this considerable amount of development, structure evolution has also been performed to simplify the structure and process. Meso-scaffold layers, such as TiO2 and Al2O3, are usually used in the perovskite layer as a buffer layer to minimize the short circuit path way in the perovskite device. However, as perovskite thin-films have shown remarkable diffusion lengths and efficient charge extracting layers were discovered, the device structure could be simplified without the need for these meso-scaffold layers (so called planar devices). However, creating a planar device architecture through one step spin coating deposition has proven to be challenging due to the complex grain growth behaviour of perovskite thin-films. In general, TiO2, ZnO and SnO2 inorganic or C60 and PCBM derivative organic electron transport layers have been used in the device without the meso-scaffold layer, however, still TiO2 is mainly used as the electron transport layer. Compared to the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of a meso-device, TiO2 based planar devices have shown lower PCE values around 15% due to their tough morphology control. This tough morphology control limits the reproducibility and active area of the device. To solve this problem, vapour deposition, multi-cycle, and solvent quenching methods were used which improved the device efficiency to 19%. Unfortunately, these methods are often difficult to reproduce; they require precise optimization and are more time-consuming to fabricate devices. Commonly, in the perovskite crystallization process, either the solution deposited perovskite precursor or perovskite in solvent evaporated on the substrate results in self-assembled cubic or tetragonal shape perovskite crystals formed during the annealing process. During the crystal formation, the precursor solution undergoes nucleation first and then a crystal growth process. More precisely, perovskite follows a heterogeneous nucleation process, thus various sizes of nuclei are formed at the same time. Needless to say, this phase inhomogeneity of the initial state determines the later morphology of the perovskite thin-film and it could potentially be controlled by specific thermodynamic conditions. If there are few nuclei formed on the surface, the unconstrained crystal growth presumably leads to larger crystal domains with the disadvantage that vacant sites are left between the grains, which could result in shunting pathways (pin-holes and trap sites) in the device. Thus, the final morphology needs to be optimally controlled for pin-hole free perovskite layers, which is crucial to obtain high efficiency solar cells. Therefore, homogenously induced crystallization is a key factor to fabricate highly efficient planar devices, which represents a significant challenge, especially in solution based deposition processes. Particularly, the fabrication of planar CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite has been reported to be challenging. The perovskite from methylammonium iodide (MAI) and lead chloride (PbCl2) sources appears to have different crystallization dynamics than the perovskite from MAI and lead iodide (PbI2) sources. PbCl2 undergoes template topotactic self-assembly during the initial annealing stage, and the perovskite crystal domains are sharply faceted. These sharply faceted domains are hard to control and limit the surface coverage of the device, which usually result as pinholes in the device. Apart from the coverage of the perovskite layer, rough perovskite layers could cause a trade-off problem between reproducibility and efficiency. Thin hole transport layers (HTLs) usually lead to higher efficiency but thick HTLs support better reproducibility due to better coverage. Thus a one step process for flat and uniform perovskite layers is desirable for high efficiency and reproducibility for large area devices.

Here, we use heated airflow for the first time in MAI:PbCl2 precursor solution during perovskite solution spin coating, which allows for the fabrication of simple reproducible pin-hole free mixed halide CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite thin-films via a one-step method. By inducing swift nucleation a PCE of 19% on a 0.09 cm2 cell and 14.9% on a larger area device (0.71 cm2) is achieved. Gas assisting methods have been introduced for CH3NH3PbI3 and HC(NH2)2PbI3, but relatively low PCEs were reported and a more detailed study is needed to prove the effect of this method for a MAI:PbCl2 precursor system. It should be emphasized that this is the first time that the nucleation stage of perovskite crystallization is distinctively controlled in mixed halide perovskite thin-films. Much previous work focused on the growth mechanisms of perovskite, however, we believe that the nucleation stage could determine the morphology and film surface of perovskite, which follow typically physical rather than chemical mechanisms. If we could induce swift nucleation on the substrate at the same time, nuclei could be evenly distributed and form a uniform perovskite layer. The creation of a nucleus is governed by the Gibbs free energy difference between the bulk and surface energy of the new phase. During the nucleation stage, by classical nucleation theory, unfavourable interfacial contact leads to small sizes of nuclei and favourable contact leads to large size nuclei. These two terms have to balance out and the critical nucleus size is determined. However, once the perovskite precursor solution is deposited, the thermodynamic crystallization behaviours of perovskite are differently processed at each point of the surface. Thus, different sizes of nuclei are distributed on the substrate surface and result in irregular perovskite crystal growth. In general, nucleation processes are occurring on the substrate when the solute clusters overcome their Gibbs free energy. The Gibbs free energy for heterogeneous crystallization can be determined as ΔGheterogeneous = ΔGhomogeneous × f(θ). Where f(θ) = (2 − 3cosθ + cos3θ)/4. Here, θ is the contact angle of the nucleus in the precursor solution. We introduced the heated airflow during spin coating to decrease the contact angle of the solution, which leads to fast evaporation of the solvent (N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF)) in a shorter time. As a result, the precursor solute can be evenly distributed and nuclei can overcome the energy barrier for nucleation in a shorter time resulting in swift nucleation through the whole surface of the substrate.
This leads to better physical adsorption of nuclei from the precursor solution and a layer growth of perovskite crystals without pin holes (Fig. 1b). Compared with a control device, on which the cluster aggregation is increased, we expect a slow nucleation stage with different crystallization processes and therefore island growth of perovskite layers with pinholes (Fig. 1a). Therefore, this novel method could be very useful for fabricating a large area device.

Firstly, we prepared the perovskite films with room temperature airflow following the reported method. Mixed halide perovskite layers from room temperature airflow processing resulted in improved coverage than without airflow but yielded not fully covered films with pin-holes (Fig. S1). Therefore, we used only heated airflow and analyzed its nucleation and crystal growth stage in this report. For the heated airflow samples, various temperatures were applied during the spin coating 1.35 m s−1 with 50 °C, 100 °C and 150 °C airflow. We analyzed the initial stage of perovskite crystallization with an optical microscope. We spin-coated the perovskite solution in a sealed dry box (humidity < 25%) flushed with dry air and tested each heat flow condition. As a comparison, control samples were prepared with a precursor solution solely spin coated without any treatment. Microscopy imaging was carried out right after spin-coating of the precursor solution (within 1 min to maintain the initial state of the samples). The sample without airflow shows irregularly distributed flower-like shaped nuclei with low coverage because perovskite films still have an excess amount of DMF solvent after spin coating, resulting in only a small amount of nuclei being spread on the substrate irregularly (Fig. 2a). However, the sample with 50 °C airflow shows uniformly distributed nuclei with full coverage because the supersaturation state of the film is induced during the spin coating, which results in adhesion of solute clusters on the substrate over the whole surface of the substrate within a short time (Fig. 2b). The sample with 100 °C airflow shows a much more uniform surface than with the 50 °C airflow. With the 150 °C airflow (Fig. 2c), we could observe some cracks on the nucleated surface (Fig. 2d). These images clearly demonstrate the effect of heated airflow on the nucleation stage of perovskite (the tone of the microscope image was controlled for obtaining a clear image).

We annealed these samples at 100 °C for 2 h 30 min to finalize the crystal growth and eliminated the by-product. The resulting perovskite films were analyzed by using scanning electron microscopy imaging (SEM). On the sample without airflow, we could observe the pinholes on the films (Fig. 3a), where we could see the exposed FTO/TiO2 surface on the film that could later act as the shunting pathway (Fig. 3b, highlighted as circle). On the other hand, the applied 50 °C airflow leads to a pinhole free film (Fig. 3f and g). As we increased the temperature to 100 °C and 150 °C, we could observe larger grains of perovskite (Fig. 3k, l, p and q). However, the 150 °C airflow samples show that pin holes have again formed between the grains (Fig. 3q, highlighted as circle). We assume that the high temperature airflow (150 °C which is near the boiling point of DMF) would evaporate the DMF too fast, which leads to the fast solute extraction from the solution and cracks formed at the grain boundary. The cross-sectional SEM image of the control sample shows pin-hole sites on the perovskite layer and an irregular perovskite thickness (Fig. 3c). However, with the airflow of 50 °C and 100 °C, very smooth and flat film distribution of perovskite layers is observed (Fig. 3h and m). At 150 °C airflow, an irregular thickness of the perovskite layer was observed again (Fig. 3r). Additionally, we carried out conductive atomic force microscopy (c-AFM) measurements to confirm the morphology and conductive properties of the resulting perovskite layer. The topography images (Fig. 3d, i, n and s) show that grain sizes increased as the temperature of airflow was increased. Compared to the control sample, perovskite grains from 50 °C airflow have slightly larger sizes (0.40 μm2vs. 0.51 μm2). As we increased the airflow temperature to 100 and 150 °C, grain sizes increased to 1.08 μm2 and 1.26 μm2, respectively (see Fig. 4). Particularly the roughness of the perovskite surface dramatically decreased when we applied the airflow. The root mean square (RMS) value of the control sample roughness is 91.8 nm and the samples treated with heated airflow are 49.3 nm, 51.5 nm and 70.2 nm for 50 °C, 100 °C and 150 °C airflow (Fig. 4). Li-Jun Wan et al. reported that the grain boundaries have lower energy barriers for charge dissociation, so that at low bias voltage (before the bias overcomes the energy barrier of the internal perovskite crystal), charges are collected at the grain boundaries. Thus, we could observe the surface conducting properties of perovskite by measuring c-AFM under a low bias state. We measured the c-AFM at 0.3 V under dark conditions. We overlapped the c-AFM and topography map shown in Fig. 3e, j, o, and t. The current density of perovskite is highlighted in red color. The control sample showed no current signal, which indicates poor conducting properties of perovskite. The perovskite film treated with 50 °C airflow indicates a small amount of current signal, whereas on the perovskite film from 100 °C airflow, we could observe a significantly increased current signal at the grain boundaries, indicating superior conductive properties of large grain perovskite. However, perovskite from 150 °C airflow treatment shows a decreased current signal. Pin holes in the perovskite layer act as recombination sites, which reduce the current in the perovskite layer. We fabricated full devices comparing each heated airflow treatment condition. We wanted to demonstrate the effect of the heated airflow treatment on the perovskite layers, therefore we used the same fabrication conditions for the control devices. In Fig. 5, we present histograms of device parameters using each perovskite layer airflow treatment. Control devices showed lower short circuit currents (JSC), open circuit voltages (VOC) and fill factor (FF) values than optimized devices from 50 °C and 100 °C heated airflow but showed a similar distribution to the 150 °C airflow treated samples. JSC and VOC increased as the heated airflow temperature was increased to 100 °C. We expect that enlarged grain sizes and fully covered perovskite layers contribute to the decreased leakage current and grain boundary area in the perovskite film, which decreased the charge recombination. Hence, most of the charges are effectively transported through the perovskite films in a single crystalline grain rather than the grain boundary, which results in an increased VOC and FF with very reproducible results. However, at 150 °C heated airflow treatment, overall device performance parameters were decreased. We assume that pin-holes and traps between the grains provide recombination sites, which results in a decreased device performance.
Pin-hole free perovskite layers seem to block the leakage current and less trap sites allow for higher VOC values. We analyzed the quality of the perovskite layer by measuring the photoluminescence (PL) decay of perovskite films prepared under each heated airflow condition (Fig. 6a). We prepared the perovskite layers on the bare glass without any electrical quenching material. We calculated the charge lifetime by fitting to a mono-exponential model and found that the lifetime of the perovskite control film (195 ns) shows a similar lifetime to the film prepared with 50 °C heated airflow (210 ns). For a higher heated airflow, 292 ns (100 °C) and 554 ns (150 °C) were obtained. The increased lifetime potentially originates from the large perovskite grain sizes. Thus, even though the perovskite film from 150 °C heated airflow has pin-holes, it shows the longest photoluminescence decay lifetime. We analyzed the trap density of each perovskite by measuring the space charge limited current (SCLC) in the devices following the reported method by Sargent et al. The trap density was calculated using the following equation:
where
VTFL is the trap-filled limit (TFL) voltage, e is the elementary charge, nt is the trap density in the film, d is the film thickness, ε is the dielectric constant and ε0 is the vacuum permittivity.

The trap density of the control sample was calculated to be 2.2 × 1016 cm−3 and the trap density of perovskite with 50 °C, 100 °C and 150 °C airflow had 7.6 × 1015 cm−3, 2.8 × 1015 cm−3 and 1.8 × 1016 cm−3 traps (Fig. 6b). The trap density of perovskite decreased when we applied the heated airflow but it increased again at 150 °C airflow. Again, we expect that pin-holes and grain boundaries in the perovskite layer can act as trap sites. Even though 150 °C airflow led to the longest lifetimes due to its larger grains, its trap density was presumably higher due to its poor surface coverage (morphology), which affects the efficient current flow. Therefore, we should not only consider the grain size and PL characteristics of perovskite films but also consider the surface coverage. In addition, our heated airflow method resulted in remarkable reproducibility of perovskite layer quality, which could be beneficial for the fabrication of large area devices. Therefore, we correspondingly fabricated devices with a larger area of 0.71 cm2. We compared this to an optimized device with an area of 0.09 cm2. We show the record device performance of two devices in Fig. 7a. Both cells showed a very high JSC value of over 23 mA cm−2 with very high FF values. The 0.09 cm2 area cell had a JSC of 23.7 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.08 V, and a FF of 74.4%, combined with a PCE of 19.0% at reverse scan. The 7.9 times larger device (0.71 cm2) showed a comparable efficiency with JSC = 23.4 mA cm−2, VOC = 1.02 V, FF = 61.9% and PCE = 14.9%. Due to its planar structure, our device showed hysteresis behavior (Fig. S2) and the hysteresis behavior didn't get affected by the scan rate (Fig. S3). We also measured the stabilized maximum power output efficiency of the 0.09 cm2 device at 0.84 V (Fig. 7b). The device worked well with 14.3% of stabilized efficiency for 50 s which is 75.3% of the fast scan efficiency, which is a reasonable value considering the reported value. Note that the 14.3% MPP value is ranked as one of the best values reported so far among the planar devices employing the conventional TiO2 ETL and the 75.3% MPP efficiency for the best efficiency (19.0%) was acceptable when compared with literature studies (Table S1). The decrease of the MPP efficiency is not fully understood, but it is possible due to the insufficient electron extraction caused by the low electron mobility of TiO2 (∼10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1). Recently, the devices employing high electron mobility materials such as SnO2 (∼10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1) or C60 fullerene (∼1.6 cm2 V−1 s−1) ETLs exhibited a very little difference between the MPP and J–V efficiencies.

We demonstrated a simple hot air quenching method applying heated airflow to fabricate pin-hole free CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite thin-films. This method provides a high supersaturated state at the nucleation stage with controlled uniformly distributed nuclei which results in a pin-hole free perovskite film growth. We used airflows heated to 50 °C, 100 °C and 150 °C and confirmed the different nucleation stages by comparing with a control sample. Perovskite with 50 °C and 100 °C heated airflow resulted in a pin-hole free perovskite layer and we find that as we increase the airflow temperature, the grain size of perovskite is increased. Larger grains lead to higher conducting properties and long PL-decay response. However, the morphology of perovskite also affects the device performance. For the best performing perovskite solar cell, both the perovskite crystal grain quality and morphology should be considered. In our optimization, 100 °C heated airflow yielded improved perovskite grain quality and pin-hole free morphology resulting in a PCE of 19.0% and a stabilized efficiency of 14.3% when tested in a full device. Due to the great reproducibility of pin-hole free thin-films, larger area devices also showed a PCE of 14.8% in the fast reverse scan. We believe that our pin-hole less perovskite layer could provide an easy way to prepare a fully covered flat CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite layer for efficient planar perovskite devices.


This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korean government (MSIP) (Code No. 2015R1A2A1A10054230), Center for Advanced Soft Electronics under the Global Frontier Research Program (Code No. NRF-2012M3A6A5055225) and Nano Material Technology Development Program (2012M3A7B4049989).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta09020f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017