 DOI: 10.1039/D0CP04350H
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 25118-25125


Masatoshi
Yanagida
*,

Yasuhiro
Shirai
,

Dhruba B.
Khadka
 and 

Kenjiro
Miyano
*

Centre for Green Research on Energy and Environmental Materials, National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS) 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0044, Japan. E-mail: YANAGIDA.Masatoshi@nims.go.jp; MIYANO.Kenjiro@nims.go.jp

Received
17th August 2020
, Accepted 9th October 2020
First published on 9th October 2020
We use photoinduced absorption spectroscopy (PAS) to study the ionic motion in CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells, consisting of indium tin oxide (ITO)/NiOx/perovskite/phenyl-C61-butyric-acid–methyl ester (PCBM)/aluminum-doped zinc oxide (AZO)/ITO. We observed a slow (∼50 mHz) spectral blue shift (∼10−4 eV) under modulated 520 nm illumination, which we interpreted in terms of the modulation in the bulk ion density. Numerical simulation shows that the mobile ion moves in and out from the double layers at the perovskite/charge transport layer interfaces in order to recover the bulk charge neutrality tipped off-balance by the photocarriers. The diffusion coefficient of the ion is 10−10 to 10−11 cm2 s−1, when we assume that the characteristic time constant of the ion motion is governed by the diffusion.

Metal halide perovskite solar cells have been intensively investigated because of high efficiency and low temperature fabrication processes. In this research, the ion migration in the perovskite has been investigated because the ion distribution influences the opto-electronic properties and long-term stability as the solar cells. The hysteresis in current density–voltage (J–V) curves and the unusual loop features in Cole–Cole plots of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) have been explained by the ionic distribution forming electric double layers at the interface between perovskite and charge transport layers. The ionic transportation has been utilized for an alternative route to create novel perovskite solar cells. For example, I− migration transforms the mesoporous CsPbBr3 perovskite into CsPbI3 or CsPbBrxI3−x. The I− ions migrate from illuminated space in the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite films on glass and passivate the trap sites. The photoluminescence is consequently enhanced in a time scale of minutes. The ionic migration from bulk to interface also induces the electrochemical reaction at the interface and degrades the performance of the solar cells.

The ion migration has been estimated from the transient current or voltage of the devices to understand the relationship between ionic motion and the band energy profile in perovskites. The band energy of perovskites has also been analysed through a giant overshoot of electroluminescence of the perovskite devices. The ionic motion has been estimated for some specific electrochemical cells such as graphite/CH3NH3PbI3/graphite, Pb/PbI2/CH3NH3PbI3/AgI/Ag, Pb/PbI2/CH3NH3PbI3/CuI/Cu, and Cu/CH3NH3PbI3/AgI/Ag. The extraction of ionic motion from current and voltage is important to understand the comprehensive mechanism in the perovskite solar cells. The ion migration was directly observed through the light absorption of I2 exuded by immersing CH3NH3PbI3 in toluene. The optical images of the cross section of the perovskite solar cells showed the mobile PbI2 thread. Under 8 V μm−1 of the electric field, the filamentary paths were observed in the perovskite between Au electrodes with a spacing of 50 μm by using laser confocal scanning microscopy. The ionic motion has been also observed as the cross-sectional potential change detected by conductive atomic force microscopy (c-AFM) or Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM). However, the effect of ionic motion on the photovoltaic properties such as the stability and the efficiency are still unclear because no direct methods have been applied for the observation of ionic motion in the operating devices.
Photoinduced absorption spectroscopy (PAS) has been used for studying the transient processes in the perovskite devices or semiconductors. Wang et al. observed a long lifetime of charge separation of the perovskite solar cells based on mesoporous NiO by using PAS. One can observe the absorption change in a very wide time scale by changing the modulation frequency from mHz to MHz. Here, we report on PAS results at low frequencies, which we propose to be caused by the ion redistribution in response to the modulated photo illumination. In contrast to the usual transport methods, we do not have complications of separating the electronic conduction from the ionic displacement current; a clear demonstration of a purely ionic motion in the operating CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells. We employed solar cells, consisting of ITO/NiOx/perovskite/PCBM/AZO/ITO, which have demonstrated high stability and little hysteresis.

All chemicals were purchased from commercial suppliers and used as received, unless stated otherwise. For the preparation of perovskite films, precursor solutions were prepared by dissolving PbI2 (Kanto-chemical, 98% purity) in anhydrous DMF (400 mg ml−1) and methyl ammonium iodide (MAI) + methyl ammonium chloride (MACl) (Wako Chemicals, battery grade) in ethanol (50 mg ml−1; MAI:MACl = 19:1 molar ratio). [6,6]-Phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) (Sigma Aldrich, 99% purity) solution (2 wt%) dissolved in anhydrous chlorobenzene was used for coating the electron transport layer (ETL). All the solutions were passed through 0.45 μm syringe filters. Aluminium-doped zinc oxide (AZO) nanoparticle ink (Nanograde N-21X) was used to prepare the AZO layer.


The perovskite devices were prepared according to the published procedure. The patterned indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrates (15 Ω cm−2) were pre-cleaned in an ultrasonic bath with detergent, pure water and 2-propanol, followed by an ultraviolet-ozone (UV-Ozone) treatment for 5 min to remove the organic residues. NiOx layers were prepared as the hole transport layer (HTL) on the ITO by sputtering NiO (target: NiO 99.9%, Kojundo Chemical lab. Co. Ltd, Saitama, Japan) under an Ar pressure of 3.5 Pa in a radio frequency (RF) sputtering machine (Sanyu Electron Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan, SVC-700RF II NA). NiOx/ITO substrates were transferred into a nitrogen-filled glove box (<1.0 ppm O2 and H2O). The PbI2 precursor solution was spin-coated at 3000 rpm for 90 s and a mixed precursor solution of MAI and MACl was subsequently coated on the PbI2 layer at 4000 rpm, for 90 s. Then to promote the crystallization, these as grown CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite films were placed on a hot plate with MACl powder covered with a Petri dish at 100 °C. For the ETL, PCBM was spin-coated on top of the perovskite films at 700 rpm for 30 s, followed by deposition of a thin AZO layer spinning at 1000 rpm for 30 s. Finally, ca. 270 nm of ITO (target: 90% In2O3 and 10% SnO2, Kojundo Chemical lab. Co. Ltd., Saitama, Japan) was sputtered under 0.15 Pa of Ar pressure. Devices with an area of ca. 0.26 cm2 were sealed using ultraviolet (UV)-curable resins before the subsequent measurements under ambient conditions. The UV-Vis transmittance was measured by a UV-visible spectrometer (Shimadzu Co. Japan, UV-2600). The current density–voltage (J–V) and external quantum efficiency (EQE) were obtained using a spectrometer (Bunkokeiki, Japan, SM-250IQE,) by using an aperture mask of 0.185 cm2 (0.43 cm × 0.43 cm). The resolution of wavelength is ca. 10 nm. Our device consists of ITO/NiOx/CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite/PCBM/AZO/ITO. The devices are optically transparent by employing ITO electrodes on both sides, so that photoinduced absorption spectroscopy (PAS) spectra in the transmission mode can be sensitively measured.


A 520 nm light from a diode laser (Thorlabs, Japan, L520P120) was used to excite the sample because the EQE was maximum at 520 nm. The laser intensity was modulated with a frequency response analyser (NF corporation, Japan, FRA51615). Light from a halogen lamp (Bunkoukeiki Co., Ltd, Japan, BSO-H400) that passed through a monochromator (Bunkoukeiki Co., Ltd, Japan, M25) was utilized as a probe light. The probe light intensity through the sample device was detected with a Si variable-gain avalanche detector (Thorlabs, Japan, APD430A/M) through a long-pass filter with a cut-on wavelength of 600 nm. The detector bandwidth is better than 10 kHz. The modulation frequency from 10 mHz to 103 Hz was used. We measured the probe light power through the sample device with and without the pump light: the time-dependent signal (ΔT) with the pump was divided by the signal intensity (T) without. We analysed ΔT/T, which does not require calibration or correction of the measurement system. The bias was applied to the sample devices using a potentiiostat (Hokuto Denko Co., Japan, HA-151).


We used a commercial numerical simulator (Fluxim, Switzerland, SETFOS 5.0), to calculate the ion density profile in a perovskite device under light illumination. Parameters of the numerical simulator are summarized in Table S1 in ref. 4. Numerical simulation of the ion distribution of the ESI.


The devices are illuminated from the HTL side for optical and photovoltaic measurements. The thickness of NiOx, PCBM and AZO were ∼40 nm, ∼50 nm and ∼100 nm, respectively. The thickness of the perovskite layer was 240 nm from the cross section of the SEM image. The J–V curve under illumination of 1 sun and external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the device are shown in Fig. 1(a) and (b), respectively. The short circuit current density (JSC), open circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) were 17.2 mA cm−2, 0.98 V, 58% and 9.8%, respectively. On sweeping the voltage from −0.2 to 1.2 V and 1.2 to −0.2 V, the hysteresis of the J–V curve was almost negligible. The JSC value estimated from Fig. 1(b) was 17.3 mA cm−2, corresponding to the JSC value of the J–V curve. Internal quantum efficiency, which is EQE divided by (1 − reflectance) is ca. 85% at 500 nm. The devices cannot fully absorb light because of the thin thickness of 240 nm (see the transmittance in Fig. S1(a) of the ESI). When the devices were sealed by the glass and resins, the photovoltaic properties of the devices were stable over two months during measurements. The similarly encapsulated devices have shown high stability over 4000 h under continuous illumination and are highly reproducible.


In PAS, the excitation (pump) light, P, was modulated at an angular frequency of ω, P(ω) = P0eiωt. The transmittance change at the same frequency probed at a wavelength λ, ΔT(λ,ω)eiωt was measured. The complex relative transmittance ΔT(λ,ω)/T(λ) was noted, where T(λ) is the steady state transmittance spectrum. Typical data obtained are shown in Fig. 2(a) at several λ in the form of Cole–Cole plots, i.e., Re(ΔT/T) vs. Im(ΔT/T) (see also the enlarged Cole–Cole plots below 0.1% of Re(ΔT/T) and Im(ΔT/T) in Fig. S2 of the ESI).

It is immediately noticed that Fig. 2(a) is strikingly similar to the typical EIS Nyquist plots at low frequencies, which is interpreted in terms of a Warburg process of mobile ions (or voids thereof) in a restricted geometry: at the higher frequency end (>0.2 Hz), the data follow a straight line with a phase angle of −π/4 and at a low frequency (<0.2 Hz), and the curve closes in a semicircular form. Based on this observation, we tried to fit the transmittance in terms of the Warburg element, W(ω). We will discuss that this is a plausible choice later.
ΔT(ω) = ΔT(∞) + {ΔT(0) − ΔT(∞)}·W(ω)
(1)
where Δ
T(∞) is the limiting ΔT value at a high frequency and ΔT(0) is the ΔT value at ω = 0, respectively, and,

(2)
where
, D is the diffusion constant and L is the thickness of the perovskite layer, respectively. The colour solid line for each plot in Fig. 2(a) is the fitting line using eqn (1) and (2).

In Table 1, we summarize the results of fit. The high frequency in-phase component, ΔT(∞), is nonzero and is mostly photoluminescence (PL) by the excitation laser. This is confirmed by repeating the experiment without the probe beam. Other photoinduced phenomena of electronic origin are possible but all of them would be extremely small as we will discuss later.
Wavelength (nm)

D (10−11 cm2 s−1)
{ΔT(0) − ΔT(∞)}/T (%)
780
7.6
0.07
770
5.0
0.26
760
5.8
0.53
750
7.5
0.62
740
6.2
0.49
730
5.8
0.16
720
5.0
0.05
The quality of fitting (Fig. 2(a)) and the magnitude of constant D (D ≈ 10−11 to 10−10 cm2 s−1) are comparable to the reported value of I− diffusion. Independent of the probe wavelength, λ, all imply that the transmittance is influenced by the ion motion. Then, what would be the mechanism that connects the ion motion with the optical change? We propose that the bulk ion distribution is modified by the light illumination and that the local compositional change shifts the bandgap.

The transmission change {ΔT(0) − ΔT(∞)}/T in Table 1 is the net photoinduced transmission change at the probe wavelength λ and is plotted in Fig. 2(b) together with the numerical differentiation of the transmittance, {T(λ) − T(λ − Δλ)}/T(λ), where Δλ = 0.2 nm is chosen to reproduce the observed peak height (see also Fig. S1(b), ESI). The fit is reasonably good. This implies that the transmission spectrum shifts upward by 0.2 nm, i.e., the bandgap widens by 4 × 10−4 eV. Photoinduced spectral change has been already studied and an absorption loss (transmission increase) at the band edge was reported. Photobleaching or other dynamics of electrons and holes are proposed as the origin of the phenomena. Recently, Pazoki et al. interpreted the photoinduced transmission in terms of the Stark effect. The band filling is another mechanism for photoinduced dielectric function modulation and the widening of the optical gap (Moss–Burstein shift), which has been studied recently by Lim et al. Although all of these measurements show the bandgap shift, they are of the electronic origin and thus very fast and reach the respective steady state far above our frequency range. On the other hand, the timescale of our measurements is 100 Hz (1.6 ms) to 10 mHz (16 s), indicating that the physical origin is totally different. The phenomena of electronic origin are all lumped in ΔT(∞), i.e., outside of our discussion. Furthermore, our observation was made under a constant voltage condition. The potential profile that may influence the Stark effect should become flat in the time scale of our measurement excluding any effect in our measurements.

The light absorption properties of perovskites sensitively depend on the composition. The blue shift of the absorption edge has been observed in the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite as the composition is shifted away from the stoichiometry. Sarmah et al. observed the peak of photoluminescence from the surface shifted to higher energy (17 nm blue shift) than that of the bulk for the perovskite single crystals. This has been attributed to the surface accumulation of ions via electrostatic or electrostriction effects. Wei et al. estimated the interfacial iodine vacancy influence on the valence band maximum and the conduction band minimum of perovskites. Therefore, the spectrum should be sensitively changed by the ion distribution in the perovskites. Based on this scenario, we propose that the spectral shift originates from the bulk ion distribution modulated by illumination.

In order to see the effect of photo-illumination on the ion distribution, we performed numerical simulations incorporating the mobile ions. The details are given in ref. 4. Numerical simulation of the ion distribution of the ESI. Because the nature of the ion species is irrelevant in the following discussion, the nature of the ion species is irrelevant, we assume that the mobile ions are anions (I− ions). A result of calculations is shown in Fig. 3, in which the mobile anion density is assumed to be 1018 cm−3 and the perovskite layer is located between 0 and 300 nm. The mobile anions and vacancies thereof accumulate and form double layers at the perovskite/ETL and HTL interfaces, respectively, which compensate the built-in potential. At the mobile ion density of 1018 cm−3, the double layers are thin (<10 nm) and its ion (vacancy) density is very high. Therefore, the interface regions are omitted from Fig. 3. In the dark where the thermally excited free carriers are negligible, the ion density distribution is flat in the bulk. However, the ion density is less than the stoichiometric value of 1018 cm−3 even in the dark, making most of the bulk slightly I− deficient. This inherent asymmetry has a profound impact on the efficiency asymmetry in pin vs. nip devices. Partial binding of mobile ions in the accumulation layer has been suspected before.

The I− deficiency increases as the light intensity increases. Numerically, this is accompanied by the photogenerated free electron accumulation in the bulk caused by the particular choice of the simulation parameters (Table S1 and Fig. S4 in the ESI). In order to maintain the charge neutrality, anions are pushed out from the central region. From Fig. 3, it is clear that the mobile anions are pushed into the double layer (ETL side) under light illumination and released in the dark, all happening under the charge neutrality condition modified by the free carrier density.
Note in passing that the same effect occurs if we exchange the role of anion with cation and electron and hole. The result is shown in Fig S5 (ESI).
It is speculated that the observed bandgap shift is due to the local stoichiometric change away from thermal equilibrium; in our case in Fig. 3, increase in I− vacancies. Detailed first principles numerical calculations would be difficult because the fraction of the vacancies is so small that one would need an enormously large super cell to calculate the electronic structure. Even if it is done, the accuracy of calculation would be questionable. Nonetheless, we can refer to a study, in which the effect of one I− vacancy in a supercell containing about 50 iodine atoms has been considered. The bandgap increases about 0.05 eV over that of the vacancy-free structure. This will translate to about 1017 cm−3 iodine vacancies for a 10−4 eV bandgap shift. There are many problems in rationalizing our results against numerical calculations, e.g., the charge of the vacancy is assumed to be neutral on the calculation side and we do not know the excess carrier density exactly on the experimental side. Nevertheless, we believe that the argument is plausible, albeit further clarifications based on independent experimental means are definitely necessary.

We noted earlier the similarity of Fig. 2(a) with the Nyquist plots of EIS data at low frequencies. However, it is not obvious at all if the use of eqn (2) is appropriate here. We claim that the charge build-up in the double layers results in the ion depletion in the bulk. Eqn (2), however, describes the ionic transport, not directly related to the ion build-up. Moreover, it describes the ionic impedance under the transmissive boundary condition, which is in direct conflict with the idea of the ion accumulation at the boundary.

Physical interpretation set aside, we clearly need to show, in a numerical simulation, that eqn (2) is at least a reasonable approximation for the response of the bulk ion density to the sinusoidal illumination modulation. Because the frequency domain simulation is rather involved, we simulated the response of the ion distribution to a step function light illumination. In order to compare the simulation against eqn (2), we calculated its step function response by Fourier transform of eqn (2). In Fig. 4, we show some representative results. Details are described in ref. 5. Justification for using eqn (2) of the ESI. It is clear that the dynamical aspects of the numerical simulation are captured very well by the Fourier transform of eqn (2). Notably, the transition from the fast to slow responses spans over 2 decades in time and the fast part corner curves much slower than the slow part corner. Of course, this is not proof that the bulk ion density follows the Warburg formalism. However, it justifies the use of eqn (2) as a fitting tool; especially, the way to guess ΔT(0), which is obtainable only by extrapolation and interpretation of the diffusion constant, D.

Under the premise that ΔT/T reflects the ion density, we can extend our measurements in various directions. One is the excitation power, P0, dependence as shown in Fig. 5(a). The ΔT/T signal at 750 nm was measured when P0 was changed from 18.0 to 74.0 mW cm−2. The Bode plots are shown in Fig. S7 (ESI). The fitting is reasonably good. The fitting results are summarized in Table S3 (ESI). The light power-dependence of the D value is probably within the error bar. We assumed that the local free carrier density does not influence the energy barrier of the ion diffusion though the temperature of the devices was not controlled. The shift of the transmittance spectra (Δλ) was calculated from the peak height as was done in Fig. 2(b) and shown in Fig. 5(b). We see a linear relationship between the intensity and the spectral shift. This is in accordance with the numerical simulation shown in Fig. S9 (ESI), in which the ion deficiency (and thus Δλ) is proportional to the light intensity.


Another aspect we can extend into is the bias voltage-dependence. As an example, we present data measured at the bias voltages of 0 and 0.9 V in Fig. 6. The Bode plots are also shown in Fig. S8 (ESI). The fitting results by using eqn (1) are summarized in Table S4 (ESI). The simulation result is shown in Fig S9 (ESI). At 0.9 V, the density of the mobile ion in the double layer is smaller than at 0 V, because the internal voltage to be compensated by the mobile ion is reduced from the built-in potential. Therefore, the ion density deficiency at 0.9 V is less than that at 0 V and hence the {ΔT(0) − ΔT(∞)}/T value at 0.9 V is smaller than that at 0 V. Note that ΔT(∞) increases, while {ΔT(0) − ΔT(∞)}/T slightly decreases under the bias voltage. The former is reasonable because we have stronger PL. The latter agrees with the numerical simulation. Thus, in all aspects of the experimental conditions, the numerical simulation predicts the observation semi-quantitatively.


It is interesting to study the influence of many more parameters of the photoinduced effect. In order to search a wide device parameter space, however, the restriction imposed on the design of the device in the current experimental setup is stringent because transparent contacts must be employed. If we can use reflection, this constraint is removed; since reflection and transmission are related, we should be able to extract the same information after proper data manipulation. This is indeed the case. We show an example of the reflection measurement in 8. Reflection measurement in the ESI. Searching the temperature-, thickness-, and ion species-dependence, to name a few, with this approach (albeit an improvement in the s/n ratio is called for) is beyond the scope of this paper and will be our next project.


Photoinduced transmittance change was observed in CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells by using PAS. The transmittance edge shifted by Δλ = 0.2 nm (∼4.5 × 10−4 eV) to higher energy (i.e., band gap widening) under 520 nm illumination (77.7 mW cm−2). It was found that a Warburg element is a good fitting function to the Cole–Cole plots of ΔT/T, which hinted that an ionic motion is behind the scene. By using numerical simulations, we found that the bulk mobile ion density is modulated by the light illumination, and that the transient response of the ion density is very similar to that expected by the Warburg element, in which the ion mobility in the simulation matches well with the diffusion constant in the latter. The diffusion coefficient is 10−11 to 10−10 cm2 s−1 and it is comparable to the other reported values of I−. The spectral shift was attributed to the band gap increase due to the photoinduced bulk depletion of the mobile ion. It is to be noted that the ion motion over the whole device is possible because the double layer (of I−, in this case) acts as a reservoir that facilitates the “soft” ionic motion.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported in part by JSPS KAKENHI Grant number JP19K04500 and by the Panasonic-NIMS center of Excellence for Advanced Functional Materials.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: 1. Transmittance spectrum of the device. 2. Enlarged Cole–Cole plots at various probe wavelengths. 3. Bode plots at various probe wavelengths. 4. Numerical simulation of the ion distribution. 5. Justification for using eqn (2). 6. Bode plots at various light intensities. 7. Bode plots and numerical simulation for applied bias-dependence. 8. Reflection measurement. See DOI: 10.1039/d0cp04350h
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2020