 DOI: 10.1039/C7CC05590K
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 10548-10551


Deliang
Zhang
,

Bin-Bin
Cui
*,

Chenxiao
Zhou
,

Liang
Li
,

Yihua
Chen
,

Ning
Zhou
,

Ziqi
Xu
,

Yujing
Li
,

Huanping
Zhou
 and 

Qi
Chen
*

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, P. R. China. E-mail: qic@bit.edu.cn

Advanced Research Institute for Multidisciplinary Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, P. R. China. E-mail: cui-chem@bit.edu.cn

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P. R. China

Received
19th July 2017
, Accepted 30th August 2017
First published on 31st August 2017
A simple chemical process was developed in a scalable manner, to reduce trap states in perovskite absorbers from the very beginning. The obvious decrease of I2 in methylammonium iodide and the decrease of trap density in the resultant films were identified, which led to the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) increase from 16.5% to 18.5%.

Organic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted enormous attention, because of their outstanding optoelectronic properties such as large absorption coefficient, long diffusion length, high carrier mobility, and low fabrication cost. In addition, the skyrocketing power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs since their first demonstration in sensitized solar cells makes them become the most promising photovoltaics to compete with traditional Si-based solar cells. However, intrinsic defects in perovskite absorbers have significant influence on material properties and the performance of PSCs, which could potentially become non-radiative recombination centers and subsequently harm the photophysical properties of the perovskite films. Theoretical calculations have shown that point defects, introduced by vacancies or interstitials of methylammonium (MA), Pb, and iodide (I), are the most likely defects in MA lead iodide (MAPbI3) perovskites because of their low energies of formation. All these encourage unparalleled efforts to optimize the architecture of PSCs devices and to understand their fundamental operational principles. In addition, the reduction of the trap density of absorber layers plays an important role towards the final commercialization of PSCs.

In recent years, several reports concluded that remarkable improvements were obtained in PCEs by reducing the trap density of absorber layers in the devices. For example, the use of supramolecular halogen bond complexation can passivate the trap states at the perovskite surface. An appropriate amount of PbI2 can passivate the CH3NH3PbI3 films resulting in high performance solar cells. Furthermore, the use of CdS to passivate the surface trap sites of TiO2 enhanced the light stability of PSCs. The trap density can also be reduced by Li-treated TiO2, resulting in the elimination of photovoltaic hysteresis. For the trap density of absorber layers, attempts have been made to investigate the Pb/I ratio in precursors that affects the defects and the photovoltaic performance. Very recently, Seok et al. reported a two-step deposition method for the fabrication of high-quality perovskite films. The introduction of additional iodide ions (I3−) into the dripping solution facilitated the fabrication of a PSC with a certified PCE of 22.1%. An optimized dripping solution reduced the vacancies of I point in perovskites largely. However, there are fewer reports of reducing defects caused by interstitials of I2 and the following performance improvement of perovskite devices.
Besides imbalanced I/Pb stoichiometry in the precursor, the trace amount of I2 generated in the formation of MAI is likely responsible for quite a part of intrinsic trap states in perovskite films. It is well known that the remaining I− could easily evolve into I2 due to its low redox potential, which is evident from the colour change when MAI is exposed to O2 or air. Moreover, light illumination can lead to the appearance of I2 from the decomposition of PbI2. In addition, it is reported that I2 could react with metal electrodes (e.g. Ag) to result in poor stability in the photovoltaic cells. Moreover, the existence of I2 in the perovskite absorber not only affects the transportation of carriers, but also possibly accelerates the degradation of MAPbI3. Thus, it is critical and valuable to explore effective and simple ways to suppress the content of I2. Recently, researchers have proposed that the existence of MA additives could provide the alkaline conditions which are the key to make sure that I2 was deoxidized to I−. During the purification process of crude MAI, the formation of I2 is mostly unavoidable because of the easy interaction between MAI and O2 in air. In this communication, we employed commercially available methylamine alcohol solution (12.5 mmol L−1) to recrystallize MAI in the synthesis process for the first time, which effectively excluded most of I2 in the final product. Additionally, we explore the influence of purer MAI on the performance of the resultant PSCs.
In a conventional synthesis route, hydroiodic acid was reacted with methylamine to obtain the raw product of MAI, which is subsequently recrystallized in an ethanol/ether mixture. In our method, methylamine alcohol solution is employed during the recrystallization, which dissolves MAI better. The crude CH3NH3I was then purified once and twice in methylamine alcohol solution to obtain samples denoted as MAI-1 and MAI-2, respectively. The Reference is MAI which is purified three times using ethanol in a conventional process. We found that the addition of methylamine alcohol solution could suppress the formation of I2 and reduce the content of iodine in the MAI after purification.
The effectiveness of methylamine alcohol solution is firstly validated by UV-vis absorption spectroscopy. We prepared an MAI/DMF solution with a concentration of 1.57 mol L−1 and then extracted 50 μl of the MAI/DMF solution by diluting in 3 ml DMF to conduct the measurement. This revealed significant colour differences between the three solutions, which could be verified easily by the naked eye (see the inset map in Fig. 1a). The colour of the MAI-2 solution is the lightest, which could possibly indicate that the content of I2 in this solution is the minimum. UV-vis measurement of an I2/DMF solution was conducted as a reference and we observed a peak at around 365 nm in the spectrum due to I2 absorption in the I2/DMF solution (see Fig. S1, ESI). UV-vis absorption spectroscopy identified the obvious decrease of I2 when the crude raw material was recrystallized in methylamine alcohol solution instead of ethanol, directly. All solutions have a peak at around 365 nm, but the peak of MAI-2 is the lowest compared to the other solutions, which indicates the decreased content of I2 in the MAI purified twice using methylamine alcohol solution (UV-vis, see Fig. 1a). The reason why using methylamine alcohol solution to purify the crude MAI could reduce the content of I2 in the final product and the resulting effectiveness are provided in the following paragraphs.
Firstly, we found that the reduction of I2 in the precursors boosts the photovoltaic efficiency in the resultant devices. The devices employed the structure of ITO/SnO2/perovskite/spiro-MeOTAD/Au, whereas a one-step method was used to fabricate the absorber layer. Actually, both one-step and two-step methods have been demonstrated to produce solution-processed photovoltaics with high efficiencies. The PCEs of these devices were measured using a solar simulator under AM 1.5 irradiation and ambient conditions. As shown in Fig. 1b, the best performance of the devices based on MAI-2 showed a short-circuit photocurrent density (Jsc) of 22.69 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.13 V, a fill factor (FF) of 0.72, and a PCE of 18.54% (see Table 1). As shown in Fig. 1c, we investigated the stabilized outputs of high performance devices for Reference, MAI-1 and MAI-2 in a nitrogen atmosphere. The stabilized PCE of over 18% of MAI-2 was achieved by keeping the voltage at the maximum power point. And for Reference and MAI-1, the stabilized PCEs were 16.03% and 17.61%, respectively. The stabilized Jsc values of these devices are shown in Fig. S2, ESI. In addition, the current density–voltage (J–V) curves under an opposite scan direction for the devices of Reference, MAI-1 and MAI-2 are also shown in Fig. S3, ESI. The lessened hysteresis of the MAI-2 based device, compared with those of Reference and MAI-1 based devices, indicates that the defect was reduced in the MAI-2 based perovskite films. To verify the advantage of MAI-2 and its universality, we prepared 120 cells using three types MAI (40 cells per one type of MAI) under the same experimental conditions. The PCEs of devices with different MAIs are in accordance with the normal distribution (see Fig. 1d), showing that the average PCEs of the devices based on MAI-2 are higher than those of the others, and the MAI-1 based devices have better PCEs than the devices based on Reference.
Samples

V
oc


J
sc

FF
PCE

N
defects


E
U


V
oc (V), open-circuit voltage; Jsc (mA cm−2), short-circuit current density; FF, fill factor; PCE (%), power conversion efficiency; Ndefects (1015 cm−3), defect density; EU (meV), Urbach energies.
Reference
1.13
22.79
0.641
16.52
9.04
23.85
MAI-1
1.12
22.33
0.689
17.23
7.45
22.94
MAI-2
1.13
22.69
0.722
18.54
4.40
21.43
To reveal the underlying mechanism that governs the improvement of the device performance in MAI-2, we carried out time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements (see Fig. S4, ESI) to probe the lifetime of free carriers in the perovskite films. The PL lifetimes of Reference, MAI-1 and MAI-2 are fitted with a bi-exponential decay function written as
(1)
where
A1 and A2 are time independent coefficients of the amplitude fraction for each decay component. τ1 and τ2 are decay time of fast and slow components, respectively, where the slow decay is ascribed to be the bulk carrier recombination. The MAI-2 sample gives a slow component decay time of τMAI-2 = 199.28 ns, compared with τMAI-1 = 192.68 ns and τReference = 133.57 ns, respectively. The MAI-1 and MAI-2 samples showed longer lifetimes of carriers than that of Reference, indicating the reduction of trap density in the perovskite films.

Considering the low trap state density in most perovskite films, the carrier lifetime is prone to be affected significantly by measurement conditions, such as variations in film thickness. Thus, only the TRPL result is not creditable enough to support the elimination of defects in the perovskite films fabricated using MAI-1 and MAI-2 precursors. The space charge limited current (SCLC) of the perovskite films was checked, as shown in Fig. 2a–c. The sharp increase of the J–V curve correlates to a trap-filled limit (TFL), where all the defects are occupied by charge carriers. The defect density is calculated according to the equation:
Ndefects = 2εε0VTFL/eL2
(2)
where
ε and ε0 are the dielectric constants of MAPbI3 and the vacuum permittivity, respectively. L is the thickness of the obtained perovskite film, and e is the elementary charge. Through the measurement of SCLC, the VTFL values of perovskite films based on different MAIs purified using ethanol or purified once and twice using methylamine alcohol solution are 1.61 V, 0.87 V, and 0.71 V, and the defect densities Ndefects were calculated to be 9.04 × 1015 cm−3, 7.45 × 1015 cm−3 and 4.40 × 1015 cm−3 for the samples based on Reference, MAI-1 and MAI-2, respectively (see Table 1). We claim that the defect density is decreased obviously in the perovskite films that were fabricated with MAI-2. In addition, the defect densities which we calculated using SCLC in this communication are in the same magnitude with or lower than that in previous reports (∼1015 to ∼1016 cm−3). This indicates that the use of methylamine alcohol solution to purify MAI can really decrease the defect density in perovskite films.

We also conducted the transmittance measurements to estimate the Urbach energies of perovskite films fabricated with different MAIs. The Urbach energies deliver important information of trap density of films that is investigated from the band tails. The Urbach energies for perovskite films are calculated from the formula:
α = α0exp(hν/EU)
(3)
where
EU is the Urbach energies of perovskite films, and α0 is constant. The absorption coefficient (α) can be obtained from the transmittance spectrum:

α = −ln(T)/d
(4)
where
T is the transmittance, and d is the thickness of films. The relationship between “α and energy” is shown in Fig. 2d–f. The Urbach energies were calculated from the reciprocal of the slope near the band edge. The relevant values of 23.85, 22.94, and 21.43 meV are obtained from the perovskite films based on Reference, MAI-1 and MAI-2, respectively (see Table 1). The Urbach energy of the perovskite film based on MAI-2 is the minimum compared to the others, which means the minimal trap density in this perovskite film.

The result calculated from the Urbach energies is in good agreement with the TRPL and SCLC measurements. The Urbach energy values attained here are higher than previous literature reports, which may be attributed to the processing conditions.
As is known, the morphology and crystallinity of perovskite layers are critical in determining the devices’ efficiency and stability. We not only investigated the influence of different MAIs on the morphology of the perovskite layer using SEM (see Fig. S5, ESI), but also explored the polycrystalline films using X-ray diffraction (XRD, Fig. S6, ESI) patterns of the perovskite films with thermal annealing. The SEM images do not show substantial differences, which means that the MAI with methylamine alcohol solution have little influence on the growth of perovskite films. The XRD data of three samples also have no obvious difference, inferring that using methylamine alcohol solution to purify crude MAI does not affect the crystallinity of perovskite films after annealing and the films are in a desired phase with good crystallinity. The prominent peaks at 14.2° and 28.5° corresponding to the (1 1 0) and (2 2 0) crystal planes of CH3NH3PbI3 were observed at XRD patterns of all samples.
In order to bridge materials’ properties to the devices’ performance, we further conducted the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) to investigate the electric response of the resultant devices, as shown in Fig. S7, ESI. The equivalent circuit of this model (the inset of Fig. S7, ESI) has been already reported. The first semicircle at high frequency refers to the RCT value for the charge-transfer resistance at the photovoltaic. The radius of the semicircle is related to the charge-transfer resistance. The radius of the semicircle of solar cells based on MAI-2 is the minimum, which means that the charge-transfer resistance of MAI-2 based solar cells is the minimum. This clearly indicates that the reduction of trap states facilitates carrier transport and ultimately leads to the enhancement of devices’ performance when MAI-2 was employed.
According to the previous report, the existence of MA could suppress the formation of I2 in the precursor of perovskites because of the disproportionation of I2. A possible reaction could be as follows:
3I2 + 6CH3NH2 + 3H2O → 5I− + IO3− + 6CH3NH3+
(5)
where the alkaline conditions which could be offered by the methylamine alcohol solution play a key role in this reaction and the trace amount of water may come from the methylamine alcohol solution and the air atmosphere during the process of synthesis. In the process of our purification, the methylamine alcohol solution offers the MA molecules, and consequently the alkaline conditions resulting from the hydrolytic reaction of MA. This leads to the reduction of I
2 in the MAI purified by using methylamine alcohol solution, compared with the MAI purified three times using ethanol only.

In summary, we have used methylamine alcohol solution to purify the crude MAI powder, resulting in a substantial decrease of I2 in the final MAI precursor. This results in the enhancement of device performance, which is in part contributed from the facilitated charge transport within the device. The decrease in density of trap states is evidenced by the UV-vis absorption spectroscopy, TRPL, SCLC and the measurement of Urbach energy of each sample. This thus creates a sound correlation between the decrease of I2 in precursors and the decrease of trap density in the perovskite films, which finally improves the performance of photovoltaic cells. In addition, the proposed method provides an efficient and cost-effective approach to fabricate high-quality perovskite absorbers with reduced trap density in a scalable manner, which paves the way toward commercialization of perovskite photovoltaics.
The authors acknowledge funding support from National Key Research and Development Program of China Grant No. 2016YFB0700700, National Natural Science Foundation of China (51672008 and 51673025), and the Young Talent Thousand Program. The IV and EQE data reported here were acquired using a 3A steady-state solar simulator (SS-F5-3A) and a solar cell quantum efficiency measurement system (QE-R) supported by Enli Technology Co., Ltd.

There are no conflicts to declare.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cc05590k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017