 DOI: 10.1039/C4TC02396J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 1319-1324


Sihui
Li
,

Wenhua
Li
*,

Qian
Liu
,

Hedi
Wei
,

Enquan
Jin
,

Huan
Wang
,

Yang
Dong
,

Heng
Lu
,

Xuejuan
Zhang
,

Xiuxiu
Zhao
,

Mingzhao
Wang
* and 

Zhishan
Bo
*

Beijing Key Laboratory of Energy Conversion and Storage Materials, College of Chemistry, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China. E-mail: liwenhua@bnu.edu.cn

Received
22nd October 2014
, Accepted 27th November 2014
First published on 28th November 2014
We investigated photovoltaic performances of polymer solar cells depending on three materials (P1/PC71BM, P2/PC71BM, P3/PC71BM) that embedded with a certain sized (35 nm) Ag nanoparticles (NPs) between indium tin oxide (ITO) and PEDOT:PSS anode buffer layer. The power conversion efficiency of the three solar cells enhanced by 13.6%, 21.1%, and 16.0%, respectively, and the increase mainly originated from Jsc. The other measurements and investigations demonstrated that both the optical and electrical properties made contributions to the development of device performances. The introduction of Ag NPs between ITO substrates and PEDOT:PSS layers is one of the most effective approaches to improve the polymer solar cell performance.

As one of the most efficient photovoltaic devices, bulk heterojunction (BHJ) polymer solar cells (PSCs) offer potentially significant benefits and have been studied intensively because of their low cost, light weight, low-temperature fabrication, mechanical flexibility, solution processability, and so forth. Although great efforts have been made to improve the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs, it is still a challenge for further efficiency improvement due to the limited light absorption of the thin active layer. Specifically, the thickness of the active layer for BHJ PSCs is usually limited by recombination because of the low carrier mobility. Therefore, the competition between the sweep-out of photo-generated carriers and the recombination within the active layer has to always be considered. In this case, it is highly desirable to find ways that can maximize the light absorption capability instead of increasing the thickness of the active layer. Recently, the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effects of metal nanoparticles (NPs) have been introduced into PSCs and were expected to enhance the light absorption and corresponding photogeneration of mobile carriers. Among a variety of strategies to incorporate the metal NPs, mixing them directly in the active layer is the most commonly used simple method, and moreover, it can improve the overall performance of the PSCs. However, there is always a problem of exciton quenching occurring by nonradiative energy transfer when the metal NPs are too close to the active layer. Hence, some groups have studied the light absorption enhancement of metal NPs introduced into poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonic acid (PEDOT:PSS) hole transporting layer by direct mixing with the PEDOT:PSS solution. However, a serious aggregation was easily observed, which would lead to the incident light being reflected before reaching the active layer. Fortunately, the addition of metal NPs at the interface of the indium tin oxide (ITO) anode and the PEDOT:PSS layer offers the possibility of eliminating the tendency for NPs' aggregation. But up to now, there are limited investigations focused on this issue and among these studies, some methods including vapor-deposition, pulse-current electrodeposition and electron beam evaporation (EBE) have been adopted to incorporate the NPs at the interface of the ITO substrate. From a simplistic point of view, it is essential to develop a solution-processable procedure for the incorporation of Ag NPs into the PEDOT:PSS layer. In the present work, the uniform-sized Ag NPs are synthesized by a modified method. We further propose and demonstrate a convenient method of spin-coating the as-prepared Ag NPs onto an ITO-coated glass substrate. In addition, the performance enhancement of PSCs depending on three different donor materials has been studied, as well.


The method used to prepare Ag NPs was originally proposed in the previous study. In a typical synthesis, the Ag NPs were synthesized by the reduction of silver nitrate with 1,4-butanediol in the presence of poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) (PVP). Herein, the 1,4-butanediol was also used as the solvent in the system, and PVP acted as a capping agent in order to make the NPs soluble and stable in ethanol. Therefore, it played an important role to produce nice Ag NPs. In view of the acknowledged significance of both the shape and size of metal NPs in determining the incoupling efficiency of incident light, it is necessary to focus on the preparation of NPs with better quality. In the process of optimizing the various reaction parameters, we found that both the property of PVP (e.g. molecular weight) and reaction temperature were influential in controlling the morphology of Ag NPs. In addition, it is noteworthy that the precise control of temperature during the heating process is critical to obtain Ag NPs with nice uniformity both in shape and size.


Fig. 1a shows the typical scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images and size distribution of the as-synthesized Ag NPs. It is clear to see that these as-prepared Ag NPs are quasi-spherical as shown in the SEM image and have relatively uniform diameters of about 35 nm as depicted in the presented histogram. Herein, the average size was measured by randomly counting about 150 NPs in the SEM image by Image Tool Software. In Fig. S1, energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) analysis indicates that the Ag NPs consist of pure silver without oxidation. To analyze the optical characteristics, the absorption spectrum of Ag NPs dispersed in ethanol was recorded by UV-vis spectroscopy. As shown in Fig. 1b, a strong absorption band centered at ∼400 nm, which could be assigned to a localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR), is observed. Improved PCEs have been achieved due to the contribution of this LSPR effect, as we will subsequently discuss.

Based on the advantages previously discussed, we fabricated Ag NPs-based PSCs with the structure ITO/Ag NPs/PEDOT:PSS/Active layer/LiF (0.6 nm)/Al (100 nm). Devices without any Ag NPs were made as well and used as references. Fig. 2a shows the molecular structures of various polymer materials used in the active layer and photovoltaic device structure. These three polymers were successfully developed in our group to be applied as electron donor materials and exhibited high power conversion efficiencies in PSCs as reported in previous studies. Stimulated by the further improvement of their efficiencies, we chose them to construct solar cell devices to evaluate the ability of Ag NPs to enhance device performance, as shown in Fig. 2b.

The current–voltage (J–V) curves and photovoltaic performances of these three types of plain BHJ devices with the blends of P1:PC71BM, P2:PC71BM, and P3:PC71BM as the active layer, respectively, and BHJ devices embedded with Ag NPs are described in Fig. 3a–c and Table 1. The best plain devices exhibited PCEs of 4.62%, 5.3%, 5.7%, respectively, for P1:PC71BM, P2:PC71BM, and P3:PC71BM-based devices, which were comparable to the reported values in our previous work. When Ag NPs were embedded into the three types of BHJ devices by spin-coating onto the ITO substrates, both short-circuit current (Jsc) and PCE increased. Specifically, the best Ag NPs-embedded BHJ devices had final PCEs as high as 5.25%, 6.42%, and 6.61%, respectively, depending on the P1:PC71BM, P2:PC71BM, and P3:PC71BM, which means 13.6%, 21.1%, and 16.0% enhancement compared with that of the plain devices fabricated in the same condition. Therefore, it shows a promising positive effect on increasing the PCE of BHJ devices to introduce Ag NPs on the interface between the ITO and PEDOT:PSS layers. However, it is necessary to point out that more Ag NPs do not mean higher PCE enhancement, and the quantity of used Ag NPs has been optimized as a very important parameter.
Polymer
W/O or W Ag NPs

V
OC [V]
FF [%]

J
SC [mA cm−2]
PCEmax [%]
PCEave [%]
Thickness [nm]

a W/O and W represent without and with, respectively.
b At least four devices were tested and the average values were determined.


P1

W/O
0.80
0.66
8.75
4.62
4.50
88
W
0.81
0.65
9.97
5.25
5.18
93

P2

W/O
0.99
0.64
8.36
5.30
5.27
70
W
0.98
0.64
10.24
6.42
6.24
81

P3

W/O
0.97
0.64
9.18
5.70
5.65
70
W
0.96
0.65
10.6
6.61
6.52
81
It is notable that the critical factor that increases the PCE characteristics of the devices using Ag NPs is Jsc, which increased from 8.75 to 9.97, 8.36 to 10.24, and 9.18 to 10.6 mA cm−2, respectively, as shown in Table 1. As one of the most effective photovoltaic parameters in determining the PCE of BHJ devices, Jsc value can be increased mainly by improving the light harvesting, charge transport/collection efficiency, etc., in BHJ. In our case, 13.9%, 22.5% and 15.5% enhancements in Jsc have been achieved after the Ag NPs were embedded into BHJ devices composed of P1:PC71BM, P2:PC71BM, and P3:PC71BM, respectively, whereas open-circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF) almost maintain constant in most of the devices. According to the previous studies, charge recombination is commonly regarded as one important loss mechanism limiting Voc in BHJ PSCs. The appropriate introduction of Ag NPs at the interface of ITO and PEDOT:PSS did not give rise to additional charge recombination, which usually arises in devices with Ag NPs blended in the active layer. Therefore, the Voc of our devices did not decrease obviously under the optimized condition. Although a general improvement in Jsc has been observed for all the three types of devices, it is still necessary to emphasize that the Jsc of the Ag NPs-embedded device based on P2:PC71BM was enhanced greatly by 22.5%. Herein, it is worthy to point out that the difference between the measured Jsc value and the calculated one was almost negligible (within 7%), which indicates good reasonability of our OPV measurements.

To better understand and illustrate the PCE enhancement, we also performed UV-vis absorption measurements of solar cells with and without NPs. This enhancement might be attributed to the increased optical absorbance, compared with that of a plain device at around 350 nm to 600 nm, which is depicted in Fig. 4a and S2. To further determine the reason for the improved Jsc, we measured the incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra for the plain BHJ devices and that with Ag NPs incorporated between the ITO and PEDOT:PSS layers. For the sake of brevity, we only take data of devices based on P2:PC71BM as a representative example for the following discussion. Data of other two BHJ devices are shown in the ESI. As shown in Fig. 4b, the external quantum efficiency (EQE) exhibits a maximum value of 70% near 375 nm, and the EQE enhancement is observed in the wavelength range of 350 nm to 600 nm for the P2:PC71BM device with Ag NPs. This point is in good agreement with the additional light absorption demonstrated in Fig. 1b.

However, we have to say that the absorption change shown in the Fig. 4a is not so significant, although the absorption enhancement is indeed observed, which can be further elucidated from the diffuse reflectance spectra shown in Fig. S6. The lower reflectivity of the device incorporated with Ag NPs indicates stronger absorption of incident light. Therefore, apart from the LSPR effect, it is highly important that the other possibilities leading to the enhancement of Jsc are investigated to understand the final PCE improvement. Among the studies of the dependence of PCE on the electrical properties, such as exciton dissociation rates, charge transport rates and charge collection efficiencies, to increase the anode surface roughness (RMS) can be employed to shorten the distance for holes to reach the anode, which will induce the hole collection efficiency improvement. It is also proven as a reason to interpret the Jsc increase in our case by the investigation on the morphology change of the surface of PEDOT:PSS. As shown in the AFM 3D height images (Fig. 5e and f), the increase in RMS from 0.932 to 0.982 nm is achieved after incorporating Ag NPs between ITO and PEDOT:PSS. It is notable that the RMS value change here is not too much, compared with the reported one. However, it is reasonable by taking into account of the similarity between AgNPs' size (35 ± 3 nm) and the typical thickness of PEDOT:PSS (35 nm). Actually, it not only gives an explanation to the small absorption enhancement due to the feature of laterally distributed LSPR near field in the active layer but also highlights the good dispersibility of Ag NPs embedded in the PEDOT:PSS layer. Combining with the analysis of the AFM 2D height images and the 3D height image in Fig. 5a and d, respectively, we can conclude that the introduction of Ag NPs into PSCs devices by the spin-coating method is successful.
On the one hand, it is apparent that the Ag NPs are all well dispersed on the ITO and almost emerged into the PEDOT:PSS layer without any obvious aggregation. It eliminates the negative effect of the incident light reflected by large particles before reaching the active layer and smooths the light path to the active layer. On the other hand, the tiny RMS change is already “big” enough to induce an increase of interfacial area between PEDOT:PSS and active layer, which resulted in an improved hole collection efficiency at the anode, particularly the Jsc in our devices. Meanwhile, we could obtain the device series resistance (Rs) of the OPV from the inverse slope of the dark J–V curve at a voltage of 1.0 V from Fig. 3d and S5, and it shows the series resistances of the devices with embedded Ag NPs decreasing from 9.35 Ω cm2 (without Ag NPs) to 7.96 Ω cm2 (with Ag NPs) for P2:PC71BM, 15.51 Ω cm2 (without Ag NPs) to 9.25 Ω cm2 (with Ag NPs) for P1:PC71BM and 10.3 Ω cm2 (without Ag NPs) to 5.0 Ω cm2 (with Ag NPs) for P3:PC71BM, which is consistent with improved charge transport and higher short-circuit currents.

In this study, we prepared Ag NPs with good uniformity both in shape and size and furthermore incorporated them between the ITO substrate and the PEDOT:PSS anode buffer layer. It was demonstrated that the performance of PSCs based on three OPV materials (P1:PC71BM, P2:PC71BM, P3:PC71BM) all dramatically increased after including the Ag NPs, and the enhancements mainly originated from Jsc. Based on the investigation of optical and electrical properties of PSCs with and without Ag NPs, respectively, it could be concluded that the LSPR effect of Ag NPs enhanced the light absorption of our devices, while, incorporating Ag NPs between the ITO substrate and the PEDOT:PSS anode buffer layer induced the anode RMS enhanced to some extent, which resulted in the hole collection efficiency improved. Thus, both the optical and the electrical properties made contributions to the development of PSC performance and to introduce Ag NPs between the ITO substrate and PEDOT:PSS layer is one of the most effective approaches for improving PSC performance. It is worth mentioning that the solution processable method (the synthesis method and treatment with ethanol of Ag NPs we employed) is simpler and also green, which is suitable for the applications to large-area processes.


Financial support from the NSF of China (51003006 and 21161160443), the 973 Programs (2011CB935702), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities are gratefully acknowledged.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental parts include EDS and TEM images of Ag NPs (Fig. S1), UV-Vis absorption spectra (Fig. S2), AFM 2D and 3D height images (Fig. S3), EQE spectra (Fig. S4), and J–V curves in the dark current (Fig. S5). Diffuse reflectance spectra (Fig. S6). See DOI: 10.1039/c4tc02396j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015