 DOI: 10.1039/C8TC05873C
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 2199-2206


Menghua
Zhu
,

Guangda
Niu
* and 

Jiang
Tang
*

Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics (WNLO), Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan 430074, China. E-mail: guangda_niu@hust.edu.cn; jtang@mail.hust.edu.cn

Received
22nd November 2018
, Accepted 18th January 2019
First published on 18th January 2019
Elemental selenium (Se), as the oldest photovoltaic material, has many advantages such as a direct fundamental band gap, earth-abundance, simple composition, nontoxicity, and a low melting point for optoelectronic applications. Both its crystalline and amorphous forms have been studied as an active layer in solar cells and detectors. In this review, the fundamental properties of Se, including the crystal structure, and optical and electronic properties, have been revisited. Then we separately summarize the advantages, progress and status of utilizing crystalline Se (c-Se) in solar cells and amorphous Se (a-Se) in detectors. Additionally, we briefly discuss the potential and remaining issues of c-Se solar cells as a top cell in tandem photovoltaic devices. We hope that this review could be helpful for researchers involved in the study of Se for optoelectronic applications.

Se is the oldest photovoltaic material. Willoughby Smith firstly discovered the photoconductivity of Se in 1873. Later in 1877, Adams and Day noted the photo-generated currents and internal voltages within a Se bar. The next significant step came seven years later (1883), Charles Fritts moved this material forward by constructing the world's first photoelectric module. But since the emergence and rapid development in the silicon industry, silicon photovoltaic devices soon grew as the main stream. In contrast, the power conversion efficiency of Se photovoltaics only increased from <1% in the earliest demonstration to 5.0% in the 1980s. Although rarely studied, Se has many advantages such as earth-abundance, simple composition, nontoxicity, and low melting point for optoelectronic applications. Se are applied in various thin film devices such as xerographic plates, memory switches, photovoltaic cells, and radiation and UV light detection.

Elemental Se exists in six allotropic forms in the solid state. They can be generally classified into crystalline and amorphous states. The crystalline state includes α-monoclinic, β-monoclinic, gray triangular crystals and the only thermodynamically stable form hexagonal Se, referred to as crystalline selenide (c-Se) here. Both α-monoclinic and β-monoclinic Se contain four Se8 rings in a unit cell stacked either parallel to each other (β monoclinic) or with two different stacking directions (α). C-Se consists of helical polymeric chains and is insoluble in CS2. It is a semiconductor and has a direct band gap between 1.8 and 2.0 eV depending on the synthesis conditions. Hexagonal Se has a high absorption coefficient (over 104 cm−1) in the visible region, and a low melting point of 220 °C, which enables the convenient vacuum fabrication of Se films. Owing to its large band gap, hexagonal Se attracts great interest as a potential top absorber in Si based tandem photovoltaic devices. In terms of the non-crystalline state, there are red amorphous, black amorphous and vitreous Se. Benefitting from the high resistivity and good uniformity, a-Se based optoelectronic devices are advantageous due to their low dark current and easy upscaling capability. The above properties enable the wide use of a-Se in numerous detection applications, such as high-gain avalanche rushing amorphous photoconductor detectors, X-ray detectors and solid-state image sensors.
In this paper we mainly focus on the past development progress of c-Se and a-Se. The fundamental properties of c-Se and a-Se, including the crystal structure and optical and electrical properties, have been summarized. We then review the recent progress of c-Se based solar cells and the related film preparation methods, and the application of a-Se for photodetectors and X-ray detectors. Finally, the potential use of c-Se in tandem solar cells and unsolved issues are also briefly discussed.

Se was firstly discovered by Swedish scientist Berzelius in 1817. The atomic number is 34 and the atomic weight is 78.96. Se has six stable isotopes with masses of 74, 76, 77, 78, 80 and 82, and the outer electronic configuration is 4s2 4p4.

C-Se, also termed grey metallic Se, is the most thermodynamically stable crystal structure and consists of helical chains arranged in a hexagonal array (Fig. 1). The structure can be viewed as a distorted cubic primitive lattice, while each atom has two nearest neighbors which belong to the same chain and four nearest neighbors in adjacent chains. The hexagonal cell dimensions reported by Swanson, Gilfrich, and Ugrinic were a = b = 4.3662 Å and c = 4.9536 Å, with a chiral space group of P3121 (or its enantiomorph P3221). The melting point of Se is as low as 220 °C, and it has been reported that a Se crystal can be formed when sintered at 200 °C, implying the possibility of assembling flexible photoelectric devices on a polyimide (PI) substrate. However, the crystallization of Se from the melting state is not an easy process. Due to the complex polymeric structure, the mobility of Se atoms in the melting state is greatly decreased, and the arrangement of Se atoms into the hexagonal array becomes extremely slow. Additionally, other physical properties of hexagonal Se are as follows: density 4.82 g cm−3, boiling point 685 °C, work function 5.9 eV, and atomic radius 1.17 Å.
a-Se has been reported to be composed mainly of the Se8-ring. There are also some polymeric chains of Se atoms in a-Se. The Se8-ring can dissolve in CS2 solution while the polymeric chain can hardly dissolve. The glass transition temperature of a-Se is 48–50 °C. The accurate composition depends on the deposition conditions such as the substrate temperature, deposition rate, etc. Previous studies have found that if the substrate was kept at room temperature, the evaporated film consisted of the Se8-ring, and if the substrate was around 70 °C, the film mainly consisted of polymeric chains.

C-Se has generally been reported as a direct transition semiconductor with a band gap of 1.8–2.2 eV. Following the Shockley–Queisser theory, the theoretical solar conversion efficiency of solar cells with the aforementioned band gap can reach up to 20%. The absorption coefficient of Se is larger than 105 cm−1 in the ultraviolet and visible spectra below ∼600 nm, allowing sufficient absorption of the solar spectrum within a thickness of 500 nm. C-Se normally exhibits p-type conductivity, and the prevailing hypothesis is that this arises from the acceptor states generated by dangling Se bonds because the chains are not infinitely long. The density of holes in Se single crystals is about 1014 cm−3, and the mobility of the holes is dependent on the impurity content and on the thermal treatment of the samples and may vary from 0.003 to 3 cm2 V−1 s−1.

The carrier mobility of a-Se is lower than that of c-Se due to the absence of a long range ordering structure. Its electron mobility is determined to be 5–7 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, and the hole mobility is determined to be 0.13–0.14 cm2 V−1 s−1. The hole lifetime is estimated in the range 5–17 μs. The measured μτ value for electrons is 3 × 10−7–10−5 cm2 V−1, and that for the hole is 6 × 10−6–10−7 cm2 V−1. The resistivity is around 1012–1014 Ω cm, and such a high resistivity guarantees the ultralow dark current and also low noise signals when applied in detectors.
Generally, the difference in the optical and electrical properties of selenium is mainly determined by their band structures, doping density and defect density. For example, due to the lack of the periodic arrangement of Se atoms, a-Se exhibits a higher band gap (1.99 eV) than c-Se (1.85 eV) yet a lower carrier mobility. The presence of dangling bonds and the associated non-radiative transitions makes a-Se possess a photo-acoustic signal at 800 nm. In terms of doping, previous works have found that doping with bromine or thallium together with selenium vacancies and interstitial defects can determine the majority carrier type and concentration of the polycrystalline films.
In a word, because of the periodic arrangement of Se atoms, c-Se, compared with a-Se, enjoys a low concentration of Se vacancies and hence a less non-radiative recombination loss; a smoother charge transport and hence a higher mobility; and a smaller band gap and hence could absorb more sunlight and produce solar cells with a higher efficiency. C-Se is suitable for solar cells while a-Se is more competitive for detection applications because of its high resistivity.

Solar cells have continuously been a hot topic due to their importance to replace traditional fossil energy. Under illumination, electrons can be pumped from the valence band of the absorber layer into the conduction band, and the generated carriers (electrons and holes) can be separated by forming a PN junction with another heavily doped semiconductor and then collected by the electrodes. The energy loss in solar cells relates to the non-radiative recombination process within devices. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of solar cells is determined by three key parameters, short circuit current (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), and filling factor (FF). Overall, these parameters are highly correlated with the semiconductor band gaps, carrier lifetime, carrier diffusion length, radiative recombination etc. C-Se has a large band gap of around 1.8–2.2 eV, which makes it an appropriate choice for top cells in tandem devices. However, due to the limited efforts in controlling the film quality, the unresolved defect issue and non-radiative recombination are the major limitations for c-Se based photovoltaic devices. Here we summarize the reported film fabrication methods for c-Se, which is decisive on the film quality (crystallinity, defects, etc.). The prevailing fabrication methods for the c-Se film include vacuum deposition process (VDP), and solution processing methods such as spin-coating and electrochemical deposition (ECD). Herein, all the previously reported Se-based solar cells are summarized in Table 1.

Se-Based solar cells structure
Method

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
Fill factor (%)
Efficiency (%)
Publication date ref.
ITO/Te/Se/Au
VDP
0.54
10.9
56
3.3
1984
FTO/CdSe/Se/Au
VDP
—
—
—
4.6
1984
ITO/TiO2/Se/Au
VDP
0.884
10.8
25
5.01
1985
n-TiO2/Se/p-CuCNS
ECD
0.60
3.0
—
0.13
1998
FTO/cp-TiO, mp-TiO2/Se/Au
ECD
0.65
8.7
53
3.0
2013
FTO/compact-TiO2/mp-TiO2/Se/
P3HT/PEDOT:PSS/Ag
VDP
0.71
9.71
38
2.63
2014
FTO/compact-TiO2/mp-TiO2/Se/
Spiro-OMeTAD/PEDOT:PSS/Ag
VDP
0.69
8.10
33
1.83
2014
FTO/bl-TiO, mp-TiO2/Se/PTAA/Au
Spin-coating
0.66
9.7
66
3.52
2016
FTO/ZnMgO/Se/MoOx/Au
VDP
0.969
10.6
63
6.51
2017
FTO/TiO2/Se/MoOx/Au
VDP
0.866
10.9
60
5.73
2017
FTO/TiO2/Se/Au
VDP
0.728
10.5
50
3.88
2017
The VDP is a frequently used method for Se film fabrication. In general, high purity Se powder evaporates under vacuum conditions and is directly deposited on the surface of the substrate. The thickness of the Se film could be tuned from 0.2 to 20 μm. The Se film derived from this approach exhibits a full surface coverage and a uniform grain structure with grain sizes up to micrometers. However, the heat treatment during the VDP could easily cause cracks in the crystallized Se film due to the shrinkage during the crystallization process. The crystalline Se film could also peel off easily from the glass surface. There are also amounts of voids and holes within the Se films due to the evaporation loss of Se from the deposited film.
In 1984, Hideo Ito et al. obtained a stable crystalline Se film with a thickness of 1 μm on glass by depositing a thin cadmium selenide (CdSe) layer between glass and c-Se. The CdSe layer (0.02–0.03 μm) acted as an adhesive medium helping Se to adhere onto the substrate. The Se film could be fabricated by vacuum evaporation at 250 °C, without peeling off and cracks. The final c-Se based solar cell has a structure of SnO2/CdSe/Se/Au, and the efficiency reaches 4.6% at 60 °C, 100 mW cm−2 illumination. It should be noted that the device performance was improved after 20 days, and the authors ascribed this phenomenon to the stress release (Fig. 2b). The tensile stress in the crystallized Se was of the order of 1011 Pa, but this value decreased by about one order after 40 days.
In 1985, Nakada et al. introduced the sputter-deposited TiO2 layer in Se solar cells. The cell consisted of transparent ITO layers, n-type TiO2, p-type polycrystalline Se, and Au as the back contact metal. The efficiency of Se solar cells was enhanced to 5.01%. The Se layer was firstly grown in an amorphous form at room temperature because a crystalline Se layer deposited at a higher temperature inevitably has voids and pinholes. Then the Se layer was annealed in air at 180–220 °C to convert amorphous Se into a crystalline form. The cells showed a poor efficiency without the TiO2 layer because of the poor adhesion of Se on bare ITO. The TiO2 film layer, with an optimal thickness of 500 nm, can avoid the formation of voids on the surface of the Se film, leading to an improvement in the efficiency of the device.
In 2014, inspired by the development of dye-sensitized solar cells and perovskite solar cells, Wang et al. applied elemental Se in a mesoscopic solar cell with a hybrid organic–inorganic structure of FTO/compact-TiO2/mp-TiO2/Se/P3HT/PEDOT:PSS/Ag (Fig. 3). Such a structured device exhibited a power conversion efficiency of 2.63%. In this device, the organic semiconductor P3HT was used to selectively collect and facilitate the transport of holes to the Ag cathode. Similar to the work by Nakada et al., Se was firstly deposited in the amorphous state, and then converted into a crystalline state by sintering.
In 2017, Todorov and co-workers redesigned the structure of Se solar cells with improved back and front interfaces. Based on the ZnMgO/Se/MoOx/Au structure, the heterojunction solar cell achieved a device efficiency of 6.51% (Voc = 0.97 V, Jsc = 10.6 mA cm−2, and FF = 63.4%). This is the highest efficiency for all kinds of Se based solar cells up to now. In order to reduce the chance of electron–hole recombination and enhance the collection, the authors introduced a high-work-function hole-selective layer MoOx between the Se and the gold back contact. They also utilize ZnxMg1−xO (ZnMgO) with a tunable band gap as a buffer layer, and obtained a record Voc of 969 mV with an optimized electron transfer layer (ETL). Additionally, in order to increase the benefit from the back surface field and at the same time decrease the material consumption and fabrication time, they reduced the thickness of the Se layer to only 100nm, which is 20 times less than previous studies. Moreover, the device showed good stability in an air atmosphere (Fig. 4d) with no efficiency loss after 5 months.
Besides the vacuum deposition method, solution deposition of the Se film has also been widely studied. In 1998, Tennakone et al. reported the synthesis of Se films by electrolysis in an aqueous solution of Se dioxide (0.5 M) with FTO/TiO2 as a substrate and subsequently built a FTO/n-TiO2/Se/p-CuSCN/Au structured solar cell. The photogenerated electrons and holes can be effectively transferred from the Se layer to nano-porous n-TiO2 and p-CuSCN, respectively. This kind of Se based solar cell showed a Voc of 600 mV and Jsc of 3.0 mA cm−2 at 800 W m−2 simulated sunlight.
Later in 2013, Nguyen, et al. also prepared the Se layer by an electrolytic method. The device structure is FTO/cp-TiO2/mp-TiO2/Se/Au, as shown in Fig. 5a. The electrolyte was a mixed solution of NaCl, HCl and H2SeO3, while Ag/AgCl was used as the reference electrode. After depositing the Se layer, the film was further annealed at 200 °C for 3 min in air to improve the crystallinity of Se. The cell with a Se layer deposited in 11.5 mM HCl and 20 mM H2SeO3 showed the best performance with a short-circuit photocurrent density of 8.7 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage of 0.65 V, a fill factor of 0.53, and a conversion efficiency of 3.0% (Fig. 5b). However, the limitation of this method is that several pulse cycles for deposition and post-annealing are required to achieve compact c-Se films.
In addition to the electrochemical deposition method, spin-coating, as an easy and widely adapted strategy for solution process, could also be applied to prepare Se films. In 2016, Kanatzidis et al. developed an efficient spin-coating process to fabricate Se solar cells with the structure of FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2/Se layer/PTAA/Au. In this work, a mixture of ethylenediamine (EDA) and hydrazine solvents was used to dissolve the Se powder, and the solution was then spin coated directly onto the substrate followed by an annealing process at 200 °C (Fig. 6). By adjusting the volume ratio of EDA/hydrazine, the film formation and morphology could be manipulated. The increased coverage and smoothness of Se was achieved using an EDA additive, and the possible reason was that EDA can coordinate with Se and this allowed Se to slowly crystallize onto the TiO2 surface. The heterojunction solar cell achieved a device efficiency of 3.52% (Voc = 0.66 V, Jsc = 9.7 mA cm−2, and FF = 66%). The device also showed good stability that a slight efficiency drop (0.17%) was observed after 30 days of storage in air.

There are also many papers working on utilizing a-Se in detectors, with a wide detectable wavelength ranging from visible to UV and X-rays. Detection of UV light and X-rays has attracted attention in various fields, like astronomic observation, flame sensors and medical imaging applications. The basic figures of merit for detectors include dark current and responsivity, i.e. the ratio of the generated photocurrent to a given incident power. Due to the high resistivity (1012–1014 Ω cm), a-Se based detectors have a low dark current and a suppressed thermal noise. Moreover, photoconductive a-Se detectors exhibit a photoconductive gain, which helps increase the photocurrent and responsivity. A photoconductive gain is achieved when a photon-generated charge can travel through the circuit multiple times before recombination, and this requires the charge lifetime to exceed the charge transit time. As previously stated, a-Se has an estimated hole lifetime as long as 5–17 μs, which guarantees the photoconductive gain within detectors.

Amorphous Se has been utilized in detecting ultraviolet (UV) light, as studied by Tomoaki Masuzawa et al. The device is a diode-structured vacuum tube consisting of a-Se-based photoconductive anode and a nitrogen-doped diamond cathode (Fig. 7a). The response to the UV light is confirmed by the emission current-applied voltage characteristics of the detector (Fig. 7b). The calculated quantum efficiency is 1000 under a bias voltage of 400 V, demonstrating the excellent photoconductive gain effect in this kind of detector.
Shiva Abbaszadeh et al. demonstrated that a-Se detectors can be used for measuring ultraviolet photons (200–400 nm). The device was fabricated by firstly patterning Cr electrodes on a glass substrate, then spin coating polyimide (PI) onto the electrodes, and finally thermally evaporating a 2 μm-thick a-Se on top of the PI layer. PI was used to further minimize the dark current. The dark current of the detector at room temperature was 3 pA mm−2 at a high electric field of 43 V μm−1. Thereby detector cooling is not required for such a low dark current. To demonstrate the application, the detector could measure the UV photons generated from a portable battery-operated microplasma, where nanogram amounts of samples were introduced and generated characteristic emissions. In their paper, they used Zn with a characteristic emission at 213.8 nm, Mg with the emission at 285.2 nm and Cu with the emission at 324.8 nm for feeding samples. The good responsivity toward UV light could be used to quantify the amounts of these samples.
Another more famous application of a-Se is direct X-ray detection. Generally, X-ray detectors can convert X-rays to either charge or lower energy photons, while converting to charge is termed the direct way and to lower energy photons the indirect way. In the indirect way, scintillators firstly convert X-rays to photons and then these photons are collected by silicon photodiodes. The generated light can scatter many times by scintillator grains before it escapes, which easily causes image blur or resolution loss. In the direct route, X-rays are absorbed by the photoconductor and generated electron–hole pairs. The produced charge carriers are collected by the external electric field. The directional migration can avoid the carrier scattering in indirect conversion and is beneficial for better image resolution.
The use of a-Se in direct X-ray detection is based on the following reasons: (i) its amorphous form enables the easy and inexpensive evaporation of large area detectors; (ii) the low dark current of a-Se guarantees the low detector noise, which is highly important for weak signal detection. The other properties of a-Se-based X-ray detectors are as follows: the conversion efficiency is ∼1000 electron–hole pairs/50 keV X-ray at an electrical field of 10 V μm−1; due to the atomic number (Z) restriction, the attenuation efficiency of a-Se (Z = 34) toward X-rays is better than that of silicon (Z = 14) but lower than that of other semiconductors like CdTe (Z = 48, 52) and that of the recently reported metal halide perovskites. Quantitatively, ∼50% of a 50 keV beam could be attenuated within the 365 μm Se film.
In order to achieve a high-sensitive a-Se based photodetector for an X-ray photodetector, many device structures have been developed. Fig. 8a illustrates a structure of a-Se based flat-panel detector proposed by Kasap et al., which has been commercialized. Generally, a-Se receives X-ray radiation, and generates electrons and holes, while the charges are collected by the storage capacitor. The stored charges could act as output currents when applying a gate voltage to turn on the field effect transistor (FET). During imaging applications, the above detectors are aligned in arrays, and the TFT gate is connected to a common row gate signal line and a scanning clock generator addresses all the rows. Specifically, TFT switches are turned on one by one via a gate line according to the clock generator. The signal charge is then transferred through data lines into a processing circuit. a-Se flat-panel detectors (FPDs) typically need a high operating voltage of 1–1.5 kV to provide an electric field of 80–100 V μm−1 across the a-Se film for efficient extraction of charge carriers. However, a breakdown of the FET gate and the irreversible breakdown of the a-Se layer are often caused by the high voltage and the local field enhancement at the edge of the metal electrode. Introducing a resistive interface layer can decrease the local electric field, but at the same time the carrier transport property was negatively affected.
In the above structure, the top electrode/a-Se (200 μm in thickness)/back electrode is assembled in a vertical stacking mode. Karim et al. raised the lateral metal–semiconductor–metal (MSM) structure with a thick a-Se layer for direct X-ray detection. The spacing between the two metal electrodes is smaller than 10 μm, and the driving voltage is thereby lower than the vertical structure. However, their simulation results found that the electric field within the lateral structure is not uniformly distributed and only confined to the surface region with a thickness of ∼20 μm. The charge collection is thereby expected to be insufficient.
The lateral MSM structure has also been used as photodetectors in an indirect X-ray imaging system. Reznik et al. reported this kind of photodetector with a polyimide layer being inserted between the metal electrodes and a-Se as a blocking contact. It can significantly reduce the dark current even at high applied biases that result in high photo-to-dark-current ratios, thus leading to a wide dynamic range and a high signal-to-noise ratio. In addition, the hole-blocking layer prevents the hole injection from back contact, which also helps in applying a high voltage across the a-Se film. A 2 μm-thick a-Se alloy (containing 0.2% As and 5 ppm Cl) is then thermally evaporated on top of the polyimide layer which was coated on a glass substrate. In Fig. 8b, the dark current in a-Se is significantly reduced from 10−8 A mm−2 to 10−13 A mm−2 at a voltage of 20 V when using the blocking layer.

In summary, elemental Se has several key features suitable for optoelectronic applications, including a direct band gap, earth-abundance, simple composition, nontoxicity, and a low melting point. As for photovoltaic applications, crystalline Se-based solar cells have only been documented in limited papers, and the current record efficiency is 6.53%. Amorphous Se has additional features of high resistance, high uniformity, and convenient preparation at low temperature, rendering a-Se a suitable choice for detecting UV light and X-rays.

Although barely studied, the wide band gap of c-Se (1.8–2.2 eV) makes Se an attractive high-band-gap absorber. One important subject in the photovoltaic field is to fabricate tandem solar cells. For example, placing a ∼1.75 eV band gap “top cell” above silicon bottom cells could theoretically break the Shockley–Queisser efficiency limit for silicon solar cells (29.4%). Although the band gap of c-Se is slightly higher than optimal, an attractive feature of c-Se is that the band gap could be reduced to 1.2–1.8 eV by Te alloying. Se and Te easily alloy to form a solid solution due to their similar crystal structure and electronegativity. Substitution of Te into Se has been reported to reduce the Se8 ring population and slightly increases the chain fraction but reduces the chain length.
Although without systematic characterization, Nakada et al. already fabricated a TiO2/TeSe solar cell dating back to 1985. The selenium (0.2–20 μm) evaporated immediately after Te deposition (15 Å). The annealing process could drive the thin Te layer to diffuse into the Se layer to form the alloyed film. Then in 2014, Ito et al. tried to fabricate Te/Se based solar cells with an electrochemical deposition method, but only achieve a PCE of 1.17% resulting from the poor film quality. Based on the understanding of the c-Se film, future studies should be conducted to further improve the Te/Se film quality (uniformity, coverage, crystallinity, grain boundary passivation, etc.). For example, for vacuum deposition, the substrate, deposition temperature, and post-annealing conditions should all be adjusted to adapt the utilization of Te/Se absorbers. Additionally, the fundamental physical properties of the Se and Te/Se alloy should be studied to direct device fabrication, like the band structure, energy level, defect properties and so on. We believe that c-Se is an important member in the photovoltaic family, and more attention is required to realize its potential in tandem solar cells.

There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61725401, 51702107 and 5171101030), the National Key R&D Program of China (2016YFA0204000), and the HUST Key Innovation Team for Interdisciplinary Promotion (2016JCTD111 and 2017KFXKJC003).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019