 DOI: 10.1039/C9NR01836K
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 8776-8784


Zhiqi
Li
,

Jiajun
Dong
,

Wenbin
Han
,

Guanhua
Ren
,

Chunyu
Liu
,

Houxiao
Cui
,

Liang
Shen
 and 

Wenbin
Guo
*

State Key Laboratory of Integrated Optoelectronics, College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University, 2699 Qianjin Street, Changchun 130012, People's Republic of China. E-mail: guowb@jlu.edu.cn

State Key Laboratory on Superhard Materials, Jilin University, 2699 Qianjin Street, Changchun 130012, People's Republic of China

Received
1st March 2019
, Accepted 8th April 2019
First published on 9th April 2019
To overcome the intrinsic chemical-reduction-activity of highly p-doped PEDOT:PSS and improve the open-circuit voltage (Voc) of planar inverted perovskite solar cells, a kind of oxidized carbon nanorods (OCNRs) is developed by a ball-milling/chemical-oxidation method and incorporated into PEDOT:PSS hole transport layer (HTL). The incorporation of OCNRs can increase the work function of the PEDOT:PSS layer, which avoids the energy-level mismatch between the PEDOT:PSS HTL and the HOMO level of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite layer, leading to a relatively high Voc of 1.01 V (vs. 0.92 V for the PEDOT:PSS device). Moreover, the introduction of OCNRs into the PEDOT:PSS HTL increases the grain size and uniformity of the perovskite layer, accompanied by the improved charge transport ability. As a result, the fill factor of perovskite solar cells is increased from 75.4% to 81.7%, and the best power conversion efficiency of 19.02% is achieved.

The groundbreaking development of organometal halide based perovskite solar cells (PSCs) represents a promising alternative to next-generation photovoltaic cells due to their rapidly increased power conversion efficiency (PCE) and prospect for low-cost solution-processed fabrication. Among the various structures of PSCs, inverted planar hetero-junction architecture PSCs have attracted enormous research interest because of their low-temperature fabrication process and compatibility with flexible substrates. For the typical manufacture of the inverted device, the precursor solution of PbI2 and methylammonium iodide (MAI) blending is deposited on the hole transport layer (HTL). Subsequently, an n-type fullerene or its derivatives is coated on the top of the perovskite film to form a p–i–n junction. Recently, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) has been considered as the most commonly used HTL due to its low-cost, easy manufacturing, and high transparency. Generally, PEDOT:PSS is synthesized using the oxidation polymerization method, and the hydrophilic insulating PSS is employed as a dispersant to improve dispersity in water. However, the highly p-doped properties cause intrinsic chemical-reduction-activity of the PEDOT:PSS films, which results in a relatively low open-circuit voltage (Voc of about 0.9 V) in PEDOT:PSS based PSCs. The exorbitant conglutination and insulating properties of PSS also result in a poor system conductivity. Therefore, various additives such as surfactants, ionic solvents, salts, and acids have been widely used to improve the Voc and conductivity of PSCs. Among them, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have been employed as the ideal dopants in the polymer-based mixed system for their excellent electrical, optical, and mechanical properties. Previous reports also show that CNT doping can effectively improve the conductivity and Seebeck coefficient of the PEDOT:PSS system. The physical mixing of commercial PEDOT:PSS with CNTs is the most simple way for solute dispersion. The aromatic thiophene rings in the PEDOT backbone can enable strong π–π stacking interactions with hybridized carbon on the surface of CNTs, which expedite conductive phase formation. The long molecular chain of PSS can also twine around the CNTs, which makes PSS act as the surfactant to disperse CNTs from each other. However, the redundant and overlong CNTs (usually hundreds of nanometers to micrometers) can cause overlapping and winding, leading to the inhomogeneous distribution of particles. Besides, incorporating long CNTs into the HTL may increase the roughness of the film interface and make the device shorted. The development of novel organic semiconductors offers a new choice for HTLs (such as PTAA), but the high cost and complex synthesis/purification processes make it difficult for large-scale commercial application in the future. PEDOT:PSS is still a promising HTL due to its low-cost, high transparency, and high conductivity, if it can overcome the shortcomings of energy level mismatch and hydrophilicity.

In this paper, the oxidized carbon nanorods (OCNRs) with high work function are synthesized using a ball-milling/chemical-oxidation procedure and doped into PEDOT:PSS to overcome the energy level mismatch between the PEDOT:PSS HTL and the HOMO level of the perovskite layer. The addition of OCNRs into PEDOT:PSS increases the work function of PEDOT:PSS and improves the crystallinity of perovskite. Accompanied by the boosted charge extraction, the optimized device displays an enhanced Voc of 1.01 V, a high fill factor (FF) of 81.70%, and a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 22.98 mA cm−2, yielding a relatively high efficiency of 19.02%.

The detailed synthetic procedure and molecular formula of OCNRs are shown in Fig. 1. The initial product of CNRs is prepared via the Sb auxiliary ball milling process (Fig. 1a). In the milling process, the interactive rolling balls in the container cause high-frequent collisions on the pristine CNTs. Elastic, plastic, and shear deformation accompanied by fracture, amorphization, and chemical reaction occur almost simultaneously, which results in the cleavage of pristine CNTs (Fig. 1b and c). As a result, the long and single nanotube is cleaved into many carbon rods. The addition of Sb powder enhances the efficiency of ball milling because Sb can act as many tiny balls. These tiny balls have more frequent impacts on nanotubes, which enables part of the pulverized Sb embedding on the sidewall of the carbon tubes (Fig. 1b and c). Subsequently, the located Sb particles are removed by acid treatment (Fig. 1d). In the process of the further refluxing and oxidation process, more active-property surfaces and fresh defects will locate in the position of the occupying Sb particles. Consequently, the shortened OCNRs with a high surface oxidation state are obtained. The strong oxidation not only generates more oxygen-containing groups such as hydroxyl and carboxyl groups on the surfaces of OCNRs for better dispersing ability but also enhances the work function of the product, which will be discussed later.

The morphology of carbon materials used in this study was characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The specific constituents are measured by the X-ray diffraction (XRD) method. An obvious porous ‘spaghetti’-type structure is observed in the SEM micrograph of the pristine CNTs (Fig. 2a), suggesting that the overlong CNTs branches are always curved and twisted together. For comparison, the TEM micrographs of CNRs before and after pickling and oxidation are exhibited in Fig. 2b and c respectively. Fig. 2b shows that the pristine CNRs are enclosed in a large amount of impurity, which might be the graphite/Sb pieces, indicating that lots of debris are simultaneously produced in the CNTs crash. By contrast, Fig. 2c presents the uniform dispersed rods, exhibiting that the graphite/Sb pieces can be removed by acid treatment. Compared to the original CNTs, the OCNRs are fractured and shortened by ball-milling. Most of the OCNRs are straight and not entangled, and the length is shorter than 50 nm. The length distribution histogram in Fig. 2d reveals that the averaged particle length of OCNRs is about 30–50 nm with a dominant length of ∼44 ± 2 nm.
Moreover, XRD patterns of CNTs, CNRs, and OCNRs are shown in Fig. 2e. The graphite crystalline frameworks of CNTs and OCNRs still exist after the milling and pickling process, which could be proved by the strong Bragg peak of 2θ = 26.1° from the (002) crystal plane of original graphite. Compared to the pristine CNTs, the XRD image of initial CNRs exhibits obvious Sb-signal diffraction peaks locating at 2θ = 28°, 2θ = 41°, and 2θ = 43°, which confirms the residual Sb pieces. The additional peaks at 2θ = 46° and 2θ = 55° might originate from the crushed graphite pieces. However, the strong Sb-signal peaks and impurity peaks disappear for OCNRs, corresponding to the purified rods in Fig. 2c. Besides, the increased peak intensity at 2θ = 33° reveals the C–O signal, which is ascribed to the oxidation reaction in the pickling process.
High-resolution TEM (HRTEM) images are used to investigate the fundamental properties of OCNRs. The HRTEM image (Fig. 2f) indicates that the resulting segments of OCNRs samples are very straight with a well preserved tubular structure, and the original structure in the fracture zone is destroyed. The fracture surfaces of OCNRs are closed by the amorphous carbon. The enlarged HRTEM image (Fig. 2g) suggests that the inner and outer diameters of OCNRs are 8 nm and 13 nm respectively. Lattice diffraction signals can't be detected on the partial surface of OCNRs (the yellow circle in Fig. 2g) due to the fresh defects in the oxidation process. Additionally, no obvious Sb and amorphous carbon are observed on the perimeter of OCNRs, which is in good agreement with the XRD spectra. The electron diffraction pattern (Fig. 2h) shows discernible weak diffraction rings, which verify the crystallinity of the graphitic carbon in OCNRs.

Fig. 3a depicts the device structure of PSCs, which consists of a CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite absorber layer sandwiched between the PEDOT:PSS:OCNRs HTL and PCBM electron transport layer (ETL). Indium-doped tin oxide (ITO) and silver (Ag) are respectively employed as the anode and cathode electrodes. The cross-section SEM picture of the device is shown in Fig. 3b. The thickness of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite layer is about 300 nm from the profile. The thickness of PEDOT:PSS:OCNRs and PCBM is about 25 nm and 40 nm respectively.
Raman spectroscopy of the PEDOT:PSS:OCNRs HTL was first studied to prove the effect of OCNRs on the device. The strong Raman peak (Fig. 3c) in the region of 1000–1300 cm−1 corresponds to the inter-ring stretching vibrations of PEDOT:PSS. The Raman peaks at 1450 cm−1 and 1530 cm−1 are related to the symmetric stretching mode of the aromatic C–C band and antisymmetric C–C. The strong π–π stacking interaction between the aromatic thiophene rings in the PEDOT backbone and the hybridized carbon (including fresh defects) on the surface of the OCNRs can expedite the separation between PEDOT and PSS polymer chains. This delocalization would change the electron cloud activity in the PEDOT:PSS system, leading to the enhanced Raman intensity. The results demonstrate OCNRs were successfully incorporated into the PEDOT:PSS HTL.
To further verify the interaction effect of OCNRs and PEDOT:PSS, the photoluminescence (PL) spectra of PEDOT:PSS and PEDOT:PSS:OCNRs films were recorded and are shown in Fig. 3d. A high PL intensity was observed for the pristine PEDOT:PSS, and the PL intensity decreased accompanied by the increased OCNRs concentration. Therefore, the PEDOT:PSS:OCNRs film exhibits more efficient PL quenching than the PEDOT:PSS film, which might result from efficient charge carrier transfer between PEDOT:PSS and OCNRs. However, excess OCNR doping can introduce lots of impurity defects, resulting in charge recombination inside the PEDOT:PSS system. Additionally, a good light transmittance is as important as the low trap state for HTL, thus the transmittance spectra of PEDOT:PSS and PEDOT:PSS:OCNRs films were recorded and are shown in Fig. 3e. It is worth noting that the transmittance in the near-infrared region around 750–1000 nm is decreased after doping OCNRs into PEDOT:PSS, which is attributed to the absorption of OCNRs. Meanwhile, the transmittance increases with the concentration of OCNRs in the wavelength range of 380–700 nm because the interaction of OCNRs and PEDOT:PSS reduced light scattering inside the PEDOT:PSS mixture. This decreased absorption of PEDOT:PSS:OCNRs films in the visible region is advantageous to the modified devices.
Subsequently, the substrate hydrophobicity is explored by a water contact angle to distinguish the surface wettability difference of HTL. As we know, the high hydrophilicity and hygroscopicity of PEDOT:PSS usually reduce the air stability of devices, resulting in the rapid degradation of device performance. The hydrophilic substrate surface is also detrimental to the formation of large perovskite grains. Similar to the UV treated ITO (12° in Fig. 3f), PEDOT:PSS exhibits the hydrophilic surface with a water contact angle of 17° (Fig. 3g), which is adverse to the growth of large perovskite grains and the formation of full coverage films. Compared to pristine PEDOT:PSS, the incorporation of OCNRs into PEDOT:PSS slightly increases the water contact angles: 31° for 0.05 wt% (Fig. 3h), 46° for 0.1 wt% (Fig. 3i), 62° for 0.15 wt% (Fig. 3j), and 71° for 0.2 wt% (Fig. 3k). The increased contact angles suggest that the optimized films are more hydrophobic, and the increased surface energy is beneficial for the deposition of perovskite.

Fig. 4 depicts the top-view atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of MAPbI3 films deposited on PEDOT:PSS and PEDOT:PSS:OCNRs. It is worth noting that the perovskite film on PEDOT:PSS consists of numerous small grains with sizes varying from 50 to 120 nm (Fig. 4a). A large number of voids decrease the surface coverage of the film, which will cause charge recombination in the transmission process. The grain size tends to be larger when the perovskite film is coated on the top of the PEDOT:PSS:OCNRs film (0.05 wt% in Fig. 4b). Further increasing the concentration of OCNRs to 0.1 wt% significantly enhances the grain size (Fig. 4c). Particularly, the grain size becomes larger and more uniform when the concentration of OCNRs increases to more than 0.15 wt% (Fig. 4d). The large-grained perovskite film possesses fewer grain boundaries and defects, which is advantageous to the charge transport.
To elucidate the impact of morphology evolution on the charge transfer dynamics, the steady-state PL spectra of the perovskite film on the PEDOT:PSS and PEDOT:PSS:OCNRs (optimized OCNR concentration: 0.15 wt%) were recorded and are shown in Fig. 4f. The perovskite on PEDOT:PSS demonstrates a high PL intensity, while the intensity decreases after introducing OCNRs into PEDOT:PSS. It suggests that the PEDOT:PSS:OCNRs film exhibits more efficient charge transfer than the PEDOT:PSS film, which demonstrates that PEDOT:PSS:OCNRs can be used to achieve high performance solar cells. Furthermore, the time-resolved PL decay in Fig. 4g was used to investigate the hole extraction ability of HTL. The decreased decay time from 11.28 ns to 9.05 ns suggests the accelerated charge transfer between the perovskite and PEDOT:PSS:OCNRs films. The result confirms the positive effect of OCNRs on facilitating the interfacial charge extraction efficiency between the perovskite and anode.
Moreover, the decreased recombination and improved charge transfer would improve device efficiency; Fig. 4h shows current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the optimized PSCs fabricated with PEDOT:PSS and PEDOT:PSS:OCNRs (OCNRs concentration of 0.15 wt%) HTL. The J–V curves of PSCs with different ratios of OCNRs are summarised in Fig. S1 (ESI). The photovoltaic parameters including Jsc, Voc, FF, and PCE from 16 devices are deduced and are listed in Table S1 (ESI). The control device with the PEDOT:PSS HTL exhibits the highest efficiency of 15.62% accompanied by a Jsc of 22.31 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.92 V, and a FF of 75.39%. These parameters of the PEDOT:PSS based device are in accordance with the previously reported literature. However, the device based on OCNRs exhibits a Voc of 1.01 V, a FF of 81.70%, and a Jsc of 22.98 mA cm−2, yielding an improved PCE of 19.02%. Additionally, the integrated current density from the measured incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra (see Fig. 4i) of the OCNRs based device is 22.14 mA cm−2, which is consistent with the Jsc extracted from the J–V curves. Fig. S2 (ESI) exhibits the steady photocurrent and PCE measured at the maximum power output point (0.7 V for the control device and 0.83 V for the best-performing OCNR device). The stable PCE measured at the maximum power point is 15.62% and 19.01%, which agrees well with the J–V results. Fig. 4j and k provide the J–V curves of the OCNRs based device and control device from forward and backward scanning. Compared to the control device, the OCNRs devices show a slightly smaller photocurrent hysteresis due to the enhanced crystallizability of perovskite films.
To unravel the role of improved crystallizability in device performance, we obtained the SEM images of CH3NH3PbI3 films prepared on ITO/PEDOT:PSS and ITO/PEDOT:PSS:OCNRs (optimized OCNRs concentration of 0.15 wt%) substrates. As shown in Fig. 5a, the average grain size of CH3NH3PbI3 on PEDOT:PSS is about 88 ± 40 nm, and some voids distribute on the upper surface. By contrast, the high-quality crystals of CH3NH3PbI3 form on the top of ITO/PEDOT:PSS:OCNRs substrates with the increased grain size of 126 ± 20 nm. The AFM images of ITO/PEDOT:PSS and ITO/PEDOT:PSS:OCNRs are shown in Fig. S3 (ESI). A finer and more uniform morphology can be observed in the ITO/PEDOT:PSS:OCNRs films, which might be another important factor to the improved crystallization. XRD patterns of the perovskite films on PEDOT:PSS and PEDOT:PSS:OCNRs substrates are obtained to further verify the enhanced crystallizability. As shown in Fig. S4 (the freshly prepared perovskite) and Fig. 5c (exposed in ambient air for 24 h), the peak locating at 12.23° is attributed to the (100) lattice planes of PbI2, and the (110) and (220) peaks at 14.17° and 28.44° correspond to the typical tetragonal crystal structure of the perovskite in the (110) and (220) planes. Compared to the perovskite on PEDOT:PSS, the diffraction peaks of (110) and (220) lattice planes for freshly prepared CH3NH3PbI3 on PEDOT:PSS:OCNRs become stronger, suggesting the higher crystallinity of perovskite grains. Good crystallinity of perovskite films can eliminate the photocurrent hysteresis and enhance device performance, which can be further proved by the decreased dark leakage current at the diffusion dominated zone (Fig. 5d). The perovskite on PEDOT:PSS presents lots of lattice plane peaks (PbI2 peak at 12.23°) after the films are exposed in ambient air for 24 h, which proves that OCNRs can sufficiently protect the perovskite film from moisture ingress and increase the stability.
To prove the enhanced work function of OCNRs and the influence of the energy level variation of the PEDOT:PSS:OCNRs on Voc, the work functions of pristine CNTs and modified OCNRs were measured by scanning Kelvin probe microcopy and are shown in Fig. 6a. The work function of pristine CNTs is −4.918 eV, and the work function of OCNRs increases to −5.802 eV. For the PSCs, the work function of PEDOT:PSS coated ITO is −5.269 eV. Meanwhile, the work function of the PEDOT:PSS:OCNRs coated ITO increases to be −5.438 eV. Based on the energy levels of PEDOT:PSS, PEDOT:PSS:OCNRs, and CH3NH3PbI3 shown in Fig. 6b, the energy level alignments in the thermal equilibrium steady-state are displayed in Fig. 6c. The contact of PEDOT:PSS coated ITO and CH3NH3PbI3 provides a Schottky barrier, and the potential barrier blocks electrons to transfer into the ITO electrode. But, holes can be effectively collected by the ITO electrode. Moreover, the energy level shift caused by the intrinsic chemical-reduction-activity of the PEDOT:PSS films usually drops the work function of the PEDOT:PSS films. The reduced work function of PEDOT:PSS increases the energy level mismatch between the PEDOT:PSS HTL and the HOMO level of the perovskite layer, which results in the decreased potential barrier of electron transport, yielding a Voc of 0.92 V. Incorporation of OCNRs into PEDOT:PSS increases the work function of PEDOT:PSS, which increases the barrier height of electron transport. Therefore, a larger onset potential can be found in the dark J–V curve (Fig. 6d), corresponding to the enhanced Voc.
The light intensity dependent Voc of PEDOT:PSS and PEDOT:PSS:OCNRs devices is further investigated, and the corresponding Voc-light illumination intensity and the fitting results are presented in Fig. 6e. Compared to the control device (slope of 1.3kT/q), the decreased slope of 0.94kT/q (where k is the Boltzmann constant, T is absolute temperature, and q is elementary charge) is achieved for OCNRs based devices. The result indicates that both the bimolecular radiative recombination and trap-assisted nonradiative recombination decrease in the OCNRs based device. The decreased charge traps could be attributed to the increased perovskite grain sizes, which would reduce the barrier height for hole transport and enhance electron blocking. In addition, the dark J–V curves for hole only devices with the architecture of ITO/PEDOT:PSS:OCNRs/CH3NH3PbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Ag are shown in Fig. 6f. It can be seen that the J–V curves can be divided into three regions: the (I) ohmic response region at the low bias voltage (linear relation), (II) trap-filled limit (TFL) regime (a rapid nonlinear rise), and (III) SCLC region (saturation region). The OCNRs based device exhibits the low VTFL, corresponding to a low trap state density, which agrees well with the light intensity dependent Voc. Besides, the OCNRs based device shows bigger saturated current in the SCLC region, resulting from the improved hole transport shown in Fig. 6c.

In summary, a kind of OCNRs with high work function is developed by a ball-milling/chemical-oxidation method and doped into PEDOT:PSS to overcome the chemical reduction of intrinsic p-doped PEDOT:PSS. The incorporation of OCNRs into PEDOT:PSS improves the work function of PEDOT:PSS and avoids the energy-level mismatch between the PEDOT:PSS HTL and the HOMO level of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite layer. Meanwhile, the enhanced perovskite crystallinity improves the uniformity of perovskite films, which decreases the recombination inside the device. As a result, the optimized cells display an enhanced Voc of 1.01 V, a high FF of 81.70%, and a Jsc of 22.98 mA cm−2, yielding a relatively high efficiency of 19.02%. This work demonstrates a simple avenue to use carbon nano-materials to improve energy-level manipulation and morphology of PSCs.


The authors declare no conflict of interest.


The authors are grateful to the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61875072), the Special Project of the Province-University Co-constructing Program of Jilin Province (SXGJXX2017-3), the Science and Technology Innovation Leading Talent and Team Project of Jilin Province (20170519010JH), and the International Cooperation and Exchange Project of Jilin Province (20170414002GH, 20180414001GH) for supporting the work.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9nr01836k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019