 DOI: 10.1039/D1TA04214A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 15798-15806


Zhi
Zheng
,

Mengyang
Li
,

Zhaotong
Qin
,

Enfang
He
,

Yuli
Yin
,

Fengyun
Guo
,

Shiyong
Gao
,

Xinchang
Pang
,

Liancheng
Zhao
,

Zheng
Tang
*,

Xinhu
Lu
 and 

Yong
Zhang
*

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001, China. E-mail: yongzhang@hit.edu.cn

Center for Advanced Low-Dimension Materials, State Key Laboratory for Modification of Chemical Fibers and Polymer Materials, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Donghua University, Shanghai 201620, China. E-mail: ztang@dhu.edu.cn

Department of Physics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, New Territories 999077, Hong Kong

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, China

Received
18th May 2021
, Accepted 24th June 2021
First published on 24th June 2021
Non-radiative recombination loss (ΔEnon-rad) has become the main limiting factor for the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of organic solar cells (OSCs). Herein, two benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]difuran (BDF) polymers (P-FT and P-FP) in combination with two electron acceptors (m-ITIC and Y6) in OSCs were employed to systemically investigate the impact of molecular orientation and interaction on energy loss in OSCs. The use of the Y6 acceptor instead of ITIC provided a reduced energy loss in OSC, regardless of the donor used, and the energy loss was lower in OSC based on P-FP, as compared to that based on P-FT. ΔEnon-rad as small as 0.23 eV was obtained in the P-FP:Y6 device, due to the small energetic disorder. In addition, the P-FP:Y6 device also possessed a promising EQEmax of 86.7%. These results provide a deep understanding of the role molecular interactions between the polymer donor and acceptor play in reducing energy loss and promoting device performance through synergic selection and optimization of donor and acceptor in OSCs.

Organic solar cells (OSCs) have attracted extensive research attention due to their potential for providing light-weight, low-cost and large-area flexible solar cells in the past few decades. The power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of OSCs have improved to >18% recently with the use of fused ring non-fullerene electron acceptors (NFAs), such as ITIC and Y6, in the bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) layer of OSCs compared to the fullerene-based electron acceptors. Generally, the PCE of an OSC is determined from the product of the open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc) and fill factor (FF), in which each parameter is governed by a different working mechanism. For example, applying narrower band-gap donor and/or electron acceptor materials in the BHJ layer to absorb more sunlight could increase the Jsc in principle. The recent development of NFAs with absorption up to the near-infrared region has provided much room in materials for enhancing the Jsc in OSCs. The FF is more related to the morphological factors of phase separation and crystallinity in the nanoscale interpenetrating BHJ layer. The proper morphological control methods in the processing of the BHJ layer, such as thermal and/or solvent annealing, and donor/acceptor selection have proved to be the effective strategy to improve the FF.

The Voc in OSCs is traditionally thought to be proportional to the energy difference between the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the donor and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the acceptor in the BHJ layer. However, a detailed analysis of Voc is more complicated as it involves different energy loss pathways. The total energy loss (Eloss) in an OSC is typically over 0.60 eV, in contrast, the energy loss in a perovskite solar cell can be as low as 0.40–0.50 eV. Thanks to the prosperities of abundant donor and electron acceptor materials and morphological tuning methods for high Jsc and FF, the large Eloss, which can also be expressed as qVloss where Vloss refers to voltage loss, in OSCs has become the critical limiting factor in further improving the performances of state-of-the-art OSCs. Minimizing the qVloss will afford a high Voc and thus contribute to a high PCE.
In terms of the thermodynamic process of an OSC, the total Eloss (Eg–qVoc) can be divided into two parts: one is the energy loss (ΔECT) incurred from the charge generation process, defined as Eg–ECT, where ECT is the interfacial charge transfer (CT) state between the donor and acceptor in the BHJ layer; the other one (ΔECR) is the energy loss due to the charge recombination, defined as ECT–qVoc, which includes both the radiative and non-radiative recombination, etc.24,26 The former loss ΔECT is associated with the driving force needed for exciton separation, and it is related to the molecular structure and orbital energy of the donor/acceptor combination and their energetic disorder as governed by the interfacial morphology. This means that the intermolecular interactions between donor and acceptor as well as their molecular packing behavior in the active layer of the OSC will have a significant effect on the ΔECT, which thus highlights the importance of the proper selection of the donor and acceptor in reducing the energy loss in OSC. The energy loss ΔErad (or qΔVrad) induced by the radiative recombination is inevitable in the solar cells, as illustrated in Shockley–Queisser (SQ) model. However, the non-radiative recombination loss ΔEnon-rad (or qΔVnon-rad), which is typically over 0.30 eV in an OSC, is reducible as it is characterized by the electroluminescence external quantum efficiency (EQEEL). In most cases, the large Eloss of an OSC is mainly contributed by the high ΔEnon-rad due to the low EQEEL in the OSC device. The low EQEEL is mainly considered to be from the existence of the vibrational decay of CT states in the BHJ layer, which is correlated to the intrinsic molecular properties of the organic donor and acceptor. Increasing EQEEL can suppress the non-radiative energy loss, but it may cause a sharp drop in the maximum external quantum efficiency (EQEmax), consequently decreasing the PCE of the OSC. Furthermore, it is also noted that an increasing ECT leads to a reduced ΔEnon-rad in most OSCs. However, too high an ECT limits the exciton dissociation efficiency and absorption spectral range of the active layer. This makes it highly difficult to realize a reduced total energy loss while achieving a high PCE in OSCs. Therefore, a better understanding regarding the roles of molecular design strategy and the selection of donor and acceptor play in determining the energy losses in OSCs is highly important. Achieving it requires investigation of the relationship between the molecular structure and the energy loss in order to approach a high performance OSC.
In this work, we applied two benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]difuran (BDF) polymers (P-FT and P-FP) and two representative electron acceptors (m-ITIC and Y6) in OSCs to systemically investigate the synergic effect of electron acceptors and polymer side chain engineering on the Eloss, especially on ΔEnon-rad. Polymers P-FT and P-FP have the same polymer backbone with a BDF donor unit and difluorobenzotriazole acceptor unit, but they possess the fluorothienyl and fluorophenyl side chains, respectively. The different side chains will endow P-FT and P-FP with different molecular packing behaviors and intermolecular interactions with m-ITIC and Y6. The OSCs fabricated with these two BDF polymers and m-ITIC (or Y6) provided promising PCEs of up to 13.34%, which exhibit the potential excellence of BDF polymers in the efforts of developing low-cost high performance OSCs because of the easily obtained biorenewable sources of furan and its derivatives. The grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) results indicate that P-FT and P-FP have different interactions with m-ITIC and Y6. The energy loss analysis in these OSCs shows that the application of the Y6 acceptor in either P-FT or P-FP devices could decrease the Eloss in comparison with m-ITIC devices. The decreased Eloss in both Y6 and m-ITIC devices observed after replacing the polymer donor P-FT with P-FP indicates the important impact of side chain engineering in the polymer donor on Eloss of the OSCs. With these synergic effects, the Eloss in the P-FP:Y6 device was significantly reduced to 0.575 eV, considerably smaller than that of the P-FT:m-ITIC device (0.726 eV). The ΔEnon-rad of the P-FP:Y6 device was as small as 0.23 eV, which is among the smallest ΔEnon-rad reported so far for OSCs. It is noted that these calculations of energy loss values are based on the use of the more reliable photovoltaic band-gap (EPVg) instead of the optical band-gap (Eoptg). Encouragingly, the P-FP:Y6 device can also provide an EQEmax of up to 86.7% despite having a small ΔEnon-rad. These results indicate that a rational polymer side chain engineering and synergic selection of the electron acceptor will be a prominent and effective strategy in reducing the energy loss and boosting the photovoltaic performance of OSCs.


Fig. 1a shows the chemical structures of P-FT, P-FP, m-ITIC and Y6. The main difference in polymers P-FT and P-FP is the side chains, in which P-FT has the 2-ethylhexylfluorothienyl side chains and P-FP has a slight larger conjugated 2-ethylhexyldifluorophenyl side chains. The change in the side chains in P-FT and P-FP will produce a different polymer chain stacking, crystallinity and interactions with other molecules. The m-ITIC belongs to the acceptor (A)–donor (D)–acceptor (A) type of electron acceptor, whereas Y6 is the A–D–A–D–A type of electron acceptor. m-ITIC and Y6 are two classic representatives of the current state-of-the-art electron acceptors and have a different molecular packing behavior and crystallinity. The UV-Vis absorption spectra of P-FT and P-FP films are shown in Fig. 1b. Both P-FT and P-FP display similar absorption profiles with different 0–0 and 0–1 oscillation strengths, indicating the different molecular orders in thin film states. The optical band gaps (Eoptg) of P-FT and P-FP were calculated to be 1.92 eV and 1.95 eV, respectively, from the onset of the absorption spectra. The Eoptg of m-ITIC and Y6 are 1.58 eV and 1.32 eV, respectively. The energy levels of polymers, electron acceptors and other materials used in the OSCs are depicted in Fig. 1c. The LUMO and HOMO energy levels of P-FT and P-FP are −3.48/−5.48 eV and −3.61/5.54 eV, respectively. The slightly lower energy levels of P-FP are mainly from the additional fluorine atom on the phenyl side chain.

The photovoltaic performances of P-FT and P-FP with m-ITIC and Y6 acceptors were characterized with an inverted device structure of ITO/ZnO/active layer/MoOx/Ag. Fig. 2 shows the current density–voltage (J–V) and external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves of the optimized devices and detailed photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table 1. The PCEs varied from 8.86% to 13.34% depending on the different combinations of P-FT or P-PT with the m-ITIC or Y6 acceptor. The EQE spectra of these devices showed broad photoresponses from both polymer and acceptor. The EQEmax values for the m-ITIC devices were around 75–79%, while the EQEmax increased to 83.33% for the P-FT:Y6 device and further to 86.72% for the P-FP:Y6 device, which is one of the highest values reported for OSCs. As shown in Fig. 2a and Table 1, in general, m-ITIC devices possessed high Vocs compared to those of Y6 devices as a result of the high-lying LUMO level of m-ITIC, and from the aspect of a polymer donor, P-FP devices exhibited an increased Voc compared with those of P-FT devices. For example, the Voc of the P-FP:Y6 device was increased to 0.815 V from 0.745 V of the P-FT:Y6 device. The device generally provides a higher Jsc in the Y6 device than that of the m-ITIC device due to the broad absorption of Y6, even though the morphology of the active layer also plays a role. However, the FF in these devices showed a different trend. With P-FT as the polymer donor, the P-FT:m-ITIC device had a higher FF than those of P-FT:Y6 and P-FP:m-ITIC, whereas in the case of P-FP, the FF of the P-FP:Y6 device was higher than those of P-FP:m-ITIC and P-FT:Y6. Since the FF is more dependent on the morphology and charge transport pathway of the blend film, the results in FF indicate that polymers P-FT and P-FP have different intermolecular interactions with m-ITIC and Y6, which interactions induce the different molecular packing behaviors of the polymer or acceptor in the active layer.
Polymer
Acceptor

V
oc (V)

J
sc
 (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
EQEmax (%)

J
ph (%)

a The data in parenthesis is the calculated Jsc from EQE.
b The averaged PCE is listed in parenthesis.

P-FT

m-ITIC
0.924
17.64 (16.90)
70.10
11.43 (10.87)
79.37
93.5
Y6
0.745
21.87 (21.13)
65.12
10.61 (10.02)
82.50
87.8
P-FP

m-ITIC
0.995
14.94 (15.56)
60.55
8.86 (8.70)
75.78
87.2
Y6
0.815
23.27 (24.00)
70.37
13.34 (12.70)
86.72
95.1
To confirm this speculation, the hole and electron mobilities of these devices using the space-charge-limited-current (SCLC) method were also measured (Fig. S1). This showed that the P-FT:m-ITIC device had more balanced hole and electron mobilities than those of the P-FT:Y6 device, and the electron mobility of the P-FT:m-ITIC device is also higher than that of the P-FT:Y6 device. However, the P-FP:Y6 device exhibited higher and better balanced hole and electron mobilities than those of the P-FP:m-ITIC device. The variation in mobilities is consistent with the FF change as discussed above. These results imply that P-FT and m-ITIC have a better compatibility and form a preferred nanoscale phase separation, which has little effect on their molecular packing and also does not break their own charge transport pathway in the blend. While blending P-FT with Y6, their interactions, however, destroyed the ordered Y6 molecular packing and therefore led to a lower electron mobility and FF in the P-FT:Y6 device than that of the P-FT:m-ITIC device. In the case of P-FP, a better compatibility in the P-FP:Y6 blend film is expected with a more favorable phase separation than that in the P-FP:m-ITIC device. In this case, we also measured the water and glycerol contact angles to investigate the compatibility of these blend films (Fig. S6). The results also indicated that the P-FP:Y6 blend exhibits a better compatibility, and the detailed results are shown in the ESI and Tables S2 and S3.
Grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) of the neat and blend films of P-FT/P-FP and m-ITIC/Y6 were also measured to further understand the molecular packing information and are exhibited in Fig. 3, S2 and S3. The neat P-FT and P-FP films displayed the (100) lamellar diffraction peaks at 0.28 Å−1 (d = 22.44 Å) and 0.30 Å−1 (d = 20.94 Å), respectively, in the out-of-plane (OOP) direction. In particular, the P-FP film presented higher order (h00) reflections (Fig. 3b), suggesting it has a more ordered molecular stacking in the lamellar direction than that in P-FT film. While blending with m-ITIC, one can observe that P-FT:m-ITIC and P-FP:m-ITIC exhibited broad (010) peaks at 1.80 Å−1 (3.49 Å) and 1.76 Å−1 (3.57 Å), respectively, in the OOP direction, corresponding to the face-on orientation mainly from m-ITIC (Fig. S2a and b). The slightly higher π–π stacking peak and denser packing in the P-FT:m-ITIC film may indicate that P-FT has a better compatibility and stronger interactions with m-ITIC than those between P-FP and m-ITIC. In contrast, when m-ITIC was replaced by Y6, the packing of Y6 became more disordered in the P-FT:Y6 blend film, as indicated from the much weaker (010) peak at 1.78 Å−1 (3.53 Å) in the OOP direction (Fig. 3c). On the other hand, the (010) peak in the OOP direction from the P-FP:Y6 film possessed a similar intensity to that of the Y6 neat film (Fig. 3d, e), which means the face-on oriented packing of Y6 was kept in the blend film. The integral linecuts of (010) along the polar angle further confirmed that the P-FP:Y6 film has a higher face-on orientational order than that of the P-FT:Y6 film, consistent with the observed high electron mobility in the P-FP:Y6 device.
The different interactions between P-FT/P-FP and m-ITIC/Y6 in the blend films will lead to distinct donor/acceptor interfacial properties, determining the charge generation and recombination process, as well as Eloss in the OSC. To examine this, the energy losses of P-FT:m-ITIC, P-FT:Y6, P-FP:m-ITIC and P-FP:Y6 devices were analyzed. For OSCs, Eloss can be divided into three parts, as exhibited in eqn (1):
Eloss = qΔVloss = Eg–qVoc = qΔV1 + qΔVradoc + qΔVnon-radoc = ΔE1 + ΔErad + ΔEnon-rad
(1)
where Δ
Vradoc is the radiative voltage loss from absorption below the bandgap, and ΔVnon-radoc is the non-radiative recombination voltage loss. The energy loss diagram illustrating the different voltage loss terms is shown in Fig. 4a. Before analyzing the details of each part, Eg values were first measured, more specifically we used the photovoltaic bandgap (EPVg), which is more relevant for determining voltage losses, as compared to the optical bandgap, more generally used in the literature. The EPVg values are determined from the derivatives of the EQE spectra, as shown in Fig. 4b. The EPVg of m-ITIC- and Y6-based devices are found to be 1.65 eV and 1.39 eV, respectively, whereas Eoptg for m-ITIC- and Y6-based devices are 1.58 eV and 1.32 eV, respectively, as shown in Table S1 and Fig. S4.

Accordingly, the Eloss for these devices calculated from both Eoptg and EPVg were derived, as listed in Table 2. The Eoptloss for the P-FT:m-ITIC and P-FF:m-ITIC devices are 0.656 eV and 0.585 eV, respectively, and the EPVloss values are slight increased to 0.726 eV and 0.655 eV for the P-FT:m-ITIC and P-FP:m-ITIC devices, respectively. When Y6 is used as the acceptor, the Eoptloss and EPVloss in the P-FT: Y6 device were decreased to 0.575 eV and 0.645 eV, respectively. In using the blend of P-FP:Y6, the Eloss values were further decreased, and the Eoptloss and EPVloss were as small as 0.505 eV and 0.575 eV, respectively. More importantly, we observe that the solar cell based on P-FP:Y6 could possess a high EQEmax of over 85%, despite having a low Eloss. This is the best case in BDF polymer based OSCs and also comparable with most benzo[2,1,3-b′]dithiophene (BDT) and other polymer-based OSCs, as shown in Fig. 4b, c. In addition, the non-radiative loss in this study is also close to a calculated theoretical limit suggested by Nelson et al. (Fig. S5).
The first part of the energy loss (Eg–qVocSQ) is the energy difference between the bandgap edge (Eg/q) and VocSQ under an SQ model, which is an unavoidable loss for all types of solar cells due to the radiative recombination from the absorption above the bandgap. The value of ΔE1 is only determined by the Eg of the used materials and temperature of the solar cells. The VocSQs for m-ITIC- and Y6-based devices are 1.38 V and 1.14 V, respectively, when using EPVg as the indicator. Thus, the ΔE1 were calculated to be 0.27 eV and 0.25 eV, respectively, for m-ITIC- and Y6-based devices.
The second part of the energy loss (ΔErad) is from the additional radiative recombination within the bandgap due to the difference of absorption between a real solar cell and the assumption of the SQ model. In OSCs, the CT state absorption is believed to contribute additionally to the radiative recombination process, and the small driving force, which is the energetic difference between the interfacial CT state and Eg, is more preferable for decreasing ΔErad. The highly sensitive FTPS-EQE and EL measurements of the completed devices were therefore preformed to determine the ECT by fitting the expression derived using the Marcus theory. The ECT in these P-FT/P-PT and m-ITIC/Y6 devices varied from 1.29 eV to 1.57 eV, leading to a small driving force of 0.08 eV to 0.16 eV. The ΔErad of the P-FT:m-ITIC device is 0.146 eV, and when m-ITIC was replaced by Y6, ΔErad was reduced to 0.135 eV in the P-FT:Y6 device, which is consistent with the reduction observed in the driving force. ΔErad was further decreased to 0.095 eV in the P-FP:Y6 device, which also has the smallest driving force. The slightly larger ΔErad in the P-FP:m-ITIC device, also with a small driving force, compared to that in the other devices may be due to the higher degree of energetic disorder of the active materials of P-FP:m-ITIC.
The third part of energy loss is the non-radiative recombination loss and it is related to the external quantum efficiency of electroluminescence (EQEEL). ΔEnon-rad can be quantified as ΔEnon-rad = −kBT × ln(EQEEL), where kB is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature. As such, ΔE3 can be reduced by increasing the EQEEL of the solar cell through, e.g., either the continued optimization of NFAs or tuning the molecular orientation of the donor–acceptor interface. The EL spectra and EQEEL curves of these devices are depicted in Fig. 4. The EQEEL of P-FT:m-ITIC was 2.90 × 10−6, corresponding to a ΔE3 of 0.31 eV, whereas the ΔE3 of the P-FT:Y6 device was decreased to 0.26 eV due to the slightly increased EQEEL of 3.3 × 10−5. The P-FP:m-ITIC device provided a ΔE3 of 0.25 eV. With the Y6 acceptor, the ΔE3 of the P-FP:Y6 device further decreased to 0.23 eV, which is comparable to that in the state-of-the-art OSCs, as a result of a high EQEEL of 9.5 × 10−5 (Fig. 5).
As mentioned earlier, the radiative and non-radiative recombination losses are the result of charge recombination process (ECT–qVoc). Fig. 4f displays the changes in the ECT–qVoc, Eloss, ΔErad and ΔEnon-rad in the P-FT/P-FP and m-ITIC/Y6 devices. It clearly shows that the use of the Y6 acceptor instead of m-ITIC can lead to a suppressed charge recombination loss with decreased Eloss, ΔErad and ΔEnon-rad. More importantly, these loss values were then further decreased by changing the polymer donor from P-FT to P-FP, indicating the importance of polymer/acceptor combination through a rational molecular optimization. The low Eloss that occurred in the P-FP:Y6 device is a combined result of the suppressed radiative and non-radiative recombination losses (Table 2).
Polymer
Acceptor

E
g
 (eV)

E
CT (eV)

qV
SQ (eV)

E
loss
 (eV)
ΔE1 (eV)
ΔErad (eV)
ΔEnon-rad (eV)

a 
E
PVg, the values in parenthesis are Eoptg.
b The EPVloss calculated from EPVg–qVoc; the Eoptloss calculated from Eoptg is listed in parenthesis.

P-FP
Y6
1.39(1.32)
1.31
1.14
0.575(0.505)
0.25
0.095
0.23

m-ITIC
1.65(1.58)
1.57
1.38
0.655(0.585)
0.27
0.135
0.25
P-FT
Y6
1.39(1.32)
1.29
1.14
0.645(0.575)
0.25
0.135
0.26

m-ITIC
1.65(1.58)
1.49
1.38
0.726(0.656)
0.27
0.146
0.31
As discussed in the recent literature, the density of states (DOS) are closely correlated to energetic disorder and Eloss. Narrowing the width of the tail of the DOS can reduce the disorder and energy loss. In semiconductors, the Urbach energy (Eu) is generally applied to characterize the width of the DOS tail and disorder. The Urbach rule states that the optical absorption coefficient (α(E)) of the low photon energy follows the following equation:
(2)
where
α0 is the optical absorption coefficient at the band edge and E is the photon energy. To evaluate the degree of energetic disorder, the FTPS-EQE curves of these four devices were measured and analyzed. According to eqn (2), the Eu of the P-FT:m-ITIC device was calculated to be 30.48 meV, and the P-FP:m-ITIC device has an Eu of 25.85 meV. In the Y6-based devices, an Eu of 23.06 meV for the P-FT:Y6 device was obtained, and P-FP:Y6, however, showed an Eu of 22.26 meV, indicating the lowest energetic disorder. The order of Eu values in these devices followed the observed radiative and non-radiative recombination loss, indicating the significance of the low degree of energetic disorder.

To further investigate the intermolecular dynamic process between donor and acceptor, the exciton dissociation efficiency (ηdiss) was also examined. As shown in Fig. 6, the ηdiss was investigated by the photogenerated current density versus effective voltage (Jph−Veff) curves of representative OSCs. The P-FP:Y6 device showed ηdiss of 95.1%, which is higher than the 87.8% of the P-FT:Y6 device. Based on the results discussed above, P-FP:Y6 exhibited a more face-on orientation and stronger crystallization tendency which related to the enhanced ηdiss, which could be a reason for the higher Jsc in the P-FP:Y6-based device. Similarly, with m-ITIC as the electron acceptor, the P-FP device, however, exhibited a lower ηdiss of 87.2% than the 93.5% of P-FT:m-ITIC device, attributed to a better compatibility of P-FT:m-ITIC. These results are in good agreement with the energy loss and device performance, indicating the significance of tuning the intermolecular dynamic process through synergic optimizing of the polymer side-chain and selection of the electron acceptor.

In summary, we have demonstrated the roles the side chains of P-FT and P-FP and the electron acceptors played in the molecular orientation and intermolecular interactions, and their impact on the Eloss in OSCs. The variations of side chains in P-FT and P-FP led to different interactions between the donors and the acceptors, i.e., m-ITIC and Y6. P-FT has a better compatibility and stronger interactions with m-ITIC compared with that of P-FP. When the polymer P-FT was replaced by P-FP, the interaction between the donor and the acceptor molecules reduced. GIWAXS results revealed that the use of P-FT leads to an altered packing orientation of Y6, and the use of P-FP has little impact on the face-on orientation ratio. This suggests that there was a lower degree of energetic disorder in the P-FP:Y6 device compared with that in the P-FP:m-ITIC device, and the trend of energetic disorder in P-FT devices is similar. Therefore, the P-FP:Y6 device possessed the Eloss value of 0.575 eV, which is the smallest in these four devices, as a result of the lowest energetic disorder. A ΔEnon-rad as small as 0.23 eV was also obtained in the solar cell based on P-FP:Y6. This is the lowest value reported for BDF polymer-based OSCs and is also among the best in BDT and other polymer-based OSCs. The Urbach energy analysis also showed that P-FP:Y6 has the smallest Eu of 22.26 meV. It is also remarkable that the P-FT:Y6 device exhibited an outstanding EQEmax of 86.72%, despite having a small ΔEnon-rad. Thus, our results suggest that the rational and synergic side-chain engineering of a polymer donor and the electron acceptor selection is of significance to achieve high performance OSCs with small Eloss and ΔEnon-rad.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors thank financial support from the National Key Research and Development Program (2021YFE0105800 and 2019YFA0705201) and the Natural Science Foundation of Heilongjiang Province of China (Grant No. E2018036). The authors would like to thank Yanni Ouyang and Professor Chunfeng Zhang of Nanjing University for their fruitful discussion and suggestions. Y. Zhang thanks the support of the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Harbin Institute of Technology).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta04214a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021