 DOI: 10.1039/C7CC02447A
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 5163-5166


Hua-Shang
Rao
,

Bai-Xue
Chen
,

Xu-Dong
Wang
,

Dai-Bin
Kuang
* and 

Cheng-Yong
Su


MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinorganic and Synthetic Chemistry, Lehn Institute of Functional Materials, School of Chemistry, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, P. R. China. E-mail: kuangdb@mail.sysu.edu.cn; Fax: +86 20-8411 3015

Received
30th March 2017
, Accepted 12th April 2017
First published on 12th April 2017
Nowadays, obtaining a thin and large-area perovskite single-crystal (SC) is still challenging. Herein, we report a novel strategy to prepare a laminar MAPbBr3 SC with a controllable thickness of 16 μm and a size of 6 × 8 mm. Additionally, the SC solar cell achieves an intriguing efficiency of 7.11% with an impressive stability, maintaining 93% initial PCE after aging for 1000 h.

Organometal trihalide perovskites have attracted a surge of research interest as promising materials for miscellaneous optoelectronic applications, including high-efficiency solar cells, light-emitting diodes, lasers and highly sensitive photodetectors, by virtue of their alluring advantages such as a wide absorption range, high extinction coefficient, long electron–hole diffusion length and high Hall mobility. In particular, in perovskite solar cells (PSCs), these attributes have successfully provided an extremely high certified power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 22.1%, rivaling that of a crystalline silicon solar cell. However, the inherent high trap density at the grain boundaries of a polycrystalline (PC) film is still unavoidable, which results in refined electrical properties such as a shorter carrier diffusion length. Accordingly, a perovskite single crystal (SC), owing to its free grain boundaries, superior thermostability and moisture stability, is vastly desirable.

Thus far, low trap-state perovskite SCs have been synthesized via several methods, such as antisolvent vapor-assisted crystallization (AVC), the classical cooling method, the top-seeded solution-growth method and inverse temperature crystallization (ITC); however, their derived solar cells are rare and the corresponding photovoltaic performances are unsatisfactory. For instance, an ∼100 μm thick single crystal wafer via wire slicing is not appropriate for PSC application. In addition, although the lateral structure of a perovskite device via piezoelectric poling was successfully prepared, its poor photovoltaic efficiency of 1.88% was far from expected. Recently, the cavitation-triggered asymmetric crystallization (CTAB) method has been developed to form a small size planar MAPbBr3 (MA = CH3NH3+) SC whose derived planar structure solar cell exhibited a champion PCE of 6.5%. Hence, the controllable fabrication of a large-area and thin perovskite SC is challenging but much desired for highly efficient solar cells.
Herein, a laminar MAPbBr3 SC with a controllable thickness of 16 μm and a size of 6 × 8 mm is achieved via space-limited inverse temperature crystallization (SLITC) growth, which is modified according to our previous work. In addition to a controllable thickness and a larger-area, these resultant laminar MAPbBr3 SCs possess prominent crystallinity, high mobility (23.7 cm2 s−1 V−1) and a low trap density (2.5 × 1010 cm−3), contributing to a high PCE of 7.11% with a remarkable maintenance of 93% initial PCE after 1000 h aging, which is the highest for SC PSCs, so far. Transient optical and electricity measurements have been conducted to investigate the carrier dynamics between each interface of a laminar MAPbBr3 SC PSC, proving the significance of the electron transport layer (ETL) and the hole transport material (HTM) for efficient charge separation and extraction.
To obtain thickness-controllable laminar MAPbBr3 SCs, building a limited space filled with a flowing precursor solution of 1.1 M PbBr2 and MABr dissolving in DMF is the most highlighted. As shown in Fig. S1a (ESI), two FTO glasses were used as growth substrates, in which a sandwiched polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) bounding box was added to construct the growing space. Herein, the substrates can be FTO glass, TiO2-coated FTO glass, ITO glass or other rigid plates for the in situ growth of MAPbBr3 SCs. Obviously, the thicknesses of the PTFE thin membrane (such as 20, 35 and 50 μm) are used to decide the thickness of laminar SCs. Moreover, PTFE blocks and aluminium splints are used to fit pump tubes and substrates closely. The substrate is supplied with a local heating of 90 °C as shown in Fig. S1b (ESI). Then, the MAPbBr3 SCs primarily grow in the hot region for inverse temperature crystallization of MAPbBr3 in DMF as shown in Fig. 1a. Moreover, the MAPbBr3 SCs tend to grow a laminar crystal for space limitation. Two holes were perforated on each substrate, in order to keep the precursor solution flowing using a peristaltic pump, which is the key to maintain the growth of SCs. In addition, the leakproof nature of the module is extremely important to assure the continuous growth of MAPbBr3 SCs. The typical growing time of the laminar MAPbBr3 SC is two days.

Fig. 1b shows the photograph of the laminar MAPbBr3 SC on TiO2-coated FTO glass with a size of 6 × 8 mm, whose XRD pattern (Fig. S2, ESI) displayed four distinct characteristic peaks at 14.9°, 30.1°, 45.8° and 62.5°, which are assigned to the (100), (200), (300) and (400) crystal planes of MAPbBr3, respectively, indicating an exposed face of the (100) crystal plane. Such (100)-oriented laminar SC was ascribed to the directional growth along the (100) crystal plane which suppressed others growth. The lattice parameter extracted from XRD patterns apparently corresponds to a cubic phase of a = 5.9379 Å, which is similar to the typical bulk MAPbBr3 SCs. Furthermore, a very narrow peak FWHM of (100) calculated to be 0.079 synchronously reveals a high crystallinity of the laminar MAPbBr3 SC. As shown in Fig. 1c, the narrow emission peak of steady-state photoluminescence (PL) located at 545 nm is a bit smaller than the absorption onset of ∼560 nm, which should be ascribed to the separation of excitons into free charges at room temperature, implying a lower trap density of the sample. In addition, the optical bandgap was calculated to be 2.26 eV (Fig. S3, ESI) through its corresponding Tauc plots, which agrees with the previous reported values for bulk SCs and planar SCs. It should be noted that the bandgap value of the laminar MAPbBr3 SC is narrower than the value of the MAPbBr3 PC film (2.31 eV), which could improve photon harvesting and hence enhance photocurrent generation.
The carrier transport properties of the laminar MAPbBr3 perovskite SC have been investigated via the space charge limited current (SCLC) method by constructing a device of Au/MAPbBr3 SC/Au. The MAPbBr3 SC (thickness of 16 μm) was grown on an insulated glass substrate. The sample was patterned with 120 nm thick Au electrodes, which structured a channel of 0.5 mm as shown in Fig. 1d. The dark I–V characteristic (Fig. 1d) displayed an Ohmic region (blue) with a linear relation at the lower bias, and then followed a trap-filled limit region (green). Such trap-filled limit voltage VTFL was determined to be 2.2 V, corresponding to a calculated trap density (ntrap) of 2.5 × 1010 cm−3. Furthermore, the mobility (μ) was figured out as 23.7 cm2 s−1 V−1 by fitting the curve with the Mott–Gurney law at the Child's (cyan) region with a higher bias. Notably, the ntrap and μ of the current laminar MAPbBr3 SC sample are seven magnitudes lower and two magnitudes higher than those of the MAPbBr3 PC film (1 × 1017 cm−3 and 0.26 cm2 s−1 V−1), respectively, which will considerably enhance the photoelectric performance. Overall, the laminar MAPbBr3 SC prepared by this method possessed high crystallinity, high mobility and low trap density.
Laminar perovskite SCs are ideal model materials for the high efficiency PSCs. In order to investigate the interfacial interaction of PSCs, three structures of laminar MAPbBr3 SC solar cells are designed: (I) FTO/PVK/Au (PVK = laminar MAPbBr3 SC), (II) FTO/TiO2/PVK/Au and (III) FTO/TiO2/PVK/HTM/Au. According to the cross-sectional SEM image of the structure (III) shown in Fig. 2a, the 16 μm thick laminar MAPbBr3 SC presents a homogeneous morphology with free grain boundaries. Furthermore, it is also clear that the MAPbBr3 SC is tightly in contact with the TiO2 layer, verified by the high magnification SEM shown in Fig. S4 (ESI), which laid the foundation for the excellent optoelectronic performance. Meanwhile, the interface of the HTM/MAPbBr3 SC was also smooth and was tightly in contact with the HTM as shown in Fig. 2b. The HTM and Au layers were calculated to be 100 nm and 120 nm, respectively.

Fig. 2c shows the illuminated current density–voltage (J–V) curves of solar cells with different structures, whose detailed photovoltaic parameters are tabulated in Table S1 (ESI). The cell of structure (I) shows an open circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.65 V, a short-circuit current (JSC) of 7.77 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.39, yielding a PCE of 1.98%. After adding the TiO2 compact layer, the PCE of structure (II) increased to 4.08% with a VOC of 0.91 V, a JSC of 8.35 mA cm−2 and a FF of 0.53. When superadded with the HTM layer, the PCE of an integral laminar MAPbBr3 SC solar device has been boosted to 7.11% with a VOC of 1.31 V, a JSC of 8.77 mA cm−2 and a FF of 0.62, whose JSC value agreed well with the integrated current density of 8.62 mA cm−2 from the incident photon to the current conversion efficiency (IPCE) as shown in Fig. 2d. Obviously, the remarkable improvement of the PCE for structure (III) benefits from the augmentation of JSC, VOC and FF, which will be discussed later. Moreover, the statistical data of 20 devices with structure (III) are provided in Fig. S5 (ESI), showing a medium PCE of 6.55% with a slight standard deviation (4.3%).
In order to explore the difference in the three structures thoroughly, time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL), transient photovoltage (TPV) and transient photocurrent (TPC) were implemented. Firstly, TRPL measurements were performed to investigate the photocarrier dynamics of the absorbers. The samples of (i) FTO/PVK, (ii) FTO/TiO2/PVK and (iii) FTO/TiO2/PVK/HTM were prepared to estimate the carrier lifetime via TRPL as shown in Fig. 3a and b. The decay curves of TRPL exhibited a fast (τ1) and a slow (τ2) dynamics, respectively, whose bi-exponential fitted parameters are tabulated in Table S2 (ESI). In particular, the sample of (i) presents a τ1 of 90.26 ns and τ2 of 373.7 ns when the excitation laser illuminated from the PVK side, whereas it was fitted at 13.7 ns and 131.8 ns when illuminated from the FTO side, respectively. Since the high extinction coefficient of perovskite causes the generation of carriers near the illuminated surface, the lifetimes of the PVK side are similar to the previous single MAPbBr3 SC. Accordingly, the average lifetime of the sample (i) decreased from 262.1 ns of the PVK side to 122.4 ns of the FTO side, resulting from the accelerated carrier separation by FTO. Such improved carrier diffusion or separation at the FTO/PVK interface can probably originate from the built-in field (Ebi0, FTO/PVK). In addition, as for sample (ii), when the TiO2 layer was coated with FTO glass, the average lifetime decreased a bit to 109.2 ns when illuminated from the PVK side whereas it drastically declined to 23.89 ns when illuminated from the FTO side, revealing a more efficient carrier separation by introducing the TiO2 layer on FTO glass. Herein, the Ebi1 or other factors such as defect concentration at the TiO2/PVK interface (Fig. 3c) significantly influence the lifetimes of the FTO side. Nevertheless, such factors might not be enough to penetrate through the whole PVK layer, which resulted in a slight variation in the lifetimes of the PVK side. By comparison, the average lifetime of sample (iii) remarkably decreased to 0.37 ns on the PVK side and 0.42 ns on the FTO side with the incorporation of both TiO2 and HTM. Such a pronounced result of sample (iii) was largely affected by both Ebi1 and Ebi2 (the interface of PVK/HTM, Fig. 3d), which facilitated the carrier penetration of the whole PVK layer and accelerated the carrier separation no matter at the PVK or FTO side. Herein, it is feasible to explain that the advanced photovoltaic performance of cells (II) and (III) shown in Fig. 2c should stem from the fast carrier separation and charge extraction according to the decreased lifetimes of (ii) and (iii).
The TPV and TPC measurements were further employed to investigate the underlying carrier dynamics along the entire pathway in the completed solar cells. The recombination lifetimes in the PSCs extracted from the decay curves of TPV (Fig. S6, ESI) by a single exponential fitting, were used to gather information on carrier recombination rates in the working device with enhanced steady light intensities of 3.83, 9.83, 33.3, 56.8, 80.3 and 104 mW cm−2. The dwindling lifetimes and transport times (Fig. 4) with the enhanced light intensity should be ascribed to the aggravated recombination and increased carrier concentration under higher illumination, respectively. It is noteworthy that the lifetime of cell (III) is higher than that of cell (II) and cell (I), pointing out a retardation of the interfacial recombination of FTO/PVK and PVK/Au by introducing the TiO2 and the HTM layer. Such a result also verifies the improved VOC values of cells (II) and (III) compared to cell (I). Moreover, the Ld calculated from TPV are 27 μm of cell (I), 56 μm of cell (II) and 60 μm of cell (III) respectively, under an illumination of 104 mW cm−2, exhibiting the preponderance of TiO2 and HTM layers for efficient carrier separation and extraction. The increasing Ld is attributed to the enhanced built-in fields at TiO2/PVK and PVK/HTM interfaces as expounded above. Furthermore, the transport times were extracted from the decay curves of TPC (Fig. S6, ESI) with the same steady light intensity, whose values are (III) < (II) < and (I), revealing that the device (III) has the fastest electron transport which can hence exhibit the highest JSC observed in Fig. 2c. Overall, both the transient optical (TRPL) and electricity (TPV and TPC) measurements confirm an advancement of photocarrier separation and extraction by importing TiO2 and HTM interfaces.
The stability of the perovskite solar cell is an important issue for further applications. The current laminar MAPbBr3 SC solar cell (device III: FTO/TiO2/PVK/HTM/Au) was aged in an ambient condition for different durations. Impressively, the cell held 93% PCE of the initial value after a storing time of 1000 h (Fig. S7, ESI), manifesting excellent stability and potential for future application of the MAPbBr3 SC solar cell. In addition, the effects of a laminar MAPbBr3 SC with different thickness on photovoltaic performances are further investigated. Laminar MAPbBr3 SCs with thicknesses of 30 and 45 μm have been prepared by utilizing the PTFE thin membranes of 35 and 50 μm (Fig. S8, ESI), respectively. These SCs were subsequently assembled into solar cells with structure (III) and their photovoltaic performances are shown in Fig. S9 and Table S3 (ESI). Laminar MAPbBr3 SCs with thicknesses of 30 and 45 μm have been prepared by utilizing the PTFE thin membranes with thicknesses of 35 and 50 μm, respectively. These SCs are subsequently assembled into solar cells with structure (III) and their photovoltaic performances are shown in Fig. S9 and Table S3 (ESI). The overall decay of the photovoltaic parameters should be attributed to the inefficient electron collection caused upon increasing the perovskite SC thickness.
In summary, a novel strategy for space-limited inverse temperature crystallization growth (SLITC) is successfully developed to fabricate a laminar MAPbBr3 SC with controllable thickness and size. The resultant laminar single crystals have expressed superior crystallinity, high mobility (23.7 cm2 s−1 V−1) and low trap density (2.5 × 1010 cm−3). When employed as an efficient PSC absorber, the optimized 16 μm thick laminar MAPbBr3 SC solar cell has achieved a remarkable PCE of 7.11% with excellent stability of preserving 93% initial PCE after aging for 1000 h. Moreover, the carrier dynamics of three structured solar cells was thoroughly investigated in this study with TRPL, TPV and TPC measurements, demonstrating an utmost significance of TiO2 and the HTM layer for PSC to reduce the interfacial recombination of FTO/PVK and PVK/Au as well as to enhance the charge separation and extraction of photocarriers. Moreover, the current study will significantly stimulate further exploration of other highly efficient and stable MAPbI3 and alloyed perovskite single crystal solar cells.
The authors acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (91433109, 91222201), GDUPS (2016), the Program of Guangzhou Science and Technology (201504010031), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, and the NSF of Guangdong Province (S2013030013474).
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental section and characterization of the MAPbBr3 SC and device. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cc02447a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017