 DOI: 10.1039/D2TA09916K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2023, 11, 9085-9096


Shengye
Tao
,

Liangzheng
Dong
,

Junsu
Han
,

Yafei
Wang
,

Qianming
Gong
,

Jinquan
Wei
,

Ming
Zhao
* and 

Daming
Zhuang
*

School of Material Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University, 100084, Beijing, PR China. E-mail: zhaoming2013@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Key Laboratory for Advanced Materials Processing Technology of Ministry of Education, State Key Laboratory of New Ceramics and Processing, Tsinghua University, 100084, Beijing, PR China. E-mail: dmzhuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Received
21st December 2022
, Accepted 23rd March 2023
First published on 29th March 2023
An in situ potassium (K)-doped copper–zinc–tin–sulfide (CZTS) precursor is prepared and annealed through selenization. After comprehensive optimization of the annealing, a cell with an efficiency of up to 12.62% is obtained, far exceeding the 10.32% efficiency of the reference cell. Besides excellent grain growth enhancement due to the K-doping, the removal of voids in the bulk of the absorber is confirmed. A model based on in situ K-doping-enhanced element diffusion is proposed to explain this effect, showing the validity and universality of the proposed method. Moreover, the suppression of the deep-level defect states is confirmed by the elimination of the ‘roll-over’ behavior and greatly enhanced photoluminescence intensity. Temperature-dependent admittance spectroscopy is applied to the fabricated device, enabling the defect types to be determined. This study sheds light on the mechanism of defect modification through K-doping via the in situ incorporation strategy which prevents the disturbance caused by initial K diffusion in other ex situ incorporation strategies. Based on the results, the defect modification of in situ K-doping is attributed to the doping-induced homogenization of matter, which suppresses the Sn-related defects (e.g., ZnSn, VSn) stemming from local composition vibration.

Kesterite Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)2 (CZTSSe) semiconductors are promising candidates to replace Cu(In, Ga)(Se,S)2 (CIGSSe) as the absorber layer for thin film solar cells. They have attracted widespread attention for decades owing to their direct bandgap, high absorption coefficient (>104 cm−1), and abundant and environmentally benign constituents. To date, the highest efficiency achieved by kesterite is 13.0%, somewhat lower than the 23.35% of state-of-the-art CIGSSe solar cells and far below the Shockley–Queisser limit of 31%.

The efficiency gap between CZTSSe and CIGSSe cells is attributed to several intrinsic properties, including:
(1) A narrow phase stability zone, resulting in a high probability of unexpected secondary phases (such as Cu2(S, Se), Zn(S, Se), Sn(S, Se), Sn(S,Se)2 and Cu2Sn(S,Se)3) in the absorber bulk and/or at the buffer/absorber interface. These phases may reduce the short circuit current density (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), and fill factor (FF), and are detrimental to device performance.
(2) Large amounts of defects and defect clusters due to the low formation energy. Clusters of defects cause poor carrier lifetimes and strong non-radio recombination in kesterite devices, reducing the Voc and FF of solar cells.
(3) Band tailing or sub-band state issues caused by bandgap and/or electrostatic potential fluctuations stemming from cation disorders or defect clusters. These contribute to the large Voc deficit of kesterite cells.
To combat the abovementioned problems, various strategies have been employed. In terms of phase control, two-step annealing enables the precise control of the absorber phase and the elimination of the fine-grain zone at the back interface, resulting in devices with superior performance. In terms of the modification of defects and the suppression of related non-radiative recombination, alkali doping is regarded as the most effective strategy. Sodium(Na) doping increases the hole concentration stemming from the formation of acceptor defects (e.g., NaZn−) and reduces non-radiative recombination by passivating the grain boundaries, while lithium produces similar passivation effects through local electric field inversion. The effects of doping by light alkali elements have been intensively investigated and reported, but there are few results regarding the use of heavier alkalis for doping in kesterite solar cells. In the case of CIGSe solar cells, potassium (K) post-deposition treatment leads to the depletion of Cu and Ga at the CdS/CIGSe interface, enhancing the efficiency. A breakthrough in achieving efficiency levels above 20% was made using KF post-deposition treatment (PDT).
The current performance of kesterite cells following K-doping is summarized in Table 1 (including the results presented herein). Various incorporation methods have been used to fabricate different devices, producing varying effects at different efficiency levels. The reported incorporation methods include the addition of K salt to the precursor solution (bulk incorporation), pre-absorber synthesis evaporation of KF on the back contact before preparing the absorber, spin coating of K salt solution on the precursor, post-deposition treatment with KF, and the incorporation of K via vapor phase transportation. The reported effects of K-doping and the possible explanations are as follows.
Incorporation method
Cells
PCE (%)

V
oc (mV)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
Year
Solution method
Doped
3.34
498
12.18
55.00
2014 (ref. 34)
Undoped
2.94
574
9.91
52.00
Pre-absorber synthesis evaporation
Doped
5.60
350
29.30
54.20
2016 (ref. 2)
Undoped
4.10
292
27.40
51.70
Spin coating
Doped
7.7 ± 0.5
389 ± 6
34.6 ± 2
57 ± 1
2017 (ref. 35)
Undoped
5.2 ± 1.1
385 ± 28
26.9 ± 3.1
50 ± 2
Spin coating
Doped
3.6
423.3
25.6
32.60
2017 (ref. 17)
Undoped
6.4
426.0
30.8
48.50
Vapor phase transportation
Doped
3.13
256
26.90
45.45
2018 (ref. 28)
Undoped
0.88
137
21.32
30.13
Solution method
Doped
9.70
432
36.70
61.00
2018 (ref. 36)
Undoped
6.40
364
33.80
51.60
Post-deposition treatment
Doped
11.46
453
36.22
69.87
2021 (ref. 22)
Undoped
10.12
442
35.56
64.41

In situ doping
Doped
12.62
424
37.80
78.71
This work
Undoped
10.32
405
37.20
68.46
(1) Just 10% content of K-doping compared with Na via the vapor transport mechanism produces a similar enhancement in grain growth and promotes crystal nucleation and growth. This comes from K-doping by a solution method facilitating the (112) preferred orientation. Li et al. and Engberg et al. also reported that K-doping promotes grain growth in the absorber when using vapor phase transportation and the solution method, respectively.
(2) K-doping by the solution method eliminates the resistivity phase of ZnS due to the inhibition of Sn loss.
(3) K-doping by vapor phase transportation and the solution method increases the carrier concentration. Hsieh et al. found that K-doping by the solution method induces fewer grain boundaries, which alleviates the non-radiative recombination and increases the carrier density.
(4) K-doping combined with Na through spin coating improves the lifetime of minority carriers.
(5) The photoluminescence (PL) intensity is greatly enhanced by K-doping via the solution method. This is ascribed to the reduced interface recombination. Rey et al. reported an enhanced PL intensity when applying the KF-PDT.
(6) The modification of grain boundaries by the vapor transportation mechanism following K-doping was observed by Li et al. They considered the K ions to accumulate at the grain boundaries, forming a downward trend in the local energy level that helps the separation of the exciton and the charge transportation.
(7) K-doping by spin coating slightly enlarges the bandgap of the device.
The K incorporation methods described above are ex situ doping methods that involve an initial K diffusion process as the absorber layer forms. Even in the solution method, where K is doped in a homogeneous solution, the K may be uniformly distributed on the surface of the kesterite cores, as reported by Zhou et al., and the doping is accompanied by K diffusion from the surface to the interior of the cores. Such a diffusion process complicates the K-doping effects, making it difficult to determine the mechanism whereby K-doping enhances device performance. The beneficial effects of K-doping have been observed by many researchers, but the mechanism behind these effects remains largely unknown. The use of heavy alkalis (K, rubidium, and cesium) for doping kesterite solar cells represents a promising pathway to achieving state-of-the-art efficiency. However, studies of K-doping in kesterite solar cells are still in the nascent stages of discussion.
This paper describes, for the first time, the in situ K-doping of kesterite solar cells by selenization annealing of the K-doped CZTS precursor via sputtering of the KF pre-incorporated quaternary ceramic CZTS target. In this approach, the precursor has atomic-scale homogeneous K-doping, which prevents the initial diffusion of K. This precursor configuration helps to shed light on the K-doping effects and mechanism by removing the disturbance caused by the initial diffusion. In this work, the average power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the devices is enhanced from 9.79% to 11.85%. The best efficiency reaches 12.62% with a total area of 0.3 cm2 without an anti-reflection layer, while the reference device achieves an efficiency of 10.32%. The cells were verified by a standard testing agency, and a verified efficiency of the in situ K doped device is 12.66%. The test report is provided at the end of ESI. More importantly, comprehensive characterizations of absorbers and devices clarify the effects of K-doping on absorber formation and the ultimate device performance, as well as the mechanism behind those effects. The effects of in situ K-doping on grain growth enhancement, removal of voids in the bulk, and suppression of non-radiative recombination are observed, and a model of void removal and the mechanism of non-radiative recombination suppression is derived to explain the defect modifications.

Molybdenum (Mo)-coated soda lime glass (SLG) substrates were prepared by DC sputtering of a 99.999% Mo target on a 25 × 75 mm2 SLG with a thickness of 880 nm. An SiO2 intermediate layer was applied between the Mo back contact and the SLG with a thickness of 50 nm to suppress the excessive Na diffusion from the SLG to the absorber. The K-doped CZTS precursors were prepared by sputtering a quaternary CZTS ceramic target with the pre-incorporated 0.6 at% KF. The composition of the target is Cu-poor and Zn-rich with nominal cation ratios of Cu/(Zn + Sn) = 0.7, Zn/Sn = 1.2. The precursors were deposited on the Mo-coated SLG with a thickness of 1400 nm. The base pressure of the sputtering was 2 × 10−3 Pa, the working pressure was 0.7 Pa, and the sputtering power density was 0.8 W cm−2. As the reference sample, the CZTS precursor without K-doping was also deposited on the Mo-coated SLG by sputtering the quaternary CZTS target with the same nominal cation ratios (Cu/(Zn + Sn) = 0.7, Zn/Sn = 1.2).


The as-deposited undoped and doped precursors were selenized in a quartz box fixed in a vacuum chamber with a water-cooling system. Two-step annealing was applied, in which the sample was heated from 25 °C at a rate of 20 °C min−1 to 400 °C, then a 20 min dwelling time was implemented before a 15 min ramping to the target selenization temperature. The target temperature ranged from 480 °C to 540 °C in steps of 15 °C. The annealing process was performed in a 3 vol% H2Se/Ar atmosphere controlled by the ratio of H2Se/Ar gas flow rate. A schematic illustration of the annealing process is shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). After annealing, the samples were cooled in the chamber by the water-cooling system.


A CdS buffer layer with a thickness of 50 nm was deposited by chemical bath deposition (CBD) on the as-annealed absorbers, then an intrinsic ZnO layer (80 nm) and an aluminum-doped ZnO layer (400 nm) were deposited by magnetron sputtering as the window layer with a square resistance of 50 Ω. A Ni(10 nm)/Al(1500 nm) grid (two 0.3 mm-diameter circles, 0.5% shading) was thermally evaporated on the top of the window layer. The solar cells were isolated with mechanical scribing, and the assigned total area of solar cells was 0.3 cm2.


The current–voltage (JV) data of the solar cells were measured by a Keithley 2400 source meter with a four-probe configuration and a solar simulator (Class AAA, OAI) under standard conditions (1000 Wm−2, 25 °C, AM 1.5 G). And all cells' performance is calculated on the total area of 0.3 cm2. The intensity of the solar simulator was calibrated by a monocrystalline silicon reference cell (VLSI Standards Inc.). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the cells was measured without white light bias from 350–1400 nm using a QE system (Crowntech Inc.) equipped with a 150 W Xenon lamp, monochromator, lock-in amplifier, and light chopper. The morphology observations were conducted by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, GeminiSEM 500, ZEISS) on the 5 nm platinum-coated samples, and element mapping was obtained through coupled window-less energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS, Extreme, Oxford Instruments). The composition and phase of the absorbers were analyzed using X-ray diffraction (XRD, D8 Advance, Bruker, with Cu Kα as excitation), electron probe microanalysis (EPMA, JXA-8230, JEOL), and Raman spectroscopy (RTS2, Zolix, with 633 nm laser excitation). The fabricated devices were cut with a focused ion beam (TESCAN S900X) to form a smooth cross-section with a length of 40 μm. Secondary-ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) depth-profiling data were obtained by the SIMS system (TOF-SIMS 5-100, ION-TOF GmbH). Bi+ ions with 30 keV energy were used as primary ions, and positive ions were detected. O2+ ions with 2 keV energy were used as the sputtering source; the current was 457 nA and a raster size of 300 × 300 μm2 was sputtered. The analyzed area measured 100 × 100 μm2. The absolute calibrated PL spectrum was acquired by a fluorescence spectrum instrument (FLS980, Edinburgh, with 808 nm laser excitation). The temperature-dependent characterization was carried out on a hot/cold plate (HCP621GP, Instec Inc.) with a liquid nitrogen cooling system (MK2000 temperature controller, Instec Inc.). Admittance spectroscopy was performed using an impedance analyzer (E4990A, Keysight) from 100 Hz to 1 MHz.


The CZTSe absorber was produced by a two-step annealing process including precursor sputtering and selenization annealing. The typical structure of heterojunction thin film solar cells was adopted (i.e., Mo/CZTSe/CdS/i-ZnO/AZO/NiAl). The detailed fabrication process of the device is described in Section 2. Five annealing temperatures were chosen to allow comparative optimization. The photovoltaic performance of each temperature group is presented in Fig. S3 (ESI). The doped devices suggest an optimal annealing temperature of 510 °C. Boxplots (with data points) of the photovoltaic data from 12 cells in the 510 °C group are shown in Fig. 1a, b, d and e. The doped devices exhibit superior performance over the undoped devices, with a significant boost in the average PCE from 9.79% to 11.85%. A greatly enhanced average FF (from 66.77% to 76.33%) and slightly increased average Voc (from 394.64 mV to 412.74 mV) contribute to this improvement. The average Jsc values of the undoped and doped devices are similar at 37.15 mA cm−2 and 37.68 mA cm−2, respectively. The JV curves of the best undoped and doped device are shown in Fig. 1c. The PCE of the best doped device is 12.62% (with a Voc of 424.01 mV, FF of 78.71%, and Jsc of 37.80 mA cm−2), while the reference best doped device has a PCE of 10.32% (with a Voc of 405.04 mV, FF of 68.46%, and Jsc of 37.20 mA cm−2). The performance of the devices in this study are close to the efficiency of state-of-the-art kesterite thin film solar cells, demonstrating the reliability of the subsequent analysis. Fig. 1f shows the EQE data and integrated current density of the undoped and doped devices. The doped device has a slightly superior quantum efficiency over the undoped device in the visible light region, and this uniform enhancement is ascribed to the better collection of photo-generated carriers in the absorber, as influenced by electrical factors. The energy bandgap (Eg), which can be extracted from the intercept of the linear fit of [Eln(1 − EQE)]2versus photo energy E, is 1.050 eV for the undoped device and 1.048 eV for the doped sample. The integrated current densities of the undoped and doped devices are 34.98 mA cm−2 and 35.52 mA cm−2, respectively. The gap between the integrated current density and Jsc under standard conditions could be caused by a barrier to the photo current stemming from the photodoping of the buffer layer, because the EQE characterization was carried out without white light bias on the device.

The surface and cross-section morphologies of the absorber layers are shown in Fig. 2a. The enhanced grain growth of in situ K-doping can be easily observed from the surface and cross-section images. For the undoped absorber, uniformly distributed holes can be observed on the surface. These cause poor buffer coverage, which results in the direct contact of the window layer with the p-type absorber in the local area of the cells. Such contact deteriorates the shunt resistance (Rsh) of the cells, ultimately leading to low FF compared with doped devices. With in situ K-doping, the grain growth of the absorber is greatly boosted, and the absorber becomes denser and hole-free. Grains extending through the depth of the absorber with a size above 2 μm can be observed after selenization annealing. These large grains lead to a dense and uniform absorber with fewer grain boundaries, which result in low absorber resistivity and good coverage of the buffer layer. These effects are beneficial for reducing the series resistance (Rs) and enlarging Rsh in the device, ultimately leading to a high cell FF. As shown in Fig. S4(ESI), the Rsh of the doped device greatly enlarged form 539 Ωcm2 of the undoped device to 5358 Ωcm2. However, the rapid drop in the current near the Voc excessively scattered the derivative plot in Rs and A characterization, the two value can't be extracted. Nevertheless, the sharper drop in current of the doped device indicates a smaller Rsh than the undoped device. The dark area on the surface of the doped absorber suggests a different surface conductivity of the absorber area. This phenomenon is usually regarded as a sign of a conductive secondary phase (e.g., Cu2Se), but the possibility of a minor secondary phase existence is not supported by the EDS element mapping results in Fig. S6 (ESI). This same dark area appears in the FIB cut cross-section of the device, but the element distribution is uniform. Thus, we conclude that this dark area comes from the nonuniform sputtering of the platinum coating applied to enhance the conductivity of the sample.

Fig. 2b shows the XRD pattern of the absorbers, where the diffraction peaks represent the peaks of the crystal planes of the kesterite phase. The texture of the (200) crystal plane can be seen in the undoped absorber, but this peak does not appear in the doped absorber. The enhanced grain growth from in situ K-doping is confirmed by full-width at half maximum measurements of the high-angle diffraction peaks (i.e., (116) crystal plane, for which 2θ = 53.53°), which are 0.108° and 0.062° for the undoped and doped absorbers, respectively. Fig. 2c shows the Raman spectra of the absorbers, with peaks located at 171, 196, and 238 cm−1 corresponding to the B mode, A mode, and E mode of the kesterite phase, respectively. The XRD patters and Raman spectra indicate that a monophase kesterite with no minor secondary phase was obtained after selenization annealing. Table 2 presents the element content of the 510 °C annealed absorbers. The cation ratios (Cu/(Zn + Sn) and Zn/Sn) of the undoped sample are 0.857 and 1.081, compared with 0.841 and 1.116 for the doped sample. The different cation ratios may be associated with the 1–3% relative error of the EPMA quantitative analysis. Through annealing in the active H2Se atmosphere, the atomic percentage of sulfur measured by EPMA (Table 2) in the annealed absorber is below 1%, and the secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) signal intensity of sulfur in the bulk absorber is below 10 compared with 400 in the precursor (Fig. 3c, d, f and g). Combining the aforementioned results, we can conclude that the sulfur in the precursor has been completely replaced by selenium, leaving a pure kesterite phase of CZTSe.
Sample
Cu
Zn
Sn
Se
S
Na
K
Undoped
22.89
13.87
12.83
48.56
0.76
1.09
0.01
Doped
23.34
14.62
13.10
47.07
0.68
1.15
0.04
A comprehensive temperature optimization experiment for in situ K-doping was conducted, and an optimal annealing temperature of 510 °C was determined. After selenization annealing, monophase kesterite absorbers with nearly identical cation ratios were obtained, and grain growth enhancement was clearly observed. The enhanced performance of the doped devices was contributed to by a slightly increased Voc and greatly enhanced FF. The high FF of the doped cells could be related to low Rs induced by the enhanced grain growth and the high Rsh induced by the good buffer coverage. In situ K-doping has outstanding beneficial effects on grain growth, but attention should be paid to the underlying mechanism. The enhancement of Voc requires further study. Thus, comprehensive characterization of the element distribution and defects was carried out using the optimal 510 °C annealed samples.


Fig. 3a and b shows the cross-section morphology of the focused ion beam cut device. The length of the cutting edge is 40 μm. Another selected set of sites is shown in Fig. S5 (ESI). In the middle of the undoped device's absorber, many voids are visible, while there are practically no voids in the middle of the doped device's absorber. The doped absorber exhibits a set of size-reduced voids at the rear interface. The voids in the undoped absorber near the heterojunction space charge region (SCR) create distortions in the crystal lattice and dangling bounds, which have a negative effect on device performance. The possibility of phase decomposition-induced voids was excluded by the EDS cross-section mappings shown in Fig. S6 (ESI). Comparing the distribution of holes between the undoped and doped devices, it is evident that in situ K-doping eliminates voids in the middle of the absorber and leaves fewer voids at the rear interface. Such a change is strongly related to the diffusion of matter during annealing. The element distribution allows us to understand the process of void removal via in situ K-doping. Thus, SIMS depth profiling was conducted on the precursors and devices. The results are shown in Fig. 3c, d, e and f.

The signal intensities of 63Cu+, 64Zn+, 120Sn+, and 32S+ in the undoped and doped precursor are nearly identical, confirming their identical base composition, which is consistent with the EPMA results. Performance differences resulting from composition differences are excluded by this result. Additionally, the doped precursor has a strong and uniform signal of 39K+, with intensity counts of 1.1 × 105 in the CZTS layer and lower signal counts in the Mo rear contact layer. The K signal in Mo layer is contributed to the diffusion of K from the CZTS layer into the Mo layer. In this work, the uniform signal intensity of 39K+ in the precursor layer proves the validity of the in situ K-doping method. Comparatively, the undoped precursor has a much lower intensity of 39K+, with a signal intensity of less than 10, and a higher 39K+ signal intensity near the Mo layer. The higher signal near the Mo layer can be regarded as the K diffusing from the SLG substrate. The Na intensity in the doped precursors increases without deliberate doping, showing a uniform distribution and signal intensity of about 110. SIMS characterization is highly sensitive to alkali elements, and the deliberate inclusion of sodium fluoride (NaF) in the sputtering target (0.6 at%) leads to a uniformly distributed 23Na+ intensity with a signal intensity of 6 × 104 (Fig. S2, ESI). Hence, in situ K-doping enhances the Na diffusion from the Mo layer to the CZTS layer, and this diffusion process can be explained by a solid-state ion exchange mechanism between Na and K cations.
Selenization annealing forms a U-shaped depth profile of Na in both absorbers (shown in Fig. 3g), but the doped absorber exhibits a lower level of Na in the bulk and a relatively higher level at the front and rear interfaces, resulting in a steeper gradient in the U-shaped Na distribution. A similar Na distribution has been reported in CIGS, where K-doping via PDT leads to the incorporation of K and repellence of Na in the bulk CIGS layer, resulting in a higher Na content at the front interface. The higher Na content at the back interface of the CZTSe and Mo layers is in line with another study in which KF was incorporated by pre-absorber synthesis evaporation followed by high-temperature annealing, where doped absorbers had a higher Na content at the rear interface than the control sample. According to this discussion and the Na distribution observed in this work, it is clear that the subsequent high-temperature heat treatment after in situ K-doping strengthens the diffusion of Na from the SLG through the Mo layer into the absorber, and the K in the bulk of the absorber repels the Na from the absorber's bulk. This maintains the Na at low levels in the bulk and at high levels at the front and rear interfaces. The synergy of in situ K-doping and subsequent high-temperature annealing leads to a U-shaped Na profile with a steeper gradient in the doped sample. This distribution is believed to be related to the improved cell performance.
Alkali selenide can act as a fluxing agent during annealing, causing enhanced crystallization. In the K–Se and Na–Se binary phase diagrams, there are several binary compounds in the Se-rich region. For Na–Se, there are NaSe (495 °C), Na2Se3 (313 °C), NaSe2 (290 °C) and NaSe3 (258 °C), while for K–Se compounds, there are KSe (475 °C), K2Se3 (375 °C), KSe2 (206 °C) and K2Se5 (195 °C). These compounds have lower melting points than the annealing temperature. In our previous work, a Se/(S + Se) ratio of 0.85 was confirmed in the precursor after being held at 400 °C in an H2Se atmosphere for 20 min. Given the high K content and moderate Na content in the doped precursor, the liquid phase of K–Se and/or Na–Se compounds forms easily during the first dwelling stage of annealing and is distributed through the whole doped absorber layer. The K in the doped device has a lower concentration at the front interface than in the bulk, unlike the Na, demonstrating a single positive gradient in the K distribution from the absorber's front interface to rear interface. The absolute intensity of 39K+ in the absorber is also lower than the doped precursor. These indicate a permanent loss of K during annealing. Here, we ascribe the loss to the vapor transportation of K stemming from the low melting point of KSex compounds. During the annealing, the KSex compounds on the surface of the absorber vaporize into the atmosphere and re-condense on the walls of the chamber with the water-cooling system, and the KSex compounds in the bulk continue to diffuse from the rear to the front, ultimately forming the single-gradient distribution. We believe that this diffusion process accounts for the void removal in the doped absorber. A schematic illustration is shown in Fig. 3h and i.
In our opinion, the voids appear in the early stage of crystallization as a result of crystal nucleation and crystal orientation growth. The existence of alkali selenide (NaSex, KSex) greatly enhances the mobility of the grain boundaries by introducing two more types of atoms to participate in the diffusion process, which enhances the coefficient of mutual diffusion. This effect explains the enlarged grain size in the doped absorber. The loss of K reflects the flux of KSex from rear to front, as well as other composition elements of the absorber, enhancing the non-densifying surface diffusion and vapor transportation of matter in the voids in this direction, as shown on the right of Fig. 3h. The arrows pointing upward indicate this process, as the matter of the absorber moves up while the voids in the bulk of the absorber move downward, as indicated by the downward arrow. The enhanced coefficient of mutual diffusion and net matter flux work in conjunction to turn the many voids in the bulk into fewer and smaller holes at the rear interface. This model based on diffusion and matter flux is in good agreement with actual observations, and is theoretically reproducible in other absorber preparation(e.g., CZTS, CZTSSe and CIGS(Se) etc.)

In situ K-doping greatly enhances the grain growth by enhancing the diffusion of elements via the increased mutual diffusion coefficient of the system. The diffusion of Na in the precursor at room temperature, assisted by K, can be observed, which may further enhance the diffusion. Moreover, the void removal effect of in situ K-doping has been observed, which is explained by the unidirectional matter flux stemming from the formation and permanent loss of KSex compounds. This model suggests a novel and universal strategy to obtain a high-quality absorber.

The absolute calibrated PL spectra of the absorber layers were measured to investigate the main recombination path in the absorbers. As shown in Fig. 4, the PL intensity is greatly enhanced and a red shift occurs in the doped absorber. As the excitation power increases, the position of the PL peak remains unchanged, indicating an unchanged recombination path. The doped and undoped absorbers have peak PL positions at 0.969 eV and 0.977 eV, respectively, which represent the transition energy Et,PL of recombination. The PL peak is an indicator of the maximum achievable Voc, limited by the bulk. Subsequently, the Voc is limited by the quasi-Fermi-level splitting. There are similar PL intensity ratios of doped to undoped absorbers under different excitation laser power densities, and the average value is 5.28 (detailed data are presented in Table S1, ESI). The change in quasi-Fermi splitting due to the higher PL intensity is Δμ ≈ kBTln(5.28) ≈ 43 meV, but the red-shifted PL peak of the doped absorber reduces this positive effect. In theory, the two effects should mutually increase the device's Voc by 35 mV, but the average increase in Voc is 10 mV. The exact difference in Voc between the doped and undoped devices ranges from −1.2 mV to 42.91 mV, which contains the predicted value. The Voc is also influenced by the properties of subsequent layers and the formed interfaces. From this point of view, the deviation in the actual device's Voc from the predicted value is not remarkable, and it is clear that enhanced radio recombination accounts for the improved Voc of the doped devices, indicating fewer deep-level defects in the doped absorber than in the undoped absorber.

The influence of interface recombination can be identified by the temperature-dependent JV measurements for the undoped and doped devices under AM1.5G illumination, as shown in Fig. 5a and b. The dominant recombination barrier height Φb was extracted from the linear extrapolation of Vocversus temperature (as shown in Fig. 5c) according to , where A is the ideality factor, Φb is the barrier height, J00 is the prefactor of the saturation current, and JL is the light-generated current. For the undoped device, Φb = 0.974 eV, while for the doped device, Φb = 1.000 eV, as shown in Fig. 5c. Both Φb values are close to the Eg extracted from the EQE data, indicating that the dominant recombination is within the bulk of the absorber rather than at the interface. The smaller difference between Φb and Eg for the doped device (0.048 eV compared with 0.076 eV for the undoped device) can be attributed to the higher buffer/absorber interface quality as a result of the denser, hole-free surface of the absorber via in situ K-doping. The extraction of the recombination barrier height bases on an unchanged ratio of J00 to JL, although the continuous degradation of Jsc suggests that JL will change, as reflected in the poor linearity of the Voc–T curve. Thus, the extraction of Φb is conducted under a specific temperature range. A reduction in Jsc can be observed in both the undoped and doped devices as the testing temperature decreases, with the undoped device having a lower Jsc at the same temperature. This result is in accordance with the EQE results (Fig. 1f), in which the doped device has a higher EQE than the undoped device through the visible wavelengths. Such a difference can be explained by the different collection of photo-generated carriers in the absorber, which are wavelength-independent and caused by electrical loss factors. The doped device exhibits a better photo-carrier collection than the undoped device, which could be explained by the better minority carrier lifetime as a result of fewer deep-level defects acting as recombination centers.
Another important observation is that the current-blocking behavior in the undoped device at low temperatures disappears in the doped device. The current-blocking behavior of the diode under forward bias (also called the ‘roll-over’ effect) has been reported in previous studies. Several models have been developed to explain this phenomenon, such as the pinning of EF at a certain energy as the conduction band edge at the front interface creates a barrier for the current flow, the existence of acceptor-like defects at the front interface and/or in the bulk of the absorber leading to the blocking of the JV curve, the secondary diode at the rear interface greatly increasing the Rs of the device, thus reducing the current under forward bias, and the change of the layer alignment of MoSe2 from perpendicular to parallel creating increased series resistance at low temperatures. The issues mentioned above all lead to the current being blocked under forward bias, then flowing under a recovered exponential increase at a higher voltage than Voc. Regarding the enhanced PL intensity of the doped sample and the analysis of the difference in photo-carrier collection, the current blocking is likely to be related to deep-level defects in the absorber. Thus, the energy level of the defect states should be characterized to clarify these issues.
Admittance spectroscopy (C–f–T) characterization of the undoped and doped devices was performed. The results are presented in Fig. S7 (ESI). There is an abnormal increase in capacitance from 300 K to 260 K, which can be attributed to the increase in defect capture cross-sections as the temperature decreases. The increase in cross-section results enhances the electron and hole capture coefficients, and subsequently enlarges the electron occupancy of defects in the band gap and increases the density of charged defects in the absorber, finally enlarging capacitance measured in the admittance spectrum. The measured capacitance decreases when the temperature increases in the test temperature region. Further research is needed to determine the cause of this abnormal behavior, which differs from previous reports. We focus on the admittance data below 260 K in this study.

Fig. 5d and e illustrates the −fdC/df vs. frequency curve calculated from the admittance spectroscopy. The peaks show the inflection points for each C–f–T curve, which represent the transition frequency ω0. The Arrhenius plots are the linear fits of the data according to
where
k is the Boltzmann constant, ω0 is the inflection angular frequency of the C–f–T curves, ν0 is the average escaping frequency of the traps, which is dependent on temperature (ν0 ∼ T2), and Ea is the activation energy of detects relative to the valence band maximum. From the Arrhenius plots (Fig. 5f) of transition frequency over temperature (ln(ω0/T2) versus 1000/T), we can obtain the activation energy Ea of the defect states from the slope of the linear fit to the data. In the undoped device, there are two defect states with Ea values of 164 meV and 208 meV; similar defect states in the doped device have Ea = 170 meV and 204 meV. The distribution of the deep defect states in the bandgap follows the equation
where
E(ω) is the transition energy of defects relative to the valence band maximum, Vd denotes the built-in voltage, and w is the width of the depletion region. The density of defect states is proportional to dC/dω = dC/d(2πf); thus, the much stronger peaks, especially the additional peaks at the low frequency region, indicate a greater population of deeper defect states in the undoped device than in the doped device. The reduced population of deep defect states accounts for the greatly enhanced PL intensity. Those acceptor-like defects with an activation energy of 164–170 meV could be assigned as acceptor defects CuZn, and defects with an activation energy of 204–208 meV could be Sn-related defects (e.g., ZnSn or VSn in the Cu-poor Zn-rich condition).


Fig. 6 shows the ratios of Zn to Cu and Sn to Cu in absorbers annealed at different temperatures, as measured by EPMA. The doped absorbers show a steadier cation ratio of Sn to Cu, indicating the stabilization of Sn in the surface region of the absorber via in situ K-doping, as the EPMA quantitative analysis is carried out from the surface side of the absorber, and the penetration depth is about 1 μm, no Mo signal is present. Johnson et al. reported the self-regulation of the Cu/Sn ratio in CZTS, which was explained as the result of SnS evaporation and inclusion in the isothermal system. We believe this evaporation and inclusion exist in our annealing process, but in the undoped precursor, only a limited portion near the surface of the absorber participate in this process. The result is that the Sn content is more sensitive to the annealing temperature, because the saturation vapor pressure of Sn compounds is sensitive to temperature, and lower amounts of Sn compounds in the evaporation and inclusion processes lead to more severe changes in Sn content. In the doped precursor, enhanced element diffusion enables a greater portion of the absorber to participate in the evaporation and inclusion, stabilizing the Sn content. Based on SIMS depth profiles, Fig. 7a and b shows the element mapping of Sn near the absorber surface. The figure shows many points with low Sn content, which may be caused by the preferred sputtering of grain boundaries in SIMS characterization. From Fig. 7c and d, both absorbers exhibited nearly identical average 120Sn+ signal intensity. It is worthy to note that the doped absorber possessed a smaller standard deviation of Sn signal, which means a slightly more uniform distribution of Sn. Recently, Gong et al. revealed that the Voc deficit mainly comes from the deep defects on/near the absorber surface which stemmed from SnSe2 involving multi-phase grain growth. The local vibration of the Sn content in the absorber may originated from this multi-phase grain growth, and accounts for the formation of Sn-related defects. In the present study, the existence of Sn-related deep-level defects was confirmed, and its population was reduced via K in situ doping induced homogeneous distribution of Sn.
The red shift of the PL peak in the doped absorber indicates a change in the transition energy of the main radio recombination path. The D–A transition and/or free-to-bound transition mechanism have been reported as the recombination paths in kesterite solar cells, both of which are related to the energy level of the defect states acting as recombination centers and determining the recombination path in the absorber. Here, the 8 meV red shift of the PL peak in the doped absorber is in accordance with the 6 meV deeper energy level of the dominant acceptor defect in the doped device under the assumption that the conduction band minima of both samples are identical and the deeper recombination centers reduce the transition energy of recombination. This suggests that radio recombination in our devices occurs via the free-to-bound transition mechanism. The Eg value calculated from the quantum efficiency is regarded as the transport gap caused by the percolation of a transport path within the non-flat lateral band edges. Dimitrievska et al. stated that Eg corresponds to the lowest band gap energy within the absorber. The radio recombination represented by PL corresponds to the transition energy of the exciton transporting from the conduction band minimum to the recombination center. Thus, Et,PL + Ea represents the real band gap of the absorber, while Eg represents the minimum band gap including the band tailing effects. The PL peak position (transition energy of radio recombination) Et,PL, bandgap Eg determined from EQE, and dominant defect states Ea of both samples are presented in Table 3. The value of Et,PL + Ea − Eg is also shown, which is considered as an indicator of band tailing. Both samples exhibit identical band tailing effects, which is rational as they have an identical composition and were processed by the same annealing strategy.
Sample

E
t,PL


E
g


E
a


E
t,PL + Ea − Eg
Undoped
0.977
1.050
0.164
0.091
Doped
0.969
1.048
0.170
0.091

We fabricated kesterite solar cells using an in situ K-doped CZTS precursor. These cells achieved 12.62% efficiency, higher than the 10.32% of the reference device. The effect of in situ K-doping on grain growth was clearly observed to aid a dense and hole-free absorber with large grains (>2 μm) extending through the depth direction. Moreover, the void removal effect was observed in the bulk of the absorber, and a diffusion model describing this process was proposed. The model suggests that doping introduces KSex compounds and unidirectional matter flux, which reduces the size of the voids and pushes them backwards. The high-quality absorber of the doped sample leads to a high FF in the final device. The suppression of deep-level defects via in situ K-doping was also confirmed. This can be attributed to the K-doping-induced homogeneous distribution of Sn and the reduction in Sn-related defects (e.g., CuSn, VSn), which account for the greatly enhanced PL intensity of the doped absorber, ultimately contributing to an increase in Voc in the devices. Remarkably, the proposed doping strategy enhances the quality of the absorber and modifies the Sn-related defects, suggesting a pathway toward kesterite solar cells with higher efficiency.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


This work was financial supported by Foshan Advanced Manufacturing Research Institute of Tsinghua University (grant numbers 20182000306).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta09916k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023