 DOI: 10.1039/C9SE00093C
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 1448-1454


Van Hoang
Nguyen
*,

Shinya
Kato
,

Kazuhiro
Gotoh
,

Yasuyoshi
Kurokawa
 and 

Noritaka
Usami


Graduate School of Engineering, Nagoya University, Japan. E-mail: nguyen.van.hoang@material.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Graduate School of Engineering, Nagoya Institute of Technology, Japan

Received
14th February 2019
, Accepted 5th April 2019
First published on 9th April 2019
A new aspect of solute PEDOT:PSS was explored, its function as an excellent passivation material. Solute PEDOT:PSS with a thickness of 9.4 nm exhibited an effective carrier lifetime of 940 μs at an injection level of 1 × 1014 cm−3. A new architecture of hybrid crystalline silicon solar cells with highly conductive PEDOT:PSS on the front side and solute PEDOT:PSS on the backside was demonstrated. The reverse saturation current density Jo of 9.4 nm-thick solute PEDOT:PSS was evaluated as 2.2 × 10−14 A cm−2, which is ten times lower than that without solute PEDOT:PSS on the backside, 1.45 × 10−13 A cm−2. With the introduction of 7.5 nm-thick solute PEDOT:PSS on the backside, the performance drastically improved with an open-circuit voltage VOC of 618 mV, short-circuit current density JSC of 28.33 mA cm−2 and power conversion efficiency Eff of 11.45% owing to efficient passivation. Employment of solute PEDOT:PSS as an efficient passivation material opens a new route for the fabrication of hybrid c-Si solar cells, which is facile, reproducible and environmentally friendly.

In recent years, carrier-selective solar cells using solution-processable materials have gained considerable interest thanks to their low-temperature processing, facile fabrication and low cost production, independent of complicated doping processes and mask-alignment lithography. Among hole-selective organic materials, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) has been widely applied for the fabrication of hybrid c-Si solar cells since it possesses high conductivity, high transparency, a wide band gap, and a relatively high work function, ϕm = 5.0 eV. The simplest structure of hybrid c-Si solar cells, Ag/PEDOT:PSS/c-Si/Al, yielded an encouraging efficiency of 13.3% by optimizing the solvent mixture of PEDOT:PSS, ethylene glycol and surfactants. It is worth noting that PSS accumulation on the Si substrate was reported to prevent carrier transport through the interface. Later studies focused on optimizing PEDOT:PSS, passivating both sides of solar cells or depositing an electron-selective material on the backside. Engineering of the interface between PEDOT:PSS and the c-Si substrate was attempted with chemical silicon oxide (SiOx), alumina oxide (Al2O3) by atomic layer deposition, and organic layers, which not only reduced recombination loss but also promoted carrier collection. Further improvements included improving the electrical contact of PEDOT:PSS by mixing it with Ag nanowires, treating PEDOT:PSS with different solvent enhancers, and improving the uniformity of PEDOT:PSS coverage on textured surfaces. Recently, employment of electron-selective materials with low work functions on the backside of hybrid c-Si solar cells was extensively studied. Deposition of a metal with lower work function than Al such as Ba, Ba(OH)2, or Mg prior to deposition of Al lowered the work function of Al, which effectively promoted carrier collection. The deposition of electron selective materials such as TiO2, LiF, or Cs2CO3 by thermal evaporation and chemical vapor deposition was also applied to enhance the performance of hybrid c-Si solar cells. Furthermore, electron-selective materials using solution-based processes yielded promising power conversion efficiencies. Organic materials with dipole moments such as amino acids, nucleobases or sarcosine were investigated as a potential interfacial layer for electron-selective organic materials, which not only reduced the work function of the Al contact but also suppressed the recombination loss at the rear-side. PEDOT:PSS has also been demonstrated to be a potential passivation material, with a surprisingly low emitter saturation current density of 80 fA cm−2 observed for PEDOT:PSS/c-Si/SiN stacks.

In this contribution, solute PEDOT:PSS was employed as an efficient passivation material on the backside of hybrid c-Si solar cells. Herein, solute PEDOT:PSS was formed by mixing pristine PEDOT:PSS with different amounts of methanol, which produced different thicknesses of PEDOT:PSS. 9.4 nm-thick solute PEDOT:PSS had the most promising passivation properties compared with other thicknesses, with a maximum effective carrier lifetime (τeff) of 940 μs under irradiation of 1 × 1014 cm−3. Thinner, 7.5 nm thick solute PEDOT:PSS layers had decreased passivation effects but were more favorable for collecting photogenerated carriers, with the structure Ag/PEDOT:PSS/c-Si/solute PEDOT:PSS/Al exhibiting a power conversion efficiency Eff of 11.45% with a fill factor (FF) of 0.653, VOC of 618 mV and JSC of 28.33 mA cm−2. The reduction of surface recombination due to solute PEDOT:PSS passivation at the backside was greater than any decrease of built-in potential Vbi by the p-type PEDOT:PSS, which resulted in a net improvement of the performance of the c-Si solar cells. Employment of solute PEDOT:PSS on the backside to enhance the solar cell performance is a simple, reproducible and environmentally friendly passivation process.

Solute PEDOT:PSS was made by mixing a 500 μL solution of PEDOT:PSS (Heraeus Clevios PH 1000) with Triton surfactant (Sigma Aldrich) and different amounts of methanol (Fujifilm Wako Pure Chemical Co.) with volume ratios of 1:3, 1:5, 1:7 and 1:11, where methanol is the larger component of the solution. The mixed solutions were sonicated for 24 hours at room temperature before use. To evaluate their properties, the treated PEDOT:PSS was spun onto glass (1.5 × 1.5 cm2) at a speed of 6000 rpm for 60 s prior to annealing at 170 °C in air for 20 min. Then, silver paste was applied on four corners of the PEDOT:PSS thin film and Hall measurements (Ecopia HMS-3000) were conducted to measure the properties of thin PEDOT:PSS such as conductivity and sheet resistance using the Van der Pauw method. To investigate the thickness of PEDOT:PSS on glass, spectroscopic ellipsometry (J. A. Woollam Co.) was used.

The structure of PEDOT:PSS hybrid c-Si solar cells with solute PEDOT:PSS on the backside is described in Fig. S1. The fabrication was realized on n-type Czochralski Si(100) substrates with double-side-polishing (300 μm, 1–5 Ω cm) in which an active area of 1 × 1 cm2 was cleaned with acetone, ethanol and deionized water for 5 minutes under sonication. The Si substrates were subsequently etched with 5% HF for 30 s to remove the native oxide followed by a 5 s DI rinse before deposition of PEDOT:PSS thin films. The Si front side was spin-coated at 6000 rpm with highly conductive PEDOT:PSS of 900 S cm−1, which was produced by doping it with Triton (Sigma-Aldrich) and ethylene glycol (Wako, 058-00986). On the backside of the Si solar cells solute PEDOT:PSS containing methanol was spun at the same speed. Finally, a 200 nm-thick Al film and 300 nm-thick Ag were thermally evaporated onto the backside and front side of Si solar cells (ULVAC Kiko, Inc VPC-260F), respectively. Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics were measured under 1-sun illumination using a JASCO YQ-250BX solar simulator, which is also integrated with a monochromator, power meter and Keithley source meter for external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements. The effective carrier lifetime measurements of the c-Si substrate passivated with thin PEDOT:PSS were conducted using microwave photo-conductivity decay (μPCD) at an injection level of 1 × 1014 cm−3 (KOBELCO, LTA1512EP). Quasi steady state photoconductivity (QSSPC) (Sinton Instruments WCT120) was used to evaluate the implied VOC and effective carrier lifetime at an injection level of 1 × 1015 cm−3.

Triton doped PEDOT:PSS samples mixed with methanol with volume ratios of 1:3, 1:5, 1:7 and 1:11 lead to change in the thickness of solute PEDOT:PSS, from 17.1 to 9.4, 7.5 and 4.9 nm, respectively. Fig. 1 shows the conductivity and sheet resistance of thin PEDOT:PSS as a function of thickness. It was noticed that the increase of sheet resistance and decrease of conductivity correspond with the decrease of thickness of solute PEDOT:PSS. The 4.9 nm-thick solute PEDOT:PSS possessed a sheet resistance of 29 MΩ per square and a conductivity of 0.0565 S cm−1. Normally, a small amount of methanol enhances the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS since the hydrophilic –OH groups of methanol dissolve and remove the insulating PSS from the core–shell structure of PEDOT:PSS. When PEDOT:PSS was mixed with larger volumes of methanol, the quantity of PEDOT and PSS was diluted, which may lead to the poor conductivity of thin solute PEDOT:PSS. In solute PEDOT:PSS, the insulator PSS naturally surrounds the charging PEDOT such as in pristine PEDOT:PSS. However, at too high volumes, the polar methanol serves as a dispersant of solute PEDOT:PSS instead of enhancing the conductivity. With such thin solute PEDOT:PSS on glass, the transmittance is higher than 90% in the visible range [Fig. S2].


The mapping of effective carrier lifetimes of the c-Si substrate covered by solute PEDOT:PSS on both sides was conducted with μPCD. All results of average and maximum effective carrier lifetimes are listed in Table 1. For Triton doped PEDOT:PSS with no added methanol, the highest effective carrier lifetime τmaxeff was 189 μs [Fig. 2a]. The τmaxeff increased to 566 μs with 17.1 nm-thick solute PEDOT:PSS [Fig. 2b], and τmaxeff reached a maximum of 940 μs with 9.4 nm-thick solute PEDOT:PSS [Fig. 2c]. The maximum τeff and average τeff (τavereff) decreased when the thickness is lower than 9.4 nm [Fig. 2c and d]. Some organic chemicals such as 9,10-phenanthrenequinone, and quinhydrone were employed as passivation materials, which resulted in promising effective carrier lifetimes up to milliseconds. The passivation mechanism of solute PEDOT:PSS may be associated with the interfacial properties of the methanol/Si interface and the PSS/Si interface. The reaction of smooth H–Si (100) with methanol resulted in the subsurface oxidation forming Si–O–Si bonds, which were formed by the insertion of oxygen atoms from methanol molecules into the Si–Si bonds between the surface and underlying silicon atoms. The use of a PSS thin film as a high-quality passivation material has also been previously demonstrated with an effective carrier lifetime of 2.4 ms. The passivation mechanism was attributed to the oxidation of the Si surface by PSS thin films, where one O atom in PSS was grafted onto the Si surface to form Si–O–R bonds. In short, the enhanced passivation of solute PEDOT:PSS may originate from the formation of silicon oxide by methanol and PSS. The maximum τeff and average τeff (τavereff) decreased with thinner solute PEDOT:PSS since the chemical passivation may gradually decrease with thinner solute PEDOT:PSS related to the amount of PSS. It was similarly found with PSS where thicker PSS produced more stable passivation. Fig. S3 exhibits the effective carrier lifetimes at different injection levels of c-Si passivated with solute PEDOT:PSS with thicknesses of 17.1, 9.4, 7.5 and 4.9 nm, which were obtained from measurement of 1 point. It turned out that the τeff increased with an increase in the injection level. With the 9.4 nm-thick solute PEDOT:PSS, the effective carrier lifetime was recorded as 840 μs with an injection level of 2.5 × 1014 cm−3 and it increased to 940 μs with an injection level of 1 × 1014 cm−3. The increase of the effective carrier lifetime with an increase in the injection level demonstrated the impurity or defect density to be negligible to either the equilibrium carrier density or injection level. That means the solute PEDOT:PSS effectively reduced the recombination surface loss. The measured τeff was determined using the surface and bulk recombination, which can be formulated as the equation below:

(1)
where
τb is the bulk recombination lifetime, d is the wafer thickness and S is the recombination rate. It is assumed that the wafers have a similar d of 200 μm and τb of 19 ms. Thus, the S extracted from eqn (1) for 9.4 nm-thick PEDOT:PSS is 20.24 cm s−1, which is much lower than that resulting from silicon oxide passivation. These aforementioned results confirmed that the solute PEDOT:PSS with reasonable thickness functioned as an excellent passivation material.

Sample
No methanol
1:3
1:5
1:7
1:11
Thickness (nm)
49.7
17.1
9.4
7.5
4.9
Average τeff (μs)
113
450
607
269
231
Highest τeff (μs)
189
566
940
506
476

First of all, we deposited the solute PEDOT:PSS with different measured thicknesses on the c-Si substrate as the front side of solar cells, where the structure of solar cells is Ag/solute PEDOT:PSS/c-Si/Al. The solar cells with highly conductive PEDOT:PSS on the front side were considered as reference samples. The J–V characteristics of thin PEDOT:PSS hybrid c-Si are presented in Fig. S4 and all key parameters are listed in Table S1. The JSC and VOC gradually decreased with reducing thickness of PEDOT:PSS. With 17.1 nm- and 9.4 nm-thick solute PEDOT:PSS, the VOC decreased to 518 mV and 514 mV, respectively, compared with the reference sample value of 550 mV. Organic-Si solar cells were not sensitive to the thickness of the PEDOT:PSS film, from 20 nm to 100 nm. However, the performance decreased when the thickness of solute PEDOT:PSS is thinner than 20 nm. The performance abruptly decreased from the solute PEDOT:PSS thickness of 7.5 nm, which generated an Eff of 1.52% with a VOC of 326 mV and a JSC of 11.12 mA cm−2. The PEDOT:PSS hybrid c-Si solar cells have been described as either Schottky barrier solar cells between the metal-like polymer PEDOT:PSS and n-Si substrate, or as p–n junction type devices with PEDOT:PSS as a p-type layer as the hole-selective material. An inversion layer interface between PEDOT:PSS and c-Si was observed by Erickson et al. In silicon-organic solar cells, incident photons are harvested by the c-Si substrate, which photogenerated carriers, electron–hole pairs instead of organics. The depletion region in Si may be generated due to electron diffusion from n-Si to PEDOT:PSS, which decreased carrier recombination and improved light response. The photogenerated electron–hole pairs are dissociated and transferred to the electrodes under an electrical field generated in the depletion region. Therefore, the built-in potential (Vbi) across the junction is considered as a key factor to qualitatively estimate the driving force for charge dissociation. Furthermore, the depletion layer in Schottky junction solar cells could not totally impede carrier recombination and the reverse dark current resulting from charge carrier recombination would still flow across the devices under an applied voltage bias in the dark. The solute PEDOT:PSS with poor conductivity may not be considered as a metal-like polymer. The possible explanations for decreased VOC and JSC may originate from the abrupt np− junction, where p− is regarded as the thin solute PEDOT:PSS. Low carrier density of thin solute PEDOT:PSS implied a reduced Vbi, which corresponds to decreased VOC and JSC. Furthermore, thin solute PEDOT:PSS with poor conductivity made the exchange of carriers difficult, which also reduced the JSC.


Fig. 3a shows the J–V characteristics of PEDOT:PSS hybrid c-Si with different solute PEDOT:PSS thicknesses/ratios as the backside passivating layer under AM1.5G simulated sunlight illumination. All key parameters are listed in Table 2. The structure of the hybrid c-Si solar cell is described as Ag/highly conductive PEDOT:PSS/c-Si/solute PEDOT:PSS/Al. With the 9.4 nm-thick solute PEDOT:PSS layer, the performance enhanced with an Eff of 9.9% with a VOC of 629 mV, a JSC of 28.57 mA cm−2 and a FF of 0.551. The VOC is much improved compared with that of the reference value of 550 mV but FF is lower than that of the reference. With 7.5 nm-thick solute PEDOT:PSS, the FF is comparable with that of the reference sample, which yielded an Eff of 11.45%, a VOC of 619 mV and a JSC of 28.33 mA cm−2. With 4.9 nm-thick solute PEDOT:PSS, the VOC continued to decrease to 594 mV leading to an Eff of 10.45%. The lower VOC of reference samples originated from the severe recombination losses at the fully metalized backside electrode, where the metal electrode is directly deposited onto the doped c-Si substrate. As mentioned above, the Al/c-Si interface formed a Schottky-barrier, commonly observed at metal–semiconductor interfaces, which resulted in a high contact resistance and low JSC. When a solute PEDOT:PSS layer is inserted on the backside, the efficiency of hybrid c-Si solar cells drastically enhanced, which is attributed to the efficient suppression of the recombination losses. These results confirmed that the solute PEDOT:PSS plays a role as an excellent passivation material of the c-Si substrate. The highest VOC obtained resulted from 9.4 nm-thick solute PEDOT:PSS on the backside, which generated the highest τeff. The VOC started to decrease from the solute PEDOT:PSS thickness of 7.5 nm since the passivation effects also started to deteriorate from this thickness. However, 9.4 nm-thick solute PEDOT:PSS may be unfavorable for carrier transport, since solute PEDOT:PSS on the backside acts as a p-type layer with moderate carrier concentration. The p–n–p− structure of solar cells hinders the selective transport of electrons towards the contact electrode, which leads to a lower FF [Fig. S5a]. With the solute PEDOT:PSS thickness of 7.5 nm, the photogenerated carriers are more easily transported, which made the FF comparable with that of the reference sample. It turned out that the increase of JSC was mainly due to the reduction of the recombination rate at the backside with solute PEDOT:PSS, which confirmed the dominant effect of passivation of thin PEDOT:PSS over the decreased carrier transport properties. The enhancement of JSC by solute PEDOT:PSS was also shown by the increase in EQE of hybrid c-Si devices as shown in Fig. 3b. It is observed that hybrid c-Si solar cells with thin PEDOT:PSS on the backside in general exhibit an enhanced spectral response from 500 nm to 1000 nm compared to those without thin PEDOT:PSS. This can be because the solute PEDOT:PSS with a thickness of 9.4 nm on the backside may compensate for the parasitic absorption when PEDOT:PSS was used as the window layer. In addition, the EQE of the 9.4 nm-thick solute PEDOT:PSS on the backside slightly improved at short wavelengths. When the thickness of solute PEDOT:PSS reduced to 4.9 nm, the EQE value started to decrease due to the increasing recombination loss at the backside but it was still higher than that without solute PEDOT:PSS on the backside. It is worth pointing out that the significantly enhanced EQE value should be attributed to the effective suppression of charge recombination and reduction of parasitic absorption loss, which boosted the enhancement of carrier collection capability over the spectral response at long wavelength. D. Zielke et al. demonstrated that solar cells with PEDOT:PSS on the backside exhibited a smaller JSC loss than those with PEDOT:PSS on the front side, which have a three times higher parasitic absorption loss. As a consequence, solar cells with PEDOT:PSS on the backside exhibited a promising efficiency of 17.4% with a JSC of 39.7% and a VOC of 653 mV which is much higher than that with PEDOT:PSS on the front side presenting a lower efficiency of 12.3% with a JSC of 29 mA cm−2 and a VOC of 603 mV. Furthermore, an optimized structure with PEDOT:PSS on the backside boosted the performance to 20.6% on p-type Si wafers. In those cases, PEDOT:PSS on the backside was employed as a hole-selective material and the phosphorus-diffused n+ regions were considered as an electron-selective material on the opposite side. Use of PEDOT:PSS on the backside and an a-Si material on the front side also presented similar results. In our contribution, the solute PEDOT:PSS mainly functioned as a passivation material, which reduced the recombination loss at the backside. Thin solute PEDOT:PSS with poor conductivity was not considered as an efficient hole-selective material on the backside. And highly conductive PEDOT:PSS on the front side was mainly responsible for carrier exchange. Evidently, our structure of solar cells was different from the “Back PEDOT:PSS” structure.

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF

E
ff


R
S (Ω cm2)
Ref.
25.97
0.550
0.656
9.37
2.09
9.4 nm
28.57
0.629
0.551
9.90
2.29
7.5 nm
28.33
0.619
0.653
11.45
1.80
4.9 nm
27.78
0.594
0.632
10.45
1.54
The series resistances (RS) of the aforementioned samples were also extracted from the dark J–V characteristics [Fig. S5b], with the following equation:
(2)
where
n is the diode ideality factor, k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, e is the charge of an electron, and A is the contact area. The 9.4 nm-thick solute PEDOT:PSS on the backside provided an RS of 2.29 Ω cm2 while the reference sample presented an RS of 2.09 Ω cm2 [Table 2]. The RS started to decrease up to 1.8 Ω cm2 and 1.54 Ω cm2 with 7.5 nm- and 4.9 nm-thick solute PEDOT:PSS, respectively. In short, the RS is not largely divergent for all samples with/without thin PEDOT:PSS on the backside. High dark current in reverse bias and low series resistances were normally observed with a metal–semiconductor–metal diode. If highly conductive PEDOT:PSS on the front side and solute PEDOT:PSS on the backside may be considered as a metal-like polymer, high dark current in reverse bias and low resistance of solar cells may be explainable with this structure.


To elucidate the potential benefits of solute PEDOT:PSS as an efficient passivation material, the means of QSSPC were taken for PEDOT:PSS/c-Si/solute PEDOT:PSS [Fig. 4a]. All results extracted from QSSPC are listed in Table 3. With 9.4 nm-thick solute PEDOT:PSS on the backside, the effective carrier lifetime obtained was 113.21 μs, which is 10 times higher than that of reference samples, 9.74 μs at the same injection level of 1 × 1015 cm−3. The effective carrier lifetimes gradually decreased with thinner solute PEDOT:PSS. The 7.4 nm-thick solute PEDOT:PSS generated a τeff of 84.6 μs while the 4.9 nm-thick solute PEDOT:PSS yielded a τeff of 59.3 μs. These results again confirmed that solute PEDOT:PSS is an efficient passivation material for the c-Si substrate, which suppressed the recombination loss and decreased the recombination rate at the backside. Through the QSSPC measurements, the reverse saturation current density Jo was systematically extracted by fitting the reciprocal effective lifetime 1/τeff as a function of excess carrier concentration Δn. Physically, Jo was used to express the recombination rate in the Si/solute PEDOT:PSS interface. The Jo of 9.4 nm-thick solute PEDOT:PSS was evaluated as 2.2 × 10−14 A cm−2, which is ten times lower than that of reference samples, 1.45 × 10−13 A cm−2. With 7.5 nm- and 4.9 nm-thick solute PEDOT:PSS, the Jo slightly increased. The implied VOC extracted from QSSPC was evaluated with the following equation:

(3)
where
n and p are the total electron and hole concentrations. The extracted values of VOC are comparable with the VOC of solar cells, which may confirm that the results are consistent [Table 3]. It is worth pointing out that the enhanced VOC resulted from the excellent passivation of thin PEDOT:PSS on the backside. Furthermore, the VOC may be estimated from Jo with the following equation:

(4)

τ
eff (μs) at the injection level of 1 × 1015 cm−3

J
o (A cm−2)
Implied VOC (mV)
Ref.
9.74
1.45 × 10−13
549
9.4 nm
113.21
2.2 × 10−14
624
7.5 nm
84.6
4.25 × 10−14
615
4.9 nm
59.3
4.36 × 10−6
600
With a JSC of 28 mA cm−2, the implied VOC values with 9.4 nm- and 7.5 nm-thick solute PEDOT:PSS calculated were 697 mV and 680 mV, respectively, which were comparable with the estimated VOC of 690 mV resulting from PEDOT:PSS/SiOx/c-Si/SiNx. Furthermore, our practical solar cells on the planar c-Si substrate exhibited similar results to those obtained from Ti/Pd/Ag/PEDOT:PSS/SiOx/c-Si/BSF/Al. It may be deduced that the solute PEDOT:PSS may be able to replace either the dielectric thin film SiNx or BSF, which are deposited by a vacuum process or complicated chemical doping process. However, solute PEDOT:PSS also acts as a p-type layer on the backside and may hamper the carrier transport and lower the Vbi of solar cells in practice. The solute PEDOT:PSS as an excellent passivation material can overcome this deficiency and enhance the performance of solar cells with increased VOC and JSC. Fig. 4b presents the results of transient photovoltage decay spectroscopy, which is considered as a useful method to evaluate carrier recombination in photovoltaic devices. When exposed to pulsed light, a voltage was generated across the solar cells. The quasi-Fermi level varied, which induced the difference of voltage. Once the light was switched off, the photovoltage started to decay due to the presence of charge recombination. Solar cells with highly concentrated trap sites show rapid voltage decay since photogenerated carriers recombine with trap sites. As shown in Fig. 4b, the photovoltage decay tends to be shallower with the introduction of solute PEDOT:PSS, which confirmed the passivation effect of solute PEDOT:PSS on the backside for reducing the recombination rate.

The solute PEDOT:PSS was evidenced to be an excellent passivation material, which generated the highest effective carrier lifetime of 940 μs under irradiation of 1 × 1014 cm−3. Even though the solute PEDOT:PSS on the backside of hybrid c-Si solar cells can slightly inhibit collection, the passivation effect is stronger, enhancing the performance of hybrid solar cells to 11.45% with an increased VOC of 619 mV and JSC of 28.33 mA cm−2 thanks to the suppression of the recombination loss at the backside. Employment of solute PEDOT:PSS as an excellent passivation material may open a new route for the fabrication of hybrid c-Si solar cells.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the Marubun Research Promotion Foundation, Japan.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9se00093c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019