 DOI: 10.1039/C8CP06418K
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 30189-30199


Jesús
Rodríguez-Romero
,

Bruno
Clasen Hames
,

Pavel
Galar
,

Azhar
Fakharuddin
,

Isaac
Suarez
,

Lukas
Schmidt-Mende
,

Juan P.
Martínez-Pastor
,

Abderrazzak
Douhal
*,

Iván
Mora-Seró
* and 

Eva M.
Barea
*

Institute of Advanced Materials (INAM), Universitat Jaume I, 12006 Castelló, Spain. E-mail: sero@uji.es; barea@uji.es

Departamento de Química Física, Facultad de Ciencias Ambientales y Bioquímica, and INAMOL, Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha, Avenida Carlos III S.N., 45071 Toledo, Spain. E-mail: abderrazzak.douhal@uclm.es

Department of Physics, University of Konstanz, 78457 Konstanz, Germany

UMDO, Instituto de Ciencia de los Materiales, Universidad de Valencia, Valencia 46071, Spain

Received
15th October 2018
, Accepted 14th November 2018
First published on 16th November 2018
The employment of bulky aliphatic cations in the manufacture of moisture-stable materials has triggered the development and application of 2D/3D perovskites as sensitizers in moisture-stable solar cells. Although it is true that the moisture stability increases, it is also true that the photovoltaic performance of 2D/3D PVK materials is severely limited owing to quantum and dielectric confinement effects. Accordingly, it is necessary the synthesis and deep optical characterization of materials with an adequate management of dielectric contrast between the layers. Here, we demonstrate the successful tuning of dielectric confinement by the inclusion of a conjugated molecule, as a bulky cation, in the fabrication of the 2D/3D PVK material (C6H5NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1, where n = 3 or 5. The absence of excitonic states related to n ≥ 1 at room temperature, as well as the very low concentration of excitons after 1 ps of excitation of samples in which n ≥ 3, provide strong evidence of an excellent ability to dissociate excitons into free charge carriers. As consequence films with low n, presenting higher stability than standard 3D perovskites, improved significantly their performance, showing one of the highest short circuit current density (Jsc ≈ 13.8) obtained to date for perovskite materials within the 2D limit (n < 10).

During recent years, hybrid organic–inorganic halide perovskites (PVKs) of the formula ABX3, where A = methylammonium or formamidinium, B = Pb, Sn, or Ge and X = Br or I, have continuously made breakthroughs in optoelectronic devices including photovoltaics, light-emitting devices, lasers and photodetectors owing to their unique optical and electrical properties. Their performance in perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has been exceptionally remarkable, and solution-processed devices now deliver a power conversion efficiency (PCE) that is close to 23%. However, challenges such as their stability under environmental conditions need to be addressed when considering commercial applications.

The inclusion of bulky hydrophobic organic cations in the chemical formulation of perovskites is one of the most successful strategies followed to overcome issues related to stability towards moisture. The material that is produced adopts a layered arrangement denoted as a 2D or 2D/3D PVK of the general chemical formula R2Rn−1′PbnX3n+1 (R = aryl or alkyl cation, R′ = methylammonium, formamidinium, etc., X = Cl, Br or I and n = number of inorganic layers). This structural arrangement has the form of a natural multi-quantum well structure, which produces two important phenomena: (1) excitons (or charge carriers) are confined to the inorganic layers (wells) because the band gap is very different in comparison with the organic layers (barriers), and consequently it is possible to observe highly stable excitonic transitions with a high binding energy, even at room temperature (quantum confinement effect); and (2) the greater difference in dielectric properties between the inorganic and organic layers produces still more intense coulombic interactions of excitons than in systems where a less pronounced dielectric contrast is observed (dielectric effect). The dielectric mismatch and its effects on the exciton binding energy have been described previously by Ishihara et al. From that study, it is possible to determine that the dielectric confinement can be modulated via the organic cation. Several studies have been reported in which bulky cations have been successfully employed in the synthesis of layered materials, with applications in highly moisture-stable solar cells. Although the stability of devices is improved, the poor photovoltaic performance of 2D/3D PVK materials confirms the disadvantages related to the quantum and dielectric confinement effects. From a quick glance at the reported results, it becomes evident that the principal reason should be related to the aliphatic nature of all the cations used. Fig. S1 (ESI) shows the chemical structures of the principal bulky cations used in the fabrication of solar cells. These organic molecules are represented by butylammonium (BA) (and propylammonium, not shown) iodide, ammonium valeric acid (AVA) iodide, 2-iodoethylammonium (EA) iodide, phenylethylammonium bromide or iodide and anilinium iodide. Recently, it was demonstrated that the inclusion of polarizable guests within the crystal lattice of 2D materials leads to a significant reduction in the confinement of excitons owing to a very significant decrease in the exciton binding energy. From an analysis of polarizability as a key parameter for improving photovoltaic performance by decreasing the exciton binding energy, the aliphatic derivatives (of BA or propylammonium, the latter not shown) only have σ-electrons located between their non-polar single covalent bonds (C–C), such that their polarizability (ε) is very low. Conversely, the inclusion of aromatic rings with free and polarizable π-electrons leads to a higher ε value than that observed for aliphatic chains. The cases of AVA and EA are very interesting. Although their structures are formed from a non-polar carbon backbone with slightly polarizable electron clouds (butyl and ethyl chains), the inclusion of the acid (COOH) and iodide functionalities endows them with a polarizable fragment.
In a previous work, we demonstrated that photovoltaic devices based on anilinium (Any) 2D and 2D/3D perovskites exhibit higher performance than those prepared with BA cation, in particular because of the higher photocurrent exhibited by the former. On the basis of this result, and considering that the choice of a bulky cation has direct implications not only on the stability, but also on the global electronic and photovoltaic performance of devices, we focused on complete optical and morphological characterization of a new type of material. Our aim is to reduce stronger effects, such as high exciton binding energies, via the modulation of the dielectric contrast by the introduction of a bulky cation with free and polarizable π-electrons. Steady-state and femtosecond transient absorption measurements were used to study the energy structure and dynamics of photoexcited charge carriers to explore the differences in internal charge carrier processes between our samples and traditional 2D/3D PVKs. We have shown that our materials are capable of an efficient dissociation of initially generated excitons, which is in accordance with the expectation of a low exciton binding energy. Subsequently, we focused on the fabrication of a second generation of solar cells based on an Any2MA4Pb5I16 2D/3D perovskite by a hot-casting method. The positive effect of temperature on the properties of the materials was demonstrated by a direct correlation between temperature and the crystal size and PCE. Our champion device, which was fabricated at T = 190 °C, exhibited a PCE of 7.63% with a Jsc of 13.79 mA cm−2. In addition, stability studies showed that films based on a 2D/3D anilinium perovskite exhibited moderately higher resistance to environmental conditions in comparison with solar cells based on 3D perovskites.

PbI2 (99.999%) was purchased from TCI. Anilinium iodide, TiO2 paste (30 NR-D) and MAI were purchased from Greatcell Solar. A solution of titanium diisopropoxide bis(acac) (75% in 2-propanol), 4-tert-butylpyridine, bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide, ethanol, acetonitrile, chlorobenzene, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and dimethylformamide (DMF) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. All reagents were used without further purification.


The XRD patterns of the prepared films were recorded using an X-ray diffractometer (D8 Advance, Bruker AXS) (Cu Kα, wavelength of λ = 1.5406 Å) within the range of 3–40° with a step size of 0.04° and a counting time of 3 s per step. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were obtained using a Jeol JEM-3100F field emission gun scanning electron microscope with an energy range of 15 kV. The surface coating percentage was calculated on the basis of the shade threshold method using ImageJ software. Absorption spectra were recorded with a Varian Cary 300 BIO UV-Vis spectrophotometer. Photovoltaic devices were characterized using a Sun 2000 solar simulator (Abet Technologies). The light intensity was adjusted to 100 mW cm−2 using a calibrated Si solar cell. Anilinium cells prepared at 130 °C and 150 °C and a 3D perovskite cell as a reference cell were characterized by impedance spectroscopy (IS). The measurements were carried out under one-sun irradiation (AM 1.5 conditions) and different bias potentials that ranged from zero to open-circuit voltage at frequencies of between 1 MHz and 0.1 Hz with an AC signal of 20 mV. Devices were characterized using two masks to define active areas of 0.101 and 0.12 cm2, respectively, and the respective values were appropriately normalized to the area.


Films were prepared on glass that had previously been treated in a UVO chamber (15 min). After that, the glass was heated to 130 °C for 30 min and moved directly to a spin-coater for deposition of the perovskite after heating, with no cooling period during the transfer from the hotplate to the spin-coater. The corresponding solutions of Any2MAn−1PbnI3n+1, where n = 3 or 5, were heated to 70 °C. The perovskite layers were deposited by spin-coating of the precursor's solution (50 μL) at 5000 rpm with an acceleration of 5000 rpm s−1 for 40 s. Then, they were annealed at 100 °C for 10 min. The perovskite precursor solutions were prepared by the addition of the necessary amounts of the respective reagents to obtain a 0.225 M solution with respect to PbI2 in 1 mL of DMF and 0.095 mL of DMSO. Promptly, a layer of PMMA, (solution prepared from 1.8 mg/1 mL chlorobenzene. The amount of solution is 50 μL) was deposited at 2000 rpm with an acceleration of 2000 rpm s−1 for 45 s.


The setup used for femtosecond TA experiments mainly comprised a 30 fs oscillator (CDP systems) and a regenerative amplifier (Legend-USP, Coherent) and an optical parametric amplifier (OPA, CDP Systems). This laser system generated pumping (70 fs, 1–7 mW, 400, 500, 600 and 700 nm, 1 kHz) and probing (50 fs, 1 W, 800 nm, 1 kHz) laser beams, which were used to generate probing white light. The pump fluence of absorbed photons ranged from 8.2 × 1012 to 9.0 × 1012 ph per cm2 (intensity of ∼90–100 μW). All the presented spectra are chirp-corrected. The measured instrument response function (IRF) of the system was ∼70 fs. All the experiments were performed at 293 K.


Borosilicate glass was exposed to UV-O3 for 10 min. A compact layer of TiO2 was deposited on the substrate by spray pyrolysis of a solution of titanium diisopropoxide bis(acac) (75% in 2-propanol, Sigma-Aldrich) diluted with absolute ethanol in a ratio of 1:9 (v/v), respectively. 2D/3D perovskite films were deposited in a similar way to that described in a previous paragraph. Subsequently, the samples were placed in the cold finger of a commercial closed-cycle cryostat (ARS DE-202) that allows temperature variations in the range of 20–300 K. The excitation laser used for time-integrated PL and TRPL measurements was a 200 fs pulsed Ti:sapphire laser (Coherent Mira 900D with a repetition rate of 76 MHz) tuned to 808 nm and doubled to 404 nm with a BBO crystal. The backscattered PL signal was dispersed by a double-grating spectrograph/spectrometer with a focal length of 0.3 m and detected by an Andor Newton 970 EMCCD camera (for time-integrated PL spectra) placed at the exit of the second spectrometer and a Micro Photon Device (MPD) single-photon avalanche diode (SPAD) photodetector connected at the exit of the first monochromator. This SPAD was attached to a time-correlated single-photon-counting electronic card (TCC900, Edinburgh Instruments) for TRPL measurements.


The morphology of the films was investigated using an AFM microscope (Concept Scientific Instruments) in resonant mode. The surface potential of the perovskite films was measured using KPFM mode with an applied electrostatic bias of 1 V in single-pass mode. Current maps of the films were recorded in c-AFM mode using a diamond-coated tip with an applied bias of 4 V in an N2 flow. In the absence of N2, results are often not reproducible.


Fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrates were partially treated with Zn and 2 M HCl and further cleaned with soap (Hellmanex) and deionized water, followed by sonication in (a) ethanol and (b) i-PrOH for 15 min at each step, and then dried with compressed air. Then, the resulting substrates were exposed to UV-O3 for 10 min. A compact layer of TiO2 was deposited on the substrates by spray pyrolysis of a solution of titanium diisopropoxide bis(acac) (75% in 2-propanol, Sigma-Aldrich) diluted with absolute ethanol in a ratio of 1:9 (v/v), respectively. A mesoporous TiO2 layer was deposited by spin-coating with a suspension prepared from Dyesol 30NRD paste, which was diluted with absolute ethanol. After being dried at 100 °C for 10 min, the substrates were gradually heated to 500 °C and cooled to room temperature. The perovskite absorber layers were deposited by spin-coating with a 0.225 M precursor solution at 5000 rpm for 20 s. The perovskite precursor solutions were prepared by the addition of 0.1136 g of PbI2, 0.0218 g of anilinium iodide and 0.0313 g of methylammonium iodide (MAI) in a mixture of 1 mL of DMF and 0.095 mL of DMSO. We used a modified version of a successful hot-casting process. The perovskite precursor solutions were heated to 70 °C during all the processes. On the other hand, the substrates with a compact/mesoporous layer of TiO2 were heated to 110 °C, 130 °C, 150 °C, 170 °C and 190 °C for 10 min before the deposition of the respective perovskite layer was started. Once the perovskite was deposited by spin-coating (50 μL; 5000 rpm; acceleration of 5000 rpm s−1; 20 s), the respective substrates were heated for a further 10 min to 100 °C. The substrates displayed layers with colors ranging from greenish-brown to dark brown, depending on the fabrication temperature. After the substrates were cooled to room temperature, the hole-transporting layer (HTL) was deposited by spin-coating at 4000 rpm for 30 s. The HTM was prepared by dissolving 72.3 mg of 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-(p-methoxyphenyl)amino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD), 28.8 μL of 4-tert-butylpyridine, and 17.5 μL of a stock solution of 520 mg mL−1 lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide in acetonitrile in 1 mL of chlorobenzene. Finally, 60 nm of gold was thermally evaporated in a vacuum chamber on top of the device to form the electrode contacts. The complete device fabrication was carried out outside a glove box.


As a first step, we focused on the fabrication of thin films of the formula Any2MAn−1PbnI3n+1, hereafter denoted as AnyPbn, where n = 3 and 5, and their morphological characterization by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Although the film where n = 1 exactly represents the 2D material, its low absorption across the visible range restricts its application as a sensitizer in useful photovoltaic devices. The XRD patterns and SEM images of thin films prepared by the hot-casting method are shown in Fig. 1 (for Methods see ESI). The XRD patterns of both materials display peaks at 14.2° and 28.5°. These peaks have been associated with preferential horizontal (111) and vertical (202) growth in 2D perovskites. Additional peaks located at 20.1° and 31.9° increase in intensity with the value of n, and these have been associated with (112) and (312) planes, respectively, in a 3D perovskite. Morphological characterization by SEM demonstrates that the nucleation points are composed of leaf-type grains with an impressive size of greater than 1 μm. It is evident that the particle size increases with the value of n, together with the surface coating percentage. The values that were determined are approximately 47% and 67% for n = 3 and 5, respectively (Fig. S2, ESI).

Regard the optical properties, the absorption spectra of 2D PVK films (n = 1–5) chemically formed just by aliphatic chains, and even by phenylethylammonium, (see Fig. S1, ESI) are characterized by an easily recognized excitonic transition at the edge of the absorption band, exhibiting a red-shift progression on going from lower to higher n. Such intense excitonic absorption, with huge oscillator strength, was related to an intense Coulomb interaction between the charge carriers and, therefore, it is expected a very large exciton binding energy, affecting negatively the photovoltaic performance. Unlike previous reports, the absorption spectra of our materials exhibited a direct red shift to 760 nm for the films with both n = 3 and n = 5, and no traces of QW-like optical transitions were observed. On the other hand, the photoluminescence (PL) spectra recorded for the films with n = 3 and n = 5 at room temperature are practically identical (Fig. 2a and b). The main PL peak detected at ≈770 nm is close to reported values for 3D PVKs. In addition, both films exhibited very similar temperature-dependent PL behavior (Fig. S3, ESI).
The temperature-dependent PL spectra of a film with a nominal value of n = 2 exhibit emission peaks that can be assigned to excitonic transitions for layers from n = 1 to n = 7 (of which the most intense is that related to n = 3), in addition to a band for n = infinite at 760 nm at room temperature, which demonstrate the 2D/3D nature of this sample (Fig. 2c). The quenching of the PL intensity with an increase in temperature can be accounted for by an activation energy of 23–53 and 21 meV for the samples with n = 3 and n = 5, respectively (Fig. 2d and e). The temperature dependence of the non-radiative recombination time is also consistent with the quenching of the PL intensity. TRPL spectra at the different temperatures exhibit an exponential dependence from which the decay time can be deduced (see Fig. S3, ESI). The non-radiative recombination time can be estimated from those measured decay times and the PL intensities at different temperatures by assuming a quantum yield of unity below 110 K and is characterized by an activation energy of 8–21 and 23 meV for the samples with n = 3 and n = 5, respectively (Fig. 2d and e). These activation energies, which were responsible for the non-radiative recombination mechanism in our samples, could be ascribed to the exciton dissociation process, as referred to for PVKs in the literature.
In order to obtain information about the dynamics of excited charge carriers and thus the influence of free π-electrons in the anilinium ion on the charge carrier recombination and transfer properties of our samples, we carried out femtosecond (fs) time-resolved transient absorption (TA) studies of the films. The TA UV-Vis spectra of Any2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 films (n = 3, n = 5 and 3D) recorded at a pump–probe delay of 0.5 ps are presented in Fig. 3a. The TA spectra of the films with n = 3 and n = 5 exhibit a weak excitonic signature in the region of 505 nm, which can be attributed to excitonic states related to n = 1 (Fig. 2c). When the pump–probe delay was increased to 2 ps, strong positive (PIA3, 735 nm) and negative (PB2, 770 nm) bands were detected for the samples with both n = 3 and n = 5. The positive band can be ascribed to a signal due to absorption by free charge carriers, whereas a negative NIR band has recently been observed in the TA spectra of 2D/3D perovskite samples with n ≥ 3 and was related to the photobleaching of low-energy states (states related to layers with high n values). A comparison of the optical properties of 2D/3D and 3D PVKs demonstrates significant differences. The transient spectrum of a 3D PVK at a pump–probe delay of 0.5 ps consists of two bleaching bands at 480 nm (PB1) and 760 nm (PB2), and a less intense broad photoinduced absorption (PIA) band (600–750 nm). These bands are absent in the spectra of the new samples, which indicates that the materials are composed of a 2D/3D PVK. The difference in IR TA behaviour between 2D/3D and 3D perovskites can be interpreted on the basis of different mechanisms of charge carrier generation and transfer.
Whereas in the MAPbI3 3D perovskite charges are free after excitation and relax within <1 ps, in a 2D/3D perovskite charges are primarily generated in the form of excitons owing to the intrinsically higher exciton binding energy. For samples with n ≥ 3, it is expected that these excitons will dissociate and undergo transitions to energetically lower states, which is in agreement with the present temperature-dependent measurements (Fig. 2d and e). Fig. 3b shows normalized representative fs transient absorption decays for the samples with n = 3, 5 and the 3D perovskite gated at 510 and 485 nm, respectively. These decays were well fitted using a biexponential function (Table S1, ESI), which has been successfully applied to analogous systems. The dynamics of all the samples exhibited a fast initial decay followed by a slower decrease of the residual signal intensity. For the transient decays of all the 2D/3D samples we calculated similar time constants of ∼0.5 and 18 ps, although their components differ in amplitudes, which indicates a difference in the influence of the most probable mechanisms of faster/slower exciton deactivation between the samples. The signals of the samples with n = 3 and n = 5 exhibit no offset and a large amplitude of the faster decay component (87% and 89%, respectively), and making almost 90% of the TA signal lost within 1 ps. Thus, excitons are extremely effectively deactivated within these samples. In addition, the dynamics of the TA gated at 735 and 770 nm exhibits longer time constants of ∼0.5 and 40 ps and very slow decays (regarded here only as offsets). The values of the increasing amplitudes are comparable to those determined in the region of 500 nm for both samples (A1 = 88% and A2 = 12%, respectively; see Table S2 and Fig. S4a, b, ESI). The difference between the second time constants observed in both spectral regions (18 vs. 40 ps) can be interpreted in terms of the occurrence of trapping/release or other processes that could extend the transport time of charges originating from more stable excitons. However, more in-depth studies in addition to this work are needed to elucidate this point. The similarity between the decay of excitons in the region of 500 nm and the increase in the TA NIR signal strongly supports the expected mechanism of exciton deactivation in our samples, which is based on exciton dissociation followed by the transition of the free charges to lower-energy states.
For further clarification of the charge carrier processes in our samples, TA measurements of the 2D/3D PVK sample with n = 5 upon excitation at 500, 600 and 700 nm were performed and compared with those carried out using excitation at 400 nm (Fig. S4c–e, ESI). The TA spectra at a pump–probe delay of 2 ps have comparable shapes (minimal signals in the visible spectral interval and strong signals in the red and IR regions), which suggests that independently of the excess energy the photoexcited charges underwent transitions to states at 770 nm (Fig. S4c, ESI). These results suggest that the excited charges underwent transitions to common low-energy states, as we observed previously. The dynamics of TA observed at 770 nm using all the excitation wavelengths are presented in Fig. S4d and e (ESI). As it can be seen, the initial increases in dynamics, which are related to charge transport from higher-energy states, are similar for excitation at 400 and 500 nm (τ = 0.5 ps), and these became faster upon a further increase in the excitation wavelength (τ = 0.3 ps and 0.2 ps for 600 and 700 nm, respectively). Moreover, only the dynamics of TA observed using pump wavelengths of 400 and 500 nm exhibited a secondary component (∼ tens of ps). The subsequent slow decay does not depend much on the excitation wavelength, and excitation at 400 and 500 nm can create excitons in these layers. Excitation of thicker layers resulted in fast dissociation of the initial excitons and their transition to energetically lower states. An increase in the excitation wavelength from 600 to 700 nm reduced the time constants because the positions of the excited and final states in the transition were closer. The absence of signals at 505 nm when excitation at 600 and 700 nm was used also proved that differences existed between low-energy states in the 2D/3D and bulk 3D PVKs, because the signal at 480 nm (PB1) observed for the 3D PVK could be generated by excitation at 600 nm.
In summary, the ultrafast dynamics of the excited 2D/3D samples of Any2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 suggest the extensive deactivation of excitons in the samples with n ≥ 3. This statement is supported by (i) the absence of exciton states related to n > 1, (ii) the very low concentration of excitons after 1 ps in the samples with n ≥ 3 (spectral region of ∼500 nm), and (iii) the strong TA signal due to PIA and the negative band in the NIR region. The similarity in the dynamics of the TA decays in both multilayered samples and, in particular, the comparable values of the TA signals at 735 nm suggest that excitons in the sample with n = 3 were able to dissociate with an efficiency similar to that in the sample with n = 5. This direct comparison is possible because the samples were excited using the same fluence of absorbed photons. In addition to that, the amplitude (∼12%) of the second increase in TA was lower and the decay was faster than those reported for non-conjugated 2D/3D perovskite samples (∼ a few tens of percentages and from tens to hundreds of ps). This difference can also be interpreted in terms of higher efficiency of exciton dissociation and charge transfer from the initial excitonic states to low-energy states, which is related to the thicker perovskite layers (high n values) in the Any2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 samples in contrast to other 2D/3D perovskite films.
In the next section, we focus on the characterization of solar cell devices based on the AnyPb5 2D/3D PVK and their fabrication by a modified hot-casting method. The choice of n = 5 as sensitizer was made not only on the basis that the photovoltaic performance of solar cells based on 2D/3D perovskites increases with the value of n but also considering that the long term stability of the devices decreases with n, as a consequence of the decrease of concentration of hydrophobic cations. Considering the deficient coating by our 2D/3D PVK material, previously discussed, and with the aim of improves it, we fabricated thin films through a scanning of temperatures from 110 to 190 °C.
The structural properties of 2D/3D perovskite layers formed at different substrate temperatures were analyzed by XRD. The XRD patterns are shown in Fig. S5a (ESI). The values that were obtained perfectly match those described in the previous section for the sample with n = 5. In addition, the reflection peak observed at 6.9° confirms the 2D/3D nature of this material. However, a greater degree of crystallinity of the material was observed when the preheating temperature of the substrate was increased, which is supported by the trend in the full width at half maximum (FWHM). The FWHM of the (111) reflection at 14.2° was reduced from 0.232° for perovskite films processed at 100 °C to 0.099° for films treated at 170 °C (Fig. S5b, ESI). However, when the temperature reached at least 170 °C it was possible to see diffraction peaks at 12.72°, which could be associated with traces of PbI2.
The morphology and electrical characteristics of AnyPb5 films (T = 110, 150 and 190 °C) were investigated by measuring the topography and also the local current by atomic force microscopy (AFM). Fig. 4a, c and e show topographical AFM maps of the samples processed at 110, 150 and 190 °C, which covers the whole temperature range chosen in this work.
Both AFM and SEM images suggest that the vertical growth of perovskite grains occurred through nucleation points along the surface of mesoporous TiO2, which unfortunately was not completely covered. The 2D/3D perovskite grown on top of mesoporous TiO2 exhibited a leaf-like shape, of which the size increased as the temperature rises, which explains the higher degree of crystallinity observed from the reduction in the XRD FWHM. The grain size that was determined ranged from 1.51 ± 0.04 to 2.26 ± 0.10 and 7.1 ± 0.4 μm for the films prepared at 110, 150 and 190 °C, respectively (Fig. S6, ESI). At higher temperatures the surface coverage improved owing to the larger grain size, which also influenced the surface roughness. The calculated root mean square (rms) roughness over a number of grains was 11.2 ± 1.0, 13.6 ± 3.3, and 17.4 ± 3.0 nm for the films prepared at 110, 150, and 190 °C, respectively, whereas the surface coating percentage was determined to be ≈57% for the film prepared at 110 °C, ≈67% for the film prepared at 150 °C and ≈79% for the film prepared at 190 °C (Fig. S7, ESI).
Considering that in 2D/3D perovskites the transport properties are severely limited in comparison with their 3D counterparts owing to the presence of a bulky organic cation, we recorded local current maps via conducting AFM under an N2 flow at an applied bias of 4 V (Fig. 4b, d and f). Interestingly, we observed an increase of nearly an order of magnitude in the local current in perovskite films treated at a higher temperature; see Fig. 4g. Systematically, in all the samples we observed a lower current at grain boundaries (dark regions), which suggests that grain boundaries limited the performance and increased the trap density in the films. We also observed a minor variation in the local current within a single leaf structure (Fig. S8, ESI), which suggests a highly polycrystalline surface that was probably due to mixed phases with different values of n and/or crystal orientations. This was further confirmed by surface potential maps recorded via Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) (Fig. S8, ESI), which demonstrated a small variation in the surface potential of up to 300 mV within an individual grain. We observed a jump in the surface potential at grain boundaries, which changed by up to 1 V in film regions with no perovskite (or on the TiO2 surface).
Absorbance measurements were carried out to determine potential variations in optical properties as a consequence of the different fabrication temperatures. Fig. 5 shows the absorption spectra of the fabricated AnyPb5 films. All the films exhibited identical spectral features, with a continuous increase in absorption in the IR region with a decrease in wavelength (maximum at 750 nm) and a shoulder at around 505 nm. The appearance of the excitonic peak may have been due to trace amounts of the phase with n = 1, which it is possible to detect as a consequence of the great stability that the excitons exhibit even at room temperature. The position of the absorption maximum in the IR region is in accordance with the TAS measurements (negative bleaching, Fig. 3b) and is probably related to the presence of LES states. In addition, the pronounced Urbach tail observed at 800–900 nm may be related to other low-energy localized states caused by structural inhomogeneities in the samples. Interestingly, even though the spectral profiles have identical features, it is possible to see a systematic increase in the absorption properties as the fabrication temperature increased. In addition, Fig. 5 shows that the films became darker as the temperature increased. Considering that the spectral profiles of all the samples display the same optical properties, the increase in absorption can be related to both better surface coverage and a thicker film, as was observed previously by AFM and SEM.
After the fundamental characterization of the perovskite material, the photovoltaic performance of PSCs fabricated using different preheating temperatures of the substrate was analyzed. The fabrication of our second generation of devices was carried out, whereby an n–i–p architecture was created comprising FTO, compact and mesoporous layers of TiO2, a 2D/3D perovskite with n = 5, spiro-OMeTAD as the hole-transporting layer and gold. Fig. 6 shows the current–potential (J–V) curves and the photovoltaic parameters for champion devices fabricated at each of the temperatures that were employed. Regarding the effect of the manufacturing temperature, the J–V curves for the champion devices show a systematic increase in the PCE with an increase in temperature from 110 to 190 °C. The PCE values that were achieved were 5.96% for the device prepared at 110 °C and 7.63% for the device fabricated at 190 °C. The principal factor that contributed to the improvement in PCE with the increase in the crystallization temperature was the photocurrent density Jsc, which rises from 10.39 mA cm−2 for T = 110 °C to 13.79 mA cm−2 for T = 190 °C. Higher values of the photocurrent density have been reported for 2D/3D perovskites with relatively low values of n; however, the value reported here is one of the highest achieved using a layered perovskite with a low n value. For comparison, when butylammonium iodide (BAI, pure phase, n = 5) was used instead of anilinium iodide, the maximum value of Jsc that was achieved was 11.67 mA cm−2. With respect to another feature that characterizes photovoltaic performance, the fill factor had values of ∼70%, which tended to decrease as the temperature increased, while the Voc values remained between 805 and 822 mV. The low Voc values observed in our results with respect to previously reported values for 3D perovskites were probably due to the higher recombination rate, as was studied by impedance spectroscopy (see Fig. S9, ESI); however, a complete study will be reported separately.
In brief, the 2D/3D samples exhibited a lower recombination resistance (higher recombination rate) than standard 3D perovskites at a high applied bias, for which the recombination current is important; see Fig. S9a (ESI). Different recombination pathways are possible. Among these, the incomplete surface coverage of the mesoporous TiO2 layer by the perovskite film unfavorably affected the cell performance. This point indicates that there is more room for the improvement of anilinium-based 2D/3D perovskites via the control of crystal nucleation/growth processes. It is also interesting to point out that the low-frequency capacitance, which is associated with charge accumulation driven by ion diffusion, was significantly lower than in the 3D samples (see Fig. S9b, ESI), which indicated that ion diffusion in the 2D/3D materials was less extensive.
Interestingly, the average values determined for devices fabricated at different temperatures did not follow the same trend as those for the champion cells; see Table S3 and Fig. S10 (ESI). Regarding the average PCE values, an improvement was evident with an increase in the temperature; however, when the processing temperature was increased to at least 170 °C, the dispersion of the results that were obtained increased, which caused the average PCE to gradually decrease. We suggest that the variability that was observed in the results was directly related to the experimental conditions. The preheated substrates were quickly transferred from the hotplate to the spin-coater, and immediately the perovskite precursor solution was added and the spin-coating process started. When samples are in a low temperature range, e.g., 110 to 150 °C, changes in temperature are less abrupt and the results can be more reproducible in comparison with a higher temperature range.
Even though the introduction of a bulky cation with a high value of ε suggests a stronger interaction with water than that of cations with low values of ε (and therefore low moisture stability), we carried out a stability test under ambient conditions on the fabricated devices. Their stability was compared with that of solar cells based on a pure 3D PVK (Fig. S11, ESI). The devices were kept at an ambient humidity of greater than 40% for a period of 288 h. Interestingly, the devices prepared between 110 and 150 °C exhibited higher long-term stability than devices based on a 3D perovskite stored in similar conditions. On the other hand, the results showed that the devices fabricated at the highest temperatures (170 and 190 °C) exhibited lower long-term stability than those based on 3D perovskites. Very recently, we have shown that the presence of a slight amount of moisture during the perovskite deposition processes is positive from the point of view of stability. Hence, the high temperatures utilized in the high-temperature regime would inhibit the presence of this slight amount of humidity, which would prevent its beneficial role.
In conclusion, we demonstrated that the use of a conjugated anilinium cation, with a cloud of free and polarizable π-electrons, in the preparation of a 2D/3D PVK leads to the production of a material with improved optical and electrical properties. The determining factor is the tuning of the dielectric contrast between the inorganic and organic layers, which has a direct influence on the decrease in the exciton binding energy. Using steady-state and femtosecond time-resolved absorption experiments, we have proved the high efficiency of the dissociation of initially generated excitons, even in samples with a low n value (about 3), and thus the high potential of these structures in photovoltaics. The use of a range of temperatures of fabrication relationship between the temperature and the size/crystallinity of the material. Hence, a gradual increase in the size of crystallites was observed on moving from a low to a high fabrication temperature. When the crystallinity of the material was improved via the temperature and greater coverage of the film was achieved, the PCE increased. Importantly, the recorded higher Jsc value in comparison with the reported ones is strongly indicative of both (1) a lower exciton binding energy achieved by tuning the dielectric contrast between wells and barriers and (2) an improvement in the electron transport properties of the material. Surprisingly, although the intrinsic nature of employed cation suggests a significant interaction with water, devices fabricated with a 2D/3D perovskite displayed higher stability (nearly 70%) after 288 h than those based on a 3D one (less than 40%) after the same period and under the same environmental conditions. Further improvements in the performance of anilinium-based 2D/3D perovskites can be anticipated if greater control of the conditions of nucleation and crystal growth is achieved, which is work that is currently in progress.

There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the University Jaume I (project SOLENPE UJI-B2016-05), the Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad of the Spanish Government (MAT2016-76892-C3-1-R, MAT2014-57646-P, MAT2017-86532-R, and TEC2017-86102-02-1-R) and the European Research Council (ERC) via a Consolidator Grant (724424-No-LIMIT). J. R. R. thanks CONACyT-México for the postdoctoral fellowship. B. C. H. is grateful for the support of the National Council of Technological and Scientific Development (CNPq), Brazil, through the Science without Borders program. A. F. acknowledges the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation for the postdoctoral fellowship.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Chemical representations of structures of cations used in the fabrication of 2D materials. SEM images of surface coatings for films with n = 3 and n = 5, as well as the film with n = 5 at several temperatures. Details of PL, TRPL and TAS spectra for films with n = 3 and n = 5 and 3D films. XRD patterns and determination of FWHM for the film with n = 5 at several temperatures. AFM details. Impedance spectroscopy. Statistical distribution of photovoltaic parameters at different fabrication temperatures. Response of stability to environmental conditions. See DOI: 10.1039/c8cp06418k
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2018