 DOI: 10.1039/C5RA16898H
(Paper)
RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 90217-90225

Xun Zhou,
Weili Meng,
Chao Dong,
Changwen Liu,
Zeliang Qiu,
Juanjuan Qi,
Junwei Chen and 
Mingtai Wang*

Institute of Applied Technology, Hefei Institutes of Physical Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei 230031, P. R. China. E-mail: mtwang@ipp.ac.cn; Fax: +86-551-65593171; Tel: +86-551-65593171

Received
21st August 2015
, Accepted 15th October 2015
First published on 22nd October 2015
High-purity Cu2ZnSnS4 quantum dots (CZTS-QDs) with a size of 3–5 nm and a band gap of 1.67 eV are synthesized by a facile solvothermal method using simple chemicals in ethanol solvent. The CZTS-QDs have an ionization potential (IP) of −5.96 eV and an electron affinity (EA) of −4.33 eV, which are almost not changed after removal of capping molecules on them. Due to the favorable IP and EA positions with respect to those of poly(2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylene vinylene) (MEH-PPV), the CZTS-QDs act as effective electron acceptors for hybrid solar cells based on polymer/CZTS blends with MEH-PPV as the polymer. CZTS-QDs and MEH-PPV form type-II heterojunctions to enable the solar cells to have a promising open-circuit voltage of 0.63 V, and the efficient charge separation for neutral excited states produced either on the polymer or on the CZTS-QDs makes the solar cells have a wide spectral response extending to 900 nm. It is revealed that removal of capping molecules on the quantum dots mainly leads to a reduced polymer exciton diffusion effect on the electron transport dynamics due to the formation of wider CZTS charge transport channels and an increased short-circuit current (Jsc) in the solar cells, where the enhanced Jsc dominantly correlates with the increased charge transfer and collection efficiencies due to the improved charge transport property in CZTS channels.

Hybrid polymer-based solar cells (HPSCs), with an organic conjugated polymer as electron donor (D) and inorganic semiconductor nanostructures as electron acceptor (A), are promising for fabricating cost-effective and solution-processed photovoltaic devices. HPSCs possess the combinative advantages of organic and inorganic materials, such as the high absorption, mechanical flexibility, lightweight of conjugated polymers and the chemical stability, high electron mobility and adjustable electronic features of inorganic materials. In the HPSCs, the conjugated polymer absorbs photons to generate excitons that will diffuse in the polymer toward D/A interfaces, the polymer excitons dissociate into free charge carriers (electrons and holes) at the D/A interfaces with the photogenerated electrons being injected into inorganic nanostructures and the photogenerated holes remaining in the polymer, and the electrons and holes diffuse respectively in the channels formed by the inorganic nanostructures and the polymers towards their collection electrodes. Normally, the nanostructures of metal oxides (e.g., ZnO and TiO2) and binary or ternary chalcogenides (e.g., CdS, CdSe, CdTe, PbS or CuInS2) are used as acceptor materials in HPSCs. However, those HPSCs often suffer from several deficiencies, such as that the wide band gap of oxides is not favorable for photon absorption in visible spectrum, while the chalcogenides often contain the detrimental elements for environment. Therefore, it is desirable to explore low band gap and nontoxic nanoparticles as the alternative acceptor materials for HPSCs.

Currently, quarternary metal chalcogenide Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS), a semiconductor with a low band gap of about 1.5 eV, a high absorption coefficient of 104 cm−1 and naturally abundant elements, has received the great attention of scientists in the field of solar cells. The thin film with ca. several micrometer in thickness of CZTS nanoparticles has been used as light-harvesting layer in inorganic photovoltaic devices with a planar configuration of Mo/CZTS/CdS/ZnO:Al/ITO. The CZTS thin films in those solar cells were normally prepared by the methods such as sputtering, e-beam/thermal evaporation, spray pyrolysis and chemical vapour deposition, which generally require the complex equipment and encounter the hard controllability of film composite. However, there are no reports on the HPSCs based on CZTS nanocrystals or quantum dots (QDs) up to now.
Solution synthesis of CZTS nanocrystals or QDs has been achieved through hot injection and hydrothermal or solvothermal techniques. Despite a wide application to the preparation of CZTS nanocrystals, the hot injection method often requires a sophisticated setup, the high temperature exceeding 200 °C, and applications of expensive and toxic solvents. By contrast, hydrothermal or solvothermal technique is a relatively easy way with a high yield. Several researchers have synthesized kesterite CZTS nanoparticles by a solvothermal route with high-boiling-point solvents such as ethylenediamine and ethylene glycol. Stannite and kesterite CZTS nanocrystals have been prepared by the hydrothermal process with ethylenediamine as both solvent and chelating ligand. Liu and coworkers synthesized kesterite CZTS-QDs by the hydrothermal route with a mixed solvent of ethylenediamine and water. The hydrothermal or solvothermal technique previously employed for preparing CZTS nanocrystals/QDs normally involves the application of mixed solvent consisting of high boiling-point and toxic organics (e.g., ethylene glycol, ethylenediamine). In particular, no reports of the thermally stable kesterite CZTS-QDs synthesized by solvothermal way with a single and low-boiling solvent are available. Herein, we prepare the kesterite CZTS-QDs by a solvothermal way with ethanol as solvent and simple inorganic chemicals as precursors and the CZTS-QDs as electron acceptor are effectively applied to HPSCs for the first time, in combination with poly(2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylene vinylene) (MEH-PPV). Our results demonstrate that MEH-PPV and CZTS-QDs can form type-II heterojunctions for the HPSCs with a broad spectral response, the CZTS-QDs can serve as effective acceptors and donors due to their complementary absorption and decreasing the content of capping molecules on the CZTS-QDs can improve significantly the performance of solar cells.

Copper(II) acetate monohydrate (AR), zinc acetate dehydrate (AR), tin(IV) chloride (AR), thiourea (AR), ethanol (AR), acetone (AR), isopropylalcohol (AR), hydrochloric acid (AR), chlorobenzene (CP), acetic acid (GR) were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. 1-Octadecanamine (OA) (Alfa Aesar, 98%), MEH-PPV (average Mn = 40000–70000, Aldrich), poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) (Clevios™ PH 1000), 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) (Aldrich, 96%), titanium tetraisopropoxide (Ti(OiPr)4) (Acros, 98%), lithium perchlorate (Aladdin, 99.9%), indium tin oxide-coated sheet glasses (ITO, ≤15 Ω □−1, Shenzhen Laibao Hi-Tech Co., Ltd., China) were commercially obtained. All the chemicals were used without further purification, except for the distillation of chlorobenzene under reduced pressure before use.


Copper(II) acetate monohydrate (0.1 mmol), zinc acetate dehydrate (0.05 mmol), tin(IV) chloride (0.05 mmol) and OA (1 mmol) were dissolved in 80 mL ethanol completely. Afterwards, thiourea (0.2 mmol) was added into the ethanol solution. The mole ratio of Cu, Zn, Sn and S elements in the precursors was 2:1:1:4. After 15 min nitrogen bubbling to purge oxygen, the precursor was transferred to a 100 mL Teflon-lined stainless autoclave, which was sealed and heated at 180 °C for 16 h. Then, the autoclave naturally cooled to room temperature, the product was washed with ethanol by centrifugation (15000 rpm, 10 min) for 4 times, and the CZTS-QDs were collected and dried under vacuum at 60 °C for 24 h.


The as-prepared CZTS-QDs (20 mg) capped by OA were dispersed in 80 mL ethanol, in which TBP (2 mL) was dissolved. After 15 min nitrogen bubbling to purge oxygen, the whole solution was transferred to 100 mL Teflon-lined stainless autoclave sealed and heated at 90 °C for 6 h for the removal of OA. When the autoclave naturally cooled to room temperature, the modified CZTS-QDs (referred to as T-CZTS-QDs) were washed with ethanol by centrifugation (15000 rpm, 10 min) for 4 times and dried under vacuum at 60 °C for 24 h.


Prior to fabrication, the ITO was cleaned by sonication using detergent, deionized water, acetone and isopropyl alcohol sequentially for every 15 min followed by 15 min of ultraviolet ozone (UV-ozone) treatment. The TiO2 sol–gel was spin-coated onto the ITO glass with Ti(OiPr)4 as precursor. TiO2 sol–gel was prepared from a mixture of Ti(OiPr)4, absolute ethanol, and acetic acid with volume ratio of 1:20:0.1. The mixture was stirred at room temperature until a homogeneous colorless stable TiO2 sol was obtained. An etched ITO substrate was spin-coated with the TiO2 sol at 2500 rpm for 40 s in ambient conditions. The freshly coated TiO2 film was exposed to a humid air (50% relative humidity) overnight, in order to get a full hydrolysis of the precursor and a good polymerization of the Ti–O network, and the TiO2 film was sintered in a tube furnace under a nitrogen trickle. The temperature of the furnace was slowly raised at a rate of 1 °C min−1 up to 550 °C and held at this temperature for 30 min and then cooled at a rate of 1 °C min−1 to room temperature. Then, a MEH-PPV/CZTS-QDs (T-CZTS-QDs) photoactive layer was deposited from chlorobenzene (mass ratio of mMEH-PPV:mCZTS = 1:2, MEH-PPV content of 8 mg mL−1) over the TiO2 layer by spin-coating (1000 rpm, 1 min). After heat treatment at 150 °C for 15 min in nitrogenous atmosphere, a PEDOT:PSS layer as hole transport layer was spin-coated (1500 rpm, 1 min) on photoactive layer from the PEDOT:PSS suspension that had been passed through a 0.8 μm filter in ambient conditions, and dried at 140 °C for 30 min in vacuum, which provided a PEDOT:PSS layer of ca. 40 nm in thickness. Finally, 100 nm Au film was subsequently deposited onto PEDOT:PSS layer by thermal evaporation through a shadow mask to form a top contact of 1 mm × 4 mm, which defined the active area of each device. The devices were transferred into a glovebox (O2 < 1 ppm, H2O < 1 ppm) for sealing.


The powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern was recorded on a MXP18AHF X-ray diffractometer with monochromated Cu Kα irradiation (λ = 1.54056 Å). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) observations were performed on a JEOL-2010 microscopy. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analyses were performed on an ESCALAB 250 XPS, using an Al Kα X-rays as the excitation source, and all the XPS peaks were calibrated by using the C 1s peak (284.60 eV) for neutral carbon as the reference. Raman spectrum was recorded using a JY Labram-HR spectrometer with 514.5 nm wavelength incident laser light. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) spectra of the samples in KBr pellets were recorded on a Nicolet Magna-IR™ 750 spectrometer with a maximum resolution of 0.1 cm−1. Cyclic voltammetric (CV) measurements were performed on an IM6e electrochemical workstation (Zahner Co., Germany) in N2 atmosphere at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 with a platinum counter electrode. In the CV measurements, lithium perchlorate dissolved in acetonitrile (0.1 M) was used as supporting electrolyte, and the potential (E) was recorded versus Ag/AgCl reference electrode; the working electrode was prepared by drying ca. 20 μL CZTS-QDs (T-CZTS-QDs) dispersion (10 mg mL−1) in an ethanol–water mixture (2/3 in volume) on a carbon substrate. Atomic force microscope (AFM) (Veeco multimodeV) images were taken out in tapping mode under a scan rate of 1 Hz. The water contact angle measurements were achieved on the optical contact angle measuring device (KRUSS, DSA20) using the drop shape method with dropping the water beads on the surface of CZTS-QDs and T-CZTS-QDs films on quartz sheets.

The film samples of MEH-PPV, MEH-PPV/CZTS-QDs and MEH-PPV/T-CZTS-QDs for study of optical properties were spin-coated (1500 rpm, 60 s) on freshly cleaned quartz substrates from chlorobenzene solutions with a MEH-PPV concentration of 8 mg mL−1, where the solutions for the blend samples were the same to those for the cell assembly. Prior to the measurements, the films were kept in vacuum overnight at room temperature. Absorption spectra were recorded under ambient conditions on a UV 2550 spectrophotometer (Shimadzu); while photoluminescence (PL) spectra were measured under ambient conditions on a Hitachi F-7000 spectrofluorometer with an excitation at 480 nm.
Steady-state current–voltage (J–V) curves were measured with AM 1.5 illumination of 100 mW cm−2 calibrated with a reference solar cell (91150V, Newport, USA) under ambient conditions on a 94023A Oriel® Sol3A solar simulator (Newport) with a 450 W xenon lamp as the light source, and the data were collected with an Oriel® I–V test station (PVIV-1A, Keithley 2400 Source Meter, Labview 2009 SP1 GUI Software, Newport). Incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) spectra of the solar cells were measured on a QE/IPCE Measurement Kit (Newport, USA), all the kit components were automatically controlled by Oriel® Tracq Basic V5.0 software. The dynamic intensity modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) and intensity modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS) were measured with a controlled intensity modulated photo spectroscopy (CIMPS) (Zahner Co., Germany) in ambient conditions, as described elsewhere.

Fig. 1 shows the XRD pattern and high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) images of the as-obtained CZTS-QDs. In Fig. 1a, the mainly observed diffraction peaks in XRD pattern can be indexed as those of kesterite CZTS, where the peaks at the 2θ values of 28.7°, 47.8° and 56.4° correspond respectively to (112), (220) and (312) planes according to JCPDS 26-0575. The calculated size (S) of the CZTS-QDs is ca. 4.1 nm by the Scherrer formula S = Kλ(Bcosθ)−1, where K is a constant (0.9), λ is the wavelength of X-ray (1.54056 Å), B is the full width half maximum (FWHM) of (112) peak (in radians), θ is the Bragger angle of the (112) peak. The HRTEM image in Fig. 1b shows that the CZTS-QDs have a diameter of 3–5 nm, very closed to the calculation of XRD result and smaller than the Bohr radius of CZTS nanocrystal around 2.5–3.4 nm. The lattice fringes in Fig. 1c are separated by 0.31 nm, which matches well with the spacing distance of (112) planes of kesterite CZTS.

Fig. 2 shows the Raman and XPS spectra of the as-synthesized CZTS-QDs. A single Raman peak at 336 cm−1 is detected for the CZTS-QDs (Fig. 2a), which is in agreement with CZTS nanocrystals (336 cm−1). The Raman peaks for such as Cu2S (475 cm−1), ZnS (351 and 274 cm−1), Cu3SnS4 (318, 348, and 295 cm−1) are not evidently detected, suggesting that the as-prepared CZTS-QDs are of a quite high purity. In the XPS survey spectrum (Fig. 2b), Cu, Zn, Sn and S elements from CZTS, as well as C and N ones, are clearly indicated. The N is surely resulting from as-capping OA molecules, while the C is likely due to the capping agents and the contamination as a result of the sample exposure to atmosphere. The Cu 2p spectrum (Fig. 2c) exhibits the peaks of 2p3/2 at 932.6 eV and 2p1/2 at 952.6 eV with a splitting of 20.0 eV, indicative of Cu(I) in CZTS-QDs. The presence of Sn(IV) is confirmed by the Sn 3d spectrum (Fig. 2e) that splits into Sn 3d5/2 (487.3 eV) and Sn 3d3/2 (495.7 eV). The Zn 2p3/2 peak locates at 1021.9 eV, suggesting the presence of Zn(II). The core level spectrum of S 2p splits into S 2p3/2 (161.7 eV) and S 2p1/2 (162.85 eV) peaks by an energy difference of 1.18 eV. The core level spectra (Fig. 2c–f) are consistent with the previous reports on the CZTS-QDs synthesized by hydrothermal method. The XPS data show that the stoichiometric ratio of Cu:Zn:Sn:S is 1.8:1:1:3.7 in the as-prepared CZTS-QDs, very close to the ratio of 2:1:1:4.

Fig. 3 shows the absorption spectrum of the as-synthesized CZTS-QDs stably dispersed in ethanol (the photo in Fig. 3), which features a broad shoulder with a trail towards long wavelength direction, similar to the CZTS-QDs or nanocrystals obtained by hot-injection and hydrothermal route. The band gaps of CZTS-QDs is estimated to be ca. 1.67 eV by direct band gap method (inset to Fig. 3).

The OA capping molecules on the CZTS-QDs have a long and nonconductive aliphatic chain, which may impede the charge carrier transfer from polymer to CZTS-QDs in the polymer/QDs blends. The as-synthesized CZTS-QDs were treated with TBP at 90 °C in order to remove OA. For a simple discussion, the TBP treated CZTS-QDs are referred to as T-CZTS-QDs. Fig. 4a compares the FT-IR spectra of OA, CZTS-QDs, T-CZTS-QDs and TBP. For OA, the characteristic peak of C–H bending mode from aliphatic long chain appears at 1466 cm−1. Even though the FT-IR spectra of CZTS-QDs and T-CZTS-QDs look very similar, the relative vibration band at 1466 cm−1 for OA is much weaker in T-CZTS-QDs than in CZTS-QDs with the peak between 1000 and 1200 cm−1 as reference, indicating that the major part of OA molecules on the as-synthesized CZTS-QDs have been removed after TBP treatment. On the other hand, the characteristic absorbance vibrations at 1598, 712 and 570 cm−1 for TBP in Fig. 4a are not evident in the FT-IR spectrum of T-CZTS-QDs, suggesting that almost no TBP is adsorbed on the T-CZTS-QDs. The water contact angles reduces from 77.9° for CZTS-QDs film to 63.8° for T-CZTS-QDs film (Fig. 4b and c), which also confirms the effective removal of the hydrophobic OA capping molecules on QDs by TBP treatment.
When QDs are used as an electron acceptor material to prepare HPSCs, it is important to get insight into the band structures of the QDs, because the bands of polymer and nanocrystal must locate at the favorable positions to produce type-II heterojunctions. Previous results have shown that the CV measurements are helpful for determination of the ionization potential (IP) and electron affinity (EA) of nanoparticles. With Ag/AgCl reference electrode, it is expected that the nanoparticles have IP = −(Eox + 4.72) eV and EA = −(Ered + 4.72) eV, where Eox and Ered are the onset potentials of oxidation and reduction peaks. Fig. 5 shows the CV results of the bare electrode, CZTS-QDs and T-CZTS-QDs. The CZTS-QDs and T-CZTS-QDs exhibits an Eox at ca. 1.24 and 1.20 V versus Ag/AgCl electrode, and an Ered at ca. −0.37 and −0.43 V versus Ag/AgCl electrode, respectively. Accordingly, the IP and EA levels for CZTS-QDs are respectively −5.96 eV and −4.35 eV, while those for T-CZTS-QDs are respectively −5.92 and −4.29 eV. The electrochemical band gap of CZTS-QDs and T-CZTS-QDs are 1.61 and 1.63 eV, respectively, very close to the optical data (Fig. 3). Clearly, the capping agents on the CZTS-QDs almost have no evident effects on their band structures, which is in agreement with the previous reports. In comparison to the band gap (1.5 eV) of bulk CZTS, the increased band gap of either CZTS-QDs or T-CZTS-QDs is attributed to quantum size effect.
Fig. 6 shows the absorption and room temperature PL spectra of the films of MEH-PPV, MEH-PPV/CZTS-QDs and MEH-PPV/T-CZTS-QDs. The absorption spectra of blend films of MEH-PPV/CZTS-QDs and MEH-PPV/T-CZTS-QDs (Fig. 6a) show both the absorptions from CZTS quantum dots and MEH-PPV, in which the weight fraction of QDs in those two samples are comparable as indicated by the similar absorbance of the samples. The absorption spectra are the simple sum of the absorption spectra of MEH-PPV and CZTS-QDs (T-CZTS-QDs) components without evidence of any additional absorption peaks in the spectral range measured (300–900 nm). The PL spectra of the blend films of MEH-PPV/CZTS-QDs and MEH-PPV/T-CZTS-QDs (Fig. 6b) display the emission profiles similar to the pristine MEH-PPV, which suggests the remaining luminescence is due to the radiative decay of the excitons from the polymer. The PL quenching efficiency was estimated by comparing the maximum emission intensities of the blend films to that of pristine MEH-PPV sample. When mixed with CZTS-QDs and T-CZTS-QDs, the luminescence of MEH-PPV is quenched by 60% and 77%, respectively, suggesting an effective charge transfer from MEH-PPV to QDs. Clearly, the quenching efficiency of T-CZTS-QDs is increased by 17% in comparison to that of CZTS-QDs.

We fabricated the HPSCs based on MEH-PPV/QDs blend films, with the architecture as illustrated in Fig. 7a. According to the CV results and previous report, the band level alignments depicted in Fig. 7b imply the favor of dissociation of excitons and the transfer and collection of electrons and holes to generate photocurrent. Based on HOMO and LUMO levels of MEH-PPV at −5.3 and −2.9 eV, the CZTS-QDs or T-CZTS-QDs and MEH-PPV in devices (Fig. 7a) form type-II heterojunction (Fig. 7b) that facilitates the charge transfer from MEH-PPV to the QDs. The conduction band (−4.3 eV) and valence band (−7.4 eV) for TiO2, and the work function values for ITO (−4.8 eV), Au (−5.1 eV) and PEDOT:PSS (−5.1 eV) are adopted by referring to the previous reports. For efficient photocurrent generation, the neutral excitons generated by photoexcitation need to be separated into free charge carriers that further require the collection at electrodes. Since both MEH-PPV and CZTS can serve as adsorption materials, the MEH-PPV/CZTS devices have reasonably three exciton dissociation processes as follows: (1) the excitons generated by the MEH-PPV absorption are dissociated at the MEH-PPV/TiO2 interface, in which the electrons are injected into TiO2 and the holes remain in the polymer; (2) the excitons generated in MEH-PPV are dissociated at the MEH-PPV/CZTS interface with the electrons injected into CZTS and further into TiO2 but the holes left in the polymer; (3) the excitons resulting from the CZTS absorption are dissociated at the CZTS/TiO2 interface and the resulting electrons are energetically injected into TiO2 and holes injected into MEH-PPV. Actually, the CZTS acts as both light-harvester and electron-acceptor in the MEH-PPV/CZTS devices.

Fig. 7c shows the typical steady-state J–V characteristics of the solar cells. The open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current (Jsc), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (η) of the devices are summarized in Table 1, in which the data were collected from three individual devices for each sample. The Voc in the two devices are comparable. After removal of the major part of OA capping molecules from CZTS-QDs, Jsc and FF get significantly increased. Particularly, the Jsc in the MEH-PPV/T-CZTS-QDs device is about one and a half times the value of that in the MEH-PPV/CZTS-QDs counterpart device. As compared with the narrow absorption range (mainly in 400–600 nm) of pure MEH-PPV film, the MEH-PPV/CZTS-QDs and MEH-PPV/T-CZTS-QDs films have the absorption extending to ca. 900 nm (Fig. 6a) due to the complementary absorption of CZTS-QDs and T-CZTS-QDs. The formation of continuous and condensed nanochannels of CZTS-QDs and T-CZTS-QDs facilitates the transport of the charge carriers generated by MEH-PPV and CZTS absorptions. Therefore, CZTS in our devices serves actually as acceptors and donors for photocurrent generation. Fig. 7d compares the IPCE spectra of the MEH-PPV/CZTS-QDs and MEH-PPV/T-CZTS-QDs devices. As indicated in Fig. 7b, CZTS quantum dots are excited together with the excitation of MEH-PPV, and the dissociation of the excitons in CZTS at the CZTS/TiO2 interface leads to the hole injection into MEH-PPV and the electron injection into TiO2. Actually, both solar cells exhibit two IPCE bands: 400–600 nm from MEH-PPV and CZTS absorptions and 600–900 nm merely due to the CZTS absorption. Therefore, during the photocurrent generation, the CZTS quantum dots in those devices act as both the acceptor to receive the electrons from polymer exciton dissociation at the MEH-PPV/CZTS interface and the donor to absorb photons to generate excitons. With the removal of OA capping molecules from CZTS-QDs, the response in 400–600 nm gets remarkably increased mainly because of the enhanced charge transfer from MEH-PPV to the QDs (Fig. 6b). Meanwhile, after removing OA molecules on the CZTS-QDs, the IPCE response in 600–900 nm gets increased, even though slightly, which is also attributed to the increased hole transfer from the QDs to MEH-PPV subjected to the improved interfacial property at the MEH-PPV/CZTS interface since the weight fraction of QDs in those two devices are comparable (Fig 6a). In general, the Jsc can also be calculated by integrating the IPCE data with AM 1.5 solar spectrum. The calculated Jsc values are respectively 0.86 mA cm−2 and 1.40 mA cm−2 for MEH-PPV/CZTS-QDs and MEH-PPV/T-CZTS-QDs devices, comparable to the measured data. Note, the calculated Jsc data are actually a bit higher than the measured values, which may be attributed to the smaller incident light intensity normally used in IPCE measurements.
CZTS quantum dots
Voc (V)
Jsc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
η (%)
Rs (kΩ)
Rsh (kΩ)
τD (ms)
τe (ms)
CZTS-QDs
0.63 ± 0.01
0.70 ± 0.02
34 ± 0.70
0.15 ± 0.01
7.17 ± 0.03
24.37 ± 0.08
0.61 ± 0.00
0.31 ± 0.01
T-CZTS-QDs
0.65 ± 0.01
1.06 ± 0.09
37 ± 2.12
0.26 ± 0.01
5.82 ± 1.34
33.04 ± 1.71
0.25 ± 0.00
0.61 ± 0.00
To get further deep insight into the charge transport and recombination properties, dynamic IMPS and IMVS measurements were carried out to characterize the MEH-PPV/CZTS-QDs and MEH-PPV/T-CZTS-QDs solar cells. As powerful dynamic photoelectrochemical methods, IMPS and IMVS have been widely applied to study HPSCs. As shown in Fig. 8, both of the measured IMPS and IMVS responses mainly locate in the forth quadrant (positive real, negative imaginary) of the complex plane with a distorted semicircle shape. The time constant τ defined by the frequency (fmin) of the lowest imaginary component of IMPS or IMVS is an evaluation of the transit time (τD) for photogenerated electrons to transport to the collection electrode under short-circuit condition or the electron lifetime (τe) related to the charge recombination in the solar cells under open-circuit condition. According to the relation τ = (2πfmin)−1, the τD and τe values are obtained for MEH-PPV/CZTS-QDs and MEH-PPV/T-CZTS-QDs devices (Table 1). Clearly, the dynamic data show that the removal of OA capping molecules improves the electron transport to collection electrode (i.e., reduces τD from 0.61 ms for MEH-PPV/CZTS-QDs solar cell to 0.25 ms for MEH-PPV/T-CZTS-QDs solar cell) and reduces the interfacial charge recombination (i.e., increases τe 0.31 ms for MEH-PPV/CZTS-QDs solar cell to 0.61 ms for MEH-PPV/T-CZTS-QDs solar cell), which eventually lead to an increased collection efficiency of photogenerated electrons at electrodes.
Interestingly, the crossing point of the IMPS response with the real axis at high frequency (referred to as Phigh point) shifts toward the origin after removal of OA capping molecules. The electron transport channels formed by stacking disordered nanoparticles in the blend layer may be theoretically regarded as aligned nanorods. Our previous theoretical results showed that the Phigh point moves towards the origin as the interspacing between the nanorods becomes larger, indicating a reduced polymer exciton diffusion effect on the electron transport dynamics. Therefore, the positions of Phigh points in Fig. 8a indicate that the CZTS channels become more separated in the MEH-PPV/T-CZTS-QDs devices. This is further supported by AFM data (Fig. 9). Known from the AFM images, the T-CZTS-QDs accumulate into larger aggregates than the CZTS-QDs, suggesting that less OA content on CZTS-QDs results in wider CZTS channels in MEH-PPV matrix. Formation of the wider charge transport channels will produce a reduced D/A interfacial area, but the reduced D/A interfacial area does not lead to a reduced charge transfer efficiency from MEH-PPV to CZTS quantum dots as indicated by the PL data.
Normally, the Jsc in HPSCs dominantly correlates with the light absorption, charge injection at D/A interface and charge collection at electrodes. Since the MEH-PPV/CZTS-QDs and MEH-PPV/T-CZTS-QDs films have a similar absorption property and a comparable contribution from CZTS quantum dots (Fig. 6a), the improved Jsc in the MEH-PPV/T-CZTS-QDs solar cells predominantly correlates with the enhanced charge transfer at D/A interface (Fig. 6b) and the increased charge collection efficiency at electrodes due to the improved charge transport property in CZTS channels, for which the smaller τD and longer τe in the solar cells provide further supports. The squareness of J–V curve is characterized by parameter FF, which normally correlates with the series resistance (Rs) and shunt resistance (Rsh) of solar cells. For the ideal cases (FF ≈ 1), the values of Rs and Rsh are zero and infinite, respectively. The increased FF in MEH-PPV/T-CZTS-QDs solar cells can be explained by the reduced Rs and increased Rsh as a result of the increased charge transport property after removal of OA capping molecules on quantum dots.

High-purity CZTS-QDs are synthesized by a facile solvothermal technique. The IP (−5.96 eV) and EA (−4.35 eV) levels of the CZTS-QDs are favorable for the formation of type-II heterojunction in combination with MEH-PPV, which generates consequently the hybrid solar cells with the CZTS-QDs as effective electron acceptors and the polymer as main donor. The efficient charge separation for neutral excited states produced either on the polymer or on the CZTS-QDs makes the solar cells have a wide spectral response extending to 900 nm, and the solar cells exhibit a promising Voc up to 0.63 V. It is revealed that removal of capping molecules on the CZTS-QDs almost imposes no effect on the IP and EA levels, but mainly leads to a reduced polymer exciton diffusion effect on electron transport dynamics due to the formation of wider charge transport channels and an increased Jsc in solar cells. The enhanced Jsc and FF upon removal of capping molecules predominantly correlate with the increased interfacial charge transfer and charge collection efficiencies subjected to the improved charge transport property in CZTS channels. The results here provide a potential QD material candidate for low-cost and efficient solar cells.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (11274307, 91333121 and 11474286), and the Natural Science Foundation of Anhui Province (1308085ME70).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015