 DOI: 10.1039/C2CS35230C
(Critical Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7909-7937

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Xiaobo
Chen
*,

Can
Li
,

Michaël
Grätzel
,

Robert
Kostecki
 and 

Samuel S.
Mao


Department of Chemistry, University of Missouri – Kansas City, 5100 Rockhill Road, Kansas City, MO 64110, USA. E-mail: chenxiaobo@umkc.edu

State Key Laboratory of Catalysis, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 457 Zhongshan Road, Dalian 116023, China. E-mail: canli@dicp.ac.cn

Institut des sciences et ingénierie chimiques, Ecole polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne, EPFL SB ISIC LPI, CH G1 526, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. E-mail: michael.graetzel@epfl.ch

Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Mail Stop 90-3027D, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. E-mail: R_Kostecki@lbl.gov

Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Mail Stop 70-108B, and Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. E-mail: ssmao@lbl.gov

Received
31st August 2011

First published on 18th September 2012
Over the past decades, there have been many projections on the future depletion of the fossil fuel reserves on earth as well as the rapid increase in green-house gas emissions. There is clearly an urgent need for the development of renewable energy technologies. On a different frontier, growth and manipulation of materials on the nanometer scale have progressed at a fast pace. Selected recent and significant advances in the development of nanomaterials for renewable energy applications are reviewed here, and special emphases are given to the studies of solar-driven photocatalytic hydrogen production, electricity generation with dye-sensitized solar cells, solid-state hydrogen storage, and electric energy storage with lithium ion rechargeable batteries.

Xiaobo Chen

Xiaobo Chen is an Assistant Professor and the Director of Materials Modification and Characterization Laboratory at the Department of Chemistry, University of Missouri – Kansas City (UMKC). He obtained his PhD degree from Case Western Reserve University in 2005. His research interests include nanomaterials synthesis, characterization, modifications, and applications in renewable energies, such as photocatalysis, battery and environmental pollution removal. He has published around 40 peer-reviewed articles with over 8000 citations.

Can Li

Can Li is a Professor and the Director of the State Key Laboratory of Catalysis, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, and the director of Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy. He obtained his PhD degree from Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics in 1989. His research interests include environmental catalysis, chiral catalysis, photocatalysis, solar energy utilization (photocatalysis and photovoltaic), in situ characterization, with UV Raman and time-resolved spectroscopy. He has published more than 400 peer-reviewed papers with over 5000 citations, authored 30 patents and delivered more than 70 plenary and invited lectures at national and international conferences. He has received numerous awards, including International Catalysis Award, Hong Kong “Qiu-Shi Outstanding Young Scientist Award”, HoLeungHoLee Prize, National Award for Outstanding Young Scientists in China, National Natural Science Prize of China, etc.

Michaël Grätzel

Michaël Grätzel is a Professor at the Ecole Polytechnique de Lausanne (EPFL) and the Director of the Laboratory of Photonics and Interfaces. Michael Grätzel graduated in Chemistry in 1968 from the Free University of Berlin. He received his PhD in 1971 from the Technical University of Berlin. His research interests include energy conversion systems, in particular photovoltaic cells, lithium ion batteries and photo-electrochemical devices. He has published over 900 papers (over 88000 citations, h-index 138), two books and authored more than 50 patents. He has received numerous prestigious awards, including the Balzan Prize, the Galvani Medal, the Faraday Medal, the Harvey Prize, the Gerischer Award, the Dutch Havinga Award and Medal, Albert Einstein World Award of Science, Paul Karrer Gold Medal and the Millennium Technology Grand Prize, etc.

Robert Kostecki

Robert Kostecki is a Staff Scientist and Deputy Division Director at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. Dr Kostecki received his PhD degree in Chemistry from the University of Geneva (Switzerland) in 1994. His research interests focus on fundamental phenomena that determine electrochemical performance of electrochemical energy storage and conversion systems. He is recognized for his pioneering work in the field of spectro-electrochemical diagnostics, especially in bridging the gap between fundamental science and applications of significant technological importance e.g., batteries. He has co-authored 68 papers in refereed journals, 13 conference proceedings papers, 130 meeting presentations and 10 patents. He is an active member of numerous scientific societies and committees, (co)-chaired numerous committees, workshops and government–university–industry research roundtable meetings.

Samuel S. Mao

Samuel S. Mao is Director of Clean Energy Engineering Laboratory of the University of California at Berkeley and a career staff scientist at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. After receiving his PhD degree from U.C. Berkeley in 2000, he has been leading a multidisciplinary research team developing clean energy technologies and investigating enabling materials science. He has published over 100 scientific articles that received more than 10000 citations. He has served as a technical committee member, program review panelist, grant proposal reviewer, and national laboratory observer for the U.S. Department of Energy. He was a general co-chair of the Materials Research Society annual spring meeting in 2011, and will be co-chairing the International Conference on Clean Energy in 2012.

The widely projected depletion of the fossil fuel reserves on earth and the rapid increase in green-house gas emissions and other environmental pollutions have brought about an urgent need for the development and efficient use of renewable and clean energy resources. A number of approaches have been pursued to tackle the challenges. Among them, the ability to produce electricity and fuels such as hydrogen using sunlight, and the ability to efficiently store them, could help revolutionize how we live our life in the future. For example, in one proposed scenario of the renewable hydrogen economy, hydrogen, as the energy carrier, is produced through solar irradiation of water, then stored and used in a hydrogen fuel cell car, which produces no pollution except water. In another scenario, electricity is produced under solar irradiation through the use of solar cells, then stored in a battery and used in an electric car, producing no emission. Nevertheless, these renewable energy technologies are not yet cost competitive with the traditional, nonrenewable, fossil energy technologies.

On the other hand, aiming to control and expand the properties of materials on the nanometer scale, scientists have been studying nanomaterials over the past decades. Nanomaterials are matters with at least one dimension in their physical size ranging between 1 and 100 nm. Nanomaterials appear in a variety of forms such as nanoparticles, nanorods, nanowires, nanofibers, nanotubes, nanoporous framework, etc. As the size of the materials decreases, the percentage of the atoms on the surface and the surface-to-volume ratio increase dramatically. For example, while less than 0.2% of atoms are on the surface for a 100 nm particle and 10% for a 10 nm particle, around 90% of the atoms are essentially on the surface for a 2 nm particle. The atoms on the surface may have one or more dangling bonds; they are generally very active and tend to form bonds with adjacent molecules or particles to reduce the total energy, thus getting stabilized. This can result in an increased chemical activity, lowered melting point, increased phase transition pressure, and higher solubility, for instance, when compared to their bulk counterparts. In addition, the intrinsic properties of nanomaterials are affected by their size on the nanometer scale. For example, the electronic band structures of nanoparticles are altered if their size is smaller than certain threshold values. For semiconductors, these values are commonly called the Bohr radius, which is in the range from several nanometers to tens of nanometers. The Bohr radius of a semiconductor is normally the average distance between the excited electron and hole after the semiconductor absorbs light with energy larger than its band gap. When the size of a semiconductor crystal is larger than its Bohr radius, the movement of the electron and hole is largely confined by it. However, when the size of a semiconductor crystal is smaller than its Bohr radius, the movement of the electron and hole is largely confined by its physical size, although a small part may leak out due to a quantum tunneling effect. This confinement can cause the electronic band structure of a semiconductor to become discrete or quantized, along with an increase in the band gap between the valence band edge and the conduction band edge. Electronic transitions between the valence band and the conduction band underlie the optical absorption and emission of a semiconductor. So one can tune the optical property of a semiconductor by changing its size within the Bohr radius. In addition to the optical properties, transport of the optically excited electrons and holes across the interface and within the particle can also be modified if the size is smaller than the characteristic mean free path and/or diffusion length.
Many materials, including nanomaterials, have been widely studied for numerous renewable energy applications. For the present writing, we aim to offer a brief overview of the applications of nanomaterials for solar hydrogen generation, solar electricity generation with dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), solid-state hydrogen storage, and electrochemical electric energy storage. Each section of this review contains a short introduction of the principles of the respective technology, followed by a discussion of the benefits of using nanomaterials, together with selected examples representing recent progress. The emphasis of this review is on the benefits of using nanomaterials for these applications. It is noted that the coverage of this review is far from complete and comprehensive. For a complete grasp of these and other related fields, please refer to more specialized references, such as ref. 21–42. Whereas we do hope that this writing will inspire the interest of the reader in renewable energy technology research, the reader is advised to further reading of the cited articles, reviews, and books.

The driving force of solar hydrogen generation is the dream of renewable clean fuels. Imagine that if one can acquire hydrogen gas directly from splitting water using sunlight, then we would have an endless source of clean fuel that has many applications. Hydrogen can be stored in a fuel tank and used for cars powered by a fuel cell where only water is emitted. In such a scheme we would be able to avoid environmental problems currently faced by the use of fossil fuels. Semiconductor materials can act as the key media which help split water into oxygen and hydrogen under solar irradiation.

There are two basic approaches to achieving solar hydrogen generation: an electrode system and a particle system, as schematically shown in Fig. 1. The principles for both systems are similar; a semiconductor acts as the light absorber in which electron–hole pairs are generated upon solar irradiation, while a metal acts as the electron trapper or a co-catalyst. Photo-generated electrons and holes are produced when the semiconductor electrode or particle absorbs sunlight and the electrons are excited from the valence band to the conduction band. The excited electrons can be either transported to the metal electrode connected by an external circuit in the case of an electrode system, or directly transferred to the metal particles deposited on the surface of the semiconductor particle in the case of a particle system. The electronic structure of the metal used for solar water splitting is typically characterized with a half-filled d band. The Fermi level of the metal normally lies below the conduction band edge of the semiconductor. Thermodynamically, transport of the photo-generated electrons from semiconductor to metal is favorable due to the potential difference between the metal and the semiconductor. Before the electrons can move around and get transported, the electron–hole pair from the optical absorption needs to be separated. Meanwhile, the excited electrons need to overcome several barriers in order to transport or migrate to the metal after they are generated. The electrons have to overcome the trapping in the bulk, on the surface of the semiconductor, or at the semiconductor–metal interface, in order to avoid the possibility for meeting the holes to get recombined.
Using the particle system as an example, the processes in the photocatalytic generation of hydrogen are illustrated in Fig. 2. They include light absorption of the semiconductor photocatalyst, generation and recombination of the excited charges (electrons and holes), separation, migration, and trap of excited charges, and transfer of excited charges to water or other molecules to produce hydrogen. The amount of hydrogen generated is largely determined by the amount of excited electrons that survived to reduce protons at the water–metal interface. Any processes that consume excited electrons such as trapping and charge recombination should be avoided. Thus, the semiconductor photocatalyst should first have a sufficiently small band gap to absorb as many photons from the sun as possible, and reflection or scattering of light by the photocatalyst should be minimized. After absorbing light, the semiconductor photocatalyst should have a high efficiency in generating excited charges, instead of producing heat via the interaction between the electrons and the lattice (phonons), or emitting fluorescence. Meanwhile, in order to transfer the excited electron to the metal, where hydrogen molecules are produced, the conduction band edge of the semiconductor has to lie above the hydrogen evolution potential and below the conduction band of the semiconductor. Fig. 3 lists the band positions of some oxide and sulfide compounds relative to the chemical potentials for hydrogen/oxygen evolution from water. There are many candidate materials which meet the electronic structure requirement for the generation of hydrogen from water. At first glance, the oxide materials have a larger band gap, thus absorb less sunlight, and the sulfide materials have a narrower band gap and can absorb more sunlight. Although the sulfide materials seem to be capable of absorbing more sunlight, they usually undergo oxidation reaction on the surface to become corroded over time under sunlight in water, and therefore quickly lose the capability to generate hydrogen from water. One of the challenges in semiconductor-based photocatalytic hydrogen generation is to design stable narrow bandgap materials which can absorb as much light as possible and match electronic structure requirement for hydrogen generation.
In addition, efficient charge separation and fast charge transport without bulk or surface charge recombination are crucial for photocatalytic hydrogen generation. Any approach beneficial to the charge separation and transport should be taken into account, such as design of a built-in electric field and use of high photoconductive semiconductor materials. The reaction of photo-generated H2 and O2 to form H2O on the photocatalyst surface is usually called “surface back reaction (SBR)”. It reduces the amount of H2 generated from the photocatalytic reaction. The addition of sacrificial reagents to remove the generated holes on the surface of the photocatalyst can help improve the efficiency of photocatalytic hydrogen production.
The efficiency of photocatalytic hydrogen generation from water splitting can be measured directly based on the amount of hydrogen gas generated, or indirectly on the electrons transferred from semiconductor to water, within a certain time period under solar irradiation. The apparent and overall quantum yield are frequently used, as defined by eqn (1) and (2) respectively. The quantum yield is also frequently called quantum efficiency (QE).
(1)
(2)
 The number of reacted electrons equals twice the number of generated hydrogen molecules. In addition, the solar energy conversion efficiency is sometimes used, as defined in
eqn (3):

(3)

Semiconductor nanomaterials have several advantages over their bulk counterparts for solar hydrogen generation due to the following reasons. (a) Higher surface area. Higher surface area of nanomaterials can generally provide larger reaction surface area. (b) Higher optical absorption. As the size of nanomaterials decreases, their optical absorption may increase dramatically. Thus, to absorb an equal amount of light, less material is required. (c) Shorter charge migration length. Due to the small size of nanomaterials, the excited electrons only need to migrate a shorter distance to reach the surface and reduce water into hydrogen. Given that nanomaterials are usually highly crystallized and their size is smaller than the Bohr radius, it is possible that right after light absorption, the electrons are directly pumped to the surface of the nanomaterial. In this case, charge trapping and recombination in the bulk could be avoided. (d) Higher solubility. Compared to the bulk materials, nanomaterials normally display higher solubility due to their higher surface energy and higher surface area. The higher solubility of nanomaterials can provide a clear solution of catalyst, reducing light-scattering of bigger particles, and increasing the apparent quantum efficiency, which is defined by the ratio of the amount of the hydrogen generated over the amount of light irradiated. (e) Tunable electronic structure. Owing to the effect of quantum confinement, the electronic structure of nanomaterials can be tuned by changing their sizes. So it is possible that some of the bulk semiconductors with small band gap that are not suitable for solar hydrogen generation can be explored to generate hydrogen if their sizes are controlled to the desired values. (f) Plasmonic resonance assisted charge injection and separation. Small noble metal nanoparticles on the semiconductor surface can help electron transfer from the catalyst to reduce water into hydrogen. The electrons in the conduction band of these noble metal nanoparticles can oscillate collectively from one surface to the other surface under sunlight, thus inducing strong optical absorption, called plasmon absorption. If the structures of such metal–semiconductor nanocomposites are well designed, the plasmon-enhanced absorption of metal nanoparticles can inject electrons to the conduction band of the semiconductor.


In 1972, Fujishima and Honda reported the photocatalytic hydrogen generation on a TiO2 single crystal under UV light irradiation. A series of studies have been conducted following that, and TiO2 has become one of the most effective semiconductor photocatalysts.

However, the electronic band gap in the ultraviolet (UV) wavelength regime of TiO2 has largely limited the overall photocatalytic efficiency. Narrowing the band gap of TiO2 is vital to achieve efficient absorption of sunlight and high efficiency for solar hydrogen production. Various metal and nonmetal elements have been doped into the lattice of TiO2 lattice and visible-light absorption has been obtained. For example, in the early 1990s Choi et al. conducted a systematic study of TiO2 nanoparticles doped with 21 metal ions and found that the photoreactivity, charge carrier recombination rates, and interfacial electron transfer rates were significantly influenced by the metal ion dopants. Anpo et al. found that the absorption band of Cr-ion-implanted TiO2 shifted smoothly toward the visible light region and the extent of the red shift depended on the amount of metal ion dopant, while impregnated or chemically Cr-ion-doped TiO2 showed no shift in the absorption edge of TiO2; however, a new absorption band appeared at around 420 nm as a shoulder peak due to the formation of an impurity energy level within the band gap, and its intensity increased with the number of Cr ions. The absorption spectra that shifted to a lower energy region with an increase in the dopant concentration were also found for V-, Mn-, or Fe-doped TiO2. This red shift was attributed to the charge-transfer transition between the d electrons of the dopant and the CB (or VB) of TiO2. Metal ion doped TiO2 prepared by ion implantation was found to have a large shift in the absorption band toward the visible light region with various transition-metal ion dopants such as V, Cr, Mn, Fe, and Ni, and the order of the effectiveness in the red shift followed V > Cr > Mn > Fe > Ni. Nonmetal doped TiO2 normally has a color from light yellow to brown or even light gray, with the onset of the absorption spectra red shifted to longer wavelengths. Asahi and co-workers calculated the electronic band structures of anatase TiO2 with different substitutional dopants, including C, N, F, P, or S, using the FLAPW method in the framework of the local density approximation (LDA).Fig. 4 shows the density of states (DOSs) for TiO2 doped different non-metal elements and pure TiO2.
In Asahi's report, the substitutional doping of N was the most effective in the bandgap narrowing among other N species because its p states mixed with O 2p states, while the molecularly existing species, e.g., NO and N2 dopants, and interstitial species, gave rise to the bonding states below the O 2p valence bands and antibonding states deep in the bandgap (Ni and Ni+s), and were well screened and hardly interacted with the band states of TiO2. In N-doped TiO2 nanomaterials, the bandgap absorption onset shifted 600 nm from 380 nm, with primary optical absorption increase between 400 and 500 nm, compared to the 500 nm absorption due to the oxygen defects in TiO2. N–F-co-doped TiO2 prepared by spray pyrolysis absorbed light up to 550 nm in the visible light spectrum. Yuan et al. found that in nitrogen (N)-doped TiO2 samples the N was presented in the state of both molecularly chemisorbed N2 and substituted N; while both of them contributed to the response to visible light, the substituted N was responsible for the hydrogen evolution under visible light.
S dopant induced a similar bandgap narrowing as nitrogen: the mixing of the sulfur 3p states with the valence band was found to contribute to the increased width of the valence band, leading to the narrowing of the bandgap, the strong absorption in the region from 400 to 600 nm. In Asahi's study, C dopant introduced deep states in the gap. C-doped TiO2 made using a flame method showed long-tail absorption spectra in the visible light region, and demonstrated enhanced activity over pure TiO2 in water splitting as shown in Fig. 5. At an applied potential of 0.3 volts, C–TiO2 (CM-n-TiO2, flame-made) displayed with a total conversion efficiency of 11% in water splitting and a maximum photoconversion efficiency of 8.35% when illuminated at 40 milliwatts per square centimeter, compared with a maximum photoconversion efficiency of 1% for n-type TiO2 (electric tube furnace or oven-made) biased at 0.6 volts. Cl-, Br-, and Cl–Br-doped TiO2 had also increased optical response in the visible region compared to pure TiO2.
Ti3+ in a partially reduced TiO2 of a mixture of anatase phase and rutile phases through a facile one-step combustion method extended the photoresponse of TiO2 from the UV to the visible light region, and led to high visible-light photocatalytic activity for the generation of hydrogen gas from water. The recent argument from high-resolution scanning tunneling microscopy and photoelectron spectroscopy measurements that Ti interstitials in the near-surface region may be largely responsible for the defect state in the bandgap brought up different opinions over the traditional knowledge that bridging oxygen (Obr) vacancies are usually assumed to cause the Ti 3d defect state in the bandgap of rutile TiO2(110). The new argument that the donor-specific sites play a key role in and may dictate the ensuing surface chemistry, such as providing the electronic charge required for O2 adsorption and dissociation, was largely supported by the identification of a second O2 dissociation channel that occurs within the Ti troughs in addition to the O2 dissociation channel in Obr vacancies and comprehensive density functional theory calculations.
Recently, surface disorder-engineered TiO2 nanocrystals made through a hydrogenation process displayed large absorption in the visible and infrared optical regime, with a black color. An ensemble of such nanocrystals retained the benefits of crystalline TiO2 quantum structures for photocatalytic processes, while structural disorders together with hydrogen at the surface enhanced the visible and infrared absorption.Fig. 6A illustrates schematically the density of states of disorder-engineered, black TiO2 nanocrystals as compared to that of un-modified, white TiO2 nanocrystals. Disorder-engineered TiO2 nanocrystals exhibited substantial efficiency and stability in photocatalytic production of hydrogen. Fig. 6B shows measured quantities of hydrogen gas as a function of time over a 22 day testing period of solar hydrogen production experiments using black TiO2 nanocrystals as the photocatalysts. The full spectrum solar simulator was used as the excitation source, which produces about one sun power at the sample consisting of black TiO2 nanocrystals loaded with 0.6 wt% Pt. Methanol was applied as the sacrificial reagent that enhances trapping of photo-generated holes in addition to enabling pure hydrogen gas release. Measurements were conducted initially for 15 consecutive days; each day the sample was irradiated for 5 h, and then stored in darkness overnight before testing the next day. Hydrogen generation was measured using a gas chromatograph and data were taken approximately every hour during solar irradiation. After testing for 13 days, 30 ml pure water was added to compensate for the loss and measurements continued for two additional days before the sample was stored in darkness for two days' (days 16 and 17) storage period. Throughout the testing cycles, the disorder-engineered, black TiO2 nanocrystals exhibit high stability in addition to very high hydrogen production capability.
Aside from the doping and structural alterations, tremendous research efforts have been devoted into the development of TiO2 nanomaterials with different size, shape, and morphologies in order to gain the benefits of nanomaterials for photocatalytic hydrogen generation. A variety of chemical and physical fabrication methods have been developed in achieving these nanomaterials, such as sol–gel, hydrothermal, and electrochemical oxidation. Grimes et al. developed TiO2 nanotubes with tunable size, length and wall thickness by the electrochemical oxidation of titanium foil, and these nanotubes demonstrated enhanced activity in water splitting for hydrogen generation. For example, titania nanotubes were grown from a starting titanium sheet by potentiostatic anodization in an electrolyte of 0.5% HF + acetic acid mixed in a 7:1 ratio using a platinum counter electrode. The as-anodized nanotubes were amorphous and were subsequently annealed at 500 °C in an oxygen ambient for 6 h to induce crystallinity. Fig. 7A shows a cross-section image of a 25 °C sample anodized at 10 V. The pore diameter was essentially the same (22 nm) for the anodized titania nanotube arrays fabricated at (a) 5 °C, (b) 25 °C, (c) 35 °C, and (d) 50 °C. The wall thickness increased with decreasing anodization temperature from 9 nm at 50 °C to 34 nm at 5 °C. The wall thickness increased with decreasing anodization temperature. The length of the nanotubes increased with decreasing anodization bath temperature from 120 nm at 50 °C to 224 nm at 5 °C. The hydrogen evolution was measured on a photoelectrochemical cell with Pt mesh cathode and a photoanode consisting of titania nanotubes. Gas chromatographic analysis verified that the volume ratio of the evolved hydrogen and oxygen was 2:1. 48 μmol of hydrogen gas was generated during 1800 s of exposure to 320–400 nm 100 mW cm−2 illumination with a hydrogen generation rate of 960 μmol h−1 W−1, or 24 mL h−1 W−1. The quantum yield was over 90% at high anodic polarization. The nanotubular architecture allowed for more efficient absorption of incident photons as well as decreased bulk recombination. Photoconversion efficiency as a function of potential for the different photoanodes is shown in Fig. 7B. A maximum conversion efficiency of 6.8% was obtained for nanotubes anodized at 5 °C.
Yang et al. has recently developed a hydrothermal method in making {001} facet-selective anatase TiO2 microcrystals and nanocrystals by modifying the surface with fluorine. Normally, most available anatase TiO2 crystals are dominated by the thermodynamically stable {101} facets (more than 94%), rather than the much more reactive {001} facets. They demonstrated that for fluorine-terminated surfaces this relative stability is reversed: {001} is energetically preferable to {101}. They carried out a systematic investigation of 12 non-metallic atoms X (where X can represent H, B, C, N, O, F, Si, P, S, Cl, Br or I) based on first-principle calculations. Fig. 8A shows the calculated surface energy (γ) values for different adsorbates. Among the 12 X-terminated surfaces and the clean surfaces, termination with F atoms not only yields the lowest value of γ for both the (001) and (101) surfaces, but also results in (001) surfaces that are more stable than (101) surfaces. They synthesized uniform anatase TiO2 single crystals with a high percentage (47%) of {001} facets as shown in Fig. 8B, using hydrofluoric acid as a morphology controlling agent. A fluorine-free surface can be obtained using heat treatment on the fluorinated surface of anatase single crystals without altering the crystal structure and morphology.
The photo-oxidation and photo-reduction activities of the {001} exposed anatase TiO2 samples were estimated by detecting the amount of ˙OH radicals and the hydrogen evolution rate from the photochemical reduction of water in the presence of methanol as a scavenger, respectively. The intensity of the fluorescence signal associated with 2-hydroxyterephthalic acid (TAOH) from the reaction of terephthalic acid (TA) with ˙OH radicals generated from different anatase TiO2 samples under the irradiation of UV-visible light for 25 min is shown in Table 1. Nanosized TiO2 showed a 5.6 times stronger photo-oxidation capability than micron-sized TiO2. The nanosized TiO2 (surface area ca. 21 m2 g−1) also had a superior photoactivity over mesoporous TiO2 with a large surface area of 150 m2 g−1, and the hydrogen evolution rate of nanosized TiO2 without surface fluorine was 8.2 times higher than that of micron-sized TiO2 without surface fluorine. The enhancement was attributed to the synergistic effects of the increased surface area to volume ratio associated with the nanosized crystals and the raised conduction band minimum, which promoted photo-reduction reactions due to the higher potential of the excited electrons.
Sample
A
B
C
D

a For hydrogen evolution, 1 wt% Pt species was loaded on each sample.

TAOH/a.u.
17444
30600
67370
170560
H2/μmol h−1
3
25
70
205
Wolcott et al. fabricated dense and aligned TiO2 nanorod arrays using oblique-angle deposition on indium tin oxide (ITO) conducting substrates and demonstrated their use as working electrodes in photoelectrochemical (PEC) cells for the generation of hydrogen by water splitting. The TiO2 nanorods were 800–1100 nm in length and 45–400 nm in width with an anatase crystal phase. Overall water splitting with a photo-to-hydrogen efficiency of 0.1% was observed with an applied overpotential at 1.0 V (versus Ag/AgCl). Cho et al. prepared a hierarchically branched TiO2 nanorod (B-NR) structure that simultaneously offered a large contact area with the electrolyte, excellent light-trapping characteristics, and a highly conductive pathway for charge carrier collection. The branched TiO2 nanorod array produced a photocurrent density of 0.83 mA cm−2 at 0.8 V versus reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE), under Xenon lamp illumination (UV spectrum matched to AM 1.5G, 88 mW cm−2 total power density), as shown in Fig. 9. With an applied bias of 0.6 V versus RHE, the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency reaches 67% at 380 nm, nearly two times higher than the bare nanorods without branches. The improved efficiency was due to (i) improved charge separation and transport within the branches, and (ii) increase in surface area facilitating the hole transfer at the TiO2/electrolyte interface. TiO2 nanoribbons and nanofibers have also been demonstrated in photocatalytic hydrogen generation.
Doped TiO2 nanotubes have shown further improvement in photocatalytic hydrogen generation. A high photoelectrochemical water-splitting performance was observed with nitrogen-doped double-wall TiO2 nanotube arrays, due to high surface areas and expanded optical absorbance to the visible light region. Xu et al. synthesized carbon modified (CM)-n-TiO2 nanotube arrays by anodization of Ti metal sheet in fluoride solution and subsequent annealing in air and natural gas flame oxidation. They prepared the following photoanode samples: (1) flat thin films without carbon doping (reference sample) prepared by annealing in air at 500 °C for 1 h and then in air at 820 °C for 18 min using an electric tube furnace, (2) nanotube films prepared by anodization followed by calcination in air at 500 °C for 1 h and at 820 °C for 18 min using an electric tube furnace, (3) flat thin films with carbon doping prepared by calcination of Ti sheet in air at 500 °C for 1 h followed by oxidation in natural gas flame at 820 °C for 18 min, and (4) nanotube films with carbon doping prepared by anodization followed by calcination in air at 500 °C for 1 h and oxidation in natural gas flame at 820 °C for 18 min. The carbon contents in the samples 1, 2, 3, and 4 were found to be 0, 0, 3.7, and 4.3 at%, respectively. The photocurrent density versus measured potential at these electrodes under illumination of 100 mW cm−2 white light from a 150 W xenon lamp are shown in Fig. 10. The photoresponse of undoped n-TiO2 nanotube arrays (curve 2) increased by a factor of nearly two, compared to the undoped flat thin film of n-TiO2 (curve 1). This enhancement was attributed mainly to the increase in the surface area of n-TiO2 nanotube arrays and the reduced diffusion path length and consequent reduced bulk recombination of photogenerated holes. Carbon-doped flat surface CM-n-TiO2 (curve 3) produced photocurrent density five times higher compared to that at undoped reference flat surface n-TiO2 film (curve 1). When the nanotube structure was coupled with carbon doping, an increase of more than eight times in the photoresponse of n-TiO2 (curve 4) was obtained compared to that at reference undoped flat thin film (curve 1) due to both carbon doping and nanotube effects. Mohapatra et al. found carbon-incorporated titania nanotubes prepared in a sonoelectrochemical method by using ethylene glycol to be highly promising for water-splitting. Wang et al. reported hydrogenated TiO2 nanowires and nanotubes showing improved photocatalytic activity in hydrogen generation.
Although single-phase TiO2 has been a benchmark photocatalyst with high photocatalytic activity for hydrogen production in biomass reforming, Zhang et al. recently found that the photocatalytic activity could be enhanced by designing the surface phase junctions between anatase and rutile. The size-dependent outer/inner phase transformation in TiO2 nanoparticles with narrowed size distribution was investigated using UV Raman spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction, and transmission electron microscopy. Particle size was found to be the critical parameter in determining the onset transition and nucleation temperature of TiO2. The transformation temperature was decreased with the decrease of the initial particle size. Rutile nucleated at interfaces of the contacting anatase grains (<60 nm). The free surface, interface, and bulk are all likely to work as rutile nucleation sites for large particles (≥60 nm). Photocatalytic reforming of biomass (methanol, glycerol, glucose) using different phase composition of TiO2 was performed under the UV light irradiation. It was found that the nano-composited TiO2 materials calcined at certain temperatures showed the highest photocatalytic activity for hydrogen evolution. The high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) study showed that a kind of surface-phase junctions was formed between the rutile and the anatase for the catalysts with high activity, which was further confirmed when anatase was deposited on the surface of the rutile. It was proposed that such surface-phase junction could possibily promote charge separation across the junctions between different phases, which might be responsible for the enhanced photocatalytic activity for hydrogen evolution. This synergistic effect of anatase and rutile has also been suggested in other studies.
Recently, Paracchino et al. reported a highly active photocathode for solar H2 production, consisting of electrodeposited cuprous oxide, which was protected against photocathodic decomposition in water by nanolayers of Al-doped zinc oxide and titanium oxide, and activated for hydrogen evolution with electrodeposited Pt nanoparticles. A schematic representation of the electrode structure and an SEM image of the Cu2O grains covered with a 5 × (4 nm ZnO/0.17 nm Al2O3)/11 nm TiO2 atomic layer deposition protective layer and Pt nanoparticles are presented in Fig. 11. The notation ‘5 × (4 nm ZnO/0.17 nm Al2O3)/11 nm TiO2’ represents five bilayers of 4 nm of ZnO and 0.17 nm of Al2O3 followed by 11 nm of TiO2. The role of the different surface protection components was investigated, and high photocurrents were measured at a potential of 0 V versus the reversible hydrogen electrode at mild pH. The electrodes remained active after 1 h of testing, cuprous oxide was found to be stable during the water reduction reaction and the Faradaic efficiency was estimated to be close to 100%.
Solid solution compound (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) has been studied as an efficient photocatalyst for overall water splitting in photocatalytic hydrogen generation. In 2006, Maeda et al. reported the highly active photocatalyst (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx), modified with nanoparticles of a mixed oxide of rhodium and chromium. This catalyst showed stoichiometric evolution of hydrogen and oxygen. The quantum efficiency of overall water splitting on this catalyst is about 2.5% at 420–440 nm. The (Ga1–xZnx)(N1–xOx) solid solutions were prepared by heating a mixture of Ga2O3 and ZnO powders under NH3 flow. The nanoparticles of a mixed oxide of rhodium and chromium were loaded with the wet impregnation method. Fig. 12A shows the quantum efficiency of overall water splitting by the photocatalyst as a function of the wavelength of the incident light. The quantum efficiency decreases with increasing wavelength, and the longest wavelength suitable for overall water splitting coincides with the absorption edge of the (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) solid solution; this indicates that the reaction proceeds through light absorption by the solid solution. A typical time course for overall water splitting on the impregnated (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) photocatalyst under visible light (at wavelengths longer than 400 nm) is shown in Fig. 12B. Stoichiometric evolution of hydrogen and oxygen was evident from the start of the reaction, and there was no noticeable degradation of activity in repeated runs for 35 h. The total evolution of hydrogen and oxygen after 35 h was 16.2 mmol, exceeding the amount of catalyst (3.7 mmol) used in the reaction. They found that these nanoparticles consist of core/shell-structures of a metallic Rh core and trivalent Cr-oxide shell and that the Rh core promotes charge separation in (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) and tunneling electron transfer to the Cr2O3 shell, which prevents water formation from H2 and O2 while providing catalytic active sites for H2 production. Both the Rh core and the Cr2O3 shell are essential for achieving photocatalytic overall water splitting in this (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx)-based system. When ZnGa2O4 or a ZnGa2O4–ZnO mixture was used as the starting material to prepare (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx), the photocatalytic activity of the catalyst was found to be dependent on both the Zn/Ga ratio of the starting material and the nitridation time, because both factors affect the crystallinity and atomic composition of the final (Ga1−xZnx) (N1−xOx) material. It was also revealed that the addition of ZnO promotes crystallization of the catalyst and controls the zinc concentration, thereby improving activity. Post-calcination at moderate temperatures was found to be effective for improving the activity of (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) as a photocatalyst for overall water splitting under visible light. The activity of (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) with a composition of x = 0.12 increased with the post-calcination temperature up to 873 K, above which the material commences to decompose oxidatively. This activity enhancement was attributed to a reduction in the density of zinc- and/or oxygen-related defects that function as recombination centers for photogenerated electrons and holes. The degree of enhancement by post-calcination decreased with increasing ZnO composition (x), reflecting a decrease in the as-prepared defect density with increasing x. The optimized photocatalyst, with a composition of x = 0.18, loaded with Rh2−yCryO3 co-catalyst (2.5 wt% Rh, 2 wt% Cr) and post-calcined at 823 K, exhibited an apparent quantum efficiency of ca. 5.9% at 420–440 nm. A solid solution of zinc oxide and germanium nitride (Zn1+xGe)(N2Ox) (x = 0.44) was later demonstrated to be an effective photocatalyst for overall water-splitting under ultraviolet and visible light. The catalyst was prepared by reacting GeO2 and ZnO under ammonia flow at 1123 K for 15 h. Rh2−xCrxO3 was identified as the most effective co-catalyst for (Zn1+xGe)(N2Ox), which greatly caused an increase in the activity for hydrogen evolution. Modification of the optimized (Zn1.44Ge)(N2.08O0.38) sample by loading with Rh2−xCrxO3 (3.0 wt% Rh, 0.2 wt% Cr) results in an effective photocatalyst for overall water decomposition with a quantum efficiency of ca. 0.20% at 420 nm. They recently demonstrated a new concept of using GaN:ZnO loaded with Rh/Cr2O3 (core/shell) and Mn3O4 nanoparticles as H2 and O2 evolution promoters, respectively, under irradiation with visible light. TaON-based photocatalysts have also been demonstrated to be active for hydrogen generation from water under visible light irradiation.
CdS has also been widely studied as a photocatalyst to generate solar hydrogen. For example, Bao et al. reported highly active nanoporous CdS nanostructures, including nanosheets and hollow nanorods. These nanoporous CdS nanosheets had sizes up to 60 nm and an average thickness of about 9 nm, and the CdS hollow nanorods had lengths up to 30 nm and outer diameters in the range 7–14 nm as shown in Fig. 13A. These CdS nanostructures contained nanopores with diameters of 3 nm and exhibited a very large BET surface area of about 112.8 m2 g−1. A high hydrogen yield of about 4.1 mmol h−1 under visible light irradiation (λ ≥ 420 nm) was attained with the obtained nanoporous CdS nanostructures loaded with monodispersed 3–5 nm Pt nanocrystals as shown in Fig. 13B. This corresponded to an apparent quantum yield of about 60% measured at 420 nm. The high efficiency was due to an effective charge separation, a fast transport of the photo-generated carriers, and a fast photochemical reaction at the CdS/electrolyte interface. The onset of the action spectrum agrees well with that of the UV-visible diffuse reflectance spectrum as shown in Fig. 13C. Hydrogen evolution stopped at the absorption edge in the tail region (>600 nm), revealing that the visible-light response of the photocatalyst is due to the band-gap transition between the valence and conduction bands.
The photocatalytic activity for the hydrogen evolution over CdS nanorods and nanowires has also been studied.Fig. 14 shows hydrogen evolution on nondecorated CdS nanorods as well as decorated with 4.8 nm Pt nanoparticles under illumination with UV-visible light (360–440 nm) in the presence of sodium sulfite as the hole scavenger. While no H2 evolution is detected for the CdS-only system, Pt nanoparticles decorated samples yield hydrogen with a rate of 5 mmol g−1 h−1. The maximum quantum yield of Pt-decorated samples reaches 3.9%, with average quantum yields in the range of 2–3%. The photocatalytic activity of Pt-decorated CdS nanorods is determined by subnanometer size Pt clusters and not by the presence of larger Pt nanoparticles.
Recently, Amirav et al. designed a multicomponent nano-heterostructure for efficient photocatalytic hydrogen production that consists of a Pt-tipped CdS rod with an embedded CdSe seed. In such a structure, a spatially controlled nano-heterostructure is composed of a platinum-tipped cadmium sulfide (CdS) rod with an embedded cadmium selenide (CdSe) seed (Fig. 15A and B). Therefore, holes were three-dimensionally confined to the CdSe seed, whereas the delocalized electrons were transferred to the metal tip. Consequently, the electrons were separated from the holes over three different components which could be tuned by the length of the CdS rod. By tuning the nanorod heterostructure length and the seed size, as shown in Fig. 15C, the hydrogen production activity was significantly increased compared to that of the unseeded rods. This structure was found to be highly active for hydrogen production, with an apparent quantum yield of 20% at 450 nm.
Reber et al. reported that Ag2S improved the photocatalytic activities of CdS and ZnS photocatalysts in 1986. In 2009, a record quantum yield of 93% at 420 nm was reported for the Pt–PdS/CdS photocatalyst by Yan et al. The photocatalytic activities for H2 evolution over CdS, Pt/CdS, Pd/CdS, Pt–Pd/CdS, and Pt–PdS/CdS catalysts are given in Table 2. The experiments were done using 0.3 g of photocatalyst powder suspended in 200 mL of 0.5 M Na2S−0.5 M Na2SO3 solution in a pyrex glass cell under visible light irradiation (k > 420 nm) (light source: 300 W Xe lamp; loading amount: 1 wt% Pt). CdS without co-catalysts exhibits very low photocatalytic activity for H2 evolution (ca. 0.023 mmol h−1), and the activity is enhanced markedly by loading noble metals such as Pd or Pt as the co-catalysts. When PdS is employed as the co-catalyst, the photocatalytic activity is even higher than that of Pt/CdS, achieving 280 times higher activity than that of CdS alone. Most interestingly, the activity is enhanced further to 380 times when Pt and PdS are co-loaded on CdS, and the H2 evolution rate was estimated to be as high as 8.77 mmol h−1, corresponding to a QE of 93% at 420 nm.
Catalyst
H2 evolution rate (mmol h−1)
QE (%)
CdS
0.023
0.2
Pd/CdS
3.82
40
Pt/CdS
4.80
51
Pt–Pd/CdS
4.95
53
PdS/CdS
5.99
64
Pt–PdS/CdS
8.77
93
The photocatalytic activity depends on the loading amount of Pt and PdS, as shown in Fig. 16. For Pt/CdS, the rate of H2 evolution is increased with the increase of Pt-loading from 0 to 0.65 wt%. When the loading amount of Pt is increased to 0.65 wt%, the activity reaches a maximum, 4.80 mmol h−1 with a QE of 51%, at 420 nm. The rate of H2 evolution over PdS/CdS shows a similar trend, but only 0.13 wt% PdS achieves a maximum activity as high as 5.99 mmol h−1, corresponding to a QE of 64% at 420 nm. The activity can be greatly increased further when Pt is co-loaded with PdS on CdS. The maximum activity of 8.77 mmol h−1 with a QE of 93% is achieved by co-loading only 0.30 wt% Pt and 0.13 wt% PdS on CdS. Zong et al. also reported that the nanojunctions formed between MoS2 and CdS play an important role in enhancing the photocatalytic activity of MoS2/CdS photocatalysts.
Spurgeon et al. and Plass et al. recently proposed a membrane for solar hydrogen generation, as shown in Fig. 17. The membrane layer between the two semiconductor electrodes can fulfill a number of important functions for the device to split water sustainably. It can simultaneously provide structural support for the wire arrays, separate the gaseous hydrogen and oxygen products, enable an ohmic conduction path for electrons between the anode and cathode, and act as an ion-exchange medium for the protons involved in the electrochemical reaction, while being optically transparent enough to ensure that light is effectively absorbed by both semiconductor assemblies. p-Si wire arrays have been successfully transferred to low-cost polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) layers, resulting in thin, flexible, transparent, structurally robust films as shown in Fig. 16B and C. These polymer-supported Si wire arrays have been employed in liquid-junction photoelectrochemical cells as well, yielding reasonably high energy-conversion efficiencies. Hou et al. recently showed that bio-inspired incomplete cubane-like molecular clusters (Mo3S4) could efficiently catalyze the evolution of hydrogen when coupled to a p-type Si semiconductor that harvests red photons in the solar spectrum.
Many other materials and material combinations have also been explored for photocatalytic hydrogen generation, and nanoscale effects on the photocatalytic activity have also been demonstrated. For a comprehensive reading, please refer to recent review articles and books, such as ref. 5, 7, 17–32.

The general structure and the operating principle of a DSSC are illustrated in Fig. 18. A nanocrystalline mesoporous TiO2 film with a monolayer of the charge transfer dye attached to its surface is pasted on a transparent conductive substrate, such as a tin-doped indium oxide (ITO) or fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass. A redox electrolyte or an organic hole conductor is placed in contact with the film. Electrons in the conduction band of TiO2 can be injected from the dye by photoexcitation, and conducted to the outer circuit to drive the load and make electric power. The electrolyte, usually an organic solvent containing a redox system, such as the iodide/triiodide couple, will donate electrons to the dye to restore the dye to its original state. The restored dye can transfer electrons to TiO2 by photoexcitation again and generate electricity. The regeneration of the sensitizer by iodide prevents the recapture of conduction band electrons by the oxidized dye. Meanwhile, the electrons migrated through the external load at the counter-electrode regenerate the iodide by the reduction of triiodide. The difference between the Fermi level of TiO2 and the redox potential of the electrolyte produces a voltage under illumination. Overall, electric power is generated from sunlight without the DSSC device suffering any permanent chemical transformation.

The change in the electron concentration in the nanocrystalline electron conductor that results from photo-induced charge injection from the dye is the fundamental cause for producing the photovoltage in a DSSC. Thus the photo-induced chemical potential gradients determine photovoltage generated. The difference in electron energies between the redox level and the bottom of the conduction band of the electron conductor gives the maximum photovoltage. The enthalpic and entropic driving forces that exist at the dye–electron conductor interface induce charge separation, and such a driving force at the electron conductor–contact interface facilitates charge transport. There are three key factors for efficient light harvesting and conversion: (i) the very high surface area of nanostructured oxide films for dye adsorption, (ii) efficient injection of electrons from the excited dye to the conduction band of TiO2, and (iii) transport of charge carriers through a porous structure that should take place with minimal recombination loss of electrons.
The overall conversion efficiency of a dye-sensitized solar cell is expressed by the photocurrent density measured at short circuit (Jsc), the open-circuit photovoltage (Voc), the fill factor of the cell (FF), and the intensity of the incident light (Is):
ηglobal = JscVocFF/Is
(4)
The fill factor FF is defined by the ratio of the maximum power (Pmax) of the solar cell divided by the open-circuit voltage (Voc) and the short circuit current (Isc). It can assume values between 0 and 1.
FF = Pmax/(IscVoc)
(5)

Pmax is the product of the photocurrent and photovoltage at the voltage where the power output of the cell is maximal. The value of the fill factor reflects the extent of electrical (Ohmic) and electrochemical (overvoltage) losses occurring during the operation of a DSSC. Higher fill factors can be obtained by increasing the shunt resistance and decreasing the series resistance as well as reducing the overvoltage for diffusion and electron transfer.

Fill factor values of 0.65–0.8 (Jsc: 16 to 22 mA cm−2 and Voc: 0.7 to 0.86 V) can be reached with the-state-of-the-art ruthenium sensitizers, under full sunlight, which corresponds to a standard air mass 1.5 global (AM 1.5 G) spectral distribution and an intensity of 1000 W cm−2. The transfer coefficient β for electron transfer from TiO2 to the electrolyte affects the fill factor of a DSSC. Its rate shows exponential voltage dependence, following a Tafel law. A better fill factor can be obtained with a larger β value for a given Voc. Theoretically, β should be 1 for electron transfer from a semiconductor to a solution redox couple. Smaller β values are usually observed due to the participation of surface states whose energy levels lie below the conduction band of TiO2. A larger β value can be associated with a shallower distribution of the surface defect states.
The photocurrent density produced in the external circuit under monochromatic illumination of the cell divided by the photon flux that strikes the cell is called the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE).
IPCE(λ) = LHE(λ)φinjηcoll
(6)
Here, LHE(λ) is the light-harvesting efficiency for photons of wavelength λ; φinj is the quantum yield for electron injection from the excited sensitizer in the conduction band of the semiconductor oxide; and ηcoll is the electron collection efficiency. The IPCE value is normally plotted as a function of the excitation wavelength, which sometimes is also referred to as the “external quantum efficiency” (EQE).

Nanomaterials are widely applied to the electrode for DSSCs due to the following reasons. The first is high surface area. The high surface area of nanomaterials can provide a large surface for dye chemisorption, reducing the amount of electrode materials. The second is short charge migration length. A short charge migration length allows effective charge transport from the dye molecules to the electrode possible.


The driving force for the development of mesoscopic semiconductor materials with an enormous internal surface area is the need for dye-sensitized solar cells to absorb far more of the incident light. Fig. 19A shows an electron micrograph of a nanocrystalline TiO2 film with a grain size in the range of 10 to 80 nm. The mesoporous film is interconnected to allow electronic conduction to take place. The mesoscopic pores between the particles are filled with a semiconducting or a conducting medium, such as a p-type semiconductor, a polymer, a hole transmitter or an electrolyte. A junction of extremely large contact area between two interpenetrating, individually continuous networks can be obtained. Charge carriers can percolate easily across the mesoscopic particle network, making the huge internal surface area electronically addressable. Semiconductors with a porosity of 50% have a surface area available for dye chemisorption over a thousand times that of a flat, unstructured electrode of the same size. If the dye is chemisorbed as a single molecular layer, enough can be retained on a given area of electrode to provide absorption of essentially all the incident light. The astounding photoelectrochemical performance of nanocrystalline semiconductor junctions is illustrated in Fig. 19B and C. Both electrodes are sensitized by the ruthenium complex cis-RuL2(SCN)2 (L is 2,2′-bipyridyl-4-4′-dicarboxylate). The IPCE value reaches 88% with the nanocrystalline electrode – more than 600 times of the single-crystal electrode (0.13% near 530 nm). The photocurrent in standard sunlight augments 103–104 times when passing to a nanocrystalline electrode from a single crystal. This striking improvement is due to the far better light harvesting of the dye-sensitized nanocrystalline film as compared with a flat single-crystal electrode, and to the mesoscopic film texture favoring photogeneration and collection of charge carriers. The mesoporosity and nanocrystallinity of the semiconductor are important not only because of the large amount of dye that can be adsorbed on the very large surface but also for two additional reasons: (a) they allow the semiconductor small particles to become almost totally depleted upon immersion in the electrolyte (allowing for large photovoltages), and (b) the proximity of the electrolyte to all particles makes screening of injected electrons, and thus their transport, possible. Charge transport in such mesoporous systems is best described by a random walk model. And the performance of the DSSCs made from the randomly oriented anatase nanocrystals can be further improved by organizing the anatase nanocrystals with the Pluronic P123 templated in forming ordered mesoporous TiO2 film.

One dimensional (1D) nanostructures are proposed to improve the electron transport properties over the randomly distributed nanocrystalline film. 1D TiO2, including nanorods, nanotubes, nanobelts, and nanofibers, has been employed to fabricate the DSSC electrode in replacing TiO2 nanocrystals, demonstrating higher efficiency. In 2005, Law et al. introduced a version of the dye-sensitized cell in which the traditional nanoparticle film was replaced by a dense array of oriented, crystalline ZnO nanowires. The nanowire anode was synthesized by mild aqueous chemistry and features a surface area up to one-fifth as large as a nanoparticle cell. The direct electrical pathways provided by the nanowires ensured the rapid collection of carriers generated throughout the device, and a full Sun efficiency of 1.5% was demonstrated, limited primarily by the surface area of the nanowire array. The application of TiO2 nanorods in DSSCs was demonstrated by Song et al. in 2005 as well within a quasi-solid-state dye-sensitized solar cell. The overall conversion efficiency of the TiO2 nanorods showed 6.2% under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G illumination.
Films constructed of oriented one-dimensional nanostructures, such as nanotube (NT) arrays, aligned perpendicular to the collecting substrate can potentially improve the charge-collection efficiency by promoting faster transport and slower recombination. A comparison of the electron pathways through nanoparticulate and nanotubular structured TiO2 is shown in the schematic diagram of Fig. 20. Directional electron mobility and decreased intercrystalline contacts can accelerate electron transport and lower the recombination probability. The extent to which transport or recombination could be affected by an oriented architecture depends on mechanistic considerations, such as the density and location of structural defects, the crystallinity, and the composition of the redox electrolyte. In 2006, Grimes et al. demonstrated the use of TiO2 nanotubes in DSSCs, and conducted a series of studies in the following years. For example, they prepared highly ordered nanotube arrays of 46 nm pore diameter, 17 nm wall thickness, and 360 nm length, grown perpendicular to a fluorine-doped tin oxide-coated glass substrate by anodic oxidation of a titanium thin film, as shown in Fig. 21A. After crystallization by an oxygen anneal, the nanotube arrays were treated with TiCl4 to enhance the photogenerated current and then integrated into the DSSC structure. Under AM 1.5 illumination the generated photocurrent was 7.87 mA cm−2, with a photocurrent efficiency of 2.9%, although the negative electrode was only 360 nm thick. The highly ordered TiO2 nanotube arrays, in comparison to nanoparticulate systems, had superior electron lifetimes and provide excellent pathways for electron percolation as shown in Fig. 21B. In 2008, they further developed a straightforward low-temperature (180 °C) method to prepare single crystal rutile TiO2 nanowire arrays up to 5 μm long on TCO glass, applied in a DSSC, and an AM 1.5 photoconversion efficiency of 5.02% was achieved using TiO2 nanowire arrays 2–3 μm long.
Improved DSSC performance based on the TiO2 nanorod array electrode over the disordered nanoparticle electrode was also reported by other researchers.Fig. 22A compares the solar cell response of TiO2 nanorod and P25 particle films. The I–V curves revealed that the DSSC based on TiO2 nanorods presented a significantly increased short-circuit current (Jsc), to 13.5 mA cm−2 by 40.6% from 9.6 mA cm−2 for P25 particle electrode. In the meantime, the fill factor decreased from 0.711 to 0.657 and open-circuit voltage (Voc) decreased from 780 to 680 mV. The power conversion efficiency was enhanced to 6.03% by 13.3% from 5.32% by using the TiO2 nanorods. The TiO2 nanorod film had a higher IPCE from 400 nm to 750 nm wavelength ranges than the P25 TiO2 film, as shown in Fig. 22B. The maximum IPCE value for the nanorod film was approximately 50% higher than that of the particle film.
It is believed that TiO2 nanotubes could be superior to nanorods or nanowires because of the availability of inner as well as outer walls of tubes for dye adsorption. In 2007, Zhu et al. reported the dynamics of electron transport and recombination in DSSCs incorporating oriented TiO2 nanotube (NT) arrays. The NT arrays consisted of closely packed NTs, several microns in length, with typical wall thickness and inter-tube spacing of 8–10 nm and pore diameters of about 30 nm, as shown in Fig. 23A and B. The transport and recombination properties of the NT and nanoparticle (NP) films were studied. Transport and recombination time constants were measured by intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) and intensity-modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS). Fig. 23C and D compare transport and recombination times for NT- and NP-based DSSCs as a function of the incident photon flux (light intensity) I0. The thicknesses of the NT and NP films (4.3 and 4.2 μm, respectively) in the cells were about the same. For both film morphologies, the transport time τc (Fig. 23C) exhibits a power-law dependence on the light intensity. The transport times τc for both film morphologies are comparable. For both NT and NP films, electrons perform an exclusive random walk between trap sites that have a power law distribution of waiting (release) times. On the other hand, the recombination time constants τr for the NT arrays are an order of magnitude larger than those for the NP films over the light-intensity range investigated, as shown in Fig. 23D. Thus the charge collection efficiency ηcc for NT electrodes, as described by the relation (ηcc = 1−τc/τr), can be significantly greater, given that recombination in the NT films is 10 times slower than that in the NP films and that the transport times for both film morphologies are about the same. Their calculation of the charge-collection efficiency at the highest light intensity shows that ηcc for the NT films is 25% larger than that for the NP films. The ratio of τc at short circuit and τr at open circuit (τc/τr) equals the ratio of the time constants measured at the maximum power point. The 25% improvement in the charge-collection efficiency is close to the ηcc at the maximum power point. This implies that NT films can be made much thicker than NP films for a given recombination loss.
Recently, Kim et al. reported that bamboo-type nanotubes-based DSSCs showed a significantly higher efficiency than smooth-walled tubes (Fig. 24). The key improvement provided by the bamboo structure is the higher dye loading per unit volume. Not only can the additional area provided by the bamboo rings add to the active area but also the spacing introduced between the tubes may allow dye molecules to cover the interior and exterior of TiO2 NT walls.
Qu et al. performed structure transformation and photoelectrochemical properties of TiO2 nanomaterials calcined from titanic nanotubes. In their study, hydrothermally synthesized titanate nanotubes were calcined at different temperatures (400–700 °C) in air to obtain TiO2(B) nanotubes, anatase nanorods, and anatase nanoparticles, and were then used to fabricate photoelectrodes for DSSCs. It was found that the DSSC with anatase nanorods calcined at 600 °C showed much better photoelectrochemical performance than those using other samples, with a photovoltaic conversion efficiency of 7.71%. Their results indicated that the charge-transfer resistance and lifetime depended on the morphology and structure transformation of the synthesized TiO2 samples. The anatase nanorods, obtained from the calcination of titanate nanotubes at 600 °C, had a lower charge-transfer resistance and a longer electron lifetime, implying lower electron–hole recombination and a higher charge-collection efficiency.

In general, hydrogen may be stored in the form of pressurized gas, liquefied hydrogen, or can be chemically or physically bonded to a suitable solid-state material. To meet the need for hydrogen storage for transportation applications, the material candidate must at least have the following characteristics: high hydrogen capacity, fast hydrogenation-dehydrogenation, easy activation and minimal deterioration during hydrogenation cycling. Of the three hydrogen-storage approaches, solid-state storage has the highest volumetric density of hydrogen. The fundamental mechanisms for solid-state hydrogen storage include chemisorption and physisorption.

Physisorption mainly involves the adsorption of hydrogen molecules on the surface of materials through the van der Waals interaction. The van der Waals force is a weak intermolecular force. This force between the hydrogen molecule and the surface is normally in the lower kJ mol−1 range. Thus, to achieve a sufficient amount of adsorbed hydrogen, it is necessary to apply low temperatures (e.g. 77 K of liquid nitrogen temperature). Nevertheless, because of the weak molecular forces, release of physisorbed hydrogen can be fast. On the other hand, chemisorption starts with dissociation of hydrogen molecules and chemical bonding of the hydrogen atoms by integration in the lattice of a solid material, e.g. metal hydrides. This process inherently involves large enthalpy changes and normally requires high operation temperatures and a catalyst for fast hydrogen uptake and release. As a consequence, the force is more material specific compared to the case of physisorption. Fig. 25A illustrates the hydrogen adsorption/absorption process in a metal hydride form and Fig. 25B shows the potential energies of 2H + M and H2 + M reactions at a gas–metal interface. The ideal material for hydrogen storage would achieve a compromise between physisorption and chemisorption (Fig. 25C). In physisorption, hydrogen is weakly bonded to the storage material (<10 kJ mol−1), resulting in a low storage capacity at room temperature. In chemisorption, the bonding is too strong (>50 kJ mol−1), thus requiring high temperatures to release the hydrogen. The potential energy for useful molecular hydrogen physisorption on a metal surface at low temperature falls in the range 10–60 kJ mol−1. This is much lower than the energy required for chemisorption of atomic hydrogen that usually occurs at high temperatures. Among the metals/materials that can effectively adsorb and desorb hydrogen are Li, Al, Mg and their alloys whose hydrides can store 4–6 MJ kg−1 gravimetric energy density or 2–3 MJ L−1 volumetric energy density.

Nanostructured materials may offer advantages for molecular hydrogen storage by providing high surface area, or encapsulation or trapping hydrogen in microporous media. An increased surface area and porosity in nanostructures offer additional binding sites on the surface and in the pores that could increase storage mainly through physisorption. The possibility of storing a significant amount of hydrogen on high surface area density materials has been a key driver in the investigation of the hydrogen sorption properties of nanotubes, graphite sheets, metal–organic frameworks and template ordered porous carbons. Nanostructured carbons, zeolites, metal–organic frameworks, clathrates and polymers with intrinsic microporosity are examples of the investigated physisorption materials. However, using porous nanostructured materials, in general, can reduce the gravimetric and the volumetric storage densities.

For chemisorption, the low rate of bulk hydride sorption and the high temperatures required for gas release are among the major obstacles in the development of materials for hydrogen storage. Nanomaterials can increase the kinetics of uptake and release; the sorption characteristics can be fine-tuned by controlling the particle sizes. With a metal hydride (whether the hydrogen is stored interstitially or held by complex ligands) the kinetics of both absorption and desorption, and the heat transfer, can be improved by an order of magnitude simply by reducing the grain size of the metal.Fig. 26 clarifies why nanomaterials are superior to macroscopic bulk materials in absorbing hydrogen. For the bulk hydride, the sorption rate is small, release temperature is too high, and the poor heat transfer can lead to process interruption. Fast hydrogen exchange can be achieved by using nanoparticles in reducing diffusion distances for hydrogen. The increased porosity and smaller size lead to increased diffusion-limited rates. Thus, increased kinetics and uptake can be obtained by reducing the grain and particle sizes. Meanwhile, the surface-to-volume ratio increases for nanoparticles. The low coordination surface atoms increase adsorption sites and induce weaker binding energy in small metallic clusters. Surface energies and material properties at the nanoscale offer ways to tune the energetics of absorption and desorption to reduce the release temperature and speed up release process.
Assume the reaction
M + H2 → MH2
(7)
where M is a metal. The molar free energy of formation for bulk material is express as:

(8)

P, the equilibrium pressure of hydrogen is related to the adsorption process through the van't Hoff relation.

(9)
Where
H0 and S0 are the equilibrium enthalpy and entropy changes, respectively, R is the gas constant, and T is the absolute temperature.

At nanoscale, the reaction enthalpy is affected by the surface and size effects. The increased surface to volume ratio increases the adsorption sites and the low coordination of the surface atoms. Small metal clusters have weaker binding energies relative to bulk. The thermodynamic stability of such clusters depends on the number of atoms present. Both electronic and geometric shells play vital roles. At the nanoscale, a significant contribution occurs to the nanoscale thermodynamics of adsorption due to the surface free energy, and consequently, the dependence of free energy on r, the size (radius) of the nanocluster. The van't Hoff relation (eqn (8)) has an additional term due to the surface energy, and the enthalpy and entropy terms are dependent on the particle size. The molar free energy of formation for nanoparticle is now express as:
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)

 signifies the average surface area. Its product with , the change in surface tension, represents the contribution from the surface energy upon hydride formation. Variation of the van't Hoff plot with the size of the nanocluster offers a means to optimize nanostructured hydrogen storage systems as illustrated in Fig. 27.

In general, the reduction in particle size of hydrides into nanoscale may have the following effects: significantly shortens the ion diffusion path along the lattice of solid phase; induces exposure of reactive (unstable) planes, edges and corners; creates defects within the lattice of nanoparticle; lowers the melting point of hydride and facilitates mass transport and intermolecular reaction. All these features allow faster rate of hydrogen release from nanosize materials than from their bulky counterparts. The presence of dangling bonds and chemisorbed species on the internal surface of mesopores or outer surface of nano-carbons are likely to induce chemical interaction with hydrides, and can be the point “catalyzing” or “initiating” dehydrogenation. For hydrided nanoparticles in equilibrium with non-hydrided ones, any system with an extra positive surface energy term will cause reduction of the magnitude of the effective enthalpy-of-formation and cause release of hydrogen at a lower temperature.

For hydrogen chemisorption, the most studied materials are metal hydrides and related complex hydrides. Small hydrogen atoms can readily enter the interstitials of many metals and alloys to form hydrides. Since a high weight fraction of hydrogen in the solid-state hydrogen-storage materials is required for practical transportation system applications, research to enhance the hydrogen capacity in metal hydrides has been focused on those based on light weight elements such as magnesium. Metal hydrides can have a theoretically large hydrogen-storage capacity. For example, MgH2 has a theoretical capacity of ∼7.6 wt%. However, the desorption characteristics of these materials in the bulk are inconvenient for practical applications. Polycrystalline Mg was found to not exhibit significant hydrogen-storage reactions at 573 K, but nanostructured Mg could absorb hydrogen readily, even without any activation.Fig. 28A illustrates the advantage of nanocrystalline over bulk Mg2Ni on the absorption kinetics and Fig. 28B shows that the desorption temperature of Mg2NiH4 decreases as the particle size decreases from bulk to nanometer.

Recently, high-capacity Mg NCs were reported by encapsulating within a selectively gas-permeable polymer. The nanostructuring of the Mg provides rapid storage kinetics without using expensive heavy-metal catalysts. Fig. 29A illustrates the schematic of hydrogen storage composite material: high-capacity Mg NCs are encapsulated by a selectively gas-permeable polymer – poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA). As shown in Fig. 29B, the bulk Mg shows no weight increase upon hydrogen exposure, indicating a lack of MgH2 formation. However, the Mg NCs/PMMA composites display a sharp weight increase upon hydrogen exposure, with a steep slope of hydrogenation occurring during the first 6 min, which plateaus off to constant mass in less than 30 min. The differences in slope between the first 6 min and the remainder of the absorption curve are attributed to a change in the rate-limiting mechanism for hydrogen uptake. The hydrogen absorption capacity of the MgNCs/PMMA composite was well-preserved through three absorption/desorption cycles (Fig. 29A inset); however slightly decreased dehydriding kinetics were observed after the third cycle as evinced from the decreased slope of descent. This marginal degradation is probably due to material fatigue owing to relaxation of structural defects. From the measured absorption isotherm, a calculated hydrogen absorption capacity value of 5.97 wt% Mg (∼4 wt% in overall composite mass) is reported, 78.6% of the theoretical value of magnesium.
Ammonia borane (AB), having a hydrogen content of 19.6 wt%, has been regarded as one of the promising candidates for hydrogen storage. However, releasing H2 from AB has to be above 100 °C with the co-production of a substantial amount of borazine. Gutowska et al. showed that by confining AB into the hexagonally ordered mesoporous silica (SBA-15, with an average pore size of ca. 7.5 nm, see Fig. 30A), hydrogen started to release from AB at about 50 °C with significantly less by-product borazine (Fig. 30B), milder exothermicity and no observable induction period. It is likely that the confinement of AB in the nanopores alters the dehydrogenation pathway by forming less stable dehydrogenated product(s). In the meantime, the presence of defects in the nanostructured AB and −OH groups of the silica may induce faster H2 release. A number of approaches to enhancing dehydrogenation properties of AB, including confining it on carbon cryogel, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) and nano-BN, were reported recently.
Mechanical ball milling of bulky NaAlH4 produced smaller particles of approximately 150 nm and of faster dehydrogenation kinetics. However, those nanoparticles aggregated in the cyclised dehydrogenation and rehydrogenation. A later progress in controlling the particle size of NaAlH4 to smaller scale and at the same time preventing particle aggregation was the confinement of NaAlH4 on nanostructures or into mesopores of a few nanometers. Balde et al. impregnated NaAlH4 on carbon nanofiber (CNF) of 20–30 nm in diameter and observed significantly improved dehydrogenation properties. Through tuning its loading on CNF the particle size of NaAlH4 can be controlled. Fig. 31 shows that NaAlH4 of 2–10 nm releases H2 right above ambient temperature with the maximum rate at about 70 °C which is nearly 120 °C lower than NaAlH4 of larger size (1–10 μm) and exhibits advantages over the Ti-doped system. The reduction in particle size significantly shortens the ion diffusion path and may induce more exposure of open planes, edges and corners to allow faster dehydrogenation. Zheng et al. put NaAlH4 into ordered mesoporous silica and achieved faster dehydrogenation at 180 °C.
A similar approach was adopted to improve the dehydrogenation of LiBH4. Yu et al. ball-milled LiBH4 and carbon nanotubes at different ratios and observed enhanced dehydrogenation of LiBH4 at 250 °C. Similarly, Zhang et al. ball milled LiBH4 and mesoporous carbon at the weight ratio of 1:1 and obtained LiBH4 of 5 nm in size mixed with or “embedded” in destroyed mesoporous carbon. Compared with neat LiBH4, the LiBH4–mesoporous carbon mixture released the majority of H2 at lower temperatures and could achieve partial reversibility at 350 °C. Gross et al. incorporated LiBH4 into porous carbon of different pore sizes and observed the size-dependence of dehydrogenation kinetics (see Fig. 32). The smaller the pore size (or the particle size of LiBH4), the faster the rate of dehydrogenation became. As a matter of fact, the rate of dehydrogenation of LiBH4 in 13 nm aerogel was about 50 times faster than that of LiBH4–graphite at 300 °C.
Physisorption of hydrogen molecules in nanostructured materials has been explored extensively; examples include various forms of carbon, clathrates, and metal–organic frameworks. Significant storage capacity was initially reported for hydrogen storage using carbon nanotubes. In the case of activated carbons and activated carbon fibers, a hydrogen absorption of 5 wt% is obtained at low temperature (77 K) and high pressure (30–60 bar). For graphitic nanofibers, multiwalled carbon nanotubes, single-walled carbon nanotubes, a reversible hydrogen uptake of 1.5 wt% per 1000 m2 g−1 under ambient conditions was reported. A hydrogen capacity of 7 wt% is observed for ordered porous carbon with a surface area of 3200 m2 g−1, prepared by a template, at 77 K and 20 bar. Recent studies on carbon aerogels (CAs), another class of amorphous porous carbon structures with high surface area, showed 5 wt% of hydrogen adsorption for a surface area of 3200 m2 g−1 at 77 K and 20–30 bar (Fig. 33). The amount of adsorbed hydrogen is proportional to the specific surface area of the carbon material. Recent research of hydrogen physisorption on carbon nanostructures involves efforts on increasing the surface area of carbon to provide more binding sites and incorporating functional groups (dopants) in carbon to increase the binding energy between hydrogen and carbon surfaces.
Metal–organic frameworks represent another important example of solid-state hydrogen storage materials due to the possibility of designing a functionalized porous structure for physisorption, as well as their low density (<1.00 g cm−3) and high specific surface area (>500 m2 g−1). For example, the metal–organic framework of composition Zn4O(BDC)3 (BDC = 1,4-benzenedicarboxylate) with a cubic 3-D extended porous structure was demonstrated to be able to adsorb hydrogen over 7 wt% at cryogenic temperature.

Rechargeable lithium batteries provide the capability of delivering the stored chemical energy as electrical energy with high conversion efficiency and no gaseous exhausts. The motivation for developing battery technologies based on Li metal as anode is to achieve electric storage systems with high energy density. Li is the most electropositive (−3.04 V versus standard hydrogen electrode) and the lightest metal. The high stored volume and gravimetric energy density of a Li battery has enabled realization of cellular telephones and laptop computers. Nevertheless, the issues that continue to plague the development of Li batteries for the potential mass market of electric vehicles include cost, safety, and charge/discharge rates, in addition to stored energy density and battery life.

A single lithium battery cell is comprised of a positive electrode (cathode), a negative electrode (anode), a separator, and an electrolyte that conducts lithium ions. The separator isolates the cathode from the anode. It is normally a membrane which allows lithium ion transport while preventing electron crossover from one side to the other (lithium ion permeable and electron impermeable). The anode and cathode are connected through an external circuit. To circumvent the safety issues surrounding the use of Li metal, substituting metallic Li for a second insertion material leads to the so-called Li-ion or rocking-chair technology (vs. lithium battery). The principle of rocking-chair batteries is shown in Fig. 34. The rechargeable lithium-ion battery does not contain lithium metal. It is a lithium-ion device, comprising a graphite negative electrode (anode), a nonaqueous liquid electrolyte, and a positive electrode (cathode) formed from layered LiCoO2. On charging, lithium ions are deintercalated from the layered LiCoO2 intercalation host, pass through the electrolyte, and are intercalated between the graphite layers in the anode. Discharge reverses this process. The electrons travel through the external circuit. The performance (cell potential, capacity or energy density) of the battery is related to the intrinsic property of the materials that form the positive and negative electrodes. The cycle-life and lifetime depend on the nature of the interfaces between the electrodes and electrolyte, whereas safety is a function of the stability of the electrode materials and interfaces. Charge rates are typically given in terms of the fraction of the theoretical capacity that can be charged over a period of one hour per gram of active material at a given charge current. The theoretical capacity of the fully lithiated alloy Li4.4Si is 4212 mA h g−1, an order of magnitude higher than graphite (372 mA h g−1, in the form of LiC6). For example, a rate of 1 C corresponds to a charge current of 4.2 A per gram of silicon.

The advantages of using nanostructured inorganic materials for lithium ion batteries include the following. (1) The reduced dimension increases the rate of lithium insertion/removal and electron transport. The small size of nanostructured materials allows shorter transport distances for lithium-ion within the particles. The diffusion time constant is given by t = L2/2D, where L is the diffusion length and D the diffusion constant. The intercalation time decreases with the square of the particle size. (2) The high surface area of nanostructures permits a high contact area of the electrode with the electrolyte and hence a high lithium-ion flux cross-section coefficient on the interface per mass of the electrode material. (3) The chemical potentials for lithium ions and electrons may be modified by tuning the size of the materials on the nanoscale. This can result in a change of electrode potential (thermodynamics of the reaction). (4) Nanostructures can provide facile strain relaxation, tolerate large volume change during lithiation and delithiation to prevent electrode pulverization and maintain effective electrical contact, allowing a large range of solid solutions.


In lithium-ion containing liquid organic electrolytes, if lithium is polarized to a sufficient negative potential, lithium ion will be able to react with Si or metal M (M = Sn, Mg, Ca, Al, Pb, etc.) to form intermetallic compounds. Compared with the graphite (372 mA h g−1), lithium alloys such as Li22Sn5 and Li22Si5 have much higher capacity (990 mA h g−1 for Li22Sn5 and 4200 mA h g−1 for Li22Si5). Poor cycle stability of the alloy electrode and the pulverization of the material occur due to large volumetric changes induced by the repeated alloying and de-alloying. If the electrodes can be engineered with morphologies such as nanowire arrays or ordered mesoporous structures on the nanometer scale to provide the necessary volume of free space to accommodate expansion during alloying, the material stress can be minimized to avoid electrode pulverization and to achieve greater reversibility and cycling stability.

Recent progress on nanostructured silicon electrode is a good example. The low cycling stability of bulk silicon has limited the commercial use of silicon in lithium cells, although the theoretical capacity of fully lithiated silicon alloy Li4.4Si is 4212 mA h g−1, an order of magnitude higher than graphite (372 mA h g−1). During lithiation, the large volume change (>300%) leads to high internal stress and electrode pulverization. This causes subsequent loss of electrical contact between the active material and current collector, and leads to poor reversibility and rapidly declining capacity. At high charge/discharge rates, the capacity of silicon electrodes decreases due to low lithium ionic conductivity in silicon and sluggish mass transfer at the electrode interface. Silicon films with a strong adhesion to the substrate have been shown to undergo anisotropic volume changes. Silicon films with thicknesses of 50 nm or less exhibit the best reversibility and highest capacities. Fig. 35 shows the electric storage performance of an amorphous n-type silicon film. The amorphous n-type silicon film with a thickness of 50 nm vacuum deposited onto nickel substrates exhibited an initial capacity of approximately 3750 mA h g−1, a reversible capacity near 3800 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles at 1 C, and a reversible 3000 mA h g−1 capacity after 1000 cycles under a heavy load of 12 C. By reducing electrode dimensionality to increase the surface-to-volume ratio and provide shorter lithium diffusion distances, electrode polarization may be reduced, allowing high capacities to be realized.
The nature of the stress experienced by the active material during lithiation/delithiation is seen to depend on morphology. The use of nanoscale morphologies may also enhance the rate capability and specific capacity. Nanoscale dimensions allow quick relaxation of stress, making nanoparticles more resistant to fracture than bulk particles. Silicon nanowires and nanotubes have shown high discharge capacities and stable cycling over tens of cycles, with reversible capacities as high as approximately 3400 mA h g−1 as shown in Fig. 36. Nanowire and nanotube-based electrodes can accommodate material expansion during cycling, and can form a direct current pathway when nanowires are grown directly onto the current collector. This facile strain relaxation resulting from the small dimension of nanowires and nanotubes was demonstrated by partially coating a Si nanowire with electrochemically-inactive nickel. The ability for silicon nanowires to deform without fracture may contribute to the high reversible capacities observed.
Alternatively, the finding of Li-insertion activities in the lithium titanites inspired interests in titanium oxide-based nanomaterials for anode applications. Li4Ti5O12 is an excellent host for reversible Li-insertion/extraction with a specific capacity of 175 mA h g−1. TiO2 offers a capacity up to its theoretical value at 335 mA h g−1. The redox reaction occurs typically at 1.5–1.8 V vs. the Li+/Li redox couple. The relative high potentials make TiO2 electrodes inherently safer than the graphite or silicon anode and render fewer reactions at the electrode/electrolyte interfaces. The electrochemical performance of TiO2 electrode materials is, however, limited by the poor conductivity of Li+ accompanied by electrons in its bulk form. TiO2 has been fabricated into various nanostructures that resulted in improved Li insertion characteristics to improve the charge/ion transport properties. The Li-reactivity has been found to increase with the decreased particle size. For example, 0.8 mol Li-insertion into nanostructured rutile TiO2 (10 nm × 40 nm) at room temperature has been reported, while only 0.1–0.25 mol of Li into micrometer-sized rutile.Fig. 37 shows a comparison of the electrochemical performance of TiO2 rutile samples with three sizes. Only a very small quantity of lithium ions (0.03Li/TiO2) can be inserted into the bulk rutile in a galvanostatic mode (current 30 mA g−1, i.e. the reaction of one lithium ion per 11 h). Nanosized TiO2 (50 nm) could be inserted up to 0.23 Li per TiO2 rutile. This corresponds to a specific capacity of 77 mA h g−1 (at 1/10 C) during the first reduction down to 1.0 V. When the size was decreased to 10 nm rutile rod particles (10 nm × 200 nm), Li-insertion was up to 0.85 Li during the first reduction under the same test conditions. Li-insertion progressed through two solid solution domains, then transforming into electroactive rocksalt type LiTiO2 (ccp) through an irreversible phase change due to the volume expansion in the ab-plane. Similar improvements of the capacity, charge/discharge rate and cycling stability by the smaller size on the nanometer scale have also been reported for anatase and brookite TiO2 as the electrode materials.
On the other hand, Olivine LiFePO4 has been considered a promising cathode material for large scale lithium-ion batteries used for hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs) or electric vehicles (EVs). The material has low toxicity, potential for low cost, long cycle ability and high safety. In the early stage of LiFePO4 research, many reported that the rate performance of LiFePO4 was greatly limited by the slow diffusion of lithium ion in LiFePO4, and/or the low electronic conductivity. The diffusion coefficient of lithium ion in LiFePO4 is quite small (10−14–10−16 cm2 s−1, resulting in poor electrochemical performance of LiFePO4. Transports of lithium ions and of electrons at the interface are quite important for the power performance of LiFePO4. A much higher rate capability of 130 mA h g−1 at a 10 C rate was obtained with carbon-coated LiFePO4 nanorods with a length of up to 100 nm. It was also found that the carbon-free LiFePO4 with a reduced dimension of 100–200 nm exhibited a similar electrochemical property in terms of specific capacity of 147 mA h g–1 at a 5 C rate and high capacity retention upon cycling to a carbon-coated LiFePO4. The improved electrochemical properties were attributed to the small size of the material, which facilitates both ionic and electronic transport within the nanostructures. Recent studies on nanometer-sized LiFePO4 have shown that bulk lithium transport is so fast that the charging is ultimately limited by the surface adsorption. For example, in 2009, Kang et al. reported the nanometer-sized stoichiometries of LiFe1−2xP1−xO4−x with improved ionic conductivity of the surface. The materials exhibited a good capacity of 130 mA h g−1 even at a discharge rate of 50 C (Fig. 38). When the electrode material is prepared with 65% mass of carbon additive, a capacity of more than 100 mA h g−1 is achieved at a very fast rate of 200 C. Similar improvement on another cathode material, LiMnPO4, has also been achieved with the decrease of the size of the material into nanometer scale, resulting in good rate behavior and a long cyclic life. However, when reading literature capacity normally refers to the capacity of the active materials, e.g. in this case, pure LiMnPO4. For the capacity of the whole electrode, the mass of the other nonactive components needs to be taken into account.
Besides the lithium ion insertion–extraction or alloying processes, a new interfacial charge-storage mechanism has been found in the reactions of transition metal oxides with lithium ions. It involves the formation/decomposition of Li2O, accompanying the electrochemical reduction/oxidation of the metal nanoparticles in the range 1–5 nm:
MO + 2Li+ + 2e− ↔ Li2O + M
(16)
Transition metal oxides MO (M is Co, Ni, Cu or Fe) exhibit specific capacities of 700 mA h g−1 with 100% capacity retention for up to 100 charge/discharge cycles. Reversible decomposition of Li2O can be catalyzed by the nanoparticles of the transition metal (in the range 1–5 nm) produced in the charge process. Although the mechanism of the conversion reactions of the transition metal oxides is not fully understood, it is believed that the electrochemically driven size confinement of the nanoscale metal particles is the key point to enhance their electrochemical activities toward the formation/decomposition of Li2O. The conversion reactions of the transition metal nitrides, fluorides and phosphides have been reported.
Nanomaterials exhibit the desirable advantages such as improved lithium ion diffusion rate in the solid phase of the host compound; enhanced reaction rate caused by larger interface between the electrode and the electrolyte due to a high surface area and porosity of the nanostructures; and potential new reactions that are not possible with the bulk materials. However, the agglomeration of the materials are induced by the large surface area and high surface energy of the nanomaterials. Therefore, the “kinetically stabilized” nanomaterials should be considered, which, in fact, have been developed by using heterogeneous nanostructures and nano/micro hierarchical structures. Meanwhile, the synthesis of the nanomaterials is usually difficult due to complex processes, high costs, and difficulties in controlling the nano-dimensions. The widely applied synthesis methods including sol–gel, radio-frequency magnetron sputtering, mechano-chemical, etc., still need to be optimized to obtain the more competitive battery products. Recent developments in nanotechnology have opened new opportunities for the large scale applications (roll-to-roll, inkjet printing…) in various fields of nanomaterials. Therefore, it is of great importance, but still a challenge to explore the nanomaterials for high performance and practical lithium ion batteries. It has also been noticed that many LiFePO4 producers can produce this material on a commercial base that achieve >160 mAh g−1 of capacity based on half-cell configurations.

Over the past two decades, nanomaterials have been studied intensively for their potentials for solar-driven generation and effective storage of hydrogen fuel and electricity. The fundamental properties of nanomaterials, i.e., their small size and high surface area, bring in tremendous benefits for applications. The small size offers shorter charge migration distance within the particle, whereas the large surface area provides a large reaction area and high charge and ion transfer rates. The very high surface-to-volume ratio of a nanomaterial increases the adsorption sites as well as low coordination of the surface atoms. Tolerance of structure change and strain relaxation exhibited in many nanomaterials can yield a large range of composition tunability and good stability of the material. However, the large surface area and high surface energy may also induce significant side reactions and agglomeration of the material. In addition, large scale fabrication of nanomaterials has been elusive due to the complex processes, high costs, and difficulties in controlling the homogeneity in general; recent development has opened new opportunities for large scale applications through processes such as roll-to-roll and inkjet printing nanomanufacturing. It is of great importance to explore possible cost-effective approaches to solving the challenges faced by the community of nanomaterials for their better applications to renewable energy production and storage.


The authors thank Professor Peter Y. Yu of the Department of Physics, University of California, at Berkeley for helpful discussion and advice. This work has been supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (RK, SSM). This work was supported by the Assistant Secretary for Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, Office of Vehicle Technologies of the U.S. Department of Energy, under contract no. DE-AC02-05CH11231 (RK). XC would also acknowledge the support from the University of Missouri – Kansas City and University of Missouri Research Board, and the generous gift from Dow Kokam. XC would thank the galleyproof reading and comments of Dr Han Wu from Dow Kokam as well.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012