 DOI: 10.1039/D0TA04843G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 16291-16301


Jung-Hui
Kim
,

Inchan
Hwang
,

Se-Hee
Kim
,

Jeonghwan
Park
,

Wonjoo
Jin
,

Kwanyong
Seo
* and 

Sang-Young
Lee
*

Department of Energy Engineering, School of Energy and Chemical Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan 44919, Korea. E-mail: syleek@unist.ac.kr; kseo@unist.ac.kr

Received
11th May 2020
, Accepted 13th July 2020
First published on 29th July 2020
Coupling solar cells with energy storage devices promises to overcome issues associated with intermittency and longevity of the individual systems. Despite such significance of the coupled power sources, most previous approaches have involved bulky configurations with inactive components, eventually hindering their application as portable power sources. Furthermore, to enable practical/versatile applications of the coupled power sources, their operating voltages should be widened and customized for a specific purpose. Here, we demonstrate voltage-tunable portable power supplies based on tailored integration of interdigitated-back-contact-structured crystalline-silicon photovoltaics (cSiPV) and printed bipolar quasi-solid-state lithium-ion batteries (bQSSBs). The maximum power voltages of the cSiPVs and end-of-charge voltages of the bQSSBs are respectively varied and mutually matched to widen the operating voltage window (2.7–13.5 V) of cSiPV–bQSSB. The resulting cSiPV–bQSSB achieves high overall efficiency (10.2%) and stable photo-rechargeable cyclability. Moreover, cSiPV–bQSSB featuring a customized operating voltage is seamlessly unitized with various electronic devices and exhibits sustainable long-time operation under variable weather conditions.

The ever-increasing demand for ubiquitous electronics in the modern era has inspired the relentless pursuit of advanced power sources providing stable electrical energy at any time and place. Photovoltaic (PV) cells, which harness clean and abundant sunlight resources, are considered as an appealing energy-generating system. However, their strong dependency on weather conditions and extinction of electrical activity during the night time cause uncontrolled fluctuations and intermittency of power generation. Meanwhile, energy storage devices such as batteries and supercapacitors intrinsically require charging steps, with concomitant pausing of the operation.

To address the aforementioned challenges (i.e., the intermittency of PVs and the limited energy density of energy storage devices), combining PVs with energy storage devices has garnered considerable attention. Notably, in addition to this electrical coupling, operating voltages of the hybrid PV-energy storage devices should be widened and customized to enable their practical and versatile applications. This issue has been underscored in the recent publications, in which series connection of PVs was suggested as a facile way to secure reliable photo-charging voltages for energy storage devices. In many previous studies of integrated PV-energy storage devices, the individual power sources were simply connected by external electrical wires, direct current (DC)–DC converters, and other supplementary parts. The inclusion of the inactive components, however, results in energy storage efficiency loss, shape complexity, and volume increase. Notably, these limitations hinder applications of PV-energy storage devices as portable power sources. Another intriguing approach is the direct physical integration of PVs with energy storage devices by sharing common current collectors. Despite the fabrication simplicity and performance improvement, their advancement and further application has been stalled due to lack of attention to voltage widening. Moreover, the parameter matching between the output voltage of PVs and end-of-charge voltage of energy storage devices has not been the center of attention, thus hindering the increase of the overall efficiency (e.g., the higher voltage of PVs than the end-of-charge voltage of energy storage devices does not effectively contribute to facilitating the redox reaction of energy storage devices). These issues tend to become more serious as the operating voltages of PVs and energy storage devices vary and widen.
As an alternative to the physical combination of PVs and energy storage devices, single-bodied hybrid power systems have been explored, in which energy generation and storage reactions are electrochemically synchronized. However, the available candidates of PVs and batteries (or supercapacitors) are insufficient and the photoelectric-conversion/storage efficiency (i.e., overall efficiency) is much lower than those of physically integrated power systems. Another challenge facing the hybrid power systems is their narrow operating voltage window. In most cases, the operating voltages reported to date are limited to 1 V.
Here, we demonstrate a new class of voltage-tunable portable power supplies based on tailored integration of interdigitated back contact (IBC)-structured crystalline silicon photovoltaic (cSiPV) modules and printed bipolar quasi-solid-state lithium-ion batteries (bQSSBs). Using ultraviolet (UV) curing-assisted stepwise printing, bQSSBs with a multi-stacked cell configuration are directly fabricated on the aluminum (Al) current collector of a cSiPV module. To widen the operating voltage window of the cSiPV module–bQSSB (hereafter, referred to as “cSiPV–bQSSB”) system, we vary the operating voltages of the cSiPV module and bQSSB, respectively, while matching the maximum power voltage (Vmax) of the cSiPV module to the end-of-charge voltage (Vend-of-charge) of the bQSSB. The cSiPV modules with controlled Vmax are fabricated without power loss by the screen printing-based modularization process. The Vend-of-charge of the bQSSBs can be tuned by changing the number of bipolar-stacked cells. In addition, the fast electrochemical kinetics of the individual power sources beneficially contributes to the photo-charge/galvanostatic-discharge performance.
The resulting cSiPV–bQSSB provides an exceptionally wide voltage window (2.7–13.5 V), rapid photo-charging within 30 s (leading to a galvanostatic-discharge time of 36 min at a current density of 0.1C), high overall efficiency (10.2%), and stable photo-rechargeable cyclability, which lie far beyond those of previously reported PV-battery systems. More notably, by virtue of its customized operating voltages, simple/compact design, and lightweight feature, cSiPV–bQSSB can be seamlessly unitized with a portable global positioning system (GPS) that consumes more energy at high voltages. The portable GPS (powered by cSiPV–bQSSB) ceaselessly runs without conventional external electrical charging. Furthermore, cSiPV–bQSSB continuously operates a light-emitting diode (LED) lamp installed outside a building under variable weather conditions, during both the daytime and night time. cSiPV–bQSSB as a “voltage-tunable, user-customized all-day operating portable power supply” has not been previously reported, to the best of our knowledge.

High-efficiency IBC cSiPVs were fabricated using P-type Si wafers with a resistivity of 1–3 Ω cm and a thickness of 120 μm. The backside of each cell consisted of an interdigitated emitter by the selective area diffusion of phosphorus; elemental doping was conducted through patterned SiO2 diffusion barriers of 900 nm. The heavily-doped n+ regions were formed by diffusion of phosphorus using a spin-on-dopant method with P509 (Filmtronics). The entire surface, except for the emitter and BSF regions, was coated with a 10 nm-thick Al2O3 layer at 200 °C via atomic layer deposition (Atomic premium, CN1), and a 65 nm-thick SiNx film was deposited at 350 °C using plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PE-CVD; PEH-600, SORONA). And then, the area of the back surface field (BSF) was selectively patterned by photolithography and 10 nm MoOx/500 nm Al was deposited by a thermal evaporation process. For the emitter metal electrodes, interdigitated grid patterns were formed in the emitter regions by photolithography, and a 500 nm-thick Al film was thermally deposited. The photovoltaic properties of the PVs were investigated using a solar simulator (Class AAA, Oriel Sol3A, Newport) under AM 1.5G illumination. The incident flux was measured using a calibrated power meter and double-checked using a NREL-calibrated solar cell (PV Measurements, Inc.).


To electrically isolate each IBC cSiPV, the backside of the as-fabricated wafer was attached with UV-curable tape (DUV 190, DS Semicon) and dicing was performed. A transparent UV-curable polymer (NOA 63, Norland Products, Inc.) was coated onto the front surface of the isolated IBC cSiPVs (the surface without electrodes) and then fully cured by UV exposure for 5 min, which resulted in the formation of a transparent handling substrate for the PV module. The polymer-embedded PVs were obtained by filling the transparent UV-curable film. The UV-curable tape at the back of the polymer embedded cells was detached after exposure to UV light for 5 min. To interconnect the cells in series, Ag paste was selectively painted on the metal electrode of PVs through the screen-printing process. After heat treatment for 5 min at 80 °C, the insulating polymer (NOA 63) was coated on the rear side of the IBC cSiPV module using the spin casting process with 500 rpm. Then, an Al sharing current collector was attached to the insulating polymer and the anode of the module was connected to the current collector.


A micro pyramid-structured silicon substrate was used as a master mold. The random-size pyramidal structures of the master mold show an average height and a base size of 8 μm and 7 μm, respectively. To fabricate the master mold, we cleaned a planar silicon substrate with acetone, methanol, and deionized (DI) water. After removing the silicon native oxide by immersing in buffered oxide etchant (BOE, HF/NH4F = 7/1 (v/v)), the planar silicon substrate was dried under a nitrogen (N2) gas flow. The cleaned silicon substrate was immersed in wet-etching solution of potassium hydroxide (KOH, 40 wt% solution)/isopropyl alcohol (IPA, 99.9%)/DI water = 10/5/85 (v/v/v) at 75 °C for 60 min. To remove the remaining potassium ions on the silicon substrate, a mixed acid solution of hydrochloric acid (HCl, 36%)/hydrogen peroxide (H2O2, 30%)/deionized (DI) water = 1:1:5 (v/v/v) was used at 80 °C for 10 min. Next, we deposited a trichloro-(1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyl) silane (FOTS) monolayer to detach the structured PDMS optical layer easily. A mixed solution of the PDMS base resin and curing agent (Sylgard 184, Dow Corning Co.) was poured on the silicon master mold and annealed at 100 °C for 10 min. The cured optical film was detached from the silicon master mold.


Carbon black (CB) powders were chosen as a conductive additive. Prior to the surface modification, the CB powders were dried at 120 °C overnight. They were subjected to UV/O3 treatment (UVC-30, Jaesung Engineering Co., UV radiation = 28 W cm−2) for 30 min. Subsequently, the UV/O3-treated CB powders were mixed with DETA solution and sonicated for 90 min at 60 °C. The resulting CB powders were rinsed using excess acetone followed by filtration, yielding DETA-treated CB powders. The DETA-treated carbon powders were characterized by conducting X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, ThermoFisher) and zeta potential measurements (Zetasizer Nano ZS, Malvern Instruments Inc.).


The electrode pastes were composed of active materials/carbon black/gel electrolyte precursor whose composition ratios were 60/8.5/31.5 (w/w/w) for the LiCoO2 (LCO) cathode and 52/7.5/40.5 (w/w/w) for the Li4Ti5O12 (LTO) anode, respectively. The gel polymer electrolyte precursor was prepared by mixing a UV-curable ethoxylated trimethylolpropane tri-acrylate (ETPTA) monomer (Aldrich) (including 1.0 wt% 2-hydroxy-2-methl-1-phenyl-1-1propanone (HMPP) as a photo-initiator) and high boiling point electrolyte (1 M LiPF6 in ethylene carbonate(EC)/propylene carbonate(PC) 1/1 (v/v)) in a composition ratio of 15/85 (w/w). To fabricate the bQSSB with cSiPV, the LTO anode paste was directly stencil-printed onto an Al current collector of the cSiPV module without any processing solvents and then exposed to UV irradiation. UV irradiation was performed using an Hg UV-lamp (Lichtzen) with an irradiation peak intensity of approximately 1260 mW cm−2. Subsequently, on the LTO anode (thickness = 50 μm and mass loading = 5.9 mg cm−2), a composite polymer electrolyte (CPE, gel electrolyte precursor/Al2O3 nanoparticles (average particle size ∼300 nm) = 56/44 (w/w)) was introduced through the UV curing-assisted printing process. Then, the LCO cathode paste was stencil-printed directly on the CPE/LTO anode and solidified by UV irradiation, yielding the printed LCO cathode (thickness = 30 μm and mass loading = 6.2 mg cm−2). After placing an Al current collector on top of the printed LCO cathode/printed CPE/printed LTO anode, the QSSB unit cell was obtained. Another QSSB unit cell was introduced, using the same printing process, on the top of the pre-fabricated QSSB unit cell, leading to the bQSSB with a bipolar structure. The number of QSSB unit cells on the cSiPV module was determined from the Vmax of the module concerning the voltage matching between the cSiPV and the bQSSB. Finally, the encapsulation of the bQSSB was conducted with Al pouch packaging substances and a UV-curable hydrophobic polymer (PRO-001, Novacentrix). All assembly steps of the cells were performed in a dry room.

The rheological properties of the electrode pastes were measured using a rheometer (Haake MARS 3, Thermo Electron GmbH). The cross-sectional structure of cSiPV–bQSSB was examined using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (S4800, Hitachi) in conjunction with an EDS. The cross-sectional sample specimen of cSiPV–bQSSB was obtained by argon (Ar) ion milling (Model 1040 Nanomill, Fischione). The 4-point probe measurements were conducted using a resistivity meter (FPP-RS 8). The non-blocking symmetric cell test was conducted using an impedance analyzer (VMP-300, Bio-Logic) over a frequency range of 1 to 106 Hz at a temperature of 25 °C. The electrochemical performance of the cells was investigated under various charge/discharge conditions using a potentiostat-galvanostat (VMP-300, Bio-Logic).

cSiPV–bQSSB was illuminated using a full-sun intensity solar simulator (Class AAA, Oriel Sol3A, Newport). Simultaneously, the voltages of cSiPV–bQSSB during photo-charging were in situ measured using a potentiostat/galvanostat. After the bQSSB was fully photo-charged, it was galvanostatically discharged over a wide range of current densities.

The overall efficiency of integrated cSiPV–bQSSB was calculated using the equation given below.

Pin indicates the light intensity (= 100 mW cm−2 (1 Sun)), tcharge is the sunlight irradiation time, and A is the irradiated area of a PV module. Ein and ELIB are the photo-charged energy and galvanostatically discharged energy, respectively. cSiPV–bQSSB was connected with a portable GPS or a LED and its operation as a unitized power source was explored under various environmental conditions as a function of time.


For direct photo-charging of the bQSSB by the PVs, the output voltage of the PVs should exceed the charging voltage of the QSSB. As the maximum power voltage (Vmax) of the single PV is limited to approximately 0.6 V, the PV voltage must be tuned by a modularization process. Conventional cSiPVs are usually modularized by inserting a metal-wire connection between the front and rear electrodes of each PV unit, and adjusting the output voltage of the PV module. However, modularization by this process is inevitably affected by shadowing by the front metal-wire connection area. Moreover, the space consumed by connecting the front and back electrode of each PV reduces the packing density of the PV module. In contrast, the electrodes in the IBC cSiPVs are positioned on the rear surface of the PV, which simplifies the modularization process, minimizes the electrical and optical losses, and creates a perfectly seamless structure. On the downside, the fabrication process of conventional IBC cSiPVs involves complicated multiple patterning processes and high-temperature doping processes (>900 °C; see Fig. S1). Therefore, a new and simple manufacturing process for IBC cSiPVs is required.

In this study, the fabrication process of a miniaturized IBC cSiPV module was simplified by adding a dopant-free back-surface field (BSF). The BSF—a hole-selective material (MoOx) of 10 nm thickness—was deposited by a thermal evaporation process. As shown in Fig. S1, the MoOx BSF-based IBC cSiPVs were manufactured by a significantly simplified fabrication process with only seven steps (versus 11 steps in the conventional fabrication process of IBC cSiPVs). Consequently, MoOx BSF-based IBC cSiPVs with a surface area of 1 cm2 achieved a maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 16.0%. The open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), and fill factor (FF) of the devices were 628 mV, 34.3 mA cm−2, and 74.1%, respectively (Fig. S2).
To boost the output voltage, the IBC cSiPV units were interconnected in series by the screen-printing method using Ag paste (see Fig. 1A). In the integrated PV-battery power system, the sharing Al current collector was positioned between the rear side of the PV module and the bQSSB. When directly formed on the rear side of the IBC cSiPV module, the current collector can connect the positive and negative electrodes of the IBC cSiPV module, causing an electrical short circuit. To prevent such short-circuiting, a UV-curable insulating polymer (NOA 63, Norland products) was spin-coated onto the electrodes of the IBC cSiPV module. The insulating polymer was selectively exposed to UV irradiation, creating an open area for the negative terminal of the PV module. Next, the sharing current collector (Al metal foil) was attached to the insulating polymer layer. Finally, the IBC cSiPV module was optimized for the integrated PV-battery power system by connecting the sharing Al current collector to the negative terminal electrode of the IBC cSiPV module using Ag paste.
We also increased the light absorption capability of the IBC cSiPV module by attaching an optical adhesive film to the front surface of the module. Being constructed from random inverted-pyramid-structured polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), the optical film effectively reduces the surface reflection and increases the optical depth of the IBC cSiPV PV module (Fig. S3). When installed with the optical adhesive film, the IBC cSiPV module (Vmax = 5.6 V, area = 12 cm2) delivered a short circuit current (Isc) and efficiency of 37.1 mA and 16.5% respectively, versus 35.2 mA and 15.9% respectively without the film (Fig. 1B). The increased Isc of the IBC cSiPV module with the optical adhesive film was re-confirmed from the improved external quantum efficiency (EQE) over the entire wavelength region (Fig. 1C). Because the film was physically attached to the front surface of the IBC cSiPV module, it did not degrade the performances of the other photovoltaic parameters such as the FF and Voc.
The ubiquitous electronics powered by the PV-battery system often face fluctuating angles of incident light because the mobile devices would be continuously changing their position. Hence, suppressing the efficiency loss of the IBC cSiPV module at various angles of incident light is needed to secure effective photo-charging of the PV-battery system. The use of an optical adhesive film with inverted pyramid structures is a viable approach to prevent the efficiency reduction of the PV module caused by increasing angle of the incident light. The photocurrent ratio (relative to the photocurrent at normal incidence) was higher in the IBC cSiPV module with the optical adhesive film than in the device without the film, because the film increased the incident angle of the light (see Fig. 1D). Notably, at an incidence angle of 60°, the photocurrent ratio of the IBC cSiPV module with the optical adhesive film (0.55) was higher than the device without the film (0.43). Meanwhile, as the incidence angle increased, the power density ratio between the IBC cSiPV modules with and without the optical adhesive film increased from 1.05 to 1.34 (Fig. 1E). Based on these results, the optical adhesive film is a strong candidate that can facilitate outdoor applications of the IBC cSiPV module.

Along with the high PCE of the cSiPV module described above, much attention should be paid to photoelectric-charge/galvanostatic-discharge capability (i.e., electrochemical redox kinetics) of the bQSSB to develop highly efficient cSiPV–bQSSB. To this end, we chose LiCoO2 (LCO) and Li4Ti5O12 (LTO) as cathode and anode active materials in the bQSSB, respectively, owing to their fast rate performance and structural stability. Other electrode active materials with high capacities and wide electrochemical voltages can be used to develop advanced bQSSBs, which will be an interesting topic in future studies. In addition, to secure well-interconnected electronic networks in the battery electrodes that are affected by dispersibility of conductive additives (herein, carbon black (CB) powders), we modified the surface of CB powders in the electrodes. The CB powders were grafted with diethylenetriamine (DETA) to promote their inter-particle repulsion. The DETA grafting process is described in the Experimental section. The beneficial effects of the DETA-modified CB (denoted as DETA CB) powders on the formation of the electronic networks are conceptually illustrated in Fig. 2A. The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra (Fig. 2B) showed characteristic N 1s peaks around 400 eV (assigned to amine groups), verifying the successful grafting of DETA on the CB powders. Additionally, the zeta potential of the DETA CB powders was +32 mV (vs. + 0.5 mV of the pristine CB powders), revealing the enhanced electrostatic repulsion between the powders (Fig. 2C).

The DETA CB powders were integrated into a printed LCO cathode. The effects of the DETA CB powders on the LCO cathode paste (i.e., prior to UV curing) were analyzed by micro-computed tomography (micro-CT) imaging and rheological characterization. The DETA CB powders in the cathode paste were uniformly and homogeneously dispersed, whereas the pristine CB powders in the control cathode paste tended to aggregate (Fig. 2D). This microstructural change affected the rheological properties of the cathode paste (Fig. 2E). The cathode pastes showed typical thixotropic fluid behavior,i.e., characterized by a higher storage modulus (G′) than loss modulus (G′′) in the low shear–stress region, and crossover of G′ and G′′ in the high shear–stress region. Owing to the uniform dispersion state, the cathode paste containing the DETA CB powders exhibited a lower yield stress than the control cathode paste. A low yield stress is known to improve the printing quality in the stencil printing process. A high-quality printed image fabricated from the DETA CB powders is confirmed as shown in the insets in Fig. 2E.
The beneficial contribution of the DETA CB powders was verified by measuring the electrical conductivity of the model LCO cathodes (LCO/CB/polyvinylidene fluoride (PVdF) binder = 90/4/6 (w/w/w)) fabricated by the conventional slurry casting method. The LCO cathode with the DETA CB powders showed the higher electronic conductivity as compared to the control cathode incorporated with the pristine CB powders (Fig. S4A). This result was confirmed by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) analysis of the printed LCO cathodes in the symmetric cell configuration. The composition ratio of the printed LCO cathode was LCO/DETA CB/gel electrolyte = 60/7.5/32.5 (w/w/w), where the gel electrolyte consisted of ethoxylated trimethylolpropane tri-acrylate (ETPTA) and 1 M LiPF6 in ethylene carbonate (EC)/propylene carbonate (PC) (1/1 (v/v)) = 15/85 (w/w). The printed LCO cathode containing the DETA CB powders exhibited a lower cell resistance than the control LCO cathode (Fig. 2F), which appeared to be consistent with the above-mentioned electrical conductivity results.
As a supplementary experiment to further confirm this advantageous effect of the DETA CB powders, we fabricated a coin-type (2032R) half cell (printed LCO cathode/liquid electrolyte (1 M LiPF6 in EC/PC (1/1 (v/v)))-filled polyethylene separator/Li metal anode) and investigated its electrochemical performance. The cell containing the DETA CB powders showed the higher discharge rate capability compared to its counterpart containing the pristine CB powders at a fixed charge current density of 0.1C (Fig. S4B). Moreover, the cell with the DETA CB powders exhibited the higher charge rate capability at a fixed discharge current density of 0.1C (Fig. S4C). It should be noted that this superior charge rate capability enabled by the DETA CB powders is expected to improve the storage efficiency of the electric energy generated by the cSiPV module.
In addition to the printed LCO cathode described above, the printed LTO anode (LTO/DETA CB/gel electrolyte = 52.0/6.5/41.5 (w/w/w)) was fabricated. The LTO anode paste exhibited shear-thinning and thixotropic fluid behavior (Fig. S5), similar to the LCO cathode paste. The charge/discharge profiles (measured at a fixed charge/discharge current density of 0.1C/0.1C) of the half cells containing the printed LCO cathode or printed LTO anode are presented as a function of cycle number (Fig. S6A). Meanwhile, a printed composite polymer electrolyte (CPE, ETPTA/1 M LiPF6 in EC/PC/Al2O3 nanoparticles = 6.5/37/56.5 (w/w/w)) showed sufficient ionic conductivity over a wide temperature range (Fig. S6B). Finally, we fabricated a printed QSSB full cell (LCO cathode/CPE/LTO anode) containing the aforementioned battery components. The LTO anode paste was printed on the Al current collector and solidified by UV curing. Subsequently, the printed CPE and the printed LCO cathode were fabricated by the same UV curing-assisted printing process. The printed QSSB full cell showed normal charge/discharge behavior (Fig. 2G) and stable capacity retention over 100 cycles (Fig. 2H).

A wide voltage window is essential for versatile applicability of cSiPV–bQSSB in various electronic devices. The manufacturing procedure of a voltage-tunable cSiPV–bQSSB is schematically presented in Fig. 3A and S7. This section details the fabrication and characterization of cSiPV–bQSSB, with a focus on the compact design and widening of the voltage window.

Employing the bipolar cell configuration, in which the unit cells are serially connected in a single package, is considered as a facile approach for increasing the operating voltage of batteries. A prerequisite condition of bipolar batteries is no ionic flow between the adjacent cells, necessitating the use of solid-state electrolytes. As described above, the printed composite polymer electrolyte in this study serves as a solid-state electrolyte in bulk electrodes and as an ion-conducting separator membrane. The QSSB unit cell was fabricated on an Al current collector of the cSiPV module by UV curing-assisted stepwise printing. A second QSSB unit cell was fabricated on the pre-fabricated QSSB unit cell by the same printing process, yielding a bipolar-stacked QSSB (designated as bQSSB). The cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and corresponding energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS) images of the bQSSB (inset of Fig. 3A and S8) demonstrated the successful fabrication of the bipolar structure and its seamless unitization with the cSiPV module. As shown in Fig. 3B, the operating voltages of the bQSSBs tended to linearly increase with the number of serially stacked cells (Vend-of-charge = 2.7 V for 1 cell → 13.5 V for 5 cells), exhibiting facile control of the operating voltages via the bipolar cell configuration.
To successfully develop high efficiency cSiPV–bQSSB systems, the operating voltages of the bQSSBs should not only be widened, but should also be mutually matched with those of the cSiPV modules. The IBC structure of the cSiPV, in which all electrodes are positioned on the rear surface, effectively tailors the modularization without power loss, enabling facile control of the output voltage. In other words, the output voltage of the IBC cSiPV module can be easily tuned by serially connecting an appropriate number of PV units in the screen-printing process. This modularization process yielded cSiPV modules with Vmax ranging from 2.7 to 13.5 V (Fig. 3C, Table S2). It should be noted that the output voltage of the cSiPV module was increased to a very high value (13.6 V) proportionally to the number of PV units connected in-series (Fig. S9).

Fig. 3D illustrates the importance of voltage matching between the cSiPV module and bQSSB. The overall efficiency of a model integrated power system (consisting of one bQSSB with a fixed Vend-of-charge = 2.7 V and cSiPV modules with different Vmax values) decreased with increasing Vmax of the PV modules (that implies a widening voltage gap between the cSiPV and bQSSB), while the PCE of the PV modules remained almost constant. In cSiPV–bQSSB, the increase of Vmax is accompanied by the decrease of photo-charging current density, eventually resulting in the loss of the overall efficiency of cSiPV–bQSSB (see the equation of the overall efficiency provided in the Experimental section). To address this problem, we voltage-matched the cSiPV–bQSSB systems, in which their operating voltages (varying from 2.7 to 13.5 V) were consistently synchronized with the Vend-of charge of the bQSSB (Fig. 3E). Both the overall efficiency and PCE of resulting cSiPV–bQSSB were negligibly changed over a wide range of Vmax of the cSiPV modules (Fig. 3F), demonstrating the advantageous effect of voltage matching.
By virtue of its single-bodied integration, cSiPV–bQSSB is also dimensionally compact. One example (Vend-of charge = 10.8 V) of cSiPV–bQSSB is 5 cm long, 3 cm wide, and 824 μm thick (Fig. S10). By contrast, a control PV-battery system with the same Vend-of-charge, which consists of one cSiPV module and four conventional lithium-ion batteries connected in-series by external electrical wires, was too bulky and complicated.
The photo-charge/galvanostatic-discharge behavior of the cSiPV–bQSSB systems (schematically shown in Fig. S11) was examined as a function of their operating voltage. At each voltage, the systems were photo-charged for 30 s under a light intensity of 1 Sun (100 mW cm−2), and then galvanostatically discharged. The galvanostatic-discharge behaviors of the cSiPV–bQSSB modules were dependent on their Vmax values (Fig. 3G). Specifically, cSiPV–bQSSB with high Vmax exhibited high discharge voltage and low discharge capacity, whereas the opposite behavior (i.e., low discharge voltage and high discharge capacity) was observed for cSiPV–bQSSB with low Vmax. Accordingly, the galvanostatic-discharge performance of cSiPV–bQSSB can be readily tailored to meet customer requirements under the same sunlight intensity. This unique electrochemical behavior underscores the potential use of the cSiPV–bQSSB systems in various applications demanding different operating voltages and capacities, which has never been reported in previous studies on PV-battery systems (Table S2).

The photo-charge/galvanostatic-discharge performance of cSiPV–bQSSB was investigated with a cSiPV–bQSSB system comprising a cSiPV module (Vmax = 5.6 V) and a bQSSB (Vend-of-charge = 5.4 V). The structural compactness of cSiPV–bQSSB is shown in Fig. 4A.

As shown in Fig. 4B, cSiPV–bQSSB was photo-charged to 5.4 V for 30 s under 1 Sun illumination, and then galvanostatically discharged to 3.0 V for 36 min at a discharge current density of 0.1C without experiencing constant voltage (CV) charge mode. The overall efficiency of cSiPV–bQSSB was estimated to be 10.2%. No appreciable difference in the discharge behavior was observed between the aforementioned photo-charging and a typical DC electric-charging (Fig. 4C), verifying the practical viability of cSiPV–bQSSB. Meanwhile, to address a self-discharge issue of cSiPV–bQSSB, open-circuit voltage (OCV) of fully charged (i.e., 5.4 V) cSiPV–bQSSB was measured as a function of the elapsed time (Fig. S12). cSiPV–bQSSB showed the normal OCV profile comparable to that of the bQSSB alone, demonstrating the electrochemical/structural stability at the interface of the cSiPV module and bQSSB. The photo-charge/galvanostatic-discharge cycling retention of cSiPV–bQSSB was stable over 100 cycles (corresponding to 180 h), in which the integrated power system was photo-charged for 1 min under 1 Sun illumination and galvanostatically discharged at a discharge current density of 0.1C (Fig. 4D and Fig. S13). In addition to the good cycling performance, the overall efficiency hardly changed during the cycling test, confirming the sustainable cyclability of cSiPV–bQSSB. Moreover, the above-described cycling performance far exceeds those of the previously reported PV-battery systems (Table S2).
Long-term exposure to sunlight tends to cause structural/performance degradation of photo-rechargeable systems, which poses a big obstacle to their practical use. To resolve this issue, dimensional changes of cSiPV–bQSSB were examined after being placed on a hot plate (set at different temperatures varying from 30 to 90 °C) for 3 h. cSiPV–bQSSB showed no significant change in its dimension and shape (i.e., neither swelling nor shrinkage) along with stable operation of a LED over the whole range of temperatures (Fig. S14A). Furthermore, the OCV of the fully charged SiPV-bQSSB was stably maintained at various temperatures (Fig. S14B), exhibiting its good thermal tolerance.
The output power of PVs tends to fluctuate or be cut off under cloudy conditions. As shown in Fig. 4E, the output power generated solely by the cSiPV module was affected by sunlight illumination. By contrast, cSiPV–bQSSB provided a stable output power regardless of the weather conditions, indicating the viability of the bQSSB as a coupled power source. The galvanostatic-discharge behavior of cSiPV–bQSSB was compared with that of the bQSSB alone (Fig. 4F) at a fast discharge current density (2.0C) under sunlight illumination. The bQSSB alone was rapidly discharged to 3.0 V in 13 min, but cSiPV–bQSSB maintained its voltage with only a negligible decline. This result demonstrates that the energy discharged from the bQSSB of cSiPV–bQSSB is simultaneously refueled by the energy generated by the cSiPV module.

To explore the feasibility of cSiPV–bQSSB as a voltage-tunable, photo-rechargeable power source, it was combined with various electronic devices that required different operating conditions. In the first example, a cSiPV–bQSSB system (length (L) × width (W) × thickness (T) = 4.0 cm × 3.0 cm × 0.1 cm) was used as a power source of a portable GPS (L × W × T = 4.0 cm × 4.0 cm × 0.5 cm). A portable GPS generally consumes a large amount of energy under high current conditions for position-tracking and data transmission, so its power source should be frequently recharged to secure stable operation. For this reason, conventional electrical charging by a static power supply is not suitable for portable GPS applications, and an alternative power source is required. Driven by its compact and slim dimension, cSiPV–bQSSB was seamlessly unitized with the portable GPS, producing a power source-installed portable GPS (Fig. 5A and S15). The operating voltage (5.4 V) of cSiPV–bQSSB was designed to exceed the working voltage (3.2 V) of the GPS, thereby enabling a reliable energy supply to the GPS. Under sunlight illumination, the cSiPV–bQSSB-installed portable GPS successfully traced the movement pathways of a user and stably transmitted the collected information to a mobile phone (Fig. 5B). In addition, the voltage of cSiPV–bQSSB repeatedly recovered to its fully charged state during the GPS operation, confirming the sustainability of the cSiPV module-driven energy supply.

In the second example, cSiPV–bQSSB (L × W × T = 3.0 cm × 2.0 cm × 0.1 cm; operating voltage based on Vend-of charge of the bQSSB = 2.7 V) was directly combined with a LED (working voltage = 1.5 V), and its operation outside a building was monitored over time. cSiPV–bQSSB ceaselessly powered the LED during the daytime and even at night (Fig. 5C and Movie S1). Furthermore, the LED continuously operated over one week without conventional external electrical charging along with little dependence on the weather conditions (Fig. 5D), highlighting the long-term activity of cSiPV–bQSSB. These examples demonstrate the customizability of the cSiPV–bQSSB to meet the different operating requirements of various application devices.

We presented cSiPV–bQSSB as a voltage-tunable portable power supply. The operating voltages of the cSiPV module (Vmax) and bQSSB (Vend-of charge) were varied and elaborately matched to enlarge the voltage window of cSiPV–bQSSB. The photo-charge/galvanostatic-discharge performance was enhanced by the facilitated electrochemical kinetics and optimized architecture of the individual power sources. Owing to its structural uniqueness and electrochemical superiority, cSiPV–bQSSB provided a wide voltage window (2.7–13.5 V), high overall efficiency (10.2%), and stable photo-rechargeable cycling performance. In addition, simple/compact cSiPV–bQSSB featuring a customized voltage can be seamlessly unitized with various portable electronic devices that require different operating conditions. Powered by cSiPV–bQSSB, electronic devices such as GPSs and LEDs were continuously operated over an exceptionally long-time period throughout the day and night, and under variable weather conditions, which is difficult to achieve with the sole use of conventional PVs or batteries.cSiPV–bQSSB holds great promise as a new user-customized power source platform for the upcoming smart/ubiquitous electronics era.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the Basic Science Research Program (2017M1A2A2087812, 2019R1A2C2086602, and 2018R1A2A1A05019733), and Wearable Platform Materials Technology Center (2016R1A5A1009926) through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant by the Korean Government (MSIT). This work was also supported by the New Renewable Energy Core Technology Development Project of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) granted financial resource from the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy, Republic of Korea (No. 20183010013900).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fig. S1–S15, Table S1–S2, and Movie S1. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta04843g
‡ These authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020