 DOI: 10.1039/C7EE00844A
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1610-1620


Yongxi
Li
,

Lian
Zhong
,

Bhoj
Gautam
,

Hai-Jun
Bin
,

Jiu-Dong
Lin
,

Fu-Peng
Wu
,

Zhanjun
Zhang
,

Zuo-Quan
Jiang
*,

Zhi-Guo
Zhang
*,

Kenan
Gundogdu
*,

Yongfang
Li
 and 

Liang-Sheng
Liao
*

Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices, Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China. E-mail: lsliao@suda.edu.cn; zqjiang@suda.edu.cn

Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: zgzhangwhu@iccas.ac.cn

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China

Department of Physics and Organic and Carbon Electronics Laboratory, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695, USA. E-mail: kgundog@ncsu.edu

Laboratory of Advanced Optoelectronic Materials, College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China

Received
27th March 2017
, Accepted 31st May 2017
First published on 31st May 2017
Low-bandgap polymers/molecules are an interesting family of semiconductor materials, and have enabled many recent exciting breakthroughs in the field of organic electronics, especially for organic photovoltaics (OPVs). Here, such a low-bandgap (1.43 eV) non-fullerene electron acceptor (BT-IC) bearing a fused 7-heterocyclic ring with absorption edge extending to the near-infrared (NIR) region was specially designed and synthesized. Benefitted from its NIR light harvesting, high performance OPVs were fabricated with medium bandgap polymers (J61 and J71) as donors, showing power conversion efficiencies of 9.6% with J61 and 10.5% with J71 along with extremely low energy loss (0.56 eV for J61 and 0.53 eV for J71). Interestingly, femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy studies on both systems show that efficient charge generation was observed despite the fact that the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO)–HOMO offset (ΔEH) in the blends was as low as 0.10 eV, suggesting that such a small ΔEH is not a crucial limitation in realizing high performance of NIR non-fullerene based OPVs. Our results indicated that BT-IC is an interesting NIR non-fullerene acceptor with great potential application in tandem/multi-junction, semitransparent, and ternary blend solar cells.

Near-infrared (NIR) conjugated materials are of interest in organic photovoltaics (OPV) due to their impressive advantages such as strong absorption in the NIR region, and hence find high potential application in semitransparent and tandem solar cells. However, the existence of a significant driving force in these solar cells creates a problematic trade-off between the open-circuit voltage (Voc) and short-circuit current density (Jsc). Here, such a low-bandgap (1.43 eV) non-fullerene electron acceptor (BT-IC) was specially designed, showing a high power conversion efficiency of 10.5% along with simultaneously high Voc of 0.90 eV and Jsc of 17.5 mA cm−2 when blend with a medium bandgap polymer donor (J71). Our results demonstrate that the BT-IC acceptor is a unique NIR non-fullerene acceptor with potential application in tandem/multijunction, semitransparent (or visibly transparent), and ternary blend solar cells, and hence it deserves further attention.


Near-infrared (NIR) organic semiconductors have attracted extensive interest due to their great contribution to enable many exciting breakthroughs in the field of organic electronics. In particular, NIR active molecules with a typical optical bandgap (Eg) smaller than 1.5 eV are beneficial for organic photovoltaics (OPVs) for the following reasons: (1) sunlight possesses about 50% of its radiation intensity in the NIR region. Thus, the development of organic semiconductors with Eg from 1.2 eV (absorption onset ∼1000 nm) to 1.5 eV (absorption onset ∼825 nm) is desirable. (2) Some interesting physical properties have been found in these materials, such as a stronger dipole moment and a lower exciton binding energy. (3) They can be used in semitransparent OPVs that strongly absorb light from the NIR region while allowing most of the visible light to pass through. (4) These materials are particularly important for tandem solar cells.

Conjugated non-fullerene (NF) acceptor based polymer solar cells (PSCs) have been presenting very promising prospects because they are able to pave the way for using new acceptors with light absorption ability. This means that not only polymer donors but conjugated acceptors can also act as absorbers, and conjugated polymers with UV-Vis absorption can be utilized especially when the acceptors are able to absorb NIR radiation. In the NF acceptor design, the approach of extending the effective conjugation of NF acceptors is undoubtedly a rational way to shift the absorption edge toward the long wavelength. Recently, Zhan et al. have developed a series of interesting ladder-type materials as NF acceptors. For this kind of molecular structure, the enlarged fused rings ensure good conjugated planarity, which is beneficial for carrier transport. In several cases, the performances of NF acceptor based solar cells have outperformed those of the fullerene-based control devices. Very recently, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of a state-of-the-art NF acceptor based solar cell has already approached 12%. This incredibly rapid progress is realized mainly due to the development of versatile NF acceptors. However, most of the high-performance NF acceptors reported so far still show a high absorption coefficient in the UV-Vis range. NF acceptors with absorption cut-off in the NIR region are rarely reported although they are worth being explored to enlarge the absorption region.
Besides extending the conjugation, ladder-type NF acceptors can also be modified to achieve NIR absorption by changing the constituent units, re-organizing their alignment and using stronger substituents to strengthen the intramolecular charge transfer (CT) effect. But one great challenge in developing highly efficient NIR acceptors is to deal with the dilemma between the driving force and the voltage loss, which should also be taken into account especially when they have a narrow bandgap. According to molecular engineering, to realize a high open circuit voltage (Voc) it requires that the acceptor must have a higher lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy level. Meanwhile, a higher highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy level to reduce the Eg value is also needed. However, this elevated HOMO level of the acceptor will simultaneously diminish the energy offset of the HOMOs between the polymer and acceptor, which will reduce the driving force and thus affect photo-induced charge separation (Fig. 1a). In this regard, how to make a compromise between these features is the pivotal issue in designing highly efficient NIR acceptors, but one affirmative trade-off would be to elevate the HOMO rather than to lower the LUMO which is preferred for the goal of reducing Eg, because this method can still maintain a high Voc.
Herein, we present a new rigid ladder-type NIR acceptor (BT-IC, Fig. 1b) by using a benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′] dithiophene (BDT) unit as the core and two cyclopenta[2,1-b;3,4-b′]dithiophene (CPDT) units to form a fused 7-heterocyclic ring. On the BDT unit, a strong electron-donating group, 2-ethylhexyloxy, is also introduced to further reduce Eg by raising the HOMO level without sacrificing Voc. Absorption spectroscopy reveals that BT-IC has a low optical bandgap (1.43 eV), with the absorption edge extending to the NIR region (870 nm). As this molecule was paired with two medium gap polymers J61 and J71, the PCE of solar cells can reach up to 9.6% along with a high Voc of 0.87 V for J61, and 10.5% along with a high Voc of 0.90 V for J71. Interestingly, it is also found that the J61 or the J71/BT-IC system achieves such high PCEs despite the fact that the HOMO–HOMO offset (ΔEH) as low as 0.10 eV, which is much smaller than the empirical threshold value of 0.3 eV to make efficient charge separation. However, transient absorption measurements indicate that the small ΔEH is not a limiting factor in the charge separation process. These results open a new avenue for exploring highly efficient NIR semiconductors in PSCs.

The chemical structures of J61, J71 and BT-IC are shown in Fig. 1b. The synthetic route for BT-IC is shown in Scheme S1 in the ESI. Compound 1 was obtained via a Stille coupling reaction between BDT-Sn and 2-bromothiophene-3-carboxylate using Pd2(dba)3 as the catalyst. After a nucleophilic addition reaction with p-hexylphenyllithium and an acid-promoted intramolecular annulation, compound 3 could be isolated in 63% yield. The mixture was further reacted with phosphorus oxychloride to afford compound 4 in 75% yield. Finally, subsequent Knoevenagel condensation between compound 4 and 3-(dicyanomethylidene)indan-1-one afforded the target molecule BT-IC in 85% yield. The chemical structure of each new compound is fully characterized by 1H NMR, 13C NMR, and MALDI-TOF MS. BT-IC was highly soluble in general organic solvents, such as dichloromethane (DCM), chloroform and ortho-dichlorobenzene (o-DCB) at room temperature. Instead of these halogenated solvents, BT-IC also showed relatively good solubility in environmentally friendly solvents, such as o-xylene and 1,2,4-trimethylbenzene at room temperature. Since large amounts of solvents will be used in the roll-to-roll printing of large-area modules, it is imperative to search for new non-fullerene acceptor materials with good solubility in environmentally friendly solvents. Thermal properties were investigated by thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) performed under nitrogen. BT-IC showed good thermal stability with a decomposition temperature (5% weight loss) of 312 °C (Fig. S1 in the ESI). Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) was also used to analyze the thermal properties. Fig. S2 (ESI) shows that a crystallization peak can be observed at 125 °C for BT-IC. Grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXD) measurement was also carried out to understand the packing and aggregation of BT-IC. The high crystalline order of BT-IC can be seen in Fig. S3 (ESI). The out-of-plane line cut is dominated by a broad (100) diffraction peak, which, in fact, is composed of multiple peaks. By peak splitting, it is seen that one broad peak is located at 0.43 A−1 with a crystal coherence length of 0.109 in full width at half maximum. One dominant scattering is seen at 0.67 A−1, with a crystal coherence length of 0.041 in the in-plane diffraction profile, which comes from the (001) packing of the crystal. The π-stacking is seen at in-plane scattering at 1.66 A−1, corresponding to a distance of 3.8 Å. The azimuthal angle spreading of (100) and π-stacking peaks indicate that the molecule takes a dominant edge-on orientation.

As shown in Fig. 2a, BT-IC exhibits a strong absorption band at 550–800 nm in dilute DCM solution with the absorption peak located at 718 nm. As compared to the absorption of BT-IC in DCM, BT-IC in thin films exhibits a marked red-shift (∼50 nm) in maximum absorption. This remarkable bathochromic absorption in the solid state may correlate with its J-aggregates between the big aromatic moieties. Moreover, the maximum extinction coefficient of the BT-IC in DCM is 1.27 × 105 M−1 cm−1 (Fig. S4 in the ESI), which is comparable to that of “IT-IC” (1.3 × 105 M−1 cm−1) reported by Zhan and co-workers. Furthermore, Eg of BT-IC extracted from its absorption band edge is estimated to be 1.43 eV, which is 0.16 eV smaller than that of IT-IC (1.59 eV). The smaller Eg can be attributed to the increased internal charge transfer by the introduction of a stronger electron-donating moiety of the alkoxy group substituted BDT unit in this A–D–A (acceptor–donor–acceptor) type electron acceptor. Besides, the absorption edges of J61 and J71 are located at 650 nm and 632 nm, which clearly give satisfactory absorption in the range of 350–870 nm for both J61:BT-IC and J71:BT-IC blend films (Fig. S5 in the ESI). This complementary absorption is desirable for enhancing light harvest so as to increase Jsc of the solar cells.
The frontier molecular orbital (FMO) energy levels of J61, J71, BT-IC and IT-IC were measured using cyclic voltammetry (CV) on films with ferrocene as the reference (shown in Fig. 2b). The HOMO and LUMO levels were deduced from the onsets of the oxidation and reduction peaks, which were measured four times for each material. The EHOMO and ELUMO levels of J61, J71, BT-IC and IT-IC were calculated to be −5.27 (±0.02)/−3.21 (±0.02) eV, −5.35 (±0.02)/−3.18 (±0.01) eV, −5.43 (±0.02)/−3.85 (±0.02) eV and −5.60 (±0.01)/−3.89 (±0.02) eV according to the equation: EHOMO/LUMO = −e(Eox/red − Eferrocene + 4.80) (eV). The Eferrocene value in our case is 0.51 eV (Fig. S6 in the ESI) and the error is the standard deviation from the four measurements. Cyclic voltammetry studies showed that BT-IC exhibited a higher HOMO level but a similar LUMO level as compared with IT-IC, implying that the application of this new material as an acceptor in PSCs will absorb more light in the NIR region without sacrificing Voc. Fig. 2d shows the energy diagram relative to the vacuum level. It should be noted that both of the energy offsets between the polymer donor (J61 or J71) and the NF acceptor (BT-IC) in LUMO levels are ∼0.70 eV, which leads to sufficiently efficient electron transfer from the donor to the acceptor. However, in this case, both of the energy offsets of HOMO levels (ΔEH) are only ∼0.10 eV, which is much smaller than the empirical threshold of 0.3 eV for effective exciton dissociation to overcome the binding energy of the excitons. In order to further verify the results obtained from CV measurements, we also used ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) to concisely demonstrate the molecular energy levels in the solid state. As shown in Fig. 2c and Fig. S7 in the ESI, the ionization potentials of J61, J71 and BT-IC were calculated to be −5.20 eV, −5.23 eV and −5.45 eV, respectively. Although there is a small difference between the HOMO levels determined from the CV and UPS measurements, the trends are similar. Interestingly, although the J61 (or J71):BT-IC system has such a small ΔEH, hole transfer from the acceptor (BT-IC) to the donor (J61 or J71) is highly efficient, as can be seen from the photoluminescence (PL) quenching experiments and the transient absorption measurements, which will be discussed in more detail below.
Density functional theory (DFT) calculations at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level were performed to gain a deeper insight into the geometric and electronic properties of BT-IC. As shown in Fig. S8 (ESI), we can clearly see that the HOMO/LUMO wave functions of both molecules are well delocalized over the rigid backbone. This high degree of the HOMO/LUMO delocalization is contributed by the highly coplanar backbone. The calculation predicted a HOMO level of −5.35 eV for BT-IC, slightly higher than that of IT-IC (−5.48 eV), which is similar to the value observed in the CV measurement. Meanwhile, the optimized geometries were also investigated. BT-IC showed a highly planar structure with an extremely small torsion angle of 0.4°. This highly planar geometry would facilitate π-electron delocalization and enhance charge mobility.
To evaluate the photovoltaic performance of BT-IC, polymer J61 was initially selected as a donor material. PSCs with a device configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/J61:BT-IC/PDINO/Al were fabricated from chloroform solution, where PDINO was used as a cathode buffer layer (perylenediimide functionalized with amino N-oxide). The J–V curves of the active layer at different annealing temperatures are shown in Fig. S9 and Table S1 (ESI). It is noted that the thermal annealing process played an important role in improving the device performance. The optimized devices were spin-coated from chloroform solution with a 1:1 weight ratio of donor/acceptor (D/A) followed by thermal annealing at 120 °C for 10 min (Fig. 3a and Table 1). The device gave the best performance of 9.6% with a Voc of 0.87 V, a Jsc of 16.35 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 67.1%. Very recently, our group developed another medium bandgap polymer J71. The trialkylsilyl substituents instead of alkyl side chains make the HOMO energy level of J71 even deeper relative to that of J61. This will be beneficial for PSC devices to further improve Voc. In order to verify whether this new NIR acceptor BT-IC can work well with other polymer systems, we also investigated the PSC performance of the J71:BT-IC blend. The optimized devices with a 1:1.5 weight ratio of D/A gave the best performance of 10.5% with a Voc of 0.90 V, a Jsc of 17.75 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 65.7%. Good reproducibility is also demonstrated; the efficiency histogram in Fig. S10 (ESI) shows that >70% of the devices (among 20 devices) have PCEs higher than 9.3% for J61:BT-IC and 10.2% for J71:BT-IC. For the J71:BT-IC devices, one can find that both Jsc and Voc as high as 17.75 mA cm−2 and 0.90 V were obtained simultaneously. As is well known, the trade-off feature between Jsc and Voc existed in PSCs constructed with low bandgap polymers. In general, one method to maximize Voc is to reduce the energy loss (Eloss) which happens during the dissociation of excitons and the generation of free charge carriers. Generally, Eloss is defined by Eloss = Eg − qVoc, in which Eg refers to the optical bandgap determined by the smaller value of donor or acceptor materials. A small Eloss often promises an additional increase of Voc. For fullerene acceptor based PSCs, this value is around 0.8–1.3 eV, which is much larger than that of inorganic/inorganic–organic hybrid solar cells (0.3–0.5 eV) and such large Eloss will limit the performance of PSCs. In the present PSCs based on J71:BT-IC or J61:BT-IC, Eg refers to the onset absorption of BT-IC (1.43 eV). Thus, the values of Eloss are successfully reduced to 0.56 eV for the J61:BT-IC based device and to 0.53 eV for the J71:BT-IC based device, without significantly sacrificing the photocurrent generation. Notably, Eloss of 0.53 eV in J71:BT-IC devices demonstrated in this work is among the smallest value reported so far for PSCs with PCEs higher than 6%. This unique property is perhaps because the electronic orbitals of BT-IC much more closely overlap with neighboring molecules in the solid state. More importantly, such a small Eloss is achieved even with a narrow Eg of 1.43 eV. The external quantum efficiencies (EQEs) of the optimized devices are presented in Fig. 3b. The high quantum yields between 50 and 70% are achieved in a broad range of 450–870 nm for both J61:BT-IC and J71:BT-IC systems. The calculated Jsc integrated from the EQE were 15.54 and 17.42 mA cm−2, which are in good agreement with that measured from the J–V curves. The strong solar spectral response of the device in the range of 600–870 nm makes BT-IC a good candidate for application in semi-transparent and tandem solar cells. The unnormalized UV-Vis absorption spectra are provided in Fig. S5 in the ESI; it can be seen that the J71:BT-IC (1:1.5, w/w) blend shows a stronger absorption in a broad range relative to that of the J61:BT-IC (1:1.5, w/w) blend, which may account for its higher EQE and Jsc values.
Active layer

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCEave, (%)
PCEmax (%)

a Device fabricated with CF without any additive.
b Reported values are average PCEs from 20 devices.

J61:BT-IC
0.87
16.35
67.1
9.37
9.56
J71:BT-IC
0.90
17.75
65.7
10.28
10.46
Tapping-mode atomic force microscopy (AFM) was performed in order to gain a deeper insight into the nature of the morphology of the different blend films. The morphologies of the J61:BT-IC (1:1, w/w) and J71:BT-IC (1:1.5, w/w) blends are shown in Fig. S11 in the ESI. The root-mean-square (RMS) roughness values of the blend films are 0.66 nm for the J61:BT-IC blend and 0.37 nm for the J71:BT-IC blend. The relatively smooth surface suggests good miscibility of the new acceptor with different polymer donors within the films, which is essential for practical applications. Moreover, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was also used to investigate the optimized device morphological property. As shown in Fig. S11 (ESI), a bicontinuous interpenetrating network was observed in the J71:BT-IC (1:1.5, w/w) blends, while for the J61:BT-IC (1:1, w/w) blend, we found slightly larger domains (30 nm). The larger domain can result in large barriers to hamper exciton dissociation and carrier collection, thus resulting in a lower Jsc value.
The balanced hole/electron mobility is another important parameter to obtain high performance in PSCs. The hole and electron mobilities were measured by the space charge limited current (SCLC) method using hole/electron-only devices with the device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/J61 (or J71): BT-IC/Au and ITO/PDINO/J61 (or J71): BT-IC/PDINO/Al at the optimized blend ratio. As shown in Fig. S13–S16 in the ESI, for the J61:BT-IC (1:1, w/w) blend film, the hole and electron mobilities are estimated as 6.15 × 10−4 and 4.59 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 respectively, and for the J71:BT-IC (1:1.5, w/w) blend film, the hole and electron mobilities are estimated as 3.53 × 10−4 and 7.60 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. The high and balanced hole and electron mobilities play a crucial role in reducing bimolecular recombination. As a result, high values of Jsc and FF can thus be obtained. The electron mobilities in neat BT-IC films were also measured (see Fig. S17, ESI). The electron mobility of BT-IC was 7.0 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, and this high mobility supported the design hypothesis that the long effective conjugation length and good planarity of large fused-ring systems will improve charge transport.
Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) was recorded to confirm the efficient exciton dissociation and charge transfer behaviour in the blends. The PL spectra of neat J61, J71, the BT-IC film and the blend films (J61:BT-IC and J71:BT-IC) are shown in Fig. 4, where excitation energies of 2.2 eV for J61 and J71, and 1.7 eV for BT-IC were selected for the selective excitation of donor polymers and BT-IC excitation. A comparison of the PL spectra of the blend film with neat films showed that the PL emission peaks of J61 and J71 were almost quenched (by over 97%) when excited at an energy of 2.2 eV, indicating the efficient electron transfer from the polymer donors to the electron acceptor (BT-IC) for the excitons generated in the donor phase. Moreover, we also studied the hole transfer from BT-IC to J61 or J71, by measuring the PL after selectively exciting BT-IC using 1.7 eV photons. Compared with the PL of the neat BT-IC film, the PL emission peak of BT-IC was quenched up to 92% in blend films. Considering that the donor (J61 or J71) and acceptor (BT-IC) can be well mixed with each other in the blend film, which has been confirmed by the morphology study, the completed PL quenching of BT-IC emission is attributed to efficient hole transfer from the acceptor (BT-IC) to donor (J61 or J71), although the HOMO difference between the donor and acceptor is only 0.10 eV. This finding is consistent with our previous result, but it is achieved at an even smaller ΔEH. Besides, time resolved photoluminescence measurements were also performed on neat and blended films (Fig. 4e and f) using time correlated single photon counting (TRSPC). A longer lifetime was observed in neat J71 compared to the neat J61 film (Fig. S18 in the ESI). The average lifetime (τave) values, extracted by a double exponential fit convoluted with the instrument response function are 979 ps, 1107 ps and 248 ps for J61, J71 and BT-IC neat films respectively. As is known, the lifetime of singlet excitons in neat samples determines the diffusion length and hence has a direct impact on photocurrent generation. Our results suggest that the longer intrinsic lifetime of donor polymer J71 results in the efficient exciton diffusion to the interface and is consistent with the higher Jsc value obtained from the J71:BT-IC blend. Moreover, the exciton lifetimes of both blend films were clearly quenched as compared to neat films within the instrument response (60 ps), also suggesting both efficient hole and electron transfer between the donor and acceptor.
In order to track the charge generation dynamics, we performed femtosecond Transient Absorption Spectroscopy (TAS) in both J61:BT-IC and J71:BT-IC systems. In these experiments, 1.62 eV pump photons were used in order to selectively excite the acceptor, and the resultant dynamics were monitored by measuring the differential transmission of broad band probe pulses in the IR and the visible region of the spectra at different time delays after the excitation. Fig. 5 shows the spectra and the dynamics of the J61:BT-IC and J71:BT-IC blends in the visible range with BT-IC excitation (Eex = 1.62 eV) and the TAS spectra of J61, J71 and BT-IC neat films are shown in Fig. S19–S21 in the ESI. Increased transmission with a vibronic structure in the absorption spectra is due to the bleaching of the ground state (GSB). The negative signal (decreased transmission) in the spectra is due to the excited state absorption of photo-generated charges or excitons in the film. Interestingly, we found the ground state bleaching signal from the donor polymer in the blended film (GSB signal above 2 eV is from the donor polymer) at this (1.62 eV) excitation where only BT-IC is excited. Fig. 5c shows the evolution of the GSB signal of J61 and BT-IC in the blend. The characteristic decay time constants for the 1.66 eV peak are 1.25 ps (75%) and 73 ps (25%) with double exponential fittings. The exponential fits to the 2.41 eV peak resulted in a time constant of 1.39 ps for the rise and a biphasic decay with 260 ps (49%) and 6.4 ns (51%) time constants. The rise dynamics of J61 GSB (2.41 eV) closely matches with the fast component of BT-IC GSB (1.66 eV) dynamics. We also observed a similar correlation of the decay of BT-IC GSB with the rise of J71 GSB in the J71:BT-IC blend (Fig. 5d). This growth of the GSB signal of both donor polymers (in the first 25 ps) with acceptor excitation is due to the efficient hole transfer from BT-IC to the donor polymer in both blends. Although ΔEH between the polymer and acceptor is only 0.10 eV, our ultrafast measurement shows that hole transfer is efficient in both blend films.
The exciton and polaron dynamics were also investigated by performing TAS in the NIR probe range from 0.8 eV to 1.6 eV. Fig. 6a–c display the TAS of neat BT-IC, J61:BT-IC (1:1, w/w) and J71:BT-IC (1:1.5, w/w) films at different time delays with BT-IC excitation (Eex = 1.62 eV). The strong negative band centred at 1.2 eV is due to the excited state absorption of BT-IC singlet excitons. The absorption band ∼1.35 eV (which is absent in neat BT-IC) is due to the absorption of polarons in charge separated states (CS). These assignments of the exciton and polaron PIA spectral features in the NIR region are consistent with previous polymer blend TAS. In addition, we monitored the positive polaron (hole) band dynamics on both blends with selective acceptor excitation (1.62 eV). Fig. 6d shows the time evolution of polarons in two blended films. The rise time constant from the exponential fit is 1.54 ps, which is very similar to the one obtained from the visible range data (1.39 ps). The rise in the donor polaron signal in the first 25 ps in both blends is due to the efficient hole transfer from the acceptor to the donor and supports the conclusion from the visible range TAS data.
It should be noted that there have been several attempts to reduce the driving force by diminishing the LUMO–LUMO offset (ΔEL) in recent years. However, most of such material systems are inefficient since the inadequate driving force for electron transfer would often result in low quantum efficiency for charge generation. One recent example reported by Takimiya and co-workers exhibited a relatively high PCE of 8.9% along with PL quenching of 66%, despite the fact that ΔEL in the blend was extremely low (ΔEL = 0.12 eV). However, the charge separation was relatively slow (100 ps). Yan and co-workers also achieved an efficient organic solar cell with a negligible driving force (ΔEL = 0.08 eV), yet it still exhibited efficient and ultra-fast electron transfer. The PL quenching efficiency reached up to 87% with a low voltage loss of 0.61 V. Herein, we present a NIR non-fullerene electron acceptor. The energy level of the HOMO rather than the LUMO in this newly constructed system should be finely aligned to decrease the driving force while keeping the high quantum efficiency. Although ΔEH is only 0.10 eV, the PL quenching efficiency reached up to 92% and our ultrafast measurement shows that hole transfer is quite fast (<2 ps). A possible reason for this interesting phenomenon is that the larger conjugation length and rigid structure of BT-IC will decrease the exciton binding energy of charges in the CT state. This assumption is consistent with the results reported by Friend et al. They demonstrated that structural rigidity and suppressed torsion relaxation will result in more extended wave-functions and low reorganization and this will decrease the barrier for the formation of polarons and allow for efficient charge separation with minimal band offsets. As we prepare this manuscript, Hou et al. also reported a highly efficient solar cell with small ΔEH by tuning the HOMO levels of polymer donors. These examples with our results of small driving force could provide a new way to reduce the energy loss without sacrificing the charge separation, which is especially essential to develop highly efficient NIR solar cells. Notably, the above mentioned energy offset is estimated from the isolated donor and acceptor. And this method is considered to neglect the influence of exciton binding energy and other interfacial effects. The estimation of the energetics offset based on the excited state energy of the polymer/acceptor and the charge transfer (CT) state energy (ECT) of the blend will be more precise, because the influence of exciton binding energy and other interfacial effects can also be considered. Therefore, we also attempted to determine ECT of the blend films by means of the electroluminescence measurement. As shown in Fig. S22 in the ESI, it is very difficult to evaluate the ECT of the J71:BT-IC blend, because the excited states of the BT-IC and the ECT of the J71:BT-IC blend are energetically very close, and thus the energy offset is very small. This is consistent with our result of the small ΔEH in the J71:BT-IC system. More complex characterization such as NIR-sensitive EQE may be helpful to this study, which is ongoing in our group.

In summary, a novel NIR non-fullerene acceptor (BT-IC), featuring a large fused ring ladder-type structure was designed and synthesized for organic solar cells. The PSC device employing BT-IC as an acceptor paired with J61 as a donor exhibited a maximum PCE of 9.6% in a single junction solar cell, along with a high Voc of 0.87 V despite the fact that BT-IC had a narrow bandgap of 1.43 eV. Moreover, BT-IC also worked well with polymer J71, which showed the best PCE of 10.5%, along with a high Voc of 0.90 V. This was rarely reported in previous studies in NIR PSCs. Interestingly, although ΔEH in both J61:BT-IC and J71:BT-IC blends is as small as 0.10 eV, efficient charge generation is observed in femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy studies. This suggests that such a small ΔEH is not a primary limiting factor in the high performance of non-fullerene solar cells. Our results demonstrate that the BT-IC acceptor is a unique NIR non-fullerene acceptor with potential application in tandem/multijunction, semitransparent (or visibly transparent), and ternary blend solar cells, thus deserving further attention.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21504062, 21572152 and 91633301), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation Funded Project (2015M581853), and the Jiangsu Province Postdoctoral Science Foundation FundedProject (1501024B). Transient absorption spectroscopy and photoluminescence work at NCSU (B. G. and K. G.) was supported by the Office of Naval Research (ONR) grant N000141310526 P00002. We thank Prof. Feng Liu for GIXD measurements and Mr Bing Guo for TEM tests. Yongxi Li, Lian Zhong and Bhoj Gautam contributed equally to this work.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ee00844a
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017