 DOI: 10.1039/D1TC05228D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 3207-3216


Minglang
Li
,

Hui
Lin
*,

Benteng
Ma
,

Xin
Yu
,

Xiaoyang
Du
,

Gang
Yang
,

Caijun
Zheng
* and 

Silu
Tao
*

School of Optoelectronic Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC), Chengdu 610054, China. E-mail: lhui@uestc.edu.cn; zhengcaijun@uestc.edu.cn; silutao@uestc.edu.cn

Received
29th October 2021
, Accepted 20th January 2022
First published on 21st January 2022
For optimizing the performance of photovoltaic devices, fabricating ternary organic solar cells (TOSCs) is a common strategy. However, the hybrid system involves complex intermolecular interactions, which poses a challenge to the choice of the third component. Herein, we report a TOSC based on D18-Cl:N3, combined with a high-efficiency small molecule non-fullerene Y6, which has similar chemical structures to the host acceptor, to form an acceptor alloy. By forming an alloy state in the blend film, the performance of the device is enhanced and the stability of the device is improved. After optimizing the mass ratio of the third component, it was found that the performance was best when 50 wt% Y6 was added. After balancing the carrier mobility, reducing energy loss, and improving the film morphology, the best power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 17.74% is obtained. In addition, The alloy state of the two non-fullerene acceptors N3 and Y6 also effectively improves the heat resistance and light radiation stability of the device. Our results prove that choosing non-fullerene acceptors with similar chemical structures and electrical properties to form an alloyed acceptor is a reasonable and reliable ternary strategy that can further improve the performance of organic solar cells.

In today's diversified field of solar cells, organic solar cells (OSCs) that can be prepared simply by a solution method have attracted attention because of the significant merits of lightweight, low cost, flexibility, and translucent preparation. In recent years, with the emergence of novel high-efficiency organic photovoltaic materials (such as D18, Y6, etc.), the performance of OSCs has been rapidly optimized. To further enhance the performance of the devices in terms of efficiency and stability, the ternary strategy of preparing ternary organic solar cells (TOSCs) by introducing an extra donor or acceptor into the host binary system has been widely used and proved to be reasonable and effective. According to the different intermolecular interactions among the three components in the blend system, the mechanism of performance enhancement of devices can be described by the following models: parallel, charge transfer, energy transfer and alloy models, and there are often more than two model mechanisms that work together in a TOSC, which presents challenges in the choice of the third components. This is not only because it is necessary to carefully choose the appropriate mechanism model to improve the performance of a certain material system, but more importantly, the random introduction of the third component may destroy the charge transport channels and fine film morphology of the original binary system. In response to these issues, the ternary alloy model that uses the additional component and the host component to form an alloy state can be an effective solution, which can establish independent and enhanced charge transport channels and improve device stability through new optimized crystal phases.

In literature, two acceptors that have similarities in chemical structures, accounting for favorable compatibility, prefer to form an acceptor alloy. For devices involving alloyed acceptors, its properties, mainly open-circuit voltage (VOC), can be continuously tuned by varying the mixing mass ratio of acceptors, which provides advantages in simultaneously increasing the VOC and other key parameters of the devices. Moreover, reports are proving that the formation of alloys also helps to build a highly ordered molecular orientation and a better molecular crystallinity of the blended films, which contributes to enhancing charge separation and transport as well as improving device stability. Therefore, compared to other TOSC models, the alloy model can present unique advantages in morphological optimization, thereby raising the possibility of smoothly fabricating ternary devices with higher efficiency and better stability. However, previous studies on acceptor alloys prefer to focus on fullerenes or between non-fullerene acceptors and fullerenes. Their device performance is often limited by the low absorption and limited adjustable energy levels of fullerene derivatives. Due to the difference in molecular structures, there is still little research on acceptor alloys constructed from non-fullerene small molecule acceptors. Thus there are still few reports of high-efficiency TOSCs based on non-fullerene acceptor alloys, especially for Y6-based systems.
Herein, we choose the novel conjugated polymer D18-Cl as the host donor of the system and select high-efficiency small molecule non-fullerene N3 and Y6 together as acceptors to fabricate high-efficiency TOSCs based on an alloy model. The recently born Y6 and its derivatives are widely regarded as highly effective non-fullerene small molecule acceptors. Compared to Y6, N3 behaves optimized solubility, electronic and morphological attributes due to its extra branched alkyl chains. There have been many reports of N3 or Y6 being used in ternary organic solar cells, but there is still a lack of using them both for fabricating TOSCs, which indicates the potential of this study. According to characterization studies, the two non-fullerene acceptors tend to form an alloy state, which promotes the exciton dissociation, charge collection and optimizes the film morphology. After optimizing the mass ratio of the third component, it is found that when 50 wt% Y6 is added, the best device performance is achieved. The enhanced charge transport channel enables the current of the device to reach 27.89 mA cm−2, and the optimized molecular crystallinity and phase separation in the active layer increases the fill factor to 74.31%. As result, the best device efficiency reaches 17.74%. Moreover, the alloy state formed by the two non-fullerene acceptors Y6 and N3 also effectively improves the heat resistance and light radiation stability of the device. Our results suggest that it is a reasonable and reliable ternary strategy to select non-fullerene acceptors with similar chemical structures and electrical characteristics to compose an alloyed acceptor, which helps to further improve the performance of OSCs.

The experimental details are shown in the ESI.


The molecular structures of D18-Cl, Y6, and N3 are shown in Fig. 1a. The corresponding energy level structures and normalized absorption spectra are depicted in Fig. 1b and c, respectively. This study aims to select these three materials to build a TOSC based on the alloy model between the two acceptors. Unlike other ternary models, the alloy model does not form its independent carrier transport channel by each component but is formed by two components in the active layer with similar structures and electrical properties (here, N3 and Y6) with the unified highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy level as exhibited in Fig. 1b, which means that the photogenerated electrons are transported through the channels formed by the acceptor alloy. Besides, due to the similar solar absorption characteristics of N3 and Y6, the absorption wavelength range of the two absorption spectra is the same, as shown in Fig. 1c, indicating that the improvement of device performance does not come from the complementary of the absorption spectra between the components. Therefore, we supposed that the formation of alloy state of N3:Y6 promotes the exciton dissociation of the system, charge collection, and optimizes the morphology of the blend film. These characteristics directly increase the photocurrent, VOC, and fill factor (FF) of the devices and thus improve the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of OSCs.

OSC devices were fabricated based on a conventional structure of indium-tin-oxide (ITO)/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/PDINN/Ag (the details of the fabrication process can be found in the ESI). The typical current density–voltage (J–V) curves of two binary OSCs and the optimal TOSC under AM 1.5G simulated solar light with 100 mW cm−2 intensity are depicted in Fig. 2a, and the corresponding key parameters are summarized in Table 1. For the binary solar cells, the D18-Cl:N3-based device shows a PCE of 16.66%, a VOC of 0.856 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 26.90 mA cm−2, and an FF of 71.35%, while the D18-Cl:Y6-based device shows a PCE of 16.99%, a VOC of 0.872 V, a JSC of 26.38 mA cm−2, and an FF of 70.73%. The latter cell has higher VOC with lower JSC and FF while the former is conversely, suggesting the potentiality of the ternary strategy to comprehensively optimize the device performance with balanced parameters. For the TOSCs with 50 wt% Y6, the optimal device shows a PCE of 17.74%, a VOC of 0.866 V, a JSC of 27.89 mA cm−2, and an FF of 74.31%. As expected, ternary devices have higher JSC, FF, and thus higher PCE than those of the binary ones. It should be noted that, as exhibited in Table 1, the VOC of the ternary device is between the binary ones and changes with the ratio of the two acceptors. For this phenomenon in which VOC is approximately linearly dependent on the mass ratio of the acceptors, as depicted in Fig. S1 (ESI), we speculate that an alloy state is formed between the two acceptors N3 and Y6, which avoids energy-level pinning and can collect electrons more effectively.
Y6 (%)

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a The integrated JSC from the EQE spectra.
b The best PCE.
c Average PCE from 10 devices.

0
0.856
26.90 (26.12)
71.35
16.66 (16.37 ± 0.08)
30
0.863
27.07 (26.55)
71.81
17.11 (16.77 ± 0.10)
50
0.866
27.89 (27.55)
74.31
17.74 (17.49 ± 0.04)
100
0.872
26.38 (26.27)
70.73
16.99 (16.24 ± 0.14)
In OSCs, the VOC of the device is directly defined by the energy bandgap and energy loss of the blend system, which can be calculated by the following formula:
where
e represents the charge of an electron. According to the alloy model theory, the addition of Y6 will change the LUMO level of the alloyed acceptor, and its value can be estimated by the following formula:
where
E represents the LUMO level value of each acceptor, Ne is the quasi-frontier orbital density of each acceptor, f represents the mass ratio of each acceptor.

Combined with the definition of VOC, the relationship between the VOC of binary and ternary devices can be given by the following equation:
where
VOC1 and VOC2 are the VOC of binary devices based on N3 and Y6, respectively. Furthermore, when the Ne of the two materials is close, the above two formulas can be approximated and simplified as:
ELUMO Alloy = f1·E1 + f2·E2
VOC Tenary = f1·VOC1 + f2·VOC2
which explains why
VOC changes approximately linearly with the change in the mass ratio of the two acceptors. According to the simplified LUMO level formula, we can estimate the LUMO level of the alloyed acceptor based on the mass ratio of N3 and Y6 and then estimate the energy level band gap and energy loss of the corresponding blend system. The estimated values are summarized in Table S1 (ESI). As shown in the table, the LUMO level of the blend system gradually moves up as the proportion of Y6 increases, and the bandgap and energy loss are also lifted accordingly. The N3-based binary device has the lowest energy loss (0.294 eV) and therefore has relatively high JSC and FF, but it has the lowest efficiency due to the lowest VOC. In contrast, the Y6-based binary device has the highest energy loss (0.508 eV), corresponding to lower JSC and FF, but higher VOC makes the PCE of the device relatively high. Compared with binary devices, the optimal ternary device has achieved a good balance between VOC and energy loss (0.394 eV at the optimal mass ratio), which not only maintains a higher VOC but also increases the JSC and FF, thereby further improving the efficiency of the device.

To further confirm the improvement of JSC, the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of both binary and ternary OSCs were measured. The EQE spectra of different Y6 content are shown in Fig. 2b. The EQE spectra of binary and ternary solar cells show similar photovoltaic responses due to the similar absorption properties of N3 and Y6, and they all show good photovoltaic responses in the range from 450 to 800 nm. As the mass ratio of Y6 gradually increases, the response intensity of the wavelength bands around 350 nm and 600 nm is significantly improved. According to the absorption spectra of the binary and ternary films are shown in Fig. S2 (ESI), the absorption intensity of the ternary film at 350–600 nm is significantly stronger than that of the binary films, which corresponds to the increase in the photoresponse at 350–600 nm in the EQE results. The slight decrease in intensity at 650–800 nm also corresponds to the slight decrease in the photoresponse in the corresponding wavelength range in the EQE spectra. The integrated current density value of the optimal TOSC is 27.55 mA cm−2, which has good consistency with the JSC value of 27.89 mA cm−2 from the above J–V curves, suggesting the reliability of the photovoltaic performance measurement. These results suggest that the addition of Y6 improves the morphology of the blended film, thereby enhancing its absorption and the conversion efficiency from light absorption to photocurrent among the donor and the two acceptors in the best TOSC.

To further understand the internal mechanism of the performance improvement of ternary devices, the charge transfer and energy transfer relations in the blend film were studied separately. Acceptor-only devices were prepared to study the charge transfer relation and the corresponding typical J–V curves are depicted in Fig. 3a. OSC based on the N3:Y6 mixture (1:1) shows a JSC between those based on neat N3 and Y6, suggesting a negligible charge transfer between the two acceptors. The photoluminescence (PL) spectra of each component were measured to understand the energy transfer relation and the PL spectra of D18-Cl, N3, Y6, acceptor mixture (N3:Y6 = 1:1) and each blend film are shown in Fig. 3b and Fig. S3 (ESI). Since N3 and Y6 have almost the same PL spectra, the PL spectra of the acceptor mixture and the acceptors almost overlap. The peak positions of the PL spectra of the donor and the acceptors do not change in blend films, and their intensity is close, which further suggests that the addition of Y6 has a negligible effect on their PL. Compared to the absorption spectra, there is no overlap between the PL and the absorption spectra between N3 and Y6, indicating a negligible energy transfer between them. These results suggest that the performance improvement of TOSCs is not attributable to the charge and energy transfer mechanism in the blend system.

To investigate the compatibility among each component, the contact angles based on water and methylene iodide (CH2I2) of neat films were measured. The characterization results are shown in Fig. 3c. The surface energy (γ) values of neat D18-Cl, N3, and Y6 films are calculated to be 27.14, 38.73, and 38.25 mN m−1, respectively. The similar surface free energy values of N3 and Y6 suggest good compatibility with each other. Furthermore, the interfacial energy among the three components is calculated to confirm the compatibility by the following equation:
where
γX:Y is the interfacial energy between different materials; γX and γY are surface energy of the neat materials, respectively; β = 0.000115 m2 mN−2. As a result, the interfacial energy values between the donor and different acceptors are calculated to be 2.02 mN m−1 and 1.85 mN m−1 for D18-Cl:N3 and D18-Cl:Y6, respectively. For comparison, the interfacial energy value between Y6 and N3 is calculated to be 0.0035 mN m−1, which is much lower than those between donor and acceptors, suggesting good compatibility between the two acceptors. And the good compatibility between N3 and Y6 indicates that the two acceptors tend to form an alloyed acceptor.

To further affirm the formation of the acceptor alloy, cyclic voltammetry (CV) was performed to measure the LUMO energy level of the acceptor mixture of different proportions of Y6. As shown in Fig. S4 (ESI), the position of the first peak from the origin shifts to the left as the mass ratio of Y6 increases, indicating that the LUMO energy level of the acceptor mixture also increases, and this change is close to a linear function. Combined with the discussion above, both VOC and LUMO energy levels vary almost linearly with the mass ratio of Y6, which is in line with the alloy model.
To further study the effect of adding Y6 on molecular crystallinity, grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) measurements of neat and blend films were conducted. As exhibited in Fig. 4, the curve of neat N3 film shows a strong and sharp crystallinity peak at 25.40°, while the curve of neat Y6 film shows a weak and unobvious crystallinity peak at 24.28°, indicating that the two have similar π–π stacking orientation, but the molecular crystallinity of N3 is significantly stronger than that of Y6. For the mixture of N3 and Y6, the curve shows a slightly weaker but still sharp crystallinity peak at 25.02° compared to that of N3, which suggests that the addition of Y6 slightly decreases the crystallinity of the acceptor mixture. Since the ternary device involving Y6 has significantly improved JSC and FF, it is indicated that the introduction of Y6 has suppressed the excessively strong crystalline domain of N3, and the overall crystallinity of the acceptor has been adjusted to a more appropriate level, thus resulting in better charge transport and film morphology. More importantly, the position of the crystallization peak of the acceptor mixture is different from those of neat N3 and Y6, suggesting that a novel crystal phase different from N3 and Y6 is formed, which confirms the formation of the alloyed acceptor.

To further understand the influence of the newly formed acceptor alloy state on the charge transport characteristics of TOSCs, the electron and hole mobilities (μe and μh, respectively) of OSCs were measured through the space charge-limited current (SCLC) method. Both hole and electron mobilities can be defined by the following formula:
where ε0 represents the vacuum permittivity, εr represents the relative permittivity, μ is the corresponding carrier mobility, V represents the applied voltage of the device, and L represents the film thickness of the active layer. The J0.5–V curves of electron-only and hole-only devices are depicted in Fig. 5a, and the SCLC characterization results of each device are summarized in Table S2 (ESI). The μe and μh values of the D18-Cl:N3 blend were computed to be 3.56 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 6.40 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, with μh/μe ratio of 1.80, while the μe and μh values of the D18-Cl:Y6 blend was computed to be 3.45 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 6.27 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, with μh/μe ratio of 1.82. As a comparison, the μe and μh of the optimal ternary blend of D18-Cl:N3:Y6 (1:0. 8:0.8) are 4.87 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 7.25 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, with μh/μe ratio of 1.49. Apparently, in the optimal blend film, both μe and μh values are increased compared to those of the binary ones, and the ratio of the two carrier mobilities gets more balanced, which indicates an enhanced charge transport channel should be established in the ternary blend film, which contributes to the optimized FF and JSC of the TOSCs.
To further investigate the charge recombination dynamics for the optimal TOSCs, the light intensity dependence of JSC and VOC was studied and the corresponding characterization results are summarized in Fig. 5b and c. In literature, the functional relationship between the light intensity and the JSC can be defined as a power-law given by JSC∝Iα, where I represents the light intensity and α represents the coefficient. When α = 1, it means that ideal charge transport is formed in the film with negligible bimolecular recombination, and the closer its value is to 1, the better the charge transfer performance of the active layer. The α values of the D18-Cl:N3-based and D18-Cl:Y6-based devices were computed to be 1.004 and 1.005, respectively, while the α value of the optimal TOSCs was computed to be 1.001, indicating a better charge transport model and decreased bimolecular recombination in the optimal active layer. The relation between VOC and the light intensity can be described as VOC∝S ln(I), where I is the light intensity and S = nkBT/q. When n = 1, the bimolecular recombination is dominated in solar cells, while n = 2, the monomolecular recombination is dominated in solar cells. The n values of D18-Cl:N3-based, D18-Cl:Y6-based, and the optimal ternary OSCs were calculated to be 1.594, 1.564, 1.552, respectively, which suggests that charge carrier recombination is a combination of monomolecular and bimolecular processes in both binary and ternary OSCs. Combined with the results above, the decreased n value indicates a suppressed germinate recombination in TOSCs, which contributes to the enhanced PCE.
To further research the charge dynamics in terms of collection and generation, the relation between photocurrent density (Jph) and effective voltage (Veff) of each device was also measured. The characterization results were summarized in Fig. 5d and Table S3 (ESI). The exciton dissociation and charge collection efficiency can be evaluated according to ηdiss and ηcoll (defined as JSC/Jsat and Jpower/Jsat, respectively, where Jpower represents the Jph value under maximal power output condition and Jsat is the saturated photocurrent density). The ηdiss values of D18-Cl:N3-based and D18-Cl:Y6-based OSCs are 95.1% and 95.5%, respectively, while the ηdiss value of the optimal ternary OSCs is 97.7%, indicating an enhanced exciton dissociation in the optimal TOSCs. The ηcoll values of the D18-Cl:N3-based and D18-Cl:Y6-based OSCs are 82.3% and 83.8%, respectively, while the ηcoll value of the optimal ternary OSCs is 85.3%, indicating an optimized charge collection in the optimal TOSCs. These results suggest that the introduction of the newly formed acceptor alloy in the ternary blend enhances the efficiency of charge generation and exciton dissociation.

To further study the phase separation morphology of the binary and ternary blend films, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) was applied. As shown in Fig. 6a–c, the introduction of Y6 forms a slightly smoother and better phase separation. Furthermore, the surface root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of each device was measured by AFM. As shown in Fig. 6d–f, the RMS roughness values of D18-Cl:Y6-based and D18-Cl:N3-based films are 0.860 nm and 0.882 nm, respectively. As a comparison, the RMS roughness value of the optimal ternary blend film is 0.854 nm, indicating a more moderate and appropriate film was formed in the TOSCs. These results suggest that charge separation and charge carrier transport are more effective due to a better film morphology in the optimized TOSCs.


In addition to high PCE, device stability is also a key issue that needs to be solved for commercial applications of OSCs. However, due to the aggregation characteristics of D18 and its derivatives, in the previously reported OSCs based on the D18 material system, there is little involved in improving device stability, especially thermal stability. The strong tendency to aggregate might present challenges in the fabrication and achieving reproducibility of device performance both in high efficiency and good stability. To thoroughly study the influence of the formation of non-fullerene acceptor alloys on device stability, thermal, light radiation stability tests for binary and ternary devices were conducted, and all the devices were nonencapsulated. A thermal stability test was applied under continuous 80 °C thermal annealing in an ambient atmosphere, while a light radiation test was applied under continuous 100 mW cm−2 illumination annealing in an ambient atmosphere. As shown in Fig. 7 and Fig. S5 (ESI), after 150 minutes of continuous thermal annealing, the efficiency of the optimal ternary device can be maintained at 72% of its pristine state, which is higher than the 69% and 68% of the binary ones. Similarly, after 150 minutes of continuous light annealing, the efficiency of the optimized ternary device can be maintained at 80% of its pristine state, which is higher than the 78% and 77% of the binary ones. The results above suggest that the introduction of Y6 forming acceptor alloy effectively improves the heat resistance and light radiation stability of the blend system. Besides, an obvious burn-in effect can be observed, as the device performance dropped dramatically within the first 30 min. Previous studies have pointed out that the burn-in effect can be caused by the instability of the interface and the electrode, air-induced phase separation, molecular incompatibilities between the donor and acceptor, and so on. This means that to avoid rapid device performance degradation caused by the burn-in effect, the device should have stable interfaces, electrodes, film morphology, and packaging. For our study, with the addition of Y6, the optimal ternary device has a better and more stable film morphology, resulting in better stability compared to the binary devices. Combined with the changes of other parameters in Fig. 7c and d and Fig. S5 (ESI) over time, the improvement of the stability of the ternary device mainly comes from a more stable VOC. Since the value of VOC depends on the mass ratio of the two acceptors forming the alloy state, the improvement of the stability of this device can be mainly attributed to the formation of the acceptor alloy which optimizes the crystallinity of the molecules in the blend film while suppressing the undesirable aggregation.


In conclusion, we demonstrated that adding Y6 to the D18-Cl:N3 binary OSC can effectively improve the performance of the devices. When 50 wt% Y6 is added, the device performance achieves the best. The VOC was adjusted from 0.856 V to 0.866 V, JSC increased from 26.90 mA cm−2 to 27.89 mA cm−2, FF was improved from 71.35% to 74.31%, and the highest PCE reached 17.74%. According to the above-mentioned characterization results, this improvement is mainly attributed to the alloyed acceptor formed by two small-molecule non-fullerene acceptors Y6 and N3. The higher VOC, enhanced charge transport channel, and the improved molecular crystallinity and phase separation in the blend film together result in the best device efficiency approaching 18%. Besides, the alloy state also effectively improves the heat resistance and light radiation stability of the device. Our results suggest that it is a reasonable and reliable ternary strategy to select non-fullerene acceptors with similarities in chemical structures and electrical characteristics to form an alloy state, which helps to further optimize the performance of OSCs.


Experiments were designed by Minglang Li. Device Fabrication was carried out by Minglang Li. The characterization was done by Minglang Li and Xin Yu.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC Grant No. 62075029, 52073040, 61775029, and 62105055), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2020TQ0058, 2021M7006), the International Cooperation and Exchange Project of Science and Technology Department of Sichuan Province (2019YFH0057, 2020YFH0063).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Materials and methods, CV, SCLC, etc. See DOI: 10.1039/d1tc05228d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022