 DOI: 10.1039/C6CC04840D
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 10791-10794


Jing
Wei
,

Heng
Li
,

Yicheng
Zhao
,

Wenke
Zhou
,

Rui
Fu
,

Huiyue
Pan
 and 

Qing
Zhao
*

State Key Laboratory for Mesoscopic Physics and Electron Microscopy Laboratory, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. E-mail: zhaoqing@pku.edu.cn

Collaborative Innovation Center of Quantum Matter, Beijing 100084, China

1585 Clifton Rd Ne Atlanta GA 30329, USA

Received
11th June 2016
, Accepted 22nd July 2016
First published on 1st August 2016
The metal–insulator–semiconductor (MIS) structure is applied to perovskite solar cells, in which the traditional compact layer TiO2 is replaced by Al2O3 as the hole blocking material to realize an all-low-temperature process. Flexible devices based on this structure are also realized with excellent flexibility, which hold 85% of their initial efficiency after bending 100 times.

The recent breakthrough of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has led to power conversion efficiencies of over 20%. Due to their low cost, simple fabrication and high efficiency, PSCs have emerged as a most promising new generation photovoltaic technology. Their instability, current-density–voltage (J–V) hysteresis and high temperature process remain to be solved for their industrialization. Many works have been reported on the stability and hysteresis of perovskite, but few focus on the high-temperature process of the TiO2 layer in the n-i-p structure, which causes high power consumption and hinders the development of flexible solar cells. Organic structures based on PCBM/PEDOT: PSS, alternative electron transport layers, such as ZnO, and low-temperature process for a TiO2 layer are approaches that have been used to try and solve this problem. However, they all inevitably introduce some new problems, such as lower stability, higher cost and inferior performance.

To date, most PSCs are fabricated in the sandwiched structure: the perovskite light absorber is placed between the electron-transport layer (ETL) and hole-transport layer (HTL). Photo-generated electrons will be extracted by the ETL and blocked by the HTL. Since the presence of these two interfaces is not a prerequisite for device function, and because perovskite possesses long-range balanced electron- and hole-transport lengths, a number of reports have emerged on HTL (or ETL)-free perovskite solar cells. ETL-free devices avoid the high temperature process of compact TiO2, which may be a good choice for all-low-temperature-processed PSCs. However, without the hole blocking layer, this structure inevitably suffers from electric leakage at the interface of FTO and perovskite. The ETL-free structure seems to be a Schottky contact, which is similar to silicon-based Schottky-barrier solar cells. Schottky-barrier solar cells have a lower power conversion efficiency (PCE) than those based on p–n junctions. In Schottky solar cells, the metal-semiconductor interface has a serious pinning effect, which reduces the Schottky barrier, brings in a higher dark current, and decreases the open-circuit voltage (Voc). An insulator layer is introduced to the Schottky contact to increase the open circuit voltage (Voc), short circuit current density (Jsc), and fill factor, by inhibiting the dark current caused by the majority carriers, which is known as a metal–insulator–semiconductor (MIS) solar cell. This MIS solar cell can work with tunneling current.
Herein, we replace the TiO2 compact layer with ultra-thin insulate Al2O3 as the hole blocking material, and fabricate perovskite solar cells with the MIS structure. After optimizing the process parameters, this structure results in good efficiency (14.6%) with a simple, low-temperature process. A model based on the MIS structure was employed to clarify the working mechanism of the device. In addition, owing to the low temperature process for the insulating layer deposition, flexible MIS-PSCs were fabricated to realize flexible energy devices with good device performance and flexibility. The flexible solar cells can hold 85% of their initial efficiency after 100 times bending.
The concept of MIS-PSCs is illustrated in Fig. 1a, with the structure of transparent conductive electrodes (FTO)/hole blocking layer (Al2O3)/perovskite/hole transporting layer (spiro-OMeTAD)/top electrode (Au). Fig. 1b shows the energy levels of the device components. Electrons will be transported to FTO by the tunneling effect through the Al2O3 layer, and holes will be extracted by the HTL.
Different thicknesses of Al2O3 layers (0–3 nm) were deposited onto FTO glass using the atomic layer deposition (ALD) method in order to determine the best parameters for the MIS-PSCs. Due to the fact that the performance of the device lies crucially on the thickness of the Al2O3 film, precise monitoring of the deposition thickness becomes the key to studying the mechanism and obtaining good devices. The ALD method is a good choice to realize a uniform and compact Al2O3 layer with a thin and accurate thickness. The TiO2 compact layer has also been deposited by ALD previously. However, depositing a 20 nm TiO2 film by ALD at a low temperature below 100 °C needs about 10 hours, which is a long time for industrial manufacture. In this work, depositing an Al2O3 layer of 1–3 nm thickness only takes minutes by ALD, which is very convenient and superior compared to TiO2. The J–V curves, under dark and light (100 mW cm−2 AM1.5 simulated sunlight), of the corresponding devices are shown in Fig. 2a and b. The J–V curves under dark show typical diode characteristics, implying that the shunt resistance of the devices is very large, except the device with a 3 nm Al2O3 layer, which may be too thick to achieve the tunneling current. Additionally, the threshold voltage increases with a larger thickness of Al2O3, which indicates that more voltage falls on the Al2O3 layer. A larger threshold voltage may bring a bigger open circuit voltage in the solar cell, however it can also decrease the current. This speculation is confirmed by the results of Fig. 2b. The device of 1 nm Al2O3 shows the best photovoltaic performance, whereas 2–3 nm Al2O3 is reduced in turn, which is mainly caused by the reduction in photocurrent and fill factor. Thus, we can fix the parameter of Al2O3 thickness at ∼1 nm. After more detailed experiments with the Al2O3 thickness varying from 0.5 nm to 1.5 nm (Fig. 2b), we finally determined the thickness to be 1.0 nm, and the device shows the best PCE of 14.6%. We further measured the photocurrent over time at a fixed voltage close to maximum power point to determine the real working status of the device. As shown in Fig. 2c, the photocurrent increases up to the maximum value almost instantly as the illumination is turned on, as well as it falls as the light is turned off, thus showing a good photo response, which corresponds to the good contact of interfaces and high quality of perovskite. The PCE reaches up to 13% and remains at ∼12%, which show the good working performance of the MIS-PSCs. The hysteresis of the J–V curves was also studied and the results are shown in the ESI (Fig. S1 and S2).
To determine the function of the Al2O3 layer in devices, we should shed light on the working mechanism of the MIS structure. As shown in Fig. 3, when Al2O3 is thin enough, the structure will work as a Schottky junction. This structure will cause carrier recombination and a big dark current. When the Al2O3 layer is thickened to a proper thickness, photo electrons can be transported to FTO by the tunneling effect, and holes will be blocked by the barrier and extracted by HTL. Further thickening the Al2O3 layer will hinder the electron transport due to its insulating property. From the parameters of MIS solar cells based on an SiO2 insulator, we can roughly estimate that 1–3 nm thickness may work as the “tunnel” junction here, which has been confirmed by the J–V measurement above.
A model based on MIS solar cells was put forward to analyse the J–V properties of the devices, to further clarify their photovoltaic characteristics. The equivalent circuit is shown in the inset of Fig. 4a, and the J–V characteristic of the model is described as
(1)
where,

J0 = n × T2exp(−qΦb/kBT) × exp(−χn1/2δ).
(2)

J, JL and J0 stand for the output current density, light induced current density, and reverse saturated current density, respectively; Rs and Rsh represent the series resistance and shunt resistance, respectively; A is the ideality factor of a heterojunction, kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, V is the DC bias voltage applied to the cell, n is a constant, Φb is the barrier height of insulator layer, χn stands for the electron affinity, and δ is the thickness of the insulator layer. Assuming that Rsh is very large, from eqn (1), we can deduce:

(3)

Rs and A can be derived from eqn (3), thus helping us to analyze the performance of devices. Fig. 4a gives the plots of dV/dJ versus (JSC − J)−1 with the linear fitting curves according to eqn (3) based on devices of a 2 nm Al2O3 layer. There is a good linear relationship between dV/dJ and (JSC − J)−1 both under illumination and in the dark, meaning that the device is a well-behaved MIS solar cell to a certain extent. The ideality factor, A, and series resistance, Rs, of the device are derived from the slope and intercept, respectively, of the linear fitting results in Fig. 4a. Using this method, we calculated the values of A and Rs for all the devices, and the results are shown in Table 1. For a well-behaved heterojunction solar cell, the ideality factor is usually between 1.3–2. From Table 1, the ideality factors of devices with 1–3 nm Al2O3 layers are all between 1.3–2, both under illumination and in the dark, which indicate that the devices agree well with the heterojunction solar cell model. However, structure without the Al2O3 layer shows the ideality factors of 2.24 and 2.54 in the light and dark, respectively, which are agreeable with its poor photovoltaic performance in the solar cell. Rs increases with an increase in the thickness of the Al2O3 layer, thus illustrating the good control of the Al2O3 thickness. For overall consideration, the device with a 1 nm Al2O3 layer shows a good ideality factor and relatively low Rs, providing the best efficiency for MIS-PSCs.

Thickness
0 nm
1 nm
2 nm
3 nm

A (light)
2.24
1.8
1.36
1.31

R
s (light)
2.37
2.45
4.39
10.02

A (dark)
2.54
1.87
1.42
1.34

R
s (dark)
2.46
3.64
6.22
10.53
Impedance spectroscopy (IS) was conducted with bias from −0.2 V to 1 V. An equivalent circuit model (inset of Fig. 4b) was used to identify the main recombination process in the devices. This model is widely used to explain the Nyquist figure with only one semi-circle. Constant phase element (CPE) is used for processing and analyzing the irregular semicircle impedance in the Nyquist figure, and its impedance expression is
(4)
The average lifetime of carriers based on the CPE element can be derived from eqn (5):
τavg = (RshQ)1/n.
(5)
Simulating IS data based on this model, the τavg extracted under various bias is shown in Fig. 4b. The result shows that the recombination rate is higher in the Schottky structure and restrained in the MIS structure. The Al2O3 layer has two effects: decreasing recombination at the interface and decreasing the tunneling current. This is why the 2 nm sample has a larger lifetime at high bias and smaller lifetime at low bias.
Photoluminescence (PL) was measured to compare the extraction ability of the MIS structure under different thickness of Al2O3 to photon-generated carriers. The results are shown in the ESI (Fig. S3).
The above analysis reveal that FTO/Al2O3/perovskite/HTM/Au is a good MIS-heterojunction solar cell, in which perovskite/HTM acts as a p–n junction, where HTM has enough ability to abstract holes to the Au layer; while FTO/Al2O3/perovskite acts as an MIS structure, to restrain carrier recombination, increase Voc and inhibit dark current, thus resulting in the good performance of the whole solar cell. Moreover, the cell parameters, including the ideality factor and series resistance, are comparable to that of high-efficiency thin film solar cells such as Si, Cu(In,Ga) Se2 and Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4. Since MIS-PSCs have been demonstrated to be a good heterojunction-MIS structure similar to these inorganic solar cells, the mature technologies used in them could also be employed to improve the cell performance.
Thus far, we successfully fabricated solar cells based on a low-temperature process, which effectively reduces the energy cost of their preparation. Another advantage of this process and structure is to make flexible solar cells. In traditional PSCs, in addition to their high-temperature process, the flexibility of TiO2 layer is worse than other layers. Decreasing the thickness of this layer is a direct and effective approach to reduce the stress from bending. Replacing the 20–40 nm TiO2 by a 1 nm Al2O3 layer minimizes the thickness of the inorganic layer, which is a big advantage that benefits bending. As shown in Fig. 5a and b, when the film is bent, a thick and compact TiO2 film is easy to crack at surface as it suffers big stress; whereas the much thinner film of the Al2O3 layer bears much smaller stress at the same bending radius. With this benefit, this new MIS-PSC structure has very good flexibility and relatively high efficiency. An ultra-thin inorganic film greatly reduces the negative effects of bending stress on structure. From Fig. 5c, after 100, 150, even 200 times bending with the curvature radius of 4 mm, the device still holds 85%, 80% and 60% of its initial efficiency. In contrast with other flexible PSCs, which can only bear dozens of times bending, our MIS-PSC exhibits much better performance of resistance flexure.
In conclusion, we propose a new type of perovskite solar cell based on the MIS structure via a simple, low-temperature process. The ideal model for MIS solar cells has been applied to clarify the J–V characteristics of the devices. Some intrinsic parameters were derived, showing good MIS properties similar to traditional inorganic thin-film solar cells, which can provide us abundant mature technologies and experience for the further development of MIS-PSCs. PL and IS measurements further verify the good carrier transfer ability of the MIS structure and its good inhibitory effect on carrier recombination. Taking advantage of the low-temperature process and thinner film structure, we further made flexible solar cells on a flexible substrate, and obtained devices with excellent flexibility and good performance. This thin and flexible structure gives MIS-PSCs unique advantages compared to traditional inorganic cells. They can be widely used in many fields, including flexible electronics, wearable power equipment, building integrated photovoltaic (BIPV), etc., thus showing a large market potential and a bright future.
This work was supported by National 973 projects (2013CB932602, 2011CB707601, MOST) from Ministry of Science and Technology, China, National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC51272007, 61571015, 11234001, 91433102). Q. Z. acknowledges Beijing Nova Program (XX2013003) and the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University of China.
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental section for device preparation, J–V curves, photoluminescence and impedance spectrum measurement are included. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cc04840d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016