 DOI: 10.1039/D3TC00378G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2023, 11, 4634-4644


Yue
Jian
,

Tianliang
Xie
,

Litao
Han
*,

Dongxing
Kou
,

Wenhui
Zhou
,

Zhengji
Zhou
,

Shengjie
Yuan
,

Yuena
Meng
,

Yafang
Qi
 and 

Sixin
Wu
*

Key Laboratory for Special Functional Materials of MOE, National & Local Joint Engineering Research Center for High-efficiency Display and Lighting Technology, Collaborative Innovation Center of Nano Functional Materials and Applications, School of Materials, Henan University, Kaifeng 475004, China. E-mail: wusixin@henu.edu.cn

Received
1st February 2023
, Accepted 3rd March 2023
First published on 7th March 2023
As a promising absorber material for thin film solar cells, the highest reported power conversion efficiency (PCE) of Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTSSe) is still far from the detailed balance limit of efficiency due to the large VOC deficit. Back contact engineering plays an important role in promoting the CZTSSe solar cell towards realizing high PCE. In this study, a MoO3-modified layer with the highest oxidation state 6+ and better thermal stability was in situ introduced by spin-coating Na2S aqueous solution on the Mo electrode. The results demonstrate that the Na2S layer at the rear contact provides more Na to diffuse into the absorber, thus improving the crystallinity of the film and the quality of the p–n heterojunction, and the carrier collection in the neutral region and at the front interface of the devices is enhanced. The formation of the MoO3 layer can also inhibit the decomposition reaction between Mo and CZTSSe, which minimizes the secondary phases and voids, and improves the quality of the back interface. Moreover, the band alignment and interfacial barrier at the back contact were modified by the MoO3 layer, resulting in better carrier collection and the reduction of photogenerated carrier recombination. By optimizing the Na2S (MoO3) layer, the average PCE of the CZTSSe solar cell increased to 12.48% from 10.22% with the large VOC increments of 60 mV and FF increments of 5%, and the best performance was achieved, with an active area efficiency of 12.74% without the anti-reflection coating layer.

Kesterite quaternary material Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTSSe) thin film solar cells have inspired significant research activity due to their impressive photovoltaic performance, and are regarded as one of the leading photovoltaic technologies in regard to their industrial prospect. Since the material family has optimal band gaps (Eg), remarkable absorption coefficients (>104 cm−1), abundant non-toxic elements and thermodynamically stable structures, CZTSSe solar cells have the potential to achieve high efficiency. Despite the above advantages, the maximum efficiency of CZTSSe solar cells has only reached 13.6% to date, which is still far below the detailed balance limit efficiency of 32%. There is still much room for improvement in the actual certified efficiency as compared to the theoretical efficiency. One of the main bottlenecks restricting the development of kesterite-based CZTSSe is the unfavorable back contact, which leads to a large open-circuit voltage deficit (VOC-def) and low fill factor (FF).

As far as the back interface contact is concerned, the main problems include the following: (i) the decomposition reactions due to the instability of the Mo/kesterite interface leading to the formation of secondary phases (e.g. Cu2Se, ZnSe, SnSe) and voids at the rear surface, which affects the film growth and introduces defects into the absorber layer; (ii) the unmatched energy band alignment and the existence of a Schottky barrier at the Mo/kesterite interface suppress the hole transport and increase the carrier recombination at the rear interface. To address these issues, various interfacial layers have been introduced between the absorber layer and Mo to passivate the Mo/CZTSSe interface, such as TiB2, GeO2, WO3, TiN, Al2O3, ZnO, Na2S and MoOx. In particular, MoO3, as a wide-bandgap material with high work function, has been widely used as an interfacial layer in CZTSSe solar cells, which can impose an interfacial field to accelerate the carrier separations. For the moment, numerous technologies have been proposed to introduce the MoO3 interface layer, including thermal evaporation, magnetron sputtering,in situ pre-annealing the Mo substrate and spin coating. However, there are still some problems with MoO3, which limit its further application. (i) For the thermal evaporation and magnetron sputtering method, the oxygen loss during the processing usually leads to the formation of sub-stoichiometric MoO3−x (0 < x < 1) with a lower work function. A higher work function metal contact is more conducive to reducing the barrier height at the rear contact. (ii) Although MoO3 has been proven to effectively improve the device performance as a back contact modified layer, the required high temperature for CZTSSe crystallization often results in the degradation of the MoO3 layer due to element diffusion. The sacrificing of the MoO3 makes it impossible to effectively optimize the band alignment at the back contact. (iii) The doping of alkali metal Na plays an important role in promoting the crystal growth of the absorber and passivating the grain boundaries. However, Repins et al. showed that the out-diffusion of Na from the SLG during CZTSe evaporation was not sufficient for good device properties. Although the enhanced Na diffusion by the MoO3 layer has been reported by many studies, a few articles have observed that the diffusion of Na is slightly suppressed in the presence of the MoO3 layer.
In this study, a MoO3 interfacial layer is in situ synthesized by an easy, rapid, environment-friendly, low-cost and reproducible Na2S solution-based process. The XPS and SIMS results show that the MoO3 formed by in situ oxidation has better thermal stability and the highest oxidation state of 6+, hence keeping its work function as high as possible. The synergistic effect between Na2S and MoO3 leads to multiple benefits for the CZTSSe solar cells, including the following: (i) the spin-coated Na2S layer on the Mo substrate provides sufficient Na to diffuse into the absorber, which promotes the growth of large grains. Thus, the improved crystallinity of the CZTSSe film and quality of the p–n junction promoted the carrier collection in the neutral region and at the front interface of the devices, leading to the enhancement of the minority carrier lifetime and VOC. (ii) the Na2S layer or the formation of the MoO3 layer suppressed the decomposition reaction between CZTSSe and Mo, minimizing the voids and secondary phases, such as Cu2Se, ZnSe and SnSe at the rear contact. (iii) Since MoO3 has a high work function compared to Mo, a more favorable band alignment is provided by the structure of CZTSSe/MoO3/Mo. Therefore, the minority carrier collection is improved and the recombination is reduced at the CZTSSe/Mo interface due to the additional electrostatic field and smaller potential barrier, resulting in the improvement of VOC. Therefore, the best CZTSSe solar cell with a high PCE of 12.74% has been achieved without an anti-reflection coating layer.

2-Methoxyethanol (anhydrous, 99.80%), cuprous chloride (CuCl, ≥99.95% metals basis), zinc acetate (Zn(CH3CO2)2·2H2O, 99.99% metals basis), hydrated stannic chloride (SnCl4·5H2O, 99.99% metals basis) and silver chloride (AgCl, AR, 99.50%) were purchased from Beijing InnoChem Science & Technology Co., Ltd. Selenium particles (99.99%) were purchased from ZhongNuo Advanced Material Technology Co., Ltd. Sodium sulfide (Na2S, 95.00%), cadmium sulfate (CdSO4·8/3H2O, 99.00%), thiourea (NH2CSNH2, 99.00%) and ammonia solution (NH3·H2O, 25.00%) were obtained from Aladdin Company. All chemicals were used directly as received without any further purification.


The first step was to prepare Na2S aqueous solution and spin the solution onto Mo soda-lime glass (MSLG). The Na2S aqueous solution was prepared simply by dispersing Na2S in distilled water with different molar ratios (0.05, 0.10, 0.15, 0.20 M) under magnetic stirring at a speed of 300 rpm for 30 min at 30 °C. Then, the prepared Na2S aqueous solution was spin-coated onto the Mo substrate at 600 rpm for 10 s and 3000 rpm for 30 s, followed by a 16 min sintering on a 120 °C hot plate in air. After two spin-coating/annealing processes, a thin Na2S nanoparticle layer was obtained, as shown in Fig. 1a. The annealing temperature and time were selected based on the device efficiency shown in Fig. S1 (ESI).

The CZTSSe precursor films were prepared on the Mo substrates with (A) and without (B) the Na2S layer via the spin-coating method according to our previous work, as illustrated in Fig. 1b.
The CdS buffer layer with a thickness of 50 nm was deposited on the CZTSSe film at 65 °C by chemical bath deposition (CBD). The i-ZnO (50 nm) and ITO (200 nm) were further deposited sequentially via magnetron sputtering. After that, the Ag gate electrode (100 nm) was deposited on top of the device by thermal evaporation. Finally, the thin film was mechanically divided into solar cells with an active area of 0.21 cm2.

The phase structures and crystallinity of the CZTSSe films were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Bruker D8 Advance) with a Cu Kα radiation source (λ = 1.5406 nm) operating at 40 kV and 40 mA. In order to ensure the accuracy of the results, the diffraction data were refined by Rietveld through Jade 6.0. The XRD pattern of a standard polycrystalline Si was used to correct the instrumental broadening. Raman spectroscopy was captured at an excitation wavelength of 532 nm by a Raman spectrometer (inVia, Renishaw, UK). The morphologies of the films were analyzed by a scanning electron microscope (SEM, JSM-7900F) under an accelerating voltage of 5 kV, equipped with an energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) (AZtecLive UltimMax 40). The depth profiles of the compositions were measured by time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectroscopy (ToF-SIMS), in which a 3 keV beam of Cs+ ions with a current of 30 nA and a 25 keV beam of Bi3+ ions with a current of 1 pA were applied for sputtering and analysis, respectively. XPS measurements were performed using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (American Thermo Fischer, ESCALAB Xi+). Photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) characteristics were acquired using a digital source meter (Keithley 2400) with a solar simulator (Zolix SS150) under standard test conditions (AM 1.5G, 100 mWcm−2). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) was recorded on a Zolix SCS100 QE system equipped with a lock-in amplifier and a 150 W xenon light source. Capacitance–voltage (C–V) curves and temperature-dependent dark current density–voltage characteristics (J–V–T) were performed by an FT-1030 HERA DLTS system equipped with a cryostat controller (JANIS VPF-800). The J–V–T data were acquired under unbiased voltage with the temperature ranging from 120 K to 320 K in steps of 10K. The C–V data were collected with a scanning range from −1 V to 0 V. The UV-vis absorption spectra were recorded using an ultraviolet-visible-near-infrared spectrophotometer (UV, PE Lambda 950). The steady-state fluorescence (PL) measurement and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) were measured using an OmniFluo 900 spectrometer system equipped with an H10330C detector (Hamamatsu) and a DCS900PC collector. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was obtained by using fs-UPS ESCALAB 250Xi, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA.


The effect of spin-coated Na2S on the Mo surface has been characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The morphologies with various mole ratios are shown in Fig. S2 in the ESI. As is shown, the surface of the Mo electrode was composed of dense strip-like grains and after being treated with Na2S aqueous solution, many small white spots began to appear. This trend was even more pronounced when the molar ratio of Na2S was increased. To further explore the variation in the composition, a detailed analysis was carried out on Mo substrates treated without and with 0.1 M Na2S. The choice of 0.1 M Na2S-treated Mo electrode was based on the device performance results, presented later. For the convenience of presentation, the Mo substrates without and with the Na2S layer were named substrate A and B, and the CZTSSe film and device formed on the two back contacts were designated film A and B or device A and B, respectively. Energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) was executed to analyze the element distribution of the two substrates. As denoted in Fig. S3 (ESI), the Na element was uniformly distributed on the surface of substrate A but aggregated on the surface of substrate B, which indicated that the small white spots were Na2S. Furthermore, the EDS mapping results of the O element indicated that the O content on the surface of substrate B was richer than that on substrate A. As denoted in Table S1 (ESI), the O content of the back contact B surface was about two times as much as that of substrate A. The residual O content on the substrate A surface can be attributed to the exposure to air during sample preparation before characterization. The increased O content on the substrate B surface may be caused by the oxidation of the Mo electrode during the spin coating process of Na2S aqueous solution.

The chemical states of element Mo on the back contact were further investigated by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Compared to substrate A (Fig. 2a), the strong symmetrical peaks with binding energies of 235.5 eV and 232.4 eV corresponding to Mo 3d3/2 and Mo 3d5/2 appeared on substrate B, which confirmed the formation of the MoO3, as illustrated in Fig. 2b. In addition, the quantitative XPS analysis indicated that the surface of Na2S-treated Mo consisted of 38.4% Mo and 61.6% MoO3. No contribution from any of the lower oxidation states, such as Mo4+, was observed. The formation of MoO3 on the surface of the Mo substrate after annealing was also proved by the XRD patterns (Fig. 2c). Compared with substrate A with only one peak corresponding to Mo at 40.12°, the peaks at 25.7° and 38.9° assigned to MoO3 appeared on substrate B. These results indicate that the MoO3 formed by in situ oxidation was highly pure with the Mo elements only in the Mo6+ oxidation state. It is also worth noting that no diffraction peak of Na2S was detected on substrate B, which may be due to its low content caused by the hydrolysis reaction in the solution. As the molar ratio of Na2S increased, the diffraction peaks appeared on the substrate, as shown in Fig. 2d.
The aqueous solution of Na2S contains many ions, such as Na+, S2−, OH−, HS−, due to the hydrolysis reaction. Thus, when the Na2S aqueous solution is in contact with Mo during spin-coating in the air, electrochemical corrosion occurs under heating conditions, resulting in the stable oxidation of Mo to MoO3. The anode and cathode formulas are as follows:
Anode: 2Mo + 12OH− → 2MoO3 + 6H2O + 12e−
(1)
Cathode: 3O2 + 6H2O + 12e− → 12OH−
(2)
In particular, this Na
2S solution-treated technique can result in the conservation of the highest oxidation state (6+) for the MoO3 layer, hence keeping its work function as high as possible. For the thermal evaporation and sputtering method, the oxygen loss during the processing often leads to the lower oxidation state of Mo and the formation of sub-stoichiometric MoO3−x (0 < x < 1) with lower work function. This Na2S solution-treated technique also has many advantages, such as reproducibility, feasibility, cost-effectiveness, and industrial viability.



Fig. 3a and b respectively illustrate the top-view and cross-sectional morphologies of devices A and B fabricated on different substrates. Compared to film A on the Mo substrate, film B on the Na2S-treated Mo substrate exhibited a grain size that was a little larger, and thus better crystallinity, consistent with the XRD and Raman results shown in Fig. S4 (ESI). Many studies have suggested that Na doping can promote the crystal growth of the CZTSSe absorber. However, Repins et al. showed that the out-diffusion of Na from the SLG during CZTSe evaporation was not sufficient for good device properties, and an additional NaF layer on the Mo-coated substrate led to improvements in all photovoltaic parameters. Herein, the first effect of the spin-coated Na2S layer on the Mo substrate was to provide sufficient diffusion of the Na element from the bottom to the top of the CZTSSe film, which promoted the crystallinity. More importantly, the formation of voids at the CZTSSe/Mo interface was substantially suppressed in film B. As is well known, the decomposition reactions due to the instability of the Mo/kesterite interface can lead to the formation of secondary phases, such as Cu2S, SnS, ZnS, etc. Then, the voids near the interface can be attributed to the high volatility of SnS. It has been reported that the Na2S or MoO3 intermediate layer can effectively inhibit the CZTSSe/Mo reaction in CZTSSe. Hence, the second effect of the Na2S-modified layer was to suppress the decomposition reaction between CZTSSe and Mo back contact, mitigating the formation of voids and secondary phases at the back contact and leading to better back contact interface quality.

To further understand the improved quality of the absorber, the time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectroscopy (ToF-SIMS) analysis on CZTSSe films was carried out and the depth distributions of various chemical elements were studied. Fig. 3c and d show the depth profiles of related chemical elements for CZTSSe films spin-coated on substrate A and B, respectively. For better comparison; the depth profiles of Cu, Zn, Sn and Na were redrawn together. As illustrated in Fig. 3e, the chemical elements of Cu, Zn and Sn showed similar distributions on the surface and in the body of the two films. However, it was also observed that these elements clustered together to form bumps near the back interface, suggesting the presence of Cu2S, ZnS and SnS phases. Compared to film A, the heights of the bumps were reduced for film B, meaning the reduction of the secondary phases. This is because the reaction between Mo and the CZTSSe film was inhibited by the intermediate layer Na2S or MoO3. Fig. 3e further displays the distributions of Na elements for the two films. There is significant Na deficiency on the surface of film A. Although Na in soda-lime glass can diffuse into the CZTSSe film during the selenization process, this diffusion is limited, which is not enough to ensure the uniform distribution of Na in the film. Interestingly, the content of Na in film B is much higher at the surface, implying that the spin-coated Na2S layer provides more Na elements to diffuse over the entire CZTSSe film. The sufficient diffusion of Na and the inhibition of the decomposition reaction at the back contact led to the better crystallinity of the CZTSSe films on the Na2S-treated Mo substrate. Meanwhile, although two layers of Na2S were spin-coated for film B, there was no obvious difference in the distribution of Na at the back contact as compared with film A. This indicates that the Na2S layer is self-depleted during selenization, leading to the Mo/MoO3/CZTSSe structure.
Another thing worth noting is the stability of the MoO3 layer. Although the MoO3 layer introduced by thermal evaporation or sputtering can inhibit the chemical reaction at the back electrode, it is also easy to decompose and diffuse to the Mo back electrode as a sacrificial layer in the subsequent selenization process, thus losing the role in adjusting the band alignment at the back contact. In this work, the existence of the MoO3 layer after selenization was proved by the depth profiles of Mo and O. As shown in Fig. 3f, there is more O near the CZTSSe/Mo interface in the film B, which means that the MoO3 has not been sacrificed during selenization. The stable intermediate layer with high work function can reduce the potential barrier at the back interface and suppress the recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes, thus improving the efficiency of the device.

The photovoltaic properties of CZTSSe devices fabricated on Mo substrates treated with different concentrations of Na2S (from 0 to 0.2 M), including open circuit voltage (VOC), short circuit current density (JSC), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (PCE), were collected and are compared in Fig. 4. Each case contains at least 20 individual cells. It can be seen from the statistical data that as the concentration of the Na2S aqueous solution increased to 0.1 M from 0, VOC increased from 451 mV to 488 mV, JSC increased from 37.2 mA cm−2 to 39.2 mA cm−2 and FF increased from 61.0% to 65.2%. Thus, the beneficial effects of VOC, JSC and FF led to the improvement of the PCE, from 10.22 to 12.48% on average. The CZTSSe solar cells with a concentration of Na2S aqueous solution of around 0.1 M presented the best and most reproducible photovoltaic efficiency. According to the XPS, SEM, XRD, Raman and SIMS results above, the enhanced performance may be attributed to the inhibition of voids, improved crystallinity of the absorber film, and optimized band arrangement at the back contact. However, with the further increase in the concentration, the VOC, JSC, FF and PCE of the photovoltaic devices sharply decreased, which can be attributed to the larger Rs (Fig. S5 and Table S2, ESI) and significant reduction of the carrier transport caused by the thicker MoO3 with higher resistivity.

To understand the mechanism of the solar cell improvement, the J–V characteristics of the champion solar cell on the Na2S-treated Mo back contact (device B) in comparison with a reference solar cell on Mo substrate (device A) are presented in Fig. 5a. Device A achieved a PCE of 10.66% with VOC of 451 mV, JSC of 38.2 mA cm−2 and FF of 61.8%. Device B demonstrated a PCE of 12.74%, with VOC of 491 mV, JSC of 39.3 mA cm−2, and FF of 66.0%. Improvements in the JSC, VOC and FF were observed for both. In general, the VOC improved significantly by introducing a modified layer at the back contact and JSC, FF were mainly affected by the bulk quality of the CZTSSe absorber layer. The diode parameters, series resistance (Rs), shunt resistance (Rsh), shunt conductance (Gsh) and ideality factor (A) were then determined according to the method by Hegedus et al., as shown in Table 1. The corresponding dJ/dV vs. V curves and dV/dJ vs. (J + JSC)−1 curves for the champion devices under different conditions are shown in Fig. S5 (ESI). Compared with device A, device B showed a larger Rsh and smaller Rs, which can be attributed to the inhibition of the chemical reaction between Mo and CZTSSe and improved crystallinity, leading to an increase in JSC and FF.Gsh is inversely proportional to VOC and is mainly influenced by the recombination in solar cells. The Gsh value of the CZTSSe solar cell decreased to 0.90 from 1.05 mS cm2 with the employed Na2S layer at the rear contact, which indicated the lower recombination in the absorber, at the Mo back contact interface, or the p–n heterojunction interface. As a result, the VOC value of the photovoltaic device was enhanced.
Device
PCEmax [%]

V
OC [mV]

J
SC [mA cm−2]
FF [%]

R
s [Ω cm2]

R
sh [Ω cm2]

G
sh [mS cm2]
A
10.66
451
38.2
61.8
0.8
956
1.05
B
12.74
491
39.3
66.0
0.51
1113
0.90
To directly evaluate the quality of the p–n junction and obtain electric field information in the space-charge region of the devices with and without the Na2S layer on the back contact, the C–V measurements of devices A and B were performed, as displayed in Fig. S6 (ESI). The depletion region width (Wd), carrier concentration (NC–V) and built-in potential (Vbi) of the two devices calculated according to the following formulas are shown in Fig. 5b and c and Table 2:
(3)
(4)
(5)
where
C is the measured capacitance, A is the active area of the device, ε0 is the vacuum dielectric constant (≈8.854 × 10−12 F m−1), εs is the relative dielectric constant of CZTSSe, and q is the electron charge (≈1.602 × 10−19 C). The carrier density (NC−V) of device A was calculated as 1.57 × 1016 cm−3, and its Wd was estimated to be 0.233 μm. After introducing the Na2S layer, NC−V decreased to 1.32 × 1016 cm−3 and Wd increased to 0.291 μm. The larger depletion region width of device B can lead to an increase in the effective carrier collection length, and an enhanced separation capability of carriers at the interface. An absorber with low carrier concentration tends to have low shunt conductance (Gsh) and form a wide depletion width with a buffer layer that leads to high charge collection. In addition, the Vbi of device A was 465 mV and the Vbi of device B was 547 mV, which increased by 82 mV. A higher Vbi can also reduce charge accumulation at the interface and promote photo-generated carrier transport, thus improving VOC and FF.

Device

N

C–V (cm−3)

W
d (μm)

V
bi (mV)

E
a (eV)
A
1.57 × 1016
0.233
465
0.78
B
1.32 × 1016
0.291
547
0.96
The VOC improvement is not only related to the quality of the p–n junction, but also relies on the lifetime and the diffusion length of the minority carriers in the neutral region. To confirm the better carrier collection length, the external quantum efficiencies (EQE) were determined, as illustrated in Fig. 5d. Although the quantum efficiencies of these two devices are equivalent in the short wavelength range of 300–550 nm, the EQE response of device B in the medium and long wavelength region of 550–1200 nm is significantly improved, which suggests less nonradiative recombination and greater carrier collection length in the neutral region and at the back interface of the CZTSSe absorber, resulting from the improved crystal quality and greatly reduced voids as discussed above.Fig. 5e shows the PL spectra of two films. It is noted that film B has a higher PL intensity. The higher PL intensity of the absorber indicates a lower nonradiative recombination center concentration, which reduces the capture of photogenerated carriers by defects and prolongs the lifetime of carriers in the bulk of CZTSSe absorbers. It is well known that minority carrier lifetime is important for determining the collection of photo-generated carriers. Therefore, the time-resolved photoluminescence decay measurements (TRPL) were conducted on the CZTSSe film A and B. The TRPL decay curves were obtained and are depicted in Fig. 5f, where a bi-exponential model of the TRPL transients was used for fitting the curves. The effective minority carrier lifetime (τ) is 1.43 ns and 2.70 ns for the CZTSSe films without and with the Na2S back modified layer, respectively. The prolongation of carrier lifetime also indicates that the back modified layer can significantly inhibit the non-radiative recombination of film B, which may be related to the improved crystallinity and decreased trap density of the CZTSSe film.
According to the above analysis, the increase in VOC is to some extent related to the optimization of the p–n heterojunction and the absorber layer caused by the improvement of the crystallinity of the CZTSSe film. However, many studies have suggested that the MoO3 layer with high work function at the rear contact can more effectively improve the VOC and device performance. To determine the main improvement of the recombination path in thin-film solar cells, temperature-dependent current density voltage (J–V–T) testing was conducted. Fig. 6a and b show the J–V–T variation of devices A and B in the temperature range of 120–320 K, respectively. For device B, the J–V–T curves show a strong downward trend at low temperature, indicating the good diode characteristic of the cell. The recombination activation energy (Ea) can be calculated according to the relationship between Aln (J0) and 1/KT, and the main recombination pathway can be determined by comparing the Ea with the bandgap (Eg) of the solar cells. If the Ea is close to or equal to the Eg of the absorber, i.e., the (Eg–Ea) value is low, the dominant recombination mechanism is the absorber neutral region Shockley Reid Hall (SRH) recombination. If the Ea is far less than the Eg of the absorber layer, the predominant recombination path occurs at the interface. Fig. 5c shows the Ea data for devices A and B. The calculated Ea value of device A is 0.788 eV, which is much smaller than the CZTSSe bandgap (1.04 eV). The Eg of CZTSSe films is 1.04 eV for both devices A and B, which was determined by Tauc curves derived from the UV absorption spectra (Fig. S7, ESI). Meanwhile, the Ea value of device B is 0.958 eV, which is closer to the CZTSSe bandgap value. The increase in the Ea value of device B indicated that the interface recombination was passivated by the back interface modification layer, which further promoted the increase of VOC.
Models have suggested that the barrier height at the back contact of the absorber should not exceed 300 meV in order to not impede device performance. However, a Schottky barrier height as large as 320 meV has been reported for CZTS solar cells. Many studies have shown that MoO3 is an appropriate interfacial layer at the back contact for significantly improving the device performance of CZTSSe solar cells because it has a high work function (∼5.5 eV) compared to the metallic Mo that has a work function around 4.5 eV. By using the MoO3 interfacial layer, the structure of CZTSSe/MoO3/Mo can provide favorable band alignment at the back contact. This is because high-work-function material will lead to the decrease or disappearance of the Schottky barrier (Φb) at the interface of a metal/p-type semiconductor according to the following formula:
Φb = Eg + χ − Φm
(6)

Eg is the bandgap, χ is the electron affinity of the semiconductor, and Φm is the work function of the metal. Therefore, the heights of the back contact barrier of the two devices were calculated by fitting the linear parts of the Ln(RsT) and 1/T curves (Fig. 6d). Compared with device A (280 meV), device B has a lower Φb (179 meV), suggesting a small interfacial barrier, which is consistent with previous studies. The Rs of the devices can be estimated from the J–V–T. The lower Rs of device B also indicated that the quality of the back interface was effectively improved, as shown in Fig. 6e. Based on the above results, it can be inferred that a good ohmic contact can be formed between the CZTSSe absorber and Na2S-treated Mo substrate. The J–V curve of Mo/MoO3/CZTSSe/Ag and Mo/CZTSSe/Ag hole devices can best illustrate the quality of back contacts, as shown in Fig. 6f. The Mo/CZTSSe/Ag device exhibited diode-like J–V characteristics in the first quadrant, indicating that a Schottky barrier similar to a hole injection barrier was formed at the back interface, while the J–V curve of the Mo/MoO3/CZTSSe/Ag hole device showed symmetric linear behavior similar to the ohmic contact. Therefore, the recombination of electron–hole pairs at the back interface was reduced, resulting in a higher VOC and device efficiency.

To further examine the band structure and recombination mechanism at the rear contact, ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) measurements were performed on the CZTSSe film and substrate B with the MoO3 layer. The valence band spectra were obtained with a monochromatic He I light source (21.21 eV) and a VG Scienta R4000 analyzer. A sample bias of −5 V was applied to observe the secondary electron cutoff. The work function was determined from the difference between the photon energy and the binding energy of the secondary cutoff edge. As depicted in Fig. 7a, the secondary-electron cutoff energy (Ecutoff) of the CZTSSe film B obtained via the extrapolation of the linear part of the binding energy edge was 16.11 eV, and the Fermi level (EF) was calculated as −5.10 eV using the following equation:
EF = Ecutoff − 21.21 eV
(7)
The difference between the Fermi level and valence band maximum (VBM) was obtained by the linear fitting of the tail region of the UPS spectra, which was 0.41 eV (inset of
Fig. 7a). Therefore, combined with the bandgap (Fig. S7, ESI), the Fermi level, VBM, and conduction band minimum (CBM) of the CZTSSe film B were −5.10 eV, −5.51 eV, and −4.47 eV, respectively. The band structure of the MoO3 was also obtained through the UPS spectra of substrate B as shown in Fig. 7b. Combining the band gap of MoO3 (3.1 eV) from the literature, the Fermi level, VBM and CBM of MoO3 were −5.51 eV, −8.41 eV and −5.31 eV. It should be noted that the Fermi level of the MoO3 is closer to the CBM than VBM, which indicated n-type conductivity. Many previous studies have proved that the application of the n-type MoO3 as a hole injection layer is also conducive to improving the performance of inorganic solar cells and organic solar cells. Herein, the changes in the energy band map before and after CZTSSe/MoO3 contact are proposed, as shown in Fig. 7c. When the Fermi levels of the materials equilibrate, it can cause electron transfer, and thus generate an electrostatic field in CZTSSe near the back contact, and upward bending of the conduction band toward the back contact, which will drive the photoexcited electrons away from the back contact interface and move toward the p–n junction in the front contact. Consequently, not only is the electron collection length increased but the recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes at the back interface is also suppressed due to the reduced potential barrier and additional electrostatic field. On the other hand, although the holes are not transported to the Ag electrode through the valence band of the MoO3 because of its significant deep valence band edge, the gap states of the MoO3 allow holes to be easily transferred and collected by the Ag electrode. Relatively speaking, a MoSe2 layer with appropriate thickness at the rear contact is more conducive to the hole extraction because the VBM of MoSe2 is higher than that of CZTSSe. However, the thickness of MoSe2 formed spontaneously during the selenization process is difficult to control. The formation of MoSe2 is usually accompanied by the back interface reaction and secondary phase. In addition, compared with MoO3 with a high work function of 5.5 eV, the work function of MoSe2 is close to that of CZTSSe (about 5.1 eV) reported by our group and other reasearchers, which will not significantly reduce the Schottky barrier height at the back contact. Thus, it is the favorable energy band structure provided by the MoO3 layer that promotes carrier transport, inhibits the recombination of electrons and holes, and therefore significantly improves the VOC and efficiency.


A stable intermediate MoO3 layer was introduced at the rear contact of the CZTSSe solar cell by spin-coating Na2S aqueous solution on the Mo substrate. The Na2S layer and the formed MoO3 layer have multiple benefits. The Na2S layer provides more Na to diffuse into the CZTSSe absorber and the upper surface, promoting the crystallinity of thin films and hence obtaining a better quality bulk and p–n junction interface. The increased depletion region width and built-in potential resulted in the enhancement of VOC and FF. The Na2S and formed MoO3 layers inhibited the decomposition reaction between Mo and the CZTSSe absorber, leading to the reduction of secondary phases and voids at the rear interface. The MoO3 formed by in situ oxidation has better stability, higher valence state and work function, which modifies the band alignment at the back contact. Therefore, the reduced potential barrier and additional electrostatic field will improve the minority carrier collection and reduce the recombination rate at the rear interface, leading to the improvement of VOC. As a result, the best CZTSSe device efficiency increased from 10.66% to 12.74% with a pronounced increase in VOC and FF.


Yue Jian: data curation, writing-original draft preparation. Tianliang Xie: data curation, validation. Litao Han: conceptualization, writing–review & editing. Wenhui Zhou and Yafang Qi: supervision. Yuena Meng: project administration. Zhengji Zhou, Dongxing Kou and Shengjie Yuan: resources, supervision. Sixin Wu: resources, methodology.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (62074052, 61974173, 62104061 and U1904192), the Science and Technology Innovation Talents in Universities of Henan Province (21HASTIT023) and the Key Scientific and Technological project of Henan Province (20B480002 and 212300410115).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3tc00378g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023