 DOI: 10.1039/C3TA13152A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2250-2255


Hyosung
An
,

Donghoon
Song
,

Joosub
Lee
,

Eun-Mi
Kang
,

Justyn
Jaworski
,

Jong-Man
Kim
* and 

Yong Soo
Kang
*

Department of Chemical Engineering, Hanyang University, 133-791, Seoul, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jmk@hanyang.ac.kr

Center for Next Generation Dye-sensitized Solar Cells, WCU Department of Energy Engineering, Hanyang University, 133-791, Seoul, Republic of Korea. E-mail: kangys@hanyang.ac.kr

Received
10th August 2013
, Accepted 27th November 2013
First published on 28th November 2013
Tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) is employed as an equilibrium shifting agent for the esterification reaction between the carboxylic acid of the amphiphilic Z907 dye and Ti-OH on the mesoscopic TiO2 surface in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs). We demonstrate that TEOS treatment of the Z907-dyed TiO2 film increases the amount of strongly anchored dyes, and also improves the electron diffusion length (Ln). Consequently, the cell provides a remarkable short-circuit current density (Jsc) enhanced by 22% (9.0 → 11.0 mA cm−2) and the total power conversion efficiency increased by 14% (4.9 → 5.6%) under 1 sun (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2), even with less than half the amount of adsorbed dye as compared to the reference. Therefore, TEOS treatment seems to be effective in increasing the power conversion efficiency along with increasing the concentration of the strongly anchored dye, specifically when using an amphiphilic dye such as Z907.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) have been attracting much attention in both academia and industries because of their rather high energy-conversion efficiency and low production costs. DSC configurations utilize an electrolyte sandwiched between a mesoporous photoanode and counter electrode, where the photoanode is decorated with dyes. Surface passivation by co-adsorbents is a common way to increase the power conversion efficiency by preventing electron recombination from the TiO2 surface with oxidized redox species such as I3− and also by dissociating dye aggregates or weakened dye–dye interactions. Therefore, many different co-adsorbents, such as deoxycholic acid (DCA), chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA), and dineohexyl bis-(3,3-dimethylbutyl)-phosphinic acid (DINHOP) have been investigated. Interestingly, stearic acid co-adsorbent increased the content of the strongly anchored dye in the TiO2 surface, which is an additional advantage of using this co-adsorbent. As a result, it brought about approximately 25% enhancement in the photocurrent density as well as the energy conversion efficiency of the DSCs, even for much lower dye coverage.

Meanwhile, silane or siloxane derivatives have also been investigated to passivate the surface of the TiO2 layer as well as to increase the surface area for dye loading, to shorten the electron transport pathway or to use light scattering effect by itself or using structures of template, core–shell, micron-sized beads, etc. Unlike other co-adsorbents containing either carboxylic acid or phosphonic acid, the silane or siloxane derivative treatment could easily form a polymerized layer at the outer surface of the TiO2 layer as it is catalysed by surface-adsorbed water. A drawback of this approach is nanopore clogging, resulting in hindrance of the regeneration rate of oxidized dyes.
Herein, we attempt to significantly reinforce the anchoring of amphiphilic Z907 (ref. 20) bound to the TiO2 surface with the help of the equilibrium shifting agent tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) and thereby to increase the concentration of strongly anchored dyes (Fig. 1). The chemical structures of TEOS and Z907 sensitizing dye are shown in Fig. 2. When a Z907-sensitized TiO2 electrode is dipped in the TEOS ethanolic solution, TEOS can be competitively co-adsorbed onto the TiO2 surface, which may be rarely polymerized to clog nanopores of the TiO2 surface and help the weakly bound Z907 convert the strongly bound dyes by the equilibrium shifting reaction instead (Fig. 3). Consequently, we can expect an improved performance, as we examine in detail below.

All reagents were used as received. Sensitizing ruthenium dye Z907 (cis-diisothiocyanato-(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid)-(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dinonyl) ruthenium(II)) was obtained from Solaronix (Switzerland). Tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) was purchased from Aldrich. The electrolyte consists of 0.6 M 1-methyl-3-propyl imidazolium iodide (MPII), 0.1 M lithium iodide (LiI), 0.05 M iodine, 0.5 M 4-tert-butyl pyridine (tBP) and 0.1 M guanidine thiocyanate (GuSCN) in acetonitrile.


FTO glass was cleaned in isopropyl alcohol, deionized water and acetonitrile in this sequence using an ultrasonic bath for 15 min. Any solvent residue was removed in a vacuum oven for 30 min. A TiO2 blocking layer was prepared by TiCl4 treatment, followed by annealing at 450 °C in air for 30 min. A 5.5 μm thick transparent TiO2 mesoscopic film was coated on the FTO glass, TEC-8 (∼8 Ω cm−2, Pilkington) and a 4 μm thick scattering layer was deposited onto the transparent TiO2 layer by the doctor-blade technique with commercial TiO2 pastes (Dyesol 18 NR-T and Dyesol WER 2-O, respectively) with a square-shaped active area of 0.26 cm2. After annealing the layer-by-layer deposited TiO2 film at 450 °C for 30 min, TiCl4 treatment was repeated with the method corresponding to the previous treatment. After cooling to 80 °C, the prepared TiO2 electrodes were immersed into 0.3 mM Z907 solution in acetonitrile–tert-butanol (1:1 v/v) at 30 °C for 24 h. The films were then rinsed in the same solvents to remove the excess dye and then stored in a vacuum oven for 30 min to remove the residual solvent. To treat the dyed TiO2 surfaces with the co-adsorbent, the photoanode was immersed in 300 mM TEOS in anhydrous ethanol at 30 °C for 4 days, and rinsed with anhydrous ethanol. The counter electrodes were thermally platinized at 450 °C for 30 min, using ethanolic H2PtCl6 solution. The TiO2 substrate and Pt counter electrode were assembled using a Surlyn frame, Meltonix 1170-25 (Solaronix). The electrolyte was injected through the hole in counter substrates and the DSCs were finally sealed with 25 μm Surlyn under a thin glass cover by heating to produce Device-Z and Device-ZT, without and with the TEOS treatment, respectively.


For photoelectrochemical measurements, a 300 W xenon light source (Newport, USA) was used to give a 1 sun illumination at AM 1.5 (100 mW cm−2) at the surface of the solar cell. The light intensity was calibrated by a silicon solar cell (PV Measurements, Inc.). The current voltage characteristics of the cell under the conditions were obtained by applying an external potential bias to the cell and measuring the generated photocurrent with a Keithley model 2400 digital source meter (Keithley, USA). A shading mask with an aperture of 0.49 cm2 was applied to each cell, preventing the overestimation of power conversion efficiency and this area was used to calculate the short circuit current density (mA cm−2).


EDX using a Horiba EX-250 attached to a Hitachi FE-SEM S-4800 was carried out to determine the presence of chemical species on the TiO2 surface. UV-visible spectra of dye-sensitized TiO2 electrodes were recorded on a single beam Agilent 8453 UV-visible spectrometer. By subtracting the absorbance of just the 5.5 μm thick transparent TiO2 electrode, the value of the dye loading amount of both the control and Device-ZT was estimated, and then the amount of dye loading for modified cells was determined from the absorption difference of the dipping solution before and after the co-adsorbent treatment at 526 nm.

IPCE spectra of DSCs were measured as a function of wavelength in the range of 300 to 800 nm with a chopping wavelength of 10 nm using a QEX7 model solar cell spectral response measurement system (PV Measurements Inc.) after calibration using a silicon reference cell. The IPCE is derived from the following equation:
(1)
where the photocurrent density is induced by the monochromatic light with wavelength (
λ).

Intensity-modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS) using the CIMPS (Controlled Intensity Modulated Photo Spectroscopy) system (Zahner) was employed to give insight into the charge recombination at the TiO2–electrolyte interface. IMVS provides information on the electron lifetime (τn) under open-circuit conditions. Intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) using the CIMPS system employs the same light perturbation of IMVS but measures the dynamics of charge transport and back reaction under short-circuit conditions. The electron diffusion length, Ln = (Dnτn)1/2 indicates the result of competition between electron transport and back reaction. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed with an Autolab PGSTAT 302N. The frequency range was usually 10 mHz–1 MHz at −0.75 V bias voltage in the dark.

The chemical structure of the TEOS treated TiO2 film surface was investigated by energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy.


Table 1 lists the relative atomic concentration of the three elements in the two photoanodes. The slightly lower concentration of Ti and the appearance of Si (2.42%) in the TEOS modified film imply that the surface of the Z907-anchored TiO2 layer has successfully reacted with TEOS. After the co-adsorbing process, the amount of Z907 loading decreased considerably from 1.42% to 0.64%, indicating that more than half of the dyes adsorbed on the surface were desorbed during the TEOS treatment. The amount of dye detached from the TiO2 surface as a result of TEOS treatment was also investigated by UV-vis spectroscopy as follows.
Ru (%)
Ti (%)
Si (%)

a Note that values obtained are an average of two samples for each experiment.

Z907 only
1.42
98.59
0.00
Z907 + TEOS
0.64
96.95
2.42

Fig. 4 shows the absorption spectra of 500 mM TEOS solution in chloroform, the TiO2 films sensitized with Z907 alone, and Z907 plus TEOS. The TEOS co-adsorbent did not absorb in the visible region. Meanwhile, the UV-vis absorption intensity of Z907 was drastically decreased during the co-adsorbent anchoring process. The relative peak intensity of the photoanodes at λmax (526 nm) was about 54% lower for Z907 + TEOS as compared to Z907 alone (Table 2), which is consistent with the EDX results described above.
Dye and co-adsorbent

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (mV)
FF

η (%)
Relative dye load

a Values obtained represent the average over 3 devices for each experiment. The cell active areas were 0.26 cm−2.

Device-Z
Z907 only
9.0
736
0.73
4.9
1.00
Device-ZT
Z907 + TEOS
11.0
721
0.70
5.6
0.44

When a dye having two carboxylic acids such as Z907 and N719 (RuL2(NCS)2:2TBA (L = 2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid; TBA = tetrabutylammonium)) reacts with hydroxyls on the TiO2 surface, either one or two ester groups are formed depending on the environment. A one ester linkage between the dye and the TiO2 surface is commonly termed as weakly anchored whereas a two ester linkage is referred to as strongly anchored. Therefore, when dyes are strongly anchored, it is expected that the electron injection from the excited dyes to the conduction band (CB) of TiO2 is promoted, resulting in a higher current density. In addition, long-term stability would be better for the strongly anchored case simply because two ester bonds would be stronger than one ester linkage.


Fig. 5 displays the normalized ATR-FTIR spectra of nanoporous TiO2 immobilized with Z907 and Z907 after the TEOS treatment in the ranges of 3150–2750 and 1450–1250 cm−1. The peaks at 2924 and 2854 cm−1 arise from the asymmetric and symmetric modes of the CH2 unit of the aliphatic chains of Z907 and the ethoxy chains of TEOS, whose intensities were normalized against the intensity of the CH2 unit. The ethoxy chains of TEOS may contribute to the CH2 peak intensity at 2924 and 2854 cm−1; however, their contribution would be very small since most of the ethoxy groups become ethanol, which is subsequently evaporated. The peak at 1374 cm−1 is attributed to the symmetric stretching mode of the carboxylate group anchored to the TiO2 surface. The normalized intensity of the carboxylate, representing the relative concentration of the carboxylate per dye molecule, was increased almost two fold (see Table S1). This strongly suggests that the weakly anchored dyes on the TiO2 surface become strongly anchored after the TEOS treatment. A scheme of the strong anchoring dyes on the TiO2 surface is suggested in Fig. 6.
The reaction between carboxylic acids from weakly anchored dyes and the hydroxyl of TiO2 to form carboxylate is an equilibrium reaction to produce water as a by-product as shown in relationship (1) of Fig. 6. During the TEOS treatment, water produced from relationship (1) may react with TEOS as written in relationship (2) and therefore its concentration would be decreased, resulting in the equilibrium reaction shift toward the formation of two carboxylates and hence a strongly anchored dye. Therefore, it is suggested that TEOS can act as an equilibrium shifting agent. In other words, some weakly anchored dyes readily become strongly anchored during the TEOS treatment because of the equilibrium shifting help of TEOS. On the other hand, since the less hydrophobic N719-dyed film did not provide a hydrophobic surface to repel water molecules (produced from anchoring reactions and present as an impurity during cell fabrication), the amount of the strongly anchored N719 was not increased after the TEOS treatment (see Fig. S3 and S4). It was therefore anticipated that only when a hydrophobic dye such as Z907 is used, the amount of strongly anchored dyes may become increased and consequently help increase Jsc due to rise in the charge injection efficiency, which will be discussed in the following section.

The solar cell performance was evaluated to investigate the effect of the TEOS treatment. Hereafter, the cell will be referred to as Device-Z with Z907 only and Device-ZT with Z907 and TEOS. The TEOS treatment condition was not largely varied depending on the concentration and treatment time as evidenced in Fig. S9 and S10.


Fig. 7a indicates the corresponding photocurrent density versus potential curves of Device-Z and Device-ZT under 1 sun illumination and in the dark. Cell performance parameters including the short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), and photovoltaic conversion efficiency (η) are listed in Table 2. Device-ZT containing the Z907 + TEOS electrode was found to yield higher Jsc (+2.0 mA cm−2) with slightly reduced Voc (−15 mV), compared to Device-Z. Employment of TEOS as a co-adsorbent was proved to enhance the overall power conversion efficiency by 14% (4.9 → 5.6%) due to the increase in short-circuit current by 22% (9.0 → 11.0 mA cm−2) despite small decreases in both Voc and FF. Interestingly, it was observed that the TEOS treatment with Z907 enhanced the cell performance whereas treatment with N719 showed a decrease in the cell performance (see Table S2), suggesting a characteristic feature of the hydrophobic dye Z907. Hence, Device-ZT guaranteed a reasonable long-term stability under ambient conditions (Fig. S5).
In the case of TEOS treatment with Z907, the maximum IPCE value increased from 57% up to 76% at 520 nm, compared to that of Z907 without TEOS treatment, as shown in Fig. 7b. The large decrease in IPCE value around 370 nm could be due to strong absorption of I3− in the electrolyte. From the spectrum integral of Devices-Z and -ZT under the condition of 1 sun, the calculated Jsc values are 9.05 and 11.29 mA cm−2, respectively, which are in excellent accord with the listed values in Table 2. The increase in Jsc seems to be due to the rise in charge injection efficiency attributed to increase in the concentration of the strongly anchored dyes as well as the change in the TiO2 CB edge. Hence, Device ZT shows higher dark current density than Device-Z as shown in Fig. 7a, suggesting that the electron recombination in Device-ZT occurs faster even after the TEOS adsorption onto the Z907-sensitized TiO2 surface. In other words, the TEOS layer in Device-ZT was less effective in retarding the back electron recombination. As a result, Device-ZT displayed a small decrease in photovoltage (736 → 721 mV).

A characteristic feature of these devices is the unexpectedly high dark current density and the high current density under illumination even with formation of a thin TEOS layer on the TiO2 surface as shown in Fig. 7a.


V
oc is chiefly governed by charge concentration in the TiO2 layer and CB edge shift, where the charge concentration depends on charge injection and recombination. Note that an apparent TiO2 CB edge shift may occur downward via the TEOS treatment (see Fig. S6), indicating a small decrease in the Voc. To gain further insight into the slight Voc drop by the TEOS treatment, intensity-modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS) was employed to investigate the charge recombination behavior at the TiO2–electrolyte interface.Fig. 8a shows the plot of electron lifetime (τn) versus the incident light intensity. Device-ZT showed a slightly shorter value of the electron lifetime than Device-Z without TEOS, indicating the faster charge recombination rate. Also, the impedance results were also in agreement with the IMVS results (see Fig. S7). It appears that the TEOS layer may cover the surface of the TiO2 layer, but may not be effective in blocking or retarding the electron recombination as much as the Z907 dye.
During the TEOS treatment, almost half of the attached dye became detached as described previously, indicating that the TEOS treatment replaced the dyes effectively covering the TiO2 surface with a TEOS layer. It is plausible to assume that a bulky dye molecule is more effective in blocking electron recombination than a very thin TEOS layer. This is consistent with the previous results by Cho et al., claiming that a thin phosphonic acid–3-aminopropylphosphonic acid barrier did not effectively retard the back electron recombination, but the electron tunnelling occurred effectively through the thin barrier.
Intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) was employed to investigate the increased photocurrent density, which was measured at the same light perturbation as IMVS.Fig. 8b presents the plot of diffusion coefficient (Dn) versus incident light intensity. It is worth noting that the Dn value provides information about the influence of CB edge movement on the electron transport. Device-ZT, compared with Device-Z, showed 35% higher Dn values under the given conditions, indicating that the lower CB edge could contribute to higher Dn and Jsc values according to the trapping/detrapping electron transport mechanism. Also, the electron diffusion length was calculated and illustrated in Fig. 8c as a function of the light intensity, indicating that the diffusion length is longer in Device-ZT than in Device-Z.

The TEOS treatment enhanced the photo-induced current by 22% (9.0 → 11.0 mA cm−2) without a significant photovoltage penalty, thereby improving the conversion efficiency by 14% (4.9 → 5.6%) under 1 sun, even with less than half the amount of dye, compared to the untreated case. The increased photocurrent density may be attributed to the effective charge injection from strongly anchored dyes by the equilibrium shifting action of TEOS as well as a downward CB edge shift. Moreover, the device showed a better long-term stability than the untreated reference cell under ambient conditions and no TiO2 pore clogging behavior, which could reduce current density (Fig. S11). Therefore, it is concluded that the TEOS treatment is an effective avenue in enhancing the power conversion efficiency.


This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIP) for the Center for Next Generation Dye-sensitized Solar Cells (No. 2008-0061903) and by the Korea Center for Artificial Photosynthesis (KCAP) (No. 2009-0093883).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: I–V characteristics, ATR-FTIR spectra, schematic diagram of N719, impedance results, long-term stability results. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta13152a
‡ These authors contributed equally to this manuscript.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014