 DOI: 10.1039/D1GC00599E
(Paper)
Green Chem., 2021, 23, 3633-3641


Yuying
Cui
,

Shurong
Wang
,

Chengbo
Li
,

Aili
Wang
,

Jing
Ren
,

Chenguang
Yang
,

Bin
Chen
,

Zhen
Wang
 and 

Feng
Hao
*

School of Materials and Energy, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, 611731, China. E-mail: haofeng@uestc.edu.cn

Faculty of Printing, Packaging and Digital Media Technology, Xi'an University of Technology, Xi'an 710048, Shaanxi, China

Received
16th February 2021
, Accepted 12th April 2021
First published on 12th April 2021
Antisolvent assisted crystallization has been most widely applied in depositing high-quality perovskite thin films for efficient perovskite solar cells (PSCs). However, the toxicity of common antisolvents (chlorobenzene, toluene etc.) involved in perovskite processing raises serious environmental and health concerns for large-scale implementation. Herein, a green co-antisolvent of propyl acetate is induced to adjust the degree of supersaturation in diethyl ether, enabling pinhole-free, smooth, and uniform perovskite thin films. By carefully controlling the polarity of the antisolvents, the deposited perovskite film showed higher electron mobility and suppressed defect density than that of the control film. As a result, a high power conversion efficiency up to 20.61% was achieved in a p–i–n inverted MAPbI3 PSC with an impressive fill factor (FF) over 84%. The high FF is mainly attributed to the attenuated ideal factor and improved diode junction quality. This approach provides a greener path to the sustainability and scalability of the emerging PSC technology.

Organic/inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted immense attention with an exponentially growing certified power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 25.5%. This unexpected PCE increase comes from the prominent photoelectric properties of halide perovskites, such as high extinction coefficient, fast carrier mobility, long carrier diffusion length, and controllable band gap. The preparation of perovskite films usually started from depositing a precursor solution on a substrate, accompanied by thermal annealing to complete the crystal growth. For a high-quality perovskite thin film, some reported strategies including hot-casting, vapor-phase drying, gas quenching, and antisolvent assisted crystallization are applicable for a wide range of perovskite components. It has been demonstrated that antisolvent assisted crystallization is most widely applied to deposite high-quality perovskite films by manipulating the nucleation and crystal growth process due to the low-cost and high accessibility.

Generally, polar aprotic solvents, such as N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), γ-butyrolactone (GBL),N,N-dimethylacetamide (DMAC) and N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP), are commonly used to dissolve perovskite precursors with the formation of solvated iodoplumbate complexes with Pb2+ ions. Hamill et al. applied Gutmann's donor numbers (DN) to assess the coordinating ability of solvents with Pb2+, where the trend is DMSO > DMAC > NMP > DMF > GBL. Therefore, suitable solvents should be considered to ensure large surface coverage by increasing the degree of supersaturation. Additionally, the anti-solvent dripping during the spin-coating promotes nucleation and crystal growth with homogeneous spherulitic characteristics. Subsequently, films with a perovskite phase formed through grain boundary movement and Ostwald ripening.
Currently, common antisolvents can be classified into two categories: non-halogenated ones such as diethyl ether (DE), toluene (TOL), anisole, and ethyl acetate (EA), and halogenated ones such as chloroform and chlorobenzene (CB). Among all these antisolvents, CB is most popular due to the high dipole moment, surface tension and viscosity, thus resulting in fast nucleation and a large crystallite size. However, the large-scale use of CB causes environmental and health concerns because of nonnegligible toxicity. Moreover, CB is likely to induce heterogeneous crystallization and make the perovskite films more susceptible to moisture due to the poor hydrogen bond with precursor ions.
So far, DE, as a green antisolvent, usually contributes to a higher degree of supersaturation due to its high vapor pressure compared to CB (442 Torr for DE, and 9 Torr for CB), which can extract DMF more rapidly from the precursor. Unfortunately, with the use of DE it is hard to control the processing window due to its low boiling point and low viscosity, thus restricting the device reproducibility. For ester-based antisolvents, they could induce uniform grain formation with less porosity. Bu et al. and Zhang et al. reported a synergic interface optimization with EA, yielding a PCE of 19.43% and 17.83% in n–i–p PSCs, respectively. Angmo et al. firstly investigated the microstructure of a perovskite film with EA, propyl acetate (PA), and isopropyl acetate by in situ crystallization. The resulting PSCs achieved 17.78% stabilized PCE using PA antisolvent. Liu et al. further employed co-antisolvents, EA and isopropanol (IPA), to smooth the surface and grain boundaries of perovskite films. Yi et al. mixed EA and petroleum ether (PE) to control the supersaturation degree and realized reduced solvent evaporation for crystal growth. Therefore, it is still highly desired to develop green antisolvents for the deposition of high-quality perovskite films.
Herein, we adopted an eco-friendly antisolvent mixture of PA and DE to grow smooth, large grain size and pinhole-free perovskite films by carefully controlling the polarity of the antisolvents. By mixing DE with 20% PA (volume ratio), the resultant perovskite film showed a higher electron mobility of 10.75 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and suppressed defect density of 3.82 × 1016 cm−3 than that of the control film (7.77 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 4.48 × 1016 cm−3), respectively. Subsequently, the PSC device delivered a fill factor (FF) over 84% and a PCE of 20.61% in inverted MAPbI3 devices with negligible hysteresis, significantly higher than the control device with a PCE of 18.28% and FF of 79.13%. The improved FF is among the highest reported values for inverted PSCs, which is mainly due to the attenuated ideal factor and improved diode junction quality for the device with mixed green antisolvents.

Ethanol (General-Reagent, 99.7%), acetone (Cdkelong, 99.5%), isopropanol (IPA, Aladdin, 99.8%), ethylene glycol (Cdkelong, 99.5%), ethylenediamine (Cdkelong, 99.0%), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, Sigma-Aldrich, 99.8%), N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP, General-Reagent, 99.0%), diethyl ether (DE, KESHI, 99.5%), propyl acetate (PA, Adamas-beta,99%), chlorobenzene (CB, Sigma-Aldrich, 99.8%), nickel acetate tetrahydrate (Adamas-beta, 98%), methylammonium iodide (MAI, Great-Cell, 99.9%), lead(II) iodide (PbI2, Aladdin, 99.9%), silver (Ag, Trillion Metals, 99.9%), [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM, Luminescence Technology, 99%), and polyethyleneimine (PEI, Sigma-Aldrich, 50% (w/v) in H2O) were used.


Fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) conducting glass was ultrasonically cleaned with detergent, deionized water, ethanol, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol for 20 min, respectively. Then, the substrates were dried by nitrogen stream and treated under UV ozone for 15 min; 0.5 M nickel acetate tetrahydrate in ethylene glycol with equal molar ratio ethylenediamine was spin-coated on the substrates to deposit a NiOx layer at 4000 rpm for 30 s under ambient conditions and then annealed at 350 °C in a muffle furnace for 1 h. The perovskite precursor solution was prepared using PbI2 (1.35 M) and CH3NH3I (MAI, 1.35 M) in DMF:NMP = 8:9 (v:v), and stirred for 2 h at 25 °C. The antisolvent was prepared by mixing diethyl ether (DE) and propyl acetate (PA) at volume ratios of 1:0, 1:0.1, 1:0.2, 1:0.3 and 1:0.4. The perovskite film was spin-coated in a one-step procedure at 3000 rpm for 70 s, and 1 mL of antisolvent was dropped onto the substrate in the last 25 s. The films were quickly transferred to a hot-plate and annealed at 100 °C for 10 min. A layer of PC61BM (20 mg mL−1 in chlorobenzene) was spin-coated at 2000 rpm for 30 s, and then a dilute PEI solution in IPA was spin-coated at 4000 rpm for 30 s. Finally, a 100 nm Ag electrode was deposited by thermal evaporation under high vacuum to complete the device.


MiniFlex 600 (Rigaku) X-ray diffractometer (XRD) with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.15406 nm, 40 kV, 100 mA) was used to analyze the crystalline phase of perovskite films. A Keithley 2400 source and a solar simulator (San-EI Electric) with standard AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) illumination were used to measure the J–V characteristics of PSCs under ambient conditions. A standard silicon solar cell AK-200 (Konica Minolta) was used to calibrate the light intensity. The cell mask area was 0.096 cm2. The monochromatic incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) was measured using QE-R (Enlitech). A UV-2600 spectrometer (Shimadzu) with an integration sphere was used to measure the UV–vis absorption of the NiOx and perovskite films. A scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Gemini SEM 300) was used to observe the morphology of perovskite layers. The steady photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) decay measurements were conducted using a Fluo Time 300 (PicoQuant). Transient photocurrent decays (TPC), transient photovoltage decays (TPV) and impedance spectroscopy (IS) data were measured using a Paios 2.0 system (FLUXiM).


MAPbI3 films were prepared via a one-step spin-coating method with antisolvent dripping (Fig. 1a). Table S1 lists the corresponding environmental and health impact of different antisolvents. Compared with DE, PA showed better environmental friendliness and lower health damage. The crystalline phase of perovskite films with different antisolvents (DE:PA = 1:0, 1:0.1, 1:0.2, 1:0.3 and 1:0.4, respectively) was first studied using the X-ray diffractometer (XRD) spectra as shown in Fig. 1b. Compared with the control film with blank DE, the diffraction intensity at (110) and (310) crystal planes in PA-mixed antisolvents slightly increased and reached a maximum at the 20% PA ratio, indicating that the addition of PA could promote the crystallinity of the perovskite film. We did not observe the PbI2 peak at 12.5° in the XRD spectra, which manifested a complete transformation to the perovskite phase. Then, atomic force microscopy (AFM) was performed to study the roughness of the as-deposited perovskite film. The root mean square (RMS) of perovskite films with the mixed antisolvent was slightly lower than that of pure DE, as shown in Fig. 1c and d. Furthermore, the effect of the antisolvents on the morphology of the deposited perovskite films was checked by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Fig. 1e and f show the representative surface morphology of the perovskite film with different DE to PA ratios. The perovskite film with blank DE showed an irregular grain size and heterogeneous features. Interestingly, adding 20% PA in DE yields a perovskite film with a larger grain size and smoother surface. It can be inferred from Fig. 1g that the grain size of the perovskite film with mixed antisolvent increased about 40% to an average grain size of 166 nm. Due to the formation of a strong hydrogen bond, the incorporation of PA in the antisolvent could raise homogeneous supersaturation of the precursor, thus promoting uniform nucleation and crystal growth. Note that PA was used to denote the film deposited with 20% PA mixed antisolvent henceforth.

To characterize the charge carrier dynamics of perovskite films from different antisolvents, steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) were measured, Fig. 2a and b. It should be noted that the PL measurement was performed on a perovskite film, in the absence of any charge transporting layer. The PL intensity of perovskite films with PA was much higher than that of pure DE. For the perovskite film without a quench layer, the higher PL intensity corresponds to less trap states in the perovskite film and suppressed nonradiative recombination. The PL decays shown in Fig. 2b were well fitted with a bi-exponential decay model as listed in Table 1. The average PL lifetime (τavg) of the perovskite film was calculated via the following equation:
(1)
where
A1 and A2 are the relative weight fraction amplitudes, τ1 represents the fast decay time component caused by non-radiation recombination at the defect sites and τ2 represents the slow decay time component derived from radiation combination in the perovskite film. Compared with the control film (4.68 ns), the τ1 value of the PA-film (5.13 ns) was obviously increased, illustrating that the non-radiative recombination was inhibited. Meanwhile, the τ2 value of the PA-film was also significantly enhanced from 25.27 ns to 46.33 ns, indicating that the carrier lifetime of perovskite films was substantially improved. The film with PA exhibited a relatively longer τavg of 39.79 ns than that with pure DE (17.39 ns), which is mainly attributed to the suppressed nonradiative recombination mentioned above. Ultraviolet and visible (UV–vis) spectra in Fig. 2c indicated that there are no obvious changes in the absorption profiles of the perovskite films. Moreover, the trap state density of the perovskite film was detected from the space charge-limited current (SCLC) measurement. The trap state density (Nt) can be calculated by the trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL) using equation:

(2)
where
ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, ε is the relative dielectric constant of MAPbI3, VTFL is the starting voltage of the trap-filled limit voltage, e is the elementary charge of the electron, and d is the thickness of the perovskite film (d = 420 nm). As depicted in Fig. 2d, the PA film exhibited a lower VTFL of 0.87 V compared to the pure DE device (1.02 V), with a corresponding trap state density of 3.82 × 1016 cm−3 and 4.48 × 1016 cm−3, respectively. Notably, the decreased defect density of the perovskite film with PA was mainly due to the smooth surfaces and larger grain size with less grain boundaries. Furthermore, the charge-transporting behavior was checked by the photo-generated charge carrier extraction by the linearly increasing voltage (photo-CELIV) technique, as shown in Fig. 2e. The charge mobility (μ) can be calculated using the equation:

(3)
where
tmax is the time at the maximum extraction current, j0 is the initial current, the Δj is the extraction current and A is the ramp rate. The charge carrier mobility was estimated to be 10.75 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the PA film, which was almost 40% higher than that of the DE film (7.77 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, the details listed in Table S1). The photo-CELIV transients recorded at various light intensities are shown in Fig. S1 and the corresponding μ is shown in Fig. 2f. With the change of light intensity, the PA film showed more stable charge mobility than those with pure DE.

Samples

τ
1 (ns)

A
1


τ
2 (ns)

A
2


τ
ave (ns)
Ctr.
4.68
0.77
25.27
0.23
17.39
PA
5.13
0.63
46.33
0.37
39.79
The photovoltaic performance of p–i–n inverted PSCs was further studied with a structure of FTO/NiOx/MAPbI3/PC61BM/PEI/Ag. As shown in J–V curves in Fig. 3a, the device with PA exhibited markedly higher photovoltaic performance than that with pure DE. As a reference device, the control device with pure DE showed a PCE of 18.28% with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.02 V, a short-circuit current (Jsc) of 22.64 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 79.13%. The PA device achieved a PCE of 20.61% with a Voc of 1.05 V, a Jsc of 23.20 mA cm−2, and an outstanding FF of 84.49%. Meanwhile, the hysteresis index (HI) was evaluated using the following equation:
(4)
where
 and  stand for the area under J–V curves measured from forward and reverse scans, respectively. The PA device exhibited a slightly reduced HI, which was ascribed to the suppressed carrier recombination and improved carrier transport and extraction (Table 2). To control the polarity of the antisolvents, different volume ratios of PA were added in the antisolvents. A maximum PCE was achieved with 20% PA as shown in Fig. S2 and Table S3. The improvement was mainly attributed to an increased FF. Meanwhile, other common anti-solvents were also applied to compare the device performance (Fig. S3 and Table S4). The different supersaturation degrees result in diverse device performances, where the device with toluene exhibited the worst PCE due to the formation of nonuniform perovskite thin films. To check the device reproducibility, 25 independent devices were fabricated (Fig. 3b). The FF showed a clear increasing trend to a maximum value around 84% at 20% PA and then started to decline. It should be noted that the obtained FF (84%) is among the highest reported values for inverted PSCs by the antisolvent method (the details were listed in Table S5). The monochromatic incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the PA device is shown in Fig. 3c. An integrated current density (Jint) of 22.40 mA cm−2 was achieved, which was close to the measured Jsc of 23.20 mA cm−2. Fig. 3d presents the steady-state photocurrent output under a fixed bias at the maximum power point (MPP) at 0.86 V for the PA device, delivering a steady Jsc of 23.03 mA cm−2 and steady PCE of 20.01%.

Sample
Scan direction

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
HI
Ctr.
Fwd
1.02
22.72
74.39
17.20
0.037
Rev
1.02
22.64
79.13
18.28
PA
Fwd
1.05
23.10
82.96
20.09
0.034
Rev
1.05
23.20
84.49
20.61

Fig. 4a shows the plots of −dV/dJ vs. 1/(Jsc – J) and the linear fitting curves according to:
(5)
where
A is the ideal factor, Rs is the series resistance, and J is the instantaneous current density. A and Rs of the device were derived from the slope and intercept of the linear fitting results. The relatively lower A of 1.53 for the PA device compared to that of 2.05 for the pure DE device illustrates the suppressed trap-assisted Shockley–Read–Hall recombination in the PA device. The Rs of device with PA was lower than that of the control device, which verified that small Rs favored a high FF. Fig. 4b shows the plots of dJ/dV vs. V using the equation:

(6)
where
JL represents the photogenerated current density, and G is the shunt conductance. Derived from the plots near the JL, G was obtained by calculating the average dJ/dV value from 0 to 0.5 V. The calculated illuminated shunt conductance (G) of the device with PA is 0.51 mS cm−2, which was significantly lower than that of the pure DE sample (2.23 mS cm−2). The relatively lower G demonstrates that there are fewer shunt paths in the PA device, which will be beneficial to reduce the carrier recombination. The typical dark J–V characteristic curves are shown in Fig. 4c. Compared to the control device, the PA device exhibited a lower leakage current. These results demonstrated that the photo-generated charge carriers effectively pass through the transport layer instead of being shunted directly.

Transient photovoltage decay (TPV) measurement was used to probe the charge recombination lifetimes as shown in Fig. 5a. The recombination lifetime was remarkably increased from 31.69 μs for the control device to 79.43 μs for the device with PA, implying reduced recombination in the mixed antisolvent processed device. Meanwhile, the charge transport could also be checked from the transient photocurrent decay (TPC) in Fig. 5b. The photocurrent decay time of the PA device was derived to be 0.77 μs, which was slightly lower than that of the control device (1.08 μs), indicating a facilitated charge transport in the PA device. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was also applied to characterize the charge transport property of PSCs. Fig. 5c shows the dark Nyquist plots of the control and PA devices. Correspondingly, the serial resistance (Rs) correlates to the high frequency element, and the recombination resistance (Rrec) correlates to the semicircle in the low frequency region. The PA device exhibited a higher Rrec of 20.61 kΩ compared to the control device (8.82 kΩ), which indicated suppressed charge recombination in the PA device. This is mainly attributed to the improved perovskite film quality and in good agreement with the TPV measurement results. Furthermore, capacitance–frequency plots were obtained using impedance spectroscopy (IS) by varying the frequency from 1 MHz to 1 Hz as shown in Fig. 5d. The capacitance at low frequency (∼1 Hz) is the electrode polarization caused by the electrode phenomenon, which is related to the chemical reactive sites at the interface. The PA device showed a smaller capacitance than the control device in the low frequency range, indicating that the charge accumulation at the interface is reduced. The reduced charge accumulation is beneficial to suppress the hysteresis behavior of PSCs, which was in accordance with the smaller HI for the device with PA. Moreover, the unencapsulated PA device exhibited better stability under ambient conditions with 30% relative humidity at 25 °C than the control device with pure DE (Fig. S4), which was associated with the improved crystal quality of the perovskite film with mixed antisolvent and a higher water contact angle as shown in Fig. S5. In addition, the UV-vis absorption and phase stability of the devices were studied under at 50–60% relative humidity and 100 °C, as shown in Fig. S6 and S7. Under thermal stress at 100 °C, the PbI2 peak (12.5°) was observed both in the control and PA devices, whereas the diffraction intensity in the PA device was much weaker than that in the control device, indicating that the decomposition of perovskite was inhibited to some extent in the PA device. Meanwhile, the PA device showed reduced absorption loss from the UV-vis absorption spectrum compared to the control device. Therefore, our work presents a simple eco-friendly strategy to improve the quality and stability of halide perovskite films.

In conclusion, we demonstrated feasible eco-friendly antisolvents of PA and DE for the deposition of highly uniform, smooth and pinhole-free perovskite films. By carefully controlling the polarity of the antisolvents, the deposited perovskite film showed higher electron mobility and suppressed defect density than that of the control film. As a result, we obtained a PCE of 20.61% for the inverted MAPbI3 PSCs, with a notable FF over 84%. The device physics was carefully characterized and the results indicated the high FF was mainly attributed to the attenuated ideal factor and improved diode junction quality of the device from the mixed antisolvent. The green antisolvent is expected to be applicable to a wide range of perovskite compositions, which is of vital importance for the scale-up of perovskite photovoltaics and other optoelectronic devices.


The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China NSFC (51702038), the Key Project of the Science & Technology Department of Sichuan Province (2020YFG0061) and the Recruitment Program for Young Professionals.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1gc00599e
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021