 DOI: 10.1039/C9TC05227E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 15276-15284


Huifen
Xu
,

Yuhai
Sun
,

Haiying
Zheng
*,

Guozhen
Liu
,

Xiaoxiao
Xu
,

Shendong
Xu
,

Liying
Zhang
,

Xiaojing
Chen
* and 

Xu
Pan
*

Institutes of Physical Science and Information Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, 230601, P. R. China

Key Laboratory of Photovoltaic and Energy Conservation Materials, Institute of Applied Technology, Hefei Institutes of Physical Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei 230031, P. R. China

Petroleum Engineering Technology Research Institute, Shengli Oilfield Company, Sinopec, Dongying 257000, P. R. China. E-mail: hyzheng@ahu.edu.cn; xjchen@rntek.cas.cn; xpan@rntek.cas.cn

Received
23rd September 2019
, Accepted 6th November 2019
First published on 8th November 2019
Recently, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have represented a significant breakthrough due to their excellent photoelectric properties. However, short lifetime and poor moisture stability make it difficult for PSCs to achieve further application. Here, we have introduced a fluorinated ammonium salt (2,2,2-trifluoroethylamine hydroiodide, FEAI) with a high dipole moment to grow a 2D modified layer ((FEA)2PbI4) at the interface of perovskite/HTL. Due to the electronegativity of FEA+, the 2D modified layer brings about an effective passivation effect, leading to reduced interface defect sites and suppressed nonradiative recombination. Moreover, the remarkable hydrophobicity of the 2D modified layer can provide protection of 3D perovskite from moisture erosion but not at the expense of efficiency. As a result, based on (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15, the FEAI-modified PSCs showed a high power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 19.24%, with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.08 V, a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 22.65 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 78%. After aging under a relative humidity of 50 ± 5% for 60 days, the modified PSCs retain 88% of their initial PCE. Our work provides a valuable strategy to prepare a 2D perovskite modified layer with a high dipole moment cation for high-performance PSCs with superior moisture stability.

Organic–inorganic halide perovskite materials with the general formula ABX3 (A= CH3NH3+, CH (NH2)2+ or Cs+, B = Pb2+ and X = Br−, Cl− or I−) have received widespread attention in the field of photoelectricity. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has increased from 3.8% to over 25% in less than ten years. As one of the most promising photovoltaic materials, they exhibit excellent photovoltaic properties, such as adjustable band gap, strong band-edge absorption, low exciton energy and long carrier diffusion length. However, several challenges still exist for wide application and commercial development of PSCs including their short lifetime and moisture instability.

The properties of perovskite absorber layers and the interface of ETL/perovskite or perovskite/HTL directly determine the performance of devices. Unfortunately, they are easy to degrade while exposed in a high humidity atmosphere or organic solution, which is indirectly led by the formation of perovskite hydrate. On the one hand, the hydrolysis of the perovskites is triggered by the hygroscopic property of the materials themselves. Then, the monohydrate CH3NH3PbI3·H2O and dehydrate (CH3NH3)4PbI6·2H2O come into being in sequence and eventually decompose back into precursor PbI2. On the other hand, the undercoordinated I− is susceptible to oxidation into volatile bimolecular iodine (I2), which can cause irreversible decomposition of perovskites.
At present, there are lots of strategies to improve the stability of PSCs, including solvent engineering, doping a perovskite absorber layer and modifying the interface of ETL/perovskite or perovskite/HTL. The introduction of modified layers has been proved to be an effective way to passivate the interface and improve the moisture stability of the perovskite layer. Sargent et al. reported a back-contact passivation of semiconductor polymers to reduce interfacial and extraction losses at the interface of perovskite/HTL, where the resultant PSCs achieved a PCE as high as 21.6%. Petrozza et al. employed a functional hygroscopic polymer layer of poly(ethylene oxide) on perovskite films to improve the long-term stability of perovskite devices. Recently, 2D perovskite materials have been studied as a hygroscopic and passivation layer between perovskite and HTL due to their excellent chemical properties and the potential of hole extraction. In addition, when exposed to water and high temperature, the 2D passivation layers can availably inhibit ion migration from organic HTM or air into the perovskite active layer and further enhance the operation stability of devices. However, due to the existence of long-chain complexes, the 2D perovskite forms a quasi-2D phase separation structure with a multidimensional quantum well effect, which restricts the transformation of photogenerated carriers. It is still a challenge to design an effective 2D modified layer which can improve both moisture resistance and passivation effect for high-performance PSCs.
In this work, we introduced 2,2,2-trifluoroethylamine hydroiodide (FEAI) to grow a 2D perovskite layer with a high dipole moment at the interface between 3D perovskite absorber layer and HTL. The modified films present better crystallization and surface morphology, leading to higher photovoltaic performance with suppressed nonradiative recombination. Finally, owing to the improved passivation effect of the (FEA)2PbI4 modified layer with excellent hydrophobicity, the device with 5 mg mL−1 FEAI exhibits an improved PCE of 19.24% compared to 16.74% for the control device. Meanwhile, the modified devices display superior moisture stability compared to the control devices, retaining 88% of their initial efficiency after 60 days aging at a relative humidity of 50 ± 5%.

We fabricated the perovskite active layer based on (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 which has been proved to possess excellent photovoltaic performances. To explore the effect of the 2D (FEA)2PbI4 perovskite layer on the perovskite films, we introduced FEAI at various concentrations (0, 5, and 15 mg mL−1 labeled as control, FEA-5 and FEA-15 for easy recognition) in isopropanol solution to coat on the perovskite absorber layer by a dynamical spin-coating approach. In the control perovskite film, PbI2 in excess interacts with FEAI, forming a 2D (FEA)2PbI4 perovskite layer on the top of the 3D perovskite bulk. The perovskite crystal structure and schematic structure of PSCs with a 2D modified layer under investigation are shown in Fig. 1a.

We conducted X-ray diffraction (XRD) to study the crystal structure of the control and modified perovskite films. As shown in Fig. 1b, all the films exhibit the peaks at diffraction angles of 14.1° and 28.4° which are attributed to the crystal planes of the 3D phase, indicating that the growth of the 2D perovskite top layer does not alter the structure and orientation of the 3D perovskite. The peak intensity at 14.1° of the modified film exhibits a slight increase compared to that of the control film, suggesting the enhancement of crystal structure. We also measured XRD patterns of the (FEA)2PbI4 film and FEAI for reference in Fig. S1 (ESI). The (FEA)2PbI4 film peaks at diffraction angles of 6.0°, 11.2°, 18.4°, 24.5° and 30.8° can be an index to the crystal phase of the 2D (FEA)2PbI4 structure. Notably, after modification with FEAI (5 mg mL−1), the peak intensity at 12.7° arising from PbI2 is reduced, demonstrating that there is less of PbI2 due to the interaction with FEAI. When the concentration of FEAI increases to 15 mg mL−1, the new diffraction peak at about 6.0° is assigned as due to the crystal plane of the 2D phase. In addition, the emergence of peaks at about 11.3° and 12.7° ascribed to the non-perovskite δ-phase and PbI2 respectively confirms the poor quality of the FEA-15 film, which brings about decreased photovoltaic performance.
To further understand the impact of the modified layer on the light absorption of (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 perovskite films, we measured the Ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra as shown in Fig. 1c. Compared to the control perovskite film, no appreciable shift of the band edge is observed in the absorption spectra of the films modified with FEAI. The absorption intensity of the FEA-5 films shows a slight improvement at a wavelength from 480 to 850 nm in comparison to the control films, indicating higher photovoltaic performance.
As shown in Fig. 2a–c, all the films exhibit no visible pinholes and cracks. Compared with the control film, the FEA-5 film presents more compact and smother surface morphology with uniform grain size, resulting in lower interface defect. The presence of a small amount of 2D (FEA)2PbI4 at grain boundaries also makes a contribution to inhibiting the nonradiative recombination. When the concentration of FEAI increases to 15 mg mL−1 (Fig. 2c), the 2D passivation layer displays uneven distribution on the surface and the morphology turns rugged, which increases defect sites and hole extraction. Furthermore, according to atomic force microscope (AFM) images in Fig. 2d–f, the FEA-5 perovskite film displays reduced roughness from 38.3 nm (control film) to 20.7 nm, which is 31.1 nm for FEA-15 due to the unordered distribution of 2D (FEA)2PbI4 on the surface. It is seen that among the three perovskite films under investigation, the film modified with 5 mg mL−1 presents the best morphology, indicating the best photoelectric property.
We conducted X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements as shown in Fig. 3a–c to confirm the presence of (FEA)2PbI4 on the top surface of the 3D perovskite layer. The core level peaks of Pb, N and F are ascribed to the elements in the perovskite material. The peaks of Pb 4f7/2 and Pb 4f5/2 in the spectrum of the FEA-5 film are located at 137.8 eV and 142.7 eV, respectively, which display a slight shift to the low energy compared to the control film. It reveals the different chemical environments of the Pb element in the FEA-5 film due to the formation of (FEA)2PbI4. In the N 1s spectra (Fig. 3b), the two specific peaks belonging to C–NH2 are located at ≈400.2 and ≈401.8 eV. The intensity of two peaks in the FEA-5 film is relatively stronger compared to the control film, which implies the existence of FEA+. The F 1s spectrum of the control film exhibited a weak peak at 687.7 eV (Fig. 3c) which originates from the F element in the FTO glass. The relative intensity of the single peak at 687.2 eV in the F 1s spectrum of the FEA-5 film is significantly enhanced in comparison to the control film due to the fluoro-substitution on the methyl group (Fig. 3c). It further ensures the existence of the 2D modified layer.
Furthermore, we carried out steady state photoluminescence (PL) measurements, time-resolved photoluminescence spectroscopy (TRPL) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) to investigate charge transfer dynamics. The PL decay in organic–inorganic metal halide perovskites is defined majorly by trap-assisted recombination at defect sites, which are supposed to be eliminated by reducing the non-radiative decay and achieve superior photovoltaic performance. After FEAI modification under the same experimental conditions, the steady state PL spectra of perovskite films on top of the mesoporous TiO2 layer are shown in Fig. 3d. Notably, the PL intensity of the films greatly decreases after FEA-5 modification. Since the PL emission originates from radiative recombination in the perovskite layer, the lower PL intensity indicates more electron transfer to the TiO2 layer and reduced charge recombination. In addition, the PL peak position of films modified with FEAI represents a slight blue-shift which demonstrates the passivation effect of the 2D (FEA)2PbI4 modified layer.
Generally, the defect states in perovskite films would form non-radiative recombination centers which ultimately reduce the Voc and FF of perovskite solar cells. TRPL is a powerful measurement for characterization of the charge recombination dynamics of perovskite films. The TRPL signals of the films with the hole transport layer are subjected to additional non-radiative recombination at the interface. The mitigation of surface charge traps can significantly prolong the PL lifetime of films. To investigate the passivation effect of the (FEA)2PbI4 modified layer on the intrinsic carrier behaviors of perovskite films, we monitored TRPL measurement for the control and FEA-5 perovskite films with HTM on top. The measured PL decay curves are fitted by a single exponential decay function: y = A1×exp(−x/τ1) + y0, where A1 is the time-independent coefficient of amplitude fraction and τ1 is the carrier lifetime. As shown by the TRPL decays probed at 760 nm on the film surface (Fig. 3e), it can be found that the lifetime of the modified perovskite films decreases from 14.06 ns to 9.16 ns, indicating the reduced non-radiative recombination and improved charge transfer after the modification of FEAI.
Moreover, we used the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurement to investigate the transport and recombination resistance of the control and FEA-5 devices in the dark. The Nyquist plots of the devices are depicted in Fig. 3f. One can find a complete semicircle at a high frequency and an incomplete semicircle at a low frequency, which are assigned to the charge transport resistance (Rct) and the recombination resistance (Rrec), respectively. The data could be fitted based on a commonly used equivalent circuit model of PSCs. As shown in Table S1 (ESI), the FEA-5 devices present a smaller Rct and bigger Rrec, revealing that the excellent passivation effect of the 2D (FEA)2PbI4 modified layer improves charge transfer and reduces carrier recombination.
The photovoltaic performance of the control and modified PSCs was examined as shown in Fig. 4. The current–voltage (J–V) curves in Fig. 4a were obtained under a standard AM 1.5 simulated solar light illumination with an active area of 0.09 cm2. The corresponding photovoltaic parameters based on different concentrations of FEAI are shown in Table S2 (ESI). The FEA-5 device exhibits a Voc of 1.08 V, a Jsc of 22.65 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 78%, yielding a high PCE of 19.24%. When referring to the control device, the PCE is 16.74%, with a Voc of 1.05 V, a Jsc of 20.49 mA cm−2 and a FF of 77%. The positive improvement of the FEA-5 device performance compared to the control devices is due to the effective passivation effect and hole extraction of the 2D modified layer. The J–V curve of the FEA-5 device is shown in Fig. S2 (ESI). Unfortunately, when the concentration of FEAI increases to 15 mg mL−1, the PSC exhibits a reduced PCE of 17.04%. This is caused by the poor film quality and the uneven distribution of the 2D perovskite on the surface of the 3D perovskite film. In addition, the J–V curves of the different devices from reverse scan and forward scan are presented in Fig. S3 (ESI), and photovoltaic parameters of the PSCs (0.09 cm2 aperture) under 1 sun simulated irradiation are presented in Table S5 (ESI). Compared to the control and FEA-15 devices, the FEA-5 device has displayed ignored hysteresis in Fig. S3 (ESI). The corresponding incident photon conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra were recorded to measure the photon energy response of the devices. As shown in Fig. 4b, the FEA-5 device displays a slightly higher response than the control device in the wavelength range from 350 to 750 nm. The integrated Jsc values are shown in Table S3 (ESI), which are in good agreement with the Jsc values from the J–V curves. The uniformity and reproducibility of the control and FEA-5 PSCs were further studied by the Gaussian distribution of PCE histograms (Fig. 4c). Generally, the FEA-5 device presents an average PCE of 17.19% among 30 devices, which is 15.64% for the control device. According to the statistical distributions of Voc in Fig. 4d, the modified devices present an ordinal enhancement of Voc, verifying the passivation effect of the 2D modified layer.
Furthermore, the electron-only and hole-only devices were fabricated to evaluate the trap density of the control and FEA-5 perovskite films using the space charge limited current (SCLC) method, which was measured respectively in glass/FTO/TiO2/perovskite/PCBM/Ag and glass/FTO/PEOOT: PSS/perovskite/PCBM/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au devices. Three regions are supposed to exist: (I) the ohmic region showing a linear relationship between the current and electric field at low bias, (II) the trap filled limit region at intermediate bias exhibiting a steep increase in current and (III) a trap-free space-charge limited current (SCLC) region at high bias. The trap density is calculated according to the equation Ntrap = (2εε0VTFL)/(eL2), where ε, ε0, e and L are the relative dielectric constant of the perovskite, the vacuum permittivity, the elementary charge, and the thickness of the corresponding perovskite material (Table S4, ESI), respectively.VTFL is the onset voltage of the trap filled limit region, whose values are obtained by fitting the dark J–V curves. As shown in Fig. 5, the trap density of the electron-only device is reduced from 6.15 × 1015 cm−3 for the control to 4.75 × 1015 cm−3 for the modified film, and VTFL is mitigated from 0.5050 V for the control to 0.3898 V for the modified film (Fig. 5a and b). The VTFL and Ntrap of hole-only devices with FEA-5 modification shown in Fig. 5d also display a remarkable decrease compared to the control device (Fig. 5c), indicating that the modified devices exhibit mitigated charge recombination and promoted hole transportation at the perovskite/HTL interface. This phenomenon matches well with the results of TRPL and EIS measurements we discussed above. Moreover, the superior performance of modified films is attributed to the high dipole moment fluorine which can improve carrier separation to free carriers and transportation via the polarization of the organic cation group and reduced carrier recombination.
Finally, we conducted moisture stability tests of the control PSCs and the devices modified with FEA-5 and FEA-15, which were unencapsulated and stored at room temperature with 50± 5% relative humidity (RH). As shown in Fig. 6a, all the films present quite excellent moisture stability and retain over 98% of the initial PCE during the first 10 days. The modified PSCs still possess high moisture resistance and maintain 88% of the initial PCE after 60 days, while the PCE of control devices decreases to 65% of its initial PCE. To further evaluate the properties of our fluorine in terms of moisture resistance, we monitored the XRD patterns of the control and modified films which were stored in a dehumidification cabinet. As shown in Fig. 6b, the relative intensity of the 3D phase peak at 14.1° and 28.4° for the control film sharply drops and the PbI2 peak at 12.7° prominently increases. This is owing to the fact that the perovskites decompose back into precursor PbI2 while exposed to a high humidity atmosphere. Nevertheless, the XRD patterns of modified films show almost no change. This indicates that the presence of the fluorinated cation can effectively improve the hydrophobicity of the perovskite surface. Furthermore, the water contact angle measured for control and modified films is shown in Fig. 6c–f. Obviously, it can be observed that the contact angle increases from 73.3° to 81.8° after modification by 5 mg mL−1 FEAI. The decreased water contact angle of the FEA-15 film is caused by the rough and uncompact surface morphology, resulting in a decrease in long-term stability. Hence, the PSCs with high quality perovskite films have superior photovoltaic performance and outstanding moisture stability due to the introduction of a 2D perovskite modified layer.

In conclusion, we have fabricated high-performance and moisture-stable PSCs by introducing a 2D perovskite modified layer ((FEA)2PbI4) with a high dipole moment. Due to the electronegativity of FEA+ and the existence of fluorine atoms, the perovskite films exhibit improved hydrophobicity and an excellent passivation effect. Moreover, the modified films display better crystallization and more uniform morphology with reduced roughness, resulting in increased charge lifetime and recombination resistance compared to the control film. As a result, based on the component of (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15, the device with a 2D modified layer shows an optimal PCE as high as 19.24%, which is 16.74% for the control devices. The modified PSCs present excellent moisture stability, which retain 88% of their initial PCE after aging at 50 ± 5% RH for 60 days, while the control devices only retain 65%.


Formamidine iodide (FAI) and methylammonium bromide (MABr) were obtained from Xi’an Polymer Light Technology Corp. Other materials were purchased from Alfa. All materials and reagents were used as received without further purification. FTO-coated glass was rinsed by sonication in detergent, and cleaned with ultrapure water and ethanol. A compact-TiO2 layer was deposited on the FTO by spray pyrolysis at 430 °C. The precursor solution was composed of 0.6 mL of titanium diisopropoxide and 0.4 mL of bis(acetylacetonate) in 7 mL of isopropanol. A mesoporous TiO2 layer was spin-coated on the compact layer at a speed of 4000 rpm for 20 s using a 30 nm TiO2 paste which was diluted with ethanol (TiO2:ethanol = 1:5.5). Next, mesoporous TiO2 was slowly annealed by sintering from room temperature to 510 °C for 3 h on a flattening oven. The precursor solutions of 1.4 M Pb2+ in (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 were obtained by dissolving the corresponding perovskite powders in DMF and DMSO mixed solvent (DMF:DMSO= 4:1 by volume) with stirring at 60 °C for 30 min. In addition, the molar ratio of PbI2:FAI in the precursor solutions was 1.05:1. Then, the precursor solutions were spin-coated first at 1100 rpm for 11 s and then at 4600 rpm for 34 s in an air flowing glovebox. About 120 μL of chlorobenzene was drop-cast on the substrate during the spin coating step 15 s before the end of the procedure. The substrate was then annealed at 105 °C for 50 min on a hot plate. The precursor solutions of 1.4 M Pb2+ in (FEA)2PbI4 were obtained by dissolving FEAI and PbI2 in DMF and DMSO mixed solvent (DMSO:DMF= 1:4 by volume). The (FEA)2PbI4 film was prepared by spin-coating on a glass substrate with annealing at 105 °C for 20 min. The FEAI interfacial modification solution with a concentration 0, 5, and 15 mg mL−1 in isopropanol was spin-coated on the top of the perovskite absorber film at 3500 rpm for 20 s, and then the substrate was heated at 105 °C for 20 min on a hot plate. The HTM solution with 73 mg of spiro-OMeTAD, 4-tert-butylpyridine, Li+ salt and cobalt(III) salt in chlorobenzene solvent was spin-coated onto the perovskite layer at 3000 rpm for 20 s. Finally, 60 nm of Au was deposited via thermal evaporation on top of the HTM layer.


XRD patterns of the perovskite films were recorded on a Rigaku Smartlab 9 kW diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation. The data were collected in the 2θ range from 5° to 60° at room temperature. The film morphology was investigated by using a high-resolution scanning electron microscope (SEM) with a Schottky Field Emission gun. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) was carried out by using a MultiMode V (Veeco) viewer and analyzer. Absorption spectra and reflectance spectra were recorded on an ultraviolet-vis (UV-vis) spectrophotometer (U-3900H, HITACHI, Japan). Steady-state PL spectra were measured using a spectrofluorometer (Photon Technology International) and analyzed with the software Fluorescence. The J–V curves were measured by using a solar simulator (Newport, Oriel Class A, 91195A) with a source meter (Keithley 2420) under 100 mW cm−2 illumination (AM 1.5G). The absorbed effective area for each device was 0.09 cm2 by masking a black mask. The incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) was collected as a function of wavelength from 300 to 900 nm (PV Measurements, Inc.), with a dual Xenon/quartz halogen light source, measured in DC mode with no bias light used. The setup was calibrated with a certified silicon solar cell (Fraunhofer ISE) prior to measurements. The pump light wavelength was 500 nm and the probe light wavelength was 760 nm. At a repetition rate of 5 Hz, the energy of the laser device was 150 μJ cm−2. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was recorded at −0.8 V in the dark, in the frequency range of 1 Hz to 1 MHz by using an Autolab analyzer (Metrohm, PGSTAT 302N, Switzerland). The humidity stability test was carried out in a container with 50± 5% relative humidity. The container was kept in the dark and the temperature was maintained at about 20 °C.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2016YFA0202401).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9tc05227e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019