 DOI: 10.1039/C9TC00403C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 4709-4715


Li
Li
,

Gongchu
Liu
,

Jie
Zhang
*,

Zhenfeng
Wang
,

Tao
Jia
,

Yingyuan
Hu
,

Congcong
Cao
,

Kai
Zhang
*,

Fei
Huang
* and 

Yong
Cao


State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, P. R. China. E-mail: msjzhang@scut.edu.cn; mszhangk@scut.edu.cn; msfhuang@scut.edu.cn

Received
22nd January 2019
, Accepted 16th March 2019
First published on 18th March 2019
Two wide bandgap conjugated polymers (PBTZNT and PFBTZNT) based on naphthobistriazole (TZNT) as the acceptor unit and benzodithiophene (BDT) as the donor unit were developed and applied in non-fullerene polymer solar cells (NF-PSCs). Detailed investigations revealed that the TZNT unit and fluorine atom substitution of BDT have significant influence on the resultants’ optical and electronic properties, molecular aggregation properties, and charge separation in the bulk-heterojunction films, and thus the overall photovoltaic performances. Two copolymers exhibited wide optical bandgaps, strong absorption and high hole mobility. The NF-PSCs based on the resulting copolymers as the donor materials and m-ITIC as the electron acceptor exhibited impressive photovoltaic performances. Among them, the devices based on the PFBTZNT:m-ITIC system exhibited a high power conversion efficiency of up to 11.02%. This work demonstrates that the TZNT unit is a promising candidate as an electron-deficient building block for high performance NF-PSCs, and side-chain engineering with the addition of fluorine substituents is an effective molecular design strategy for further improvement of the photovoltaic performance.

Bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) polymer solar cells (PSCs) have attracted extensive industrial and research interest in the past two decades due to their advantages of low cost, light weight, and the potential for the fabrication of large-area flexible devices. Generally, the light harvesting layer of BHJ-PSCs contains an electron-donating material and an electron-accepting material. Among the electron-accepting materials, non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs) have become increasingly competitive in recent years due to their promising characteristics of strong absorption, easily adjustable energy levels, and facile accessibility. The power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of the best single-junction binary NF-PSCs have exceeded 14%. Among the reported NFAs, low bandgap acceptors with an acceptor–donor–acceptor (A–D–A) structure have attracted much attention for their high electron mobility and strong absorption from 600 to 800 nm. To make full use of sunlight via maximised photon-harvesting, it will be vital to develop appropriate medium or wide bandgap donor polymers that have complementary absorption to the low bandgap acceptor.

It has been reported that fusing the acceptor units to build blocks can enlarge the planarity and extend the π-conjugated area of the aromatic structure, thus favouring the ordered interchain packing of the resulting copolymers and further enhancing the carrier mobility and the photovoltaic performances. Our group has thus designed and synthesized a series of new blocks via this strategy, such as naphtho[1,2-c:5,6-c]bis(1,2,5-thiadiazole) (NT) units, quinoxalino[6,5-f]quinoxaline (NQx) and naphthobistriazole (TZNT). When blended with [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM), copolymers based on NT exhibit high PCEs up to 11.3%, whilst for copolymers based on TZNT the PCE can reach up to 7.1%, which shows the great application potential of the fused structure blocks. Copolymers based on benzotriazole (BTA) have been proved to be a successful material system in NF-PSCs. Compared with the BTA unit, TZNT has an enlarged planar aromatic structure containing two fused 1,2,3-triazole rings. The advantages of the TZNT unit are that the extended π-conjugated area and enlarged planar conformation can improve the interchain packing of the resulting copolymer, and the two extra positions for incorporating solubilising alkyl side chains onto the resulting copolymers do not disturb the planarity of the copolymer backbone. In addition, TZNT-based copolymers exhibit very strong absorption from 300 to 600 nm, a range that is complementary to low bandgap acceptors. These advantages make TZNT-based copolymer donors very suitable for NF-PSCs, suggesting that TZNT units have great potential in NF-PSCs. Meanwhile, fluorination can simultaneously improve the open-circuit voltage (VOC), short-circuit current (JSC), and fill factor (FF) of the resulting PSC devices by lowing the energy levels, increasing the absorption coefficient, and strengthening the inter/intramolecular interactions and crystallinity compared with non-fluorinated molecules, a strategy that has been well developed in NF-PSCs. Taking these advantages into account, high photovoltaic performance can be expected by introducing fluorine atoms into the thiophene-conjugated side chain.
Herein, we designed and synthesized two new D–A copolymers, PBTZNT and PFBTZNT, based on TZNT as the acceptor unit and thienyl-substituted benzodithiophene (BDT) or fluorinated thienyl conjugate (BDTF) as the donor unit. The selection of BDT and BDTF as donor units was motivated by the fact that BDT-based copolymers have a two-dimensional (2D)-conjugated structure, which facilitates charge transport in NF-PSCs. As a result, both copolymers exhibited wide optical bandgaps (1.97 eV), high extinction coefficients, and high hole mobility, which can be ascribed to the introduction of TZNT. The resulting device based on PFBTZNT:m-ITIC exhibited a high PCE of 11.02% with a VOC of 0.91 V, a JSC of 17.63 mA cm−2, and a FF of 68.72%.

Naphtha[1,2-c:5,6-c]bis(1H-[1,2,3]triazole) (3), 4,8-di[2-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-5-yl]-benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene (M2), and (4,8-bis(4-fluoro-5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl)bis(trimethylstannane) (M3) were prepared according to previously reported literature. The details of the synthesis of the monomers and copolymers are provided in the ESI (Schemes S1 and S2). 3 was obtained from 2 by a ring-closing reaction. The alkylation of 3 with 5-(bromomethyl)undecane gave naphtho[1,2-c:5,6-c]bis(2-butyloctyl-[1,2,3]triazole) (4). We then used the Br2 bromination reaction, Stille-coupling reaction, and NBS bromination reaction, to obtain the target compound TZNT (M1). PBTZNT and PFBTZNT were synthesised as purple solids by the Stille-coupling polymerisation between M2/M3 and M1. PBTZNT showed an average molecular weight of 39.3 kDa with a polydispersity index (PDI) of 2.01, and PFBTZNT showed an average molecular weight of 37.0 kDa with a PDI of 1.77, according to high-temperature gel permeation chromatography (GPC) in 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene using polystyrene as the standard. Both copolymers exhibited excellent solubility in common organic halogenated solvents, such as chloroform (CF), chlorobenzene (CB) and o-dichlorobenzene (o-DCB). Moreover, these copolymers all showed high decomposition temperatures over 450 °C with 5% weight-loss in thermogravimetric analysis (Fig. S4a, ESI). No obvious exothermic or endothermic peaks are observed from 50 °C to 300 °C in the differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurement of these copolymers (Fig. S4b, ESI), demonstrating that their thermal stability was good enough for device applications. The related data including the molecular weights and thermal properties of PBTZNT and PFBTZNT are summarised in Table S1 (ESI).


The UV-vis absorption spectra of the two copolymers in CB solution at various temperatures are shown in Fig. 1a and b. The two copolymers showed similar absorption spectra with the maximum absorption peak of ca. 540 nm. Notably, the absorption intensity of the shoulder peaks gradually decreased as the temperature increased from 25 °C to 95 °C. This indicates that these copolymers can form strong π–π interactions in low-temperature solution, presumably because the TZNT blocks, with their enlarged planar aromatic structure and extended π-conjugated area, are favourable for ordered interchain packing of the copolymers. Moreover, PFBTZNT still showed an obvious shoulder peak at 95 °C in contrast to PBTZNT, which indicates that PFBTZNT can form a stronger and a more stable intermolecular aggregation than PBTZNT. The absorption coefficients of PBTZNT and PFBTZNT are displayed in Fig. S5a (ESI). Notably, the extinction coefficient of the PFBTZNT solution (1.31 × 105 cm−1) at 576 nm was higher than that of the PBTZNT solution (1.00 × 105 cm−1). The absorption coefficients of blend films are displayed in Fig. S5b (ESI). The absorption coefficient of PFBTZNT:m-ITIC blend film was higher than that of the PBTZNT:m-ITIC blend film in the wavelength range of 350–750 nm. The better light-harvesting of PFBTZNT:m-ITIC blend films can be expected to ensure higher JSC in PFBTZNT-based devices. The normalized absorption spectra of pure PBTZNT, PFBTZNT, and m-ITIC films are shown in Fig. 1c. In the thin films, PFBTZNT showed a significantly enhanced vibronic absorption peak compared with PBTZNT, and the shoulder peak of PFBTZNT redshifted 5 nm from solution to film, which is similar to that of PBTZNT (3 nm). The absorption edges of the copolymer films were both located at 628 nm, corresponding to a bandgap (Eoptg) of 1.97 eV, which is well matched with the absorption of the narrow bandgap acceptor m-ITIC from 300 to 800 nm (Table 1).

Copolymer
UV-vis in solution
UV-vis as thin films
CV

ε (105 cm−1)

λ
max (nm)

λ
onset (nm)

λ
max (nm)

λ
onset (nm)

E
optg (eV)
HOMO (eV)
LUMO (eV)

E
cvg (eV)

a In chlorobenzene solution with a concentration of about 10−5 M.
b Films were spin-coated onto a quartz plate from 10 mg mL−1 chlorobenzene solution.
c 
E
optg = 1240/λonset.
d Calculated HOMO/LUMO energy levels.
e 
E
cvg = LUMO–HOMO.


PBTZNT

1.00
532,576
604
538,579
628
1.97
−5.35
−3.02
2.33

PFBTZNT

1.31
537,575
612
534,580
628
1.97
−5.47
−3.20
2.17
The electronic energy levels of the copolymers were evaluated by cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements, which were carried out by using tetra-n-butylammonium hexafluorophosphate (Bu4NPF6) (0.1 M in acetonitrile) as the electrolyte, a saturated calomel electrode as the reference, and graphite as the working electrode, as shown in Fig. S7 (ESI). The measured HOMO/LUMO levels of PBTZNT and PFBTZNT were −5.35/−3.02 and −5.47/−3.20 eV, respectively. Evidently, compared with PBTZNT, PFBTZNT possesses a lower HOMO level due to the fluorine substituents. This is beneficial for achieving higher VOC of the resulting devices.

To study the backbone conformation and π-electron delocalisation of the resulting copolymers, theoretical calculations of the model compounds with three repeated D–A units were performed. The calculations used density functional theory (DFT) at the B3LYP level with the 6-31G* basis set. To simplify the calculations, alkyl chains were replaced by methyl groups, which did not significantly affect the corresponding geometry and electronic properties. The optimised conformations and their calculated LUMO and HOMO surfaces are shown in Fig. 2. Two copolymers display a very similar geometry due to their identical conjugated backbones. In addition, both the HOMO and LUMO orbitals are reasonably delocalised along the main chains. The calculated HOMO/LUMO energy levels are −4.60/−2.34 eV and −4.70/−2.42 eV for PBTZNT and PFBTZNT, implying that the calculated bandgaps are 2.26 eV and 2.28 eV respectively. These values show the same trend as the electrochemical cyclic voltammetry analysis (Fig. 1d), which confirmed that the introduction of fluorine atoms effectively lowered the HOMO level of the resulting copolymers.


To investigate the photovoltaic properties of the copolymers, we adopted a conventional device architecture ITO/PEDOT:PSS/copolymer:m-ITIC/PFN-Br/Ag, as shown in Scheme 1. The water- and alcohol-soluble poly[(9,9-bis(3-((N,N-dimethyl)-N-ethylammonium)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)]dibromide (PFN-Br) was used as the cathode buffer layer to facilitate electron extraction from the active layer. Instead of the ITIC acceptor, 3,9-bis(2-methylene-(3-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)-indanone)-5,5,11,11-tetrakis(3-hexylphenyl)-ITIC) was selected as an acceptor due to its advantages of better crystallinity, a stronger film absorption coefficient, slightly up-shifted LUMO energy levels, and greater electron mobility. The device processing conditions were systematically optimised in terms of solvent, weight ratio, processing additive concentration, thickness and annealing, as shown in Tables S2–S7 (ESI). The optimised active layers were prepared by spin-coating the copolymer:m-ITIC (1:1, w/w) blend solution with a total blend copolymer concentration of 10 mg mL−1 in chlorobenzene, followed by thermal annealing at 100 °C for 10 min and the optimised active-layer thickness was ca. 100 nm. The optimised current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the PSCs based on PBTZNT:m-ITIC and PFBTZNT:m-ITIC are shown in Fig. 3a, and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarised in Table 2. The optimal PSC based on PFBTZNT:m-ITIC exhibited a PCE of 11.02% with a JSC of 17.63 mA cm−2, a FF of 68.72%, and a VOC of 0.91 V, whilst the PCE of the PSC based on PBTZNT:m-ITIC was 9.23% with a VOC of 0.89 V, a JSC of 15.55 mA cm−2, and a FF of 66.37% under the same conditions. The slightly increased VOC value of the PSC based on PFBTZNT:m-ITIC compared with that based on PBTZNT:m-ITIC can be attributed to the down-shifted HOMO of the donor copolymer PFBTZNT. In addition, for the PSC based on PFBTZNT:m-ITIC, a high JSC value of 17.63 mA cm−2 was probably due to the complementarity of the absorption spectrum, the strong extinction coefficient and the good morphology of the PFBTZNT:m-ITIC blend film. These results indicate that side-chain engineering with the addition of fluorine substituents can simultaneously improve the VOC and JSC of PSCs.

Active layer

V
OC (V)

J
SC
 (mA cm−2)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCEmax/PCEave (%)

a Each Jcal was determined from the integration of the related EQE curve.
b Each PCEave was obtained from at least 8 devices.


PBTZNT:m-ITIC
0.89
15.19
15.55
66.37
9.23/9.02

PFBTZNT:m-ITIC
0.91
16.98
17.63
68.72
11.02/10.85
The external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the PSCs fabricated under the optimal conditions was measured, as shown in Fig. 3b. Both devices exhibited a broad response range from 300 to 800 nm, with the maximum EQE values of 71.8% and 79.4% for the PSCs based on PBTZNT:m-ITIC and PFBTZNT:m-ITIC, respectively, indicating the very efficient photon harvesting and charge collection within the cells. Moreover, the EQE of the PFBTZNT:m-ITIC-based PSC in the range of 320–770 nm was higher than that of the PBTZNT:m-ITIC-based PSC, resulting in a higher JSC in the corresponding devices. In addition, the integral current densities obtained from the EQE measurements are consistent with the J–V measurements.
The charge carrier mobilities of the pristine copolymer films and the blend films were measured using the space-charge limited current (SCLC) method. The hole-only and electron-only mobilities were evaluated by using devices with ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/MoO3/Ag and ITO/ZnO/active layer/Ca/Al architectures, respectively. The corresponding mobility parameters are summarised in Table S8 (ESI), whilst the current–voltage (J1/2–V) curves of the pristine copolymer films and the copolymer:m-ITIC blend films are shown in Fig. S8 (ESI). It can be seen that the hole mobility of both pristine copolymer films was very high (more than 1 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1), which can be ascribed to the enlarged planar aromatic structure and extended π-conjugated area of the TZNT blocks. The higher charge mobility is beneficial for achieving higher JSC and FF. The hole mobility of the PFBTZNT film (2.38 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1) was higher than that of the PBTZNT film (1.66 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1), which can be mainly attributed to the improved intermolecular interactions and better π–π stacking of PFBTZNT, thus ensuring effective charge carrier transport to the electrodes. Both blend films exhibited high carrier mobility and a balanced carrier ratio, which are beneficial to the FF. In contrast to the PBTZNT:m-ITIC blend film (hole mobility, μh = 2.61 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1; electron mobility, μe = 1.85 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1; μh/μe = 1.41), the PFBTZNT:m-ITIC film possesses higher mobilities (hole mobility, μh = 5.22 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1; electron mobility, μe = 3.11 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) and almost the same balanced hole/electron mobility (μh/μe = 1.68), which are also favourable for charge carrier transport to the electrodes and thus increasing the FF.

To understand the charge transfer behavior between the donor and acceptor in the blend films, we measured the photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the PBTZNT, PFBTZNT and m-ITIC pure films. The PL spectra of the optimised PBTZNT:m-ITIC and PFBTZNT:m-ITIC blend films were also measured. We selected the wavelengths of 550 nm to excite the donor copolymers and 680 nm to excite m-ITIC according to their respective absorption maxima, as shown in Fig. 4. When excited at 550 nm, the emission of the donors was quenched by 98.0% for PBTZNT and 99.6% for PFBTZNT. The higher quenching efficiency of PFBTZNT:m-ITIC blend films indicates that the electron transfer from the donor copolymer PFBTZNT to the acceptor m-ITIC was more effective than that from PBTZNT. For the acceptor, when excited at 680 nm, the emission of m-ITIC was quenched by 97.7% and 97.9% for PBTZNT and PFBTZNT, respectively. The high quenching ratio of both blend films suggest that the hole transfer process in the active layer was very effective in both devices. Efficient photo-induced charge transfer between the donor and acceptor is beneficial for improving JSC in PSCs, as confirmed by the enhanced JSC obtained from the PFBTZNT:m-ITIC-based devices.

To elucidate the charge recombination mechanism of the PBTZNT-based and PFBTZNT-based devices, we investigated the photocurrent (JSC) and VOC as a function of light intensity. The relationships between VOC and Plight are shown in Fig. 5a. Here the slope of VOCversus the natural logarithm of the light intensity is given by kBT/q, where kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, and q is the elementary charge. Typically, a slope of 1 kBT/q implies that bimolecular recombination is the dominating mechanism. In contrast, a slope of 2 kBT/q implies that trap-assisted recombination is dominant. The device based on PFBTZNT:m-ITIC exhibited a slope of 1.365 kBT/q, meaning that bimolecular recombination dominated in this device. However, the device based on PBTZNT:m-ITIC exhibited a slope of 1.609 kBT/q, suggesting that trap-assisted recombination dominated. The relationships between JSC and Plight are shown in Fig. 5b, wherein Plight varied from 3 to 120 mW cm2. The power-law dependence of JSC on illumination intensity can be expressed as JSC ∝ (Plight)S, in which S, the exponential factor, tends to unity when the bimolecular recombination of the charge carriers is weak. The slopes (S) extracted from the fitting curves are 0.980 for the PBTZNT-based devices and 0.998 for the PFBTZNT-based devices, indicating that the bimolecular recombination in the PBFTZNT-based devices was weaker than that in the PBTZNT-based devices, resulting in a higher FF in the PFBTZNT-based devices.
The dependence of photocurrent density (JPh) versus the effective voltage (Veff) of the devices was also measured to investigate their photogenerated carrier generation and charge collection behaviour, as shown in Fig. 5c. Jph = JL − JD, where JL and JD are the current densities under illumination and in the dark, respectively. Veff = V0 − Vappl, where V0 is the voltage when Jph = 0 and Vappl is the applied voltage. The charge extraction capability of the devices can be evaluated by the charge collection probability parameter P(E, T), where P(E, T) = Jph/Jsat. Here, Jsat is the saturation photocurrent density when Veff >2 V. The P(E, T) value of the PFBTZNT-based device was calculated as 93.81%, which is slightly higher than that of the PBTZNT-based device (92.41%), suggesting that the PFBTZNT-based device had higher exciton dissociation and charge extraction efficiency.
Transient photocurrent (TPC) measurements were carried out to investigate the charge extraction behaviour of the PBTZNT-based and PFBTZNT-based devices. The measurements were carried out at 0 bias, and the results are shown in Fig. 5d. The average charge transit times across the films after charge generation were measured to be 0.36 and 0.27 μs for the devices based on PBTZNT:m-ITIC and PFBTZNT:m-ITIC, respectively. The shorter transit time for the device based on PFBTZNT:m-ITIC indicates more efficient charge extraction from the photoactive layer, which is in favour of improving the current density. Transient photovoltage (TPV) measurements were also performed to probe the charge recombination process in both devices, as shown in Fig. S9 (ESI). Because the recombination of holes with trapped electrons accelerates the decay of the open-circuit photovoltage of these devices, the electron lifetime can be used to compare the recombination dynamics. The photovoltage decay time of the device based on PFBTZNT:m-ITIC (0.22 μs) was slightly longer than that of the device based on PBTZNT:m-ITIC (0.16 μs), implying that the PFBTZNT-based device more efficiently prevented charge recombination, resulting in an improvement of JSC and FF values.

The morphologies of the blend films were investigated by tapping-mode atomic force microscopy (AFM) (Fig. 6a and b) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (Fig. 6c and d). As seen in the AFM images, the PFBTZNT:m-ITIC blend film exhibits a more uniform and smooth surface, with a relatively lower root-mean-square (RMS) roughness value of 1.60 nm, than the PBTZNT:m-ITIC blend film, which has an RMS roughness of 2.53 nm. The TEM images of PBTZNT:m-ITIC and PFBTZNT:m-ITIC are shown in Fig. 6c and d, respectively. Compared with the PBTZNT-based device, the PFBTZNT-based device shows a more obvious phase separation and a better interpenetrating network, which is beneficial to charge separation and transport, and thus greater mobility. A favourable film morphology for charge carrier transportation can be expected to enhance the JSC and FF of the resulting devices.


We designed and synthesised two novel wide bandgap conjugated copolymers (PBTZNT and PFBTZNT) based on the extended π-conjugated naphthobistriazole (TZNT) as an acceptor unit and thienyl-substituted benzodithiophene (BDT) or fluorinated thienyl-conjugated benzodithiophene (BDTF) as a donor unit. Both copolymers exhibited wide optical bandgaps (1.97 eV), high extinction coefficients and high hole mobility, due to the introduction of the extended π-conjugated TZNT unit. Experimentally, the device based on PFBTZNT:m-ITIC exhibited a higher PCE of 11.02%, with a VOC of 0.91 V, a JSC of 17.63 mA cm−2, and a FF of 68.72%, in comparison with a PCE of 9.23%, a VOC of 0.89 V, a JSC of 15.55 mA cm−2, and a FF of 66.37% for the device based on PBTZNT:m-ITIC. This work demonstrates that the extended π-conjugated TZNT unit is a promising candidate as an electron-deficient building block for high-performance NF-PSCs, and that side-chain engineering with the addition of fluorine substituents is an effective molecular design strategy for further improvement of the photovoltaic performance.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 91633301 and 21634004) and the Foundation of Guangzhou Science and Technology Project (201707020019).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Details of the experimental section, device fabrication and characterization, carrier mobility measurements, and other figures and tables. See DOI: 10.1039/c9tc00403c
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019