 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA04008J
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12054-12057


Wei
Wei
,

Kai
Sun
 and 

Yun Hang
Hu
*

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Michigan Technological University, 1400 Townsend Drive, Houghton, MI 49931-1295, USA. E-mail: yunhangh@mtu.edu

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2136, USA

Received
13th May 2016
, Accepted 14th July 2016
First published on 15th July 2016
The direct conversion of CO2 into important solid materials is one of the most attractive research topics. In this communication, we report an invention, namely, the reaction of CO2 and Na to form three dimensional crape myrtle flower-like graphene with superior properties of a large surface area and high conductivity. Furthermore, the dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) with the 3D graphene as a counter electrode exhibited a high energy conversion efficiency of 10.1%, which is much higher than that (7.7%) of the DSSC with an expensive Pt counter electrode. This provides a promising method to synthesize electrode materials and a novel approach to utilize a greenhouse gas.

Solar energy, as an abundant and clean source of energy, is the most promising candidate to replace fossil fuels. The development of reliable and environmentally friendly approaches for solar energy conversion is one of the challenges that our society is facing. Solar cells provide an effective way to convert solar energy into electricity. Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have attracted intensive attention due to their simple structure, low fabrication cost, and promising efficiency. The main components in a standard DSSC include a nanostructured semiconductor with a sensitizer as the photo-electrode, a redox shuttle (typically an I3−/I− redox couple) as the electrolyte, and a conductive material as the counter electrode. The counter electrode (CE), which plays a critical role in DSSCs, electrocatalytically reduces triiodide (I3−) to iodide (I−). An ideal CE should have high conductivity to transport electrons from an external circuit to the electrolyte and excellent catalytic activity for the reduction of the electrolyte. Platinum is a standard CE for DSSCs due to its excellent conductivity and catalytic activity. However, its high cost with a limited source constitutes a critical issue for its application. This has motivated the exploration of inexpensive carbon-based counter electrodes for DSSCs. Graphene, as a rising star of nanomaterials, is a promising ideal candidate being a Pt-free counter electrode for DSSCs.

Numerous approaches have been developed to synthesize flat graphene, including chemical vapor deposition, mechanical cleavage, and epitaxial growth. Furthermore, a great effort was made for the synthesis of graphene with 3D structures, such as the activation of graphene oxide using KOH or CVD growth of graphene foam on a porous Ni foam as a template. Recently, in our previous studies, new types of graphene sheets with a 3D honeycomb-like structure and 3D cauliflower-fungus like structure were synthesized via invented reactions. On the other hand, the increase of atmospheric CO2 is a primary cause for the global warming. Available techniques for CO2 sequestration include oceanic injection, geological injection, and scrubbing and mineral carbonation. However, the cost and leakage as well as effects on sea biota are principal issues of geological and oceanic sequestration. The conversion of CO2 to useful chemicals is considered as a more important solution to solve CO2 issues. The objective of this research is to convert CO2 into 3D graphene. This provides not only a new approach for 3D graphene synthesis, but also a novel process for the utilization of a greenhouse gas. Furthermore, the DSSC with the synthesized 3D graphene as the CE exhibited an excellent power conversion efficiency of 10.09%, which is much higher than that (7.69%) of the DSSC with an expensive Pt counter electrode.
The following reaction (eqn (1)) is designed for the synthesis of 3D graphene:
4Na(l) + 3CO2(g) → C(graphene) + 2Na2CO3(s)
(1)
Its thermodynamic feasibility and energy-economic features were demonstrated by its negative changes of Gibbs free energy and enthalpy, respectively (Fig. S1). Although this research is still at the laboratory scale, it shows promising potential for industrial applications. Furthermore, the simultaneous generation of Na2CO3 particles can separate graphene sheets from each other, which can inhibit the formation of graphite. In addition, the Na2CO3 particles can serve as an in situ template to control the shape of 3D graphene. According to this design, we successfully carried out the following experiments.
10 mmol of liquid Na was reacted with 50 psi CO2 for 24 h in a ceramic tube reactor at 600 °C (unless mentioned otherwise). The obtained products were subjected to X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements. As shown in Fig. 1a, diffraction peaks of Na2CO3 can be observed, confirming the reaction between Na and CO2. Hydrochloric acid was used for the post-treatment of the products to remove Na2CO3, followed by washing with deionized water several times. The obtained black powder was identified as carbon with oxygen functional groups by elemental analysis and EDS (Table S1). The XRD pattern of the carbon shows a broad peak at 2θ = 25°, which corresponds to the (002) plane of the graphitic structure of carbon, indicating its layered structure with an interlayer space of 0.356 nm. This broad peak is different from a sharp diffraction peak of graphite, confirming the formation of graphene instead of graphite. The layered structure was further demonstrated by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM). As shown in Fig. 2a and b, one can see a three dimensional crape myrtle flower-like structure. The flower structured layer was also supported by the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) observation (Fig. 3a). The thickness of the layer, which is estimated from the TEM image, is 1.5 nm. This indicates that each of the layers consists of 4 graphene sheets. It is generally recognized that a carbon layer containing 10 or less graphene sheets can be defined as a graphene material. Therefore, the synthesized carbon is 3D crape myrtle flower graphene (CMFG).
The structure of 3D CMFG was further evaluated by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). As shown in Fig. 1c, the deconvolution of the C 1s peak revealed three components centered at 284.8, 289.0, and 287.2 eV, which would be associated with sp2 carbon atoms, sp3 carbon atoms, and C–O groups, respectively. The main component is sp2 bonded carbon (82.2%). The sp2 bonding feature of carbon was also confirmed by electron energy loss spectra (EELS) (Fig. 3c), in which there are a peak at 285 eV and another one at 290–330 eV. The former peak is associated with transitions from the 1s to the π* state, whereas the latter is due to the transition from the 1s to the σ* state. This sp2 evidence further demonstrates the graphene structure of 3D CMFG materials. However, because sp3 carbon atoms and C–O groups constitute its 17.8% content, the graphene contains rich defects. The defects were further supported by Raman spectra. The Raman spectra show a D band at 1355 cm−1 and a G band at 1575 cm−1 (Fig. 1d), which correspond to the aromatic rings with dangling bonds and the stretching of sp2 carbon pairs, respectively. In contrast, the Raman spectra of graphite always show a strong G band with a tiny D band, which is different from this case. This indicates that graphite was not formed in this process.
The BET surface area of CMFG, which was determined by N2 adsorption, is 575 m2 g−1 (Table S1). Because a perfect graphene sheet has a surface area of 2600 m2 g−1, the number of sheets in the 3D CMFG graphene can be calculated as follows (eqn (2)):
(2)
This is consistent with the value from the TEM measurements. Furthermore, the 3D CFMG has a high conductivity, reflected by a low resistance of 5.4 kΩ sq−1 that was measured by the four-point probe method. The combination of a large surface and a high electrical conductivity makes the 3D CFMG an excellent counter electrode material for DSSCs.
The photovoltaic performance of CMFG as a counter electrode for DSSCs was evaluated with a typical sandwich configuration, namely, N719 dye-sensitized TiO2 film as a photoelectrode, CMFG as a counter electrode (CE), and iodide/triiodide as an electrolyte between the two electrodes. A DSSC with a Pt CE was also prepared for comparison. Fig. 4a shows the J–V characteristics measured under simulated sunlight with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 in the range from 320 to 1100 nm. Their photovoltaic characteristics, such as the short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (ff), and power conversion efficiency (PCE), are summarized in the table in the inset of Fig. 4a. The DSSC with a Pt CE exhibited a PCE of 7.69%, a Jsc of 17.55 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.75 V, and an ff of 0.58. Compared with the Pt-based DSSC, the DSSC with the CFMG CE showed a much larger PCE (10.09%) with a Jsc of 19.29 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.78 V, and an ff of 0.67. This indicates that the CFMG CE possesses much better electrocatalytic performance for the reduction of triiodide to iodide.
Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was conducted using a three-electrode electrochemistry system. As shown in Fig. 4b, one can see two pairs of redox peaks. The more negative pair corresponds to the redox reaction of I3−/I−, while the more positive pair corresponds to the redox reaction of I2/I3−. The peak to peak separation (Epp) is inversely proportional to the electrochemical rate constant. Furthermore, the higher the peak current density, the better the catalytic activity. The CMFG exhibited a smaller peak-to-peak separation and a much larger redox current density (for the I3−/I− reaction) than the Pt electrode. This indicates that it has much higher electrocatalytic activity than Pt, which can explain why the DSSC with a CMFG CE exhibited a much higher power conversion efficiency than the DSSC with a Pt CE. The electrocatalytic activity of the CMFG CE was further supported by electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) (Fig. S4).

In conclusion, the reaction of CO2 and Na was invented for the synthesis of 3D crape myrtle flower-like structure free standing graphene. Furthermore, the synthesized CMFG possesses high electrical conductivity and high catalytic activity, which make it an ideal counter electrode candidate for DSSCs. The DSSC with a CMFG CE reached a high power conversion efficiency of 10.1%, which is much higher than that (7.7%) of the DSSC with an expensive Pt counter-electrode. Therefore, the invented reaction between CO2 and Na not only provides a unique approach to synthesize 3D graphene for energy application but also constitutes a novel process to solve the issues of greenhouse gases.


This work was supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation (CBET-0931587, DMR-0723032, and DMR-0420785). Y. H. H. also thanks Charles and Carroll McArthur for their great support.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta04008j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016