 DOI: 10.1039/D0EE02017F
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3823-3847


Xuesong
Lin
,

Danyu
Cui
,

Xinhui
Luo
,

Caiyi
Zhang
,

Qifeng
Han
,

Yanbo
Wang
* and 

Liyuan
Han
*

State Key Laboratory of Metal Matrix Composites, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China. E-mail: sjtu-wyb@sjtu.edu.cn; han.liyuan@sjtu.edu.cn

Special Division of Environmental and Energy Science, Komaba Organization for Educational Excellence, College of Arts and Sciences, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Henan Institute of Advanced Technology, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, China

Received
24th June 2020
, Accepted 14th September 2020
First published on 15th September 2020
Inverted perovskite solar cells (IPSCs) have attracted great attention in recent years due to their reliable operational stability, negligible hysteresis and low-temperature fabrication process. To accelerate their commercialization, the focus of research on IPSCs has been to enhance the power conversion efficiency over the past few years. Herein, an overview of efficiency progress in IPSCs is given including the structure design, the fabrication of perovskite films and the modification of charge transport materials. Specifically, the effects of interface passivation on the performance of those devices have been emphasized. Finally, perspectives on the further development and commercialization of IPSCs are proposed, such as developing new electron transport materials and rear electrode materials, and employing field effect passivation materials and inorganic hole transport materials.

Xuesong Lin

Xuesong Lin obtained his bachelor's degree in functional materials from Huazhong University of Science and Technology in 2019 and then continued his study at Shanghai Jiao Tong University for his doctorate degree, under the supervision of Prof. Liyuan Han. His current research is focused on constructing highly efficient and stable perovskite solar cells through structure innovation and interface engineering.

Yanbo Wang

Yanbo Wang obtained his PhD degree from Shanghai Jiao Tong University in 2020 and then joined Shanghai Jiao Tong University as an assistant professor. His current research is focused on disclosing the stability mechanism of perovskite solar cells and fabricating highly efficient and stable perovskite solar cells through composition engineering, interface modification, and structure innovation.

Liyuan Han

Liyuan Han is the chair professor of Shanghai Jiao Tong University. He received his PhD degree from the University of Osaka Prefecture in 1988 and joined SHARP Corporation and started research on solar cells. In 2008, he moved to National Institute of Materials Science, Japan and established a research center of next generation solar cells. His current research interests involve fundamental research on perovskite solar cells and fabricating efficient and stable perovskite solar modules for commercialization.

With the consumption of traditional energy, it is of great necessity to develop renewable energy such as solar energy. Perovskite solar cells (PSCs), as a promising candidate for new generation photovoltaics, have a high certified power conversion efficiency (PCE) and low fabrication cost. The main structures of PSCs can be divided into regular (n–i–p) and inverted (p–i–n) structures, according to the direction of the photocurrent. Compared to their regular counterparts, inverted PSCs (IPSCs) show a series of advantages for future commercialization including long-term operational stability, negligible hysteresis, and low-temperature fabrication. Here, we comprehensively present an overview of the efficiency progress in IPSCs layer by layer, including the structure design, perovskite fabrication, modification of charge transport materials, and interface passivation. Finally, we propose suggestions for the further development of IPSCs for commercialization.


Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) as a promising candidate for third-generation photovoltaic technology have triggered extensive research due to their outstanding optoelectronic properties and low-cost solution process. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs has been successfully boosted to a certified value of 25.2% after intensive research over the past decade. PSCs can be divided into regular (n–i–p) and inverted (p–i–n) structures, where regular PSCs can be further divided into mesoporous (Fig. 1a) and planar (Fig. 1b) PSCs, depending on whether a mesoporous scaffold is employed. Regular devices utilize n-type and p-type semiconductors as front and rear charge transport materials (CTMs), respectively, where the incident light is absorbed by the perovskite from the electron transport material (ETM) side, while electrons and holes are collected by the front and rear electrodes, respectively. Early reports on the regular structure usually utilized n-type mesoporous TiO2 as the front ETM, which required high-temperature thermal treatment. By reducing the thickness of the mesoporous layer, the devices suffered from more serious hysteresis. Those disadvantages increased the fabrication cost of regular devices and restricted the credibility of the device performance. Recently, by using low-temperature processed SnO2 as an ETM with higher electron mobility and stability under UV light, the record PCE of regular devices continued to be refreshed. On the other hand, inverted PSCs (IPSCs) have the opposite device configuration and direction of charge transport as shown in Fig. 1c. The working mechanism of IPSCs is described as follows: (1) the perovskite absorbs photons from the front hole transport material (HTM) side to generate electron–hole pairs under light illumination, which are separated into free carriers at the interface; (2) the separated electrons are transported to the rear electrode through the conduction band of the rear ETMs, while holes are transported via the valence band of the front HTMs to the front electrode, such as fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) and indium tin oxide (ITO); and (3) electrons and holes are collected by the rear and front electrodes, respectively, which generates the current in the loop.


Fig. 2 shows the efficiency roadmap of IPSCs. The first IPSC (ITO/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS)/CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3)/1-(3-methoxycarbonyl)-propyl-1-phenyl-(6,6)-C61 (PCBM)/bathocuproine (BCP)/aluminum (Al)) was proposed in 2013. However, due to the poor efficiency of 3.9%, the inverted devices hardly received wide attention. Two years later, the certified efficiency of PSCs with an aperture area of over 1 cm2 (PCE = 15%) was first recorded in the 〈Solar Cell Efficiency Tables〉 and showed eye-catching light stability for over 1000 hours, which utilized an inverted structure. In addition, (i) IPSCs show better air and humidity robustness owing to the additive-free PCBM rear layer with better hydrophobicity, compared to the conventional HTM with corrosive and hydrophilic dopants of regular devices; (ii) the hysteresis was considerably reduced because of the better electron conductivity of PCBM than TiO2 at that time; and (iii) IPSCs expand the possibility for integrating PSCs with silicon or Cu(In,Ga)Se2 photovoltaic technology to fabricate tandem solar cells with efficiency over 40%. Those outstanding advantages attracted much attention in the field of photovoltaics and triggered research fever of improving the efficiency of IPSCs. Last year, the efficiency of small-area IPSCs reached a certified value of 22.3% and a record efficiency of over 18% for a mini-module has been achieved on an aperture area of 19.276 cm2. Recently, a mini-module using an inverted structure first passed the 85 °C/85% RH damp heat test that is stipulated by the standards of IEC 61215. Those results indicate that the inverted structure is perhaps more suitable for fabricating large-area devices with high efficiency and long-term stability, which means that IPSCs may have a big chance to realize commercialization. Over the past five years, most of the work on IPSCs has focused on further improvement in efficiency.
Here, we give an overview of the efficiency progress in IPSCs organized as follows. After surveying recent progress on IPSCs from the aspects of structure innovation, and the fabrication methods of perovskite films with different components and CTMs, we emphasize the effects of interface passivation on further improvement of the performance of those devices. At the end of this review, the conclusions and possible pathways towards reducing the levelized cost of electricity and realizing the commercialization of IPSCs are outlined.

An IPSC is generally composed of a transparent conductive oxide, HTM, perovskite, ETM, and rear electrode material (REM). According to the difference in device structure, inverted structures can be further divided into planar, mesoporous, bulk heterojunction (BHJ), and graded heterojunction (GHJ).

The first inverted device adopted a planar heterojunction with a donor–acceptor interface, which avoided the high-temperature thermal treatment required for a mesoporous TiO2 layer, and effectively simplified the manufacturing process. Subsequently, compact NiOX was also proved to be suitable as an HTM for planar inverted devices. Due to the better energy level matching, the open-circuit voltage (VOC) of the device reached 1.05 V. In order to further improve the hole extraction ability of HTMs, some researchers introduced mesoporous NiOX nanoparticles into the compact NiOX/MAPbI3 interface to construct the first mesoporous IPSCs of ITO/compact NiOX/NiOX nanoparticles/MAPbI3/PCBM/BCP/Al, achieving a PCE of 9.15%. However, the inferior hole mobility and the larger intrinsic light absorption coefficient of mesoporous NiOX restricted the further development of the device performance. Unlike mesoporous NiOX, Han et al. introduced a highly transparent Al2O3 inert scaffold into the compact NiOX/MAPbI3 interface, which effectively filled the pinholes of ultrathin NiOX without increasing light absorption, and blocked possible shunt paths between NiOX and PCBM. Moreover, the band alignment showed that the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of Al2O3 of −7.9 eV is significantly deeper than the work function (EF) of FTO of −4.7 eV, which can effectively prevent the backflow of holes from FTO to the perovskite, thereby reducing non-radiative recombination. Ultimately, the device enhanced the fill factor (FF) from 62% to 73% with a PCE of over 13%. In addition, Liu et al. demonstrated that an ultra-thin NiOX (HOMO = −5.25 eV) combined with a mesoporous CuGaO2 HTM with a lower HOMO of −5.32 eV formed graded band level alignment with the HOMO of the perovskite, along with increased effective interfacial area, which enhanced the hole extraction. In addition, similar to mesoporous Al2O3, a CuGaO2 layer reduced the hole diffusion pathways and trap density, which depressed trap-assisted recombination and further boosted the steady-state efficiency close to 20%.
To circumvent the imbalance in the electron and hole mobility of MAPbI3 and reduce the device photocurrent hysteresis, Wu et al. reported the first BHJ inverted device by introducing PCBM into the perovskite active layer. Compared with the two-step deposition method (Fig. 3a), they added a small amount of PCBM into the PbI2 precursor to prepare a flat perovskite–PCBM BHJ with large perovskite grains (Fig. 3b). Owing to the higher conductivity, better carrier mobility, and longer diffusion length brought by the BHJ structure, the carrier extraction ability of PSCs with 0.1 wt% PCBM was significantly improved, which increased the FF of the device from 73% to 82%. Furthermore, the photocurrent hysteresis was obviously reduced because of enhanced charge carrier mobility and good balance in electron and hole mobility. Nevertheless, further increasing the PCBM content in the perovskite triggered the agglomeration of PCBM, leading to serious non-radiative recombination, which reduced VOC and the FF of the devices. Subsequently, an inorganic n-type semiconductor ZnO was added to the perovskite precursor as a nucleation site, which controlled the heterogeneous nucleation process of the perovskite. A perovskite–ZnO BHJ with better perovskite crystallinity was prepared and the FF and VOC of the devices were increased to 77.3% and 0.98 V, respectively.
A formamidinium (FA)-based halide lead perovskite possesses a wider absorption spectrum than the MA-based counterpart, which originates from the narrower bandgap relative to that of the latter, and has been expected to further improve the short-circuit current (JSC) of the device. However, the carrier transport of the FA-based perovskite film is unbalanced, which means that the electron transport capacity is significantly lower than that of holes. Moreover, the required diffusion distance of electrons is much longer than that of holes in IPSCs. Therefore, Han et al. developed a GHJ strategy and the schematic process is shown in Fig. 4a, where a PCBM solution in toluene was used as an antisolvent. During the subsequent annealing, molecular PCBM further diffused into the perovskite, forming a perovskite–PCBM GHJ with a controllable composition distribution. According to the time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) profiles, the content of the (sulfur) S element from the ETM showed a continuous and uniform declining process from the rear to the front of the GHJ film, overlapping with the (iodine) I signal from FAPbI3 (Fig. 4b), which indicated that a perovskite–PCBM GHJ was formed. The gradient distribution of PCBM created an energy level gradient in the perovskite/PCBM mixed region, which effectively improved the extraction of electrons in FAPbI3-based IPSCs (Fig. 4c). As a result, a certified PCE of 18.21% was obtained with an aperture area larger than 1 cm2, which was the best result of IPSCs at that time. Similarly, Fang et al. treated the perovskite surface with an antisolvent method containing conjugated Lewis base indacenodithiophene end-capped with 1,1-dicyanomethylene-3-indanone (IDIC) to prepare a perovskite–IDIC GHJ. They suggested that the lone pair electrons on the cyano and carbonyl groups in the IDIC molecule can effectively passivate the dangling bond defects of unsaturated Pb ions at the surface of the perovskite, which was consistent with the work of Huang et al. Meanwhile, the non-polarity brought by the symmetric molecular structure of IDIC increased the hydrophobicity of the heterojunction.

The PCE of a single-junction solar cell is restricted by two factors, including low-energy photon transmission and thermal relaxation of hot carriers, according to the Shockley–Queisser limit. Tandem solar cells, generally including four-terminal and two-terminal tandems, offer a promising way to overcome the efficiency limits. Compared to the four-terminal counterparts, two-terminal tandem solar cells show preferable potential for industrial applications due to the reduced number of electrodes and window layers. Perovskites are attractive materials for stacking with mature silicon and Cu(In,Ga)Se2 solar cells, due to a sharp optical absorption edge, continuously adjustable band gap (1.48 to 2.23 eV) and suitable VOC (∼1.15 V), depending on the components of the halide anions. Considering the parasitic absorption, operational stability and processing temperature, low-temperature processed IPSCs with transparent and stable ETMs are a better choice as top cells than the regular ones for perovskite/silicon, perovskite/Cu(In,Ga)Se2 and all-perovskite tandem solar cells.

In early 2020, to stack with silicon solar cells with a band gap of 1.12 eV, McGehee et al. developed an efficient triple-halide (Cl, Br, I) perovskite top cell with a well-matched band gap of 1.67 eV. In detail, they first shrunk the lattice constant of the perovskite by replacing FA+ and I− with smaller Cs+ and Br−, which made Cl− more suitable for X-sites. By further incorporating Cl− into the lattice, the band gap of the triple-halide perovskite recovered to 1.67 eV without increasing the concentration of Cs+. Photoinduced phase segregation was also suppressed due to the reduced halogen vacancy defects. As a result, the carrier diffusion length of the perovskite was enhanced by near a factor of 2, leading to the highest certified PCE of 16.83% for top-illumination semitransparent IPSCs of ITO/poly(N,N′-bis(4-butylphenyl)-N,N′bis(phenyl)benzidine) (poly-TPD)/poly(9,9-bis(3′-(N,N-dimethyl)-N-ethylammoniumpropyl-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene))dibromide (PFN-Br)/perovskite/LiF/C60/BCP/Ag with an aperture area of 1 cm2. By further integrating this top cell with silicon bottom cells, a PCE of 27% was achieved for a two-terminal tandem device. Apart from the adjustment of the perovskite components, Shin et al. developed a 2D–3D mixed perovskite with a wide bandgap of 1.68 eV by anion engineering of PEA(I0.25SCN0.75). For two-terminal perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells, a PCE of 26.7% was achieved. Recently, a high-performance redox flow battery powered by perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells was successfully fabricated, showing a bright future for integrated solar energy conversion and storage systems. At present, the record PCE of perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells has reached 29.1%, which shows a bright future for commercialization.
In 2018, a record efficiency of 22.43% for perovskite/Cu(In,Ga)Se2 two-terminal tandem solar cells was achieved by optimizing the electrical connection and optical transparency of the interconnecting layer by Yang et al. By ITO sputtering and chemical mechanical polishing of the surface of boron-doped ZnO/Cu(In,Ga)Se2, they successfully reduced the surface vertical roughness of the bottom cells from 250 nm to 40 nm, which was suitable for the deposition of 300–600 nm perovskite. The record has now been refreshed by Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie GmbH to 24.2%. For all-perovskite tandems, the necessity of mixed Pb–Sn perovskites with narrow bandgap restricts the utilization of metal oxide CTMs, whose hydroxyl groups probably induced the oxidation of Sn2+. Therefore, the inverted structure using organic CTMs such as PEDOT:PSS is preferable in all-perovskite tandem solar cells. Tan et al. used metallic tin to reduce Sn4+ to Sn2+ by a comproportionation reaction, which successfully obtained a certified efficiency of 22.1% for all-perovskite tandem solar cells. Recently, this group developed an all-perovskite triple-junction solar cell by a solution process, which showed a PCE of over 20%.

The perovskite film as a light harvester significantly affects the performance of solar cells. Nowadays, the light harvesters used in highly efficient PSCs have transitioned from the initial MAPbI3 to FAPbI3 or mixed-cation lead perovskites. Dense perovskite films are supposed to prevent the unwanted connection between the CTMs, which blocks the shunt paths and reduces interfacial non-radiative recombination. Based on the Shockley–Queisser limit, a highly-crystalline and thick perovskite, with a suitable bandgap around 1.4 eV, can convert solar energy into electricity as much as possible under AM 1.5 conditions and achieve a PCE over 30%. Studies have shown that an appropriate increase in the hydrophobicity of HTMs can effectively increase the grain size of the above perovskites, thereby reducing the density of defect states and accelerating carrier transport. In this chapter, we summarize the fabrication of perovskite films with different components in IPSCs and discuss the effects of the HTM substrate on perovskite crystallization.


Early reports mostly used solvent engineering to improve the coverage of MAPbI3 perovskite films. For example, Chen et al. demonstrated that N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) as the solvent for the perovskite precursor improved the coverage of the MAPbI3 film with fine grains on the PEDOT:PSS substrate compared to conventional γ-butyrolactone (γ-GBL) (Fig. 5a and b). They proposed that DMF has a lower boiling point (152.8 °C) than γ-GBL (205 °C), which makes it more volatile and induces the formation of supernumerary MAPbI3 fine grains. Moreover, the larger surface free energy caused by small grains would further stabilize the perovskite crystal. Subsequently, the mixed solvent of DMF and γ-GBL with a moderate boiling point further optimized the formation process of the perovskite film, thus effectively eliminating the tiny pinholes between the grains. Nevertheless, limited by the manufacturing process, the perovskite layer had a thickness of only about 20 nm with a lot of defects such as grain boundaries, which resulted in a low VOC and JSC of 0.7 V and 10 mA cm−2, respectively. In this respect, the vacuum deposition method was introduced to prepare thick MAPbI3 films with enhanced coverage. Based on this method, Bolink et al. obtained 285 nm-thick MAPbI3 with a JSC of more than 16 mA cm−2. To further utilize the solar energy, they adopted the improved vacuum deposition to prepare a 500 nm-thick MAPbI3 layer. Ultimately, the devices of ITO/TaTm:2,2′-(perfluoronaphthalene-2,6-diylidene)dimalononitrile (F6TCNNQ)/MAPbI3/fullerene (C60)/C60:Phlm/Ag achieved a JSC of more than 20 mA cm−2 and a PCE of 15.8%.

Although the vacuum deposition method has preliminarily solved the challenge of preparing a uniform MAPbI3 thick film, the crystalline quality of the prepared film remained inferior. In addition, compared to the vacuum deposition method, the solution method exhibited obvious advantages, such as simple and low-cost fabrication. In 2014, Tang et al. used ultraviolet-ozone treatment to treat the ITO/NiOX substrate, which improved the wettability towards the perovskite precursor. Subsequently, they spin-coated a layer of PbI2 film on the ITO/NiOX substrate, and immersed it in a hot isopropanol (IPA) solution of MAI, thereby preparing a light harvester of about 300 nm thick (Fig. 5c). However, JSC of the devices remained inferior (13.1 mA cm−2), possibly owing to (1) the difficulty for MAI to penetrate into the thick PbI2 film to fully transform to MAPbI3; and (2) the increased roughness of the film caused by rapid crystallization of MAPbI3 through the dip casting process. In the same year, Huang et al. first proposed the inter-diffusion method, where a DMF solution of PbI2 was spin-coated on an ITO/PEDOT:PSS substrate, followed by an IPA solution of MAI. Finally, flat and 280 nm-thick MAPbI3 was formed by inter-diffusion of MAI during annealing, and the device showed a JSC of 19.6 mA cm−2. However, the carrier diffusion length of MAPbI3 prepared by this process remained merely 100–130 nm, which brought out the ineffective extraction of photo-generated carriers in the perovskite and resulted in negligible contribution to the improvement of JSC with the increase in film thickness. To further improve the carrier diffusion length and film thickness, the researchers further annealed the perovskite film in an atmosphere of DMF solvent (Fig. 5d), and successfully fabricated a high-quality MAPbI3 film with a thickness of more than 1 μm. Compared with thin films prepared by conventional annealing processes, solvent annealing provided a wet environment and promoted the long-distance diffusion of precursor ions and molecules, thus significantly increasing the grain size and carrier diffusion length of the perovskite. Ultimately, the optimal device achieved a JSC of more than 21 mA cm−2 and a PCE of 15.6%. Hereafter, IPA/DMF mixed solvent annealing was successfully applied to the one-step preparation of MAPbI3(Cl) films, and effectively avoided the excessive dissolution of perovskite in DMF and improved the crystalline quality of the film, which further improved JSC and the PCE of the device up to 22.23 mA cm−2 and 18.9%, respectively.
Except for the improvement of the preparation process, additive engineering has been proved as an effective method to improve the quality of perovskite films. Generally, perovskite films have been prepared by an antisolvent fast-crystallization method, whose grain size and crystallinity remain poor. Therefore, researchers immersed a fine-grained perovskite film into an NH4SCN solution in IPA. Due to the strong interaction between MA+ and SCN−, part of the perovskite dissolves into a continuous rod-shaped intermediate, which eliminated a large number of grain boundaries. Subsequently, the intermediate film was annealed to form a perovskite film with an increased grain size and reduced defect density, which enhanced the PCE from 16% to 19.44% (Fig. 6). It is generally believed that moisture will accelerate the decomposition of the perovskite into PbI2 and volatile MAI, and lead to the destruction of the perovskite film. However, Wu et al. demonstrated that trace amounts of H2O can effectively improve the solubility of PbI2 in DMF solvent, and thus a PbI2 film with improved crystallinity and uniformity was formed, which promoted the growth of a high-quality light harvester and improved the electrical contact between MAPbI3 and PEDOT:PSS. The optimal device with 0.5 vol% H2O additive achieved a high FF of 85% and a PCE of 18%. After that, they introduced controllable H2O into an IPA solution of MAI, which also improved the perovskite crystalline quality and achieved a PCE of over 20%.
Han et al. proposed the dual additive strategy using an ionic liquid of methylammonium acetate (MAAc) and the thiourea-like molecule of thio-semicarbazide (TSC) to realize a high-quality MAPbI3 film by a one-step solution method (Fig. 7a). They demonstrated that MAAc and TSC remain in the spin-coated film and promote uniform nucleation and grain growth of the perovskite, which can be fully removed during the annealing process (Fig. 7b). Compared with the perovskite using MAAc as a single additive (Fig. 7c), the strong interaction between TSC and Pb2+ decelerated the crystallization of the perovskite, and the grain size of the perovskite dramatically increased (Fig. 7d). As shown in Fig. 7e, the diffraction peaks of the perovskite film with MAAc–TSC dual additives were sharper than those of the MAAc-only-based sample, indicating improved crystallinity and preferential orientation of the MAPbI3 film. Ultimately, a device with an aperture area of 1.025 cm2 achieved a record certified efficiency in IPSCs (PCE = 19.19%) at that time. Due to the high crystalline quality and rare defects, the device retained 80% of its initial efficiency after aging at 85 °C for 500 hours, reflecting excellent thermal stability. In addition, additives such as HI, MAI, rhodanine derivatives, poly(trimethylolpropane triacrylate), and Pb(Ac)2 were added to the perovskite precursor to control the nucleation and crystallization process by other researchers.

Compared with MAPbI3, FAPbI3 has a wider absorption spectrum and higher thermal stability. However, only a few studies were reported that used FAPbI3 as the light absorber layer in inverted devices, probably due to the incomplete crystallinity of FAPbI3 on conventional poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA) and NiOX HTMs.

In 2015, researchers proposed a slow-down annealing method to improve the crystalline quality of FAPbI3, and fabricated IPSCs with a configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/FAPbI3/PCBM/BCP/Ag. Unlike the one-step annealing method (140 °C/20 min), the perovskite precursor film was annealed progressively at 100 °C, 120 °C and 140 °C for 20 min, respectively. On the premise of preventing component volatilization, the diffusion distance of precursor ions and molecules was extended, which reduced the defects and grain boundaries of FAPbI3 and resulted in an improvement of JSC from 14.73 mA cm−2 to 21.48 mA cm−2 with a PCE of 13.56% for the optimal devices.
Furthermore, partial MA substitution for FA cations of FAPbI3 has been demonstrated to effectively improve the crystalline quality of the perovskite, possibly due to the increase in the configuration entropy of the precursor, which effectively slowed down the perovskite crystallization. However, excessive MA substitution sacrificed the advantage of wide spectrum absorption of FAPbI3, which was not conducive to the improvement of JSC. Therefore, in 2017, Han et al. spin-coated an IPA solution of volatile MACl on yellow phase δ-FAPbI3 after antisolvent treatment, aiming to enhance the crystallinity without sacrificing the purity of the perovskite. In the subsequent annealing process, the infiltration of MACl effectively promoted the transformation from the inactive yellow phase δ-FAPbI3 to the active black phase α-FAPbI3. In addition, MACl induced vertical crystallization of the active black phase α-FAPbI3, which improved the photon absorption and photogenerated carrier separation. As a result, FAPbI3-based inverted devices achieved a high JSC of more than 23 mA cm−2 and a PCE of 20.65%, with excellent stability under 500 hours of light illumination and thermal aging testing. Those results show the potential of FAPbI3 in IPSCs, which requires further optimization by additive engineering and interface engineering.

FA+/MA+ mixed-cation perovskites can adjust the tolerance factor of the perovskite to 0.9–1.0, thus stabilizing the crystalline structure of FAPbI3. Furthermore, doping of inorganic cations such as Cs+ has been shown to effectively manipulate the crystallization rate of the perovskite through the entropy increase effect, thereby improving the quality of the perovskite film. In addition, researchers demonstrated that the ion size mismatch between Cs+ and organic monovalent cations could induce chemical pressure and lattice strain, which lowered the vibrational intensity of the perovskite and enhanced the thermal stability of the light harvester and devices.

Generally, it is difficult to fabricate homogeneous perovskite films with multiple cations, which can be solved by additive engineering and fabrication process optimization. For instance, Song et al. dropped a chlorobenzene (CB) antisolvent including a semiconductor additive (SA) with a rhodamine group on an intermediate film of (FAPbI3)0.8(MAPbBr3)0.2. Due to the strong Lewis acid–base interaction of the tertiary amine group with the perovskite precursor, the grain size of the SA-treated perovskite increased to the micrometer scale. Meanwhile, the high conductivity SA was distributed at the grain boundaries, which benefited photogenerated carrier transport. As a consequence, JSC of the inverted devices was enhanced from 20.4 mA cm−2 to 22.4 mA cm−2, with a VOC of 1.13 V and a PCE of 20.3%. Similarly, an n-type conductive additive poly(bithiophene imide) (PBTI) solution in CB was employed as an anti-solvent to improve the carrier transport of mixed-cation perovskite (MA,FA,Cs)Pb(I,Br)3. The unsaturated Pb ion dangling bonds at the perovskite grain boundaries have been effectively passivated by the lone pair electrons of the S atom on PBTI, thereby effectively inhibiting non-radiative recombination in the perovskite film. Consequently, the IPSCs reached a FF of 79.8% (versus 77.7% for the control ones) based on ITO/NiOX/perovskite/PCBM/zirconium acetate (ZrAcac)/Ag, and obtained a PCE of 20.67%.
Furthermore, a one-step method based on dual precursors was developed to prepare mixed-cation perovskite (FA,MA)PbI3 films. Researchers mixed a Pb(Ac)2/MAI solution in DMF and PbI2/FAI solution in DMF uniformly, and then spin coated the mixture on the substrate to obtain a mixed-cation perovskite precursor film. As the annealing temperature increased, the perovskite phase shifted from the inactive phase δ-(FA,MA)PbI3 (δ) to the active α-(FA,MA)PbI3 (α) phase at room temperature and transformed to a mixed phase of δ, α, and MAPbI3 at 100 °C. As the annealing temperature reaches 120 °C, the intermediate perovskite phases fully transformed into α single phase, without obvious residue of MAAc. Owing to the promising crystalline quality and light absorption of the mixed-cation perovskite film, the device enhanced JSC from 19.57 mA cm−2 to 23.09 mA cm−2 with a PCE of 20.15% and a stable power output of 20% under maximum power point tracking (MPPT).
Considering that the major drawback in the performance of IPSCs is the low VOC, Zhu et al. introduced a technique of solution-processed secondary growth (SSG-G), where the surface of a (FA,MA)Pb(I,Br)3-based perovskite was modified by dripping an antisolvent containing guanidinium bromide, which reduced the lead halide and grain boundaries, and produced a wide bandgap top layer. SSG-G induced EF of the perovskite surface to shift 400 meV downward to the HOMO, indicating that the n-type nature of the surface perovskite has been increased, which improved the energy level matching and effectively restricted non-radiative recombination at the perovskite/PCBM interface. As a result, the IPSCs based on the 1.62 eV-band-gap perovskite achieved a VOC of 1.21 V with a voltage gain of 100 mV with a PCE of 20.9%. In addition, Chen et al. reported that small molecule Lewis base 2-acetylpyridine can effectively passivate Lewis acid defects at the upper interface of perovskite IPSCs, further improving the PCE from 16.75% to 20.05%. Recently, long-chain olamine (OAm) was introduced as surface-anchoring alkylamine ligands (AALs) into the Cs0.05(FA0.92MA0.08)0.95Pb(I0.92Br0.08)3 perovskite precursor. During the film formation of the light harvester, long-chain AALs were distributed at the grain boundaries of the perovskite intermediate. The strong interaction between the amino groups and the perovskite grains restricted the rotation of the grains and produced a (100)-orientation-dominant film with lower defect density than a randomly oriented film (Fig. 8a and b). Eventually, long-chain AALs were distributed on the surface of the perovskite film, where the wide-bandgap AAL layer could effectively block holes and achieve tunneling of electrons, thereby improving carrier separation (Fig. 8c and d). Owing to the multi-functional OAm modification, the inverted devices with a configuration of ITO/PTAA/perovskite/C60/BCP/Ag achieved a record certified PCE of 22.3% with a VOC of 1.14 V.
At present, the state-of-the-art IPSCs are almost all based on mixed-cation lead perovskite materials. In addition, mixed halides are widely employed in those perovskites to modify the band gap, tolerance factor and crystallization, such as mixed I-Cl, and mixed I-Br. Those perovskite compositions and relative device performances are listed in Table 1.
Compositions
Band gap (eV)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF
PCE (%)
Ref.
FA0.85MA0.15Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3
—
21.95
1.081
0.784
18.21

35

MAPbI3
∼1.5
23.17
1.122
0.757
19.19

36

FA0.85MA0.15Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3
1.55
22.99
1.13
0.791
20.59

37

(CsPbI3)0.05[(FAPbI3)0.89(MAPbBr3)0.11]0.95
—
25.1
1.05
0.7512
19.83

38

Cs0.05(FA0.92MA0.08)0.95Pb(I0.92Br0.08)3
1.56
23.9
1.14
0.82
22.34

29


The effect of the substrate on the quality of perovskite films cannot be neglected. Systematic research showed that compared to hydrophilic substrates, perovskites on hydrophobic substrates usually show a larger grain size. The reason is that a perovskite precursor film on a hydrophilic substrate is composed of a larger amount of microscopic droplets, acting as the initial nucleation sites, while the number of microscopic droplets formed on a hydrophobic substrate is much smaller. On the other hand, considering that perovskite precursors usually dissolve in polar solvents, such as DMF and IPA, the precursors show a strong affinity for hydrophilic surfaces. Therefore, hydrophobic substrates such as PTAA, poly(N,N′-bis(4-butylphenyl)-N,N′bis(phenyl)benzidine) (poly-TPD) and metal oxides may induce a noncontinuous perovskite layer or lead to formation of pinholes due to poor wetting (surface energy mismatch), indicating that further adjustment of the hydrophobicity of the substrates can effectively enhance the quality of perovskite thin films for IPSCs. The same as metal oxide NiOX in IPSCs, metal oxide TiO2 and SnO2 substrates in the regular counterparts also needed pretreatments such as UV-ozone treatment to tune the precursor wettability.

At present, most IPSCs with high certified efficiencies are based on PTAA HTMs, indicating the outstanding potential of PTAA as an HTM in IPSCs. It is worthwhile to investigate the film formation on hydrophobic PTAA to further improve the perovskite quality and thus enhance the device performance. Recently, the same as the function of PFN, a conjugated polyelectrolyte of semiconductor MPS6-TMA was synthesized, which possessed an amphiphilic π-conjugated polymer backbone and tertramethylammonium (TMA+) counterions. The amphiphilic backbone enhanced the compatibility between hydrophobic PTAA and the polar perovskite precursors. In the meantime, TMA+ ions can act as a replacement for monovalent cations and the nucleation sites of the perovskite. Those advantages optimized the wetting and passivated the interfacial trap states, which simultaneously enhanced all the performance parameters of PTAA-based IPSCs and obtained a PCE of 18.36% with an aperture area of 1 cm2. Similarly, to improve the wetting of the perovskite precursor on poly-TPD, Lee et al. inserted an amphiphilic polymer of N,N′-bis(4-butylphenyl)-N,N′bis(phenyl)benzidine (PFN), which had both hydrophobic and hydrophilic groups and facilitated the formation of an anchor between poly-TPD and the perovskite. As a result, the coverage of the perovskite film was significantly enhanced.
In addition to the wettability, the crystal lattice of the HTM also has an impact on the subsequent crystallization of the perovskite film. Li et al. reported that incorporating an inorganic alkali halide into PEDOT:PSS could induce oriented crystallization of the perovskite. In detail, since the lattice constant (α) mismatch between the face-centered cubic structure of NaCl (α = 0.58 nm) and the simple cubic structure of MAPbI3 (α = 0.57 nm) was less than 2%, NaCl could serve as a nucleus, which guided the (001)-orientation perovskite growth (Fig. 9a–c) and facilitated the carrier transport of MAPbI3. Besides, the doping of NaCl further downshifted EF of PEDOT:PSS from −5.0 eV to −5.2 eV, leading to a better ohmic contact on the HTM/perovskite interface. As a result, the FF of devices exhibited an increase from 75.5% to 81.9%. Inorganic NiOX-HTM-based IPSCs also suffered from poor crystallization of the perovskite. By molecular dynamics simulations, Ning et al. found that the interface defects of NiOX/MAPbI3 originated from the lattice mismatch, which further resulted in unwanted carrier recombination. To moderate interfacial defects, they partially replaced MA with dimethylamine (DMA) in the perovskite lattice, which enhanced the robustness of the perovskite structure and reduced the lattice mismatch, thus suppressing the formation of defects. The optimized IPSCs based on MAXDMA1−XPbI3 exhibited a PCE of 21.6% with a VOC of 1.116 V, JSC of 23.5 mA cm−2 and FF of 0.82.
As for studies of IPSCs employing a mesoporous structure, Mitzi et al. proposed that a mesoporous structure may induce a random ordering of monovalent cations and reduce the orientation of perovskite grains. Listorti et al. suggested that the diffusion length of the perovskite that was infiltrated into the mesoporous structure would be shorter than that deposited on planar substrates. These phenomena also exist in mesoporous TiO2 layers for regular devices. Moreover, a mesoporous scaffold offers many more available nucleation sites for the capping perovskite layer, which enhanced the film coverage but reduced the grain size of the perovskite.

Charge transport materials, including HTMs and ETMs, play a key role in the effective separation and transport of carriers in PSCs. The basic function of HTMs (ETMs) is to construct a hole (electron) selective contact, which enhances the extraction efficiency of photogenerated holes (electrons) and blocks the flow of electrons (holes). With suitable energy band alignment between the CTMs and perovskite, PSCs can utilize the built-in electric field at the two interfaces to achieve effective separation of carriers, which is able to reduce the non-radiative recombination and thermal loss of VOC. By regulating the properties of the CTMs, balanced transport of charge carriers will be achieved and unwanted charge accumulation will be eliminated, which can reduce the hysteresis and enhance the long-term stability of devices. Here, we systematically summarize the development of CTMs and show their physical properties in Table 2.

CTMs

σ (S cm−1)
Charge mobility (cm2 (V s)−1)
Device structure

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF
PCE
Stability
Ref.
HTMs
PEDOT:PSS
∼10−6–103
∼0.01–1
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/Ca/Al
23.51
1.03
0.83
20.1%
No obvious change after 500 s 1 sun soaking

67, 108 and 156–158

PTAA
∼10−7
∼10−3–10−2
ITO/PTAA/SSG-(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15/PCBM/C60/BCP/Cu
21.86
1.175
0.814
20.9%
No obvious change after 1200 min 1 sun soaking

14, 37, 38, 81 and 159–162

NiOX
∼10−13
∼10−4
ITO/Cu-NiOX/MAPbI3−XClX/PCBM/ZrAcac/Ag
23.07
1.12
0.77
20.5%
—

163–167

CuOX
∼10−6
∼100
ITO/CuOX/MAPbI3−XClX/PCBM/C60/BCP/Ag
22.5
1.11
0.758
19%
—

168–171

CuSCN
∼10−3–10−5
∼10−3–0.1
ITO/CuSCN/MAPbI3/PCBM/Bis-C60/Ag
19.6
1.07
0.74
16
85% left after 300 h in air

128 and 172–176

rGO
∼0.1–1
—
ITO/rGO/PTAA/MAPbI3/PCBM/BCP/Ag
20.3
1.09
0.777
17.2%
90% left after 500 h 1 sun soaking

177–180

ETMs
PCBM
∼10−8–10−4
∼10−4–0.1
FTO/NiOX/SP3 passivated MAPbI3/PCBM/BCP/Ag
22.69
1.146
0.786
20.43
86% left after 30 d in air

30, 72 and 181–184

ICBA
—
∼10−3
ITO/PTAA/(FA0.83MA0.17)0.95Cs0.05Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3/ICBA/C60/BCP/Cu
19.7
1.20
0.775
18.3%
90% left after 720 h in N2

185–187

TiOX
∼10−8–10−6
∼10−4–1
FTO/NiOX/FA1−XMAXPbI3/PCBM/TiOX/Ag
23.09
1.10
0.814
20.65%
90% left after 500 h under 85 °C

147–151

ZnO
∼10−6
∼10−5–102
ITO/NiOX/MAPbI3/ZnO/Al
21
1.01
0.76
16.1
90% left after 60 d in air

134 and 188–191

AZO
—
∼10–102
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3−XClX/PC70BM/AZO/Al
18.5
0.90
0.80
13.3%
82% left after 1000 h in air

192–194

SnO2
∼10−6
∼10−8–102
ITO/NiO/MAPbI3/C60/SnO2 nanoparticles/Ag
21.8
1.12
0.77
18.8%
90% left after 30 d in air with 70% RH

190 and 195–199


Polymer HTMs (P-HTMs) are suitable for low-temperature solution processes of IPSCs and show an advantage of high designability. Moreover, due to the larger molecular weight, P-HTMs possess higher tolerance to polar solvents compared to small-molecule HTMs. Therefore, P-HTMs have been extensively studied and we summarize the molecular structures with the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) and HOMO of P-HTMs in Fig. 10.

PEDOT:PSS, as a p-type conductive polymer, is widely used as an HTM in IPSCs due to the advantages of solution processing under low temperature, and excellent light transmission; the molecular structures of PEDOT and dopants are drawn in the blue dashed box of Fig. 10. However, the acidic PEDOT:PSS severely affects the stability of the device and its relatively low LUMO leads to poor electron blocking ability. More importantly, the energy level mismatch between PEDOT:PSS and the perovskite caused severe non-radiative recombination.
Early studies found that the Fermi level (EF) of PEDOT:PSS has been greatly affected by the content of PSS. Therefore, sodium polystyrene sulfonate (PSS-Na) was introduced into PEDOT:PSS as an additive to partially replace PSS, which shifted the HOMO of modified PEDOT:PSS (m-PEDOT:PSS) from −4.9 eV to −5.2 eV (versus −5.2 eV for the HOMO of MAPbI3) and improved the energy level alignment of the HTM/perovskite. As a result, the device based on ITO/m-PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/Al achieved an enhanced VOC from 0.96 V to 1.11 V with a PCE of 15.56%. Subsequently, 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4TCNQ)-doped PEDOT:PSS was introduced as an HTM into inverted devices. The doping of F4TCNQ increased EF of PEDOT:PSS from −5.08 eV to −5.18 eV, which further reduced the thermodynamic potential loss at the HTM/perovskite interface. Furthermore, the lone pair of electrons on the N atom of the F4TCNQ molecule could effectively passivate the unsaturated Pb ion dangling bonds, which eventually improved the PCE from 13.30% to 17.22%. Notably, small molecule dopants, such as F4TCNQ, are soluble in polar solvents of perovskite precursors. In comparison, dopamine with stronger electron donating ability has been copolymerized on PEDOT:PSS, which prevented the aforementioned challenge and effectively shifted EF of the HTM from −5.1 eV to −5.33 eV, resulting in VOC and the FF of the devices being increased to 1.08 V and 77.5% (versus 1.01 V and 74.2% for the control ones), with a PCE of 18.5%.
Although additives can effectively improve the electrical properties of PEDOT:PSS, the severe corrosion of the device caused by the strong acidity and moisture adsorption of PEDOT:PSS still deteriorates the long-term stability of devices. Alkaline imidazole was introduced into PEDOT:PSS to improve the instability of the device due to the corrosiveness of the HTMs. Imidazole molecules encapsulated PSS and tuned PEDOT:PSS to alkali (b-PEDOT:PSS, pH = 9.0), which further induced the phase separation of PEDOT:PSS as a nucleus of the perovskite. Unlike strong bases such as NaOH and KOH, the mild imidazole had no significant effect on the conductivity of the HTMs, and further improved the transmittance of the HTMs. Consequently, the b-PEDOT:PSS-based inverted devices achieved a 180 mV increase of VOC and retained 95% of the initial efficiency after aging for 2 weeks in air of 20% relative humidity.
PTAA has become the most widely used P-HTM in inverted devices, owing to the excellent electrical properties and chemical neutrality. Hydrophobic PTAA can significantly increase the grain size of the perovskite and possesses an energy band structure well-matched with highly efficient mixed-cation perovskites. Energy band engineering of PTAA is expected to further reduce the thermodynamic potential energy loss at the HTM/perovskite interface. Therefore, the inorganic HTM CuSCN has been used as a dopant to improve the electrical properties of PTAA. Compared to PTAA, lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulphonyl)imide (LiTFSI)-doped PTAA and CuI-doped PTAA, the perovskite on CuSCN-doped PTAA obtained the largest grain size because of its relatively high hydrophobicity. Furthermore, the HOMO of CuSCN-doped PTAA shifted significantly to −5.17 eV versus −5.40 eV of the perovskite, resulting in an improvement in FF from 62% to 72%.
In addition to conventional P-HTMs, a pH-neutral conjugated polyelectrolyte named CPE-K was also utilized, which possessed an excellent wetting property towards perovskites. Owing to the efficient hole selectivity, CPE-K resulted in a very high quenching efficiency of 99% with the perovskite, compared to the value of 71% for the PEDOT:PSS/perovskite interface. However, due to the narrow bandgap of CPE-K (1.4 eV), the parasitic absorption of CPE-K in the long wavelength region was severe, which impaired JSC. On the other hand, researchers have developed a large amount of small molecule HTMs, such as DFTAB, TAE, NTPA, BTPA, TPA derivatives, XY1, DMZ, TFM and TPTPA, as shown in Fig. 10. For instance, Eid et al. employed an easily-synthesized pH-neutral small molecule DFTAB to replace the acidic PEDOT:PSS. In detail, to construct a triarylamine structure with excellent transport properties, they chose DFTAB with 1,4-diflurobenzene as the rigid planar central core to facilitate π–π stacking between molecules and four N,N-bis(4-methoxyphenyl)aniline as peripheral groups to further enhance the property of carrier transport. Unlike PEDOT:PSS with intraband states due to the PSS dopant, DFTAB with a high LUMO of −2.1 eV possessed a better electron blocking function, thus preventing the back-flow of electrons, and reduced the interface recombination. Compared to the devices with PEDOT:PSS, VOC of IPSCs using DFTAB was improved from 0.9 V to 1.07 V. Through molecular design, these small molecules can achieve additional functions such as interface passivation. However, small molecule HTMs with polar groups are generally vulnerable to polar solvents of the perovskite precursor. To solve this problem, Shao et al. developed a series of crosslinkable small molecule HTMs, which formed insoluble three dimensional networks under mild annealing temperature and enhanced the solvent resistance capability of the HTM. On the other side, Huang et al. proposed that an HTM-free PSC could also achieve a high PCE of over 20%. Therefore, the necessity of an HTM in IPSCs should be discussed in the future.

Inorganic HTMs have been extensively studied due to their advantages in long-term stability, such as NiOX-based p-type semiconductors, copper-based compounds (CuI, CuSCN, CuOX, CuAlO2, CuCrO2, and CuCaO2) and other metal oxides (CoOX, WOX, MoS2, Co2N, and VOX), as illustrated in Fig. 11.

Generally, the NiOX semiconductor obtains conductivity through intrinsic Ni vacancies. Notably, the intrinsic resistivity of NiOX remains large, which increases the series resistance of the device and restricts the thickness of NiOX, as well as forming more defects on a larger scale. Therefore, the doping of metal cations (e.g., Ag, Cs, Cu, and K) and molecules has been systematically studied to improve the conductivity and tune the energy level of NiOX by adjusting the Ni vacancy concentration. In 2015, Han et al. demonstrated heavily doped NiOX with Li+ with a slight mismatch of ionic radii, which increased the concentration of Ni vacancies and thus the hole conductivity. This made it possible to prepare large-area and efficient NiOX-based devices, without an obvious increase in unwanted series resistance. To compensate the adverse positive shift of the HOMO caused by Li+ doping, Mg2+ was further introduced into Li+-doped NiOX (Fig. 12). As a result, high efficiency could be obtained in a cell with an aperture area >1 cm2 with a thicker NiOX film, which is the first efficiency (>15%) of PSCs recorded by the 〈Solar Cell Efficiency Tables〉. In 2018, He et al. proposed that F6TCNNQ reduced the HOMO of hydrothermally-synthesized NiOX from −5.21 eV to −5.36 eV and its intrinsic resistance, which decreased the thermodynamic potential loss at the HTM/perovskite interface. Eventually, the average PCE of the device with ITO/F6TCNNQ-doped NiOX/perovskite/PCBM/ZrAcac/Ag as the structure was boosted by about 19.69% to 20.86%, with a VOC of 1.12 V.
However, highly-crystalline NiOX HTMs usually require a high annealing temperature, which increases the fabrication cost and restricts the application in flexible devices. Therefore, researchers have employed the sputtering method to prepare NiOX at low temperature. In addition, Han et al. demonstrated a feasible organic solvent method to synthesize high-quality NiOX nanoparticles as an HTM of low-temperature-fabricated IPSCs with an aperture area >1 cm2, achieving a PCE of 18.49%.

Fullerene and its derivatives (such as PCBM) are representative small molecule ETMs that are widely used in IPSCs. Compared with C60, PCBM possesses better electron extraction ability and film formation capability, while it suffers from poor electron conductivity. Therefore, PCBM/C60/LiF rear electrode buffer layers have been introduced into inverted devices, which achieved the reduction of the series resistance and effective transport of carriers. In addition, the doping method for PCBM can effectively improve its electrical properties. Fang et al. adopted two-dimensional graphene with good conductivity to effectively improve the PCBM conductivity (5.5 vs. 7.5 Ω cm), and further accelerated the electron transport of the perovskite/ETM interface. However, with graphene-doped PCBM as the ETM, VOC has dropped, which was consistent with devices using 1,3-dimethyl-2-phenyl-2,3-dihydro-1H-benzoimidazole derivative (HX) doped PCBM as an ETM. The results suggested that the n-type doping of PCBM by HX caused its up-shift in the LUMO energy level, resulting in a shrinkage in the quasi-Fermi level splitting of the perovskite. In addition to fullerene and its derivatives, researchers designed and synthesized small-molecule ETMs such as HATNA and its derivatives (Fig. 13a–e), PDI-EH (Fig. 13f), and NDI-ID (Fig. 13g). For instance, researchers took the conjugated HATNA as the core to develop its derivatives. By grafting an F group and adjusting the chain length of the sulfonyl group, continuous adjustment of the LUMO and HOMO was achieved without doping. This strategy avoided the challenge of reduced stability caused by additives, and provided more choices for the selection of the ETM in inverted devices. To further improve the stability of the ETMs, researchers prepared nano-rods or polymer ETMs with higher molecular weights, such as hPDI2-Pyr-hPDI2 (Fig. 13h), hPDI3-Pyr-hPDI3 (Fig. 13i), and P(NDI2DT-TTCN) (Fig. 13j). For example, Park et al. developed a NDI-based polymer (P(NDI2DT-TTCN)) as a replacement for fullerene-based ETMs in IPSCs. As shown in Fig. 13j, this polymer contains an alternating copolymer of NDI and dicyano-terthiophene groups as strong electron-withdrawing (electron-accepting) backbones, where the S–N groups induced a pseudo-planar structure of dicyano-terthiophene. Compared to the conventional PCBM, P(NDI2DT-TTCN) showed higher viscosity and stronger π–π stacking with face-on orientation. Those advantages not only facilitated the formation of a homogeneous ETM film but also prevented current leakage by direct contact between the perovskite and REM, which enhanced JSC from 19.8 mA cm−2 to 22.0 mA cm−2. However, due to the poor energy level alignment and electron transport capability, the certified efficiency of the device based on the above ETMs is normally lower than that of the device based on PCBM.

Compared with organic ETMs, inorganic ETMs have superior chemical stability. However, the inferior conductivity and band-alignment make it challenging to obtain high efficiency for inverted devices based on inorganic ETMs alone. Therefore, researchers applied multilayer ETMs based on fullerene/inorganic metal oxide to simultaneously achieve high efficiency and long-term stability of inverted devices. For instance, SnO2 nanoparticles synthesized by the hydrothermal method were introduced between C60 and Ag in a device with a structure of FTO/NiOX/MAPbI3/C60/SnO2 nanoparticles/Ag. Because of the proper energy band structure and high crystallinity of SnO2, the inverted device achieved a significant improvement in moisture stability without sacrificing efficiency. After 30 days of storage in air with a relative humidity of 70–80%, the devices retained more than 80% of the initial efficiency of 18.8%. Subsequently, atomic layer deposition technology (ALD) was employed to prepare a denser SnOX layer (ALD-SnOX). The insertion of ALD-SnOX blocked the diffusion of external moisture and internal decomposition components, which prevented the degradation of the perovskite and the corrosion of iodide ions on REMs, resulting in enhanced long-term thermal and moisture stability for over 1000 and 350 hours, respectively. Later, NiOX and aluminum-doped zinc oxide (AZO) prepared by ALD were used as the HTM and ETM, respectively, to realize the moisture stability of inverted devices, which retain 86.7% of the initial efficiency after 500 hours at 85 °C and MPPT in ambient air.
In this regard, excellent CTMs should meet several criteria: (1) HTMs should have high hole mobility, conductivity, chemical stability, electron blocking ability, and light transmittance as well as working as a substrate to assist high-quality crystallization of the perovskite; (2) ETMs should have high electron mobility and hole blocking ability and be able to protect the perovskite active layer from oxygen and moisture; (3) a well-matched band alignment of HTMs and ETMs with the perovskite is required to avoid the generation of Schottky barriers that hinder carrier separation; and (4) the interfaces of HTM/perovskite and perovskite/ETM should have as few interfacial defects as possible to reduce non-radiative recombination.

The properties of REMs significantly influence the performance of the devices. The basic functions of REMs are to form an external circuit and reflect the incident light as a rear reflector. The work function, conductivity, stability and preparation processing conditions of REMs play key roles in the efficiency and long-term stability of IPSCs. For instance, the degradation of REMs caused by ion migration and external factors such as oxygen and moisture greatly affects the stability of the whole device. In addition, the EF difference between the ETM and REM may form a Schottky barrier at the interface that hinders carrier transport.


In IPSCs, REMs are generally deposited on the ETM or the buffer layer, such as BCP and LiF, by vacuum thermal evaporation. Currently, the REMs of inverted devices are mainly based on metal or carbon materials. Generally, the vapor pressure of the REMs prepared by vacuum thermal evaporation satisfies the following formula:

(1)
where
p is the saturated vapor pressure of the REMs. A is a constant related to the material properties. R is the gas constant, R = 8.314 J (mol K)−1. ΔH is the temperature-independent latent heat of phase transformation in the evaporation process. T is the absolute temperature. The evaporation temperature is defined as the temperature when p of the evaporation material has reached 0–10 Pa. The related parameters of conventional REMs and evaporation boat materials (EBMs) are shown in Table 3.

REMs and EBMs

A

 (10
4 K)

T
1Pa (°C)

T
10Pa (°C)

E
F (eV)

E
REM-I − EREM–REM (kJ mol−1)

σ (107 S m−1)
Ref.
Al
11.79
1.594
1187.3
1334.7
−4.2
236.9
3.8

23

Au
11.89
1.758
1323.0
1482.4
−5.0
—
4.3

62 and 202

−5.3
Ag
11.85
1.427
1027.2
1157.5
−4.3
71
6.9

203

Ti
12.50
2.32
1722.7
1910.6
−4.33
168.6
0.24

202

Cu
11.96
1.698
1258.8
1410.7
−4.65
20.69
6.0

202

Bi
11.18
0.953
651.7
751.1
−4.25
17.6
0.095

203

C
15.73
4.0
2419.7
2614.1
−5.0 (CNT)
−398
—

204

−4.48 (Gr)

202

W
12.40
4.068
3256.9
3592.3
−4.5
—
1.9

202

Mo
11.64
3.085
2592.9
2886.4
−4.6
—
1.9

202

Ta
13.04
4.021
3032.5
3328.6
—
—
—
—
Al metal has an EF of −4.2 eV, which is well matched with the LUMO of PCBM (−4.2 eV). This proper band matching achieved a promising ohmic contact at the PCBM/Al interface (Table 3). However, the low conductivity of Al is detrimental to the charge transport. On the other hand, previous studies demonstrated that there exists a large driving force for the reaction between I and Al atoms (EREM-I − EREM–REM = 236.9 kJ mol−1, Table 3).
In 2016, Yang et al. exposed fresh devices of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/Al to the atmosphere for one hour and found a large number of bubbles on the surface of Al, which seriously damaged the Al electrode and deteriorated the devices (Fig. 14a). To reveal the mechanism of REM failure, the frame of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM was stored in air for 0, 25, 50, 75, 100, and 200 hours, respectively. After preparing the Al REM, similar current density–voltage (J–V) curves were obtained for the devices with different storage times, indicating that the failure of the device stems from the destruction of the Al REM. In addition, a high evaporation temperature is required to realize the evaporation of Al (1187.3–1334.7 K), which may incur the thermal decomposition of the perovskite. To solve this problem, low-temperature electron-beam evaporation and the sputtering method have been applied to prepare Al REMs for inverted devices, which further improved the coverage of the REMs.
A similar mechanism was also observed in the device using Ag as an REM. As shown in Fig. 14b, before evaporation of the Ag REM, thermal aging of the device showed no adverse influence on the final performance of PSCs. On the contrary, thermal aging significantly decreased VOC and the FF of the device with an Ag REM, which hardly affected JSC.208 The results of ToF-SIMS showed that, compared with the fresh device, significant I enrichment appeared at the PCBM/Ag interface after aging at 85 °C for 24 hours (Fig. 14c and d). The researchers further peeled off the Ag REM after aging at 100 °C for 72 hours and conducted XRD and grazing incidence XRD (GIXRD) tests, which showed a significant characteristic peak of AgI at the surface of Ag (Fig. 14e and f). With the aging temperature rising, the I element further accumulated at the PCBM/Ag interface and diffused into the Ag REM, mainly because the AgI layer tended to grow into the Ag REM by the chemical driving force of EREM-I − EREM–REM = 71 kJ mol−1, which further induced the degradation of the perovskite. Further research found that the pinholes generated by the oxidation of PCBM in the inverted device cause the infiltration of oxygen and moisture, which decomposed the perovskite. The decomposition component HI diffused and corroded the Ag REM, producing AgI with hydrogen. The above process can be described as follows:
4CH3NH3PbI3 + 2H2O → (CH3NH3)4PbI6·2H2O + 3PbI2
(2)
(CH3NH3)4PbI6·2H2O → 3CH3NH2↑ + 3HI↑ + CH3NH3PbI3 + 2H2O
(3)
2Ag + 2HI → 2AgI + H2↑
(4)
In order to prevent the formation of insulator AgI, Chen et al. employed chemically inert bismuth (Bi) metal as the interlayer between Ag and BCP to block diffusing components (e.g., MA, HI, and MAI) and external molecules (e.g., H2O, and O2) (Fig. 14g). To further prove the efficient blocking effect of Bi, they replaced the PCBM/BCP/REM(Bi/Ag or Ag) layers of the aged device, and the devices with the Bi interlayer showed no significant change in performance, while the control devices based on PCBM/BCP/Ag showed significant recovery in JSC, suggesting that the Bi interlayer effectively prevented the generation of by-products such as AgI. On the other hand, EF of the Bi interlayer was between the LUMO of PCBM and EF of Ag, which benefited the efficient transfer of electrons (Fig. 14h). Based on the multifunctional inert Bi interlayer, inverted devices with an aperture area of over 1 cm2 achieved excellent thermal and light stability, which retained 97% and 95% of the initial efficiency of over 18% after continuous light illumination or 85 °C aging for 500 hours in an inert environment, respectively. Apart from conventional Al and Ag, Ca with suitable EF was investigated to be used as an REM, whereas its moisture absorption restricted its application. Therefore, researchers tried to employ more stable metals (e.g., Au, and Cu) as the REMs of inverted devices. However, the REMs of Au and Cu still faced challenges, including higher thermal evaporation temperature, unsuitable EF, and larger resistivity.
Compared with metal REMs, carbon materials show excellent resistance to I corrosion (EREM-I − EREM–REM < 0) and good light transmittance, which are expected to be used in tandem PSCs. Researchers laminated carbon nanotubes layer by layer and doped them with PEI to improve the ohmic contact with PCBM. Owing to the stable carbon REMs, the thermal stability of the device has been significantly improved, retaining >90% of the initial efficiency after aging at 60 °C for 500 hours.

As early as 1994, Green et al. utilized field effect passivation to develop passivated emitter rear locally diffused (PERL) crystalline silicon solar cells, which are still one of the mainstream technologies nowadays. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 15, they fabricated a wide-bandgap oxide layer between the metal electrode and semiconductor, where both sides of the oxide layer spontaneously form an electric dipole moment under the effect of the electric field, which generates an induced electric field opposite to the Schottky barrier electric field. As a result, the Schottky barrier and the non-radiative recombination of the interface were eliminated, which boosted the PCE of silicon solar cells up to 24.7%. A field effect passivation layer, such as BCP, LiF, metal acetate, and poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), can also be inserted between the ETM and REM to eliminate the interfacial Schottky barrier in IPSCs.

BCP has been widely used as a hole blocking layer in organic solar cells. Chen et al. employed the capacitance–voltage (C–V) characteristics to further study the essential role of BCP for the charge transport at the PCBM/Ag interface in inverted devices. As can be seen from Fig. 16a, without a BCP buffer layer, electrons accumulated at the interface of PCBM/Ag due to the Schottky barrier (Fig. 16a), which is consistent with the peak appearing at 0.9–1.1 V in the C–V curves (Fig. 16d). When 5 nm BCP was inserted at the interface (Fig. 16b), electrons effectively transported to the REM owing to field effect passivation, which was consistent with the significant decrease in the peak representing the charge accumulation (Fig. 16e). However, the efficiency of electron tunneling would decrease exponentially when the thickness of BCP increased to 13 nm, leading to charge accumulation in the device under illumination at a 0.6 V bias voltage (Fig. 16c and f).
Seo et al. utilized LiF with a thickness of only 0.5 nm as the buffer layer of the PCBM/Al interface, which increased the FF of the device from 70.8% to 76.7%, whereas the moisture absorption of LiF threatens the stability of the devices. Subsequently, ZrAcac has been proved to effectively improve the electrical contact at the PCBM/Ag interface. Due to the decent film-forming ability of ZrAcac and its larger LUMO (−1.29 eV) relative to that of PCBM (−4.2 eV), the Schottky barrier of the PCBM/Ag interface was eliminated, which improved the PCE of the devices from 12.43% to 18.69%. Notably, the HOMO of ZrAcac (−4.39 eV) was much larger than that of PCBM (−6.1 eV), which induced ZrAcac to effectively block holes and increased the FF of IPSCs to 78.1%. This result showed the importance of eliminating the Schottky barrier at the ETM/REM interface for efficient inverted devices. In addition, a π-expanded electrolyte, phenanthroline derivative and non-conjugated polymer with good film-forming properties as interlayers also effectively improved the ohmic contact of the PCBM/Ag interface.

With the substantial developments of perovskite crystallization and charge transport regulation, non-radiative recombination has become one of the main drawbacks that limits the device performance, which originates from defects and interface energy level mismatch. Non-radiative recombination will cause severe thermal potential loss and greatly affect VOC and the FF of devices. Generally, VOC of inverted devices is inferior to that of regular structure ones, indicating more serious interfacial non-radiative recombination in IPSCs. In addition to modification of CTMs in Section 4, the systematic interface passivation of perovskites has become an effective way to reduce non-radiative recombination and enhance VOC and the FF.

The large HOMO difference between PEDOT:PSS and the perovskite increases the thermodynamic potential loss at the HTM/perovskite interface, which usually restricts VOC of PEDOT:PSS-based inverted devices below 1.0 V. To address this issue, the small molecule (N,N′-bis(4-(6-((3-ethyloxetan-3-yl)methoxy))-hexylphenyl)-N,N′-diphenyl-4,4′-diamine) (OTPD) was introduced as an interlayer between PEDOT:PSS and the perovskite, where OTPD was cross-linked under the inductive effect of the acid group on PEDOT:PSS, denoted as X-OTPD. As a result, the cross-linked X-OTPD possessed tolerance to the washing of the solvent. In addition, researchers introduced the hydrophobic PTAA into the PEDOT:PSS/perovskite interface. In addition to reducing the thermodynamic potential loss at the interface, the hydrophobicity of PTAA can reduce the nucleation sites of the perovskite, thereby increasing the grain size of the perovskite and reducing defect states of grain boundaries. Consequently, the FF of inverted devices was enhanced from 76.91% to 82.59%. Previous work further proved that the appropriate combination of the developed HTMs, such as rGO/PTAA and rGO/CuSCN, can suppress the non-radiative recombination of the interface, which enhanced VOC and the FF of IPSCs.
For the PTAA/perovskite interface, Song et al. prepared monoatomic semi-conductive antimonite nanosheets by the liquid-phase exfoliation method as an interlayer. Due to the high conductivity and the appropriate HOMO (−5.3 eV) of antimonite nanosheets, the carrier transport at this interface was significantly improved, resulting in an enhancement of VOC by 50 mV. In addition, the non-radiative recombination caused by the interfacial defect states of PTAA/perovskite restricts the performance of inverted devices. For instance, Qu et al. doped PTAA with F4TCNQ to improve its conductivity, while the F4TCNQ in PTAA would dissolve in dimethyl sulfoxide, leaving a large number of hole traps in the HTM, which increased the defect-induced non-radiative recombination. For this reason, wide bandgap polystyrene and PMMA were introduced as a passivation layer into the F4TCNQ-doped PTAA/perovskite interface to prevent the F4TCNQ from dissolving and passivate interfacial defects to improve the electron blocking capability. As a result, the FF of inverted devices was improved from 74.9% to 77.1%. Owing to the larger resistivity of polystyrene and PMMA, the FF of the device decreased obviously as the thickness of the passivation layers increased. These results indicated that for a field effect passivation layer, the thickness must be controlled at a low level without hindering the charge transport in the device.

V
OC and the FF of NiOX-based IPSCs remain relatively inferior, possibly due to the existence of severe defect states and the energy level mismatch of the NiOX/perovskite interface. In view of this, He et al. proposed that similar lattice constants between metal chlorides and perovskites enabled extremely thin metal chlorides (MCl) to induce high-quality perovskites through lattice matching, thereby reducing the defect states of the NiOX/perovskite interface. Owing to the modified lattice matching of NiOX/perovskite and the doping effect of MCl on NiOX, a high VOC of 1.15 V was obtained. Recently, phenethyl ammonium iodide (PEAI), a passivator widely used in regular structural devices, was also applied at the NiOX/perovskite interface. PEAI could react with PbI2 to in situ form two-dimensional perovskite PEA2PbI4, which effectively enhanced the binding force of the NiOX/perovskite interface and the crystallization of the perovskite. On the other hand, PEAI passivated the dangling bond of unsaturated Pb ions at the interface, which improved the carrier transport, resulting in a VOC close to 1.1 V and a JSC exceeding 24 mA cm−2.
The perovskite/ETM interface serves to extract electrons and block holes in IPSCs. In addition, the degradation caused by moisture and oxygen mostly originates at this interface. As described in Section 4.2, C60 and its derivatives such as PCBM are the most commonly used ETMs in inverted devices. The low LUMO of C60 forced the LUMO of the perovskite to bend downward at the perovskite/C60 interface, reducing the splitting of the quasi-Fermi level of the perovskite and further resulting in the decrease of VOC. In view of this, a large number of materials with suitable energy band structures were used as the interlayers of perovskite/C60 to eliminate the non-radiative recombination loss caused by the energy level mismatch. For instance, the conductive polymer poly(9,9-dioctyfluorene-co-benzothiazole) (F8BT) was inserted at the perovskite/C60 interface. Owing to the higher LUMO (−3.75 eV) of F8BT, the thermodynamic potential loss of the interface was effectively reduced, resulting in a 176 mV increase in VOC. In addition, small molecules TPE-ISO4 and TPE-DPP4 with diketopyrrolopyrrole and isoindigo groups were demonstrated to be effective in enhancing the electron extraction of perovskite/C60 and passivating trap states, resulting in a VOC of 1.05 V and PCE of 18.44%.
For the interface of perovskite/PCBM, a small molecule interlayer of the 1,1-dicyanomethylene-3-indanone series (INIC series) was inserted at the perovskite/PCBM interface. The lone pair electrons of the F atom in the molecule effectively passivated the unsaturated Pb dangling bond of the interface, which avoided the pinning of the interfacial energy level caused by defect states, and improved the FF of the device to a high value of 82.7%. Similarly, the lone pair of electrons on the carbonyl and carboxyl groups of small molecule tetrafluoroterephthalic acid (TFTPA) effectively passivated the electron traps on the surface of the perovskite and strengthened the combination of the perovskite/PCBM interface, promoting the extraction capability and obtaining a VOC of 1.13 V with a PCE of 19.39%. Besides, TFTPA was able to strengthen the interfacial binding, where the electron-deficient TFTPA and the electron-rich PCBM were combined by strong Coulomb forces, which allowed PCBM to tolerate polar solvent CB washing, as shown in Fig. 17.
Recently, Li et al. developed the fullerene derivative of PCBB-3N-3I with a tertiary amine group and iodide ion to improve the carrier transport and eliminate non-radiative recombination losses at the perovskite/PCBM interface (Fig. 18a). They proposed that the electrostatic interaction between the iodide ion of PCBB-3N-3I and the dangling bonds of Pb ions promoted ordered stacking and preferred orientation at the perovskite interface. As shown in Fig. 18b, the highly oriented PCBM-3N-3I provided a large dipole moment for the perovskite/PCBM interface, and shifted the surface vacuum level of the perovskite downward by 0.19 eV, which enhanced the ohmic contact at the interface and obtained a VOC increase of 70 mV. Consequently, devices based on PCBB-3N-3I obtained a VOC of 1.105 V and a JSC of 23.46 mA cm−2 with a PCE of 21.10%, indicating that the combination of field effect passivation and electrical passivation played an important role in suppressing the interfacial recombination of IPSCs.
For the interface passivation of the perovskite, the following should be noted: (1) the trade-off effects of increased interfacial defects due to the fresh interfaces and eliminated defects of the original interfaces by interlayer insertion should be comprehensively considered; (2) the drawbacks of solvent corrosion and high-temperature heat treatment on the interlayer should be considered (for instance, the interlayer applied to the HTM/perovskite interface should be able to resist the corrosion of the precursor solvent of the perovskite, and withstand the heat treatment of the functional layer such as the perovskite); and (3) excellent interlayers should have multiple functions, such as defect passivation, interfacial modification, and energy band matching.

In summary, great efforts have been made to increase the efficiency of small-area IPSCs from 3.9% to 22.3% by improving the quality of the perovskite and charge transport layer, passivating defects and modifying interfaces, etc. In addition, with the benefits of long-term stability, an inverted mini-module with an aperture area of 57.2 cm2 was successfully fabricated, which showed no degradation of the PCE after 20 days in an inert atmosphere. Moreover, the mini-modules based on the inverted structure first passed the 85 °C/85% RH damp heat test, indicating the bright commercialization prospects of IPSCs. However, the efficiency of IPSCs is still lower than their regular counterparts and other aspects still have room to be enhanced. The following suggestions are proposed to further accelerate the research of IPSCs:

(1) To overcome the weakness of lower VOC, (i) the crystallization quality of the perovskite should be further improved to reduce the defect density of perovskite films. (ii) A fullerene derivative (PCBM) was commonly used as ETMs in IPSCs, which lacks variations because it is difficult to modify. Recently, the efficiency of organic solar cells was sharply boosted from 12% to 17% by development of non-fullerene ETMs. Although some of these new ETMs have already been introduced into PSCs, the efficiency is low because of the different nature between PSCs and organic solar cells. Hence, specific non-fullerene ETMs with suitable energy level and conductivity are required to be developed to match the perovskite in IPSCs to reduce the energy loss at the interface.
(2) Field effect passivation materials are effective in breaking Schottky barriers to benefit the charge transport. However, the uniformity of these materials on a large scale is a challenging issue in the future.
(3) The light-soaking stability of IPSCs was greatly enhanced to be longer than 1000 hours when the HTM was replaced by inorganic NiOX, implying that it is important to use inorganic materials as the HTM at the front side to avoid decomposition under light illumination. Hence, more inorganic HTMs should be developed in the future. On the other hand, thermal stability is a general issue similar to the research on regular devices. In addition, other stability tests such as light cycling, temperature cycling and bias should be performed to disclose the degradation mechanism.
(4) Although new chemically stable REMs such as Bi and carbon were developed, it is still hard to fabricate REMs with high conductivity by a low-temperature process. We suggest more research should be done for this issue.
Currently, the urgent issue for IPSCs is still obtaining higher efficiency, which is beneficial for reducing the cost of power generation and thus accelerating the progress of their commercialization.

The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (11834011, 11674219) and the KAKEHI Grant of Japan (Grant No. 18H02078).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020