 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM32267F
(Highlight)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16171-16181

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Yongquan
Qu
 and 

Xiangfeng
Duan
*

Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA 90095

California Nanosystems Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA 90095. E-mail: xduan@chem.ucla.edu

Center for Applied Chemical Research, Frontier Institute of Science and Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710049, China

Received
11th April 2012
, Accepted 15th May 2012
First published on 25th June 2012
Nanostructures have been the focus of considerable interest for solar energy conversion in the areas of renewable green energy sources as well as environmental remediation due to their unique physicochemical properties. Here we highlight the recent efforts on developing new materials for solar energy conversion with a focus on one-dimensional homogeneous and heterogeneous nanowires. We first outline challenges and strategies to develop highly efficient and stable semiconductor materials for solar energy conversion, and then discuss the potential advantages and recent progress in exploring one-dimensional homogeneous and heterogeneous structures. We will particularly focus our discussion on the photovoltaic performance of various one-dimensional nanowire materials. Lastly, the perspectives for further improving the efficiency and stability of the solar energy conversion system using one-dimensional homogeneous and heterogeneous nanowires and their potential applications will be discussed.

As we are facing increasing challenges from diminishing fossil fuels, global warming and environmental pollution, there is increasing interest in developing renewable and environmentally friendly energy resources. Among various renewable green energy sources, solar energy represents the most abundant natural resource on the earth, and has the potential to replace the current fossil fuels to satisfy the energy demand of our society in future. Tremendous efforts have been devoted to the development of new materials and devices that can efficiently harness solar energy in the past decades.

One of the most popular approaches to harness solar energy is to use photovoltaic (PV) cells to directly convert solar energy into electricity. This approach can effectively harvest and convert solar energy, but the generated electricity cannot be easily stored and has to be immediately consumed. In particular, considering the performance of solar photovoltaics is highly variable and dependent on the weather and time of the day, it poses a serious energy storage challenge for sustained energy supply. Very often, the generated electricity has to be stored in a secondary device (e.g. batteries or supercapacitors). On the other hand, in natural photosynthesis, solar energy is harvested by green plants and directly converted into storable chemical energy in the form of various high energy organic compounds. This strategy effectively addresses all three essential problems of solar energy harvest, conversion and storage. Therefore, there is increasing interest in developing artificial photosynthesis systems that can mimic the natural photosynthetic process and efficiently harvest, convert, and store solar energy in the form of chemical bonds. To this end, photoelectrochemical cells (PEC) and photocatalytic (PC) routes have been intensively investigated.
To effectively harvest and convert solar energy into useful energy forms, efficient solar photon absorption, charge generation, separation and transportation are required. The inorganic semiconductor material is ideal for solar energy harvesting because of its wideband absorption of photons with energy exceeding the band gap. Therefore, conventional semiconductors (e.g. silicon) are the primary materials of choice for the current state-of-the-art photovoltaic devices, which are however often limited by high production cost and/or limited efficiency.
Nanostructured materials such as quantum dots, nanorods or nanowires have recently attracted considerable attention for solar energy harvest, conversion and storage due to their unique physical and chemical properties compared to their bulk counterparts. Size and morphology dependent properties, such as quantum confinement effects in semiconductor nanostructures, provide a rational approach toward a highly efficient solar energy conversion process. It has been demonstrated that the band gaps and optical absorption characteristics of semiconductor quantum dots can be rationally tuned for efficient harvest of the entire solar spectrum. Additionally, inorganic nanostructures can be processed through the solution process to form functional devices and therefore can offer a low cost pathway for solar energy harvesting devices. Significant efforts have been placed on the application of quantum dots in photovoltaic devices in which the photo-generated electrons and holes are transported to external circuits. However, the difficulties in efficiently addressing individual quantum dots electrically have prevented such materials from realizing their full potential for efficient solar energy harvest and conversion.
Mimicking natural photosynthesis, the photocatalysts mediated photoelectrochemical processes can utilize the photo-generated electrons and holes on site to drive thermodynamically uphill redox reactions (e.g. proton/CO2 reduction or water oxidation). This process enables the harnessing and conversion of solar energy into chemical energy in situ, bypassing the most challenging problem associated with extracting electrical carriers to external circuits from individual nanostructures, and therefore may offer an alternative pathway for efficient solar energy harvest and conversion. In general, nanostructures with a large surface area and more active sites are desired for photoelectrochemical reactions. The photogenerated charges in nanostructures can reach reactive surface sites within a short diffusion length, and therefore can efficiently suppress the bulk recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes to improve the charge utilization efficiency.
To date, a broad range of nanostructured materials have been investigated as potential building blocks for constructing the future generation of photovoltaic devices and photocatalytic systems. Zero-dimensional nanostructures such as quantum dots with tunable band gaps can allow for efficient optical absorption, and charge generation, but are often limited by the lack of a mechanism for effective charge separation and transportation. On the other hand, one dimensional nanostructures such as nanowires have attracted considerable interest because they represent the smallest dimension for efficient charge generation, separation and transportation. One dimensional nanostructures possess the unique chemical, structural and physical properties that make them ideally suited for solar energy harvest and conversion. There are now well-developed approaches for the synthesis of a wide variety of nanowire materials with well controlled chemical composition, physical dimension, structure morphology and heterojunction architecture. This fine synthetic control can readily offer several significant advantages not available in other material systems: (1) with confinement in two lateral dimensions and the unconstrained axial dimension, the one dimensional structures can simultaneously allow for efficient optical absorption and charge transportation. (2) With fine synthetic control, multiple homo- or hetero-junctions (such as p–n junctions) can be synthesized within the individual nanowire to create an internal built-in potential that can effectively drive charge separation and direct the transportation of photogenerated electrons and holes in the opposite directions, and therefore minimize the bulk recombination (Fig. 1). (3) The unique geometry of nanowire arrays can allow for low optical reflection and enhance the light trapping and absorption within nanowire arrays.
Driven by these unique characteristics, nanowires as potential materials for solar energy conversion have been the focus of considerable efforts. A significant portion of these efforts has been focused on the hybrid structures obtained by combining nanowires with nanoparticles and/or organic semiconductors. Although these studies have led to many interesting developments, the performance of such hybrid devices is often limited by the other components rather than the nanowires, and therefore it is difficult to take full advantages of the one-dimensional nanowires in this case. Here we focus on highlighting the recent efforts that use nanowires only as the building blocks for the development of solar energy conversion systems, including photovoltaics, photoelectrochemical cell and photocatalysis.

There are two unique junctions including p-type–intrinsic–n-type (p–i–n) and metal–semiconductor junctions, which have been thoroughly studied as the critical component of PV devices at the single nanowire level. Geometrically, there are three prototypical PV devices in axial (Fig. 1a), topotaxial (Fig. 1c) and radial (Fig. 1d) structures. For the axial structure, the electron–hole pairs are generated within semiconductors under light illumination and carriers can be efficiently separated due to the built-in-potential at the depletion region (Fig. 1b). The separated electrons and holes migrate in the opposite directions towards the two ends of the nanowire. The topotaxial structure extends the interface to the longitude cross-section of the nanowires and shortens the carrier diffusion range to less than the diameter of nanowire. The radial structure further extends the heterojunction interface along the surface of the nanowires, resulting in a short carrier diffusion range and a large interface for efficient carrier separation and transport. The bulk recombination of charge carriers is largely suppressed in such a structure compared to an axial structure due to the large junction area and short diffusion length in the radial structure. The photoresponse of various homogeneous and heterogeneous structures is summarized in Table 1.

Junction

V
OC (V)

J
SC


FF

η (%)

a 
J
SC unit is mA cm−2.
b The value is ISC (pA).

Axial silicon p–i–n

i = 0 μm
0.12
3.5 pA
—
—

i = 2 μm
0.24
14 pA
—
—

i = 4 μm
0.29
3.5
0.51
0.5
Tandem, i = 2 μm
0.39
8.2 pA
—
—
Axial silicon p–n
Original
0.451
13
0.77
4.6
a-Si:H
0.564
16
0.81
7.4
a-SiNx:H
0.535
23
0.75
9.0
Radial silicon p–n
0.26
23.9
0.55
3.40
Radial n-GaN–i-InxGa1−xN–p-GaN
In% = 27%
1.0
0.39
—
—
In% = 14.9%
1.0
0.24
—
—
In% = 5.6%
1.1
0.14
—
—
In% = 0
2.0
0.059
—
—
Radial GaAs p–i–n
0.8–0.95
—
0.65
4.5
Topotaxial n-CdS–p-CuxS
0.32
5.5
0.40
—
Radial n-CdS–p-Cu2S
0.61
11.4
0.808
5.4
Al–n-Si nanowire
0.19
5.0
0.40
0.46
Axial Pt–n-Si–n+-Si nanowire
0.30
11.2
0.54
1.81
Axial p-PPY–n-CdS
<0.15
<0.043
0.26
0.016
Radial p-P3HT–n-ZnO
0.40
0.32
0.28
0.036
Radial p-QT–n-ZnO
0.35
0.29
0.32
0.033
Bilayer p-CuPc–n-F16CuPc
0.35
0.054
0.36
0.007

Despite the fact that silicon has an indirect band gap with a relatively small absorption coefficient that is unfavorable for light absorption, the initial investigation of single nanowire PV devices has focused on silicon nanowires because of the ease in controlling both their morphology and doping. The growth of p–i–n silicon nanowires is commonly catalyzed by Au nanoparticles. Silane (SiH4), diborane (B2H6) and phosphine (PH3) are used as silicon precursor, p- and n-dopants, respectively. The photoresponse of a single silicon p–i–n junction and multijunctions in both axial and radial geometries has been well investigated as summarized in Table 1. The as-grown axial p–i–n silicon nanowire (Fig. 2a) exhibits a very uniform diameter. Due to the difference in the etching rates (ri > rp > rn) of silicon with different dopants by potassium hydroxide, clear delineation of each segment is displayed in Fig. 2b and c for a p–i–n and p–i–n+–p+–i–n silicon nanowire, respectively.

The photovoltaic properties of the axial p–i–n silicon nanowire diodes with i lengths of 0 μm, 2 μm and 4 μm are shown in Fig. 2d. The obtained open circuit voltages (VOC) and short-circuit current (ISC) were 0.12 V and 3.5 pA, 0.24 V and 14.0 pA, and 0.29 V and 31.1 pA, respectively. These results indicate that increasing the length of the intrinsic segment leads to increased VOC and ISC. This can be attributed to the suppression of the interfacial recombination by introducing an intrinsic segment, compared to the p–n junction. The I–V curve (Fig. 2d) of p–i–n silicon nanowires with 4 μm of intrinsic length yields a fill factor (FF) of 51%, an efficiency of 0.5% and a maximum output power of 4.6 pW. For a tandem p–i–n+–p+–i–n axial modulation as shown in Fig. 3c, the representative I–V curves (Fig. 2e) on one- and two-cell photodiodes with 2 μm of intrinsic length yield the VOC and ISC values of 0.23 V and 10.2 pA, and 0.39 V and 8.2 pA, respectively. Ideally, the VOC of tandem cells should be double that of a single cell, while the ISC should remain constant. The measured values are smaller than those of the expected values, which can be attributed to parasitic series resistances due to the non-ideal tunneling interface between highly doped n+ and p+ segments.
The p–n junction of the radial structure is along the circumferential sidewalls of silicon nanowires, which has a short charge diffusion length and in turn improves the charge separation and transportation. The schematic of the radial silicon p–i–n device is illustrated in Fig. 3a.Fig. 3b shows the cross-section of the radial silicon nanowire with a distinct n-type silicon shell, an intrinsic intermediate layer, and a p-type core as well as SEM images of the fabricated single nanowire device. I–V data yield a VOC of 0.260 V, an ISC of 0.503 nA, and an FF of 55.0% (Fig. 3c). The maximum power output for the radial silicon nanowire device at one sun is 72 pW, approximately 15 times that of the axial p–i–n structure. The apparent JSC calculated using the projected area of the radial nanowire structure is 23.9 ± 1.2 mA cm−2. The large JSC in the radial nanowire device implies substantial absorption across the solar spectrum and efficient carrier collection. The apparent efficiency of this device as shown in Fig. 3c was 3.4%.
Due to the large surface area to volume ratio of nanowires, the photovoltaic response of the devices based on the nanowires is very sensitive to the surface recombination. Recently, Kelzenberg et al. passivated the silicon nanowire surface with a-Si:H and a-SiNx:H to obtain an efficiency of 9%, the highest apparent efficiency to date at the single nanowire scale. The device structures are shown in Fig. 4a–c for the as-synthesized nanowire, a-Si:H coated nanowire and a-SiNx:H coated nanowire, respectively. Radial p–n junctions were selectively formed on part of p-Si nanowires by thermal phosphorus diffusion. Therefore, the devices have two charge collection zones including radial and axial sections (Fig. 4a). The surface recombination velocities of silicon after passivation are 3–4 orders of magnitude lower than those of as-synthesized silicon nanowires (>4 × 105 cm s−1). The photovoltaic device based on silicon nanowires coated with SiNx:H (Fig. 4d) shows the best efficiency of solar energy conversion compared to those of coated with oxide and a-Si:H, which was attributed to the enhanced light absorption from the anti-reflective nature of nitride coating and additional passivation effect.

Other than silicon nanowire PV devices, group III nitrides also have attracted considerable attention for solar energy conversion due to the potential of full-solar spectrum light absorption. This is accomplished by tuning the alloying composition of the InxGa1−xN system to span the band-gap range from 0.7 eV (InN) to 3.4 eV (GaN). Photovoltaic properties of radial n-GaN–i-InxGa1−xN–p-GaN nanowires have been investigated by tuning the composition of In. The device structure is shown in Fig. 5a and b. Decreasing the In percentage in intrinsic segments leads to a maximum luminescence at 556, 457, 396 and 371 nm as shown in Fig. 5c. Typical J–V curves recorded from radial nanowires with different luminescence are shown in Fig. 5d. The obtained VOC and JSC values are 1.0 V and 0.39 mA cm−2, 1.0 V and 0.24 mA cm−2, 1.1 V and 0.14 mA cm−2, and 2.0 V and 0.059 mA cm−2 for nanowires with luminescence at 556, 457, 396 and 371 nm, respectively. The increase in VOC is consistent with the band-gap increase upon decreasing In composition, while the decrease in JSC is a result of a reduced carrier generation as a decreasing portion of the solar spectrum becomes available for absorption with the increased band gap. Compared to the photovoltaic properties of radial p–i–n silicon nanowires, the VOC is much larger than that of silicon nanowires (∼0.3 V). However, the ISC (58 pA) is much lower than the best value of silicon nanowire devices (∼500 pA). The low short-circuit current is a consequence of lower light absorption and carrier generation, as well as interfacial and/or surface recombination. The photovoltaic response of GaAs radial p–i–n nanowires has also been studied with a VOC of 0.8–0.95 V, an FF of 0.65 and an efficiency of 4.5% under AM 1.5 illumination.


CdS, with a band gap of 2.42 eV, is a most suitable semiconductor material for solar energy conversion. CuxS, a p-type semiconductor with a band gap of 1.24 eV, has a large minority carrier diffusion length. Therefore, the n-CdS–p-CuxS heterojunction can be considered a prototype for solar cell studies. A topotaxial p-CuxS–n-CdS nanorod has been studied at the single nanorod scale and showed a typical p–n junction photovoltaic behavior. The synthesis of the heterojunction was conducted through a simple topotaxial conversion process, in which the CdS nanorods were coated with a CuCl thin film and annealed at 190 °C. The topotaxial n-CdS–p-CuxS nanorod junction shows a photovoltaic response with a VOC of 0.32 V, a JSC of 5.5 mA cm−2 and an FF of 0.397. The performance is much worse than that of the n-CdS–p-Cu2S thin film. Recently, Yang's group reported radial n-CdS–p-Cu2S nanowires as efficient photovoltaic cells at the single nanowire scale. The radial nanowire shell was obtained using a solution based cation exchange reaction, in which as-prepared CdS nanowires were dipped into a 0.5 M CuCl solution at 50 °C. The thickness of the Cu2S shell was determined by the dipping time. The high quality of the interface with less than 10% lattice distortion is shown in HRTEM (Fig. 6a and b). Fig. 6c shows the typical SEM image of the single nanowire device. The I–V characteristics of a n-CdS–p-Cu2S nanowire under one-sun irradiation show a clear photovoltaic effect with a VOC of 0.61 V, a JSC of 11.4 mA cm−2, a fill factor FF of 80.8%, and an efficiency of 5.4%. The VOC and FF values of n-CdS–p-Cu2S nanowires are close to the theoretical limits and better than those of n-CdS–p-CuxS nanorods and n-CdS–p-Cu2S thin film with the maximum of VOC of ∼0.54 V and an FF of 71%. The improvement of the photovoltaic response of n-CdS–p-Cu2S nanowires is attributed to the high quality of heteroepitaxial junction and high carrier collection efficiency of the radial structure. Compared to the Si and GaAs p–i–n radial nanowires, n-CdS–p-Cu2S nanowires have an abrupt and epitaxial interface with a low defect density, which can improve carrier collection efficiency and minimize the interface recombination. The construction of multiple units of the photovoltaic devices in either parallel or series configurations confirms that the single n-CdS–p-Cu2S nanowire based photovoltaic devices are reproducible and versatile.


Metal–semiconductor junctions are another type of photovoltaic devices, in which photogenerated electrons and holes are separated by the built-in potential of the heterojunction under the light irradiation. The first investigation of single nanowire based metal–semiconductor heterojunctions was based on aluminum (Al) and n-Si, in which Al metal is in contact with an n-type silicon nanowire (Fig. 7a). The J–V curve displays typical characteristics of a Schottky junction. Upon illumination, the devices exhibit a clear photovoltaic behavior as shown in the J–V measurements based on a single nanowire (Fig. 7b). This device exhibits a VOC of 0.19 V, a JSC of 5.0 mA cm−2, an FF value of 0.40, and an overall solar energy conversion efficiency of 0.46%. The photovoltaic performance of this PV device is comparable to that of a p–i–n silicon nanowire.


Pt with the highest work function may be one of the best candidates for making metal–semiconductor PV devices based on n-type semiconductors. Pt–n-Si–n+-Si nanowire photodiodes were fabricated through a combination of dry etching and electrodeposition methods. A typical TEM image of a Pt–n-Si–n+-Si nanowire and schematic of the fabricated device are shown in Fig. 8a and b, respectively. The photovoltaic effect of the Pt–n-Si–n+-Si nanowire photodiode (Fig. 8c) is clearly illustrated in the I–V data measured in the dark and under one-sun irradiation (Fig. 8d). The I–V data obtained under one-sun equivalent irradiation show a clear photovoltaic effect with a VOC of 0.30 V, an ISC of 0.135 nA, and an FF of 54%. The apparent JSC calculated using the projected active area is 11.2 mA cm−2, higher than the previous value of 5.0 mA cm−2 reported for a single Si nanowire with a metal–semiconductor Schottky junction. The photovoltaic power conversion efficiency η is 1.81%, which is more than three times of the 0.5% value reported for Si p–i–n axial junction nanowires and the 0.46% value reported for Si nanowires with metal–semiconductor junction.


The polymer–inorganic nanowire hybrid solar cell presents a class of PV devices with low cost and scalable synthesis. Despite the vast efforts in this area, the efficiency of this class of solar cell is typically below 3%, which is much lower than the polymer bulk heterojunction solar cells. The short exciton diffusion length of polymers (∼10 nm) and interface defects between the polymer and inorganic nanowire may result in low efficiency. Studying the polymer–inorganic nanowire solar cell at the single nanowire scale can help in understanding this class of solar cells. Axial p-polypyrrole (PPY)–n-CdS nanowires and radial poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT)–ZnO (Fig. 9a) and didodecylquaterthiophene (QT)–ZnO (Fig. 9b) hybrid nanowires have been studied at the single nanowire scale. Axial p-PPY–n-CdS nanowires were synthesized through an electrodeposition method. The photovoltaic response of a single nanowire solar cell shows a VOC less than 0.15 V, a JSC less than 0.043 mA cm−2, and a maximum efficiency of 0.016% at an incident light intensity of 6.05 mW cm−2. The performance of axial PPY–CdS nanowires is lower than expected, which could be explained by the long PPY sections (>2 μm) and short exciton diffusion length of PPY (∼10 nm). Therefore, the radial p–n junction hybrid nanowires with ∼10 nm thickness of polymer could be a better candidate for solar energy conversion. The polymer–ZnO hybrid nanowires are synthesized by chemically grafting the polymer on the surface of ZnO nanowires.Fig. 9c and d show the I–V characteristics of two types of photovoltaic cells. The P3HT–ZnO nanowire device yields a JSC of ∼0.32 mA cm−2, a VOC of ∼0.40 V, an FF of ∼0.28, and an efficiency of ∼0.036%. The QT–ZnO nanowire devices show similar photovoltaic results with a JSC of ∼0.29 mA cm−2, a VOC of ∼0.35 V, an FF of ∼0.32, and an efficiency of ∼0.033%. These results are consistent with literature values of the P3HT–ZnO nanowire bulk solar cell, which yields a JSC of ∼0.74 mA cm−2, a VOC of ∼0.17 V, an FF of ∼0.34, and an efficiency of ∼0.04%. The larger open circuit voltage of single nanowire devices may be attributed to (a) a better polymer–ZnO interface through chemical grafting than through bulk spin coating and (b) increased shunt resistance in nanowire devices by eliminating shorting paths present in bulk ZnO nanowire array devices.


Despite the encouraging progress on polymer solar cells, few reports have addressed pure organic p–n junction solar cells at the single nanowire or nanoribbon scale. Part of the difficulty is the integration of the organic p–n junction within one nanostructure. Recently, a CuPc–F16CuPc p–n junction nanoribbon bilayer was prepared through a physical vapor transportation (PVT) technique. Bilayer characteristics of the nanoribbons are shown in Fig. 10a. Under one sun illumination, the device as shown in Fig. 10b yields a JSC of ∼0.054 mA cm−2, a VOC of ∼0.35 V, an FF of ∼0.36, and an efficiency of ∼0.007%. The performance of organic p–n junctions is much lower than those of inorganic nanostructures and organic–inorganic hybrid nanostructures. The short exciton diffusion length and non-ideal contact may be responsible for the low efficiency.


The investigations on single nanowire photovoltaic devices have stimulated studies towards the applications of the homogeneous and heterogeneous nanowires for solar energy conversion. Especially, the radial p–n and p–i–n nanowire arrays have been extensively investigated due to their high performance for solar energy conversion at the single nanowire scale. In this section, we highlight a few recent examples using nanowires as building blocks for solar cells, photoelectrochemical devices, photocatalysis and power supply for nanodevices.


Solar cells using vertically oriented nanowire arrays as building blocks have been extensively investigated since nanowire arrays can reduce optical reflection, increase light absorption and enhance the charge collection efficiency. Specifically, three device architectures including a radial nanowire array, an axial nanowire array and a nanowire array embedded in a thin film have been explored. In this part, emphasis is placed on the solar cells that only use homogeneous and heterogeneous nanowires.

The choice of semiconductor materials is critical for the performance of the solar cell since the intrinsic properties of the semiconductors determine the light absorption, charge generation, separation and transportation, as well as the photo and/or chemical stability. Structures of solar cells can also significantly affect the photovoltaic behavior of the devices. Previous results of simulation and performance of single nanowire solar cells indicate that the radial p–n junction nanowire geometry has the potential to improve the efficiencies of the photovoltaic devices due to the decreased charge diffusion length and large interface area for charge separation. Current investigations of all nanowire based solar cells mainly focus on the radial homogeneous and/or heterogeneous nanowire array as summarized in Table 2.
Solar cell element
Synthesis

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA/cm2)
FF

η (%)
p
n

a 
V
OC varies with the power density of incident light.

Radial Si nanowire
Thermal boron diffusion
Electroless wet etching
0.29
4.28
0.33
0.46
Radial Si nanowire
Electroless wet etching
Thermal phosphorus diffusion
∼0.52
∼16.5
∼0.6
∼5.0
Radial Si nanowire
Electroless wet etching
SOD phosphorus diffusion
0.45
6.34
0.53
1.47
Axial InN nanowire
Molecular beam epitaxial (MBE)
0.06
85
0.318
1.62
Radial ZnO–ZnSe
ZnO: MBE, ZnSe: CVD
0.1–0.7
—
—
—
Solar cells using a radial silicon nanowire array as the building block are illustrated as examples to demonstrate the potential of nanowire-based solar cell for future applications. The first silicon nanowire radial p–n junction solar cell was developed by the UC Berkeley group. In this study, a layer of p-type α-Si (doped by BCl3) was deposited on the surface of an n-silicon nanowire array (obtained by electroless chemical etching of phosphorus-doped Si wafer with a dopant concentration of 1 × 1016 cm−3) to obtain the radial junction (Fig. 11a). The α-Si was crystallized at 1000 °C with a boron concentration of 1 × 1019 cm−3. The photovoltaic characteristics of the solar cell exhibit a JSC of 4.28 mA cm−2, a VOC of 0.29 V, an FF of 0.33, and an efficiency of 0.46% (Fig. 11d). The VOC is comparable to that of a single nanowire solar cell but is much lower than a silicon bulk solar cell. The low VOC is attributed to the surface recombination as evidenced by the large dark current and large diode ideality factor. Generally, the high surface to volume ratio of nanowires could lead to the exacerbated surface–interface recombination. The rough surface of silicon nanowires by electroless chemical etching can also aggravate the interface recombination. The low-quality interface between the single crystal n-Si core obtained by electroless chemical etching and the polycrystalline p-shell obtained by physical deposition and thermal crystallization further depresses the photovoltaic behavior of the solar cell. Passivating the silicon nanowire surface and increasing the interface quality are expected to improve the performance of the solar cell. In two subsequent investigations, solar cells based on silicon p–n junction nanowire arrays were fabricated using thermal diffusion of BCl3 (Fig. 11c) or the spin-on-dopants (SOD, Fig. 11b) on an as-etched silicon nanowire array, which has led to significant improvement in the photovoltaic performance (Table 2) due to the high quality of the silicon p–n junction. However, the large surface-to-volume ratio still causes substantial surface recombination. Garnett and Yang defined the roughness factor (RF) as the actual surface area of the structure divided by the geometric area. A short nanowire has a low value of RF. The photovoltaic response as a function of RF is shown in Fig. 11f. Because of the large surface area of nanowires, increasing the RF value results in decreasing VOC and FF values due to the increased surface recombination, and increasing JSC values owing to the improved light trapping effect. In terms of JSC, the light trapping effect can dominate over the surface and junction recombination as the JSC continues to increase with higher RF. In addition to solar cells based on silicon nanowire arrays, the photovoltaic characteristics of the solar cells fabricated from axial p–i–n InN nanowire arrays and radial ZnO–ZnSe nanowire arrays are summarized in Table 2. The performance of these solar cells is much lower than those using silicon nanowire arrays as the building block. The structures and quality of nanowire arrays need further optimization to improve the solar cell performance.

The advantage of heterogeneous nanowires for water splitting is that a combination of semiconductor materials is used to match the energetic requirements for water splitting: one semiconductor satisfies the conduction band minimum for proton reduction and H2 evolution, and the other semiconductor satisfies the valence band maximum for water oxidation and O2 evolution. Meanwhile, the built-in potential at the interface can promote the separation and transport of photogenerated electrons and holes. CdS–TiO2 and n- or p-Si–TiO2 radial nanowires have been studied for PEC water splitting. A silicon nanowire array was synthesized by electroless chemical etching and TiO2 shell was deposited by atomic layer deposition (Fig. 12a and b). The radial nanowire arrays were used as photoanodes and had an enhanced photocurrent (Fig. 12c) compared to the planar Si–n-TiO2 structure due to their lower reflectance and larger surface area. n-Si–n-TiO2 junction nanowires exhibit a higher photocurrent density (20–25%) and more negative onset potential than those of p-Si–n-TiO2 junction nanowires. Higher photocurrent is achieved for n-Si–n-TiO2 junction since the band bending at the electrolyte–n-TiO2–n-Si interface helps the charge separation and transportation in the desired direction as shown in Fig. 12d. In the case of p-Si–n-TiO2 junctions, the flow of charge at the interfaces of TiO2–electrolyte and p-Si–n-TiO2 is in the opposite direction (Fig. 12e). Therefore, the n–n junction radial nanowire array with a higher open circuit voltage and higher photocurrent represents an interesting structure for photoelectrochemical water splitting.


Another application of single nanowire-based PV devices is photocatalysis. A Pt–n-Si–n+-Si–Ag nanostructure encased in a silica shell can function as a potential standalone photoelectrochemical nanodevice to drive photocatalytic reactions (Fig. 13a). The formation of this complicated hetero-nanostructure offers several important advantages to enable a potentially highly efficient photocatalyst. Firstly, a nanoscale photodiode is created for efficient electron–hole separation; secondly, the one-dimensional morphology and insulating shell minimize recombination by ensuring that the separated electrons and holes can only move in opposite directions toward two metal catalysts for desired reactions; thirdly, the encapsulation of the semiconductor portion in a protective insulating shell avoids direct electrochemical reactions on the semiconductor surface and therefore minimizes the deleterious side reactions that can lead to semiconductor degradation and ensures the electrochemical stability of the whole system; and lastly, this enhanced stability allows for flexible selection of semiconductors with desired band gaps for efficient visible light absorption.

Such a photoelectrochemical nanodevice can facilitate both thermodynamically downhill and uphill reactions. Photocatalytic dye degradation and CO2 reduction were used to evaluate the photocatalytic activity of such photoelectrochemical nanodevices.Fig. 13b shows a typical TEM image of a free standing Pt–n-Si–n+-Si–Ag nanowire with a silica insulating shell. Photocatalytic studies show that such a nanowire heterostructure can function as an efficient photocatalyst to facilitate the photodegradation of indigo carmine (IC) (Fig. 13c). Based on the degradation rate, an apparent quantum efficiency (QE) as high as 41.9% was achieved. Additionally, such a nanowire heterostructure also showed high stability. The photocatalytic activity of the Pt–Si–Ag diodes remained essentially constant over 30 reaction cycles (Fig. 13d), demonstrating the exceptional stability of Pt–Si–Ag nanowire photodiodes. This stability may be attributed to the integrated protective oxide shell, which insulates the semiconductor from photoelectrochemical degradation. The Pt–Si–Ag diodes can also be used to catalyze thermodynamically uphill reactions, for example, photocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction, in which H2 reduces CO2 into small organic compounds such as formic acid (Fig. 13e). An extra potential of 0.11 V is needed for this reaction. Recent studies have demonstrated that Pt–n-Si–n+-Si–Ag nanostructures can catalyze this reaction with a QE of approximately 20%.
Another example is the radial Ag–AgCl core–shell heterogeneous nanowires synthesized by in situ oxidation using Ag nanowires as templates. The nanostructures display the photocatalytic activity for methylene orange (MO) photodegradation. The Ag–AgCl core–shell nanowires with a 8:92 mole ratio exhibit higher activity than nanowires with different ratios or pure AgCl nanowires.

Homogeneous and heterogeneous nanowire-based PV devices can generate a built-in potential and a photocurrent under light irradiation. They can function as a nanoscale photo-power generator for nanoelectronics. A typical example is a nanowire FET sensor powered by a radial silicon nanowire PV device as shown in Fig. 14. The binding and unbinding of charged species to the FET change the nanowire resistance and hence cause a change in the voltage drop across the nanowire sensor. Fig. 14b shows an example, in which a pH sensor was powered by a single silicon nanowire PV device operating under 8 sun illumination. Measurements of the voltage drop across the silicon nanowire sensor as a function of time showed reversible increase (decrease) in voltage as the solution pH was decreased (increased). In another example, multiple integrated silicon nanowire PV devices can be used as nanowire logic gates (Fig. 14c), since two radial Si-nanowire PV devices interconnected in series or in parallel can yield VOC or ISC values nearly the sum of the two constituent devices.


We have provided a brief overview of the recent research progress on one-dimensional homogeneous and heterogeneous nanowires for solar energy conversion. With well-defined nanostructures, the photovoltaic devices based on single nanowires offer a versatile platform to study the charge generation, separation and transportation at various interfaces, including inorganic–inorganic, organic–inorganic and organic–organic interfaces at the nanoscale. These studies provide important foundation knowledge for further optimization of the nanostructures for highly efficient solar cells, photoelectrochemical cells and photocatalysis. One-dimensional homogeneous and heterogeneous nanostructures feature enhanced charge separation and transportation, large surface areas, and low light reflectivity. However, the performance of photovoltaic devices based on these nanostructures is still not competitive compared to their bulk counterparts largely due to surface and/or interface issues. For future research activities, there are still several fundamental challenges to be addressed for practical applications.

The first problem is the low efficiency of photovoltaic devices based on homogeneous and heterogeneous nanowires. The surface recombination due to the large surface-to-volume ratio and the p–n junction interface recombination are primarily responsible for the low photovoltaic characteristics of the devices. In the future, emphasis should be placed on the synthesis of p–n junction nanowires with a high-quality interface with minimum defects. Passivation of the p–n junction nanowire surface is also important for suppressing surface recombination and improving the performance of photovoltaic devices. To thoroughly understand the intrinsic properties and fully explore the potential of one-dimensional nanostructures for solar energy conversion, comprehending the details of the carrier dynamics, surface and interface states and evaluating their potential impact on the efficiency of photovoltaic devices are required.
The second challenge is the stability of semiconductor materials, especially for photoelectrochemical and photocatalytic processes. In these applications, the harsh electrochemical reactions occur directly on the semiconductor surfaces, leading to the degradation of semiconductor nanostructures. Forming a protective layer on the semiconductor is an important strategy to improve the stability of the semiconductor. TiO2, a known chemically stable semiconductor, has been deposited on Si nanowire surfaces and leads to an improved stability of Si. As described above, the axial Pt–n-Si–n+-Si–Ag nanowire encased in a silicon oxide insulating shell displays a high stability during photocatalytic reactions. In this structure, the semiconductor silicon is protected by the silicon oxide and two metal catalysts, where the electrochemical reactions are performed on the Ag and Pt catalysts. The silicon oxide is unstable at a strong alkaline electrolyte. Other more stable protective materials (i.e. HfO2) may be explored.
The third challenge is the choice of semiconductor. The choice of a semiconductor with proper band gap and band edge position is of critical importance. The fundamental problems for solar energy conversion, such as solar absorption, charge generation, separation and transportation, photoelectrochemical stability, are all highly dependent on the exact semiconductor material of choice. In general, a smaller band gap is desired for more broader absorption of the solar spectrum, but a larger band gap is desired for larger open circuit voltage for photoelectrochemical reactions. The creation of multiple heterojunctions in series (tandem cell) can mitigate this tradeoff relation to simultaneously allow for broader absorption and sufficient built-in potential. Properly selected semiconductor components with matched lattice parameters can allow the formation of a high quality interface within a one-dimensional heterojunction to suppress the junction interface recombination, and improve the efficiency.

The present summary gives a brief overview of recent efforts on photovoltaic devices of single homogeneous and heterogeneous one-dimensional nanostructures, as well as their potential applications as building blocks for photocatalysis, photoelectrochemical cells, solar cells and power supplies for nanodevices. These one-dimensional materials provide an ideal platform to study photovoltaic characteristics of various semiconductor junctions at the nanoscale. These studies can offer exciting potential in efficient utilization of solar energy. The material selection, optimized geometry and architecture, as well as surface treatment are important factors to be addressed to realize the full potential of the one-dimensional homogeneous and heterogeneous nanowires for highly efficient solar energy conversion.


We thank the partial support of this work by the U.S. Department of Energy through Award DE-SC0008055 program.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012