 DOI: 10.1039/D2TA06672F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 22592-22604


Yanjing
Rong
,

Mengqi
Jin
,

Qing
Du
,

Zhitao
Shen
,

Yan
Feng
,

Mengxin
Wang
,

Fumin
Li
,

Rong
Liu
,

Huilin
Li
 and 

Chong
Chen
*

Henan Key Laboratory of Photovoltaic Materials, Henan University, Kaifeng, 475004, P. R. China. E-mail: chongchen@henu.edu.cn

Received
23rd August 2022
, Accepted 29th September 2022
First published on 29th September 2022
The lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (Li-TFSI)-doped spiro-OMeTAD hole transport layer (HTL) suffers from poor ambient long-term conductivity, detrimental ion migration, and inability to passivate perovskite defects at the perovskite/HTL interface, which seriously hinders obtaining efficient and stable perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Here, to address all these issues, a multifunctional NiO quantum dot (QD)-modified multi-walled carbon nanotube (MWCNT:NiO) additive is added to spiro-OMeTAD. By virtue of the high conductivity, hydrophobicity and anchoring effect of MWCNT:NiO on Li-TFSI through Li-O chemical bonds, the ambient long-term conductivity, restricting Li+ ion migration and anti-deliquescence of the doped HTL are effectively improved. Meanwhile, better energetic alignment, reduced interfacial defects and the loss of organic FA+/MA+ cations at the perovskite/HTL interface are achieved due to the added MWCNT:NiO. Consequently, the optimized MWCNT:NiO-based PSC exhibits an impressive PCE (22.73%) as well as a pronounced stability for over 1200 h under ambient conditions without encapsulation (room temperature, 30–50% relative humidity). These results demonstrate that the incorporation of such a multifunctional MWCNT:NiO material provides a promising strategy to combine interface engineering and HTL optimization, which is conductive to the realization of efficient and stable PSCs as well as other perovskite-based electronics.

In recent decades, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) based on organic-inorganic lead halide perovskite crystalline thin films have become powerful candidates for photovoltaic technology in the future due to the rapid development of power conversion efficiency (PCE), low preparation cost and process suitable for large-scale fabrication. The use of organic–inorganic lead halide perovskites ABX3 (A = MA+(CH3NH3+), FA+(NH2CHNH2+), Cs+; B = Pb2+, Sn2+; X = Cl−, Br−, I− (ref. 10 and 11)) as the active layer has rapidly improved the efficiency of PSCs from 3.8% (ref. 12) initially to 25.7% (ref. 13) currently certified, one of the main reasons for which is that ABX3 perovskites have unique photoelectric properties, such as high charge carrier mobility, large extinction coefficient and long charge diffusion length. At present, many efficient PSCs have adopted a n–i–p planar heterojunction structure, which is mainly composed of an electron transfer layer (ETL)/perovskite active layer/hole transport layer (HTL) sandwich.

The HTL plays an important role in extracting photogenerated holes from the perovskite layer, preventing charge recombination at the metallic electrode, and improving the stability by preventing moisture/oxygen from coming into contact with the perovskite film. Although many materials have been reported for the HTL, spiro-OMeTAD is still the benchmark HTL for high efficiency PSCs due to its high solubility, suitable ionization potential, amorphous character and good-film-formation ability. However, a pristine spiro-OMeTAD film also suffers from obvious deficiencies such as low conductivity and poor compactness, which is not conducive to hole transport and cannot prevent oxygen and moisture from permeating into the perovskite layer. To remedy these deficiencies, lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (Li-TFSI)/4-tert-butylpyridine (tBP) are essential as commonly used and effective additives in spiro-OMeTAD. However, Li-TFSI/tBP doping also brings a series of new issues, including lithium ion migration, poor environmental long-term conductivity of the spiro-OMeTAD layer caused by the hydration and aggregation of Li-TFSI, and poor optical and thermal stability during the operational lifetime due to its relatively low glass transition temperature. In addition to the above drawbacks, Li-TFSI/tBP doped spiro-OMeTAD also cannot effectively modify the perovskite/HTL interface to reduce perovskite crystal defects and optimize the interface energy arrangement, which does not contribute to more efficient charge extraction and attenuates the instability of device performance caused by perovskite crystal defects. Therefore, simultaneously overcoming these drawbacks of the spiro-OMeTAD layer may effectively improve the performance and stability of the PSCs. To this end, our research group recently proposed an effective strategy by doping Li-TFSI/tBP based spiro-OMeTAD with multifunctional inorganic nanomaterials, thereby improving device efficiency and stability through the synergistic effect of these two types of additives. For instance, by incorporating inorganic Sb2S3 nanoparticles (NPs) and PbSO4 quantum dots (QDs) with good hydrophobicity and surface activity into spiro-OMeTAD, the efficiency and stability of the PSCs are effectively improved, which stems from the promotion of long-term conductivity and anti-deliquescence of the HTL by inorganic nanomaterials due to the oxidation of spiro-OMeTAD molecules and the chemical anchoring of lithium salt by inorganic nanomaterials and the passivation of perovskite defects at the perovskite/HTL interface. However, due to the low charge mobility of the inorganic nanomaterial itself and the difficulty in forming an effective continuous channel for charge transport between inorganic NPs, the conductivity of doped spiro-OMeTAD needs to be further improved. For this purpose, we earlier utilized the high charge mobility of single-walled carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and the defect passivation function of inorganic quantum dots on perovskite crystals and prepared TiO2 QD-modified CNTs (CNT:TiO2), which were incorporated into spiro-OMeTAD and significantly improved device performance and stability. Unfortunately, since CNT:TiO2 is dispersed in the hole-conducting spiro-OMeTAD matrix and TiO2 is an N-type semiconductor, excess TiO2 QDs in the spiro-OMeTAD matrix easily induces charge recombination at the HTL/perovskite interface. Besides, the effect of such inorganic nanomaterials in spiro-OMeTAD on Li+ ion migration was still not investigated.
Herein, addressing these issues all at once, we successfully prepared P-type NiO QD-modified multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT:NiO) as an additive to dope Li-TFSI/tBP-based spiro-OMeTAD and form a composite spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO film (For convenience, the Li-TFSI/tBP in the film will not be labeled hereinafter unless otherwise specified), which will replace the traditionally used spiro-OMeTAD film and enable the PSCs to have high atmospheric and light/thermal stability and achieve excellent photovoltaic performance. The structure of the as-prepared PSCs is shown in Fig. 1a. Thanks to high electrical conductivity and hydrophobicity of MWCNTs and the interaction of NiO QDs with spiro-OMeTAD molecules and Li-TFSI, the long-term conductivity and moisture barrier ability of the spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO composite HTL are greatly enhanced. Furthermore, the incorporated MWCNT:NiO can serve as a multifunctional interfacial mediator in PSCs (Fig. 1a), where MWCNT:NiO can not only passivate the perovskite crystal defects and facilitate the hole extraction/transfer at the perovskite/HTL interface by optimizing interfacial energy level assignments, but can also efficiently inhibit Li+ ion migration, reduces the loss of organic FA+/MA+ cations and impede the degradation of the vulnerable perovskite. By virtue of these diverse functions of MWCNT:NiO, the PSCs based on a spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO composite HTL demonstrate high efficiency and enhanced stability. The PSCs exhibited a PCE of 19.21% before doping, which improved to 21.13% and 22.73% upon MWCNT and MWCNT:NiO doping, respectively. Accordingly, the optimized spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO-based PSC exhibits excellent stability, which can still maintain 91% of its initial efficiency for 1200 h after aging in an ambient environment (room temperature, 30–50% relative humidity) without encapsulation. These results demonstrate that the development of such a QD modified MWCNT material consisting of these characteristics will facilitate further exploration of approaches for high performance and stable PSCs.

Methylammonium iodide (MAI, ≥99.9%), formamidine iodide (FAI, ≥99.9%), lead iodide (PbI2, ≥99.99%), and 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-p-dimethoxyphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) were purchased from Advanced Election Technology (China). Cesium iodide (CsI, ≥99.9%) and lead bromide (PbBr2, ≥99.9%) were purchased from Aladdin Industrial Corporation (China). N,N-Dimethyl formamide (DMF, ≥99%), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, ≥99%), 4-tert-butylpyridine (tBP), bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide lithium salt (Li-TFSI), and an isopropanol dispersion of aluminium oxide (Al2O3, nanoparticles < 50 nm particle size) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. The above chemicals are used without further purification. Multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT; OD: 10–20 nm; length: 10–30 μm; purity: ≥98 wt%) and Ni quantum dot(QD)-coated MWCNTs (MWCNT:Ni; OD: 10–20 nm; length: 10–30 μm; CNT content: >38 wt%) were purchased from Times Nano. CH3CH2CH2CH2NH3I (BAI) was purchased from Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp. (China). Gold (Au, 99.995%) was purchased from China New Metal Materials Technology Co. Before use, indium tin oxide-coated glass slides (ITO, ≤15 Ω) were cleaned. Potassium chloride (KCl) was purchased from J&K Scientific Ltd. Tin oxide aqueous solution (SnO2: 15% mass in a H2O colloidal dispersion with a few organic solvents) was purchased from Alfa Aesar.


MWCNT:NiO composites were prepared by high temperature treatment of the purchased MWCNT:Ni powder. Specifically, a certain amount of MWCNT:Ni powder was heated in air at 200 °C for 30 minutes, so that metal Ni was oxidized to NiO QDs and then naturally cooled to room temperature.


First, spiro-OMeTAD powder (72.5 mg) was dissolved in 1 ml chlorobenzene and then the obtained solution was mixed with tBP (28.5 μL) and 18 μl of Li-TFSI solution (520 mg in 1 mL acetonitrile) and stirred for 12 hours to prepare the spiro-OMeTAD solution. Second, a certain amount of MWCNT powder was dispersed in chlorobenzene with different concentrations and ultrasonicated for 30 minutes to obtain chlorobenzene solution containing MWCNTs. Then, the corresponding proportion of the MWCNT dispersion was added to the prepared spiro-OMeTAD solution and stirred for 4 hours to obtain the spiro-OMeTAD solution containing MWCNTs. Finally, the method for obtaining spiro-OMeTAD solution containing MWCNT:NiO powder was the same as that for obtaining the spiro-OMeTAD chlorobenzene solution containing MWCNTs, and the only difference was to replace MWCNTs with MWCNT:NiO.


The electron transport layer SnO2 was obtained by spinning 100 μL SnO2-KCl solution (10% concentration) onto the ITO glass (20 × 20 mm2) substrates at 5500 rpm for 10 s, followed by annealing at 150 °C for 10 min. Then, the samples were treated with an ultraviolet ozone cleaner for 60 min. After the samples were cooled to room temperature, an isopropanol dispersion of Al2O3 was spin-coated on the SnO2 surface at 3500 rpm for 20 s to obtain an Al2O3 layer. The samples were then annealed at 200 °C for 20 min and moved into a nitrogen glove box (O2 < 0.1 ppm, H2O < 0.1 ppm). The perovskite layer with a composition of Cs0.05(FA0.85MA0.15)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3 (CsFAMA) was prepared by one-step spin coating. Perovskite precursor solution (1.4 M) was prepared by dissolving PbI2 (500.2 mg), PbBr2 (115.6 mg), FAI (194.5 mg), MAI (31.7 mg), and CsI (18.2 mg) in 1 mL DMF/DMSO mixed solution (volume ratio, 8.5:1.5). After 12 hours of stirring at room temperature, the precursor solution was spin-coated on the Al2O3/SnO2-KCl/ITO/glass substrate at 4000 rpm for 12 s, and 850 μL of diethyl ether antisolvent was drop-cast on the substrate at 5 s before the end of the spin. Then the samples were annealed at 120 °C for 10 min to obtain an ITO/SnO2-KCl/Al2O3/CsFAMA film. The pre-prepared pure spiro-OMeTAD, spiro-OMeTAD:MWCNT and spiro-OMeTAD:MWCNT:NiO solutions were spin-coated onto the CsFAMA films (4500 rpm, 20 s) to obtain ITO/SnO2-KCl/Al2O3/CsFAMA/spiro-OMeTAD:MWCNT and ITO/SnO2-KCl/Al2O3/CsFAMA spiro-OMeTAD:MWCNT:NiO films, respectively. Finally, a 80 nm thick gold electrode was deposited on HTLs by vacuum thermal evaporation. The effective area of all devices was 0.04 cm2.


Film morphology and the thickness of various layers (ITO/SnO2-KCl/CsFAMA/spiro-OMeTAD) were measured by field-emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (JSM-7001F, Japan Electron Optics Laboratory Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were acquired using a JEOL JEM-F200 microscope with an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. The energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDX) mappings of C, O, and Ni elements of the spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO film were performed by using a JSM-7900F scanning electron microscope. Atomic force microscope (AFM) images were obtained by using a scanning probe microscope (Multimode 8, Bruker, USA). The X-ray diffraction (XRD) data of MWCNT:NiO was obtained by X-ray diffractometry (DX-2700, Dandong Haoyuan Instrument Company, China). The water contact angle of pristine spiro-OMeTAD, spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT and spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO films on ITO/SnO2-KCl/Al2O3/CsFAMA substrates was measured by using a contact angle tester (DSA25).

The UV-visible absorption spectrum of the spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO film was obtained by using a Varian Cary 5000 UV-vis spectrophotometer. Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) was measured by using a HORIBA Jobin Yvon Fluorolog-3 spectrofluorometer system which used an Xe 900 (450 W xenon arc lamp) as the light source and the excitation light is incident from the ITO side. The transient fluorescence spectrum (TRPL) was measured using an Edinburgh instrument FLS 980 PL spectrometer. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and ultraviolet photoelectron spectrum (UPS) measurement were carried out using an X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (AXIS ULTRA, UK) (He Iα photon source, hν = 21.20 eV). A Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrometer (Nicolet 6700, Thermo Scientific) was used to collect the data of spiro-OMeTAD and spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO films on the glass substrates. The J–V curves of perovskite solar cells were measured by using a Keithley 2410 source meter (Cleveland, OH, USA) under standard AM 1.5G irradiation at 100 mW cm−2 generated by a xenon solar simulator at a scan rate of 0.1 V s−1 for both the forward (from −1.2 V to 0.1 V) and reverse (from 0.1 to −1.2 V) scan directions. The light intensity was simulated using a NIST-certified silicon reference solar cell (Newport 532 ISO1599). The incident photocurrent conversion efficiency (IPCE) was measured using a solar cell quantum efficiency test system (Qtest Station 500ADX, United States Dawn Technology Co, Ltd, USA). For device long-term stability testing, the unencapsulated PSCs in an ambient environment (room temperature, 30–50% relative humidity), under light illumination (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) and continuous heating (N2-filled glovebox, 85 °C) conditions were measured. The hole mobility of the cells was calculated by using the space-charge limit current (SCLC) measurements (ITO/PTAA/Al2O3/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au). The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurement of the PSCs was performed by using a CHI660E (Chenhua Device Company, Shanghai, China) electrochemical measurement system under illumination of 100 mW cm−2. Mott–Schottky (M–S) measurements were performed using an electrochemical workstation (CHI660E, Chenhua Device Company, China) in a dark environment with a frequency range of 0.1–105 Hz.

The details are provided in the ESI.



Fig. 1a shows the structure of the as-prepared device with MWCNT:NiO-doped spiro-OMeTAD as the HTL and the schematic diagram of charge transfer and transport at the CsFAMA/HTL interface (left). The TEM image in Fig. 1b shows the microstructure of the synthesized MWCNT:NiO, from which it can be clearly observed that NiO QDs are firmly adsorbed on the MWCNT surface. Fig. 1c shows the high-resolution TEM image of a single NiO QD and the interplanar distance of 0.209 nm is correlated with the (200) plane of cubic NiO. The crystal structure of MWCNT:NiO powder was confirmed by XRD, as shown in Fig. 1d. The diffraction peak at 2θ = 21.01° (202) and 26.52° (300) comes from the MWCNT, and three obvious diffraction peaks at 2θ = 37.25°, 43.28°, and 62.85° correspond to the (111), (200) and (220) crystal plane diffraction of the cubic phase NiO (PDF#47-1049). The average crystalline size of the NiO QDs estimated from TEM and XRD results was about 5 nm.


Fig. 2a shows the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of spiro-OMeTAD without and with MWCNTs and MWCNT:NiO. In the spiro-OMeTAD film, many pinholes can be seen. In contrast, when spiro-OMeTAD films were incorporated with the MWCNTs and MWCNT:NiO, the pinholes were significantly reduced, indicating that MWCNTs and MWCNT:NiO improved the compactness of the films. The distribution of MWCNT:NiO in a spiro-OMeTAD matrix was further detected by EDX. Fig. 2b shows the element distribution of C, Ni and O, respectively, reflecting the uniformity of the dispersion of the MWCNT:NiO additive. Fig. 2c shows cross-sectional SEM images of the ITO/SnO2-KCl/Al2O3/CsFAMA/spiro-OMeTAD, ITO/SnO2-KCl/Al2O3/CsFAMA/spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT, and ITO/SnO2-KCl/Al2O3/CsFAMA/spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO films, respectively. The thickness of the CsFAMA layer is about 450 nm, which is consistent with the perovskite layer thickness previously reported for high-efficiency PSCs. Compared with that (120 nm) of the spiro-OMeTAD layer, the thickness increased slightly for spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT (132 nm) and spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO (140 nm), which helps to enhance the quality of the spiro-OMeTAD film. Fig. 3a–c shows the AFM images of these three films and the corresponding 3D morphologies are displayed in Fig. 3d–f. The root mean square average (RMS) roughness value of the spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO film is 4.39 nm, which is remarkably decreased compared to that of the spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT (5.20 nm) and pristine spiro-OMeTAD films (5.94 nm). The reduction of surface roughness is more favorable to the interfacial contact and reducing interfacial charge loss. Variation in roughness usually results in a change in surface wettability. As shown in Fig. 3g–i, the water contact angle is increased from 32° for spiro-OMeTAD to 55.6° for MWCNT-doped films and 73.9° for MWCNT:NiO-doped films, indicating that the spiro-OMeTAD:MWCNT:NiO HTL can more effectively slow down the penetration of water into the perovskite layer than spiro-OMeTAD:MWCNT, so as to enhance the stability of PSCs. Ultimately, the SEM, RMS and water contact angle measurement results show that MWCNT:NiO can improve the flatness and compactness of thin films more effectively than MWCNTs, which indicates that NiO QDs can improve the dispersion of MWCNTs in spiro-OMeTAD and enhance the contact between MWCNTs and spiro-OMeTAD.
We recorded the UV-vis absorption spectra and the UPS spectra to study the effects of MWCNT:NiO and MWCNT doping on the optical and electrical properties of HTLs in the devices. Fig. 4a shows the UV-vis spectra of spiro-OMeTAD, spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT and spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO films on glass substrates, from which the optical band gap (Eg) of the film is estimated as shown in the inset. Compared with the spiro-OMeTAD film, spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT and spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO films show slightly increased light absorption in the whole measurement wavelength range, which may be mainly due to the improvement of the compactness of the films. In addition, with the addition of MWCNTs and MWCNT:NiO, the Eg of the film correspondingly decreases from 3.01 eV of the pristine spiro-OMeTAD to 3.0 eV and 2.98 eV. Furthermore, Fig. 4b shows the UPS spectra of the spiro-OMeTAD films with and without MWCNT:NiO, from which the valence-band energy level (Ev) is obtained according to the equation Ev = 21.20 − (Ecutoff − Eonset), where Ecutoff is the low kinetic cutoff edge and Eonset is the high kinetic energy initial edge. The Ev of the spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO film is −5.4 eV, which is lower than that (−5.13 eV) of the spiro-OMeTAD film. Therefore, after the incorporation of MWCNT:NiO, the Ev of the HTL is closer to that (−5.47 eV) of the perovskite layer, which is helpful for the transfer and extraction of photo-generated holes at the perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO interface. Furthermore, the conduction-band energy levels (Ec) can be obtained by using the equation Ec = Ev + Eg. The Ec of spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO films is calculated to be about −2.42 eV, higher than that (−3.9 eV) of the perovskite film. Thus, the corresponding energy level diagrams of the PSCs can be obtained, as shown in Fig. S1. To further explore the effects of MWCNTs and MWCNT:NiO additives on the charge transfer and recombination at the perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD interface, the steady-state PL and TRPL spectra were measured. As shown in Fig. 4c, all three types of films display strong PL peaks at about 766 nm. Meanwhile, the PL intensity of the spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO-based film decreased rapidly compared with those of the control and MWCNT-based films, indicating that the introduction of MWCNT:NiO accelerated the hole extraction rate at the CsFAMA/spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO interface compared with the pristine spiro-OMeTAD and spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT HTLs. Similar results can be obtained from the TRPL results as shown in Fig. 4d. The measured TRPL curves are fitted with a biexponential decay function I(t) = I0 +A1exp(−t/τ1) + A2exp(−t/τ2), where the fast decay time constant τ1 is related to fast interface charge transfer at the perovskite/HTL interface, the low decay time constant τ2 is ascribed to the recombination of photogenerated carriers in the perovskite layer, and A1 and A2 represent the proportions of the τ1 and τ2, respectively. The specific parameters are listed in Table 1. After the incorporation of MWCNT:NiO into the spiro-OMeTAD film, the τ1 decreased from 6.27 ns to 1.61 ns but τ2 increased from 7.04 ns to 8.58 ns, indicating faster charge transfer at the CsFAMA/HTL interface and reduced nonradiative charge recombination in the CsFAMA film. Moreover, among these three films, the film with MWCNT:NiO shows the shortest average charge recombination lifetime (τave) of 2.18 ns, which can be attributed to the high conductivity of MWCNT:NiO and its defect passivation function for perovskite crystals.
Device

A
1 (%)

τ
1 (ns)

A
2 (%)

τ
2 (ns)

τ
ave (ns)
Spiro-OMeTAD
99.99
6.27
0.01
7.04
6.27
Spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT
99.44
4.11
0.56
8.01
4.15
Spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO
98.36
1.61
1.64
8.58
2.18
To investigate the effect of MWCNT:NiO on the electrical conductivity of HTLs, we studied the conductivity (σ) of the spiro-OMeTAD, spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT and spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO HTLs. Fig. 5a shows the J–V characteristics of three kinds of resistance devices with ITO/spiro-OMeTAD/Au, ITO/spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT/Au and ITO/spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO/Au. The σ can be acquired by using the equation: σ = L/R × S, where R is the resistance that can be obtained from the J–V curves mentioned above, L is the thickness of the HTL and S is the effective area (0.04 cm2) between ITO and Au. The calculated σ for pristine spiro-OMeTAD is 7.60 × 10−4 S cm−1, while the σ obviously increases to 9.08 × 10−4 S cm−1 and 11.55 × 10−4 S cm−1 upon MWCNT and MWCNT:NiO doping, respectively. To reveal the reason why MWCNT:NiO leads to high conductivity of HTLs and understand the interaction mechanism between the functional groups of the spiro-OMeTAD molecule and the surface of MWCNT:NiO, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) of the films with and without MWCNT:NiO were conducted as shown in Fig. 5b. The FTIR spectra with MWCNT:NiO could be divided into three main bands centered at 1491, 1600, and 3779 cm−1, corresponding to C–H, CC, and the hydroxide group (O–H), respectively. The FTIR spectrum of the spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO film revealed that the C–H band vibration wavenumber redshifted from 1459 cm−1 to 1491 cm−1, suggesting an enhanced C–H bond interaction, which may originate from the weakening of the C–O bond in the O–CH3 functional group because of the partial attraction of the electrons on the Ni atoms in NiO by the O atoms in the O–CH3 group. This explanation can be further confirmed from the following XPS results. Moreover, a strong CC bond vibration characteristic peak at 1600 cm−1 was found for the MWCNT:NiO-modified spiro-OMeTAD film, while the peak strength in the pristine spiro-OMeTAD film is very low, which can be attributed to the addition of MWCNT:NiO. The peaks of the O–H bond at 3645 cm−1, 3705 cm−1 and 3779 cm−1 were found in the spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO film, but not in the spiro-OMeTAD film, suggesting that the O in NiO forms a new O–H bond with the H in spiro-OMeTAD, due to the strong interaction between MWCNT:NiO and spiro-OMeTAD.
In order to better understand the reasons for the red shift of the C–H vibrational peaks and the appearance of the O–H vibrational peaks in FTIR spectra, the XPS spectra were measured. Fig. 5c shows the XPS full spectra of the MWCNT:NiO powder, and pristine and MWCNT:NiO-added spiro-OMeTAD films, from which three distinct peaks of C 1s, O 1s, and Ni 2p are observed in the MWCNT:NiO powder and MWCNT:NiO-doped spiro-OMeTAD film. Here, the proportions of the elements in MWCNT:NiO powder were C 1s: 40.02%, O 1s: 39.87%, and Ni 2p: 20.11%, and those in the spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO film were C 1s: 39.04%, O 1s: 54.75%, and Ni 2p: 6.20%, respectively. Compared with pristine spiro-OMeTAD (C 1s: 89.89% and O 1s: 10.11%), the increasing proportion of the O 1s element in the spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO film is probably due to the O atoms of the added MWCNT:NiO. In order to further reveal the modification mechanism of MWCNT:NiO, the fine spectra of Ni and O elements were measured (Fig. 5d–f). In the Ni 2p spectra of the spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO film (Fig. 5d), the peaks of Ni 2p3/2 and Ni 2p1/2 (ref. 37) and two shake-up satellite peaks centered at 862.3 eV and 880.6 eV (ref. 38) were observed. Both Ni 2p3/2 and Ni 2p1/2 peaks were fitted into two peaks corresponding to Ni2+ and Ni3+. The peaks at 856.1 eV and 872.9 eV belong to the 2p3/2 and 2p1/2 orbits of Ni3+, which are typical Ni–O bonds in NiO, whereas the other peaks at 856.9 eV and 874.5 eV belong to the 2p3/2 and 2p1/2 orbits of Ni2+. Since the existence of Ni3+ is the main reason for the P-type properties of NiO, the increase in the Ni3+ concentration would result in the generation of additional holes and increase the conductivity of NiO. In the spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO film, the Ni3+/Ni2+ ratio (1.53) is higher than that (0.39) of the MWCNT:NIO powder (Fig. 5e), indicating that the Ni2+ in MWCNT:NiO doped spiro-OMeTAD was partially oxidized to Ni3+ and therefore improved the hole conductivity of the spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO film. Moreover, the spectrum of the O 1s region (Fig. 5f) shows three kinds of oxygen contributions. Specifically, the peak O at 530.9 eV is related to typical Ni–O bonds. The peaks O at 531.8 eV and 533.1 eV are usually associated with the oxygen in the hydroxyl group (OH−) and absorbed oxygen. Therefore, the adsorbed oxygen may be the main reason for the oxidation of Ni2+ in NiO QDs to Ni3+. Besides, since there is no OH− in the spiro-OMeTAD molecule, the formed OH− in the spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO film likely originates from the bonding between the O atoms in the NiO and the H atoms in the O–CH3 group in the spiro-OMeTAD molecule, which also indicates that NiO is attractive to the spiro-OMeTAD molecule.
Meanwhile, considering the effect of additives on the quality of spiro-OMeTAD films (Fig. 2 and 3) and the interaction of the MWCNT and MWCNT:NiO additives with spiro-OMeTAD molecules (Fig. 5), we further measured and compared the long-term conductivity of doped and undoped spiro-OMeTAD films in air, which can be evaluated by using time-dependent J–V curves of the three types of resistance devices (i.e., ITO/spiro-OMeTAD/Au, ITO/spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT/Au, and ITO/spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO/Au). As shown in Fig. 6a–c and Table S1, after 43 days of exposure to air (room temperature, 30–50% relative humidity), the long-term conductivity of the spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO film is significantly higher than those of the spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT and spiro-OMeTAD films. The long-term conductivity of the spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO film is still 91.8% of its initial conductivity, while for the spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO and spiro-OMeTAD films, only 84.7% and 72.7% of their initial values remain, respectively. To explain these results, the morphologies of all three films were further studied after 43 days of aging in air by SEM. As shown in Fig. 6d–f, compared to the spiro-OMeTAD and spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT films, fewer holes were found in the spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO film, which may be due to the interaction of NiO QDs and spiro-OMeTAD molecules and lithium salt (Fig. 6h), which effectively inhibits the aggregation of lithium salt and delays the aging and collapse of the spiro-OMeTAD film. In order to further reveal the underlying mechanism by which NiO affects the device performance, we first studied the atomic interaction between Li-TFSI and NiO QDs by density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Fig. 6h shows that the Li atoms in Li-TFSI and O atoms in NiO combined to form Li–O chemical bonds. In other words, Li-TFSI molecules are anchored to NiO nanoparticles by the formed Li–O bonds, which may provide two benefits, one is that the NiO dispersed in spiro-OMeTAD can prevent the aggregation of Li-TFSI due to phase separation, and the other is that it can improve the hydrophobicity of the HTL (Fig. 3g–i). Therefore, the MWCNT:NiO additives can simultaneously improve the hydrophobicity and long-term conductivity of the spiro-OMeTAD HTL, which may effectively promote the long-term stability of the PSCs.
To find the optimum doping concentration of MWCNT:NiO in the spiro-OMeTAD solution, PSCs with different MWCNT:NiO doping concentrations (0 to 0.05 mg mL−1) were prepared and the device performance was tested. Fig. S2a shows the statistical distribution of PCEs based on spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO with different concentrations, in which selected 40 devices at each concentration for comparison. Meanwhile, the statistical distributions of the corresponding performance parameters are shown in Table S2. It can be found that, the optimized device with MWCNT:NiO was obtained at the optimum doping concentration of 0.015 mg mL−1, with a PCE of 22.73%, an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.17 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 24.91 mA cm2 and a fill factor (FF) of 0.78. When the doping concentration of MWCNT:NiO was further increased from the optimal concentration (0.015 mg mL−1), the device performance will deteriorate, which can be partly attributed to the severe degradation of the quality of the spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO HTL caused by the excessive doping amount of MWCNT:NiO (Fig. S3a and b). For a comparison, the performance parameters of PSCs with different MWCNT doping concentrations are also listed in Table S3, from which it can be found that the highest efficiency of 21.13% was achieved by the spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT-based cells at an MWCNT doping concentration of 0.015 mg mL−1.
The following discussion focuses on optimized PSCs with the MWCNT and MWCNT:NiO-doped HTLs. Fig. 7a compared the J–V characteristics of the PSCs based on pristine spiro-OMeTAD, spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT, and spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO HTLs under AM1.5G solar illumination (100 mW cm−2). Fig. S2b shows the statistical distribution of three types of optimized PCEs. Table 2 shows the average and best photovoltaic parameter values of different PSCs. The spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO based PSC displays a forward scan (FS) PCE of 22.21% and a reverse scan (RS) PCE of 22.73%, while the spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT based PSC displays a FS PCE of 20.42% and a RS PCE of 21.13% and the pristine spiro-OMeTAD based control PSC showed a FS PCE of 18.24% and a RS PCE of 19.21%. The performance improvement comes mainly from the substantially enhanced Jsc, and the marginally increased Voc and FF. The enhanced Jsc (from 22.88 mA cm−2 to 24.91 mA cm−2) can be attributed to the higher conductivity of the MWCNT:NiO doped spiro-OMeTAD film. At the same time, the incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) spectra and integrated Jsc for the control and doped PSCs are shown in Fig. 7b, which shows that, compared to the spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT-based PSC and control PSC, the spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT-based PSC shows the highest IPCE value. The integrated Jsc values are 21.03 mA cm−2, 22.37 mA cm−2 and 23.52 mA cm−2 for the control, spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT and spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO-based cells, respectively, which correspond to the measured Jsc values (Table 2). The statistical distributions of the parameters such as Voc, Jsc, and FF with 20 cells in each type of device are displayed in Fig. S4a–d, showing that the performance parameters of the PSCs with MWCNT:NiO and MWCNT:NiO are improved overall compared to the control devices, which proves the effectiveness of doping. As shown in Fig. 7c, the steady-state PCEs of the control and optimized spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO-based PSCs were also measured at the maximum power point (MPP) for 800 s, which are 18.08% and 21.14%, respectively. Meanwhile, the current densities corresponding to its maximum power point are 21.06 mA cm−2 and 23.56 mA cm−2. Obviously, MWCNT:NiO based PSCs have better stability under light illumination. Moreover, we also tested the long-time stability of the unencapsulated PSCs in an ambient environment (room temperature, 30–50% relative humidity), under light illumination (AM1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) and continuous heating (85 °C) conditions, as shown in Fig. 7d. In an ambient environment, the optimized spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO-based PSC can still maintain 91% of its original efficiency after 1200 hours of aging, while the MWCNT-doped and control cells lost about 36% and 62% of their initial PCE under the same condition, respectively. Under prolonged light illumination, the optimized PSCs with MWCNT:NiO and MWCNT and the control PSC retains 69%, 55% and 31% of their initial efficiency in a nitrogen glove box for 380 hours (∼35 °C), respectively. Moreover, after 450 hours of heating at 85 °C in a nitrogen glove box, the PSC with MWCNT:NiO displayed 71% of its initial efficiency. In contrast, the PCEs of the spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT-based and control PSCs are only 51% and 15% compared to their initial efficiencies. These results show that both the additives MWCNT and MWCNT:NiO can improve the cell efficiency and stability, and the MWCNT:NiO-based PSC exhibits the highest efficiency and the best stability. Besides, in order to exclude the influence of lithium salt (Li-TFSI) on the device performance and stability, the J–V characteristics of pristine spiro-OMeTAD, spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT and spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO HTLs without Li-TFSI were measured and are shown in Fig. S5a. The corresponding device performance parameters are shown in Table S4. The results show that when the spiro-OMeTAD film is not doped with Li-TFSI, the PCEs of all three kinds of PSCs without Li-TFSI are decreased significantly compared to their corresponding PSCs with Li-TFSI, suggesting that the role of Li-TFSI in spiro-OMeTAD is still crucial for achieving high-efficiency PSCs. Nonetheless, our results demonstrate that doping of spiro-OMeTAD with MWCNT and MWCNT:NiO still increases the cell efficiency from 9.24% to 13.64% and 15.53%, respectively, which proves the effectiveness of MWCNT or MWCNT:NiO doping. More importantly, compared with the pure MWCNT doped HTL, the MWCNT:NiO doped HTL has significantly improved the efficiency and stability of the cells, which fully proves that NiO quantum dots play a key role in the improvement of device performance. Meanwhile, we also tracked the long-time stability of the PSCs without Li-TFSI (Fig. S5b) under dark conditions, proving that the PSCs with MWCNT and MWCNT:NiO also show better stability at room temperature (30–50% relative humidity) compared with the PSCs based on an undoped spiro-OMeTAD HTL.
Devices

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
Best PCE (%)
Average PCE (%)
Spiro-OMeTAD FS
1.14
22.86
0.70
18.24
17.74 ± 0.53
Spiro-OMeTAD RS
1.15
22.88
0.73
19.21
18.75 ± 0.46
Spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT FS
1.15
23.99
0.74
20.42
19.86 ± 0.56
Spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT RS
1.16
24.29
0.75
21.13
20.56 ± 0.57
Spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO FS
1.16
24.87
0.77
22.21
21.68 ± 0.53
Spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO RS
1.17
24.91
0.78
22.73
22.11 ± 0.52
Besides the greatly improved hydrophobicity and long-term conductivity of the HTL due to the doping of MWCNT:NiO (Fig. 3g–i and 6a–c), the suppressed ion migration in the PSCs may be another reason for the improved device performance and stability. To prove this speculation, we removed the Au electrode of PSCs after 43 days of use (Figure S6 and movieS1) and analyzed the Li and N element distributions in the exposed spiro-OMeTAD and spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO HTLs with SEM-EDX (Fig. 7e and f). For the aged control PSCs, large accumulations of Li-TFSI aggregates were observed on the surface of the spiro-OMeTAD layer with a weak and unevenly distributed signal of Li (Fig. 7e, with the total element spectra in Fig. S7a), indicating the immigration of the Li+ ions from the spiro-OMeTAD film to the perovskite active layer, while for the aged PSCs with MWCNT:NiO, the spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO film is still flat and compact without obvious Li-TFSI accumulation after 43 days of aging, and the distribution signal of the Li element in it is still uniform and strong (Fig. 7f, with the total element spectra in Fig. S7b), indicating that the Li+ positive ions are well anchored by MWCNT:NiO without obvious ion migration. The distribution of the N element also showed similar results in these two films, indicating that after doping MWCNT:NiO in the HTL, the organic cations (MA+/FA+) in the perovskite films were better locked in the perovskite, reducing the crystal defects caused by the loss of organic cations during device operation. Obviously, these results strongly demonstrate that the MWCNT:NiO additives can effectively reduce the migration of Li+ positive ions and crystal defects caused by the lack of organic cations, thus effectively improving the device stability.
The effects of MWCNTs and MWCNT:NiO on the interfacial charge extraction at the CsFAMA/HTL interface in PSCs was revealed by using capacitance–voltage (C–V) measurements. Commonly, the interfacial charge density NA can be estimated by using equation C−2 = 2(Vbi− V)/A2eεε0NA, where V is the applied bias, Vbi is the built-in field of PSCs,A is the effective interface area, e is the electron charge, and ε and ε0 are associated with the dielectric constant of perovskite and vacuum dielectric constant, respectively. The slope of the C−2–V plot is inversely proportional to the NA. Fig. 8a shows that the PSC with MWCNT:NiO exhibits the largest slope and highest Vbi among these three types of PSCs, indicating that the MWCNT:NiO additive is the most favorable for interfacial charge extraction. To further investigate the effects of MWCNTs and MWCNT:NiO on the charge recombination in PSCs, the light intensity (I = 50, 80, 100, 120, and 150 mW cm−2) dependent Voc and Jsc were measured. Fig. 8b shows the Vocversus ln(I) plots, and the slope of the devices with MWCNT:NiO is 1.21 kT/e, which is closer to 1 kT/e than that of the control PSC or spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT-based PSC, suggesting that MWCNT:NiO additives can effectively reduce trap density. Fig. 8c shows the I dependent Jsc of PSCs. The slope (0.99) for the spiro-OMeTAD + CNT:NiO-based PSCs is closer to 1 compared with that of the spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT-based PSCs (0.95) and spiro-OMeTAD-based PSCs (0.93), suggesting the least trap-assisted charge recombination in the PSCs with MWCNT:NiO.
The trap density and carrier mobility of the spiro-OMeTAD film can be estimated by the space charge limited current (SCLC) method. As shown in Fig. 8d and e, the trap densities (Nt) of the modified (i.e., ITO/PTAA/Al2O3/CsFAMA/spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO/Au and ITO/PTAA/Al2O3/CsFAMA/spiro- OMeTAD + MWCNT/Au) and control (ITO/PTAA/Al2O3/CsFAMA/spiro-OMeTAD/Au) devices with a hole-only structure are calculated with the following equation Nt = 2ε0εrVTFL/eL2, where the value of e is the electron charge, L is the thickness of the perovskite layer, ε0 is defined as vacuum permittivity, the value of εr is the dielectric constant of CsFAMA (εr = 47), and VTFL is the trap-filled limit voltage, which can be acquired from the J–V curves in Fig. 8d. With the addition of MWCNTs and MWCNT:NiO, the VTFL of PSCs decreased to 0.20 V and 0.18 V from that (0.23 V) of the control PSC, respectively. Accordingly, the Nt of the MWCNT and MWCNT:NiO modified PSCs decreased to 1.15 × 1016 cm−3 and 1.04 × 1016 cm−3 from that (1.33 × 1016 cm−3) of the control cell. Furthermore, the hole mobility can be obtained by using the modified Mott–Gurney equation J = 9ε0εrμeV2/8L3 (μe is the mobility of the charge carrier and V is the effective applied voltage) (Fig. 8e), which is increased to 9.99 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 for the MWCNT:NiO-doped spiro-OMeTAD film from 8.51 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 for the undoped spiro-OMeTAD film. The improved hole mobility of spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO will contribute to better charge transportation and an improved fill factor (FF). Furthermore, in order to reveal the passivation mechanism of NiO QDs to perovskite surface defects, the bonding interaction of the NiO/CsFAMA interface was investigated by using DFT. To simplify the calculations, we used Cs+ ions to completely replace the polyatomic FA+ and MA+ cations and the calculation results are shown in Fig. 8f. Clearly, the red O atoms are enriched with electron clouds, while the electron clouds from the Pb2+ in the perovskite crystal are drawn to the O atoms to form O–Pb bonds. Meanwhile, the electron clouds of the Ni atoms in NiO are attracted to the I atoms in the perovskite crystal to form Ni–I bonds. Hence, the NiO QDs can effectively passivate the defects caused by coordinatively unsaturated Pb and I atoms, which is beneficial to the improvement of device performance. In addition, the dark current measurement of the PSCs without and with MWCNT:NiO also confirmed the suppressed charge recombination as shown in Fig. S8a, which demonstrated that the dark current density of the MWCNT:NiO based PSCs is one to two orders of magnitude lower than that of control PSCs, indicating less charge carrier recombination.
EIS is an effective way to analyse charge transport and recombination in the PSCs. Fig. S8b shows the measured EIS spectra with three different types of PSCs and the corresponding fitting data are shown in Table S5.RCT1 denotes the charge transfer resistance at the CsFAMA/spiro-OMeTAD interface and the charge transfer resistance at the SnO2-KCl/CsFAMA interface is represented by RCT2. CPE1 and CPE2 are the transport chemical capacitance and the chemical capacitance, respectively. From the fitting results (Table S5), it can be found that the value of RCT1 decreased from 3282 Ω to 2462 Ω and the RCT2 decreased from 432.6 Ω to 243.7 Ω when MWCNT:NiO is added to spiro-OMeTAD. Therefore, the incorporated MWCNT:NiO can effectively reduce charge transport resistance. In order to further verify that the MWCNT:NiO-based PSC has good charge transfer performance and less charge recombination, the surface transient photovoltage (TPV) responses of three types of PSCs were measured (Fig. S9) and detailed parameters are shown in Table S6, which provides information about the charge recombination lifetime (τrec) through the interfaces of the devices. Obviously, the MWCNT:NiO-based PSC has a longer τrec of 3.82 μs than the MWCNT-doped (1.78 μs) and control (0.16 μs) PSCs, suggesting that the MWCNT:NiO-based PSC has better charge separation and transport efficiency.

In conclusion, a facile and multifunctional MWCNT:NiO additive strategy for incorporation into the spiro-OMeTAD HTL was demonstrated, which effectively improved the compactness and hydrophobicity of the spiro-OMeTAD + MWCNT:NiO composite HTL, and also greatly enhanced the long-term conductivity of the HTL. The improved conductivity of MWCNT:NiO doped spiro-OMeTAD was because of the strong interaction between the O in MWCNT:NiO and the H in spiro-OMeTAD. MWCNT:NiO also passivated the perovskite crystal defects by forming Ni-I bonds and it efficiently promoted hole transfer and transport at the perovskite/HTL interface. Furthermore, MWCNT:NiO additives also reduce the migration of Li+ ions and the loss of organic FA+/MA+ cations in PSCs. This strategy not only improved the device efficiencies up to 22.73%, which is 1.2 times that of spiro-OMeTAD based control PSCs, but also significantly enhanced the moisture (room temperature, 30–50% relative humidity), thermal (85 °C), and light-illumination stabilities simultaneously. This work offers a new concept for the design and synthesis of a multifunctional inorganic QD-modified MWCNT additive for a traditional spiro-OMeTAD HTL towards highly efficient and stable PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This study was funded by the National Science Foundation for Young Scientists of China (Grant No. 61704048), National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 62174049), Program for Science &Technology Innovation Talents in Universities of Henan Province (Grant No. 19HASTIT049), Provincial Key R&D and Promotion Special Projects (Science Scientific Problem Tackling) by the Science and Technology Department of Henan Province and the Department of Finance of Henan Province (Grant No. 222102240042).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta06672f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022