 DOI: 10.1039/C2CP43434B
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 2075-2080

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Golnaz
Sadoughi
,

Varun
Sivaram
,

Robbert
Gunning
,

Pablo
Docampo
,

Ingmar
Bruder
,

Neil
Pschirer
,

Azam
Irajizad
* and 

Henry J.
Snaith
*

Sharif University of Technology, Institute for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, Teheran, 14588-89694, Iran. E-mail: Iraji@sharif.edu; Fax: +98 21 66164119; Tel: +98 21 66164123

University of Oxford, Department of Physics, Clarendon Laboratory, Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PU, UK. E-mail: h.snaith1@physics.ox.ac.uk; Tel: + 44 (0)1865 272380

BASF SE, Carl-Bosch-Straße 38, 67056 Ludwigshafen, Germany

Received
28th September 2012
, Accepted 19th November 2012
First published on 3rd January 2013
We present an investigation on the optimisation of solid-state dye sensitized solar cells (SDSCs) comprising mesoporous tin oxide photoanodes infiltrated with poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) hole conductor and sensitized with an organic dye. We chose both the SnO2 and P3HT for their high charge carrier mobilities and conductivities, but as a result preclude conventional device configurations because of high leakage current and low shunt-resistance. To minimize the “hole leakage current” through the FTO anode, we employed a double compact layer structure, and to minimize “electron leakage current” at the silver cathode, we developed a protocol for depositing an optimal P3HT “capping layer”. After optimisation of cell fabrication, the electron lifetime is increased considerably and the solar cells exhibited simulated AM1.5 full sun solar power conversion efficiencies in excess of 1%.

The third decade of the development of the dye sensitized solar cell demands increased focus on cost and manufacturability. As such, the solid-state dye-sensitized solar cell (SDSC) has emerged as an attractive alternative to cells that employ liquid electrolyte redox couples, posing leakage, corrosion, and stability issues. The conventional SDSC architecture combines the inorganic, nanocrystalline, and mesoporous titania film (nc-TiO2) found in liquid cells with the organic hole transporting material (HTM), 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis (N,N-di-4-methoxyphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD). Despite the success that such conventional SDSC's have achieved, including efficiencies of over 7%, inherent limitations of the chosen charge transport materials pose a bottleneck for continued improvement.

nc-TiO2 exhibits low electron mobility, slow transport is consequently less competitive with recombination processes and the poor conductivity of these materials degrades the theoretically achievable fill factor (FF) through series resistance.
The Achilles' heel of the SDSC, its “mandatory” <2 μm thickness above which performance is reduced due to a number of factors including less efficient charge collection, limits the absorption of SDSC's and hence the short-circuit current (JSC). Thus, the determining characteristics of cell efficiency are hindered by suboptimal charge transport. Moreover, increasing electron mobility in the nc-TiO2 while holding the spiro-OMeTAD hole mobility constant, and vice versa, may only improve the situation little because ambipolar diffusion stipulates that opposite charges are extracted at the same rate. This is especially relevant under high forward bias near and beyond the maximum power point, since spiro-OMeTAD does not exhibit significantly increased mobility with greater charge density and is in fact the least conductive component under these conditions. Therefore, replacement materials are sought for both TiO2 and spiro-OMeTAD to minimise the transport bottleneck over all working conditions.
SnO2 and P3HT have been established as promising “high mobility” alternatives to conventional SDSC components. Bulk and nanostructured SnO2 exhibit electron mobilities of about 250 and 125 cm2 V−1 s−1 respectively, over 2 orders of magnitude higher than the ∼1 cm2 V−1 s−1 of bulk TiO2. Even though this mobility “hike” is yet to be demonstrated in mesoporous SnO2 films, presumably this is due to lack of effort and optimisation, rather than fundamental limitations. Similarly, the hole-mobility in P3HT of the order of 10−1 cm2 V−1 s−1, is decisively superior to that of spiro-OMeTAD (10−5 to 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1), however, we note that the structural disorder in the mesoporous film may significantly reduce this mobility. Additionally, SnO2's conduction band energy is reportedly 0.4 V below that of TiO2, conducive to more efficient electron injection from the dye, and advantageously for UV stability its 3.8 eV bandgap ensures minimal direct photon absorption compared to TiO2's 3.2 eV bandgap; however, the conduction band offset does suggest a lower achievable VOC for a like-to-like comparison with the same dyes and hole-transporters. Chemical structure and approximate energy levels of the materials used in this study are illustrated in Fig. 1a. P3HT has its own attendant advantages; good solubility in most organic solvents allows effective processing into mesoporous oxides, and P3HT's efficient light harvesting behaviour in the UV-visible spectrum anticipates dual employment as a hole transporter and absorber. P3HT already fulfils both roles in combination with fullerene electron acceptors, and its capacity for Forster Resonant Energy Transfer (FRET) with an appropriate near-IR absorbing dye has yielded optimistic results.
Here, we introduce the combination of SnO2 and P3HT in a solid-state dye-sensitized solar cell, and to date this is the only study which has successfully incorporated both materials into the SDSCs. We demonstrate that the barrier to obtaining functioning solar cells is ironically the high conductivity of the constituent components which in a primitive solar cell design renders the shunt resistance too low to sustain a significant rectification. Through optimisation of the anode and cathode contacts, we report functional devices with good rectification and greater than 1% full sun power conversion efficiency.

Maximising the shunt resistance in a solar cell is essential in order to maximise performance. The shunt resistance is that in parallel to the photovoltaic diode in an equivalent circuit. The factors responsible for low shunt resistance are the recombination resistance and the unipolar electron and hole only resistances through the solar cell. In Fig. 1b we show the chemical structure of the polymer and dye used in this work along with a cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the optimised device. A compact layer is introduced in SDSCs to prevent “short circuits” from direct contact between the FTO and the HTM, which would manifest themselves as a very low resistance unipolar hole-current. The conventional deposition method for SnO2 compact layers in SDSCs is spray pyrolysis deposition (SPD) of butyl tin chloride as the precursor in ethanol. However, the “hole-blocking” capability of the SnO2 compact layer deposited in such a manner is not as effective as compact TiO2, and although it works reasonably well with spiro-OMeTAD, it appears to not effectively block hole-leakage current with the much more conductive hole-transporter P3HT. This is likely to be either due to pin-holes in the layer, or due to it being too conductive itself. To probe the conductivity, in Fig. 2a we show conductivity measurements for a spray-pyrolysed SnO2 compact layer with an extracted conductivity of ∼10−2 S cm−1. This high conductivity could certainly explain the lack of hole blocking capability, when combined with P3HT, which also has a conductivity in the range of 10−2 S cm−1 when “doped” with Li-TFSI.

The cause for the high conductivity of the SnO2 layer deposited via spray pyrolysis from butyl tin chloride is the subject of a separate study and will be presented elsewhere. However, our studies indicate that the presence of the Cl, in the butyl tin chloride, appears to induce strain the SnO2 lattice as revealed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra, which we infer to result in the n-type doping. To overcome this issue of the highly conductive compact layer, we have investigated a wide range of available SnO2 precursor salts, deposited via both spin-coating and spray pyrolysis. The most promising material from our investigations has proven to be tetra isopropoxy tin isopropanol deposited via spin-coating. In Fig. 2a, we also show the conductivity measurement for this compact layer with the same thickness as the spray pyrolized butyl tin chloride compact layer (∼100 nm), which results in an estimated conductivity of 10−6 S cm−1. This is now comparable to the conductivity of TiO2 compact layers conventionally employed in TiO2 based SDSCs.
In Fig. 2b, we show the forward bias dark current through a series of P3HT based SDSCs employing different SnO2 compact layers. The dark current is reduced when comparing the spray pyrolized compact layer to the spin-coated compact layer, but not by a sufficient margin. Indeed, even a 5 successive spin-coated compact layer does not sufficiently inhibit the dark current. This has leaded us to postulate that although the spin-coated layer has superior electronic properties for functioning as a hole-blocking layer, it has inferior physical blocking properties due to microscopic pinholes or nanoporosity. Consequently, to combine the advantages of film uniformity from SPD with sufficiently low conductivity to block hole-current, we have investigated different combinations of SPD and spin-coated layers. For our optimum configuration we have used multiple coatings, with an initial butyl tin chloride sprayed layer, followed by two further coats of the spin-coated compact layer. To illustrate the advantageous influence on performance, in Fig. 2c, we show the current voltage curves of a device fabricated with the different compact layers. Fig. S1 and S2 (ESI) performance parameters for all the different combinations are presented. We note that although this variation in compact layer is essential for P3HT based solid-state DSCs, it has negligible influence on spiro-OMeTAD based SDSCs, indicating that dark hole-leakage current is less of an issue with the latter hole-transporter.

Above, we have successfully increased the hole-only resistance by blocking the hole-current at the FTO electrode with the optimisation of the compact layer. In order to block the electron current, reliance is usually made on the presence of a “capping layer” of HTM predominantly covering the top of the mesoporous electrode. This prevents direct contact of the n-type oxide (here SnO2) with the top metallic electrode.

For spiro-OMeTAD based SnO2 SDSCs we have previously demonstrated that the insertion of a mesoporous insulating “buffer layer” on top of the mesoporous SnO2 can successfully block electronic contact with the silver cathode. Here, we followed the same procedure but found that although a very thin (20 nm) buffer layer marginally improves the VOC, the gain is overcompensated by a reduction in short-circuit current. As the alumina buffer layer thickness is increased, the power conversion efficiency steadily decreases, for reasons that are not entirely apparent. These results are presented in Fig. S3 of the ESI. Therefore, instead of introducing a buffer layer to inhibit the electron leakage current, we have varied the thickness of the P3HT capping layer in order to study its influence on performance. The thickness, or uniformity, of the typical single layer of P3HT spin-coated from 20 mg ml−1 solution appeared to be inadequate to ensure a thick and uniform enough capping layer and sufficient electron-blocking characteristics. We deposited an additional P3HT layer via spin coating a second time, with a range of P3HT solution concentrations. All cells were given a low concentration of P3HT, 20 mg ml−1, for the first layer, thereby assuring good pore wetting. We note that with the presence of the Li-TFSI in the system, the P3HT cannot be washed out of the pores after the first casting.Fig. 3 shows the effect of increasing the thickness of the P3HT capping layer (from 50 nm to 600 nm) on solar cell performance parameters. Both JSC and VOC are significantly enhanced over the values obtained from a single low concentration layer of P3HT. While the VOC increases with increasing thickness of the P3HT capping layer, after a capping layer thickness of 360 nm all parameters, including the power conversion efficiency decrease. The reason for the drop in performance with too large a capping layer thickness is unclear, since P3HT should be suitably conductive (10−3 to 10−2 S cm−1) so as not to present a significant series resistance in the thick capping layer. However, since the Li-TFSI is “pre-cast” on the sensitized SnO2 films prior to P3HT coating, and is responsible for the doping and enhanced conductivity in P3HT, it is entirely feasible that secondary coating of P3HT is relatively undoped. This “undoped” capping layer would only have conductivity of the order of 10−4 S cm−1 or less and thus be responsible for the series resistance losses.
In Fig. 4, we show the current voltage curves of SDSCs with spray pyrolysed compact layer and 50 nm thick P3HT capping layer along with current voltage curves of SDSCs with optimised double compact layer and 360 nm thick P3HT capping layer. A near order of magnitude improvement in efficiency was obtained comparing to its initial value.

In order to fully characterize the effect of a thick P3HT capping layer on the electron transport and recombination, we performed transient photocurrent and photovoltage decay measurements (see Experimental section for details). In Fig. 5a we show the electron lifetime, as determined by the open-circuit voltage decay lifetime, against charge density for cells with 50 nm and 360 nm capping layers. It is very clear that at the same charge density, over two orders of magnitude faster “recombination” is observed for cells containing the thin capping layers. We know that there is significant leakage current in these thin-capping-layer cells, so there is apparently a predominant recombination pathway (between the electrons in the TiO2 and the holes in the P3HT), through the silver electrodes. The general lesson here is that if there is significant shunting in a solar cell, then both transient electronic and transient spectroscopic measurements on complete devices are not only influenced by the dye-sensitized interface, but also by the electrode contacts. Influences of changes to the cell composition upon the electronic contacts have to also be considered in addition to influences to the dye-sensitized interface.

We show the transport characteristics measured at short circuit in Fig. 5b, which follow a power law dependence with light intensity, indicating that the charge collection in the system is limited by the multi-trapping electron transport in the SnO2. The relative difference between the cells with the different capping layers is small, although the slightly faster current decay in the device with the thin capping layer could be a result of electron collection at both the FTO and silver electrodes, again consistent with the lower photocurrent in the thin capping layer configuration.

SnO2 mesoporous films infiltrated with P3HT hole conductor were assembled, optimised, and probed for the first time, yielding device efficiencies in excess of 1%. The key challenge in obtaining operational devices has been to reduce the dark leakage current. Specifically, we have presented a new protocol for SnO2 compact layer preparation, which now effectively blocks hole-current, even from the highly conductive P3HT. Additionally, we have inhibited the electron-current at the cathode, by optimising the P3HT capping layer deposition procedure. We have therefore proved the viability of devices based on a combination of SnO2 and P3HT and this device architecture could be a promising candidate for SDSC's, specifically if combined with improved dyes, surface treatments to enhance charge generation form the P3HT, or inorganic extremely thin absorber layers.


To prepare solid state dye sensitized solar cells, FTO (Fluorine doped tin oxide) coated glass substrates (Pilkington) with a sheet resistance of 15 Ω sq–1 were patterned by etching with zinc powder and HCl. The glass was then washed with Hellmanex and deionized water, acetone, and ethanol, followed by oxygen plasma etching for 10 minutes to remove organic residue. Compact layer deposition of SnO2 was accomplished either by spincoating or through spray pyrolysis deposition. The spin coating solution was prepared by adding anhydrous acetic acid to a solution of tetra isopropoxy tin isopropanol (Gelest) in anhydrous ethanol (8% W). The solution was filtered using a 0.45 μm syringe filter and spin coated on patterned FTO at 2000 rpm. A compact SnO2 layer was formed by heating resulting film at 500 °C for 30 min. For spray pyrolysis deposition, a solution of butyl tin trichloride 95% (Sigma Aldrich) in anhydrous ethanol (1:10 volume ratio) was used for spray pyrolysis deposition at 300 °C, using air as the carrier gas. During the deposition of the compact layer, the etched parts of electrodes were masked so that the SnO2 only covered the FTO to prevent short-circuiting of the as made devices. The substrates were then annealed at 500 °C for 30 minutes to form a 100 nm SnO2 compact layer.

A homemade SnO2 mesoporous paste was prepared as reported previously and diluted in anhydrous ethanol. The paste was then spin-coated on the SnO2 compact layers. Subsequently, the samples were gradually heated up to 500 °C (ramped over 1.5 h) and sintered at this temperature for thirty minutes to form a 1.5–1.7 μm thick mesoporous SnO2 layer.
The various surface treatments referred to in the results section were applied as follows; MgO: a 20 mM magnesium acetate solution in ethanol was prepared and heated to about 60 °C. Subsequently cells were immersed in this solution for 1 minute and promptly rinsed with ethanol and dried in air. TiO2: cells were soaked in a 15 mM TiCl4 solution in water at 70 °C for 1 hour, then rinsed with deionized water and dried in air. SiO2: devices were immersed in a basic solution of tetra-ethyl-orthosilicate in ethanol for 5 minutes at room temperature, then rinsed with ethanol and dried in air. The surface treated samples were then resintered for 30 minutes at 500 °C with subsequent cooling to 80 °C and immersed in a 0.5 mM solution of ID504 dye in anhydrous dichloromethane for 1 h. The films were thoroughly rinsed twice in anhydrous dichloromethane and dried.
Over the dye coated electrode, 25 μL of “additive solution” was dispensed onto each cell and left about 20 s to wet the films before spin-coating at 1200 rpm for 45 s. The additive solution consisted of lithium-bis(tri-fluoro-methyl-sulfonyl)imide salt (Li-TFSI, Sigma Aldrich) and 4-tert-butyl pyridine (tBP) in anhydrous acetonitrile at a concentration of 20 mM and 60 mM respectively. P3HT (Rieke) was dissolved in anhydrous chlorobenzene at different concentrations, ranging from 20 mg ml−1 to 90 mg ml−1. The samples were spin-coated with two layers of P3HT. The first layer of P3HT (20 mg ml−1) was left to infiltrate the mesoporous SnO2 for 20 seconds prior to spinning at 1200 rpm for 40 seconds. A second layer, to ensure an adequate capping layer, was spun immediately after dispensing onto the first P3HT layer at the same rate. Finally a 200 nm-thick silver layer was thermally evaporated on the polymer surface as the cathode in a chamber with pressure of ∼10–6 Torr.
Scanning electron microscopy: the cross section SEM of devices was performed on a Hitachi S 4300 with a 5 kV acceleration voltage. Current–voltage measurements were carried out at room temperature using a Keithley 2400 unit under a solar simulator illumination of AM 1.5 (100 mW cm−2) generated with an ABET Sun2000 Class AAB solar simulator calibrated using an NREL calibrated silicon reference cell with a KG5 filter. Metal apertures were used to mask the solar cells to define the active area or around 0.12 cm−2. The spectral mismatch factor was less than 1%.
Transient photovoltage and photocurrent decay measurements were performed to investigate the electron transport and recombination time. The principles and the experimental setup of this technique have been described previously. Briefly, a white light bias was generated from an array of diodes (Lumiled Model LXHL-NWE8 whitestar) with red light pulsed diodes (LXHLND 98 redstar, 200 μs square pulse width, 100 ns rise and fall time) as the perturbation source, controlled by a fast solid-state switch. The photovoltage and photocurrent were recorded using a 1 GHz Agilent oscilloscope and a Keithley 2400 sourcemeter.
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cp43434b
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2013