 DOI: 10.1039/C3RA22926B
(Review Article)
RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 7160-7181

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Christos L.
Chochos
*,

Nikos
Tagmatarchis
 and 

Vasilis G.
Gregoriou


Advent Technologies SA, Patras Science Park, Platani Rio, 26504, Greece. E-mail: cchochos@advent-energy.com; vgregoriou@advent-energy.com; Fax: +30-2610-911-585; Tel: +30-2610-911-583

Foundation for Research and Technology, Hellas, Institute of Chemical Engineering Sciences, Stadiou Street, Platani, Patras, P.O. Box 1414, GR-26504, Greece. E-mail: gregoriou@iceht.forth.gr; Fax: +30-2610-990-987; Tel: +30-2610-965-300

Theoretical and Physical Chemistry Institute, National Hellenic Research Foundation, 48 Vassileos Constantinou Avenue, Athens, 11635, Greece. E-mail: tagmatar@eie.gr; Fax: +30-210 7273794; Tel: +30-210 7273835

Received
16th November 2012
, Accepted 17th January 2013
First published on 18th January 2013
The demand for further optimization of the photovoltaic efficiency has stimulated an intensive research effort both for new low-band-gap polymeric materials as electron donors and for new efficient electron-accepting materials. As regards the latter, less attention has been observed on the optimization of the electron acceptor material compared to the extensive studies on the electron donor polymer in organic photovoltaic (OPV) cells. The majority of the acceptor materials used so far in solar cells are organic (carbon based) materials, however other traditional acceptor materials include inorganic semiconductors, such as cadmium selenide (CdSe) nanocrystals, titanium oxide (TiO2) and zinc oxide (ZnO) nanoparticles. From the implemented organic materials high power conversion efficiencies PCEs (>9.0%) are observed in OPVs utilizing fullerene derivatives and especially [6,6]-phenyl-C61 butyric acid methyl ester (PC60BM) as the acceptor. Recently, very promising efficiencies of ∼5.0% have been also obtained by Polyera corporation utilizing soluble conjugated polymers as both the donor and the acceptor components. It is therefore expected that through improved materials design for enhancing the electron mobility, better tuning of the energy levels and absorption profile of organic materials, significant improvements in the device performance can still be expected. In this work, the current trends on the most promising solution processable n-type organic materials (fullerene derivatives, small molecules and conjugated polymers) will be presented in detail, emphasizing on the correlation between structure/optoelectronic properties/morphology characterization and device performances.
Christos L. Chochos
Christos L. Chochos holds a degree in Chemistry (2001), a MSc (2004) and a PhD (2006) in Polymer Science and Technology from the Chemistry Department of University of Patras. His research interests include the design, synthesis and multigram production of low band gap semiconducting polymers for organic photovoltaics. Recently, he received a Marie Curie (2013-2015) Intra European Fellowship (FP7-PEOPLE-2012) with an excellent mark of 98.4/100, where he will try to develop new LBG conjugated polymers by eco-friendly methodologies at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering of the University of Ioannina.
Nikos Tagmatarchis
Nikos Tagmatarchis is Director of Research at the Theoretical and Physical Chemistry Institute at the National Hellenic Research Foundation, in Athens, Greece. His research interests focus on carbon-based nanostructured materials, including fullerenes, nanotubes, graphene and diamond, toward the preparation of novel hybrid materials for diverse nanotechnological applications. His accomplishments in the area are reflected on a plethora of publications, citations and numerous invitations at conferences. He was recipient of the European Young Investigator Award (2004), Visiting Professor at the Chinese Academy of Sciences (2011) and Invited Fellow by the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science in Japan (2012).
Vasilis G. Gregoriou
Vasilis G. Gregoriou is the CEO/CTO and co-founder of Advent Technologies (www.advent-energy.com), a company that is engaged in the commercialization of new materials and systems for renewable energy sources such as fuel cells and photovoltaic systems. He has also held research positions in both the USA (Northeastern, MIT, Polaroid, Princeton) and Greece (FORTH-ICEHT) so far. His research activities include the areas of flexible photovoltaics based on organic semiconductors, optically active materials based on conjugated oligomers and polymer nanocomposites. He holds a PhD in Physical Chemistry from Duke University (1993).

Organic electron (accepting-transporting) materials are essential for the fabrication of organic p–n junctions, organic photovoltaic cells (OPVs), n-channel organic field-effect transistors (OFETs), organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) and complementary logic circuits. In bulk heterojunction (BHJ) OPV device for example, the light passing through the transparent contact (indium tin oxide; ITO) is absorbed by the photosensitive layer to form excitons (hole–electron pairs) which dissociate into free holes and electrons at the interface between the donor and the acceptor layer. Holes and electrons transport in the donor and acceptor phases, respectively, and are collected at the electrodes, resulting in the generation of electrical power (Fig. 1).

The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of an OPV cell is determined by the open-circuit voltage (Voc) value multiplied by the short-circuit current density (Jsc) and the fill factor (FF) values and divided by the incident-light intensity as shown by the formula: n = (Voc × Jsc × FF)/Pinc
Electron (accepting-transporting) materials for organic electronic applications, so called n-type organic materials, have a variety of design requirements that are application specific. Thus it is not particularly used to provide a rigid set of guidelines for the development of a “universal” material that can be used, e.g., in OLEDs, OPVs and OFETs. Not only will the optimal material itself be application specific, but in many (most) cases the choice of material will be system specific, i.e., the organic semiconductor will be working in a system of materials and it will be necessary to match various materials parameters of the n-type material according to its ability to interact and function properly with the other materials in the system. Thus, the basic requirements for an ideal acceptor organic material for OPVs include: (a) good solubility and film-forming properties; (b) strong and broad bandwidth absorption; (c) high electron mobility; (d) suitable HOMO/LUMO energy levels relative to the p-type electron donor to guarantee photoinduced electron transfer between them (Fig. 2); the difference between the LUMO of the acceptor and the HOMO of the donor should be as large as possible to increase the open circuit voltage (Voc) of solar cells; and (e) high purity.
In this review, we focus on representative solution processable n-type organic materials, such as fullerene derivatives, organic small molecules and conjugated polymers used to accept and transport electrons in OPVs. The molecular architecture, electronic structure (HOMO/LUMO and band gap), electron mobility, and photovoltaic performance of diverse n-type organic materials are discussed and presented in details.

The low-lying triply-degenerated LUMO of fullerene accounts for the ability of fullerene to accept up to six electrons and this property has been extensively exploited when investigating fullerene materials as novel electron acceptors for OPVs and OFET devices. On the other hand, established methodologies on the chemical modification of fullerenes have resulted on the preparation of a plethora of fullerene derivatives with enhanced solubility in a variety of solvents.

The most widely studied fullerene derivative, used as acceptor in OPV devices, is the [6,6]-phenyl-C61 butyric acid methyl ester 1 (abbreviated as PC60BM). Searching to improve the PCE in BHJ solar cell prototype devices, a series of functionalized fullerenes, bearing the characteristics of PC60BM, were synthesized and tested. Some interesting structures of PC60BM-based materials are collected and shown in Scheme 1. Briefly, the main characteristics of those fullerene derivatives include the presence of a longer alkyl chain length in material 2, which is beneficial for enhancing solubilization in organic solvents and the presence of electron-withdrawing substituents on the phenyl ring of PC60BM in materials 3 and 4, which result in upshifting the LUMO level of the fullerene derivative acceptors. Importantly, in fullerene derivatives 5 and 6, when the planar phenyl ring present on the benchmark PCBM material 1 was replaced by a bulky triphenylamine, and 9,9-dimethylfluorene, respectively, high PCE (4%) was obtained. The latter result highlights how the electron-donating properties of triphenylamine and 9,9-dimethylfluorene are beneficial for achieving higher Voc in fullerene-based BHJ solar cells.
Recently, a large family of C60 derivatives resembling the PC60BM structure were synthesized, however, possessing various aryl, heteroaryl and/or alkyl groups in a form of a cyclopropane ring fused to the fullerene cage. Based on the chemical structure of those materials, their efficiency in BHJ solar cells was found up to 4.1%. As a general conclusion, the solubility of the materials tested plays a crucial role in order to achieve best performance.
More interestingly, a series of thienyl-based methanofullerenes (Scheme 2), in which the phenyl ring of the PC60BM is replaced by a thienyl moiety were synthesized and employed as electron acceptors in BHJ OPVs. As it is shown in Scheme 2, the materials used in that study included the thienyl-substituted methanofullerene 7, bisadduct 8 and higher adducts 9 and 10. The electrochemical and photophysical properties of these materials were examined by a set of cyclic and differential pulse voltammetry as well as UV-vis and femtosecond laser flash photolysis and electron transfer phenomena found to occur. Among those materials, the thienyl-substituted methanofullerene 7 showed the highest PCE, reaching almost 4%, thus demonstrating the effect of thienyl substitution on the race for better performance on BHJ solar cells.
When designing a new fullerene derivative as efficient and promising n-type component for solar cells, the target is to raise the LUMO level such as the Voc becomes higher. This can be achieved not only by introducing functionalities with electron-donating character to fullerenes but also by utilization of the so-called higher fullerenes and even multiaddition of organic addends onto fullerenes or even endohedral metallofullerenes. Actually, the energy of the LUMO level shifts by only tens of meV by the former approach, while multiaddition leads to even higher Voc values. For instance, PC70BM is the higher fullerene analogue of PC60BM, with improved light absorption in the visible region. Actually, when PC70BM was used as electron acceptor in a BHJ solar cell with poly(2-methoxy-5-(3′,7′-dimethyloctyloxy)-p-phenylene vinylene), abbreviated as MDMO-PPV, photoinduced charge separation was observed. The efficiency of the charge generation was examined by photoluminescence measurements in which ultrafast charge transfer deactivated the excited state of MDMO-PPV in the MDMO-PPV:PC70BM and an overall 3% PCE was registered. On top of that, additional experiments based on AFM revealed that different solvents can result in distinctly different efficiencies for poly(p-phenylene vinylene) (PPV):fullerene photovoltaic cells as a result of changed morphologies. To further highlight the advances that have been made, especially from the synthetic point of view, a library of several C70-based PC70BM analogues were prepared and tested in BHJ. The major finding was that slight variations in the molecular structure of the fullerene material, i.e. presence of various aryl (heteroaryl) and/or alkyl groups appended to the fullerene cage, could cause significant changes in its physical properties, in particular its solubility in organic solvents. Overall, the best material combinations were those in which the donor and acceptor components were of similar and sufficiently high solubility in the solvent used for the deposition of the active layer.
Along the same lines, dealing with higher fullerenes, a mixture of C84 isomers was functionalized by applying a diazoalkane addition reaction to yield the corresponding PC84BM derivatives. As C84 shows an even broader absorption profile in the visible region as compared to C60 and C70, it was expected that further improvement in the current output could occur. In fact, when the relative wide band gap donor MDMO-PPV was used in combination with the PC84BM in BHJ prototype device, the Voc of the device was found 500 mV lower than that of the one with PC60BM, as a result from the difference in their corresponding LUMO levels. However, on the other hand, the maximum PCE was only 0.25%, a rather small value which is explained by the lower Jsc and the FF registered as compared with the corresponding values for PC60BM.
Raising the LUMO of the fullerene as acceptor unit results in a higher Voc without affecting the absorption of the cell. In this respect, bis PC60BM 11 is an interesting approach as it has a substantially higher LUMO level as compared to that of PC60BM (Scheme 3). Although C60 bis-adducts come as isomers, it is possible to either separate them or at least remove some of them in order to deal with a less complex system that may perform better. Thus, when such a bis PC60BM 11 was prepared as a mixture of only three regioisomers, its higher LUMO level resulted on a PCE of 4.5% in BHJ solar cell. At this point it is also interesting to note that the complex formation of multiple isomeric adducts can be avoided, by applying the so-called tether functionalization of C60. According to that, bis-cyclopropanation of C60 utilizing the ethylene moiety as tether resulted in the formation of a reduced number of bis-adducts at higher yield as compared with the standard bis-addition reaction. Bis PC70BM adducts as well as their thienyl analogues were also synthesized. Although such bis-adducts came in the presence of isomers, the additional disorder introduced by this mixture of isomers did not bring any negative effects on the BHJ device performance of the solar cell.
Searching for new fullerene-based materials able to collect sunlight more efficiently and keeping in mind the improved optical absorption of PC70BM a new class of fullerene-based materials constituted by two covalently connected fullerene units (Scheme 4), namely C60 and/or C70 emerged. Those dimers, endowed with a solubilising alkyl chain, exhibit increased light-harvesting properties due to the presence of two units of identical, i.e. (C60)212 or (C70)2, or different, i.e. (C60–C70) fullerenes linked through a 2-pyrazoline moiety and a pyrrolidine ring. The photovoltaic properties of those dimers in blends with regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene), abbreviated as rrP3HT, were exploited and photoinduced electron transfer was found to occur in BHJ studied, being most efficient in rrP3HT:(C70)2.
Lately, a novel family of fullerenes, the trimetallic nitride template (TNT) metallofullerenes was derivatized in order to get access to some new materials with improved properties to be used as electron acceptors in BHJ solar cells. In general, trimetallic nitride templated metallofullerenes are less reactive than empty fullerenes and classical endohedral metallofullerenes due to the formal transfer of six electrons from the metal atoms to the fullerene cage, which leads to a closed shell electronic structure and an increase of the HOMO–LUMO gap with a corresponding reduction in reactivity.
Sc3N@C80, as the most abundant species in the TNT metallofullerene family was functionalized by the well-known diazoalkane addition of methyl 4-benzoylbutyrate p-tosylhydrazone to furnish the corresponding PCBM analogue 13 (Scheme 5). Similarly, the Y3N@C80PCBM analogue was also synthesized, however, due to the insufficient amount of material the photovoltaic properties of both materials have yet await exploration. On the other hand in an independent study, the availability of higher amounts of Lu3N@C80, not only allowed the formation of the corresponding PC60BM derivative 14 but also the exploration of its photovoltaic properties. The reduced energy offset of the molecular orbitals of Lu3N@C8014 to the donor rrP3HT reduces energy losses in the charge transfer process and increases the Voc as compared to that when PC60BM was used as an acceptor. Thus, without surprise, PCEs higher than 4% were registered highlighting the potential of endohedral metallofullerenes in general and trimetallic nitride templated metallofullerenes in the particular case hold towards achieving higher PCEs in OPVs.
As addition of diazo compounds to C60 results in the formation of two isomeric products, namely [5,6]-open fulleroids and [6,6]-closed methanofullerenes, with the former conserving the 60π electrons of the parent C60, the possibility of tuning the electronic properties and thus the performance in OPVs by synthesizing methanofullerene and iminofullerene C60 adducts was recently examined. In fact, the heteroanalogues of PC60BM, namely [5,6]-open azafulleroid-PC60BM 15 and [6,6]-closed aziridinofullerene-PC60BM 16 (Scheme 6) were easily prepared by thermal reaction of methyl 5-azido-5-phenylpentanoate with C60, followed by in situ thermal extrusion of nitrogen. [5,6]-Open azafulleroid-PC60BM 15 and [6,6]-closed aziridinofullerene-PC60BM 16 found to have less negative reduction potential than PC60BM. The latter can be rationalized considering the higher electronegativity of the nitrogen present on the fullerene structure, which results in slightly reduced electron density in the fullerene shell. In addition, material 15 exhibits a substantial electron mobility (μe = 4.1 × 10−2 cm2 Vs−1) in a solution-processed device, which is the first example of a fullerene with mobility that exceeds that of the optimized high performance of PC60BM (μe = 2.8 × 10−2 cm2 Vs−1). Furthermore, when prototype devices were constructed with 15 and 16, both devices exhibited good device performance with high efficiency of 2.8% (for 15) and 2.3% (for 16), while comparison between the open and close structures revealed an enhancement in photocurrent for 15 as compared to 16, which is most likely attributed to the lower degree of symmetry of 15.
Regardless the numerous PC60BM-based derivatives synthesized and examined on BHJ solar cells, there were also designed and prepared a variety of other differently modified fullerene-based electron acceptor materials. An interesting family of those concerns the naphthyl ones. Not only fullerenes with naphthyl moieties onto their skeleton possess enhanced solubility in organic solvents but also some of them show good device performance. The group of Fréchet reported the very first examples of introducing the naphthyl moiety onto C60 sphere, by the direct reaction of C60 with an ortho-dimethinequinine formed in situ by reaction of methyl-(3,4-dibromomethyl)-benzoate with potassium iodide. As soon as the material was fully characterized, prototype devices with the dihydronaphthyl fullerene benzyl alcohol benzoic acid ester 17 (Scheme 7) were fabricated and found to exhibit PCE of up to 4.5% under standard illumination conditions. The latter result suggests that excellent alternatives to PC60BM for BHJ solar cells can be rationally synthesized.
Recently Yang et al. designed and synthesized a naphthyl containing fullerene derivative 18 (Scheme 7) by a [4 + 2] cyclic addition reaction that exhibited 0.06 eV higher LUMO levels than PC60BM. OPV based devices were fabricated based on rrP3HT and a high performance low band gap conjugated polymer, abbreviated as PBDTTT-C, as donor materials and 18 and PC60BM as acceptors. The devices based on 18 have higher Voc than the counterpart PC60BM devices. In rrP3HT systems, the devices based on 18 reached performances of 3.63%. In PBDTTT-C systems, the devices based on 18 have a lower Jsc and FF than those of PC60BM devices, and achieved a performance of 3.00%. The PCE has been enhanced to 5.07% when the corresponding C70 derivative of 18 was synthesized and employed in BHJ with PBDTTT-C.
Moreover, two 56π-electron fullerenes, o-quinodimethane-methano[60]fullerene 19 and thieno-o-quinodimethane-methano[60]fullerene 20, were also prepared (Scheme 7) by Diels–Alder reaction between methano[60]fullerene and o-quinodimethane type dienes. These fullerenes possess not only high LUMO levels but also sterically small addends, featuring outstanding performance in OPVs. Up to 5.74% and 5.51% PCEs were achieved for rrP3HT:19 and rrP3HT:20 solar cells, respectively.
The versatility of the Diels–Alder cycloaddition reaction on fullerenes, which behave as dienophiles, has allowed the incorporation of two naphthyl units on C60. Thus, following a modified procedure than the original applied for the formation of the mono-naphthyl adduct, dihydronaphthyl-C60 bisadduct 21 was synthesized (Scheme 8), by reacting o-quinodimethane, as formed by extrusion of SO2 from sultine, with C60. As 21 has (i) slightly stronger absorbance, (ii) higher-lying LUMO energy level resulting in higher Voc, and (iii) better thermal stability than that of PC60BM, a PCE of 5.37% was registered when combined with rrP3HT in BHJ solar cells.
Since it is known that PC70BM-based materials usually exhibit higher PCEs than PC60BM analogues, under the same conditions, the dihydronaphthyl-based bisadduct of C70 was recently synthesized and its photovoltaic performance in rrP3HT-based BHJ solar cells was tested. Interestingly, the dihydronaphthyl-based bisadduct of C70 showed 0.2 eV higher LUMO level as compared with that of PC60BM, displayed broad absorption in the visible region, possessed high Voc and consequently its PCE was as high as 5.95%.
Having pointed out that PC60BM analogues face drawbacks such as weak absorption in the visible region as well as low LUMO energy level resulting in lower Voc it is of high importance to design and synthesize new soluble fullerene derivatives, which could surpass those disadvantages. In this frame, C60 derivatives carrying indene units were recently synthesized (Scheme 9). The first indene-based fullerenes prepared and tested in BHJ solar cells were the mono-22 and bis-23 adducts of C60. Especially the bis-adduct possesses higher LUMO level as compared to that of PC60BM, thus resulting on 5.44% PCE with rrP3HT and 5.4% with another low band gap polymer, a value significantly improved as compared with that of having the PC60BM as the acceptor. In addition, for enhancing the solar light harvest, the corresponding bis-indene adducts of C70 were also synthesized and similar values of conversion efficiencies were registered.
On the contrary, when the tris-indene C60 adduct 24 was prepared, isolated and tested its performance in BHJ solar cells, the PCE found only 1.56%. Despite demonstrating the highest Voc value as compared with the corresponding mono- and bis-adducts, its lower FF and Jsc were decisive points for keeping low the performance. In addition, the lower light absorption and electron mobility of the prototype device of the tris-indene adduct with rrP3HT suggested that the number of addends attached onto C60 governs the overall performance of the electron acceptor when utilized in OPVs (Fig. 3).
A proper investigation was carried out to compare the solar cell performance of several polymers with the conventional electron acceptor PC60BM and fullerenes bearing one to three indene addends. Interestingly, it was found that the multiadduct fullerenes with lower electron affinity improve the efficiency of the solar cells only when they do not intercalate between the polymer side chains. However, when they intercalate between the side chains, the multiadduct fullerenes substantially reduce solar cell photocurrent. Furthermore, it was found that the intercalated fullerenes might orient with their side groups parallel to the substrate, which in turn could cause poor electron transport. Thus, it was concluded that the orientation of the fullerene addends within molecularly mixed polymer:fullerene phases should be carefully considered when designing new materials for BHJ solar cells.
Yang et al. has designed and synthesized a similar to 18 indene-functionalized C70 fullerene derivative 25 by [4 + 2] cyclic addition reaction between indene derivative (methyl 1H-indene-3-carboxylate) and C70 (Scheme 10). The absorption and photoluminescence of 25 and its mixed films with different polymer donor materials were investigated, as well as its electrochemical property and electron mobility. It was found that 25 has 0.05 eV higher LUMO level than that of PC70BM. Its electron mobility reached 6.32 × 10−4 cm2/ Vs−1, which is slightly lower than 9.55 × 10−4 cm2 Vs−1 of PC70BM under the same experimental conditions. The photovoltaic devices based on rrP3HT, and two high efficiency low band gap polymers, abbreviated as PBDTTT-C and PBDTTDPP, as donors, with 25 as an acceptor provide PCEs of 4.2%, 6.0% and 6.2%, respectively.
Fulleroisoquinolinones (6-member-ring) 26 and fulleroindolines (5-member-ring) 27 have been synthesized (Scheme 11) by palladium catalyzed annulation of N-alkyl benzamides with C60. A device incorporating fulleroisoquinolinones and the rrP3HT exhibited PCE up to 2.3%.
A modified fullerene derivative, 28 (Scheme 12) has been described by Mikroyannidis et al. possessing a 4-nitro-α-cyanostilbene moiety. This replacement aimed to increase the absorption, enhance the solubility and suppress the crystallization. Interestingly, 28 shows higher solubility in common organic solvents and stronger absorption than PC60BM in the range of 250–900 nm. The LUMO level of 28 is 0.25 eV higher than that of PC60BM. The OPV devices based on the rrP3HT with 28 as electron acceptor displayed higher Voc of 0.86 V and a PCE of 4.23%, when the blend was cast from chloroform solvent, while the device based on P3HT:PC60BM displayed PCE of 2.93% under the same conditions. The PCE was further enhanced to 5.25% when OPV devices based on rrP3HT:28 deposited from a mixture of solvents (chloroform/acetone) and subsequent thermal annealing, respectively.
Diphenylmethanofullerene 29 (Scheme 13) also showed interesting properties as acceptor in BHJ solar cells as it generates high Voc compared to its energy levels. However, slightly lower PCEs were obtained when diphenylmethano[60]fullerene was used as an acceptor material, compared to PC60BM, most likely due to a reduced Jsc. Pentaaryl fullerene derivatives were also used as acceptor materials in BHJ solar cells in combination with rrP3HT as a donor material. In this case, although Voc were obtained, as attributed to the high LUMO of the penta(organo) fullerenes, a homogeneous distribution of the donor and the acceptor compounds, was identified thus accounted for moderate Jsc and photocurrent conversion efficiency.
Finally, it is interesting to note that in all the above mentioned cases, dealing with modified fullerenes as electron acceptors in BHJ solar cells, the addends were introduced on 1,2 positions of a six-membered ring on the fullerene skeleton. Recently, a few differently functionalized fullerenes were prepared, in which the added functional units were incorporated at 1,4 positions of a hexagon (Scheme 14). Those 1,4-derivatives, with molecular structures 30–34 were less symmetrical than previous reported fullerenes and therefore displayed a stronger absorption in the visible region. As the LUMO energy level of the 1,4-substituted fullerene derivatives can be tuned by changing the substituent, the Voc can be similarly influenced thus affecting the whole performance of the prototype device.

Since it is necessary to optimize the optical properties and energy levels of new n-type materials that have strong absorption in the visible region and high LUMO energy levels ensuring efficient charge transport as well as high Voc nonfullerene-based small organic molecules are nowadays developed.

Perylene diimide (PDI) derivatives are a particularly interesting class of electron acceptors. They have high molar absorption coefficients in the visible and have demonstrated high electron mobilities in n-type organic field-effect transistors. Their LUMO is similar to that of PC60BM, and therefore is also favorable for electron transfer in BHJ photovoltaic devices. Additionally, the low HOMO energy of most PDI derivatives can facilitate hole transfer to the conjugated polymer after absorption of light by the PDI molecule or the excited state of the PDI can be transferred to the donor polymer by Förster energy transfer depending on the driving force of the processes. However, the major drawback of several PDI derivatives is their limited solubility in common organic solvents. Unfortunately, this poor solubility limits the choice of solvents to those that create unfavorable morphologies from most donor polymers (such as rrP3HT for instance) which makes device optimization unfeasible. In order to surpass this limitation, Li et al. has synthesized and investigated a series of PDI derivatives 35–37 (Scheme 15) as electron accepting materials in BHJ solar cells. The PCEs of the blend films using 37 are clearly superior to those of 35 and 36. This is a consequence of an improved Jsc of the devices using 37 as electron acceptor compared to those using 36 and especially 35, if cast from chloroform, and in addition a higher Voc and larger FF, if cast from chlorobenzene. In fact the best devices using 37 exhibit a Voc of 0.75 V, which is higher than typically available from rr-P3HT:PC60BM devices and close to the diagonal band-gap of 0.8 V, i.e., the offset between the HOMO of the donor polymer rrP3HT and the LUMO of the electron acceptor 37. Unoptimized PCE of 0.5% was achieved by casting from chlorobenzene. By alkylation at the 2,5,8,11-positions of the PDI core, it is demonstrated that the solubility of PDI, especially in higher boiling solvents, and the solid state photophysical properties can be modified to make it a significantly more attractive electron acceptor in OPVs.
Jabbour and co-workers fabricated solar cells by using perylene derivatives 38–40 (Scheme 16) as acceptors and palladium phthalocyanine as donor. Owing to the panchromatic absorption of the blend, the EQE spectrum of the cell covered the region from 400 to 800 nm with a maximum of around 40% at 600 nm. By using 38 as an acceptor, the device achieved a PCE of 2.0% compared to 39 and 40, which exhibit 1.0 and 1.1%, respectively. The devices comprising 38 and 39 generate similar Jsc values of 5 mA cm−2, while 40-based device showed a lower Jsc of 3 mA cm−2. The lower PCE for 39-based device was due to its poor FF of 0.40 compared to 0.63 for 38-based device. This difference in photovoltaic performance could be due to larger interfacial recombination and/or poor intermolecular packing as well as lower carrier mobility.
Sharma and co-workers prepared new PDIs 41 and 42 (Scheme 17) and employed them in BHJ devices in combination with different small-molecule donor materials. PCEs of 1.87% with a high Voc of 0.98 V for 41 was initially obtained. The incorporation of a thin ZnO layer between the blend and the Al cathode further increased the device efficiency to 2.46%, which was ascribed to the enhanced light absorption by the active layer due to the optical interference between the incident light and the reflected light from the Al cathode. The PCE was further improved to 3.17% upon thermal annealing showing a Jsc of 6.3 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.95 V, and a FF of 0.53. On the other hand, the PCE of the 42-based devices was 1.28%, which was improved to 3.88% when the blend was thermally annealed at 100 °C for 20 min.
Jenekhe et al. has synthesized a series of π-conjugated oligomers with a donor–acceptor (D–A) architecture (Scheme 18) containing a central naphthalene diimide (NDI) electron-withdrawing group and appended electron-donating oligothiophenes of varying size 43a–43d. Thin films of the oligomer semiconductors had optical band gaps that varied from 2.1 eV in 43a and 1.6 eV in 43c to 1.4 eV in 43d, demonstrating good potential for light harvesting and exciton generation. The LUMO energy levels of the oligomer semiconductors were similar (∼4.0 eV), but the HOMO levels varied from −5.5 eV in 43c and 43d to −6.1 eV in 43a and 43b, showing that suitable energy band offsets necessary for efficient photoinduced charge transfer could be achieved with various electron donor polymers.
Solution-processed BHJ blends of each oligomer with rrP3HT showed a photovoltaic response when the oligomer charge transport was such that μe/μh ≥1; oligomers having μe/μh <1 did not show a photovoltaic response. Similarly, a photovoltaic response was not observed in rrP3HT:43b, which showed a dendritic nanomorphology, and rrP3HT:43d, which showed a microscale phase-separated morphology. On the other hand, rrP3HT:43a and rrP3HT:43c blends, showing a photovoltaic response, had a bicontinuous nanoscale morphology, while light harvesting and exciton generation take place in both phases of the BHJ thin film. BHJ devices with an active layer of rrP3HT:43c (1:3 w/w) showed a PCE of 1.5%, with Voc = 0.82 V, FF = 0.53, and Jsc = 3.43 mA cm−2 by using a processing additive (1,8-diiodooctane) at an optimum concentration of 0.2 vol%, lower than the optimum concentrations found in polymer:fullerene systems.
It known that pentacene derivatives are efficient p-type materials. However, Anthony and coworkers reported a series of pentacenes containing electron accepting units such as cyano 44 or trifluoromethyl 45 and used them as n-type material in BHJ solar cells in combination with rrP3HT as donor (Scheme 19). The best solvent mixture used for the device fabrication was toluene/dichlorobenzene (10:3 ratio by volume). In a 1:1 w/w blend ratio of donor–acceptor, 44-based devices generated a Voc of 0.84 V, a Jsc of 3.56 mA cm−2, a FF of 0.42, and a PCE value of 1.3%. Similarly, 45-based devices gave a Voc of 0.80 V, a Jsc of 3.17 mA cm−2, a FF of 0.50, and a PCE value close to 1.3%. The authors concluded that the “sandwich herringbone” crystal packing motif of pentacenes is one of the important parameters for better solar cell performance.
A new class of organic acceptors, the dicyano-substituted quinacridone derivatives 46a–46c, for BHJ solar cells were designed and synthesized by Wang et al. (Scheme 20). Quinacridone (QA) and its derivatives are widely used organic pigments with high chemical and thermal stability, unique supramolecular assembly and optoelectronic properties. Based on the intramolecular charge transfer transition (ICT) feature and abundant intermolecular interactions in the aggregate state, QA solids usually absorb intensely in the visible light spectrum. Although the unsubstituted quinacridone molecule is poorly soluble, a simple alkylation at the N atoms could effectively improve the solubility of QA and result in solution processable organic materials.
The new synthesized molecules 46a–46c possess visible and near-IR light absorption with a band gap of 1.8 eV, exhibit low LUMO levels of ∼−4.1 eV (under the same experimental conditions the ELUMO of PC60BM was estimated at −3.7 eV), and moderate electron mobilities. The electron mobilities of DCN-4CQA 46a, DCN-6CQA 46b and DCN-8CQA 46c, as measured in FETs, are 2.75 × 10−5, 3.04 × 10−4 and 1.14 × 10−4 cm2 Vs−1, respectively. Photovoltaic devices were fabricated by using rrP3HT:46a–46c films as the active layer in 1:1 w/w and thermal annealing at 75 °C for 20 min. The device with rrP3HT:46c showed the highest PCE of 1.57% with Voc = 0.48 V, FF = 0.57, Jsc = 5.72 mA cm−2, whereas the PCE values of the devices using 46a and 46b as acceptors are 0.28% and 0.30%, respectively, due to the much lower Jsc, Voc and FF. One of the reasons for the higher PCE of the 26c is that introduced moderate aggregation and moderate area of donor/acceptor interface, as compared to that of 46a and 46b. In addition, during the annealing process, in rrP3HT:26c blend films, the 46c is able to re-arrange and re-aggregate into preferred aggregates due to the flexibility of 46c with longer alkyl chains. Therefore, the authors suggested that in order to develop an efficient small molecule electron acceptor material for OPVs, not only absorption, stability, electron mobility, solubility and molecular orbital energy level, but also the morphology of the active layer should be seriously considered.
With the goal of reducing the offset between the LUMO energies of donor semiconducting polymers and acceptor molecules and thereby minimizing energy loss in BHJ solar cells, Wudl, Heeger and coworkers directed their attention to the development of 9,9′-bifluorenylidene derivatives, specifically to 12-(3,6-dimethoxy-fluoren-9-ylidene)-12H-dibenzo[b,h]fluorene 47, as a new small molecule electron acceptor (Scheme 21).
For 47, the Eg = 2.18 eV as determined from the onset of absorption spectrum in solid state, EHOMO = 5.30 ± 0.06 eV as estimated from ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS). The LUMO energy (3.12 ± 0.06 eV) was calculated using the HOMO level and the optical band gap. Under the same experimental conditions, the Eg, EHOMO and ELUMO of rrP3HT are 1.90 eV, 4.9 ± 0.06 eV and 3.00 ± 0.06 eV, respectively.
BHJ solar cells were fabricated with rrP3HT:47 as the active layer in 1:1.5 w/w. With Al as the cathode, rrP3HT:47 devices yield a Jsc = 1.99 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.58 V, a FF = 0.32, and PCE = 0.36%. With the same active layer, but with Ba as the cathode, the devices yield the following: Jsc = 3.9 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.10 V, FF = 0.40, and PCE = 1.70%. The huge difference in the Voc of the devices is explained taking account the work functions of the electrodes and the LUMO level of the 47. When the work function of the cathode (−4.26 eV for Al) is lower than the LUMO energy level of 47 (−3.1 eV), the Fermi energy is pinned at the electrode value, and energy is lost in the transfer of electrons from the 47 to the cathode. However, when the work function of the cathode is closer to the vacuum level than the LUMO energy level of 47 (−3.12 eV), alignment of the Fermi level is achieved by charge transfer of electrons from the cathode into the 47, and an ohmic contact is formed. As a result, the Fermi energy is pinned close to the LUMO level of 47. The increase in Voc with Ba (1.10 V) relative to Ca (1.04 V) is consistent with the different work functions (−2.70 eV for Ba; and −2.87 eV for Ca). In addition, Wudl, Heeger and co-workers demonstrated that electron transfer occurs even though the LUMO offset of the rrP3HT and 47 is 0.12 eV. Thus, large LUMO band offsets are not required for charge separation. The exciton binding energy in rrP3HT must be less than approximately 0.1 eV. On the other hand, the low Jsc of the rrP3HT:47 devices results at least in part from the low mobility of 47 (∼10−5 cm2 Vs−1 in OFETs). The low FF and modest efficiency also imply relatively poor electron transport through the 47 nanostructure (poor connectivity).
In addition, 48 could be considered a tetrabenzofulvalene with an atom numbering that reflects fluorene linked by a double bond between the 9 and 9′ carbon atoms (Scheme 22). In the ground state, 48 is forced to be coplanar because of the presence of the double bond. Material 48 is a much more versatile scaffold than the fullerenes as, theoretically, it has twelve different sites for functionalization by substitution. On the other hand, C60 can only be functionalized by addition reactions, which result in a major modification of the electronic structure with each subsequent addition.
Tilley and co-workers reported a photovoltaic device based on rrP3HT as the donor and 2,7-bis(pentafluorophenylethynyl)hexa fluorogermanofluorene 49 as acceptor (Scheme 23). A high Voc of 0.90 V was obtained because of the higher LUMO level (−3.5 eV) of the acceptor. However, the device showed very low PCE of 0.035%. Tian et al. prepared a D–A type molecule 50 (Scheme 23) and used it as an acceptor blended with poly(2-methoxy-5-[2-ethylhexoxy]-1,4-phenylene vinylene) (MEH-PPV) or rrP3HT as the donor. The cells generated high Voc values of up to 1.14 V with rather low PCEs in the range of 0.13–0.2%. These low efficiencies were attributed to the lower electron mobility (1.15 × 10−5 cm2 Vs−1) of 50 compared to PC60BM (2 × 10−3 cm2 Vs−1).
Burn, Meredith and co-workers introduce a solution processable, n-type small molecule 2-[(7-(9,9-di-n-propyl-9H-fluoren-2-yl)2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)methylene]malononitrile 51 (Scheme 24) based on the fluorene-benzothiadiazole (FBT) moiety.
It can be processed by evaporation under vacuum or by solution processing to give amorphous thin films and can be annealed at a modest temperature to give films with much greater order and enhanced charge transport properties. The electron affinity of 51 is −3.6 eV as determined from the reduction potential versus the Fc/Fc+ couple and is similar to that measured for PC60BM (−3.7 eV) under the same conditions. The molecule can efficiently quench the photoluminescence of the rrP3HT and time resolved microwave conductivity measurements show that mobile charges are generated indicating that a truly charge separated state is formed. The PCE of the photovoltaic devices are found to depend strongly on the acceptor packing. Optimized BHJ devices rrP3HT:51 in 1:2 w/w casted from dichlorobenzene and annealed at 65 °C for 20 min exhibit PCE of 0.73 ± 0.01% with Voc = 0.62 V, Jsc = 2.4 mA cm−2 and FF = 0.49. The efficiencies of the devices are limited by the level of crystallinity and nanoscale morphology that was achievable in the blend with rrP3HT.
Sellinger et al. initially described the synthesis and characterization of a series of n-type conjugated materials based on the Heck reaction of 4,5-dicyano-2-vinylimidazole (vinazene) with selected dibromoaromatics. The most promising material from these studies was 4,7-bis(2-(1-(2-ethylhexyl)-4,5-dicyanoimidazol-2-yl)vinyl)benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole 52, as shown in Scheme 25, possessing high electron affinity (−3.43 eV) and strong absorption in the visible spectrum. The latter material when combined with selected donor polymers, such as a phenyl-substituted regioregular polythiophene, showed PCE of 1.4% after 40 min of annealing at 80 °C with Voc = 0.62 V, FF = 0.50, Jsc = 5.7 mA cm−2. The relatively low PCE was partially attributed to the low electron mobility of 52 [10−5 cm2 Vs−1, as measured by space charge limited current (SCLC) method] compared to PC60BM (10−3 cm2 Vs−1).
Sellinger et al. expanded further this family of electron accepting molecules consisting of a central benzothiadiazole moiety flanked with vinylimidazole 52 and vinylimides (53, 54) following the general B–A–B structure that allows for more symmetric placement of the alkyl chains at the ends of the molecules (Scheme 25). The optical band gaps of 52–54 were estimated at 2.43, 2.34 and 2.16 eV, respectively. Because the electron affinities of 53 and 54 (−3.30 and −3.35 eV) are smaller than that of PC61BM (−3.7 eV) and 52 (−3.43 eV), a larger Voc for rrP3HT:53 devices (up to 0.96 V) is observed. The new acceptors also show strong absorption in the visible spectrum with molar extinction coefficients greater than 105 M−1 cm−1. The best rrP3HT:53-based OPV devices were obtained when using chlorobenzene-based solutions at a total concentration of about 20 mg mL−1 and a blending ratio of 1:1.4 w/w that yield a record high PCE for a BHJ utilizing a non-fullerene acceptor material of 2.54% with Voc = 0.96 V, FF = 0.56, Jsc = 4.7 mA cm−2.
Finally, solution processable low band gap diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP) based organic semiconductor derivatives have been also explored as small molecule electron acceptor materials. Janssen et al. prepared four DPP-based 55–56 small molecules (Scheme 26) and tested these materials as electron acceptors in BHJ solar cells with rrP3HT as the electron donor. All compounds show one or more reversible oxidation and reduction waves. The aldehydes 55b, 56b have a much lower reduction potential than their parent compounds 55a, 56a and at the same time the oxidation potential are increased. The electrochemical band gap calculated from the oxidation and reduction potential onsets is slightly higher than the optical band gaps calculated from the onset of the optical absorption in thin films. Solar cells were prepared by spin casting a blend of rrP3HT and the acceptor molecule from chloroform 55a and 56b or chlorobenzene 56a and 56b solution upon thermal annealing. Device efficiencies are in the range of 0.15–0.31% and are limited by low FF and low photocurrent. The best efficiency was obtained in the rrP3HT:55b system with Voc = 0.52 V, FF = 0.31 and Jsc = 1.93 mA cm−2.
At the same period of time Sonar et al. demonstrated the synthesis of new low band gap solution processable DPP-based derivatives (Scheme 27) functionalized with electron withdrawing end capping groups (trifluoromethylphenyl 57, 58, 60 and trifluorophenyl 59).
These compounds showed optical band gaps ranging from 1.81 to 1.94 eV and intense absorption bands that cover a wide range from 300 to 700 nm, attributed to charge transfer transition between electron rich phenylene-thienylene moieties and the electron withdrawing DPP core. The lowest band gap was obtained for 60, which originates from the extension of the π-conjugated system. DPP acceptors 57, 58, 60 show reversible or partially reversible oxidation behavior with two oxidation peaks except 59, which is attributed to the high electron donating nature of two active blocks (thienylene and phenylene moieties). The HOMO values vary from −5.18 to −5.31 eV whereas the LUMO values presented in the range of −3.52 to −3.68 eV.
BHJ solar cell devices were fabricated, using blends of the rrP3HT as the donor and the DPP acceptor molecules in a blend ratio of 1:2 w/w, and exhibited promising performance. Photovoltaic performances of these new acceptor materials are quite sensitive with molecular structure and processing conditions. Higher PCEs were recorded for 57 and 60 acceptors. The best PCE of 1.00% has been achieved for devices using 57 with Voc = 0.81 V, Jsc = 2.36 mA cm−2, and FF = 0.52 processed from toluene.
Finally, earlier report from Camaioni et al. demonstrated the synthesis of an n-type oligothiophene derivative, an oligothiophene-S,S-dioxide 61 (Scheme 28), and its use as an electron acceptor material in solution-processed BHJ solar cells. Although the device based on rrP3HT:61 (1:1, w/w) generated a high Voc of 0.93 V, the PCE was only 0.06%, which was ascribed to the less uniform blend morphologies.

The use of polymers as both the donor and the acceptor components offers greater flexibility in design of materials with optimum energy levels and thus the ability to individually optimize the π–π* energy gaps for maximum absorption of the visible spectrum from a single layer device. It is therefore expected that through improved materials design, better tuning of the energy levels and higher electron mobility, significant improvements in the device performance of all-polymer solar cells can still be expected.


The cyano-substituted PPVs present reversible reductions leading to better electron injection/transport characteristics than PPV due to introduction of the cyano groups, thereby are promising candidates as electron acceptors in OPVs.62 (Scheme 29) was one of the first conjugated polymer used as electron acceptor in solar cells in blends with MEH-PPV acting as the electron donor. Photovoltaic cells made from these blends gave poor device performance, but improvements arising from the optimization of the device architecture through a lamination technique and from a better choice of the hole-transporting polymer (in this case a regioregular phenyl-substituted polythiophene derivative was used instead of MEH-PPV) resulted in photovoltaic cells with PCE of 1.9%. Further optimization of the device performance has been achieved in recent studies by Fréchet et al., demonstrating a PCE of 2%, from a bilayer device fabricated by spin coating. However, it is not reported if the polymer used in these studies is regioregular or regiorandom. Recently, regioregular cyano-substituted PPV has been synthesized and its optoelectronic properties are superior as compared to those of its regiorandom counterpart. The regioregular showed stronger interchain interactions in the films exhibiting an optical band gap of 1.88 eV as compared to the 1.99 eV of regiorandom and higher electron mobility.

Moreover, once the cyano group is introduced on the benzene ring in the case of 63 (Scheme 29) instead on the vinyl group a significant lower PCE is achieved. When 63 is used as the acceptor in blends with the poly[3-(10-n-octyl-3-phenothiazinevinylene)thiophene-co-2,5-thiophene] (PTZV-PT) as the donor, a PCE of 0.8% was obtained with Voc = 0.85 V, Jsc = 3.14 mA cm−2 and FF = 0.29, after thermal annealing at 120 °C for 15 min.
Increased PCE as compared to 63 is obtained by the use of an another cyano-substituted PPV derivative, the poly[9,9-dioctylfluorene-2,7-diyl-alt-1,4-bis(2-(5-thienyl)-1-cyanovinyl)-2-methoxy-5-(3,7-dimethyl-octyloxy)benzene] (64, Scheme 29). BHJ solar cells based on a blend of MDMO-PPV as the donor and 64 as the acceptor were fabricated and a PCE of 1.5% was reported with an impressive Voc of 1.40 V for a single cell configuration, Jsc = 3.0 mA cm−2 and FF = 0.37.
Finally, a cyano-substituted polyether phenylene vinylene derivative (65, Scheme 29), the poly[oxa-1,4-phenylene-1,2-(1-cyano)ethenylene-2,5-dioctyloxy-1,4-phenylene-1,2-(2-cyano) ethenylene-1,4-phenylene] is another promising electron acceptor in this class of n-type polymer. Bilayer devices of 65 with M3EH-PPV (poly[2,5-dimethoxy-1,4-phenylene-1,2-ethenylene-2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-(1,4-phenylenevinylene-1,2-ethenylene)]) as electron donor showed PCE of 1%. Further improvement in the PCE was achieved in blends of M3EH-PPV:65 (1:1 w/w) by demonstrating a PCE of 1.7% with Voc = 1.36 V, Jsc = 3.57 mA cm−2 and FF = 0.35. The higher PCE of the blend devices was attributed to the formation of a vertically composition graded other than homogeneous blend during spin coating, stemming from the much lower solubility of M3EH-PPV in chlorobenzene compared to 65. The vertically composition graded structure can facilitate both exciton separation and efficient transport of the separated charges to the electrodes.

At the same time with the studies performed on the cyano-substituted polyether PPV 65, Kallitsis et al. developed new copoly(arylether)s derivatives containing substituted anthracene 66, quinquephenyl 67 and terphenyl 68 moieties with aromatic 1,3,4-oxadiazole units or an oxadiazole-based polyfluorene copolymer 69 (Scheme 30) and evaluated their performance as electron accepting materials. In contrast to the rather high efficiency observed in the polyether 65, the PCEs of the copoly(arylether)s 66–68 when blended with the rrP3HT are particularly low due to their low electron affinities and low electron mobility, preventing the charge dissociation at the interfaces.


A dicyano substituted polythiophene 70 exhibiting high electron affinity (LUMO = 3.6 eV) was employed in solar cells as electron acceptor (Scheme 31) with MEH-PPV as the electron donor, however the PCE of the devices was very low (3.5 × 10−4%) due to the lack of solubility of 70, preventing the formation of high quality films. In attempts to improve the solubility of this kind of material, Kallitsis et al. presented a new, easy processable n-type polythiophene derivative poly(3-cyano-4-hexylthiophene); 71 (Scheme 31). The latter was synthesized showing both excellent solubility in common organic solvents (tetrahydrofyran, chloroform) and high electron affinity (LUMO = −3.6 eV). When 71 was employed in blends with MDMO-PPV, low molecular weight polymer rrP3HT and poly(4,4-dihexylcyclopentadithiophene) as the electron donor polymers, unoptimized PCEs as high as 0.014% for the MDMO-PPV:71 system were obtained, which are still low but are two orders of magnitude higher than those of 70.


Jenekhe et al. reported studies of photoinduced electron transfer and photovoltaic properties of a series of bilayer donor–acceptor (D–A) thin films prepared from PPV or MEH-PPV as the donors and a series of 5 acceptor conjugated polymers having electron affinities between −2.7 eV and −4.0 eV. The charge-transfer efficiency at the D–A interface and the PCE of the devices were higher when 72 (poly-(benzimidazobenzophenanthroline ladder)); Scheme 32 with the higher electron affinity (−4.0 eV) was used. PCE of 1.5% for the PPV:72 bilayer system was recorded with Voc = 1.10 V, Jsc = 2.15 mA cm−2 and FF = 0.50. However, the major disadvantage of 72 is that it is deposited from a strong acid make it less desirable for mass production.


Efficient all-polymer solar cells comprising two different low band gap naphthalenediimide (NDI)-based copolymers (Scheme 33), the poly([N,N′-bis(2-octyldodecyl)-naphthalene-1,4,5,8-bis(dicarboximide)-2,6-diyl]-alt-5,5′-(2,2′-bithiophene); 73 or poly[N,N′-bis(2-octyldodecyl)-2,6-bis(thieno-2-yl)naphthalene-1, 4,5,8-tetracarboxylicdiimide-5′,5′′-diyl-alt-4,4-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta[1,2-b:5,4-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl]; 74 as acceptors and rrP3HT as the donor were demonstrated by Neher et al.

These polymers exhibit nearly ideal properties for constituting the acceptor phase in organic solar cells, such as excellent ambient and thermal stability, low band gaps of 1.45 eV for 73 and 1.25 eV for 74, respectively, high electron affinities (the LUMO of 73 is −4.35 eV and the LUMO of 74 is −4.15 eV) and high electron mobilities. As examples, 73 displays electron mobility in OFET of 0.85 cm2 Vs−1, whereas by SCLC values of more than 10−3 cm2 Vs−1 for the bulk mobility were recorded. However, the high mobility of 73 is preserved upon blending with rrP3HT. Initially, BHJ solar cells comprising blends of 73 with rrP3HT (in a 1:1 ratio) prepared from different solvents showed poor PCEs of about 0.2% due to the hierarchical blend morphology with a mesoscale phase separation into impure donor-rich and acceptor-rich domains which leads to geminate recombination and prevents the effective extraction of free charges to the electrodes. A slightly higher PCE of 0.6% was achieved by increasing the weight fraction of 73 in the blend and by using xylene as the solvent due to the formation of an interpenetrating network of well-crystallized P3HT nanofibers, embedded into the 73 phase. Further optimization was achieved by preventing the polymers to form large and well-ordered crystallites in the blend layer. By combining optical spectroscopy and morphological investigations, Neher, Facchetti and co-workers concluded that a more optimized nanomorphology is introduced by suppressing the aggregation of the NDI copolymers at the early stage of film formation. It is known that NDI copolymers have a strong tendency to pre-aggregate in specific organic solvents, and that pre-aggregation can be completely suppressed when using suitable solvents with large and highly polarizable aromatic cores. The better intermixing of the donor and acceptor domains is proposed to be the origin of the strongly improved device performance. BHJ solar cells prepared from such non aggregated polymer solutions show dramatically increased PCEs of up to 1.4%, which is mainly due to a large increase of the short circuit current. In addition, optimized solar cells show remarkable high fill factors of up to 70%. The best performing cell for 73 is found for a 1:1 mixture of p-xylene and chloronapthalene, giving a PCE of 1.4% with Voc = 0.56 V, Jsc = 3.77 mA cm−2 and FF = 0.65, whereas for 74 is found for a 1:1 mixture coated from tetralin with a PCE of 1.1% (Voc = 0.63 V, Jsc = 2.43 mA cm−2 and FF = 0.70).

PDI small molecules were used in BHJ solar cell as acceptor materials, as reported above, because of their electronic properties and their better harvesting of the solar light respect to fullerenes, but the OPV devices made with these molecules have shown poor efficiencies. These low photovoltaic performances are mainly due to the difficult PDIs processability and to the poor morphology of the photo-active blends.

A solution-processable, narrow band gap, high-mobility, alternating copolymer of perylene diimide and dithienothiophene (DTT) building blocks that exhibits broad absorption through the visible and into the near-IR were the first successful attempts towards enhancing the PCE. Device measurements show that alternating donor–acceptor polymers of this type are promising electron-transport materials for n-channel OFETs and promising sensitizers and electron-transport materials for all-polymer solar cells. The first PDI-based polymer used in OPVs presented by Zhan et al. was 75a (Scheme 34) consisting of alternation of a N,N’-dialkylperylenediimide moiety with dithienothiophene (DTT). The molecular weight (Mw) of 75a is 15000 g mol−1 and the energy levels are −5.9 eV (HOMO) and −3.9 eV (LUMO). The electron mobility of 75a is 1.3 × 10−2 cm2 Vs−1 as measured in FETs while after optimization in terms of both material and device structure, a PCE of 1.46% was obtained using 75a as an electron acceptor and a bi(thienylenevinylene)-substituted polythiophene derivative as an electron donor in 1:1 w/w. The photovoltaic characteristics of the best device were Voc = 0.63 V, Jsc = 4.2 mA cm−2 and FF = 0.39.
Zhan et al. also synthesized a series of copolymers based on PDI and DTT with 2 75b or 3 75c DTT units surrounding the PDI (Scheme 34) and investigated in detail the effect of the DTT number on the optoelectronic properties and photovoltaic performance. The maximum absorbance increases and the band gap decreases with increasing the conjugation length of oligo-DTT from 1.7 to 1.5 eV. The LUMOs of these polymers are essentially unaffected, while the HOMO increases from −5.8 to −5.4 eV by increasing the conjugation length of oligo-DTT. All-polymer solar cells based on the same electron donor [bi(thienylenevinylene)-substituted polythiophene derivative] and acceptor 75b exhibit similar PCE (1.48%) with 75a (Voc = 0.69 V, Jsc = 5.02 mA cm−2 and FF = 0.43) using an optimized ratio of 3:1 w/w. On the other hand, when 75c was used as acceptor the PCE dropped significantly to 0.77%. Finally, Zhan et al. replaced also the DTT with a dodecyl substituted dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole (DTP) and the corresponding polymer 76 display a band gap of 1.4 eV, an electron mobility of 1.2 × 10−3 cm2 Vs−1 but lower PCE.
While Zhan et al. investigated the role of DTT and DTP moieties as co-monomers of PDI, Yang et al. reported PDI copolymer 77 (Scheme 35) containing cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophene as the electron rich unit. The polymer exhibited −5.52 eV (HOMO), −4.02 eV (LUMO) and an optical band gap of 1.5 eV. However, the BHJ solar cells with 77 as the electron acceptor and poly(4,4′-bis(2-ethylhexyl)dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]silole-2,6-diyl-alt-(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)) as the electron donor exhibited poor PCE of 0.43% with Voc of 0.68 V and Jsc of 1.4 mA cm−2.
Hashimoto et al. expanded the family of the PDI copolymers by the synthesis of six PDI-based polymers by combination of PDI unit with different donor segments including fluorene 78, dibenzosilole 79, carbazole 80, thiophene 81, DTP 82 and vinylene 83 (Scheme 36) and utilized them as n-type polymers for OPVs.
The optical band gaps of the polymers are 1.77 eV 78, 1.82 eV 79, 1.77 eV 80, 1.70 eV 81, 1.32 eV 82 and 1.59 eV 83. All PDI-based polymers undergo reversible reductive n-doping/dedoping processes, while only 82 showed reversible p-doping/dedoping processes. By changing the electron-donating segments, tailoring of the LUMO energy levels of the PDI-based polymers was achieved, varied from −4.05 eV for 83 to −3.61 eV for 78. The electron mobilities were estimated to be in the range of 10−4 to 10−3 cm2 Vs−1 in FETs for all six copolymers, comparable to those of other PDI-based polymers. BHJ solar cells based on the six perylene diimide containing polymers as acceptor materials and two polythiophene derivatives (rrP3HT and a copolymer with conjugated side chains; PT1) as donor materials were investigated systematically in donor–acceptor 2:1 w/w. PT1:78–83 systems showed obvious improvement in their device performance compared to the corresponding rrP3HT:78–83 combinations because of the better film morphology of PT1:78–83 systems and the lower HOMO energy level of PT1 than that of rrP3HT. The highest PCE of 2.23% was recorded for the PT1:80 with Voc = 0.70 V, Jsc = 6.35 mA cm−2 and FF = 0.50, which is one of the best PCE values of polymer–polymer blend photovoltaic devices reported to date. This high PCE was achieved upon extensive optimization of the film morphology using solvent mixtures. The best mixture for this system is toluene–chloroform 9:1.
Catellani et al. synthesized and characterized copolymers based on PDI units linked in bay positions with bithiophene 84a or terthiophene units 84b and employed as acceptor material in polymeric solar cells (Scheme 37). The copolymers exhibited ambipolar electrochemical properties, high electronic affinities and wide electronic absorption in the visible spectrum. The optical band gaps of 84a and 84b are 1.65 eV and 1.60 eV, respectively. The copolymers show the following HOMO and LUMO energy levels: −5.89 eV and −4.23 eV for 84a and −5.94 eV and −4.34 eV for 84b. BHJ solar cells fabricated using 84a or 84b as the electron acceptors and rrP3HT as the electron donor in 1:1 w/w demonstrate low PCEs. 84a exhibits 0.4% whereas 84b 0.8% with Voc = 0.56 V, Jsc = 2.81 mA cm−2 and FF = 0.51.
Finally, two PDI copolymers were synthesized by linking the PDI unit through the nitrogen atoms with polyoxyethylene chains or a phenylenevinylene segment (Scheme 38). The electron mobility of the non conjugated 85 is 5 × 10−4 cm2 Vs−1 and bilayer devices with copper phtalocyanide as the electron donor show low PCE of 0.30%. On the other hand, Mikroyannidis et al. obtained a significantly higher PCE of 2.3% under white-light illumination calibrated to an AM1.5 intensity of 30 mW cm−2 using the alternating PDI-phenylenevinylene copolymer acceptor 86 and poly(3-phenyl hydrazone thiophene) donor in 1:1 w/w with Voc = 0.60 V, Jsc = 2.98 mA cm−2 and FF = 0.39. The absorption of 86 is broad, with an optical band gap of 1.66 eV and an electron mobility of 0.85 × 10−2 cm2 Vs−1 as measured by SCLC.

Benzothiadiazole is the most common electron-withdrawing building block for the synthesis of donor–acceptor conjugated polymers. Initially, benzothiadiazole was copolymerized with fluorene providing 87 (Scheme 39) with energy levels of −3.5 eV (LUMO) and −5.9 eV (HOMO). The PCE of 87 in blends with rrP3HT (donor:acceptor ratio of 60:40 w/w) is a significantly low 0.13%. This can be attributed to the low electron mobility and in part to the charge separation efficiency of 87.

Substantial higher PCE (1.8%) is obtained by Friend et al. when 88; poly((9,9-dioctylfluorene)-2,7-diyl-alt-(4,7-bis(3-hexylthien-5-yl)-2,1,3benzothiadiazole)) is used as the electron acceptor (Scheme 39) in blends with rrP3HT (1:1 w/w) using xylene as solvent.88 has similar structural motif as 87 but with the addition of two hexyl-substituted thiophene rings next to benzothiadiazole. The addition of the thiophene rings results in the upshift of the HOMO and LUMO levels of 88 as compared to 87. The LUMO is situated at −3.15 eV and the HOMO at −5.37 eV. Due to the ambipolar nature of the polymer that can actually support both electron and hole transport [8 × 10−5 cm2 Vs−1 for electrons and 8 × 10−4 cm2 Vs−1 for holes, as measured in FETs], 88 was also used as electron donor polymer in blends with PC60BM (in 1:3 w/w) providing 1.25% PCE. Thus, the assignment of conjugated polymers as either electron donors or electron acceptors is relative and depends on the energy level offsets in respect to its blend counterpart.
Janssen et al. expanded the family of the benzothiadiazole copolymers by designing and synthesizing through Suzuki or Stille cross-coupling polymerization three related polymers 89, 90 and 91 (Scheme 40) that carry one thiophene unit for each electron deficient unit. The 1:1 ratio was chosen to keep the HOMO level as low as possible and tuning the LUMO level by using the benzothiadiazole 89, the benzotriazole 90 or the quinoxaline 91.
All oligothiophene copolymers 89–91 have similar oxidation potentials at ∼0.35 V vs. Fc/Fc+. Because the three polymers differ in the nature of the electron deficient unit, the reduction potential varies and is less negative for 89 (−1.67 V vs. Fc/Fc+) than for 90 (−1.80 V vs. Fc/Fc+) and 91 (−1.84 V vs. Fc/Fc+), indicative of stronger acceptor properties for 89. The polymers were applied in BHJ solar cells with rrP3HT as the donor material in 1:1 weight ratio. A photovoltaic effect has been obtained with the three polymers, leading to devices with high Vocs (0.99–1.15 V), but with Jsc and FF that limit the efficiency to ∼0.2%. The performance of the photovoltaic devices is limited by incomplete exciton dissociation and separation of the photogenerated electrons and holes at low fields. The separation is in competition with charge recombination to the triplet state. The limited formation of free charge carriers may further be enhanced by the relatively low-energy difference between the optical band gap energy of the polymers and that of the interface charge transfer state of (0.06–0.16 eV) and the fact that phase-separation in these blends seems to occur on a scale larger than the exciton diffusion length. In addition, the low electron mobility (∼10−7 cm2 Vs−1, as measured by SCLC) of the acceptor polymers hampers the charge collection.
Finally, a conjugated polymer composed of all electron accepting monomers (Scheme 41) was developed by Ober et al. by the successful preparation of a bis(trifluoroborate) functionalized 2-alkylbenzotriazole and its copolymerization through Suzuki cross-coupling with dibromo-benzothiadiazole in the presence of a Pd catalyst and LiOH, yielding the high molecular weight polymer 92 (Mn = 120 Kg mol−1). The absence of thiophene ring in the polymer backbone resulted in excellent electron-transport properties (μe = 0.02 cm2 Vs−1). Using ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy (UPS) the HOMO level of 92 was measured at −5.4 eV and by extracting the optical band gap (2.0 eV), the LUMO level was estimated to −3.4 eV. Unoptimized PCE of 0.31% in blends of rrP3HT:92 (1:1 w/w) is obtained with the appearance of a high Voc of 1.08 V.

In recent years, a number of polymers based on DPP units have been presented that have low LUMO energy levels, high extinction coefficients and high electron mobilities in field-effect transistors. Taking these into account Janssen et al. reported the synthesis and optoelectronic properties of three acceptor polymers (Scheme 42) bearing DPP units in the main chain 93–95.

The optical gap in solid state decreases from 93via94 to 95 (2.1, 2.0 and 1.75 eV respectively). The oxidation potential follows the same trend (0.5, 0.4 and 0.22 V vs. Fc/Fc+). The reduction potential is the same for 93 and 94 (−1.7 V vs. Fc/Fc+) and more positive for 95 (−1.55 V vs. Fc/Fc+), indicating a stronger acceptor character in 95. Their performance as acceptor materials in BHJ solar cells using rrP3HT as the donor material in 1:1 w/w demonstrate a relatively high Voc (≥0.9 V) but FF and Jsc limit the photovoltaic device performance. The overall PCE for rrP3HT:93, rrP3HT:94 and rrP3HT:95 is 0.14%, 0.11% and 0.36%, respectively. For rrP3HT:93 and rrP3HT:94 photoinduced absorption (PIA) spectroscopy gives no evidence for charge transfer, consistent with the small Jsc (0.68 and 0.44 mA cm−2 respectively). For rrP3HT:95 a higher Jsc (1.63 mA cm−2) was obtained. PIA measurements indicated formation of free charges in the rrP3HT:95 blend that recombine to the triplet state.

Poly[(1,4-divinylenephenylene)(2,4,6-triisopropylphenylborane)] 96 is the first organoboron polymer (Scheme 43) working as n-type material in a BHJ solar cells.

Boranes are inherently electron poor systems due to the boron vacant pz orbitals and thus can be used as strong electron acceptors. Molecules with three-coordinate boron groups have already shown PV effect.
The chosen combination between rrP3HT and 96 as electron donor and acceptor materials foresees the following advantages: (1) high theoretical open circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.35 eV as expressed by the energy gap between LUMOA–HOMOD; (2) optimal energy gap between LUMOD–LUMOA for an efficient charge separation (ca. 0.35 eV) with a minimal energy loss and (3) high extinction coefficient of 96 in the lowest wavelength region of the visible spectrum, thus extending the solar harvesting of rrP3HT. In the best case the rrP3HT:96 device in 1:1 w/w irradiated at 320 mW cm−2, gave a Voc of about 1 V and Jsc of about 18 mA cm−2. The average external quantum efficiency (EQE) was of about 12%.

Three donor–acceptor type copolymers 97–99 consisting of dicyanofluorene as acceptor and various donor moieties were designed and synthesized (Scheme 44) by Seki et al. The presence of two cyano groups, which are strongly electron withdrawing in nature, made the dicyanofluorene moiety a good electron acceptor and provide to polymers low lying LUMO level of −3.73 eV 97, −3.78 eV 98 and −3.84 eV 99. BHJ solar cells based on films consisting of 97, 98 or 99 mixed with rrP3HT with a blend ratio of 1:1 spin casted from a solution in chlorobenzene display a maximum PCE of 0.07% for 99 with a Voc of 0.74 V, Jsc of 0.28 mA cm−2, and FF of 0.33. On the other hand, 97 and 98 exhibited very low PCEs (<0.01%). The polymers exhibit relatively good short-range charge-carrier mobilities but show weak long-range charge-carrier mobilities. The authors demonstrated that the highly localized LUMOs in 97 and 98 act as traps thereby hindering the electron flow, whereas the LUMO of 99 is almost equally distributed between the neighboring dicyanofluorene moieties allowing electron transport by means of an “island hopping” mechanism. This leads to the superior electron transport and photovoltaic performance of 99 over those of 97 and 98.


We identify the following major considerations and design criteria based on the above analytical presentation:

(1) The HOMO/LUMO energy levels of the acceptor material relative to those of the donor polymer semiconductor should offer sufficient offsets to facilitate photoinduced electron/charge transfer and efficient charge separation while maximizing the photovoltage. A LUMO/LUMO offset (ΔELUMO) thought to be necessary is above 0.12 eV; this value is still a relevant guide in the case of new acceptors materials. Although the HOMO/HOMO offset (ΔEHOMO) has not been an important consideration, a ΔEHOMO at 0.2–0.3 eV or larger is necessary to extract holes and confine them to the representative electrode. As is already well-known, the maximum possible Voc is directly related to the HOMO/LUMO offset (ΔEHOMO/LUMO) of the active donor and acceptor in the OPV.
(2) To facilitate good charge transport and efficient charge collection at the electrodes, the acceptor material should have a high electron mobility (μe > 10−3 cm2 Vs−1).
(3) The optical band gap of the acceptor material should contribute to light harvesting and exciton generation, and ideally, they should be complementary to those of the donor polymer in the visible-near IR spectral range.
(4) To facilitate favorable acceptor material/donor polymer blend phase separation thermodynamics and kinetics in forming the BHJ active layer film, the acceptor material should have a sufficiently large molar mass.
(5) The solubility of the acceptor material in common organic solvents is essential to realize solution-based processing and the fabrication of OPVs.
(6) The purity of the acceptor material should be sufficiently high (electronic grade) to enable high performance OPVs.

Financial support of this work provided under the co-operational programs “AdvPol 850” and “Nanorganic” from the Ministry of Education and Religious Affairs in Greece.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013