 DOI: 10.1039/C3NR03048B
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9536-9540

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms

Chao Li,
Yujin Chen,
Yue Zhao,
Huifang Wang,
Wei Zhang,
Yaowen Li*,
Xiaoming Yang,
Changqi Ma,
Liwei Chen*,
Xiulin Zhu and 
Yingfeng Tu*

Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Advanced Functional Polymer Design and Application, Department of Polymer Science and Engineering, College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University, Suzhou, 215123, P. R. China. E-mail: ywli@suda.edu.cn; tuyingfeng@suda.edu.cn; Fax: +86 512 65882130; Tel: +86 512 65882130

i-Lab Suzhou Institute of Nano-Tech and Nano-Bionics (SINANO), Chinese Academy of Sciences, Suzhou, 215123, P. R China. E-mail: lwchen2008@sinano.ac.cn

Received
13th June 2013
, Accepted 5th August 2013
First published on 8th August 2013
A series of acceptor–donor–acceptor-based small molecules (SMs) with varied crystallinity were successfully synthesized. The processing additive can induce the SMs to self-organize as nanofibrils with higher crystallinity and controlled scales of nanofibrils, which have significant influence on the photovoltaic performance.

The self-assembly of semiconducting π-conjugated materials has been intensively studied during the past 20 years. Specific interest has been placed on polythiophenes, especially on poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), due to good solubility in organic solvents and the relatively higher charge mobility. Recently, the self-assembled 1D nanostructures of P3HT have been known to largely enhance the crystallinity, mechanical flexibility, and the speed of charge transport, compared with the 2D thin film counterparts. The directional transport of the holes along the P3HT nanofibrils led to increased carrier mobility in thin film transistors. When employed in bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells (OSCs), the P3HT nanofibrils led to remarkable improvement in the power conversion efficiency (PCE). Because the nanofibrils with nanoscale phase separation can prompt excitons to reach donor–acceptor interfaces and be collected, where the photogenerated excitons can diffuse in their diffusion lengths (5–20 nm), and charge carriers can reach the electrodes and internal order by continuous pathways. In these previous studies, π-conjugated polymers were normally used to obtain nanofibrils. A limited number of studies have been reported on small molecule (SM)-based nanofibrils in blend films, although SMs exhibit the advantages of high purity, favourable solution processability, well-defined molecular structures and definite molecular weight. Furthermore, one-step formation of nanofibrils in blend films has been accomplished with only polymer components. The difficulty of controlling the aggregation and packing structures of SMs accounts for their limited use as nanofibrils in blend films, and spontaneous in situ formation of nanofibrils of SMs in blend films is a challenging task.

Acceptor–donor–acceptor (A–D–A) molecules, which are a type of donor–acceptor (D–A) structure molecule, have attracted more and more interest due to their outstanding photovoltaic performance because the A–D–A molecules possess extended conjugated length, good tunable energy levels and relatively higher crystallization through delicate chemical structure design and modification. Additionally, the processing additive plays an important role in controlling the morphology of the BHJ active layer due to its selective (differential) solubility of the fullerene component and higher boiling point than the host solvent. Such a combination of properties leads to controllable aggregation of donor materials in solution, which translates to an increase in the sizes and enhanced crystallinity of the BHJ domains in the film.
Herein we report a series of A–D–A-based SMs (T(TDPPT)2, TT(TDPPT)2 and BDT(TDPPT)2) by designing their coplanar conformation and unambiguously demonstrate that they possess varied crystallinity and morphologies when blended with PC71BM. The self-organization and crystallization of SMs in SM:PC71BM blend film can be further regulated with the processing additive 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO), which gives enhanced crystallization and controllable scales of nanofibrils compared to films spun from pristine solvent. This method was used to fabricate the active layer of BHJ OSCs, where both the short circuit current density (Jsc) and fill factor (FF) were obviously improved, suggesting that these self-organized highly ordered nanofibril blend films can facilitate charge separation and transportation, which has a good perspective for the fabrication of nanofibril-based active layers.
T(TDPPT)2, TT(TDPPT)2 and BDT(TDPPT)2 were synthesized by the palladium(0)-catalyzed Stille coupling reactions between a central electron-donating moiety and different electron-accepting moieties. The chemical structures are shown in Fig. 1, and the detailed synthetic procedure and characterizations of compounds are described in the ESI (Scheme S1). This series of small molecules possess varied molecular conformations, which exhibit different dihedral angles (Fig. 1). The order of coplanarity is BDT(TDPPT)2 > T(TDPPT)2 > TT(TDPPT)2. They also show good solubility in common organic solvents, and exhibit good thermal stability with 5% weight loss temperatures (Td) higher than 350 °C under N2, as revealed by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) (Fig. S1). The UV-vis absorptions of the three SMs are compared, as shown in Fig. 2a, and the maximum absorption wavelength and the absorption edge are almost the same in solution. This indicates that the intensities of the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) interaction between D and A moieties are similar, which is not affected by the varied conformation of molecules. The red-shift in the film state of all SMs (Fig. 2b) as compared to the solution state (Fig. 2a) suggests that strong π–π stacking due to the intermolecular interaction in the solid state of the SMs is more favorable than in the solution. The low optical band gaps (Eg,opt) of the SMs, which are estimated from the absorption edges of the thin films, further confirm their potential applications in solar cells. The BDT(TDPPT)2 shows an increase in ionization potential of approximately 0.1 eV, in comparison to that of T(TDPPT)2 and TT(TDPPT)2, probably as a result of larger resonance stabilization energy of the fused ring over one or two thiophene rings.
The cyclic voltammetry (CV) diagrams of the SMs were obtained by using n-Bu4NPF6 as supporting electrolyte in acetonitrile solution (Fig. S2). It reveals the similar highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the SMs are −5.20–5.30 eV and −3.30–3.44 eV vs. ferrocene/ferricinium, respectively (see Table S1). The tendency of energy levels is in good agreement with those calculated at the B3LYP/6-31G* level (Fig. S3). This suggests that the varied conformation of molecules does not contribute to the voltammogram.
Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) experiments were carried out to test the crystallization of three SMs, and the crystallization temperature of T(TDPPT)2, TT(TDPPT)2 and BDT(TDPPT)2 is 152.9 °C, 160.8 °C, and 171.2 °C, respectively (Fig. 3a). The corresponding enthalpies of crystallization are 28.83 J mol−1, 41.29 J mol−1 and 30.73 J mol−1, and reveal that TT(TDPPT)2 has the best crystallization ability due to the varied molecular conformations. Blend films containing SMs and PC71BM component were examined by out-of-plane X-ray diffraction (XRD), which was used to further determine the crystallization and stacking mode of SMs when blended with PC71BM.
As shown in Fig. 3b, in comparison with the broad and weak diffraction peak of T(TDPPT)2:PC71BM and BDT(TDPPT)2:PC71BM blend films, the TT(TDPPT)2:PC71BM blend film shows a sharp and strong diffraction peak at q = 0.42 Å corresponding to the (100) orientation for the TT(TDPPT)2 lamellar organized crystallite, which indicates that TT(TDPPT)2 possesses higher crystallinity and ordered arrangement. These results may be caused by the disruption of the formation of the low energy component with the presence of PC71BM19 and thus suppression of SM crystallization. Addition of 1–2 vol% DIO in chlorobenzene to the solvent was used to cast the SM:PC71BM blend films. It is interesting to find that all the SM:PC71BM blend films show obvious diffraction peaks and increased diffraction intensity, which indicates that the processing additive can significantly enhance crystallinity of SM:PC71BM blend films and thus increase their degree of order. Particularly in the TT(TDPPT)2:PC71BM blend films, the (100) diffraction peak appears at the same diffraction angle and is more sharp for the highly ordered lamellar orientation compared with that before adding DIO. More importantly, the lamellar d-spacing (1.5 nm) of the TT(TDPPT)2:PC71BM blend film is more closely packed than the other blend films and that of P3HT:PCBM, which is beneficial for charge transport between components. This can be explained that the processing additive allows the SMs to crystallize more completely by providing increased drying time during the kinetically limited spin-coating process. This phenomenon is consistent with the P3HT:PCBM system for high performance photovoltaic devices.
Due to the additive having different influences on the SMs, with varied crystallization and further self-organization, atomic force microscopy (AFM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) were used to further investigate the micro- and nanostructures of the SM:PC71BM blend films with and without processing additive. The SM:PC71BM blend films without additive generally show relatively low roughness, which indicates that the SMs have relatively good miscibility with PC71BM (Fig. S4d–f). The gradually increasing roughness from 0.38 nm, 0.52 nm to 2.35 nm may be caused by the different molecular conformations and crystallization of SMs consequently affected their miscibility and interactions with PC71BM. This result can be further confirmed by the increased grain sizes in the TEM images (Fig. 4a–c), resulting in low hole mobility across the entire film due to multiple crosses over grain boundaries. Interestingly, the blend film microstructures have been affected by the processing additive (DIO). SM:PC71BM blend films with DIO processing show obvious changes in the varied scales of the nanofibrils of SM crystallites compared with that without DIO processing (Fig. 4a–c), which are broadly distributed in this image with an optimum morphology for high-performance BHJ PSCs. The formation of crystallites can be further confirmed by the increased roughnesses from the AFM images (Fig. S4g–i). In this study, the T(TDPPT)2:PC71BM blend film with DIO processing shows relatively smaller T(TDPPT)2 crystal nanofibrils (in the range of 4 nm width), good phase separation and some continuous T(TDPPT)2-rich islands in the TEM image (Fig. 4d). In contrast, TT(TDPPT)2:PC71BM and BDT(TDPPT)2:PC71BM blend films with DIO processing show crystal nanofibrils with respective widths of 10–15 nm and 15–20 nm and lengths of 30–100 nm and 70–180 nm. It is noted that pure SM films and SM:PC71BM blend films (Fig. S4a–f) do not show any fibril-like morphology, which indicates that the PC71BM is not the driving force for formation of nanofibrils. The nanofibrils appeared only when DIO was added to the mixture of SM:PC71BM. Meanwhile, XRD data shows that the crystallinity of the SMs has been greatly increased after adding DIO. The formation of the crystal nanofibrils and their growth in the three blend films after adding DIO reveal that the self-organization of SMs are very sensitive to varied molecular conformation, crystallization, evaporation rate and solubility parameter of the solvent. The processing additive can provide a fine adjustment of the crystal nanofibrils according to the molecular conformation and crystallization. Considering the previous results and the mechanism of molecular crystallization and the processing additive, a speculative self-organizing process for crystal nanofibrils is suggested as follows: The formation of nanofibrils are mainly caused by the crystallization of the SM and self-organization between SMs and PC71BM. Therefore, a free region and sufficient time for crystallization and self-organization are necessary. DIO dissolves PC71BM more readily than SMs, and is a solvent with high boiling point, which can extend the evaporation time of the solvent and hence provides sufficient time for self-organization. Thus, processing additives provide a medium that is more fluid and allows the chains to find optimal conformations. A molecule with higher crystallization and coplanarity possesses a stronger driving force for π–π stacking and self-organization ability.
The photovoltaic properties of the SM nanofibrils were evaluated by fabricating BHJ OSCs with a conventional device structure (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/SM:PC71BM/LiF/Al). The detailed device fabrication process is described in the ESI. Fig. 5 shows the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the devices, and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are given in Table S2.
The optimized BHJ solar cells based on SM:PC71BM without DIO processing show similar poor PCE and larger series resistance (Rs) and lower shunt resistance (Rsh), which may be caused by the lower phase separation of T(TDPPT)2:PC71BM and TT(TDPPT)2:PC71BM, and large “grain” of BDT(TDPPT)2 with disrupted boundaries. With DIO processing, the devices show significantly improved photovoltaic performance due to the formation of crystal nanofibrils and good phase separation, which have been demonstrated by our previous results. It is interesting to find that the Jsc of device based on SM:PC71BM blend film with DIO processing is significantly affected (in the range of 5.22–7.48 mA cm−2) by the varied scales of crystal nanofibrils, which did not have an impact on the open-circuit voltage (Voc). The gradually improved Jsc of the devices based on BDT(TDPPT)2:PC71BM, TT(TDPPT)2:PC71BM and T(TDPPT)2:PC71BM indicate that the nanofibrils with smaller scale and moderate crystallinity provided larger interfacial contact areas between donor and acceptor materials, which can facilitate the charge separation and transportation, although the TT(TDPPT)2:PC71BM blend film possesses the nanofibrils with highest degree of crystallinity. The varied Jsc and fill factor (FF) can be further confirmed by the mobility of electrons and holes in the blends, because they are important parameters for both the ability and balance of charge carrier transportation. The T(TDPPT)2:PC71BM and TT(TDPPT)2:PC71BM blend films with DIO processing show relatively higher hole mobility of 2.4 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 7.4 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Fig. S5 and Table S3), respectively, which can be attributed to the higher crystallinity of T(TDPPT)2 and TT(TDPPT)2 in the blend films as indicated from the XRD data. In the case of electron mobility of the blend films, the T(TDPPT)2:PC71BM blend film with larger interfacial contact areas shows the highest electron mobility. The generally higher hole and electron mobilities of the T(TDPPT)2:PC71BM blend film give better charge transportation ability and hence the highest Jsc. The ratios between the electron and hole mobilities are away from unity, i.e., 2.0, 0.2 and 1.9 respectively for T(TDPPT)2:PC71BM, TT(TDPPT)2:PC71BM and BDT(TDPPT)2:PC71BM blend films with DIO processing, resulting in unbalanced charge transport in the BHJ OSCs based on these blend films, and finally giving low FF. Meanwhile, T(TDPPT)2:PC71BM and BDT(TDPPT)2:PC71BM blend films exhibit higher FF compared with that of TT(TDPPT)2:PC71BM blend film, which may be caused by their better balanced charge transport properties. Therefore, these results firmly confirm our speculation that the processing additive can induce SMs with varied crystallinity to controllably self-organize with good phase separation, higher nanoscale crystallinity and improved nanofibrils, and give a general guideline for optimizing active layer morphology of BHJ OSCs. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves of SM:PC71BM with DIO processing under monochromatic light are shown in Fig. S6. The EQE curves exhibit a broad response covering 350–800 nm, and the calculated Jsc values from the integrals of EQE curved are consistent with those of J–V measurement. It can be seen from this figure that the EQE spectra of the devices resemble the absorption spectra of the blend films (Fig. S7) used in the device, indicating both components used in the blend contribute to the photocurrent. It is noted that the EQE in the wavelength region 450–700 nm is broader than the absorption spectra of the blend films. This can be ascribed to the contribution of crystallized SM nanofibrils, which are more efficient photogenerated charge carriers, especially in the wavelength region of 450–550 nm. Furthermore, the varied nanostructures and crystallinities of the nanofibrils also influence the photocurrent. T(TDPPT)2:PC71BM blend film with a smaller scale and moderate crystallinity, providing larger interfacial contact areas, shows a larger value compared to the other two blend films across a broad spectral range.

In summary, we successfully synthesized a series of A–D–A-based SMs with varied crystallinity. DIO processing can provide an efficient method for the self-organization of crystallized SMs without being disrupted by the appearance of PC71BM. DIO can also induce the SMs with varied crystallinity to form nanofibrils with higher crystallinity and controllable length. The self-organized ordered smaller nanofibrils of T(TDPPT)2:PC71BM blend film give efficient charge separation and transportation, therefore leading to higher Jsc and PCE.


We acknowledge the financial support from the National Nature Science Foundation of China (grant no. 21204057), Jiangsu Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. BK2012213), Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education of China (grant no. 20113201120004), Open Project of State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials (grant no. sklssm201333), the Project of International Cooperation of the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (2011DFA50530) and Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Synthetic process and characterizations of SMs; TGA, electrochemical properties, molecular orbital surfaces of SMs; AFM images of SM:PC71BM blend films; EQE curves; optical, electrochemical properties and photovoltaic parameters. See DOI: 10.1039/c3nr03048b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013