 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA02486J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11286-11293


Zhenzhen
Zhang
,

Liuliu
Feng
,

Shutao
Xu
,

Jun
Yuan
,

Zhi-Guo
Zhang
,

Hongjian
Peng
,

Yongfang
Li
 and 

Yingping
Zou
*

College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Central South University, Changsha 410083, China. E-mail: yingpingzou@csu.edu.cn

Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China

State Key Laboratory for Powder Metallurgy, Central South University, Changsha 410083, China

Received
21st March 2017
, Accepted 8th May 2017
First published on 9th May 2017
A new small molecule, ITTC, bearing an indacenodithieno[3,2-b]thiophene core and a 2-(6-oxo-5,6-dihydro-4H-cyclopenta[c]thiophen-4-ylidene)malononitrile end group, was designed, synthesized and characterized as a non-fullerene electron acceptor. The ITTC possesses strong and broad light absorption, high and balanced charge mobility and a nanoscale interpenetrating morphology when blended with a recently synthesized hexafluoroquinoxaline based polymer donor-HFQx-T. HFQx-T was obtained from a Stille coupling copolymerization of a 2,6-bis(trimethyltin)-4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophene-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene electron donating unit and a hexafluoroquinoxaline based electron accepting unit. The device employing HFQx-T as the donor and ITTC as the acceptor delivered a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 8.19% without any post-treatment. After thermal annealing, an impressive PCE of 10.4% was obtained. This performance is among the highest PCEs reported for fullerene-free polymer solar cells up to date. This study demonstrates the great potential of ITTC as n-type materials for organic electronics.

Solar cells are promising solutions for energy and environmental problems of the 21st century owing to sustainable and clean solar energy. The solution-processed bulk heterojunction polymer solar cells (PSCs), with blend active layers, based on electron-donating conjugated polymers and electron-accepting fullerene derivatives or nonfullerene as the active layer, have attracted broad interest from academic and industrial communities. However, the commercialization of PSCs requires the availability of inexpensive materials in large quantities. The fullerene derivatives suffer from several shortcomings, such as poor absorption in the visible region, costly preparation and purification. The nonfullerene acceptor materials are an alternative to these issues, since many properties could be enhanced, modified or tuned such as the absorption, energy levels, device stability and easy synthesis and purification. Therefore, nonfullerene acceptors hold great potential to replace fullerene derivatives as n-type materials. In the past few years, nonfullerene acceptor materials, based on perylene diimide (PDI) and naphthalene diimide (NDI), were widely investigated. However, there is a trade-off between high electron mobility and the nanoscale aggregation domain for PDI and NDI derivatives.

Zhan and co-workers reported a high performance fused ring nonfullerene acceptor, named “ITIC”, composed of indacenodithieno[3,2-b]thiophene (IT) as the central core and 2-(3-oxo-2,3-dihydroinden-1-ylidene) malononitrile (IC) as the acceptor end group (EG). The ITIC exhibits strong and broad absorption, suitable energy levels and high electron mobility. When blended with a low-bandgap p-type polymer PTB7-Th, the device achieved a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 6.8% without any post-treatment against 6.05% with PTB7-Th:PC61BM blend films. The success of ITIC as an electron acceptor has attracted considerable attention; the efficiencies have rapidly reached 8–12%. In addition, certain parts of the ITIC structure could be modified in order to improve the PCEs by modifying the aromatic cores, side-chains,etc. Several groups have focused on the influence of the EG. For example, a novel acceptor IT-M reported by Hou and coworkers, which was based on IT as the central core and methyl-modified IC as the EG, exhibited a PCE of 12.05% by using 1% of 1,8-diiodooctane(DIO) as an additive. Because of the weak electron-donating properties of the methyl group, IT-M could elevate the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy levels, which is beneficial to increasing the open-circuit voltage (Voc). Zhan's group reported a series of acceptors (INIC1, INIC2, and INIC3) with fluorinated IC as the EG, and delivered high efficiencies of 10–11.5% by 0.25% of DIO treatment.
According to Chang et al., the following points should be followed in order to design and synthesize p-type materials for high photovoltaic performances: (a) benzene was used to lower the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy levels for a higher Voc; (b) thiophene was used to enhance the light harvesting and improve the mobility for a better short circuit current density (Jsc) and fill factor (FF). Unfortunately, the thiophene-based donor materials usually have a low Voc due to the high-lying HOMO levels. However, the high HOMO levels don't sacrifice the Voc for the design of electron acceptors, because the Voc is irrelevant to the HOMO levels of the acceptor. Moreover, the sulfur atom in thiophene is more easily polarized than carbon atoms and tend to form strong S⋯S interactions, which can facilitate π-stacking and charge transport. Taking the above considerations, we replaced the benzene unit of IC with a thiophene unit and synthesized a new acceptor material, ITTC, which was based on the IT core and the 2-(6-oxo-5,6-dihydro-4H-cyclopenta[c]thiophen-4-ylidene)malononitrile (TC) as the EG. Our molecular design strategy is as follows: on the one hand, the IT core has a large, rigid and coplanar structure, implying broad absorption and high charge mobility; on the other hand, the thiophene-based EG has strong light harvesting from the electron delocalization and better charge transport coming from the strong S–S interactions.
Besides materials synthesis, the active layer treatment during device fabrication has to be taken into account in order to improve photovoltaic performances. It is well known that solvent additive processing (such as DIO or chloronaphthalene (CN)) could be a significant approach to optimize the morphology and obtain high photovoltaic performances. However, several studies showed that the residual additive has poor reproducibility and is prone to a photo-oxidative-degradation as well as decreases the device stability. The other common and promising post-treatment to improve the device performance is thermal annealing (TA). Some investigations indicated that TA can improve the crystallinity of donor/acceptor materials and allow polymer reorganization into fibrillar crystallites creating microphase separation and highly ordered interpenetrating networks. For example, Li and coworkers reported a nonfullerene PSC based on J51:ITIC blend films, showing an increased PCE from 7.03% to 9.26% with only a TA treatment. Introducing fluorine atoms on the conjugated building block is beneficial to forming solid state ordering due to inter- and intramolecular non-covalent C–F⋯π and F⋯S interactions. Our group fabricated the PSCs with tetrafluoroquinoxaline based polymers as the p-type donor and ITIC as the n-type acceptor, delivering a PCE of 6.40% without any post-treatment, and then after TA at 170 °C for 10 min, the PCE was improved to 8.47%. Most recently, we synthesized a hexafluoroquinoxaline based polymer donor (HFQx-T), through the combination of the 4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophene-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b]dithiophene as the electron donating unit and the hexafluoroquinoxaline as the electron accepting unit. Here, the devices based on a HFQx-T donor and an ITTC acceptor (the corresponding chemical structures are shown in Fig. 1a), achieved an impressive PCE of up to 10.40%, which is listed among the highest PCEs in additive-free PSCs.

The synthetic procedures of the TC and ITTC are presented in Fig. 1b and experimental details are shown in the ESI. All the steps are simple and classical reactions of nucleophilic addition–condensation. Compound 2 was obtained in 34% yield by a Knoevenagel condensation reaction between ethyl acetoacetate and compound 1, and then undergoes rearrangement under acidic conditions. The compound 3 was synthesized in 43% yield by a straightforward Knoevenagel condensation reaction between compound 2 and malononitrile. ITTC was synthesized through the Knoevenagel condensation reaction between IT-CHO and TC with 52% yield. All intermediates were characterized by 1H NMR, and the target product ITTC was characterized by NMR and elemental analysis. NMR spectra of the intermediates and ITTC are shown in Fig. S1–S4. The new acceptor ITTC exhibits good solubility in common solvents, such as chloroform (CF) and chlorobenzene (CB). HFQx-T has been recently prepared by our group, which will be reported in due course.


The ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) absorption spectra of the ITIC and ITTC film are shown in Fig. 2a. The absorption maximum (λmax) of ITTC is at 707 nm which is an 8 nm red-shift from the 699 nm of ITIC. The ITIC film absorption coefficient of ITTC is 1.23 × 105 cm−1, which is higher than that of its counterpart-ITIC (1.19 × 105 cm−1). ITTC and ITIC have absorption edges of 771 nm and 765 nm, which correspond to the optical bandgaps (Eoptg = 1240/λedge) of 1.61 eV and 1.62 eV, respectively. These results indicate that replacing benzene with thiophene can provide broader and stronger absorption. As shown in Fig. 2b, the HFQx-T:ITTC blend film possesses complementary absorption from 300 to 800 nm, which should be desirable for a high Jsc.

The electrochemical properties of ITTC, ITIC and HFQx-T were measured by cyclic voltammetry (CV) with the ferrocene/ferrocenium (Fc/Fc+) redox couple (4.8 eV below the vacuum level) as an internal reference. The HOMO energy level (EHOMO) and LUMO energy level (ELUMO) were deduced from the onset oxidation and reduction potentials. As shown in Fig. 2c, the EHOMO/ELUMO of ITTC are −5.49/−3.85 eV, which are slightly higher than those of ITIC (−5.59/−3.93 eV). The optical and electrochemical data of ITIC and ITTC are summarized in Table 1. The EHOMO and ELUMO of the HFQx-T donor were measured to be −5.45 eV and −3.50 eV (Fig. S5). The energy diagram relative to the vacuum level is shown in Fig. 2d. For the HFQx-T:ITTC system, the LUMO energy offset (ΔELUMO) between HFQx-T and ITTC is 0.35 eV, which has enough driving force for the exciton dissociation of the donor HFQx-T and the electron transfer from HFQx-T to ITTC. Due to the slightly elevated HOMO levels of thiophene-based acceptor ITIC, the HOMO energy offset (ΔEHOMO) between HFQx-T and ITTC is only 0.04 eV. However, the hole transfer from the ITTC acceptor to the HFQx-T donor is highly efficient, which was evidenced by the photoluminescence (PL) quenching measurements as described below.
Acceptor

λ
max
 (nm)

λ
edge
 (nm)

E
optg
 (eV)

ε
 (cm−1)

E
HOMO (eV)

E
LUMO (eV)

E
cvg
 (eV)

a Absorption maximum of a thin film.
b Absorption edge of a thin film.
c Optical band gap calculated from the absorption edge of a thin film: Eoptg = 1240/λedge.
d Absorption coefficient of the film state.
e Electrochemical bandgap obtained from ELUMO–EHOMO.

ITTC
707
771
1.61
1.23 × 105
−5.49
−3.85
1.64
ITIC
699
765
1.62
1.19 × 105
−5.59
−3.93
1.66
PL quenching experiments were further conducted to investigate the exciton dissociation and charge transfer in the HFQx-T:ITTC blends. The PL spectra of the HFQx-T (excited at 620 nm) and ITTC (excited at 690 nm) films as well as the blend films of HFQx-T:ITTC (1:1, w/w) (excited at 620 and 690 nm) are shown in Fig. 3. When excited at a wavelength of 620 nm, the pure HFQx-T films showed a broad PL emission band in the range of 680–880 nm centered at 720 nm. For the blend films, the emissions were almost all quenched by 98.5%. After TA, the blend films were effectively quenched by 98.8%, which indicated efficient electron transfer from HFQx-T to ITTC. The PL intensities of ITTC were also significantly quenched by 87.8% and 86.6% with and without TA, respectively, which means effective hole transfer from ITTC to HFQx-T. The results confirm that efficient exciton separation and charge transfer can take place under a low energy offset for nonfullerene PSCs, which is beneficial to obtaining a high Jsc.

To investigate the potential applications of ITTC in PSCs, we fabricated PSCs with a traditional structure of indium tin oxide(ITO)/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS)/active layer/perylene diimide functionalized with amino N-oxide (PDINO)/Al, where PEDOT:PSS and PDINO were used as the hole and the electron transport layer, respectively. The optimal conditions for producing the devices were obtained by screening the HFQx-T:ITTC weight ratios and annealing temperatures. The optimized HFQx-T:ITTC weight ratio is 1:1 (w/w) and annealing temperature is 130 °C. The detailed photovoltaic data are summarized in Table S1. The current–voltage (J–V) curves of the devices with optimized HFQx-T:ITTC blends under the illumination of AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2 are shown in Fig. 4a, the corresponding photovoltaic data are listed in Table 2. The PSCs based on HFQx-T:ITTC blend films showed a PCE of 8.19% with a Voc of 0.88 V, a Jsc of 15.05 mA cm −2 and a FF of 0.61. After TA at 130 °C for 10 min, the PCE of the device was improved to 10.4% with a Voc of 0.88 V, a higher Jsc of 16.49 mA cm −2 and a FF of 0.71. It's worth noting that under TA at 130 °C for 10 min, the devices based on HFQx-T:ITTC blend films with different weight ratios all exhibit an average efficiency over 9.5%, which is very beneficial for device reproducibility. The corresponding external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the devices with or without TA are shown in Fig. 4b. The devices based on the HFQx-T:ITTC blend showed broad EQE spectra from 300 to 800 nm. Obviously, the maximum EQE value of 73% after TA is improved from that of 67% without TA. The Jsc of the devices calculated from integration of the EQE spectra with an AM 1.5G reference spectrum was 15.74 mA cm−2 (TA) and 14.64 mA cm−2 (without TA), which were rather consistent with the values from J–V measurement (less than 5% mismatch), which indicated that the results were reliable.

Active layer
Ratio

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
PCEavg (%)

a Without annealing.
b Annealing at 130 °C for 10 min.
c Reported values are average PCEs from 10 devices.

HFQx-T:ITTC
1:1
0.88
15.05
61
8.19
8.10
1:1
0.88
16.49
71
10.40
10.11
Charge transport plays an important role in PSCs. A high and balanced charge mobility is helpful to obtain a large FF. Thus, we measured the charge transport properties of the HFQx-T:ITTC (1:1, w/w) blends with or without TA using the space charge limited current (SCLC) method. Fig. 5a and b show the measurement results and the related data are summarized in Table 3. The hole only and electron only devices were measured with the device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/Au and ITO/ZnO/active layer/Al, respectively. The blend film showed a hole mobility of 6.0 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 and an electron mobility of 8.1 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 with balanced charge transport (μe/μh = 1.35). After TA treatment, the blend film possessed a higher hole mobility of 1.8 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and an electron mobility of 1.77 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, therefore, the more balanced hole/electron mobility (μe/μh = 1.02) was achieved. After TA, charge mobilities got improved probably because TA can induce more self-ordering in the active layer. The improved Jsc and FF with TA could be attributed to the higher and more balanced charge carrier mobility. Light intensity (P) dependence of photovoltaic performance was further investigated to understand the geminate recombination behavior in the devices. Generally, the correlation of Jsc and P can be described as Jsc ∝ Pα. If the bimolecular recombination of the charge carrier is negligible, the power-law exponent (α) should be 1. As shown in Fig. 5c, the values of α for the as-prepared and TA based devices were 0.96 and 0.98, respectively. The higher α value after TA suggested weaker bimolecular recombination existing in the devices. The suppressed charge recombination correlates well with the balanced carrier mobilities of the devices mentioned above and agrees well with the higher FF of 0.71.
Active layer
Ratio

μ
h cm2 V−1 s−1

μ
e cm2 V−1 s−1

μ
e/μh

α



a Without annealing.
b Annealing at 130 °C for 10 min.
c Power-law exponent.

HFQx-T:ITTC
1:1
6.0 × 10−5
8.1 × 10−5
1.35
0.96
1:1
1.8 × 10−4
1.77 × 10−4
1.02
0.98

Tapping-mode atomic force microscopy (AFM) was used to investigate the surface morphology of the active layer. The AFM height images show a root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of 1.105 ± 0.095 nm for HFQx-T:ITTC blend films (1:1, w/w) without TA and 1.395 ± 0.055 nm for HFQx-T:ITTC blend films (1:1, w/w) after TA at 130 °C for 10 min, which is based on five testing times on different areas for each blend film, representative AFM height and phase images are shown in Fig. S6a–d. The slightly larger RMS values of the HFQx-T:ITTC blend films may be attributed to its slightly higher crystallinity of HFQx-T after TA, which is beneficial for charge transport. From the AFM phase images, the HFQx-T:ITTC blend films with and without TA show clear phase separation and uniform morphology, indicating good miscibility of HFQx-T and ITTC blend. Furthermore, we investigated the internal morphology of HFQx-T:ITTC blend films by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). TEM images showed TA led to better and more uniform interpenetrating networks (Fig. 6). The morphology analysis indicated that the nanoscale interpenetrating morphology via the TA treatment is beneficial for efficient exciton dissociations and charge transfer in the device, which can lead to a higher Jsc and FF.


In summary, a promising nonfullerene acceptor (ITTC) with a new end group TC was designed, synthesized and characterized. This n-type small molecule ITTC shows strong and red-shifted absorption relative to ITIC and matched energy levels with the polymer donor HFQx-T. Moreover, the optimized HFQx-T:ITTC blend films exhibit high and balanced hole and electron mobilities and nanoscale phase separated interpenetrating networks. The fullerene-free PSC based on HFQx-T:ITTC (1:1, w/w) blend films afforded a PCE of 8.19% without any post-treatment. Furthermore, the devices delivered an impressive PCE of 10.40% with a higher Jsc of 16.49 mA cm−2 and a FF of 0.71 after TA. Our preliminary investigations show that ITTC has great potential and could be an interesting candidate for fullerene-free PSCs. Although HFQx-T:ITTC blend films have reached high efficiencies, much more work remains to be done to improve photovoltaic parameters through material modification and device engineering. We strongly believe that mapping more high performance donors to match rapidly developing electron acceptors will hold bright future for tomorrow's photovoltaics.


This work has been financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51673205), Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars of Hunan Province (2017JJ1029), Project of Innovation-driven Plan in Central South University, China (2016CX035), State Key Laboratory of Powder Metallurgy, Central South University, China and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities of Central South University (2016zzts023). The authors deeply thank Prof. Věra Cimrová and Dr Ahmed Najari for their valuable suggestions and nice revisions during the manuscript preparation.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details including synthesis, measurements, instruments, related figures and tables. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta02486j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017