 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA11220G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2192-2199


Deokjae
Choi
,

Hyun
Yoon
,

Ka-Hyun
Kim
*,

Han-Don
Um
* and 

Kwanyong
Seo
*

Department of Energy Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan 44919, Republic of Korea. E-mail: kseo@unist.ac.kr; handon@unist.ac.kr

Max Planck Center for Attosecond Science, Max Planck POSTECH/KOREA Research Initiative, Pohang, Gyeongbuk 37673, Republic of Korea

KIER-UNIST, Advanced Center for Energy, Korea Institute for Energy Research, Ulsan 44919, Republic of Korea. E-mail: ka-hyun.kim@kier.re.kr

Department of Physics, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju 28644, South Korea

Received
22nd November 2018
, Accepted 2nd January 2019
First published on 4th January 2019
In this study, an indium tin oxide (ITO)-free carrier-selective contact (CSC) for crystalline silicon (c-Si) solar cells with a micro-grid metal electrode is reported. The ITO layer is crucial for collecting the carriers separated at the junction between CSC and n-Si because of the relatively low conductivity of CSC. However, previous research investigated the formation of ITO films via sputter deposition, which can lead to performance degradation of solar cells due to the parasitic absorption of the ITO layer and plasma damage at the CSC/Si junction during sputtering. Moreover, the use of ITO is hindered because of the rare indium metal. Herein, we investigate the carrier transport mechanism at the MoOx/n-Si junction to understand the reason for the poor performance of ITO-free devices. A majority of the carriers are limited because of a highly resistive carrier path, with a sheet resistance of 16 kΩ sq−1 during carrier transport, leading to the severe degradation of fill factor (FF) and short-circuit current (Jsc). To minimize the power loss during carrier transport, a micro-grid metal electrode that can effectively collect carriers separated at the MoOx/n-Si junction is applied. With this micro-grid electrode, the electrical losses of ITO-free solar cells can be minimized despite the highly resistive path of the MoOx/n-Si junction. Hence, the best device exhibits a power conversion efficiency of up to 17.0% without the ITO layer.

Crystalline silicon (c-Si) solar cells have dominated the photovoltaic market, with up to 90% market share related to material abundance, non-toxicity, and high efficiency. However, a majority of c-Si solar cells are fabricated by conventional doping processes, which are not cost-effective because of the use of high temperature (>900 °C) and multiple process steps during solar-cell fabrication. To replace this doping process, researchers have reported an alternative method to form a junction via the deposition of carrier-selective contact (CSC) materials. CSC materials are capable of selectively collecting only a specific charge and blocking an opposite charge. Transition-metal oxides, organic materials, and alkali metals have been proposed to be CSCs. These CSCs can be formed at low temperature (<100 °C) by cost-effective processes such as thermal evaporation or spin coating. Among the CSCs, molybdenum oxide (MoOx) is one of the promising hole collectors for n-type c-Si solar cells because of a high work function of 6.6 eV (ref. 25) and a large band gap of 3.3 eV, demonstrating an efficiency of 22.5% for a c-Si solar cell. However, there is an obstacle in the fabrication of MoOx/n-Si solar cells, namely, the use of indium tin oxide (ITO) as a transparent top electrode. Typically, a highly conductive transparent electrode such as an ITO layer is the key to effectively collecting carriers in a large area of a MoOx/n-Si device owing to the extremely low conductivity of MoOx. However, the ITO film causes not only optical loss due to parasitic absorption at a short wavelength but also open-circuit voltage (Voc) degradation due to the plasma damage at the MoOx/Si junction during sputtering. To prevent the efficiency degradation of the MoOx/n-Si solar cell and avoid the use of a rare indium material, an ITO-free device should be developed.

In this study, the photocarriers separated at the MoOx/n-Si junction with the use of a metal micro-grid electrode even without the ITO layer between the MoOx layer and metal electrode were effectively collected. In addition, the photocarrier transport mechanism was investigated by the analysis of the sheet resistance of each conductive carrier path, including the ITO, MoOx, and inversion layers at the MoOx/n-Si junction. On the basis of the photocarrier transport mechanism, an ITO-free carrier collector was designed to minimize the resistive and optical power losses. Using the as-developed metal micro-grid electrode, the optimized carrier collection of the ITO-free device was successfully realized, with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 12.5%, which was 28% greater than that observed for an ITO-deposited device (9.8%). This result is mainly related to the absence of absorption loss by the ITO layer as well as the significant reduction of the reflection loss caused by the metal electrode. To improve the PCE of ITO-free MoOx/n-Si solar cells, an n-Si wafer was textured to form pyramidal structures, followed by deposition of MgF2 film as antireflection coating layers on MoOx/n-Si. Hence, the light reflection of solar cells is minimized, yielding a PCE of 17.0% for the ITO-free MoOx/n-Si solar cell.

To characterize the electrical property of MoOx/n-Si junction, Transfer Length Method (TLM) was performed. The 20 nm-thick MoOx was evaporated on Czochralski (CZ) n-type Si wafers (resistivity of 1–3 Ω cm, 350 μm thick) and glass substrate. The Si substrate was dipped into the buffered oxide etchant (BOE, HF:NH4F = 7:1) before evaporation of MoOx to remove the native oxide. Al electrodes were fabricated using stencil lithography. Using metal shadow mask with 0.8 × 0.3 cm at various spacings (0.5 mm to 1.75 mm with 0.25 mm increments), Al electrode was deposited with thermal evaporation (Fig. S1 in ESI). Then the current–voltage responses were measured by source meter system (Keithley Instruments 2200 and 6487 Picoammeter, Cleveland, OH, U.S.A.) in the dark and under vacuum. The sheet resistance of 50 nm-thick indium tin oxide (ITO) on glass substrate was measured with four-point probe measurement (FPP-RS8, Desol Eng).


20 nm-thick MoOx film was thermally evaporated on CZ n-type Si wafers (resistivity of 1–3 Ω cm, 350 μm thick) after dipping into the BOE solution. After deposition of MoOx film, 50 nm-thick ITO film was deposited by sputtering system (Pursed DC sputter, ULtech), and then 200 nm-thick Ag electrode was thermally evaporated using busbar and finger bar shaped metal shadow mask (shading loss of 16%). As a back contact. 200 nm-thick Al film was deposited at rear side of devices.


Metal grid electrode patterns with adjustable spacing and width of 3 μm was fabricated using photoresist (AZ4330E, AZ electronic materials, thickness of ∼10 um) after dipping into BOE solution. After a soft bake at 100 °C for 3 min, the substrate was patterned by exposing to UV light (MA6 mask aligner, Karl Suss) with a soda lime photomask at expose dose of 200 mJ cm−2. After exposure, the substrate was then immersed in a developer solution (AZ 300 MIF) for 7 min. 20 nm-thick MoOx/200 nm-thick Al films were thermally evaporated on the patterned substrate, then lift off step was followed by dipping into acetone solution. In order to form the MoOx/n-Si junction in whole area of substrate, 20 nm-thick MoOx film was thermally evaporated on the substrate. As a back contact. 200 nm-thick Al film was deposited at rear side of devices (Fig. S2 in ESI).


In order to fabricate a micro-pyramid structured silicon wafer, we first cleaned the planar CZ n-type Si wafers (resistivity of 1–3 Ω cm, 350 μm thick) with acetone, methanol and de-ionized (DI) water. After removing the silicon native oxide by immersing buffered oxide etchant (BOE, HF:NH4F = 7:1), the planar silicon substrate was dried by nitrogen (N2) gas flow. The cleaned silicon substrate was immersed into the solution of potassium hydroxide (KOH, 40 wt% solution), isopropyl alcohol (IPA, 99.9%) and DI water with 1:0.5:8.5 vol% at 75 °C for 40 min. To remove the remaining potassium ions on the silicon substrate, a mixed acid solution of hydrochloric acid (HCl, 36%), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2, 30%) and DI water with 1:1:5 vol% was used at 80 °C for 10 min. After immersing in BOE solution, 1 μm-thick SiO2 layer was deposited by using a plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PE-CVD, PEH-600) on the front of n-type silicon substrate as a diffusion barrier. For the formation of back surface field (BSF), the phosphorus source (P509, Filmtronics, Inc.) was spin-coated on a dummy c-Si wafer, and then baked at 200 °C for 20 min to remove the organic solvent. The backside of n-Si substrate was positioned to face the P509 coated dummy wafer to form a BSF layer. The doping process was carried out in a tube furnace under a mixed ambient of O2 (125 sccm) and N2 (500 sccm) at 900 °C. After the formation of BSF layer, phosphorus silicate glass that formed during the SOD process was removed by BOE solution. Then top electrode patterns were fabricated through the photolithography process at the front side of substrate. 20 nm-thick MoOx/200 nm-thick Al films were deposited to use as front hole contacts, and 200 nm-thick Al film was deposited as a rear electrode. After the lift-off process with acetone treatment, 20 nm-thick MoOx/100 nm-thick MgF2 films were deposited on whole area of device by using thermal evaporator. The active area of the solar cells was 1 cm2.


The photovoltaic properties of fabricated solar cells were investigated using a solar simulator (Class AAA, Oriel Sol3A, Newport) under AM 1.5 G illumination. Incident flux was measured using a calibrated power meter, and double-checked using a NREL-calibrated solar cell (PV Measurements, Inc.). EQE was measured using a Xe light source and a monochromator in the wavelengths range of 400–1100 nm. Optical reflection measurements were performed over wavelengths of 400–1100 nm using a UV-Vis/NIR spectrophotometer (Cary 5000, Agilent) equipped with a 110 mm integrating sphere to account for total light (diffuse and specular) reflected from the samples.


To understand the explicit role of the ITO layer on the CSC of n-Si solar cells, two MoOx/n-Si photovoltaic devices were fabricated (Fig. 1a and b), i.e., the ITO-deposited and ITO-free devices, with the only difference between the two devices being the presence of ITO as the top transparent electrode. The front metal electrodes of both devices comprised a single busbar and five fingers, with an identical spacing of 1.6 mm between fingers. The Experimental section provides the details regarding the fabrication of both devices. The ITO-free MoOx/n-Si solar cell exhibited a PCE (1.4%) significantly less than that observed for the ITO-deposited device (9.8%; Fig. 1c). In particular, the Jsc and FF values (6.1 mA cm−2 and 41.0%, respectively) for the ITO-free device were extremely less than those of the ITO-deposited device (23.7 mA cm−2 and 75.6%, respectively). However, Voc (548 mV) was constant regardless of the ITO layer. These results can be explained by the mechanism of photocarrier separation and collection in MoOx/n-Si solar cells. After the formation of the MoOx film on n-Si, the energy band of n-Si bended downward because of the large gap between the work function of MoOx and the Fermi level of n-Si, leading to the accumulation of holes at the interface between MoOx and n-Si. This hole accumulation led to the formation of an inversion layer. Because of the generation of the built-in potential between the inversion layer and n-Si substrate, the electrons and holes were separated and moved toward n-Si and MoOx, respectively. With the formation of the inversion layer regardless of ITO, the Voc values did not change irrespective of the deposition of the ITO layer on MoOx, indicating that photocarriers are successfully separated at the ITO-deposited and ITO-free devices. However, the separated carriers are not effectively collected by the ITO-free device as demonstrated by the internal quantum efficiency (IQE) as IQE corresponded to the ratio of the number of charge carriers collected by the solar cell to the number of photons absorbed by the cell (Fig. S3 in ESI). The IQE values for the ITO-free device were considerably less than those for the ITO-deposited device in a broad range of wavelengths, indicative of issues related to the transport and collection of carriers after separation.

The transport and collection mechanism of the separated carriers between the MoOx layer and n-Si substrate with and without the ITO layer was investigated by the comparison of the resistances for the possible collection paths. For the ITO-deposited MoOx/n-Si device, holes were collected through three possible paths, including the inversion, MoOx, and ITO layers (Fig. 1a). By contrast, the ITO-free device only exhibited two possible channels, i.e., the inversion and MoOx layers (Fig. 1b). As the separated holes preferentially move through a highly conductive path (i.e., the path with the lowest resistance), the individual sheet resistance values for the ITO, MoOx, and inversion layers must be compared. The transfer length method (TLM) was employed to estimate the sheet resistance values for the ITO, MoOx, and inversion layers. The Experimental section and Fig. S4 (ESI) provides the detailed TLM measurement. The sheet resistance values calculated for the ITO, MoOx, and inversion layers were 100, 1.6 × 104, and >1012 Ω sq−1, respectively. These values are similar to those reported previously. On the basis of the comparison of these sheet resistance values, the separated holes in the ITO-deposited device were assumed to pass through the ITO rather than the highly resistive inversion layer. By contrast, the holes should move through the inversion layer in the ITO-free devices. Therefore, the Jsc and FF values for the ITO-free MoOx/n-Si solar cell significantly decreased because of the high series resistance of the highly resistive inversion layer for hole collection. This result can be explained by the following equations:
(1)
(2)
where
I represents the total current, IL represents the light-generated current, V represents the voltage across the diode, I0 represents the dark saturation current, Rs represents the series resistance, q represents the electric charge of electrons, n represents the ideality factor; k represents the Boltzmann constant, T represents the temperature, ΔFF represents the reduction of fill factor, and FFp represents the pseudo-fill factor. As shown in eqn (1), the total current collected through the electrode decreased because of the significant increase in Rs, leading to the increase in the diode current. For highly efficient ITO-free solar cells, a front metal electrode should be designed to achieve an Rs value as low as those observed for ITO-deposited solar cells.

The key to successfully realizing ITO-free MoOx/n-Si solar cells is the efficient collection of the photoinduced holes by the metal electrode without any carrier loss caused by the extremely high resistance of the inversion layer. For efficient hole collection in the ITO-free MoOx/n-Si solar cells, two main factors for the metal electrode should be considered. First, the resistive losses occurring during the transport of carriers on the inversion layer must be minimized. Second, the optical absorption in the Si substrate via the decrease in the shading loss of the metal electrode must be maximized. On the basis of these factors, a micro-grid electrode was designed (Fig. 2a) with a width of 2–3 μm was designed, corresponding to the resolution limit of a conventional photolithography process for minimizing the shading loss of a metal electrode.
The resistive and optical power losses in MoOx/n-Si solar cells were calculated according to the grid spacing (Fig. 2b). ESI Note 1 provides details for the calculation processes of each power loss. With the decrease in the electrode spacing, the resistive power loss decreased because of the reduced path length (i.e., half the electrode spacing) of the holes, corresponding to the transporting distance until their collection by the electrode. However, with the decrease in the electrode spacing, the optical power loss increased because the area covered by the metal electrode increased, as well as the quantity of the reflected light. By contrast, with the increase in the grid spacing, the optical power loss decreased, and the resistive power loss significantly increased. When the spacing of the metal electrode was greater than 1000 μm, a majority of the generated power was lost because of the resistance of the MoOx/n-Si inversion layer. This result is consistent with the efficiency of the ITO-free device, in which the spacing of the finger electrodes is 1.6 mm (Fig. 1). A trade-off relationship existed for each power loss, and the total power loss was minimized at a spacing of 192 μm.
To confirm the power loss calculation results, an ITO-free MoOx/n-Si solar cell was fabricated by the application of a metal grid electrode without the ITO layer. The width of the fabricated metal electrode was 2–3 μm, and the spacing was adjusted to 50, 100, 200, and 400 μm. Fig. 2c shows the trend of the Rs and FF values with respect to the electrode spacing. With the decrease in the electrode spacing, FF increased from 65.7% to 77.9%, whereas Rs decreased from 1.89 to 0.98 Ω. This result is consistent with the resistive power loss results shown in Fig. 2b. In other words, an increased number of holes are recombined because of the resistance of the MoOx/n-Si inversion layer with the increase in the electrode spacing. With a wide electrode spacing, Jsc increased from 26.7 to 31.8 mA cm−2 (Fig. 2d). This result is also in agreement with the optical loss analyzed in Fig. 2b. However, the Voc values were almost constant as only the electrode spacing was changed without affecting the MoOx/n-Si junction. Table 1 summarizes the photovoltaic parameters of devices with different grid spacings for the metal electrode. Hence, the ITO-free MoOx/n-Si solar cell exhibits the highest PCE of 12.5%, with a metal grid electrode spacing of 200 μm; this PCE value represents 28% higher efficiency compared to the ITO-deposited device discussed in Fig. 1. The ITO-free device with an optimized metal electrode exhibited a PCE (12.5%) greater than that observed for the ITO-deposited device (9.8%). Both devices exhibited similar Voc values; however, the ITO-free device exhibited a higher Jsc.
Electrode

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
50 μm spacing
26.7 (26.4)
0.558 (0.551)
77.9 (77.4)
11.6 (11.2)
100 μm spacing
27.7 (27.7)
0.558 (0.556)
76.5 (76.2)
11.8 (11.6)
200 μm spacing
29.5 (29.2)
0.558 (0.551)
75.7 (74.9)
12.5 (12.1)
400 μm spacing
31.8 (31.4)
0.548 (0.548)
65.7 (67.4)
11.5 (11.4)
50 nm ITO
23.7 (22.3)
0.548 (0.548)
75.6 (75.8)
9.8 (9.3)
To understand the reason for the increased photocurrent observed for the ITO-free device, the total absorbance of the device and the external quantum efficiency (EQE) for ITO-deposited and ITO-free devices were estimated (Fig. 3a and b). In addition, the absorption loss of each layer formed in the device was calculated. First, the total absorption of the device before the formation of the metal electrode (gray dashed line) was estimated. Then, the optical loss originating from the metal reflection (gray filled area) was verified by the subtraction of the absorption of the device with the metal electrode from that without the metal electrode. In addition, the parasitic absorption losses originating from the ITO (red filled area) and MoOx layers (black filled area), which were indicated below the absorption spectrum of the device with the metal electrode (red solid line), were calculated. Notably, a large difference was observed between the measured EQE spectrum (sky blue solid line) and the spectrum-subtracted optical losses (olive solid line). This difference revealed the electrical loss originating from the bulk recombination in the Si substrate. Optical losses were quantified by the integration of each absorption spectrum at 300–1100 nm under AM 1.5 G illumination according to the following equation:
(3)
where
Φ(λ) and q represent the photon flux and the electric charge of electrons, respectively. Assuming that there are no optical and electrical losses, the theoretical Jsc value for a silicon solar cell absorbing all of the photons at 300–1100 nm is 43.36 mA cm−2.

For the ITO-deposited device (Fig. 3a), the Jsc loss caused by the surface reflection of the device without the metal electrode corresponded to 6.4 mA cm−2. Then, the incident light was also lost by the reflection of the busbar and finger metal electrode. The rate of absorption reduction caused by the metal reflection almost coincided with the area ratio of the metal electrode (16%). Owing to the reflection from the busbar and finger metal electrode, Jsc decreased to 6.2 mA cm−2. The red region revealed the absorption of the ITO layer; in particular, it was more significant at a wavelength of <360 nm, corresponding to the band gap of ITO (∼3.5 eV). Owing to the parasitic absorption of the ITO layer, a photocurrent of 1.8 mA cm−2 was wasted. For the MoOx layer (black filled area), a relatively low absorption loss of 0.28 mA cm−2 was observed because of a band gap of 3.3 eV for the MoOx layer, as well as an extremely thin layer (thickness of 20 nm). Even though the optical losses by the metal electrode and oxide layers were eliminated, the absorption spectrum of silicon (olive solid line) did not match the recorded EQE spectrum (sky blue solid line). Photons corresponding to a Jsc of 4.5 mA cm−2 were recombined in bulk silicon. The increased recombination occurred at a long wavelength region. This result can be explained by the fact that the ITO-deposited device is limited by the rear-surface recombination because of the lack of back surface field (BSF) and rear passivation layer. On the basis of the EQE spectrum, the ITO-deposited device exhibited a Jsc of 24.1 mA cm−2; this value is consistent with the Jsc measured by the solar simulator.
For the ITO-free device, a Jsc of 10.0 mA cm−2 was lost by the surface reflection of the substrate without the micro-grid electrode (Fig. 3b). The Jsc losses caused by reflection from the optimized grid-metal electrode and by the MoOx layer corresponded to only 0.51 and 0.27 mA cm−2, respectively. The ITO-free device exhibited a Jsc of 29.0 mA cm−2 based on the EQE spectrum, indicating that a Jsc of 3.6 mA cm−2 is lost as a result of recombination.
To compare the optical losses in both devices, the Jsc losses for each layer are shown in Fig. 3c, except those for bulk silicon recombination. The total optical loss for the ITO-deposited device was 14.71 mA cm−2; this value is greater than that observed for the ITO-free device (10.78 mA cm−2). The surface reflection for the ITO-deposited device exhibited an optical loss of 6.4 mA cm−2, which was less than that observed for the ITO-free device (10.0 mA cm−2). This result can be explained by the presence of ITO (Fig. S5 in ESI). When the thickness of the film is an odd multiple of one quarter-wavelength of light, the reflected waves from the surfaces interfere to cancel each other, which is the destructive interference. Because of the 50 nm-thick ITO layer on MoOx/Si substrate, the destructive interference occurs at the longer wavelength compared to ITO-free device (i.e., MoOx/Si substrate without ITO layer). In other words, the antireflection coating (ARC) effect by the ITO layer leads to the decrease in the incident light reflection on the front surface. However, compared to the ITO-deposited device, the ITO-free device did not exhibit optical loss because of ITO absorption. In addition, the ITO-free device exhibited a considerably lower Jsc loss with the optimized metal electrode. The optimized metal electrode exhibited a significantly lower Jsc loss (0.51 mA cm−2) compared to the ITO-deposited device (6.23 mA cm−2). Notably, the Jsc loss for the optimized metal electrode was even less than that of ITO (1.8 mA cm−2) because of the superior transmittance of the optimized metal electrodes (Fig. S6 in ESI). The Jsc loss by the MoOx layer in the ITO-free device (0.27 mA cm−2) was almost the same as that in the ITO-deposited device (0.28 mA cm−2). Hence, the Jsc losses caused by the oxide layers and metal electrode for the ITO-deposited device (8.31 mA cm−2) are considerably greater than those for the ITO-free device (0.78 mA cm−2). Although the ITO-free device exhibited a surface reflection higher than that of ITO-deposited device, it exhibited a higher Jsc owing to the absence of parasitic ITO absorption and significant reduction of the reflection loss due to the optimized metal electrode. If the surface reflection of the ITO-free device was decreased by the ARC layer with minimized parasitic absorption, the difference in the Jsc values between the ITO-free and ITO-deposited devices would be greater. Hence, the ITO-free device demonstrates potential for acquiring improved Jsc if the surface reflection is reduced.
To maximize the light absorption of ITO-free MoOx/n-Si solar cells, the n-Si wafer was textured with a pyramidal structure, followed by the deposition as an antireflection (AR) coating layer. A textured surface is effective for minimizing the surface reflection and increasing the optical path length. In addition, a quarter-wavelength AR coating can decrease surface reflections via the decrease in the mismatch between the refractive indices of air and MoOx/n-Si. Herein, magnesium fluoride (MgF2) was used as the AR coating layer because of its extremely large band gap (>10.8 eV), leading to the absence of parasitic absorption. A thin MgF2 layer was thermally evaporated on the MoOx layer. Because of the low-temperature deposition process of the MgF2 layer, the MoOx/n-Si junction would not be damaged during the deposition of the AR layer, and the MoOx/n-Si solar cell surface could be exposed to ion bombardment during ITO sputtering for ITO-deposited solar cells. In addition, the rear side of the device was investigated for efficiently collecting the electrons via the insertion of a thin lithium fluoride (LiF) film or a highly doped n-Si layer between n-Si and the rear electrode (Fig. S7 in ESI). Compared to the devices with the LiF film, the highly doped n-Si layer exhibited the highest PCE related to the BSF effect, as well as the improved ohmic contact between n-Si and the rear electrode. Fig. 4a shows the schematic of the optimized ITO-free MoOx/n-Si solar cell. MoOx (yellow) was deposited to generate the hole inversion layer on the entire surface of the n-Si wafer, followed by the formation of the MgF2 (red) layer on the MoOx layer as the AR coating. As the top electrode, the Al micro-grid electrode with a spacing of 200 μm and width of 3 μm was deposited on the pyramidal textured n-Si wafer. The BSF (cyan) layer and Al electrode were formed on the entire area of the back side. The scanning electron microscope images shown in Fig. 4b–d revealed the successful formation of the micro-grid and MgF2/MoOx layer between the pyramidal Si structures.

Fig. 4e shows the current density–voltage (J–V) curves for the optimized ITO-free device with the pyramid-textured Si substrate. Table 2 summarizes the photovoltaic parameters of Voc, Jsc, FF, and PCE in order to compare the planar devices with and without ARC and BSF. With the addition of the MgF2 layer on the planar ITO-free MoOx/n-Si solar cell, Jsc improved from 29.5 to 34.5 mA cm−2, mainly related to the decreased light reflection of the silicon substrate. In addition, Voc improved from 0.548 to 0.588 mV, corresponding to the decrease in the rear surface recombination between Al and n-Si due to the BSF layer. Hence, PCE is improved from 12.5% to 14.9%. Using the textured Si substrate for minimizing the surface reflection, the Jsc value increased from 34.5 to 37.1 mA cm−2 as expected. In addition, Voc increased from 588 to 608 mV, which can be understood from eqn (4):
(4)
where
kB represents the Boltzmann constant and J0 represents the saturation current density. With increasing Jsc, Voc increased according to eqn (4). Furthermore, the implied open-circuit voltage (iVoc) values for 100 nm MgF2, 20 nm MoOx, and n-Si stacks with pyramidal (623 mV) and planar structures (601 mV) were estimated using quasi-steady state photoconductance to support the Voc increase (Fig. S8 in ESI). This result is consistent with the Voc increase observed for a pyramidal device. Finally, the optimized photovoltaic device exhibited an efficiency of 17.0%; this value is the highest PCE obtained for an ITO-free MoOx/n-Si solar cell. In other words, the PCE for ITO-free MoOx/n-Si solar cells can be successfully increased without the degradation of photovoltaic performance. In addition, an ITO-deposited MoOx/n-Si solar cell with a micro-grid electrode, BSF, and pyramidal textured n-Si wafer was fabricated (Fig. S9). The ITO-deposited device exhibited a PCE of 16.5%, a Jsc of 35.6 mA cm−2, a Voc of 598 mV, and an FF of 77.5%. For the ITO-deposited device, carriers passed through the ITO layer with a high conductivity (Fig. 1d), leading to an FF greater than that observed for the ITO-free device. This result can also be explained by the fact that the Rs value for the ITO-deposited device (0.95 Ω) was less than that observed for the ITO-free device (1.39 Ω). Despite the slightly lower value of FF (75.3%), however, the ITO-free device exhibited a PCE greater than that observed for the ITO-deposited device because of the improved Jsc and Voc values. This result is mainly related to the elimination of parasitic light absorption originating from the ITO layer. Notably, the EQE significantly improved (>60%) in the short-wavelength region compared with that observed for the ITO-deposited device (>30%; Fig. 4f and S9). This comparison between the ITO-deposited and ITO-free devices revealed that the micro-grid electrode enables the fabrication of the MoOx/n-Si solar cells without the ITO layer, as well as the enhancement of PCE with superior UV response.

Device

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Planar
29.5 (29.2)
0.558 (0.551)
75.7 (74.9)
12.5 (12.1)
Planar with BSF and ARC
34.5 (34.2)
0.588 (0.583)
76.1 (75.8)
14.9 (14.7)
Pyramidal with BSF and ARC
37.1 (36.6)
0.608 (0.601)
75.3 (75.7)
17.0 (16.6)

In summary, highly efficient (17.0%) MoOx/n-Si solar cells were fabricated by the integration of a micro-grid electrode without the use of an ITO contact. On the basis of the analysis of the carrier transport at the MoOx/n-Si junction, the photovoltaic performance of ITO-free MoOx/n-Si solar cells was limited by the extremely high resistance (1.6 × 104 Ω sq−1) of the inversion layer, which was the carrier collection path. A micro-grid metal electrode that can effectively collect carriers separated from the interface between MoOx and n-Si was designed to minimize the power loss during the photocarrier transport. With the metal grid electrode, the ITO-free MoOx/n-Si solar cells exhibited a PCE 28% greater than that observed for the ITO-deposited cells because of the absence of the parasitic absorption originating from the ITO layer, indicating that the developed electrode structure is optimal as the top electrode for minimizing the carrier loss and maximizing light absorption. Thus, the application of the optimized metal electrode to MoOx/n-Si solar cells provides an approach for the prevention of the use of a rare indium material and opens a unique avenue for the remarkable improvement of PCE for MoOx/n-Si solar cells.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the 2018 Research Fund (1.180006.01) of UNIST (Ulsan National Institute of Science & Technology). It was also supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korean Government (MSIP) (2017R1A2B4002738, NRF-2015R1D1A1A01059726 & 2017M1A2A2087812) and the research and development program of the Korea Institute of Energy Research (B7-2426). This work was also supported by the New Renewable Energy Core Technology Development Project of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) granted financial resource from the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy, Republic of Korea (No. 20183010013900). It was also supported in part by Global Research Laboratory Program (Grant No 2009-00439) and by Max Planck POSTECH/KOREA Research Initiative Program (Grant No 2016K1A4A4A01922028) through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fig. S1–S9, supplementary note 1. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta11220g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019