 DOI: 10.1039/C2CC33517D
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8377-8379

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Jessica
Lohrman
,

Chenxi
Zhang
,

Wei
Zhang
* and 

Shenqiang
Ren
*

Department of Chemistry, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045, USA. E-mail: shenqiang@ku.edu; Tel: +1 785-864-2315

Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA. E-mail: wei.zhang@colorado.edu

Received
15th May 2012
, Accepted 25th June 2012
First published on 27th June 2012
We demonstrate noncovalent electrostatic and π–π interactions to assemble semiconducting single wall carbon nanotube (SWCNT)–C60@COP nanohybrids. The C60@COP light harvesting complexes bind strongly to SWCNTs due to significant π–π-stacking between C60, the aromatic dicarbazolylacetylene moieties and the nanotube surfaces.

Semiconducting single wall carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) have unique electronic and optical properties for diverse optoelectronic applications, including photovoltaics, photodetectors and photoswitches. SWCNT–porphyrin molecular complexes are promising candidates for light harvesting applications, due to their long-lived charge separated states, and efficient charge-transport behavior of SWCNTs. Sophisticated self-organization of the natural porphyrin photosystems serves as a model for artificial photosynthetic systems that require efficient energy and electron transfers. Accordingly, the synthesis and supramolecular self-assembly of a variety of porphyrin pigments have been widely explored with the aim of constructing efficient photochemical and optoelectronic devices. However, it is usually challenging and time-consuming to produce such complex supramolecules in a reasonable yield. The molecular-scale engineering of these materials also requires an understanding of their noncovalent interactions. To overcome those challenges in the construction of complex nanohybrid light harvesting systems and to further explore the great potential of these intriguing nanomaterial assemblies in photovoltaic applications, we report herein a novel strategy to form a new class of nanohybrids, namely the encapsulation of C60 into a shape-persistent covalent organic polyhedron (COP) to afford C60@COP core–shell complexes, followed by their binding to the surface of SWCNTs in a “side-to-face” fashion through π–π stacking interactions. In the assembled C60@COP–SWCNT nanohybrids, C60 and SWCNTs are positioned at close distance. The solar cell study revealed the great potential of such nanohybrid materials in photovoltaic applications.

Given the recent advances of dynamic covalent chemistry (DCC) in highly efficient construction of well-defined, thermodynamically favored 2-D or 3-D molecular architectures, we have successfully accomplished the synthesis of a series of macrocyclic and cage compounds through imine or olefin metathesis. Very recently by utilizing alkyne metathesis, we also achieved the one-step synthesis of a shape-persistent porphyrin-based COP consisting of only aromatic moieties in its backbone structure. The COP-5 (Fig. 1) was prepared from tetra-substituted porphyrin monomers, catalyzed by our newly developed multidentate Mo(VI) carbyne catalyst. The unique combination of the conjugated system and the rigidity of this COP molecule renders its rapid and strong binding with C60 to form the self-assembled C60@COP complex. Stable suspensions of C60@COP–SWCNT were generated by simply stirring a 1,2-dichlorobenzene solution of C60@COP and SWCNTs under an argon atmosphere for 24 h. The π–π interaction between the C60@COP complex and the SWCNTs results in the formation of three-component nanohybrids (Fig. 2a). The cage molecule we used consists of only rigid, aromatic building blocks, and it does not have too much conformational flexibility. But the four side arms indeed have some rotational freedom when they interact with SWCNTs. The corresponding highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy levels were calculated using Eox and Ered (onset) from the cyclic voltammetry measurements in solution of C60@COP (for details see Fig. S1, ESI). Based on cyclic voltammetry results, the C60@COP complex shows EHOMO = −5.32 eV, Egap = 1.2 eV and ELUMO = −4.12 eV. Fig. 2b shows the band diagram with HOMO/LUMO levels of C60@COP and SWCNT. Regarding to type-II heterojunction solar cells, these two materials can be used as a photoactive layer.
Valuable insights into structural features were obtained by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM). Representative TEM images of the C60@COP/SWCNT nanohybrids are shown in Fig. 3. Clearly, SWCNT debundling is far from quantitative, as SWCNT bundles with diameters ranging from 2 to 10 nm are present. Regardless of the presence of SWCNT bundles, there is clear evidence that individual C60@COP (core–shell) complexes are immobilized on SWCNT surfaces. Importantly, there was no evidence for the formation of aggregated C60@COP complexes. It has been widely accepted that porphyrins bind strongly to SWCNTs in a face-to-face fashion through π–π stacking interactions. However, the computer modeling of the C60@COP–SWCNT assembly shows that the C60@COP binds the SWCNT through two bis(carbazolyl)acetylene side arms (Fig. 2c), instead of through the porphyrin panel. The simulated distance between the bottom of C60 and the SWCNT surface is 0.3 nm. This is consistent with the observed short distance (<0.5 nm) between C60 and SWCNT from HRTEM investigation (Fig. 3b and Fig. S2, ESI). This represents one of rare, if any, binding modes of porphyrin-containing molecules with SWCNTs. Such type of binding results in a close distance between the C60@COP complex (particularly C60) and the SWCNT, thus allowing efficient electron transfer to occur between the C60@COP pigment complex and the attached SWCNT, as demonstrated below. Moreover, the flexible noncovalent interaction may allow the attached pigment complex to have considerable freedom in its orientation and thus facilitate interactions between pigments. The supramolecular assembly of the C60@COP complex and the SWCNT creates a type-II heterojunction interface by forming the noncovalent bonding. As such, the SWCNTs will be particularly attractive scaffolds because of their highly ordered carbon structures and well-defined interfacial band offset with the C60@COP complex. The systematic preparation and characterization of both the individual building blocks and the nanohybrid in solution and thin film are ultimately beneficial for the understanding of optoelectronic interactions in solution-processed solar cells.
UV/Vis and photoluminescence spectra are often used to quantify supramolecular interactions in the light-harvesting complex. Further evidence for the formation of C60@COP–SWCNT nanohybrids was obtained from spectroscopic investigations of pure COP-5, C60@COP complex, COP-5–SWCNT, and C60@COP–SWCNT (Fig. 4). In line with the porphyrin, the absorption maxima of COP-5, which are ascribed to the electronic transition across the band gap, are clearly visible in the 300–700 nm range. A comparison of porphyrin led to continuously red-shifting maxima due to the increased conjugation length of COP. In Fig. 4a, absorption features of the porphyrin COP-5 with an absorption maximum at 440 nm are depicted. In the absorption spectrum of COP-5–SWCNT, the signatures of the two constituents, that is, the COP-5 and SWCNT (ESI), are discernible. Importantly, the absorption in the region between 450 and 900 nm appeared as a result of the introduction of SWCNTs. Coupling the C60@COP complex to the SWCNT imposes, however, notable changes to the characteristic C60 band-gap transitions. In the absorption spectrum of the C60@COP–SWCNT nanohybrids (Fig. 4a), C60@COP transitions are registered in the ultraviolet and visible range, at 350, 440, 530, 565 and 600 nm. Transitions in the visible and in particular in the near-infrared range correspond to suspended and sufficiently debundled SWCNTs, as optical transitions between van Hove singularities become discernible. Notably, the characteristic C60@COP bandgap absorption is superimposed onto SWCNT transitions. Owing to the importance of the charge transfer in the light harvesting complex, we performed emission quenching experiments with COP-5, C60@COP and C60@COP–SWCNT with excitation at 350 nm (Fig. 4b). Excitation at 350 nm is preferential for π–π* transitions of COP-5 and brings about fluorescence peaks at 600, 660, and 720 nm. All porphyrin COP-5 samples display bright luminescence. The excitation spectra of the luminescence at 350 nm led to features that are in excellent agreement with ground-state absorption features including a band gap onset at 650 nm (see Fig. 4a). The underlying quenching mechanism is in line with the fact that now the charge transfer within the C60@COP–SWCNT assembly, rather than that within the C60@COP complex, dominates. Most significant is, however, nearly quantitative quenching of the band-gap luminescence by increasing the SWCNT loading (3 wt% vs. 1 wt%).
Central to the understanding of the exciton and charge carrier dynamics in the C60@COP–SWCNT nanohybrid active layer is the study of the electrical and optical properties of fabricated devices, so we next investigated the dependence of their performance on photoactive materials and SWCNT loading. Fig. 5a shows the operating characteristics of C60@COP and C60@COP–SWCNT hybrid devices at different nanotube concentrations; we report the complete set of results in Table S2 (ESI). The short-circuit current (Jsc) is observed to increase with nanotube loading at low SWCNT weight concentrations (1 wt%), until a peak value of JSC = 2.34 mA cm−2 is achieved at 3 wt%. The open circuit voltage (Voc) is dictated by the LUMO and HOMO band offset between the acceptor C60@COP and donor SWCNT, respectively. It agrees well with the band levels of the C60@COP complex from the CV measurement. Neither the COP-5–SWCNT nor the C60–SWCNT system shows promising photovoltaic performance (Fig. S3, ESI), thus demonstrating the uniqueness and great importance of the C60@COP–SWCNT nanohybrid system. The experimental results also showed that the solar cell performance is highly dependent on the sequence of the three component mixing (COP-5, C60 and SWCNT) in solution (Fig. S2 and S3, ESI), which is presumably due to the effect of SWCNTs on the COP–C60 complex binding: the initial π–π stacking between COP-5 and SWCNTs may impede the further C60 binding. Only the preformed C60@COP could provide a type-II heterojunction with the SWCNT component. Notably, for the best hybrid device with 1 wt% and 3 wt% SWCNT, we measured an equal AM1.5 power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 0.16%. Though showing a higher Jsc, high loading of SWCNT (3 wt%) does not guarantee higher PCE due to the decreased fill factor (FF). The decrease of FF results from the reduced shunt resistance or fast recombination from SWCNT bundling at relatively high 3 wt% loading, which is confirmed by non-uniformly distributed percolation morphology (Fig. 5b and c).
In summary, by virtue of supramolecular π–π interactions, SWCNTs and the C60@COP complex form light-harvesting complexes, which form a novel type of versatile donor–acceptor nanohybrids, SWCNT–C60@COP. The porphyrin-containing COP–C60 complex (C60@COP) binds to SWCNTs in a “side-to-face” fashion through its two bicarbazolylacetylene side arms, which represents a different binding mode from those conventional cases where porphyrin binds to SWCNTs in a “face-to-face” fashion. The complementary use of electron microscopic and spectroscopic techniques confirmed the hierarchical integration of the electronically coupled constituents, namely the C60@COP complex and SWCNTs. A thorough photophysical investigation (i.e., absorption and photoluminescence quenching measurements) sheds light on the formation of a type-II heterojunction for the solution processed excitonic solar cells. To this end, we constructed a solar cell comprised of a spun-cast photoactive thin film of C60@COP–SWCNT. Under AM1.5 conditions, a short circuit current of 1.4 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage of 0.47 V, a fill factor of 24%, and an efficiency of 0.16% were measured for this setup at 1 wt% SWCNT loading. We believe that the current results not only document the optoelectronic processes in the complex, but also sketch a potent alternative for fabricating efficient photoactive molecular devices.
S. R. thanks University of Kansas for startup financial support, New Faculty General Research Fund (NFGRF) and a subcontract from Department of Energy award (DESC0005448). W. Z. thanks the National Science Foundation (DMR-1055705 and CBET-1033255) and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) for funding support. The authors thank Dr Hai Long for his help with the computer modeling and Nano-C. Inc. for the C60 sample.
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Electrochemical characterization, additional TEM images, current–voltage characteristics of an s-SWCNT–C60@COP solar cell. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cc33517d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012