 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA09724K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1539-1547


Runsheng
Mai
,

Xiayan
Wu
,

Yue
Jiang
*,

Yuying
Meng
,

Baiquan
Liu
*,

Xiaowen
Hu
,

Jean
Roncali
*,

Guofu
Zhou
,

Jun-Ming
Liu
,

Krzysztof
Kempa
 and 

Jinwei
Gao
*

Institute for Advanced Materials, Academy of Advanced Optoelectronics, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Quantum Engineering and Quantum Materials, South China Normal University, Guangzhou 510006, P. R. China. E-mail: yuejiang@m.scn.edu.cn; gaojinwei@m.scnu.edu.cn

Sun Yat-Sen University, School of Chemistry, Guangzhou, 510275, P. R. China

Luminous Centre of Excellence for Semiconductor Lighting and Displays, School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798, Singapore. E-mail: bqliu@ntu.edu.sg

Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Optical Information Materials and Technology, Institute of Electronic Paper Displays, South China Academy of Advanced Optoelectronics, South China Normal University, Guangzhou 510006, P. R. China

Moltech-Anjou CNRS UMR 6200, University of Angers, 2 Bd Lavoisier, Angers, 49045, France. E-mail: jeanroncali@gmail.com

Laboratory of Solid State Microstructures, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, P. R. China

Department of Physics, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts 02467, USA

Shenzhen Guohua Optoelectronics Tech. Co. Ltd., Shenzhen 518110, P. R. China

Supramolecular Organic and Organometallic Chemistry Center, Babes-Bolyai University, 11 Arany Janos Str., 400028 Cluj-Napoca, Romania

Received
9th October 2018
, Accepted 6th December 2018
First published on 17th December 2018
We demonstrated an efficient multi-functional material, (E)-1,2-bis(5,11-bis(2-(2-ethoxyethoxy)ethyl)-5,11-dihydroindolo[3,2-b]carbazol-2-yl)ethane (BEDCE), obtained by a simple and low-cost solution processing procedure, which can be used as both an interfacial layer in perovskite solar cells (PSCs) and a greenish-yellow light emitter in organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs). With excellent morphology and interfacial contact due to its elastomeric and amphiphilic properties, the BEDCE layer at the perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD interface in PSCs significantly improves the short-circuit current and fill factor, enhancing the efficiency from 17.20% to 19.02%. Besides, the first solution-processed non-doped greenish-yellow OLEDs based on elastomeric BEDCE show efficiency and luminance of 4.56 cd A−1 and 10320 cd m−2, respectively, which are among the highest performances. Thus, to the best of our knowledge, BEDCE is the first multi-functional material to be utilized in both OLEDs and PSCs with good performances, showing its promising potential applications for various devices.

Electronic devices based on organic conjugated materials (OCMs) that interconvert energy between light and electricity have obtained tremendous attention due to eco-friendliness, solution-processing, and easily tuned properties of OCMs such as organic solar cells (OSCs), organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), and organic field effect transistors (OFETs). It is well-known that the photovoltaic (PV) process is the reverse of electroluminescence (EL) and the PV and EL processes accordingly require different optical and electronic properties for a source material. Given that light must be absorbed in PV devices but emitted in EL devices, materials used in a PV device usually have opposite energetic level “ladders” to those used in an EL device. Therefore, among many OCMs, only few can be efficiently applied in both PV and EL devices. In other words, a material may be a good candidate for PV generation but it may not be considered as an electrically driven high-quality light emitter. From a more general perspective, searching for efficient multi-functional organic materials with excellent photon-to-charge and charge-to-photon conversions is of great importance. Such a material, which can solve multiple problems at the same time, is highly preferred for not only the reduction of overall cost with only one necessary apparatus, but also the possibility of more intelligent and multi-functional devices in the future.

In the molecular construction of OCMs, polycyclic aromatic systems with heteroatoms have received special attention because of their merits such as good stability, higher charge mobility, better solubility and versatility. Among them, indolo[3,2-b]carbazole (ICZ) (Scheme 1) is a planar and rigid π-conjugated system consisting of five fused rings with two unsubstituted pyrroles. The good thermal stabilities and excellent charge-transport properties of ICZ derivatives have led to extensive investigations on the possible applications of these compounds as hole-transport materials (HTMs) for perovskite solar cells (PSCs) and as hosts in OLEDs, thus providing the possibility of developing its derivatives for multi-opto-electronic devices.
Currently, PSCs with more than 22% power conversion efficiency (PCE) have been reported, but one of the most important components 2,2,7,7-tetrakis(N,N′-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9-spirobifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD) suffers from stability and cost issues. For example, the high crystallinity of Spiro-OMeTAD limits full coverage and interconnection of perovskite crystals. Furthermore, the dopant of Spiro-OMeTAD can inevitably diffuse into the perovskite crystals, thus shortening the lifetimes of the devices. In this context, intense research activity aiming at the development of new HTMs as alternatives to Spiro-OMeTAD, including carbazole derivatives such as ICZ, has been undertaken. Bao, Leclerc and coworkers investigated structure–hole–mobility (μh) relationships on OFETs based on a series of six ICZ derivatives. Getautis and Nazeeruddin reported two HTMs based on the ICZ block, leading to PSCs with PCE of ∼15%. On the other hand, other star-shaped carbazole derivatives also show promising potential as HTMs. However, it should be mentioned that Spiro-OMeTAD is an exceptional HTM in spite of some shortcomings, and it would be much better to search for an alternative strategy for correcting these shortcomings rather than utilizing other potential HTMs as a replacement. Interfacial engineering is an efficient way to reduce surface carrier recombination and enhance the efficiencies of PSCs. Recently, PVK and PMMA thin layers were inserted between Spiro-OMeTAD and the active layer in PSCs, enhancing the efficiency by increasing charge separation while protecting the device from moisture. Interfacial doping effect is also used for surface passivation and to reduce carrier losses. Li and coworkers employed the electron-acceptor tetrafluorotetracyanoquinodimethane (F4TCNQ) to improve PCE from 14.3% to 16.4%.
For charge-to-photon conversion, in the field of OLEDs, high-quality blue, green, and red emission devices have been fabricated and some of them have been commercialized. Nevertheless, less attention has been paid to yellow emission materials and devices, particularly those with greenish-yellow emission. In fact, until now, efficient and bright-yellow OLEDs have usually been constructed with host-dopant systems, which requires a precise and complicated fabrication process with high cost and inevitable microstructural phase separation in many cases. Recently, high-efficiency bright-yellow materials and low-cost processing techniques have become equivalently important. The solution-processing technique (e.g., spin-coating) offers many merits compared with the vacuum evaporation technology. However, the performance of solution-processed OLEDs lags behind that of devices obtained with vacuum evaporation. On account of potential applications in stage lights, signal lights, and high-quality RGBY-TVs, it is urgent to develop novel materials for efficient and bright solution-processed non-doped greenish-yellow OLEDs.
Herein, we report the synthesis and characterization of an efficient multi-functional ICZ-based material (E)-1,2-bis(5,11-bis(2-(2-ethoxyethoxy)ethyl)-5,11-dihydroindolo[3,2-b]carbazol-2-yl)ethane (BEDCE), an extended derivative of ICZ, on which four oligo-oxyethylene side chains have been introduced at the nitrogen atoms. We demonstrate the critical role of this material in both high-efficiency PSCs and bright greenish-yellow OLEDs accessible by a simple and low-cost solution processing procedure. A BEDCE layer at the perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD interface in PSCs significantly enhances the short-circuit current and fill factor, yielding the best efficiency up to 19.02%. Furthermore, long side chains inhibit the strong π–π stacking of ICZ blocks. The first solution-processed non-doped greenish-yellow OLEDs based on elastomeric BEDCE show efficiency and luminance of 4.56 cd A−1 and 10320 cd m−2, respectively, which are among the highest reported performances. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that a multi-functional material has been utilized in both OLEDs and PSCs with good performance, showing its promising potential applications for various devices.

The three-step synthesis of BEDCE is depicted in Scheme 1. ICZ was prepared as previously reported. N-alkylation was conducted in the presence of KOH with 2-(2-ethoxyethoxy)ethyl bromide to give compound 1 in 51% yield. Vilsmeier–Haack formylation of compound 1 with DMF and POCl3 in dioxane gave compound 2 in 75% yield. Finally, the target compound BEDCE was obtained in 59% yield by McMurry reaction. The detailed synthesis procedures and NMR and mass spectrometry results of compounds 1, 2 and BEDCE are shown in ESI (Fig. S1–S6).

The thermal behavior and stability of BEDCE were determined by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) (Fig. S7, ESI). The decomposition temperature (Td) is evaluated to be ∼380 °C, suggesting that BEDCE is stable enough for use in opto-electronic devices. The DSC trace exhibits a weak exothermic peak at 20 °C, corresponding to the glass transition temperature (Tg), which results in an elastomeric material at room temperature; this is in agreement with its naturally amorphous phase. These results indicate that the incorporation of four oligo-oxyethylene chains on the nitrogen atoms introduces large steric hindrances, modulating the strong π–π stacking tendency of ICZ skeletons.

Fig. 1a shows the UV-vis absorption spectra of BEDCE and the corresponding results are listed in Table 1. The solution spectrum of BEDCE exhibits two absorption bands with maxima (λmax) at 284 and 338 nm corresponding to π–π* transitions of ICZ and ICZ vinyl, followed by a low-intensity band with λmax at 446 nm, which is assigned to the entire π conjugated system. The spectrum of solution-cast thin film shows broadening of the absorption bands with 4–6 nm bathochromic shifts of the absorption maxima. These slight redshifts indicate relatively weak intermolecular interactions. A band gap (Eg) of ∼2.36 eV is estimated from the long-wavelength absorption edge of the solid-state spectrum. Fig. 1b shows the PL spectra of BEDCE in tetrahydrofuran (THF) solution and as a thin film spun-cast on quartz under monochromatic irradiation of 284 nm. The solution spectrum shows two emission bands with maxima at 426 and 531 nm due to the ICZ vinyl unit and π-conjugated system, respectively, with PL quantum yield (ΦPL) of 88.1%. In the solid-state spectrum, the intensity of the band at 426 nm decreases considerably presumably because of intermolecular interactions, whereas the band in the 500–600 nm region results in an intense greenish-yellow light.
Compd.
BEDCE

a In CHCl3.
b In film.
c In 0.10 M Bu4NPF6/DCM, scan rate 50 mV s−1, reference SCE.


λ
max
 (nm)
284, 338, 446

ε (M−1 cm−1)
90000, 63000, 18000

λ
max
 (nm)
288, 340, 448

E
pa1, Epa2 (V)
0.44, 0.62
HOMO (eV)
−5.28
LUMO (eV)
−2.91

μ
h (cm2 V−1 s−1)
4.35 × 10−4
To examine the electrochemical properties of BEDCE, the cyclic voltammogram (CV) of BEDCE was recorded in dichloromethane (DCM) in the presence of 0.10 M tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate as the supporting electrolyte. The CV curve presents two quasi-reversible oxidation waves with anodic peak potentials (Epa1 and Epa2) of 0.44, 0.62 V (Fig. 1c and Table 1). The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy level (−5.28 eV) was estimated from the onset of the oxidation process; the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level (−2.91 eV) was evaluated using the sum of the optical band gap (Eg) and the HOMO level. The deeper HOMO level of BEDCE compared to that of Spiro-OMeTAD (−5.22 eV) can be expected to promote hole-injection from perovskite crystals. The hole mobilities of pristine BEDCE and Spiro-OMeTAD films were assessed by the space-charge limited current method (SCLC) on hole-only devices with a structure of indium tin oxide (ITO)/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS)/BEDCE/MnO3/Au (Fig. 1d). Spiro-OMeTAD was chemically doped in the same way as in PSCs (please see Method). As shown in Table 1, BEDCE presented higher mobility than Spiro-OMeTAD (4.35 × 10−4vs. 2.99 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively), indicating its excellent hole transporting capability.
In addition, it is also recognized that uniform and smooth morphology is highly favorable for improving the performance of PSCs. In particular, the grain boundaries of CH3NH3PbI3 layer and pinholes in the Spiro-OMeTAD layer caused by the crystallization process should be inhibited or otherwise passivated by an interfacial layer. The role of the BEDCE layer in improving microstructural quality can be clearly seen in Fig. 2, which shows the surface morphologies of pure perovskite film, perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD film, perovskite/BEDCE film, and perovskite/BEDCE/Spiro-OMeTAD film (scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images). The boundaries of CH3NH3PbI3 crystals are clearly shown in Fig. 2a. The deposition of Spiro-OMeTAD on perovskite crystals leads to smoother morphology, but the surface exhibits pinholes due to the strong tendency of Spiro-OMeTAD to crystallize (Fig. 2b). In contrast, when deposited on CH3NH3PbI3 crystals, BEDCE forms a continuous smooth surface (Fig. 2c). Finally, as shown in Fig. 2d, the deposition of Spiro-OMeTAD on a thin BEDCE film leads to improved homogeneity and compactness of the surface morphology, with no evidence of pinholes.
The remarkably improved morphology is most likely associated with the fact that the elastomeric quality of BEDCE allows close contact with Spiro-OMeTAD. Furthermore, the interface between BEDCE and Spiro-OMeTAD layers also allows the formation of an interfacial phase during subsequent device fabrication. These two factors together effectively limit the fast crystallization process of Spiro-OMeTAD, yielding smoother and denser layer morphology. The underlying mechanism can be explained by looking at the water contact angles of Spiro-OMeTAD and BEDCE layers deposited on a perovskite layer, as shown in Fig. S8 in the ESI. The contact angles of 85.4° vs. 83.5° for BEDCE and Spiro-OMeTAD layers, respectively, deposited on top of the perovskite layers indicate that BEDCE is slightly less hydrophilic than Spiro-OMeTAD. As shown in a previous study on materials based on triarylamines, long oligo-oxyethylene side chain substitution induces amphiphilic property in the resulting materials. This unexpected result suggests that the hydrophilic oligo-oxyethylene chains point downwards to the perovskite and form tight contact between BEDCE and perovskite layers, promoting the charge separation and transportation process in the perovskite layer and thus the whole structure.

Based on the above results, BEDCE was evaluated as an interfacial layer in PSCs of the following configuration: fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/BEDCE/Spiro-OMeTAD/Ag (schematically drawn in Fig. 3a and designated as cell 1). For comparison, a reference cell (cell 2) of the same configuration without BEDCE layer was fabricated by the same procedure. Fig. 3b shows the corresponding energy level diagram of cell 1. BEDCE shows a slightly higher HOMO level than Spiro-OMeTAD. Fig. 3c shows the colored SEM cross-sectional image of cell 1 before the deposition of an Ag electrode; an un-colored SEM image of the cross section of cell 1 is shown in Fig. S9. The thickness of BEDCE is ∼10 nm, whereas the thicknesses of the layers of m-TiO2, perovskite crystals and Spiro-OMeTAD are about 230, 250, and 325 nm, respectively. Moreover, consistent with the results shown in Fig. 2c, BEDCE fills the crystal boundaries and levels the surface, allowing better contact, which is beneficial for hole transportation and protecting perovskite crystals from ion diffusion.


Fig. 3d shows the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the best cells with or without BEDCE under AM 1.5 simulated solar illumination with an incident power light of 100 mW cm−2. The detailed photovoltaic parameters exhibiting the typical Gaussian distribution are summarized in Fig. 3f and S10 (ESI). The reference cell 2 gives the best PCE of 17.20% with open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.03 V, short-circuit current density (JSC) of 22.38 mA cm−2 and FF of 74.86%. The insertion of a thin layer of BEDCE between the perovskite crystals and Spiro-OMeTAD leads to significant improvement in photovoltaic characteristics with VOC of 1.02 V, JSC of 23.83 mA cm−2, and FF of 78.66%, leading to PCE of 19.02%. As expected, the smooth and pinhole-free morphology obtained due to insertion of BEDCE (Fig. 2d) results in higher FF.
As shown in Fig. 3e, both devices present external quantum efficiencies (EQE) higher than 80% in the 450–650 nm spectral range. The insertion of the BEDCE layer leads to improved response over the entire spectrum. Integration of these EQE spectra results in increase in JSC values from 20.16 mA cm−2 for the cell devoid of BEDCE to 21.99 mA cm−2 on insertion of the BEDCE layer. These values are in good agreement with the results obtained under white-light illumination. The results of electrochemical impedance spectrometry (EIS) (Fig. 4a) show that the introduction of a 10 nm layer of BEDCE in the device induces net decrease in transfer resistance (Rtr), which is the characteristic arc obtained in the high-frequency range (104 to 106 Hz), illustrating the lower electron–hole recombination rate at perovskite/BEDCE/Spiro-OMeTAD interfaces. This result, consistent with surface morphologies (Fig. 2), can explain the observed increase in FF.
The effect of interfacial hole-transporting layers on the photoluminescence of CH3NH3PbI3 was investigated by steady-state photoluminescence emission spectroscopy (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) on perovskite, perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD, and perovskite/BEDCE/Spiro-OMeTAD films on glass. Excitation wavelengths of 520 and 472 nm were used for PL and TRPL, respectively. As shown in Fig. 4b, the strong emission peak of CH3NH3PbI3 at 770–800 nm is quenched to a large extent by the deposition of Spiro-OMeTAD. The insertion of the BEDCE interfacial layer produces further quenching of photoluminescence, demonstrating that the photo-generated holes are efficiently extracted by the composite BEDCE/Spiro-OMeTAD hole-transporting layer, contributing to higher JSC and FF. This conclusion is further confirmed by TRPL measurements (Fig. 4c). The TRPL signal exhibits bi-exponential decay with a shorter-lived lifetime τ1 of 9.18 ns and a longer-lived lifetime τ2 of 73.64 ns for the pristine perovskite film; these values decrease to 4.24 ns and 21.59 ns after deposition of Spiro-OMeTAD and further decrease to 1.09 ns and 12.60 ns after insertion of a BEDCE layer between Spiro-OMeTAD and the perovskite film. This result is in accordance with the PL results, where both suggests a faster charge transfer efficiency after inserting a layer of BEDCE.
The stability tests of PSCs with or without BEDCE were conducted with humidity around 35% (Fig. S11, ESI). In two weeks, no clear degradation was observed. In addition, taking into account the blocking property of BEDCE from ion diffusion of the Spiro-OMeTAD layer, even longer stability could be obtained.

To evaluate the potential of BEDCE as an emitter in solution-processed non-doped OLEDs, an OLED of structure ITO/PEDOT:PSS (40 nm)/BEDCE/TpPyPB (50 nm)/Cs2CO3 (1 nm)/Al (100 nm) was fabricated (Fig. 5a), where ITO is the anode, PEDOT:PSS is the hole injection/transport layer, BEDCE is the greenish-yellow emitter, Cs2CO3 is the electron injection layer, and Al is the cathode. After careful consideration of electron transporting layer (ETL), 1,3,5-tri(p-pyrid-3-yl-phenyl)benzene (TpPyPB) was chosen (Fig. 5b) due to its (i) ultrahigh electron mobility of 7.9 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, which can efficiently transport electrons, and (ii) deep HOMO of −6.66 eV, which can effectively prevent hole leakage. The HOMO and LUMO energy levels of these materials are shown in Fig. 5c. The high hole mobility and small HOMO barrier of BEDCE with PEDOT:PSS (0.08 eV) allow holes to effectively reach the emitting layer. Moreover, the elastomeric structure and amphiphilic property of BEDCE allow it to easily form better interfacial contact with the below PEDOT:PSS and above TpPyPB layers, favoring charge injection into the emitting layer.

As shown in Fig. 6a, maximum current efficiency (CE) and EQE of 4.56 cd A−1 and 1.34%, respectively, are obtained. A maximum power efficiency (PE) of 2.05 lm W−1 was measured (Fig. S12, ESI) with a maximum luminance of 10320 cd m−2 (Fig. 6b). The electroluminescence (EL) spectrum of BEDCE is shown in Fig. 6c and the Commission International de I'Eclairage (CIE) coordinates of (0.36, 0.59) are displayed in Fig. 6d. Since these CIE coordinates are far from the National Television System Committee (NTSC) coordinates for green color (0.21, 0.71), it can be ascribed to greenish-yellow emission, which is in accordance with previous results. These results show that an efficient and bright solution-processed greenish-yellow OLED was fabricated. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first OLED based on elastomeric ICZ materials. Furthermore, the efficiency and luminance are among the highest reported so far for solution-processed non-doped greenish-yellow fluorescent OLEDs. By further enhancing molecular engineering and device engineering (e.g., optimizing charge balance via selection of ETL with higher LUMO to reduce the electron transport barrier; improving hole transport into the active layer by using a more suitable hole injection layer), much higher efficiency can be expected. These results suggest that further molecular engineering can lead to interesting new emitting materials derived from this basic ICZ structure.

In summary, an efficient and multi-functional ICZ-based compound was successfully synthesized in good yield by a three-step method. The grafting of four polyether side chains on the molecule confers amphiphilic and elastomeric properties to the resulting BEDCE material. The insertion of a thin interfacial layer of BEDCE between perovskite and standard Spiro-OMeTAD hole-transporting material ensures full coverage of perovskite crystals and filling of crystal boundaries, resulting in the elimination of pinholes in the quickly crystallized Spiro-OMeTAD; we also observed increase in FF from 74.86% to 78.66% and in PCE from 17.20% to 19.02%. Besides, based on its high ΦPL, BEDCE was used as the emitting material in solution-processed non-doped greenish-yellow OLEDs with efficiency and luminance (4.56 cd A−1 and 10320 cd m−2) among the highest reported so far for this kind of device. These results demonstrate that BEDCE and related compounds can be efficient multi-functional materials with large potential for light-electricity interconversion devices.


Chemical reagents were purchased and used as received without further purification. Tetrahydrofuran (THF) was distilled in the presence of sodium and benzophenone under protection of dry nitrogen prior to use. NMR spectra were recorded on a Bruker Avance or Varian as 400 MHz spectrometer (1H, 400 MHz; 13C, 100 MHz) using CDCl3 or DMSO-d6 as the solvent and tetramethylsilane (TMS) as an internal standard. UV-vis spectra were recorded with a PerkinElmer LAMBDA 950 UV/Vis/NIR spectrophotometer. Photoluminescence (PL) spectra were measured with a HITACHI F-4600 spectrofluorometer. DSC experiments were recorded on a METTLER TOLEDO instrument with a scanning rate of 10 K min−1.


The devices were fabricated according to literature procedures. The detailed device fabrication is as follows: ITO-coated glass was patterned as substrates. The substrates were carefully washed in ultrasonic baths of detergents, deionized water, acetone, isopropanol, and plasma. A PEDOT:PSS layer was deposited onto the substrates by spin-coating at a speed of 4000 rpm for 1 min; then, the substrates were sintered at 120 °C for 30 min in air. The undoped HTMs (15 mg mL−1) were dissolved in anhydrous dichloromethane. The HTM solution was spun-cast on the above substrates at a speed of 2000 rpm. A Dektak 6M profilometer was used to measure the thicknesses of the films. Finally, molybdenum oxide (15 nm) and gold (60 nm) were thermally evaporated under high vacuum on the HTM layer. J–V characteristics of the devices were measured with a Keithley 2400 Source-Measure unit interfaced with a computer. Device characterization was carried out in air.


Devices were prepared on transparent FTO (Pilkington, TEC-8, 8 Ω sq−1)-coated glass substrates, which were ultrasonically cleaned with detergent, deionized water, acetone and isopropanol for 15 min, sequentially, followed by plasma cleaning for 10 min prior to use. A compact titanium dioxide (TiO2) layer was spun-cast from a solution of 0.15 M titanium diisopropoxide dis(acetylacetonate) (SigmaAldrich, 75 wt% in isopropanol) in 1-butanol (Sigma-Aldrich, 99.8%) at 2000 rpm for 30 s on the pre-cleaned FTO, followed by drying at 125 °C for 10 min. After cooling, a mesoporous TiO2 layer was deposited by spin-coating TiO2 paste (Dyesol 18NR-T) diluted in anhydrous ethanol (1:7 w/w) at 5000 rpm for 30 s, followed by drying at 125 °C for 10 min. The layers were annealed at 500 °C for 30 min in a muffle furnace. After cooling, it was plasma-treated for 10 min prior to use. CH3NH3PbI3 precursor solution was prepared in a glove box with 1.25 M PbI2 and 1.26 M MAI in a mixed solution of N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, 99.8%, anhydrous, Sigma-Aldrich) and dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO, 99.8%, anhydrous, Sigma-Aldrich) (7:3 v/v). The spin-coating procedure was performed at 500 rpm for 3 s followed by 5000 rpm for 30 s. At 20 s before the last spin-casting step, 420 μL of chlorobenzene was pipetted onto the rotating substrate, followed by annealing at 100 °C for 10 min on the hotplate. Then, 20 μL of BEDCE solution (10 mg in 1 mL chlorobenzene) was spin-cast on top of the perovskite at 500 rpm for 3 s followed by 3000 rpm for 30 s. Subsequently, 20 μL of spiro-OMeTAD solution (72 mg in 1 mL chlorobenzene, Toronto Research Chemicals), 29 μL of 4-tert-butylpyridine (Sigma-Aldrich, 96%) and 17.5 μL of lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (Li-TFSI) solution (520 mg Li-TSFI in 1 mL acetonitrile, Sigma-Aldrich, 99.8%) were mixed and spin-cast at 2000 rpm for 30 s. Devices were finalized by thermal evaporation of 100 nm-thick Ag layers at a constant evaporation rate of 1 Å s−1. The active areas of all devices were 0.07 cm2 as defined by a metal mask.


The current–voltage (J–V) curves of the devices were measured by Keithley 2400 in a glove box under AM1.5G illumination (1000 W m−2) from a solar simulator (Newport, 91160), which was calibrated using a standard silicon solar cell device from the NREL. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves were measured using a standard EQE system (Newport 66902). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were carried out in the dark on a CHI6601 Electrochemical Workstation and bias voltage of 200 mV with 5 mV voltage perturbation was applied for measurements over a frequency range of 10−1 to 106 Hz (from highest to lowest). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were obtained by FE-SEM (ZEISSUItra55). Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra (HORIBA Fluorolog-3) were measured under an excitation wavelength of 520 nm. Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements were performed on FLS980 at room temperature with excitation wavelength of 472 nm. Contact angle measurements were obtained by OCA 15 Procontact-angle system (Dataphysics, Germany) using 2 μL droplets at room temperature.


AI4083 PEDOT:PSS solutions (filtered through a 0.45 μm filter) were spin-cast onto ITO-coated glass substrates at 4000 rpm for 60 s and baked at 150 °C for 30 min. BEDCE was deposited by spin-casting at 2000 rpm for 30 s. Afterward, the samples were transferred to a vacuum thermal evaporation chamber to deposit other organic materials and the cathode. Without breaking the vacuum, the electron transporting layer, Cs2CO3 and Al layers were thermally deposited at a base pressure of 2.0 × 10−4 Pa. The thicknesses of layers were controlled by quartz crystal oscillators. After preparation, all devices were immediately encapsulated under a nitrogen atmosphere using epoxy glue and glass slides. The emission area of all devices is 1 × 1 mm2 as defined by the overlapping areas of the anode and cathode. The CIE coordinates and EL spectra were recorded via a PR705 Spectra Scan spectrometer using a computer-controlled source meter; the current density–voltage–luminance properties were measured simultaneously.


R. M. and X. W. contributed equally. Y. J. and J. W. G conceived and co-directed the project. Y. J. and R. M. designed and synthesized the materials. X. W. fabricated and optimized the PSCs device. B. L. fabricated and optimized the OLEDs devices. Y. M. and X. H. contributed to the materials characterization. Y. J., J. W. G., B. L., J. R., K. K. contributed to the writing. J.-M. L. and G. Z. participated in the results discussion. All authors commented on the final paper.


There are no conflicts to declare.


We thank the financial support from National Key R&D Program of China (No. 2016YFA0201002), NSFC-Guangdong Joint Fund (No. U1801256) and NSFC (No. 51803064, 51571094, 51431006, 51561135014), Guangdong Provincial Foundation (2016KQNCX035), Program for Chang Jiang Scholars and Innovative Research Teams in Universities (No. IRT_17R40) and Guangdong Innovative Research Team Program (No. 2013C102). We also thank the support from the Guangdong Provincial Engineering Technology Research Center for Transparent Conductive Materials, National Center for International Research on Green Optoelectronics (IrGO), MOE International Laboratory for Optical Information Technologies and the 111 Project, and University Foundation (16KJ06). This work was in part, financially supported by the project SMOSCs (37_220).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: 12 figures, synthetic details and NMR spectra and can be found. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta09724k
‡ Co-first author.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019