 DOI: 10.1039/D3NJ00573A
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2023, 47, 7346-7355


Arzoo
Sheikh
,

Kumavat
Soni
,

R.
Brajpuriya
 and 

N.
Lakshmi
*

Department of Physics, Mohanlal Sukhadia University, Udaipur, Rajasthan 313001, India. E-mail: nlakshmi@mlsu.ac.in

Applied Science Cluster, UPES, Dehradun, Uttrakhand 248006, India

Received
6th February 2023
, Accepted 14th March 2023
First published on 28th March 2023
This study compares the photovoltaic and electrochemical properties of a nano-sized ZnO–SnO2 composite synthesized by a simple yet effective mechanical mixing technique for use as a photoanode material with ruthenium N719 dye in DSSCs for energy harvesting applications. The formation of the composite was confirmed by the X-ray diffraction technique. The electrochemical properties of the composite and pure samples were studied by cyclic voltammetry, Mott–Schottky analysis and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. The results show that the nanocomposite behaves as a single semiconducting material with a single flat-band potential and oxidation/reduction potentials with superior photovoltaic performance (>33% compared with the pure ZnO sample) in comparison with its constituent metal oxides. The higher stability of the nanocomposite has been confirmed in this work by the improved electron lifetime of this material. The results achieved by the fabricated device and the analysis of the photovoltaic properties suggest that these composite nanomaterials can serve as new-generation photoanodes in high-efficiency DSSCs.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) were first proposed by Gratzel in 1991 and owing to their phenomenal physical, thermal and electrical properties, they have been a topic of great interest for researchers. A typical DSSC can be created using the following basic components: a transparent conductive substrate, a photoanode thin film (made up of semiconducting materials), an electrolyte, a counter electrode and a dye sensitizer. Intensive research is being conducted to expand the horizon of DSSCs due to their various attractive qualities, including cost-effectiveness, simple fabrication process and fairly good conversion efficiency, which make them viable candidates to replace conventional silicon solar cells. The efficiency of a DSSC is governed by numerous electrical factors such as the input power, open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF) and short circuit current (Jsc). These factors further depend on photon absorption, charge transportation, charge collection, recombination rate and electron lifetime. The photo-anode plays an important role in the collection/transportation of charge carriers from the dye to the external circuit. However, the adsorption of the dye also depends on the material of the photoanode. Therefore, amongst all the components, the choice of photoanode material for use as the electron transport layer is the most investigated and exploited area in the field. The photo-anode material constitutes a dye-coated wide-band-gap semiconducting oxide material coated on the transparent conducting oxide (TCO) substrate. The composition and morphology of the photoanode significantly govern the photovoltaic efficiency of the DSSC; hence, to obtain an effective photoanode, in addition to doping with suitable elements, different approaches for material synthesis and architectural designs of photoanodes, such as surficial decoration and structure design, are being employed. TiO2, Cu2O, ZnO, SrTiO3, V2O5, Zn2SnO4 and Nb2O5 are some of the photoanode materials that have been extensively used so far.

Initially, among the n-type metal oxides, the use of TiO2 gained a lot of attention as it is a material with great potential. Although ZnO, SnO2 and other metal oxides were subsequently investigated for application as photoanodes, various superior characteristics of TiO2, including low toxicity, high chemical stability and easy availability, make it the most popular choice of photo-anode material for DSSCs. Compared with other transition metal oxides, TiO2 exhibits relatively superior conduction band (CB) edge, electron affinity, surface area, and dye loading due to which it is widely used as a photo-anode in DSSC applications. TiO2-based DSSCs also exhibit higher efficiencies due to their wide bandgap of 3.2 eV, as well as stability toward UV light absorption. However, the drawbacks associated with pure TiO2-based devices are the high carrier recombination caused by the relatively low charge carrier mobility (0.1–1 cm2 V−1 s−1 compared with 100–200 cm2 V−1 s−1 for those of SnO2 and ZnO) and the presence of several trap states.
ZnO has a wide bandgap (3.2 eV) and possesses a large exciton binding energy (60 meV) along with high electron mobility, which facilitates electron transport by minimizing the recombination loss. These properties make ZnO a good choice of electron transport material after TiO2. However, ZnO exhibits instability in acidic dyes and a slow rate of electron injection, which accounts for the low efficiency of ZnO-based DSSCs compared with those using TiO2 (10). Nonetheless, ZnO crystallizes easily and shows anisotropic growth due to which it is considered a good alternative to TiO2. These versatile and supporting characteristics encourage the synthesis of ZnO nanostructures with different morphologies, which promote unique properties when applied in DSSCs. Therefore, ZnO photoanodes with different morphologies have gained a lot of attention in the past few years in the field of DSSCs; especially, one-dimensional structures, such as nanowires, nanotubes and nanorods, show exceptional electron transmission properties and reduced recombination, thereby improving electron collection and resulting in enhanced photoconversion efficiencies. Similar properties and the high electron mobility of the wide-band-gap SnO2 crystal also make it a promising candidate for photoanode device architectures. Moreover, the stability of SnO2 is comparatively high due to its low sensitivity towards UV.
As observed earlier, the performance of a device based on ZnO is seriously affected by its poor stability under acidic conditions when ruthenium-based dyes are used, resulting in the formation of agglomerates. These act as barriers on the ZnO surface, averting the injection of electrons from the dye to the conduction band (CB) of ZnO. The semiconducting nature of ZnO is thus destroyed by barrier formation, thereby reducing the photovoltaic efficiency of the device. As for the third alternative considered, namely SnO2, the low open-circuit voltage obtained in SnO2 nanostructures inhibits the enhancement of power conversion efficiency owing to the high recombination rate.
In order to reduce these shortcomings of pure oxides, a viable strategy is doping them with different kinds of crystals or preparing composites by pairing the metal oxides with other semiconducting materials having suitable electronic properties, which subsequently leads to a rise in electron/hole charge separation. Many such composite systems have been studied for their application as photocatalysts. Some examples are ZnO–TiO2, ZnO–CdS, ZnO–AgBr,etc. Recently, ZnO–SnO2 composite nanostructures have attracted significant attention for their capacity to boost the photo-catalytic properties of ZnO.
This work reports the studies performed on a ZnO–SnO2 composite prepared by the mechanical mixing method using an agate mortar and a pestle; this composite was employed as a photoanode in a DSSC. The electrical and transport properties of the ZnO–SnO2-based DSSC were then compared with those of the pure-ZnO- and pure-SnO2-based DSSCs to understand the effect of doping on the photovoltaic efficiency of the DSSC. Our study establishes the synergetic effect of the choice of an appropriate proportion of constituents in a nanocomposite material and enhanced properties to achieve desirable device functionality.

For the synthesis of the device consisting of pure ZnO, the nanoparticles of ZnO were synthesized using the precipitation method with zinc nitrate hexahydrate (Zn(NO3)2·6H2O) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH) as the precursors. Zinc nitrate hexahydrate and sodium hydrate were mixed with water individually to form aqueous solutions, which were then mixed to produce ZnO nanoparticles. The formation of the ZnO nanoparticles can be explained in terms of the following reactions:

Zn(NO3)2 → Zn2+ + 2NO3−
(1)
Zn2+ + 2OH− → Zn(OH)2
(2)
Zn(OH)2 → ZnO + H2O
(3)
In order to initiate the preparation process, both the aqueous solutions of zinc nitrate hexahydrate and sodium hydrate were mixed using a magnetic stirrer by following these steps: 4.56 g of zinc nitrate hexahydrate was dissolved in 150 mL of deionized water to form a uniform solution, and an aqueous solution of NaOH was formed by dissolving 1.2 g of NaOH in 300 mL of water. The two solutions were then mixed by adding the aqueous solution of NaOH dropwise to the aqueous solution of Zn(NO3)2 under magnetic stirring. Following the process of addition, stirring was continued for another 30 minutes, and then the mixture was cooled using cold water. The resultant precipitate was filtered followed by washing several times under the flow of deionized water. This precipitate was then dried by maintaining an average temperature of 70–90 °C for 4 h and left for calcination at 200 °C for about 2 h, which resulted in the formation of ZnO nanoparticles. The ZnO nanoparticles were then used to prepare the ZnO:SnO2 composite of 50:50 composition by weight (ZnO:SnO2 = 50:50) through uniform mechanical mixing.

For the fabrication of the photoanode, the paste of each sample was prepared. 0.2 g of the sample was measured and ground for homogeneity using an agate mortar and pestle. The sample was heated in an oven for about 20–25 minutes at 50 °C to remove any moisture content present. An ethanolic solution of the above-dried sample was prepared by adding 4 mL of pure ethanol to it followed by sonication for 30 minutes using a probe sonicator for homogeneity. The obtained solution was poured into a Petri dish and then placed in an oven until a homogeneous thin layer of the paste was formed. A cellulose solution prepared using 0.2 g ethyl cellulose, 1.7 g terpineol and 2 mL ethanol was added to the paste and kept overnight for binding. Further, 2 mL ethanol was added to the mixture and mixed for 2 h using a magnetic stirrer until a uniform paste was formed, which was then ground in an agate mortar and pestle in order to slightly densify it to form a homogeneous paste for application.


For the device architecture to be successfully completed, the photoanode paste was applied on the fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass substrate, forming the electrical contact. The FTOs with a resistivity of around 18–20 Ω cm−2 were washed using an ultrasonicator in a series of cleansing steps: sonication for 10 minutes in sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) solution, followed by 10 minutes in distilled/deionized water and finally 10 minutes in an ethanol solution. After the completion of the cleansing process, they were heated in an oven for 20–30 minutes to be cleared of any contaminations. To conclude the fabrication of the working electrode, the FTOs were coated with the previously prepared densified paste of the conducting oxide through the doctor blade technique. After 10 minutes, the films were moved to an electric hot plate for heat treatment. To enhance the adhesion property and prevent any inhomogeneity, the photoanode was kept for calcination at 450 °C, after which it became suitable for dye loading. For optimum loading of dye, a dye bath was prepared by dissolving 0.65 g N719 dye (ruthenium complex dye constituting the ammonium salt of N3) in 100 mL ethanol with a few drops of dichloromethane and acetonitrile, in which the samples were then placed. The N719 dye is mostly preferred as it offers higher performance for the device. The extra dye molecules present on the sample surface were then washed using ethanol, and then the samples were dried at room temperature.

The counter electrode used in the DSSC was prepared using the spin-coating technique; the hydrochloroplatinate (H2PtCl6) solution was deposited at 2000 rpm for 1 minute on the FTO substrate. The calcination of these counter electrodes was carried out at 450 °C for 20 minutes. The calcined counter electrode was then combined with the photo anode using a spacer to complete the device architecture. In the end, to complete the DSSC circuit, the I−/I3− electrolyte was added between the two electrodes.

The crystalline structure of the samples was investigated using a Rigaku Ultima IV X-ray diffractometer (XRD) machine with Cu Ka radiation (l = 1.54 Å) as the X-ray source. The sample was scanned at 40 kV and 40 mA in a 2θ range of 20–80° under ambient conditions by maintaining a scan speed of 2° per minute. To measure the J–V (photocurrent density–voltage) characteristics of the prepared DSSCs, a Keithley 2450 digital source meter was employed at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. For the photovoltaic performance evaluation of the DSSCs, a Solar simulator PET 80AAA, USA, made of a 500 W Xenon lamp and AM 1.5G filter as the light source with a power density of 100 mW cm−2 was focused on the surface of the cell to be tested.

Using a Fluke multimeter, the open-circuit voltage decay (OCVD) measurements were recorded to analyse the carrier lifetime and the solar cell behaviour. An electrochemical workstation (Solartron 1260) was set up for electrochemical impedance spectroscopy studies, while the data was analyzed using the CorView software. The cyclic Voltammetry and Mott–Schottky spectra were documented using a Newport USA electrochemical station for the purpose of studying the electrochemical properties of the cell. The cyclic Voltammetry patterns were recorded using a three-electrode setup wherein the sample worked as the working electrode, a platinum wire was the counter electrode, and saturated calomel was used as the reference electrode. A Newport Oriel IQE-200, which uses a 250 W quartz-tungsten halogen lamp as the light source, was employed to record the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the DSSCs.

For studying the crystal structure of the prepared pure ZnO, pure SnO2 and the ZnO–SnO2 composite samples, the X-ray diffractograms were recorded over the 2θ range from 20° to 80° and are presented in Fig. 1(a). The peaks of ZnO obtained in the diffractogram match well with JCPDS card number 36-1451, which is associated with the hexagonal wurtzite structure. Moreover, the SnO2 peaks observed are in close agreement with JCPDS card number 41-1445, exhibiting a tetragonal structure. The Williamson Hall method, as given in eqn (4), was used to determine the average particle size and strain.

(4)
In eqn (4), θ is the Bragg's angle, β is the full width at half maximum (FWHM) extracted by Gaussian fitting of the corresponding peak, D is the intercept obtained from the Williamson Hall (W–H) plot, ε is the strain and λ is the wavelength of the X-ray source. Using the value of the intercept, the particle size was calculated, while the slope of the W–H plot yielded the lattice strain. The particle size of the composite was observed to have increased compared with those of the constituent samples, whereas the strain was reduced. The dislocation density describes the charge imbalances in a crystal, oxygen vacancies, and the possibility of defects and dislocations in a crystal and was calculated by using eqn (5). In this equation, δ is the dislocation density, whereas D is the particle size calculated using the W–H method.
(5)
The average grain size, strain and dislocation density of the pure ZnO, pure SnO2 and ZnO–SnO2 composite samples are reported in Table 1. For this purpose, the diffraction peaks of the (1 0 1) planes of ZnO and (1 1 0) planes of SnO2 were used.
Sample
Particle size (nm)
Strain
Dislocation density (nm−2)
ZnO
37
5.89 × 10−4
7.30 × 10−4
ZnO:SnO2 (50:50)
46
1.12 × 10−4
4.72 × 10−4
SnO2
30
4.14 × 10−4
11.11 × 10−4

The I–V curves of the DSSCs fabricated using pure ZnO, pure SnO2 and ZnO–SnO2 composite at room temperature under 1.5 AM solar light conditions at 1 SUN illumination and 100 mW cm−2 light intensity are shown in Fig. 2. The obtained photovoltaic parameters, such as short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (η), are tabulated in Table 2. As observed in Table 2, the composite-based device showed the highest Voc value of 0.60 V among all three samples. This rise in Voc can be attributed to the suppression of charge recombination and a small shift in the conduction band. The device fabricated using pure SnO2 exhibited FF = 50% and Voc = 0.57 V.

Device

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc

FF

η%
ZnO
0.32
0.55
0.14
0.02
ZnO:SnO2 (50:50)
0.33
0.60
0.17
0.03
SnO2
5.70
0.57
0.50
1.65
On the contrary, the pure-ZnO-based device showed a low Voc (≈0.55 V), FF(≈0.14) and a low Jsc (≈0.32 mA cm−2), which may be due to the formation of Zn2+ complexes with the dye, owing to which charge separation is restricted, and the dye is unable to inject electrons into ZnO. It was also noticed that, with the addition of SnO2 to ZnO, the nanomaterial showed improved values of current density and FF, which greatly influenced the photovoltaic performance of the composite ZnO/SnO2-based photoanode (Voc ≈ 0.60 V, Jsc ≈ 0.33 mA cm−2, and FF = 17% yielding η ≈ 0.03%). The efficiency of the ZnO–SnO2-based device showed a 33% increase compared with the ZnO-based device. The better performance of the composite-based device can be attributed to the negative shift in the flat-band potential and high electrical conductivity.
Open-circuit voltage decay (OCVD) analysis is a useful technique to analyse the electron lifetime and electron recombination velocity in DSSCs. In order to conduct the OCVD measurement, at first, the device is placed under light illumination produced by a solar simulator, and the voltage reading measured after the simulator is turned off gives rise to an exponentially decreasing curve. At this point, the dye molecules are not excited since light is not incident on the cell, thereby restricting the injection of electrons from the dye molecules into the conduction band of nanostructures. Only the previously entered electrons present in the photoanode recombine with the electrolyte based on which the electron lifetime can be calculated.

Fig. 3 shows the OCVD decay curves of the pure samples and the composite material, which indicates the slower decomposition of the composite sample device than the devices fabricated using pure ZnO and SnO2. Using the eqn (6) mentioned below, the lifetime (τn) of electrons was calculated.
(6)
Here, τn is the electron lifetime, KB is the Boltzmann constant (1.38 × 10−23 JK−1), T is the absolute temperature, e is the elementary electron charge, and Voc is the open-circuit voltage. The electron lifetimes in the prepared DSSCs are tabulated in Table 3.
Device

τ
n (ms)
ZnO
3.644
ZnO:SnO2 (50:50)
4.043
SnO2
2.561
As evident from Table 3, the lifetime τn in the ZnO–SnO2 composite-based DSSC was higher compared with those made of the pure samples. The longer lifetime of the electrons in the ZnO:SnO2 (50:50) device indicates lower recombination, thereby resulting in the enhanced photovoltaic performance of the composite-based DSSC.
The incident photon conversion efficiency (IPCE%) for the devices synthesized using pure ZnO, the composite and pure SnO2 was calculated using the formula given in eqn (7) and is plotted in Fig. 4 as a function of the wavelength.
(7)
The encouraging IPCE results for the composite-based photoanode can be ascribed to the increment in the light-scattering effect due to the crystal structure and also the enhancement of Voc due to reduced recombination at the FTO–electrolyte interface, as suggested by various researchers. Therefore, improved charge collection efficiency with an improved IPCE of ≈28% was observed for the nanocomposite-photoanode-based DSSC in this study. It was higher than that of the pure ZnO-based DSSC (showing IPCE ≈ 18%), but somewhat lower than the device fabricated using pure SnO2 (≈37%), which had higher Jsc and Voc values.
In this work, the IPCE of all the prepared devices exhibited a peak between 530–545 nm (Fig. 4). It was observed that the peak corresponding to the pure ZnO-based device not only had a lower value but was also very broad, which can be attributed to the high recombination rate in this sample. Although the peak corresponding to the device constructed using pure SnO2 had a value higher than that of the composite-based sample, it was also comparatively much broader, which again is indicative of a higher recombination rate in this sample. Thus, the value of IPCE for the composite-based DSSC device was higher than that of pure ZnO and slightly lower than that for the pure SnO2-based device. Since the peak was sharper than the other two cases, it could be concluded that the formation of the composite reduced the rate of recombination. This is also corroborated by the largest value of electron lifetime (τn) for the composite-based DSSC device (Table 3). It was almost twofold that of the pure ZnO-based DSSCs and can be attributed to the crystal structure of the nanocomposite.

Cyclic voltammetry (CV) studies were conducted to examine the variations in electrochemical properties upon combining the pure samples to form a composite. In this study, measurements were done using a three-electrode system, wherein saturated calomel, the sample film, and a platinum wire were used as the reference electrode, working electrode and counter electrode, respectively. The cyclic voltammograms were obtained by dipping the 3 electrodes in an 0.5 M sodium sulphate aqueous solution.

In the CV curves, the peaks indicate the potential value at which the prepared material gets oxidized or reduced. The pure ZnO sample exhibited three oxidation peaks at −1.36 V, −0.96 V, and −0.46 V, while the pure SnO2 sample had oxidation peaks at −1.22 V and −0.88 V. Comparatively, for the composite material, two reduction peaks at −1.07 V and −1.50 V were observed along with three oxidation peaks at −1.20 V, −0.97 V, and −0.67 V.
As observed in Fig. 5, the composite material showed similarity with ZnO in terms of the oxidation peak, but it also exhibited a higher current value comparable to that of SnO2. Moreover, based on the current response in the CV curves, the current of the composite material was comparatively higher than those of its pure constituent materials, indicating the improved electrical conductivity of the composite material. The addition of SnO2 leads to an improvement in conductivity, as suggested by other researchers as well. Therefore, a shift in conduction band energy to higher values is observed in the voltammograms.
The Mott–Schottky method is a useful technique to determine the semiconducting nature (n-type or p-type semiconductor) of a material and its properties, such as donor/acceptor density, flat band potential, etc. For the studied samples, the positive slope obtained from the Mott–Schottky (MS) curves (Fig. 6) evidenced the n-type behaviour of the semiconductors. Using this curve, the electron density of the samples can be determined. The donor density, ND, was calculated by using the relationship
(8)
where
C is the capacitance (the value obtained by extrapolating the linear part of the MS curve to obtain the slope), ε is the dielectric constant (8.5), ε0 is the vacuum permittivity (8.85 × 10−12 F m−1), q is the electron charge and A is the active area (0.0001 m2).

Using eqn (8), the donor densities for the pure and composite samples were calculated to be 1.6 × 1019, 1.9 × 1019 and 1.4 × 1019 cm−3 for the ZnO:SnO2 samples with the ratios 100:0, 50:50 and 0:100, respectively, indicating a rise in the concentration of apparent donor density when SnO2 is added.
The flat-band potential (Vfb) was also calculated from the plot by extrapolating the curve to the zero of the abscissa. The values obtained were −0.6 V, −0.7 V and −0.5 V for pure ZnO, the ZnO–SnO2 composite and pure SnO2, respectively. The shifting of Vfb of the composite sample towards a more negative value compared with those of the pure samples indicates higher carrier concentration, based on which it can be concluded that the addition of SnO2 to ZnO to form a composite may contribute to an increase in donor density, as confirmed by the calculated values. This, in turn, increases electron injection and the charge transfer process taking place at the photoanode/electrolyte interface. The improved results, therefore, establish that an enhanced electron injection efficiency is achieved in a dye-sensitized solar cell by applying the ZnO–SnO2 composite sample compared with the pure ZnO nanomaterial.
To understand the charge transfer kinetics related to the redox reaction of I−/I3− at the dye-sensitized photoanode/electrolyte interface, Tafel analysis was applied. In the case of a photoelectrode used in a DSSC, the Butler–Volmer equation given below describes the rate of the cathodic and anodic reactions at the photoanode/electrolyte interface.
(9)
Here, I represents the total current density, Io is the exchange current density, Eeq is the I−/I3− electrode potential at equilibrium, E is the applied voltage, n is the number of electrons transferred, and αa and αc are the anodic and cathodic transfer coefficients, respectively.
The first term is proportional to the cathodic current, whereas the second term is proportional to the anodic current. When E is equal to Eeq, at I = Io (in the dark), Io depends on the reaction area and the concentration of I−/I3− on the photoelectrode. On intersecting the linear anodic and cathodic branches of the polarization curve, the exchange current density (Io) is calculated. On rearranging the terms for the given condition, the Tafel equation is obtained:
(10)
It is clear from the above equation that the Tafel slope (b) is inversely proportional to a. Meanwhile, ba and bc are the anodic and cathodic Tafel slopes calculated from the linear anodic and cathodic Tafel regions of the polarization profiles and signify the anodic and cathodic reactions occurring at the photoanode/electrolyte interface. In this study, Tafel polarization measurements were carried out using a three-electrode system similar to the setup used for cyclic voltammetry by scanning the electrode potential range of −0.6 to 0.6 V. The obtained polarization curves were fitted using core view software. Fig. 7 shows the Tafel curves of the pure-material- and composite-based DSSCs, and the values obtained using curve fitting are tabulated in Table 4.
Device

R
p (Ω)

R
s (Ω)

β anode (mV per decade)

β cathode (mV per decade)

I
o (μA cm−2)
ZnO
25.67
33.75
871.37
228.89
0.266
ZnO:SnO2 (50:50)
19.61
39.78
697.10
160.03
0.159
SnO2
10.46
82.97
273.35
94.991
0.179
The exchange current density (I0) in eqn (9) gives information regarding the I−/I3− couple present at the dye-coated photoanode/electrolyte interface. For the pure ZnO-based DSSC, an exchange current density of 0.266 μA cm−2 was observed, whereas, in the composite- and SnO2-based DSSCs, it decreased up to 0.159 and 0.179 μA cm−2, respectively. This decrease may be ascribed to the better contact between the photoanode and the electrolyte due to the active-surface characteristics. The dip in exchange current density leads to an increase in charge transfer resistance from the conduction band of the photoanode to the electrolyte interface. Also, from Table 4, it can be observed that the βc of SnO2 is lower, indicating the lower recombination resistance offered by the SnO2-based DSSC, which is often reported as a major drawback in the literature. With the addition of ZnO, the recombination resistance increases in the case of the composite, which leads to a lower recombination rate, thus addressing the above-mentioned problem. The above analysis is supported by a higher cathodic Tafel slope (βc) observed in the case of the ZnO-based device, corresponding to a decrease in recombination reaction at the photoanode/electrolyte interface, compared with the lower value of βc for the SnO2-based device. The effectiveness of the reactions occurring at the dye-coated photoanode/electrolyte interface was justified by the low values of anodic Tafel slope (βa) in the case of the composite-based device. This effect resulted in an increment in the open-circuit voltage values of the SnO2- and composite-based DSSCs compared with the pure ZnO-based DSSC. The cathodic Tafel slope was decreased for the composite device compared with the pure ZnO device and indicates that the addition of SnO2 had led to an enhancement in the reaction rates of the I3− ions at the photoanode/electrolyte interface, whereas, the higher βa value denotes a fall in the reaction rate.
To gain a better understanding of the improved electron transfer kinetics in these DSSC devices, electrochemical impedance measurements were carried out in dark conditions at −0.6 V forward bias to obtain the Nyquist plot shown in Fig. 8. Generally, the EIS spectra of a DSSC include three semicircles and is referred to as the Nyquist plot. These three semicircles in the Nyquist plot usually represent the three resistances in the system. The resistance related to the electrochemical reaction at the electrolyte/Pt counter electrode (Rp) is located in the higher-frequency range, the charge transfer resistance at the working electrode/dye/electrolyte (Rs) is located in the middle-frequency range, and the Warburg resistance related to the diffusion process (Rw) of I−/I3− in the electrolyte is present in the low-frequency range. Since the middle-frequency semicircle gives information about electron recombination at the photoanode/electrolyte interface, which this study seeks to elucidate, the plots for all three DSSCs in the mid-frequency range are given in Fig. 8.
Among all the devices, the highest value of recombination resistance was observed for the device based on pure ZnO, indicated by the larger radius of the semicircle. It signifies a hindrance in the recombination of electrons between the ZnO photoelectrode and electrolyte, which is concurrent with the data tabulated using the Tafel plot and is further supported by the data on PCE. The charge transfer resistance denoted by Rp (Table 4) is the resistance at the Pt counter electrode/electrolyte interface and is represented by the semicircle located at high frequencies in the Nyquist plot. As seen in Table 4, the pure SnO2- and composite-based devices presented lower values of Rp, indicating better catalytic reaction at the counter electrode/electrolyte interface compared with the ZnO-based device. Rs mentioned in Table 4 refers to the sheet resistance offered by the photoanode. As observed from the tabulated data, the sheet resistance offered by the ZnO-based device was the least, and the maximum sheet resistance was offered by the SnO2-based device. Further, when ZnO was added to SnO2, the sheet resistance Rs in the composite-based device decreased considerably.

• In this work, a very simple yet effective method of mechanical mixing using an agate motor pestle has been used to prepare a nanocomposite with ZnO and SnO2 nanomaterials in a 50:50 ratio by weight to fabricate a DSSC device, and a comparison has been made with pure nanomaterial samples for its application as a photoanode.

• Using XRD studies, the structure of the nanocomposite has been confirmed to retain the wurtzite structure of ZnO and the tetragonal structure of SnO2. Parameters, such as particle size, strain and dislocation density, have also been calculated.
• The Voc and Jsc parameters were enhanced when the composite structure (ZnO–SnO2-based DSSC) was used rather than the pure constituents. The lifetime of electrons in the composite sample was higher compared with those in the pure samples, indicating a lower recombination rate, which leads to higher stability.
• The IPCE value of the nanocomposite sample also shows a considerable increase compared with the pure ZnO sample due to the addition of SnO2. It is key a parameter accounting for solar energy conversion. Thus, although the efficiency of the composite is lower than that of the device made from pure SnO2, the pay-off is in terms of enhanced stability and low rates of recombination.
• On investigating the electrochemical properties, enhanced functional performance parameters, such as improved electrical conductivity, and high charge carrier donor density, are observed for the device based on the nanocomposite material due to the synergistic effect of the two oxides, which work together toward optimizing the charge recombination rate and address the stability issues that arise when the single photo anode materials are employed in their pure form.
• The composite nanomaterial possesses a single flat-band potential and oxidation/reduction potentials with improved photovoltaic performance compared with its constituent metal oxides, thereby suggesting that this composite nanomaterial can be used as photoanodes in DSSCs, in optical devices and as photocatalysts.

Arzoo Sheikh: investigation, data curation, methodology, writing – original draft preparation. Kumavat Soni: data curation, investigation, writing – review & editing. R. Brajpuriya: writing – review & editing. N. Lakshmi: supervision, writing – review & editing.


The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.


We acknowledge support from DST-FIST and UGC-DSA schemes and RUSA 2.0 Project (Budget head-7B-(a)-(ii)) of the Department of Physics, MLSU). Kumavat Soni acknowledges UGC NET-JRF. We are thankful to Professor S. S Soni, Department of Chemistry, Sardar Patel University, Anand, Gujarat, India for his useful guidance in performing electrochemical and impedance measurements.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2023