 DOI: 10.1039/D3TA00493G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2023, 11, 9616-9625


Xiang
Zhang
,

Dan
Zhang
,

Tonghui
Guo
,

Junjie
Zou
,

Junjun
Jin
,

Chunqiu
Zheng
,

Yuan
Zhou
,

Zhenkun
Zhu
,

Zhao
Hu
,

Qiang
Cao
,

Sujuan
Wu
,

Jing
Zhang
 and 

Qidong
Tai
*

The Institute of Technological Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, P. R. China. E-mail: qdtai@whu.edu.cn

Department of Microelectronic Science and Engineering, Ningbo University, Zhejiang 315211, P. R. China

Institute for Advanced Materials, South China Academy of Advanced Optoelectronics, South China Normal University, Guangzhou 510006, P. R. China

School of Material Science & Engineering, Wuhan Institute of Technology, Wuhan 430073, PR China

Received
28th January 2023
, Accepted 3rd April 2023
First published on 4th April 2023
Zinc oxide (ZnO) is an appealing electron transport layer for inorganic perovskite solar cells (IPSCs). However, attempts to achieve high device performance have been undermined by the imperfections at the ZnO/perovskite interface, including the intrinsic defects of ZnO and the nonideal contact between ZnO and perovskite films, which can cause severe interfacial recombination losses. With the purpose of resolving these problems, cesium salts with functional anions of acetate (Ac−), fluoride (F−) and trifluoroacetate (TFA−) are explored to modulate the deposition of ZnO films. It is evidenced that these functional anions can coordinate with both Zn2+ and Pb2+ ions, causing defect passivation of the ZnO and the top perovskite films to different extents. Meanwhile, the Cs+ ions can reduce the hydroxyl defects and form an interfacial dipole on the surface of ZnO via Zn–O–Cs bonds. Therefore, more stable and efficient interfacial electron transport can be established. Accordingly, we obtained a maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 14.25% in low-temperature carbon-based IPSCs (C-IPSCs) using a CsPbI2Br light absorber. This PCE is the highest value among all the ZnO-based C-IPSCs reported to date. Moreover, the corresponding devices without encapsulation demonstrate improved long-term stability in ambient air.

All-inorganic CsPbX3 (X = I, Br, or mixed halides) perovskites have attracted increasing attention in recent years. Among them, CsPbI2Br has been considered as the most promising light absorber owing to its preferable trade-off between band gap (Eg) and phase stability, and the corresponding inorganic perovskite solar cells (IPSCs) based on a hole transport layer (HTL)/noble metal electrode have achieved power conversion efficiency (PCE) over 17%. Unfortunately, the additives in the HTL are hygroscopic and deliquescent, which will accelerate device degradation. Apart from the high costs, the noble metal electrode is sensitive to halide ion migration, which will cause the phase segregation and irreversible degradation of IPSCs. As an alternative, carbon electrodes have been widely used in the photovoltaic field due to their cheapness, earth abundance, and suitable work function (WF). In addition, the excellent hydrophobicity of carbon electrodes can protect perovskite films from moisture intrusion. Taking all of this into account, carbon-based IPSCs (C-IPSCs) should be the appropriate choice for commercial application, as they have the great advantages of low cost, simplified structure, and outstanding stability.

At present, most state-of-the-art C-IPSCs are composed of a titanium dioxide (TiO2) electron transport layer (ETL). However, the growth of TiO2 generally requires a high annealing temperature (≥450 °C) and a complicated fabrication process, which are both energy-consuming and incompatible with flexible devices. Meanwhile, the lower electron mobility (μe) and excellent photocatalytic activity of TiO2 will cause unbalanced charge transport and thus adversely affect device stability. To solve the above issues, a series of low-temperature ETLs, such as tin oxide (SnO2), zinc oxide (ZnO), and niobium pentoxide (Nb2O5), have been developed. By comparison, ZnO exhibits high μe and enhanced ultraviolet (UV) light stability. More importantly, the hybrid perovskite deprotonation induced by ZnO does not affect CsPbX3 because of the absence of organic cations. Therefore, ZnO is regarded as the most promising ETL for C-IPSCs. Nevertheless, it is rarely used in the field of C-IPSCs.
In 2019, Wang et al. for the first time introduced ZnO into C-IPSCs and obtained a PCE of 7.60%. By treating fluorine (F)-doped SnO2 with deionized water, ZnO-based C-IPSCs have achieved a record PCE of 12.39%. However, this PCE is still lower than their Shockley–Queisser theoretical limit (20.1%) due to the imperfections at the ZnO/perovskite interface, including the intrinsic defects of ZnO and the nonideal contact between ZnO and perovskite films. In ZnO with an open hexagonal close-packed lattice structure, Zn atoms occupy only half of the tetrahedral sites. Hence, there are plenty of octahedral sites that can accommodate the intrinsic defects of ZnO or extrinsic dopants. It is reported that the quantity of buried interfacial defects is about 100 times higher than that in perovskite films, especially for the deep-level defects. All these defects can act as charge recombination centres and shunt pathways, resulting in a charge transport barrier and moisture permeation, which are the key factors that contribute to open-circuit voltage (Voc) loss, current density–voltage (J–V) hysteresis and device instability. On the other hand, the ZnO/perovskite interfacial energy level mismatch can also decrease electron extraction efficiency and facilitate interfacial charge accumulation, leading to the loss of device performance. It has been proved that inserting alkali chlorides as buried interfacial passivators can simultaneously regulate the quality of the ETL and perovskite films and adjust the interfacial energy level alignment. Recently, Xing et al. demonstrated the defect passivation effect of organic molecular carbon–halogen bonds with high electronegativity. Compared with other halide ions, fluoride (F−) should be an appropriate anion doping candidate because its ionic radius (1.36 Å) is closer to that of O2− (1.40 Å). In addition, Lewis base molecules with electron-donating groups (e.g., CO, SO, etc.) have been verified to be able to coordinate with metal atoms and optimize the interfacial energy level alignment. To simplify the fabrication procedures, the above functions can also be realized by directly incorporating interfacial molecules into ETLs. However, there is no report of such a study in ZnO-based C-IPSCs.
To this end, we use cesium salts with functional anions of acetate (Ac−), F− and trifluoroacetate (TFA−) to modulate the deposition of the ZnO ETL in low-temperature CsPbI2Br C-IPSCs. It is found that the cesium modulators can bridge the two layers at the buried interface by coordinating with both Zn2+ and Pb2+ ions, which can not only passivate the defects of ZnO and perovskite films, but also reduce the interfacial energy level difference via decreasing the hydroxyl (–OH) defects and forming a Zn–O–Cs interfacial dipole. Furthermore, different degrees of positive roles are identified for different anions, revealing that the TFA− anion is superior to Ac− and F− anions. Benefiting from the improved interfacial contact, released interfacial residual strain, alleviated halide ion migration, suppressed charge recombination and enhanced electron transport, the CsTFA-modified devices exhibit a maximum PCE of 14.25% with less J–V hysteresis, which is the highest value reported for ZnO-based C-IPSCs so far. In addition, the optimized devices without encapsulation present enhanced moisture, thermal, and UV light stability in ambient air.

Fig. S1 (ESI) displays a schematic diagram for the fabrication process of low-temperature CsPbI2Br C-IPSCs, in which three multifunctional cesium salts including CsAc, CsF and CsTFA (Fig. S2, ESI) are directly added into a ZnO precursor solution. For simplicity, we denote CsAc, CsF, and CsTFA-modified ZnO as ZnO-CsAc, ZnO-CsF, and ZnO-CsTFA, respectively. Fig. 1a shows a schematic illustration of the passivation mechanism of cesium modulators. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were carried out to study the electrostatic potential profiles of cesium salts, which are shown in Fig. 1b–d. Obviously, the electron cloud density is mainly distributed on the carboxyl groups and F− anions (red-yellow color) due to their strong electronegativity, and they are expected to interact with Zn2+ ions in ZnO and Pb2+ ions in CsPbI2Br to passivate film defects (Fig. 1a). Meanwhile, the Cs+ ions should be able to substitute for the H+ of –OH groups on the ZnO surface by chemical reaction: –OH + Cs+ → −O−Cs + H+, forming a Zn–O–Cs interfacial dipole (Fig. 1a). The dipole moments of CsAc, CsF and CsTFA were calculated to be 9.8, 12.5 and 15.3 Debye, respectively (Fig. S3, ESI). The increased dipole moment is expected to decrease the WF of ZnO and improve the built-in potential (Vbi) of C-IPSCs, thus providing a stronger driving force for electron transport, as discussed later. In addition, hydrophobic fluorinated materials can release interfacial stress, adjust energy level alignment and protect perovskite films from the intrusion of moisture. Based on the above advantages, it is expected that the above-mentioned cesium salts as buried modulators are capable of achieving multiple functions and thus improving the photovoltaic performance of C-IPSCs.

To investigate the effect of cesium modulators on the ETLs, a series of measurements were performed. As shown in Fig. S4–6 (ESI), the Cs and F signals proved the existence of cesium modulators in doped ZnO ETLs. All the ETLs exhibited high optical transmittance in the wavelength range of 400–800 nm (Fig. S7a, ESI), ensuring the high light absorption in upper perovskite films. We also found that the cesium modulators did not affect the light absorption and Eg of ETLs (Fig. S7b, ESI). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy were carried out to study the interaction between cesium modulators and ETLs (Fig. 1e–g and S8, ESI). As presented in Fig. 1e, the O 1s XPS spectra could be deconvoluted into three parts corresponding to lattice oxygen (OL), oxygen vacancies (Ov), and surface –OH defects (OOH), respectively. Compared with the pristine ETL, the peak area ratios of Ov and OOH were found to be decreased after modification, implying an effective filling of Ov defects and the reduction of O dangling bonds. (Table S1, ESI). This result is expected to inhibit electron accumulation and enhance the conductivity (σ) and μe of ZnO, as confirmed by Fig. 2a and b and Tables S2 and S3 (ESI). In order to clarify quantitatively the effect of cesium modulators on the ZnO defects, the trap state density (Nt) of pristine or doped ETLs was calculated through the space charge limited current (SCLC) model: Nt = 2ε0εiVTFL/qd2, where ε0 is vacuum permittivity (ε0 = 8.854 × 10−12 F m−1), εi is the relative dielectric constant of ZnO (εi = 8.49), the trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL) is the voltage at the kink point, q is the elemental charge (q = 1.6 × 10−19 C), and d is the thickness of the pristine or doped ETLs (d ≈ 40 nm). As shown in Fig. 2c–f, Nt was gradually decreased from ZnO to ZnO-CsAc, ZnO-CsF and ZnO-CsTFA ETLs, suggesting that TFA− was more effective than Ac− and F− in defect passivation, which is consistent with the interaction strength trend demonstrated by Zn 2p XPS spectra (Fig. 1f). Compared with the pristine ETL, the Zn 2p core levels of doped ZnO ETLs were shifted toward higher binding energies, indicating a change in electron cloud density around Zn atoms because of the strong interaction between Zn2+ and carboxyl groups/F− anions, as further confirmed by the formation of Zn–F bonds (Fig. 1g) and the shifted CO/C–O/C–F bonds (Fig. S8d–f, ESI).
The substrate quality is one of the key factors that affects the growth of perovskite films. Fig. S9 (ESI) shows the XRD patterns of the pristine and doped ZnO ETLs. It can be seen that all the ETLs exhibited the same phase structure, while the peak intensity was slightly stronger in the latter, suggesting the better crystallinity of doped ZnO ETLs. This result was also evidenced by the reduced full-width-at-half-maximum (FWHM) values (Table S4, ESI). The improved crystallinity can be attributed to the fact that F− anions occupied Ov defects and carboxyl groups passivated surface suspension bonds through esterification reaction, which is consistent with the XPS results (Fig. 1e). Fig. S10 (ESI) presents the top-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the pristine and doped ZnO ETLs. As can be seen, there were some pinholes in the pristine ETL, which will create shunt pathways, thus resulting in serious leakage current and carrier recombination (Fig. S11a, ESI). In contrast, the doped ZnO ETLs showed homogeneous and compact morphologies, avoiding direct contact between perovskite films and indium-doped tin oxide (ITO) glass (Fig. S11b, ESI). According to the atomic force microscope (AFM) images in Fig. 3a–d and the DMSO/DMF contact angle images in Fig. S12 (ESI), both the root mean square (RMS) roughness and contact angle of ETLs slightly decreased after modification, which is conducive to the nucleation and crystallization of perovskite films.
Apart from the substrate quality, the energy level alignment at the ETL/perovskite interface directly affects the electron extraction efficiency. To study the effect of cesium modulators on the surface potential profile of ETLs, we carried out Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) measurements. As shown in Fig. 3e–h, the doped ZnO ETLs exhibited a higher contact potential difference than the pristine ZnO ETL, indicating that the cesium modulators could decrease the WF of ZnO owing to the formation of a Zn–O–Cs interfacial dipole. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was further performed to quantitatively illustrate the interfacial energy level alignment. As exhibited in Fig. S13 and S14 and Table S5 (ESI), the WF values were calculated to be 4.48 eV (ZnO), 4.44 eV (ZnO-CsAc), 4.39 eV (ZnO-CsF), and 4.30 eV (ZnO-CsTFA), following a trend similar to that of KPFM results. The energy level diagrams combining the Eg extracted from Fig. S7b (ESI) are displayed in Fig. 3i and S15 (ESI). According to the basic theory of heterojunction band alignment, the reduced energy barrier (ΔEc) at the ZnO/CsPbI2Br interface is expected to facilitate electron extraction and suppress charge accumulation, which is essential for improving the Vbi value (Fig. 3j) and mitigating J–V hysteresis.
Subsequently, we investigated the effect of cesium modulators on the morphology and crystallinity of perovskite films. According to the top-view SEM images in Fig. 4a–d, the CsPbI2Br films on the doped ZnO ETLs presented a more uniform and smooth morphology than that of the control film. Meanwhile, the cross-sectional SEM images (Fig. 4e–h) confirmed that cesium modulators could effectively reduce interfacial defects and improve interface contact. As depicted in the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of Fig. 4i, all the films presented similar diffraction peaks at 14.6°, 20.8°, and 29.6° that were assigned to the (100), (110), and (200) planes of α-phase CsPbI2Br, respectively. Compared with the control sample, the modified films showed stronger peak intensity and narrower FWHM, especially for the (100) and (200) planes, which means better crystallinity (Fig. S16 and Table S6, ESI). This result could be related to the interaction between cesium modulators and perovskite films, which is verified by XPS spectra. As shown in Fig. S17 (ESI), the Cs 3d core levels remained almost unchanged, while the Pb 4f, I 3d, and Br 3d core levels shifted to higher binding energies after modification, indicating the strong interaction between cesium modulators and Pb/halide sites. Interestingly, the O 1s and F 1s XPS spectra in Fig. S18 (ESI) showed additional peaks at 531.36 and 684.40 eV, which correspond to Pb–O and Pb–F bonds, respectively. FTIR spectra were utilized to further verify the above-mentioned interaction, as shown in Fig. S19–21 (ESI). After mixing with PbI2–DMSO, the CO stretching vibration of cesium modulators shifted to a lower wavenumber due to the coordination of CO with Pb2+ ions. However, the C–F bond shifted to a higher frequency, which may be ascribed to the higher electron density caused by the interaction between CO and Pb2+ ions. Furthermore, the wavenumber of SO stretching vibration for PbI2–cesium modulators–DMSO was higher than that of PbI2–DMSO, suggesting that the interaction between DMSO and Pb2+ ions in the former samples was weaker, which is conducive to the crystallization of perovskite films. Consequently, the carboxyl groups and F− anions of cesium modulators may coordinate with Pb2+ ions at the bottom of perovskite films by the formation of Pb–O and Pb–F bonds, which is conducive to passivating interfacial Pb-related and halide vacancy defects, thus inhibiting halide ion migration and stabilizing the perovskite lattice (Fig. S22, ESI).
Then, we performed steady-state photoluminescence (PL), time-resolved PL (TRPL), and transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy to understand the electron transport process at the ETL/perovskite interface. As depicted in Fig. S23 and Table S7 (ESI), all the modified samples exhibited stronger PL quenching and shorter PL lifetime (τpl) than those of the control, suggesting more effective electron transport at the ETL/perovskite interface due to reduced film defects and adjusted interfacial energy level alignment. Fig. S24 (ESI) exhibits the two-dimensional pseudocolor plots and TA spectra at different delay times, in which the photobleaching (PB) negative peak at around 660 nm corresponds to the ground state bleaching and stimulated emission of perovskite films, while the photoinduced absorption (PA) positive peak at 570–630 nm can be assigned to the absorption of transient species. Apparently, the PB negative peak intensity of the modified samples is significantly decreased compared with that of CsPbI2Br films on the pristine ETL, implying enhanced electron extraction efficiency. Moreover, the average TA lifetime (τta) of the PB negative peak was also obtained by fitting kinetic decay traces, as shown in Fig. S25 and Table S8 (ESI). The reduced τta values of the modified samples suggested that cesium modulators could construct a charge injection “bridge” between CsPbI2Br and ZnO to passivate interfacial defects and accelerate electron transport. To quantify the Nt of perovskite films on the different substrates, we performed SCLC measurements. As illustrated in Fig. 4j and Table S9 (ESI), all the modified samples exhibited lower Nt values, which is beneficial for inhibiting charge accumulation and halide ion migration. In addition, we also observed that the light absorption of the modified perovskite films was slightly stronger than that of the control, while the Eg remained unchanged (Fig. S26, ESI).
Interfacial residual strain is considered to be one of the reasons for perovskite defects and structural instability. To estimate the lattice distortion of CsPbI2Br films, depth-dependent grazing incidence XRD (GIXRD) measurements (Fig. S27, ESI) were conducted. In depth-dependent GIXRD plots, the shift of the diffraction peak to a lower 2θ angle is a signature for tensile strain, whereas a shift of diffraction peak to a higher angle represents the existence of compressive strain. As displayed in Fig. S28a (ESI), the diffraction peak of the (100) plane of CsPbI2Br films on the pristine ETL was obviously shifted to lower angles by varying the grazing incidence angle (ω) from 0.3° to 1.2°, demonstrating depth-dependent lattice distortion. In particular, the d-spacing value of the perovskite surface was much smaller than that of the bottom interface, further suggesting the existence of serious tensile strain near the bottom interface owing to different thermal expansion coefficients between CsPbI2Br and ZnO (Fig. 4k). In contrast, the CsPbI2Br films on the doped ZnO ETLs presented a significantly reduced shift of diffraction peak in the same depth ranges (Fig. S28b–d, ESI), indicating the alleviated lattice expansion (Fig. 4k) and hence evidently released tensile strain near the ETL/perovskite interface (Fig. 4l). We further precisely quantified the residual strain of CsPbI2Br films using Williamson–Hall analysis by plotting βcosθ versus 4sinθ from the XRD pattern, where β is the FWHM value. As shown in Fig. 4m and S29 (ESI), the cesium modulators did reduce the lattice strain of CsPbI2Br films near the bottom interface, which is in accordance with depth-dependent GIXRD results. As discussed above, the released interfacial residual strain could be attributed to the interactions between cesium modulators and under-coordinated Pb2+ ions from the bottom of perovskite films.
Based on the above results, we fabricated the C-IPSCs with a planar structure of glass/ITO/pristine or doped ZnO/CsPbI2Br/carbon to evaluate the impact of cesium modulators on the photovoltaic performance. Fig. 5a exhibits the schematic structure and cross-sectional SEM image of the CsTFA-modified device, in which the average thickness of ZnO-CsTFA, CsPbI2Br, and carbon is about 40 nm, 420 nm, and 18.8 μm, respectively. We also proposed the effect of different ETLs on the charge transport process at the buried interface, as shown in Fig. 5b. The dependence of device performance on the cesium modulator concentration is illustrated in Fig. S30 (ESI), and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Tables S10–12 (ESI). Encouragingly, a maximum PCE of 14.25% was achieved for CsTFA-modified C-IPSCs (Fig. 5c–f and Tables 1 and S13, ESI). To the best of our knowledge, it is the highest PCE among all the ZnO-based C-IPSCs reported so far (Fig. 5g and Table S14, ESI). Meanwhile, the modified devices also showed less J–V hysteresis (Fig. 5c–f and Table S13, ESI), which may be attributed to reduced charge accumulation, passivated film defects, and inhibited halide ion migration. Fig. S31a (ESI) shows the steady-state short-circuit current density (Jsc) profiles within 400 s at the maximum power point. Notably, the Jsc values of the modified devices stayed almost constant with time, confirming again the reduced J–V hysteresis of the modified devices. The steady-state PCE values from Fig. S31b and Table S15 (ESI) were also in good agreement with the reverse scan (RS) values obtained from J–V results (Fig. 5c–f and Tables 1 and S13, ESI). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves in Fig. 5h verified the Jsc values derived from the J–V curves in Fig. 5c–f and showed a good match within 3% deviation. Fig. S32 (ESI) exhibits the statistical distributions of photovoltaic parameters from 30 individual devices with or without cesium modulators. Obviously, the improved PCE in the modified devices derived from the simultaneous enhancement of Voc, Jsc and fill factor (FF). In addition, a slightly improved reproducibility was also observed for the modified devices compared to the control device.
Device

V
oc (V)

J
sc
 (mA cm−2)

J
sc
 (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)

a Best PCE.
b Average PCE from 30 individual devices.
c Measured Jsc values from J–V curves.
d Integrated Jsc values from EQE curves.

ZnO
1.201
14.71
14.39
0.669
11.82 (10.81)
ZnO-CsAc
1.253
14.86
14.47
0.736
13.70 (12.56)
ZnO-CsF
1.259
14.92
14.58
0.743
13.96 (12.88)
ZnO-CsTFA
1.269
14.95
14.72
0.751
14.25 (13.22)
To study the origin of improved Voc, Mott–Schottky analysis was conducted and the results are plotted in Fig. S33a and Table S16 (ESI). Obviously, the Vbi values of the modified devices were higher than that of the control device. The higher Vbi values can give rise to a larger driving force for charge separation and induce an expanded depletion region to suppress interfacial charge accumulation/recombination, which is the main reason for the increased Voc and reduced J–V hysteresis in the modified devices. We ascribed the increased Vbi values to the adjusted interfacial energy level alignment at the ETL/perovskite interface (Fig. S33b, ESI). Moreover, the larger slope of the modified devices further illustrated the lower interfacial charge density. According to the SEM images in Fig. 4e–h and S10 (ESI), we speculated that the lower Jsc and FF values of the control device might be attributed to the poor interfacial contact and shunt pathways produced by the porous ZnO ETL, which will cause serious interfacial charge recombination (Fig. 5b). In contrast, the pinhole-free and continuous doped ZnO ETLs could avoid the direct contact between CsPbI2Br films and ITO glass to promote electron transport. This result was further verified by the lower leakage current and smaller ideality factor (m) in dark J–V curves (Fig. S34a, ESI).
To further understand charge carrier dynamics during device operation, a series of characterization experiments were carried out. Fig. S34b (ESI) presents the Nyquist plots and corresponding equivalent circuit model. The fitted parameters are summarized in Table S17 (ESI). Compared with the control device, the modified devices exhibited decreased series resistance (Rs) and contact resistance (Rtra) as well as increased recombination resistance (Rrec), indicating enhanced charge transport and suppressed charge recombination owing to reduced film defects and energy level differences, resulting in the improvement of Voc and FF. Fig. S34c (ESI) shows the normalized transient photocurrent (TPC) decay curves of the C-IPSCs. Apparently, the modified devices had shorter charge transport time (τtra) than that of the control device (Table S18, ESI), suggesting much improved charge extraction efficiency. Meanwhile, a longer charge recombination lifetime (τrec) of the modified devices was observed from the transient photovoltage (TPV) decay curves (Fig. S34d and Table S19, ESI), which implies a suppressed charge recombination process, as further illuminated by light intensity (Plight)-dependent J–V measurements. As shown in Fig. S34e (ESI), the linear slopes of the modified devices were smaller than that of the control device, which means that cesium modulators could effectively suppress trap-assisted recombination. Furthermore, the Jscversus Plight relationship was fitted by a power-law equation (Jsc ∝ PlightΦ), where Φ values close to one represented a less bimolecular recombination in the modified devices (Fig. S34f, ESI).
Finally, the effect of cesium modulators on the long-term stability of perovskite films and devices was investigated. As shown in Fig. S35 (ESI), the color of the control film changed from brown to yellow after aging in ambient air (25 °C, 20–30% relative humidity (RH)) for 800 h, and the absorption intensity sharply decayed as the aging time increased. More importantly, an absorption signal of the δ-phase CsPbI2Br at about 450 nm (Fig. S36, ESI) emerged, indicating a partial transition from the α-phase to the δ-phase. In spite of this, the α-phase is still dominant in the control film. Therefore, a small amount of δ-phase has little effect on the Eg of CsPbI2Br, which is consistent with previous reports. In contrast, the perovskite films on the doped ZnO films presented a mitigated variation trend in the film color and absorption spectra under the same conditions, suggesting inhibited moisture-induced phase degradation, as further confirmed by the temporal evolution of XRD patterns (Fig. 6a–d). This improved moisture stability could be ascribed to increased hydrophobicity caused by reduced film defects (Fig. S37, ESI). Therefore, the modified devices without encapsulation were more stable than the control device (Fig. 6e). In addition, the modified C-IPSCs demonstrated better thermal (85 °C, 20–30% RH) and UV light stability (365 nm UV light irradiation) compared to the control device (Fig. 6f–g), which is closely related to passivated film defects, released interfacial residual strain, and inhibited halide ion migration, as was discussed above.

In summary, we have demonstrated an effective strategy for improving the PCE and stability of CsPbI2Br C-IPSCs by using cesium salts with functional anions of Ac−, F− and TFA− to modulate the deposition of ZnO films. Detailed analyses suggest that these multifunctional cesium modulators can simultaneously passivate the defects of ZnO and top perovskite films via coordinating with both Zn2+ and Pb2+ ions. Meanwhile, the Cs+ ions can substitute for the H+ of –OH groups and form a Zn–O–Cs interfacial dipole on the surface of ZnO film. Compared with Ac− and F−, TFA− is the most effective in promoting interfacial electron extraction and transport. Accordingly, the CsTFA-modified devices achieve a maximum PCE of 14.25% with less J–V hysteresis, which is currently the highest value reported for ZnO-based C-IPSCs. Furthermore, the optimized devices without encapsulation exhibit improved long-term stability in ambient air. This work provides a simple and cost-effective route for preparing efficient and stable C-IPSCs in the future.


X. Zhang: methodology, investigation, formal analysis, data curation, writing – original draft. D. Zhang: conceptualization, methodology, formal analysis, data curation. T. Guo: methodology, validation, data curation. J. Zou: validation, data curation. J. Jin: validation, data curation. C. Zheng: validation, data curation. Y. Zhou: validation, data curation. Z. Zhu: validation, data curation. Z. Hu: methodology, funding acquisition. Q. Cao: conceptualization, methodology. S. Wu: methodology, resources. J. Zhang: conceptualization, methodology, resources. Q. Tai: conceptualization, supervision, resources, project administration, funding acquisition, investigation, writing – review & editing. All authors discussed the results and commented on the manuscript.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61974106). Dr Zhao Hu was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 52103229) and Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (No. 2021A1515110632). The authors would like to thank SCI-GO (https://www.sci-go.com/) and Shiyanjia Lab (https://www.shiyanjia.com/) for the support with XPS characterization and DFT analysis, and Dr Ye Ma and Dr Mingyuan Du from the Core Facility of Wuhan University for their assistance with AFM, KPFM and FTIR measurements and data analysis.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3ta00493g
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023