 DOI: 10.1039/D0NJ04318D
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 20212-20221


Sadia
Shahbaz
,

Asif Ali
Tahir
,

Tapas
Mallick
,

Idris Al
Siyabi
,

Bandar Y.
Alfaifi
 and 

Safeer
Ahmed
*

Department of Chemistry, Quaid-i-Azam University, 45320, Islamabad, Pakistan. E-mail: safeerad@qau.edu.pk; Fax: +92-51-90642241; Tel: +92-51-90642145

Environment and Sustainability Institute (ESI), University of Exeter, Penryn Campus, TR10 9FE, UK

Received
31st August 2020
, Accepted 26th October 2020
First published on 27th October 2020
A polymer gel electrolyte (PGE), using poly(styrene-co-acrylonitrile) (SAN) as a gelator, 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide (BMIMI) as the ionic liquid, and lithium iodide (LiI) as a source of iodide ions, is synthesized and investigated for its performance while employing it in a quasi-solid-state dye-sensitized solar cell using a N719 sensitizer and an I−/I3− redox couple. The PGEs are synthesized using different wt% of SAN and the relative amounts of LiI and I2 are optimized for iodide ion (I−) and triiodide ion (I3−) generation and their influence on the photovoltaic performance of the devices was investigated. On optimizing the PGE composition, the device gives an ionic conductivity of 7.00 mS cm−1, with a triiodide diffusion coefficient of 7.28 × 10−5 cm2 s−1, ensuring efficient polymer networks for the mobility of ionic species. The absorption edge for all PGEs lies close to ∼420 nm having transparency of more than 80% in the visible and NIR region. Impedance analysis evidently supports 17 wt% SAN as the optimum composition for PGE with better charge transfer and a decrease in recombination rate and considerable improvement in the electron lifetime. The highest photovoltaic conversion efficiency is 6.72% with the 17 wt% SAN PGE.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have attracted considerable and widespread attention after the work reported by O’Regan and Gratzel in 1991. As promising substitutes for organic photovoltaic devices, they have become more pronounced due to their low cost, lightweight, environmental friendliness, and relatively high conversion efficiencies. The typical device consists of a dye molecule decorated wide bandgap semiconductor (usually TiO2) based photoanode, electrolyte solution, and a counter electrode (usually platinum coated on conductive oxide glass). Generally, an iodide triiodide (I−/I3−) based liquid electrolyte is employed in the device. The photoexcited electrons from the dye molecules are transferred to the semiconductor conduction band which in turn transfers them to the external circuit and the oxidized dye molecules are regenerated through chemical reduction by the iodide ions in the electrolyte. The so-formed triiodide ions are reduced back to iodide ions on the counter electrode due to the electrons in the external circuit. As a result, the cycle is completed while regenerating the photocurrent. Liquid electrolyte based DSSCs have achieved power conversion efficiencies of nearly 12.0%. However, co-sensitized DSSCs with alkoxysilyl and carboxy-anchor dyes ADEKA-1 and LEG4 enhanced the electron injection from excited dyes to TiO2 photoelectrodes and gave an overall efficiency of 14%. Such DSSCs have good conversion efficiencies but issues such as electrolyte leakage, volatility and increased interaction with the common metallic components still remain thereby hampering the activity of the device. Moreover, the liquid electrolyte based devices face thermal and chemical instability.

To confront the electrolyte leakage, solvents having low volatility such as 3-methoxy propionitrile (3-MPN) can be used but they cause rapid degradation of the device. The ultimate solution to these problems is to replace the liquid electrolyte with the solid or the quasi-solid-state electrolytes. Among them, the electrolytes possessing ionic liquids prove to be promising in exhibiting good chemical stability, high thermal stability, negligible vapour pressure, higher ionic conductivity, etc.
The quasi-solid-state DSSC seems to lie on the borderline of the liquid and the solid-state DSSCs and exhibits the merits of both. In preparing this kind of electrolyte, one of the major issues is the penetration level of the electrolyte in the mesoporous network of the semiconductor, thus resulting in poor contact with the photoelectrode. As the number of the molecular segments responsible for charge transfer is quite low as compared to that of the liquid electrolyte, the migration and vibration of these available molecular segments remain suppressed. Such issues can be overcome by the use of polymer based quasi-solid-state DSSCs as they confer stability as well as the increased charge transfer of the liquid electrolyte. The 3D framework of the polymeric matrix serves to imbibe and store the liquid electrolyte allowing the ions to move freely within the polymeric cage. Thus, the trapping mechanism can inhibit the evaporation of the solvent. Additionally, polymeric gels with a low charge transfer resistance are considered pivotal to reduce the ionic hindrance within the polymeric cage which otherwise can affect the conductivity of the device. Imidazolium iodide salts are considered as low melting solids that remain liquid at room temperature and at the same time make the polymeric material amorphous which reduces the crystallization rate. As mentioned above, ionic liquids are considered as promising alternatives to reduce the electrolyte leakage. Kubo et al. in 2002 reported the effect of the alkyl chain length on the physical properties of ionic liquids. According to their report, an increase in the alkyl chain length results in an increase in the viscosity of the ionic liquids as they are bound by weak van der Waals forces. The ultimate effect of the long and bulky alkyl chain lengths is a decrease in the conductivity of the medium. Ionic liquids with an imidazolium cation serve to develop a Helmholtz layer by adsorption on the semiconductor surface that reduces the recombination rate.
To date, various polymers and co-polymers have been used in solar cells as the electrolytes which include PVDF-HFP, PMMA, PAA-PEG, PEO-amine, PAN-VA,etc. Previously, Wu et al. in 2006 used poly(styrene-co-acrylonitrile) (SAN) with the N-methyl pyridinium iodide salt as the I− source and achieved a power conversion efficiency (PCE) value of 3.10%. The most convenient way of increasing the photovoltaic performance is to add appropriate species into the electrolyte which include various plasticizers, nanoparticles to develop nano-composites, ionic or polyionic species, etc. The addition of ethylene carbonate/propylene carbonate or nitrogenous organic compounds serves to enhance the ionic conductivity and reduces the crystallinity of the polymer electrolyte. SAN, which is a hydrophilic non-crystalline copolymer, was used by Lan et al. in 2006 where NaI was used as the iodide source with SAN as a matrix. SAN possesses an excellent ability to homogeneously comingle with the solvents which aids in its transformation to the gel state.
The purpose of using SAN in combination with an ionic liquid and LiI as the I− source is to increase the performance of the device. The infiltration is done with the in situ gelation of the liquid electrolyte of the mesoporous semiconductor network. Moreover, the effects of LiI and I2 have also been studied to check their concentration effect on the performance of the device for an optimized composition.
Considering the so far reported work it was observed that there is an urgent need to investigate SAN further in comparison to other such polymers. Furthermore, the use of an ionic liquid in combination with LiI and SAN has not been reported so far to the best of our knowledge. The current work reports on the preparation and successful use of a SAN based electrolyte using the I−/I3− redox couple and 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide (BMIMI) as the ionic liquid in DSSC devices with substantial improvement in the performance of the device. The effective response is rationalized by investigating the charge transport properties of the ions in the developed quasi-solid-state electrolyte. The use of the SAN co-polymer with an ionic liquid (BMIMI) is the main motivation of the current work. On one hand it addresses the above-mentioned issues of liquid electrolytes and on the other hand, it improves the conductivity of the medium. The use of LiI as a source of iodide ions is due to its well-established performance in the DSSCs.

Anhydrous lithium iodide (LiI) (Sigma-Aldrich), iodine (I2) (Sigma-Aldrich), 4-tert-butyl pyridine (4-TBP) (Sigma-Aldrich), poly(styrene-co-acrylonitrile, average Mw ∼165000) (Sigma-Aldrich) and 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide (BMIMI) (Sigma-Aldrich), N719 dye (Solaronix), titania pastes: 18NR-T and 18NR-AO (Dyesol), acetonitrile (ACN) (Sigma-Aldrich), and ethanol (Fischer Scientifica) were used as received.


The FTO coated glass was used as a substrate for the preparation of photoanodes and photocathodes. The FTO substrates were ultrasonicated systematically in a detergent, in distilled water, in acetone and finally in isopropanol for 15 min each. Two types of TiO2 pastes with variable particle sizes of 20 nm and 400 nm were screen printed on the conductive glass. The TiO2 pastes were screen printed (Dyesol) on the FTO conductive side to have a transparent layer of 10–12 μm thickness (20 nm particles). A scattering layer (400 nm particles) with a thickness of nearly 2–4 μm was above it. The coated layers were finally subjected to a systematic sintering process at 325 °C for 5 min, 375 °C for 5 min, 450 °C for 15 min, and 500 °C for 30 min and then dipped in the dye solution prepared in ethanol at 80 °C for at least 24 h. The counter electrodes were prepared by drop-casting a 0.5 mM solution of hexachloroplatinic acid in isopropanol and sintered at 450 °C for 30 min.


The gel based quasi-solid-state electrolytes were prepared with various compositions of the SAN polymer dissolved in acetonitrile. The redox couple was the iodide triiodide (I−/I3−) system. The precursor combination employed was 0.1 M LiI, 0.05 M I2, 0.5 M 4-TBP and 0.6 M BMIMI. To have a homogeneous gel-based system, various compositions of the SAN polymer were dissolved in acetonitrile and were continuously stirred for 5–6 h at 80–85 °C for efficient solubility and uniform distribution of the polymer in the solvent. After prolonged stirring, LiI and I2 were added to the polymer solution followed by the addition of 4-TBP and the ionic liquid. The prepared electrolyte solution was stirred continuously until it assumed the viscous gel like appearance. The structure of the co-polymer, photo of the gel electrolytes and differentiation of liquid and gel electrolytes are shown in Fig. 1. The SEM images of the deposited pastes as photoanodes are shown in Fig. 2.


The components were assembled into sandwich type assembly which consisted of a photoanode, made up of two different kinds of titania pastes decorated with the dye molecules, and a platinum counter electrode. The electrolyte was injected between the two electrodes with a sheet of Surlyn as a sealing spacer and pressed thoroughly for efficient adsorption of the gel while ensuring no leakage. The active area of the cell was kept as 0.25 cm2.


After assembling the DSSC, the device was tested for its performance under 1 sun illumination (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2) on a Wacom solar simulator and the intensity of the lamp was adjusted with a silicon solar cell reference. The amorphous nature of the material was confirmed through XRD (Bruker D8 Advance) analysis of the gel coated FTO substrate with a Cu Kα (λ = 1.54 Å) radiation source. The scans were recorded between 5° and 70° 2θ degrees with a step size of 0.02°. Scanning electron microscopy analysis was performed using a HITACHI S3200N SEM instrument to analyse the morphology of the screen printed TiO2 layer and the gel based electrolyte. The transmittance spectra of the gel coated thin films were recorded using an UV-Vis-NIR (LAMBDA 1050 UV/Vis/NIR) spectrophotometer between 380 and 1200 nm wavelength ranges. Electrochemical measurements were recorded through a potentiostat/galvanostat (PGSTAT 302N, Autolab). The scans were run between −1.0 and +1.0 V at a scan rate of 0.05 V. For the kinetic study of the interfacial properties, impedance analysis was performed at an applied bias voltage which was set at the open circuit voltage with a perturbation amplitude of 10 mV. The scans were run in the frequency range of 10 MHz to 0.1 Hz. The impedance spectra were analysed through Z-View software elucidating the characteristics of DSSCs. The conductivity of the gel polymer electrolytes was also calculated by performing impedance spectroscopy with a sandwich type assembly.


The prepared polymer gel electrolytes (PGE), Fig. 1b, were tested on the dye sensitized TiO2 films. Various wt% of SAN were introduced in the liquid electrolyte. It was observed that moving from 5 wt% SAN to higher concentrations, the electrolyte solution transforms into a gel state at a faster rate with a decrease in the solution flow rate and apparently becomes more and more viscous on increasing the SAN content from 5 to 23 wt%.


The SEM images of homogenously screen printed TiO2 pastes on the FTO substrate shown in Fig. 2a and b under high and low resolution indicate a highly nanoporous surface structure with pore sizes in the range around 60 nm.

The XRD patterns of different wt% of the SAN based PGE are shown in Fig. 2c. The XRD analysis reveals an amorphous nature with the broadening of the peaks employing SAN as a gelator. The peaks marked with the asterisk represent those of the FTO substrate. The appearance of a broad shoulder around 22° at 2θ could be ascribed to slight ordering in the SAN matrix which further decreases as the SAN content is increased and the gel becomes more viscous. The amorphous structure helps in the migration of ions in the electrolyte system which is responsible for being conductive as well. Scanning electron microscopy was carried out to investigate the morphology of the SAN based PGE. The SEM image for the 17 wt% SAN is shown in Fig. 2d where compact and large sized flake-like structures can be seen.

The overall photoconversion efficiency is equally dependent on the ionic mobility of the redox couple which in turn depends on its ionic conductivity. The conductivity values of the I−/I3− redox couple for the gel based quasi-solid-state DSSCs with SAN as the gelator were calculated through electrochemical impedance analysis. The intersection point at the x-axis of the Nernstian plot gives the values for the bulk resistance of the material. The relationship employed for measuring the conductivity is

σ = t/(Rb/A)
(1)
where “
t” represents the thickness of the material or the spacing between the two electrodes, “Rb” is the bulk resistance which is obtained from the intercept of the Nyquist plot and “A” represents the area of the material under measurement. Table 1 shows the ionic conductivity values for different compositions of the PGE. An increase in ionic conductivity renders the accretion of charge carriers. The maximum is found for 17 wt% SAN which is nearly 7.00 mS cm−1. The σ for the liquid electrolyte was 7.2 mS cm−1. The comparable ionic conductivity of 17 wt% SAN PGE to that of the liquid electrolyte is well reflected later in the photoconversion efficiency results. It is reported that an increase in the ionic conductivity also reflects the improved reaction kinetics of the device. Usually, at higher concentrations of the polymer, the cage structure of the polymer creates hindrance in the mobility of the ions resulting in the reduced flow rate of the electrolyte. Moreover, the hindrance might be due to a reduction in the size of the cage which causes a drop in the ionic conductivity value. Another probable reason for the drop in the ionic conductivity at 23 wt% of polymer addition is the aggregation of the ionic species which leads to a decrease in the surface area. The electrolyte uptake capability is dependent on the pore structure of the PGE. The increased surface area leads to the better imbibition and percolation of the electrolyte in the mesoporous network of the semiconductor, providing variable routes for ionic transportation. Obviously, conductivity is not the only factor determining the performance of the DSSCs. Other factors accounting for the purpose, including the extent of penetration of the gel electrolyte into the TiO2 particles, the structural pattern (amorphous or crystalline) of the gel, etc. play their roles in making the material appropriate for the application. The disorder in the PGE's creates free spaces, voids, and the channels for efficient ionic transportation that ultimately increases ionic conductivity. However, the presence of the crystalline regions blocks the transport pathways for ionic mobility that eventually affects the diffusion of the electrolyte in the mesoporous structure of the photoanode and thus the photoconversion performance of the device. The developed gel showed overwhelmingly an amorphous nature which helped in the interlinkage between the semiconductor nanoparticles and the gel.

Polymer gel electrolytes

D
app/10−5 cm2 s−1
*σ (mS cm−1)

R
s (Ω)
RCT1 (Ω)
RCT2 (Ω)

τ (s)
%ηcc
5 wt% SAN
7.01
5.27
19.43
11.18
12.41
0.15
39.0
11 wt% SAN
7.20
5.90
21.36
20.41
12.73
0.10
37.0
17 wt% SAN
7.28
7.00
17.09
17.36
18.34
0.14
51.4
23 wt% SAN
6.66
5.03
22.26
25.53
14.40
0.15
39.1

A sandwiched type assembly was employed to measure the diffusion coefficient of the ions while measuring the limiting current density. A cyclic voltammetry technique was employed to assess the apparent diffusibility of the ions through the PGE and to measure the limiting current density using a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. The obtained response is shown in Fig. 3 which shows zero current between −0.54 V and +0.25 V and then an exponential increase at these extreme values for the reduction and oxidation currents leveling off to limit the current density. From the figure, it is apparent that the limiting current density is a bit higher for the liquid electrolyte in the oxidation current which indicates a reasonable transport of ions in the PGE system. Under the applied voltage, the following reaction takes place on the working electrode.
3I− → I3− + 2e−
As the iodide ions are found in excess, the process is limited by the concentration of triiodide ions. The apparent diffusion co-efficient values are calculated by the following formula:
(2)
where ‘
n’ represents the number of electrons, ‘F’ is Faraday's constant, ‘L’ represents the distance between the electrodes, and  is the molar concentration of the I2. As the iodide/triiodide-based system is a two-electron system, n = 2. As shown in Fig. 3, the calculated apparent diffusion co-efficient for 17 wt% SAN turns out to be higher in magnitude than the one for 11 wt% SAN. Though the diffusion ability of the liquid electrolyte is higher than that of the gel based, the 3-D network is found to be efficient enough in facilitating the ionic mobility. From the values in Table 1, it is evident that the apparent diffusion coefficient values gradually decrease with the increase in the polymer content. The apparent diffusion coefficient value of the triiodide ions for the 17 wt% polymer addition is 7.28 × 10−5 cm2 s−1 whereby the minimum value recorded is 6.66 × 10−5 cm2 s−1 for the 23 wt% polymer addition. The observed decrease agrees with the apparent viscous nature of the polymer electrolyte. The diffusion of the triiodide ions was hampered leading to the slow movement of the ions which results in the reduction of the limiting current densities.


Spectral studies of the FTO substrate and various SAN based gel polymer electrolytes were carried out by measuring the transmittance spectra in the UV-vis-NIR region. It can be seen from Fig. 4 that the absorption edge for all the gel based polymer electrolytes lies at the start of the visible region (∼420 nm) whereas they are transparent in the rest of the visible region with the maximum transparency shown by 23 wt% SAN which decreases with the decrease in the polymer content. The high transmittance indicates the smooth surfaces of the deposited films that ultimately reduce the light scattering of the incident light and thus a greater number of photons will be able to pass through the transparent layer to the adsorbed dye. The sufficiently high transmittance clearly indicates the compatibility of the gel electrolyte with the DSSC devices while absorbing minimum light and allowing the dye molecules to absorb maximum light. The inset shows the photograph of the prepared PGE films on FTO having very good homogeneity and transparency with a yellow luster.


To understand the charge kinetics the developed quasi-solid-state DSSC devices were subjected to impedance analysis and measurements were carried out at room temperature. The measurements were performed in the dark, under open circuit voltage with the sandwiched type assembly. The obtained results are depicted in Fig. 5 and Table 1. The two semicircles observed in the Nyquist plot represent two types of resistor elements in the device. The first one, observed in the high frequency region, represents the charge transfer resistance at the counter electrode and the electrolyte, referred to as RCT1, and the second semicircle, observed in the middle frequency region, represents the resistance at the photoelectrode/dye and the electrolyte interface, referred to as RCT2. A third, low frequency semicircle is usually absent due to the overlap of the middle frequency semicircle which is far more intense. It is apparent from the Nyquist plots and the corresponding data that the RCT1 values are small, justifying the fast transfer of electron across the counter electrode–electrolyte interface. Relatively higher values of the so-called series resistance (Rs) are understandable in compact sandwich type solar cells in contrast to solution cell impedance measurements where the Rs values are far smaller than the charge transfer resistance. The effect of higher Rs values is also observable in the decreased FF values discussed in the photovoltaic analysis section. The conforming equivalent circuit diagram is shown at the top of Fig. 5a, where R1, R2, and R3 correspond to Rs, RCT1 and RCT2, respectively. The constant phase elements (CPE1 and CPE2) are the circuit elements referring to the imperfect capacitance of the electrical double layer. For the prepared quasi-solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells the amount of SAN significantly affected the charge transfer resistance process. The highest RCT1 is for the electrolyte with the highest polymer content. However, the RCT1 value for the 17 wt% polymer content is low as compared to that of the 23 wt%, which indicates the increased electro-activity at the electrolyte/platinum interface for 17 wt% SAN. The increased value of the RCT1 for the 23 wt% polymer content is in accordance with the lower ionic conductivity of the PGE ascribed to the poor penetration of the electrolyte ions for higher wt% of SAN beyond the optimized value.

As far as the charge transfer process at the semiconductor electrolyte interface is concerned, the RCT2 value for the 17 wt% polymer content is the highest, among others. It is well accepted that the higher the values of charge recombination resistance (here RCT2), the more difficult the electron–hole recombination thus resulting in the less favored charge recombination process. This could also be interpreted in terms of the apparent viscosity as higher viscosity of the electrolyte with the 17 wt% polymer content decreases the I3− and the TiO2 contact resulting in the reduced recombination process that ultimately is responsible for the increment in the photoconversion efficiency of the device. For the electrolyte with the 23 wt% polymer content, the charge recombination resistance is still high (but lower than that of 17 wt% SAN), however, the high polymer content leads to the increased apparent viscosity, which slows down the diffusion of the electrolyte effectively in the mesoporous TiO2 layer. This low electrolyte penetration level in turn reduces the Jsc of the device. The higher charge transfer resistance can also be attributed to the increased viscosity of the electrolyte that resists the flow and causes slower iodide ion regeneration from the I3− reduction at the Pt electrode. The systematic impedance pattern change, for RCT1 and RCT2, is further obvious from the Bode plots (Fig. 5b) which complements the above discussion. Here the RCT2 appears first in the low frequency region followed by RCT1 in the high frequency region with a typical phase angle variation for the quasi-reversible charge transfer process. The corresponding frequencies of RCT2 for varied amounts of SAN were used to calculate the electron lifetime.
The charge collection efficiency (ηcc) is a very important parameter, Fig. S1 (ESI), which gives the effectiveness of the charge carriers transported from the TiO2 conduction band to the FTO substrate and thus to the external circuit. The following relationship is used to calculate the charge collection efficiency.
%ncc = 1/[1 + (Rs/RCT2)]
(3)
The highest charge collection efficiency is recorded for the electrolyte with the 17 wt% polymer content which is supported by its increased ionic conductivity. This is further complemented by the maximum charge recombination resistance values preventing the electrons in the TiO2 conduction band from recombining with the I3− ions in the electrolyte. The electron lifetime can be calculated from the Bode plot (Fig. 5b) according to the following relationship:
τ = 1/2πfmin
(4)
where
fmin corresponds to the peak frequency of the curves towards the lower frequency. The electron lifetime is related to the recombination centers and the trap states; the more trap states, the longer the lifetime, whereas the reverse is true for the recombination centers. The electron lifetime is found to be comparable for all the compositions except that of 11 wt% SAN.


Improving the performance of the device would require the optimization of the concentration of different components as well. The role of iodide ions in the electrolyte is to regenerate the dye molecules whereas the triiodide ions are reduced to iodide ions at the counter electrode to keep them available for the regeneration of dye molecules. Consequently, both the iodide and triiodide ions are considered to be essential parameters for determining the performance of the cell, and for certain concentrations, the process becomes the limiting one. The effect of LiI was considered by varying the concentration from 0.1 M to 0.5 M while keeping the concentration of I2 constant and vice versa; i.e. by varying the concentrations of I2 at a fixed concentration of LiI.

The maximum conductivity values are recorded for an I2 concentration of 0.05 M among all the compositions of the electrolyte. For the ample amount of iodide ions, I− in the electrolyte, the rate of reduction of ionized dye molecules by I− ions increases which compensates for the energy loss through this channel. A similar trend in conductivity values has also been observed. It seems that the charge transfer resistance at the counter electrode/electrolyte interface is low and thus a negative shift in the conduction band edge of the TiO2 film has been observed for 0.1 M LiI.
For the low concentrations of LiI in the electrolyte, the system remains in its homogenous state as the polymer cage can hold all the ions efficiently. Whereas for the higher concentrations of either LiI or I2 (Fig. 6), the generation of I3− ions increases which is responsible for the generation of dark current by recombining with the TiO2 conduction band electrons. Moreover, the state of ions also gets affected by the change in the mode of ions from solvated to contact ones. As a result, a phase disengagement between the polymer matrix and solvent molecules is observed which leads to the reduction in the mobility of charge carriers.
For 0.5 M LiI (see Fig. S2(a and b), ESI), a marked decrease in Jsc is mainly due to the slow diffusion of the triiodide ions in the electrolyte that ultimately results in the low photovoltage of the cells. However, its increase reflects the increased interaction of the cations with the polymer matrix thus making the favorable transport of the triiodide and iodide ions. A higher Voc observed at a low concentration of LiI is due to the increased concentration of electrons in the TiO2 film. The results of J–V curves are also compatible with the shift of the TiO2 conduction band towards the positive direction due to the adsorption of the cations. It is observed that for all the ratios of the LiI and I2, there is a decrease in the Voc values with the increase in the concentrations. As mentioned earlier, Voc is mainly affected by the recombination reactions occurring at the semiconductor/electrolyte interface. For the increasing concentration of I2, the concentration of I3− ions also increases which results in the increase in the recombination reactions leading to the decrease in the Voc of the devices. On the other hand, by varying the concentration of LiI at a given concentration of I2, the Voc again decreases. This is because the [I3−] ions are constant, and the counter ions play a significant role by adsorbing on the surface of the TiO2 and shifting the conduction band edge positively. The observations were validated by the J–V profiles discussed below. In addition, the presence of the ionic liquid also facilitates the transport properties in the device.
At high LiI concentration, a decrease in the conductivity as shown in Fig. 6 can be seen, which is due to the formation of excessive polyiodide species along with the iodide ions. On the other hand, free lithium ions have the tendency to penetrate the TiO2 surface or in the crystal lattice as well. So, the concentration of free lithium ions can increase or decrease depending upon the strength of the interaction with the polymer matrix.

The photovoltaic characteristics of the dye-sensitized solar cells, employing various wt% of SAN, have been measured under 1 sun illumination, 100 mW cm−2 (AM 1.5). The behavior of different compositions of the electrolyte and their effects on the characteristic parameters, open circuit voltage (Voc), short circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF), and the photoconversion efficiency (η), are shown in Fig. 7 and Fig. S3 (ESI) with the corresponding data given in Table 2.

Polymer gel electrolytes

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
%FF
%η
Liquid
8.22 ± 0.03
0.776 ± 0.003
67 ± 1.5
4.3 ± 0.1
5 wt% SAN
13.07 ± 0.03
0.826 ± 0.003
57 ± 1.8
6.2 ± 0.3
11 wt% SAN
14.81 ± 0.02
0.824 ± 0.003
48 ± 2.2
6.0 ± 0.4
17 wt% SAN
13.11 ± 0.03
0.854 ± 0.006
60 ± 1.7
6.7 ± 0.1
23 wt% SAN
10.47 ± 0.03
0.861 ± 0.007
62 ± 2.0
5.6 ± 0.3
It is apparent from Fig. 7 and the data that the devices with PGE showed improved Jsc and Voc values in comparison to the device with the liquid electrolyte. The Jsc values increased considerably even up to 80% of the current density of liquid electrolyte. The increase in Voc was small as expected, e.g. 17 wt% of SAN showed a value of 0.854 V in comparison to the value of 0.776 V of the liquid electrolyte. Table 2 clearly shows the dependence of Jsc, Voc, FF, and finally the efficiency on the composition of the electrolyte and it can be inferred that the performance of the device strongly relies upon the concentration of the polymer used. As the FF indicates the extent of energy loss, a higher FF would result in a minimum loss of energy. Though the presence of the ionic liquid increases the conductivity of the liquid electrolyte, at the same time it causes hindrance in the diffusion of ions due to higher viscosity. As a result, the Jsc and PCE of the device decrease, as apparent from Table 2.
The maximum current density (Jsc) is obtained for 11 wt% SAN but the fill factor turned out to be approximately 60 to 63% for 17 wt% SAN resulting in the maximum power conversion efficiency value of 6.72% (up to 7.05% for some devices). The light harvesting efficiency also depends on the nature of the dye which is kept the same and thus acted as a constant parameter here. The lower values of the FF for the rest of the samples indicate the overdosing of the polymeric segments providing low sites for ionic mobility. It is interesting to mention that the so far reported maximum efficiency of a quasi-solid-state DSSC based on SAN is 3.10% which used N-methyl pyridinium iodide as the iodide source whereas the use of ionic liquid in the current work boosted the device performance by more than 100% i.e. the efficiency increased up to 6.72%. In a similar work by Lan et al. using SAN with a solvent mixture of ethylene carbonate/propylene carbonate (EC/PC) using 0.5 M N-methyl pyridinium iodide, the device gave a FF of 53%, conversion efficiency of 2.75% and the ionic conductivity for this composition was 4.63 mS cm−1. In the current work, SAN was first tested with EC/PC using LiI/I2 as a source of iodide ions but the output was quite low. Therefore, the solvent system was changed with acetonitrile and an ionic liquid was included which considerably increased the ionic conductivity up to 7.00 mS cm−1 and the device PCE to 6.72%. Moreover, other photovoltaic parameters also showed significant improvement as given below in Table 2.
It can be seen from the data in Table 2, that the maximum Voc is recorded for 23 wt% SAN and then for 17 wt% SAN, which then decreased for the lower polymer content. With a lower concentration of SAN, a positive shift of the Fermi level of the TiO2 conduction band has been suggested which results in a decrease in the Voc of the cell. This systematic decrease may be due to the increased interaction or the adsorption of the Li+ ions on the surface of the TiO2. The Jsc is mainly affected by the diffusion rate of the triiodide ions and it was noticed that the Jsc is at the maximum value for 11 wt% SAN. The slightly higher value than that of 17 wt% SAN cells could be ascribed to the change in resistors offered by different interfaces.
The high ionic conductivity values for 17 wt% SAN and 11 wt% SAN also support the development of the Helmholtz layer which dramatically reduces the adsorption of the Li+ ions on the TiO2 surface. This high value of Jsc indicates the increased level of the charge density in the TiO2 conduction band and it is assumed that the electrons in the TiO2 conduction band show an exponential charge recombination phenomenon with the holes in the electrolyte. The existence of multiple traps and the exponential charge recombination phenomenon results in the reduction of the FF as well. The optimized wt% of SAN, for the highest efficiency, is well complemented by the power output plot as shown in Fig. 7b. The deviation in the trends of FF and PCE for 11 wt% SAN indicates some sort of effect on the transport properties of the ions which needs to be further investigated. A recent review on different types of gel electrolytes in DSSC devices is a good reference and inspiration to further investigate the developed PGE matrix in this work.

A series of poly(styrene-co-acrylonitrile) SAN based quasi-solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells were successfully fabricated using the iodide/triiodide redox couple. The effect of variable wt% of the copolymer was studied and the best device efficiency was achieved after optimizing the concentration of the iodide/triiodide redox couple at a molar ratio of 2 for LiI/I2 in the electrolyte. The use of ionic liquid BMIMI and LiI as the iodide source in the SAN based gel electrolyte enhanced the performance by more than 100% i.e. the photoconversion efficiency increased from the so far reported value of 3.10% to 6.72% in the current work. Among all the studied compositions of SAN, the 17 wt% composition showed the highest PCE upon irradiation with 100 mW cm−2 light intensity. The improved performance is ascribed to the higher mobility of ionic species in the presence of LiI as compared to N-methyl pyridinium iodide. The adsorption of smaller sized Li+ cations in the presence of ionic liquid accelerated the driving force for electron injection from the sensitizer LUMO level to the TiO2 conduction band. The resultant rapid electron dynamics led to the substantial increase in Jsc and a minor improvement in Voc values. Furthermore, at a molar ratio of 2 for LiI/I2, a maximum ionic conductivity with the increased diffusion rate of triiodide ions was achieved. The amorphous nature of the co-polymer with a large number of free volume cages was assumed to be there which assisted in the movement of the ions through the polymer chains and thus contributed to the ionic conduction. This work will be a well-meaning reference to those working on solar energy devices, particularly those who are investigating a semi-solid electrolyte to be used in DSSCs or in other energy devices. Considering the potential response of the prepared PGE and small deviations in the trends of some of the parameters it is worth exploring the PGE matrix further. The possible aspects could be, but are not limited to, various new constituent compositions, photoelectrochemical and thermal stability, the kinetics of various charge transfer processes, etc.


The authors have no competing interests to declare.


We are very grateful to the Higher Education Commission (HEC) of Pakistan for financial support through the NRPU Project No. 20-2232 and the fellowship for six months IRSIP (International research support initiative program).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0nj04318d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2020