 DOI: 10.1039/D1QI01458G
(Research Article)
Inorg. Chem. Front., 2022, 9, 1785-1793


Xuan
Zheng
*,

Xin
Miao
,

Yufei
Xiao
,

Lei
Guo
,

Yalin
Wang
,

Tao
Hu
,

Xinghou
Gong
,

Chonggang
Wu
 and 

Chuanxi
Xiong


Hubei Provincial Key Laboratory of Green Materials for Light Industry, Collaborative Innovation Center of Green Lightweight Materials and Processing, and School of Materials and Chemical Engineering, Hubei University of Technology, Wuhan, 430068, China. E-mail: zx88@hbut.edu.cn

State Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology for Materials Synthesis and Processing, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, 430070, China

Received
19th November 2021
, Accepted 27th February 2022
First published on 28th February 2022
Two-dimensional (2D) tungsten diselenide (WSe2), a novel layered transition metal dichalcogenide (TMDC) with a fascinating structure and remarkable functionalities, has been extensively investigated for various promising applications, including photodetectors, photocatalysis, and solar cells. In this work, WSe2 nanoflakes (NF-WSe2) have been obtained by liquid-phase exfoliation. In addition, the unique crystalline structure and desirable electrical properties of the as-exfoliated NF-WSe2 in polymer solar cells (PSCs) are presented. Notably, NF-WSe2 can effectively boost hole transport in PSCs, attributed to its higher uniformity on indium tin oxide (ITO), suitable ionization potential (IP) and enhanced charge transport properties. PSCs based on the ternary bulk-heterojunction poly[N-9′-heptadecanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole)] (PCDTBT):[6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) + β-carotene (bCar) with NF-WSe2 as the hole transport layer (HTL) are realized with superior photovoltaic characteristics. Furthermore, the implementation of the NF-WSe2 HTL also prominently increases the long-term durability of PSCs compared with that of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) reference cells. This study represents a milestone for the integration of WSe2 in the enhancement of device performance in PSCs.

Solar cells, a renewable eco-energy source that converts solar power into electric energy, are an effectively inexhaustible energy source which can play an essential role as a substitute for existing fossil fuels to fulfil the worldwide goal of carbon neutrality. As such, bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) polymer solar cells (PSCs) have unprecedented opportunities, attributed to their flexibility, low cost, light weight, and solution processability. Although the power conversion efficiency (PCE) values of non-fullerene solar cells have already been demonstrated to reach over 18% within the past year, there is still a lack of proficient strategies to realize long-term operational stability. The active layers of PSCs formed by non-fullerene acceptors have higher PCEs than those devices utilizing fullerene acceptors (PC71BM), but the non-fullerene acceptors makes them susceptible to degradation caused by photo-oxidation. In order to address this negative impact, poly(2,7-carbazole-alt-dithienylbenzothiadiazole) (PCDTBT):PC71BM active blends have been shown to be amenable to address this impediment, even without encapsulation.

Previous researchers have shown that PC71BM molecules generally have low oxygen reactivity and appeared to constrain the dissemination of oxygen into the PSC active blends. As of late, a natural sustainable photosynthetic material called β-carotene (bCar) has been utilized as a low-cost alternative in a range of organic photovoltaics. bCar shows light absorption related to the excitation of an electron, which can be transferred to the LUMO of the fullerene acceptor. In fact, utilizing bCar as the electron donor associated with PC71BM in PSCs can lead to PCEs of up to 0.58%, and the inverted bCar:PC71BM PSCs display unnoticeable drops in the PCE when exposed to solar illumination for a maximum time of 6 h. However, the resulting PSCs exhibit reasonably low performances when bCar or its derivatives serve as electron donors. It is a challenge to contrive bio-inspired BHJ active layers ((PCDTBT:PC71BM) with the access to natural pigment like bCar, producing an alternative path to well-engineered PSCs.
Besides further improvement in the PSCs's photoactive materials, the hole transport layer (HTL) is a key determinant of the extraction of photogenerated carriers from the active layers. It is generally hypothesized that the most widely used hole transporting material in BHJ cells is poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS), which may contribute to the corruption of the transparent photocathode indium tin oxide (ITO). To tackle practical issues with the aforementioned drawbacks, an assortment of transition metal oxides (TMOs), like MoO3, NiOx, etc., can be regarded as preferable to PEDOT:PSS. Unfortunately, these TMOs depend on high vacuum processing, which is not consistent with overall roll-to-roll manufacturing. 2D layered TMDCs (like MoS2, WS2 and WSe2) have emerged as promising HTL candidates, owing to their high carrier mobility and excellent electrical/optical properties. In contrast to the extensive theoretical and experimental efforts on the spin- and valley-controlled applications of MoS2, as well as WS2, WSe2, with its much stronger spin–orbit coupling (SOC), 2λv = 450 me in the valence band and 2λc = 30 me in the conduction band, provides an excellent system for materials with controlled electronic properties. In spite of the advantages of their illustrated potential, the bulk of TMDC-based HTLs require vacuum deposition procedures, such as high-temperature annealing, and chemical doping for band gap tuning. In addition, controlling the morphology and consistency of solution-processed TMDC-based HTLs has also been demonstrated to be challenging. Subsequently, the improvement of solution-processed TMDCs to be utilized as dependable HTLs in PSCs is a subject of intense research.
Bulk TMDCs can be effectively exfoliated into few-layer materials via the liquid-phase exfoliation (LPE) method. Since few-layered TMDCs have been realised in different systems, including N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP), N-cyclohexyl-2-pyrrolidone (CHP), isopropanol (IPA), ethanol and indeed water, controlling the conditions allows the use of a variety of common solvents. The boiling points of both NMP and CHP are above 200 °C, which allow their consolidation into functional devices for a wide range of applications, albeit requiring advanced exfoliation yield.
In this work, we demonstrated a facile scheme to fabricate durable PSCs by replacing the well-used PEDOT:PSS with tungsten diselenide (WSe2) and bCar as active layer additives to mitigate the so-called “burn-in” degradation demonstrated in PSC systems. We explored the use of PCDTBT:PC71BM + bCar BHJ active layers for an effective pathway for the charge transport driven enhancement of the device performance. The improvement of the charge transport was further certified by hole mobility and photoluminescence studies. Significant differences in the photovoltaic parameters were observed between pristine and WSe2-based HTLs. As a result, the PCDTBT:PC71BM PSCs with adequate bCar content, combined with WSe2-based HTLs, exhibit stable operation for more than 1000 hours. This approach gives a straightforward methodology to improve the development of devices with better capabilities, and suggests the potential application of TMDCs for widespread use in solar cells.

To utilize WSe2 as a HTL in a OPV device, the WSe2 ought to be in controlled layers, as a thickness over a certain level can act as a obstruction that hinders carrier transfer. WSe2 nanoflakes (NF-WSe2) were exfoliated from bulk WSe2 crystals using our previously reported protocol. In brief, the LPE preparation of NF-WSe2 was performed via the mechanical stirring of the bulk material in NaOH/urea aqueous solution, and subsequently a centrifugation procedure was carried out to separate the bulk aggregates (Fig. 1a). The NF-WSe2 supernatant was diluted to a concentration of 0.5 mg mL−1 in IPA, and its use as the HTL did not require further annealing (Fig. 1b).

The as-exfoliated NF-WSe2 was first investigated through XRD analysis (Fig. 2a). By referencing the JCPDS card (no. 38-1388) of hexagonal WSe2, none of the diffraction peaks in NF-WSe2 display a marked difference from the bulk, demonstrating that LPE with the urea/NaOH system did not damage the integrity of the structure. Moreover, the concentrated of the diffraction maximums is strikingly diminished after exfoliating, showing the decrease in the thickness of NF-WSe2. From the SEM image (Fig. 2b), it appears that the NF-WSe2 have a graphene-like structure, which consists of ultra-thin bonded few-layer nanoflakes with rich collapsed edges. The nexus of the structural properties of the as-exfoliated NF-WSe2 was further researched via TEM (Fig. S1a and b) and HRTEM (Fig. 2c and d). As shown in Fig. 2c, the (002) lattice distances between neighboring layers is 0.68 nm, which is in agreement with the crystal structures in Fig. 2a. The SAED pattern (Fig. 2e) exhibits the hexagonal symmetry of NF-WSe2 with a lattice distance of 0.285 nm, matching well with the (100) plane. Thereby, clear evidence of the symmetrical arrangement of the W and Se elements across the whole structure was provided by the HAADF images (Fig. S1c and d). These findings are in qualitative agreement with the XRD results.
AFM was performed to confirm the formation of NF-WS2 before and after mechanical exfoliation, as depicted in Fig. S2. The lateral dimension of NF-WS2 varies from 100 to 750 nm, with a mean size of 250 nm, and the lateral thickness changes from 2.5 to 35 nm with an average value of 2.5 nm in height, respectively. These results are presumably from the surface smoothing effect that is enhanced by the spin-coating method. Fig. 3a shows the Raman spectra of bulk and as-exfoliated NF-WSe2. Compared to the bulk WSe2, the frequency difference between the first-order peaks of E2g1 and A1g for the NF-WSe2 is consistent with AFM results, which denotes the reduction in the thickness of the nanosheets and the formation of few-layer nanoflakes.

Fig. 3b and c depict the high-resolution XPS results of the surface chemistry of W 4f and Se 3d for the as-exfoliated NF-WSe2 nanoflakes. It is noteworthy that for the W 4f spectrum, there are two sets of W species, i.e., W4+ and W6+. Obvious peaks appearing at around 34.7 and 32.5 eV are attributed to the W 4f5/2 and W 4f7/2 of W4+, so the exceptionally high binding energy of 37.4 eV should be ascribed to oxidized W (W–O bond). The binding energies at 53.3 and 54.2 eV correspond to 3d5/2 and 3d3/2, respectively, confirming the formation of WSe2. We examined the thermostability of the as-exfoliated NF-WSe2 though TG-DSC analysis (Fig. s3); the conversion of WSe2 showed an exothermic peak at about 586 °C and a final mass loss of 39%. The decline is induced by the oxidative decomposition of NF-WSe2, thereby eliminating the aforementioned W–O peak and confirming the thermo-oxidative stability of NF-WSe2.
To assess the photometric characteristics of the NF-WSe2 film, the transmittance spectra of ITO/NF-WSe2 substrates are presented in Fig. S4, where the thicknesses of the corresponding NF-WSe2 films are controlled via altering the coating speed. In this work, the thicknesses of the NF-WSe2 films are 10, 15, 20 and 30 nm. In Fig. S4, the transmittances of the NF-WSe2 films are above 79% in the range of 380–800 nm and the highest transmittance can even reach 85%. Additionally, the optical transmittance decreases slightly as the thickness of NF-WSe2 film increases. Furthermore, we studied the role of the NF-WSe2 HTLs in PSCs. The cell comprises the donor polymer PCDTBT, the fullerene acceptor PC71BM and the additive bCar as active materials, as depicted in Fig. 4a. The device with PEDOT:PSS as the HTL was regarded as the reference. The energy levels of the PSCs presented in Fig. 4a are obtained from the UPS experimental results (Fig. S5) and combined with literature reports. The ionization potentials (IP) of bare ITO and ITO/HTL were determined by the secondary electron cut-off region. The photo-generated holes in the active blends (PCDTBT:PC71BM) can be readily transported to the ITO through the bCar interlayer and NF-WSe2 HTL.

Fig. 4b displays the J–V curves of the optimized PSCs based on PEDOT:PSS HTL and NF-WSe2 HTL with various thicknesses, while the comparative cells’ parameters are outlined in Table 1. The NF-WSe2-based cells exhibit a better performance as the thickness of the NF-WSe2 film is increased. When the thickness of the NF-WSe2 HTL is up to 15 nm, the NF-WSe2 HTL based PSCs displayed the PCEmax value of 4.5% with a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 9.7 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.89 V, a fill factor (FF) of 53.7% and a series resistance (Rs) of 5.68 Ω. However, as the thickness of the NF-WSe2 HTL is further increased to 30 nm, the PCEmax of the cell begins to decrease, which means that excessive thickness is unfavorable for hole transport. If the thickness of the HTL matches the electron/hole delocalization size within the charge transfer (CT) exciton, the charge separation (CS) yield can be enhanced significantly. The optimal thickness of NF-WSe2 can potentially reduce the energy loss contributed by the CT exciton binding, which can in turn improve the photocurrent of the solar cell. Additionally, the space charge limited current (SCLC) method was introduced to demonstrate the hole mobility of the above HTL. The hole-only devices are organized with the structures of ITO/NF-WSe2 or PEDOT:PSS/PCDTBT:PC71BM + bCar/MoO3/Ag. The hole mobility is estimated by the SCLC model based on Mott–Gurney law, as described by eqn (1):
(1)
where
ε0 is the permittivity of free space, εr is the relative dielectric constant (assumed to be 3), μ is the hole carrier mobility, V is the applied voltage, and L is the thickness of the PCDTBT:PC71BM + bCar film. The SCLC curves of hole-only devices are illustrated in Fig. S6 and the measured hole mobilities (μh) of the overall devices are summarized in Table S1. As seen in Table S1, the μh value of the NF-WSe2 (15 nm) HTL is higher than those of the other hole-only devices, which facilitates hole transport in the PSCs and is in qualitative agreement with the device performance.

Active layer
HTL

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCEmax (PCEavg) (%)

R
s (Ω)
PCEavg values calculated from 10 devices.
PCDTBT:PC71BM + bCar
PEDOT:PSS
10.3
0.89
49.0
4.5 (4.2 ± 0.12)
6.84
NF-WSe2 (10 nm)
9.7
0.90
51.6
4.5 (4.2 ± 0.11)
7.33
NF-WSe2 (15 nm)
9.7
0.89
53.7
4.5 (4.3 ± 0.15)
5.68
NF-WSe2 (20 nm)
9.6
0.89
51.8
4.5 (4.2 ± 0.12)
6.42
NF-WSe2 (30 nm)
9.3
0.88
50.6
4.1 (3.8 ± 0.12)
6.94
In the PSCs, the morphology of the HTL also has a decisive effect on the charge collection. From the viewpoint of the surface root-mean-square (RMS) data extracted from the AFM images (Fig. S7), the optimized NF-WSe2 device (15 nm) depicts the lowest RMS roughness of 2.27 nm, which is amenable to the photovoltaic parameters. Therefore, changing the thickness of the NF-WSe2 film gives rise to excessive roughness, which impedes the interfacial interaction between the HTLs and the active layer, resulting in hampering the device performance.
The PCEs of the NF-WSe2-based devices declined at a moderate rate during the long-term endurance test. The associated PCEs over time are presented in Fig. 4c, and the Jsc, Voc and FF of the device as functions of the storage time are presented in Fig. S8. When PEDOT:PSS was substituted for NF-WSe2 as the HTL, a noticeable fall in the performance of the PEDOT:PSS device was plotted. Generally, the acidic nature of the PEDOT:PSS would generally corrode the ITO, attributed to the hygroscopicity, however with bCar this could be a consequence of the electron transfer scavenging effect in PCDTBT:PC71BM blends, which minimizes the “burn-in” degradation generated from the acceptor. On the contrary, devices with the NF-WSe2 HTL show significantly improved stability, especially after 1000 h storage; these devices retain approximately 80% of the initial value. This kind of stability of NF-WSe2-based devices may be associated with the presence of lone pair electrons on the surface and the absence of dangling bonds in the WSe2 layer, which are expected to promote the electron transfer and reduce the degradation of the adjacent electrode, consequently enhancing the device stability.
To study the charge transfer behavior for the best performance of the NF-WSe2 (15 nm) HTL, PL spectra of the active layer on ITO and ITO/NF-WSe2 (15 nm) are measured. As shown in Fig. 5a, pure PCDTBT:PC71BM + bCar blends exhibit a high peak at 695 nm. By the introduction of the NF-WSe2 (15 nm) HTL, pronounced PL quenching is measured, demonstrating the efficient hole extraction from the active layer to the HTL. Fig. 5b depicts the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra for the PCDTBT:PC71BM + bCar devices fabricated with the PEDOT:PSS and NF-WSe2 (15 nm) HTLs. As can be seen from this figure, there is a small distinction between NF-WSe2 (15 nm) and PEDOT:PSS in the EQE spectra, matching well with the Jsc values.
In order to confirm the role of the NF-WSe2 (15 nm) HTL, the photogenerated charge carrier recombination under open-circuit conditions is studied, as shown in Fig. 5c. The recombination mechanism is given by the relationship between Voc and P, in terms of the equation: Voc ∝ nkTq−1 ln(P), where P is light intensity, n is the ideality factor, k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, and q is the elemental charge. In addition to presenting the Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination, the device also shows a linear effect for SRH recombination, so the slope of kT/q becomes a key metric.Fig. 5c displays the light intensity dependence of Voc. A slope of 1.41kT/q is observed in the device with the PEDOT:PSS HTL. A lower slope of 1.33kT/q for the NF-WSe2 (15 nm) device is obtained, demonstrating the reduced SRH recombination in the PSCs.
The light intensity dependence of Jsc follows the power law, described as Jsc ∝ Iα, where α is the coefficient of the power law. As shown in Fig. S9, the increased value of α in the 15 nm NF-WSe2 (α = 0.99) device implies better charge extraction with reduced bimolecular recombination compared to that in the PEDOT:PSS device (α = 0.97). To depict the exciton separation ability of the devices, the photocurrent density (Jph) versus effective voltage (Veff) under illumination at 100 mW cm−2 is plotted (Fig. S10). The charge collection characteristic (ηc) is defined as ηc = Jph/Jsat, where Jsat is the saturated Jph at a large enough Veff. As shown in Fig. S10, the ηc increases from 89.6% to 94.5% under short-circuit conditions after adding NF-WSe2. A higher ηc also suggests reduced bimolecular recombination within the above device.
To further explore the photovoltaic applicability, PBDB-T:PC71BM + bCar devices were fabricated using NF-WSe2 as the HTL (Fig. s11). After the incorporation of different NF-WSe2, the PCE values of the PBDB-T:PC71BM + bCar devices are considerably improved compared to those of the PCDTBT ones. The observed performances are provided in Table S2. The results reveal that the device with the NF-WSe2 (15 nm) HTL gives a very promising PCE of 9.2%, which indicates the applicability of NF-WSe2 as a HTL candidate in current PSCs. The stabilities of PBDB-T:PC71BM + bCar devices with thickness-dependent NF-WSe2 for the HTL were also compared; the results reveal that the PSCs maintain about 68% of their initial PCE even after 900 hours of aging (Fig. S12).
The nature of the interfacial interactions can be distinguished with impedance spectroscopy (IS), as illustrated in Fig. 5d. The Nyquist plots, achieved via IS analysis, show that the impedance spectra are distinct semicircles for both devices. In addition, a low series resistance (Rs) of 19 Ω and smallest device resistance (Rs + R1 + R2, where R1 and R2 are the resistance of the photoactive layer and interface, respectively) of 244 Ω are measured in the NF-WSe2 (15 nm) device. This evolution suggests that the NF-WSe2 (15 nm) HTL operates in an intrinsic high mobility state, which facilitates hole transport at the active layer/HTL interface, and accordingly inhibits carrier recombination. The above results indicate that NF-WSe2 exhibits promising potential for solar devices.

In summary, we triumphantly realized the liquid-phase exfoliation of WSe2 in urea/NaOH aqueous solution to produce an efficient HTL in highly durable PCDTBT:PC71BM + bCar-based polymer solar cells. Through systematic characterizations, it is proven that the optical, electronic, morphological, and inner physical properties of the NF-WSe2 films are superior to those of the reference PEDOT:PSS. Eventually, with the optimized PCDTBT:PC71BM + bCar-based device featuring NF-WSe2 (15 nm) as the HTL, a significant long-term enhancement over the control cells based on PEDOT:PSS is obtained, which is among the highest efficiencies for PCDTBT:PCBM BHJ solar cells (Fig. S13 and Table S3). Analysis of the charge transfer behavior reveals that the enhanced performance is due to improved charge extraction in the HTL/active layer interface. This work highlights the promise of the urea/NaOH (aq.)-based LPE route for the preparation of high quality 2D materials, and provides possibilities for their application in PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 51703053), the Natural Science Foundation of Hubei province (grant no. 2014CFA094), Technology Foundation for Selected Overseas Scholar, Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security (grant no. [2013]277), the Doctoral Foundation project of Hubei University of Technology (BSQD2020032) and the Fundamental Research Funds for Hubei Provincial Key Laboratory of Green Materials for Light Industry and Collaborative Innovation Center of Green Light-Weight Materials and Processing (202007B02).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional TEM, EDS, AFM and UPS data. See DOI: 10.1039/d1qi01458g
This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2022