 DOI: 10.1039/C9NJ04080C
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 18843-18847


Hong Chul
Lim
,

Ja-Jung
Koo
,

Jae Il
Kim
,

Jin-Kyu
Lee
,

Zee Hwan
Kim
 and 

Jong-In
Hong
*

Department of Chemistry, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea. E-mail: jihong@snu.ac.kr; Fax: +82-2-889-1568; Tel: +82-2-880-6682

QDBrick Co. Ltd #401, Backlim Bldg., 31-3, Maeheon-ro, Seocho-gu, Seoul, Korea

Received
6th August 2019
, Accepted 11th November 2019
First published on 12th November 2019
We developed a gradient quantum dot (QD)@polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP)-silica composite as a spectral converter to improve light harvesting of the photoactive layer in organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices. The spectral converter prepared by a simple sol–gel method served as a luminescent down-shifting (LDS) layer that absorbed ultraviolet and emitted visible light. Re-emitted light energy from the LDS layer appeared within the absorption range of the photoactive donor material of P3HT in the OPV devices. We investigated how the light harvesting ability was affected by the concentration of QD@PVP and the thickness of the LDS layer. The OPV devices with the LDS layer showed increased power conversion efficiency (PCE) from 3.38% to 3.68% compared to pristine OPV devices due to improved incident light transmittance and increased light harvesting.

Organic photovoltaic (OPV) solar cells have received much attention as a renewable energy source due to their advantages of flexibility, easy synthesis of active layer materials, and low-cost fabrication of large areas. Intensive research studies have been conducted, reaching a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 13%. However, there are still challenges to improving the efficiency and lifetime of OPV devices, compared to inorganic solar cells. Ultraviolet (UV) light has been known to weakly contribute to photo-to-current conversion and degrade organic photoactive materials such as polymers and small molecules, and thus would reduce the lifetime as well as PCE of OPV devices. It is known that these problems can be solved by using spectral converters. The ideal photo-conversion materials (spectral converters) should absorb UV photon energy in a wide range and efficiently transfer absorbed energy to the photoactive materials in OPV devices. To meet these requirements, colloidal quantum dots (QDs) are considered the most promising as practical spectral converters. QDs can be used in two ways to be applied to OPV devices. One method is the incorporation of QDs into the active layer or carrier transport layer of the OPV devices for exciton (electron–hole pair) generation or charge transport. There is another method utilizing QDs as a luminescent down-shifting (LDS) material, embedded within the host matrix.

The host matrix should be transparent over a broad range of wavelengths, and should ensure durability during the fabrication processes and should be completely miscible with guest QDs with no aggregation. Polymeric host materials provide good optical and thermal properties as well as easy processing. However, the surface of QDs is hydrophobic and unstable toward radical species, generated during free radical polymerization processes in the presence of QDs. Simple mixing of poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) polymers with QDs induces phase separation, owing to low compatibility of PMMA with organic-coated QDs. Several research groups have been striving to overcome these problems involved in QD-polymer composites. Alternatively, the silica sol–gel process, including hydrolysis and condensation, has been considered a promising approach for the host matrix due to the transparency in the UV-Vis region and the stability of the thin film during the OPV fabrication process. However, acid-catalysed hydrolysis processes of silicate are incompatible with hydrophobic QDs because the surface of the QDs can be attacked by protons (H+ ions) in acidic aqueous solution. These phenomena would lead to low quantum yields by energy transfer between their aggregates. In addition, CdSe core and core@shell quantum dots are unstable under long-term irradiation. Thus, it is necessary to overcome the problems mentioned above for more desirable LDS materials.
Herein, we describe the development of a gradient QD@polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP)-silica composite and its LDS effect in OPV devices. As a spectral converter, gradient QDs have several merits, including a high absorption coefficient in the UV range, and a narrow emission spectrum (full width at half maximum, FWHM ∼ 30 nm). In particular, gradient QDs have better quantum yields and (photo)chemical stability than core@shell QDs. The fabricated OPV devices with a LDS layer showed increased PCE from 3.38% to 3.68% compared to the pristine OPV devices.

All organic chemicals were purchased from Aldrich and TCI. Solar cell materials, including P3HT and PC61BM, were purchased from Nano getters (South KOREA). Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)–poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS, P) was purchased from Baytron. Tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) and trimethoxymethyl silane (MTMS) were purchased from Aldrich.


Both selenium (0.0316 g, 0.4 mmol) and sulfur (0.128 g, 4.0 mmol) were weighed into a vial in a glove box and 3 ml of tri-n-octylphosphine (2.19 g, 6.72 mmol) was added. The mixture was stirred overnight until all the solids were dissolved and the solution became clear and colorless. The resulting chalcogenide stock solution was stored at room temperature in the glove box until use.


For the synthesis of green-emitting gradient alloy QDs (λem,max = 550 nm), a mixture of cadmium acetate (Cd(OAc)2, 0.4 mmol), zinc acetate (Zn(OAc)2, 4.0 mmol), oleic acid (OA, 5.5 ml, 17.6 mmol), and 1-octadecene (ODE) (10 ml) was heated at 180 °C until all the solids were dissolved clearly to generate metal precursors of Cd(OA)2 and Zn(OA)2. Removal of water produced from the previous reaction was done by degassing at 150 °C under vacuum for 20 min. To a mixture of metal precursors heated to 300 °C was added the chalcogenide stock solution containing Se (0.4 mmol) and S (4.0 mmol), which was heated at 280 °C for 10 min. Then, the mixture was cooled down to 25 °C and centrifuged at 4000 rpm with acetone, resulting in gradient QDs. Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP)-wrapping gradient QDs were prepared by stirring a mixture of gradient QDs (0.1 g) and PVP (1 g) in chloroform (100 ml) for 24 h. Gradient QDs wrapped with PVP (abbreviated as QDs) were dissolved in chloroform for the OPV process. QDs were also dissolved in ethanol to test acid endurance.


A luminescent down-shifting layer (LDS) was prepared as follows. The precursor solution for the sol–gel process was made to be a 1:1.5:4.3 molar ratio of TEOS (tetraethyl orthosilicate):MTMS (methyltrimethoxysilane):H2O. The resulting solution was stirred at room temperature for 72 h. The synthesized QDs in chloroform were mixed in a 1:1 volume ratio with the precursor solution for the sol–gel process. The weight of the QDs varied from 0 to 0.5 wt% (5 mg QDs/1 ml solution). The ITO/glass substrates were sequentially cleaned using detergent (Mucasol, Merz GmbH & Co, 10 min), deionized water (10 min), and isopropyl alcohol (IPA) (10 min) through ultrasonication, followed by annealing at 120 °C for 3 h. The substrates were treated with ozone for 5 min. The LDS layer was fabricated by spin-casting on the opposite side of the ITO/glass substrate. An ITO/glass substrate without an LDS layer was also prepared for the control device. All the samples of the as-prepared LDS layer were annealed at 120 °C, for 30 min under thermal curing.


PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution (CLEVIOS P) was spin-coated onto pre-patterned ITO/glass substrates with or without a luminescent down-shifting layer to prepare the hole transport layer (HTL), followed by post-annealing treatment at 120 °C for 20 min in the glove box with continuous flow of nitrogen gas. Then, 2.0 wt% of P3HT:PC61BM (1:0.8 w/w) in chlorobenzene for the active layer of the bulk heterojunction solar cells was spin-coated on PEDOT:PSS as a hole transport layer (50 nm) at 2000 rpm, for 30 s and then annealed at 150 °C, for 10 min in a nitrogen atmosphere glove box. The active layer thickness is 100 nm, measured by profilometry. Finally, LiF (1 nm) and Al (100 nm) were thermally evaporated under 10−6 torr as a cathode electrode.


High resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, JEOL JEM-2100) experiments were performed at 200 kV for the as-synthesized QDs. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi S-4300) was used to confirm the thicknesses of the thin films of QD-silica composites. Optical properties of all the prepared samples were characterized by absorption (UV-Vis spectrophotometer, Beckman DU650) and photoluminescence (PL) spectra (Jasco FP-7500 spectrophotometer). The quantum yields (QYs) of the QDs were measured by a QE-2000 (Otsuka electronics). The current–voltage characteristics of the OPV devices were determined using a Keithley 2400 source meter and an AM1.5 simulated white light source. The incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) was measured using a 1000 W Xe lamp combined with a calibrated monochrometer (Acton research). The intensity of the monochromatic light was calibrated using a silicon photodiode (Newport).


The gradient QDs show high quantum efficiency and stability under ambient conditions compared to core@shell QDs (Fig. S1, ESI). As prepared, the gradient QDs capped by oleic acid (OA) have an average diameter of ca. 6 nm, (Fig. 1a for the transmission electron microscopy image of the sample). The alloy inside the gradient QDs means chemical composition heterogeneities and strains, which affect the XRD peak shifts and broadening (Fig. S2, ESI). Since dispersion of QDs in the LDS layer is a crucial factor for application as a spectral converter, the hydrophobic OA-capped QDs were wrapped with an amphiphilic polymer, PVP (Fig. 1b). The PVP-wrapping of gradient QDs (abbreviated as QDs, vide infra) showed no change in PL properties (intensity and emission wavelength), which indicates that QDs were not aggregated. These QDs show high endurance under acidic and basic conditions, allowing further chemical transformation (Fig. S3, ESI).


For the application as a LDS layer, the QD-silica composites were prepared as follows to confirm the compatibility of QDs with the silica medium. The sol–gel precursor solution for the host matrix was prepared simply by blending tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) and methyltrimethoxysilane (MTMS) in water (TEOS:MTMS:H2O = 1:1.5:4.3 in molar ratio) and then stirring for 72 h at room temperature without a catalyst, which was added to the chloroform solution of QDs in ethanol (a co-solvent of sol–gel processes). The PL emission wavelength of the resulting composite films on a slide glass depends on the size and composition of the QDs (Fig. S4, ESI). The resulting silica matrix is ideal as a host matrix of the LDS layer due to the transparency in the UV-Vis region, and the QDs do not aggregate in the silica medium. The QD-silica composites having green emission were deposited on the opposite side of the ITO/glass substrate by spin-casting, and then thermally cured at 120 °C for 30 min. The optical properties of the QD-silica (0.1 and 0.5 wt%) thin films were investigated by measuring absorption and PL spectra, compared to 0.005 wt% OA-coated QDs in ethanol. There are no noticeable differences in absorption and PL spectra between the QD-silica thin films and OA-coated QDs (Fig. 2a). This indicates that the QDs were well dispersed without both phase separation and aggregation in the thin film (silica matrix). Normalized PL spectra by excitation at 350 nm appeared between 520 and 620 nm, and the maximum peak was at 562 nm with a FWHM of 40 nm. The emission spectrum of the thin film appeared within the absorption range (350 to 650 nm with λmax of 551 nm) of the poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) thin film as a photoactive material for OPV devices (Fig. 2b). Therefore, it is apparent that the QDs in thin films on the opposite side of a ITO/glass substrate can act as a spectral converter by converting a part of near UV light to green visible light so that the photo-response of the P3HT thin film will be increased.

We also investigated the effect of the thin film thickness on the optical properties of the thin films of 0.1 wt% QDs-silica composites, as shown in Fig. 4. The thickness of thin films was confirmed by SEM images (Fig. S5, ESI). The PL spectra show that the emission intensity increases with the thickness of the QD-silica thin film (Fig. 3a). However, the transmittance was not affected by the thickness of the thin film in the visible range (Fig. 3b). This result clearly reveals that the QDs were well dispersed in the thin film.
We also examined the effect of the concentration of QDs (0 to 0.5 wt%) on the optical properties of the QD-silica thin films. The concentration of QDs in the silica matrix directly affected the light harvesting of P3HT. The thin films with different concentrations of QDs have uniform surfaces and similar thicknesses of ca. 3.1 μm, confirmed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Fig. S6, ESI). The transmittance of the QD-silica thin films in the short-wavelength region is almost linearly diminished with the concentration of QDs (Fig. 4a). This result implies that the photoactive layer in OPV devices can be protected against photo-degradation because of the efficient UV-absorbing QDs in the LDS layer. However, in the wavelength range from 400 to 650 nm, the transmittance value of the bare ITO/glass substrate is 82.1% and those of the thin films are 83.6, 83.0, 82.5, and 81.1% with QD loading of 0, 0.1, 0.3, and 0.5 wt% on the ITO/glass substrate, respectively (Fig. 4b). These results imply that as the intensity of the incident sun light increases, the absorption of the photoactive materials is enhanced due to their gradient refractive index from the thin film to ITO. The refractive index of the silica matrix (nD = 1.4) is between those of air (nD = 1.0) and the glass substrate (nD = 1.5). The transmittance values of the thin films with 0–0.3 wt% QDs are higher than that of the only ITO/glass substrate in the absorption wavelength range of P3HT.

We investigated the effect of QD-silica thin films as a LDS layer on the OPV device performance (in terms of light harvesting ability with various concentrations of QDs within the silica matrix). The thermal stability of QD-silica thin films is important because the annealing processes are required after the spin casting of a LDS layer during the fabrication of the OPV devices. The QD-silica thin films are stable enough during the fabrication of the OPV device because a thin film based on the MTMS:TEOS copolymer can be cured at 420 °C.30Fig. 5a shows a schematic of the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) OPV device with the LDS layer. Four BHJ devices were fabricated using PEDOT:PSS as a hole transport layer (HTL), P3HT:[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) (1:0.8 w/w) as a photoactive layer, and the QD-silica (0, 0.1, 0.3 and 0.5 wt% of QDs) thin films as a LDS layer. A reference BHJ device was also fabricated without a LDS layer. The characteristic parameters of the OPV devices, including the open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (PCE), are summarized in Table 1. The Voc and FF values were similar in all the devices. As expected, the J–V characteristics of the devices with a LDS layer exhibited higher values of Jsc and PCE than those of the reference device without a LDS layer, as shown in Fig. 5. The Jsc value (11.17 mA cm−2) of the device with 0.1 wt% QDs in the LDS layer is higher than that of the reference device (10.26 mA cm−2). This is because the QDs in the thin film are uniformly dispersed and their emission range is within the absorption range of P3HT, leading to more effective generation of excitons in P3HT. The maximum Jsc and PCE values were observed at 0.1 wt% QDs in the LDS layer. The PCE and Jsc values gradually decrease with increasing amount of QDs (0.3 and 0.5 wt%) in the LDS layer. These results imply that increasing the amount of QDs in the LDS layer results in more effective light harvesting of the LDS layer (in the short wavelength region) but in less transmittance of the incident sun light (in the visible range). Thus, one should make a balance between two factors for improving the efficiency of OPV devices. Furthermore, IPCE experiments were performed to confirm the increasing efficiency by the LDS layer under various incident illumination wavelengths (Fig. S7, ESI). The IPCE values of the OPV device with 0.1 wt% QDs in the LDS layer were further increased in the wavelength range between 320 and 450 nm compared to the OPV devices without the LDS layer. The increase in the rate of the PCE by the LDS layer was estimated approximately as follows. The PCE value of the P3HT:PC61BM (2.0 wt%, 1:0.8 w/w) photoactive layer is 13% assuming 100% IPCE in the 450–650 nm region. The wavelength range is the general light-harvesting region of P3HT:PC61BM. This value was calculated based on the reported data from the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) (Fig. S8, ESI). However, the PCE value of the OPV devices fabricated in our laboratory was 3.4%. Thus, only 26% of the theoretical value was converted to photocurrent. In addition, when 320–450 nm sunlight reaching the Earth's surface is converted into 100% current, the PCE value is 8.5%. The PL quantum yield (PLQY) of the LDS layer with 0.1 wt% QDs in this area is 53.7% (Fig. S9, ESI). Therefore, the following equation could be derived.

Devices

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
ΔPCE (%)
All device configurations consist of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PC61BM (2 wt%, 1:0.8 w/w)/LiF/Al.
w/o LDS layer
0.61
10.26
0.54
3.38
—
0 wt% QDs
0.61
10.64
0.54
3.50
103.6
0.1 wt% QDs
0.61
11.17
0.54
3.68
108.9
0.3 wt% QDs
0.61
10.73
0.54
3.53
104.5
0.5 wt% QDs
0.61
10.40
0.54
3.43
101.3
The expected PCE value of BHJ OPV devices based on P3HT:PC61CM (2.0 wt%, 1:0.8 w/w) with the LDS layer of 0.1 wt% QDs is given by:
η(exp,QD) × QQD × c + (η(P3HT:PCBM) × ΔT) + η(P3HT:PCBM)
where
η(exp,QD) is the theoretically estimated PCE value in the 320–450 nm region absorbed by the QDs (8.5%), QQD is the PLQY of the LDS layer of 0.1 wt% QDs (53.7%), c is correction value (26%), η(P3HT:PCBM) is the experimentally determined PCE value of the P3HT:PC61CM (2.0 wt%, 1:0.8 w/w) photoactive layer (3.4%), and ΔT is the change in the light transmittance from the 450 to 650 nm region absorbed by the P3HT:PC61BM photoactive layer with the LDS layer of 0.1 wt% QDs (1.1%). Using the values mentioned above, η(exp,QD) (8.5%) × QQD (53.7%) × c (26%) + (η(P3HT:PCBM) (3.4%) × ΔT (1.1%)) + η(P3HT:PCBM) (3.4%), the calculated PCE value is 4.62%. Although the PCE value (3.68%) obtained by the experimental measurements is 80% of the calculated PCE value (4.62%), the PCE value obtained in the experiments is thought to reflect the effect of the LDS layer with 0.1 wt% QDs. It is, therefore, reasonable to infer that the QD-silica thin film as a LDS layer enables light harvesting and protection of the photoactive layer from UV light.


In conclusion, we developed QD-silica thin films as an efficient LDS layer of OPV devices where QDs and silica matrices were used as a spectral converter and a transparent host matrix, respectively. The QDs were dispersed effectively without both phase separation and aggregation in the silica matrix. The LDS layer enabled effective light harvesting in the short wavelength region and thus reemitted visible light in the absorption range of P3HT, enabling increased light harvesting of the photoactive layer. It was found that the OPV device fabricated with a 0.1 wt% QD in the LDS layer resulted in 8.9% increase in the PCE. This approach is expected to be applied to other kinds of solar cells and light-emitting diodes.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the NRF grant (No. 2018R1A2B2001293) funded by the MSIP.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: TGA, DSC, AFM, CV, UV, and OPV device parameters. See DOI: 10.1039/c9nj04080c
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2019