 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA02415G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8161-8171


Chandu V. V. M.
Gopi
,

Mallineni
Venkata-Haritha
,

Young-Seok
Lee
 and 

Hee-Je
Kim
*

School of Electrical Engineering, Pusan National University, Busandaehak-ro 63 beon-gil, Geumjeong-gu, Busan, 46241, South Korea. E-mail: heeje@pusan.ac.kr; Fax: +82 51 513 0212; Tel: +82 51 510 2364

Received
22nd March 2016
, Accepted 19th April 2016
First published on 19th April 2016
As a promising type of new-generation solar cells, the electrocatalytic activity and stability of counter electrodes (CEs) play a key role in the performance of QDSSCs (quantum-dot-sensitized solar cells) at present. Here, a facile solution-processing method for fabricating metal sulfides (CoS, NiS, CuS and PbS) on vertically aligned ZnO nanorods (NRs) has been demonstrated and used to produce efficient CEs in polysulfide electrolyte-based QDSSCs. Compared with bare metal sulfide CEs (CoS, NiS, CuS and PbS), the ZnO NR framework presents a larger surface area for loading more metal sulfide catalysts and easy accessibility of the electrolyte. Additionally, the metal sulfide catalyst with high catalytic activity plays the main role in the reduction of the oxidized polysulfide, while the ZnO NRs offer an excellent electron pathway for shuttling electrons to highly catalytic metal sulfide sites and facilitate charge transport during catalysis. Cyclic voltammetry measurements indicate that the ZnO/PbS CEs still retain good cyclability after 50 cycles, demonstrating super-stability, while the ZnO/CoS, ZnO/NiS, ZnO/CuS, and Pt CEs show obvious fluctuations. Therefore, the ZnO/PbS CE exhibits much higher catalytic activity with the polysulfide electrolyte than ZnO/CoS, ZnO/NiS, ZnO/CuS and Pt CEs. As a result, a QDSSC based on the ZnO/PbS CE achieves a power conversion efficiency (η) of 4.76%, which is attributed to the high fill factor (FF) of 0.566, and the η is much higher than that based on ZnO/CoS (2.75%), ZnO/NiS (3.12%), ZnO/CuS (4.10%) and Pt (1.54%) CEs. The excellent catalytic performance along with the facile preparation of ZnO NRs decorated with metal sulfide CE materials make them a distinctive choice among the various CEs studied.

The vast use of fossil fuels, which causes global warming and emission of greenhouse gases, has led us to focus on the development of renewable energy sources, which is an urgent task for the future. The direct conversion of sunlight into electricity by using solar cells is one of the promising technologies that have been developed for future alternative energy sources. Among the available solar cells, silicon-based solar cells have superior power-conversion efficiencies of over 20%. However, the issues of high manufacturing costs and installation of the processing technologies of silicon-based solar cells need to be resolved.

As a cost-efficient alternative to silicon-based solar cells, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and quantum dot (QD)-sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs) have been considered as one of the most promising developments for the next generation of solar cells, due to their high conversion efficiency and low-cost cell fabrication. The structure and working mechanism of QDSSCs is very similar to that of DSSCs. QDSSCs can be regarded as modified DSSCs and were first reported by O'Regan and Grätzel in 1991. In particular, QDSSCs are attracting more attention than DSSCs because QDs as sensitizers possess several excellent properties, such as higher absorption coefficients than most organic dyes, multiple exciton generation (MEG), tunable bandgaps due to the quantum confinement effect, the possibility of hot electron injection, and easy fabrication processes.
However, despite the many excellent properties mentioned above, the highest power conversion efficiency (η) achieved in a QDSSC (η = 8.55%) is lower than that of a DSSC (13%). This implies that some challenges still remain with respect to enhancing the performance of QDSSCs. There are many circumstances that significantly affect the performance of QDSSCs, such as the nanostructure of the photoanode, QD sensitizers, the electrolyte, the cell structure, and the counter electrode (CE). Among these, the CE has been less studied than the other factors, even though this may be the key to developing efficient QDSSCs. Besides improvements in the photoanode and electrolyte, much attention has been focused on the CE due to its poor charge transfer to the oxidized redox polysulfide species (Sn2−), which greatly reduces the fill factor and power conversion efficiency of the QDSSC. Hence, the optimization and fabrication of CEs are equally important in further improving the performances of QDSSCs. The basic requirements, therefore, for CEs are low cost, facile fabrication, high electrocatalytic activity and good stability.
The triiodide/iodide ion (I−/I3−) is the most efficient electrolyte adopted in DSSCs and is unfortunately unsuitable for QDSSCs, which is due to the majority of QD sensitizers being subjected to severe photodegradation when used in conjunction with the I−/I3− electrolyte. Therefore, the polysulfide couple (Sn2−/S2−) is the optimal electrolyte for QDSSCs, since it can effectively stabilize the QDs while improving the performance of QDSSCs. Pt has exhibited excellent electrocatalytic activity toward the reduction of I3− in DSSCs, but Pt shows very low electrocatalytic activity toward the reduction of the polysulfide electrolyte used in QDSSCs, which results in a very low FF and power conversion efficiency. This is because the sulfur-containing compounds adsorb onto the surface of Pt, leading to an overpotential and inefficient reduction of the redox polysulfide electrolyte; moreover, Pt is an expensive material. Therefore, other effective CE materials are needed to improve the performance of QDSSCs.
Until now, various platinum-free materials have been developed and reported as CE materials, among which metal-chalcogenides, such as CoS, NiS, CuS, Cu2S, PbS, and Cu2ZnSnS4, exhibited a superior performance in QDSSCs due to their much higher electrocatalytic activity in reducing Sn2− to nS2−. A common strategy to fabricate metal sulfide CEs is to expose Co, Cu, or Pb foils to a polysulfide electrolyte solution after acid treatment to obtain an interfacial layer of metal sulfide. However, the problem is that this in situ preparative method suffers from continuous corrosion of metal foils in the presence of polysulfide electrolyte, leading to mechanical instability of the electrode. To address the above problem, some deposition methods, such as the chemical bath deposition method (CBD), the hydrothermal method, electrodeposition, and successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR), have been applied to deposit metal sulfides on ITO or FTO glass.
Kim et al. prepared CuS thin films using a facile CBD method with different concentrations of polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) and directly used these as CEs in QDSSCs without any further post-treatment. With the assistance of theoretical prediction, Chen et al. reported Cu2−xE (E = S, Se) micro-/nanotubes (NTs) with a hierarchical architecture, prepared by using copper nanowires (Cu NWs), with stable sulfur and selenium powder as precursors at room temperature, and they used these as CEs for high-performance QDSSCs. Lin et al. proposed that a PbS electrode synthesized by successive ionic solution coating and reaction (SISCR) outperforms Pt and CuS electrodes. Recently, Song et al. applied ZnO/PbS films as CEs for QDSSCs by a two-step solution-processing method and these exhibited the highest η of 3.06%. Mainly, this approach focused on the fabrication of ZnO-based PbS CEs for improving the solar cell performance. Although metal sulfides deposited on ITO and FTO are stable in polysulfide electrolyte, the adhesion of metal sulfide on ITO and FTO glass is poor, resulting in low coverage and thin films, hence a low catalytic activity of the CEs, thus reducing the PCE of a QDSSC. Therefore, special attention is given to the development of new counter electrodes, which are required to further enhance the PCE of QDSSCs.
In an attempt to increase the performance of QDSSCs, this article discusses the overall electrochemical behaviour of QDSSC metal-sulfide counter electrodes. Here, for the first time, hierarchically assembled ZnO nanorods (NRs) with catalytically active metal sulfide (CoS, NiS, CuS and PbS) shells were fabricated to effectively reduce the series resistance (Rs) and charge-transfer resistance at the interface of the CE/electrolyte. A schematic structure of a QDSSC based on ZnO NRs with a metal sulfide catalyst is illustrated in Scheme 1. Well-aligned ZnO NRs were first hydrothermally grown on a conducting FTO substrate and then metal sulfide catalysts were deposited onto the ZnO nanorods by a facile low-temperature chemical-bath-deposition method. The vertically aligned ZnO NRs act as an excellent electrical tunnel for improved charge transport from an external circuit to highly catalytic metal sulfide sites, where the electrons are used to reduce the oxidized polysulfide. Therefore, a combination of the high-surface-area ZnO NRs and the highly catalytic metal sulfide would greatly enhance the catalytic activity of the CE toward the polysulfide redox couple. As a result, a QDSSC based on a ZnO/PbS CE provides a PCE of 4.76%, which is close to the cell with a ZnO/CuS CE (4.10%) and much higher than those with ZnO/CoS (2.75%), ZnO/NiS (3.12%), ZnO/Pt (1.78%) and Pt (1.68%) CEs. Furthermore, QDSSCs based on the ZnO/PbS CE show outstanding stability in working conditions under continuous illumination for over 20 h without a distinct decrease in the PCE.

ZnO NRs were prepared by a two-step facile chemical method. The first step was to coat a ZnO seed layer, using a spin-coating technique, on the FTO substrate. Prior to the deposition of ZnO NRs, the FTO substrates were cleaned ultrasonically with acetone, ethanol, and distilled (DI) water for 10 min each. The ZnO seed layer was prepared using zinc acetate dihydrate 10 mM [Zn(CH3COOH)2·2H2O] as a precursor, dissolved in ethanol and stirred for 30 min. After spin-coating of the sol on the FTO-coated glass substrates, the samples were annealed at 450 °C for 30 min in ambient air. The thicknesses of the seed layers were 20 nm and 50 nm.

The second step was to grow ZnO NRs on the seeded FTO substrate using a chemical bath deposition method. The seeded substrate was suspended upside down in an aqueous solution containing 0.015 M zinc nitrate hexahydrate (Zn(NO3)2·6H2O) and hexamethylenetetramine (HMT) (C6H12N4) at 95 °C for 15 h to grow ZNO NRs. The samples were then rinsed with DI water and annealed at 450 °C for 30 min in ambient air.

The CBD method was applied to deposit metal sulfides (CoS, NiS, CuS, and PbS) on ZnO NRs to serve as CEs. A typical synthesis was carried out by dissolving 0.1 M CoCl2·6H2O (or 0.1 M NiSO4·6H2O or 0.1 M CuSO4·5H2O or 0.1 M Pb(NO3)2) as a metal source in 50 ml of deionized water and adding 0.4 M CH3CSNH2 as a S source, followed by adding 0.2 M CH3COOH dropwise and stirring continuously. To the above solution, 0.4 M CH4N2O was added and stirred vigorously for 30 minutes to form a homogeneous solution. The previously prepared ZnO NR substrates were immersed and kept horizontally in the growth solution, and chemical bath deposition was carried out for 1 h at 90 °C. After deposition, the metal-sulfide-decorated ZnO NR thin films were rinsed with ethanol and DI water; the samples were labeled ZnO/CoS, ZnO/NiS, ZnO/CuS, and ZnO/PbS.

To fabricate the bare Pt and ZnO/Pt electrodes, cleaned FTO glass and ZnO NR substrates were coated with a Pt paste (Pt-catalyst T/SP, Solaronix), using the doctor-blade method, and annealed at 450 °C in air for 10 min. The samples were labeled Pt and ZnO/Pt, respectively.

Mesoporous TiO2 films were prepared using the doctor-blade method by coating commercially available TiO2 paste of particle size 20 nm (Ti-nanoxide HT/S, Solaronix) over FTO (7 Ω cm−2) glass substrates, followed by sintering at 450 °C for 30 min, and a thickness of 7.5 μm was obtained after solvent evaporation. The QD photosensitizers were coated on the TiO2 using a SILAR under optimized conditions already reported elsewhere. For the CdS QDs, 0.1 M Cd(CH3COO)2·2H2O and 0.1 M sodium sulfide (Na2S) were prepared in 50 ml of deionized water separately, for cation and anion sources, respectively, dipped for 5 min each, and 5 cycles of SILAR were carried out. The as-prepared electrodes were labeled as TiO2/CdS. For CdSe QDs, the TiO2/CdS electrodes were dipped in an aqueous cationic precursor solution of 0.1 M Cd(CH3COO)2·2H2O and in an aqueous anionic precursor solution of Na2SeSO3 for 5 min each, and this process was repeated up to 8 times. The as-prepared electrodes are represented as TiO2/CdS/CdSe. The Na2SeSO3 aqueous solution was prepared from aqueous 0.2 M selenium (Se) and 0.4 M Na2SO3 in a round-bottom flask. This solution was refluxed at 120 °C for a period of 4 h. Finally, to avoid corrosion due to the polysulfide electrolyte and back electron transfer into the electrolyte, two SILAR cycles of a zinc sulfide (ZnS) passivation layer were deposited over a TiO2/CdS/CdSe-sensitized photoanode using aqueous solutions of 0.1 M Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O and 0.1 M Na2S, each for 1 min per dip, and the photoelectrodes are represented as TiO2/CdS/CdSe/ZnS.

The TiO2/CdS/CdSe/ZnS photoanodes and the fabricated metal sulfide-decorated ZnO NRs and Pt electrodes were sealed using a sealant (SX 1170-60, Solaronix) at 100 °C. A polysulfide electrolyte consisting of 1 M Na2S, 2 M S, and 0.1 M KCl in methanol and water at a ratio of 7:3 was used to fill the space between the electrodes. The cells were left for a few hours for complete diffusion of the electrolyte within the photoanode and then tested under AM 1.5 G illumination at 100 mW cm−2.

Symmetrical metal sulfide-decorated ZnO electrodes (ZnO/CoS, ZnO/NiS, ZnO/CuS and ZnO/PbS) were sealed using a sealant (SX 1170-60, Solaronix) at 100 °C. The internal space of the cells was filled with the polysulfide redox couple. Tafel polarization with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) were performed using a BioLogic potentiostat/galvanostat/EIS analyzer (SP-150, France) for the symmetrical cells with ZnO/CoS–ZnO/CoS, ZnO/NiS–ZnO/NiS, ZnO/CuS–ZnO/CuS, ZnO/PbS–ZnO/PbS, and Pt–Pt CEs in the dark over a frequency range of 100 mHz to 500 kHz.


The surface morphology and thickness of the electrodes were investigated using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, S-2400, Hitachi). X-ray diffraction (XRD) was performed on a D8 ADVANCE with a DAVINCI diffractometer (Bruker AXS) using Cu Kα radiation operated at 40 kV and 40 mA. X-ray photon spectroscopy (XPS) was performed using a VG Scientific ESCA-LAB 250 with monochromatic Al-Kα radiation of 1486.6 eV and an electron take-off angle of 90°. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was carried out in a three-electrode system with an aqueous solution of 0.1 M KCl, 0.1 M Na2S, and 0.1 M S, at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 using a BioLogic electrochemical analyzer. Pt was used as a CE, and Ag/Ag+ was used as a reference electrode. UV-visible absorption spectra were recorded using an OPTIZEN 3220 UV spectrophotometer.

The current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the QDSSCs were examined under one sun illumination (AM 1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2) using an ABET Technologies (USA) solar simulator with an irradiance uniformity of ±3%. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was conducted on the QDSSCs using a BioLogic potentiostat/galvanostat/EIS analyzer (SP-150, France) under one sun illumination at frequencies ranging from 100 mHz to 500 kHz. The applied bias voltage and AC amplitude were set to the VOC of the QDSSCs and 10 mV, respectively. The electrical impedance was characterized using Nyquist plots. To perform the stability test, QDSSCs based on ZnO/CoS, ZnO/NiS, ZnO/CuS, ZnO/PbS, ZnO/Pt and Pt CEs were continuously irradiated with AM 1.5 G radiation at 100 mW cm−2 under working conditions, and the J–V curves were tested every 2 h for 20 h.


Fig. 1 shows low and high magnification and cross-sectional field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) images of the ZnO NRs and metal-sulfide-decorated ZnO NR (ZnO/CoS, ZnO/NiS, ZnO/CuS and ZnO/PbS) CEs. Fig. 1a and f show FESEM images of the as-grown ZnO NRs on an FTO substrate. It can be clearly seen that large-scale vertical growth of ZnO NRs has been realized and these are uniformly distributed throughout the substrate. The vertical alignment of ZnO NRs is favorable for enhancement of the charge-transfer properties of the solar cells. The average diameter of the ZnO NRs was around 50 nm and the thickness of the ZnO NR film was found to be about 1.55 μm (Fig. 1k). It was found that the deposition of CoS (Fig. 1b) and NiS (Fig. 1c) metal sulfides did not destroy the morphology of the ZnO NRs. However, an enlarged SEM image revealed that the surface of the NRs became rough after CoS and NiS deposition. The roughened texture of the nanoscale CoS and NiS coatings on these NRs is clearly visible. The average diameters of ZnO/CoS and ZnO/NiS NRs were measured to be 256 nm and 203 nm, respectively. As shown in Fig. 1l and m, the cross-sectional thicknesses of ZnO/CoS and ZnO/NiS were found to be 1 μm and 1.03 μm, respectively. It is clear that the diameter of the ZnO NRs increases with the deposition of CoS and NiS on the ZnO NRs. For the deposition of CuS on the ZnO NRs, the CuS nanoparticles are uniformly decorated on the surface of the ZnO NRs (Fig. 1d and i). The uniform distribution of CuS nanoparticles arose from the growth mechanism and the thickness of ZnO/CuS is kept at 0.41 μm. From the FESEM images shown in Fig. 1e and j, the PbS formed cubic particles and grew uniformly on the surface of the ZnO NRs. When depositing the PbS on ZnO NRs, the layer of PbS nano-cubes that covered the NR surface became thick and dense, as shown in Fig. 1o, and the entire surface of the ZnO NRs was covered by PbS in a conformal way, forming a ZnO/PbS core–shell structure and providing a large area of catalytic sites, which is a requisite for highly catalytic properties.

To further investigate the phase composition and phase structure of metal sulfide-decorated ZnO NRs, XRD measurements were carried out and the results are shown in Fig. 2. The XRD pattern of the ZnO NRs grown on an FTO substrate was indexed to the (002), (101), (102), and (103) planes of the hexagonal wurtzite structure of ZnO (JCPDS No. 36-1451). ZnO NRs grown on the FTO substrate show a stronger diffraction peak corresponding to the (002) plane, growing along the c-axis perpendicular to the substrate surface. After deposition of CoS on ZnO NRs, a new peak is observed in addition to the diffraction peaks from the ZnO NRs (34.4°:(002) and 62.9°:(103)). This broad peak is centered at 46.9° and can be indexed to the (102) plane of hexagonal CoS (JCPDS No. 03-065-3418). As shown in Fig. 2, XRD peaks for NiS were observed on ZnO NRs, the diffraction peaks of NiS at 30.1° and 45.9°, corresponding to the (100) and (102) crystal planes of the hexagonal NiS structure (JCPDS No. 01-075-0613). For deposition of CuS on ZnO NRs, we observed CuS peaks on the ZnO NR surfaces. The peaks at 2θ values of 29.3 and 31.8° are for the (103) and (102) planes, corresponding to hexagonal CuS, and they match well with JCPDS No. 01-079-2321. The XRD patterns of the ZnO/PbS film are shown in Fig. 2, clearly exhibiting diffraction peaks at 25.9°, 30.0°, 43.0°, 50.9°, 68.8°, 70.9°, and 78.9°, which can be assigned to the corresponding (111), (200), (220), (311), (331), (420), and (422) crystal planes of PbS, which can be indexed as a cubic structure. The reported values matched well with JCPDS No. 05-0592. The X-ray diffraction patterns given in Fig. 2 show that the peaks of PbS on ZnO NRs were sharp, indicating their good crystallinity.
The composition and chemical bond configuration of the ZnO/CoS, ZnO/NiS, ZnO/CuS, and ZnO/PbS CEs were identified by XPS measurement, and the results are shown in Fig. 3. Fig. 3 exhibits the XPS full survey spectra of metal-sulfide-decorated ZnO NRs: the presence of peaks of Zn 2p, Co 2p, Ni 2p, Cu 2p, Pb 4f, S 2p, O 1s, and C 1s can be clearly observed. Zn 2p in ZnO/CoS, ZnO/NiS, ZnO/CuS, and ZnO/PbS samples is revealed by two strong peaks. It is obvious that the two strong peaks, separated by 23.9 eV at 1021.4 eV and 1045.3 eV for Zn 2p1/2 and Zn 2p3/2, respectively, indicate essentially identical binding energies for the Zn 2p orbital in accordance with Zn(II). Fig. 3a shows two peaks of Co 2p at 778.0 eV for Co 2p3/2 and 793.4 eV for Co 2p1/2 with a splitting of 15.4 eV. As shown in Fig. 3b, the XPS spectrum of ZnO/NiS exhibited two peaks for Ni 2p at binding energies of 853.4 eV and 870.1 eV, which can be attributed to Ni 2p3/2 and Ni 2p1/2, respectively. The Cu 2p core splits into Cu 2p3/2 (933.4 eV) and Cu 2p1/2 (953.3 eV) peaks, as shown in Fig. 3c. The XPS spectrum of ZnO/PbS presented in Fig. 3d shows two Pb peaks at 137 eV (Pb 4f7/2) and 141.9 eV (Pb 4f5/2). The S 2p peak appearing in metal-sulfide-decorated ZnO NR samples at 161.9 eV is indexed as sulfide. This result confirms the successful deposition of metal sulfides on ZnO NRs.
Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was performed under a three-electrode system using a diluted aqueous polysulfide (0.1 M S, 0.1 M Na2S, and 0.1 M KCl) electrolyte for analyzing the electrochemical properties of the electrodes. Fig. 4a shows cyclic voltammograms of metal-sulfide-decorated ZnO NR and Pt electrodes. In the CV curves, the peak on the positive side, known as the anodic peak, corresponds to the oxidation of S2− to Sn2− and the peak at the negative side, known as the cathodic peak, corresponds to the reduction of Sn2− to S2−. The reduction current peaks reflect the catalytic reduction of Sn2− at the CE. A higher cathodic peak current represents a faster redox reaction rate in the electrolyte. Compared with the Pt electrode, metal-sulfide-decorated ZnO NRs provided a larger current in the reduction potential range, suggesting a higher catalytic activity for reducing the S2−/Sn2− electrolytes. Interestingly, the reduction current peak of the ZnO/PbS is much higher than that for the ZnO/CuS, ZnO/NiS, and ZnO/CoS, revealing the superior electrocatalytic activity to the S2−/Sn2− redox couple. The magnitudes of the current peaks for the polysulfide reduction were in the order ZnO/PbS > ZnO/CuS > ZnO/NiS > ZnO/CoS > Pt CEs.
The stability of the metal sulfides with ZnO NR electrodes were compared with those of the Pt electrode by CV analyses, as shown in Fig. 4b. By repeating the cycles of a CV analysis, the CE stability can be estimated on the basis of the degree of degradation of the CV curves. The unchanged curve shape and current peak after 50 cycles of successive scanning indicated excellent electrochemical stability of the metal sulfide-decorated ZnO NR CE materials in the polysulfide electrolyte system. A gradual decrease in the current was observed as the potential cycling proceeded in the ZnO/CoS CE, and this degradation was much more pronounced in the Pt electrode. However, successive CV scanning indicated that corrosion or dissolution of the ZnO/NiS, ZnO/CuS and ZnO/PbS CEs in polysulfide redox couple electrolytes would not occur, and that these can stably catalyze Sn2− ion reduction. Therefore, the metal sulfide-decorated ZnO NR electrodes maintained a constant current and shape for their CV curves over 50 cycles, demonstrating that they are electrochemically stable for polysulfide redox couples.
To evaluate the catalytic activities of the electrodes formed from ZnO NRs decorated with metal sulfides and Pt, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed with symmetrical cells constructed with two identical CEs (CE/electrolyte/CE). Fig. 5a shows the EIS spectra with typical Nyquist plots of ZnO/CoS, ZnO/NiS, ZnO/CuS, ZnO/PbS and Pt electrodes. Also, EIS was carried out on symmetrical dummy cells composed of two identical ZnO/Pt CEs with the polysulfide redox couple and the Nyquist plot of ZnO/Pt is shown in Fig. S1. According to the equivalent circuit (inset of Fig. 5b), the high-frequency intercept on the real axis represents the series resistance (Rs). The charge-transfer resistance (Rct) and the corresponding double layer capacitance (Cμ) at the electrode/electrolyte interface give rise to the left semicircle (high frequency region), whereas the right semicircle (low frequency region) is attributed to the Nernst diffusion impedance (ZW) of the redox couple in the electrolyte. A detailed magnified Nyquist plot for the Pt CE is shown in Fig. 5b. The values of the EIS parameters were obtained by fitting the EIS plots with an equivalent circuit with the Z-view software.
The Rs values of the ZnO/CoS, ZnO/NiS, ZnO/CuS and ZnO/PbS electrodes are 10.34, 9.14, 8.52 and 7.57 Ω, respectively, which are lower than the Rs values of the Pt (10.70 Ω) and ZnO/Pt (10.57 Ω) CEs. The lower Rs value of ZnO/PbS could be attributed to either the high electrical conductivity of the FTO substrate or to good bonding strength between the ZnO/PbS film and the FTO substrate, which in turn promotes the collection of more electrons from the external circuit. The Rct of metal sulfide-decorated ZnO NRs is much smaller than the value for Pt (96.53 Ω) and ZnO/Pt (73.89 Ω), demonstrating that metal sulfides on ZnO NRs have a high catalytic activity in reducing the polysulfide redox couple. The Rct of ZnO/PbS (7.54 Ω) was lower than that of ZnO/CuS (8.63 Ω), whereas ZnO/NiS and ZnO/CoS have a relatively high Rct of 12.9 Ω and 15.37 Ω, respectively. The lower Rct at the interface of the CE/electrolyte not only decreases internal resistances but also attenuates recombination rates and concentration gradients in the polysulfide redox couple, which have been proven to affect the FF and JSC of the QDSSCs. As for the metal sulfide-decorated ZnO NR electrodes, the large Cμ values (ZnO/PbS, 682.69 μF; ZnO/CuS, 634.52 μF; ZnO/NiS, 351.91 μF; ZnO/CoS, 203.72 μF; ZnO/Pt, 147.85 μF and Pt, 50.97 μF) indicate that the ZnO/PbS and ZnO/CuS electrodes possess a large surface area, which promotes their high catalytic activity. The ZW of ZnO/PbS (2.16 Ω) is lower than for ZnO/CoS (5.83 Ω), ZnO/NiS (3.56 Ω), ZnO/CuS (3.15 Ω), ZnO/Pt (23.85 Ω) and Pt CEs (30.43 Ω). A lower ZW denotes better electrolyte diffusion and facilitates faster mass transport of electrons; this proves the extraordinary catalytic activity of the ZnO/PbS CE for the reduction of the polysulfide electrolyte.
Tafel-polarization analysis was carried out in a dummy cell similar to the ones used in EIS to aid investigation of the interfacial charge-transfer properties of the S2−/Sn2− redox couple on the CEs. The electrocatalytic activities of the ZnO/CoS, ZnO/NiS, ZnO/CuS, ZnO/PbS and Pt electrodes were reconfirmed by Tafel polarization measurements, as shown in Fig. 6, which reveal a logarithmic current density (logJ) as a function of voltage (V). Theoretically, the Tafel plot could be divided into three zones. The plot at low potential (|V| < 120 mV) is attributed to the polarization zone, the plot at the middle potential (with a sharp slope) belongs to the Tafel zone related to charge transfer between Sn2− and the CE, and the plot at high potential (horizontal part) is the diffusion zone. The exchange current density (J0) and the limiting diffusion current density (Jlim) can be extracted from the latter two zones. The intersection of the tangent line of the Tafel zone and the extension line of the zero bias provides information about J0, which is closely related to the Rct according to eqn (1):
(1)
where
Rct is the charge-transfer resistance calculated from the EIS measurement at the CE/electrolyte interface, R is the gas constant, n is the number of electrons involved in the reduction of the polysulfide electrolyte at the counter electrode, T is the temperature, and F is Faraday's constant.

Therefore, according to the slopes for the anodic or cathodic branches, J0 follows the order ZnO/PbS > ZnO/CuS > ZnO/NiS > ZnO/CoS > Pt, implying an excellent electrocatalytic ability for the S2−/Sn2− redox couple. Another important parameter, the limiting current density (Jlim) can be derived from the diffusion zone of the curve. The Jlim of the ZnO/PbS shows a higher magnitude than the ZnO/CoS, ZnO/NiS, ZnO/CuS and Pt CEs, revealing a higher diffusion velocity for the ZnO/PbS CE in the S2−/Sn2− electrolyte. According to eqn (2), the Jlim is positively relevant to the diffusion coefficient (D), which corresponds to the diffusion behavior of the S2−/Sn2− redox couple in the electrolyte.
(2)
where
D is the diffusion coefficient of the polysulfide, l is the electrolyte thickness, n is the number of electrons involved in the reduction of disulfide at the counter electrode, F is Faraday's constant, and C is the polysulfide concentration. The Tafel polarization measurement result is in good agreement with the EIS results.

The prepared QDSSC devices based on metal sulfide-decorated ZnO NR CEs were characterized under AM 1.5 G simulated solar irradiation (100 mW cm−2) to assess the device performance. Fig. 7 shows the photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the QDSSCs obtained using the various CEs fabricated here, and the detailed photovoltaic parameters, such as open-circuit voltage (VOC), short-circuit current density (JSC), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (η), are summarized in Table 1. J–V curves for the QDSSCs fabricated with bare metal sulfide (CoS, NiS, CuS and PbS) CEs are shown in Fig. S2. The photovoltaic parameters extracted from the J–V curves are shown in Table S1. QDSSCs fabricated using CoS, NiS, CuS and Pt as CEs show efficiencies of 2.04%, 2.68%, 3.40%, and 3.96%, respectively. On the other hand, the QDSSC fabricated using ZnO/Pt (1.78%) as CE performed poorly due to its inability to catalyze the polysulfide reduction, as shown in Fig. S3. The hierarchically assembled ZnO NRs not only provided an improved charge transport network but also allowed for the efficient deposition of metal sulfides to provide more active sites for catalyzing the reduction of Sn2− to nS2−. Therefore, the combination of the high-surface-area ZnO NRs and the highly catalytic metal sulfide catalyst would greatly enhance the catalytic activity of the CE toward the polysulfide electrolyte.
CE

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF

η%

R
s (Ω)

R
CE (Ω)

R
w (Ω)

R
k (Ω)

R
k/Rw

L
n (μm)

τ
n (ms)

k
eff (s−1)

D
n (cm2 s−1)
ZnO/CoS
0.589
10.84
0.430
2.75
10.30
4.61
1.62
8.33
5.20
17.10
4.05
246.91
7.20 × 10−4
ZnO/NiS
0.595
11.81
0.444
3.12
9.53
1.83
1.23
8.71
7.07
19.94
4.78
209.20
8.31 × 10−4
ZnO/CuS
0.605
12.79
0.530
4.10
8.74
1.36
0.67
5.24
7.76
20.89
5.00
200.00
8.71 × 10−4
ZnO/PbS
0.633
13.28
0.566
4.76
7.67
1.03
0.41
4.02
9.80
23.47
5.32
187.96
10.35 × 10−4
Pt
0.507
10.65
0.285
1.54
10.97
12.21
5.09
8.31
1.63
9.57
1.72
581.39
5.32 × 10−4
As a result, the QDSSC with the ZnO/PbS CE yields a remarkable η of 4.76%, with a JSC of 13.28 mA cm−2, a VOC of 0.633 V, and a FF of 0.566. The QDSSC with the ZnO/CuS CE produces a η of 4.10%, while the ZnO/NiS CE-based QDSSC has a η of 3.12%, and the ZnO/CoS CE-based QDSSC has a η of 2.75%. The improved morphology of PbS nanocube architectures on ZnO NRs (ZnO/PbS) can offer more efficient transport channels to ensure rapid transportation of electrons, and thus the charge-combination process can be suppressed, resulting in an improved performance. Meanwhile, the QDSSC with a Pt CE shows a low η of 1.54%, indicating a poor catalytic activity for the reduction of Sn2−, which is due to the strong absorption of S2− ions on the surface of Pt, reducing the surface activity of Pt. The higher VOC in the ZnO/PbS CE could be attributed to the higher electron density that remains in the conduction band of the TiO2, raising the Fermi level. These results indicated a higher electrocatalytic activity for ZnO/PbS and ZnO/CuS CEs than for ZnO/NiS, ZnO/CoS and Pt CEs, as evidenced by the high JSC and FF. Therefore, this result led us to conclude that ZnO/PbS is a promising material for replacing the current metal-based CEs in QDSSCs.
To further investigate the internal resistances and charge-transfer kinetics in the QDSSCs, we performed EIS analysis. Fig. 8a shows Nyquist plots of QDSSCs with metal-sulfide-decorated ZnO NRs and Pt CEs. The experimental impedance data were fitted using an equivalent circuit model (Fig. 8b) and results are listed in Table 1. The equivalent circuit model consists of a series resistance (Rs), which is obtained from the nonzero intercept on the real axis of the impedance plot and represents the sheet resistance of the FTO substrate; Cμ (Cμ = CμL) is the chemical capacitance, Rw (Rw = rwL) is the electron transport resistance, and Rk (Rk = rk/L) represents the TiO2/electrolyte interfacial charge-transfer resistance (or the so-called recombination resistance) in the QDSSCs. Similarly, RFTO and CFTO stand for the resistance and capacitance of the FTO. In general, the Nyquist plot of the QDSSC consists of three semicircles. The first semicircle in the high frequency range represents the charge-transfer resistance (RCE) and capacitance (CCE) at the CE/electrolyte interface, the second semicircle in the middle frequency region represents the combination of the Rk and Rw, and the third semicircle in the low frequency region corresponds to the Warburg diffusion process of the S2−/Sn2− polysulfide redox couple. Some other important parameters could be estimated from the following equations:
τn = RkCμ
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
where
L is the TiO2 film thickness (7.5 μm), τn is the electron lifetime, Ln is the diffusion length of the electrons, Dn is the effective diffusion coefficient, and keff is the reaction rate constant for the electron recombination. From Table 1, a decrease in Rs can be seen for the ZnO/PbS CE-based QDSSCs, which is believed to be the reason for the increase in the FF (0.566) of the devices. The RCE value of ZnO/PbS (1.03 Ω) is lower than that of ZnO/CoS (4.61 Ω), ZnO/NiS (1.83 Ω), ZnO/CuS (1.36 Ω) and Pt CEs (12.21 Ω), suggesting that ZnO NRs greatly enhance the charge transfer of the ZnO/CuS and ZnO/PbS CEs. The Rk of the ZnO/PbS CE was smaller than that of the other CE-based QDSSCs, which is due to improved electron transfer at the TiO2/QDs/electrolyte interface with reduced recombination. Moreover, Rk/Rw for the ZnO/PbS CE (9.80) is much higher than that of the ZnO/CoS (5.20), ZnO/NiS (7.07), ZnO/CuS (7.76), and Pt (1.63) CEs. A higher Rk/Rw is the crucial factor with respect to maintaining low charge recombination, a high charge collection efficiency, and a high PCE for a solar cell. A larger Dn and longer τn and Ln were found in the ZnO/PbS-based QDSSC than in the ZnO/CoS, ZnO/NiS, ZnO/CuS and Pt-based QDSSCs, indicating that electron transfer in the ZnO/PbS-based QDSSC was unblocked for a longer distance than in the other CE-based QDSSCs. The higher value of Ln was consistent with the higher JSC and FF values of the ZnO/PbS-based QDSSC.

The stability of a solar cell is critical to the real application. The stability of the working state of TiO2/CdS/CdSe/ZnS QDSSCs with ZnO-decorated metal sulfides and Pt CEs was measured in our work. Fig. 9 shows the extracted photovoltaic parameters (VOC, JSC, FF, and η) from working stability tests based on our ZnO/CoS, ZnO/NiS, ZnO/CuS, ZnO/PbS and Pt CEs under continuous light-soaking for 20 h with a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2. Also, Fig. S4 shows the photostability of the ZnO/Pt CE-based QDSSC over 20 h. During the initial 8 h measurement of the CEs after the device fabrication, the VOC, JSC, and FF were very stable, resulting in a constant η. Then, the η showed a clear decrease after 8 h and this was ascribed to the simultaneous decrease in JSC and VOC in ZnO/CoS, ZnO/NiS, ZnO/CuS, ZnO/Pt and Pt CEs. The improvement of η in the initial stage can be partially ascribed to the capillary effect of slow electrolyte solution permeation into the TiO2 pores and improved ionic transport due to heating of the polysulfide redox couple. As a result, the η of the ZnO/CoS, ZnO/NiS, ZnO/Pt and Pt decline rapidly, dropping from 2.75% to 2.35%, 3.12% to 2.96%, 1.78% to 1.58% and 1.54% to 1.29%; on the other hand, the ZnO/CuS CE shows a slow change in η from 4.10% to 4.09% in 20 h. Interestingly, in the beginning stage, the QDSSC with the ZnO/PbS CE shows values for VOC, JSC, FF, and η of 0.633 V, 13.28 mA cm−2, 0.566, and 4.76%, respectively. When the stability test is continued to 20 h, the photovoltaic parameters of the QDSSC based on the ZnO/PbS CE slightly improved with time (VOC = 0.646 V; JSC = 13.47 mA cm−2; FF = 0.574, and η = 4.99%). The stability of the ZnO/PbS QDSSC was much better than that of the ZnO/CoS, ZnO/NiS, ZnO/CuS, ZnO/Pt and Pt CE-based QDSSCs.

In summary, for the purpose of designing highly efficient and stable CE materials for QDSSCs, the capability of fabricating ZnO NRs decorated with metal sulfides (ZnO/CoS, ZnO/NiS, ZnO/CuS, and ZnO/PbS) has been demonstrated through a two-step solution-processing method. The metal sulfide nanostructures would provide more active sites to catalyze the reduction of Sn2− to nS2− and connect with the vertically aligned ZnO NR network to ensure conductivity, accelerate the electrolyte transport, and promote fast charge transport as well as increase the diffusion velocity of the redox couple. In addition, CV, EIS and Tafel analyses indicated that the combination of the highly catalytic PbS catalyst and the high-surface-area ZnO NRs (ZnO/PbS) produced a superior electrochemical catalyst and remarkable stability in catalyzing the reduction of Sn2− to S2−, compared to the ZnO/CoS, ZnO/NiS, ZnO/CuS and Pt CEs. As a result, the CdS/CdSe/ZnS QDSSCs with ZnO/PbS CEs, using a polysulfide electrolyte, showed the highest power conversion efficiency of 4.76% under 1 sun irradiation, better than that of ZnO/CuS (4.10%), ZnO/NiS (3.12%), ZnO/CoS (2.75%), ZnO/Pt (1.78%) and Pt (1.54%) CEs. Considering their low cost and facile fabrication, and especially their stability and high power conversion efficiency, these have demonstrated the promising potential of ZnO NRs with metal sulfides when applied as the CEs in QDSSCs.


The authors declare no competing financial interest. The samples were analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi S-4200) and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM; Jem 2011, Jeol corp.) with a 4k × 4k CCD camera (Ultra Scan 400SP, Gatan corp.) at the Busan KBSI.


This work was financially supported by the MOTIE (Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy), Korea, under the Industry Convergence Liaison Robotics Creative Graduates Education Program supervised by the KIAT (N0001126).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta02415g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016