 DOI: 10.1039/D1TC05030C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 1246-1258


Jing
Guo
,

Tao
Wang
,

Yao
Wu
,

Rui
Sun
,

Qiang
Wu
,

Wei
Wang
,

Hui
Wang
,

Xinxin
Xia
,

Xinhui
Lu
,

Tao
Wang
 and 

Jie
Min
*

The Institute for Advanced Studies, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China. E-mail: min.jie@whu.edu.cn

State Key Laboratory of Silicate Materials for Architectures, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, 430070, China

Department of Physics, Chinese University of Hong Kong, New Territories, 999077, Hong Kong, China

Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, China

Key Laboratory of Materials Processing and Mold, Ministry of Education, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, 450002, China

Received
19th October 2021
, Accepted 11th December 2021
First published on 13th December 2021
With the state-of-the-art impressive power conversion efficiency (PCE) of all-polymer solar cells (all-PSCs) surpassing 17%, it has become increasingly urgent to achieve highly stable devices under long-term operational conditions. Herein, the photostability of all-PSCs based on three isomeric polymer acceptors (PAs, PYTT-x (x = 1–3)), as well as their underlying degradation mechanisms, were investigated. Impressively, the relatively amorphous PA PYTT-1 and crystalline PA PYTT-3 provided completely different degradation mechanisms and morphological evolutionary processes, deriving from domain shrinkage-related increased energetic bulk traps in the former, and increased surface-assisted recombination together with domain growth and vertical phase rearrangement in the latter. In contrast, the decent longevity of PYTT-2 with moderate crystallinity almost preserves the initial nanostructure with a slight loss of molecular ordering. The analysis further revealed that three types of degradation behaviors along with related blend microstructure evolution are correlated with the synergistic effects of intermolecular interactions and crystallization characteristics. Not only do these findings underscore the key role of photovoltaic material design regarding the regioisomerized end-capping groups in the determination of film formation and its blend microstructure evolution under light-soaking for long exposure times, but more importantly, also denote the correlation between the molecular structure and device photostability directly.

Solution-processed bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells (OSCs) acting as one of the high-potential third-generation photovoltaic technologies for sustainable energy harvesting have rendered power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of over 18%, pushing this photovoltaic technology towards potential commercial applications. Despite this encouraging progress, the reliability and stability of champion OSC devices are still a significant bottleneck under various external stresses or internal factors. Exploration regarding the underlying degradation mechanism is significantly lagging behind despite the extensive research efforts for the PCEs to thrive and structure–performance correlations, raising a great challenge for entering the possible application market of OSCs.

Recently, to resolve the drawbacks of fullerene-based OSCs from the aspect of weak light absorption, limited diversity in the molecular design, and low flexibility due to the brittle crystalline features, non-fullerene acceptor (NFA) substitutes have been developed for better photovoltaic properties and stability. It should be noted that current research studies showed that highly efficient photovoltaic systems based on Y-series NFAs are not stable enough. One of the promising alternatives to resolve major challenges associated with NFA-based photovoltaic systems, especially in terms of operational stability, is to develop polymerized small-molecule acceptors (PSMAs) for constructing all-polymer solar cells (all-PSCs). This strategy is uniquely attractive because of enhanced polymer electronic structure tunability, morphological and mechanical BHJ film robustness, more excellent compatibility with large area manufacture, and outstanding stability under operation and stress protocols. Additionally, due to interchain entanglement between the polymer donor (PD) and the polymer acceptor (PA), the PAs are normally perceived to possess some unique stability properties like superior resilience against thermal and mechanical stress, as compared to the relevant fullerene and NFA materials. Despite this, performance attenuation and morphological evolution in the relevant all-PSCs are still observed under increased thermal heating or even exposure to the ambient conditions. In particular, appropriate investigations have initially shown that the material structure-determined stability was also present in the all-polymer systems. Thus, considering the rapid striking progress of PCEs benefiting from the structural diversity of PAs in all-PSCs, an in-depth understanding of the structure–property relationship and the effect of molecular structure modulation on the relevant device efficiency and stability is in urgent need of exploration.
It is interesting to note that the effects of the structural modification of PAs on the thin-film storage, and thermal, and mechanical properties of the all-polymer systems were investigated widely. However, the relevant photostability (or operational stability) studies of all-polymer systems have been rarely involved in previous reports. Based on our research and understanding, there are two specific reasons. On the one hand, some relevant binary all-polymer systems usually exhibit poor light-soaking stability. In some cases, their photo-stabilities are not better than those of the NFA-based photovoltaic systems. These results are very different from the abovementioned phenomena of storage, and thermal and mechanical properties and cannot reflect the remarkable merits of all-polymer materials. On the other hand, achieving a photostable BHJ microstructure of an all-polymer system is particularly challenging due to the obviously reduced entropic contributions which suppress PD–PA pair miscibility and compatibility versus that of small molecular NFA-based systems. It is worth noting that many intrinsic and external factors affect the light-soaking degradation behaviors, so relevant investigations on the performance degradation mechanisms of all-polymer systems have become highly complicated. Consequently, many studies only provide photostability data without reasonable explanation, while some interpretations of PA structural effects on device photostability generally tend to be phenomenological. Since exposure to light is inevitable during the all-PSC operation, steady device performance under long-term light-soaking should be ensured. Thus, understanding molecular structure dependence of durable morphological stability, especially under illumination stress, is essential to guide the design and development of photovoltaic materials.
Incorporating three structurally similar PAs, namely PYTT-1, PYTT-2, and PYTT-3 (Fig. 1A) with slightly different isomeric thiophene-fused ending-groups and PD PBDB-T, herein we systematically explored the photostability behaviors of these three all-polymer systems and established a molecular structure–stability correlation instead of the well-known structure–performance relationship. Among these all-polymer systems, we found a slight attenuation in the photovoltaic performance of the all-PSCs based on PA PYTT-2 with a thiophene π-bridge attached to the β position of the thiophene on the electron-withdrawing acceptor units. In contrast, relatively severe losses in the device performance were observed in the PYTT-1- and PYTT-3-based all-PSCs maintained under controlled light-soaking for 200 hours. Analysis of the donor–acceptor morphology diagram, depicted from detailed morphology measurements, validates the apparent differences in physical degradation mechanisms and morphology evolution behaviors of these three similar all-polymer systems. Furthermore, relevant investigation results revealed that these three types of degradation behaviors of all-polymer systems are correlated with the synergistic effects of intermolecular interactions of PD–PA pairs and crystallization characteristics of PAs.

The chemical structures of PAs PYTT-1, PYTT-2 and PYTT-3, and PD PBDB-T are depicted in Fig. 1A. These three isomeric PAs consist of the same fused-aromatic-ring-constructed structure but differ in the isomerized thiophene-fused ending-groups and location of the thiophene π-bridge attached to thiophene. Three PAs were synthesized according to the reported procedure and have been used as acceptors to construct the PBDB-T-based all-PSCs and their structure-performance correlations investigated as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). The corresponding photovoltaic parameters of these three PAs-based all-polymer systems are summarized in Table S1 (ESI). The all-polymer devices based on PBDB-T pairing with PYTT-1, PYTT-2, and PYTT-3 delivered comparable PCEs of 13.36%, 14.35%, and 13.41%, respectively.

After the all-PSC construction with a conventional configuration of ITO/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS)/active layer/PDINN/Ag (Fig. 1B), the devices were kept under the illumination of a white LED array (spectra shown in Fig. S2, ESI) in a nitrogen-filled glove box with oxygen and water content below 0.2 ppm. The J–V characteristics of the all-PSC devices exposed to continuous illumination under maximum power point (MPP) tracking were recorded periodically at intervals of 30 minutes. The time-dependent evolution trends of current–voltage curves are shown in Fig. 1C–E, and the detailed degradation trends of relevant photovoltaic parameters are provided in Fig. 1F–I. The PYTT-2-based all-PSCs showed a nearly unchanged PCE (maintaining 90% of the initial PCE) under 200 hours of MPP tracking at continuous light irradiation with a white LED lamp (100 mW cm−2), while the PYTT-1- and PYTT-3-based devices exhibited similar degradation trends but with different attenuation rates. The PYTT-3-based devices underwent the most dramatic degradation among these three types of all-polymer systems, with the PCE dropping to 75% of its original values after 200 hours of light soaking, mainly resulting from the reduced open-circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF) values (see Fig. 1F and H). In addition, the PYTT-1-based all-PSCs displayed a moderate PCE drop with an ∼15% deterioration in the same period, mainly contributing to the degradation of FF values (Fig. 1H).
As depicted in Fig. 1H, the FF degradation behaviors contributed the main PCE losses in all three all-polymer systems, while we observed a striking difference in the Voc degradation behavior with a rapid deterioration in the case of PYTT-3. Moreover, although both PYTT-1- and PYTT-3-based systems showed comparable degradation trends of short-circuit current density (Jsc) and FF (Fig. 1G and H), the PYTT-3-based system exhibited a faster rate of Voc decay as compared to the PYTT-1-based system. The Jsc (Fig. 1G) of these three systems was maintained almost unchanged during the degradation process. And the Jsc of the PYTT-1- and PYTT-2-based all-polymer systems showed only a slight loss compared to the PYTT-2-based all-polymer devices. The distinctly different degradation trends between these all-polymer systems based on isomeric PAs imply the underlying specific stability issues. Thus, relevant degradation behaviors and mechanisms in these all-polymer systems should be clarified to further guide the design of photovoltaic materials and the development of all-polymer systems, which will be discussed below.

Regarding the degradation behaviors of an active layer system, apart from the blend morphology evolution during illumination and exposure to heat, one should also keep in mind that the photovoltaic materials may undergo potential photoreactions (photo-degradation/photo oxygen-degradation) during light-soaking. To gain a detailed insight into the photo-degradation behaviors of PD and PA materials, we apply Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy to monitor the chemical structural changes of the photovoltaic materials without and with light-soaking for 200 hours in an N2-filled glovebox. Notably, the oxygen content in the glovebox is less than 0.01 ppm, so the influence of relevant photooxidation reactions (photo oxygen-degradation) on the molecular structure can be ruled out. As shown in Fig. 2A–D, the light-induced degradation behaviors of the PD and PA materials during irradiation under white light have been studied in pristine films. It was found that the fresh and aged films showed identical FTIR spectra, indicating that there is no photoreaction occurrence and new chemical product formation in these PD and PA neat films. Similarly, the perfect overlap of absorption spectra for the fresh and aged films strongly pointed out that there was also no observable chemical damage in the blend films and the excellent intrinsic stability of the active layer materials relevant to the device stability (Fig. S3, ESI). This is also corroborated by the results of photoluminescence (PL) studies of the PD and PA films without and with light-soaking for 200 hours. As shown in Fig. 2E–H, the comparable PL signals can be easily found in the fresh and aged films. Thus, these results demonstrated that the detailed degradation mechanisms of the investigated all-polymer systems are not mainly driven by the photo-degradation of PD and PA materials.

Additionally, the degradation kinetics of the polymer materials with a focus on the light-induced degradation could be further analyzed and determined by measuring the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) of hole-only or electron-only devices under simulated one sun illumination. The stability of pristine photoactive materials as an active layer within a complete device could partially reflect the device stability. As shown in Fig. 2I–L, the hole-only devices ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PD PBDB-T/MoO3/Ag exhibited a fairly stable trend, and no obvious degradation was observed, demonstrating excellent intrinsic photostability of PD PBDB-T and hole-only devices, while all PA-based electron-only ITO/ZnO/PAs PYTT-x/PDINN/Ag devices show a visible current density decrease (Fig. 2J–L). Considering the high intrinsic stability of pristine PAs, these results indicate that the degradation behaviors are probably caused by multiple factors, including various interfaces, electron transport materials, and electrodes within the electron-only device, etc.

To reveal the underlying mechanisms behind the different degradation behaviors of the PYTT-based systems, relevant aged and fresh solar cells were characterized and compared with several experimental techniques. The charge transport properties were firstly examined by means of photoinduced charge carrier extraction using the linear increasing voltage (Photo-CELIV) technique, as shown in Fig. 3A–C. Of note, compared with the fresh device, the recorded transient curve hardly changed for the aged device based on PBDB-T:PYTT-2. In contrast, PYTT-1- and PYTT-3-based aged devices exhibited the shift of the maximum peaks to an extended time with a drop in the peak intensity values, which is correlated with reduced device mobility and dispersive features tied to trapped charge carriers on the same delay time scale. Moreover, as depicted in Fig. S4 (ESI) and summarized in Fig. 3D and Table S2 (ESI), a more than 50% drop in mobility was observed for the PBDB-T:PYTT-1 and PBDB-T:PYTT-3 devices, and for the case of PBDB-T:PYTT-2, the carrier mobility showed a tiny decrease but over 80% of the initial value was preserved, which agrees well with the photoaging results.

To deepen the understanding, the individual mobility of electron-only and hole-only devices was further evaluated under the same aging conditions as for the solar cells. The time-dependent J–V curves were measured as shown in Fig. 3E–G. The derived mobilities from the SCLC method are presented in Fig. 3H and Table S2 (ESI). All hole-only devices are relatively stable, indicating the well-maintained transport channel for the hole. In contrast, the electron-only devices showed a continuous linear degradation as a function of light-aging time, especially showing a more pronounced decline in the electron mobility for both PBDB-T:PYTT-1 and PBDB-T:PYTT-3 devices. This fast aging in conjunction with the evolution of J–V characteristics of the abovementioned pristine films strongly suggests that the light-soaking degradation of the corresponding all-PSCs is mainly induced by the light instability of the PD:PAs active layer. But once again as observed in PAs-based electron-only devices, multiple layers and diverse interfaces in the devices are present, which may also partially account for the common loss in electron mobility of electron-only devices and general drop of FF in the photovoltaic device during the exposure time.
A closer investigation into the recombination dynamics using transient photovoltage (TPV) and charge extraction properties via transient photocurrent (TPC) measurements was further carried out (see Fig. S5 in the ESI). It is clearly noted that in Fig. 3I and J, for the PBDB-T:PYTT-2 devices, both TPV and TPC curves of the fresh and aged devices did not alter significantly. In contrast, shortened carrier lifetime and extended charge extraction time were observed in the PBDB-T:PYTT-1 and PBDB-T:PYTT-3 aged devices. Together with a dispersive feature in aged photo-CELIV traces, these changes are indicative of the presence of more additional electron trap states that increase the resistance for charge transportation and extraction. Thus, carrier recombination may be more pronounced in the corresponding devices after light-soaking stress for 200 hours. To directly examine the charge carrier recombination properties, light intensity dependent Voc was performed in the fresh and aged devices, and the corresponding results are shown in Fig. 3K. According to preceding research, the recombination behaviors can be identified as three items depending on the slope of kT/q yielded from a semi-log plot of Vocvs. light intensity (Plight). A value of 1 (slope = kT/q, where k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature in Kelvin, and q is the elementary charge) is associated with recombination of free charges, signifying that bimolecular recombination is the major loss mechanism under open-circuit conditions. When trap-assisted recombination is involved, a stronger dependency of Voc on the Plight can be observed. It is worthy of note that if the slope is smaller than kT/q, the presence of surface recombination is the dominant loss mechanism. It can be seen that the slope of the PBDB-T:PYTT-1 device increases from 1.31 to 1.42 kT/q, implying the increment in bulk-trap assisted recombination and confirming that the attenuations of Jsc and FF values are attributed to light-induced traps or morphological defects while the slopes of the fresh and aged devices based on PBDB-T:PYTT-2 are comparable (1.47 kT/q for the fresh device and 1.46 kT/q for the aged one), indicating that this all-polymer system maintains the recombination dynamics in the relevant devices regardless of light exposure. Most interestingly, a distinctive reduction of slope from 1.60 to 0.86 kT/q was observed for the PBDB-T:PYTT-3 system, corresponding to the transition of trap-assisted recombination to surface recombination, which is most likely responsible for the reduction in the Voc (Fig. 1F). In line with the preceding research, the presence of surface recombination is a common feature in high-performance NFA-based OSCs. We presumably ascribe this transition to the time-dependent phase evolution, which will be discussed below.
Owing to the limitations of transient measurements in discriminating between bulk and surface effects and non-quantitative analysis of Voc dependence of Plight, the charge recombination and extraction dynamics were further determined by a quantitative analysis of capacitance spectroscopy under different applied biases to gain insights into the evolution of the carrier mechanism losses. The detailed description of this analysis was depicted elsewhere. The obtained voltage-dependent capacitance Cb is presented in Fig. S6–S8 (ESI), and the first observation was focused on the charge carrier density (n) and effective mobility (μeff) of the fresh and aged devices. As expected, the increased carrier density was observed in all aged samples compared to the fresh ones (Fig. S9A–C, ESI), which is reasonable, especially at reverse bias, because of the inefficient charge extraction properties due to increased traps of the aged devices as evidenced in TPC. Furthermore, a clear trend can be seen in the effective mobilities (Fig. S9D–F, ESI), where the fresh devices exhibit superior mobilities relative to their after-exposure counterparts, with a moderate loss in PBDB-T:PYTT-1 (3.8 × 10−4 to 1.5 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1), slight decay for PBDB-T:PYTT-2 (2.6 × 10−4 to 1.6 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) and more than one order of magnitude reduction for the PBDB-T:PYTT-3 device (8.3 × 10−4 to 6.9 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1). This result correlates well with the time-dependent degradation of mobility as found in the Photo-CELIV and SCLC measurements. After having determined the aforementioned loss processes, a further in-depth investigation was carried out with the help of carrier density, effective mobility, applied voltage, and dielectric constants used as input parameters to obtain a quantitative analysis of recombination dynamics, while the density of traps in bulk (Nt,b), and surface-trap density (Nt,s) were the output fitting parameters. From these results as shown in Fig. 3L–O, it can be confirmed that trap-assisted recombination in the bulk is the dominant recombination channel for all three cases with Nt,b more than 1015 cm-3 before light aging. Moreover, the parameters Nt,b, and Nt,s in all all-polymer systems increased upon light-soaking, but specifically, the surface trap density exhibited a more steep increase over two orders of magnitude in the case of the PBDB-T:PYTT-3 device (2.45 × 1011 to 8.01 × 1013 cm−2), which accounts for the fact that dominant undesirable carrier recombination loss is caused by surface traps. It is worth noting that the PBDB-T:PYTT-3 device shows a relatively stable Jsc and time-dependent attenuation of Voc during light irradiation. This observation implies that surface recombination is a Voc limiting factor while not causing a significant reduction of the Jsc. In short, coupled with detailed data interpretation regarding charge transport and recombination dynamics, we unfolded the physical correlations that dominate the different decay processes between these three all-PSC devices during light exposure.

As we have observed in FTIR, UV-vis absorption, and sensitive PL measurements, the identical signals verify the superior chemical and morphological stability of PD and PA materials. However, the intrinsic stability of blend morphology is not well understood; hence the temporal evolution of PL spectra for blend films was first examined as shown in Fig. S10 (ESI). There is a strong time-dependent recovery in the relative PL intensity; the PL of the blend films was enhanced by 42%, 28%, and 85% for the PBDB-T:PYTT-1, PBDB-T:PYTT-2, and PBDB-T:PYTT-3 films, respectively, after light soaking for 200 hours in an N2 atmosphere, herein indicative of less efficient exciton dissociation due to the light-induced morphology change in the films as we excluded the effect of chemical trapping earlier. In light of the above explorations, it was necessary for morphological evolution to occur in the blend films before and after illumination to uncover the origin of the deteriorating photovoltaic properties.

Atomic force microscopy (AFM), grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS), and grazing incidence small-angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS) were also conducted to explore the morphology and stacking structure of these isomeric materials in these three blend films and further the different stacking behaviors after light exposure were analyzed. From the AFM images, as shown in Fig. S11 (ESI), all fresh blend systems exhibited a homogenous and uniformly smooth surface with a small root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of 0.90–1.50 nm. This result implies the appropriate phase separation and bicontinuous network for efficient exciton dissociation and charge transport as supported by the high-efficient photovoltaic performance of these all-PSCs (Table S1, ESI). However, upon light illuminance, a more coarse surface with increased RMS from 1.22 to 1.41 nm was observed in the PBDB-T:PYTT-3 aged film, which implies the existence of large-scale aggregation and excess phase separation after aging. Compared to PBDB-T:PYTT-3, there is no distinct difference in the surface morphology before and after light soaking for PBDB-T:PYTT-1 and PBDB-T:PYTT-2 blend films. Hence, it can be assumed that the discrepancy of main reduced photovoltaic parameters for these three isomers during light exposure is linked to different morphology-related transitions.
Additionally, a more detailed inspection of molecular orientation and packing was performed by means of the GIWAXS technique, as shown in Fig. 4A and B, with further information regarding the pristine film and 2D GIWAXS patterns shown in Fig. S12–S14 (ESI). The lamellar peak (100) in the in-plane direction and π–π stacking (010) in the out-of-plane direction of the neat and blend films are well defined, which indicates a high degree of ordering structure in these films. After light illumination, molecular ordering of PBDB-T:PYTT-1 and PBDB-T:PYTT-3 films remained unchanged with the perfectly overlapped GIWAXS profiles. Intriguingly, we observed a unique diffraction peak located at q ≈ 0.18 Å−1 with a d-spacing of 3.5 nm in the PBDB-T:PYTT-2 blend film and neat PYTT-2 in-plane GIWAXS profiles (Fig. S14A, ESI). According to previous studies, this diffraction peak, we infer, is likely related to the lamellar stacking of PYTT-2 conjugated backbones. It is clear, especially after photoaging, that the peak had totally disappeared, suggesting the loss of lamellar stacking of conjugated backbones and a less ordered molecular stacking compared to the as-prepared one.
The morphological properties concerning the intimately mixed amorphous regions and domain sizes were further investigated by the GISAXS technique as plotted in Fig. 4C (Fig. S15, ESI presents the corresponding 2D GISAXS patterns). Fitting with the Debye–Anderson–Brumberger and fractal-like network models, they were used to elucidate the scattering contribution from intermixing amorphous phases and domain size, respectively. Surprisingly, the completely different decay behaviors were confirmed in the course of morphological evolution as listed in Table S3 (ESI). It's notable to mention that the pure phase domain sizes (2Rg) of the PBDB-T:PYTT-1 and PBDB-T:PYTT-3 blends exhibit the opposite evolution trend; the gradually shrinking of domain sizes (from 25.0 nm to 16.5 nm, shown in Table S3, ESI) accompanied by the growing size of intermixing amorphous phase (from 30.0 nm to 44.0 nm) in the PBDB-T:PYTT-1 film give rise to incomplete phase separation, which deteriorates the charge collection. Moreover, the increased aggregation size (from 20.1 nm for the fresh film to 30.7 nm after aging) with strong phase separation further dominate the nanoscale transformation of the PBDB-T:PYTT-3 blend film, and this tendency is also consistent in electroluminescence (EL) spectra (Fig. S16, ESI) which show a notable red-shift of the emission peak, confirming a strong phase separation in the amorphous donor/acceptor mixed regimes. It is worth mentioning that the PBDB-T:PYTT-2 aged blend shows similar nanoscale phase parameters compared to that of the fresh sample (Table S3, ESI), which could be the reason for the relatively high stability among the three all-polymer systems. From the analyses above, we intend to conclude that the nanostructure evolution is significantly dependent on molecule structure with isomerized thiophene-fused ending-groups during long-term continuous light exposure.

By comparing the stability of PYTT-serial all-PSC devices with similar time-zero efficiencies under continuous light irradiation, we demonstrated there were three kinds of degradation behaviors that existed in these three all-polymer systems. Among them, the PBDB-T:PYTT-2 solar cells exhibit the highest long-term PCE preservation, mainly attributed to the minimal attenuation behaviors of photovoltaic parameters. This finding was further ascribed to the subtle change of molecular packing, probably related to the abovementioned decline of stacking order in the lamellar orientation of conjugated backbones. Compared to the PBDB-T:PYTT-2, the PBDB-T:PYTT-1 is influenced by the increased energetic traps in bulk, leading to a higher recombination order and thus decreased FF (Fig. 1H). Specifically, more evidence extracted from the analysis of morphological evolution shows a shrinking of domain size but molecular stacking remains constant. As a result, the interpenetrating network formed by the connection of neighboring domains was lost. This breakdown of connected domains, which decreases the domain purity, results in the enhancement of interfacial defects acting as traps, eventually contributing to trap-assisted recombination and reducing FF values in devices.

Interestingly, the PBDB-T:PYTT-3 device shows a clearly opposite trend. The domain size becomes larger and more demixing of the donor and acceptor phases occurs in the finely intermixing amorphous region with time, which normally reduces the charge generation, and induces Jsc and FF losses. However, in our case, the decay of the FF and Voc become the main factors limiting the stability, and the Jsc is barely affected. Considering the recombination dynamics of transformation from bulk- to the surface-assisted trap recombination and similar observation of Voc in the previous investigation, thus we rationally infer that continuous vertical phase separation process occurs simultaneously with the gradual formation of a PYTT-3-rich domain in the vicinity of the bottom surface, resulting in inefficient charge transfer as earlier observed in SCLC and Photo-CELIV after aging. Meanwhile, a pile-up of space charge close to the contact with the gradient of the charge carrier quasi-Fermi energy levels was developed, which further, as a consequence, reduces the built-in potential and thus severely affects the magnitude of Voc. It should be noted that a deeper insight into the mechanism of instability in the aforementioned sections exhaustively rules out the chemical defects originated from intrinsic material photo-instability; we schematically summarize, thereby with the above knowledge of the morphology evolution, the three types of microstructure degradation models as described above, comprising three-phase matrix defined as an intimately donor–acceptor intermixing amorphous region, an ordered donor-rich region, and an ordered acceptor-rich region as depicted in Fig. 5.
The generally favorable micromorphology of highly efficient OSCs was fabricated using solution-processing techniques by controlling the drying kinetics of each component during the solvent evaporation, which typically induces the thermodynamic non-equilibrium state of BHJ micromorphology. Subsequently, the thermodynamic relaxation to the stable state renders a pathway for the evolution of metastable micromorphology. The Flory–Huggins interaction parameter χ (representation of miscibility), a fundamental metric of molecular interaction, was recently introduced to describe the thermodynamic phase behavior and evaluate the stability of the original morphology. And as such, the experimental determination of the χ parameter was evaluated by the surface energy, which was derived from contact angle measurements using a droplet of water and ethylene glycol on the organic films. As shown in Fig. S17 and Table S4 (ESI), all of these systems show low χ values (0.15–0.16), which is a direct indication of a well-mixed phase between two components, resulting in the comparable photovoltaic performance in devices (Table S1, ESI). Given this subtle difference in thermodynamic behaviors but the notable discrepancy in molecular stacking, we infer the intermolecular interaction of three isomers with PBDB-T is not the only major factor that governs the morphological stability.
As it has been proved that molecular order and intrinsic crystallinity are closely related to thermal stability and photostability of organic blend films, we resort hereby to the use of temperature-dependent absorption to elucidate crystallization behaviors of the investigated polymer acceptors. From the temperature-dependent absorption data in Fig. S18 (ESI), as the temperature increased from 20 °C to 120 °C, the absorption peaks of the investigated PAs gradually decreased and blue-shifted to a different extent. In particular, a new (λ0–0) peak (the interchain π–π stacking) disappeared during the heating process as presented in Fig. S18C (ESI), indicating the strong self-assembling and aggregation properties of PYTT-3. In contrast, PYTT-1 and PYTT-2 PAs did not show any absorption shoulder peaks (λ0-0), which identifies the inferior aggregation properties in the solution state. Despite this, the maintaining of π–π stacking in PYTT-1 and PYTT-2 solutions could be facilitated in the film formation processing, supported by their photovoltaic parameters (Fig. S1, ESI). Of note is that the subtle nuance still exists with a faster absorption reduction of PYTT-2 (13.53%) compared to PYTT-1 (11.65%) as temperature is rising, implying the relatively higher degree of crystallinity of PYTT-2 than PYTT-1. Hence there is likely a possibility that the amorphous components with the high miscibility and excellent interface compatibility in binary blends lead to its domain shrinkage and vice versa, giving a signature of aggregation growth for materials that have high crystallization characteristics and moderate interaction parameter (χ). These encouraging findings (as depicted in Fig. 5) indicate that not only is temporal-evolution of morphology associated with the interaction between donor and acceptor materials, but it also scales with the crystallization properties of materials itself under external stresses. Thus, the synergistic effects of molecular miscibility and molecular crystallization characteristics should be taken into consideration when evaluating the long-term device stability.

In conclusion, we investigated and compared the degradation behaviors of three all-PSCs based on PBDB-T:PYTT-x (x = 1, 2, and 3) active layers, which showed comparable PCEs. The light-induced degradation of these PA derivative-based devices is strongly affected by the subtle substitution of isomerized thiophene-fused ending-groups of these isomerized PAs. Solar cells based on PBDB-T:PYTT-2 showed a minor loss of device performance owing to the decay of FF and caused by the slight decline of molecular ordering after light aging. Unlike the stable PBDB-T:PYTT-2 BHJ morphology, the other two major types of morphological degradation processes, namely, domain shrinkage and domain growth, are confirmed for PBDB-T:PYTT-1 and PBDB-T:PYTT-3, respectively. Consequently, such a clear opposite trend in the temporal-evolution of morphology raises the level of trap-assisted recombination with dominant loss of FF as the main contributor in the case of PBDB-T:PYTT-1, and causes surface-related recombination relevant for Voc losses for PBDB-T:PYTT-3. Additionally, similar molecular interaction (miscibility) and profound differences in crystallization characteristics are discussed, which disclose the synergistic effects of these two factors on device efficiency and stability. From the analyses above, we conclude that the nanostructure evolution is significantly dependent on molecule structure with isomerized thiophene-fused ending-groups during long-term continuous light exposure. Also, we believe that the resulting general knowledge in this research, on the combination of material structure, morphology evolution, and stability relation, will be beneficial for proposing rational strategies to improve both device efficiency and lifetime.


The authors declare no conflict of interest.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (Grant No. 51773157 and 52061135206). This work was supported by the Open Fund of the State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices (South China University of Technology) and the opening project of the Key Laboratory of Materials Processing and Mold.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1tc05030c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022