 DOI: 10.1039/C6NR01043A
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 8839-8846


Kun
Cao
,

Hao
Li
,

ShuangShuang
Liu
,

Jin
Cui
,

Yan
Shen
 and 

Mingkui
Wang
*

Michael Grätzel Center for Mesoscopic Solar Cells, Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, School of Optical and Electronic Information, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Luoyu Road 1037, Wuhan 430074, China. E-mail: mingkui.wang@mail.hust.edu.cn

Received
4th February 2016
, Accepted 20th March 2016
First published on 21st March 2016
Hybrid lead-halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are promising alternatives to silicon-based cells due to their high photovoltaic performance and low cost. We report herein fully printable perovskite solar cells with a mesoporous TiO2/Al2O3/C architecture in combination with mixed-halide MAPbI3−xBrx perovskites. A maximum conversion efficiency of 13.49% can be achieved with an increased open circuit voltage of 1.01 V, which is higher than the MAPbI3-based devices. A reduced anomalous hysteresis in the J–V curve measurement has been demonstrated in perovskite solar cells based on MAPbI2.4Br0.6 perovskite, which is directly linked to the characteristically slow kinetics measured through electrochemical impedance spectroscopy.

Hybrid lead-halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are presently under intense investigation owing to their high efficiency with easy processing. Over the last few years, perovskite solar cells have been reported to achieve a remarkably high efficiency of 20.1%. The outstanding performance of PSCs has been attributed to the unique properties of perovskite materials MAPbX3 (MA = CH3NH3; X = I, Br, or Cl), displaying excellent photovoltaic (PV) properties in terms of intense light absorption, excellent ambipolar charge mobility, small exciton binding energy, and apparent tolerance to defects. However, the state-of-the-art perovskite solar cells require noble metals and organic hole transport materials (HTM) for proper operation, which are expensive and require high vacuum instruments. Significant cost reductions are possible by replacing the noble metal counter electrode (CE) with a printable carbon electrode to fabricate fully printable perovskite solar cells.

The printable mesoscopic PSC using an inorganic oxide scaffold with a carbon CE can be constructed without the HTM deposition process. In this device, the perovskite film on top of the mesoporous TiO2 acts as both a light harvester and HTM simultaneously. Han et al. reported a fully printable perovskite device architecture using a double layer of mesoporous TiO2 and ZrO2 as a scaffold and porous carbon film as the CE, achieving a PCE of 12.8%. This work highlights a low cost, easy preparation and screen printable alternative electrode to replace noble metal electrodes. However, the micrometer-thick ZrO2 layer (1–2 μm) between the TiO2 layer and the carbon layer challenges the charge transportation and hinders further improvement of the device performance. For instance, holes that are generated have to travel over a relatively long pathway in such a structure before reaching the carbon CE. This leads to a misbalance between the effective light harvesting/charge transportation and effective isolation of the carbon conductive material from the TiO2 electrode in PSC devices. These important characteristics, which are related to the device architecture and perovskite preparation, should be carefully controlled to optimize the PCE. Very recently, our group demonstrated an ∼15% efficient fully printable PSC based on a quadruple-layer architecture of mesoporous TiO2/Al2O3/NiO/C. This work emphasizes the importance of charge extraction in perovskite solar cells, thus improving the devices’ open-circuit voltage (VOC) and output power ability.
The composition of the perovskite infiltrated in the mesoporous structure may also be important, which will extremely affect the PCE as well as other intrinsic charge responses in the device. Specifically, a mixture of multiple halogen elements in hybrid perovskites can bring several advantages, such as a tuned band gap, enhanced stability, and improved carrier transport. These benefits are important for efficient PSCs either with the mesoscopic or planar configuration. Seok et al. demonstrated an enhanced device performance with improved charge transport properties through the chemical management of MAPbI3−xBrx deposited in mesoporous TiO2 films. The stability of PSC under an ambient atmosphere was also greatly improved by the substitution of 10–15 mol% Br for I ions in perovskites. Furthermore, the addition of Br in the perovskite structure was demonstrated to improve the carrier transport and lifetime of the PSC devices as reported by Mora-Sero and co-workers. These benefits are important for carbon-based fully printable PSCs, which typically use an architecture with a thick inorganic oxide scaffold (1–2 μm) as well as a fabrication procedure in ambient air (not a glove box). What's more, mixed-halide MAPbI3−xBrx perovskites are particularly suitable for investigating the influence of perovskite preparation on the properties of PSCs, since any composition change comes together with changes in the crystal structure and absorption onset that are promptly monitored by using XRD diffraction patterns and optical absorption spectra, respectively.
Previously, we demonstrated a fully printable perovskite solar cell with a triple-layer of the mesoporous TiO2/Al2O3/C architecture filled with MAPbI2Br fabricated by sequential deposition of solutions of PbI2 and MABr, achieving a PCE of 11.03%. This work highlights a fully printable PSC based on a wide bandgap perovskite MAPbI2Br (∼1.77 eV) which achieved an impressive photovoltage of about 1.08 V. However, the devices based on MAPbI2Br perovskites leads to a much lower JSC correlated with a blue shift of the absorption spectrum, which restrains the whole PCE of the device. What's more, the physical mechanism that rules the cell performance is not yet fully understood. For instance, it is still unclear why this HTM-free PSC based on MAPbI3, generally reported as TiO2/MAPbI3 heterojunction solar cells, has low VOC and thus results in a relatively low PCE < 13.0%. In addition, the anomalous hysteresis effect during current–voltage measurements has been observed in most PSC devices with different structures. However, a weak hysteresis effect was demonstrated in the HTM-free PSC with a carbon CE even though there is a relatively long pathway for the charge carriers to transport in such a structure before reaching the electrode. Therefore, despite the great efforts focused on the understanding of fully printable PSCs’ performance, many open questions remain to be explored.
In this work, we exploited and focused on charge transportation and recombination processes for different perovskite compositions to address the aforementioned issues. We fabricated perovskite solar cell devices based on MAPbI3−xBrx perovskites through a simple and facile post-synthetic halide exchange process to modify the compositional elements of the perovskite material. We found out that by incorporating Br into perovskites infiltrated in a mesoporous TiO2/Al2O3/C architecture, a prolonged charge carrier lifetime and improved charge extraction resulted in an overall energy conversion of 13.49% under AM 1.5G illumination testing conditions. A reduced anomalous hysteresis in the J–V curve measurement has been demonstrated in the PSC based on MAPbI2.4Br0.6 perovskites. Electronic impedance spectroscopy was applied to understand the internal electrical processes in such devices.

MAI and MABr were synthesized as follows: methylamine together with hydroiodic acid or hydrobromic acid were added with a mole ratio of 1:1 into a round-bottom flask and stirred in an ice bath for 2 h. The precipitate was recovered by putting the solution on a rotavap and carefully removing the solvents at 50 °C. The product of methylammonium iodide (MAI) or methylammonium bromide (MABr) was washed three times with diethyl ether and dried in a vacuum drying oven.


Devices were fabricated on a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass serving as a transparent electrode and substrate, respectively. A compact layer of TiO2 was deposited on the cleaned FTO glass by spray pyrolysis deposition with di-isopropoxytitanium bis(acetyl acetonate) solution at 450 °C. The mesoporous TiO2 films and Al2O3 paste used for screen printing were prepared as reported previously. Finally, a carbon black/graphite counter electrode with the thickness of about 10 μm was coated on the top of the Al2O3 layer and further sintering was carried out at 400 °C for 30 min. After cooling down to room temperature, the resulting films were infiltrated with PbI2 by dropping a PbI2 solution in DMF (500 mg ml−1) that was kept at 70 °C. After drying at 70 °C for 30 minutes, the films were dipped into MAI solution (10 mg ml−1) and the films changed colour from light yellow to black during the dipping process in about 10 minutes, indicating the formation of the MAPbI3 perovskite. In the halide exchange process, the prepared devices were further dipped into the MABr solution (5 mg ml−1) for ∼1 minute and ∼3 minutes and dried at 90 °C for 30 minutes to form the MAPbI3−xBrx perovskite in the mesoporous TiO2/Al2O3/C device. Thus, the samples based on MAPbI3−xBrx films were obtained and the corresponding samples with a dipping time in the MABr solution (5 mg ml−1) for ∼1 minute and ∼3 minutes were labeled as S1 and S3, respectively. The MAPbI3 device without the halide exchange process was also prepared and labeled as S0 for comparison. To measure the absorption spectra and XRD patterns of the perovskite films in the mesoporous TiO2/Al2O3/C device, the thick carbon CE was carefully removed.


A xenon light source solar simulator (450 W, Oriel, model 9119) with an AM 1.5G filter (Oriel, model 91192) was used to give an irradiance of 100 mW cm−2 at the surface of the solar cells. The current–voltage characteristics of the devices under these conditions were obtained by applying an external potential bias to the devices and measuring the generated photocurrent with a Keithley model 2400 digital sourcemeter (Keithley, USA). A similar data acquisition system was used to control the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) measurement. The devices were tested using a metal mask with an aperture area of 0.16 cm2 to prevent the scattering light. Film cross sections were obtained using an FEI Magellan-400 field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM).



Fig. 1a depicts the device configuration of the printable mesoscopic PSC based on a mesoporous TiO2/Al2O3/C architecture. The mesoporous Al2O3 layer (insulator) was adapted as a space separator between the TiO2 and carbon CE layer to avoid short-circuit in the device. Photo-generated holes transport directly to the counter electrode since metal halide perovskites can act as a hole conductor as well (Fig. 1b). Thus, the competition between the interfacial recombination and carrier transportation would determine the charge carrier collection efficiency. The MAPbI3 perovskites were first deposited by the sequential deposition as described earlier. For the preparation of MAPbI3−xBrx based devices, a post-synthetic halide exchange process was carried out, i.e., the prepared devices were further dipped into the MABr solution with different time periods to form the bromine-substituted perovskite. Halide substitution occurs rapidly when the deposited perovskite film comes into contact with the halide solution in a mesoscopic scaffold (Fig. S1). A detailed device fabrication process for the PSC device can be found in the Experimental section. As shown in Fig. 1c, the MAPbI3 film exhibits an onset absorption band at around 800 nm, which is in accordance with the energy band gap (Eg) of ∼1.55 eV. The onset absorption bands of MAPbI3−xBrx samples S1 and S3 are ∼770 nm and ∼745 nm, corresponding to the Eg value (estimated from the onset absorption band) of 1.61 eV and 1.66 eV, respectively. The different absorption ranges can be easily ascribed to the variation of the energy band gap (Eg) of those semiconductor absorbers, arising from the Br-replacement induced structural modification. Based on the previously reported results on the relationship between the composition of halides in the MAPbI3−xBrx film and the bandgap value, the chemical formulae of the obtained MAPbI3−xBrx films with bandgaps of 1.61 eV and 1.66 eV were identified to be MAPbI2.7Br0.3 and MAPbI2.4Br0.6, respectively. As shown in Fig. 1d, the film shows a strong (001) diffraction peak of PbI2 at 12.67° in the X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra if PbI2 was firstly deposited in the mesoporous TiO2/Al2O3/C architecture. After a following dipping process in the MAI solution, this peak intensity significantly decreased, indicating a successful crystal structure conversion of the MAPbI3 films. Fig. 1d shows the XRD patterns for MAPbI3−xBrx films with post-synthetic bromine incorporation treatment. This result indicates that these materials have a similar crystalline structure assignable to the perovskite system. Compared to MAPbI3, the diffraction peaks of MAPbI2.7Br0.3 and MAPbI2.4Br0.6 are shifted uniformly to high angles. Fig. S2 illustrates an enlarged XRD pattern of the studied perovskites in the range of 2θ from 27.0° to 31°. For MAPbI3, there are two peaks at 28.2° and 28.4°, corresponding to the (004) and (220) planes in the tetragonal I4/mcm perovskite phase. By substituting I with Br, the diffraction peak from the (004) plane gradually disappears, indicating that the phase evolves from tetragonal to cubic. The phase transformation after replacing I with Br is consistent with the work reported by Seok et al.


Fig. 2a presents a typical cross-sectional SEM image of the printable PSC based on MAPbI3−xBrx and its energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) mapping of Ti, Al, C, Pb, I, and Br. The device consists of a double-layer scaffold TiO2/Al2O3 with a total thickness of ∼1.6 μm and a mesoporous carbon film (∼10 μm), which is clearly seen on top of the scaffold layer function as a counter electrode. A homogeneous distribution of MAPbI3−xBrx across the various oxide layers in the device is illustrated by the EDX image (Fig. 2a). Time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) measurements can reveal the photo-induced charge transfer and charge recombination loss. Fig. 2b shows the PL spectra of the Al2O3/perovskite and TiO2/perovskite films. The presence of the TiO2 layer dramatically accelerates the PL decay process. It elucidates an efficient charge transfer of the TiO2/perovskite interface. Meanwhile, the TiO2/MAPbI2.4Br0.6 sample presents a reduced decay time as witnessed by stronger steady state PL quenching (Fig. 2b), demonstrating that the electrons travel faster from the MAPbI2.4Br0.6 film to the TiO2 compared to MAPbI3. The improvement might be associated with the highly ordered cubic structure, whereas, in comparison, the tetragonal structure of MAPbI3 is less ordered. Fig. 2c shows the photocurrent density–photovoltage (J–V) curves of the mesoscopic perovskite devices based on MAPbI3 and the MAPbI3−xBrx films under standard AM 1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2 (with a scan rate of 0.07 V s−1). Devices A, B, and C correspond to TiO2/Al2O3/C(MAPbI3), TiO2/Al2O3/C(MAPbI2.7Br0.3), and TiO2/Al2O3/C(MAPbI2.4Br0.6), respectively. The photovoltaic parameters, open circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF), short circuit current density (JSC) and PCE are tabulated in Table 1. The device A (TiO2/Al2O3/C(MAPbI3)) displayed the highest PCE of 11.94% with a JSC of 18.52 mA cm−2, a VOC of 0.918 V, and a FF of 0.70. On comparison, device B with MAPbI2.7Br0.3 achieved the highest PCE of 13.49% with a VOC of 1.01 V, a JSC of 18.98 mA cm−2, and a FF of 0.71. The replacement of MAPbI2.7Br0.3 with MAPbI2.4Br0.6 resulted in a further increased VOC of 1.02 V, while a decreased JSC of 16.56 mA cm−2, achieving a PCE of 11.83% for device C. The reduction of JSC for the device with MAPbI2.4Br0.6 is directly related with the blue-shift of absorption onset, while the improvement of VOC is attributed to the widening of the band gap, as explained later.
Device

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF
PCE (%)

R
CE (Ω)
A
Best
18.52
0.918
0.70
11.94
50
Average
17.25
0.895
0.69
10.63
B
Best
18.98
1.01
0.71
13.49
55
Average
18.42
0.990
0.70
12.76
C
Best
16.56
1.02
0.70
11.83
52
Average
15.93
0.995
0.68
10.40

Fig. 2d presents the IPCE spectra of these devices. The photocurrent generation of the devices with MAPbI3, MAPbI2.7Br0.3 and MAPbI2.4Br0.6 started at ∼800 nm, ∼775 nm, and ∼750 nm, respectively, which are consistent with the estimated bandgap values of the perovskites. The reduced JSC of device C (with MAPbI2.4Br0.6) is directly related to the blue shift of absorption onset, while a higher IPCE values at 380–550 nm than those of MAPbI3 as can be seen from Fig. 2d. In addition, the device B gives higher IPCE values from 380 nm to the onset than those of the parent MAPbI3, which was mainly caused by better charge collection in these devices. It should be noted that the blue-shift of absorption onset for MAPbI3−xBrx perovskites would decrease the JSC of the devices. However, the MAPbI3−xBrx perovskites showed both the increased absorption and reduced carrier recombination compared with the parent MAPbI3, which are in favour of enhancing the devices’ JSC and can partially compensate the reduction of JSC caused by the blue-shift of absorption onset in principle. For device A with MAPbI3, the relatively low IPCE in the blue region corresponds to carriers generated by high-energy photons in the front section close to the FTO side, indicating that the charge carriers have to diffuse through the perovskite itself for a relatively long distance. To further check the reproducibility of device performance, Fig. S3 shows the statistical analysis from 10 devices based on MAPbI3−xBrx and MAPbI3. Obviously, the average VOC and JSC value for the devices with MAPbI2.7Br0.3 is 0.990 V and 18.42 mA cm−2, which is much higher than that of the MAPbI3 one at 0.895 V and 17.25 mA cm−2, whereas FF does not show evident change. Considering the similar device configuration, it can be inferred that the PCE is mainly enhanced due to the improvement of electronic properties, which is caused by Br-incorporated MAPbI2.7Br0.3 perovskites. The origin of VOC in PSCs have been typically ascribed to the difference between the conduction band minimum (CBM) of the perovskite and the HOMO of the HTM, or by the potential difference between the quasi-Fermi level of the electron (Efn) at the electron extraction layer/anode interface and the quasi-Fermi level of the hole (Efp) at the hole extraction layer/cathode interface under illumination, assuming that recombination within the device can be ignored. Therefore, when Efn and Efp are built up within the device under light illumination, MAPbI3−xBrx might lead to a larger difference between Efn and Efp as compared to MAPbI3, in spite of using the same electron (TiO2) extraction layer, thus resulting in a higher VOC. This result is in accordance with the reports that the perovskite materials contribute to Efn and Efp within the device.
Anomalous hysteresis in the J–V curves of perovskite solar cells has always been observed, which predominantly arises from the presence of the perovskite absorber and is dependent on the device architecture. We recorded the J–V curves of MAPbI3−xBrx and MAPbI3 perovskite cells both in forward and reverse bias directions as shown in Fig. 3 and the effect of the scan rate on the J–V characteristics as presented in Fig. S4. As shown in Fig. 3, under reverse scan (from open-circuit to short-circuit under the forward bias voltage), the device with MAPbI3 gave a JSC, VOC, FF, and PCE of 18.18 mA cm−2, 0.923 V, 0.69, and 11.59%, respectively. Under forward scan (from short-circuit to open-circuit under the forward bias voltage), the corresponding performance parameters were 18.07 mA cm−2, 0.912 V, 0.60, and 9.91%, respectively. These results indicate that the device A with TiO2/Al2O3/C(MAPbI3) has a relatively serious current hysteresis. In contrast, under reverse scan, the device C with TiO2/Al2O3/C(MAPbI2.4Br0.6) showed the JSC, VOC, FF, and PCE to be 16.24 mA cm−2, 1.01 V, 0.68, and 11.18%, respectively.
Under forward scan, the performance parameters were 16.07 mA cm−2, 1.01 V, 0.66, and 10.78%, respectively. These results were well close to those for the device under reverse scan, indicating the less current hysteresis of the device with TiO2/Al2O3/C(MAPbI2.4Br0.6). Note that the scan rate used here was 0.14 V s−1. Fig. S4 presents the effect of the scan rate on the J–V characteristics. Obviously, for device C (with MAPbI2.4Br0.6) there is only a small change in the relative scale of the hysteresis with the changing scan rate, with hysteresis again being slightly less at low scan rates. The hysteresis behavior is significantly influenced by the interfacial charge extraction and carrier transport properties of the cell. Besides, the dielectric response of the perovskite material factors such as mobile ions, trap-state discharging, or chemical or structural changes in the material are also important factors influencing the hysteresis. Therefore, we believe that the highly ordered cubic structure perovskite MAPbI2.4Br0.6 infiltrated in a mesoporous TiO2/Al2O3/C architecture helps to enhance the interfacial electron extraction velocity and the electron diffusion length, thus declining or eliminating the I–V hysteresis. This result is consistent with the PL decay result (Fig. 2b) that demonstrates a faster electron transfer in the MAPbI2.4Br0.6/TiO2 interface compared with MAPbI3/TiO2. In addition, measuring the steady-state power output directly at a given forward bias is also a feasible means to estimate the power conversion efficiency. As shown in Fig. S5, we recorded the photocurrent density of MAPbI3−xBrx and MAPbI3 perovskite cells held at a forward bias near their maximum output power point as a function of time to monitor the stabilized power output under working conditions. For the MAPbI2.4Br0.6-based device, the photocurrent density stabilizes within seconds to about 14.77 mA cm−2, yielding a stabilized power conversion efficiency around 11.37% (measured after 300 s).
Electrical impedance spectroscopy (IS) measurements can provide insights into charge transport, recombination, and accumulation of charges within the perovskite-based devices. Fig. 4 shows the Nyquist plots and the corresponding Bode phase plots for devices A–C at a bias of −0.8 V over the frequency range of 1 MHz to 100 mHz under illumination. The frequency analysis shows three separated semicircles in the Nyquist diagram (Fig. 4a) and three peaks (Fig. 4b) in the Bode plot for these HTM-free PSC devices. We can conclude that the peak in the high frequency regime (104 to 106 Hz) is related to the electron transfer process on the carbon electrode surface. However, the interpretation for the response in intermediate (104 to 10 Hz) and low frequencies (<10 Hz) would be complicated because of the multi-interfacial recombination or electron/ion diffusion. We have fitted the IS data by three series RC circuits as shown in Fig. S6.Rs is the series resistance, including the sheet resistance of the TCO glass and the contact resistance of the cell; RCE and Rct represents the charge-transfer resistance at the counter electrode surface and the charge recombination process in the mesoscopic TiO2 film. R2 is the resistance from low frequency arc. C indicates the capacitance including chemical capacitance, space charge, and double layer, which depend on the applied bias. The obtained charge exchange resistances (RCE) at a bias of −0.8 V for the three devices are tabulated in Table 1, which are not larger than 60 ohms, indicating that the charge transfer process at the carbon electrode is efficient. Important information about the recombination in the HTM-free PSC is contained in the intermediate and low frequencies. Considering the device architecture, the second semi-arc in the middle frequency region for devices A–C can be assigned to charge recombination at the perovskite/TiO2 interface. Fig. 5a presents the obtained interfacial charge recombination resistance (Rct, in the middle frequency region) at the perovskite/TiO2 interface as a function of bias. The interfacial recombination resistance Rct shows a small change for each device when the applied bias is less than −0.70 V. However, the interfacial charge recombination resistance Rct exponentially decreases with the bias for the three devices after −0.70 V. This inflection point is close to the reported values for the built-in potential of the MAPbI3/TiO2 junction. Clearly, the device B presents a larger interfacial charge recombination resistance at the MAPbI2.7Br0.3/TiO2 junction at a given bias. Fig. 5b presents the capacitance C–voltage characteristic of various devices, showing the same tendency with Rct. The general capacitive response of p–n junction cells shows that the diffusion capacitance is clearly distinguishable from the depletion capacitance in the forward bias direction. Here, it is readily observable that the depletion-layer capacitance is visible at lower bias, while at potentials more positive than 0.70 V, the diffusion capacitance exhibits exponential dependence on the bias potential.
In addition, the rise of capacitance C for the MAPbI2.4Br0.6 device is shifted to higher potentials. This is tentatively related to a different band alignment of the devices, which could be the reason for the higher VOC and should be further studied. The apparent electron lifetime τ (τ = Rct × C) shows an exponential decrease with increasing the applied bias in Fig. 5c. Apparently, device B based on TiO2/Al2O3/C(MAPbI2.7Br0.3) shows an increased lifetime. As shown in Table 1, there is about 100 mV enhancement in the VOC for device B compared with device A. Considering the charge lifetime for device B is about fourfold longer than that of device A, corresponding to about 40 mV gain in the former. Therefore, this result indicates that the augment in VOC for device B could be due to the higher lifetime and a larger bandgap of MAPbI2.7Br0.3 (1.61 eV) compared with MAPbI3 (1.55 eV). This is further confirmed by device C based on MAPbI2.4Br0.6 (1.66 eV), in which an augment VOC of almost 110 mV was achieved compared with device A, while a similar charge lifetime in these two devices is presented in Fig. 5c. Interestingly, similar to our previous report on the carbon based device with NiO as a hole selective layer, in these HTM-free PSC devices, the arc was clearly presented in the low frequency regime (<10 Hz) as demonstrated to relate to slow dynamics processes in perovskites. The origin of the slow time component and related effects is still widely discussed in the literature. Fig. S7 presents the derived components in the low frequency regime. The relationship between the low frequency resistance R2 and the applied potential shows similar characteristics to that in the TiO2/MAPbI3 interface. However, the value of R2 is about 10 times higher than that of Rct. Similarly, the capacitance C2–voltage character also shows charge accumulation features in the region exceeding 0.6–0.95 V being almost 2 orders of magnitude larger than the electron accumulation capacitance in the middle frequency region (Fig. 5b). It was observed that the τ2 of the devices based on MAPbI3−xBrx perovskite was much lower than that of the MAPbI3-based device. For device C, the τ2 shows a small change when the applied bias decreases. The slow dielectric response of the perovskite material, which is given by the low frequency feature of EIS, has been cited as a possible source of the anomalous hysteresis seen in perovskite solar cells. Capacitance may be a key parameter to explore which mechanism begins the hysteretic effect. As described in previous reports, PSCs exhibit a giant capacitance observable in the low frequency response, which might be related to the observed hysteresis effect. Fig. S8 shows the frequency-dependent capacitances under illumination for the HTM-free PSCs with TiO2/Al2O3/C structures. A capacitance of 10−2 F cm−2 was observed for device A in the low frequency, while reduction in capacitance to 10−3 F cm−2 was observed in devices B and C with MAPbI3−xBrx. Therefore, we conclude that the higher low frequency capacitance in the TiO2/Al2O3/C(MAPbI3) configuration is connected with more significant I–V hysteresis. These results are consistent with the previous reports.

Fully printable perovskite solar cells based on MAPbI3−xBrx perovskites were fabricated through a simple and facile post-synthetic halide exchange process to modify the compositional elements of the perovskite material. Considerable changes both in the lattice structure and the electronic band gap are demonstrated by incorporating Br into perovskites infiltrated in a mesoporous TiO2/Al2O3/C architecture. The devices based on TiO2/Al2O3/C(MAPbI2.7Br0.3) exhibit a higher VOC and JSC than the parent MAPbI3, showing an impressive PCE of 13.49%. Moreover, the device based on TiO2/Al2O3/C(MAPbI2.4Br0.6) demonstrated a significantly diminished J–V hysteretic behaviour in comparison with the parent MAPbI3 based device. The anomalous hysteresis in the J–V curve measurement is linked directly to the characteristically slow kinetics measured through electrochemical impedance spectroscopy.


The financial support from the 973 Program of China (2014CB643506 and 2013CB922104), the Director Fund of the WNLO, and the Wuhan National High Magnetic Field Center (PHMFF2015018) is acknowledged. The authors thank the Analytical and Testing Centre at the HUST for performing characterization of various samples.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Preparation process and XRD patterns of MAPbI3−xBrx films, photovoltaic performance and EIS analysis of different devices. See DOI: 10.1039/c6nr01043a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016