 DOI: 10.1039/C8CC05517C
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 9575-9578


Qinghua
Li
*,

Jinke
Bai
,

Tingting
Zhang
,

Chao
Nie
,

Jialong
Duan
* and 

Qunwei
Tang
*

School of Physics Science and Technology, Lingnan Normal University, Zhanjiang 524048, P. R. China. E-mail: qhli@hqu.edu.cn

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266100, P. R. China. E-mail: djl140122009005@163.com

Institute of New Energy Technology, College of Information Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, P. R. China

Received
9th July 2018
, Accepted 25th July 2018
First published on 25th July 2018
We present here the successful fabrication of core–shell constructed CdZnSe@ZnSe colloidal alloy quantum dots with tunable optical properties using a hot-injection method, demonstrating great potential in photovoltaic devices. Upon employment as charge extraction materials in all-inorganic perovskite solar cells, an enhanced power conversion efficiency up to 8.65% has been achieved arising from the boosted charge transfer dynamics.

Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are considered as excellent photovoltaic devices in recent years owing to their remarkable power conversion efficiency (PCE) up to 23.3%, which is comparable to that of silicon-based modules. However, the inferior water-, thermal- and photo-tolerance of hybrid PSCs delays their further commercialization, attributed to the volatilization of organic cations and migration of halide ions. Therefore, all-inorganic perovskites, (CsPbX3, X = I, Br) made by replacing organic components with inorganic Cs+, have attracted enormous attention in photovoltaics as detectors or light-emitting diodes, demonstrating excellent stability, especially the CsPbBr3 perovskite based devices. For an ideal photovoltaic device, the foremost priority is to facilitate favorable interfacial charge dynamics and minimize carrier losses, and therefore realize the maximized power output. Unfortunately, the 2.3 eV-bandgap of CsPbBr3, with a conduction band (CB) of −3.3 eV and a valence band (VB) of −5.6 eV, limits the interfacial charge extraction ability owing to the presence of high energy barriers at the TiO2/CsPbBr3 and CsPbBr3/carbon interfaces for corresponding carbon based photovoltaic devices, generally resulting in a PCE lower than 10%. Alleviating this issue is crucial to enhance the PCE of inorganic perovskite solar cells.

According to previous reports, interfacial engineering is an effective strategy to boost charge extraction and modulate the defect trap state by inserting an intermediate energy level between the perovskite and charge-contact layers. Among various interfacial modification materials, quantum dots (QDs) possessing tunable bandgaps within the ultraviolet-to-infrared light range display great potential in photovoltaic devices. However, enormous defects on the surface of traditional binary III–V semiconductors always play a role as recombination centers within charge transfer processes, and therefore degrade the overall power output, which has also been reported in quantum dot sensitized solar cells. Based on our previous study, it is known that introducing a shell on the surface of a QD to fabricate a core–shell construct can significantly passivate the core surface, leading to enhanced photoluminescence (PL) quantum efficiency. Inspired by this phenomenon, it is valuable to unveil the underlying mechanism of charge extraction effects of core–shell constructed QDs on CsPbBr3 halide based PSC devices.
In the current work, various core–shell constructed CdZnSe@ZnSe colloidal alloy QDs have been synthesized using an optimized hot-injection method which can be found in the ESI. Through systematic characterizations, it is demonstrated that the as-prepared QDs have excellent optoelectronic properties including tunable energy levels and high luminescence. When employed as interfacial materials to modulate the charge transfer dynamics, the hole-transporting material (HTM)-free, all-inorganic CsPbBr3 based perovskite solar cells with the architecture of FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/CsPbBr3/QDs/carbon present an enhanced photovoltaic performance, yielding a maximized PCE of 8.65%, which is mainly attributed to the boosted charge extraction behavior at the CsPbBr3/carbon interface.
Prior to the photovoltaic performance characterizations, we have conducted investigations on the as-prepared core–shell constructed QD materials. As shown in Fig. 1a, the transmission electron microscope (TEM) image demonstrates that the monodispersed CdZnSe@ZnSe colloidal alloy QDs have an average diameter of 6 nm according to the corresponding size distribution as inserted in Fig. 1a. Meanwhile, the high-resolution TEM image shows a clear lattice fringe of 0.31 nm, confirming that the QDs have excellent crystallinity, which is preferred for improving the charge transfer ability and the corresponding PSC device performance. To validate the crystal structure of the as-prepared QDs, X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns are further recorded as depicted in Fig. 1b, presenting three characteristic diffraction peaks centered at 25.1°, 44.5° and 53°, which are located between the zinc blende ZnSe (JCPDS no. 88-2345) and CdSe bulk materials (JCPDS no. 88-2346) without other raw materials. In this fashion, it can be easily concluded that the alloy CdZnSe QDs have been successfully fabricated under high temperature conditions, which is similar to our previous report. Intriguingly, when overcoating a ZnSe shell on the surface of the CdZnSe core, the characteristic peaks shift to higher angles, approaching those of ZnSe, owing to the ZnSe-rich phase in the near-surface region of the CdZnSe@ZnSe QDs.
The optical properties of the colloidal dispersions obtained using this method can be gradually changed by varying the amount of Se precursor ranging from 1.0 to 2.5 mL during the preparation of ZnSe shells. To quantify this deviation, ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) absorption spectroscopy and photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy were performed as shown in Fig. 1c. Obviously, the optical band gap energy can be tuned across almost the entire visible range (ca. 550–650 nm, denoted 1.88 eV-QDs, 1.92 eV-QDs and 2.16 eV-QDs) along with increasing the concentration of the Se precursor, which can also be cross-checked with the digital photographs of various CdZnSe@ZnSe QDs under the irradiation of a UV lamp (see Fig. 1d). Taking the feasibility of energy level modulation and the high average lifetimes of photo-induced charge (see Fig. S1, ESI) into consideration, the core–shell constructed CdZnSe@ZnSe colloidal alloy QDs are expected to enhance the charge extraction ability when applied in CsPbBr3 solar cells.
Therefore, to better understand the effect of QDs on the photovoltaic performances of solar cells, we have fabricated HTM-free, all-inorganic PSCs with the architecture FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/CsPbBr3/QDs/carbon and the corresponding cross-sectional SEM image is presented in Fig. 2a. Obviously, a layered structure composed of c-TiO2/m-TiO2, CsPbBr3 and carbon with thicknesses of 200 nm, 300 nm and 15 μm, respectively, can be observed. However, the QDs have not been clearly detected owing to their homogeneous dispersion on the perovskite surface rather than forming a compact film, which is similar to other reports. The photocurrent–voltage (J–V) features of the PSC devices are recorded under simulated air mass 1.5 global (AM1.5G) solar illumination to compare their photovoltaic performances as shown in Fig. 2b and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. According to the data and statistics of efficiencies as shown in Fig. S2 (ESI), it can be seen that the QDs can indeed optimize the performance of perovskite solar cells. Finally, an excellent PCE as high as 8.65% with a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 7.25 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.498 V and a fill factor (FF) of 79.6% has been obtained for a 2.16 eV-QDs tailored device, which is much higher than that of the control device with 7.53%-efficiency, which is mainly attributed to the enhanced Jsc, Voc, and FF. Owing to the presence of the hysteresis effect under reverse and forward scan directions (Fig. S3, ESI), the incident-photon-conversion-efficiency (IPCE) spectra and steady photocurrent density are recorded to validate the enhancement of photovoltaic performance, as shown in Fig. 2c and d, in which the integrated Jsc and stabilized efficiency are in accordance with J–V characterizations (Fig. 2b). We can conclude that employing appropriate QD materials to modify the interfaces is an effective path to improve the overall performance of perovskite solar cells.
Devices

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)

η (%)
FF (%)
QDs-free
6.88
1.411
7.53
77.5
1.88 eV-QDs
6.96
1.458
8.01
78.9
1.92 eV-QDs
7.21
1.482
8.48
79.3
2.16 eV-QDs
7.25
1.498
8.65
79.6
Considering the fact that substantial charge-carrier recombination including non-radiative losses and radiative recombination within photovoltaic devices limits the overall power output of a monolithic solar cell, we therefore hypothesize that the intrinsic mechanism behind this enhancement is mainly attributed to the reduced charge-recombination owing to the same device construction except for the presence of QD materials. To study the recombination kinetics within solar cells in detail, we have characterized the relationships of Voc and Jsc as a function of incident light intensity (I), as shown in Fig. 3a and b. As expected, the bi-molecular charge recombination behavior is significantly reduced (the value of α is closer to unity under short-circuit conditions) upon interfacial modification with QDs according to the following equation:Jsc ∝ Iα, where α is a factor related to bi-molecular recombination. To pursue the origin of this phenomenon, we have further characterized the energy levels of three QDs using the traditional cyclic voltammetry technique. As shown in Fig. 3c and Fig. S4 (ESI), it can be seen that all of the QDs have a higher highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) edge compared to the VB of −5.6 eV for a CsPbBr3 film, therefore the holes transfer to the QDs and subsequently flow to the carbon electrode. In this scenario, the cascade-like energy levels can significantly eliminate the charge-transfer barrier and boost charge extraction, resulting in suppressed recombination and therefore increased FF values (Fig. 2b). Meanwhile, the non-radiative carrier losses also demonstrate a decreasing trend, as shown in Fig. 3b, which may be ascribed to the interaction between Pb species in perovskite and CO groups in the ligand on the surface of QDs, thereby realizing the passivation of CsPbBr3 films. It is well-known that the voltage output is determined by the recombination within solar cells, therefore, the enhanced Voc further verifies the above-mentioned conclusion.
For commercialization, apart from the considerable solar-to-electrical conversion efficiency, the second key requirement is the device durability under harsh operation conditions. Thus, we have examined the long-term stability of the best device as shown in Fig. 4. The PCE of the QD tailored device can still remain at 97% of the initial value in ambient air (with a relative humidity level of 60–80%, 25 °C) without any encapsulation for 90 days. Such long-term stability of all-inorganic PSCs is closely related to the excellent moisture-tolerance of CsPbBr3 and the hydrophobic properties of the carbon electrode, and possibly the long-alkyl chain ligands on the QD surface as well, showing the positive effect on the performances of solar cells.
In summary, we have successfully synthesized the core–shell constructed CdZnSe@ZnSe alloy QDs with tunable energy levels by optimizing the concentration of the Se precursor. Arising from the matchable carrier transfer kinetics, the photo-generated holes can be extracted from the perovskite to the QDs more efficiently. Finally, this so-called HTM-free, all-inorganic PSC yields a maximized power conversion efficiency up to 8.65% with a 14.8% enhancement compared to that of the control device. The higher PCE along with the improved stability demonstrates that the QD materials are promising for promoting further development of inorganic PSCs by exploring high-quality QDs with matchable energy levels.
We gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Natural Science Foundation of China (11774141, 61774139, 21503202, and 61604143), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangxi Province (20171BCB23051, 20171BCB23052, 20171BAB202036, and 20161BAB212035), the Science and Technology Project of the Education Department of Jiangxi Province, China (GJJ160681), and the Director Foundation from Qingdao National Laboratory for Marine Science and Technology (QNLM201702).

There are no conflicts to declare.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details. See DOI: 10.1039/c8cc05517c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018