 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA07699E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21389-21395


Sergey
Tsarev
*,

Aleksandra G.
Boldyreva
,

Sergey Yu.
Luchkin
,

Moneim
Elshobaki
,

Mikhail I.
Afanasov
,

Keith J.
Stevenson
 and 

Pavel A.
Troshin


Center for Electrochemical Energy Storage, Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Nobel St. 3, Moscow 143026, Russian Federation. E-mail: S.Tsarev@skoltech.ru

The Institute for Problems of Chemical Physics of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Semenov Prospect 1, Chernogolovka 141432, Russian Federation

Department of Chemistry, Lomonosov Moscow State University, Leninskie Gory, 1-3, Moscow, Russian Federation

Received
8th August 2018
, Accepted 5th October 2018
First published on 11th October 2018
Here we explore the effect of the partial substitution of univalent methylammonium (MA) cations with hydrazinium (HA) ions on the stability, morphology and photovoltaic performance of hybrid MA(1−x)HAxSnI3 systems. The hydrazinium-loaded films have shown much superior stability with respect to light exposure under an inert atmosphere as compared to the reference MASnI3 films, which undergo rapid conversion to MA2SnI6 under these conditions. Furthermore, the incorporation of hydrazinium ions dramatically improved the photovoltaic performance of the materials yielding a maximum efficiency of 2.6% in inverted planar junction perovskite solar cells using the optimal HA0.2MA0.8SnI3 composition.

Perovskite solar cells represent an emerging photovoltaic technology, and have demonstrated outstandingly rapid improvement in power conversion efficiencies (PCE) from ∼3% to >22% in just a few years. The first perovskite-type material delivering high efficiencies was hybrid organo–inorganic methylammonium iodoplumbate (MAPbI3). The perovskite material composition has evolved further thus leading to the improved stability, optimised band gaps and enhanced efficiencies. In particular, univalent methylammonium cations can be partially or completely replaced with formamidinium (FA), hydrazinium (HA) or cesium ions. Alternatively, iodide can be partially substituted by bromide or chloride.

The high toxicity of lead compounds presents one of the main limitations for the successful development of perovskite photovoltaics. Therefore, a major effort was made to explore lead-free alternatives, which can be safe and environmentally friendly while maintaining high efficiencies in solar cells.
Tin is commonly considered as the most obvious and straightforward replacement for lead. This idea was first explored by Y. Ogomi et al., who concluded that MASnI3 films do not exhibit decent photovoltaic properties due to the presence of oxidised Sn4+ ions which increase the concentration of charge carriers and yield the almost metallic conductivity of this material. More recently, two independent studies boosted the efficiency of MASnI3 solar cells to nearly 6% (ref. 5 and 7) by employing extra purification steps for the SnI2 precursor. Indeed, the work of Hao et al. revealed that commercial SnI2 usually has a Sn4+ impurity which has to be removed by extensive purification. Nevertheless, these studies did not solve severe reproducibility problems with respect to the photovoltaic characteristics of tin-based perovskites.
Obviously, a new method was required to eliminate the Sn4+ impurity and stabilize the acceptable charge carrier density. Using SnF2 as a processing additive to the active material, which was first evaluated with a CsSnI3 perovskite, partially solved the problem, most probably by inhibiting the oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+. The fabricated devices delivered an impressive JSC of 20 mA cm−2 and a decent power conversion efficiency. As another example, the addition of SnF2 to a FASnI3 precursor solution significantly improved the photovoltaic performance of the material, delivering a PCE of 2.3% for the devices. In spite of intense research in this field, the mechanism of the SnF2-induced stabilization of Sn(II)-based perovskites still remains unclear.
The poor reproducibility of the results represents another important issue: while few papers featured the impressive characteristics of tin-based perovskite solar cells, the vast majority of publications report low efficiencies for such systems. Most probably, the fabrication of efficient solar cells using complex tin halides represents a challenging task particularly because of the generally low (and very variable) quality of Sn(II) halide precursors. A range of alternative stabilizing additives such as tin chloride, hydrazine vapor and H3PO2 (ref. 15)was explored in order to stabilise the Sn(II) perovskites. All these additives showed some positive effects on the behaviour of the complex tin halides while the main problem still remained unresolved, thus emphasizing the need for further development of this research direction.
Recently, we reported that the partial substitution of MA cations by hydrazinium ions enhanced the optical absorption of the MAPbI3 films and improved their morphology, thus resulting in a notable increase in the PCE of the solar cells. Most importantly, the incorporation of hydrazinium ions, which could harvest molecular iodine formed as one of the perovskite photodecomposition products, resulted in a statistically verified improvement in the device operational stability. In the case of tin-based perovskites, the introduction of hydrazinium iodide into the precursor solution might eliminate existing Sn4+ impurities and prevent their further formation via Sn(II) disproportionation or oxidation. Recently, the positive influence of hydrazinium chloride as an additive was demonstrated for FASnI3 leading to a significant enhancement of both the stability and efficiency of photovoltaic devices. Therefore, in this work, we systematically explored the effect of methylammonium with hydrazinium substitution on the crystal structure, film morphology, photovoltaic performance and operational stability of the lead-free tin-based perovskite systems.

Since it has been previously shown that hydrazine ions can replace methylammonium (MA) in the MAPbI3 perovskite structure, we first had to check if the same phenomenon could occur for the tin perovskites. Direct substitution of the MA cation by the hydrazinium ion (HA) should be possible since they have very similar sizes, despite having a slightly different molecular geometry. To gain some insight into the cation substitution behaviour, we measured the X-ray diffraction patterns of different MA–HA–Sn–I systems with gradually increasing HA loading (Fig. 1).

While the X-ray diffraction patterns of the hybrid systems MA(1−x)HAxSnI3 with x ranging from 0 to 0.3 matched the simulated pattern of MASnI3, the position of the d001 reflection shifted from 14.22° (pure MASnI3) to 14.18°, 14.15° and 14.10° 2θ deg. for materials with x = 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3, respectively, thus indicating an expansion of the cubic perovskite lattice (Fig. S1, ESI). When x was increased to 0.4, the d001 peak stopped shifting, while new reflections at 11.8° and 11.13° appeared in the patterns suggesting the formation of a new phase with a strongly distorted perovskite lattice. Finally, the perovskite structure completely collapsed upon further substitution of MA with HA (x > 0.5). It is also notable that the HASnI3 phase exhibited an X-ray diffraction pattern largely matching the pattern of the previously described dimethylammonium tin iodide (DMASnI3), although the intensities of the peaks were different probably due to the texture of the films. Nevertheless, such a good match of the XRD patterns strongly suggests that HASnI3 and DMASnI3 have very similar crystal lattices.
The expansion and the further collapse of the unit cell while replacing methylammonium with hydrazinium might indicate that the effective size of the N2H5+ cation is bigger than the size of CH3NH3+, in contrast to the results obtained by Kieslich et al., who proposed that these cations have nearly identical sizes. The addition of a large cation could destabilise the perovskite crystal lattice, leading to a collapse of the structure when the concentration of the cation is too high. It is also known that hydrazinium tends to form strong hydrogen bonds in organic complexes, which can be considered as another factor probably affecting the crystal structure of the hydrazinium-loaded tin-based perovskites. DMASnI3 is a 2D perovskite-like material with DMA cations located ∼0.4 Å closer to each other as compared to MA in MASnI3 (Fig. 2), which might be favourable for hydrogen bond formation. Therefore, we speculate that hydrogen bond formation might be the driving force for the new phase formation. If this assumption is correct, hydrogen bonding might stabilise the non-perovskite structure of HASnI3 considerably.
One of the critical issues severely affecting the performance of MASnI3 based solar cells is the quality of the grown perovskite films. It has been shown that spin casting MASnI3 from a DMF solution leads to much faster crystallization of the material as compared to MAPbI3, leading to the formation of a very rough film surface with micron-sized pinholes. In order to obtain better film quality, the crystallization needs to be slowed down by varying the composition of the precursors or the deposition method. Multiple methods have been tested starting from solvent/antisolvent engineering for single-step coating, employing additives or chemical vapour deposition. The addition of DMSO or NMP to the precursor solution extended the film crystallization time leaving a wider window for dropping the antisolvent, which resulted in preparing relatively smooth and pinhole-free films. An interesting approach introduced by Fujihara et al. is based on dipping the freshly coated non-solidified MASnI3 film into a bath with a cooled mixture of toluene and hexane in order to achieve the desired crystallization rate of the material and appropriate final film morphology.
We also found that NMP addition slowed down the crystallisation process yielding smooth black films after exposure to toluene as the antisolvent. The colour of the films did not change while replacing MA with hydrazinium before reaching a substitution level of 50%. The HA0.5MA0.5SnI3 films were pale yellow with some brownish regions, which clearly indicated their heterogeneous structure, also supported by the XRD data discussed above.
The morphology of the films grown on ITO/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) substrates was further studied by atomic force microscopy. Pristine MASnI3 films exhibited multiple pinholes, which corresponds to the literature data (Fig. 3). Interestingly, even minor substitution of MA with hydrazinium significantly improved the film morphology. Materials comprising 10–30% of hydrazinium produced much more uniform and smooth films. Oriented grains of 100–200 nm size were observed for MA(1−x)HAxSnI3 (x = 0.1, 0.2). Films with 10% substitution of MA with HA still showed many pinholes, while the increase in the hydrazinium content up to 20% produced pinhole-free films. A further increase in the HA loading up to 30–40% resulted in the appearance of larger and randomly oriented grains in the films.
The MA(1−x)HAxSnI3 films were further investigated using UV-Vis absorption spectroscopy (Fig. 4). The absorbance of the films slightly decreased upon the incorporation of hydrazinium ions, which can be attributed either to the intrinsic effect of methylammonium substitution or to the difference in the film morphology. The absorption of MA0.7HA0.3SnI3 films was slightly higher than that of MA(1−x)HAxSnI3 (x = 0.1, 0.2) films most probably due to light scattering effects as is evident from a higher absorption above 900 nm and a minor excitonic peak at 800 nm. When the hydrazinium loading exceeded 30%, the absorption decreased dramatically due to the 2D perovskite phase formation as evidenced by XRD.
To explore the effect of the methylammonium-to-hydrazinium substitution on the photovoltaic performance of the MA(1−x)HAxSnI3 hybrid perovskites, we fabricated solar cells using the conventional inverted device geometry with PEDOT:PSS as the hole-selective electrode coating and [6,6]-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester ([60]PCBM)as the electron transport layer. The current–voltage characteristics were measured in forward and reverse directions with a sweep rate of 10 mV s−1. The PCE and short circuit current density (JSC) of the solar cells are plotted in Fig. 5D as functions of the hydrazinium loading.
It is clearly seen that the photovoltaic performance of the solar cells was heavily influenced by the hydrazinium loading. While all the solar cells based on pristine MASnI3 were short-circuited, the devices comprising 10% hydrazinium in the active layer material started to show a diode-like response curve, with the best efficiency approaching 0.22% (Table 1).
Perovskite composition

V
OC average (top), V

J
SC average (top), mA cm−2
FF average (top), %
PCE average (top), %

a All fabricated devices were reproducibly shorted.

MASnI3
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
MA0.9HA0.1SnI3
0.1 ± 0.05 (0.1)
3.9 ± 2.2 (5.4)
33 ± 17 (37)
0.13 ± 0.1 (0.22)
MA0.8HA0.2SnI3
0.35 ± 0.05 (0.38)
11.8 ± 2.8 (14.1)
50 ± 2 (49)
2.1 ± 0.5(2.6)
MA0.7HA0.3SnI3
0.31 ± 0.03 (0.37)
4.7 ± 2.9 (7.5)
51 ± 5 (47)
0.8 ± 0.4 (1.3)
MA0.6HA0.4SnI3
0.34 ± 0.07 (0.40)
2.0 ± 0.6 (2.9)
48 ± 3 (49)
0.3 ± 0.2 (0.6)
MA0.5HA0.5SnI3
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
However, the reproducibility of the photovoltaic characteristics of HA0.1MA0.9SnI3 was very poor due to multiple pinholes in the films leading to the presence of shunts.
When the concentration of hydrazinium ions reached 20%, the efficiency of the solar cells increased significantly mainly due to the improved short-circuit current density. The top cell showed a 2.6% efficiency with a JSC of 14.1 mA cm−2, VOC of 0.38 V and fill factor of 49%. The external quantum efficiency of the device approached 45% corresponding to the integrated JSC value of 10.6 mA cm−2 (Fig. 5C). The hysteresis parameters of the top cell are shown in Fig. S2 (ESI). Preliminary stability tests revealed that the devices retained 90% of the initial PCE for 5 days when stored in a glovebox (Fig. S3 and Table S1, ESI). Interestingly, after storage, these devices showed an increased open-circuit voltage while the current density had decreased.
An increase in the hydrazinium content up to 30% resulted in the deterioration of the device performance mainly due to the reduced current density. This deterioration was attributed to the decrease in the phase purity of the coated perovskite films as revealed by X-ray diffraction. The formation of a 2D hydrazinium-rich phase might have introduced a number of defects in the active layer, which led to an increased recombination of charges. Introducing even larger amounts of hydrazinium ions into the MA(1−x)HAxSnI3 material decreased the solar cell performance to zero when the x value approached 0.5 (Table 1).
The obtained results can be favourably compared with the previously published data on the perovskite solar cells using MASnI3 as the absorber material (Table S2, ESI). To the best of our knowledge, the planar junction devices comprising the solution-processed MA(1−x)HAxSnI3 films presented in this work show higher efficiencies than all the previously reported MASnI3-based cells fabricated in a similar configuration. Record efficiencies were reached either by using mesoporous TiO2 (which forms an intrinsically unstable interface with MASnI3) or by depositing the active materials from the gas phase, most probably due to the aforementioned film quality and surface coverage issues.
Generally, the inferior photovoltaic performance of pure MASnI3 is attributed to the extreme sensitivity of Sn(II) to oxidation, resulting in self-doping by Sn(IV) impurities. At the same time, the contamination of commercial SnI2 with traces of Sn(IV) iodide can also be a reason for the poor photovoltaic performance. Mössbauer spectroscopy was applied to analyse the actual Sn oxidation state in the prepared MASnI3 and MA0.8HA0.2SnI3 samples to reveal any possible Sn(IV) impurities. The Mössbauer spectra of both samples were essentially identical as shown in Fig. S4 (ESI). The isomeric shift δ values of 3.87 ± 0.01 mm s−1 for MASnI3 and 3.86 ± 0.01 mm s−1 for MA0.8HA0.2SnI3 unambiguously suggested an oxidation state of tin(II) in both samples. The singlet peak observed in the spectrum of the 20% HA sample indicated that the hydrazinium cations are indeed integrated into the perovskite lattice; otherwise, the peak shape would change due to the different local coordination environment of Sn2+ ions in the MASnI3 and HASnI3 crystal lattices.
Although a minor Sn–O component (<1%) was still observed in both samples, we attribute it to the degradation induced by oxygen/moisture that diffused through the sample encapsulation material. However, neither SnI4 nor any other Sn4+ species were detected in the pure MASnI3 sample in contrast to the previous reports.
The absence of detectable Sn4+ impurities in the prepared samples is associated with the high quality of the purchased SnI2 precursor and accurate processing performed under a well-controlled atmosphere inside the glove boxes (<0.1 ppm of O2 and H2O). Therefore, most probably, the partial oxidation of Sn(II) to Sn(IV) is not the reason for the poor photovoltaic performance of MASnI3.
Another reason for the poor photovoltaic performance of MASnI3 films might be related to the facile disproportionation of Sn(II) to Sn(IV) and Sn(0) species upon light exposure. To test this hypothesis, we prepared MASnI3 and MA0.8HA0.2SnI3 films and exposed them to 100 mW cm−2 white light at 40 °C under an anoxic atmosphere inside the glove box. Afterwards, the films were encapsulated in polystyrene and characterised by XRD.
The analysis of the XRD patterns revealed drastically different mechanisms of degradation for the hydrazinium-loaded material and MASnI3. In the case of MASnI3 we observed the appearance of the characteristic peaks of the MA2SnI6 phase at 14.82 and 29.8 degrees after 10–50 h of illumination. Exposure of these films to white light for 100–200 h produced completely amorphous products indicating a complete decomposition of MASnI3 and MA2SnI6. In contrast, MA0.8HA0.2SnI3 films demonstrated significantly improved photostability: no crystalline degradation products were detected within 100 h of light exposure, while minor traces of SnI2 appeared after 200 h of illumination. It is notable that the intensity of the diffraction peaks characteristic of the cubic perovskite lattice decreased with an increase in the exposure time, thus suggesting the formation of some amorphous degradation products. It is very likely that the photodegradation of MA0.8HA0.2SnI3 follows the same pathway as that revealed for MAPbI3. Importantly, the integration of hydrazinium ions into the MASnI3 crystal lattice blocks the disproportionation of Sn(II) to Sn(IV) and Sn(0) species under light exposure. While there have been some improvements in the stabilisation of lead-based perovskites, the observed remarkable stabilisation effect (Fig. 6) offers a new opportunity for the implementation of Sn-based perovskites in practically useful technologies.

We have shown that up to 40% of methylammonium cations in the lead-free absorber material MASnI3 can be replaced with hydrazinium ions without breaking down the perovskite lattice. The incorporation of hydrazinium ions has a clearly positive influence on the film morphology (decreased density of voids and pinholes) and the photovoltaic performance: the device efficiency was boosted from ∼0% for MASnI3 to 2.6% for MA0.8HA0.2SnI3. Most importantly, loading the tin-based perovskite with hydrazinium ions significantly improved the material photostability due to the strong suppression of the Sn(II) disproportionation to Sn(IV) and Sn(0). While the mechanism of the observed remarkable stabilization effect still has to be clarified, it is clear that this approach gives a chance to implement tin-based perovskites as absorber materials in practically useful photovoltaic technologies.


MAI, HAI, and SnI2 (99.999%, Sigma-Aldrich) were dissolved in a mixture of dimethylformamide (DMF) and N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) (4:1 v/v) to yield 0.75 M solutions of MASnI3 (A) and HASnI3 (B) precursors. Then aliquots of the A and B precursors were mixed in separate vials to obtain solutions with the required HA to MA ratios.


Glass/ITO substrates (Kintec, 15 Ω sq−1) were sequentially cleaned with toluene, acetone, and isopropanol. Then the ITO slides were air-plasma treated for 5 minutes and immediately covered with PEDOT:PSS (Clevios PH) by spin-coating at 3000 rpm for 40 s. The resulting films were dried in air at 165 °C for 25 minutes and then transferred to an Ar-filled glovebox. All subsequent steps were performed inside the glovebox. The perovskite precursor solutions were spin coated at 3000 rpm and quenched with 130 μL of toluene dropped 30 seconds later. The films were annealed for 20 minutes at 70 °C on a hotplate. Then a 30 mg mL−1 solution of [60]PCBM was spin coated at 2000 rpm on top of the perovskite films. Aluminium electrodes (100 nm) were evaporated through a shadow mask. The device active area was 0.12 cm2 as defined by the shadow mask.

The current–voltage characteristics of the devices were measured in an inert nitrogen atmosphere inside the glove box using simulated AM1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2) provided by a Newport Verasol AAA class solar simulator. The intensity of the illumination was checked before each measurement using a calibrated silicon diode with known spectral responses. J–V curves were recorded using Advantest 6240A source-measurement units. The EQE spectra were measured using a PV Instruments system integrated with an MBraun glove box.

The X-ray diffraction patterns were collected using a Bruker diffractometer with a CuKα source. Measurements were carried out in fixed illumination mode with no sample rotation. The perovskite films were encapsulated before the measurements by spin-coating a polystyrene solution (50 mg mL−1 in toluene) inside the glove box at 2000 rpm. The sample exposure to air was limited to a maximum of 6 minutes (5 minute scans).

Atomic force microscopy measurements were performed in tapping mode using ASYELEC-01 probes and a Cypher ES atomic force microscope installed in an Ar-filled MBraun glove box.
Mössbauer spectra were collected with an electrodynamic type MS-1104 spectrometer with a Ca119mSnO3 energy source at room temperature. The thickness of the absorber layer was ∼1.1 mg cm−2 of 119Sn. The isomeric shift values are given versus BaSnO3.
The absorption spectra were obtained in an inert atmosphere using an AvaSpec-2048-2 UV-VIS fiber-optic spectrometer integrated with an MBraun glove box.

No conflict of interest is declared.


This work has been supported by the Russian Science Foundation (Project No. 18-13-00353).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta07699e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018