 DOI: 10.1039/C8NR06899B
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 20836-20843


Chi
Chen
,

Shufang
Wu
,

Jinming
Wang
,

Siyao
Chen
,

Tianyou
Peng
* and 

Renjie
Li
*

College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, PR China. E-mail: typeng@whu.edu.cn; lirj@whu.edu.cn

Received
26th August 2018
, Accepted 25th October 2018
First published on 25th October 2018
In order to explore high performance and stable perovskite solar cells (PSCs), the design and optimization of electron transport layer (ETL) have been paid more and more attention. Vertically oriented, one-dimensional (1D) TiO2 nanostructured array films are considered superior ETLs because of their rapid electron transporting property and open pore architectures. In this study, a three-dimensional (3D) rutile TiO2 nanodendrite array (RTNDA) film containing 1D trunks and branches was fabricated through second hydrothermal treatment of 1D rutile TiO2 nanorod array (RTNRA) film hydrothermally grown on a fluorine tin oxide (FTO) conductive glass. The resulting 3D-RTNDA film not only facilitates close contact with mixed-ion perovskite (Cs0.05(FA0.83MA0.17)0.95Pb(I0.9Br0.1)3) film, but also promotes the formation of a perovskite layer with larger crystal grain sizes. Both can efficiently retard the interface charge recombination, and thus result in a significantly improved power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 18.0%, improved by 20% as compared to that (15.0%) of the device fabricated with the 1D-RTNRA film. Spectroscopic, electrochemical and photoelectrochemical measurements indicate that the improved photovolatic performance can be mainly ascribed to the largely suppressed hysteresis effect, the increased open-circuit voltage and fill factor stemming from the more effective hole blocking and electron transport. The results presented here demonstrate that 3D-RTNDA film with 3D rutile TiO2 hierarchical nanoarchitecture is a promising ETL selection in designing high-performance PSCs.

As a star in the fields of photovoltaic conversion, perovskite solar cells (PSC) have received increasing attention because the organic–inorganic perovskite materials have versatile roles and advantages such as facile fabrication procedure and high power conversion efficiency (PCE). In particular, the PCE of PSCs has been unprecedentedly boosted to the newly recorded 23.3% from the first report of 3.8% in 2009. In a typical device, the perovskite layer is sandwiched between the electron transport layer (ETL) and the hole transport layer (HTL), in which the ETL has an important role in determining the device's photovoltaic performance. Until now, the most extensively adopted ETL is a mesoporous TiO2 film that not only selectively extracts the photogenerated electrons from the perovskite (light absorber) layer, but also serves as a nanostructure scaffold of the perovskite layer to suppress the front-surface charge recombination. However, the random distribution of TiO2 nanoparticles usually leads to random electron transport and poor pore-filling of the perovskite layer, and thus causes increased charge recombination.

One-dimensional (1D) TiO2 nanostructure (such as nanorod, nanowire, or nanotube) array films have been explored to improve the photovoltaic performance of PSCs since the straight pathway along the long axis of 1D nanostructures can promote the electron extraction/transport and enhance the perovskite infiltration into the open pore structures. Generally, the nanostructures of 1D TiO2 array films need precise control to maximize the charge separation/transport capability. Thus, three-dimensional (3D) hierarchical TiO2 nanorod array films consisting of a 1D trunk and branches were evolved from 1D nanostructure arrays and applied as alternative ETLs of PSCs. These 3D nanorod array films provide higher surface area and 3D interconnection networks for better interfacial connections and faster electron transport in addition to light-scattering and hole-blocking effects. In 2015, an array film with highly branched anatase TiO2 nanowires (ATNW) and varied orientation on the fluorine tin oxide (FTO) glass was fabricated and achieved a PCE of 14.2% due to the multi-functionality in promoting electron transport, forming intimate TiO2/perovskite interface, improving light harvesting and blocking direct contact. Similarly, a 3D branched TiO2 nanowire array film with a mixed anatase/rutile crystal phases was fabricated and exhibited better photovoltaic performance than the nanowire- and nanoparticle-based ETLs. Also, a 3D hyperbranched anatase TiO2 nanorod/nanofiber array film, fabricated using a multistage electrospinning and hydrothermal route, showed a PCE of 15.5% due to the superior electron transport, minimized charge recombination and enhanced light harvesting. Despite the above innovative work, the PCEs of those 3D nanorod array film-based PSCs are usually less than that of the mesoporous TiO2 film-based one.
In this context, a second hydrothermal process was developed to fabricate a 3D rutile TiO2 nanodendrite array (3D-RTNDA) film using a 1D rutile TiO2 nanorod array (1D-RTNRA) film, which was hydrothermally grown on the fluorine tin oxide (FTO) glass from a water–HCl solution of titanium(IV) n-butoxide (TBOT) through our previously reported procedure. It was found that the resultant 3D-RTNDA film consisting of 1D trunks and branches has a nanostructure with a dense bottom and open top section, which facilitates the infiltration of perovskite material into the interspaces, prevents the direct contact between perovskite and FTO, and provides more nucleation sites for the formation of perovskite layer with larger grain sizes. These factors promote the charge extraction at the perovskite/ETL interface and retard the charge recombination in the device, and thus cause a significantly improved power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 18.0%, improved by 20% as compared to that (15.0%) of the 1D-RTNRA film-based device. The functions of the unique 3D hierarchical nanoarchitecture of the present 3D-RTNDA film as the ETL of PSCs were thoroughly investigated using spectroscopic, electrochemical and photoelectrochemical techniques.

Cesium iodide (CsI) was bought from Aladdin. 2,2′,7,7′-Tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spiro-bifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) was bought from Shenzhen Feiming Sci & Tech Co. Ltd. Formamidinium iodide (FAI), lead halides (PbI2 and PbBr2) and fluorine tin oxide (FTO) glass (14 Ω) were purchased from Wuhan Jinge Solar Energy Tech Co. Ltd. All other chemicals were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Corporation and used as received unless noted otherwise.

Methylammonium iodide (MAI) and methylammonium bromide (MABr) were prepared according to the procedure reported previously. A precursor solution of Ce-containing mixed-ion perovskite (Cs0.05(FA0.83MA0.17)0.95Pb(I0.9Br0.1)3) was prepared by dissolving FAI (1.0 M), PbI2 (1.1 M), MABr (0.2 M), PbBr2 (0.2 M) and CsI (0.075 M) in anhydrous dimethylformamide (DMF)/dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) solution with a volume ratio of 4:1, which was filtered through a 0.22 μm PVDF filter before the film deposition process.

According to the route shown in Scheme 1, 1D rutile TiO2 nanorod array (1D-RTNRA) film was grown on FTO glass via a modified one-step hydrothermal process as mentioned in our previous report. Typically, 1.0 mL of titanium(IV) n-butoxide (TBOT), 0.18 g of glycine and 0.5 g of P25 powder were added into a solution containing 15 mL of water and 15 mL of HCl solution (37%) with magnetic stirring. The mixed solution was transferred to a Teflon-lined autoclave (50 mL), where the cleaned FTO with the conducting coating facing down was immersed in the reaction solution. Autoclaving was performed at 150 °C for 90 min in a lab oven. Subsequently, the resultant 1D-RTNRA film was removed and rinsed with water and ethanol several times, and finally dried in air.

3D-RTNDA film was fabricated from the 1D-RTNRA film through a second hydrothermal treatment using TiCl3 as the titanium source. Typically, the prepared 1D-RTNRA film with the array facing down was immersed in a reaction solution containing 20 mL of water, 0.5 mL of HCl solution and 0.3 mL of TiCl3 solution (15% in HCl solution) in a Teflon-lined autoclave (50 mL), which was conducted at 80 °C for 60 min in a lab oven. Subsequently, the resultant 3D-RTNDA film was removed, rinsed with water and ethanol several times, and finally dried in air and annealed at 120 °C for 60 h.

The resultant array films on FTO glass were treated with O3/UV light for 15 min and then transferred to an Ar-filled glovebox before the deposition of the perovskite layer. The perovskite layer was prepared by employing a solvent engineering deposition method, where the precursor solution was spin-coated at 1000 rpm for 10 s and then 5000 rpm for 20 s onto the 1D-RTNRA film or 3D-RTNDA film. A volume of 0.10 mL of chlorobenzene was dropped as anti-solvent 10 s prior to the end of the second step. The perovskite layer was further annealed at 100 °C for 40 min to remove the solvent. After cooling to room temperature, the spiro-OMeTAD was deposited as hole transport layer (HTL) using chlorobenzene solution (72.3 mg mL−1), which contains 0.029 mL of 4-tert-butylpyridine (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.018 mL of lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulphonyl) imide (J & K Chemical), and acetonitrile solution (520 mg mL−1) as additives. Finally, a thin gold top electrode was thermally evaporated on the HTL under high vacuum.


X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were conducted on a Miniflex 600 X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα irradiation (λ = 0.15418 nm) at 40 kV and 15 mA at a scan rate of 4° min−1. The surface and cross-section morphologies of the films were investigated by a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, Zeiss Sigma). Optical absorption and transmission spectral measurements were performed on a Shimadzu UV-3600 spectrophotometer. The devices were illuminated by a 300 W solar simulator (Newport, 91160) with a power density of 100 mW cm−2 (AM1.5G). The photocurrent–voltage (J–V) curves of PSCs with 0.09 cm−2 active area were collected using a computer-controlled Keithley 2400 sourcemeter. The light intensity was determined using a reference monocrystalline silicon cell (Oriel). The incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) curves were measured using a QE-R 3011 system (Enli Technology Co. Ltd China) in the range of 300–800 nm. For the open-circuit voltage decay (OCVD) curve measurement, the illumination was turned off using a shutter after the cell was first illuminated to a steady voltage, and then the OCVD curve was recorded. The electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were recorded by applying a bias of 0.6 V in the dark and recorded over a frequency range of 0.1–105 Hz with AC amplitude of 10 mV. The above measurements were carried out on a CHI 604C electrochemical analyzer.


The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the obtained 1D-RTNRA and 3D-RTNDA films are depicted in Fig. 1. In addition to the diffraction peaks of the FTO glass, the 1D-RTNRA film exhibits three diffraction peaks at 2θ = 36.1°, 41.2° and 54.6°, which can be assigned to the reflections of (101), (111) and (211) planes of tetragonal rutile TiO2 (JCPDS, No. 21-1276), respectively. Also, the 3D-RTNDA film derived from the 1D-RTNRA film through the second hydrothermal treatment using TiCl3 as the titanium source shows a diffraction pattern very similar to the 1D-RTNRA film, indicating that the second hydrothermal treatment has no significant effect on the crystal phase and crystallinity of the rutile TiO2 array.


Fig. 2 shows the top-view and cross-sectional FESEM images of the obtained 1D-RTNRA and 3D-RTNDA films. After the first hydrothermal process, the 1D rutile TiO2 nanorods were grown vertically on the FTO substrate with large inner pore structures among those nanorods. The average length and diameter of these nanorods are ∼800 and ∼100 nm (Fig. 2a and b), respectively. The second hydrothermal treatment not only increases the average length (∼1.0 μm) and diameter (∼140 nm) of these nanorods, but also leads to a large number of very tiny second-level nanorods as branches attached on those nanorods. Thus, a 3D rutile TiO2 nanodendrite array composed of 1D trunks and branches was fabricated (Fig. 2c and d). Although the second hydrothermal treatment slightly lowers the optical transmittance of the 1D-RTNRA film as shown in Fig. S1, the bottom interspaces in the 1D-RTNRA film are filled by second-level nanorods with much smaller diameters. This can ensure the full coverage on the FTO substrate and effectively prevent the formation of a leakage channel between the infiltrated perovskite and the bare FTO. Moreover, the maintained open structure at the top section of the 3D-RTNDA film facilitates the loading of perovskite; meanwhile, the improved surface area may provide additional nucleation sites resulting in intimate contact at the 3D-RTNDA/perovskite interface.
The mixed-ion perovskite [Cs0.05(FA0.83MA0.17)0.95Pb(I0.9Br0.1)3] layer was deposited on the 3D-RTNDA film for fabricating PSCs, and its main XRD diffraction peaks (Fig. S2) can be assigned to the photoactive trigonal α-phase (black phase) without any peaks of the photoinactive hexagonal δ-phase (yellow phase). This high purity of black photoactive perovskite ensures excellent photoelectric properties of the perovskite light absorber. Moreover, a weak diffraction peak at 2θ = 12.7°, which is the characteristic reflection of PbI2, is observed. This peak indicates that a small amount of PbI2 remains in the perovskite layer. It would be a benefit to the photovoltaic performance since small amount of PbI2 residues can passivate the grain boundaries of the perovskite layer and then reduce the dark current induced by traps at grain boundaries.
The perovskite layers on both 1D-RTNRA and 3D-RTNDA films are uniform and dense with full coverage of the arrays (Fig. 3a and b). Nevertheless, the perovskite layer on the 3D-RTNDA film has a smoother surface with more homogeneous and larger grain sizes (100–400 nm) as compared to those on the 1D-RTNRA film, in which the crystal grain sizes vary from tens to hundreds of nanometers with grain sizes in the range of 100–200 nm. This means that the 3D-RTNDA film can facilitate the formation of a smooth perovskite layer with larger crystal grain sizes, which can result from its enhanced surface area and improved nanostructure, whereby more nucleation sites are provided to promote the crystallization of perovskite. Moreover, the horizontally oriented branches on the trunk nanorods could decrease the inner-spaces and help the perovskite precursor extend along the parallel direction to form larger grains with reduced grain boundaries. Therefore, it can be deduced that the perovskite film with larger grain sizes on the 3D-RTNDA film has fewer defects than the 1D-RTNRA film, which is beneficial for the photogenerated charge separation/transport in the perovskite layer and the reduction in non-radioactive recombination.
The cross-sectional FESEM images (Fig. 3c and d) of the PSCs fabricated with the 1D-RTNRA and 3D-RTNDA films show that the perovskite materials have penetrated and filled into the pores among the nanorods, forming a capping layer with a thickness of ∼200 nm. This dense perovskite capping layer is important in harvesting incident light and reducing shunting paths by inhibiting unwanted contact between the HTL and ETL. As mentioned above, the 1D-RTNRA film consisting of dispersed nanorods has larger inner-spaces, and thus the perovskite material can easily penetrate the deep voids in the film and may partially contact the bare FTO, as no additional compact TiO2 layer was used, causing an increased charge recombination possibility. On the other hand, some deep and anomalous tiny pores are not infiltrated by perovskite materials in time due to the fast crystallization process of the perovskite layer, which is undesirable for electron extraction/transport processes. As for the 3D-RTNDA film, its dense bottom can reduce the shunt paths between the FTO and perovskite layer, and the decreased inner pores and interconnected structure can help the complete filling of perovskite, which benefits the formation of a closely contacted 3D-RTNDA/perovskite interface. The above features of the perovskite layer in the 3D-RTNDA film are of great significance for improving the PSC performance, as discussed below.

The photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves of the champion PSCs fabricated with the 1D-RTNRA and 3D-RTNDA films under simulated AM 1.5G solar irradiation (100 mW cm−2) are shown in Fig. 4a, and the corresponding photovoltaic performance parameters are listed in Table 1. Using forward scanning mode, the champion device based on the 1D-RTNRA film achieves a PCE of 15.0% with a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 22.9 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.99 V and a fill factor (FF) of 0.66. The champion 3D-RTNDA film-based PSC exhibits significantly improved Voc (1.08 V) and FF (0.73) with a much higher PCE (18.0%). The enhancements in Voc and FF values probably arise from three aspects: (1) the densely aligned bottom structure acts as a blocking layer to decrease the leakage paths. (2) The interconnected networks and porous structure of the 3D-RTNDA film promote perovskite infiltration and interfacial contact. (3) The 3D-RTNDA film promotes the formation of larger perovskite grains with fewer traps. All of these factors can effectively increase the charge separation/transport capability and reduce the charge recombination, thus enhancing the Voc and FF values.

ETL type
Scanning mode

J
SC/mA cm−2

V
OC/V
FF/%
PCE/%
Average PCE/%

a Average PCEs were measured from 15 and 20 devices for the 1D-RTNRA and 3D-RTNDA films, respectively.

1D-RTNRA
Forward
22.9
0.99
66
15.0
13.79 ± 0.93
Reverse
21.1
1.03
63
13.8
3D-RTNDA
Forward
22.8
1.08
73
18.0
17.30 ± 0.68
REVERSE
23.5
1.10
69
17.8
The above conjecture is partially supported by the dark current curves (Fig. 4b) of these champion PSCs. As seen, the 3D-RTNDA film-based device exhibits higher dark current onset than the 1D-RTNRA film-based one. This indicates that the 3D-RTNDA film can more effectively suppress the photogenerated charge recombination, and thus lead to a decreased dark current in the device. Moreover, the PCE (17.8%) measured under reverse scanning mode for the 3D-RTNDA film-based device is very similar to that (18.0%) measured under forward scanning mode (Table 1), while the PCE (13.8%) measured under reverse scanning mode for the 1D-RTNRA film-based device is much lower than that (15.0%) measured in the forward scanning mode (Table 1). These results demonstrate that the unique nanostructure features of 3D-RTNDA film can largely suppress the hysteresis effect of the 1D-RTNRA film.
Generally, a reverse scanning mode exhibits improved device performance and in particular a large FF, while a forward scanning mode displays lower values. This difference can be explained by screening effects depending on the prebias of the reverse scanning mode, which leads to a modified electric field in the device. However, the present PSCs fabricated with the 1D-RTNRA and 3D-RTNDA films deliver “inverted” hystereses, i.e., a forward scanning mode exhibits improved device performance and larger FF as compared to the reverse one (Table 1). This might be related to the formed energetic extraction barrier at the TiO2 interface due to the mixed-ion perovskite used according to the previous report. This extraction barrier leads to an enhanced electric field close to the contacts due to the dipole layers introduced by the ionic charge piling up at interfaces, which then causes an enhanced FF and PCE for the forward scanning mode.
To verify the reproducibility of the corresponding PSCs, 15 (1D-RTNRA film) and 20 (3D-RTNDA film) pieces of devices were fabricated for measuring their J–V curves under simulated AM 1.5G solar irradiation in the forward scanning direction. The corresponding histogram of PCEs is depicted in Fig. 5a. As seen, the average PCE of the 3D-RTNDA film-based device is 17.30%, much better than that (13.79%) of the 1D-RTNRA film-based one (Table 1). In addition, the 3D-RTNDA film-based device shows better reproducibility and lower standard deviation as compared to the 1D-RTNRA film-based one. The steady-state photocurrent density and efficiency held at a forward applied bias of the maximum output power point for both PSCs are shown in Fig. 5b, where the 3D-RTNDA film-based device exhibits a faster photocurrent response compared to the 1D-RTNRA film-based one. This result can be ascribed to the fast trap filling process in the perovskite layer on the 3D-RTNDA film due to the fewer grain boundaries and defects, as mentioned above.
Also, the stable photocurrent density for the 3D-RTNDA film-based device is ∼20.8 mA cm−2, higher than that (∼19.1 mA cm−2) of the 1D-RTNRA film-based one. This result is consistent with the measurement results of UV-Vis absorption spectra (Fig. S3) and incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) curves (Fig. S4). As seen in Fig. S3, the perovskite layer on the 3D-RTNDA film exhibits better light absorption capabilities than the 1D-RTNRA film, which can be due to the high quality perovskite layer and improved light-scattering effect of the 3D-RTNDA film. Similarly, the 3D-RTNDA film-based device exhibits higher IPCE values in the range of 400–750 nm than the 1D-RTNRA film-based one (Fig. S4). It can be due to the enhanced light absorption capability and the interconnected nanostructure of the 3D-RTNDA film, which improves the interfacial contact to facilitate electron extraction and collection. Thus, a stable PCE of 17.7% is achieved, while the 1D-RTNRA film-based device only shows a stable PCE of 14.7% (Fig. 5b). Moreover, the long-term stability results (Fig. S5) of the 1D-RTNRA and 3D-RTNDA film-based PSCs, which were stored without encapsulation in ambient conditions with a humidity of ∼20% in the dark, indicate that the 3D-RTNDA film-based device exhibits slower deterioration with ∼92% of its initial PCE being retained after the aging time (240 h). However, the 1D-RTNRA film-based device only retains ∼83% of its initial PCE after 240 h. These results demonstrate that the 3D-RTNDA film has significantly improved long-term stability compared to the 1D-RTNDA film-based device.

In order to understand the charge recombination behavior in the devices fabricated with the 1D-RTNRA and 3D-RTNDA films, the open-circuit voltage decay (OCVD) curves were measured, as shown in Fig. 6a. The 3D-RTNDA film-based device exhibits a much slower decay trend in Voc values than the 1D-RTNRA film-based one since the former keeps a Voc value of ∼0.6 V after 80 s decay period, while the 1D-RTNRA film-based one only maintains a Voc value of ∼0.4 V. This result indicates that the 3D-RTNDA film can reduce the charge recombination probability and prolong the electron lifetime in the device, as shown in the corresponding electron lifetime (τn)–Voc curves (Fig. 6b) derived from the OCVD measurements. Also, the Nyquist plots (Fig. S6) indicate that both PSCs have a large semicircle in the low frequency range, which can be ascribed to the recombination resistance (Rrec) and capacitance, according to the literature reports. Since the 3D-RTNDA film-based device exhibits a much larger Rrec than the 1D-RTNRA film-based one, it can be thought that the higher Voc and FF values of the 3D-RTNDA film-based device are contributed by the lower charge recombination because a higher Rrec usually means a lower charge recombination.

On the basis of the above electrochemical and photoelectrochemical characterizations, it can be concluded that the unique nanostructural features of the 3D-RTNDA film can not only remove the shunt paths that lead to current leakage, but also facilitate close contact with perovskite film for efficiently retarding the interface charge recombination. Moreover, the larger perovskite grains induced by the 3D-RTNDA film decrease the defects in the perovskite layer, which would promote the generation/transport of free carriers. Therefore, the 3D-RTNDA film as ETL can more effectively retard the charge recombination and improve the photovoltaic performance of PSCs as compared to the 1D-RTNRA film.

In summary, a novel three-dimensional hierarchical structure rutile TiO2 nanodendrite array (3D-RTNDA) film was fabricated through low-temperature second hydrothermal treatment of a one-dimensional rutile TiO2 nanorod array (1D-RTNRA) film, which was hydrothermally grown on the FTO glass from a water–HCl solution of titanium(IV) n-butoxide. The resultant 3D-RTNDA film has unique 3D hierarchical morphology consisting of 1D trunks and branches to form interconnected networks with a dense bottom and open top section, which induces the formation of the mixed-ion perovskite layer with fewer defects and larger grain sizes. Meanwhile, the 3D-RTNDA film also facilitates the complete infiltration of perovskite materials in the interspaces, enables good interfacial contact, and prevents the direct contact between the perovskite and FTO layers. All of these properties are favorable for efficient electron extraction/transport and reduced charge recombination. As a result, the 3D-RTNDA film-based device achieves significantly improved power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 18.0% compared with that (15.0%) of the 1D-RTNRA film-based one. The characterizations demonstrate that the largely suppressed hysteresis effect, the increased open-circuit voltage and fill factor stemming from the more effective electron transporting and hole blocking are the main reasons for the improved photovoltaic performance of the 3D-RTNDA film-based device. The present study paves a new way to explore high-performance perovskite solar cells by designing and optimizing the 3D hierarchical nanostructure array morphology of the electron transport layers.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This study was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21573166, 21271146, 20973128, 20871096), the Funds for Creative Research Groups of Hubei Province (2014CFA007), and the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK20151247), China.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: XRD pattern of the perovskite layer loaded on the 3D-RTNDA film; optical transmittance spectra of the 1D-RTNRA and 3D-RTNDA films on FTO glass; UV-Vis absorption spectra of the perovskite layers loaded on the 1D-RTNRA and 3D-RTNDA films; IPCE curves and long-term stabilities of the PSCs fabricated with the 1D-RTNRA and 3D-RTNDA films; and EIS spectra of the PSCs fabricated with the 1D-RTNRA and 3D-RTNDA films measured under dark at 0.6 V. See DOI: 10.1039/c8nr06899b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018