 DOI: 10.1039/C2TA00784C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3055-3060

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Ling-Yu
Chang
,

Chuan-Pei
Lee
,

R.
Vittal
,

Jiang-Jen
Lin
* and 

Kuo-Chuan
Ho
*

Institute of Polymer Science and Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan. E-mail: jianglin@ntu.edu.tw; Fax: +886-2-3366-5237; Tel: +886-2-3366-5312

Department of Chemical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan. E-mail: kcho@ntu.edu.tw; Fax: +886-2-2362-3040; Tel: +886-2-2366-0739

Received
22nd October 2012
, Accepted 13th December 2012
First published on 13th December 2012
A novel amphiphilic copolymer, poly(oxyethylene)-amide–imide (POEM), was synthesized and utilized for gelling an ionic liquid electrolyte. The polymer-gelled ionic liquid (PG-IL) electrolyte containing 1-methyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide (PMII), 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (EMIBF4) and POEM has been employed as a quasi-solid-state electrolyte in DSSCs. By adding the POEM to a room temperature ionic liquid (RTIL) electrolyte up to 5 wt%, the binary electrolyte exhibited a quasi-solid-state. The structure of the PG-IL electrolyte with POE segments, which have lone pair electrons, could cause the ionic pair separation and enhance mobility of the counter I− ions. When fabricated into a quasi-solid-state dye-sensitized solar cell, the cell performance exhibited a high power conversion efficiency of 6.28% and long-term durability over 1000 h.

Potential problems caused by liquid organic electrolytes, such as leakage and volatilization of the organic solvent, have had the effect of limiting the long-term performance and practical use of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). To surmount this problem, solidification and quasi-solidification of the electrolyte have been extensively investigated with various approaches, such as use of p-type inorganic semiconductors, gel electrolytes containing polymer or gelator, organic hole transport materials, and ionic liquid (IL) electrolytes. Among them, ionic liquid electrolytes are prospective substitutes for liquid electrolytes, because of their attractive properties, such as chemical and thermal stability, non-volatility, wide electrochemical potential window, and high ionic conductivity at room temperature. Since IL electrolytes flow at room temperature, polymers and co-polymers have been used to prepare polymer gel IL electrolytes for electrochromic devices and DSSCs. Previously, our group have reported the use of a nanoscale silicate platelet (NSP)/Triton®_X-100 complex for promoting the performance of the quasi-solid-state DSSC (QSS-DSSC) with a poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene (PVDF-HFP) based gel electrolyte, and synthesized a novel polymer, poly(oxyethylene)-amide–imide (POEM) to disperse the multi-wall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) with the PVDF-HFP gel electrolyte.

Herein, a photochemically stable linear copolymer, POEM (Scheme S1, ESI), was used to hybridize a 1-methyl-3-propyl imidazolium iodide (PMII) and 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (EMIBF4)-based IL electrolyte to prepare a new polymer-gelled ionic liquid (PG-IL) electrolyte for QSS-DSSCs. We demonstrate that it is possible to gel this binary ionic liquid mixture with an amphiphilic organic gelator at concentrations as low as 5 wt%. The PG-IL electrolyte exhibits thermoplastic behavior (i.e., the gel and sol states can be reversibly interconverted with a change in temperature, which enables the PG-IL electrolyte to sufficiently fill the porous TiO2 film while avoiding problems with the leakage of the solvent), high conductivity, long-term stability, and is simple to prepare. The developed PG-IL electrolyte overcomes problems of leakage with cells based on IL electrolytes, and should help in accelerating the widespread use of QSS-DSSCs.

Poly(oxyethylene)-diamine or poly(oxypropylene-oxyethylene-oxypropylene) segmented polyether of bis(2-aminopropyl ether) (POE2000, 2000 Mw) is a crystalline and water-soluble compound (waxy solid, melting point 37–40 °C, amine content 0.95 meq. g−1, with a formula of 39 oxyethylene and 6 oxypropylene units). The monomer, 4,4′-oxydiphthalic anhydride (ODPA, 97% purified by sublimation), Ti(IV) tetraisopropoxide (TTIP > 98%), acetonitrile (ACN, 99.99%), acetylacetone (99.5%), and isopropyl alcohol (IPA, 99.5%), were obtained from Aldrich Chemical Co. Dihydrogen hexachloroplatinate (H2PtCl6, Alfa Aesar Company, 99.95%), tetrahydrofuran (THF, 95%), and ethyl alcohol (99.5%) were purchased from Teida Chemicals. Iodine (I2, chemical grade), guanidinium thiocyanate (Guan, 99%), 1-methyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide (PMII), 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (EMIBF4), and poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG, 20000 Mw) were procured from Merck Chemical Co. 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP, 96%), toluene (99%), and tert-butanol (96%) were received from Acros Chemicals. 3-Methoxypropionitrile (MPN) and 2-methoxyethanol (99.95%) were supplied by Riedel-deHaën (Fluka), J. T. Backer and Sigma-Aldrich, respectively.

The TiO2 colloidal solution was prepared by a sol–gel method. Titanium tetra-iso-propoxide (TTIP, 69.1 g, 0.24 mol) was added to 430 ml of 0.1 M aqueous nitric acid, with continuous stirring and heating at 85 °C for 8 h. When the resultant colloid was cooled down to room temperature, it was transferred to an autoclave (Parr 4540); the temperature of the autoclave was maintained at 240 °C for 12 h. The prepared TiO2 colloid was concentrated to 10 wt%; the obtained TiO2 had particles of about 20 nm in diameter. Large-sized TiO2 (PT-501A, 99.74%, 15 m2 g−1 surface area, 100 nm diameter) was purchased from Ya Chung Industrial Co. Ltd., Taiwan for use as scattering particles in the TiO2 photoanode.

The POEM polymer was synthesized through the reaction between bis(2-aminopropyl ether) (POE2000) and 4,4′-oxydiphthalic anhydride (ODPA) at a molar ratio of 6:5 at 150 °C for 3 h in tetrahydrofuran (THF). The product mixture was subjected to rotary evaporation under a reduced pressure and was recovered as a yellowish waxy solid. The synthetic steps of POEM are outlined in Scheme S1, ESI.


For the preparation of the room temperature ionic liquid (RTIL) electrolyte, PMII and EMIBF4 were mixed at a volume ratio of 13:7 in a three-necked flask; then 1.02 g of I2, 1.35 g of TBP, and 0.28 g of Guan were added to the mixture. To obtain the PG-IL electrolyte, 0.46 g of POEM was added to the thus prepared RTIL electrolyte, and the mixture was heated at 80 °C under continuous stirring for 24 h; a homogeneous and viscous electrolyte was thus obtained.


A fluorine-doped SnO2 conducting glass (FTO, 7 Ω sq−1, visible transmittance ≧80%, NSG America Inc., USA) was first cleaned with a neutral cleaner, and then washed with DI-water, acetone, and IPA, sequentially. The conducting surface of the FTO was treated with a solution of TTIP (1.0 g, 0.0035 mol) in 2-methoxyethanol (3.0 g, 0.039 mol) for obtaining a good mechanical contact between the conducting glass and the TiO2 film, as well as to isolate the conducting glass surface from the electrolyte. TiO2 paste was coated onto the treated conducting glass by using a doctor blade technique. The dried TiO2 film was gradually heated to 450 °C in an oxygen atmosphere, and subsequently sintered at that temperature for 30 min. The TiO2 photoanode of the DSSC was composed of a 14 μm thick TiO2 layer and a scattering layer of 4.5 μm thickness. After sintering at 450 °C and cooling to 80 °C, the TiO2 film was immersed in a 3 × 10−4 M solution of dye (N719) at room temperature for 24 h. N719 (Solaronix S.A., Aubonne, Switzerland) was dissolved in ACN and n-butanol (volume ratio of 1:1) to prepare the dye solution. The thus prepared TiO2/dye electrode was placed on a platinum conducting glass electrode (ITO, 7 Ω sq−1, Ritek Corporation, Hsinchu, Taiwan), keeping the two electrodes separated by a 25 μm thick Surlyn® (SX1170-25, Solaronix S.A., Aubonne, Switzerland). The two electrodes were sealed by heating. One electrolyte contained 0.2 M I2, 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP), and 0.12 M guanidinium thiocyanate in a mixture of PMII and EMIBF4 (volume ratio of 13:7); this electrolyte was designated as RTIL. The other electrolyte was the same as the first electrolyte, however additionally contained 5 wt% POEM; this second electrolyte was designated as PG-IL. The electrolyte was injected into the gap between the electrodes by capillarity.


The surface of the DSSC was covered by a mask, thereby allowing an area of 0.16 cm2 for light illumination, and then illuminated by a class A quality solar simulator (XES-301S, AM1.5G, San-Ei Electric Co., Ltd.). Incident light intensity (100 mW cm−2) was calibrated with a standard Si cell (PECSI01, Peccell Technologies, Inc.). Photocurrent–voltage curves of the DSSCs were obtained with a potentiostat/galvanostat (PGSTAT 30, Autolab, Eco-Chemie, the Netherlands). Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were obtained by the above-mentioned potentiostat/galvanostat, equipped with an FRA2 module, under a constant light illumination of 100 mW cm−2. The frequency range explored was 10 mHz to 65 kHz. The applied bias voltage was set at the open-circuit voltage of the DSSC, between the counter electrode and the FTO–TiO2–dye working electrode, starting from the short-circuit condition; the corresponding ac amplitude was 10 mV. The impedance spectra were analyzed using an equivalent circuit model. The ionic conductivity of the electrolyte was measured by sandwiching the electrolyte between two Pt coated FTO electrodes, using a 25 μm thick Surlyn® film. Incident photo-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) curves were obtained under short-circuit conditions. The light source was a class A quality solar simulator (PEC-L11, AM1.5G, Peccell Technologies, Inc.); light was focused through a monochromator (Oriel Instrument, model 74100) onto the photovoltaic cell. The monochromator was moved in steps through the visible spectrum to generate the IPCE (λ) as defined below,

IPCE (λ) = 1240 (JSC/λφ),
(1)
where
λ is the wavelength, JSC is the short-circuit photocurrent (mA cm−2) recorded with a potentiostat/galvanostat, and φ is the incident radiative flux (W m−2) measured with an optical detector (Oriel Instrument, model 71580) and a power meter (Oriel Instrument, model 70310). The viscosity of the electrolyte was measured using a model NDJ-8S digitized viscosity meter (Cany precision Instruments Co., Ltd., China). The thermal stabilities of the electrolytes were measured by a thermogravimetric analyzer (TGA, Perkin-Elmer).


This study reported that the addition of amphiphilic polymers improves the physical properties of the RTIL electrolyte. A photochemically stable linear copolymer, POEM, was used to solidify the binary RTIL electrolyte (PMII/EMIBF4) to prepare a new PG-IL electrolyte for QSS-DSSC. The introduction of polar POE (–CH2CH2O–)x, aromatic imide (–CONCO–), and partially non-cyclic amidoacids (–CONH–COOH) segments in the copolymer provides enough mechanical strength to form a gel-state structure. The PG-IL electrolyte consists of a polymer, a solvent, and an ionic conductor. The polymer POEM host acts as a gelling agent and provides the system with solid or gel character. It also accommodates the appropriate solvent within its chain network, and prevents the solvent from volatilizing or leaking by intermolecular interactions. Fig. 1 shows digital photographs of the RTIL at 30 °C in a gel state (Fig. 1a). When adding an appropriate amount of POEM into the RTIL, the system turns to a solid state at 30 °C (Fig. 1b). Further, by heating the PG-IL electrolyte to 70 °C, it turns to a gel state which ensures that the PG-IL electrolyte would penetrate well into the TiO2 porous structure (Fig. 1c).


Table 1 and Fig. 2 show the thermal stabilities of the RTIL and PG-IL electrolytes which were measured by a thermogravimetric analyzer (TGA, PerkinElmer). The 5% weight loss temperatures (Td95%) of the RTIL and PG-IL electrolytes were 293 °C and 321 °C, respectively (Fig. 2). The PG-IL electrolyte exhibited higher thermal stability than did RTIL. This type of high thermal stability is beneficial for fabricating a durable DSSC.
Electrolyte
Thermal stability
Physical property
Photovoltaic performance
Impedance
Td95wt% (°C)

μ (cP)

σ (mS cm−1)

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF

η (%)

R
w (Ω)

a TGA: heating at 10 °C min−1 in air.
b The physical properties of the electrolytes were measured at 30 °C.
c Photovoltaic parameters of the DSSCs were measured at 100 mW cm−2 light intensity.

RTIL
293
62.5
8.80
0.63
11.6
0.73
5.37
13.04
PG-IL
321
160.6
9.84
0.66
12.7
0.75
6.28
8.49
The viscosities (μ) of the PG-IL electrolyte were measured from 30 °C up to 100 °C. These values are compared with the viscosity of the RTIL at 30 °C, as shown in Fig. 3 and listed in Table 1. The viscosities with bare RTIL and PG-IL electrolytes were 62.5 and 160.6 cP at 30 °C. It is known that viscosities as high as 100 cP are sufficient to keep the hybrid in the gel form. It is seen from Fig. 1c and 3 (point c) that the PG-IL electrolyte still maintains a high viscosity at 70 °C, making it suitable for use in QSS-DSSCs.
The ionic conductivity of the ionic liquid electrolytes was measured by sandwiching the electrolyte in between two Pt-coated FTO electrodes using 25 μm thick Surlyn® film. The ionic conductivity (σS) of the electrolyte can be determined by using the following formula:
σS = dS/(AS × RS)
(2)
The ohmic serial resistance (RS) in the formula was obtained from a Nyquist plot (Pt/electrolyte/Pt), and the device constants (dS and AS) were calculated from a standard cell calibration based on an NaCl solution of 12.9 mS cm−1 (Model 011006, Thermo Orion).

Table 1 includes the values of ionic conductivity in the QSS-electrolyte for both RTIL and PG-IL. The ionic conductivities of 8.80 mS cm−1 and 9.84 mS cm−1 were observed for the RTIL and PG-IL electrolytes, respectively. To our surprise, the value of σS for PG-IL containing 5 wt% POEM is slightly higher than that of the RTIL without adding POEM. This implies that the POE segment in the copolymer structure may solvate ionic pairs in the electrolyte and consequently enhances the mobility of the counter I− ions. For PEO-based gel electrolytes, interactions between alkali metal cations and the oxygen atoms of the ethylene oxide units promote the charge transport of the iodide anions, thereby enhancing the ionic conductivity of the polymer gel electrolyte.

Fig. 4 shows the photocurrent density–voltage curves of the QSS-DSSCs using bare RTIL and PG-IL as the electrolytes. The photocurrent density–voltage (I–V) characteristics of the QSS-DSSCs were measured at an illumination of 100 mW cm−2. The corresponding open-circuit potential (VOC), short-circuit current density (JSC), fill factor (FF), and cell efficiency (η) are listed in Table 1. The photovoltaic parameters of the QSS-DSSCs with the bare RTIL in their electrolyte are VOC = 0.63 V, JSC = 11.6 mA cm−2, FF = 0.73, and η = 5.37%. When the QSS-DSSC uses the PG-IL electrolyte, the photovoltaic parameters are VOC = 0.66 V, JSC = 12.7 mA cm−2, FF = 0.75, and η = 6.28%. It is significant that the parameters JSC, FF, and η of the DSSC based on the PG-IL electrolyte are superior to those of the DSSC with RTIL. Fig. S1 (ESI) shows the cell performance of the DSSCs with POEM/RTIL electrolytes at various weight percentages of POEM (5–9%). The PG-IL electrolyte did not form a gel when the added POEM is below 5 wt%. It can be seen that the cell efficiency decreases with the increase in the weight percentage of POEM, because the diffusion resistance of I−/I3− in the electrolyte is increased. The conversion efficiency reaches a maximum at 5 wt% of POEM in the RTIL electrolyte. The results show that the PG-IL electrolyte containing 5 wt% POEM performed better than RTIL, presumably due to the enhancement of the ionic mobility (I− ions) in the microscopic polymer networks. In addition, the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) was also measured by monitoring the photocurrent at different wavelengths. The results presented in Fig. 5 are consistent with the higher JSC value (12.7 mA cm−2) of the cell with the PG-IL electrolyte than that of the cell with the RTIL electrolyte (11.6 mA cm−2).

Fig. 6 shows electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) data of the DSSCs with RTIL and PG-IL electrolytes. The equivalent circuit is included in the inset of the figure. In general, the EIS spectra of an FTO/TiO2/dye/IL electrolyte/Pt/ITO device show three semicircles in the frequency range of 10 mHz to 65 kHz. The ohmic serial resistance (RS) corresponds to the overall series resistance. The first and second semicircles correspond to the charge-transfer resistances at the counter electrode (Rct1) and the TiO2/dye/IL electrolyte (Rct2), respectively. The third circle represents the Warburg diffusion process (Rw) of I−/I3− in the electrolyte. In our work, the value of Rw was reduced by using the PG-IL as an electrolyte in QSS-DSSCs. We speculate that the structure of PG-IL electrolyte with POE segments, which have lone pair electrons, could cause the ionic pair separation and enhance mobility of the counter I− ions. These results are consistent with the above-mentioned photovoltaic performance. Therefore, it is concluded that the PG-IL electrolyte leads to an enhancement of diffusion of I−/I3−, thus better cell performance.
As expected, the QSS-DSSCs showed excellent durability compared with that of the cell with an organic liquid electrolyte. Fig. 7 shows the at-rest durability data of the DSSCs with an organic liquid electrolyte and the PG-IL electrolyte. In this experiment, all cells were sealed by a Surlyn® film. The cell efficiency was measured once per day after storing it under dark conditions at 30 °C. All efficiencies were normalized to those of the first day. In the first 200 h, the cell efficiency increased slightly as the gel electrolyte penetrated more deeply into the porous TiO2 film. It is interesting to notice that no decay was observed in the overall power conversion efficiency of the QSS-DSSC with the PG-IL electrolyte after more than 1000 h, while the overall power conversion efficiency of the DSSC with an organic liquid electrolyte has suffered from about 30% loss. In fact, the cell with the organic liquid electrolyte lost its efficiency at a constant rate. These results thus offered the unfailing stability of the cell under our investigation for 1000 h at 30 °C. Moreover, we assembled two fresh DSSCs, one with a PG-IL electrolyte and the other with an organic liquid electrolyte. Both were stored in an oven at 70 °C, and their cell efficiencies were measured at different periods of time. Once again, the efficiencies were normalized to those of the first day. As shown in Fig. 8, the DSSC with the PG-IL electrolyte shows an extraordinary durability even though it was stored at 70 °C. In contrast, the cell with the organic liquid electrolyte lost its efficiency virtually in no time. Thus, both at-rest stability data at 30 °C and 70 °C supported the unfailing stability of the cell under our investigation for 1000 h.
According to our results, the POEM materials play an important role in enhancing the stability of DSSCs by offering a liquid-like channel for the diffusion of triiodide (I3−)/iodide (I−) ions. Thus, an improved stability was observed in the POE segment-added RTIL electrolyte, which is composed of a number of channels to avoid evaporation of the liquid electrolyte and consequently improved the stability of the quasi-solid-state DSSC.

The novel amphiphilic copolymer was proven to be effective for gelling an ionic liquid electrolyte and ultimately enhancing the performance of QSS-DSSCs. The POE segment in the copolymer structure may solvate ionic pairs in the electrolyte and consequently enhances the mobility of the counter I− ions. This PG-IL electrolyte became fluid liquid at an elevated temperature and showed high ionic conductivity and long-term stability. The QSS-DSSCs behaved as a quasi-solid-state cell which demonstrated a high conversion efficiency of 6.28%, superior to the RTIL electrolyte cell of 5.37% under 100 mW cm−2 irradiation.

Moreover, the stability of the QSS-DSSC with the PG-IL electrolyte is proved to be unfailing and far superior to that with an organic solvent-based electrolyte, tested at-rest both at 30 °C and 70 °C. The finding of the novel copolymer for gelling ionic liquid has advanced the development of a highly efficient QSS-DSSC.

This work was supported in part by the National Science Council of Taiwan. Some of the instruments used in this study were made available through the financial support of the Academia Sinica, Nankang, Taipei, Taiwan.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2ta00784c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013