 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA01800A
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7573-7579


Bhaskar
Dudem
,

Jin Hyuck
Heo
,

Jung Woo
Leem
,

Jae Su
Yu
* and 

Sang Hyuk
Im
*

Department of Electronics and Radio Engineering, Kyung Hee University, 1732 Deogyeong-daero, Giheung-gu, Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-do 446-701, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jsyu@khu.ac.kr

Department of Chemical Engineering, Kyung Hee University, 1732 Deogyeong-daero, Giheung-gu, Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-do 446-701, Republic of Korea. E-mail: imrom@khu.ac.kr

Received
29th February 2016
, Accepted 18th April 2016
First published on 18th April 2016
We report CH3NH3PbI3 planar perovskite solar cells with multifunctional inverted micro-pyramidal structured (IMPS) polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) antireflection (AR) layers for enhancing the device efficiency. These IMPS-PDMS films were fabricated via a facile and cost-effective soft lithography using micro-pyramidal structured silicon (Si) master molds formed by alkaline anisotropic wet-etching treatment of (100)-oriented monocrystalline Si substrates. The IMPS-PDMS laminated on the bare glass (i.e., IMPS-PDMS/glass) exhibited a higher solar weighted transmittance (TSW) value of ∼95.2% (or the lowest solar weighted reflectance (RSW) of ∼4.7%) than those of the bare glass and flat-PDMS/glass, i.e., TSW/RSW ∼ 90.7/9.1 and 91.5/8.2%, respectively. Additionally, it showed a much higher average haze ratio (HA) value of ∼93.1% compared to the bare glass and flat-PDMS/glass (i.e., HA ∼ 1.6 and 2.8%, respectively). By employing the IMPS-PDMS onto the outer surface of CH3NH3PbI3 planar perovskite solar cells as an AR layer, an improved short-circuit current density (Jsc) value of 21.25 mA cm−2 was obtained, as compared to the reference device and the device with flat-PDMS (i.e., Jsc = 20.57 and 20.87 mA cm−2, respectively), while showing the almost same Voc and FF values as those of the reference device. As a result, the power conversion efficiency was improved from 17.17 and 17.42% for the reference and flat-PDMS devices, respectively, to 17.74% for the IMPS-PDMS device. Also, the fluorooctyltrichlorosilane-treated IMPS-PDMS surface revealed a superhydrophobic behavior with a water contact angle of ∼150° which is useful for self-cleaning applications in outdoor environments.

Since Kojima et al. reported liquid junction CH3NH3PbX3 (MAPbX3, X = Br and I) perovskite sensitized solar cells, extensive studies have been done to develop highly efficient solid-state perovskite hybrid solar cells because of their unique material properties such as high absorptivity, high open-circuit voltage, small exciton binding energy, long charge carrier diffusion length, convenient bandgap tailoring, and solution processability.

Until now, most research studies on perovskite solar cells have been focused on improving power conversion efficiency by developing new processes for the formation of pin-hole free perovskite thin films and designing new materials via compositional engineering. Consequently, the certified power conversion efficiency of solid-state perovskite solar cells reached over 20% under 1 sun conditions (100 mW cm−2 AM1.5G).
On the other hand, highly transparent antireflection (AR) layers have been widely employed on external-facing surfaces of transparent substrates (e.g., glasses, plastics, etc.) in various solar cells or modules to reduce the surface reflection losses over a broad range of incident wavelengths and angles and to protect against direct exposure to light (ultraviolet, visible, and infrared) and daily environments such as rain, wind, and dust. Over the past years, various approaches have been followed to fabricate efficient AR layers such as thin-film coatings and nano-structures. However, porous dielectric thin-films (i.e., SiO2, MgF2, etc.) with lower refractive indices than transparent substrates have some drawbacks including poor or reduced adhesion on certain substrates, low reliability and durability of thin-films in outdoor environments as well as the narrow band of incident wavelengths and angles.
Also, nano-structures (e.g., nanogratings, nanopillars, nanowires,etc.) with relatively good mechanical durability and reliability can suppress surface reflections in broad ranges due to the graded effective refractive index profile between air and the bulk surface. However, this approach also involves costly and complicated fabrication processes such as nanolithography (e.g., electron-beam lithography, nanoimprint lithography, laser interference lithography, colloidal spheres, thermally dewetted metal nanoparticles,etc. for etch mask nanopatterns) and subsequent dry etching. Thus, it is necessary to develop an efficient AR layer in an effective way including cost-effective and simple processes. Recently, soft lithography is generally utilized to prepare transparent AR layers with nano-structures for a simple one-step process of protective encapsulation against mechanical damage to the underlying solar cell systems. In soft lithography, once master molds are made, they can be repeatedly used for pattern transfer. Furthermore, it is available to large-scale or roll-to-roll fabrication.
In particular, for the pattern transfer, conformable and elastomeric PDMS (polydimethylsiloxane) is usually used because of its low free surface energy, flexibility, and hardness. Besides, it is suitable as a protective AR layer for transparent substrates (i.e., refractive indices (n) ≥ 1.5) in solar cells due to its lower n of ∼1.43. Also, the PDMS layer can be strongly laminated on the surface of planar transparent substrates with detachability from it. In fact, for the nano-structured PDMS layer, nano-structured molds are correspondingly required, which also increases the fabrication cost and complexity, as mentioned above. In contrast, micro-structured molds can be easily prepared by a relatively simple and cost-effective wet-chemical method without lithography and dry etching processes. Micro-pyramidal structures have been generally realized on a silicon (Si) surface using a potassium hydroxide (KOH) alkaline etchant solution. The micro-structured AR layer can effectively enhance light absorption in solar cells by reducing the surface reflection due to the linearly gradient-effective-refractive-index profile and the extension of effective optical light paths, showing high total and diffuse transmissions simultaneously. Furthermore, the micro-structured PDMS layer with a self-cleaning ability, which can prevent the degradation of device performance because of its surface contamination, is also very useful in outdoor solar systems. Therefore, it is very meaningful to investigate the photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells with the micro-structured PDMS as the AR protection layer, including the analyses of its optical properties and water wetting behaviors.
To commercialize highly efficient perovskite solar cells, additional studies on modularization, stability, the development of Pb-free perovskite materials, encapsulation, AR coating, and so on are also equally important. In this work, we devised inverted micro-pyramidal structured PDMS (i.e., IMPS-PDMS) as an AR layer with self-cleaning function because of the stronger bond strength of Si–O (444 kJ mol−1) than that of C–C (356 kJ mol−1) and C–O (339 kJ mol−1) and hydrophobic characteristics. For the fabricated IMPS-PDMS layer, the optical properties, together with the light scattering behavior calculated by the finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method, and surface wettability were investigated. For device feasibility, the photovoltaic performance of CH3NH3PbI3 planar perovskite cells with IMPS-PDMS as the AR layer was also evaluated.
Fig. S1 shows the schematic diagram of the fabrication steps for the IMPS-PDMS via soft lithography using micro-pyramidal structured Si (MPS-Si) as a mold and its lamination on transparent substrates. To fabricate the IMPS-PDMS, first, Si substrates with a size of 2 × 2 cm2 were ultrasonically cleaned with acetone, methanol, and de-ionized (DI) water, and subsequently dried with a nitrogen (N2) gas flow. Prior to wet etching, the Si substrates were subsequently dipped into a buffer oxide etchant (BOE), 5 wt% hydrofluoric (HF) acid solutions, and DI water for 1 min, followed by the N2 gas blow. The Si samples were chemically wet-etched at a temperature of 75 °C for 40 min in a solution mixture of KOH: isopropyl alcohol (IPA):DI water = 1:0.5:8.5 vol%, producing micro-pyramidal structures with random arrays on the surface of Si substrates (MPS-Si). And then, the etched samples were dipped into a HCl:H2O2:H2O (1:1:5) solution mixture at 80 °C for 10 min, to remove the remaining potassium impurities on their surface. To simply transfer the pattern of MPS-Si, soft lithography was utilized. A PDMS solution, prepared by using a mixture of base resin and curing agent (Sylgard 184, Dow Corning Co.) with a 10:1 weight ratio, was poured on the MPS-Si mold, and subsequently cured at 75 °C for 2 h in an oven. The cured PDMS layer was carefully peeled off from the mold, thus creating the IMPS-PDMS with a layer thickness of ∼200 μm. Additionally, to enhance the hydrophobicity of the IMPS-PDMS, the fluoro-octyltrichlorosilane (FOTS) was treated (or rinsed) with a mixture of 20 μl of trichloro(1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyl)silane and 20 ml of n-hexane solution for a few minutes and dried in an oven at 30 °C for 12 h. To demonstrate its device feasibility as a protective multifunctional layer (i.e., AR and self-cleaning functions), the fabricated IMPS-PDMS layer was laminated on the outer surface of the FTO (fluorine doped tin oxide) glass substrate in MAPbI3 planar perovskite solar cells.

Fig. 1 shows the 30°-tilted and cross-sectional SEM (scanning electron microscopy) images of the (a) MPS-Si mold, (b) IMPS-PDMS, and (c) flat-PDMS. The insets show the high-magnification SEM images of the corresponding samples. As shown in Fig. 1(a), randomly distributed MP arrays were uniformly formed on the Si surface by the well-known alkaline anisotropic wet-etching treatment of (100)-oriented monocrystalline Si. In general, a wet etching process using an alkaline etchant solution like KOH at low temperatures (below 100 °C) and concentrations (<0.5 M) has been employed for anisotropic etching of Si. Thus, four-sided pyramidal structures were randomly formed over the Si surface through exposed {111} faces. From the SEM images of Fig. 1(a), the bottom size and height of the MPS (four-sided pyramids) were roughly estimated to be in the ranges of 4–10 μm and 3–7 μm, respectively. Using the soft lithographic pattern transfer method, the MP patterns of the Si mold were successfully and negatively replicated on the surface of the PDMS layer without any large deformation and distortion, creating the IMPS-PDMS, as can be seen in Fig. 1(b). For the inversely patterned MP arrays, their top size and depth were nearly similar to those of the corresponding mold, in the ranges of 4–10 and 3–7 μm, respectively. For comparison, SEM images of the flat-PDMS without any patterns are also shown in Fig. S2.
To observe the optical behaviors of PDMS layers, the samples were laminated on glass substrates. Fig. 2(a) and (b) show the measured total and diffuse transmittance spectra of bare glass, flat-PDMS/glass, and IMPS-PDMS/glass. The measured total reflectance spectra of the corresponding samples are also shown in the inset of Fig. 2(a). By incorporating the flat-PDMS layer into the glass surface, the total transmittance (or reflectance) is slightly increased (or decreased) compared to that of the bare glass over a wide wavelength range of 350–800 nm, as can be seen in Fig. 2(a). This is attributed to the step gradient-refractive-index distribution in constituent materials, i.e., air (n = 1)/PDMS (n ∼ 1.43)/glass (n ∼ 1.52). However, the introduction of the IMPS-PDMS film on the glass (i.e., IMPS-PDMS/glass) leads to a further enhancement in the transmission (or suppressed reflection), exhibiting a higher average total transmittance (Tavg) value of ∼94.9% (or a lower average total reflectance (Ravg) value of ∼5%) than those of the other samples (i.e., Tavg/Ravg ∼ 90.1%/8.7% for the bare glass and Tavg/Ravg ∼ 90.8%/7.7% for the flat-PDMS/glass, respectively). This is the reason why a grooved surface like the IMPS extends effective optical path lengths owing to the diffracted and rebound light between the IMPS grooves. As a result, the probability of photons transmitted through the IMPS-PDMS layer is increased instead of escaping back to air. Besides, it forms a linearly gradient-effective-refractive-index profile from air to the bulk surface via the IMPS, which can reduce the surface reflection (i.e., AR effect). Thus, the lamination of the transparent IMPS-PDMS layer can efficiently improve the transmission of bare glass. For solar cell applications, the estimation of a solar weighted transmittance (TSW) is also crucial. TSW, which is the ratio of the usable photons transmitted to the total usable photons, can be obtained by normalizing the transmittance spectra with the solar spectral photon flux (i.e., air mass 1.5 global spectrum) integrated over a wavelength range of 350–800 nm. As expected, the IMPS-PDMS/glass exhibits a higher TSW value of ∼95.2% compared to the other samples (i.e., TSW ∼ 90.7% for the bare glass and TSW ∼ 91.5% for the flat-PDMS/glass, respectively). Similarly, its solar weighted reflectance (RSW) of ∼4.7% is also lower than those of the bare glass (i.e., RSW ∼ 9.1%) and the flat-PDMS/glass (i.e., RSW ∼ 8.2%).
As discussed above, the diffracted and rebound light between the IMPS leads to a strong light scattering in the PDMS film. The transmitted light scattering can also enhance light absorption in solar cells. As shown in Fig. 3(b), for both the bare glass and flat-PDMS/glass, it can be observed that there is almost no diffuse transmitted light (i.e., <3%) at λ = 350–800 nm. Meanwhile, the IMPS-PDMS with a grooved surface laminated on the glass (i.e., IMPS-PDMS/glass) has a strong light scattering, indicating a diffuse transmittance spectrum higher than ∼85% over a broad wavelength region of 350–800 nm. This is ascribed to the inverted pyramidal structures with micro-scale periods larger than incident light wavelengths, which can generate higher orders of diffracted waves in the transmission. In order to characterize the light scattering properties of a sample, the haze ratio (H), which is defined by the ratio of the diffuse transmittance (Td) to the total transmittance (Tt), i.e., H (%) = Td/Tt × 100, is often used. For the IMPS-PDMS/glass, a much higher average H (HA) value of ∼93.1% is estimated compared to the bare glass (i.e., HA ∼ 1.6%) and the flat-PDMS/glass (i.e., HA ∼ 2.8%), respectively. The light scattering of the IMPS-PDMS can be also verified by FDTD simulation. The theoretical analysis of the optical transmission diffraction (i.e., light scattering) property of the IMPS-PDMS was performed by the FDTD method. For the simulation model of IMPS, an inverted triangle was roughly represented by a periodic geometry in the Cartesian coordinate system of a scalar-valued function of two variables, f(x, z), for simplicity. The incident light enters from air into the structure at the normal incidence. The amplitude of the y-polarized electric field (Ey) was calculated for the incident plane wave with a slab mode beam profile in the continuous-wave mode, which is normalized at a wavelength (λ) of 550 nm. The refractive indices of the glass and PDMS used in these calculations were set to be 1.52 and 1.43, respectively.Fig. 2(c) shows the contour plots of electric-field (Ey) distributions for the incident light propagating from air to the bare glass and IMPS-PDMS at λ = 550 nm. In FDTD calculations, it is assumed that the geometry of IMPS-PDMS is kept to be a period of 3 μm and a height of 4 μm, respectively. The thicknesses of the bare glass and PDMS film are 150 μm and 100 μm, respectively. As shown in Fig. 2(c), for the bare glass, there exists no diffraction light while the IMPS-PDMS shows a strong light interference pattern with a wide angular spread and it helps light propagation across the interface between air and the IMPS-PDMS. From these optical results, it is interesting to note that the introduction of IMPS-PDMS into the outer surface of the glass substrate can lead to light absorption in the active region of solar cells due to the increased total transmittance as well as the strong light scattering, simultaneously. Furthermore, in order to investigate the influence of IMPS-PDMS layer thickness on its optical characteristics, the total and diffuse transmittance spectra of IMPS-PDMS layers with different thicknesses are characterized in Fig. S3. For all the IMPS-PDMS layers with different thicknesses, both the total and diffuse transmittance spectra are very similar over a wide wavelength range of 300–800 nm. But, at wavelengths of >900 nm, there are slight discrepancies in the total and diffuse transmittance spectra, and the optical performance decreases with increasing thickness of the PDMS layer. This is attributed to the absorption of the PDMS at corresponding wavelengths.

Fig. 3(a) shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of FTO/blocking TiO2 (bl-TiO2: ∼50 nm in thickness)/MAPbI3 (∼300 nm)/PTAA (poly-triarylamine: ∼30 nm)/Au (∼60 nm) planar perovskite solar cells laminated with flat-PDMS and IMPS-PDMS layers and without the PDMS layer (reference). As shown in Fig. 3(a), the EQE value is increased in the order of reference < flat-PDMS < IMPS-PDMS devices. The calculated Jsc values from the integration of EQE spectra were 20.4, 20.7, and 21.1 mA cm−2 for reference, flat PDMS, and IMPS PDMS devices, respectively, as shown in Fig. S4(d). The EQE is a product of light harvesting efficiency (ηlhe), charge separation efficiency (ηcs), and charge collection efficiency (ηcc) and so the EQE improvement is attributed to the improved ηlhe because the flat-PDMS and IMPS-PDMS layers were attached on the same reference device. Fig. 3(b) shows current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics confirming that the IMPS-PDMS top layer is effective to improve the power conversion efficiency. The photovoltaic properties of each device are summarized in Table 1. The reference device had 1.09 V open-circuit voltage (Voc), 20.57 mA cm−2 short-circuit current density (Jsc), 76.6% fill factor (FF), and 17.17% power conversion efficiency (η). The flat-PDMS and IMPS-PDMS devices exhibited improved Jsc values from 20.57 to 20.87 and 21.25 mA cm−2, respectively, while showing similar Voc and FF values to those of the reference device. Therefore, η was improved from 17.17 to 17.42% for the flat-PDMS device and 17.74% for the IMPS-PDMS device. The improved device efficiency is only attributed to the improved Jsc due to the reduced reflection by the AR function of the IMPS-PDMS top layer. The behavior of J–V hysteresis of reference, flat-PDMS, and IMPS-PDMS devices was similar as shown in Fig. S4. The average efficiency and deviation of reference, flat-PDMS, and IMPS-PDMS devices were 16.40 ± 0.46, 16.62 ± 0.47, and 16.92 ± 0.48%, respectively, as shown in Fig. S5. To show the stability and stabilized efficiency of the IMPS-PDMS device, we measured Jsc by applying optimal bias voltage (Vopt = 0.92 V) at the maximum power point under continuous light soaking of 1 sun as shown in Fig. S6.Fig. 3(c–f) show the J–V curves of reference, flat-PDMS, and IMPS-PDMS devices with respect to the tilted angle of the device, respectively. Fig. 3(f) clearly indicates that the Jsc and η of the IMPS-PDMS device smoothly decreased with respect to the tilted angle of the device, whereas those of the reference and flat-PDMS devices steeply decreased with respect to the tilted angle of the device. This might be attributed to the enhanced light absorption in the active layer of the device due to the increased effective optical path lengths (i.e., strong light scattering) caused by the IMPS-PDMS AR layer. Furthermore, the omnidirectionally aligned microstructures allow for suppressing the surface reflection for obliquely incident light. Therefore, the IMPS-PDMS AR layer can generate electricity more efficiently under the circumstance of varying the incident angle of light in a day and the seasons than the planar AR layer.
Device

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)

η (%)
IMPS-PDMS
1.09
21.25
76.6
17.74
Flat-PDMS
1.09
20.87
76.6
17.42
Reference
1.09
20.57
76.6
17.17
Under the real outdoor environments, the dust particles and contaminants on the surface of solar cells can be harmful and can degrade the device output performance because they interfere with the incident light and reduce the light absorption ability in the active region of solar cells. Therefore, it is necessary to employ the AR protection layer with a self-cleaning function at the top surface of solar cells. Fig. 4(a) shows the photographs of a water droplet on the surface of the IMPS-PDMS layer before and after the FOTS surface modification treatment including the bare glass and the flat-PDMS layer without the FOTS surface modification treatment. As shown in Fig. 4(a), the bare glass has a hydrophilic surface with a water contact angle (θC) of ∼32 ± 0.7°. On the other hand, the PDMS with a flat surface shows a hydrophobic property with θC values larger than 90°, exhibiting a θC of ∼ 96 ± 0.5° for the flat-PDMS. However, the introduction of IMPS onto the surface of PDMS leads to the enhanced hydrophobicity (i.e., θC ∼ 116.8 ± 0.8°). This is due to the increased surface roughness, which can be explained by the Cassie–Baxter theory. However, this θC value is still much lower than those (i.e., θC > 150°, superhydrophobicity, which has a self-cleaning effect) in previous studies. To improve the hydrophobic property of the surface of the IMPS-PDMS sample, a FOTS treatment was carried out on its surface. The FOTS function on the IMPS-PDMS was characterized by performing X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements and its elemental compositions were analyzed in Fig. S7. For the XPS data, after the FOTS treatment on the IMPS-PDMS, it can be observed that a thin fluorinated layer was formed on the surface of IMPS-PDMS and a high surface roughness was further introduced. Consequently, for the IMPS-PDMS after the FOTS treatment, an increased θC value of ∼150.1 ± 0.5° was obtained, showing a superhydrophobic surface. This superhydrophobic surface is very useful to clean dusts and contaminants on the surface of devices. For the demonstration of its self-cleaning function, we tested the self-cleaning behavior of a FOTS-treated IMPS-PDMS layer covered with sand dust particles, as shown in Fig. 4(b). After dropping the water droplets, the sand dust was clearly removed by the rolling down water droplets without any remaining water droplets at the surface. Actually, in real outdoor environments, the nano/micro-structured PDMS films with a hydrophobic surface have demonstrated a superior self-cleaning ability by raindrops, and thus the solar cells integrated with the AR protection PDMS layer showed a good long-term device stability for 32 days. Therefore, this IMPS-PDMS layer with multi-functions (i.e., efficient light-harvesting and self-cleaning effects) can be utilized to enhance the practical feasibility of solar cells as well as other various optical components in outdoor environments.

An IMPS-PMDS layer with AR and light-scattering properties was fabricated from a MPS-Si master mold formed by an alkaline anisotropic wet-etching treatment of the (100)-oriented mono-crystalline Si substrate via a facile soft lithography. The IMPS-PDMS layer laminated on a bare glass substrate exhibited a higher TSW value of ∼95.2% (or the lowest RSW value of ∼4.7%) than the bare glass and flat-PDMS/glass, i.e., TSW/RSW ∼ 90.7/9.1 and 91.5/8.2%, respectively. The scattering effect of the IMPS-PDMS layer was also greatly enhanced, indicating an average haze ratio (HA) value of ∼93.1% compared to those of bare glass and flat-PDMS/glass (i.e., HA ∼ 1.6 and 2.8%, respectively). Through these optical benefits of the IMPS-PDMS, for the planar type MAPbI3 perovskite solar cells incorporated with the IMPS-PDMS on the outer surface of glass as an AR protection layer, an improved Jsc value of 21.25 mA cm−2 was obtained compared to the reference device (20.57 mA cm−2) and the device with the flat-PDMS layer (20.87 mA cm−2) under perpendicular light illumination to the device (tilted angle = 0°). In particular, it also showed less light angle-dependent photovoltaic performance at 10–60° compared to the other devices. In addition, the FOTS-treated IMPS-PDMS layer revealed the superhydrophobicity due to the highly rough surface topology, and so it showed a self-cleaning function. In conclusion, we could demonstrate high-efficiency MAPbI3 planar perovskite solar cells with the multifunctional IMPS-PDMS layer (i.e., efficient AR/light-scattering and self-cleaning abilities).


This study was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIP) (No. 2013R1A2A2A01068407, Technology Development Program to Solve Climate Changes- No. 2015M1A2A2055631, Global Frontier R&D Program of the Center for Multiscale Energy System).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta01800a
‡ B. Dudem and J. H. Heo have equally contributed to this study.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016