 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA01898F
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12133-12138


Liu Qi
Zhang
,

Xing Wang
Zhang
*,

Zhi Gang
Yin
,

Qi
Jiang
,

Xin
Liu
,

Jun Hua
Meng
,

Ya Juan
Zhao
 and 

Hao Lin
Wang


Key Lab of Semiconductor Materials Science, Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100083, People's Republic of China. E-mail: xwzhang@semi.ac.cn

Received
15th March 2015
, Accepted 6th May 2015
First published on 7th May 2015
Both high efficiency and good stability of organometal trihalide perovskite solar cells are of central importance for their practical application. Here we report the fabrication of highly efficient and stable planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells through a simple and low temperature solution process. By combining the slow growth of the perovskite film and the introduction of a ZnO interlayer, a maximum power conversion efficiency of 16.8% was achieved. More importantly, the devices showed excellent stability, which can maintain their almost original performance after storing in ambient air for two months. It has been found that the ZnO interlayer is critical in enhancing the efficiency and stability of the devices. Furthermore, the low temperature solution process and the planar device structure used in this work are well compatible with the large-area and flexible substrates.

Organic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells have emerged as a kind of promising alternative to existing photovoltaic technologies with both solution-processability and super photovoltaic performance. Significantly, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells has skyrocketed from 3.8% to more than 20% over the past several years. The high efficiency can be comparable with that of the traditional inorganic material-based solar cells, e.g. Si, CdTe, copper indium gallium diselenide and so on. However, the stability issue of the device is still the main concern for its practical application. The instability of perovskite solar cells mainly comes from the lead halide perovskite, which can be fast decomposed when it is exposed to a high humidity environment. The instability will be more serious under ultraviolet (UV) illumination due to the destructive photo-catalysis effect of the TiO2 electron transport layer frequently employed in the meso-superstructured solar cells (MSSCs). Recently, several attempts have been made to improve the stability of perovskite solar cells by modifying the perovskite itself. For example, Noh et al. introduced Br into CH3NH3PbI3 to form a new combination (CH3NH3PbI3−xBrx), and the corresponding devices exhibited improved stability. Smith et al. reported a totally new perovskite material (PEA)2(MA)2[Pb3I10], which showed promising stability while the PCE is less than 5%. In addition to adopting the new perovskite materials, the modification of the interface layer was also shown to be an effective way of improving the stability of devices. By employing Al-doped TiO2, or replacing TiO2 with mesoporous Al2O3 (ref. 16) and ZnO nano-rods, the stability of devices was remarkably improved. The other important approach is to use suitable charge transfer layers or introduce an additional protection layer to isolate the cells from the environment. For instances, various p-type polymers have been successfully incorporated as a hole transport material (HTM), and the hydrophobicity of the polymers prevented water permeation into the porous perovskite heterojunction, consequently, the stability of the cells was greatly enhanced. More recently, Mei et al. introduced a 10 μm-thick carbon layer back electrode into an HTM-free system, and the resultant cells were stable for >1000 hours in ambient air under full sunlight. In addition, Niu et al. had effectively inhibited the degradation of perovskite and improved the device stability by introducing an Al2O3 protective layer between perovskite and 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (sprio-MeOTAD). Although they have achieved highly stable devices, the primitive PCEs of their devices were relatively low, and to date, there have been few reports on successful preparation of planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells with high efficiency and good stability. Another concern is that the devices are mostly based on the high temperature processed TiO2, which is also not compatible with the industry manufacture, particularly with flexible plastic substrates. Apparently, fabricating high-performance perovskite-based solar cells at low temperature is of crucial importance for their practical application.

Here, we report the successful fabrication of highly efficient and stable planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells through a simple and low temperature solution process. Specifically, a high quality perovskite film has been formed by controlling the crystal growth process, via slowing the evaporation rate of CH3NH3Cl. Furthermore, to improve the cathode interface and protect perovskite from degradation, a ZnO interlayer was introduced between the [6,6]-phenyl-C61 butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) electron transport layer and the Al electrode. By combining the slow growth of the perovskite film with the improved cathode interface, highly efficient and reproducible planar heterojunction CH3NH3PbI3−xClx solar cells with impressive PCEs up to 16.8% have been obtained. More importantly, the devices showed promising stability; their original PCE values can still be maintained even after storage in ambient air for two months.
To prepare a mixed halide perovskite precursor solution, methylammonium iodide (CH3NH3I) and lead(II) chloride (PbCl2) (99.999%, anhydrous) were added to the dimethylformamide (DMF) solution and stirred at 60 °C for 12 h. Then the mixture was filtered with a 0.45 μm polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) filter. PCBM was dissolved in chlorobenzene with a concentration of 2 mg ml−1. The ZnO precursor solution (8 mg ml−1) was prepared with zinc acetate dihydrate and KOH according to literature procedures. The device structure used in this work is ITO/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS)/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/PCBM/ZnO/Al. Pre-patterned glass-ITO substrates were cleaned sequentially by ultrasonic treatment in detergent (2% Hellmanex in water), deionized water, acetone, isopropanol, and alcohol. After drying with nitrogen, the substrates were treated by UV ozone for 15 min to remove the last traces of organic residues. PEDOT:PSS filtered through a 0.45 μm polyethersulfone (PES) membrane was deposited on the top of the ITO by spin-coating at 3000 rpm for 40 s and then dried in air at 120 °C for 30 min to form a dense hole transport layer. Afterwards, the substrates were baked at 65 °C for 15 min in the N2-filled glove box and then the perovskite precursor solution was spin-coated on the preheated PEDOT:PSS layer at 2200 rpm for 90 s. About 30 min later, the devices were taken out of the glove box and placed on a hot plate for annealing. During annealing at 100 °C in air, the perovskite films were either kept in a partly covered Petri dish for slow growth or in an uncovered vessel for fast growth. For slow growth, approximately 90 min was required to complete the formation of perovskite from the precursors. In contrast, 40 min was enough for the fast growth of perovskite. Next, the PCBM and ZnO layers were successively deposited by spin-coating at 3500 rpm and 3000 rpm for both 45 s, respectively. (In contrast, the PCBM layer was spin-coated at 800 rpm for 45 s for the device without the ZnO layer). Finally, a 100 nm Al was deposited on the surface of the ZnO layer (or PCBM layer) by thermal evaporation under a vacuum of 10−5 Pa with a rate of 0.7 nm s−1 as a cathode. The area of our solar cells which is defined by the overlapped area of the Al layer and the ITO layer is 4 mm2.
The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of perovskite solar cells were studied using a Keithley 2400 source-measure unit under 100 mW cm−2 illumination (AM 1.5G). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured using a lock-in amplifier with a current preamplifier under short-circuit conditions after illuminating the cells with a monochromator. The long-term stabilities of solar cells were tested at room temperature over two months, while the devices were stored in ambient air (relative humidity: 20–50%) without encapsulation. The morphology of the perovskite film and the cross-sectional image of the device were investigated using a FEI Nova Nano SEM-650 and a Hitachi FE-S4800 field emission scan electron microscope (SEM), respectively. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were carried out using a Rigaku D/MAX-2500 diffractometer with a Cu Kα X-ray source.

Fig. 1a shows the scheme of the controlled growth of perovskite films in which the samples were annealed in a partially sealed environment in air. Here, the perovskite CH3NH3PbI3−xClx film was prepared by spin-coating the mixture of PbCl2 and CH3NH3I precursor solutions as described above. Generally, the process of converting the precursors (PbCl2:CH3NH3I = 1:3) to CH3NH3PbI3−xClx can be expressed as PbCl2 + 3CH3NH3I → CH3NH3PbI3 + 2CH3NH3Cl, and this reaction indicates the formation of a perovskite phase (CH3NH3PbI3) along with the sublimation of CH3NH3Cl. Actually, this process has been confirmed by analyzing the volatile byproduct collected during annealing (see Fig. S1), and the result is also consistent with the previous report. It can be anticipated that the perovskite films are always under a CH3NH3Cl rich condition when it is annealed in a partially sealed system, as shown in Fig. 1a. As a result, the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx formation process will be slowed down, and the coverage and crystallinity of the perovskite layer can be improved. Henceforth, this procedure will be referred to as “slow growth”, while the annealing performed in an uncovered vessel shall be termed “fast growth”.
The SEM images of the fast-grown and slow-grown perovskite films are shown in Fig. 1b and c, respectively. It can be found that the two films reveal distinctly different morphologies. The fast-grown film exhibits perovskite crystal sizes of several microns with apparent rectangular voids, which could lead to the direct contact between PEDOT:PSS and PCBM and cause a strong leakage pathway, resulting in a lower open-circuit voltage (VOC). In contrast, the slow-grown perovskite film shows a uniform and almost pinhole-free surface morphology as well as well-developed crystallites. The higher intensity of XRD peaks, as shown in Fig. 1d, further confirms that the crystallinity of the slow-grown perovskite is much better than that of the fast-grown counterpart. Both the improved morphology and crystallinity are favorable for enhancing the cell performance.
We applied the perovskite film into the inverted planar structure of perovskite solar cells, i.e. ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/PCBM/Al, and it was found that the devices showed poor stability (it will be shown later). In order to improve the device stability, we introduced a ZnO protective layer between the PCBM electron transport layer and the Al electrode. It was assumed that the ZnO interlayer could play multiple roles in enhancing the ambient stability of devices. Firstly, a single PCBM layer is often insufficient to achieve full coverage and completely isolate the perovskite layer from the top metal electrode, and the Al electrode can react with halide lead perovskite, and then degrade the devices. Thus, the insertion of the ZnO layer can reduce the possible direct contact between the perovskite layer and the electrode. And secondly, the ZnO interlayer combined with the PCBM layer can further alleviate or slow down the perovskite layer exposed to the humidity environment. At last, the ZnO interlayer can prevent metal diffusion into the PCBM layer and thus improve the device stability.
The cross-sectional SEM image of the completed device is shown in Fig. 2a; each of the component layers can be easily distinguished. The thickness of PEODT:PSS, perovskite, PCBM and ZnO layer is 50, 380, 15 and 110 nm, respectively. Here, the thickness of the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx layer is sufficient to serve as the light-absorbing layer. The band alignment of each layer in the device is shown in Fig. 2b. It must be noted that the PEDOT:PSS and PCBM have been conventionally used as hole and electron transport layers for the inverted planar structure, respectively. Since the ZnO interlayer has a similar work function to PCBM, the electron can be easily transported from the PCBM to ZnO and also to the Al electrode.

Fig. 3a shows the J–V characteristics of the ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/PCBM/ZnO/Al devices based on the fast-grown and the slow-grown perovskite layer, respectively. These measurements were carried out in ambient air under AM 1.5G illumination with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The ZnO thickness adjusted by the speed of spin-coating has been optimized to be 110 nm (see Fig. S2). For comparison, the device without the ZnO interlayer is also included in Fig. 3a, where the fast-grown perovskite layer was adopted and the measurement was performed in the glove box. The photovoltaic parameters for the three devices are summarized in Table 1. The device without ZnO exhibited a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 21.4 mA cm−2, a VOC of 0.940 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.625, corresponding to a PCE of 12.6%. The device with ZnO and the fast-grown perovskite gave a PCE of 14.5% with a JSC of 21.0 mA cm−2, a VOC of 0.928 V, and an FF of 0.742. The significant improvement in FF could be attributed to the better electrical contact between ZnO and Al compared with the PCBM/Al. The device with ZnO and the slow-grown perovskite showed the highest JSC of 22.0 mA cm−2 and VOC of 1.027 V, while the FF is similar to that of the fast-grown device, and finally the highest PCE of 16.8% was obtained. As demonstrated above, the quality of the perovskite film is improved because of the slow growth process, and thus the carrier recombination will be reduced, leading to the increased VOC. In addition to the VOC, the JSC was also increased, which could be due to the improved morphology and crystallinity of the perovskite film.
Type of device

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
Fast growth/without ZnO
0.940
21.4
0.625
12.6
Fast growth/with ZnO
0.928
21.0
0.742
14.5
Slow growth/with ZnO
1.027
22.0
0.742
16.8
The EQE spectra of these two devices are shown in Fig. 3b. The integrated JSC based on the EQE spectra is 21.0 and 19.6 mA cm−2, respectively, which are close to the JSC of 22.0 and 21.0 mA cm−2 measured from the J–V characteristics, further confirming the improved JSC. The small discrepancy between the two measurements is ascribed to the spectral mismatch between the EQE source and the solar simulator, as well as the different incidence angles of illumination, which will underestimate the current from the EQE spectra. Histograms of the solar cell efficiencies obtained from 140 samples of the fast-grown and slow-grown solar cells are shown in Fig. 3c. The resulting device performance followed a Gaussian distribution and yielded an average PCE of 11.97% and 14.15% for the fast-grown and the slow-grown solar cells, respectively. The relative standard deviation of PCE for the slow-grown cells (0.81) is significantly lower than the fast-grown devices (1.15), indicating that the reproducibility is much better for the slow-grown devices.
To investigate the charge recombination mechanism, the J–V characteristics of a typical device were measured under different light intensities, as shown in Fig. 3d. The dependence of the corresponding photovoltaic parameters such as JSC, VOC, FF, and PCE on the light intensity is shown in Fig. S3. The linear relationship between JSC and light intensity indicates that there is no significant space-charge-limited photocurrent in the devices. The slope of the fitting curve between δVOC and ln(I) is 0.049, close to 0.052 (2KbT/q), which suggests that the free carrier recombination is the main recombination mechanism. Although there was a little decrease of FF with the increase of light intensity, the PCE was almost the same benefiting from the increase of VOC.
Finally, the long-term stabilities of devices prepared without any encapsulation and stored in ambient air at room temperature were tested. The devices without the ZnO interlayer exhibited poor stabilities, as demonstrated by the J–V curves in Fig. 4a, and its PCE rapidly declined from 10.2% to 0.8% within 24 hours. In contrast, the device stability was greatly improved by inserting the ZnO interlayer, as shown in Fig. 4b. In the first 5 days, a significantly improved FF, and thus the increased efficiency was observed for the device with the ZnO interlayer, and this behavior is in agreement with the previous reports. The gradual self-annealing of perovskite was supposed to be a possible reason, but the exact mechanism is unclear at present. After two months of aging, the device PCE decreased from 14.1% to 13.2%, only about 6% degradation compared with its highest value.
To verify the device stability, the performances of more than 30 devices with ZnO interlayers were monitored for two months, and the statistical data are shown in Fig. 5. In the first 5 days, the FF increases gradually upon prolonging the storage time (Fig. 5c), accompanied by the almost unchange of JSC and VOC (Fig. 5a and b). As a result, the average PCE improved from the initial value of 13.2% to 13.8%, and the best performance was obtained with a PCE of 15.2% when the device was stored in air for 5 days (Fig. 5d). After storing for 10 days, the FF continued to increase to a certain degree, and then remained almost unchanged during the next 10 days, and finally, it suffered a slight decrease. Contrary to FF, both JSC and VOC remained quite stable even after being stored for two months. Significantly, the average PCE decreased from 13.8% to 13.1% after two months of aging, only about 5% reduction relative to the highest PCE tested on the fifth day, mainly due to a reduced FF. These impressive results are indicative of the superior stability of the perovskite solar cells with the ZnO interlayer, which is in a stark contrast to the device without ZnO where the performance rapidly degraded in 24 hours. The device stability was further revealed by the XRD patterns measured during two months of storage, as shown in Fig. S4. Except for the peaks from CH3NH3PbI3−xClx, there is no diffraction peak of PbI2 in the XRD patterns, which implies that no decomposition of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx occurs and the perovskite material is rather stable even storing in ambient air for two months.
The above results suggest that the stability of the device without ZnO is very poor, and the ZnO interlayer is critical in enhancing the stability of perovskite solar cells. As is well known, CH3NH3PbX3 degrades in the presence of moisture and sunlight due to the loss of CH3NH3X, which usually leads to the poor stability of perovskite solar cells. By inserting a ZnO interlayer, the penetration of moisture into the perovskite layer can be avoided and thus the degradation is suppressed. On the other hand, it was reported that Al can react with PCBM to form a charge blocking layer between the Al cathode and the PCBM layer, resulting in a rapid degradation of cell performance. Therefore, besides separating CH3NH3PbI3−xClx from moisture, the ZnO interlayer also functions as a protective layer by stopping or minimizing the diffusion of thermally evaporated Al into the PCBM layer. Ultimately, the average PCE suffered only a reduction of 5% after two months of storage in air.

In summary, we have successfully prepared highly efficient and stable planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells through a simple and low temperature solution process. A maximum PCE of 16.8% was achieved through the enhanced electrical contact benefiting from the ZnO interlayer, together with the improved quality of the perovskite film by the slow growth process. The cells are highly reproducible and exhibit excellent stability, and the average PCE suffers only a reduction of 5% after two months of storage in ambient air. The ZnO interlayer is critical in enhancing the stability of the perovskite solar cells. Moreover, the low temperature solution process and the planar device structure used in this work are well compatible with the large-area and flexible substrates. We believe that the present findings offer a promising approach toward the fabrication of perovskite solar cells for practical applications.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61376007 and 11274303), the National Basic Research Program of China (2012CB619306), and the Beijing Natural Science Foundation (2142032).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: XRD patterns of the volatile, additional J–V characteristics, dependence of photovoltaic parameters on the light intensity, and XRD patterns of devices after storage. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta01898f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015