 DOI: 10.1039/D2CP03463H
(Review Article)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2022, 24, 26948-26961


Tao
Zuo
,

Fangfang
Qi
,

ChiYung
Yam
* and 

Lingyi
Meng
*

CAS Key Laboratory of Design and Assembly of Functional Nanostructures, and Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Nanomaterials, Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Fuzhou, Fujian 350002, P. R. China. E-mail: lymeng@fjirsm.ac.cn

College of Chemistry and Materials Science, Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou, Fujian 350007, P. R. China

Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Shenzhen, 518000, China. E-mail: yamcy@uestc.edu.cn

Hong Kong Quantum AI Lab Limited, Hong Kong, China

Xiamen Key Laboratory of Rare Earth Photoelectric Functional Materials, Xiamen Institute of Rare Earth Materials, Haixi Institutes, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xiamen 361021, P. R. China

Received
28th July 2022
, Accepted 24th October 2022
First published on 25th October 2022
The certified power conversion efficiency of perovskite solar cells is gradually approaching that of crystalline silicon solar cells. Accordingly, considering the advantages of improved thermal stability and environmental friendliness of lead-free all-inorganic halide double perovskites (LFAIHDPs), they have attracted considerable attention in optoelectronic applications. Herein, we review the recent progress on LFAIHDPs via heterovalent substitution of the lead element, including their geometrical and electronic structures, synthetic processes, and applications in optoelectronic devices. Many experimental and theoretical efforts have been devoted to investigating the thermal stability, defects, and optoelectronic properties of lead-free all-inorganic halide double perovskite materials, which have been presented. Lastly, we discuss the application of machine learning strategies to predict novel perovskite structures with excellent thermal stability and optoelectronic performance.

Developing photovoltaic devices is one of the most effective ways to tackle the challenges associated with the energy demand and environmental issues globally. According to the Shockley–Queisser limit, a single-junction semiconducting material with a bandgap of around 1.1 eV (e.g., silicon) can approach a theoretical power conversion efficiency (PCE) of over 32%. Currently, the highest PCE of 26.1% has been reported for silicon. Therefore, Si-based devices occupy a dominant share of the current photovoltaic market. However, the intrinsic indirect bandgap of monocrystalline silicon affords a low light absorption coefficient, which limits the application of silicon solar cells in large-scale electricity production.

Since their first application in solar cells, the PCE of perovskite-type materials (with the chemical formula of ABX3) has surged, with their recent certified PCE of 25.7% close to that of conventional silicon solar cells. The advantages of perovskite materials such as simple manufacturing technology and low cost, together with their high PCE, make them promising candidates for next-generation solar cells. However, although perovskites exhibit excellent optoelectronic properties, their poor stability and toxicity are the main challenges that need to be overcome for their industrial application, which requires further study and optimization of these materials. Commonly proposed strategies to improve the stability of perovskites include the replacement of their A-site organic groups with inorganic metal cations (e.g., Cs, K, and Rb), reduction of perovskite dimensions and surface passivation. Cesium-based double perovskites have been commonly reported in recent studies, with a remarkable improvement in thermal stability and high carrier mobilities. Thus, experimental and theoretical investigations on Cs-based compounds are mainly discussed herein.
A straightforward way to develop non-toxic alternatives is to substitute Pb2+ with other metal cations. There have been studies on the replacement of Pb2+ with other IVA group metal cations, such as Ge2+ and Sn2+. However, the instability of these materials remains an issue due to the oxidization of their bivalent cations to tetravalent ones (e.g., Ge4+ and Sn4+) under ambient conditions. Alternatively, perovskites with the chemical formulas of Cs3M(III)2X9 and Cs2M(IV)X6 have been synthesized, where X represents a halogen element; M(III) and M(IV) are trivalent cations (for instance, Bi3+ and Sb3+) and tetravalent cations (for instance, Sn4+ and Ti4+), respectively. Although this yields long-term stability, an isolated network of metal halide octahedral units is generated in these compounds, which results in low charge mobility and indirect bandgap. A more sophisticated strategy to realize lead-free perovskites is to utilize a pair of heterovalent cations to replace two Pb2+ cations. Recently, lead-free all-inorganic halide double perovskites (LFAIHDPs) with the structure of Cs2M(I)M(III)X6 [M(I) = Ag+, Cu+, etc. and M(III) = In3+, Sb3+, etc.] have been synthesized. The three-dimensional cubic structure of these LFAIHDPs is similar to that of Pb-based compounds. Also, different monovalent cations have been tested to tune their optoelectronic properties. In addition, LFAIHDPs with the chemical formula of Cs4M(II)M(III)2X12 [M(II) = Ca2+, Cu2+, etc. and M(III) = Bi3+, Sb3+, etc.] have been proposed recently, with the (M(II)X6)4− octahedron and (M(III)X6)3− octahedron layers being stacked alternately.Fig. 1 shows the crystal structure of the common LFAIHDPs. It has been found that their crystal structure together with the corresponding electronic band alignment can be modulated by carefully tuning the ratio of M(II) and M(III) ions.
Herein, we review the recent advances on LFAIHDP materials, including their geometrical and electronic structures, synthesis processes, and applications in optoelectronic devices. Both experimental and theoretical efforts have been devoted to the investigation of the thermal stability, defects and optoelectronic properties of LFAIHDP materials. Specifically, we present the theoretical studies on the thermal stability and photoelectric properties of Cu(II)-based LFAIHDPs to demonstrate the design of LFAIHDP materials. In recent years, machine learning has emerged as a promising tool for the high-throughput design of materials. Herein, we review the use of diverse machine learning strategies to predict novel perovskite structures with excellent thermal stability and optoelectronic performances. These studies provide insights into the development of new LFAIHDP materials for optoelectronic applications.

Recently, various LFAIHDP materials have been synthetized and investigated. Among the existing perovskites, the Cs2AgBiBr6 cubic Fmm double perovskite was the first LFAIHDP to be synthesized with potential photovoltaic applications. Practically, perovskite materials can be designed by combining a wide range of cations and anions of different valences at the respective sites once the charge neutrality condition is satisfied. Nevertheless, formability and stability are the key issues in the current research and application of perovskites. To access the formability of perovskites, the Goldschmidt tolerance factor and octahedral factor are empirical indices to predict whether they can be preferentially formed, as follows:

(1)
μeff = RMeff/RX
(2)
where
teff and μeff are the Goldschmidt tolerance factor and octahedral factor, respectively. RA and RX represent the ionic radii, corresponding to A-site and X-site ions, respectively. RMeff is the average radius of the two metal ions. A teff value between 0.8 and 1.0 and μeff value larger than 0.4 usually result in s perovskite structures.Fig. 2 presents a summary of the formability of recently reported LFAIHDPs in a teff–μeff map, where the existing double perovskites generally satisfy these conditions. For quantitative prediction, first-principles calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) have been successfully applied to screen stable double perovskites.


Besides stability, the optoelectronic performance of LFAIHDPs is another key issue for their photovoltaic applications.Table 1 presents a summary of the energy bandgaps of several typical LFAIHDPs. It can be seen that these LFAIHDPs span a wide range of bandgaps, enabling various applications in optoelectronics, such as solar cells, photodetectors, light-emitting diodes (LEDs), photocatalysts and laser devices. Among them, solar cells are the most promising application of perovskites. Thus far, the reported PCEs of Pb-free PSCs are lower than that of their Pb-based counterparts, as shown in Table 2. Enormous efforts have been devoted to designing Pb-free PSCs with competitive performances and understanding the key photophysical processes of these materials.

Compound
Bandgaps (eV)
Double perovskite
Indirect
Direct
Cs2CuBiI6
0.78
1.05
Cs2AgBiBr6
1.93
Cs2AuBiBr6
0.99
Cs2NaBiCl6
2.91
Cs2KBiCl6
3.02
Cs2LiBiCl6
2.60
Cs2AgBiCl6
3.09
Cs2NaSbCl6
2.96
Cs2AgInCl6
2.96
Cs2InSbCl6
0.91
Cs2CuInCl6
0.96
Cs2NaInCl6
4.51
Cs2LiInCl6
2.66
Cs2AgSbCl6
2.54
Cs2AgSbBr6
1.93
Cs2AgTlCl6
1.96
Cs2AgTlBr6
0.95
Cs2NaBiI6
2.41
Cs2CuSbCl6
1.66
Cs4CuSb2Cl12
2.07
Cs4CuIn2Cl12
3.56
Cs4CdBi2Cl12
3.23
Perovskites
Device configuration

V
OC [V]

J
SC [mA cm−2]
FF
PCE [%]
Experimental results
Cs2AgBiBr6
ITO/compact-TiO2/Cs2AgBiBr6/spiro-MeOTAD/Au
1.06
1.55
0.74
1.22
FTO/dense TiO2/mp-TiO2/Cs2AgBiBr6/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
0.98
3.93
0.63
2.43
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/Cs2AgBiBr6/PTAA/Au
1.02
1.84
0.67
1.26
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/Cs2AgBiBr6/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
0.73
8.24
0.70
4.23
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/C-Chl/Cs2AgBiBr6/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
1.04
4.09
0.73
3.11
Cs2NaBiI6
FTO/c-TiO2/CNBI/m-TiO2/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
0.47
1.99
0.44
0.42
Theoretical results
Cs2AuBiCl6
TCO/IDL1/Cs2AuBiCl6/IDL2/Cu2O
0.86
31.69
0.81
22.18
Cs2AuAuI6
—
1.11
34.00
0.89
33.59
Cs2InSbCl6
—
—
—
—
31.00
Cs2AgGaBr6
—
—
—
—
32.45

Among the different metal ions, Bi-based perovskites have been widely studied as a replacement for Pb-based perovskites for photovoltaic applications. The common strategies to optimize their performance include use of additives, doping, surface passivation, and tuning the device configuration. Based on the strong coordination thiourea and sulfur donor additive strategy, Yang et al. achieved an increase in the PCE of solar cells based on Cs2AgBiBr6, which was as high as 3.07%. Parth et al. demonstrated that K+ doping led to obvious short-range structure disorder and multiphase formation, which are beneficial for an improvement in optical properties. Zhang et al. synthesized (Cs1−xRbx)2AgBiBr6 by doping Rb+ in Cs2AgBiBr6, which exhibited an unchanged crystal lattice, enhanced long-wave absorption and decreased density of defect states. Decorating vacancy-ordered halogenated double perovskites with dilute dopants (e.g., Ge, Sn and Pb) is beneficial to improve their optical transition characteristics. By doping Sn2+/Ge2+, the bandgaps of Cs2AgBiX6 (X = Cl and Br) decreased, making it suitable for optical absorption and photovoltaic applications. Li et al. successfully used fused-ring electron acceptor molecules to passivate defective Cs2AgBiBr6-based double perovskite solar cells and achieved a significant increase in the open-circuit voltage (VOC) from 1.079 V to 1.278 V and high PCE of 3.31%. Ning et al. fabricated a planar Cs2AgBiBr6 PSC with the device configuration of ITO/compact TiO2/Cs2AgBiBr6/spiro-MeOTAD/Au, in which the carrier diffusion length approached 110 nm. The reported PCE reached 1.22% with a short circuit current, JSC, of 1.55 mA cm−2, open circuit voltage, VOC, of 1.06 V and fill factor of 0.74. Gao et al. designed an inverted planar PSC, with the device configuration of ITO/Cu-NiO/Cs2AgBiBr6/C60/BCP/Ag to optimize the thin-film morphology and achieve a PCE of 2.23%. To further improve the optoelectronic properties and thermal stability of double perovskite solar cells, different hole transport layers (HTLs) and electron transport layers (ETLs) have been incorporated in Cs2AgBiBr6 solar cells. For instance, the PSC with the device structure of FTO/c-TiO2/mTiO2/Cs2AgBiBr6/HTL(PTAA)/Au showed a PCE of 1.26%, while the efficiency of the Cs2AgBiBr6 PSC with sensitized ETL achieved a maximum PCE of 4.23%.

Theoretically, Savory et al. predicted that the efficiency of solar cells composed of the Cs2AgBiX6 double perovskite can be as high as 7.92%; however, there are still several limitations that need to be overcome before Cs2AgBiX6 materials can be applied as solar absorbers and potential replacements of Pb-based perovskite materials. As shown in Table 2, theoretical efficiencies of over 30% for other double perovskites (such as Cs2AuAuI6, Cs2InSbCl6, and Cs2AgGaBr6) have been revealed, and therefore there is still great room to improve the efficiency of LFAIHDPs.

Alternatively, Cs2AgBiBr6 LFAIHDPs as photodetectors demonstrate high responsivity and detectivity, which are comparable to that of detectors based on Pb-based perovskites. For instance, a thin-film photodetector based on Cs2AgBiBr6 was fabricated using spin-coating technology, which exhibited a responsivity, detectivity and external quantum efficiency approach of 7.01 A W−1, 5.66 × 1011 Jones and 2146%, respectively. Shuang et al. introduced an ionic liquid for the fabrication of Cs2AgBiBr6 perovskites, achieving photodetectors with high performance, flexibility and stability at low temperature. In addition, Cs2LiYCl6 and Tl2NaYCl6 heterovalent perovskite X-ray detectors were fabricated, which showed high performance and stability for medical imaging and product inspection. By introducing phenylethylamine bromide (PEABr) to regulate the phase transitions of the Cs2AgBiBr6 crystal, the performance of the corresponding X-ray detector can be enhanced with a faster current response, higher photoconductive gain and sensitivity. To suppress ionic migration, Yang et al. utilized bismuth oxybromide to passivate the defect layers of Cs2AgBiBr6 perovskites and improve the detection and imaging performance.


LFAIHDPs have also been explored as active materials in light-emitting diodes. There are reports showing the tunability of the emission wavelengths by doping metal cations in these materials. For instance, doping Mn2+ in Cs2AgInCl6 and Cs2LiBiCl6 resulted in materials with red and orange light emission, respectively. Doping Sb3+ in Cs2NaInCl6 and Cs2KInCl6 resulted in the emission of blue light. The photoluminescence of Mn-doped colloidal lead-free double perovskite Cs2Ag1−xNaxInCl6 nanocrystals can be enhanced. Sukanya et al. concluded that Cu2+ doping led to a gradual quenching in fluorescence intensity. The doping of lanthanide ions (Ln3+) has been proven to be an effective strategy to tune the luminescence characteristics of lead-free halide double perovskites. Upon doping Cs2AgInCl6 with Na+ cations, Luo et al. found that the parity forbidden transition was allowed and the electronic dimensionality was reduced, leading to an enhanced emission through radiative recombination. Further doping of Bi3+ in Na-alloy Cs2AgInCl6 increased the photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) to 87.2% by suppressing the non-radiative recombination. Besides, enhanced stability can be achieved by Na alloying and Bi doping of Cs2AgInCl6 perovskites. Liao et al. improved the wide orange emission efficiency, stability and monodispersity of Cs2AgInCl6 nanocrystals (NCs) by doping Bi3+ and potassium bromide for surface passivation. Compared with the low photoluminescence quantum yield (0.04%) of the pristine Cs2AgInCl6 NCs, the PLQY of the doped NCs increased to 5.82%.

In addition, Na-based heterovalent perovskites have also been posed as potential light-emitting materials. It has been found that the hot carrier relaxation time in Cs2NaBiBr6 is comparable to that of Pb-based perovskites. Several groups showed that ion doping is an effective way to enhance the PLQY of Na-based perovskites. Wang et al. reported that Cs2NaBiCl6 can emit red light with a PLQY of 16% by doping Ag+ and In3+ ions. Similarly, the morphology reconstruction of the Cs2NaBiCl6 perovskite induced by Mn2+ doping is beneficial to enhance its PLQY. Zeng et al. reported an enhanced PLQY of 75.89% by doping Sb3+ in Cs2NaInCl6, while the density of the state population could be modulated by the addition of Sb3+. Further, the application of Cs2NaAlF6 and Cs2NaGaF6 doped with Cr3+ in laser devices were reported more than two decades ago.

Besides optoelectronic devices, LFAIHDPs have been applied as photocatalysts, where different composite materials based on LFAIHDPs have been synthesized to improve the photocatalytic activities for the generation of hydrogen. For instance, the hydrogen generation rate of the NiCoP/Cs2AgBiBr6 composite was reported to be as high as 373.16 μmol g−1 h−1, which outperformed that of bulk Cs2AgBiBr6. Reduced graphene oxide is another potential candidate for combination with Cs2AgBiBr6 as a photocatalyst for the generation of hydrogen with a reaction rate of up to 48.9 μmol g−1 h−1. Besides hydrogen generation, Ag-based double perovskites have also been applied for the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 and NO removal. Using Cs2AgInCl6 perovskite quantum dots as a catalyst, Chen et al. reported the highest obtained yield of CO and CH4 of 26.4 μmol g−1 and 28.9 μmol g−1, respectively, in the photocatalytic reduction of CO2. Wu et al. realized photocatalytic NO oxidation with a removal rate of 97% via the rational design of Cs2AgBiBr6 perovskite nanocrystals.


In recent years, spintronics based on LFAIHDPs has shown great potential in the development of memory devices. The calculated total magnetic moments of Cs2KCoCl6 and Cs2KNiCl6 were 4μB and 1μB, respectively, while these double perovskites exhibited 100% spin polarization at the Fermi level. Similarly, the Cs2NaMCl6 (M = Ti and V) double perovskites could achieve 100% spin polarization and a high figure of merit, indicating that the corresponding perovskites can be applied in spintronic and thermoelectric technologies. Based on first principles calculations, Han et al. proposed that Cs4MnSb2Cl12, Cs4CuSb2Cl12 and Cs4ScSb2Br12 have potential to be spintronics materials, expanding the applications of these layered bimaterials from photoelectricity to spintronics. Shabir et al. systematically studied the magnetoelectronic structures of new LFAIHDPs, i.e., Cs2NaMCl6 (M = Mn, Co and Ni), by spin polarization calculations, and determined that the total magnetic moments of the Mn-, Co- and Ni-based double perovskite are 4μB, 4μB and 1μB, respectively.


LFAIHDPs can also be used in thermoelectric devices. Saveer et al. demonstrated that the flexibility of Cs2GeNiX6 (X = Cl and Br) inhibits the thermal conductivity of the lattice, thus promoting the unique thermoelectric response. Harbi et al. studied the thermoelectric properties of new halide perovskites, i.e., CsRbTiX6 (X = Cl, Br and I), and found that the figure of merit of CsRbTiBr6, CsRbTiI6 and CsRbTiCl6 is 0.67, 0.73 and 0.95, respectively. Hind et al. performed thermoelectric correlation investigations on the double perovskite Cs2KTlX6 (X = Cl, Br, and I), and these compounds exhibited a high figure of merit in a low temperature range and at 300 K. Muhammad et al. studied new LFAIHDPs, i.e., A2KGaI6 (A = Cs and Rb) with a high thermal efficiency due to their superior conductivity. Khatir et al. calculated the thermoelectric properties of Cs2AgFeCl6 in the range of 100–900 K using the Boltzmann transport equation. Its thermoelectric response was evaluated, and the results showed that Cs2AgFeCl6 is a promising candidate material for high-temperature and low-temperature thermoelectric applications.


The usual preparation forms of LFAIHDPs are nanocrystals (NCs), single crystals, thin films, etc. They can be prepared by balancing different thermodynamic processes, such as crystal growth, homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleation. For instance, the minimum critical concentration should be rapidly increased in the nucleation-dominated process for the synthesis of nanocrystals. In contrast, the concentration should be maintained between solubility and minimum critical concentration through a growth-dominated process to synthesize single crystals. Thin films should be prepared by balancing the nucleation and growth processes to control their compactness and grain size.

The preparation methods of LFAIHDP nanocrystals include hot injection method, recrystallization, and top-down ultrasonic stripping technology. In recent years, the commonly used method for the synthesis of nanocrystals is the hot injection method, with the requirements of high temperature, inert atmosphere, and nonpolar solvent. Various LFAIHDP NCs, for instance, Cs2AgBiBr6 2D nanosheets/nanoplatelets (see Fig. 3, scheme 1), Cs4CuSb2Cl12 NCs, Cs2CuSbCl6 NCs, layered Cs4CuIn2Cl12 NCs, Cs2NaBiBr6 NCs, and Cs2NaErCl6 NCs, have been synthesized successfully through the hot injection method. However, one challenge associated with the hot injection method is that it is unsuitable for large-scale production. In addition, Liao et al. prepared colloidal potassium bromide-passivated Bi3+-doped Cs2AgInCl6 NCs based on the room temperature anti-solvent recrystallization technique. Wang et al. synthesized Cs4CuSb2Cl12 NCs through top-down ultrasonic stripping technology, where the interlayer van der Waals force and in-plane chemical bond play key roles.
LFAIHDP single crystals can be prepared through hydrothermal synthesis, cooling HX-based precursor solution method, controlled cooling crystallization method, and high-temperature molten salt method. The temperature, compound concentration, oxygen, and humidity conditions should be carefully controlled during the synthesis of LFAIHDP single crystals. Therefore, their preparation processes are usually time-consuming. By manipulating the initial chemical environment in the hydrothermal synthesis of Cs2AgBiBr6 (see Fig. 3, scheme 2), Chang et al. successfully avoided the formation of Ag vacancies and the subsequent formation of secondary phase Cs3Bi2Br9. Likewise, Cs2AgBiBr6 and Cs2AgBiCl6 single crystals were prepared by adopting the cooling crystallization method. The cooling HX-based precursor solution method and high-temperature molten salt method have been successfully applied for the synthesis of Cs2AgFeCl6 and Cs2NaVCl6 single crystals, respectively.
The spin-coating method (see Fig. 3, scheme 3), solution deposition, gas-phase anion exchange strategy,etc. are popular methods used to prepare LFAIHDP thin films. In the case of the solution deposition method, the temperature, additives and inert environment are key factors, whereas the precursor solution and rotating speed are key in the one-step solution spin-coating method. Abdelsamie et al. systematically studied the solution deposition, synthesis, and extraction of Cs2AgBiBr6 thin films. Jiang et al. successfully synthesized large-scale wide-bandgap Cs2AgBiCl6 thin films via a gas-phase anion exchange strategy. Gao et al. employed the spin-coating method with and without an anti-solvent dropping protocol for the preparation of Cs2AgBiBr6 thin films.

As shown in the previous section, we reviewed the thermal stability and optoelectronic properties of the commonly available LFAIHDPs. From a theoretical perspective, first-principles methods can be applied to predict the electrical structures, thermal stabilities, and optoelectronic properties of different LFAIHDPs, for instance, Cs2AgBiBr6, Cs2AgInBr6, Rb2CuInCl6, Cs2Au(I)Au(III)X6 (X = Cl, Br, and I), Cs2AgInCl6, Cs2TlBiBr6, and Fr2InBiBr6, which enable the screening of novel materials with outstanding optoelectronic performances.

Here, we summarize the recent theoretical studies on Cu-based double perovskites, Cs2CuSbCl6 and Cs4CuSb2Cl12 to demonstrate the general strategies for modeling LFAIHDPs. The crystal structures of Cs2CuSbCl6 and Cs4CuSb2Cl12 (as shown in Fig. 1) were optimized by using density functional theory (DFT) with the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange and correlation functional. The cut off energy was set at 520 eV, while 2 × 2 × 2 and 2 × 3 × 2 Monkhorst–Pack k-meshes were adopted for the geometrical optimization and electronic calculation of Cs2CuSbCl6 and Cs4CuSb2Cl12, respectively. For the structural relaxation, the maximum residual force on each atom is required to be smaller than 0.01 eV Å−1, and the convergence criterion of total energy is less than 10−6 eV. Our calculated lattice parameters are listed in Table 3, which are consistent with the recent reported experiment. Moreover, the obtained bandgaps agree with previous investigations, for instance, the bandgap of 2.09 eV for Cs4CuSb2Cl12 is close to the previously reported value (2.07 eV).
Cs2CuSbCl6
Cs4CuSb2Cl12

a (Å)
10.51 (10.75)
13.13 (13.03)

b (Å)
10.51 (10.75)
7.28 (7.33)

c (Å)
10.51 (10.75)
13.17 (13.01)
Bandgap (eV)
1.34
2.09
0.11
0.21
0.17
0.27

V
OC [V] (SQM)
1.08
1.78

J
SC [mA cm−2] (SQM)
35.02
12.66
FF (SQM)
0.89
0.93
PCE [%] (SQM)
33.66
20.88
To access the thermodynamic stabilities of Cs2CuSbCl6 and Cs4CuSb2Cl12, the thermodynamic equilibrium conditions were examined, which allowed us to determine the chemical potential window for the growth of the corresponding materials. The constraints to be satisfied to avoid formation of other chemicals are summarized in Table 4. Further, the chemical potential window for the thermal equilibrium growth of Cu-based perovskites is plotted in Fig. 4. As quaternary compounds, LFAIHDPs have more types of inherent point defects than ordinary perovskites. Therefore, the growth of high-quality Cs2CuSbCl6 and Cs4CuSb2Cl12 materials is expected to be more challenging. As shown in Fig. 4, the allowed regions are long and narrow, implying that the chemical conditions should be carefully controlled to obtain single-phase Cs2CuSbCl6 and Cs4CuSb2Cl12 and avoid impurity phases, similar to Pb- and Sn-based halide perovskites. The calculated stable chemical potential region of Cs2CuSbCl6 and Cs4CuSb2Cl12 verifies the feasibility of their synthesis in theory. Considering their successful synthesis, our theoretical conclusions on thermal stability are consistent with the experimental results.
Cs2CuSbCl6
Cs4CuSb2Cl12
2ΔμCs + ΔμCu + ΔμSb + 6ΔμCl = ΔH(Cs2CuSbCl6) = −12.52 eV
4ΔμCs + ΔμCu + 2ΔμSb + 12ΔμCl = ΔH(Cs4CuSb2Cl12) = −25.58 eV
ΔμCs + ΔμCl < ΔH(CsCl) = −3.94 eV
ΔμCu + ΔμCl < ΔH(CuCl) = −0.75 eV
ΔμCu + 2ΔμCl < ΔH(CuCl2) = −1.44 eV
ΔμSb + 3ΔμCl < ΔH(SbCl3) = −3.50 eV
3ΔμCs + 2ΔμSb + 9ΔμCl < ΔH(Cs3Sb2Cl9) = −20.10 eV
To understand their electronic properties, the band structures and density of states (DOS) of Cs2CuSbCl6 and Cs4CuSb2Cl12 perovskites are shown in Fig. 5. It can be found that Cs2CuSbCl6 possesses an indirect bandgap of 1.34 eV, while Cs4CuSb2Cl12 has a direct one with an energy gap of 2.09 eV. These bandgaps are suitable for photovoltaic applications according to the Shockley–Queisser limit model (SQM). According to the projected DOS, the valence band maximum is mainly contributed by the d-orbitals of the Cu atoms and p-orbitals of the Cl atoms, while the conduction band minimum is due to the contributions of the p-orbitals of the Sb and Cl atoms. Based on their band structures, the effective masses of Cs2CuSbCl6 and Cs4CuSb2Cl12 perovskites were calculated and listed in Table 3.
These key physical parameters derived by the first-principles methods can be employed in numerical simulations to predict the photovoltaic performance. For instance, we calculated the current–voltage curves of Cs2CuSbCl6 and Cs4CuSb2Cl12 based on the SQM, as shown in Fig. 6, and the corresponding key parameters are listed in Table 3. The SQM and its modified model (e.g., spectroscopic limited maximum efficiency) are commonly used to evaluate the photovoltaic performance in the literature. It can be found that the SQM efficiencies of Cs2CuSbCl6 and Cs4CuSb2Cl12 are 33.66% and 20.88%, respectively. The direct bandgap of Cs4CuSb2Cl12 is beneficial for the absorption of light, which implies that Cs4CuSb2Cl12 is a potential photovoltaic material.

As a new research paradigm, the machine learning (ML) method has attracted extensive attention due to its ability to derive information from databases. This allows the effective prediction of the properties of various materials, greatly accelerating the discovery and design of new materials with desired properties. To screen perovskite materials with required properties, ML algorithms can be applied to develop quantitative structure–property relationships to predict the properties of perovskite materials.

The typical workflow of the ML method for studying perovskite materials is shown in Fig. 7. This includes data preparation, feature engineering, model selection and application, and first-principles calculations or experimental verification. Firstly, a database is constructed, in which the features of the materials are categorized as dependent and independent variables. The commonly used databases for perovskite materials include CCDC, ICSD, and Materials Projects database. The accuracy of ML algorithms critically depends on both the quantity and quality of the data. To cleanup existing data for more reliable ML works on perovskites, Xu et al. enriched the existing data of perovskite formability and corrected the possible errors in previous data for ABX3-type perovskite materials. Secondly, feature selection is another key step that determines the accuracy of ML predictions. The features should be independent of each other and sensitive to the target properties. Optimizing material features is beneficial to improve the efficiency and accuracy of models. Accordingly, Li et al. defined novel structural factors as features to replace the tolerance factor and octahedral factor and enhanced the predictive performance of ML algorithms for perovskites. Further, Jao et al. proposed an ML model with features derived from the pseudopotential, which successfully described the bandgaps of double halide perovskites. Dai et al. applied feature engineering to construct new features and evaluate the performance of double perovskites. For the application of ML algorithms in the design of double perovskites, Li et al. employed the random forest classification model to predict the formability of double perovskites with an accuracy of 91.83%. Further, the ML model was employed to screen 1131 double perovskites with high probability of formation from 417835 candidate compounds.
By developing accurate and efficient ML models, different double perovskites with high thermal stability, suitable direct bandgaps, low effective masses, and good optoelectronic properties have been screened from a large number of unexplored compounds. For instance, Gao et al. proposed a framework by integrating the ML method and first-principles DFT calculations. Among 5796 double perovskites, two LFAIHDPs, i.e., Na2MgMnI6 and K2NaInI6, were found, to exhibit high thermal stability and excellent optoelectronic properties. These works demonstrate the successful applications of ML as an effective approach for accelerating the discovery of new perovskite materials.

To eliminate the toxicity and poor stability of lead perovskites, considerable efforts have been devoted to investigating and designing LFAIHDPs as alternatives. To date, two types of LFAIHDPs with the chemical formula of Cs2M(I)M(III)X6 and Cs4M(II)M(III)2X12 have been proposed for the replacement of lead perovskites. The former has similar three-dimensional cubic structures to Pb-based compounds, while different octahedron layers are stacked alternately in the latter. Herein, the recent application of these LFAIHDPs in different areas, such as solar cells, photodetectors, LEDs, photocatalysts, spintronics and thermoelectrics were reviewed. Among the existing LFAIHDPs, Cs2AgBiBr6 have attracted much attention due to their wide applications in optoelectronic devices. We studied the electronic properties and photovoltaic performance of two representative LFAIHDPs (Cs2CuSbCl6 and Cs4CuSb2Cl12) using first-principles methods. The optimized geometries are in good agreement with the existing experimental data. The stable chemical potential range for these two materials were determined, which implies that the chemical conditions can be carefully controlled to obtain both compounds. Based on first-principles calculations, the current–voltage curves were simulated using the SQM method (as shown in Fig. 6). Finally, we summarized the applications of machine learning (ML) in the design of halogen-based double perovskite materials. By generating the relationship between descriptors and physical properties, potential LFAIHDPs with desired properties can be screened using the ML algorithms.

Compared to Pb-based perovskites, the reported performance of LFAIHDPs still has room for improvement as potential photoelectric devices, and thus further experimental and theoretical investigations are desirable. The bandgaps of some reported LFAIHDPs are relatively large (e.g., >2 eV) or intrinsically indirect, and not beneficial for the absorption of light. Therefore, several design principles for novel LFAIHDPs as excellent photovoltaic materials include good thermal stability, low toxicity and cost, high charge mobilities and optical absorption coefficients, ideal bandgap for achieving a high PCE according to the Shockley–Queisser limit, and low charge recombination rates.
Experimentally, to further improve the performance of LFAIHDPs, the use of additives, doping, surface passivation, device structure inversion, and employing perovskite materials have been found to be effective strategies to boost the performance of LFAIHDPs. For instance, doping provides a route to tailor the stabilities and photoelectric properties of perovskite materials. The specific effects of doping strategies depend on the doping site of the perovskite, dopant type, doping amount, etc. Different existing forms (e.g., nanocrystals, single crystals, and thin films) and morphologies of LFAIHDPs can be prepared and optimized to improve their optoelectronic performance by appropriate synthesis methods. In addition, the optimization of the device configuration (e.g., inverted and conventional) have been extensively investigated. Light management techniques (e.g., plasmonic enhancements and tandem architectures) have been applied to effectively enhance the photon absorption and photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells.
Theoretically, the charge–electromagnetic field interaction plays an essential role in perovskite optoelectronic devices, which usually spans a range of space and time scales in complicated device-scale structures. The multiscale theoretical strategies based on the integration of first-principles methods, phenomenological models (e.g., the drift-diffusion model) and ML algorithms are expected to effectively accelerate the development and design of novel LFAIHDPs with superior optoelectronic performances. Based on the simulations of coupled optical–electrical processes in perovskite optoelectronic devices, we can explore the structure–performance relationships, predict the current–voltage curves, and quantify the mechanisms of new light management technologies, such as tandem and parallel device architectures and plasmonic effects. Furthermore, ML methods can be coupled with first-principles methods to calculate the key physical parameters efficiently and accurately. In addition, we can design and screen new perovskite optoelectronic devices based on the combination of multiscale methods and machine learning models.

T. Zuo, F. Qi, C. Yam, and L. Meng: investigation, conceptualization, methodology, computation, writing – original draft. C. Yam and L. Meng: funding acquisition, supervision, writing – review & editing.


There are no conflicts to declare.


We gratefully acknowledge the support from the Guangdong Shenzhen Joint Key Fund (Grant no. 2019B1515120045 (C. Y.)), the National Key R&D Program of China (No. 2021YFB3500400 (L. M.)), the Future-prospective and Stride-across Programs of Haixi Institutes, Chinese Academy of Sciences (No. CXZX-2022-GH02 (L. M.)), the National Science Foundation of China (21773246 (L. M.), 22073007 (C. Y.)), the Youth Innovation Foundation of Xiamen City (Grant no. 3502Z20206083 (L. M.)), the Opening Project of PCOSS, Xiamen University (Grant no. 202014 (L. M.)), the Shenzhen Basic Research Fund (Grant no. JCYJ20190813164805689 (C. Y.)), the Sino-German Mobility Program (M-0215 (C. Y.)) and Hong Kong Quantum AI Lab.


† These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2022