 DOI: 10.1039/C7PY01060E
(Paper)
Polym. Chem., 2017, 8, 5688-5697


Mingzhi
Zhao
,

Zi
Qiao
,

Xiaofeng
Chen
,

Chenglin
Jiang
,

Xiaoyu
Li
*,

Yongfang
Li
 and 

Haiqiao
Wang
*

State Key Laboratory of Organic-Inorganic Composite, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, China. E-mail: wanghaiqiao@mail.buct.edu.cn

Key Laboratory of Carbon Fiber and Functional Polymers, Ministry of Education, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, China. E-mail: lixy@mail.buct.edu.cn

Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China

Received
24th June 2017
, Accepted 11th August 2017
First published on 11th August 2017
Two new donor–acceptor copolymers, namely PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH and PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8, based on difluorinated quinoxaline (Qx) acceptor units and alkylthiothienyl benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene (BDT) donor units with different alkylthio side chains were designed and synthesized. The two copolymers exhibit a lower-lying HOMO energy level and closer interchain packing than their analogues with alkyl side chains attributed to the more polarizable S atom inducing stronger intermolecular interactions. Of these two polymers, PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 with linear alkylthio side chains shows closer molecular stacking with PC71BM than PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH with branched alkylthio side chains. As a result, the polymer solar cell based on the blend of PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 and PC71BM exhibited a higher PCE of 8.51% than that based on PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH and PC71BM, which was only 7.02%. More importantly, both copolymers show higher photovoltaic performances in as-cast devices than in those treated by additive or thermal annealing because an appropriate bulk morphology was formed during the process of spin-casting due to the strong interchain interactions of the polymers, which eliminates the need for solvent additives or thermal annealing.

Polymer solar cells (PSCs) have attracted increasing attention due to their potential advantages of low cost, light weight, capability to be fabricated into flexible devices and easily realized roll-to-roll manufacturing. Nowadays, owing to developments in molecule designing, device fabricating and principle studying, the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of PSCs are being well improved. The single-junction bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) PSCs have achieved PCEs over 10%. In many reported BHJ PSCs, post solvent and thermal annealing are important methods for improving the organic solar cell (OSC) performance. But the residual solvent additives in the BHJ films will act as hole traps. And additives, such as 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO), will significantly reduce the device stability. Therefore, after using additives the devices should be treated by a secondary process to remove the additives. However, considering manufacturing challenges for future commercialization of solar cells, it is necessary to remove extra processes such as adding solvent additives and thermal annealing facilitating the processing and reducing the cost of production. Thus, designing and synthesizing novel polymer materials that exhibit high solar cell performance using simpler processing methods are highly desired.

In designing molecules, a widely used strategy is to construct electron donor–acceptor (D–A) types of alternating copolymers with narrow bandgaps. Through the combination of different electron donor (D) units and acceptor (A) units, the energy levels, absorption spectra and many other characteristics of the copolymers can be easily tuned. In addition, introduction of different side chains into the copolymers can further adjust precisely the physical characteristics of copolymers such as solubility, light absorption, molecular packing, energy level, charge transport, etc. To date, flexible alkyl groups have been widely used as side chains in tuning the basic properties of the copolymers. The polymers with branched alkyl side chains generally exhibit higher solubility while the polymer analogues with linear alkyl side chains show closer inter-molecular packing and higher charge mobilities. Also, recent studies demonstrated that alkylthio side chains offer prominent advantages over their alkyl analogues. This is due to the sulfur atom with higher polarizability than the carbon atom and formation of a pπ(C)–dπ(S) orbital overlap where a divalent sulfur atom accepts a π-electron from the aromatic group into its empty 3d-orbitals. In that case, conjugated molecules substituted by alkylthio groups could exhibit unique optoelectronic properties. For example, Huo et al. replaced the alkyl side chains of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) with alkylthio side chains, and the resulting poly[(3-hexylthio)thiophene] (P3HST) exhibited a red-shifted max. absorption peak and a slightly lower highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy level, therefore resulting in a higher open-circuit voltage (Voc). Li et al. and Price et al. found that the alkylthio side chain of the benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene (BDT) unit enhanced the Voc and PCE of the relative device compared to its alkyl analogue, although the HOMO level was almost unchanged. Also, in the work of Chen et al., the HOMO and max. absorption peak of oligomers showed little change and Voc was not improved by introducing the alkylthio side chains, but both short-circuit current density (Jsc) and PCE increased because of a better morphology. The most exciting results for alkylthio groups were achieved when they were linked to the conjugated side chains of copolymers. For example, Li et al. introduced branched alkylthio substituents into the conjugated side chains of the BDT unit, and a high PCE of 8.42% was achieved for the device based on the resulting copolymer PBDTT-S-TT which is associated with its low-lying HOMO and extended absorption spectra. Based on the same copolymer, Ye et al. synthesized a copolymer PBDT-TS1 by replacing branched alkylthio side chains with linear ones, and the PCE of the relative device was further improved to 9.48%. These reports indicated that using alkylthio groups to replace alkyl side chains of the polymers would improve the photovoltaic performance, though the conclusion about the effects of the alkylthio side chains on the HOMO level, Jsc and Voc obtained in the literature studies was a little different.
In addition, Yang et al. found that some low-Eg D–A types of polymers, such as PBDTT-DPP, PDPP3T, and PDTP-DFBT, usually do not require DIO to achieve moderate cell performance, because these polymers can undergo a good nanoscale bicontinuous phase separation with PC71BM spontaneously. It is generally believed that these low-Eg polymers possess a stronger interchain interaction, thus an appropriate bulk BHJ morphology can be formed during the spin-casting or perhaps as early as in the solution state, which allows these polymers to achieve high device performance without having to use post-solvent and thermal annealing steps. This indicates that adjusting the interchain interaction to increase the aggregation propensity of the polymers would be an effective strategy to get rid of the additives or thermal annealing steps. Following this design concept, Yang et al. recently synthesized a polymer PBDTSe-TT through selenium substitution on the PTB7-polymer. PBDTSe-TT exhibits enhanced π–π interactions between molecules brought by the selenium atom, therefore achieving a high performance of 8.8% PCE without any additives. At the same time, Yue et al. reported a 2,1,3-benzothiadiazole-5,6-dicarboxylic imide-based polymer, and Nielsen et al. reported thieno[3,2-b][1]benzothiophene isoindigo-based polymers which also demonstrated the same cell behaviors as PBDTSe-TT because of their strong intermolecular interactions.
Our group has been working toward developing new D–A conjugated photovoltaic polymers. Very recently, we reported a series of D–A copolymers based on the alkylthienyl BDT donor unit and difluorinated quinoxaline (Qx) acceptor unit, and found that PBDT-DFQX-TT (whose molecular structure is depicted in Scheme 1) demonstrated the best photovoltaic performance. More interestingly, these Qx-based polymers all exhibited better performances for additive- and annealing-free devices than those treated with solvent additives and thermal annealing. On the basis of these previous findings, here, we propose that if the alkyl side chains on PBDT-DFQX-TT can be replaced with alkylthio side chains to further enhance the interchain interaction, the corresponding polymers might demonstrate improved performance for additive- and annealing-free devices. Therefore, with the intention to further improve the photovoltaic properties as well as to investigate the effects of alkylthio side chains on the properties of the copolymers, we designed and synthesized two new polymers PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH and PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 (shown in Scheme 1, compared with the formerly reported PBDT-DFQX-TT in ref. 28) by replacing alkyl side chains with branched or linear alkylthio side chains on the thienyl BDT units of PBDT-DFQX-TT. The results showed that the two copolymers exhibit a lower-lying HOMO energy level and closer interchain packing than PBDT-DFQX-TT attributed to the more polarizable S atom inducing stronger intermolecular interactions. The BHJ PSC based on PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH achieves a high performance of 8.51% PCE without solvent additives or thermal annealing, whereas the highest PCE of PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 device is 7.02%. As expected, both are higher than the devices treated with additives or annealing. These results demonstrate that introducing alkylthio substituents to enhance intermolecular interactions could be an effective strategy for developing new polymers with high performance for additive- and annealing-free devices.


Scheme 2 shows the synthetic routes to the copolymers. Monomers (4,8-bis(5-((2-ethylhexyl)thio)thiophen-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl)bis(trimethylstannane) (M1), (4,8-bis(5-(octylthio)thiophen-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl)bis(trimethylstannane) (M2), and 5,8-bis(5-bromothiophen-2-yl)-2,3-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)-6,7-difluoroquinoxaline (M3) were synthesized according to previously reported procedures. All the compounds including 1–8 and M1–3 were analyzed by 1H-NMR and 13C-NMR. PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH and PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 were prepared by the Stille coupling reaction with Pd2(dba)3 and P(o-tol)3 as the catalyst and refluxed continuously under argon protection. The crude polymers were purified by continuous extractions with methanol, hexanes, chloroform and chlorobenzene. The polymers PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH and PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 were recovered from the chlorobenzene fraction. The polymerization conditions, including the types and dosages of the catalysts, reaction temperature, reaction times, etc., were controlled carefully to ensure that the acquired polymers have similar molecular weights. The molecular weights of the copolymers were measured by GPC in the trichlorobenzene eluent at 150 °C using polystyrene standards. From the GPC results (see ESI Fig. S1), one can see that the number-average molecular weights (Mn) of PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH and PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 were 45.9 and 40.3 kDa, with a polydispersity (D) of 3.69 and 2.90, respectively. Obviously, differences of the two polymers in Mn and PDI are very small, which is beneficial for the comparative study on the effect of side chains. In addition, a high MW peak at a relatively short retention time can be observed from the GPC plots of the two polymers, which has been proved to be the residues of previous samples because the GPC testing involves continuous delivery of samples. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) (Fig. S2) showed that PBDT-DFQx-TTSEH and PBDT-DFQx-TTSC8 were thermally stable with onset decomposition temperatures corresponding to 5% weight loss at 348 and 381 °C respectively. Obviously, both the polymers were stable enough for application in PSCs.



Fig. 1(a) and (b) show the absorption spectra of PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH and PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 in chlorobenzene solution and as a thin film coated on quartz glass, and the relative optical data are summarized in Table 1, including the absorption peak wavelengths (λmax), absorption edge wavelengths (λonset), and the optical band gaps (Eoptg). For the convenience of comparison, the absorption spectra of PBDT-DFQX-TT in chlorobenzene solution and in the thin film are also given in Fig. 1(a) and (b). It should be noted that all of the polymers have three characteristic absorption bands in the range of 300–700 nm as a solution or a film. Amongst them, absorption in the wavelength range of 450–550 nm arises from the π–π* localized transition, and absorption in 500–700 nm is attributed to intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) between the donor and acceptor units. In comparison with PBDT-DFQX-TT, PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH and PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 showed slight absorbance extension in both the solution state and solid state as a result of the pπ(C)–dπ(S) orbital overlap where a divalent sulfur atom accepts a π electron from the aromatic group into its empty 3d-orbitals. For PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH and PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8, the λmax of both polymers in thin film absorption spectra appeared evidently red shifted compared with that in solution, indicating a stronger aggregation of the polymer main chain and a stronger π–π intermolecular interaction in the solid state. Well defined vibronic shoulder absorption peaks in the long wavelength range (600–700 nm) of both polymers implied the existence of ordered aggregation and strong π–π stacking. The peak at around 590 nm can be assigned as 0–1 vibronic transition and around 640 nm as 0–0. The dominant 0–0 vibronic peak is indicative of extended J-aggregate-like polymer chains that pack in ordered lamellae, whereas the 0–1 is of H-aggregate-like. The H-aggregate-like polymer has a side-by-side arrangement of chains while the J-aggregate-like polymer has a head-to-tail arrangement. PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH and PBDT-DFQX-TT have stronger 0–0 peaks indicating that the two polymers tend to form a J-aggregate arrangement whereas PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 has a stronger 0–1 peak and tends to form an H-aggregate arrangement. In general, polymers tend to form an H-aggregate-like arrangement which is beneficial for intermolecular charge mobility. The polymer possessing H-aggregate-like inter-chain packing would exhibit better charge mobilities, Jsc and PCEs for its devices.Fig. 1(c) and (d) are the absorption spectra of the polymer:PC71BM = 1:1.2 (w/w) blending film. The absorptions in the short wavelength range of the thin films are improved evidently by blending with PC71BM, indicating that PC71BM can complement the absorptions of the two polymers. Obviously, the red-shifted spectra of the polymers in the solid state and the complementary absorption spectra with PC71BM in the blend films show desirable behaviours as donor materials for application in PSCs.


λ
max (nm)
Film λonset (nm)

E
optg (eV)
HOMO (eV)
LUMO (eV)

E
eeg (eV)
Polymer
Solution
Film

a Previous work, ref. 28.

PBDT-DFQX-TT
359, 435, 586
361, 456, 642
717
1.73
−5.20
−3.50
1.70
PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH
365, 442, 622
370, 452, 642
715
1.73
−5.48
−3.46
2.02
PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8
365, 439, 576
367, 455, 594, 642
723
1.72
−5.37
−3.47
1.90

Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was performed to measure the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy levels of the conjugated polymers. The measured cyclic voltammograms and energy level diagrams are illustrated in Fig. S3 and S4, and the results are summarized in Table 1. The onset potentials for the oxidation (Eox) of PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH and PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 are 0.76 and 0.67 V vs. Ag/Ag+, respectively. The onset potentials for reduction (Ered) are −1.25 and −1.24 V vs. Ag/Ag+, respectively. The HOMO and LUMO energy levels of the copolymers were calculated from the onset oxidation potential and the onset reduction potential according to the following eqn (1) and (2):

EHOMO = −e(Eox + 4.71) (eV)
(1)
ELUMO = −e(Ered + 4.71) (eV).
(2)
The LUMO energy levels of PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH and PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 are −3.46 and −3.47 eV, respectively. Compared to PBDT-DFQX-TT, the LUMO energy levels of PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH and PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 are little up-shifted. The HOMO energy levels of PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH and PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 are −5.48 and −5.37 eV, respectively. Compared to PBDT-DFQX-TT, the HOMO energy levels decrease by 0.28 and 0.17 eV, respectively. The up-shifted LUMO and the decreased HOMO of PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH and PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 led to wider band gaps than PBDT-DFQX-TT. These indicated that the alkylthio chains significantly influence the electronic properties of the 2D-conjugated polymers. And the down-shifted HOMO energy levels are in accordance with the literature studies and these would be favorable for acquiring PSCs with high Voc.

To further study the fundamentals of molecular architecture, theoretical calculations using the density functional theory (DFT) methods were carried out to optimize the molecular geometry and to investigate the frontier orbital and molecular electronic structure at the B3LYP/6-31 G(d,p) level with the Gaussian09 program package. The molecular main chain length was n = 1. The alkyl chains were replaced with methyl groups to save the computation time. The simplified molecules were referred to as PBDT-DFQX-TTS (for PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH and PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 because of the similar backbone) and PBDT-DFQX-TT. The frontier molecular orbitals of PBDT-DFQX-TTS and PBDT-DFQX-TT, the corresponding LUMO and HOMO levels, and the dipole moment of the chain elements are shown in Fig. 2. As can be observed, the HOMOs are delocalized along the whole backbone, while the LUMOs are mostly concentrated on the Qx acceptor units. These images provide clear evidence of the formation of a well-defined D–A structure and the ICT behaviours of the polymers (i.e., the HOMO to LUMO transition is a donor to acceptor intramolecular charge transfer). The calculated HOMO energy level of PBDT-DFQX-TTS is lower than that of PBDT-DFQX-TT, which is consistent with the results obtained from the CV measurements. The ground-state dipole moment magnitude (μg) of PBDT-DFQX-TT and PBDT-DFQX-TTS was 5.95 and 6.41D. The higher μg of PBDT-DFQX-TTS indicates that introducing a sulfur atom to the flexible side chain can improve the molecular polarizability. In addition, we noted that the HOMO energy level of PBDT-DFQX-TTS simulated by the DFT calculation seems significantly higher (by ∼0.5 eV) than the experimental observation. The reason for such a deviation is that we adopted a monomer model (the number of repeat units is one) for simplifying the DFT calculation. But for the CV measurements, the experimental observation represented the real results of the whole polymer.


The device structures of the PSCs for characterizing the photovoltaic properties of the polymers were ITO/PEDOT:PSS/polymer:PC71BM/ZrAcac/Al. The polymer and PC71BM are dissolved in o-DCB together for spin-coating. The detailed device fabrication process is described in the Experimental section. The measurements of photovoltaic performances were carried out under an illumination of AM1.5G simulated solar light at 100 mW cm−2. The optimal performance data of the devices, including open-circuit voltage (Voc), short circuit current (Jsc), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (PCE) under the conditions of polymer:PC71BM = 1:1.2 (w/w) and different processing techniques are summarized in Table 2. Table S1 shows the device performance data of PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH under other conditions not listed in Table 2. Fig. S5 shows the representative current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the best devices. Considering the fact that there were some literature studies reporting that the commercially available zirconium acetylacetonate (ZrAcac) as a cathode interfacial layer (CIL) can efficiently enhance the PCEs of the PSCs attributed to the well matching energy level of ZrAcac and the Al electrode, and benefiting to efficient charge extraction, here ZrAcac was also used as a CIL to fabricate the device by spin-coating methanol solution on its active layer at room temperature and without thermal annealing or any other post-treatment. As a result, the PCEs of the devices for PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH and PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 were 7.02 and 8.51%, respectively. In particular, the Jsc of the PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 device was remarkably higher than PBDT-DFQX-TT and PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH, rendering the devices rather higher PCEs. Further treatment of adding 3% (v/v) 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) as an additive into the solution for device fabrication caused Jsc values of PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 obviously increased but that of PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH reduced. In particular, DIO treatment resulted in a dramatic decrease in Vocs and FFs of the two devices, therefore the PCEs were compromised by low Vocs and FFs. Relating to the AFM and GIXS results, the drop in the performance can be attributed to the fact that the DIO further promoted the PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 and PC71BM self-aggregation, therefore forming a larger improper phased domain and unfavorable blend film morphology. In addition, thermal annealing (TA) treatment on the devices also failed to improve their performance. The PCEs of the two devices were slightly decreased after thermal annealing (TA) treatment at 140 °C for 10 min. The device of PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH showed a great drop in FF but a slight increase in Jsc, while that of PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 demonstrated a little drop in both Voc and Jsc, which resulted in a decline in the PCEs of the two devices, indicating that thermal annealing changed the film morphologies to an undesirable status.

Polymer
Ratio
Treatment

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a Polymer/PC71BM weight ratio.
b Optimized data. Average data are in the parentheses and obtained from 10 devices.
c 
Ref. 28.
d Thermal annealing at 140 °C for 10 min.

PBDT-DFQX-TT
1:1.2
0.86
12.77
69.93
7.68
PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH
1:1.2
0.85
12.58
66.12
7.02 (6.71 ± 0.12)
1:1.2
3% DIO
0.83
11.63
59.38
5.74 (5.61 ± 0.17)
1:1.2
TA
0.84
13.59
61.34
7.01 (6.44 ± 0.27)
PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8
1:1.2
0.85
14.63
68.23
8.51 (8.37 ± 0.18)
1:1.2
3% DIO
0.81
15.02
63.23
7.71 (7.44 ± 0.26)
1:1.2
TA
0.84
14.12
69.32
8.18 (8.10 ± 0.09)
The external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves of the devices fabricated under the optimal conditions for different post-treatment techniques are shown in Fig. 3. All the devices showed a broad EQE response range covering the visible region, which is attributed to the intrinsic absorption of both the polymers and PC71BM. All the devices exhibited a response range from 300 to 700 nm and rather high photon-conversion efficiency in the wavelength range of 350–650 nm, with EQE values of 60–70%. With the help of the higher EQE values of PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 in the wavelength range of 480–620 nm, the Jsc of the PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 additive-free device is higher than that of PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH. The devices based on PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 with DIO as an additive all showed higher EQE values than the devices without DIO, in line with the improved Jsc of the devices with DIO treatment. All the Jsc values of the relative devices were in good agreement with the EQE spectra within an experimental error of 5%.
High performance solar cells depend on high hole mobilities. To investigate the charge transport properties of the polymer/PC71BM blends, a space charge limited current (SCLC) method was used to measure the hole mobilities of the polymers. The hole-only devices were measured with a device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/Au. The hole (μh) mobilities of the devices with different treatments are summarized in Table 3. The DIO treatment devices of PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 showed an increase in hole mobilities and accorded with the Jsc increase trend, while PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH showed a drop in μh. However, the decreased Voc and FF, which were caused by the morphology change after treatment, suppressed the PCE increase after treatment with DIO. As Table 3 shows, the hole mobilities of PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 were decreased after thermal annealing and the reduced mobilities led to lower Jsc and PCEs. In contrast, the hole mobilities of PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH were increased after thermal annealing, in line with the Jsc increase. The hole mobilities of PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH were in total lower than that of PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8, which may be one of the reasons that the devices of PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 show higher performance than that of PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH fabricated under the optimized conditions. However, the hole mobility of PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH and PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 is nearly about one order of magnitude lower than the previously reported parent polymer PBDT-DFQX-TT; our experiments in the later section showed that the photovoltaic performance of the former is better than the latter. These results indicated that when the hole mobility of the polymers has reached as high as 10−4 to 10−3, the hole mobility will no longer be the main factor affecting their photovoltaic performance.
Polymer
Treatment

μ
h (cm2 V−1 s−1)

a Thermal annealing at 140 °C for 10 min.

PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH
3.01 × 10−4
3% DIO
2.81 × 10−4
TA
3.34 × 10−4
PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8
7.08 × 10−4
3% DIO
8.48 × 10−4
TA
4.35 × 10−4
Charge recombination is also an important factor in determining the Jsc and FF of the PSCs. We used light-intensity dependent photocurrent measurements to study the charge recombination behaviour of polymers PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH and PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 in devices. In general, the relationship between the Jsc and illumination intensity (P) can be described as Jsc ∝ Pα, where the power-law exponent (α) should be approximated to 1 when charge recombination can be neglected. The measuring devices were fabricated with the structure ITO/PEDOT:PSS/polymer:PC71BM/ZrAcac/Al and without any other treatment. As we can see in Fig. 4, the α values for PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH and PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 are 0.958 and 1.000, respectively. High values of α suggested that bimolecular recombination was significantly suppressed. Higher α values of PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 can be one of the reasons that PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 exhibited higher Jsc and FF than PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH.
The photon energy loss (Eloss) in PSCs is generally shown as Eloss = Eg, blend − eVoc, where Eg, blend is the lowest optical band gap of the donor material and acceptor material in the blend film, and the empirical maximum value of Eloss is 0.6 eV. PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH under optimal conditions showed an Eloss = 0.88 eV while the Eloss of PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 was 0.87 eV. The devices of PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 having lower Eloss, higher EQE and lower charge recombination than PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH should be prior factors to PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 devices achieving higher photovoltaic performance.

To gain deep insight into the effect of morphologies of the polymer/PC71BM blend films on the device performance, atomic force microscopy (AFM) and grazing incidence X-ray scattering (GIXS) were used to investigate the microstructures of the polymer/PC71BM blend films. Fig. 5(a)–(f) are the height images of the blend films obtained from AFM. Among them, Fig. 5(a), (b) and (c) are of PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH/PC71BM blend films; Fig. 5(d), (e) and (f) are of PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8/PC71BM blend films. Fig. 5(a) and (d) are of casting films, Fig. 5(b) and (e) are of films treated with 3% DIO, Fig. 5(c) and (f) are of additive-free films after thermal annealing. Fig. S7 are films both treated with 3% DIO and thermal annealing. Under the same treatment, there were similar root-mean-square (Rms) values of PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH and PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8. The Rms values of two polymers were enhanced by treating with DIO which is attributed to the fact that DIO treatment can promote the phase separation and self-aggregation, making the polymers to form a bigger domain size. Generally, a smaller domain size can provide a larger area of the D/A interface and achieve more efficient exciton dissociation and charge separation. Owing to the strong inter-molecular chain attraction which can hinder the molecular movement, the Rms of the PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH blend film (Fig. 5c) and PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 blend film (Fig. 5f) didn't show a lot of change. The topography of the film in Fig. 5f) compared with the film in Fig. 5d didn't change a lot so that the PCEs of PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH and PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 additive-free devices after thermal annealing were slightly decreased correlatively. As shown in Fig. S7 there were many distinct particles appearing on the AFM topography of the films treated with both DIO and thermal annealing. The undesired morphology caused a serious decrease in the performance of the devices after thermal annealing.


Fig. 6 shows the GIXS profiles of the polymer films. All these polymer films were spin-cast from DCB (10 mg ml−1) to simulate the active layer in the device. Fig. 6(a) and (b) are the film scattering patterns which belong to the in-plane (IP) direction and out-of-plane (OOP) direction, respectively. The black lines belong to the neat polymer films, the red lines are obtained from the blend films without treatment, and blue lines are of the blend films treated with 3% DIO. Both polymers show (100) reflection at around 0.25 Å−1 in the IP and OOP directions, which belong to lamellar stacking. (100) reflection showed sharp peaks after treatment with DIO and thermal annealing, indicating the formation of more ordered lamellar stacking. And with regard to AFM topography polymers and PC71BM tend to self-aggregate. Both neat polymer films show strong π–π stacking peaks around 1.75 Å−1 only in the OOP direction, which indicate that both polymers prefer to show face-on orientation molecular stacking. The π–π stacking peaks of PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH and PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 were at 1.73 Å−1 and 1.84 Å−1, respectively. Correlatively, the π–π stacking distances were 3.63 and 3.41 Å, respectively, which were both closer than 3.79 Å of PBDT-DFQX-TT (ref. 28). Closer π–π stacking distances are attributed to the higher interchain interaction, which can improve the inter-molecular exciton transfer and it should be a reason for the higher photovoltaic performance. The π–π stacking peaks were dimmed by blending with PC71BM, which indicates that polymers intermixed well with PC71BM and partly decomposed the intermolecular ordered packing. After treatment with DIO the π–π stacking peaks become more identifiable, which indicates that DIO treatment promotes the polymers and PC71BM self-aggregation. And related to the AFM results, we consider that the polymers and PC71BM formed undesired large domain sizes, respectively, after treatment with DIO or thermal annealing, therefore leading to the decrease of the device performance.

In this work, two new copolymers PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH and PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 with branched or linear alkylthio side chains, respectively, were designed and synthesized. Replacing alkyl with alkylthio side chains is shown to down-shift the HOMO energy levels of the polymers and slightly red-shift the absorption peaks, and to enhance the interchain interaction, therefore affecting the BHJ morphology with PC71BM greatly. The polymer PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH with branched alkylthio side chains possesses a lower HOMO energy level while PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 with linear alkylthio side chains exhibits higher hole mobilities. Optimization of the PSC fabrication conditions provided a maximal PCE of 7.02% for PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH and 8.51% for PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 through a simplified processing procedure without any additives and thermal annealing. The high cell performance of the as-cast devices originates mainly from the fact that an appropriate bulk BHJ morphology has been formed during the spin-casting due to a strong interchain interaction. This is the first report on Qx-based polymers for additive- and annealing-free high-performance polymer solar cells. The results of this work provide a new approach for developing polymers with high cell performance without using extra post-treatment steps, which will enable the cost-effective fabrication of efficient polymer solar cells via high-throughput printing technologies.



Scheme 1 shows the synthetic routes to the copolymers. Monomers (4,8-bis(5-((2-ethylhexyl)thio)thiophen-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl)bis(trimethylstannane) (M1), (4,8-bis(5-(octylthio)thiophen-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl)bis(trimethylstannane) (M2), and 5,8-bis(5-bromothiophen-2-yl)-2,3-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)-6,7-difluoroquinoxaline (M3) were synthesized according to previously reported procedures. Tetrahydrofuran (THF) was dried over Na/benzophenone and freshly distilled prior to use. Other reagents and solvents were of commercial grade and used as received without further purification. All reactions were performed under a nitrogen atmosphere.


M1 (0.1 mmol, 96.87 mg) and M3 (0.1 mmol, 87.68 mg) were mixed in 6 mL of degassed chlorobenzene. After purging with nitrogen for 15 min, Pd2(dba)3 (0.005 mmol, 5 mg) and P(o-tol)3 (0.04 mmol, 12.5 mg) were added and the mixture was then purged with nitrogen for another 15 min. The reaction mixture was vigorously stirred at 130 °C for 32 h. The reaction products were then allowed to cool to room temperature, and the polymer was precipitated by slowly dropwise adding into methanol (200 mL), collected by filtration and washed with methanol. Then the solid was subjected to Soxhlet extraction with methanol, hexane and chloroform. The polymer was recovered as a solid from the chlorobenzene fraction by precipitation from methanol, filtered, and dried to afford copolymers as a dark blue solid. Mn = 45.9 kDa, PDI = 3.69 D; 1H NMR (600 MHz, CDCl3): d (ppm) 8.22–6.05 (br, 14H), 3.60–2.69 (br, 8H), 2.24–1.44 (br, 12H), 1.42–1.04 (br, 24H), 1.02–0.64 (br, 24H).


PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 was synthesized and purified following the same procedure for PBDT-DFQX-TTSEH, but monomer M2 (96.87 mg, 0.1 mmol) was used instead of M1. The solid was subjected to Soxhlet extraction with methanol, hexane, chloroform and chlorobenzene. The polymer was recovered as a solid from the chlorobenzene fraction by precipitation from methanol and PBDT-DFQX-TTSC8 was obtained as a dark purple solid. Mn = 40.3 kDa; PDI = 2.90 D; 1H NMR (600 MHz, CDCl3): d (ppm) 8.24–6.04 (br, 14H), 3.49–2.53 (br, 8H), 2.14–1.45 (br, 10H), 1.44–1.02 (br, 32H), 1.02–0.55 (br, 18H).



1H-NMR and 13C-NMR spectra were obtained using a Bruker AV600 spectrometer using CDCl3 as the solvent. The molecular weights of the polymers were measured by gel permeation chromatography (GPC) with PL-GPC220 polystyrenes as the standard and trichlorobenzene as an eluent at 150 °C. The UV-Vis absorption spectra of the polymers in chlorobenzene solution and polymer films spin-cast on quartz glass were obtained using a Shimadzu model UV-3150 spectrometer. Electrochemical cyclic voltammetry was performed using a Zahner IM6e electrochemical workstation and measured in a bath solution of Bu4NPF6 (0.1 mol L−1) in acetonitrile with a Pt disk coated with the polymer film, Pt plate, and Ag/Ag+ electrode as the working electrode, counter electrode, and reference electrode, respectively. All solutions were purged with nitrogen for 15 minutes before measuring each time. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was conducted using a Netzsch TG209C analyzer at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) characterization of the surface morphology of the active blend layers was performed in air with a Nano scope V AFM (Digital Instruments) system using tapping mode. AFM images were recorded directly on the tested devices, in the device area out of the Al electrode. Thin films were spin-cast or drop-cast on a silicon substrate for grazing incidence X-ray scattering (GIXS). For GIXS, the spin-cast neat polymer films and blend films were illuminated at a constant incidence angle of 0.2°. Scattering intensities are expressed as a function of the scattering vector q = 4π/λ·sinθ, where θ is the half scattering angle and λ = 1.57 Å is the wavelength of the incident radiation. The d-spacing of a peak is expressed by d = 2π/q.


The PSCs were fabricated with a structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/Ca/Al or ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/ZrAcac/Al. A thin layer of PEDOT:PSS [poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate)] was deposited through spin-coating on a pre-cleaned ITO-coated glass with a PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution (Baytron PVP AI 4083 from H. C. Starck) at 3000 rpm and dried at 150 °C for 15 min in air. Then the device was transferred to a nitrogen glove box, where the active blend layer of the polymer and the fullerene derivative were spin-coated onto the PEDOT:PSS layer. For the conjugated polymer: PC71BM PSCs, the active layer was formed by spin coating with an o-dichlorobenzene solution containing 8–10 mg ml−1 of the polymer. The ZrAcac cathode interlayer was simply prepared by spin-coating of a methanol solution (1 mg ml−1) on the photoactive layer at 3000 rpm for 30 s at room temperature; no thermal annealing or any other post-treatment was performed. Finally, the top electrode was deposited with a vacuum onto the active layer. The active area of the device was 4 mm2. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics were measured using a computer controlled Keithley 236 Source-Measure Unit. A xenon lamp (150 W) coupled with an AM 1.5 solar spectrum filter was used as the light source, and the optical power of the sample was 100 mW cm−2. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum was measured using a Stanford Research Systems model SR830 DSP lock-in amplifier coupled with a WDG3 monochromator and a 150 W xenon lamp. The hole and electron mobilities were calculated by using the MOTT–Gurney relationship (space-charge limited current, SCLC) to fit the current density–voltage (J–V) curves. The devices for the hole mobility measurement were fabricated using the architecture: ITO/PEDOT:PSS/polymer:PC71BM/Au. The SCLC can be approximated by using eqn (3):

(3)
where
J is the current density, εr is the dielectric constant of the active layer materials usually 2–4 for an organic semiconductor, herein we use a relative dielectric constant of 3, ε0 is the free-space permittivity (8.85 × 10−12 F m−1), μ0 is the charge mobility at zero field, L is the thickness of the blended film layer, V = Vappl − Vbi, where Vappl is the applied potential, and Vbi is the built-in potential, which results from the difference in the work function of the anode and the cathode (in hole-only devices the Vbi was 0.2 V).


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the Specialized Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education (20130010110006). The 2D-GIXRD data were obtained at 1W1A, Beijing Synchrotron Radiation Facility. The authors gratefully acknowledge the assistance of scientists of the Diffuse X-ray Scattering Station during the experiments. The authors gratefully acknowledge the Chemcloud computing of the Beijing University of Chemical Technology for the theoretical calculation of molecular orbitals.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7py01060e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017