 DOI: 10.1039/D3NR00602F
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2023, 15, 9691-9699


Yinyan
Xu
,

Pujun
Niu
,

Lun
Zhang
,

Ziying
Wen
,

Sheng
Cheng
,

Mei
Lyu
 and 

Jun
Zhu
*

Special Display and Imaging Technology Innovation Center of Anhui Province, Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Measuring Theory and Precision Instrument, Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Advance Functional Materials and Devices, Academy of Opto-Electric Technology, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei 230009, China. E-mail: jzhu@hfut.edu.cn

Instrumental Analysis Center, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei 230009, China

Received
9th February 2023
, Accepted 10th April 2023
First published on 10th April 2023
Methyl acetate (MeOAc) is the most used antisolvent in the preparation of perovskite quantum dot (QD) films. However, the hydrolysis of MeOAc results in acetic acid and methanol (MeOH), and the decomposition of the perovskite occurs more easily under acidic and polar conditions. Herein, we report a facile and universal anion modification strategy to inhibit MeOH absorption on a perovskite QD surface and improve the photovoltaic performance of perovskite QD solar cells, which is implemented by incorporating a series of guanidinium salts containing different anions (guanidinium bromide (GuaBr), guanidinium thiocyanate (GuaSCN), and guanidinium acetate (GuaAc)). All anions play a positive role in inhibiting the absorption of MeOH on the QD surface, facilitating charge transfer between perovskite QDs and passivating the defects. Moreover, the regulation of surface chemistry can be optimized by rational tailoring of different anion species. The GuaAc-based devices deliver a PCE of 7.04%, which is the highest value among inorganic CsPbBr3 QD solar cells. More importantly, the CsPbBr3 QD solar cells exhibit high transparency over the entire visible spectrum region, indicating their promising application in solar windows.

Perovskite quantum dot (QD) materials offer unique properties over those afforded by conventional thin films. Perovskite QD systems offer immense tunability in the material bandgap, the energetic position of the electronic states and surface chemistry. More importantly, for photovoltaics, perovskite QDs exhibit efficient multiple exciton generation, which leads to their theoretical efficiency having potential to break the Shockley–Queisser limit. Since lead halide all-inorganic CsPbBr3 QDs were reported for the first time in 2015, they have attracted great attention because of their excellent photophysical properties, such as a near-unity emission quantum yield and narrow-band emission, which lead to their widespread applications, particularly in light-emitting diodes. Apart from that, CsPbBr3 QDs have recently been investigated in depth and viewed as a promising candidate for high-voltage, wide-bandgap, and semitransparent solar cells due to their excellent phase stability and relatively large bandgaps (Eg of approximately 2.4 eV). Akkerman et al. first reported a facile room-temperature synthesis method to prepare CsPbBr3 nanocrystals for solar cell applications, and the corresponding device exhibited a power conversion efficiency (PCE) exceeding 5% and a high open-circuit voltage (VOC) over 1.50 V. However, in comparison with thin-film CsPbBr3 solar cells, the efficiency of CsPbBr3 QD solar cells is still lagging. Most of the CsPbBr3 QD devices suffer from a low short-circuit current (JSC).

In contrast to emitter application, photovoltaics requires strong coupling between QDs. Therefore, a large amount of antisolvents, such as methyl acetate (MeOAc), is utilized to construct perovskite QD films. Cho et al. investigated carboxylate esters with different alkyl chain lengths such as MeOAc, ethyl acetate (EtOAc), propyl acetate, and butyl acetate, for ligand exchange in CsPbBr3 QD films, and the corresponding device exhibited a PCE of 4.23% with a JSC of 4.68 mA cm−2. For further improvement in the device performance of CsPbBr3 QD solar cells, a solution of benzoic acid in MeOAc was developed to treat CsPbBr3 QD films, which can effectively exchange the long-chain ligands in the films, enabling increased electronic coupling, and lead to a high PCE of 5.46% with a JSC of 4.84 mA cm−2. However, during the preparation of perovskite QD solid films by layer-by-layer deposition, a short-chain carboxylate ester, especially MeOAc, is inevitably used to replace long-chain oleic acid (OA) and oleylamine (OAm) ligands. Methanol (MeOH) and acetic acid are produced as intermediate substances resulting from the hydrolysis of MeOAc during ligand exchange. The absorption of MeOH yields sub-bandgap trap states in QDs and results in low charge transport in lead halide perovskites, leading to poor photovoltaic performance. Therefore, an effective and facile strategy should be developed to suppress MeOH absorption on the surface of perovskite QDs.
Herein, we develop an effective and facile anion modification strategy to inhibit MeOH absorption on the surface of CsPbBr3 QDs, which is implemented through incorporating a variety of guanidinium (Gua) salts containing different anions (guanidinium bromide (GuaBr), guanidinium thiocyanate (GuaSCN), and guanidinium acetate (GuaAc)) in MeOAc to treat each layer of CsPbBr3 QD films. The effects of anion species on carrier transport, trap density, and inhibition of MeOH absorption were investigated systematically. We demonstrated that the anion treatment successfully implements multiple effects: less MeOH absorption, improved charge transport and lower defect density. Finally, PCEs of 7.04%, 6.03%, and 5.82% were achieved for GuaAc-, GuaSCN-, and GuaBr-treated CsPbBr3 QD solar cells, respectively, outperforming the PCE of 5.02% for the control devices. The champion PCE of 7.04% is the highest PCE reported for CsPbBr3 QD solar cells to date. In addition, the CsPbBr3 QD solar cells developed here exhibit ultrahigh voltage and high transparency beyond the wavelength of 500 nm, demonstrating their promising application in visibly semitransparent devices like solar windows.

Colloidal CsPbBr3 QDs were synthesized via a hot-injection method according to the previous literature with a small modification, as described in the Experimental section. As shown in Fig. S1, the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images confirmed the synthesis of monodisperse CsPbBr3 QDs with an average size of around 11.5 nm and the high-resolution TEM in the inset reveals that the synthesized CsPbBr3 QDs are highly crystalline. The light absorption and photoluminescence (PL) spectra of CsPbBr3 QDs are shown in Fig. S2. The optical band gap of CsPbBr3 QDs is 2.36 eV according to the light absorption spectrum. The PL emission peak is at 518 nm with a narrow full width at half-maximum of approximately 18 nm. For thin film fabrication, CsPbBr3 QDs dispersed in octane were spin-coated onto a substrate, and each layer of QD films was immersed in a solution of ionic salts (GuaBr, GuaSCN, and GuaAc) in MeOAc and neat MeOAc to remove the long native ligands and enable the deposition of subsequent layers. This process was repeated until the desired film thickness was achieved. (Fig. S3) We also confirmed the cubic phase structure using X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurement of CsPbBr3 QD films with and without GuaBr, GuaSCN and GuaAc treatment as shown in Fig. S4. All the samples show XRD signals corresponding to the (100), (110) and (200) planes of a cubic phase CsPbBr3 perovskite structure, indicating that the Gua salt treatment does not change the crystal structure of CsPbBr3 QDs.

UV-vis absorption measurements were carried out to gain insights into the light-harvesting ability of the QD films treated with different guanidinium salts. Here, the “control” represents the CsPbBr3 QD film treated only with pure MeOAc, and “GuaBr, GuaSCN, and GuaAc” are the samples treated with a solution of the respective ionic salts (GuaBr, GuaSCN, and GuaAc in MeOAc for each layer). As shown in Fig. 1a, the absorption intensity is slightly enhanced after the modification of Gua salt, which is mainly attributed to the effective removal of the long chain ligands and the increase in film thickness. The PL intensities of the QD films with GuaBr, GuaSCN, and GuaAc treatment are higher compared with that of the control one, and the PL intensities of the QD films with GuaAc treatment are the highest as shown in Fig. 1b. The increased PL intensities confirm the reduction of the trap-assisted nonradiative recombination in the CsPbBr3 QD films. In addition, the PL spectra of the CsPbBr3 QD films are red-shifted from 525 nm to 528 nm due to the reduced distance between the QDs resulting from the removal of long-chain ligands more effectively after treatment with GuaAc (Fig. 1c).
For a better understanding of the role of Gua salts containing different anion treatments in the QD surface ligand removal process, we performed Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy. As shown in Fig. 1d, the control CsPbBr3 QD films show strong infrared signals of C–H bonding (2850, 2930, and 2970 cm−1), CO bonding (1430 and 1501 cm−1) and C–N bonding (3207 cm−1), corresponding to the OA and OAm ligands of CsPbBr3 QDs. The intensity of resonances due to the oleyl group decreases gradually when the films are treated with GuaBr, GuaSCN, and GuaAc, indicating the effective removal of long insulating ligands. Meanwhile, resonances centered at 3440 cm−1 (symmetric N–H), 3343 cm−1 (asymmetric N–H), and 1676 cm−1 (NH) attributed to the stretching vibrations of Gua group are observed when the QD films are treated with GuaSCN and GuaAc, suggesting the attachment of GuaSCN and GuaAc to the QD surface. In addition, a resonance centered at 2059 cm−1 (ν(CN)) due to the stretching vibrations of the thiocyanate group (SCN−) is observed. However, when the QD films are treated with GuaBr, no stretching vibration of the Gua group is observed, which is attributed to the limitation of the solubility of GuaBr in the MeOAc solution. To further investigate the removal and replacement of surface ligands, we carried out nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy as shown in Fig. 1e. We focus on the proton resonances at 0.86, 1.24, and 2.02 ppm involved in the oleyl group of OA and OAm, which are labeled as 1, 2, and 3, respectively (Fig. 1f). The intensities of the oleyl-related proton resonances are high for the control CsPbBr3 film, followed by the GuaBr and GuaSCN treated films, and are relatively the smallest for the GuaAc treated film. The result suggests that the residual long-chain ligands on the QD surface are removed by the Gua salt treatment process, which would lead to enhanced electrical contact between neighboring QDs and thus facilitates carrier transport.
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed to investigate the chemical composition and electronic states of the CsPbBr3 QD films before and after GuaBr, GuaSCN, and GuaAc treatment. Core level spectra of the constituent elements in the QDs are shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. S5, where no significant changes of peak positions or shapes are found among the four sample in the Cs 3d, Pb 4f, and Br 3d core level spectra. However, the N 1s core level spectra in Fig. 2a–d exhibit notable variations among the four samples and are fitted to two peaks that attributed to the protonated –NH3+ group from OAm (402.1 eV) and the NH2+ group in Gua (400.1 eV). When the QD films are treated with GuaSCN and GuaAc, the peak intensity at 402.1 eV abruptly decreases while the peak due to the NH2+ group in Gua appears, indicating the attachment of shorter Gua to the QD surface and the removal of the longer insulating OAm ligand. These observations exhibit a similar trend to the FTIR results. In addition, the O 1s spectrum was also deconvoluted into two peaks corresponding to different chemical species to investigate the origin of the oxygen signal in detail as shown in Fig. 2e–h. The peak intensity of 532.8 eV is assigned to the carboxylate groups (COO−) originating from the oleic acid and Ac ligands bound to the CsPbBr3 QD surface, while the emergence of the peak centered at 531.3 eV in the O 1s core level spectra is attributed to the hydroxyl group (−OH) from the MeOH produced from the hydrolysis of MeOAc. According to previous reports, the formation of Pb–OH in PbS colloidal QDs creates a sub-bandgap trap state and results in low charge transport in QD films, leading to poor photovoltaic performance. In addition, poor solvents such as methanol can destroy the perovskite structure and thus adversely affect the stability of QD devices. All CsPbBr3 QD films show peaks at a binding energy of 532.8 eV, associating with a large amount of COO− coordination on the QD surface. However, the CsPbBr3 QD films with Gua salt treatment show a lower contribution at 531.3 eV compared to the control films, especially the GuaAc-treated films show the smallest contribution at 531.3 eV, indicating the formation of the smallest amount of MeOH after ligand exchange. The XPS results indicate that all anions play a positive role in inhibiting the absorption of MeOH on the CsPbBr3 QD surface. Moreover, different anions exhibit different degrees of positive effect are found for different anions, which can maximize the regulation of surface chemistry conditions by rational tailoring of anion species.
The top-view SEM images of the surface morphology of the CsPbBr3 QD films (Fig. S6a) reveal closely packed assemblies of QDs in all films, indicating that the Gua salt treatment does not change the morphology of the CsPbBr3 QD film. A similar trend is also found in the atomic force microscopy (AFM) height images. As shown in Fig. S6b, The QD films based on the control, GuaBr, GuaSCN and GuaAc treatments have a root mean square roughness of 12.3, 12.0, 11.6 and 11.0 nm, respectively. All films exhibit similar surface topography and roughness, confirming that the additional Gua salt treatment has a negligible impact on the grain growth of the CsPbBr3 QD film.
We propose the following scenario to explain why GuaBr, GuaSCN and GuaAc treatment inhibit methanol absorption on the CsPbBr3 QD surface. As shown in Fig. 3a, for the conventional ligand exchange process, acetic acid and MeOH are produced as intermediate substances resulting from the hydrolysis of MeOAc. Lead halide perovskites are significantly decomposed under polar media (MeOH), and the MeOH absorption on the QD surface results in low charge transport in lead halide perovskites, leading to poor photovoltaic performance. In addition, a large number of halide vacancy defects are inevitably generated by the shedding of the OA ligand on the CsPbBr3 QD surface during the ligand exchange process, making it easy for MeOH to adsorb onto the QD surface. When GuaSCN and GuaBr are dissolved in MeOAc solvent, large amounts of SCN− and Br− are produced and preferentially fill the halide vacancies, so only a small amount of MeOH binds to the QD surface. However, the mechanism of the best inhibition of MeOH absorption by GuaAc treatment is somewhat different from the previous GuaBr and GuaSCN. For GuaAc-treated CsPbBr3 QD films (Fig. 3b), the Ac− ions play two roles. On one hand, the Ac− ions from GuaAc salts efficiently exchange the long-chain OA ligands, thus inhibiting the absorption of MeOH on the QD surface. On the other hand, when large amounts of additional Ac− are present in MeOAc, it inhibits the hydrolysis of MeOAc and thus the production of MeOH according to the chemical equilibrium principle. In conclusion, the main role of GuaBr, GuaSCN and GuaAc is to inhibit the absorption of MeOH on the surface of QDs. However, GuaAc shows the best effect compared to GuaBr and GuaSCN due to the cooperative effect of Ac−.
To investigate the effect of Gua salt-treated CsPbBr3 QD films on solar cell devices, perovskite QD solar cells with a planar architecture of FTO/TiO2/CsPbBr3 QDs/spiro-OMeTAD/Au were fabricated as shown in Fig. 4a, in which spiro-OMeTAD and TiO2 refer to the hole transport layer and the electron transport layer, respectively. Each constituent layer of the device is clearly resolved in the cross-sectional SEM in Fig. 4b, and the thickness of the CsPbBr3 QD layer is about 300 nm. The device optimization includes fine tuning the concentration of the GuaBr, GuaSCN, and GuaAc ligand exchange solution. (Fig. S7–S9 and Tables S1–S3) Optimal results are obtained by using a GuaBr solution concentration of 0.5 mg mL−1, a GuaSCN solution concentration of 0.75 mg mL−1 and a GuaAc solution concentration of 0.5 mg mL−1. Fig. 4c presents the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the best-performing CsPbBr3 QD solar cells with and without Gua salt treatment measured under the reverse scan under AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2 simulated solar illumination, with the corresponding parameters listed in Table S4. The control CsPbBr3 QD solar cell show an VOC of 1.58 V, a JSC of 4.60 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 69.0% and a PCE of 5.02%. When the CsPbBr3 QD film treated with Gua salts, the corresponding device show an increased PCE. The GuaBr-treated solar cell exhibits a PCE of 5.82% with a VOC of 1.57 V, a JSC of 5.18 mA cm−2 and an FF of 71.1% and the GuaSCN-treated solar cell shows a PCE of 6.03% with a VOC of 1.58 V, a JSC of 5.23 mA cm−2 and an FF of 72.9%. Expectedly, the device efficiency further boosts to as high as 7.04% after the CsPbBr3 QD films are treated with GuaAc, with a VOC of 1.59 V, a higher JSC of 5.93 mA cm−2 and an FF of 74.7%, which is the highest value among the inorganic CsPbBr3 QD solar cells. The device reproducibility was studied and compared across 15 individual cells as shown in Fig. 4d and Fig. S10. The GuaAc-treated solar cells show enhanced efficiency and narrower PCE distribution compared to the control, GuaBr- and GuaSCN-treated devices. It is worth noting that the enhanced PCE is mainly attributed to the improved JSC and FF in the GuaAc-treated solar cells. The simultaneous increase of both JSC and FF in the GuaAc-treated CsPbBr3 QD solar cell may be attributed to the improved charge transport within the CsPbBr3 QD films. Fig. 4e presents the stabilized power output and the stabilized JSC values of 4.1 mA cm−2, 4.6 mA cm−2, 4.8 mA cm−2 and 5.3 mA cm−2 are maintained for the control, GuaBr, GuaSCN and GuaAc-treated CsPbBr3 QD solar cells respectively, slightly lower than that of the JSC measurement from the J–V curve. Moreover, the CsPbBr3 QD solar cells with GuaAc treatment presents alleviative hysteresis compared with the control device, as shown in Fig. S11, ESI.
We used the equation (HI = (PCEreverse-scan − PCEforward-scan)/PCEreverse-scan) to calculate the hysteresis index, which are 18.5% and 15.9% for the device without and with GuaAc treatment. Meanwhile, we also studied the transmittance of the CsPbBr3 QD films with and without Gua salt treatment to evaluate their possibility in the application of semitransparent solar cells. Fig. 4f shows the transmittance spectrum of the CsPbBr3 QD film and the inset image depict the photographs of the corresponding film. Due to its relatively wide optical band gap (2.4 eV), the CsPbBr3 QD film exhibits fine semitransparency and the curves show high transparency over the entire visible spectrum region, indicating its promising application in visible semitransparent devices, such as solar windows.
To avoid the hydrolysis of MeOAc, we tried to use acetone instead of MeOAc solvent and prepared CsPbBr3 QD solar cells. Fig. S12 present the J–V characteristics of these devices and their corresponding photovoltaic parameters. When the CsPbBr3 QD film treat with pure acetone, the device PCE reaches 4.09% with a VOC of 1.53 V, a JSC of 4.53 mA cm−2, and an FF of 58.7%, respectively. In contrast, when the CsPbBr3 QD films are treated with a solution of GuaAc in acetone, a PCE of 5.84% was achieved with a JSC of 5.56 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.58 V and an FF of 66.5%. The efficiency was still lower than that treated with GuaAc solution in MeOAc (7.04%). Therefore, MeOAc is currently still an effective antisolvent for the preparation of perovskite QD solar cells, although MeOAc is hydrolyzed to form MeOH. Here we have successfully avoided the native effects of MeOAc hydrolysis by using GuaAc.
To have a fundamental understanding of the key factors responsible for the improved performance of GuaAc-based CsPbBr3 QD solar cells, we analyzed the charge carrier collection and recombination within the solar cells. Electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed to reveal the charge transfer characteristics in the device. The Nyquist plots of CsPbBr3 QD solar cells with and without GuaAc treatment measured at 1.42 V under dark conditions are shown in Fig. 5a. Generally, the arc in the low-frequency region corresponds the recombination resistance (Rrec), which is mainly attributed to the charge transport at the perovskite/TiO2 and HTL/perovskite interface. The GuaAc-treated device shows an increased Rrec as compared to the control device, which reveals improved charge transport and less charge recombination in the solar cell with GuaAc treatment compared to that in the control device, consistent with improved JSC and FF. Furthermore, the dark current–voltage characteristic further elucidates the charge recombination behavior in the device (Fig. 5b). Under dark conditions, the current of the device decreases after the GuaAc treatment, revealing that fewer carriers pass through the defect-assisted traps. The above results suggest that the improved photovoltaic performance in the GuaAc-treated perovskite QD solar cell is due to the reduced charge carrier recombination and enhanced charge carrier extraction. In addition, the trap-state densities were estimated with a space-charge-limited current (SCLC) model by using single carrier devices. Fig. 5c displays the SCLC curve of the control and GuaAc-treated devices, and the inset shows the device structure. The trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL) value is calculated to be 0.38 V for the control device and the calculated trap density (Ntrap) is 2.56 × 1016 cm−3. In contrast, the calculated VTFL and Ntrap values are 0.21 V and 1.42 × 1016 cm−3 for the GuaAc-treated device. Meanwhile, Fig. 5d displays the dark current–voltage characteristic of the hole-only device with a structure of FTO/PEDOT:PSS/CsPbBr3 QDs/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au. The hole defect density of the GuaAc-treated device also shows a lower value (2.16 × 1016 cm−3) relative to that of the control device (1.28 × 1016 cm−3). Therefore, these results are in good agreement with the optoelectronic measurements of the perovskite QD film and the photovoltaic performance of the perovskite QD solar cells, revealing that the GuaAc treatment can significantly diminish the surface defects of perovskite QDs induced by ion vacancies. Moreover, a model of collection and recombination of charge carriers in the control and GuaAc-treated CsPbBr3 QD solar cells is proposed as shown in Fig. 5e and f. For control perovskite QD solar cells, there is a large number of MeOH and ion vacancies on the QD surface, when the device is operated under illumination, these MeOH and vacancy defects could act as trap states to capture photogenerated charge carriers, thereby leading to low charge transport in QD films and lowering the photovoltaic performance. Meanwhile, a large number of polar substances also offer access for humidity and oxygen to attack the perovskite QDs, which accelerates perovskite decomposition, thereby decreasing the stability of the perovskite QD solar cells. In contrast, after GuaAc treatment, the production of most polar substances is effectively suppressed, resulting in decreased charge carrier recombination and structural degradation of the GuaAc-based CsPbBr3 QD solar cells.

In summary, we developed a simple and effective anion modification strategy to increase the photovoltaic performance of planar CsPbBr3 QD solar cells, which was implemented through incorporating a series of guanidinium salts containing different anions (GuaBr, GuaSCN, and GuaAc) into each layer of CsPbBr3 QD films. All anions play a positive role in inhibiting the absorption of MeOH, facilitating charge transfer between PQDs and passivating the defects. Moreover, the regulation of surface chemistry can be optimized by rational tailoring of anion species. The inhibition effect grew significantly from Br− and SCN− to Ac− and the devices modified by GuaBr, GuaSCN and GuaAc exhibited a PCE of 5.82%, 6.03% and 7.04%, respectively, which are much higher than 5.02% of the control device. More importantly, the CsPbBr3 QD solar cells exhibit high transparency over the entire visible spectrum region, indicating their promising application in solar windows.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2022YFB4200500).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3nr00602f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023