 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA08314F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26421-26428


Ming
Wang
,

Huaxin
Wang
,

Wei
Li
,

Xiaofei
Hu
,

Kuan
Sun
 and 

Zhigang
Zang
*

Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Technology & Systems (Ministry of Education), Chongqing University, Chongqing 400044, China. E-mail: zangzg@cqu.edu.cn

Key Laboratory of Low-Grade Energy Utilization Technologies and Systems (Ministry of Education), Chongqing University, Chongqing 400044, China

Received
31st July 2019
, Accepted 28th October 2019
First published on 28th October 2019
One-step anti-solvent deposition methods are widely applied in inverted perovskite solar cells (PSCs). However, anti-solvent processed films typically exhibit a small grain size and abundant defects. Herein, we propose a facile passivation approach using an ultrathin poly(triarylamine) (PTAA) layer to passivate the interfacial and grain boundary defects. An energy band alignment is realized by introducing an ultrathin PTAA layer sandwiched between the perovskite layer and the poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) layer to suppress interfacial recombination and accelerate hole transfer. By optimum design of the PTAA layer, we fabricate PSCs with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 19.04%, a fill factor (FF) of 82.59% and a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 21.38 mA cm−2. To the best of our knowledge, the obtained FF value is the maximum among those reported for inverted chlorine-doped methyl perovskite solar cells (PSCs). After storage under ambient conditions for 10 days, the PCE of the PSCs with PTAA modification is still maintained at the 80% level, indicating substantially improved stability. Our work provides an effective method to boost PSCs with enhanced efficiency and stability.

Hybrid organic/inorganic perovskite solar cells (PSCs) with a planar heterojunction structure have attracted increasing attention in recent years. They have been regarded as the most promising candidates for being at the forefront of next-generation thin-film solar cells, because of their distinct advantages, such as their excellent photovoltaic properties, simple fabrication process, and low-cost. So far, planar PSCs with a sandwich structure have two major architectures (p–i–n and n–i–p). The p–i–n (or inverted) structured PSCs are currently becoming a shining star with numerous advantages, including good reproducibility and low hysteresis. In inverted PSCs, high-quality perovskite films, perfect energy band alignment, and high-efficiency charge extraction capability are widely believed to be critical for high photovoltaic performance. Recent studies suggest that the defects (or traps) at the perovskite/transport layer interfaces are the major sources accelerating the loss of efficiency. Meanwhile, interface defects can aggravate the current–voltage (I–V) hysteresis and overall device performance. It is therefore imperative to passivate these defects.

The electron-passivation approach employing electron donor materials or Lewis-bases was first reported by Noel et al. Until now, various Lewis-bases have been exploited as interface modification materials, such as polymers poly(4-vinyl pyridine) (PVP), poly(N-90-heptadecanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(40,70-di-2-thienyl-20,10,30-benzothiadiazole)) (PCDTBT), and so on. In addition, numerous organic materials were introduced to passivate the surface and grain boundaries of perovskite films, including fullerenes and their derivatives (C60, PCBM) and some organic polymers such as poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA). They were sandwiched between the perovskite layer and transport layer to suppress the interfacial recombination and therefore enhance the photovoltaic performance. Most of them can improve the FF of PSCs but at the expense of Jsc. So it is necessary to find a kind of passivation material which can increase the Jsc and FF at the same time.
PTAA is an excellent hole-transporting and electron-blocking material owing to its hole-rich components. Recently, PTAA has been proposed as a hole transport layer (HTL), considering its matched highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy level (−5.2 eV) with the valence band maximum (VBM) of perovskites. PTAA as a HTL can substantially improve the open-circuit voltage (Voc) and FF of PSCs. However, the hydrophobic PTAA without treatment impedes the deposition of the perovskite film on it by one-step methods. The common way (i.e., ultraviolet (UV) ozone treatment) to improve surface hydrophilicity can destroy the functional groups of the organic PTAA material. Accordingly, an ultrathin PTAA layer without UV treatment is necessary to guarantee the quality of the perovskite film.
In this work, we spin-coated an ultrathin PTAA layer on the surface of PEDOT:PSS to suppress interfacial recombination and accelerate hole transfer at the perovskite/PEDOT:PSS interface. The variation of perovskite film quality attributed to different amounts of PTAA was inspected. Using a simple spin-coating PTAA solution, we fabricated inverted PSCs with different PTAA concentrations. As a result, with an optimal PTAA concentration of 0.5 mg ml−1, the modified PSCs showed an improved PCE from 16.94% to 19.04%, with a high FF of 82.59% and a Jsc of 21.38 mA cm−2. These results confirm that PTAA is an effective interface modification material that heightens the quality of the perovskite film and boosts the PSC performance.

We fabricated p–i–n planar PSCs using MAPbI3−xClx as the photoactive layer, wherein PEDOT:PSS and PCBM were spin-coated as the HTL and electron transporting layer (ETL), respectively. The thin PTAA layer was inserted between the perovskite film and HTL by using different concentrations of PTAA toluene solution as the interface modification layer. The cross-sectional SEM image of the PSCs is shown in Fig. 1a. We can see the clear interface of each layer and the thickness of the perovskite layer is about 300 nm. The corresponding energy diagram of the PSCs is presented in Fig. 1b, where the HOMO of PTAA (−5.2 eV) is located between the HOMO of PEDOT:PSS (−5.0 eV) and the VBM of the perovskite (−5.4 eV). This energy band alignment accelerates the holes transporting from the perovskite film to the PEDOT:PSS layer and simultaneously suppresses the carrier recombination at the interfaces, which considerably improves the PSC performance.

To evaluate the influence of PTAA on the photovoltaic performance, we fabricated inverted planar heterojunction PSCs with different PTAA concentrations (0 mg ml−1, 0.25 mg ml−1, 0.50 mg ml−1 and 0.75 mg ml−1). Fig. 1c verifies the current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of these devices under 1 sun conditions (100 mW cm−2, AM1.5G). The inserted table in Fig. 1c summarizes the photovoltaic parameters of the PSCs with different PTAA concentrations. The pristine PSCs displayed a lower PCE of 16.94% with a Jsc of 20.26 mA cm−2, a FF of 0.76, and a Voc of 1.08 V in the forward scan direction. It is noted that the devices based on PTAA modification show an increased PCE with a higher FF and Jsc, where the PSCs based on 0.50 mg ml−1 PTAA modification exhibit an obviously improved PCE of 19.04% with a Jsc of 21.38 mA cm−2, a FF of 0.82 and a Voc of 1.07 V. While increasing the PTAA concentration to 0.75 mg ml−1, the photovoltaic performance of the devices shows a slight dip due to the decreasing FF. The extremely high external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra shown in Fig. 1d clearly indicate the superior spectral conversion of PSCs with 0.5 mg ml−1 PTAA modification. The Jsc values calculated from the EQE spectra agree well with the Jsc values obtained from the I–V curves within 5% deviation (Fig. S1). As shown in Fig. 1e, the PSCs based on 0.5 mg ml−1 PTAA modification can reduce the hysteresis in J–V characteristics compared with the pristine devices. Meanwhile, we measured steady-state output photocurrent at the maximum power point with a constant bias of 0.93 V for PTAA modification and 0.90 V for the pristine device for 200 s. The PSCs based on 0.50 mg ml−1 PTAA modification delivered a PCE of 18.68% with a photocurrent of 20.08 mA cm−2 which is very close to the values from the reverse and forward scan. The optimum PTAA modification provides the PSCs with more stable and higher steady-state photocurrent and PCE as illustrated in Fig. 1f.
The hydrophobicity of the substrates determines the morphology of the deposited perovskite films. Consequently, the contact angle measurements of the PEDOT:PSS films with different PTAA concentrations are demonstrated in Fig. 2, where the contact angles are positively related to the PTAA concentrations. Once the PTAA concentration exceeds 1 mg ml−1, the perovskite film fails to be uniform, compact and crack-free. The cracks and pinholes caused by high PTAA concentration (1 mg ml−1) in Fig. S2 clearly illustrate the reduced coverage of the perovskite films on the PEDOT:PSS substrates. To further investigate the effect of PTAA modification on the perovskite crystal growth, the surface morphologies of the perovskite films were measured, as shown in Fig. 3. The top-view SEM image of the perovskite films shows that a small amount of PTAA can improve grain sizes, resulting in better crystallinity and fewer grain boundaries as shown in Fig. S3. Meanwhile, increasing PTAA concentration deteriorates the surface roughness of the perovskite films as shown in Fig. S4. The increased surface roughness implies the poor uniformity of the perovskite films which can affect the spin-coated ETL (PCBM) and corrode the FF.
The XRD patterns (Fig. 4a) and optical absorbance spectra (Fig. 4b) were accomplished to study the crystal quality of the perovskite films modified with PTAA. It was confirmed that all the diffraction peaks observed in Fig. 4a belong to the typical MAPbI3−xClx phase. When the concentration of PTAA reaches 0.5 mg ml−1, the perovskite films show the highest intensity of the diffraction peaks which means better crystallinity. Fig. 4b presents the optical absorbance of HTL/MAPbI3−xClx from 400 nm to 850 nm. It can be seen that the absorption intensity of perovskite films based on 0.5 mg ml−1 PTAA modification is the highest one, due to the best crystallization of the perovskite films. This enhanced absorption contributes to the improvement of Jsc. We also measured the transmittance of PEDOT:PSS/ITO with different PTAA concentrations to confirm whether the PTAA layer can influence photon injection. Since the transmittance depends on the refractive index and thickness of the material, the refractive indices of PTAA and PEDOT:PSS were measured using an ellipsometer (Fig. S5). Although the refractive index of PTAA is higher than that of PEDOT:PSS, the transmittance of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTAA has almost no change because of the ultrathin PTAA layer, as shown in Fig. S6. The thickness of the PTAA film is less than 1 nm, which was also confirmed using the ellipsometer, as displayed in Fig. S7. Therefore, we can conclude that PTTA inserted between PEDOT:PSS and the perovskite has little effect on photon injection.
The charge transportation at the perovskite/PEDOT:PSS interface has great impacts on Jsc and FF. The steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) were characterized to provide insight into the improved Jsc and FF, as shown in Fig. 4c. A notable quenching phenomenon was observed when the ultrathin PTAA layer was inserted between the perovskite layer and PEDOT:PSS layer, suggesting that the ultrathin PTAA layer can suppress interfacial recombination and accelerate hole transfer at the perovskite/PEDOT:PSS interface. However, when the concentration of PTAA reaches 0.75 mg ml−1, the PL intensity tends to increase again mildly, since the higher PTAA amount deteriorates the perovskite film quality as stated above. The time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) decay measurements exhibit similar trends. The transient PL spectra of perovskite films on ITO/PEDOT:PSS with or without PTAA are plotted in Fig. 4d. By fitting the data with a bi-exponential decay model, the lifetime of charge carriers in the four half devices can be obtained. We estimate the average PL decay times (τavg) using the following equation:
(1)

τ
i and Ai correspond to the decay time and the weight factor of each decay channel, respectively. The PL average lifetime of the HTL/perovskite interface reveals the effect of carrier extraction and the interface recombination. The average PL decay time (τavg) (Table 1) decreased to 12.70 ns when 0.5 mg ml−1 PTAA was used. The reduced PL decay time observed with the ultrathin PTAA layer indicates the decrease of carrier recombination since the trap states and recombination centers at the interfaces are efficiently passivated. Although PTAA is an excellent hole-transporting material, the ultrathin PTAA layer would have a slight effect on hole-transport. The major contribution of PTAA to suppressing charge recombination is its efficient passivation at the HTL/perovskite interface which has been confirmed by the PL and TRPL results.
Samples

τ
avg (ns)

τ
1 (ns)

τ
2 (ns)

A
1 (%)

A
2 (%)
Pristine
14.32
6.5
16.67
43.48
56.52
0.25 mg ml−1 PTAA
13.88
4.76
15.48
36.26
63.74
0.50 mg ml−1 PTAA
12.70
3.8
14.06
36.05
63.95
0.75 mg ml−1 PTAA
13.46
4.63
15.25
39.92
60.08
The schematic structure of the PSCs is shown in Fig. 5a. To further clarify the mechanism for the performance improvement in PSCs with PTAA modification, a possible model of the PTAA passivated perovskite is illustrated in Fig. 5b. We think that the branched-chain of PTAA can fill the vacancy of the methylammonium ion formed in the annealing process which improved the stability of the perovskite and suppressed charge recombination at the interfaces. Electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurement is a proper indicator of the charge transport process and the contact resistance information.Fig. 5c shows the Nyquist plots of the PSCs with or without PTAA modification at 0.7 V bias voltage under dark conditions in the frequency range from 10 Hz to 1 MHz. The results suggest that the PTAA modified PSCs have a higher recombination resistance than the original PSCs. The PL spectra, TRPL decay curves, and EIS together confirm that an appropriate amount of PTAA can accelerate the hole transport, thus increasing Jsc. Furthermore, the ultrathin PTAA layer prolongs the device lifetime notably. After storage under ambient conditions with humidity up to 50% for 10 days, the PSCs with 0.5 mg ml−1 PTAA modification maintained above 80% of their original PCEs. However, the PCE of the pristine PSCs degraded to below 50% of their original PCEs. We assume that this enhanced stability is due to the hydrophobicity of PTAA (Fig. 5d). In addition, we find that the FF of the PSCs based on 0.5 mg ml−1 PTAA modification consistently maintains above 80% for seven days (Fig. S8), suggesting that PTAA is the key reason for the highest FF of high-performance PSCs as a result of decreased series resistance. Finally, the box-plotted photovoltaic data under 1 sun conditions for the pristine and 0.5 mg ml−1 PTAA modified PSCs are shown in Fig. S9. The results indicate that the PSCs with 0.5 mg ml−1 PTAA modification exhibit the best performance due to the obviously enhanced Jsc and FF.
In conclusion, we demonstrated a simple and effective defect passivation method by using ultrathin PTAA films between the perovskite film and HTL, improving the hole extraction and thus the fill factor. Since PTAA is a conducting polymer, the passivated cells have a significantly increased fill factor as a result of decreased series resistance. By optimizing the concentration of PTAA, the amount of PTAA at the perovskite/HTL interfaces was controlled well, which resulted in high crystal quality and uniformity of the perovskite films, suppressed interfacial recombination and accelerated hole transfer. With an optimal PTAA concentration of 0.5 mg ml−1, PSCs with the highest fill factor and higher Jsc were achieved, resulting in a high PCE of 19.04% with almost no hysteresis. In addition, the optimal PSCs showed remarkable stability, retaining 80% of their initial PCE without encapsulation after 10 days of storage in an ambient environment (25 °C at 50% humidity).

PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution (Clevis PVP Al 4083) with a concentration of 1.3–1.7% by weight was purchased from Heraeus. Healy-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM, 99.5% purity) was acquired from Nano-C, Inc. Methylammonium iodide (MAI, >99.5% purity), PbI2(>99.99% purity), and PbCl2 (>99.99% purity) were supplied by Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp. Rhodamine 101 (RhB101) and other chemical solutions, such as isopropanol (IPA, 99.7% purity), γ-butyrolactone (GBL, >99% purity), and dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO, >99.9% purity), were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. All solvents were used directly without further purification.


The perovskite precursor solution with a composition of 0.14 M (39 mg) PbCl2, 1.26 M (581 mg) PbI2, and 1.3 M (209 mg) MAI was dissolved in a 1 ml co-solvent of DMSO:GBL (3:7 volume ratio) solution. The perovskite solutions were heated at 70 °C for 12 hours inside a glove box filled with nitrogen gas.


ITO glass substrates (sheet resistance of 15 Ω −1) were sequentially washed with detergent, deionized (DI) water, ethyl alcohol, acetone, and isopropanol (IPA) for 30 min. Then the ITO substrates were dried with nitrogen flow and treated under UV ozone for 30 min. The thin PEDOT:PSS layer was spin-coated on the clean patterned ITO glass substrates through a 0.45 micron Teflon filter at 8000 rpm for 40 s in an ambient atmosphere, and annealed at 120 °C for 15 min to obtain the PEDOT:PSS HTL. After the PEDOT:PSS film was cooled down to room temperature, the substrates were moved into a glovebox filled with dried nitrogen (<1.0 ppm of O2 and H2O) for the deposition of perovskite films. 80 μl of different concentrations of PTAA solution (0 mg ml−1, 0.25 mg ml−1, 0.5 mg ml−1 and 0.75 mg ml−1 toluene) were spin-cast on top of the PEDOT:PSS film at 8000 rpm for 40 s and annealed on a hot plate at 100 °C for 3 min. After the films were cooled down to room temperature, the MAPbI3−xClx photoactive layer was then deposited by a simple one-step deposition method. The perovskite precursor solution (50 μl) was spin-coated on the PEDOT:PSS films and PTAA-modified films at a rotational speed of 1000 rpm for 20 s and at 3500 rpm for another 40 s, and before the end of the spin coating process, 1 ml of methylbenzene was poured into the spinning film in a few seconds. Subsequently, the obtained perovskite films were placed on a heating table at 95 °C for 5 min to form MAPbI3−xClx films. PCBM which had been dispersed in toluene with a concentration of 23 mg ml−1 was spin-coated on top of the perovskite films at a rotational speed of 2500 rpm for 30 s. After this, the substrate was annealed at 100 °C for 10 min. Then, the RhB101 layer was spin-coated on PCBM films at 1500 rpm for 40 s with a concentration of 0.6 mg ml−1. Finally, the films were transferred to a thermal evaporation chamber under high vacuum (<2.5 × 10−5 Pa), and then a 1.2 nm LiF film and a 100 nm Ag film were sequentially deposited on PCBM through a shadow mask.


X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded using a PANalytical Empyrean diffractometer equipped with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å), at a step of 0.02° and a scan speed of 2.3° min−1. Optical absorption spectra and transmission spectra were measured by using a UV-vis spectrophotometer (Shimadzu UV-1800). The steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra were obtained using a fluorescence spectrophotometer (Cary Eclipse, Agilent) with an excitation wavelength of 530 nm. The cross-section of the devices and the surface topography of the perovskite films were characterized using a JEOL JSM-7800F field emission scanning electron microscope (SEM). Atomic-force microscopy (AFM) was carried out using an MFP-3D-BIO AFM (Asylum Research, an Oxford Instruments company, USA). The time-resolved PL measurements were carried out using a combined fluorescence lifetime and steady-state spectrometer (FLS980, Edinburgh Instruments Ltd.) with a 510 nm picosecond pulsed laser. Photocurrent–voltage (I–V) curves were measured by using a Keithley 2400 source meter with an AM 1.5G solar simulator (Newport, 2612A) which was calibrated using a silicon reference cell under a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The IPCEs of the PSCs were measured using a solar cell quantum efficiency measurement system (Newport, USA). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed on a CHI660E Electrochemical Workstation (Chen Hua, China) at a bias voltage of 0.7 V in the dark. The thickness and the optical parameters were measured using a dual rotating-compensator (ME-L ellipsometer, Wuhan Eoptics Technology Co., Wuhan, China). Each solar cell device had an active area of 0.11 cm2 and was measured in air.


The authors declare no conflict of interest.


This work is financially supported by the Defense Industrial Technology Development Program (JCKY2017110C0654), Key Program Science Foundation of Natural Science Foundation of Chongqing (cstc2017jcyjBX0054), Graduate Research and Innovation Foundation of Chongqing, China (CYB18047) and National Natural Science Foundation of China (11974063, and 61574024).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta08314f
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019