 DOI: 10.1039/D1EE00157D
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 2090-2113


Wanchun
Xiang
*,

Shengzhong (Frank)
Liu
 and 

Wolfgang
Tress
*

Key Laboratory of Applied Surface and Colloid Chemistry, Ministry of Education, Shaanxi Key Laboratory for Advanced Energy Devices, Shaanxi Engineering Lab for Advanced Energy Technology, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi’an, 710119, China. E-mail: wanchun.xiang@snnu.edu.cn

Institute of Computational Physics, Zurich University of Applied Sciences, Wildbachstr. 21, 8401 Winterthur, Switzerland. E-mail: wolfgang.tress@zhaw.ch

Received
15th January 2021
, Accepted 22nd February 2021
First published on 22nd February 2021
Inorganic perovskite based solar cells (PSCs) have been receiving unprecedented attention worldwide in the past several years due to their higher intrinsic stability towards high temperatures and high theoretical power conversion efficiencies. Since a photovoltaic performance of 20.37% has been achieved for inorganic PSCs recently, the operational stability of these devices has become the major bottleneck which impedes their commercialization. The high thermal stability associated with inorganic perovskites comes along with poorer phase stability compared to their hybrid counterparts and therefore needs thorough understanding. Lattice strain and vacancies within the perovskite crystals are found to be the origin of these phase instability issues. This review summarizes the progress in stability research on inorganic perovskites. Specifically, the degradation mechanisms of inorganic perovskites towards temperature, moisture and oxygen are summarized and discussed. Solutions for tackling these stability issues are reviewed and an outlook on further strategies is provided.

Wanchun Xiang

Wanchun Xiang received his MS from Shaanxi Normal University in 2005, PhD from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2010. After 3 years of postdoctoral research with Prof. Leone Spiccia at the Department of Chemistry, Monash University in Australia, he joined the State Key Laboratory of Silicate Materials for Architectures, Wuhan University of Technology as an associate professor in 2014. He was a visiting scholar at Prof. Anders Hagfeldt's group in EPFL in the year between 2017 and 2018. In 2020, he joined as a professor in Shaanxi Normal University. His research interests include optoelectronic materials and their applications in photovoltaic devices, such as dye-sensitized solar cells and perovskite solar cells.

Shengzhong (Frank) Liu

Shengzhong (Frank) Liu received his PhD degree from Northwestern University (Evanston, Illinois, USA) in 1992. Upon his postdoctoral research at Argonne National Laboratory (Argonne, Illinois, USA), he joined high-tech companies in the USA for research including nanoscale materials, thin film solar cells, laser processing, and diamond thin films. His invention at BP Solar in the semitransparent photovoltaic module won the R&D 100 award in 2002. In 2011, he was selected into China's top talent recruitment program and now he is a professor at Shaanxi Normal University and Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

Wolfgang Tress

Wolfgang Tress is currently a senior lecturer at ZHAW in Switzerland leading the ERC-funded novel semiconductor devices group at the Institute of Computational Physics. His interests include the characterization and modelling of novel semiconductor materials and photovoltaic devices. Prior to his appointment at ZHAW, he was an Ambizione fellow at the Graetzel and Hagfeldt labs in EPFL and a Marie Curie Fellow at LMU, where he worked on perovskite solar cells. Based on his PhD thesis at TU Dresden and postdoctoral research in the Inganäs group he published a monograph on organic solar cells. Wolfgang is a former recipient of the “Energy & Environmental Science Readers’ Choice Lectureship.”

Metal halide perovskites are a new class of optoelectronic materials that have attracted huge attention worldwide. Their applications include various types of optoelectronic devices, such as solar cells, light-emitting diodes, detectors, and scintillators. In general, metal halide perovskites can be classified into organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites (OIHPs) and inorganic perovskites, where the latter are thermally more stable than the former. Although the power conversion efficiency of inorganic perovskite based solar cells has reached over 20%, inorganic perovskite materials still suffer from instability towards phase, light, moisture, etc. These instability issues seriously affect the device performance. More importantly, the degradation mechanisms between inorganic and hybrid perovskites are quite different. Therefore, a detailed view on understanding the degradation mechanisms of inorganic perovskites is highly needed, which is important for developing high-performance perovskite optoelectronic devices in real-world applications with prolonged durability.


Metal halide perovskites have several excellent optoelectronic properties, such as superior light harvesting capability, long charge carrier diffusion length and tunable bandgaps, all of which make them attractive in a variety of fields, including photodetectors, light emitting diodes (LEDs), scintillators, solar fuels and photovoltaics (PVs). In particular, solar cells with perovskites as the active material have been attracting widespread attention in the past decade since the pioneering work by Miyasaka and coworkers in 2009. In the meantime, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have been emerging as competitive rivals or considered as tandem devices as a partner on a par with silicon solar cells, which are currently dominating the PV market. In 2020, the certified power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs has reached 25.5% on lab scale, which is close to the record value for silicon (26.7%).

When it comes to the commercial application of PV technologies, several criteria must be satisfied, including high PCE, long-term stability, low cost and low toxicity. To date, the most widely used technology for preparing perovskite thin films is solution-processing, which is believed to be advantageous for industrialization due to substantially reduced production costs. Even though the toxicity and probable carcinogenicity of lead have been considered as serious environmental issues for the application of lead-based PSCs, careful encapsulation and development of lead-free perovskites are options to tackle the toxicity issue. The biggest concern that impedes the application of PSCs is long-term stability under operation. The best-performing PSCs employ organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites (OIHPs) as photoabsorbers, constituting a potential source of instability as the organic components are sensitive to elevated temperatures, which will be discussed in Section 3.1. When these organic components are completely replaced by inorganic cations (typically Cs+), the stability problem can in theory be substantially alleviated.
An early comparison of performance between CsPbBr3 and MAPbBr3 based devices suggests that the organic moiety is not an essential component in constructing high-performance perovskite solar cells. Actually, the iodine-rich cesium lead halide compositions, benefiting from their broad response to the solar spectrum, hold great promise to achieve high PCEs in inorganic PSCs. The most popular candidate of inorganic perovskites, CsPbI3, with a bandgap of 1.73 eV, is well-suited for efficient single-junction solar cells. It is even more compatible for building tandem devices with, e.g., silicon subcells. It is estimated that CsPbI3-based solar cells can reach a theoretical efficiency of 28%, which reduces to 22% for CsPbI2Br-based devices.
Nevertheless, narrow bandgap inorganic perovskite materials that are regarded fundamentally more stable turn out to be less stable. The CsPbI3 perovskite suffers from serious stability issues because it cannot preserve its ideal cubic phase under ambient conditions. The cubic phase, or generally known as the α-phase or black phase, is the desired perovskite phase with the mentioned bandgap. However, the orthorhombic non-perovskite δ-phase, also known as the yellow phase, with a large bandgap of 2.82 eV is the most stable under ambient conditions, but not suitable for PV applications.
Degradation of PSCs in the presence of humidity and oxygen also poses tremendous challenges for their commercialization, in particular with respect to desired cost-effective encapsulants. Compared with OIHPs, the degradation mechanisms of inorganic perovskites are not completely the same. For instance, due to the existence of organic moieties in OIHPs, water molecules from the environment prefer to form hydrogen bonds with them. This is an initial stage, which severely triggers the subsequent instability-causing processes such as phase transformation or even degradation of the compound. However, the complete absence of organic components in all-inorganic perovskites involves different types of degradation routes, which need thorough exploration. Therefore, we believe that a realistic and differentiated view regarding stability vs different factors is highly desired. Understanding the fundamental mechanisms for the instability of high iodine-content inorganic perovskites is of great importance to develop high performance all-inorganic perovskites and solar cells towards commercial applications.
In this review, we summarize the development of stability studies on metal halide inorganic perovskite materials and solar cells. The fundamental reasons for the intrinsic instability and stability against external factors will be discussed and compared with OIHPs. Finally, the reported strategies for tackling these issues will be summarized and further approaches will be proposed.

In the introduction it became clear that the term stability needs to be further specified, e.g. regarding the addressed property (e.g. structure, device performance) and stress factors (heat, humidity, light, etc.). When we talk about instability with respect to solar cells, we mainly refer to the degradation of the performance, which could have various origins. They range from minor changes in the concentration of defects or at interfaces between different layers in the stack to prominent chemical changes in the material such as its composition, phase or even a decomposition of a compound.

The structural stability is defined as the ability of a material to persist in the desired phase under given ambient conditions, meaning, in our case, a photoactive perovskite phase under operating conditions. Even though a perovskite phase is formed during film processing, it is uncertain whether it can remain over years of operation, because it may not be the thermodynamically most stable phase under these conditions. Furthermore, it is not known whether it remains stable under various extreme conditions (regarding temperature, light, or humidity) that can be reached during operation.
The perovskites of interest here are described by a formula of ABX3, where the A-site is occupied by a monovalent cation, such as methylammonium (MA+), formamidinium (FA+), and Cs+, the B-site can be Pb2+, Sn2+, Ge2+ and other cations with suitable radii, and the X-site is a halide (I−, Br−, Cl−). The Goldschmidt tolerance factor t is an important empirical parameter that allows researchers to pre-screen suitable components that form a stable perovskite lattice. It is defined as , where RA, RB, and RX are the radii of the corresponding ions. In order to gain stable cubic metal halide perovskites, t should be in the range between 0.813 and 1.107. Any values beyond this range are theoretically considered thermodynamically unstable accompanied by lattice distortion. For inorganic metal-halide perovskites, the A-site is usually occupied by Cs+, yielding t = 0.805 for CsPbI3 and 0.816 for CsPbBr3. However, there is a large controversy regarding the possibility of doping the A-site with Rb+ and K+, given the fact that Cs+ is already the largest single-element cation that is at the edge of t allowing the formation of a perovskite.
Whereas the Goldschmidt tolerance factor allows the estimation of ABX3 stability more on an empirical level, the formation energy provides a theoretical description based on thermodynamics. In equilibrium the substance with the lowest formation energy among the possible compounds and polymorphs exists predominantly, meaning that this state is the most stable one. The formation energy of the cubic α-CsPbI3 is much larger than that for the orthorhombic δ-phase by approximately 14.1 kJ mol−1 at room temperature, as reported by Navrotsky and coworkers. Therefore, the formed α-phase is hard to preserve under ambient conditions.
The perfect cubic structure does not involve any lattice distortion originating from lattice strain. Due to the flexibility of a lattice structure of the corner-sharing [PbI6]4− octahedra, metal halide perovskites tend to undergo distortions involving octahedral tilting and off-centering of the A- and B-site cations for the purpose of lowering the lattice entropy at low temperatures, which breaks the symmetry of the cubic structure of connected [PbX6]4− cages by decreasing the Pb–X–Pb tilting angle. Lattice distortion provides a better arrangement of each ion in the perovskite, which (1) minimizes the energy of electrostatic repulsion (reduces the metal–halide orbital overlap), (2) increases the bond valence of the A-site cations closer to their preferred oxidation state, and (3) enhances the covalency between the A-site cations and the halide because the tilt pattern has a great excess of charge located along the bond with the anions. It agrees with a recent finding suggesting that the ineffective coordination of Cs with I, the rattling of the Cs atom in its local coordination polyhedron, and the high degree of octahedral distortion are all responsible for the instability of perovskite-phase CsPbI3, highlighting the limitation of tolerance factors in predicting perovskite stability since it assumes the maximum anion contact with cations.
While lattice strain can originate from the ionic size mismatch between the size of the A cation and the octahedral [PbX6]4− network resulting in lattice distortion and octahedral tilting, defects such as vacancies, despite a small density, have high affinity for water and oxygen molecules, which is highly detrimental for perovskite stability. Although vacancies are commonly shallow electronic traps, they hold the potential to cause the formation of deep traps if they react with compounds present in the atmosphere. The absorption of water and oxygen molecules at vacancy sites is significantly enhanced compared to pristine surfaces, accelerating perovskite degradation via the vacancy-assisted decomposition mechanism, as will be discussed in detail in Sections 5 and 6. Furthermore, surface defects have been shown to catalyze phase segregation in mixed-halide perovskites due to carrier trapping and charge accumulation at the perovskite surface.
An ideal crystal lattice of perovskite should not contain any vacancy defects beyond the thermodynamic equilibrium concentrations. However, in a real film, further vacancies are unavoidable during the crystallization and film growth process, even though the crystallization conditions are carefully controlled. Therefore, these vacancies are expected to strongly influence the properties of semiconductors, such as conductivity, charge lifetime, diffusion length, and stability. Increasing the intrinsic formation energies of vacancies is a way to decrease their concentration and make perovskites more stable against external factors as suggested by Saidaminov and coworkers. They found that when FA is partially replaced with Cs/MA, the formation energies of Pb or I vacancies have been significantly increased by more than threefold. This leads to a reduction of the vacancy concentration by approximately 109 33.
In the case of metal halide inorganic perovskites, both strain-induced lattice distortion and vacancy defects are responsible for phase instability and vulnerability towards external stimuli (Fig. 1). However, the mechanisms of these factors to induce the decomposition of perovskites remain elusive. Understanding the factors governing stability against decomposition will enable the fabrication of inorganic PSCs that are more stable under operation.

The most appealing advantage of inorganic perovskites is their superior stability against heat compared to the organic–inorganic counterparts. Despite the thermal stability up to 300 °C observed in thermogravimetric analysis experiments, MAPbI3 is intrinsically unstable with respect to the heat-induced stress and can hardly sustain real solar cell operating conditions. It has been reported that MA gas sublimes from MAPbI3 films at temperatures above 80 °C, indicating the decomposition of MAPbI3. On the contrary, cesium-based all-inorganic lead halides reveal far superior thermal stability and provide an impetus for the creation of highly efficient and stable PSCs that can potentially achieve pragmatic operational benchmarks. In fact, many reported inorganic perovskite films are processed at high temperatures (e.g. 250–350 °C), where most organic components cannot survive at all. The high annealing temperature allows the formation of black polymorphs and enhanced crystallinity of inorganic perovskites. For mixed halide CsPbBr3−xIx (0 < x < 3) films, the high annealing temperature leads to the homogenization of mixed halide perovskites through halide ion movement.


As discussed in the previous section, an important concern of metal halide perovskites is their ability to maintain the desirable perovskite structure during device fabrication and operation. Therefore, a more fundamental stability associated with inorganic cesium metal halide perovskites is their phase stability, which is closely related to perovskite lattice strain. The phase stability of the CsPbI3 inorganic perovskite is very different from that of OIHPs such as MAPbI3 or mixed cation lead halides with appropriate ratios whose cubic phases are rather stable under ambient conditions. This can be explained by the appropriate ionic radii of these hybrid perovskite components that enable the tolerance factor to reside in the favorable range. In addition, the A-site organic cations have strong covalency with lead halide octahedra by almost fully occupying the spaces between these lead halide octahedra, thus releasing the lattice strain and lowering the lattice formation energy.

The most widely studied inorganic perovskites are CsPbI3 and CsPbBr3. CsPbI3 has one photoinactive yellow phase, orthorhombic δ-phase (Pmbn), and three photoactive black phases, including cubic α-phase (Pm3m), tetragonal β-phase (P4/mbm), and orthorhombic γ-phase (Pbnm). As mentioned in Section 2, the cubic α-CsPbI3 phase, though exhibiting the ideal bandgap for solar cells, is thermodynamically unfavorable at room temperature compared to its orthorhombic δ-phase. Upon heating, the δ-phase of CsPbI3 converts to α-phase at 360 °C. Upon cooling back to room temperature, CsPbI3 exists in several metastable black polymorphs instead of returning to its original yellow phase immediately. The high-symmetry α-phase starts to transform to the β-phase at 260 °C, followed by further losing its symmetry to the γ-phase at 175 °C and down to room temperature (Fig. 2a). Apparently, lattice symmetry collapses during α → β → γ phase transitions in inorganic perovskites due to octahedral tilting and macroscopic strains. In addition, the rotation of [PbI6]4− octahedra stabilizes the top of the valence band maximum (VBM) and destabilizes the bottom of the conduction band minimum (CBM) as a result of the antibonding and bonding nature of the respective orbitals. It directly leads to an increase of the electronic bandgap from the α-phase to the distorted β- and γ-phases. It is reported that, out of the three black phases of CsPbI3, the γ-phase presents the most stable state under ambient conditions. Although full conversion of the γ- to the initial yellow δ-phase occurs after ∼48 h, according to Marronnier and coworkers, the γ-phase is calculated to surprisingly have an even lower formation energy than the δ-phase, probably because the δ-phase could be further stabilized through an additional order–disorder stochastic entropy term which does not apply for the γ-phase.
CsPbBr3 has three photoactive perovskite phases, including orthorhombic γ-phase (Pnma), tetragonal β-phase (P4/mbm) and cubic α-phase (Pm3m). The γ-phase crystalizes at room temperature and transforms into β-phase at 88 °C and then α-phase at 130 °C (Fig. 2b). Among these three phases, the γ-phase is rather stable under ambient conditions compared to other halide inorganic perovskite materials. It has been reported that not only CsPbBr3 films possess remarkable heat stability during a testing period of 840 h at 100 °C, but also the unencapsulated CsPbBr3-based all-inorganic PSCs show no decline in efficiency when stored in humid air (relative humidity (RH): 90–95%) at room temperature for more than 3 months. Consequently, stable CsPbBr3-based PSCs fabricated by various perovskite film deposition techniques and surface engineering have been studied by many research groups, where the highest open circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.70 V has been achieved. Despite these advances, the large bandgap of CsPbBr3 restraining its response to the solar spectrum to wavelengths below 560 nm severely limits the maximum attainable PCE in solar cells.

The common way to prepare low bandgap inorganic perovskite (typically CsPbI3, CsPbI2Br) films is to spin-coat at room temperature, then anneal at e.g. 280 °C to form α-phase and then cool down again, hoping to not convert back to the δ phase. However, the instability of the black phases of these low bandgap films under ambient conditions is currently the bottleneck for their usage in solar cells. To solve the phase instability issue, many methods have been proposed by optimizing film morphology, reducing the grain dimensions or modifying the precursor/film composition to enhance the energy barrier for phase transition.


Precursor-additive-assisted formation of inorganic perovskite films is one of the effective methods to form high-quality and phase-stable films. The additives can firstly react with one of the perovskite precursors to form an intermediate phase, which further reacts with another precursor. This method not only slows down the crystallization process of the perovskite grains, but also lowers the entropy of phase transition, resulting in improved film morphology as well as phase stability.

A first trial to synthesize a room-temperature stable α-CsPbI3 perovskite was reported by adding a small portion of HI into the perovskite N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) precursor solution. This approach aims to accelerate the crystallization of smaller grains owing to the reduced solubility of the Cs precursors, resulting in improved stability of the black phase and enabling the successful fabrication of working inorganic PSCs with a PCE of 2.4%. Later, researchers found that it is the formation of an intermediate compound, HPbI3, in the precursor that facilitates the formation of α-CsPbI3 with more uniform grain sizes at a lower temperature. However, the formation of HPbI3 in the HI-containing CsPbI3 precursor solution was questioned by Kanatzidis and coworkers. Instead, the actual intermediate in the mixture of PbI2 with HI in DMF should be dimethylammonium lead iodide ((CH3)2NH2PbI3) due to the DMF decomposition, which is accelerated by acidic hydrolysis, e.g. HI. Thus, the CsPbI3 formed by this synthetic method is not an all-inorganic perovskite.
MAI is another popular precursor-additive for achieving efficient and stable CsPbI3 PSCs. During the annealing process, in a first step MAPbI3 forms at a lower temperature. It then acts as a perovskite template for the subsequent ion exchange whereby the MA+ ions in MAPbI3 are replaced by Cs+ while increasing the temperature. Finally, a γ-phase CsPbI3 forms with an average grain size greater than 2 μm (Fig. 3a). A sufficient amount of MAI additive in the perovskite precursor solution for the formation of MAPbI3 as an intermediate phase and a sufficiently high temperature facilitating the cation exchange are two key factors to achieve successful conversion to pure γ-CsPbI3 films. The MAPbI3 template restricts the growth of CsPbI3, resulting in compact and uniform grains, better stability and intimate contact with the underlying TiO2 in the common solar-cell architecture. MA+ can also be introduced in its gaseous form to assist the formation of high-quality and stable CsPbI3 films. The addition of MAI into the precursor solution as the initiator facilitates the absorption of the MA gas into CsPbI3 films by modifying the chemical bond of –Cs–I–Pb.
The usage of β-CsPbI3 films as active layers has taken a great step in developing highly efficient inorganic PSCs with enhanced phase stability. Dimethylammonium iodide (DMAI) was used as a precursor additive to facilitate the conversion into black β-CsPbI3. Synchrotron-based X-ray scattering revealed the presence of highly oriented stable β-CsPbI3 grains at room temperature, which were previously observed only above 260 °C. A further surface treatment with choline iodide was adopted to mitigate the effects of cracks and pinholes in the perovskite layer, which increases the charge-carrier lifetime and simultaneously improves the energy-level alignment between the CsPbI3 perovskite and charge transport layers. The CsPbI3 PSCs made from the treated material demonstrate a highly reproducible and stable efficiency of 18.4%. In an ab initio molecular dynamics simulation study, the high performance of the β-phase in PSCs is attributed to the fact that native point defects are benign for non-radiative charge recombination due to the softness of the perovskite lattice that reduces the non-adiabatic coupling. A further study identified that the role of DMAI when used as an additive in the fabrication of CsPbI3 perovskite films is a crystal growth modulator rather than an organic cation dopant as DMAI sublimes fully in the end. The presence of DMA+ affects the crystallization kinetics, forming either β- or γ-CsPbI3. When passivated with phenyltrimethylammonium chloride and employed in a solar cell, the DMAI-assisted grown β-phase CsPbI3 achieved a champion efficiency of 19.03% (Fig. 3b–d).
The solvents themselves, which are used to prepare the perovskite precursor solutions, play an important role in regulating the perovskite crystallization process by forming intermediate phases between solvent molecules and perovskite precursors. The commonly used solvent dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) can interact with PbI2 and PbBr2 to form the Lewis base adducts PbI2(DMSO) and PbBr2(DMSO), which are used as precursors to slow down the crystallization process, resulting in CsPbI2Br films with large-scale crystalline grains, providing long carrier lifetimes and improving stability in air. By modulating the ratio of DMF/DMSO in the mixed-solvent precursor solution, the formation of the CsI–PbX2–DMSO intermediate significantly reduces the annealing temperature of the inorganic perovskite film to 100 °C, leading to high-quality α-CsPbI2Br films with remarkable long-term thermal and light stability.
Another example elucidating the role of the solvent in the synthesis and storage of α-CsPbI3 is a study on cubic ligand-stabilized nanocrystals, which shows that polar solvent molecules can induce lattice distortion, leading to a phase transition into the orthorhombic phase. Such lattice distortion induces a dipole moment on the CsPbI3 nanocubes, which subsequently initiates the hierarchical self-assembly of the nanocubes into single-crystalline nanowires. An investigation on the kinetics of the self-assembly process discloses that the larger the amount or the stronger the polarity of the solvent, the more rapid the self-assembly and phase transition.
Black phase CsPbI3 thin films can also be stabilized by adding a small amount of H2O in a mixture of DMF and HI perovskite precursor. It is found that H2O molecules can affect the proton transfer reaction in the precursor solution by extracting protons from the DMF·xHI complex. The increase of the proton activity or I− concentration can form smaller lead halide colloids and thus manipulate the thermodynamically favored phase formation. Theoretical calculations coupled with experiments show that γ-CsPbI3 with a lower surface free energy becomes thermodynamically preferred over δ-CsPbI3 with a large surface area and exhibits comparable optoelectronic properties to α-CsPbI3.

The aforementioned tolerance factor t can be used to estimate whether a stable perovskite is expected to be formed dependent on the composition. MAPbI3 with t = 0.907 and FAPbI3 with t = 0.985 are in the range, where t predicts stable perovskites, although FAPbI3 is more stable in the δ-phase. Nevertheless, compositions with inappropriate ionic radii may generate undesirable lattice strain and lead to lattice distortion, which is one of the origins for phase instability. Therefore, by regulating the tolerance factors and lattice strain, compositional engineering, where mixed compounds are formed, can effectively facilitate the synthesis of stable inorganic perovskite materials. The reason is that beyond changing t the composition can substantially alter the entropy of the perovskite lattice and thus stabilize the black phase under ambient conditions. In addition to stabilization effects, it is desirable to form stable mixed halide (Br and I at the X-site) perovskite compositions due to the possibility to tune the electronic bandgap as the PbX6 octahedral cage is determinate towards the VB and CB interaction.

Various elemental additives (dopants), no matter whether incorporated into the perovskite lattice, are reported to improve the perovskite phase stability against external stimuli. Furthermore, they are reported to have beneficial effects on the solar-cell efficiency by (1) modulating the bandgap of the perovskite and (2) passivating grain boundaries and the perovskite top-surface, thus alleviating non-radiative recombination in devices.
Dopants capable of being embedded into A, B or X sites of the inorganic perovskite lattice, such as Ac−, SCN−, Sn2+, Ge2+, Sr2+, Ca2+, Ba2+, Mn2+, Cu2+, Zn2+, Bi3+, In3+, Sb3+, Nb5+, La3+, Eu2+/3+, Yb3+, Sm3+, and alkali metal cations, have been intensively explored. Organic cations, such as ethylenediamine (EDA),p-phenylenediammonium iodide (PPDI), tetrabutylammonium bromide (TBAB), zwitterions, phenylethylamine iodide (PEAI), and dimethylamine (DMA), have also been reported to be incorporated into the A-site of the inorganic perovskite lattice. It is noted that such compositions including the incorporation of organic components into cesium metal halides cannot be called all-inorganic but are technically OIHPs.
Coming back to the halide mixing, the introduction of Br into CsPbI3 can shrink the space to better fit Cs, as seen by an increase in t from 0.807 to 0.815 (Fig. 4a). However, it is found that at room temperature the inorganic perovskite black phase can be stable only as long as the ratio of I/Br is below 1.5. For instance, the I60%/Br40% (CsPbI1.8Br1.2) film remains unchanged for 100 h at room temperature and RH lower than 38%, while the I67%/Br33% (CsPbI2Br) film shows lattice distortion and phase transition under the same storage conditions. It should be noted that no additive was used when fabricating these Br-content perovskite films. On the one hand, the required Br content compromises the highest obtainable PCE by increasing the bandgaps of the materials, as depicted in Fig. 4b. On the other hand, the progress in film deposition techniques facilitates the fabrication of high-quality mixed-halide perovskite films with low defect concentrations, making the halide-alloyed inorganic perovskites attractive for an optimum trade-off between stability and PCE. These deposition methods include tuning the precursor composition, preheating the precursor solution or substrate, aging, chemical post-treatment, anti-solvent treatment, and hot-air assisted deposition.
Beyond Br and I, Cl is a candidate to occupy the X site. It is reported that the 3% Cl-doped γ-CsPbI3 films turned to the yellow phase at a lower speed than the undoped one under a humidity of ∼50%. This is explained by a more stable structure after Cl doping with increased t value and the reduction in film defect density. In another study, the addition of 5% PbCl2 in mixed halide CsPbI3−xBrx was observed to produce denser films with a larger grain size by slowing down the perovskite crystallization process. Furthermore, the shift of X-ray diffraction (XRD) peaks, assigned to the perovskite, to larger angles indicates that the Cl anion has indeed partially replaced Br in CsPbI3−xBrx. Notably, the PbCl2 additive significantly improves the black-phase stability of CsPbI3−xBrx films. With 10% PbCl2 addition, the black phase remains for 120 h in ambient air with 40% RH. In comparison, the control CsPbI3−xBrx can only survive less than 24 h (Fig. 5).
Since it is already challenging to form stable lead-halide perovskites with the Cs cation, smaller cations (such as Rb) have not been reported to form a black phase. Therefore, alloying on the A-site is not a viable approach to tune the properties of inorganic perovskites. Only the addition of small organic cations provides various possibilities, naturally resulting in OIHPs. Following this path, binary, triple or even quadruple cation hybrid perovskites have been synthesized to relax the lattice distortion more efficiently. Although Cs+ is the only inorganic cation that fits in the space between PbX6 octahedra, its small ionic size twists the PbX6 octahedral structure. The modulation on the A-site involves the incorporation of any size-matching organic cation or even those with larger radii. The latter often induces the formation of low dimensional perovskite lattices, along with tunable photophysical and electronic properties. This is because the ABX3 has rigid structural constraints due to the corner-sharing BX6 octahedra, whereas the reduced dimensional perovskites allow increased structural flexibility. In these cases, the ion size restriction according to the rule of the tolerance factor for constructing stable cubic 3D lattices is not applicable. The compound tends to form low dimensional structures such as 2-dimensional (2D) and quasi-2D perovskites.
2D perovskites adopt a layered structure of 3D perovskite slabs separated by organic spacer layers, yielding compounds with different layer (n) values (n = 1, 2,…,∞). n = ∞ indicates a cubic 3D perovskite, whereas the other n values describe 2D (n = 1) or quasi-2D (n > 1) perovskite structures. In 2D and quasi-2D perovskites, the organic spacers interact with the BX6 octahedra via van der Waals forces. The addition of small fractions of larger organic cation spacers in 2D perovskites has been reported to stabilize the black phase of the all-inorganic CsPbI3. For example, a small portion of PEAI replacing Cs+ results in quasi-2D perovskites that can significantly suppress the undesirable transition of CsPbI3 to the δ-phase.
The choice of B-site dopants, i.e. substituting Pb, is broader and thus offers more opportunities for obtaining stable inorganic perovskites. Candidates are elements residing in the same main family in the periodic table as Pb (such as Sn and Ge) or other size-matching divalent cations. Beyond those, interestingly, heterovalent cations have been found as potential candidates despite the charge discrepancy. By adding InBr3 and InI3 into CsPbI3, the resulting perovskite with a Pb:In ratio equal to 85:15 retains the bandgap of CsPbI3, while the intrinsic defect density is largely suppressed. A practical highlight is that the In-doped inorganic perovskite films can be prepared in a 90% RH atmosphere and thus a glovebox is not required. The fabricated and encapsulated PSCs employing a carbon electrode without a hole transport layer (HTL) exhibit a PCE of 12.04%, together with excellent stability in air for more than two months (Fig. 6a–d). However, the maximum concentration of heterovalent cations is highly limited to achieve stable perovskites. For instance, the addition of 10% Sb3+ stabilizes the crystal phase, while with the addition of higher amounts the cube shape turns into the platelet shape and therefore the stability is reduced.
We have also worked on compositional engineering on the B-site where we have shown that europium can be doped into the CsPbI2Br lattice on the atomic level without the formation of additional phases. The smaller ionic radius of europium relative to Pb2+ stabilizes the lattice by reducing the lattice tilting. It leads to a significant improvement in film stability as observed by the film preserving the black phase under 40% RH for six months. The corresponding device shows only 7% loss of efficiency after operation under 100 mW cm−2 continuous irradiation at maximum power point (MPP) tracking. The inhibition of a large number of defects within the perovskite film is also responsible for these dramatic improvements (Fig. 6e).
In another study by us, barium has been used to substitute a large quantity of Pb in the perovskite precursor solution and to prepare Ba-containing CsPbI2Br films. By using the Pb–Ba perovskite absorber layer, the non-radiative recombination is significantly inhibited, leading to improved VOC and PCE for the corresponding PSCs, along with enhanced stability under continuous one sun illumination. Surprisingly, Ba does not enter the perovskite lattice as rationalized by a non-shifted 133Cs ss-NMR signal and higher formation energies for Ba-based perovskites predicted by density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Instead, Ba induces immediate halide phase segregation by forming iodide- and bromide-rich domains. The finding of dopant-induced halide segregation has rarely been reported in fabricating perovskites for solar cells and is contradictory to the results of a previous study, where Ba is reported to enter the lattice for the same system. Therefore, it highlights that inducing halide phase segregation is a critical design criterion, which should be taken into account and investigated for other additives.
The incorporation of Sn into lead based inorganic perovskites provides the most promising route for compositional engineering due to the similarity of their electronic structures. Beyond bandgap tuning, partial substitution of lead with Sn ions with a smaller ionic radius mitigates lattice strain and results in a more favorable formation energy for a stable perovskite phase. For instance, tuning the Pb/Sn ratio within a series of CsPb1−xSnxIBr2 perovskite alloys allows the bandgaps to be changed from 2.04 eV to 1.64 eV with CsPb0.75Sn0.25IBr2 exhibiting the most remarkable phase stability. A rather low bandgap of 1.38 eV was reported for the CsPb0.6Sn0.4I3 compound, which shows desirable phase stability at low temperature compared to CsPbI3. By perovskite grain boundary and film surface functionalization, the corresponding solar cells demonstrate high operational stability in an inert atmosphere by retaining 70% of their initial PCE after 1045 h of testing (Fig. 6f and g). More encouragingly, the Pb/Sn binary inorganic perovskite films and solar cells can be processed in ambient conditions.
The combinations of different components provide a large library of inorganic perovskite materials with enhanced black phase stability. Several review papers have summarized more in-depth development of high-quality and stable inorganic perovskite films by compositional engineering. It should be mentioned that some of the mixed-ion perovskites are metastable and tend to form separated phases under light illumination, as will be discussed in Section 4.
A class of lead-free double perovskites with a chemical formula of A2BB′X6 are robust towards phase conversion and external stimuli. It has been reported that more than 350 double perovskites have been synthesized and 11 optimal materials were found with suitable bandgaps for photovoltaic absorbers through first-principles calculations. These materials show good phase stability against decomposition and wide-range tunable optoelectronic properties. Despite the challenges in finding adequate film deposition techniques and insufficient charge transfer abilities, these types of materials show promising applications in fabricating efficient, stable and lead-free inorganic solar cell devices. Readers are referred to other relevant review papers to gain more knowledge in this area.

Surface post-treatment of the perovskite film is another method to enhance phase stability by alleviating the number of surface defects. The utilization of a phenyltrimethylammonium bromide (PTABr) post-treatment for α-CsPbI3 films leads to “bifunctional” stabilization. Partial ion exchange leads to a Br gradient that adjusts the crystal growth to enhance the phase stability with a negligible influence on light harvesting. At the same time, the hydrophobic organic PTA cation provides surface passivation and enhances the moisture resistance. In another study, FAI salt treatment was found to optimize the interfacial properties of inorganic PSCs. An obvious increase in the water contact angle of the treated CsPbI2Br film indicates that FA+ with its hydrophobic terminal groups modified the film surface. The XRD patterns imply that neither FA+ nor I− is incorporated into the original crystal, but only an ultrathin I-enriched FA+ CsPbI2Br layer is formed on the surface, which subsequently enhances the moisture stability.

Large surface area organic terminal groups (OTGs) residing on perovskite grains would lead to a steric hindrance effect, which originates from the repulsive forces between overlapping electron clouds and is also regarded to contribute to stabilizing the perovskite phase. In a study where a large 2,4-dibutoxy phenyl unit was applied as an OTG capping layer for α-CsPbI3, the movement of surface Cs+ ions from their original positions towards H2O molecules can be apparently prohibited, which prevents subsequent tilting of the adjacent [PbI6]4− frameworks and thus increasing the energy barrier for phase transition under moisture and polar solvent environment. Similarly, PEAI with a large PEA group acts as a blocking element to hinder the black phase transition without changing the chemical composition of the final crystal structure. It is demonstrated that the CsPbI3 film without PEAI degraded within a few days from the black to the yellow phase. In contrast, the PEAI based CsPbI3 film can remain black even after thermal stressing at 80 °C for 120 h, while the reference film shows yellow spots in only 40 h. A further study suggests that PEAI cannot perform a cation exchange reaction to form a 2D perovskite layer when spun on top of the CsPbI3 films, significantly different from partial conversion into 2D perovskites (e.g. PEA2PbI4) in the case of OIHPs via the same treatment. The PEA+ and I− from PEAI passivate Cs+ and I− vacancies or defects on the surface of CsPbI3, and some Cs+ on the film surface might even be replaced by the PEA+ cations. Thus, the CsPbI3 film surface is terminated with PEA+, which stabilizes the CsPbI3 crystal structure with a reduced surface energy. The PEA+-terminated α-CsPbI3 perovskite shows not only improved phase and moisture stability, but also passivation effects with higher VOC and fill factor (FF) of the corresponding PSCs. Fang et al. proposed a post-treatment agent, methylammonium pyridine-2-carboxylic (MAPyA), to heal and stabilize CsPbI3 films. When annealed at 100 °C, MAPyA on CsPbI3 can degrade into MA gas and PyA− ions. The MA gas can repair non-dense CsPbI3 and lower the defect density, while the PyA− ions at the grain boundaries and surface can interact with CsPbI3via coordination bonds and ionic bonds, which suppresses the α → δ phase transition and moisture invasion.

Restraining the crystal growth to induce surface-energy-driven phase transformation is a promising strategy to control the metastable polymorphism. The spatial confinement induced by anodized aluminum oxide (AAO) templates with appropriate pore sizes leads to effective manipulation of the phase stability of α-CsPbI3. By varying the pore size of AAO, the surface formation energy of the (100) plane of the α-CsPbI3 is calculated to be 0.016 J m−2, lower than that of the δ-CsPbI3 (0.114 J m−2), indicating that the δ-phase is more thermodynamically stable only for a surface area threshold value of ≈1.96 × 105 m2 mol−1. Even if the surface area is less than this critical value, the α-phase CsPbI3 can still be rapidly stabilized due to the increasing compressive strain by the AAO spatial confinement, which does not happen in the case of δ-phase CsPbI3. In addition, this anisotropic microstrain can regulate the crystal growth direction to the stress-free [100] direction. The strain-induced stabilization of α-CsPbI3 inside the 41 nm sized AAO exhibits exceptional phase stability over three months under ambient conditions without noticeable changes in UV-vis absorption spectra (Fig. 7).

The dimensional reduction of 3D inorganic perovskite grains down to 0D, namely, nanocrystals and quantum dots (QDs), shows great potential in stabilizing the perovskite phase. For example, colloidal CsSn1−xPbxI3 QDs can stabilize the cubic perovskite phase for months in ambient air. This stability can be further enhanced by the passivation of CsPbI3 QDs using treatments with a variety of chemicals. A post-treatment with inorganic Cs-salts does not only fill vacancies at the CsPbI3 perovskite surface but also improve the carrier mobility between neighboring CsPbI3 QDs, resulting in the enhancement of the electrical properties along with improved stability against moisture. CsPbI3 QD films treated with the organic L-phenylalanine (L-PHE) ligand can increase the surface vacancy formation energy due to the bonding of L-PHE and contribute to higher device stability. The short-chain and hydrophobic PEA strengthens the electronic coupling between CsPbI3 QDs and enhances the moisture stability up to 15 days under ambient conditions with 30–35% RH. By crosslinking QDs with μ-graphene (μGR) in films, an effective channel for carrier transport and significantly better stability against moisture and high temperature were achieved. The instability originating from the thermal/moisture-induced QD agglomeration is also greatly suppressed.

Commonly the perovskite films are embedded between charge transport layers in a thin-film device architecture. The heterojunctions formed with adjacent layers can exert an influence on the phase stability due to potential interfacial strain. The strain is mainly caused during the annealing process due to a large mismatch in the thermal expansion coefficients of the perovskite layer and substrate, such as the transparent conductive oxides (e.g. indium-doped tin oxide). After cooling, the competing phases, including the δ-phase, are in a strained state of thermodynamic nonequilibrium. On one hand, the substrate clamping has been reported to stabilize the black phase of CsPbI3 at room temperature because it facilitates the perovskite texture formation in a favorable alignment of grains within a polycrystalline system, whereas, on the other hand, tensile strain has been found to accelerate the degradation of perovskite films. The detrimental residual tensile strain that remains after thermal annealing can be compensated by inducing a compressive strain employing an HTL with a high thermal expansion coefficient. This compressive strain enlarges the activation energy for ion migration and therefore improves the perovskite phase stability (Fig. 8).


Whereas moisture and oxygen can be potentially avoided by careful encapsulation, the perovskite employed in solar cells must be intrinsically stable under solar illumination. Illumination of metal halide perovskites with visible light provokes various phenomena such as phase segregation, lattice expansion and ion migration, irrespective of inorganic or hybrid ones. Although it is desired to have stable mixed halides due to the possibility to tune the bandgap, in the case of the Br–I mixed halide hybrid perovskite MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 with x exceeding 0.2, illumination triggers phase segregation that involves halide segregation. The results are lower-bandgap I-rich domains and higher-bandgap Br-rich domains. The same process happens in Br–I mixed halide inorganic perovskites CsPb(I1−xBrx)3 with x being higher than 0.4. Evidence of halide phase segregation has been established by McGehee and other researchers by carrying out XRD during perovskite illumination and transient differential absorption measurements, with which two semireversible competitive processes were observed: phase segregation (in tens of seconds) and its recovery (in tens of minutes). Such photo-induced halide segregation became known as the “Hoke effect”, featuring a drastic redshift in the photoluminescence (PL) spectrum due to the formation of small-bandgap, brightly luminescent I-rich domains, which are supposed to act as trapping centers for photogenerated charges. The halide segregation negatively impacts the performance of mixed halide PSCs as the redshift of the PL under illumination indicates a reduction in the bandgap and thus the quasi-Fermi level splitting, which reduces the maximum obtainable VOC and PCE. This is especially undesirable for building tandem solar cells, where higher bandgap subcells with optimum VOCs are very much demanded.

Halide segregation is driven by halide ion migration since halide ions tend to move toward more stable phases to minimize the total Gibbs energy under illumination. Migrating ions must overcome energy barriers for migration. It has been reported that the energy barrier for the migration of I− is reduced under light, which explains the observed light-induced halide segregation and unstable behavior in perovskite films and devices. Observing the formation of low-energy PL peaks of MAPb(I0.6Br0.4)3 resulting from light-induced halide segregation below room temperature (200–280 K) emphasizes the role of photoexcitation compared to solely a heating effect. An in-depth investigation of the influence of light on mixed halide inorganic perovskites was carried out based on CsPb(I1−xBrx)3 materials with x ranging from 0 to 1. The PL peak positions stay unchanged over time for films with x ≤ 0.4 excited at one sun irradiation. However, for compositions with 0.4 < x < 1, these PL peaks shifted significantly at the same excitation intensity, which infers phase segregation.
The electron–phonon coupling model has been proposed by Bischak and coworkers to explain the origins of this photo-induced halide segregation in the MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 alloy (specifically MAPb(I0.1Br0.9)3 in their study). The weakly bound electron–hole pairs rapidly dissociate under illumination to form free charge carriers. These charges deform the surrounding soft and ionic lattice through electron–phonon coupling until destabilizing the solid mixture, leading to halide segregation. The localized polarons induce local lattice strain, which is essential to promote further iodide migration to their adjacent vicinity and leads to iodide-rich domain growth to ∼8 nm. When MA+ is replaced by less polar Cs+, the electron–phonon coupling in the system becomes weaker and is unfavorable for phase separation. This is consistent with the observation that Cs-doped hybrid perovskites are more phase-stable under illumination than undoped films. It could also explain the higher threshold of x for purely inorganic CsPb(I1−xBrx)3.
The electron–phonon coupling model was further complemented by another model that describes the processes following MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 photoexcitation (Fig. 9). Upon film illumination, the holes preferentially accumulate at iodide-rich domains originated from stochastic composition fluctuations, contributing to red-shifted emission along with a nearly unchanged conduction band edge. The discrepancy of hole concentrations between the bulk and iodide-rich domains generates a valence edge difference, which provides an energetic driving force for further halide demixing. A crystallographic phase transition from cubic to tetragonal driven by the release of lattice strain additionally stabilizes an iodide-rich phase with a pronounced electron diffusion length of approximately 100 nm and a domain size of around 30nm. The cubic-to-tetragonal phase transition could be favorable for halide migration with a smaller activation energy in the cubic phase.
Phase segregation can be kinetically inhibited by low excitation intensities or reduced charge carrier diffusion lengths. For instance, no halide segregation of MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 was observed at excitation intensities lower than 20 μW cm−2. Charge carrier diffusion lengths are shorter in nanocrystal-based films than those in conventional thin films because grain boundaries between nanocrystals suppress the charge transport. For instance, under 60mW cm−2 illumination, CsPb(I0.5Br0.5)3 thin films exhibit a redshift of the PL, whereas no redshift occurs in the corresponding nanocrystal-based films under the same excitation conditions. According to Mora-Sero and coworkers, phase segregation in nano-crystalline CsPbBr3−xIx films occurs from a threshold size of 46 ± 7 nm. In another study, embedded nanocrystals of CsPb(I1−xBrx)3 in an endotaxial matrix facilitated a tunable bandgap that remained stable under extremely intensive illumination. These observations could therefore stimulate the development of inorganic PSCs based on mesoporous frameworks where the carrier diffusion lengths are already small enough to prevent halide segregation.
For inorganic PSCs, halide segregation may enhance the current density–voltage (J–V) hysteresis although it is correlated with a variety of factors, such as device structure, materials and interfaces. The ferroelastic Br-rich domains in the halide-segregated CsPbIBr2 perovskite may form nanostructured thin layers on grain boundaries or be highly disordered. Under light and electron beam illumination, iodide-rich CsPbI1+xBr2−x phases form at grain boundaries and segregate as clusters inside the film. Halide phase segregation generates numerous mobile ions and grain boundaries that may act as migrating channels for these negatively charged ions. If they accumulate at the perovskite/electron transport layer (ETL, e.g. TiO2) interface, they form large energy barriers, hampering electron extraction. As a result, planar CsPbIBr2 solar cells with spiro-OMeTAD as the HTL have been reported, the PCE of which shows a discrepancy of 50% when deduced from a reverse versus a forward scan (100 mV s−1).
Contrary to the common observation discussed above that Br–I halide phase segregation yields smaller-bandgap domains with red-shifted PL signals in a bulk film, Xiao and coworkers found that an all-inorganic mixed-halide perovskite film ensemble of CsPbBr1.2I1.8 nanocrystals unexpectedly exhibits a blue shift in the PL peaks (upon 30 W cm−2 laser excitation) that can partially revert in the dark. This PL shift is strongly dependent on the laser excitation power, with a higher excitation power (e.g. 15 kW cm−2) demonstrating reduced reversibility. The blue shift suggests that these NCs are transformed to bromine-rich phases owing to preferred Pb–I bond breaking and the subsequent escape of iodide ions. This is because the Pb–Br bond is shorter and stronger than the Pb–I bond, so that ionization of the bromide ions requires a higher binding energy. The PL shift can also be irreversible for the isolated single CsPbBr1.2I1.8 NC (e.g. the CsPbBr1.2I1.8 NC solution is significantly diluted) because of the unfavorable ion migration among nearby NCs.
Nevertheless, halide segregation induced by illumination does not always show negative impacts on device performance. It is reported that halide dealloying in the CsPbI2Br perovskite is critical in achieving high performance solar cells. Such dealloying phenomenon under steady illumination turns out to be a reversible process regardless of device architecture, suggesting transitions between different equilibrium states under dark and illumination. As a result, FF and short circuit current (JSC) in CsPbI2Br-based solar cells under light soaking are drastically improved due to the improved hole collection in dealloyed perovskite thin films. Once the light source is removed, the device reverts to a “dark state” with extremely low PCEs. On the contrary, the single halide MAPbI3 based solar cell with the same charge-transporting layers and device configuration does not show any of these responses on the investigated time scale (Fig. 10).

Different from the instability originating from light-induced halide phase segregation, illumination may be detrimental to perovskites due to an irreversible photochemical decomposition of the compound into metallic lead, neutral iodine, and AI if the generated neutral iodine is removed via sublimation or reaction with a solar cell contact. Troshin and coworkers monitored the photochemical stability of MAPbI3 and CsPbI3 perovskite films under light illumination using a setup to decrease the sample temperature while simultaneously increasing the light power up to 320 mW cm−2 to accelerate the photochemical aging process. Although the degradation kinetics was slowed down considerably due to the lower sample temperature, the MAPbI3 films demonstrated strong photobleaching after 700–1000 h along with morphological variation. It is ascribed to the formation of PbI2 as an intermediate product which undergoes further decomposition under illumination into iodine and metallic Pb or nonstoichiometric Pb iodides. The result indicates the very high sensitivity of the MAPbI3 films towards light, a severe challenge for its application in solar cells. On the contrary, the EDS analysis showed that the CsPbI3 film does not lose iodine under the same continuous illumination, highlighting the impossibility of generating volatile decomposition products during photo-illumination.


Unencapsulated MAPbI3 PSCs may degrade within a few minutes or several hundreds of hours of exposure to air with a high RH. Water vapor may also accelerate oxygen- and light-induced degradation due to the protonation for superoxide evolution and the stabilization of superoxide, a key intermediate phase for OIHP decomposition. Due to the large dipole moment of MA+, there is an appreciable resonance coupling effect between water molecules and MA+ to form hydrogen bonds, weakening its bonding with [PbI6]4− and allowing faster deprotonation of MA. FA+ with a 10 times smaller dipole moment than MA+ tends to possess better stability against moisture-induced deprotonation. The elimination of protons in inorganic cations completely rules out the decomposition pathway triggered by hydrogen bonding with the A cation, which should lead to enhanced moisture resistance. However, many studies have shown that Cs-based inorganic perovskites with low bandgaps suffer from poor moisture stability.

This poor stability, as already mentioned above, is due to phase transitions triggered by humidity. The bulk-phase of CsPbI3 thin films was found to undergo a rapid α → δ phase transition when exposed to a merely 11% RH atmosphere within 18 h at room temperature. In contrast, a similarly prepared sample that was sealed under nitrogen was stable in the α-phase, not just at room temperature but also at elevated temperatures. Similarly, the analogous CsSnI3 has been observed to be stable in the α-phase for more than a year when stored in an inert atmosphere.
The contrast between the spontaneous instability of α-CsPbI3 in the presence of water vapor and the robust thermal stability in an inert atmosphere strongly suggests that the role of moisture is not simply to lower the kinetic barrier of the phase transition but to disturb the relative free energies of different phases. The water vapor adsorbed on the surface of Cs-based inorganic halide perovskite films can favorably catalyze the α → δ phase transition at room temperature by generating vacancies in the crystal lattice and lowering the free-energy barrier of the phase transition. Free-energy calculations of a CsPbI3 model show a pronounced density of halide vacancies in contact with water molecules at the perovskite surface. This is due to the large solvation enthalpy of halide ions and their corresponding low vacancy formation energy. The time scale of a surface vacancy formation is estimated to be 1 ms with an equilibrium concentration which depends highly on the RH and is up to five orders of magnitude greater than the defect density in the bulk. Moreover, a significant reduction of the surface tension between δ and α phases was calculated in the presence of halide vacancies. This reduction results from the release of the ionic bonding energies between the neighboring PbX6 octahedra. When exposing to moisture, the adsorbed oxygen concentration on the film surface increases but does not change in depth, indicating that the water molecules are only adsorbed on the surface without entering the lattice cluster. As a consequence, these results reveal that the observed α → δ phase transition under moisture for inorganic perovskites is fundamentally different from the hydration process in the hybrid perovskite MAPbI3 by forming hydrogen bonds with water molecules, which result in compound decomposition as already described above (Fig. 11).
Since moisture can easily induce phase transition of Cs lead halide perovskites under ambient conditions, it gives rise to difficulties in device fabrication and operation under high humidity conditions. Therefore, methods for minimizing such moisture impacts have been extensively explored. As local lattice strain facilitates the formation of vacancies, modulation of cation/halide compositions can relax the lattice strain and maximize the formation energy of vacancies. As such, B and X site doping produces inorganic perovskites with robust resistance towards moisture invasion and remarkably high stability. In addition, forming a water-repelling surface layer with Rb/K segregation can effectively improve the phase stability against moisture. The Rb/K doped surface layers result in a higher activation barrier for water penetration originating from the absence of the participation of inner 5p electrons in Rb/K-H2O binding, which induces a much lower energy barrier in pristine CsPbI3. The doped perovskites thus remained in the major α-phase after direct exposure to ambient air (RH ∼ 30%) for 5 hours.
Passivation of perovskite grain boundaries and the film surface, which reduces the number of vacancies, can also reduce the vulnerability to moisture exposure. The hydrophobic poly-vinylpyrrolidone (PVP) as a perovskite additive passivates the surface of CsPbI3 grains and preserves the cubic phase. With PVP treatment, the PSCs exhibited good moisture stability with 75% retention after 500 h under RH of 45–55% without sealing. In another study where lead propionate additive featuring the extension of alkyl chain was used as passivating chemical, it was found that lead propionate remains intact in the CsPbI2Br film after annealing with the propionate part being arranged out of the crystal and coordinated to under-coordinated Pb atoms both on the film surface and at grain boundaries. The decorated PSCs demonstrate good phase stability in a 30% RH environment, which might be because lead propionate is not prone to form hydrated species. The organic ligands improve the phase stability of α-CsPbI3 by suppressing the lattice distortion triggered by moisture through a steric hindrance effect. Additionally, this effect can increase the Pb–I–Pb bond angle, which induces a stronger antibonding overlap of the Pb–I orbitals and leads to a high defect tolerance of the α-CsPbI3 perovskite.
Some researchers take advantage of the presence of water during perovskite film preparation to enhance film moisture-tolerance and PV performance. In a study of developing a moisture-tolerant method for inorganic perovskites, an intermediate phase of CsI1−yBry/CsPbI3−xBrx was identified by using an additional amount of CsBr, and the structural evolution toward a uniform perovskite layer was initiated by moisture treatment, forming new [PbX6]4− octahedra with the bonding of CsI1−yBry to Pb2+, and thus both crystallinity and photoelectronic performance of the perovskite were enhanced. Attributed to the homogeneity of the stoichiometry and crystallinity, the photovoltaic performance of the moisture-treated perovskite films was improved, with the VOC increasing from 0.97 V to 1.10 V and the PCE from 10.89% to 13.09%. It suggests that the water tolerance of the inorganic perovskite is largely improved and an inert atmosphere may not be a requirement during the processing of high-performance inorganic PSCs. More importantly, no δ-CsPbI3−xBrx phases were detected at 25–30% RH for 12 h, implying excellent moisture stability of the α-phase (Fig. 12).

Stability towards oxygen is highly desirable for PSCs as it reduces the requirements of encapsulation. For OIHPs such as MAPbI3, degradation under oxygen targets both the organic cation and the halide ions. The oxygen-mediated perovskite degradation is accelerated by exposure to light because the photoexcited electrons from the perovskite can transform the oxygen molecule into superoxide species (O2−). The iodide vacancies are the preferred sites in catalyzing the photo-induced formation of superoxide species due to a similar volume of superoxide radical ion and iodide vacancy, allowing the restoration of the full octahedra co-ordination of Pb2+. The oxygen molecules rapidly diffuse into the intergranular regions of the perovskite through halide vacancies and thus the superoxide initially forms in these areas, facilitating the formation of O–Pb bonds with a surface Pb ion and ultimately breaking the local Pb–I octahedral structure. These surface-formed superoxide species also deprotonate MA+ in photoexcited MAPbI3* and generate water molecules. Over a period of a few days, oxygen diffuses into the bulk and occupies the bulk iodide vacancies where it is reduced, leading to complete degradation of the perovskite into MA, PbI2, H2O, and I2.
4MAPbI3* + O2− → 4PbI2 + 2I2 + 2H2O + 4CH3NH2
Since the increased grain boundaries result in a high density of surface adsorption/reaction sites per unit volume, the photo-oxidized degradation rate is highly dependent on the perovskite crystallite size, with films composed of small crystallites showing high yields of superoxide formation and therefore low stability. Therefore, controlling the grain size and density of iodide vacancies in perovskite films is critical as they both enable the penetration of oxygen into the bulk and offer reaction sites for photo-oxidation. Accordingly, iodide salt treatment can be employed to reduce the number of problematic iodide vacancies, thereby hindering the electron transfer reaction that generates superoxide species. In addition, employing an ETL with high electron mobility may be beneficial to efficiently transfer electrons from the perovskite layer and reduce the chance for the excited perovskite to react with the oxygen molecules.
Compared to OIHPs, there is no concern of deprotonation by superoxide species for inorganic halide perovskites due to the fact that A-site inorganic cations are free of acid protons and the acid–base reaction can be avoided. Therefore, oxygen-induced degradation is significantly reduced for lead halide inorganic perovskites. As such, many reported fabrication methods of lead based inorganic perovskites are carried out in a dry air environment, suggesting that oxygen does not impair the film stability during processing.
Hu and coworkers unveiled that oxygen has surface passivation effects for inorganic perovskites. Similar to OIHPs where surface halide vacancies are favorable sites for oxygen molecule adsorption, oxygen molecules are also preferentially adsorbed on surface iodide or bromine vacancies in inorganic perovskites at room temperature. Upon chemisorption onto the surface of CsPbI2Br, O2 can dissociate into two O atoms at 160 °C, lower than most reported temperatures for post-annealing of inorganic perovskite films. Through a dry air fabrication process, it was found that it is the oxygen atoms rather than molecules that may be adsorbed at the halide vacancy both in the bulk and on the surface. As a result, trap densities were largely reduced and their energies shifted below the VBM. Sit and coworkers also disclosed by an ab initio study that a sufficient excess of electrons significantly reduces the activation energy of the O–O bond dissociation compared to that of the superoxide and thus accelerates the conversion of the superoxide into two O atoms which then form two covalent bonds with the surface Pb. Different from O2-passivated CsPbI2Br where the VBM mainly originates from halide p orbitals, the O-atom-passivated CsPbI2Br shows the delocalization of O orbitals contributing to the VBM. The PSCs based on O-passivated CsPbI2Br films prepared in a dry air atmosphere demonstrated a PCE of 15.17%, much higher than that of a reference device (13.32%) prepared in a N2 inert atmosphere, as well as remarkable improvement of stability. Therefore, the key point to achieve O-passivated perovskites rather than O2 is the dry-air processing condition. These findings highlight the positive impacts of oxygen on the processing of lead halide inorganic perovskite films (Fig. 13).
Compared to CsPbI3, the lead-free inorganic perovskite CsSnI3 possesses a smaller bandgap (1.30 eV) with a higher theoretical short circuit photocurrent density of 34.3 mA cm−2 achievable due to extended light harvesting in the infrared region. However, tin based PSCs are extremely sensitive towards oxygen as Sn2+ is readily oxidized to Sn4+ once exposed to air, irrespective of light and moisture. The formation of Sn4+ causes p-type self-doping, which is the intrinsic defect associated with Sn-cation vacancies that result in metallic conductivity. They act as recombination centers and deteriorate the device performance.
The oxidation degradation mechanism of a tin(II) based halide perovskite is shown as
ASnI3 + O2 → 2AI + SnO2 + SnI4
The formation of SnI4 was found to catalyze the oxidation process by lowering the kinetic barriers in the form of mitigating Sn–I bonds required to be dissociated. Such reaction requires multiple adjacent tin(II) iodide octahedra so that iodine can move from one tin to a neighboring tin atom. An alloy of another divalent element, such as Pb, with Sn cuts the pathways to some extent because the number of tin(II) iodide octahedra within the perovskite lattice is reduced, thus slowing down the formation of SnI4 and other byproducts. Pb–Sn binary inorganic PSCs therefore show excellent air-stability as the perovskite films can be processed in ambient conditions without sacrificing the device performance. CsSn1−xPbxI3 QDs also present excellent phase stability for months in a purified colloidal solution and remain unchanged even in air, thus being far superior to both of its parents, CsSnI3 and CsPbI3 QDs.
A first realization of solution processed CsSnI3 solar cells at room temperature demonstrated poor device stability with power output approaching 0 after 30 min air exposure due to a completely vanishing current, presumably because of the mentioned oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+. This process can be retarded by the addition of tin(II) halides into the precursor solution as a vacancy modulator, in which an excess of Sn2+ can partially displace Sn4+ defects in the perovskite structure. These additives cover the film surface and grain boundaries. Once oxygen molecules permeate, tin(II) from these additives is firstly oxidized to form a protective layer on the perovskite surface, preventing further oxidation. Among different tin(II) halide additives, SnCl2 shows outstanding passivation capability due to its easy aggregation on the grain surfaces and ideal solubility. The sacrificial barrier approach is also adopted in a study by alloying germanium with tin in a ratio of 1:1 to form the cesium tin-germanium triiodide (CsSn0.5Ge0.5I3) perovskite as the light absorber in PSCs. An approximately 5 nm thick native-oxide GeO2 protective layer was quickly formed within 30 s once exposed to air. A small fraction of Sn doping prevents this film from further attacks by oxygen. In contrast, in another study the synthesized CsSn0.6Ge0.4I3 NCs with an average size of around 10 nm did not show the fast formation of Ge4+ oxide. Instead, the authors attributed the enhanced ambient stability of their mixed Sn–Ge halide perovskite to its remarkably higher activation barrier (0.23 eV) towards the infiltration of water or oxygen than that of the pure Sn perovskite or even the Pb-based perovskite, which allows the terminated Ge atoms to effectively protect the inner Sn atoms from oxidation. By adding 20% SnF2 when depositing CsSnI3 films, the free charge carrier densities can be greatly reduced from ∼1019 cm−3 to 1017 cm−3, suggesting that the metallic conductivity has been significantly retarded. DFT calculations showed that the defect formation energy of Sn vacancies is the lowest amongst the possibilities in CsSnI3, and the addition of SnF2 increases this formation energy and thus lowers the defect density.
Low-Sn-vacancy inorganic perovskite thin films can also be formed by adding reduced chemicals to realize the in situ reduction reaction of Sn4+ during film processing, such as hypophosphorous acid, cobaltocene, or metallic Sn. By providing a hydrazine (N2H4) gas, which is a strong reducing agent and Lewis base, during spin-coating of the CsSnI3 precursor solution, the formation of Sn4+ can be inhibited and the charge carrier lifetime of the films is enhanced by a factor of approximately 3. An excess of SnI2 in the precursor solution along with a N2H4 atmosphere allows CsSnI3 based devices to perform best with a maximum PCE of 4.81%. The excess SnI2 acts as a Sn2+ supplier to compensate for the Sn2+ loss during the oxidation process. Nevertheless, the high background carrier densities and the Sn vacancies still play a dominant role in the bulk recombination through a Shockley–Read–Hall like mechanism, which limits the obtained VOC by recombination occurring in the absorber layer itself.

This review summarizes that the degradation of inorganic PSCs is affected by multiple parameters, including light, oxygen, moisture and composition. Solar cells that operate in a real-world environment should withstand the consequences of these factors, which depend on geographical locations, seasons, climate, etc.

The major challenge associated with low bandgap cesium lead halide inorganic perovskites is phase stability. It is known that preserving the black phase at room temperature is the prerequisite for working with PSCs. By increasing the bromide content in inorganic perovskites the phase stability can be enhanced, which, however, leads to an undesirably high bandgap or would induce halide segregation upon irradiation and sacrifice the maximum attainable PCE. In addition, external factors such as light, moisture, and oxygen may cause chemical and photooxidation degradation of perovskites.
Vacancies and strain in the perovskite lattice are considered as the major sources of instability against both intrinsic and extrinsic factors. However, due to the soft ionic nature of metal halide perovskites, vacancies and strain are hardly avoided during film processing. Understanding the origins and formation of vacancies and lattice strain is important to allow directed control of the perovskite material and film preparation. Elucidating the degradation mechanisms of both the film and device depending on different factors is another important issue that needs to be addressed immediately.
A fruitful progress in solving the above challenges and problems has been made in recent years. The replacement of components in the inorganic perovskite lattice by other cations/anions with more appropriate sizes can effectively alter the lattice parameters, leading to stabilized cubic phases. The incorporation of large organic cations to form a quasi-2D structure can also significantly enhance the phase stability. In addition, a variety of film synthetic methods add great credits in developing stable inorganic PSCs. The intermediate phase induced by additives in perovskite precursors has been approved to ideally alleviate the lattice strain as well as minimize the defect traps in film processing. Moreover, choosing appropriate compounds to decorate perovskites alongside grain boundaries and the film surface is beneficial for reducing vacancies.
The inexpensive, solution-processable inorganic metal-halide perovskites hold the promise to facilitate high-temperature-tolerant solar cells. Interest in these all-inorganic counterparts of the hybrid metal-halide perovskites has been growing tremendously over the past several years, yielding the highest PCE over 20%. However, compared to OIHP solar cells, where the phase stability issue has been remarkably solved, and scalable fabrication technologies have been flourishing, which is a big step towards commercialization, the stability of inorganic PSCs is lagging behind the fast increase of PCEs and therefore becomes the next major challenge. As such, future efforts should be focused on solving the stability issue. The exploration of stable metal halide inorganic perovskites should be continued through chemical modification for high-quality films with robust stress endurance along with novel deposition methods to alleviate lattice strain and minimize vacancy defects, including dimensional control (e.g. quantum dots or quasi-2D perovskites). New surface functional materials to reduce the number of vacancy sites in perovskites should be developed to avoid moisture and oxygen attack. Owing to the excellent thermal stability and high theoretical efficiency, solar cells based on inorganic metal halide perovskites should be an important direction, either as single-junction or in tandem with Si-cells, once the stability issue is successfully solved.

There are no conflicts to declare. 


This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51972255).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021