 DOI: 10.1039/D2EE02543D
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 4813-4822


Xingcheng
Li
,

Xin
Wu
,

Bo
Li
,

Zeyan
Cen
,

Yanbo
Shang
,

Weitao
Lian
,

Rui
Cao
,

Lingbo
Jia
,

Zhen
Li
,

Danpeng
Gao
,

Xiaofen
Jiang
,

Tao
Chen
,

Yalin
Lu
,

Zonglong
Zhu
* and 

Shangfeng
Yang
*

CAS Key Laboratory of Materials for Energy Conversion, Anhui Laboratory of Advanced Photon Science and Technology, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China. E-mail: sfyang@ustc.edu.cn

Department of Chemistry, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China. E-mail: zonglzhu@cityu.edu.hk

Hong Kong Institute for Clean Energy, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon 999077, Hong Kong, China

Received
8th August 2022
, Accepted 26th September 2022
First published on 27th September 2022
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have drawn unprecedented attention due to their skyrocketing power conversion; however, their reported fill factors (FFs) still lag behind those of commercialized solar cells, and there is a lack of a comprehensive understanding of the mechanism. Here, we employed a facile and effective strategy to improve the FF to 96.3% of the Shockley–Queisser (S–Q) limit through homogeneous incorporation of CsPbBr3 crystals, which could significantly passivate deep-level hole defects, thereby leading to dramatically enhanced hole mobility to balance with electron mobility. As a result, the non-radiative recombination is suppressed along with enhanced carrier extraction efficiency, resulting in a remarkable PCE of 25.09% (certified: 24.66%) with a record FF of 86.9%, which is the highest FF among those of the reported PSCs. An in-depth analysis suggests that this strategy could concurrently reduce the FF loss caused by series resistance, shunt resistance, and non-radiative recombination. This work provides an efficient strategy to promote the FF to approach the theoretical limit.

Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted a lot of attention due to their skyrocketing power conversion efficiency (PCE). Currently, further improvement of the PCE toward the Shockley–Queisser (S–Q) limit is impeded by the relatively low fill factors (FFs), and there is a lack of a comprehensive understanding of the mechanism. Deep-level defects act as the non-radiative recombination centers and have a great influence on the properties of the perovskites and thus lead to a low FF. To address this, we employed homogeneous incorporation of CsPbBr3 crystals into the FAPbI3 perovskite, which could significantly passivate the deep-level hole defects, thereby leading to dramatically enhanced hole mobility to balance with electron mobility. As a result, the non-radiative recombination is suppressed along with enhanced carrier extraction efficiency, resulting in a significant improvement of the FF. To quantify the FF loss, we also developed a new general method and an in-depth analysis indicates that this strategy could concurrently reduce the FF loss caused by series resistance, shunt resistance and non-radiative recombination.


Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have drawn unprecedented attention due to their skyrocketing power conversion efficiency (PCE), cost-effective fabrication, solution processibility, and compatibility for applications in printable photovoltaic modules, multijunction solar cells, wearable electronics, building-integrated photovoltaics, etc. With the continuous research on the crystallinity, defects and interfaces, PSCs have witnessed a remarkable PCE exceeding 25%, which is comparable to those of commercialized silicon solar cells and copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS) solar cells, proving their potential for commercial deployment. Previously, the enhancement of PCEs mainly resulted from the tuning of the bandgap of perovskite materials to more efficiently utilize incident photons according to the Shockley–Queisser (S–Q) limit, as well as passivating defects to suppress non-radiative recombination, which results in an increased short-circuit current density (JSC) of over 26 mA cm−2 and an open-circuit voltage (VOC) reaching over 95% of the S–Q limit. However, most of the reported high-performance PSCs (PCE >25%) showed a limited fill factor (FF) below 85%, much lower than that of the state-of-the-art Si and GaAs inorganic solar cells (∼87%). Further increasing the device efficiency of PSCs requires a significant improvement of the FF. Nonetheless, there is still a lack of a systematic study of the FF that results in achieving ultrahigh values.

Generally, several factors have been investigated to improve the FF of PSCs. A widely reported strategy is to strengthen the conductivity of the charge transporting materials (CTMs) to avoid the imperfect carrier transport at interfaces. Currently, CTMs with excellent mobilities have already been employed in most of the high-performance PSCs. Besides, the charge carrier dynamics of perovskites is also significant in determining the FF of fabricated devices but lacks a comprehensive investigation. Although a star-shaped polymer was utilized to tailor the crystallization and defects of perovskites, which simultaneously enhanced the VOC and FF of devices resulting in a PCE of 22.1% with a high FF of 86%, achieving high FFs through modulation of perovskite materials was rarely reported and the mechanism behind it needed in-depth investigation. Hence, it is imperative to systematically study how the deep-level defects influence the recombination and resistance of perovskite films and then affect the FF of devices.
Herein, we report a facile but effective strategy to improve the FF and PCE of PSCs through homogeneous incorporation of pre-synthesized CsPbBr3 crystals into formamidinium lead triiodide (FAPbI3) perovskites, resulting in high-quality α-FAPbI3 perovskites with enhanced crystallinity, improved crystal orientation and diminished deep-level defect densities. The optical and electrical analyses indicate that the eliminated deep-level hole defects could not only suppress the trap-assisted non-radiative recombination but also enhance the hole mobility to make it more balanced with electron mobility. As a result, the charge extraction efficiency is significantly enhanced and CsPbBr3-incorporated devices exhibit a champion PCE of 25.09% (certified at 24.66%) with a record FF of 86.90%, which represents the highest value among those of all reported PSC devices and is 96.3% of the Shockley–Queisser (S–Q) limit FF (90.21%). The FF loss analysis implies that CsPbBr3 incorporation could concurrently mitigate the losses resulting from series resistance, shunt resistance and non-radiative recombination. This work offers an effective way to improve the FF to approach the theoretical limit and provides an in-depth analysis of the origins of the FF loss.

To realize high-performance PSCs, conventional (n–i–p) structured devices with SnO2 as the electron-transporting material and spiro-OMeTAD as the hole-transporting material were fabricated (Fig. 1a). Potassium chloride and n-hexylammonium bromide were incorporated between SnO2/perovskite and perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD interfaces to alleviate the hysteresis and interfacial charge recombination, respectively. FAPbI3 perovskites with MACl additives were employed as the active layer (denoted as the control). Small amounts of pre-synthesized CsPbBr3 crystals (xmol% relative to PbI2, x = 0.5, 1.0, and 2.0) were incorporated into the precursor solution to modify the crystallinity and defects (denoted as the target). The time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectra (ToF-SIMS) shown in Fig. 1b and Fig. S1 (ESI), X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) shown in Fig. S2 (ESI) and the energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) maps shown in Fig. S3 and S4 (ESI) confirm the incorporation and uniformity of Cs and Br elements within the CsPbBr3-incorporated FAPbI3 perovskite films.

The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the champion control and target devices are shown in Fig. 1c. The control devices realized a PCE of 23.37%, with a VOC of 1.087 V, a JSC of 25.75 mA cm−2, and a FF of 83.47%. In contrast, the target devices achieved an enhanced VOC of 1.123 V, a similar JSC of 25.72 mA cm−2, and an increased FF of 86.90%, contributing to a high PCE of 25.09%. Each batch of 30 devices for perovskites with different amounts of additives was also fabricated, and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table S1 and Fig. S5 (ESI). Devices with 1.0 mol% of CsPbBr3 additives exhibited a champion performance, achieving an average PCE of 24.71%, VOC of 1.131 V, JSC of 25.46 mA cm−2, and FF of 85.78%, indicating the effectiveness and good reproducibility of this strategy. In comparison, we also fabricated devices with 1.0 mol% PbBr2/CsBr powder as the additive, which exhibited inferior performance to that of pre-crystallized CsPbBr3 additives (Table S2, ESI). One of the champion devices was validated by an independent solar cell-accredited laboratory (SIMIT, Shanghai, China) for certification, in which a PCE of 24.66% (with VOC = 1.128 V, JSC = 25.64 mA cm−2, and FF = 85.23%) and an alleviated hysteresis compared with the control device were confirmed (Fig. S6, S7 and Table S3 ESI).
In addition, the target device was also measured at the maximum power point (MPP, Vmmp: 1.013 V) for 300 s, obtaining a stabilized photocurrent of 24.40 mA cm−2 and a stabilized PCE of 24.72% (Fig. S8, ESI). The integrated JSC values for the control and target devices calculated from the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra are 24.75 and 24.74 mA cm−2, respectively (Fig. 1d), agreeing well with the values measured from the J–V curves. It is noteworthy that the FF obtained is the highest value among those of the reported high-performance PSCs to date, and is even comparable with that of the best-performing GaAs solar cells (86.7%) (Fig. 1e and Fig. S9, Tables S4, S5, ESI). The FF reaches 96.3% of its Shockley–Queisser (S–Q) limit, confirming the effectiveness of the approach discussed in this work to improve the FF of PSCs to an ultrahigh level.
Apart from the enhanced performance, the ambient stability and thermal stability of the control and target devices were also measured. First, unencapsulated devices were stored at room temperature with a relative humidity of 15%. The target devices showed enhanced ambient stability compared to control devices, retaining over 95% of their initial PCE after 2100 hours (Fig. S10a, ESI). For the measurement of thermal stability, spiro-OMeTAD is replaced by the more thermally stable poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA) and both devices are aged at 85 °C for more than 500 hours in a nitrogen-filled glovebox (Fig. S10b, ESI). A significant enhancement of thermal stability after incorporating CsPbBr3 could be observed, which may be attributed to the reduced defect density that suppressed ion migration and will be discussed in the following section.
To uncover the underlying mechanisms of the significant enhancement in photovoltaic performance of FAPbI3 PSCs incorporated with CsPbBr3, we first studied the crystallinity and morphology of control and target perovskite films using X-ray diffraction (XRD), synchrotron-based grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) measurements. As shown in Fig. S12a and Table S6 (ESI), CsPbBr3-incorporated perovskite films showed enhanced crystallinity than the pristine FAPbI3 film according to the full-width at half maximum (FWHM) of the (100) diffraction peak. The shift of the diffraction peak at 13.96° to a higher degree after CsPbBr3 incorporation suggests that Cs+/Br− ions enter the FAPbI3 crystal lattice and result in a lattice shrinkage (Fig. S12b, ESI). The enhanced crystallinity could be attributed to more α-FAPbI3 phases formed in the CsPbBr3-incorporated film before annealing (Fig. S14 and S15a, ESI), which also leads to a phase-pure FAPbI3 film without any non-perovskite phase (Fig. S15b, ESI).Fig. 2a and b compare the GIXRD patterns of the FAPbI3 perovskite films before and after CsPbBr3 incorporation measured under an incident angle of 0.5°, with the azimuthal scan profiles for the (100) crystal plane (q = 10 nm−1) extracted from the GIXRD patterns shown in Fig. 2c. In comparison with the control film, the target perovskite film showed an eliminated δ-phase and the peak at 90° becomes stronger and sharper, which suggests that the incorporation of CsPbBr3 induced a preferred orientation in the in-plane direction of the (100) crystal plane (Fig. S16a, ESI). The degree of orientation is then quantitatively evaluated via calculating the ratio of orientated crystallites according to the formula fori = Aori/(Aori + Aiso), where Aori and Aiso are the amount of orientated and isotropic crystallites, respectively, calculated from the integrated area of the corresponding fitted Gaussian peak divided by the total integrated area shown in Fig. 2c. The fori value increases from 59.7% to 74.3% after CsPbBr3 incorporation, indicating that CsPbBr3 incorporation facilitates the formation of a highly ordered FAPbI3 film which could be ascribed to the accelerated α-FAPbI3 phase formation rate almost without an intermediate phase. The radially integrated intensity along the diffraction rings at q = 7 nm−1 to q = 15 nm−1 extracted from the GIXRD patterns of the control and target films in Fig. S16b (ESI) also confirms the disappearance of the δ-FAPbI3 phase in the target film. Top-view and cross-sectional SEM images together with a statistical distribution of grain sizes of the FAPbI3 films before and after CsPbBr3 incorporation imply that the target perovskites have larger crystalline grain sizes and reduced grain boundaries (Fig. S17 and S18, ESI). By contrast, we also evaluated the crystallinity and morphology of FAPbI3 with the PbBr2/CsBr powder as the additive in Fig. S13 and S19 (ESI), which exhibit a similar tendency to that of FAPbI3 using pre-crystallized CsPbBr3 as the additive. However, the undesirable δ-FAPbI3 phase (Fig. S15b, ESI), which is usually accompanied by defect formation, in FAPbI3 with the PbBr2/CsBr powder could be the reason for the poorer device performance compared with that of the device with pre-crystallized CsPbBr3. The enhanced crystallinity and orientation of the phase-pure target perovskite film with a large grain size is beneficial for the improvement of charge carrier extraction and suppressing non-radiative recombination.
Next, the optical and electrical properties of control and target perovskite films are investigated. Ultrafast transient absorption (TA) characterization was employed to gain a deeper insight into charge recombination dynamics. Fig. 2d, e and Fig. S20 (ESI) present the representative pseudocolor 2D and transient TA spectra at different delay times. Two photobleaching (PB, ΔA < 0) signals and a broad photoinduced absorption (PIA, ΔA > 0) signal can be observed clearly in Fig. S20 (ESI). The PB2 signal is correlated with the population of excited charges at the band edge, and the relaxation of hot carriers stems from bimolecular recombination (a few hundred picoseconds pump-fluence dependent lifetime, solid lines in Fig. S20, ESI) and trap-assisted monomolecular recombination (thousands of picoseconds lifetime, dotted lines in Fig. S20, ESI). After CsPbBr3 incorporation, the carrier lifetime is found to increase from 2926 to 6329 ps from the normalized decay kinetic curves at 775 nm (Fig. 2f) fitted using a bi-exponential function with the corresponding fitted kinetic parameters listed in Table S8 (ESI), suggesting the effective suppression of non-radiative recombination.
As the enhanced crystallinity and reduced grain boundaries are beneficial for the decrement of defect density, we further measured the trap state density within the control and target perovskite films by using the space charge limited current (SCLC) technique and calculated the trap-state densities according to the dark I–V curves of the hole-only and electron-only devices (Fig. 2g and h). The trap-state densities (nt) within the perovskite layer reduced from 8.3 × 1014 to 5.5 × 1014 cm−3 and 1.3 × 1015 to 6.5 × 1014 cm−3 for the electron-only and holy-only devices before and after CsPbBr3 incorporation, respectively. Besides, Fig. 2i compares the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the control and target FAPbI3 films. An enhancement of the PL intensity could be observed after CsPbBr3 incorporation, indicating the suppressed non-radiative recombination.
Although the reduced defect densities and suppressed non-radiative recombination could be the reason for the enhanced VOC and FF of the target devices, there is still a lack of the understanding of how the FF was improved to an ultrahigh level. Therefore, we perform the deep-level transient spectroscopy (DLTS) measurement to study the deep-level defect evolution, thereby investigating in-depth the mechanism behind the FF enhancement. Fig. 3a–d present the measured deep-level defects of the control and target perovskite films, and the detailed results are shown in Fig. S22 and Table S9 (ESI). Two positive peaks (E1, E2) and one negative peak (H1) can be seen for the control device, which are assigned to electron traps and hole traps in n-type perovskite films, respectively. After CsPbBr3 incorporation, only two positive peaks (E1, E2) appear for the target device while the negative peak associated with the hole trap disappears. According to the activation energy (EC–ET) and concentration of traps (NT) determined from the Arrhenius plots (Fig. S22b and Table S9, ESI), the traps E1, E2 and H1 with the deep-level defects being about 0.66, 0.73 and 0.83 eV below the conduction band (EC) are likely attributed to the interstitial Pb (Pbi) and antisite defects (PbI, IPb, IFA, and FAI). The decrease of trap concentrations of E1 and E2 defects along with the disappearance of the hole trap (H1) for the CsPbBr3-incorporated target device confirm the suppression of trap-assisted recombination, which is responsible for the decrease of non-radiative recombination loss leading to an improvement in the FF as discussed below. Moreover, the disappearance of hole defects could possibly suppress the trapped holes during the hole extraction, thereby enhancing the hole conductivity. To verify this hypothesis, we first calculated the electron and hole mobilities from the dark I–V curves of electron-only and hole-only devices according to the Mott–Gurney equation (Fig. S23 (ESI) and Fig. 3e). The electron mobility increased from 5.1 × 10−3 for the control devices to 1.9 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the target devices. In contrast, the hole mobility increased significantly from 2.4 × 10−3 to 1.4 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the devices without and with CsPbBr3 incorporation, respectively, and is comparable to those reported in previous studies obtained using the SCLC method. More importantly, the electron and hole mobilities differed considerably in the control film, but more balanced charge carrier mobilities could be observed in the target films, which would result in enhanced FF in fabricated devices according to previous report. The dramatically improved carrier mobilities are probably ascribed to the reduced or diminished deep-level defects.
To better evaluate the charge extraction efficiency of electrons and holes, the steady state PL measurements for glass/perovskite, glass/SnO2/perovskite, and glass/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD were carried out, and the PL quenching efficiency was calculated (Fig. 3f–h). As displayed in Fig. 3g and h, the largely reduced emission intensities for samples with a charge-transporting layer relative to glass/perovskite samples were observed owing to the charge extraction. By evaluation of the integrated areas of the respective spectra in Fig. 3g and h, PL quenching yield increased from 98.47% for SnO2/FAPbI3 to 99.90% for SnO2/1.0 mol% CsPbBr3-FAPbI3 and from 96.30% for FAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD to 99.94% for 1.0 mol% CsPbBr3-FAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD as summarized in Fig. 3f, indicative of the trend of increased charge extraction efficiency, especially for the perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD interface, which is beneficial for improving the FF. Therefore, we attributed the enhanced FF to the eliminated deep-level hole defects that result in more balanced carrier mobilities of electrons and holes, as well as the promoted charge carrier extraction.
Statistical analysis of 30 devices for the VOC loss and the FF shown in Fig. 4a suggests that the alleviated non-radiative recombination and enhanced charge carrier extraction through CsPbBr3 incorporation lead to a simultaneously enhanced VOC and FF with good reproducibility. To gain a deeper insight into the origin of the FF increment from the aspect of device physics, we performed the FF loss analysis based on the measurement of illumination intensity-dependent VOC and resistances. VOC as a function of I on a logarithmic scale is shown in Fig. 4b, from which the trap-assisted Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) monomolecular recombination of a device can be evaluated through the analysis of the ideality factor. Compared with the control device, the target device shows a smaller ideality factor, which is closer to unity, suggesting the suppressed trap-assisted SRH monomolecular recombination. The trap-assisted non-radiative loss and charge transport loss are the two main reasons for the deficit of the measured FF below the S–Q limit, and the maximum FF (FFmax) can be empirically calculated according to the following equation:
where

As shown in Fig. 4c, the calculated FFmax values are 0.871 and 0.887 for the control and target devices, respectively. The trap-assisted non-radiative loss and the charge transport loss in the target device are both clearly suppressed, confirming that CsPbBr3 can inhibit the trap-assisted non-radiative recombination and improve the charge transport in the device.
Series resistance (Rs) and shunt resistance (Rsh) can directly reflect the charge transport in the devices. Compared with the control devices, the target devices have smaller Rs and larger Rsh obtained from the J–V curves (Fig. 4d), which are beneficial for reducing the FF loss. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) also confirms that the target devices have smaller Rs and charge transport resistance (Fig. S24 and Table S11, ESI).
We then employed a method developed for silicon solar cells to quantify the FF losses of the control and target devices due to Rs, Rsh, and additional recombination. According to the following formulae, three terms of FF loss could be obtained.
where
Jmpp and Vmpp are the current density and voltage at the maximum power point (MPP) of the J–V curve measured in one sun. FFJ01 is determined by assuming the absence of ohmic resistances and recombination current, and the detailed calculation process can be seen in S14 (ESI). Rsh was determined by the inverse of the slope of a linear fit of the dark J–V in the range of 0–50 mV (Fig. S25, ESI).Rs at MPP could be determined from the voltage shift at Jmpp between the one sun J–V curve and the pseudo J–V curve (Fig. 4e). Three terms of FF loss were calculated and presented in Fig. 4f and Table S12 (ESI). ΔFFRs dropped from 2.58% for the control device to 1.27% for the target device, and ΔFFRs showed a similar downward trend with the value decreasing from 1.23% to 0.59%, which is maybe related to the fast carrier extraction stemming from the highly ordered α-FAPbI3 and reduced deep-level traps. The remaining part of FF loss, ΔFFJ02recombination, which is closely related to the deep-level trap-assisted non-radiative recombination, is also reduced to a relatively low level of 0.58% for the target device compared with the value of 1.72% for the control device. The higher decreasing ratio (66%) of ΔFFJ02recombination than ΔFFRs (51%) and ΔFFsh (52%) suggests that the passivation of deep-level defects plays the most significant role in the FF enhancement in this work. Moreover, the FF loss analysis indicates that achieving an ultrahigh FF requires the simultaneous reduction of ΔFFRs, ΔFFsh, ΔFFJ02recombination through effective strategies.


In summary, we employ a facile strategy to tailor the crystallinity and defects in FAPbI3 perovskites via homogeneous CsPbBr3 crystal incorporation, which enables a phase-pure α-FAPbI3 perovskite with an enlarged crystalline grain size, an improved crystal orientation and substantially reduced deep-level defect density and promoted charge transport. When fabricating n–i–p structured PSCs using these high-quality perovskite films, a champion PCE of 25.09% (certified at 24.66%) was achieved. More importantly, a record FF of 86.90% was realized, which reaches 96.3% of its S–Q limit, comparable to those of the state-of-the-art silicon solar cells and GaAs solar cells. The optical and electrical analyses suggest that the significantly passivated deep-level hole defects lead to more balanced charge carrier mobilities, thereby simultaneously alleviating the non-radiative recombination and increasing the carrier extraction efficiency at both interfaces. FF loss analysis indicates that this strategy could concurrently reduce the FF loss caused by series resistance, shunt resistance and non-radiative recombination. This work offers an effective way to improve the FF to approach the theoretical limit and provides an in-depth analysis of the origins of FF loss, which will pave the way to further improving the efficiency of PSCs towards commercialization.


All chemicals were used as received without further purification, including urea (Sigma-Aldrich, ≥99%), hydrochloric acid (HCl, 37 wt% in water, Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd), thioglycolic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, 98%), SnCl2·2H2O (Aladdin, ≥99.99%), KCl (Aladdin, ≥99.99%), CsBr (Aladdin, 99.999%), PbBr2 (Aladdin, 99.0%), PbBr2 (Alfa Aesar, 99.999%), PbI2 (TCI, 99.99%), methylammonium chlorine (MACl, Xi’an Polymer Light Technology Corporation), formamidinium iodide (FAI, Dyesol), hexylamine hydrobromide (TCI, >98%), 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD, 1 M company), 4-tert-butylpyridine (t-BP, Adamas), li-bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (Li-TFSI, Sigma-Aldrich), tris(2-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)-4-tert-butylpyridine) -cobalt(III)tris(bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide) salt (Co(III) TFSI, Dyesol), [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM, 1M Company), poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA, Xi’an Polymer Light Technology Corporation) and 4-isopropyl-4′-methyldiphenyliodonium Tetrakis(pentafluorophenyl)borate (TPFB, TCI, 98%). Dimethylformamide (DMF), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), chlorobenzene (CB) and acetonitrile (ACN) were all purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Isopropyl alcohol (IPA), chloroform, diethyl ether and dichloromethane (DCM) were all purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd.


CsPbBr3 crystals were grown with the slow diffusion of vapor of the anti-solvent DCM into the precursor solution. The precursor solution was prepared by mixing 0.127 g of CsBr (0.2 M), 0.539 g of PbBr2 (0.5 M) and 3 mL of the DMSO solvent under continuous stirring at room temperature until no precipitation was observed. Then, the precursor solution was filtered with a PTFE filter (0.2 μm pore size). The clear solution was poured into a 25 mL glass vial, which was sealed with aluminum foil and allowed the DCM vapor to enter through a small hole, and the vial was stored in a 500 mL glass container under a DCM atmosphere at room temperature. After sitting for about 6 days, CsPbBr3 crystals had grown to an appropriate size. The solution was decanted, and the crystals were successively washed with DMF and DCM for removing PbBr2. The final orange CsPbBr3 crystals were dried under vacuum for over 24 h.

Compared with the PbBr2 and CsBr powders, the pre-crystallized CsPbBr3 is expected to be of higher purity.

The FTO glass substrates (1.5 × 1.5 cm2) were cleaned by sequential ultrasonic treatment in detergent, deionized water, acetone, and IPA for 15 min each. Then, the substrates were dried by nitrogen flow. Before fabricating the SnO2 layer, the substrates were treated with UV-ozone for 30 min. The SnO2 layer was fabricated by the chemical bath deposition (CBD) method according to the previous reports. Briefly, the solution was prepared by dissolving 1250 mg of urea in 100 mL of deionized water, followed by adding 1250 μL of HCl and 25 μL of thioglycolic acid. Finally, 275 mg of SnCl2·2H2O was added to the solution followed by stirring for 2 min. Then, the FTO substrates, which were sealed with a Kapton tape on the edge to prevent deposition of SnO2, were vertically placed inside the glassware that contained about 100 mL of the solution. The glassware was placed inside a water bath set to 94 °C. After 4 h of the reaction, the FTO/SnO2 substrates were removed from the glassware and cleaned via sonication with deionized water and IPA for 5 min each and then dried by nitrogen flow. The FTO/SnO2 substrates were annealed in an ambient environment (RH ∼ 25%) at 170 °C for 1 h. After cooling to room temperature, the substrates were treated with UV-ozone for 15 min, followed by spin-coating 10 mM KCl in deionized water at 3000 rpm for 30 s and annealing at 100 °C for 10 min. Before the perovskite deposition, the KCl-modified FTO/SnO2 substrates were treated with UV-ozone for 15 min and then pumped inside a nitrogen glovebox.

The perovskite precursor solution was prepared by mixing 705.34 mg of PbI2 (1.53 M), 240.76 mg of FAI (1.4 M) and 33.76 mg of MACl (0.5 M) in 1 mL of mixed solvents (DMF:DMSO = 8:1, v:v). For CsPbBr3 incorporation, extra CsPbBr3 crystals were added according to the corresponding molar ratios relative to PbI2. The perovskite precursor solution was deposited via spin-coating at 1000 rpm for 10 s and 5000 rpm for 30 s, both with a ramp of 2000 rpm. 700 μL of diethyl ether solution was deposited onto the substrate when 20 s is left for the completion of the procedure. Subsequently, the FTO/SnO2/perovskite substrate was annealed at 120 °C for 1 h. After the substrate was cooled to room temperature, 10 mM of n-hexylammonium bromide chloroform solution was deposited onto the perovskite layer at 3000 rpm for 30 s and annealed at 100 °C for 5 min. The hole transporting layer (HTL) solution, which contains 50 mg of spiro-OMeTAD, 19.5 μL of t-BP, 5 μL of Co(III) TFSI solution (0.25 M in ACN), 11.5 μL of Li-TFSI solution (1.8 M in ACN), and 547 μL of CB, was spin-coated onto the n-hexylammonium bromide treated perovskite film at 3000 rpm for 30 s with a ramp of 3000 rpm. For the device thermal stability test, PTAA doped with TPFB was used to replace spiro-OMeTAD as the hole transport layer considering that the spiro-OMeTAD was not a stable HTL. Note that, all but the HTL are the same. The concentration of PTAA was 30 mg mL−1 in toluene and the weight ratio of PTAA/TPFB was 10:1. PTAA was deposited on top of the n-hexylammonium bromide treated perovskite layer at a spin rate of 2000 rpm for 30 s. Finally, 65 nm gold was deposited via a shadow mask at a pressure of about 2 × 10−4 Pa in a vacuum chamber. The deposition rate of Au was maintained to be 0.1 Å s−1 for the first 5 nm and then changed to 0.2 Å s−1 to deposit 6–10 nm; finally, the rate was changed to 0.4 Å s−1 and maintained until the end of the deposition process. The device size area was 0.1369 cm2 (0.37 × 0.37 cm2). When measuring, a 0.0905 cm2 non-reflective metal mask aperture was used to define the accurate active area of the devices.

The current density–voltage (J–V) measurements were carried out using a Keithley 2400 source measurement unit under simulated AM 1.5 irradiation (100 mW cm−2) with a standard xenon-lamp-based solar simulator (Oriel Sol 3A, USA), which was calibrated with a monocrystalline silicon reference cell (Oriel P/N 91150 V, with KG-5 visible color filter) by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). The active device area during the measurements was 0.0905 cm2 as defined by a metal mask. The EQE measurements were carried out on an ORIEL Intelligent Quantum Efficiency (IQE) 200TM Measurement system established with a tunable light source. SEM and EDX measurements were carried out using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (FEI Apero). XPS measurements were performed using a Thermo ESCALAB 250 instrument with a monochromatized Al Kα X-ray source in a vacuum. The XRD patterns were obtained using a Rigaku SmartLab X-ray diffractometer with Cu-Kα radiation (0.154 nm). UV-vis spectra were recorded using a UV-vis-NIR 3600 spectrometer (Shimadzu, Japan). The steady-state PL spectra were recorded by employing an Edinburgh Instruments FLS920 fluorescence spectrometer with an excitation wavelength of 460 nm. The GIXRD measurements were performed at the BL14B1 beamline of the Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF) using an X-ray with a wavelength of 1.24 Å. The GIXRD patterns were obtained using a MarCCD detector mounted vertically at a distance of around 288 mm from the sample with an exposure time of 60 s at a grazing incidence angle of 0.5° and analyzed using the Fit 2D software and displayed in scattering vector q coordinates with q = 4πsinθ/λ, where θ is half of the diffraction angle and λ is the wavelength of the incident X-ray. The ultrafast transient absorption (TA) measurements were performed on a pump-probe system (Helios, Ultrafast System) with a maximum time delay of ∼8 ns using a motorized optical delay line under ambient conditions. The pump pulses at 400 nm (∼20 μW average power at the sample) were delivered by an ultrafast optical parametric amplifier (Opera Solo) excited using a regenerative amplifier (Coherent Astrella, 800 nm, 35 fs, 5 mJ, 1 kHz), seeded with a mode-locked Ti:sapphire oscillator (Coherent Vitara, 800 nm, 80 MHz) and pumped with an LBO laser (Coherent Evolution-50C, 1 kHz system). TOF-SIMS analysis was carried out in positive polarity with Bi3+ at 30 keV, sputtered by Cs+ and O2+ beams, respectively. The DLTS measurements were carried out using a Phystech FT-1230 HERA DLTS system at various temperatures with a reverse bias. Temperature scans were made between 120 and 420 K, at a heating rate of 2 K min−1. Impedance spectroscopic measurements (EIS) were performed under dark conditions using an electrochemical workstation (Autolab 320, Metrohm, Switzerland) with a frequency range from 1 Hz to 1 MHz under 1.0 V. AC 20 mV perturbation was applied with a frequency from 1 MHz to 1 Hz. The obtained impedance spectra were fitted with ZView software (v2.8b, Scribner Associates, USA).


X. Li, X. Wu and B. Li contributed equally to this work. S. Yang and Z. Zhu supervised the project. X. Li, X. Wu and B. Li conceived the idea. X. Li designed and analyzed most of the experiments. X. Wu and B. Li helped analyzing most of the data. Z. Cen assisted in SnO2 fabrication. Y. Shang assisted in XRD measurement. Z. Li and D. Gao helped in the device fabrication and characterization. W. Lian and T. Chen assisted in DLTS measurement and analysis. R. Cao and T. Chen assisted in TAS measurement and analysis. L. Jia, X. Jiang and Y. Lu joined the discussion for some experimental results. X. Li, X. Wu and B. Li drafted the manuscript under the guidance of S. Yang and Z. Zhu. All the authors revised the manuscript. X. Li, X. Wu, S. Yang and Z. Zhu finalized the manuscript.


The authors declare no competing interests.


S. Yang acknowledges the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2017YFA0402800), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51925206 and U1932214) and Collaborative Innovation Program of Hefei Science Center (2020HSC-CIP004). Z. Zhu aknowledges the New Faculty Start-up Grant of the City University of Hong Kong (9610421), Innovation and Technology Fund (ITS/095/20, GHP/100/20SZ, GHP/102/20GD), the ECS grant (21301319) and GRF grant (11306521) from the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong, Guangdong Provincial Science and Technology Plan (2021A0505110003), Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province (2019A1515010761), and the Science Technology and Innovation Committee of Shenzhen Municipality (SGDX20210823104002015). We thank beamline BL14B1 at Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF) for providing the beam time and Q. Shi at SIMIT (Shanghai) for certifying our devices with guidance on the J–V measurements.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee02543d
‡ These authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022