 DOI: 10.1039/C7TC03662K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 10295-10301


Sujaya
Kumar Vishwanath
,

Taekyu
An
,

Won-Yong
Jin
,

Jae-Wook
Kang
 and 

Jihoon
Kim
*

Regional Industrial Application Lab., Division of Advanced Materials Engineering, Kongju National University, Cheonan-daero, Seobuk-gu, Cheonan, Chungnam 31080, Korea. E-mail: Jihoon.Kim@kongju.ac.kr

Department of Flexible and Printable Electronics, Polymer Materials Fusion Research Center, Chonbuk National University, Jeonju, 54896, Korea

Received
12th August 2017
, Accepted 20th September 2017
First published on 21st September 2017
Tungsten-doped indium oxide (WIO) transparent conducting thin films, to be used in inverted organic solar cells (IOSCs), were prepared by a polymer-assisted solution (PAS) process. Tungsten has high Lewis acid strength and it is, therefore, a promising candidate dopant for formulating high-mobility transparent conducting oxides with high transmittance over a wide range of regions from visible to near-infrared. WIO–PAS was formulated by coordinating W- and In-anionic complexes with a water-soluble polymer, and subsequently spin-coated on glass substrates and heat-treated at elevated temperatures. The final WIO–PAS coating solution was prepared by adding W-PAS and In-PAS with W concentrations in solution ranging from 1 at% to 5 at%. The optimum W concentration resulting in the lowest resistivity of 7.38 × 10−4 Ω cm was 3 at%. The optimum PAS-processed WIO (PAS–WIO) film, having a thickness of 230 nm, had a sheet resistance of 38 Ω sq−1 and an optical transmittance greater than 85%. The potential of the optimum PAS–WIO films in IOSCs was also assessed. The IOSCs prepared with PAS–WIO films had a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 5.6%, which is comparable to the PCE values of IOSCs with commercial tin-doped indium oxide (ITO) films. This suggests that the PAS–WIO films are a cost-effective alternative to the vacuum-based ITO films used for the fabrication of optoelectronic devices.

In recent years, transparent conducting oxides (TCOs) have attracted remarkable research interest given their excellent performance and wide range of applications in optoelectronics, such as photovoltaics, light emitting diodes, touch panels, flat panel displays and resistive memory devices. Tin-doped indium oxide (ITO) is one of the most widely used TCOs in modern optoelectronic devices thanks to its low sheet resistance and high transmittance in the visible region. However, the low sheet resistance of ITO, based on its high carrier concentration (∼1021 # cm−3), leads to: (a) a decrease in transmittance in the near infrared (NIR) region with the shift of the plasma frequency to shorter wavelengths and (b) relatively low mobility (30–40 cm2 V−1 s−1) due to ionized impurity scattering. The optical NIR loss, resulting from free-carrier absorption, restricts the absorption window for solar cells. This leads to low photon-to-electron conversion efficiency. Therefore, research has been focused on identifying alternative dopants in In2O3, which increase the TCO mobility instead of the carrier concentration.

A doping element with high Lewis acid strength (LAS) decreases the scattering of charge carriers, thereby enhancing the carrier mobility. Zhang et al. proposed the following empirical LAS expression, which helps in determining the appropriate TCO dopant:
where
Z, r, and χ indicate the effective charge, ionic radius, and electronegativity of the dopant element, respectively. A dopant with higher LAS compared to In3+ in the parent compound attracts electronic charge from the valence band (O2−: 2p6), resulting in the screening of the dopant's effective charge (Z). This screening effect weakens the interaction between the carriers and dopant ions. In order to achieve high mobility, low resistance, and high NIR optical transmittance, various doping elements with high LAS have been used, such as molybdenum (Mo6+: 3.667), titanium (Ti4+: 3.064), and tungsten (W6+: 3.158).

In this study, W was selected as a dopant for In2O3-based TCO, which provides electrons to the conduction band by favoring the substitution of In3+ ions by W6+ in the In2O3 lattice. The fact that the W6+ dopant has a significantly higher LAS value (3.158) compared to Sn4+ (LAS: 0.228) suggests that TCOs with higher mobility and wider transparency window compared to ITOs can be fabricated. W6+ dopants in the In2O3 lattice can still provide an electron even when associated with interstitial oxygen impurities (O2−) in the lattice by forming charged complexes, , as opposed to Sn4+ dopants in ITO, which become deactivated by forming neutral complexes, .
W-Doped indium oxide (WIO) films have been prepared by a solution-based process, which provides more flexibility in adjusting the concentration of dopants in WIO compared to the vacuum-based process. The solution-based process also provides an opportunity to realize low-cost and large-area electronic devices. In this study, the polymer-assisted-solution (PAS) process, which was originally proposed by Jia et al., was employed to prepare WIO thin films. The PAS process uses metal-complexes bound to a water soluble polymer. The polymer in the PAS ensures uniform distribution of the metal-complexes in the solution and prevents the metal ions from undergoing unwanted chemical reactions, such as hydrolysis and condensation that can lead to the formation of undesired phases. Although there have been several studies on various functional oxide films prepared by the PAS process, to the authors’ knowledge, there has been no attempt to grow WIO films using the PAS process, for use in organic solar cells.
In this work, the electrical and optical properties of WIO transparent conducting films prepared by the PAS-process with W doping concentrations ranging from 1 at% to 5 at% were determined. The PAS-processed WIO (PAS–WIO) was used as a transparent electrode in the fabrication of inverted organic solar cells (IOSCs).

In order to prepare WIO films using the PAS process, the individual In-PAS and W-PAS were formulated separately. For the In-PAS, both indium(III) nitrate hydrate (Aldrich) and ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA; Aldrich) were mixed at a 1:1 ratio and dissolved in 40 mL of deionized (DI) water to form anionic In-EDTA complexes. Polyethyleneimine (PEI; Aldrich) was subsequently dissolved in the In-EDTA complex solution in order to coordinate the anionic In-EDTA complexes to the protonated PEI in the solution. W-PAS was similarly prepared by dissolving sodium tungstate dihydrate (Aldrich) and PE at a 1:1 ratio in 25 mL of DI water. The pH of the solutions was carefully adjusted to deprotonate or protonate EDTA (pH = 10) and PEI (pH = 6) accordingly. The W-PAS and In-PAS solutions were filtered through a membrane with a molecular weight cut-off limit of 10000. A schematic of In- and W-metal complexes bound to PEI is depicted in Fig. 1. The concentration of metal ion complexes captured by the polymer in each solution was analyzed using inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES; PerkinElmer). The concentrations of In and W cations in the respective solution were 32.74 mg mL−1 and 71.40 mg mL−1. Finally, WIO–PAS was prepared by adding the W-PAS to the In-PAS at different mixing ratios ranging from 0 at% to 5 at%.

The formulated WIO–PAS was spin-coated on glass substrates at a rotational frequency of 2000 rpm for 60 s. The glass substrates had been ultrasonically cleaned using acetone, ethanol and boiled isopropyl alcohol (IPA). The polymer in the spin-coated WIO–PAS films was depolymerized in a tube furnace at 500 °C for 1 h in a mixed gas environment composed of hydrogen forming gas and oxygen gas (4:1). The W dopants in the WIO films were then activated by rapid thermal annealing (RTA) under a mixed gas atmosphere composed of 95% of N2 and 5% of H2 at 700 °C.
The final thickness of the WIO films obtained from a single-step spin coating process, as measured by a surface profilometer (Dektak 150; Veeco) and confirmed by a field emission electron microscope (FE-SEM; Nova 200), was 70 nm. The crystal structure of the WIO films was investigated by X-ray diffraction (XRD; Rigaku MiniFlex 600) with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.154 nm). The oxidation states of W and In atoms in the WIO films were analyzed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, MultiLab, ESCA 2000). The resistivity, carrier mobility, and carrier concentration of the WIO films were characterized by Hall measurements using the van der Pauw method (HMS3000; ECOPIA). The optical transmittance of the WIO films was measured using a UV/VIS spectrometer (V-570; JASCO).
In order to assess the potential of PAS–WIO films as electrodes in optoelectronic devices, inverted organic solar cells (IOSCs) with a device configuration of PAS–WIO/ZnO/PTB7:PC71BM/PEDOT:PSS/Ag were fabricated. The same IOSCs were also prepared on commercial ITO glasses as a reference. The WIO and ITO substrates were thoroughly cleaned using acetone, ethanol and boiled IPA and dried in a conventional oven at 120 °C for 20 min. The ZnO for the electron selective layer (25 nm) was spin-coated on the WIO films prior to the active layer. The active layer in the IOSCs was prepared with a PTB7:PC71BM blend solution in chlorobenzene (8 mg mL−1 PTB7 and 12 mg mL−1 PC71BM). The active layer was spin-coated onto the ZnO-coated WIO films and had a thickness of 90 nm. The PEDOT:PSS for the hole selective layer (Clevios P VP AI 4083) was diluted with IPA at a ratio of 1:10 prior to spin-coating over the active layer at 5000 rpm in a glove box. Finally, the Ag metal top electrode (100 nm) was evaporated through a shadow mask under vacuum (5 × 10−6 Torr). The dimension of the final IOSC, defined by the top Ag electrode, was 0.38 cm2. Details on the fabrication of IOSCs can be found in our previously published work. The photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the IOSCs prepared with both ITO and PAS–WIO films were evaluated using a Keithley 2400 source meter unit with an irradiance of 100 mW cm−2 at AM 1.5 conditions (Oriel Sol 3A, Newport).

The doping concentration to achieve optimum electrical performance was determined by varying the W concentration from 0 at% to 5 at% in the PAS–WIO films prepared by a single-step spin coating process. As seen in Fig. 2(a), the resistivity and sheet resistance of the PAS–WIO films decreased with increasing W concentrations up to 3 at%. However, further increase in W concentration resulted in increased resistivity and sheet resistance. This behavior can be attributed to a change in the carrier concentration (n) and mobility (μ), as presented in Fig. 2(b). The increase in the W concentration up to 3 at% resulted in an almost linear increase of the carrier concentration to values higher than 2.5 × 1020 cm−3 and a mobility higher than 34 cm2 V−1 s−1 was maintained. However, for doping concentrations beyond 3 at%, both the carrier concentration and mobility decreased. This suggests that at the high W concentration range, some dopants were not activated but were rather incorporated into the IO lattice as neutral and ionized impurities. Hence, it was observed that the mobility decreased to below half of its maximum value (μmax ≈ 40 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 2 at% vs. μ ≈ 15 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 5 at%). The significant reduction in the mobility at high doping concentrations can be explained by the Brook–Herring–Dingle (BHD) theory, which suggests that the mobility in a degenerate semiconductor (n ≥ 1020 cm−3) is mainly affected by ionized impurity scattering and neutral impurity scattering. The optimum PAS–WIO film, obtained at a doping concentration of 3 at%, exhibited a carrier mobility of 34 cm2 V−1 s−1 and a carrier concentration of 2.5 × 1020 cm−3. As a result, the corresponding sheet resistance and resistivity were 105 Ω sq−1 and 7.4 × 10−4 Ω cm, respectively.


Fig. 3(a) presents optical transmission spectra of the PAS–WIO films as a function of wavelength in the range of 350–1800 nm for various W concentrations. For all doping concentrations investigated, the PAS–WIO films exhibited high transmittance over a wide range of frequencies covering the visible and NIR regions. The inset in Fig. 3(a) depicts the optical transmittance of the films at 550 nm. The optical absorption coefficient (α) provides an indirect insight into the bandgap (Eg) in TCO films since α is related to the electron transition from the valence band to the conduction band in direct semiconducting materials. The absorption coefficient (α) can be calculated from experimental observations of transmittance equations:
T = (1 − R)exp(−αd)
(αhν)2 = A(hν − Eg)
where
d is the film thickness, hν is the incident photon energy, and A is a constant.

For the PAS–WIO films prepared with various W concentrations, the change in (αhν)2 values as a function of hν is plotted in Fig. 3(b). The optical Eg of the films was obtained by the intercept values of the hν-axis after linear extrapolation of the plot as shown in Fig. 3(b). The Eg of the PAS–WIO films ranged from 3.80 eV to 3.89 eV, which corroborates with Eg values reported elsewhere.


Fig. 4 presents the XRD patterns of In2O3 and PAS–WIO films with the optimum doping concentration of 3 at%. The XRD diffraction patterns exhibit a polycrystalline structure corresponding to the cubic bixbyite phase of In2O3 with a preferential orientation of (222). No phase disturbance or impurity phases were observed in the PAS–WIO films. In order to understand whether the polycrystalline nature of the WIO films has an effect on electron mobility in the PAS–WIO films, the average grain size (d) was compared against the electron mean free path (l) using both the Scherrer equation and degenerate gas model according to the following equations:
where
λ, β and θ are the wavelength used in XRD, the full width at half maximum (FWHM) and diffracted angle of the (222) peak, respectively. The terms ħ, ρ, n, and e are the reduced Planck constant, the resistivity, the carrier concentration and the electron charge, respectively. The results of the comparison are summarized in Table 1. The calculated mean free path for the PAS–WIO film with the optimum doping concentration (3 at%) was 4.37 nm, which is approximately one order of magnitude smaller than the average grain size (d = 39 nm). This result suggests that the electron mobility is not significantly affected by the grain boundary scattering in the case of PAS–WIO films.

W concentration (at%)
Ave. grain size (nm)
Resistivity (Ω cm)
Carrier concentration (cm−3)
Mean free path (nm)
1
39
1.1 × 10−3
1.5 × 1020
3.92
2
9.8 × 10−4
1.6 × 1020
4.42
3
7.3 × 10−4
2.5 × 1020
4.43
4
1.6 × 10−3
2.2 × 1020
2.10
5
2.5 × 10−3
1.6 × 1020
1.69
The chemical states of In and W atoms in the optimum PAS–WIO film with a W concentration of 3 at% were investigated by XPS. Fig. 5(a) presents the XPS spectrum for In 3d5/2 and In 3d3/2 levels at 444.35 eV and 451.65 eV, demonstrating the binding energy of the In3+ ion in the In2O3. The W 4f spectrum exhibits a doublet with binding energies of 35.4 eV for W 4f7/2 and 37.5 eV for W 4f5/2 as shown in Fig. 5(b). Such an XPS spectrum corresponds to the W6+ oxidation state. This analysis suggests that extra electrons contribute to the In2O3 matrix due to the W6+ dopants substituting for In3+ in the PAS–WIO films. However, it is to be noted that it is also possible for a W4+ oxidation state to arise when the film is grown under low oxygen partial pressure. This process condition removes the interstitial oxygens, resulting in the dissociation of the neutral complexes according to: . However, the absence of asymmetry or a shoulder in the spectrum of the W 4f doublet in Fig. 5(b) suggests that the majority of W dopants were fully oxidized to the W6+ state in the PAS–WIO films.

Addition of the W dopant at 3 at% in PAS–WIO prepared by a single-step spin coating process resulted in a single-layer film with a resistivity of 7.38 × 10−4 Ω cm and a sheet resistance of 105 Ω sq−1. The sheet resistance of the WIO single-layer film was relatively higher than the sheet resistance of ITO, which is the typical electrode for optoelectronic devices, such as an organic solar cell (OSC). It is known that high sheet resistance of the transparent electrode in OSCs leads to reduction in the fill factor, and subsequent deterioration of the OSC efficiency. In order to moderate the sheet resistance of PAS–WIO single-layer films, the thickness of the films was increased by multiple spin-coating steps. The final film thickness was 230 nm after four successive spin coating steps as shown in Fig. 6. Each spin coating step was followed by depolymerisation heat treatment in a tube furnace at 500 °C for 1 h in a mixed gas environment composed of hydrogen forming gas and oxygen gas (4:1). The entire WIO multilayer films were then annealed by RTA to activate W dopants under a mixed gas atmosphere composed of 95% of N2 and 5% of H2 at 700 °C. Since an increase in the thickness of TCO films can be accompanied by a decrease in the transmittance of the TCO films, both the sheet resistance and transmittance of the WIO (doped with 3 at% W) films were monitored as a function of the number of spin-coated layers. The sheet resistance in Fig. 7(a) decreased with increasing number of spin-coated layers, ranging from 105 Ω sq−1 for a single layer to 38 Ω sq−1 for four layers of the WIO films. Irrespective of the number of spin-coated layers, the resistivity of the WIO films was fixed at a value of around 7.38 × 10−4 Ω cm. The optical transmittance of the multilayers of the PAS–WIO films in the wavelength range from 350 nm to 2000 nm is depicted in Fig. 7(b). The transmittance of the films was marginally reduced as the number of layers increased. However, it, overall, remained at 80% over a wide range in the visible and IR regions.


The potential of the PAS–WIO films as an alternative to ITO films in IOSCs was investigated. IOSCs with a device configuration of ZnO/PTB7:PC71BM/PEDOT:PSS/Ag were developed on both the PAS–WIO prepared throughout this study and commercially available ITO films. The band structure of the IOSC is shown in Fig. 8(a). The thickness of the WIO films used in IOSCs was kept fixed at 230 nm (sheet resistance ∼38 Ω sq−1, optical transmittance at 550 nm ∼85%) to match the sheet resistance value of the commercial ITO films (sheet resistance ∼10 Ω sq−1, optical transmittance at 550 nm ∼90%). The photocurrent–voltage curves of the IOSCs on both the PAS–WIO and the commercial ITO films are presented in Fig. 8(b). Table 2 summarizes the cell performance characteristics of the IOSCs such as the short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (PCE). The PCEs of the IOSCs developed using the PAS–WIO film and the commercial ITO film were 5.52% and 7.46%, respectively. The difference in the PCEs of both IOSCs is attributed to the fill factor, resulting from the difference in sheet resistance between the PAS–WIO and the commercial ITO films. However, there was no appreciable difference in the Voc and Jsc of both IOSCs. Given that the WIO films were prepared by a solution-based process, the PAS–WIO films are considered to be a cost-effective alternative to vacuum-based ITO for the fabrication of OSCs.

Transparent electrode
PAS-processed WIO
Commercial ITO

R
s (Ω sq−1)
38
10
Transparency (%, @ 550 nm with glass substrate)
86
90

J
sc (mA cm−2)
15.02
15.86

V
oc (V)
0.75
0.72
FF
0.48
0.65
PCE (%)
5.52
7.42

The optoelectronic properties of PAS–WIO transparent conducting oxide films were investigated as a function of the tungsten concentration in the range between 0 at% and 5 at%. The optimum W-doping concentration was determined at 3 at%, resulting in a resistivity of 7.38 × 10−4 Ω cm, a carrier mobility of 34 cm2 V−1 s−1, a carrier density of 2.54 × 1020 cm−3, and an optical transmittance of 86% at 550 nm. The sheet resistance of the PAS–WIO films could be adjusted from 105 Ω sq−1 to 38 Ω sq−1 by increasing the film thickness from 70 nm to 230 nm without noticeable reduction in transmittance. In order to evaluate the feasibility of PAS–WIO films as transparent electrodes for optoelectronic devices, IOSCs were fabricated on PAS–WIO films and compared against commercial ITO films. The fabricated IOSCs on the PAS–WIO exhibited a PCE of 5.52%, suggesting that the PAS process is a promising method to prepare cost-effective transparent conducting electrodes for optoelectronic devices.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (No. NRF-2015R1D1A1A01058635 and NRF-2017R1A2B2001838) and the Nano R&D program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT, and Future Planning (No. NRF-2015M3A7B4050307).


† These authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017