 DOI: 10.1039/C6GC02300B
(Paper)
Green Chem., 2017, 19, 795-802


Fang-I
Lai
,

Jui-Fu
Yang
,

Yu-Ling
Wei
 and 

Shou-Yi
Kuo
*

Department of Photonics Engineering, Yuan-Ze University, 135 Yuan-Tung Road, Chung-Li, 320, Taiwan

Advanced Optoelectronic Technology Center, National Cheng-Kung University, Tainan, 701, Taiwan

Department of Electronic Engineering, Chang Gung University, 259 Wen-Hwa 1st Road, Kwei-Shan, Tao-Yuan 333, Taiwan. E-mail: sykuo@mail.cgu.edu.tw

Department of Nuclear Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, No. 5, Fuxing Street, Kwei-Shan, Tao-Yuan 333, Taiwan

Received
17th August 2016
, Accepted 14th November 2016
First published on 23rd November 2016
Polycrystalline Cu2ZnSnSe4 (CZTSe) thin films were directly deposited on Mo-coated glass substrates by evaporation and following selenization. Single-phase CZTSe films were formed in the temperature range of 480–540 °C, with a selenization step of 30 min. X-ray diffraction and Raman spectroscopy revealed that these thin films exhibited high crystallinity and strong preferential orientation along the (112) direction, confirming the presence of the kesterite CZTSe phase. The films prepared at temperatures above 520 °C showed many voids at the bottom of the CZTSe absorber layer, due to Sn loss during high-temperature growth, as confirmed by scanning electron microscopy and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy analyses. The band gaps (Eg) of the CZTSe thin films, which were obtained by photoluminescence spectroscopy, varied from 0.88 to 0.93 eV, depending on the SnSex loss during selenization. The solar cell fabricated with the CZTSe film grown at 500 °C showed the best conversion efficiency of 7.18%, with an open-circuit voltage of 0.38 V, a short-circuit current density of 42.34 mA cm−2, and a fill factor of 44%. Further improvements in the microstructure and Sn loss of CZTSe films may increase the efficiency of the CZTSe solar cells.

Photovoltaic devices for fossil-fuel-free energy are inherently sustainable unless they are too expensive to produce, the materials for their manufacturing are depletable, or they are environmentally unsafe. In recent years, thin-film solar cell technologies based on CdTe and polycrystalline CuIn1−xGaxSe2 (CIGS) absorber materials have achieved record-breaking efficiencies of 19.6 and 21.7% for laboratory-scale devices and have already reached the commercial production stage. However, these thin-film photovoltaic technologies suffer from serious issues relating to toxicity, high material costs, and low availability of raw materials, which are predicted to severely limit the production, mass deployment, and economic sustainability of these solar cells. Thus, intense research efforts have been triggered to develop alternative thin-film solar absorber materials composed of abundant, low-cost, and non-toxic elements that can yield high-efficiency devices, and will be economically competitive with conventional energy sources in the near future. Kesterite thin films based on sulfide Cu2ZnSnS4, its selenide derivative Cu2ZnSnSe4 (CZTSe), and sulfur–selenium alloy Cu2ZnSn(Sx, Se1−x)4 are promising absorber materials for sustainable photovoltaics, because of the abundance, environmental benignity, and industrial compatibility of the constituent elements. The superior properties of CZTSe for solar cells include its high absorption coefficient exceeding 104 cm−1, p-type conductivity, and a direct band gap of ∼1.0 eV, which is the optimum band gap for high-efficiency solar cells. CZTSe thin films have been prepared using various methods such as spin coating, evaporation and vapor phase selenization, electroplating and selenization, RF sputtering and vapor phase selenization, and co-evaporation. CZTSe thin film solar cells prepared by an ink printing method hold the highest efficiency. However, the use of hydrazine during the preparation of ink-printed CZTSe thin films for high-efficiency CZTSe solar cells has made the fabrication process more expensive, high-risk, and extremely toxic, as hydrazine is a controlled substance that is highly corrosive, flammable, and explosive. Hydrazine must be used in an oxygen-free environment, and can cause the partial etching of the Mo electrode back-contact layer, possibly decreasing the yield rate during mass production and also causing scale-up issues. These problems hinder the commercialization of ink-printed CZTSe solar cells. As a result, vacuum processes appear more suitable for industrial production, as they are stable and also capable of fabricating high-efficiency CZTSe solar cells. Among the various methods, evaporation is very advantageous for the growth of CZTSe thin films, as the atomic ratio of the CZTSe thin film can be easily controlled during the evaporation process. There are two kinds of available evaporation methods: co-evaporation and a two-step process. Among them, the two-stage process has been widely used, owing to its more industry friendly features.

The two-stage process includes the prior formation of a precursor at a relatively low temperature, followed by selenization treatment at a high temperature. The selenization process is characterized by material loss due to re-evaporation of Se and SnSex at temperatures above 350 °C, which has been a crucial issue for the preparation of high-quality CZTSe absorber layers. Various methods have been developed to compensate for the decomposition during selenization, such as purging excess gaseous SnSex and Se at the final stage of annealing, or the recently introduced fast heating ramps, in which a precursor with excess chalcogen, or excess Sn and Se during co-evaporation, is used for selenization. To supply Se during selenization, gaseous H2Se is generally preferred, as it is more chemically active for the CZTSe crystallization reaction; however, owing to its high toxicity, it causes ecological concerns and demands post-treatments.
The highest efficiency ever observed for CZTSe thin film solar cells is equal to 12.7%; it was achieved by IBM by using a hydrazine slurry approach for the preparation of the CZTSe absorber layer. The highest efficiency for a CZTSe solar cell fabricated by using the two-step process is 9.7%; notably, H2Se was used in the selenization step. As mentioned above, H2Se is highly toxic and can contaminate the environment; likewise, hydrazine used in the slurry approach is extremely toxic, flammable, and explosive. Therefore, both chemicals used in the preparation of CZTSe thin films are hazardous to humans, and their use is not desirable.
In this study, to prepare the absorber layers of high-efficiency CZTSe solar cells, we adopted the two-step process and used environmentally benign Se powder in the selenization step. Unlike other studies, in which additional Sn or Se sources, such as an additional precursor layer of SnSex, were used to produce the CZTSe absorber layer, we utilized a general selenization process without adding excess supply of Sn and Se. Additional supply of Sn and Se can result in the segregation of the SnSex secondary phase and requires a chemical wash, leading to an increase in fabrication cost and post-treatment of liquid chemical waste. Through deliberate control of the selenization step, CZTSe solar cells with a high efficiency of 7.18% and a high short-circuit current of 42.34 mA cm−2 were produced. In particular, the obtained short-circuit current value is very close to the theoretical ideal current density of 51.4 mA cm−2, which confirms the high quality of the fabricated device.

Precursor Zn/Cu/Sn/Mo stack layers were fabricated through high-vacuum evaporation of Zn (99.99%) and Sn (99.999%) ingots in W boats on Mo/soda-lime glass substrates. Zn, Sn, and Cu layers were deposited at the substrate temperature of 20 °C and the deposition rate of 0.5 nm s−1. The total thickness of the precursor layer was ∼1 μm, and the area was 2.5 × 2.5 cm2. The precursors were converted into CZTSe films by selenization in a tubular quartz furnace heated externally with halogen lamps. The precursors and 700 mg of selenium powder were loaded into a quartz box, and inserted into the furnace. The selenization was performed at high temperatures of 480, 500, 520, and 540 °C, with a dwell time of 30 min. The phases, structures, and compositions of the CZTSe films were analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), Raman spectroscopy, energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS), and X-ray diffraction (XRD). The Raman spectra of the CZTSe films were obtained at room temperature by using a He–Ne laser (632.8 nm, 5 mW) and a triple monochromator (Horiba, Lab RAM HR) equipped with a liquid nitrogen cooled charge-coupled detector. The focused light spot on the film surface had a diameter of ∼200 μm. A Siemens D500 X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα (1.5418 Å) radiation was used for the XRD measurements. The scanning was conducted over the angular θ–2θ range of 20°–80° with a step of 0.1° and a dwell time of 0.5 s. The elemental composition of the films was determined by EDS. The CZTSe thin films were characterized by Hall measurements and photoluminescence spectrophotometry. The as-deposited CZTSe thin films were used to fabricate CZTSe solar cells with ZnO:Al (300 nm)/i-ZnO (50 nm)/CdS (50 nm)/CZTSe/Mo/soda-lime glass stacking structures, in which the CdS buffer layers were grown by chemical bath deposition using Cd(CH3CO2)2·2H2O and CH4N2S solutions, while the intrinsic ZnO and the following Al-doped ZnO (AZO) window layers were both grown by RF magnetron sputtering. The device fabrication terminated with Ni–Al grids deposited by RF magnetron sputtering. The performances of the CZTSe solar cells were investigated by current voltage (I–V) and external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements. The I–V measurements were conducted under AM 1.5 solar (1000 W m−2) illumination at 25 °C by using a solar simulator. The EQE results were acquired from a system integrated with a 300 W Xe lamp (Newport 66984) and a monochromator (Newport 74112). The dispersed light beam had an approximate spot size of 1 × 3 mm2. The temperature was controlled at 25 ± 1 °C during the measurements. The active areas of the CZTSe solar cells were equal to 0.18 cm2 (excluding the front grid areas).



Fig. 1(a–d) show the top-view SEM images of CZTSe thin films obtained at different values of selenization temperature (Tsel); the corresponding Tsel values are shown in the SEM images. No obvious CuSe clusters were observed on the sample surfaces. The CZTSe grain size increased with Tsel and reached 1–2 μm. The cross-sectional SEM images are shown in Fig. 1(e–h). All thin films had the same thickness of ∼2 μm. The CZTSe thin films grown at 520 and 540 °C showed larger grains (∼1–2 μm) extending through the cross-sectional length of the films, as well as larger air voids. As confirmed by the EDS analysis, the formation of air voids was due to SnSex loss.


Fig. 2 shows the atomic percentages of Sn and Se as functions of Tsel; the inset displays the atomic percentages of Cu, Zn, Sn, and Se of all CZTSe thin films prepared at different Tsel values. Comparing the Sn and Se atomic percentages of the CZTSe thin films prepared at 480 °C with those of the thin film prepared at 540 °C, relative changes of 16.7% for Sn (from 11.38% to 9.48%) and 3% for Se (from 49.17% to 47.69%) were observed (Fig. 2). The elemental concentration change was due to the fact that the secondary phase material, i.e., SnSex, which was formed during selenization and has a low vapor point, re-evaporated as Tsel exceeded 350 °C.
To investigate the optical properties, the as-deposited CZTSe thin films were prepared on Mo/glass substrates, at different values of Tsel. Fig. 3(a) shows the PL spectra of CZTSe thin films with Cu/(Zn + Sn) ratios of 0.78, 0.80, 0.86, and 0.88 for Tsel = 480, 500, 520, and 540 °C, respectively. The optical band gap values of the CZTSe samples were found to vary between 0.88 and 0.93 eV. Notably, the band gap energy of CZTSe hinges on the Cu/(Zn + Sn) ratio. A plot of the band gap energy as a function of the Cu/(Zn + Sn) ratio for the CZTSe thin films prepared at different Tsel is shown in Fig. 3(b); a decrease in the optical band gap could be observed as the Cu/(Zn + Sn) ratio increased, in agreement with previous reports. The optical band gap of semiconductor materials is determined by the conduction band minimum (CBmin) and the valence band maximum (VBmax). The VBmax of CZTSe is related to the antibonding of the Cu 3d and Se 3p orbitals. Hence, the shift of the band gap may be due to the decrease of VBmax with the decreasing Cu/(Zn + Sn) ratio.

Fig. 4(a) shows the XRD patterns of CZTSe thin films prepared at different values of Tsel; the (112)-oriented texture was dominant in all CZTSe thin films, and no extra dominant peaks corresponding to metallic or other compound phases were observed. To evaluate the effect of Tsel on the preferred orientation degree, we defined the variable R1 as the ratio of the intensity of the (112) peak to the sum of the intensities of all peaks in the XRD pattern.
(1)
Similarly, we used the variable R2 for the ratio of the (220) peak intensity to the sum of the intensities of all the peaks:
(2)
The calculated values of R1 and R2 obtained for the CZTSe thin films are listed as follows: R1 = 0.67 and R2 = 0.19 for Tsel = 480 °C; R1 = 0.64 and R2 = 0.22 for Tsel = 500 °C; R1 = 0.68 and R2 = 0.19 for Tsel = 520 °C; R1 = 0.70 and R2 = 0.17 for Tsel = 540 °C. The CZTSe thin film with Tsel of 500 °C had the highest R2 value, indicating that the most advantageous Tsel was equal to 500 °C, as at this temperature the preferred orientation was the desired (220) orientation. The CZTSe (220) orientation provides great advantages in opto-electrical properties for photovoltaic applications. Notably, (220)-textured CuInSe2 or Cu(In,Ga)Se2 thin films grown on Mo-coated soda-lime glass substrates are characterized by a lower density of non-radiative recombination centers, more open structures, and stronger inactive grain boundaries, in contrast to (112)-textured thin films. The CZTSe crystal structures descend from that of CuInSe2 by substitution of Zn and Sn for In, and S for Se; thus, CZTSe thin films are expected to inherit the features of Cu(In,Ga)Se2 thin films. CZTSe thin films with a higher degree of (220) orientation provide superior optoelectronic properties for solar cell applications.
Raman spectroscopy was used to provide additional analysis of the structures and characterize the phase purity of CZTSe samples. Fig. 4(b) shows the Raman spectra of CZTSe samples measured at room temperature; Tsel has been accordingly labeled in the spectra. Clearly, the main CZTSe Raman peaks were mostly detected at 171 and 195 cm−1, which was consistent with the results reported in previous literature. In addition, no Raman peaks of the secondary phase were observed in the Raman spectra, showing the absence of impurity phases in CZTSe solid solutions.
From the vibration viewpoint, the zone center phonon representation of the CZTSe structure is composed of 24 vibration modes, including three acoustic modes and 21 optical modes. Among the 21 optical modes, only Raman peaks corresponding to some Raman active modes are detected in Raman scattering measurements; the dominant peak in Raman spectra is generally expected to correspond to the A1 vibration mode originating from the vibrations of Se atoms surrounded by other atoms at rest in the lattice. Thus, the Raman peaks at 195 cm−1 for CZTSe samples were ascribed to the A1 mode. The inset in Fig. 4(b) shows the shift of the dominant peak toward low frequency as Tsel increased from 480 to 520 °C, and the subsequent shift toward low frequency (by ∼1 cm−1).
The Raman peak shift can be explained by the change in elemental mass and bond strength. According to extended Keating's model, the frequency of the A1 mode is given by:
(3)
where
αX–VI (X = Cu, Zn, Sn; VI = Se) is the bond-stretching force constant related to the interaction between the nearest neighbors, and MVI is the mass of Se.

As the temperature rose from 480 to 520 °C, ν decreased as Tsel increased, owing to the decrease in αSn–Se. In the temperature range of 520–540 °C, ν increased with Tsel, owing to severe Se loss, as shown by the EDS data in Fig. 2, resulting in a decrease in MVI, and a consequent shift toward higher frequencies.

Fig. 5(a) shows the dependence of resistivity, mobility, and carrier concentration on Tsel. The resistivity of the film with Tsel of 480 °C was 92 Ω cm; the resistivity decreased as Tsel increased from 480 to 540 °C, whereas the carrier concentration increased with Tsel until 520 °C, followed by a drop at 540 °C.
These changes in electrical properties could be understood by considering the increase in CZTSe grain size with Tsel. The larger grain size of the CZTSe film favored the conduction and carrier transport by eliminating the grain boundaries. Additionally, the electrical properties of the CZTSe thin films were enhanced as Tsel increased from 480 to 520 °C and Sn loss increased, as shown by the EDS results. Given that the Sn vacancy (VSn) is an acceptor type point defect in CZTSe, the enhanced electrical properties of CZTSe could also be caused by the VSn increased concentration. However, the formation energy of VSn is 3 eV, which is higher than the formation energy of VCu and ZnSn at ∼1 eV. Therefore, VSn was unlikely to cause the electrical property variation observed in the CZTSe thin films. Likely, the increase in hole concentration was majorly caused by ZnSn and the larger grain size.
The drop of carrier concentration at Tsel of 540 °C was due to the significant loss of Se, resulting in a massive concentration of Se vacancy, VSe, which is a point defect acting as a donor in CZTSe alloys. The massive formation of VSe decreased the hole concentration in CZTSe. This inference was confirmed by the drop in atomic concentration of Se at 540 °C, as shown by the EDS results (Fig. 2).

Fig. 5(b) shows the room temperature dark current (Idark) I–V curves of CZTSe solar cells fabricated with CZTSe thin films prepared at different values of Tsel. The obtained I–V parameters are summarized in Table 1. Notably, for all four I–V curves shown in Fig. 5(b), two distinct regions could be identified according to the current behavior depending on bias voltage. Region I spanned from reverse bias to forward bias below 0.3 V, where the current exhibited a space charge limited behavior originating from shunt leakage current; region II started from forward bias above 0.3 V, where high forward bias voltage was applied and diode current was obtained.

T
selenization (°C)

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
sh (Ω cm2)
Junction rectifying character
480
3.72
286.4
14.57
500
0.90
162.45
38.68
520
1.08
50.27
9.01
540
1.56
38.88
7.33
In region I, the currents of CZTSe solar cells with Tsel of 520 and 540 °C were larger than those of CZTSe solar cells with Tsel of 480 and 500 °C, indicating that CZTSe solar cells with higher Tsel had higher shunt leakage currents. The high shunt leakage was caused by SnSex loss during selenization. The elemental loss could raise the concentration of non-radiative recombination centers at the CZTSe surface and cause shunt leakage in the depletion region. Additionally, the air voids formed in the CZTSe absorber layer could also lead to discontinued deposition of the CdS buffer layer on the CZTSe surface, resulting in the formation of a shunt leakage path, which caused the shunt leakage current. In region II, where diode current dominated, the lowest series resistance (Rs), thus the highest diode current, was exhibited by the device with Tsel of 500 °C, revealing optimum grain size and low point defect concentration at this value of Tsel. Although grains could grow larger in samples prepared at the Tsel of 520 and 540 °C, enhancing the photocurrent, severe elemental losses in these two samples caused an increase in the concentration of non-radiative recombination centers, generating significant electrical loss and suppressing the diode current at high forward bias voltages.
The junction rectifying character, which can be expressed as the ratio of the value of dark current at 0.6 V to the value of dark current at −0.6 V, measured the excess forward current flowing through recombination states and hopping paths. The junction rectifying characters of the devices prepared at the Tsel values of 480 and 500 °C were more pronounced than those of the devices prepared at Tsel of 520 and 540 °C, indicating improvements in thin film quality in the case of the samples with Tsel of 480 and 500 °C. The lower rectifying character of CZTSe solar cells prepared at Tsel of 520 and 540 °C was likely due to air voids and higher defect concentration, which respectively caused shunt leakage current and increase in Rs, as previously shown by SEM images and EDS measurements.
The performances of CZTSe solar cells fabricated with CZTSe thin films prepared at different Tsel were characterized by I–V and EQE measurements. Fig. 6(a) shows the I–V characteristic curves of each solar cell under AM 1.5 solar spectrum illumination at 25 °C, whereas the obtained solar cell parameters are summarized in Table 2. The power conversion efficiency changed with the variation of the junction rectifying character. The lower open-circuit voltage (Voc) and short-circuit current density (Jsc) values were attributed to the reduction of the junction rectification ratio.

T
selenization (°C)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF

η (%)
480
32.42
0.34
0.36
4.04
500
42.34
0.38
0.44
7.18
520
29.54
0.28
0.35
3.05
540
17.93
0.21
0.34
1.22
The Voc values can be calculated using the diode equation:
(4)
where
I0 is the saturation current density, q is the electronic charge, Il is the light-generated current density, T is the temperature, and k is Boltzmann's constant.

According to eqn (4), low I0 and high Il values resulted in higher Voc. The low Voc values of CZTSe solar cells prepared at Tsel of 520 and 540 °C resulted from the higher shunt leakage current and Rs, as inferred by the comparison of reverse currents, shown in Fig. 6(b). The best efficiency was exhibited by the CZTSe solar cell with an absorber layer prepared at the Tsel value of 500 °C, where large grain size and the absence of air voids were observed. The cell efficiency was 7.18%, with a Voc of 0.38 V, a Jsc of 42.43 mA cm−2, and a fill factor of 44%. Notably, the observed high current density of 42.34 mA cm−2 exceeded the values published in many previous reports, and it is close to the ideal value (51.4 mA cm−2).
The EQEs of CZTSe solar cells using CZTSe layers prepared at different Tsel are shown in Fig. 6(b). The CZTSe solar cell with the film prepared at Tsel of 500 °C had the best EQE over the entire spectral range, reaching values of ∼70–95% at wavelengths ranging from 480 to 1050 nm. The absorption edges of AZO, CdS, and CZTSe were located at 370, 480, and 1300 nm, respectively. In addition, the EQE spectra showed drastic decreases at wavelengths above 1100 nm. This was due to incomplete carrier collection. The decrease in carrier collection could be attributed to a shorter minority carrier diffusion length and a narrow space charge region, resulting from the high defect density of the CZTSe absorber layers, which could be caused by the smaller grain size as well as voids. This also indicated the superior quality of the CZTSe absorber layer with Tsel of 500 °C.

In this work, we used environmentally benign Se powder in the selenization step of the two-step process for the preparation of the absorber layer for high-efficiency CZTSe solar cells. A high efficiency of 7.18% and high short circuit current of 42.34 mA cm−2 were achieved. In particular, the short circuit current of 42.34 mA cm−2 is very close to the theoretical ideal current density of 51.4 mA cm−2, demonstrating the high quality of the device.

In this work, the effect of Tsel of the CZTSe absorber layer on the efficiency of CZTSe solar cells was investigated; Tsel values of 480, 500, 520, and 540 °C were used, while CZTSe thin films were prepared on soda-lime glass substrates using a two-step process. The four CZTSe thin films were characterized by XRD, Raman spectroscopy, Hall measurement, and PL spectroscopy. Notably, the value of Tsel strongly affected the microstructure and elemental variation of the films. Higher Tsel values provided larger grain sizes, but also resulted in more air voids left from the re-evaporation of SnSex. Elemental losses occurred on CZTSe thin films with Tsel of 520 and 540 °C, as verified by EDS and SEM analyses. The best efficiency of 7.18% was exhibited by the CZTSe solar cell with the film prepared at Tsel of 500 °C, while the devices with Tsel of 480, 520, and 540 °C had efficiencies of 4.04%, 3.05%, and 1.22%, respectively. The dark I–V curves of the devices revealed larger shunt leakage currents and larger Rs values on devices with Tsel of 520 and 540 °C, caused by SnSex losses. The air voids, formed by re-evaporation of SnSex, caused discontinuous deposition of the CdS buffer layer on the CZTSe surface, resulting in shunt leakage currents. In addition, the severe elemental loss caused increases in the concentration of non-radiative recombination centers and the Rs value. The highest efficiency of 7.18% was achieved in this study by adopting an environmentally benign selenization process using Se powder, and it approaches the world record efficiency of 9.1%, which was demonstrated by using toxic H2Se gas. Moreover, the CZTSe solar cell with 7.18% efficiency exhibited an impressive short circuit current of 42.34 mA cm−2, which is close to the theoretical limit of 51.4 mA cm−2; to our knowledge, this value is higher than most values published in previous reports.

This research was supported by the Green Technology Research Center of Chang Gung University, and also a grant funded by Chang Gung Memorial Hospital (BMRP 956) and Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST105-2112-M-182-001-MY3, MOST 105-2622-E-182-002-CC3, MOST 105-2221-E-155-058).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017