 DOI: 10.1039/C4EE00502C
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3052-3060


Min-Jae
Choi
,

Jihun
Oh
,

Jung-Keun
Yoo
,

Jaesuk
Choi
,

Dong Min
Sim
 and 

Yeon Sik
Jung
*

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), 291 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-701, Republic of Korea. E-mail: ysjung@kaist.ac.kr

Graduate School of EEWS (Energy, Environment, Water and Sustainability), Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), 291 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-701, Republic of Korea

Received
13th February 2014
, Accepted 16th June 2014
First published on 18th June 2014
Despite the outstanding advantages of a simple structure and cost-effectiveness of solution-based fabrication, Schottky junction quantum dot solar cells (QDSCs) often demonstrate low open-circuit voltage and power conversion efficiency (PCE) due to insufficient band bending at the QD/metal Schottky junction. Generally, this undesirable result stems from the presence of many defects at the QD/metal interface and the consequent Fermi-level pinning effect. Here, we show how the simple oxidation of PbS QDs at the PbS/metal interface can greatly improve the open-circuit voltage, fill factor, and PCE of Schottky junction QDSCs. On the basis of systematic analysis results using current–voltage characterization, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy, and light-soaking tests, we reveal that this enhancement originates from reduced interface states at the PbS/metal Schottky junction. Moreover, a significant enhancement of stability of the device is confirmed by the maintenance of >55% of its initial PCE even after 500 hours exposure in air without additional passivation.

The increasing demand of a low-cost and high-efficiency solar cell has attracted many researchers toward exploration of third-generation photovoltaic technology. Colloidal quantum dot solar cells (QDSCs) have been suggested as one of the promising candidates due to exceptional cost-effectiveness and solution-based processability, and extensive tunability based on the quantum confinement effect. However, some issues still remain for the realization of QDSCs that can outperform other solar cells. One of them is the strong Fermi-level pinning occurring at the QD/metal interface, which disturbs the formation of a high-quality Schottky junction that can efficiently collect generated charge carriers in a Schottky-type QDSC. In this paper, we systematically tailor the PbS QD/metal interface through the formation of an ultrathin interfacial layer. By controlling the degree of oxidation at the top surface of the QD film, we reveal that the oxidized interfacial layer formed at the QD/metal interface improves the quality of the Schottky barrier and achieves significant enhancements of both the cell efficiency and air stability. On the basis of systematic analysis results using current–voltage characterization, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy, and light-soaking tests, we reveal that these enhancements originate from reduced interface states at the QD/metal Schottky junction. This study is expected to provide better understanding on the critical role of metal/semiconductor junctions in various QD-based optoelectronic devices.


Colloidal quantum dots (QDs) have been extensively studied for use in optical, electronic, and optoelectronic devices due to their size-dependent optical, electronic, optoelectronic properties, as well as their exceptional cost-effectiveness and solution-based processability. In particular, lead sulfide (PbS) and lead selenide (PbSe) QDs have large Bohr radii, providing a strong quantum confinement effect and a facile tunability of band gap energy (Eg). These advantages also offer better carrier transport characteristics and wide spectral responses for photovoltaic applications. With these advantages, the performance of PbS and PbSe quantum dot solar cells (QDSCs) has shown rapid improvements over the last few years. For example, pioneering researchers recently reported impressive energy-conversion efficiencies of PbS QDSCs of up to 7% (ref. 14) by employing short organic thiols, new device structures, and effective surface passivation of individual QDs.

While rapid increase of efficiencies has been achieved through engineering the optoelectronic properties of the QD film and the device architectures, relatively little attention has been paid to the understanding of the interface properties in QDSCs. To realize the further improvement in efficiency, the ability to engineer and optimize their interfaces with high precision is necessary. For CIGS, dye-sensitized solar cells, and organic solar cells, it is well known that interfacial modification significantly affects the device performances. In the case of QD/metal interfaces, previous studies have showed that the strong Fermi-level (EF) pinning occurs at the interface due to the surface states of QDs, which disturbs the formation of the Schottky barrier between QDs and metal. As a result, the QD/metal Schottky junction exhibits insufficient band bending, regardless of the work function of metals, which leads to low open-circuit voltages (VOC) and hence to low power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) in various types of QDSCs. Recent studies have shown that modification of interface properties effectively improves their device performances. For example, introducing a thin LiF layer at the PbS/metal interface successfully passivated localized traps in Schottky-junction QDSCs. In addition, air annealing and post-annealing thiol treatment on QD films successfully modified the interface properties in PbS QD/organic bilayer solar cells. However, to the best of our knowledge, no systematic study for understanding of the oxidation of QDs, which improves interface properties at the QD/metal interface, has been performed.
Here, we demonstrate that the simple oxidation of PbS QDs at the PbS/metal interface significantly improves the device performance and air stability in Schottky junction QDSCs. Instead of introducing an additional oxide material, we controllably produce a thin oxidized layer at the PbS/metal interface through mild-oxidation treatments of the PbS QD film including air annealing at 60 °C, UV/ozone treatment, and air exposure at room temperature (RT): these treatments convert the top-most PbS QDs to a thin wide-band-gap oxidized layer. We show how to tailor the interface properties of PbS/metal through these processes, allowing the minimization of interface states at the PbS/metal junction. As a result, a device with an oxidized interfacial layer shows a significantly larger degree of band bending at the Schottky junction and a higher value of shunt resistance (RSH), leading to a much improved PCE of 3.39% (under AM1.5G illumination), which is 670% higher than that of a device without oxidized interfacial layer. Besides this, the oxidized interfacial layer significantly enhances the air stability of Schottky junction QDSCs to more than 500 hours, with a retention rate >55%, by acting as robust protection for the PbS/metal interface from air.

Lead(II) oxide powder (PbO, 99%), 1-octadecene (ODE, technical grade 90%), oleic acid (OA, technical grade 90%), oleylamine (OLA, technical grade 70%), hexamethyl-disilathiane ((TMS)2S, synthesis grade), and 1,2-ethanedithiol (EDT, 97%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used without further purification.


PbS QDs with a first exciton peak at 910 nm (1.36 eV) were synthesized with a standard Schlenk line under an Ar atmosphere. PbO (0.9 g), OA (3 mL), and ODE (33 mL) were mixed in a three-neck flask and heated to 120 °C under a vacuum for 2 h and then filled with Ar. A stock solution, 0.36 mL of (TMS)2S dissolved in 10 mL of ODE, was swiftly injected into the flask for PbS QD synthesis. Then, the QD solution was slowly cooled to room temperature. After washing the QDs three times with acetone and toluene, PbS QDs were dissolved in 6 mL toluene, and 2 mL of OLA was added to the solution. The QD solution was stored in a glove box for 3 days and precipitated using methanol. The OLA process was repeated and the QDs powder was stored in a glove box until use.


All fabrication steps were done in a fume hood. The PbS QD thin films were fabricated via layer-by-layer (LbL) deposition. PbS QDs were prepared in octane solution with a concentration of 60 mg mL−1 and were spin-coated on cleaned ITO glasses. Then, 5 drops of 1% v/v EDT in acetonitrile solution were cast on the samples, followed by 10 drops of acetonitrile and octane to wash away residual EDT and detached ligands. All of the spin coating process was done at a speed of 2500 rpm and the solutions were cast while the substrate was rotating. As-fabricated devices were kept in a glove box for 1 day and air-annealed at 60 °C in a dry oven for various times prior to metal electrode deposition. Using a thermal evaporator at a pressure of 4 × 10−6 Torr, electrodes were deposited sequentially: 0.9 nm of LiF, 100 nm of Al, and 120 nm of Ag. An active device area (3.14 mm2) was determined by the overlapped area between the ITO and the metal electrode.


The surface morphologies and cross-section images of PbS QD films were observed using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, Hitachi, S-4800). UV-visible absorption spectra of PbS QD films were measured using a UV/visible spectrophotometer (Mecasys, Optizen POP, Korea). Chemical bonding of PbS QD films were analyzed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (VG Scientific, ESCALAB 200i). The XPS depth profiling was done with 1 keV Ar+ beam at a current of 1 μA. Ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy (UPS) data were obtained using a He lamp at 21.2 eV incorporated into an ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) chamber with a base pressure of 10−10 Torr.


The current–voltage characteristics were obtained using an I–V measurement system (WonATech, WBCS3000) in air without any encapsulation. The I–V sweeps were done between −1 and +1 V, with a step size of 0.015 V. The devices were illuminated through the glass substrate using a 150 W Xe lamp with an AM1.5G filter (LS-150-Xe, Abet Technologies). The light intensity was adjusted to 100 mW cm−2 using a Si reference cell (BS-520, Bunko Keiki).



Fig. 1a schematically describes the procedure for the formation of an oxidized interfacial layer and the fabrication of QDSC devices. Oleic-acid-capped PbS QDs with an average diameter of 3 nm were synthesized (see the methods section for more details on synthesis), and then the ligands were pre-exchanged to oleylamine, a less strongly bound ligand. The PbS QD films were produced via a layer-by-layer (LbL) technique that consisted of the spin-casting of PbS colloidal QD solution and ligand exchange with an ethanedithiol (EDT) step. The LbL deposition steps were repeated five times to obtain a 160 nm-thick PbS QD film with an estimated optical band gap energy of 1.26 eV (Fig. 1b). After being stored in an Ar-filled glove box for 1 day, the PbS QD films were processed with various mild-oxidation treatments, including thermal annealing in air at 60 °C (air annealing), UV/ozone treatment (UV/ozone), and air exposure at room temperature (RT air exposure). Then a metal electrode composed of LiF/Al/Ag was deposited on the treated QD films using thermal evaporation to form Schottky junction solar cells. The scanning electron microscope (SEM) image in Fig. 1b shows the device structure of our PbS QDSCs.


We first measured the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristic of the pristine-QD (without any oxidation treatment) device (Fig. 2a). Under light illumination of the device, partial saturation of current density at V > VOC was observed, while the dark J–V curve shows normal diode behavior. This effect can be originated from EF pinning at the interface, due to a large number of trap states at the PbS/metal interface (further analysis will be provided in Fig. 6). However, as can be seen in Fig. 2b, a short air-annealing process prior to metal deposition in a Schottky junction QDSC completely eliminated the partial saturation of current, leading to significant increases of all the solar cell performance parameters such as short-circuit current density (JSC), VOC, fill factor (FF), and PCE. Moreover, the J–V characteristics of the air-annealed-QD devices were strongly dependent on the annealing time. Detailed performance parameters of the representative devices are listed in Table 1: our best device (treated for 30 min at 60 °C) exhibited a JSC of 11.07 mA cm−2, a VOC of 0.487 V, an FF of 62.9%, and a PCE of 3.39%, which values correspond to a 1.2-fold increase in JSC, a 3.1-fold increase in VOC, a 2.0-fold increase in FF, and a 7.7-fold increase in PCE compared to those values for the pristine-QD device. Notably, our method increased not only the VOC, FF, and PCE, but also the JSC of the device, which is in contrast to the previous work that employed air annealing in QD/organic bilayer solar cells. This improvement of the JSC can be attributed to the well-controlled formation of the ultrathin oxidized layer confined at the film surface (Fig. 3c and d), which process will be discussed in detail. Similar enhancement of device performance was also obtained by UV/ozone treatment for a shorter time (0–5 min) and by RT air exposure treatment for a longer time (30–360 min) (see Fig. S2 and S3 in ESI), while annealing in the Ar-filled glove box had almost no effect on the J–V characteristics of the devices (Fig. S4 in ESI). These results suggest that the enhancement of device performance stems from the controlled oxidation of the QD film.

Air-annealing time at 60 °C

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)

V
bi (V)
FF (%)

R
S (Ω cm2)

R
SH (Ω cm2)
PCE (%)
Pristine (0 min)
8.98
0.156
0.184
31.4
5.9
2.9 × 102
0.44
5 min
12.16
0.450
0.465
50.3
7.4
7.5 × 103
2.75
30 min
11.07
0.487
0.497
62.9
10.9
3.6 × 104
3.39
60 min
7.66
0.407
0.432
52.9
12.8
1.9 × 104
1.65
90 min
2.73
0.205
0.207
35.7
38.4
1.6 × 104
0.20
It is important to note that an appropriate degree of oxidation is crucial for the maximization of device performance. As can be seen in Fig. 2c, the performance parameters of the devices show a volcano-shaped curve as a function of air-annealing time. The VOC and FF values increased with annealing time up to 30 min and decreased for longer annealing, whereas JSC increased up to 5 min. To understand these trends, we extracted the values of the shunt resistance (RSH) and the series resistance (RS) from the dark J–V curve (Table 1). Notably, the air annealing increased RSH up to 30 min, which resulted in an almost two orders of magnitude higher value for RSH for the 30 min-air-annealed-QD device compared to that of the pristine-QD device. It implies that the controlled oxidation minimizes non-radiative recombination at the interface, consequently enhancing the device performance. In contrast, RS monotonously increased with the annealing time due to the formation of oxides. For longer oxidation treatment, the high RS of the device suppresses the electron transport, leading to a reduction of device performance.
We also estimated the built-in voltages (Vbi) of each device to quantify the effect of oxidation on band bending of the Schottky barrier. In a typical Schottky diode, Vbi can be calculated by extrapolating from the voltages at which the photocurrent (JLight − JDark) becomes zero.Table 1 shows the Vbi values; these values were calculated from the light J–V curves shown in Fig. 2b and the dark J–V curves shown in Fig. S5. The value of Vbi with respect to air-annealing time showed almost the same trend with the value of VOC, which suggests that the air-annealed-QD devices exhibited a large amount of band bending compared to that of the pristine-QD device. This large band-bending may lead to the increase of the hole-injection barrier and the enhancement of VOC and FF. This result is consistent with a decrease in the forward dark current density for the air-annealed-QD devices, indicating that undesirable hole-injection to the metal electrode can be significantly reduced with the increase of the Schottky barrier height (Fig. S5 in ESI).

To investigate the origin of oxidation-induced enhancement, we analyzed the air-annealed-QD films in detail. SEM images of the films (Fig. 3a) show that air annealing did not induce any changes in the thin film morphology. Although there are some minor intrinsic cracks resulting from the LbL deposition processes, no noticeable difference was observed between the samples before and after air annealing. While as-synthesized PbS QD solutions were highly stable in air for a long storage time (see Fig. S6 in ESI), the top-surface of the PbS QD films was effectively oxidized during the air annealing treatment after ligand exchange with a short-chain ligand (EDT) to replace the electrically insulating long-chain oleate ligands. X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) analysis reveals that air annealing of the PbS QD film produces a few oxygen-containing compounds (PbO, PbSO3, and PbSO4), as can be seen in Fig. 3b. While the pristine-QD film showed almost negligible oxygen content, the air-annealed-QD films contained proportionally increasing amounts of oxygen with air-annealing time, i.e., 5.85 and 15.41 at% of oxygen for annealing times of 30 min and 90 min, respectively. The S2p XPS spectra for the air-annealed PbS QD films (see Fig. S7 in ESI) are consistent with the O1s spectra in Fig. 2b in that both sets of data indicate partial oxidation of the top-most QD layer. The atomic ratio of the three compounds for the 30 min-annealed sample was measured to be 13.87% for PbO, 43.70% for PbSO3, and 42.43% for PbSO4.

Because XPS is a very surface-sensitive analysis method (typical probe depth ∼ a few nm), we also performed XPS depth profiling analysis in order to identify whether the oxide compounds are produced deep inside the film. The 30 min-air-annealed-QD film, which showed the best device performance as mentioned above, was used for the depth profiling analysis. Fig. 3c indicates that the interior of the air-annealed film contained surprisingly little elemental oxygen, to the degree that its O1s peak intensity level is comparable with that of the background noise. This result is consistent with a previous observation involving air-exposed PbSe nanocrystal films and supports that most of the oxygen-containing compounds were formed at the surface. The estimated average thickness of the oxidized layer is <5 nm (see Fig. S8 in ESI). The overall degree of oxidation in the QD films can also be qualitatively estimated by their optical absorption spectra because significant oxidation of QDs should cause a substantial blue-shift in the absorption peaks due to the reduced diameter of unoxidized QDs compared to that of the original QDs. However, the 30 min-air-annealed-QD film showed an absorption spectra that was almost identical to that of the pristine-QD film (Fig. 3d), which supports the idea of negligible oxidation inside the film during the short, low-temperature air-annealing process. Furthermore, in order to verify that the improvement of device performance comes from surface oxidation of the QD film, we tested the operation of a device which is annealed after each of LbL deposition steps. Such a device would be expected to have an overall oxidized QD film and it experimentally shows low Jsc, VOC and FF (see Fig. S9 in ESI).
In order to investigate the role of the oxidized layer in more detail, we measured the interfacial energy levels between the PbS QD layer and the oxidized interfacial layer using ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) analysis of the pristine-QD film and the air-annealed-QD film (Fig. 4a). As shown in Fig. 3, a short air-annealing produces an ultrathin oxidized-QD layer, and thus an underlying unoxidized-QD layer with much greater thickness can also be detected during the measurement. We hence prepared a 90 min-air-annealed-QD film for the UPS measurement of the oxidized layer. The work function (φ) was derived from the high binding energy cutoff, where the spectrum ends. The EVB (valence band maximum energy) with respect to EF was extrapolated according to the linear portion from the proper valence band (VB) peak to the energy axis at the low binding energy side, as indicated in Fig. 4a. The light source used for the UPS characterization was a He lamp emitting at 21.2 eV (He I radiation). From the measurement data, the estimated φ of the pristine-QD film is 4.69 eV (= 21.2–16.51 eV), and that of the oxidized-QD film is 4.45 eV (= 21.2–16.75 eV). The vacuum level shift of 0.24 eV between the pristine PbS layer and the oxidized interfacial layer can be explained by the interfacial dipole among them, as demonstrated at the PbS/MoOx interface. For the oxidized sample, the UPS measurement indicated an EF − EVB of 1.56 eV, and the UV/Vis spectroscopy provided an optical band gap of 2.96 eV (see the details in Fig. S10). Using these values, energy band diagrams of the pristine and oxidized-QD layers were developed and are shown, respectively, in Fig. 4b. The thin wide-band-gap oxidized layer is expected to act as a considerable hole-injection barrier and to effectively suppress the dark current and thus increase VOC and FF, whereas a thick oxidized layer, formed in the case of prolonged oxidation, hinders the photocurrent collection due to the increased electron tunneling distance.
Using the results that have been presented so far, we suggest the following model that can account for the enhancement of device performance with the oxidized interfacial layer. The pristine-QD device inherently has a large number of interface states that originated from the defects at the PbS/metal interface. As can be seen in Fig. 5, these interfacial states cause significant EF pinning and reduce the Schottky barrier height, and thus this barrier cannot effectively block the dark current. For the air-annealed-QD device, the incorporation of an oxidized interfacial layer minimizes the defects at the interface, significantly increasing the Schottky barrier height and decreasing interface recombination. Moreover, the interfacial dipole between the pristine PbS layer and the oxidized interfacial layer can also enhance the degree of band bending. Therefore, the air-annealed-QD device achieves a significantly larger Schottky barrier height, which results in a great enhancement of the device performance. We believe that these phenomena and mechanisms are analogous to those of conventional silicon metal–oxide–semiconductor solar cells, in which the device performance can be significantly improved by employing a very thin oxide layer to separate the metal and the semiconductor. The deposition of ultrathin metal oxides in the form of particles or a dense film on the QD film would also provide similar enhancement of device performance.

We now investigate the change of device performances upon light-soaking of QDSC to gain further insight into the role of the oxidized interfacial layer. For this experiment, the devices were continuously exposed to AM1.5G illumination. As can be seen in Fig. 6a, the pristine-QD device exhibited a low VOC of 0.154 V and a JSC of 8.94 mA cm−2 on initial light exposure. However, continuous illumination of the device significantly enhanced the device performance. After 20 min of light-soaking, an enhanced VOC of 0.352 V and a JSC of 12.24 mA cm−2 were obtained. These enhancements due to light-soaking can be attributed to the filling of the interface states by photoexcited carriers, leading to the increase of the quasi-Fermi level differences.

In order to identify whether the light-soaking effect for the pristine-QD device is permanent or temporary, after the first light-soaking test, we stored the devices under dark conditions for 24 hours and resumed the illumination experiment. This procedure was repeated one more time. Fig. 6b shows the VOC variations as a function of light-soaking time for the pristine-QD device and for the 30 min-air-annealed-QD device. The initial value of VOC during the second and the third light-soaking tests was significantly lower than the last VOC values in the previous tests. However, similarly to the case of the first light-illumination, during the second and the third tests, the pristine-QD device exhibited a rapid increase of VOC with illumination time. These drops and recoveries of VOC support the filling and evacuation of the interface states at the PbS/metal upon photoexcitation. The storage of the light-soaked device (pristine-QD device) under dark conditions significantly reduced VOC, which can be understood by considering the release of the trapped charges from the states and consequent elimination of the enhancement effect of VOC. The maximum VOC values for the second and the third illumination tests were lower than that of the first test, which phenomenon is related to the general stability issue of QDSCs and will be discussed in detail in the next part. These results show that light-soaking temporarily reduced the effect of interface states on the value of VOC of the pristine-QD device. In contrast, the air-annealed-QD device exhibited an almost consistent VOC, which also supports the idea that the incorporation of an oxidized interfacial layer markedly reduces the interface states at the PbS/metal interface and minimizes the density of trap states that can be filled with photoexcited carriers, achieving higher and stable VOC regardless of the light-soaking treatment.

Another challenging issue in QDSCs is their poor oxidative stability. In general, Schottky junction QDSCs tend to degrade rapidly in air, which results in linear current–voltage characteristics after the devices are exposed to air for several minutes. To compare the oxidative stability of each air-annealed-QD device, we periodically measured their J–V characteristics for 1 month under storage in air. As can be seen in Fig. 7, the performance of the pristine-QD device degraded rapidly in a few hours. In contrast, the air-annealed-QD films presented greatly improved air stability of the devices: our best QDSCs with air annealing retained >55% of its initial PCE even after 500 hours of air storage time without any passivation. In order to quantitatively investigate the effect of the air-annealing process on air stability, we define PCE decay with storage time as

PCE(λ, t) = PCE0e−λt
(1)
Here, PCE
0 is the initial power conversion efficiency, λ is a characteristic power decay coefficient, and t is the air storage time. The measured λ values can be seen in the inset of Fig. 7. As can be seen in the inset of Fig. 7, the QDSC with the 30 min-air-annealing shows the lowest decay rate of 0.026 per day, while the pristine-QD device has the highest λ value of 1.325 per day, indicating a much slower degradation of PCE for the air-annealed-QD device. Moreover, as can be seen in Fig. S11, the air-annealed-QD devices exhibited quite stable values of VOC and FF. We believe that there are two possibilities regarding the role of the oxidized interfacial layer in the high oxidative stability. First, an oxidized layer might act as a diffusion barrier, impeding the oxidation at the PbS/metal interface. Second, it may prevent reactions between ligands and the metal electrode due to its placement at the PbS/metal interface. Because QDs are passivated with organic ligands, direct contact between the QD and the metal electrode can cause a reaction that will form organo-metallic species and thus promote the degradation of the metal electrode.

In order to investigate the mechanism, we performed an XPS depth profiling analysis on the metal (Al) electrode. Fig. S12 shows a significantly higher degree of electrode oxidation at the Al/PbS interface side for the pristine-QD cell, suggesting that the penetration of oxygen into the Al electrode can be relatively retarded in the air-annealed-QD device. It should be noted that QD films contain numerous nanopores, which serve as channels for the supply of oxygen. With the oxidation of Al near the metal/QD interface, the Schottky junction quality will be gradually degraded, leading to a decreasing PCE, as shown in Fig. 7. The depth profiling analysis data strongly suggest that the thin oxidized layer at the interface can serve as an effective oxygen diffusion barrier against oxidation of the Al electrode, analogous to native oxides that prevent further oxidation of metals and semiconductors.

We systematically tailored the PbS/metal interface through the oxidized interfacial layer in Schottky junction QDSCs and report significant enhancements of JSC (by 23%), VOC (by 212%), FF (by 100%), and PCE (by 670%) compared to values of a conventional device without an oxidized layer. The controlled conversion of the top-most PbS QD layer into a thin oxidized layer, which was performed by low-temperature (60 °C) oxidation and which was confirmed by XPS analyses, considerably increased the values of Vbi and RSH for the improvement of charge collection efficiency. The significant reduction of interface states due to thin oxidized layer formation is well substantiated by the two-orders-of-magnitude higher value of RSH and the stable value of VOC under continuous light-illumination, while the pristine-QD device shows considerable fluctuations of VOC under the same environment due to the temporary occupation of the trap states by photoexcited carriers. Another important effect of the oxidized interfacial layer that we showed is the substantially improved oxidative stability of the QDSCs. We believe that this study will provide better understanding of the effect of interface quality in various QD-based applications including photovoltaic devices, light-emitting devices, sensors, and so on.


This work was supported by the Center for Inorganic Photovoltaic Materials (no. 2012-0001173) grant funded by the Korea government (MEST).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The current–voltage characterization of the QDSC devices, UV/visible spectra of the QD films and solutions, XPS depth profiling analysis data. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ee00502c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014