 DOI: 10.1039/C5TC02356D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 9765-9780


Sumit
Chaurasia
,

Chia-Jung
Liang
,

Yung-Sheng
Yen
 and 

Jiann T.
Lin
*

Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529, Taiwan. E-mail: jtlin@gate.sinica.edu.tw

Assistant Research Scholar of the Ministry of Science and Technology of ROC, 

Received
30th July 2015
, Accepted 21st August 2015
First published on 24th August 2015
Metal-free dye sensitized solar cells emerged as an important source of a renewable energy resource because of low production, a simple fabrication process and a wide availablility of organic dyes. This review mainly focuses on metal-free sensitizers having rigidifed-aromatics as the conjugated spacers for application in DSSCs. Based on their structures dyes have been divided into three major subsegments: (i) ladder type polyphenylenes with or without heteroatoms; (ii) rigidified-aromatics as donor segments; (iii) fused polyaromatics. Planarization of organic molecules through rigidification of aromatics allows effective communication and their smaller reorganization energy is beneficial to photoinduced charge transfer. Dyes having rigidified aromatics as conjugated spacers emerged as promising candidates and a maximum efficiency of 12.5% has been achieved with DSSCs without a coadsorbate or co-sensitizer.

Sumit Chaurasia

Sumit Chaurasia received his PhD degree from the Medicinal and Process Chemistry Division, CDRI, Lucknow, in 2010 (under the supervision of Prof. Atul Goel). He then joined Prof. Jiann T'suen Lin's group as a postdoctoral fellow in the Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica. His current research interests include the design and synthesis of novel metal-free organic sensitizers for dye-sensitized solar cells.

Chia-Jung Liang

Chia-Jung Liang received his PhD degree from the Chemistry Department of National Taiwan Normal University in 2015 (under the supervision of Prof. Ming-Chang P. Yeh). He then joined Prof. Jiann T'suen Lin's group as a postdoctoral fellow in the Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica. His current research interest covers the synthesis and device fabrication of metal-free organic sensitizers for dye-sensitized solar cells.

Yung-Sheng Yen

Yung-Sheng Yen obtained his PhD degree in chemistry from the National Taiwan University (NTU) in 2005 under the supervision of Prof. Ying-Chih Lin. His recent research interests are mainly focused on the development of the functional materials for photovoltaic applications. Currently he is an assistant research scholar of the Ministry of Science and Technology in Prof. Jiann T'suen Lin's laboratory at the Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taiwan.

Jiann T. Lin

Dr Jiann T. Lin received his B.S. degree in Chemistry from the National Tsing Hua University in 1975. He completed his PhD degree in the Chemistry Department of University of Minnesota in 1984 (under supervision of Prof. John E. Ellis). After a year of postdoctoral fellow in the Chemistry Department of University of Michigan, Ann Arbor (under the supervision of Robert L. Kuczkowiki), he joined the Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica, as an Associate Research Fellow in 1984, and was promoted to Research Fellow in 1990. He was a visiting scholar (with Prof. Tobin J. Marks) in Northwestern University in 1991. Dr Lin is also Adjunct Professor of National Central University. His current scientific interests involve the studies of organic materials for organic light-emitting diodes, organic solar cells and two photon absorption dyes.

Two decades after Grätzel's seminal report in 2001, significant progress has been made in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). Though the perovskite-based solar cells which originated from the DSSCs have astonishing boost in conversion efficiency after being transformed to the solid state solar cells or heterojunction solar cells, two major obstacles (toxicity and moisture instability of the active materials) remain to be settled. DSSCs therefore should be still competitive because of simple device fabrication technology and flexibility in the molecular design of the sensitizers. To date, high power conversion efficiencies of 13.0, 11.50% and 12.5% have been achieved for porphyrin-, polypyridyl Ru(II) complex- and metal-free organic dye-based DSSCs, respectively. Compared with porphyrin and ruthenium dyes, metal-free dyes have two advantages: synthetic feasibility and low cost. Moreover, the efficiency of DSSCs based on metal-free dyes has kept pace with the other two dyes during the past two years, and quite a few dyes have cell conversion efficiency surpassing 10%. The prototype metal-free sensitizer, D–π–A, has an electron donor (D), an electron acceptor (A) which also functions as the anchor for adsorbing on TiO2, and a conjugated spacer (π) linking the donor and the acceptor. Upon photo-excitation, intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) from the donor to the acceptor will occur with subsequent electron injection into the conduction band of TiO2. The donor, the acceptor and the conjugated spacer can all be tuned for maximizing the intramolecular charge transfer of the D–π–A molecules.

Compared with the donors and acceptors, there is more variety of the spacer. A good spacer should allow strong electric communication between the donor and the acceptor. This review will be focused on rigidified aromatics (RGAR) based on the following reasons: (1) planar spacer can allow more effective electronic communication between the donor and the acceptor; (2) the smaller reorganization energy of a rigid segment is beneficial to photoinduced charge transfer. On the other hand, a more planar system may have a higher tendency of intermolecular aggregation, which not only reduces the solubility of the sensitizer molecule in common organic solvents, but also quenches the excited state molecule and deteriorates the electron injection. Therefore, rigidified segments are normally accompanied with sterically congested substituents for alleviation of aggregation.
In this review, we define the rigidified aromatics as the fused aromatics or segments comprised of aromatic rings capable of forming a quinoidal structure and the number of the aromatic rings in the rigidified segments will be limited to ≧3. Therefore, segments such as naphthylene, fluorene, carbazole, phenothiazine and dithienylcyclopentadiene will be excluded. However, dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]thiophene and indenofluorene are included in our discussions. As the rigid aromatic segments have also been successfully used as the electron donor of the sensitizers in several examples, this interesting class of dyes is also discussed briefly at the end of this review.

As shown in Fig. 1, the DSSC device is composed of three adjacent thin layers, including a high band-gap nanocrystalline semiconductor-based mesoporous thin film adsorbed with a dye sensitizer on the working electrode, a platinized counter electrode for the collection of electrons and a redox electrolyte, sandwiched in between the two electrodes. In general it is composed of five materials: (1) a fluorine-doped SnO2 (FTO) glass substrate, (2) a nanocrystalline TiO2 thin film as a semiconductor, (3) a dye sensitizer, (4) an electrolyte (redox mediator), and (5) a platinum-coated glass substrate. The electrolyte mostly contains an I−/I3− redox couple, which is obtained by mixing iodine (I2) and inorganic or organic iodides in suitable non-aqueous solvents. Fig. 1b describes the operational principle of a typical DSSC. Upon absorption of light [eqn (1)], an electron is injected from an excited state of the dye (S*) into the conduction band of the metal oxide [eqn (2)]. After percolation through the thin mesoscopic semiconductor film, the electrons are thought to move by a “hopping” mechanism and collected at a transparent conductive substrate of fluorine-doped tin oxide glass (SnO2:F), on which the TiO2 film is formed. The electrons then move through the external circuit to the counter electrode (Pt-coated glass). The resultant oxidized dye is subsequently reduced back to its original neutral state by electron donation from the I− ions in a redox mediator. This process is usually called dye regeneration or reduction [eqn (3)]. Finally, the I− ion is regenerated by the reduction of triiodide ion I3− at the counter electrode through the donation of electrons from the external circuit [eqn (4)] and then the circuit is completed. Ideally, such a cycle is kept repeating without any material being consumed but energy being transformed from light to electricity. During this whole process, there are some undesirable dark reactions or recombination: the electrons injected into the CB of the TiO2 electrode may recombine either with the oxidized dye [eqn (5)], or with I3− at the TiO2 surface [eqn (6)], resulting in lowering of the photovoltaic performances of DSSCs.

S + hν → S*
(1)
S* → S+ + e−
(2)
2S+ + 3I− → 2S + I3−
(3)
I3− + 2e−(Pt) → 3I−
(4)
S+ + e− → S
(5)
I3− + 2e−(TiO2) → 3I−
(6)

In order to reduce the HOMO/LUMO gap of π-conjugated chromophores, thereby shifting the λmax values to longer wavelengths, the following major approaches can be adopted: (i) enlargement of the π conjugation, (ii) introduction of aromatic rings with high tendency to form quinoidal structures and (iii) introduction of donor–acceptor substituents to facilitate intramolecular charge transfer transition (Fig. 2). The easiest way to enhance the π-conjugation of phenylene compounds is to extend the conjugation via the para position. However, the large twist angle between the neighbouring phenyl rings will counteract the conjugation of the phenylene compounds. This problem can be solved by locking the neighbouring phenyl rings to a rigid, planar segment. Restricted rotation of the phenyl rings results in better conjugation, for example, a biphenyl entity vs. a fluorenyl or phenanthrenyl entity. However sometimes these rod like structures show poor solubility upon increasing the number of phenyl units such as indenofluorene and its higher analogues, which can be easily solved by introducing long hydrocarbon chains onto the sp3 bridged carbon atoms. For example, ladder type poly(p-phenylene)s (LPPPs) (Fig. 2) that possess coplanar π-conjugated backbones, obtained through intramolecular annulation, have gained a considerable amount of research interest. An efficient π conjugation in a fully coplanar LPPP backbone leads to a number of interesting properties including increased photoluminescence efficiency and charge mobility. Additionally, enhancing the electron affinity of LPPPs was done by altering the bridge atoms. LPPPs such as indenofluorene (IF) and its isomers (Fig. 3), indenoindene, pentaphenylene, and octaphenylene, have been widely used in various fields of organic photovoltaics due to their unique features. In general for D–π–A systems planarization of the conjugated spacer allows more effective electronic communication between the donor and the acceptor.

In this section, we will discuss the use of LPPPs as efficient π-conjugated spacers for DSSCs and their effective length of π-conjugation. Fig. 3 presents the structures of the dyes (1–21).
Indenofluorene (IF), a para-terphenyl, is considered to be more π-conjugated than fluorene and has been extensively studied in the various fields of organic photovoltaics. In 2012, we were the first to report indenofluorene based sensitizers (Fig. 3) for DSSCs with an extended π-group, a maximum efficiency of 4.05% was obtained with 3, where indenofluorene was incorporated as a conjugated bridge with an extended π-group furan, diphenylamine as the donor, cyanoacrylic acid group as an electron acceptor and anchoring group. Although, the efficiency obtained with indenofluorene based sensitizers (1–3) was moderate (3.36–4.05%), the findings were interesting as it surpassed the efficiency of pentaphenylene dyes (Fig. 3) reported by Müllenet al. and indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene based dyes reported by Yang et al. (Fig. 3). Compared with indenofluorene dyes (1–3), pentaphenylene dyes4–6 have longer π-conjugation and higher extinction coefficient as evident from their UV absorption spectra (λmax = 442–457 nm, ε = 7 × 104 M−1 cm−1 for pentaphenylene dyes; λmax = 400–430 nm, ε = 5.5 × 104 M−1 cm−1 for IF dyes), a maximum efficiency of only 2.3% was obtained with the sensitizer 6. Their inferior performance was attributed to the dominant π–π* character over charge-transfer. Yang et al. reported the indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene, a ladder-type π-conjugated heteroacene, where the phenyl ring of indenofluorene is substituted with thiophene with smaller resonance energy in order to achieve high performance photovoltaic materials. Although the indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene-based (Fig. 3) dye (7) shows better absorption properties than indenofluorene and pentaphenylene dyes, still the maximum efficiency (2.31%) is far inferior to that of our indenofluorene (IF) based sensitizers. Possibly more effective suppression of the dark current, evidenced from the higher photovoltage, results in better cell performance of the indenofluorene dyes.
Polyaromatic compounds or fused aromatics compounds, composed of many fused aromatics rings with big and planar π-conjugations could benefit the charge transfer and light harvesting when used as a π-bridging unit in DSSCs. In 2012, our group was the first to explore the 2,6-linkage mode of anthracene as a rigid planar unit in a DSSC. The choice of 2,6 linkage over the 9,10 linkage mode was mainly because of two reasons: (1) the rigid segment has less reorganization energy and may facilitate electron transfer; (2) rigid segments with a planar skeleton may reduce steric congestion and allow more compact dye packing on TiO2. However a maximum efficiency of 2.88% was obtained with 10. Later, we found that the cell efficiency could be greatly improved up to 7.5% if the 2-anthracenyl entity used as the peripheral substituent of the arylamine was replaced with a 2-substituted 9,10-bishexyloxyanthracene entity, 12–15 (Fig. 3). Better suppression of dye aggregation and dark current are the key to the better performance of these new dyes. An impressively high efficiency (9.11%) surpassing the N719-based cell was achieved with the use of CDCA as the co-adsorbent. Under weak light irradiation, the efficiency can be further increased to 10.42%. Very recently, the same concept was explored by Li et al., who reported four new sensitizers 16–19 (Fig. 3) based on the 2,6-linkage mode of anthracene as a rigid planar unit in DSSCs, with varying substituents at the 9,10 position. Sensitizers 16–19 show efficiency in the range of 5.59–6.42%. The best sensitizer 17, with a stronger donor of hexyloxy-substituted triphenylamine, shows Jsc 13.42 mA cm−2, Voc 722 mV, FF 0.66, and η 6.42%, respectively. In comparison, 9,10-conjugated anthracenes normally suffer from larger steric congestion, which jeopardizes the planarity of the conjugated spacer and therefore cell performance. The cell efficiency was increased to 7.03% only after insertion of an alkynyl entity between the anthracene and the aromatic ring. Jiang et al. reported two new pyrene-based dyes 20 and 21 (Fig. 3). The best dye 20 gives a short circuit photocurrent density (Jsc) of 12.1 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.71 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.71, corresponding to an overall conversion efficiency (η) of 6.1% under AM 1.5 conditions with 2 mM of CDCA. These results show that the oligo-conjugated or oligo-aromatic entity is promising as a π-bridging unit of metal free D–π–A sensitizers for DSSCs.


Fig. 4 and 5 show the structures of the dyes (22–49) in this category. Hua, Tian and coworkers reported a series of metal-free organic dyes (22 to 24) exploiting planar quinacridone (QA) and the furan moiety as the central π-spacer. Though QA is not fused aromatics, the two nitrogen atoms of QA allow electronic communication between the donor and the acceptor. Notably, the cells have high photovoltages (776–813 mV) surpassing that of N719 (726 mV). The DSSCs based on 22 have the best efficiency of 7.70% (Jsc, 13.2 mA cm−2; Voc, 0.804 V; FF, 0.73) with 20 mM of CDCA as the co-adsorbent under AM 1.5 irradiation. The long-term stability of QA DSSCs with ionic liquid electrolytes under 1000 h light-soaking was also demonstrated. Kim et al. developed two organic sensitizers (25 and 26) containing quinacridone as the electron donor and benzene or thiophene as the π-linker. Dye 25 bearing thiophene as the conjugated bridge showed a larger red-shift with a higher intensity in the intramolecular charge transfer band compared to 26. The solar cell based on 25 shows a power conversion efficiency of 3.86% (Jsc, 8.51 mA cm−2; Voc, 0.643 V; FF, 0.70). They found that the lower conversion efficiency is due to the two carbonyl groups on the quinacridone framework with intense electron-withdrawing property, which compete with the cyanoacrylic acid anchoring group and prevent the transfer of localized electrons in the quinacridone moiety, resulting in contribution of only the shorter absorption wavelength to IPCE.

Indacenodithiophene was found to be useful as the motif for the sensitizers of polymer solar cells because its coplanarity benefits π-conjugation. Wong and Wu et al. used the indacenodithiophene functionalized with 4-(n-hexyloxy)phenyl groups on the sp3-carbon bridge as the conjugated spacer of the sensitizers, 27–29. The dyes exhibit broad absorption extending to ≧650 nm. The peripheral n-hexoxyphenyl side chains on the sp3-carbon bridge of the core serve as a spatial hindrance to mitigate undesirable dye aggregation. The best efficiency of the cells reaches 6.70% (Jsc, 13.54 mA cm−2; Voc, 0.69 V; FF, 0.71).
In 2014, Cai et al. also employed the indacenodithiophene unit as a conjugated spacer and dihexyloxy-subsituted TPA as a donor to construct the organic sensitizer 30 for DSSCs. The dyes show very intense and broad absorption. The efficiencies of DSSCs based on a volatile solvent electrolyte and a solvent-free ionic liquid electrolyte are 7.5% and 6.9%, respectively. The DSSC with the volatile electrolyte was found to have a much longer electron lifetime and higher charge collection efficiency. Later, Grimsdale et al. reported cyclopenta[1,2-b:5,4-b′]dithiophene (CPDT)-(31–33) and cyclopenta[1,2-b:5,4-b′]dithiophene[2′,1′:4,5]thieno[2,3-d]thiophene (CPDTTT)-based (34–36) dyes. The dyes containing CPDTTT exhibit more red shifted absorption wavelength and intensity compared to their CPDT congeners due to the elongation of the π-conjugated bridge. Accordingly, the latter has better cell efficiency than the former with the same donor. An important observation in this study is that an electron rich conjugated spacer in combination with a strong donor may lead to an unfavourable HOMO level and hamper dye regeneration. Wang et al. reported a sensitizer, 38, featuring the cyclopenta[1,2-b:5,4-b′]dithiophene[2′,1′:4,5]thieno[2,3-d]thiophene π-linker (CPDTTT), which displays an enhanced molar absorption coefficient and a red-shifted absorption peak with respect to its reference dye 37 with the 2,5-di(thiophen-2-yl)thieno[3,2-b]thiophene linker. They showed that the charge generation yield of the dye is related to a three dimensional configuration owing to the tethering of four hexylphenyl segments incorporated at the conjugated backbone. The performance of the dyes are dependent upon the dye bath solvent, which has a significant influence on the dye load amounts and some key photovoltaic features such as the photocurrent and photovoltage. The 38-based cell with the THF and MeCN mixture as the dye-bath solvent shows the best cell performance: η, 8.9%; Jsc: 15.67 mA cm−2; Voc: 0.75 V; FF: 0.756.
Recently, Chen et al. reported a series of sensitizers 39–42 incorporating a planar tetrathienoacene (TTA) unit in the conjugated spacer and 2-cyanoacrylic acid as the electron acceptor. They found that the insertion of the thiophene unit between TTA and the 2-cyanoacrylic acid acceptor improves both electron delocalizations as well as self-assembly and dye loading on the TiO2 surface. In contrast, the insertion of the thiophene between the triphenylamine donor and the TTA bridges slightly disrupts the molecular backbone planarity, leading to suboptimal dye assembly on TiO2 and increased recombination losses. The solar cell based on 41 exhibits a power conversion efficiency of 10.1% (Jsc, 16.5 mA cm−2; Voc, 0.833 V; FF, 0.70).
Müllen and coworkers developed two metal-free organic sensitizers 43 and 44 with coplanar dithieno[2,3-d;2′,3′-d′]benzo[1,2-b;4,5-b′]dithiophene (DTBDT) as the π-spacer. Though coplanarization of the DTBDT π-spacer is beneficial for extending the red light response of the sensitizer, lack of any substituent also results in undesirable dye aggregation. A 44-sensitized DSSC with a cobalt electrolyte showed higher conversion efficiency of 6.32%. This was attributed to the better light harvesting and more efficient dark current suppression of 44.
Wong et al. reported a new class of dyes 45–47, incorporating fused pentaheteroacene or hexaheteroacene functioned as both the donor and the π-bridge with two anchoring groups, the N-alkyl bridged helps in improving the solubility as well as suppression of dye aggregation. These dyes have impressively high absorption intensity (ε > 85000 M−1 cm−1). The device based on 46 possessing less bulky N-alkyl groups has the best efficiency of 5.5% (Jsc, 13.72 mA cm−2; Voc, 0.833 V; FF, 0.58) under AM 1.5 solar irradiation. Xue and coworkers prepared two organic dyes by implementing the dithieno[2,3-d:2′,3′-d′]thieno[3,2-b:3′,2′-b′]dipyrrole (DTDP) unit into the bridging framework of D–π–A molecules. The DTDP dyes, 48 and 49, have red-shifted ICT bands compared with the dyes containing dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole (DTP). The better cell performance of 49 than 48 is mainly due to more effective suppression of charge recombination by the hexyloxyphenyl substituents compared with the dihexyl substituents on the DTDP unit. Compared to the reference dye C241, the sensitizer 49 shows slightly lower cell efficiency under AM 1.5 illumination, 6.6 vs. 7.2%. This mainly originates from the higher regeneration efficiency and charge collection efficiency of the former.

Perylene, one of the most important polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (Fig. 6), was discovered by Kardos in 1913 and has been widely used as the pigment by industries. There are four peri and bay positions on the perylene core. The peri-position diimide substitution perylenes were developed earlier than the bay-position diimide substitution perylenes. However, most of them exhibited relatively low overall power conversion efficiencies as they were limited to perylene anhydride and perylene imide based dyes.

Ferrere and co-workers reported a series of perylene-based sensitizers, which adsorbed onto TiO2via 3,4-dicarboxylic acid anhydride or carboximide group for DSSC. Among them, 9-dioctylaminoperylene-3,4-dicarboxylic acid anhydride (50) showed the best conversion efficiency (1.92%). Zafer et al. synthesized perylenemonoimide (51) dyes with a longer alkyl chain, 6-undecyl group, to afford 1.61% overall conversion efficiency. Odobel et al. studied perylenes with four aryloxy substituents at the bay position and extended the absorbance (λmax = 581 nm) of 52 to longer wavelengths. A DSSC based on 76 in an electrolyte consisting of 0.6 M of 1-methyl-3-n-propyl imidazolium iodide, 0.1 M of LiI, 0.05 M of I2 and 0.1 M of 4-tert-butyl-pyridine showed a cell efficiency of 2.3%. The Imahori group synthesized perylene imide with an electron-donating moiety at bay positions and a bulky group adjacent to the imide group to suppress dye aggregation. The efficiency of 53 reached 2.6%. Müllen et al. also reported five new perylene molecules with different electron donating groups at peri- and bay-positions. The maximum IPCE of the dye with diarylamine substituted 54 was found to be over 70% in the range of 480–550 nm, and the efficiency reached 3.9%. To further develop the efficiency of the perylene dye, the same group investigated the thiophenyl-perylene 55 and increased the PCE of the cell to 6.8%. The Voc, Jsc and FF of the cell are 728 mV, 12.60 mA cm−2, and 0.74, respectively. Müllen et al. further studied perylene dyes with increasing order of molecular size, 54 < 56 < 57. The dye of larger size showed lower cell efficiency due to lower dye loading under 1 sun irradiation. Under 0.1 sun irradiation, the three dyes showed comparable cell efficiency, suggesting the importance of the dye morphology on device performance. Mathew et al. synthesized 1,6,9-tris(triarylaminoalkynyl)perylene monoanhydride (58) which contains three electron-donating groups by using the Sonogashira cross coupling reaction, and achieved a power conversion efficiency of 2.9% after 6 hours of dye-soaking. Keerthi et al. reported that tetra-TPA-substituted perylene monoanhydride (58a) with a broad absorption up to 750 nm (λmax = 624 nm) showed a higher cell efficiency than tri-TPA-substituted perylene monoanhydride. Both cells showed low efficiencies because the larger molecular size diminished the dye concentration on the TiO2 surface.
Since the past decade, N-annulated-perylene (PNP) derivatives have become more popular segments for developing metal free sensitizers for DSSC, owing to the tunable optical or electronic property, the easily synthetic pathway and high efficiency. Push–pull type sensitizers using PNP as a new rigid and coplanar π-linker have been recently explored by Wu and Wang independently (Fig. 7 and 8), and both of them have achieved efficiency surpassing that of the champion dye YD2-o-C8.
Zhang et al. reported a new metal-free dye (59) consisting of an N-annulated perylene segment as a spacer, diarylamine as a donor and the 2-cyanoacrylic acid as an acceptor, to afford 8.8% power conversion efficiency with a Jsc of 14.90 mA cm−2 and a Voc of 844 mV by using non-corrosive cobalt redox shuttle. The same group also reported a new metal-free dye (60) consisting of an N-annulated perylene segment as a spacer, diarylamine as a donor and a benzothiadiazole-benzoic acid as an acceptor. The efficiency of the cell is up to 7.3% with a Voc of 788 mV, a Jsc of 12.63 mA cm−2 and an FF of 0.74. Replacement of benzothiadiazole in 60 with a more electron-deficient pyridothiadiazole decreased the conversion efficiency to 5.0% due to the diminished electron injection efficiency. Later, Yan et al. in the same group used palladium catalyzed cross-coupling reactions to combine triarylamine and N-annulated perylene and synthesized dyes 61 and 62 which possessed a narrow HOMO/LUMO gap. Compared with 61, 62 has a red-shifted maximum absorption wavelength (540 nm) and a lower dye loading amount. The DSSC based on 61 exhibited a higher efficiency (9.0%) than 62 (8.6%). Recently, a metal-free perylene dye (63) which employed ethynylbenzothiadiazole-benzoic acid instead of cyanoacrylic acid as the electron acceptor achieved high cell efficiency 10.4% (Voc = 788 mV; Jsc = 12.63 mA cm−2; FF = 0.74). In a very recent article an indeno[2,1-b]perylene (NIP) dye (64) reached a maximum efficiency of 12.5% without the use of any coadsorbate. Though 64 has a longer rigid coplanar system than its previous derivatives, the branched 2-hexyldecyloxy chain incorporated at the insoluble rigid NIP and the flexible alkyl chains introduced to the amine site significantly improve the solubility of the dye and suppress dye aggregation. Wu et al. used PNP as the donor of porphyrin dyes, 65 and 66. Co(II/III)-based DSSCs of 65 and 66 display power conversion efficiencies as high as 10.3% and 10.5%, respectively, which is comparable to that of the YD2-o-C8 cell (10.5%) under the same conditions. In continuation, Wu et al. published three novel push pull type dyes 67–69 and a maximum efficiency of only 6.95% was obtained. Wang et al. reported four new perylene dyes70–73 where the N-annulated perylene was used as the rigidified spacer and the DSSCs exhibited overall conversion efficiencies ranging from 4.90% to 8.28% under AM 1.5 solar conditions. The best efficiency was obtained with 73 when the anchoring group was directly attached to the perylene moiety.


Fig. 9 and 10 present the structures of the dyes (74–104) in this category. In order to expand the absorption band of the dye, Zhou et al. constructed an organic dye 76 with a coplanar dithieno[2,3-a:3′,2′-c]phenazine entity by replacing the benzene rings of the phenazine core with the thiophene rings. Compared to the reference dyes, 74 and 75, the absorption spectrum of 76 covers the whole visible region and extends to the NIR region. After optimizing the molar ratio between 76 and 74, the co-sensitized quasi-solid-state DSSCs showed a higher η of 8.04%, as compared to that sensitized by either 76 (5.28%) or 74 (7.03%). The results are attributed to the complementary absorption spectra of the two sensitizers.

Zhou and co-workers also reported 77 and 78 with an acenaphtho[1,2-b]thieno[3,4-e]pyrazine unit in the conjugated backbone. Compared with the thieno[3,4-b]pyrazine-based congener, these acenaphtho[1,2-b]thieno[3,4-e]pyrazine dyes exhibit a bathochromic shift of the absorption spectra. It is impressive that the IPCE spectra of these two dyes cover the whole visible range extending into the NIR region up to 900 nm. Such a broad absorption is greatly beneficial to the improvement of photocurrent density and power-conversion efficiency. However, 77 and 78 exhibit low Voc values (below 500 mV), which partially counteract the positive effect of the near infrared (NIR) IPCE response, resulting in moderate PCEs of 5.3 and 3.66%, respectively. Nevertheless, the cell of 77 maintained an almost constant power conversion efficiency under one-sun soaking for 1000 h.
Wong et al. reported four organic dyes using the naphtho[2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophene entity as the π-spacer. They demonstrated that the molecule with two naphtho[2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophene entities as the π-linker has broader absorption, and the highest Jsc among the four dyes. The devices based on the four molecules have moderate efficiencies of 4.38 ± 0.12% (79), 3.98 ± 0.12% (80), 4.60 ± 0.16% (79a), and 4.49 ± 0.16% (80a), respectively.
Cao and coworkers reported four D–π–A metal-free organic dyes, 81–84, which contained a dithienopyrrolobenzothiadiazole (DTPBT) unit in the conjugated spacer linking the arylamine donor and the 2-cyanoacrylic acid acceptor.DTPBT is a planar fused segment consisting of both an electron rich entity and an electron deficient entity (benzothiazole). These dyes have broad absorption in the visible region and a very intense ICT band (ε > 42000 M−1 cm−1). Due to strong intermolecular interactions, π–π stacking of the dyes, CDCA was needed as the co-adsorbent during dye soaking of TiO2 for better cell performance. The dye (84) with triphenylamine as the donor exhibits better photovoltaic performance than 81–83 having phenothiazine as the donor. The conversion efficiencies are 6.86% and 7.55% for the cells without and with CDCA (1 mM), respectively, under standard AM 1.5 solar irradiation.
Shi et al. introduced a rigid conjugated unit, 11,12-bis(hexyloxy)dibenzo[a,c]phenazine (BPz), between the triphenylamine donor and the 2-cyanoacrylic acid acceptor/anchor to construct organic sensitizers 85–87. These dyes belong to the so called ‘‘D–A′–π–A′′ sensitizers with BPz as the auxiliary acceptor. The two hexyloxy substituents are on the orthogonal directions with planar configuration, which avoids dye aggregation. Therefore, high performance DSSCs can be achieved without co-adsorbent. Dye 87 shows the best η of 7.20%.
Lin et al. synthesized a series of new dyes containing the dithieno[3′,2′:3,4;2′′,3′′:5,6]benzo[1,2-c]furan (DTBF) entity in the conjugated spacer, 88–91. These dyes showed J-aggregation in the thin film, which is beneficial to light-harvesting. Under AM 1.5 irradiation, the cell of 91 with 10 mM CDCA as the coadsorbent showed the best performance with a Jsc of 14.29 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.76 V and a fill factor (FF) of 0.66, corresponding to an overall conversion efficiency of 7.33%.
To further improve light-harvesting and alleviate dye aggregation and charge recombination, Lin et al. reported new sensitizers, 92–96, featuring dithieno[3,2-f:2′,3′-h]quinoxaline (DTQ) as the π-linker. The planarized and electron-deficient DTQ unit is advantageous for the red-shift of the absorption spectrum. DSSCs based on these dyes showed efficiencies in the range 6.11% to 7.59%. Moreover, when the dye 92 was co-adsorbed with threefold of CDCA, the cell efficiency reached 8.41%, which is higher than that of the N719-based standard cell (8.27%) under AM 1.5 irradiation.
Reynolds and coworkers developed quadrupolar D2A dyes 97–99 containing dithienophenazine as the π-spacer and thiophene as the electron donor for DSSC application Two isomers, dithieno[2,3-a:3′,2′-c]phenazine and dithieno[3,2-a:2′,3′-c]phenazine, were employed as core units to construct the organic dyes for DSSCS. They demonstrated that the isomerism of the dyes affected the optical property and cell performance. The results show that increasing the number of internal thiophene from two to six units enhances the open circuit voltage and the short circuit current.
Reynolds and coworkers further explored the structure–property relationships of the dithienophenazine (DTP) and dibenzophenazine (DBP) acceptor units for DSSCs. Two external thiophene units were covalently attached to the core at two different positions for DBP, together with two isomers for DTP leading to a set of four isomeric structures (100–102), as shown in Fig. 10. The DTP dyes have a smaller energy gap, a higher HOMO energy level and greater fluorescence and nonradiative rate constants in solution when compared to the DBP congeners. When integrated into DSSCs, the Voc is ∼80 mV greater for the DBPs, and this change is likely due to an increase of the TiO2 conduction band. DSSCs based on these dyes showed efficiencies in the range 0.53% to 0.73% without the use of additives or scattering TiO2 layers.
Yang et al. reported two novel donor–acceptor organic dyes (103 and 104) with pyrazino-[2,3-f][1,10]phenanthroline (PPL) as an electron-withdrawing anchoring group. 103 and 104 can be efficiently adsorbed on the TiO2 surface through the anchoring group, and the 104-based cells showed a highest power conversion efficiency of 4.04%, indicating that PPL is a promising building block with dual functions, acceptor and anchor, for carboxylic acid free organic dyes.

In addition to the rigidified aromatic segments discussed in the previous sections, several rigidified aromatic segments have an electron-rich nature which make them good electron donors and have been tested for their applicability in DSSCs. Fig. 11 and 12 show the structures of the dyes (105–128) in this category. Islam, Jin and coworkers incorporated thieno[2,3-a]carbazole as a donor and thiophene or furan as a π-linker to produce 105 to 109. The organic sensitizers 107 and 108 having a long n-octyl chain and bulky substituents on the donor unit have red-shifted intramolecular charge transfer absorption bands and higher maximal IPCE values compared with that of 109. Among the dyes, the DSSCs based on 109 yielded an overall conversion efficiency up to 7.4%, which was attributed to the efficient suppression of the charge recombination and intermolecular π–π interaction due to introduction of hexyl chains on the thienyl units.

Carbazole was used by Koumura and co-workers as the electron donor of the sensitizers with good performance. Later, the same group used a segment with two fused carbazole units, 5,11-dioctylindolo[3,2-b]carbazole moiety, as the electron donor. Similar to the carbazole, the indolo[3,2-b]carbazole also has rigid planar geometry, however, the latter is a better donor due to the presence of an extra nitrogen atom. The nitrogen atoms allow incorporation of hydrophobic long alkyl chains, which not only improve the solubility of the dyes, but also prevent water-induced dye desorption from the TiO2 surface. Hara et al. designed two new sensitizers 110 and 111, in which indolo[2,3-b]carbazole was used as a donor and n-hexyl-subsituted oligothiophene as a π-spacer. DSSCs based on the sensitizer 110 outperform that of 111 even though the former has smaller π-conjugation. DSSCs based on sensitizer 110 gave a short-circuit photocurrent density (Jsc) of 15.4 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.71 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.67, corresponding to an overall conversion efficiency (η) of 7.3%. Both dyes showed remarkable cell stability, and the cells retained the initial efficiency even after 600 h of continuous visible-light irradiation at 50 °C. The remarkable stability of dyes, 110 and 111, was attributed to the hydrophobic long n-octyl and n-hexyl aliphatic chains, which could prevent water-induced dye desorption from the TiO2 surface. Compared to triphenyl amine, the indolo[3,2,1-jk]carbazole (IC) structure has a better planarity and rigidity. However the dyes based on IC, 112 and 113 showed inferior power conversion efficiency of 3.96 and 2.85%. A similar series of new rigidified donors based on an azacyclazine scaffold was synthesized by Ganguly and his coworkers. However, the cell performance was not reported.
Tian et al. also witnessed the donating ability of the indolo[2,3-b]carbazole entity. The sensitizers prepared, 114–117, were composed of indolo[2,3-b]carbazole as the donor, cyanoacrylic acid as the acceptor and benzothiadoazole, thiophene or thienothiophene as the π-spacer. These dyes have very intense π–π* and intramolecular charge transfer absorption bands. Introduction of the benzothiadiazole unit was found to red shift the absorption spectra. It is also interesting that introduction of benzothiadiazole or thieno[3,2-b]thiophene increases the photo-stability of the dyes. 117 showed a cell efficiency of 7.03% (Jsc of 14.81 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.69 V and FF of 0.69). Photo-stable indolo[2,3-b]carbazole dyes, 118–120, were also developed via a similar approach by Su's group. Among these dyes, 118 showed the best conversion efficiencies of 6.53% and 7.49% using 4 μm and 8 μm scattering layers, respectively.
Later, Su reported indolo[2,3-b]carbazole dyes with a diketopyrrolopyrroles (DPP) entity in the conjugated spacer, the hydrocarbon chains at both indolo[2,3-b]carbazole and DPP were proved to be an effective strategy for reducing the π–π aggregation of the dyes on TiO2 and suppressing the charge recombination. The cell efficiencies are 8.24 and 7.83% for 121 (Jsc, 15.72 mA cm−2; Voc, 0.739 V; FF, 0.71) and 121a (Jsc, 14.85 mA cm−2; Voc, 0.765 V; FF, 0.69), respectively. The better performance of 121 was attributed to the better light harvesting of the former.
Thomas and coworkers reported dyes 122a–122e possessing indolo[2,3-b]quinoxaline as the donor in the construction of organic sensitizers. They found that the optical and photovoltaic properties are mainly dependent on the nature of the π-linker. The solar cell performances based on these dyes are in the range from 0.86% to 3.45% depending on the π-linker.
Recently, Wong et al. reported a dianchor organic dye (ICZDTA) containing a 5,7-dialkylindolo[2,3-b]carbazole entity, via a double intramolecular Buchwald–Hartwig reaction. Being the isomer of indolo[2,3-b]carbazole, 5,7-dialkylindolo[2,3-b]carbazole is also a rigid coplanar donor. Theoretical calculation indicates efficient electron transfer from 123 to TiO2 upon photo-excitation. The solar cell based on the 123 sensitizer delivers a conversion efficiency of 6.02%.
Zheng et al. designed and synthesized a series of metal-free organic dyes, 124–126, containing the carbazole-like segment benzo[a]carbazole as the electron donor and furan or thiophene as the π-linker. The dye 126 showed a broad IPCE response with a photocurrent signal up to ∼740 nm. Accordingly, 126 gave the best photovoltaic performance (Jsc, 14.8 mA cm−2; Voc, 0.744 V; FF of 0.68), and an overall power conversion efficiency of 7.54% under AM 1.5 G irradiation.
Coplanar benzo[b]naphtho[2,1-d]thiophene synthesized via iodine-mediated cascade cyclization of the thioanisole-substituted aryldiynes was used as the donor of the sensitizer, 127, by Yamamoto and coworkers. The cell showed a moderate conversion efficiency of 3.3% (Jsc, 7.04 mA cm−2; Voc, 0.653 V; FF, 0.728).
Incorporating a planar amine with bulky substituents was found to not only increase the life of the charge-separated state of the dyes by the delocalization of the generated cation over a planar amine unit but also inhibit dye aggregation. Ko et al. reported a novel class of organic sensitizers, where the triphenylamine donor was rigidified using carbon bridges with alkyl or alkoxy chains, and connected to an electron-acceptor by thiophene units. Dye 128 with hexyl chains onto the planarized amine shows the best cell performance: Jsc, 16.78 mA cm−2; Voc, 0.75V; FF, 0.70; η, 8.71%. The efficiency is much higher than that of their reference dye containing triphenylamine as a donor (η = 6.0%).

This paper summarizes the importance of rigidified aromatic systems as conjugated spacers, either in a ladder form or fused polyaromatic. In the ladder form the π–π* transition character of the dye generally becomes more dominant over charge transfer beyond a certain number of benzene ring fused together via sp3 bridged carbon atoms. This makes the higher analogues to exhibit inferior performances. However, introduction of heteroatoms in place of sp3 bridged carbon atoms showed impressive efficiencies. Rigidified polyaromatic systems with or without heteroatoms tend to have broad and intense absorption, which is beneficial to light harvesting. Several N-annulated perylene and analogues-based sensitizers, when used as the electron donor or conjugated spacer, have been reported to exhibit high DSSC performance. Without use of any coadsorbate, a sensitizer consisting of an N-annulated indenoperylene donor and a secondary acceptor achieved a record efficiency of 12.5%, which surpassed the champion dye YD2-o-C8. The conjugated segment with planar fused segments consisting of both an electron rich entity and an electron deficient entity are also promising as the spacer because of the broadened absorption spectra. Better cell performance based on sensitizers with rigidified aromatics can be anticipated.


We would like to acknowledge the Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica, and the Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan, for their financial support.


† The first three authors have contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015