 DOI: 10.1039/C4TA01219D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10244-10249


Wenqiang
Liu
 and 

Yang
Zhang
*

Institute for Physics of Microsystem, Key Laboratory of Photovoltaic Materials, Department of Physics, Henan University, Kaifeng, Henan 475004, China. E-mail: yzhang@henu.edu.cn

Received
11th March 2014
, Accepted 26th April 2014
First published on 28th April 2014
TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 heterojunction solar cells were fabricated by spin-coating and characterized by current–voltage measurements, impedance spectroscopy and capacitance–voltage measurements. It was demonstrated that the TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 layers form an ideal p–n heterojunction suitable for the photovoltaic applications. The active acceptor concentration of 9.67 × 1015 cm−3 in the CH3NH3PbI3 layer and the built-in potential of 0.67 eV in the TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 heterojunction were derived by the Mott–Schottky relationship. Numerical simulations showed that the acceptor concentration in the CH3NH3PbI3 layer greatly influenced the electron potential barrier height at the junction interface. The degradation of TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 heterojunction solar cells showed that the efficiency remained 35.5% after storage under ambient laboratory conditions for 15 days. These results indicated that the oriented TiO2 layers provide a possible route to fabricate stable perovskite-based photovoltaic devices without hole transporting materials.

Recently, methylammonium lead halide perovskite-based solar cells have attracted considerable attention as candidates for the next generation of low-cost and high-performance photovoltaic devices. Organometal halide perovskites, CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3PbCl3, have been proven to be key materials in the fabrication of high efficiency perovskite solar cells. In the past two years, remarkable progress has been made in the power conversion efficiency (PCE) by the rational design of structures and control of interfaces. Their PCEs have achieved over 15%. Usually, such devices have two different configurations: the hole-transporting material infiltrated mesoporous TiO2 nanostructures and a simple planar heterojunction. In mesoporous nanostructured devices, organometal halide perovskites is usually regarded as a sensitizer. Mesoporous films are infiltrated with organometal halide perovskites and Hole-Transporting Materials (HTMs) extract holes from the light absorption layer of organometal halide perovskites. On the other hand, n-type metal oxides as electron transporters combine with organometal halide perovskites to form a p–n junction without additional HTMs. Organometal halide perovskites are used as efficient light absorbers and HTMs simultaneously. Apparently, such photovoltaic devices without HTMs are simpler, and save the cost of raw materials. Recently, Lioz Egar first fabricated hole-conductor-free heterojunction solar cells based on the CH3NH3PbI3 pervoskite, which acted as an absorber and a HTM at the same time. Although the performance of such solar cells is still needed to be enhanced, they have great potential in real applications. However, the mechanism of electron transport at the interface of a p–n junction based on a perovskite is not completely clear. Therefore, it is important to investigate the electrical properties of the p–n junction interface in the pervoskite-based solar cells without HTMs.

In this work, CH3NH3PbI3 was deposited on the oriented TiO2 grown in an ethanol-solvothermal system by a spin-coating method. The electrical properties of the TiO2 and CH3NH3PbI3 interface were investigated by impedance spectroscopy and capacitance–voltage (C–V) measurements.

Methylammonium iodide (CH3NH3I) was synthesized and purified using a modified process based on a previously reported method. 10 mL of hydroiodic acid (57 wt%, Tianjin Kemiou Co. Ltd.) and 14 mL of methylamine (40% in methanol, Tianjin Kemiou Co. Ltd.) were stirred in an ice bath for 2 h. The resulting solution was evaporated at 90 °C. The yellowish raw product was obtained and finally recrystallized with methanol washing five times. The obtained product (CH3NH3I) was dried at 60 °C in a vacuum oven for 24 h. The perovskite precursor solution was prepared by mixing the as-synthesized CH3NH3I and lead(II) iodide (PbI2) with a mole ratio of 1:1 in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) at 60 °C for 12 h.

FTO-coated glass (14 ohm sq.−1, Nippon Sheet Glass, Japan) was cleaned by sonication in detergent, acetone, 2-propanol, and ethanol. After cleaning, a TiO2 layer was deposited by spin-coating at 2000 rpm, heated at 450 °C for 30 min in air. TiO2 colloidal solution was prepared by following the procedure reported previously. Briefly, tetra-n-butyl-titanate (1 mL) was dropped into ethanol (6 mL) under stirring for 60 min. Acetylacetone (1 mL) was added with stirring for 40 min, and ethanol (3 mL) was added. Then, acetic acid (1 mL) solutions were added into the solution, stirred for 30 min, and subsequently spun coated at 2000 rpm for 40 s.
The oriented TiO2 films on compact TiO2 coated FTO substrates were synthesized by an ethanol–HCl solvothermal process following a similar procedure reported previously. In a typical process, 0.7 mL tetrabutyl titanate was added into a mixture of 20 mL of absolute ethanol and 20 mL of 37 wt% HCl. After stirring, the mixture was transferred into a Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave (100 mL). Four substrates were placed in the same autoclave with the conducting side facing the wall of the autoclave. The solvothermal reaction was carried out at 170 °C for 1 h in a vacuum oven. Then, the autoclave was cooled to room temperature naturally. The samples were rinsed with ethanol and deionized water. After drying in air, they were heated in a furnace at 450 °C, maintained for 1 h, subsequently raised to 550 °C and maintained for 1 h.

The above perovskite precursor solution was spread on the annealed TiO2 films and spun at 2000 rpm for 40 s in an argon-filled glove box. Then the films were heated at 120 °C for 30 min. Finally, a gold film (∼220 nm) was deposited on the top of the perovskite layer by thermal evaporation at a pressure of 10−3 Pa to complete the cell device. The active area of ∼0.08 cm2 for the devices was determined by a shadow mask.


The cross-sectional structure of the solar cells was examined using a scanning electron microscope (SEM) (JEOL, JSM-7001F, JEOL). The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics were measured using a Keithley 2440 Sourcemeter in air under AM 1.5 G illumination from a Newport Oriel Solar Simulator with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The electrochemical impedance measurements were carried out under a forward bias of 0.68 V in the dark using an electrochemical workstation (RST5200, Zhengzhou Shiruisi Instrument Co., Ltd.) with the frequency range from 10 Hz to 139 kHz. The magnitude of the alternative signal was 10 mV. Capacitance–voltage measurements were performed at fixed frequencies of 2 kHz, 8 kHz and 20 kHz in the dark, respectively. All measurements were carried out in air at room temperature.



Fig. 1 shows a cross-sectional SEM image of the device based on CH3NH3PbI3 and the oriented TiO2 film prepared by an ethanol–HCl solvothermal process. X-ray diffraction (XRD) characterization shows that the intensity of the (002) peak of rutile TiO2 is the strongest of all peaks (ESI, Fig. S1), indicating that the growth of TiO2 is highly oriented along the (002) plane on the FTO substrate during the solvothermal reaction process. This result is in good agreement with the oriented TiO2 film observed by the cross-sectional SEM image shown in Fig. 1. The thicknesses of the Au layer, oriented TiO2, compact TiO2 film can be evaluated to be 220 nm, 2.5 μm, and 30 nm, respectively. The TiO2 film prepared by a solvothermal process shows the oriented rod-type TiO2 structure, indicating that TiO2 was densely formed on the compact TiO2 film. The CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite was infiltrated into the oriented TiO2. Previous studies have demonstrated that electron transport in one-dimensional structures is intrinsically faster than that in mesoporous TiO2 nanoparticle films. Also, it should be noted that the CH3NH3PbI3 did not form a continuous phase, which indicated that it had infiltrated into the upper part of the oriented TiO2 film, but had not infiltrated into its bottom. This case is different from the previously reported porous TiO2 film with full infiltration of perovskites.



Fig. 2 shows the J–V characteristics of the heterojunction device consisting of FTO, compact TiO2, oriented-TiO2, CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite and Au in the dark (open symbols) and under illumination (solid symbols) of an AM 1.5 G simulated solar spectrum. Positive bias is defined as the positive voltage applied to the Au electrode. The clear rectifying behavior can be observed with and without illumination. A high rectification ratio of ∼500 from the device is obtained in the dark. Under illumination, the solar cell exhibits a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 13.6 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.67 V, a fill factor (FF) of 45.8% and a PCE of 4.2%. On the other hand, as we can see that there is much difference in J–V curves near the open-circuit voltage under illumination and in the dark. The exact origin of this behavior is unclear at present. However, this result is in good agreement with previously reported results of other kinds of solar cells.


To analyze the interfacial recombination at the interface between the TiO2 and CH3NH3PbI3, impedance spectroscopy measurements were carried out in the dark. Fig. 3 shows the Nyquist plots of the TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 heterojunction solar cell in the dark. The equivalent circuit shown in the inset of Fig. 3 is used to fit the experimental data (symbols). A DC voltage of 0.7 (near the Voc of the solar cell) was applied during the measurement and 10 mV AC signals were applied for a frequency range from 10 Hz to 139 kHz. When the impedance measurements are performed under the Voc, the modulated small-amplitude voltage UAC is superimposed onto the Voc. At this bias voltage, the solar cell is almost in operation under actual conditions. In Fig. 3, there is only one semicircle attributed to the electron transfer process at the TiO2 and CH3NH3PbI3 interface, implying that there is only one junction in the TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 heterojunction solar cell. It is different from the previously reported two semicircles in the perovskite-sensitized solar cells with spiro-MeOTAD HTM. The absence of another semicircle is likely due to the absence of a HTM in this device structure. The single semicircle also indicates that the interface contacts between CH3NH3PbI3 and TiO2. This is due to the contacts between Au and CH3NH3PbI3 or FTO and TiO2 are ohmic contacts, rather than the rectifying contact. Because the work function (−5.1 eV) of the metal Au is higher than the highest occupied molecular orbital (−5.43 eV) (the top of the valence band), this difference can lead to hole diffusion from CH3NH3PbI3 to Au. In the case of an ohmic contact, there are no interfaces related to charging and discharging. Therefore, the semicircle was attributed to the TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 heterojunction interface. The fitting curve by the equivalent circuit model shown in the inset of Fig. 3 is in good agreement with experimental data. It indicates that the electron elements in the circuit model can represent the real functional components. The equivalent circuit consists of a series resistor (Rs) and two parallel combinations of a resistor (Rp) and a constant phase element (CPE). The fitted value of Rs, representing the ohmic resistance in the device, is 7.7 Ω cm2. Rp is associated with the interface charge transport process, defined by the charge transfer resistance, and the CPE suggests a non-ideal behavior of the capacitor. It is usually defined by two values, CPE-T and CPE-P. If CPE-P equals 1, then the CPE is identical to an ideal capacitor without defects and/or grain boundary. The fitting of the present data shows that the value of CPE-P is 0.853. This indicates that the interface capacitance between oriented TiO2 and CH3NH3PbI3 is not perfect electrically, which is due to an inhomogenous manner of the rough interface. The fitted value of Rp is 329 Ω cm2, resulting from the charge transport across the TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 heterojunction.


Generally, C–V measurements can provide important information on the nature of the semiconductor interface and charge transport. C–V characteristics of a typical device based on the CH3NH3PbI3/TiO2 heterojunction have been measured at various frequencies in the dark at room temperature. Fig. 4 shows the Mott–Schottky plots at various frequencies. The solid lines are linear fits to the experimental data. The good agreement between the linear fits and the experimental data indicate a uniformly charge distribution region for the device. The built-in potential (Vbi) of the semiconductor p–n junction can be estimated from the Mott–Schottky equation

(1)
where
Cs is the space charge capacitance per unit area, and q, ε, and ε0 are the charge of the electron, the dielectric constant of the semiconductor, and the permittivity of free space, respectively. N, V, Vbi, k and T are the carrier density, the applied bias voltage, the built-in potential, the Boltzmann constant and the absolute temperature, respectively. At room temperature kT/q in eqn (1) is 0.026 V. Fig. 4 shows the Mott–Schottky plots at different frequencies. In the high (0 to 1.0 V) forward bias region the Cs−2vs. V plots are linear for different frequencies. This linearity implies the formation of a barrier in the TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 p–n junction. The intercepts of the straight lines yield 0.67 V, 0.86 V, and 1.13 V at 2 kHz, 8 kHz, and 20 kHz, respectively. Apparently, these plots show the dependence on frequency dispersion. That is, the capacitance decreased with increasing frequency. This indicates a contribution to the junction space charge from relatively slow deep levels at or near the interface of CH3NH3PbI3/TiO2. This result is in agreement with the above inhomogenous interface obtained by impedance analysis. According to the dielectric constant of 6.5 determined by the diffuse reflection of the CH3NH3PbI3 powder, active hole concentrations (NA) are derived to be 9.67 × 1015 cm−3, 1.7 × 1016 cm−3, and 3.1 × 1016 cm−3 by the slopes of the lines at frequencies of 2 kHz, 8 kHz, and 20 kHz, respectively. Standard p–n junction solar cell theory predicts that the Voc of the device under illumination is closely related to the Vbi of the junction. Therefore, the value of Vbi (0.67 V) obtained at 2 kHz is in good agreement with the previous report, and close to the Voc of the device under 1 sun illumination (100 mW cm−2), obtained from the J–V curve shown in Fig. 2. While, the values (0.86 and 1.13 V) obtained at 8 kHz and 20 kHz are larger than the Voc of the solar cell. This may be attributed to the presence of surface states, which were usually considered to contribute to the continuous film capacitance. Surface states may be due to an inhomogeneous distribution of crystal sizes at the film surface or interface. At higher frequencies carrier diffusion at the surface is not able to follow the ac signal. This random motion neither yields a net motion of carriers nor yields a net current in the material with a uniform carrier density as any carrier which leaves a specific location is on average replaced by another one. Therefore, the active acceptor concentration NA on the more lowly doped side of the junction determined by plotting 1/C2vs. V at high frequencies is higher than at low frequencies. The intercept with the voltage axis gives the larger Vbi than obtained at low frequencies.


To understand the energy band structure, the band diagram in the dark for the TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 heterojunction was simulated according to a NA of 9.67 × 1015 cm−3 obtained by C–V characteristics, an electron affinity of 3.92 eV and an energy gap of 1.51 eV of CH3NH3PbI3, using the AMPS-1D software (Analysis of Microelectronic and Photonic Structures). A TiO2 layer with a band gap of 3.3 eV is used as the transparent window for the solar spectrum to be harvested by the CH3NH3PbI3 layer. Fig. 5 shows the simulated energy band diagram for the TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 heterojunction solar cell under the thermal dynamic equilibrium conditions. The inclined band diagram of the CH3NH3PbI3 layer indicates good potential profile in the depletion region for effective carrier separation. The interface valence and conduction band discontinuities (ΔEv = 0.08 eV and ΔEc = 1.87 eV) are observed. The large ΔEv at the n-layer side seen in the band diagram hinders the hole flowing from the p-layer side CH3NH3PbI3 layer to the n-TiO2 layer. The barrier at the p-side resists the electron diffusion from the n-type TiO2 side to the p-type CH3NH3PbI3 side. This can improve the carrier collection. It is also found that CH3NH3PbI3 can overwhelmingly contribute to the built in potential barrier (eVbi). The large values of eVbi and ΔEv can lead to a large Jsc and Voc of such devices based on the TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 heterojunction. Thus, the combination of TiO2 and CH3NH3PbI3 layers formed an ideal p–n heterojunction suitable for the photovoltaic applications.


As we all know, perovskite-type hybrids are easily degraded in the presence of moisture due to the hygroscopic amine salts. Thus, there is very little published research on the topic. These solar cells usually exhibit serious degradation of the PCE after exposure to humidity air for few days. However, the stability of solar cells is very important for commercialized applications. So, the air stability of the TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 heterojunction solar cell was also investigated. The typical device without encapsulation was stored under ambient conditions and periodically tested for 15 days to gauge the device stability. The air stability properties of devices based on the TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 heterojunction as a function of storage time in air under ambient conditions are shown in Fig. 6(a). All the photovoltaic performance parameters were normalized to their original values, and are plotted in Fig. 6(b). It can be seen that the PCE degradation occurred gradually. After exposure to the laboratory air ambient for 9 days and 15 days, the PCEs decreased about 53.6% and 64.5% of the original value. According to our experiences, the performance of solar cells based on lead iodide perovskite sensitized porous TiO2 degraded rapidly. It was even disappeared completely in few minutes. So, this device is much more stable than the conventional device based on lead iodide perovskite sensitized porous TiO2. It should be noted that the Voc increased with storage time as shown in Fig. 6(b). This may be attributed to the increase of resistance in the cell, which is confirmed by Nyquist plots of the freshly prepared cell and its degraded cell stored for 15 days in air ambient (ESI, Fig. S2). Generally, the Voc would be increased due to the increase of Rs. On the other hand, Rp is dominated by the interface charge transport process. Larger Rp represents less recombination in the charge transport process, which can lead to the improved collection of charge carriers at the open circuit. Thus a higher Voc value can be obtained. However, with the increase in resistance, the photocurrents and fill factors may be reduced, as shown in Fig. 6(a). The downtrend of Jsc and PCE indicates that degradation of PCE is mainly caused by the decrease of Jsc. However, Jsc goes down rapidly with increasing storage time, which is attributed to the increase of series resistance in the device. The degradation can be attributed to the reaction of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskites with oxygen or water in air. The relative stability of this device may be due to the compact and oriented TiO2 film, which prevents the over infiltration of perovskites. Therefore, the selection of the oriented TiO2 film plays a role in improving device stability.


The heterojunction solar cells based on CH3NH3PbI3 and the TiO2 film grown in an ethanol–HCl solvothermal system were fabricated. Impedance spectroscopy and C–V measurements demonstrated that the combination of CH3NH3PbI3 and TiO2 formed an ideal p–n heterojunction. The active hole concentration in p-CH3NH3PbI3 and the built-in potential of TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 were derived by the Mott–Schottky relationship. According to the obtained data, a schematic energy-level diagram for the TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 heterojunction under the thermal dynamic equilibrium conditions was given by numerical simulations. It was found that CH3NH3PbI3 can overwhelmingly contribute to the electron potential barrier. The high active hole concentration is desired to improve the performance of CH3NH3PbI3 based photovoltaic devices. The high efficiency of such devices based on the TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 heterojunction is attributed to the large values of eVbi and ΔEv. The degradation behavior of TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 heterojunction solar cells without encapsulation showed that the PCE remained 35.5% after storage under ambient laboratory conditions for 15 days. Therefore, the combination of the oriented TiO2 layer and CH3NH3PbI3 formed an ideal p–n heterojunction suitable for the photovoltaic applications. Moreover, the compact and oriented TiO2 layers may play a crucial role in the stability of such solar cells.


This work was supported by the Department of Education, Henan Province under contract no. 13A480062.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: More characterization results. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ta01219d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014