 DOI: 10.1039/D0TA03692G
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 11141-11147


Il
Jeon
*,

Ahmed
Shawky
,

Seungju
Seo
,

Yang
Qian
,

Anton
Anisimov
,

Esko I.
Kauppinen
,

Yutaka
Matsuo
* and 

Shigeo
Maruyama
*

Department of Chemistry Education, Graduate School of Chemical Materials, Institute for Plastic Information and Energy Materials, Pusan National University, 63-2 Busandaehak-ro, Busan 46241, South Korea. E-mail: il.jeon@spc.oxon.org

Department of Mechanical Engineering, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan. E-mail: matsuo@photon.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp; maruyama@photon.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Nanomaterials and Nanotechnology Department, Advanced Materials Division, Central Metallurgical R&D Institute (CMRDI), P.O. Box 87 Helwan, Cairo 11421, Egypt

Canatu, Ltd., Konalankuja 5, FI-00390 Helsinki, Finland

Department of Applied Physics, Aalto University School of Science, P.O. Box 15100, FI-00076 Aalto, Espoo, Finland

Institute of Materials Innovation, Institutes of Innovation for Future Society, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8603, Japan

Energy NanoEngineering Lab., National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Tsukuba, 305-8564, Japan

Received
3rd April 2020
, Accepted 14th May 2020
First published on 14th May 2020
Triflic acid dispersed in an apolar solvent exhibited a superior doping effect and stability on carbon nanotube electrodes. By applying a high concentration of a hole-transporting material on the carbon nanotube top electrode in perovskite solar cells, higher power conversion efficiency than that of metal electrode-based perovskite solar cells was obtained.

Lead halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have received considerable attention around the world as a promising alternative energy source. Their certified power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) now exceed 20% and only a few challenges remain before commercialisation, which include long-term device stability and fabrication cost. In general, PSCs have a structure in which a photoactive material and two charge-selective materials are sandwiched by a transparent bottom electrode and a metal top electrode. The metal electrodes are typically evaporated in a vacuum by thermal deposition. This incurs substantial fabrication costs. Further, the metal electrodes induce metal-ion migration, which accelerates the degradation of perovskite layers. Therefore, it is crucial that we find an alternative to the metal electrodes to maximise the low-cost merits of PSCs and remedy the shortcoming of poor device stability.

Having high conductivity and low-cost processability, aerosol-synthesised single-walled carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have showcased promising potential as the top electrodes in PSCs. The CNT top electrodes improve the PSC stability by both removing metal-ion migration and forming an effective moisture barrier. Furthermore, the fact that CNTs are made up of carbon atoms only and the aerosol-synthesised CNT films are dry- and directly transferable significantly reduces the solar cell fabrication cost. Thus far, the only drawback of the CNT top electrodes in PSCs has been an inadequate PCE. There are two main reasons for this: the first reason is that CNT electrodes do not reflect the incident light for reabsorption, unlike metal electrodes. Therefore, the total external quantum efficiency (EQE) is lower than that of the metal electrode-based PSCs, which results in lower short-circuit current (JSC). The second reason is the limited conductivity of CNTs, which can be improved by chemical doping, but it is extremely challenging as applying any chemicals onto CNTs will damage the underlying perovskite layer. This limits the fill factor (FF) and open-circuit voltage (VOC) of the CNT-based PSCs. Recently, we reported a vapour-assisted ex situ doping method, which can effectively dope CNT top electrodes without damaging the layers underneath. A PCE of 17.56% was obtained, which was the highest PCE among the CNT top electrode-based PSCs reported to date. However, this method has a problem of its own as the long exposure to acid vapour results in a reaction between the acidic dopant and 4-tert-butylpyridine (t-BP), limiting the doping effectiveness. Moreover, it is difficult to control the exposure time precisely, resulting in low reproducibility. Therefore, it is necessary to develop a more controlled and effective doping method that can be applied to the CNT top electrodes without damaging the neighbouring layers. In addition to this, for the CNT electrodes to outperform the metal electrodes, there has to be a method that is unique to CNTs which can improve the device performance even more, other than p-doping. Herein, we report CNT electrode-laminated PSCs (CNT-PSCs), in which triflic acid (TFMS) dispersed in a non-polar solvent is cast onto the CNT top electrodes. This induces a stable doping effect without damaging the underlying perovskite layer as well as avoiding reaction with t-BP. We found that the dispersion force, polar force, and hydrogen bonding force of the solvents are directly related to the doping effectiveness in CNTs. Based on this, the o-dichlorobenzene (ODCB) solvent for TFMS was found to exhibit the greatest doping effect and 0.015 wt% TFMS was the optimal concentration that showed the maximum doping effect with minimum damage to the device system. To improve the PCE further, we optimised the 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobi-fluorene (spiro-MeOTAD) concentration and the CNT film density. It is well known that amorphous spiro-MeOTAD has a relatively low mobility; thus the thickness of the spiro-MeOTAD layer cannot exceed a certain point. Harnessing the unique geometry of the porous CNT network, we found that the CNT films can accommodate a greater concentration of spiro-MeOTAD without lowering the hole mobility. Besides, different CNT film densities possess different pore sizes within the CNT films for spiro-MeOTAD to be accommodated. Upon optimizing both the concentration and the CNT density, a 1.17 times higher spiro-MeOTAD concentration with 80% transparent (at a wavelength of 550 nm) CNT films led to the highest PCE of 18.8% in PSCs. Not only was this a record-high efficiency among the reported CNT top electrode-based PSCs, but this was also higher than that of metal electrode-based control devices, which exhibited a PCE of 18.4%. This set a milestone for the CNT-applied PSCs as this was the first time that carbon electrodes outperformed metal electrodes in photovoltaics to the best of our knowledge. Moreover, it is worth emphasizing that the CNT-PSCs demonstrated in this work are semi-transparent and have great potential for other applications, such as tandem solar cells.
TFMS is a superacid with a Hammett acidity function (H0) of approximately −14.9. TFMS is one of the most effective and durable dopants for carbon electrodes. In our previous study, we used TFMS vapour to dope CNT top electrodes in CNT-PSCs. However, this method resulted in TFMS molecules building up at the interface between the CNT electrode and the perovskite, reacting with t-BP (Fig. S1a). The presence of t-BP at the perovskite surface is crucial for PSC efficiency as it induces favourable chemical interactions and improves the morphology of the perovskite layers. Therefore, it is ideal to use the drop-cast doping method from the viewpoints of reproducibility and doping effectiveness; the drop-cast TFMS solution will dope the CNT network more thoroughly and minimise the reaction with t-BP at the perovskite interface (Fig. S1b). However, drop-casting a polar solvent directly onto the CNT electrode will dissolve the perovskite layer underneath. Hence, we explored various non-polar solvents, namely tetrahydrofuran (THF), chloroform (CF), ODCB, chlorobenzene (CB), benzene and toluene to disperse TFMS for drop-cast doping (Fig. S2). The influence of the solvents on the doping effect and stability was investigated. Non-ionic molecular interaction between CNTs and the solvent can be predicted by Hansen parameters, namely, dispersion force, (fd) polar force (fp), and hydrogen bonding force (fh). These three-component data can be translated into a triangular graph, known as the Teas plot (eqn (1) and (2)).
fd = ∂d/∂d + ∂p + ∂h
fp = ∂p/∂d + ∂p + ∂h
fh = ∂h/∂d + ∂p + ∂h
(1)
fd + fp + fh = 100
(2)

Fig. 1a shows a Teas plot depicting the compatibility between CNTs and different solvents. It can be said that the distance of a solvent from the CNTs on the Teas plot represents how thoroughly TFMS permeates into the CNT network. The sheet resistance change of the CNT films upon TFMS doping (conc. 0.5 wt%) measured by the van der Pauw method (Fig. S3) shows that while the effectiveness of the doping generally follows the Teas plot, some discrepancies are present probably due to varying vapour pressures of the solvents (Fig. 1b). Ideally, solvents which pervade into the CNTs without evaporating too quickly are expected to induce the greatest doping effect. Fig. 1b shows that TFMS in ODCB displays the greatest doping effect as the sheet resistance dropped from ca. 36 Ω sq−1 to ca. 13 Ω sq−1. ODCB is rather close to CNTs on the Teas plot and has a relatively high boiling point. It is an interesting finding that acids do not need to be dissolved in order to induce strong doping. The doping durability of TFMS in different solvents was also measured. All of the solvents showed a doping durability of longer than 30 days in air, corroborating that the choice of solvents does not affect the durability of the doping effect (Fig. 1c and S4). In order to minimise the potential damage caused by TFMS, we tested low concentrations of TFMS dispersed in ODCB. Even a small concentration as low as 0.01 wt% induced a significant doping effect and the concentration of the acid did not affect the doping durability (Fig. 1d). The doping effect was confirmed by visible to near infra-red (Vis-NIR) absorption spectroscopy, photoelectron yield spectroscopy (PYS) and Raman spectroscopy. The suppression of the van Hove singularity transitions (EM11, ES22, and ES11) in Fig. 1e and lowering of the Fermi level in Fig. 1f reveal that even 0.01 wt% TFMS induces substantial p-doping. Additionally, the suppressed radial breathing mode (RBM) of the Raman spectrum (Fig. S5a) and the G-band shift by 1.6 cm−1 upon application of 0.01 wt% TFMS to a CNT film confirm the doping (Fig. S5b). It is worth noting that there are reductions in the D-band to G-band intensity ratio (ID/IG) from 0.016 to 0.012 (Fig. S5c). While p-doping with a low concentration of acid has been reported to decrease ID/IG, it may simply be due to removal of impurities on CNTs by acid. Whatever the reason may be, it is clear that even a trace amount of TFMS has a considerable effect on CNTs. To assess the doping effect in devices, CNT-PSCs were fabricated in a configuration of glass/indium tin oxide (ITO)/SnO2/CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3)/CNT. Different concentrations of TFMS in ODCB were applied to the top CNT electrode and 0.015 wt% TFMS gave the highest photovoltaic performance (Fig. 1g and Table S1). Increasing the TFMS concentration decreased the PCE of the CNT-PSCs. We ascribe this to the proton migration and the hygroscopic nature of TFMS degrading the perovskite layer (Fig. S6). X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurement shows that the application of TFMS acid leads to the breakdown of MAPbI3 into intermediates, indicated by the increase in the PbI2 peak and the appearance of intermediate peaks (Fig. S7). Having found the optimal concentration of TFMS, we applied the spiro-MeOTAD hole-transporting layer (HTL) to boost the PCE. Fig. 1h shows that spin-coating the spiro-MeOTAD HTL on top of the TFMS-doped CNT-PSCs increased the PCE from 13.2% to 17.0% (Fig. S8 and Table S2).
It is evident that the reaction between TFMS and t-BP is minimal if at all present. The application of TFMS and the HTL enhanced all three parameters. TMFS doping improved the FF by decreasing the series resistance (RS) and HTL application improved the FF by increasing the shunt resistance (RSH) (Fig. S9). TFMS doping increased the VOC as well by improving the energy alignment between the Fermi level of the CNT electrode and the valence level of the perovskite layer as evidenced by photoluminescence (PL) quenching (Fig. S10).
While the PCE of 17.0% for the MAPbI3-based CNT-PSC is already a high value, there is room for further improvement. The density of CNT films can be controlled by the aerosol CNT collection time. The longer the collection time, the denser the CNT film. There is a trade-off between the transparency and conductivity of the CNT films according to their collection time (Fig. S11 and Table S3). When CNT films are used as the top electrode, the transparency is not important. However, we cannot merely employ CNT films with the highest density. This is because CNT films with different densities have different pore sizes, which can accommodate different amounts of spiro-MeOTAD. Therefore, using CNT films with the highest density limits the hole-transporting ability as they accommodate small amounts of spiro-MeOTAD. We analysed the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the CNT films with four different densities (indicated by their transparency, T, at a wavelength of 550 nm), viz. T90%-CNT, T80%-CNT, T70%-CNT and T60%-CNT (Fig. S12). The image contrast histogram of the unprocessed SEM images shows that there are more grey images for the denser CNT films, reflecting a greater number of tubes (Fig. 2a). By processing the SEM images, we obtained information regarding the number and size of the pores within the CNT network (Fig. 2b–e and S13). The data show that the densest films, the T60%-CNT films, have the smallest pore size (Fig. 2b). While the number and size of the pores among T70%-CNT, T80%-CNT, and T90%-CNT were similar, T90%-CNT films had some conspicuously large pores (Fig. S14). This meant that we had to test different concentrations of the spiro-MeOTAD HTL for CNT-PSCs. Au electrode-based reference PSCs and CNT-PSCs were fabricated using different HTL concentrations (Fig. 2f). While both the T60%-CNT- and the T90%-CNT-based PSCs exhibited low PCEs, the T70%-CNT- and the T80%-CNT-based PSCs exhibited the highest PCEs of 18.6% and 18.8%, respectively (Fig. 2g–j). The optimal HTL concentrations were 1.05 and 1.17 times higher than the commonly used spiro-MeOTAD concentration used for Au-based PSCs.
Looking at the photovoltaic parameters of the HTL-optimised CNT-based PSCs, it is clear that the high PCE arises from the high JSC and FF, which are related to the charge extraction and hole-selectivity, respectively (Fig. 3a). In the case of conventional metal electrode-based PSCs, increasing the spiro-MeOTAD HTL concentration decreased the PCE (Fig. 3b). This is because increasing the HTL concentration results in a thicker spiro-MeOTAD layer, which leads to a decrease in the hole-transporting ability as verified by the increase in RS (Fig. S15 and Table S4). Decreasing the spiro-MeOTAD concentration led to an increased hole-transporting ability, yet the electron-blocking ability decreases as verified by the decrease in RSH (Fig. S16 and Table S5). This does not happen in the case of the CNT-laminated PSCs because the thick spiro-MeOTAD layer is tolerated more on account of the holes being extracted by the CNTs at the interface before being hindered by the limited hole mobility of spiro-MeOTAD (Fig. 3c). To verify this point, we carried out space-charge limited current (SCLC) measurements on CNT-laminated hole-only devices (ITO/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS)/MAPbI3/CNT/spiro-MeOTAD) with two different CNT densities and three different concentrations of spiro-MeOTAD. The hole mobility (μ) is correlated with the gradient of the current to voltage in the SCLC region (∇) (eqn (3)). The charge trap density (ntrap) is correlated with the trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL), which is the beginning point of the TFL region (eqn (4)).
J = 9/8 × ε0εrμ(V2/L3) → μ ∝ k(J/V2)
(3)
ntrap = 2εrVTFL/qL2 → ntrap ∝ kVTFL
(4)
The SCLC curve gradients in Fig. 4a–d show that the hole mobility increases with the increase in the HTL concentration, and the increase is greater for the T80%-CNT than the T70%-CNT. VTFL values are lower for the 1.05 times concentrated HTL-applied T70%-CNT than for the 1.17 times concentrated HTL-applied T70%-CNT, whereas the 1.17 times concentrated HTL-applied T80%-CNT exhibits a lower VTFL than the 1.05 times concentrated HTL-applied T80%-CNT. This shows that both hole mobility and ntrap indicate the hole-transporting efficiency of the CNT-PSCs. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) data of the different concentrations of HTL-applied T80% CNT-based PSCs in Fig. 4e confirm that the increase in the HTL concentration increases the charge transport resistance (RCT), which implies an electron-blocking ability enhancement as well as a hole mobility reduction (Table S6). Nevertheless, the photoluminescence (PL) quenching of different concentrations of HTL-applied T80% CNT on perovskite films reveals that applying a 1.17 times higher spiro-MeOTAD concentration to the T80% CNT film induces improved charge transfer as evidenced by the stronger quenching with a slight blue-shift, which indicates reduced charge trap sites (Fig. 4f).
A combination of the optimised CNT density and spiro-MeOTAD concentration in CNT-PSCs gave the highest PCE of 18.8% and an average PCE of 18.3% (Fig. 5a, b and Table 1: entry 6, Fig. S17), which are higher than the 18.4% for the best PCE and 17.9% for the average PCE of the Au electrode-based reference PSCs (Table 1: entry 1). Such outperformance of the CNT-PSCs over the Au-based PSCs comes from the higher FF, which is attributed to the superior charge selectivity of the optimised spiro-MeOTAD concentration and CNT density along with the improved conductivity by p-dopant solvent engineering (Fig. 5c). Despite the lower JSC due to the non-reflective nature of the CNT top electrode, the VOC of the CNT-PSCs was equal to or higher than that of the reference devices. This is ascribed to the better-aligned energy level between the CNT Fermi level and the valence band of MAPbI3 as well as the reduced Shockley–Read–Hall recombination VOC loss through more effective hole-extraction by the CNTs. The obtained PCE of 18.8% stands as the highest amongst those of the reported CNT electrode-based PSCs (Fig. 5d, Table S7 and Fig. S18–S21). As reported many times before, the CNT-laminated PSCs' device stability was greater than that of the gold electrode-based PSCs (Fig. S22). However, the difference was not great, which we attribute to the use of hygroscopic TFMS. Nevertheless, this work sets a new milestone as this is the first time a CNT electrode has outperformed a metal electrode in terms of solar cell efficiency as far as we are concerned. We plan on improving CNT-PSC technology further by advancing the doping methodology and the HTL materials. We are positive that this work will deepen the understanding of the device application of CNT electrodes and inspire other solar cell scientists to move a step closer to feasible PSCs.
Entry
Top electrode

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF
PCEbest (%)
PCEaverage (%)
1

Au


22.8


1.12


0.721


18.4


17.9 ± 0.42

2
CNTs
19.8
0.97
0.595
11.4
10.4 ± 0.72
3
TFMS-doped CNTs
20.6
1.03
0.620
13.2
12.4 ± 0.65
4
HTL-applied CNTs
21.7
1.04
0.680
15.3
14.8 ± 0.53
5
HTL-applied TFMS-doped CNTs
22.5
1.08
0.700
17.0
16.7 ± 0.14
6

Optimised HTL-applied TFMS-doped CNTs


22.7


1.12


0.738


18.8


18.3 ± 0.54


As our previous approach of using the ex situ TFMS vapour doping method led to a limited PCE, it was essential to develop a new doping method that leads to minimal interaction with t-BP while demonstrating the maximum doping effect. Direct drop-casting of TFMS dispersed in a non-polar solvent was, therefore, investigated in this work. TFMS in ODCB was found to manifest a superior doping effect and excellent stability compared with other solvents. Furthermore, by exploiting the high mobility of the porous CNT network, a higher concentration of spiro-MeOTAD was applied to the TFMS-doped CNT-laminated PSCs after CNT density optimisation. The resulting CNT top electrode-laminated metal electrode-free PSCs exhibited a PCE of 18.8%, which is higher than the 18.4% of the metal electrode-based PSCs. This is a momentous finding as we carve our own path with the CNT electrodes which finally outperformed the metal electrode in device application.


There are no conflicts to declare.


We gratefully acknowledge the Research and Education Consortium for Innovation of Advanced Integrated Science by the Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST) and the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science JSPS KAKENHI, Grant Numbers JP15H05760, JP16H02285, JP17K04970, JP17H06609, JP17F17364, JP18H05329, and JP19K15669. I. J. thanks the Yashima Environment Technology Foundation for financial support. This work was supported by a National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government Ministry of Science and ICT (MSIT) (No. NRF-2018R1A5A1025594).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta03692g
‡ These authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020