 DOI: 10.1039/C3TA11556A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11070-11077

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Xiaoliang
Zhang
,

Jianhua
Liu
*,

Songmei
Li
,

Xiaohong
Tan
,

Jindan
Zhang
,

Mei
Yu
 and 

Mengge
Zhao


School of Materials Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China. E-mail: liujh@buaa.edu.cn

Department of Chemistry and Center for Nucleic Acids Science and Technology, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, United States

Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, United States

Received
19th April 2013
, Accepted 11th July 2013
First published on 11th July 2013
The performances of photovoltaic devices can be improved by using high electron mobility nanocomposites to increase charge collection and transportation. Single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) exhibit high electron mobility and are believed to be promising materials to enhance the power conversion efficiency of photovoltaic devices. Herein, we present DNA applied as a biological scaffold to fabricate SWNTs/TiO2 and SWNTs/TiO2/Ag nanocomposites, which are integrated into photoanode films to achieve high efficiency dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). The effects of the amounts of SWNTs and Ag NPs in photoanode films on the performances of DSSCs are investigated. After incorporating the nanocomposites into photoanode films, the power conversion efficiency is enhanced. In particular, when the amounts of SWNTs and Ag NPs in the photoanode are 0.15 wt% and 0.8 wt%, the DSSC exhibits a high power conversion efficiency of ∼5.99%, ∼37.07% improvement compared with conventional TiO2-only DSSCs. The mechanisms of the performance improvement are discussed in detail.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) attract increasing attention as a promising technology for renewable energy production due to their relatively low cost, impressive conversion efficiency, environmental friendliness, and simple fabrication processes. Intensive efforts have been devoted to improve the power conversion efficiency (PCE), and it is now well-accepted that high specific surface area, fast electron transportation, and pronounced light-harvesting are indispensable to a high efficiency photoanode, but these factors are difficult to achieve simultaneously. To improve the specific surface area, a photoanode with nanostructure was investigated for loading more dye molecules to improve the photogenerated electron production. Localized surface plasmons (LSPs) of noble metal nanoparticles (NPs), such as Ag and Au NPs, were introduced into the design and fabrication of a plasmonic photoanode to improve the light-harvesting. The plasmonic photoanode not only enhances the light-harvesting, but also reduces the photoanode film thickness, improving electron collection without affecting the performances of the thin film photovoltaic devices. After incorporating a small amount of plasmonic NPs (0.1 wt%) into the photoanode film, the efficiency was improved by ∼15.4% and the photoanode film thickness decreased by ∼25%.

Single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) exhibit high electron mobility and are believed to represent one of the most promising strategies to increase charge collection and transportation. Compared with metallic SWNTs, semiconducting SWNTs have a non-continuous band structure, and the electrons in the conduction band can be transferred quickly. When incorporating a small fraction (∼0.2 wt%) of semiconducting SWNTs into a photoanode film, the electron collection and transportation efficiency are largely enhanced. These methods improve the efficiency to a certain extent, however, how to design and fabricate a photoanode to accommodate the light-harvesting and electron collection efficiency to improve the performances of photovoltaic devices remains a challenge. Therefore, it is desirable to develop new approaches to incorporate SWNTs and plasmonic metal NPs into photoanode films that not only increase the electron collection but also enhance the light-harvesting for thin film photovoltaic devices.
The DNA molecule is able to self-assemble into sophisticated nanostructures and wrap around SWNTs to aid their dispersion, and it is also an efficient reducing agent under ultraviolet (UV) irradiation. Pervious work has applied DNA and Bacillus cells as biotemplates to synthesize novel functional nanostructures. Herein, DNA was applied as a biological scaffold to integrate the SWNTs/TiO2 and SWNTs/TiO2/Ag nanocomposites into photoanode films to achieve high efficiency DSSCs. After incorporating the nanocomposites into the photoanode films, the PCE was enhanced. In particular, after incorporating the SWNTs/TiO2/Ag nanocomposites into photoanode films, the PCE was ∼5.99%, a ∼37.07% improvement compared with the conventional TiO2-only DSSC. The SWNTs/TiO2/Ag nanocomposites play dual functions, not only enhancing the light-harvesting efficiency, but also increasing the electron collection and transportation. How the amounts of SWNTs and Ag NPs in photoanode films affect the performances of the DSSCs was investigated.

The Bacillus hosts (no. 1.1100) that contained plasmid DNA with 3980 base pairs were cultured under liquid nourishment conditions. Plasmid DNA was separated from the Bacillus hosts as previously described. The concentration of DNA was calculated based on the absorption values from the UV-vis absorption spectra, and the concentration was ∼121 μg mL−1. The collected DNA was stored in a dark environment at −20 °C until needed for experiments.


The DNA solution (100 μL) was mixed with semiconducting SWNTs (20 μL, 0.2 mg mL−1), and the obtained mixture solution was sonicated on ice for 1 h. After sonication, the mixture solution was filtered to remove non-bound DNA. The SWNTs bound with DNA were dispersed in 500 μL water, and a solution containing a calculated amount of silver nitrate was added into the solution. The complex solution was placed in a dark environment at 4 °C for 12 h. Then, the TiO2 NP clusters with diameters of 3–5 nm were added into the complex solution and sonicated for 5 min. After sonication, the obtained complex solution was placed in a dark environment at 4 °C for 6 h. Then, the complex solution was UV irradiated (at 254 nm) under an UV lamp (8 W) for 40 min to reduce Ag(I) cations to Ag NPs deposited on TiO2 clusters, forming SWNTs/TiO2/Ag nanocomposites. The amount of Ag NPs in the SWNTs/TiO2/Ag nanocomposites was adjusted by controlling the concentration of Ag(I) cations anchored on the DNA. For SWNTs/TiO2 nanocomposites, the TiO2 NPs clusters were added into the mixture solution of DNA and SWNTs and the solution was placed in a dark environment at 4 °C for 6 h. The TiO2 NP clusters were bound by DNA forming SWNTs/TiO2 nanocomposites. The nanocomposites were collected by centrifugation and washed thoroughly with water and ethanol.


A calculated amount of nanocomposite was ground thoroughly and mixed with TiO2 paste (mixture of TiO2 NPs with diameters of ∼25 nm, ethyl cellulose, and terpinol), stirred and sonicated. Photoanode films with thicknesses of ∼8 μm were prepared on a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO, 15 Ω □−1) substrate via a spin coating method. The photoanode films were annealed at 500 °C for 30 min under argon gas to remove DNA, organic substances and solvent. After annealing, the photoanode films were dipped into a 60 mM TiCl4 solution for 40 min at 80 °C, then rinsed with water to remove the residual TiCl4, and again annealed at 500 °C for 30 min. After cooling to room temperature, the photoanode films were immersed into cis-bis(isothiocyanato)bis(2,2′-biprydi-4,4′-dicarboxylatoruthenium(II)bis-tetrabutylammonium) (N719, 0.5 mM) dye solution and kept at room temperature for 24 h. Then, the dyed photoanode films were immersed in acetonitrile for 5 min to remove non-loaded dye.


The dyed photoanode films were assembled into solar cells with Pt-sputtered FTO glass as a counter electrode. The electrolyte consisted of 1-butyl-3-methyl-imidazolium iodide (0.7 M), I2 (0.03 M), guanidinium thiocyanate (0.1 M), and 4-tert-butylpyridine (0.5 M) in acetonitrile and valeronitrile (85:15 v/v). The photovoltaic characteristics were measured under a 500 W xenon lamp (NBeT, Solar-500) with simulated AM 1.5 solar irradiance with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2, which was adjusted using a Si reference solar cell. The photocurrent–voltage (J–V) curves were recorded using a Keithley model 2400 source measurement unit. The photoanode film area for the DSSC performance tests was typically 0.25 cm2. The photo-to-current efficiency (IPCE) values were determined using a system comprising a monochromator, 500 W xenon lamp, a calibrated silicon photodetector and a power meter.


Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high resolution TEM (HRTEM) together with selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) were conducted using a transmission electron microscope (JSM 2100 and 2100F) at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV, and the energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectrum was measured with the instrument connected to the microscope during the TEM measurement. Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) images were collected using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (APPLO300 and XL30 S-FEG) with an accelerating voltage of 10 kV. UV-vis absorption spectra and light absorption tests were recorded on a Shimadzu UV-3600 UV-vis spectrophotometer. Raman spectroscopy measurements were performed by using a Raman system (Lab RAM HR800) with laser excitation of 514 nm (Ar ion).



Scheme 1 shows the fabrication of SWNTs/TiO2 and SWNTs/TiO2/Ag nanocomposites based on DNA as a biological scaffold. Briefly, plasmid DNA is a circular extrachromosomal molecule that is capable of replicating autonomously in Bacillus hosts and can be prepared in large quantities by using molecular biological procedures (Scheme 1a). The plasmid DNA with 3980 base pairs was separated from the Bacillus hosts as described in a previous study. DNA can bind on SWNTs and wrap around semiconducting SWNTs via π–π interactions under sonication (Scheme 1b). The negative charge of the DNA backbone can bind various metal cations and cationic NPs via electrostatic interactions, which leads to Ag(I) cations anchored on DNA and embedded inside the double helix. Under acidic conditions (pH 6.0), the surface of TiO2 NP clusters exhibit positive charge, which causes anatase TiO2 NP clusters to be anchored on DNA, forming DNA/Ag(I)/TiO2 NP cluster stable complexes (Scheme 1c). Under UV irradiation, photo-oxidation and degradation took place on the DNA (Scheme 1d), and concomitantly the anchored Ag(I) cations were reduced to Ag NPs deposited on TiO2 NP clusters, forming SWNTs/TiO2/Ag nanocomposites (Scheme 1e). For the SWNTs/TiO2 nanocomposite fabrication, the anchoring Ag(I) cations and UV irradiation processes were lacking.

UV-vis absorption spectra were recorded for the fabrication processes of the SWNTs/TiO2/Ag nanocomposites, as shown in Fig. 1. The collected DNA has an absorption band at ∼260 nm (Fig. 1a). After interaction with SWNTs, the absorption band of DNA at ∼260 nm increases in intensity due to π–π interactions between the DNA and SWNTs, resulting in the DNA wrapping on the SWNTs. Upon comparing the solutions before and after the UV irradiation (Fig. 1a), the absorption band of DNA at ∼260 nm decreases after UV irradiation, which is due to photo-oxidation and degradation taking place on the DNA base pairs. Although DNA was photo-oxidized under UV irradiation, the reduction of Ag(I) cations occurred concomitantly with the degradation of DNA. After the UV irradiation, a new absorption band appeared at ∼420 nm that is due to the surface plasmon resonance of Ag NPs (Fig. 1a). For the DNA/Ag(I)/TiO2 NPs cluster complexes (Fig. 1b), the Ag(I) cations were reduced to Ag NPs forming SWNTs/TiO2/Ag nanocomposites after the UV irradiation. Compared with the Ag NPs in Fig. 1a, the blue-shift of the Ag NPs in the nanocomposites is ascribed to the interaction between the TiO2 NP clusters and the Ag NPs, which alludes to Ag NPs deposited on TiO2 NP clusters. After the UV irradiation, the colour of the DNA/Ag(I)/TiO2 NP clusters solution changed to dark-brown for the SWNTs/TiO2/Ag nanocomposite solution (inset in Fig. 1b). It is worth noting that no reducing agents or any other additives were needed during the fabrication of the nanocomposites. The DNA not only worked as the biological scaffold to synchronously bind the SWNTs, Ag(I) cations, and TiO2 NPs clusters to drive the nanocomposite formation, but also acted as a reducing agent to reduce anchored Ag(I) cations under UV irradiation. In the absence of DNA, none of the TiO2 NPs clusters were anchored onto the SWNTs and no Ag NPs were formed, which indicates that the DNA plays a necessary role in the nanocomposite fabrication.

Fig. 2 shows the TEM images of the SWNTs bound by DNA, SWNTs/TiO2 and SWNTs/TiO2/Ag nanocomposites, and the HRTEM image together with the SAED image and EDX spectrum of SWNTs/TiO2/Ag nanocomposites. After being bound with DNA, the semiconducting SWNTs were uniformly dispersed (Fig. 2a). Fig. 2b shows the high magnification TEM image of the SWNTs bound by DNA, which reveals that the DNA was wrapped around the SWNTs, and the diameter increased from 1–2 nm for pristine SWNTs to 3–5 nm for wrapped SWNTs, as indicated by the arrows. Indeed, the dimensions of the DNA were much larger than those of the SWNTs. Under sonication, however, the conformation of the DNA was changed and it was supplely bound on the SWNTs. Under the effect of electrostatic interactions, the TiO2 NP clusters with diameters of 3–5 nm were anchored on the wrapped SWNTs forming SWNTs/TiO2 nanocomposites (Fig. 2c). The TiO2 NP clusters and Ag NPs were also anchored on the SWNTs forming SWNTs/TiO2/Ag nanocomposites after the UV irradiation (Fig. 2d). The NPs with a dark colour in the SWNTs/TiO2/Ag nanocomposites are Ag NPs and the darkish NPs are TiO2 NPs clusters (Fig. 2e). The SWNTs/TiO2/Ag nanocomposites have a wire-like structure. Importantly, applying DNA to fabricate the nanocomposites did not significantly affect the electron transfer within the SWNTs, nor did it change the properties of the pristine SWNTs.
The interplanar distance in the HRTEM image of a single Ag NP is approximately 0.24 nm (Fig. 2f), which is compatible with the 〈111〉 plane of the face-centered cubic (FCC) crystal structure of Ag. The SAED pattern (inset in Fig. 2f) shows the crystal structure of the SWNTs/TiO2/Ag nanocomposites, which also reveals that the Ag NPs have the FCC crystal structure and the TiO2 NPs clusters have the anatase structure. The EDX spectrum of the SWNTs/TiO2/Ag nanocomposites indicates that the compositions of the nanocomposites mainly consist of C, Ti, and Ag elements. The presence of the Cu and some C comes from the carbon coated TEM grid used for the TEM and EDX analysis. The Raman spectra of the SWNTs/TiO2/Ag nanocomposites show that the Raman signals of the SWNTs are weakened after the introduction of TiO2 clusters and Ag NPs onto the surfaces of the SWNTs (Fig. S1 and S2). The Raman signals of anatase TiO2 are also detected.
To incorporate the nanocomposites into the photoanode films, the nanocomposites were ground thoroughly and integrated into the TiO2 NPs (with diameters of ∼25 nm) paste, and subsequently the photoanode films were fabricated on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrates via a spin coating method. The photoanode films were annealed at an elevated temperature of 500 °C for 30 min under argon gas to protect the SWNTs and Ag NPs and ensure better contact between the SWNTs and TiO2 NP clusters. The DNA, organic substance and solvent were removed during the annealing treatment. Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) was applied to investigate the surface and cross-section of the photoanode films (Fig. 3). The photoanode films have large numbers of micro pores (Fig. 3a and S3), which originated from the removal of DNA and organic substances. These micro pores could enhance the surface area of the photoanode films and facilitate the immersion and loading of dye molecules on the photoanode films.
For TiO2-only DSSCs, the photogenerated electrons diffuse in the photoanode films and overcome the resistance among the TiO2 NPs, and are finally collected by FTO glass electrode. The function of the semiconducting SWNTs in the photoanode films is to increase the electron collection and transportation. Fig. 3c shows a schematic representation of the incorporation of semiconducting SWNTs in the photoanode films. The SWNTs form three dimensional (3D) networks in the photoanode films, in which the photogenerated electrons can be quickly collected from the TiO2 NP clusters and transferred to the FTO glass electrode. Fig. 3d shows the energy scheme of the photoanode. The TiO2 NP clusters accept the electron from the donor photo-excited dye (N719) molecule. The conduction band of the semiconducting SWNTs is lower than that of TiO2, and the electron spontaneously transfers into the conduction band of the semiconducting SWNTs from the TiO2 conduction band as the electron diffuses in the photoanode films. In the 3D networks of SWNTs, the electron is quickly transported to the current collector FTO glass electrode, preventing electron recombination or reverse reaction (Fig. 3d). We believe that incorporation of SWNTs into photoanode films not only enhances the electron collection and transportation, but the SWNTs also act as a reinforced material to prevent the photoanode films from cracking and breaking off from the FTO glass electrode.
Three types of DSSCs were fabricated using TiO2-only, SWNTs/TiO2 and SWNTs/TiO2/Ag nanocomposites as anode materials. The thicknesses of all the photoanode films were ∼8 μm. The amount of SWNTs in the SWNTs/TiO2 DSSC was 0.15 wt%, and the amount of SWNTs and Ag NPs in the SWNTs/TiO2/Ag DSSC were 0.15 wt% and 0.8 wt%, respectively. Fig. 4 shows the photocurrent–voltage (J–V) curves and the incident photo-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra of the DSSCs. The resultant photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. The overall power conversion efficiency (PCE, η) was evaluated using the equation η = (FFJscVoc)/Pin, where FF is the fill factor, Jsc is the short-circuit current density, Voc is the open-circuit voltage, and Pin is the incident light power density. The Jsc and PCE for the TiO2-only DSSCs are 8.45 mA cm−2 and 4.37%, respectively. Compared with the TiO2-only DSSC, when integrating semiconducting SWNTs into the photoanode films, the Jsc is 10.43 mA cm−2, increased by ∼23.43%, and the PCE is 5.32%, increased by ∼21.74%. The enhanced efficiency is primarily due to the increased photocurrent density, as the Voc and FF are close for the two types of DSSC (Table 1). The improvement of the efficiency can presumably be attributed to the high charge collection efficiency by the SWNTs. Compared with the TiO2-only and SWNTs/TiO2 DSSCs, the Jsc and PCE of the SWNTs/TiO2/Ag DSSC are improved, and the Jsc and PCE are 11.79 mA cm−2 and 5.99% (Table 1). The efficiency is improved by ∼37.07% and 12.59% compared with the TiO2-only and SWNTs/TiO2 DSSCs, respectively. Meanwhile, when the DSSCs have almost the same efficiency (∼6%) compared with ref. 5, the photoanode film thickness of the SWNTs/TiO2/Ag DSSC is ∼8 μm, reduced by 31.25% compared with ∼10.5 μm for the conventional TiO2-only photoanode. Compared with other conventional TiO2-only DSSCs reported in ref. 29, the SWNTs/TiO2/Ag DSSC shows better performance as the DSSCs have the same photoanode film thickness.
Sample

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)

η (%)
TiO2-only
8.45
0.744
0.69
4.37
SWNTs/TiO2
10.43
0.749
0.68
5.32
SWNTs/TiO2/Ag
11.79
0.751
0.68
5.99

Fig. 4b shows the IPCE spectra in the range of 350–750 nm for the three types of DSSCs. The IPCE is the product of the light-harvesting, electron injection efficiency, and electron collection efficiency. After integrating semiconducting SWNTs into the DSSCs, the IPCE value is enhanced, which can be attributed to the lower electron resistance such that the photogenerated electron is collected and transported fast to the counter electrode by the SWNTs. The SWNTs/TiO2/Ag DSSC has the highest IPCE value over the whole spectral range, which is mainly due to the enhanced light-harvesting after the introduction of Ag NPs into the photoanode films.
To optimize electron collection, the effect of the concentration of SWNTs (0 to 0.2 wt%) on the current density and PCE were investigated (Fig. 5), which revealed that the current density and PCE increase upon increasing the amount of SWNTs from 0 to 0.15 wt%. When the amount of SWNTs in the photoanode was further increased, the current density was not enhanced due to the amount of photogenerated electrons in the photoanode being constant. Furthermore, too many SWNTs in the photoanode negatively affect the light absorption of the photoanode films. Therefore the improvement of the current density and efficiency are ascribed to the electrons being rapidly collected by the SWNTs and transported to the current collector through SWNTs 3D networks. Interestingly, when the same amount of SWNTs (0.15 wt%) was directly incorporated into the TiO2 NP paste to prepare the photoanode film without applying DNA, the DSSC had almost the same performance as the TiO2-only DSSC (Fig. S4). It may be that either the SWNTs had poor contact with the TiO2 NP clusters or the SWNTs were not thoroughly dispersed in the photoanode film. The dependence of the performance of the DSSC on the amount of Ag NPs (0 to 1.0 wt%) was also investigated (Fig. 6). The current density and PCE increase when the amount of Ag NPs is increased from 0 wt% to 0.8 wt%. When the amount of Ag NPs in the photoanode film is further increased, the current density and PCE decrease, which is presumably due to the Ag NPs acting as recombination centres in the photoanode film. When the amount of Ag NPs in the photoanode is high, the Ag NPs in essence create internal short-circuits throughout the bulk of the photoanode layer.
To simulate the light absorption of the DSSC, the TiO2-only, SWNTs/TiO2 and SWNTs/TiO2/Ag nanocomposite films were prepared on quartz glass as for the preparation of photoanode films on FTO substrates. The thicknesses of all films were ∼2 μm, and the films were also dyed with N719 dye. The amount of SWNTs in the SWNTs/TiO2 film was 0.15 wt%, and the amounts of SWNTs and Ag in the SWNTs/TiO2/Ag film were 0.15 wt%, and 0.8 wt%, respectively. Fig. 7 shows the light absorption for three types of film. After incorporation of SWNTs into the film, the light absorption of the SWNTs/TiO2 film is slightly improved. However, after the incorporation of the SWNTs/TiO2/Ag nanocomposites into the film, the light absorption of the SWNTs/TiO2/Ag film is improved ∼20% in the range of 350–550 nm, which is mainly due to the LSP behaviour of the Ag NPs in the film. The LSPs of the Ag NPs enhance the light absorption efficiency in the following ways: (1) Ag NPs act as scattering elements to couple and trap propagating light in the photoanode films by folding the light into a thin absorber layer; (2) the plasmonic near-field of the Ag NPs couples to the TiO2 NP clusters to increase its effective absorption cross-section; (3) the surface plasmon polariton at the Ag/TiO2 interface can also efficiently trap and guide light in the photoanode films. Therefore, it can be speculated that the efficiency improvement of the SWNTs/TiO2/Ag DSSC is due to the enhanced light absorption by the LSPs of the Ag NPs and the fast electron collection and transportation by the SWNTs.
Interestingly, when metallic SWNTs were incorporated into the photoanode, the power conversion efficiency of the obtained DSSC decreased, which is due to the photogenerated electron being captured by metallic SWNTs and remaining at the continuous energy levels near the Fermi level, accelerating the recombination of electrons with the dye or the reverse reaction (Fig. 3d). This suggests that the Ag NPs, in this work, are not deposited on SWNTs but on TiO2 clusters, which is confirmed by high-magnification TEM (Fig. S5). Although the Ag NPs are able to enhance the light-harvesting and photoconversion efficiency, they can also negatively affect the performance when the amount of NPs is high. The SWNTs/TiO2/Ag nanocomposites play dual functions, not only enhancing the light-harvesting efficiency, but also increasing the electron collection and transportation. Although the nanocomposites were successfully fabricated and applied to improve the efficiency of the DSSCs by using DNA as a biological scaffold, the detailed mechanism for the DNA and TiO2 NP clusters anchoring on the SWNTs is not clear, and further investigation will be carried out in the following work. With this approach, although the performances of the DSSCs are improved, it may be possible to also enhance the performances of other photovoltaic devices and reduce the quantity of materials required and hence the cost of photovoltaic devices.

In summary, DNA has been applied as the biological scaffold to fabricate the SWNTs/TiO2 and SWNTs/TiO2/Ag nanocomposites for application in DSSCs. The semiconducting SWNTs were successfully integrated into photoanode films of DSSCs, and it was demonstrated that SWNTs increase the power conversion efficiency by increasing the electron collection and transportation. After the incorporation of a small fraction of semiconducting SWNTs (∼0.15 wt%) into the photoanode film, the power conversion efficiency increased ∼21.74%. Using the SWNTs/TiO2/Ag nanocomposites as anode materials, the DSSC exhibited a high power conversion efficiency of ∼5.99%, a ∼37.07% improvement compared with the conventional TiO2-only DSSC. The improvement is ascribed to the nanocomposites not only increasing the electron collection and transportation, but also enhancing the light-harvesting efficiency of the photoanode films. We believe that this strategy, enhancing the performances of DSSCs, could be also applied for other thin film photovoltaic technologies that require efficient light-harvesting and electron collection and transportation.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 51001007), Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, and Innovation Foundation of BUAA for PhD Graduates. X. Z. acknowledges the Overseas Visiting Research Scholarship of BUAA for PhD Graduates. X. Z. is grateful to Prof. Bruce A. Armitage, Carnegie Mellon University, for helpful advice and discussions.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional figures. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta11556a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013