 DOI: 10.1039/C3CC48920E
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 2412-2415


Hyo-Jin
Ahn
,

Ik-Hee
Kim
,

Jong-Chul
Yoon
,

Sun-I
Kim
 and 

Ji-Hyun
Jang
*

Interdisciplinary School of Green Energy and Low Dimensional Carbon Materials Center, UNIST, Korea. E-mail: clau@unist.ac.kr

Received
22nd November 2013
, Accepted 27th December 2013
First published on 3rd January 2014
We report CVD-grown p-doped three-dimensional graphene nano-networks (3D-GNs) that provide superior performance to Pt as a counter electrode material in dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). The 3D-GN based DSSC exhibits a maximum photoconversion efficiency of 8.46%, which is 6.01% greater than that exhibited by Pt based DSSCs.

A dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) is a low cost photovoltaic system that converts solar energy directly into electrical energy with high energy conversion efficiency. The DSSC is one of the most promising candidates for alternative renewable energy devices due to its inexpensive and highly scalable process. A typical DSSC consists of a dye, an electrolyte containing redox couples, a wide bandgap nanocrystalline TiO2 as a working electrode, and a counter electrode. In general, cost-inefficient Pt has been necessarily used as the standard counter electrode material in DSSCs due to its high stability, good conductivity, and outstanding electrochemical activity. Thus, finding good counter electrode materials with superior performance to Pt is urgent and critical for the realization of low-cost DSSCs. In light of this, graphene, which is analogous to carbon materials yet with many superior properties, has potential as a novel material for the counter electrode in DSSCs.

Graphene is a two-dimensional material with a one-atom-thick layer of sp2-bonded carbon atoms in a honeycomb lattice with excellent electrical conductivity and large theoretical specific surface area. The authors recently reported bi-continuous three-dimensional graphene nano-networks (3D-GNs) with controlled dimensions prepared via precursor-assisted CVD in a bulk scale with outstanding electrical conductivity and large surface area. The 3D-GNs fabricated by this method have much larger surface area than the 3D graphene foam fabricated via a nickel frame with a few hundred micrometer scale. They are also substantially superior to reduced graphene paper fabricated by vacuum filtration of chemically modified graphene in terms of conductivity. We hypothesize that these two important properties can be effectively exploited to improve the performance of a state-of-the-art Pt substitutable counter electrode (CE) in DSSCs. Furthermore, this technique utilizes nontoxic iron as a catalyst for CVD growth of graphene, the fourth most common element in the earth's crust, which will broaden the applicability of graphene in terms of fabrication cost and environmental safety of DSSCs. Here, we report p-doped precursor-assisted CVD grown 3D-GNs with a conductivity of 7 S cm−1 and a surface area of 1025 m2 g−1 as excellent single component CE materials that outperform Pt. An optimized 3D-GN-based DSSC shows 6.01% higher power conversion efficiency than a Pt-based DSSC and provides a direct route to mass-producible and cost-efficient DSSCs by replacing Pt.
Taking into consideration that oxygen-containing functional groups in carbon materials are responsible for the electrocatalytic performance of CE in DSSCs, the Pt alternatives targeted here are bulk scale precursor-assisted CVD grown 3D-GNs with a slightly detectable degree of defects (oxygen atoms) while retaining good conductivity. The experimental details of 3D-GNs are provided in ESI.Fig. 1a shows transmission electron microscope (TEM) images of low-density 3D-GNs near the edges, clearly showing nano-cavities of the 3D-GNs. The digital camera image of gram scale 3D-GNs in the inset confirms the mass-production capability of precursor-assisted CVD-grown 3D-GNs. The close-up TEM image in Fig. 1b shows a single unit cell of a few-layer graphene ball with a diameter of ∼30 nm. Fig. 1c shows the Raman spectrum of a 3D-GN fabricated via drop casting of an iron precursor solution followed by the CVD growth of graphene. The maximum ratio of I2D/IG and the minimum ratio of ID/IG are 1.28 and 0.23, respectively, indicating reasonable quality of 3D graphene networks. Fig. 1d shows the C1s XPS spectrum of 3D-GNs with an intense and strong peak at 284.2 eV, originating from C–C and CC, with a relatively small portion of defect peaks at 285.5 eV, 287.4 eV, and 289.3 eV, in good agreement with the Raman spectrum. The average conductivity of the pristine 3D-GN powders was 5 S cm−1 (Fig. S2 and S3, ESI), which is comparable to the previously reported value of 10 S cm−1 of the graphene foam created from a micron-scale nickel nanoframe. The surface area of the 3D-GNs obtained by BET measurement was a surprisingly high value of 1025 m2 g−1 with a pore size of 13 nm (Fig. S4, ESI).
It has been reported that the properties of graphene can be tailored by the incorporation of other functional groups onto the matrix of graphene. For instance, enhanced electrical conductivity of graphene is attainable by deposition of dopant atoms on the graphene lattice and an optimum catalytic effect of graphite in DSSCs can be achieved by the addition of a small amount of oxygen-containing functional groups on the surface of graphene. Here we report that CVD-grown pristine 3D-GNs can be optimized as CEs in DSSCs by simple doping of heteroatoms. By slightly increasing the content of nitrogen and oxygen via a p-doping process of 3D-GNs, both the conductivity and catalytic activity were noticeably improved. Fig. 2 compares the electrochemical activity of p-doped 3D-GNs with various contents of N and O atoms by immersing 3D-GNs in HNO3 solutions with various concentrations. The chemical compositions of p-doped graphene obtained by an elemental analysis are listed in Fig. 2a with the values of conductivity. The fractional amounts of N atoms in 3D-GNs immersed in HNO3 solutions of 50, 75, and 100 wt% for 30 min were measured to be 0.3, 0.4, and 0.5 wt% and the corresponding samples are denoted as 3D-GN-3, 3D-GN-4, and 3D-GN-5, respectively. The measured conductivity of p-doped 3D-GNs reveals a linear relationship with the content of N atoms and is enhanced up to 7 S cm−1. A further increase of immersion time did not improve the conductivity of the samples. Fig. 2b shows the XPS spectra of O1s, the peak at the 531.8 eV region, increasing with the increasing concentration of HNO3 solutions, indicating a greater degree of incorporation of O atoms which beneficially impact electrocatalytic performance. It should be noted that the conductivity, which can be adversely affected by a large amount of oxygen, did not deteriorated up to this point, due to the increase of the nitrogen content (Fig. 2a). Our approach is different from other methods aimed at enhancing the conductivity of chemically prepared graphene in that we first ensured sufficient conductivity of graphene via the CVD growth process and further enhanced both the conductivity and catalytic activity up to the easily attainable optimum conditions by a slight modification of the surface of graphene via a mild doping process. In order to compare the electrochemical performances of four types of p-doped 3D-GNs and Pt, cyclic voltammetry was carried out in electrolytes of 0.1 M LiClO4, 10 mM LiI, and 0.5 mM I2 solutions, as shown in Fig. 2c. The relatively negative potential peak between two positive current peaks was assigned to the oxidation reaction of 3I− → I3− + 2e− and the relatively negative potential peak between two negative current peaks was assigned to the reduction reaction I3− + 2e− → 3I−. The oxidation–reduction current density increases with an increase of the catalytic surface area. The peak-to-peak separation (ΔEp) for the I3−/I− redox reaction decreases with increased feasibility of catalytic reactions. As shown in Fig. 2a and c, a negative relationship between the amount of dopants and ΔEp value is observed. Notably, all 3D-GNs exhibit an apparently lower ΔEp value and greater current density compared with the Pt electrode, indicating greater electrochemical catalytic activity and catalytic surface area of 3D-GNs. 3D-GN-5 shows the minimum value of ΔEp and the maximum value of the current density, which reflect most superior accommodation of large surface area, strong catalytic effect, and high conductivity of optimized 3D-GNs. The excellent catalytic activity of 3D-GNs can be further confirmed by the slope in the Tafel curves, which represents the relationship between the current density passing through an electrode and the overpotential during oxidation or reduction of the electrode. The Tafel curves of the symmetric dummy cells of 3D-GNs with an apparently greater slope than that of Pt as well as the monotonic relationship between the content of dopants and the logarithmic current density in Fig. 2d clearly present greater electrochemical catalytic activities and diffusion characteristics of (p-doped) 3D-GNs.
In order to exploit the potential application of 3D-GNs as single component CEs in a DSSC device, photovoltaic performance of a DSSC cell fabricated with 3D-GNs was evaluated. Fig. 3a displays a schematic illustration of the DSSC cell (top), a photograph of the devices (lower left panel), and a SEM image of the 3D-GN CE (lower right panel). The SEM image confirms the presence of densely packed and tightly connected 3D graphene networks in the CE. Fig. 3b presents the photocurrent–voltage curves of DSSCs with 3D-GN CEs at an illumination intensity of AM 1.5 alongside that of a DSSC with a Pt CE reference cell. The power conversion efficiency of the p-doped 3D-GNs increased with an increase of the content of N and O, showing a maximum value of 8.46% under an optimized condition of 0.5 wt% N content with a conductivity of 7 S cm−1, which is 6.01% higher than that of Pt (7.98%). A relatively greater short circuit current density (Jsc) than that of Pt (16.3 mA cm−2) was observed for the 3D-GN based samples, as anticipated from the high surface area of the 3D-GNs (1025 m2 g−1). A comparable open circuit voltage (Voc) to that of the Pt CE was observed for the 3D-GN based CEs, reflecting an appropriate band gap difference between the Fermi level of the TiO2 electrode and the redox potential of I−/I3−. Importantly, all the 3D-GN CEs showed greater fill factor (FF) than the Pt CE (67.6%), indicating lower internal resistance in the 3D-GN-based DSSCs. Note that the power conversion efficiency of the pristine 3D-GNs without any doping treatment is already slightly higher than that of Pt (8.11 vs. 7.98). The highest value of the O content for the sample having the highest conversion efficiency at 0.5 wt% N content indicates that the surface of pristine 3D-GNs was further activated by the maximum amount of oxygen for the enhanced catalytic properties and improved conductivity. The effect of doping of pristine 3D-GNs on the performance of DSSCs can be further confirmed by the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) data, which show the internal resistance and charge transfer resistance at the interface of the electrodes and the electrolyte for the 3D-GN CEs and Pt CE as shown in Fig. 3c. Charge-transfer resistance (Rct) of the electrode surface, which is responsible for the first semicircle (high-frequency region) in the impedance curve, is widely used for evaluating the catalytic activity of CEs. Diffusion of electrolyte species is related to the second semicircle (low frequency region), which is explained by the Nernst diffusion impedance (Zw). As clearly shown in the impedance curves in Fig. 3c (and Table 1), both Rct and the diameter of second semicircles (Zw) are notably decreased, as the content of both N and O of 3D-GNs is increased. Importantly, a greatly reduced charge transfer resistance (the smaller first circle) between the highly doped 3D-GN CE (3D-GN-4 and 3D-GN-5) and the electrolyte as compared to that between Pt and the electrolyte is observed. 3D-GN-5 with maximum N and O content shows the smallest Rct and Zw values with the best overall impedance curve, clearly indicating a fast electron transfer mechanism synergetically supported by optimum conductivity and catalytic activity as well as large catalytic surface area. This is in accordance with the data obtained from the CV measurements and Tafel curves in Fig. 2c and d.

R
s (Ω)

R
ct (Ω)

Z
w (Ω)

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)

η (%)
Pt
21.00
7.5
4.0
0.725
16.3
67.6
7.98
3D-GN
20.07
6.1
3.7
0.734
16.2
68.3
8.11
3D-GN-3
20.25
5.6
3.6
0.724
16.5
68.6
8.20
3D-GN-4
20.07
1.8
2.9
0.721
16.8
69.0
8.36
3D-GN-5
19.89
1.0
2.9
0.713
17.2
69.0
8.46
The number of photogenerated electrons per incident photon as a measure of the incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) was obtained for the conventional Pt CE and 3D-GN CEs, as shown in Fig. 3d. The reference Pt CE and 3D-GN-5 exhibit maximum IPCE values of 71.64% and 73.13% at 540 nm, respectively, thus indicating improved performance of the p-doped sample that is superior to Pt. Besides, the values in the IPCE curves of the 3D-GN samples with higher O content levels were relatively high and show good agreement with the cell performance data.
In summary, we have developed a straightforward method to achieve mass-producible DSSCs via precursor-assisted CVD grown 3D-GNs with large surface area and excellent conductivity. DSSCs based on the pristine single component 3D-GNs without any treatment record comparable efficiency to Pt. The efficiency of a DSSC cell fabricated with an optimized p-doped 3D-GN CE is 6.01% superior to the efficiency obtained with a Pt CE cell, which implies the potential of 3D-GNs as an outstanding alternative to Pt. This is very promising considering that the efficiency of 3D-GN based DSSCs could be further enhanced by fine tuning several parameters for device fabrication such as improving adhesion and additional optimization of doping conditions, which is under study. The outstanding performance of 3D-GNs as CEs in DSSCs fabricated using an easy and inexpensive method suggests that this straightforward route can be exploited to achieve nano-textured 3D graphene with strong potential for use in other applications as well as for energy-related materials.
This work was supported by NRF with contract no. NRF-2010-0019408 and NRF-2012-R1A1A2043076 and by the development program of local science park funded by the Ulsan Metropolitan City and the MSIP.
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details and supplementary figures. See DOI: 10.1039/c3cc48920e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014