 DOI: 10.1039/D0NR07963D
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 5730-5743


Akash S.
Rasal
,

Khalilalrahman
Dehvari
,

Girum
Getachew
,

Chiranjeevi
Korupalli
,

Anil V.
Ghule
* and 

Jia-Yaw
Chang
*

Department of Chemical Engineering, National Taiwan University of Science and Technology, Taipei, 10607, Taiwan, Republic of China. E-mail: jychang@mail.ntust.edu.tw; Fax: +886-2-27376644; Tel: +886-2-27303636

Department of Chemistry, Shivaji University, Kolhapur, Maharashtra, India

Taiwan Building Technology Center, National Taiwan University of Science and Technology, Taipei, 10607, Taiwan, Republic of China

Received
7th November 2020
, Accepted 14th February 2021
First published on 15th February 2021
For quantum dot sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs), modifying conservative polysulfide electrolytes with polymer additives has been proven as an effective method to control charge recombination processes at the TiO2/QDs/electrolyte interface and to accomplish efficient cell devices. In this respect, the polysulfide electrolyte is modified with polymeric and sulfur-rich graphitic carbon nitride (SGCN) to enhance the photovoltaic performance of QDSSCs. For the first time, SGCN is used to passivate surface trap states and act as the steric hindrance between TiO2/QDs/electrolyte interfaces. The QDSSCs fabricated with GCN and SGCN additives exhibited higher efficiencies, especially improved short-circuit current (JSC) and fill factors (FFs) than those of the liquid electrolyte. Cu–In–S sensitized QDSSCs constructed with GCN and SGCN additives exhibited efficiencies of 6.73% and 7.13%, respectively, whereas the liquid electrolytes delivered an efficiency of 6.16%. Additionally, the applicability of SGCN additives in various Cu-based QDSSCs to enhance their photovoltaic performance is further verified using Cu–In–Se QDSSCs. An increase in the conversion efficiencies of QDSSCs with SGCN additives is possibly due to (1) their electron-rich surface which can act as an obstacle for electron–hole recombination, thereby suppressing the back-transfer of photo-induced electrons to the QD/electrolyte interface; (2) SGCN facilitates the reduction of Sn2− to S2− redox couple, thus providing holes towards the QDs/electrolyte more efficiently. Overall, this work provides an innovative and economic additive to modify polysulfide electrolytes, thereby controlling the TiO2/QDs/electrolyte interfaces of QDSSCs.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) comprising nanoporous titanium oxide (TiO2), a dye sensitizer, and a redox electrolyte have been extensively developed as a third-generation photovoltaic technology because of their simple preparation methodology, ease of production, low toxicity, and low cost. Besides, colloidal semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) have been comprehensively researched for photovoltaic technology due to their excellent light-sensitizing potential. Over the last two decades, semiconductor QDs have been under extensive research, thus they have been considered as a substitute for traditional dyes in DSSCs; these newly developed cells are also named quantum dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs).

A typical QDSSC consists of a QD-sensitized mesoporous photoanode, a counter electrode (CE) and a polysulfide (Sn2− to S2−) redox mediator. As the central component of QDSSCs, the electrolyte redox couple plays an important role in transporting the holes towards the CE as well as regenerating the QDs throughout the process. To date, liquid polysulfide electrolytes are the most widely used redox mediators in QDSSC applications owing to their rapid photo-induced hole scavenging capability and stabilizing nature towards frequently utilized chalcogenide QD sensitizers. However, there are some drawbacks to polysulfide redox couples including the over redox potential for QD regeneration and high surface tension which limits the contact between mesoporous TiO2 and redox couples, subsequently lowering the performance of QDSSCs.
Much effort has been made to overcome these problems by lowering the surface tension of solvents. For example, Arof et al. have proposed a water–methanol mixed solution as the co-solvent to prepare polysulfide electrolytes with better penetration into mesoporous TiO2. In another way, the fill factor (FF) and open-circuit voltage (VOC) of QDSSCs have been improved satisfactorily by modifying the electrochemical features of redox couples using different kinds of polymers. For example, it has been shown that the use of polymer additives such as poly(ethylene glycol) or poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) could beneficially decrease the recombination of charges at the TiO2/electrolyte interface, thus enhancing both VOC and FF in QDSSCs. In a similar approach, Yu et al. reported that addition of tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) to polysulfide electrolyte has favourable effects on its electrochemical properties and achieved a certified photovoltaic conversion efficiency (PCE) of 12.34%. In another work, Lee et al. observed an improvement in short-circuit current (JSC), VOC and FF of cell devices fabricated with guanidine nitrate (GuNO3) additives in I−/I3− redox couples in DSSC application. In their study, they claimed that Gu+ adsorbed onto the surface of TiO2 and reduced electron recombination by restraining the growth of surface states in the metal oxide photoanode. Similarly, a recent report on DSSCs has shown that both VOC and PCE can be enhanced by treating an electrolyte with 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) which holds higher resistance for electron recombination. However, the use of electrolyte additives in DSSC and QDSSC applications has not been seriously evaluated. Therefore, from a commercialization viewpoint, it is crucial to develop a low-cost, efficient, and stable electrolyte additive which can decrease the back transfer of electrons at TiO2/QDs/electrolyte interfaces to achieve higher photovoltaic performance.
Graphitic carbon nitride (GCN) is an electron-rich carbon-based polymeric material comprising a regular arrangement of triazine or heptazine cores of carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) atoms. It exhibits excellent optoelectronic and superior catalytic properties with potential applications in the fields of photovoltaics, photocatalysis, and waste water treatment. Additionally, the light-harvesting ability of GCN could assist in capturing solar photons by injecting charges into the conduction band (CB) of the semiconductor. The strong covalent bonds between carbon and nitride atoms endow GCN with thermal and chemical stability under ambient conditions. In addition, the current developments in the field of QDSSCs have demonstrated that the addition of chalcogenide elements into polysulfide electrolytes is effective in scavenging the photogenerated holes. Considering these benefits, it is plausible to assume that doping sulfur into GCN would lead to synergistic effects in stability and the hole scavenging process.
Herein, a valid and environmentally friendly route is reported to achieve more efficient and stable QDSSCs by modifying liquid polysulfide electrolytes with the incorporation of inexpensive and metal-free SGCN. The applicability of a SGCN additive approach is demonstrated to be effective in preparing various Cu-based QDSSCs, including Cu–In–S and Cu–In–Se sensitized QDSSCs. Cu-based QD absorbers are designated as light harvesting materials due to their low cost, environmental friendliness and unique optical properties. Accordingly, the SGCN additive has enhanced the efficiencies of both Cu–In–S (from 6.16% to 7.13%) and Cu–In–Se QDSCs (from 6.45% to 7.11%). The electronic parameters such as electron injection, electron lifetime, and electron transport time are systematically examined. The effects of SGCN additives on recombination dynamics are then determined and correlated with the QDSSC efficiency. To the best of our understanding, there have been no reports on the use of SGCN as an electrolyte additive to suppress the recombination of charges at TiO2/QDs/electrolyte interfaces in the construction of high-efficiency QDSSCs.

Selenium dioxide (SeO2, 99.4%), thiourea (CH4N2S, ≥99%), thioglycolic acid (C2H4O2S, 97%), and sodium thiosulfate (Na2S2O3, 99%) were received from Alfa-Aesar. Zinc acetate (Zn(OAc)2, 99.8%) was acquired from Baker. Copper(II) chloride dihydrate (CuCl2·2H2O, 99.99%), sodium citrate (98%), sodium borohydride (NaBH4, ≥98.0%), and CuSO4 (≥98%) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. Potassium chloride (KCl, 99%), indium(III) chloride (InCl3, 99.995%), and sodium sulfide nonahydrate (Na2S, 98%) were obtained from Acros Organics. Urea (CH4N2O, 99%) was obtained from Showa (Tokyo, Japan). Deionized (DI) water was used in the whole experiments, unless specifically mentioned. All reagents were used as received without further treatment.


SGCN with different weight ratios of sulfur were in situ synthesized through thermal polycondensation of a mixture containing thiourea and Na2S. In detail, thiourea (4 g) was dissolved in DI water (50 mL) under constant stirring. Then, different weight ratios of Na2S (5%, 10%, and 15%) were added to the above solution and kept on a hot plate at 90 °C to evaporate the DI water. Then, a white solid product was obtained which was ground into powder. Finally, the powder was calcined at 450 °C for 2 h with a 5 °C min−1 ramping rate in a box furnace. After completion of calcination, the resultant reddish-yellow colour solid material was again ground into a fine powder and labelled as SGCN. The same procedure was used to synthesize GCN in the absence of Na2S.


The investigated aqueous QD light-harvesting materials including Cu–In–S and Cu–In–Se QDs were prepared and purified as per our previously reported methods. Briefly, to synthesis aqueous Cu–In–S QDs, CuCl2, InCl3 and L-cysteine (1.25 × 10−2, 5.00 × 10−2, and 9.00 × 10−2 mmol, respectively) were mixed and transferred into a microwave tube comprising DI water (20 mL), and the pH of the above mixture was adjusted to ∼9.0 using NaOH solution. Subsequently, aqueous solution of Na2S (4.8 × 10−2 mmol) was added into the above mixture. Then, the mixture containing microwave tube was placed in an Anton Paar microwave reactor (Monowave 300) with 850 W maximum magnetron output power operating at 180 °C for 15 min. The obtained aqueous Cu–In–S QDs were precipitated with iso-propyl alcohol and purified using a centrifugation process at 6000 rpm. The acquired aqueous QDs were directly applied for the TiO2 photoanode sensitization process.

The aqueous Cu–In–Se QDs were prepared with slight modification to a previous protocol. In brief, CuCl2·2H2O (0.01 mmol), InCl3·2H2O (0.05 mmol), L-cysteine (0.09 mmol) and citric acid tri-sodium (0.11 mmol) were mixed and transferred into a microwave tube comprising 20 mL of DI water. Then, Se2− solution which was obtained by reducing SeO2 (0.001 mmol) with NaBH4 (0.002 mmol) in DI water (5 mL) in a nitrogen environment was added to the mixed solution. Finally, the above mixed solution was transferred into an Anton Paar microwave reactor (Monowave 300) with 850 W maximum magnetron output power and allowed to react for 10 min at 210 °C, cooled to room temperature, precipitated, and then centrifuged to obtain Cu–In–Se QDs.

The mesoporous TiO2 (m-TiO2) film photoanode design was similar to that used in our previous work. In order to deposit nanocrystalline TiO2 pastes, firstly, fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO, 15 Ω sq−1 resistance) glass was ultrasonically cleaned with detergent solution, and rinsed with ethanol, acetone and DI water. Transparent light absorbing and light scattering layers of TiO2 paste (received from Dye Sol Industries Pty. Ltd, Australia) were deposited on the FTO substrate by a screen printing technique. Finally, m-TiO2 film photoanodes were annealed at 500 °C for 30 min in a box furnace.

To carry out the sensitization process, the as-prepared m-TiO2 film was dipped into the QD solution (2 mg mL−1 in water) comprising 4.0 M TGA for 24 h. After deposition of the QDs, the m-TiO2 film was washed continuously with DI water and methanol. Then, deposition of ZnS passivation layers was performed by sequential dipping of the QD-sensitized photoanode (for 60 seconds each) into cationic and anionic precursors containing 0.1 M Zn(CH3CO2)2·2H2O in methanol solution and 0.1 M Na2S in DI water and methanol (1:3), respectively. In our experiment, four SILAR cycles were deposited on the QD-sensitized photoanode. The Cu2S CE preparation was similar to that used in our previous work. In brief, to obtain Cu2S CE, the cleaned FTO substrate was dipped into the aqueous mixture of 0.01 mol Na2S2O3, 0.002 mol M CuSO4, and 0.01 mol M CH4N2O, and maintained at 65 °C for 2 h.
Finally, the QDSSCs were fabricated by collecting the QD-sensitized photoanode and Cu2S CE using a surlyn film, followed by introduction of different electrolytes into the cells. The active area at each side was kept about 0.16 cm2. The redox electrolyte was prepared by mixing an aqueous solution of Na2S (3.0 M), sulfur (3.0 M), and KCl (0.3 M). To prepare GCN and SGCN electrolytes, different amounts of the as synthesized GCN or SGCN were added to the polysulfide electrolyte and heated on a hot plate at 85 °C under vigorous stirring for 1 h.

Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and scanning transmission electron microscopy-energy dispersive spectroscopy (STEM-EDS) images were obtained using an FEI Tecnai G2 F20 microscope operating at 200 kV. X-ray powder diffraction (PXRD) patterns in the 2 theta range between 10° and 60° were obtained using an X-ray diffractometer (Bruker, model: D8 Discover) with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.54 Å) operating at 45 kV and 40 mA. The current–voltage (J–V) curves of the cell devices were measured using a Keithley 2400 source meter under illumination of simulated AM 1.5G solar light (Oriel, Model no. 92250A) with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (1 full sun). UV–vis absorption spectra and photoluminescence (PL) spectra were recorded using a JASCO V-630 spectrometer and spectrofluorometer (JASCO FP-6500), respectively. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed on a Zennium electrochemical workstation (Zahner-Ennium) with a forward bias of 0.55 V in the dark with the frequency ranging from 10 to 0.1 Hz.


Herein, a low-cost SGCN was employed as an additive material to modify the conservative polysulfide redox couple, thus enhancing the power conversion efficiencies (PCE) of the resulting QDSSCs. GCN and SGCN were prepared via a one-step thermal polycondensation route (Scheme S1). The optical properties of GCN and SGCN were analysed by UV–vis spectroscopy. As shown in Fig. 1A, the pure GCN exhibited absorbance up to 325 nm, whereas SGCN not only extended its absorbance range to higher wavelengths but also showed higher absorbance values than those of pure GCN in the entire range. These results indicate that heteroatom doping can greatly improve the optical absorption properties and also determine a tunable electronic structure of GCN, which is in accordance with the literature reports.

In addition, the chemical structures of GCN and SGCN nanocomposites were confirmed by analysing their XRD patterns. The XRD pattern of the GCN sample has two characteristic peaks at approximately 2θ = 13.0° and 2θ = 27.4° (Fig. 1B), which were assigned to the (100) and (002) lattice planes, respectively, confirming the intra-layer d-spacing and the interlayer stacking of aromatic systems, respectively. Remarkably, the peak position of SGCN samples (2θ = 27.7°), positively shifted by 0.3° compared to that of pure GCN (2θ = 27.4°), reflecting the structural modification in the crystal lattice due to the incorporation of sulfur atoms in the host GCN. In addition, the intensity of the peak (2θ = 27.7°) greatly increased after the addition of sulfur, suggesting the reduction in the size of the GCN nanosheets. Furthermore, the peak intensity of the adjacent (100) plane located at approximately 2θ = 13.0° was weakened steadily with the incorporation of sulfur, indicating that the incorporation of sulfur species restrains the growth of the crystal lattice due to host–guest interactions.
The morphologies of GCN and SGCN were examined by TEM. As shown in Fig. 1D, a two-dimensional layered structure in the form of a thin nanosheet-like morphology was observed for GCN. On the other hand, SGCN exhibited a nanosheet-like morphology in the presence of some dark spots on or between the surfaces of the GCN nanosheets (Fig. 1E), which indicates that elemental sulfur is randomly distributed on the surface of GCN nanosheets. In addition, well distribution of sulfur on the surface of GCN nanosheets was observed from the high resolution TEM image (Fig. 1H). In order to verify the doping of a sulfur atom onto the surface of GCN, high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) was performed and the obtained images along with the corresponding EDS mapping are presented in Fig. S1 and S2. The elemental mapping images of GCN (Fig. S1) and SGCN (Fig. S2) samples indicated the co-existence of C, N, O, and S elements. The presence of an S peak in the GCN nanosheets can be attributed to the thiourea precursor. The EDS results (Fig. 1F and I) further confirmed the existence of C, N, O, and S signals on both GCN and SGCN nanosheets. Notably, SGCN contained a significantly higher atomic percentage of S and a low atomic percentage of N than that of pure GCN (insets in Fig. 1F and I), revealing that sulfur species replaced the nitrogen sites in the backbone of heptazine units, which is in accordance with the aforementioned XRD outcomes. Additionally, the thickness of the GCN and SGCN nanosheets was revealed by performing AFM analysis. As shown in Fig. S3, the GCN and SGCN nanosheets exhibited a thickness of approximately 1.5–2.0 nm.
Furthermore, the incorporation of sulfur into pure GCN was confirmed by analysing the XPS spectra of GCN and SGCN. A full survey spectrum of GCN and SGCN (Fig. 2A) represented the presence of C, N, O and S elements on the surface of SGCN samples. The high-resolution C 1s spectrum (Fig. 2B) of pure GCN exhibited two major peaks centered at binding energies (B.E.) of 285.3 and 288.5 eV corresponding to the graphitic CC bonds and the sp2-bounded carbon (CN) in the GCN lattice, respectively. Moreover, the high-resolution N 1s spectrum (Fig. 2C) exhibited three fitting peaks in which an intense peak at a B.E. of 398.5 eV could be attributed to the pyridinic nitrogen, and later two narrow peaks at B.Es of 400.0 and 401.0 eV, which could be attributed to the pyrrolic nitrogen and graphitic nitrogen groups originating from the imperfect polymerization, respectively. As shown in Fig. 2C, the N 1s spectrum of the SGCN sample became a narrower profile and its corresponding B.E. of sp2 hybridized nitrogen (398.8 eV) positively shifted by 0.3 eV in comparison with that of pure GCN (398.5 eV), also indicating the interaction of sulfur species with the nitrogen species. As shown in Fig. 2D, the high-resolution O 1s spectrum of GCN deconvoluted into two broad peaks positioned at B.Es. of 530.3 and 534.3 eV, which could be ascribed to the presence of chemisorbed H2O or CO2 on the catalyst, respectively; however, SGCN showed a slight positive shift in B.E. by 0.4 eV in comparison with pure GCN. Additionally, to verify the various states of sulfur in SGCN, we further analysed the high-resolution S 2p spectra and the corresponding deconvoluted peaks are shown in Fig. 2E. The S 2p peaks in the pure GCN spectrum were very weak compared to that of SGCN peaks which might be due to the low doping level of the thiourea precursor, as revealed by the EDS analysis. Nevertheless, the high-resolution S 2p spectrum of SGCN exhibited two main peaks in the range of ∼161–165 eV (S 2P3/2) and ∼167–171 eV (S 2P1/2), indicating the presence of two different S species in the sample. According to the literature, the main S 2P3/2 peak further could be deconvoluted into two peaks at B.Es. of 162.7 and 163.6 eV and are ascribed to the formation of C–S bonding in SGCN by replacing the latticed N with S. Moreover, the additional broad and weak S 2P1/2 peak in the range of ∼167–171 eV could be ascribed to the sulfates C–SOx (x = 2, 3, and 4). The main S 2P1/2 peak deconvoluted into three peaks at B.Es. of 168.4, 169.1 and 170.1 eV, indicating the presence of three different forms of sulfates in SGCN. From these analytical data, it is worth noting that the intensity of both S 2P3/2 and S 2P1/2 greatly increased after S doping, also indicates that the sulfur element is certainly covalently incorporated into the nitrogen sites in the backbone of heptazine units. These outcomes are well matched with XRD and EDS results.
The well-explored Cu–In–S QD-based QDSSCs were selected as light-harvesting materials to demonstrate the photovoltaic characteristics of different electrolytes. For this purpose, aqueous Cu–In–S QDs were synthesized by a facile microwave-assisted approach. The HR-TEM image of the as-synthesized aqueous Cu–In–S QDs is shown in Fig. S4A. The high crystallinity of aqueous Cu–In–S QDs was confirmed by matching d-spacings of the (112) plane of the chalcopyrite phase with a lattice spacing between two adjacent planes of 0.31 nm. The as-synthesized aqueous Cu–In–S QDs were further characterized by UV-vis absorbance spectra and PL emission spectra. The Cu–In–S QDs revealed absorbance in the 400–1000 nm range and PL emission with the peak position located at ∼850 nm (λexc = 470 nm).
In the present study, liquid polysulfide electrolytes with GCN and SGCN additives were employed in Cu–In–S QDSSCs to estimate the solar cell characteristics. For this purpose, the pristine polysulfide electrolyte was referred to as the control group (liquid). Both GCN and SGCN electrolytes were prepared by introducing a predetermined amount of pure GCN and SGCN into the liquid electrolyte. Sulfur doping was preferred here to enhance the photovoltaic performance of QDSSCs, which leads to a decrease in the recombination of electrons from TiO2 into the QDs (path 1) and from TiO2 into the electrolyte (path 2), as discussed below under EIS measurements.
To verify the adsorption of SGCN nanosheets on the surface of the QD-coated TiO2 film, the UV–vis absorption spectra of different electrolytes (polysulfide, GCN and SGCN) and Cu–In–S QD sensitized TiO2 film electrodes that were treated with different electrolytes were analysed and the corresponding results are presented in Fig. 3. As shown in Fig. 3A, the absorption wavelength of SGCN samples revealed a noticeable red shift in the entire wavelength range. It is observed that the absorption peak at 381 nm in polysulfide shifted positively to 387 nm with the incorporation of SGCN. The obvious red shift and enhanced absorbance indicate the improved photoactivity of SGCN which promotes the electron–hole pair separation efficiency. The absorbance spectra of the different QD-sensitized photoanodes namely QD deposited TiO2 film (TiO2/QDs), ZnS passivation layer deposited TiO2/QDs (TiO2/QDs/ZnS), liquid polysulfide electrolyte treated TiO2/QDs/ZnS (TiO2/QDs/ZnS/polysulfide), and SGCN electrolyte treated TiO2/QDs/ZnS (TiO2/QDs/ZnS/SGCN) were also recorded and are shown in Fig. 3B. The absorption profile did not change significantly upon addition of different electrolytes; however, the absorbance values in the studied wavelength range changed depending on the electrolyte (Fig. 3B). In addition, the changes in the absorbance values of the TiO2 film electrode is in accordance with that of liquid, and SGCN electrolytes (Fig. 3A), suggesting that SGCN nanosheets are adsorbed onto the surface of the QD-coated TiO2 film electrode. Furthermore, XPS analysis was performed in corresponding samples to demonstrate the interaction between SGCN and the QD-sensitized TiO2 photoanode. From Fig. S5, it found that the B.E. of the Ti 2p spectrum of the SGCN-treated photoanode (458.9 eV) negatively shifted by 0.2 eV in comparison with that of the untreated TiO2 photoanode (459.1 eV), revealing the interaction between SGCN nanosheets and the QD-sensitized TiO2 photoanode. These results are more consistent with the reported literature.
To understand the effectiveness of SGCN additives in the liquid polysulfide electrolyte, firstly, Cu–In–S sensitized QDSSCs were constructed as per our previously reported method. Different types of electrolytes were then introduced into cell devices and the photovoltaic performance of the as fabricated cell devices was evaluated under one-sun illumination of light. The corresponding J–V curves and photovoltaic parameters (including JSC, VOC, and FF) are presented in Fig. 4A–C and Table 1, respectively.
Cell

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (mV)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
PCE (%)

a Performance of the champion cell.
b Average efficiency and standard deviations for the four devices.

Cu–In–S QDSSC with the liquid electrolyte
20.35
623
48.5
6.16
6.10 ± 0.07
Cu–In–S QDSSC with the GCN electrolyte
21.41
634
49.6
6.73
6.67 ± 0.11
Cu–In–S QDSSC with the SGCN electrolyte
22.36
635
50.1
7.13
7.01 ± 0.10
Cu–In–Se QDSSC with the liquid electrolyte
21.18
605
50.2
6.45
6.39 ± 0.05
Cu–In–Se QDSSC with the GCN electrolyte
21.71
611
51.9
6.88
6.77 ± 0.07
Cu–In–Se QDSSC with the SGCN electrolyte
21.52
616
53.6
7.11
7.02 ± 0.07
The conversion efficiency of 6.16% (JSC of 20.35 mA cm−2, VOC of 623 mV, and FF of 48.5%) was achieved for the liquid electrolyte (control group). The addition of GCN into the electrolyte slightly enhanced the conversion efficiency up to 6.73% (JSC of 21.41 mA cm−2, VOC of 634 mV, and FF of 49.6%). However, the champion cell device with the SGCN electrolyte demonstrated the best photovoltaic performance of 7.13% (JSC of 22.36 mA cm−2, VOC of 635 mV, and FF of 50.1%), which was higher compared to that of the device fabricated using either polysulfide alone or the GCN electrolyte. The improved efficiencies of QDSSCs with the SGCN electrolyte are essentially attributed to the simultaneous enhancement in JSC and FF of cell devices. The enriched JSC can be elucidated on the basis of the increased absorbance with SGCN which may assist to harvest larger amounts of photons, whereas a slight increase in the VOC value could be resulted from the improved JSC value of cell devices.
On the other hand, the enriched FF of QDSSCs with the SGCN electrolyte is mainly ascribed to the high catalytic activity of the SGCN electrolyte than to that of the pristine liquid electrolyte (see under EIS and cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements). These results are in accordance with the literature reports in which a significant increase in VOC and FF was observed after the introduction of different polymer additives. The effect of sulfur contents in SGCN on the efficiency was evaluated using different weight ratios of S (i.e. 5%, 10% and 15%) containing SGCN electrolytes. The J–V characteristics and corresponding photovoltaic parameters of the QDSSCs fabricated with SGCN containing various amounts of S are presented in Fig. S6 and Table S1, respectively. Among the tested SGCN, the SGCN electrolyte containing 10% S exhibited a higher efficiency of 7.13% (Table S1), and thus this optimized condition was chosen for the following experiments. The effect of GCN and SGCN electrolyte concentrations on the photovoltaic performance of Cu–In–S sensitized QDSSCs was investigated by adding different weight ratios of GCN (0.25, 0.50 and 0.75 wt%) and SGCN (0.5, 1.0 and 1.5 wt%) into the polysulfide electrolyte during cell device fabrication. The J–V characteristics and corresponding photovoltaic parameters of the QDSSCs employing GCN (Fig. S7 and Table S2) and SGCN (Fig. S8 and Table S3) indicated that higher efficiencies were achieved with the addition of 0.5% or 1.0% of GCN or SGCN, respectively.
The applicability of the GCN and SGCN electrolytes was further assessed in Cu–In–Se sensitized QDSSCs. The HR-TEM image of the as synthesized aqueous Cu–In–Se QDs (Fig. S9A) exhibited high crystallinity which was further confirmed by matching d-spacings of the (112) plane of the chalcopyrite phase with a lattice spacing between two adjacent planes of 0.32 nm. The corresponding UV–vis absorption and PL spectra of the Cu–In–Se QDs are shown in Fig. S9B. The J–V characteristics and their corresponding parameters of the Cu–In–Se QDSSCs fabricated using liquid, GCN and SGCN electrolytes are summarized in Fig. 4D–F and Table 1, respectively. Fig. 4D shows that both GCN and SGCN additives enhanced photovoltaic performance similar to that of Cu–In–S sensitized QDSSCs. The Cu–In–Se sensitized QDSSCs with the liquid electrolyte yielded a PCE of 6.45% (JSC = 21.18 mA cm−2, VOC = 605 mV, and FF = 50.2). A slight increase in efficiency from 6.45% to 6.88% (JSC = 21.71 mA cm−2, VOC = 611 mV, and FF = 51.9) was accomplished after the incorporation of the GCN electrolyte. On the other hand, the best photovoltaic performance was obtained after the introduction of the SGCN electrolyte. The champion cell device with the SGCN additive exhibited an efficiency of 7.11% (JSC of 21.52 mA cm−2, VOC of 616 mV, and FF of 53.6%), which was higher than that of the control device. Similar to Cu–In–S, the optimization study for GCN and SGCN electrolytes was also performed for Cu–In–Se QDSSCs. The optimized concentration of the sulfur content in SGCN (i.e. 5%, 10% and 15%) on the efficiency is shown in Fig. S10 and Table S4, whereas the J–V characteristics with the corresponding photovoltaic parameters of the QDSSCs employing different concentrations of GCN (Fig. S11 and Table S5) and SGCN (Fig. S12 and Table S6) revealed that higher efficiencies were achieved from 0.5% GCN and 1.0% SGCN containing 10% S which is similar to that obtained using Cu–In–S QDSSCs.
To further illustrate the electron transport and recombination mechanism of different electrolytes, EIS measurements were performed and the corresponding Nyquist plots and electrochemical parameters were measured at a forward bias under dark conditions. The equivalent circuit simulation (Fig. 5C) used to obtain electrochemical parameters in which RS is the resistance of FTO used, RC1 and RC2 are the intrinsic resistance at the electrode/electrolyte interface and resistance of the interfacial charge at the photoanode/electrolyte interface, respectively.
From Table 2, it was observed that RC2 values decreased in the order SGCN > GCN > liquid electrolyte, which is in good agreement with that of the FF values in the corresponding QDSSCs. These results suggest that the SGCN electrolyte holds a lower degree of interfacial charge recombination. Furthermore, the EIS results (Table 2) revealed that the introduction of sulfur into GCN sites could significantly suppress the back transfer of photo-induced electron at the TiO2/QDs/electrolyte interface; this evidence is more supportive to our mechanism. In other words, the catalytic activity of the CE towards the reduction reaction of GCN and SGCN electrolytes was higher than that of the pristine liquid electrolyte, which in turn, enhanced the FF of corresponding cell devices. These findings are more consistent with literature reports, where a higher FF was observed with the addition of elemental chalcogenide into the polysulfide electrolyte in QDSSCs. In addition, the calculated charge density values at the TiO2 conduction band (Cμ) decrease in the order SGCN (0.97 mF) < GCN (0.93 mF) < liquid electrolyte (0.90 mF). According to EIS curves, the electron lifetime (τ) in corresponding cell devices can be calculated from Cμ and RC using the formula τ = RC2 × Cμ. The highest electron lifetime was obtained for QDSSCs with the SGCN electrolyte in comparison with both GCN and liquid electrolyte, indicating that the recombination of charges was significantly obstructed in SGCN QDSSCs (Table 2).
Cell

R
S (Ω)

R
C2 (Ω)

C
μ (mF)

τ (ms)

τ
n (ms)
Liquid electrolyte
21.3
910
0.90
819
2.82
GCN electrolyte
23.2
967
0.93
899
3.07
SGCN electrolyte
24.5
1051
0.97
1019
4.51
The recombination dynamics was further studied by Bode phase plots in which the electron lifetime (τn) was derived from
τn = 1/(2πfmax)
(1)
where
fmax is the maximum of the lower-frequency peak in the Bode phase plot. The estimated results revealed that the maximum τn value was acquired for the QDSSCs with the SGCN electrolyte (4.51 ms) compared to that of QDSSCs with GCN (3.07 ms) or liquid (2.82 ms) electrolyte. These consequences indicate that the back transfer of photo-induced electrons is obstructed more effectively in the SGCN electrolyte. In other words, the SGCN electrolyte has more efficient transport of photo-induced electrons, and less recombination than that of the GCN and pristine electrolytes, which is in conformity with the above-mentioned EIS results.

EIS measurements were further applied to elucidate the charge recombination behaviour and variation in the conduction band edge of TiO2. In a typical measurement, the cell devices were kept under dark conditions with the forward bias ranging from 0.5 V to 0.65 V. From Fig. 5D, it was observed that the RC2 value decreased gradually with an increase in the voltage at the same light intensity. Furthermore, the RC2 values summarized in Table 2 specified that QDSSCs with the SGCN electrolyte exhibited a larger RC2 value than that of QDSSCs with GCN or liquid electrolyte, which indicate that SGCN QDSSCs significantly restrain interfacial recombination. These results are well matched with the above discussed EIS consequences and supporting that recombination of photo-induced electrons is blocked expressively in QDSSCs fabricated using the SGCN electrolyte.
On the other hand, the total density of free electrons in TiO2 (Cμ) was estimated using the following equation:
(2)
where
C0 is the constant, T is the temperature, kB is the Boltzmann constant, EFn is the quasi-Fermi level of TiO2, and EC is the conduction band edge of TiO2. Cμ gives information about the accumulation of electrons in the localized states located in the TiO2 band gap. In other words, the higher the value of Cμ could beneficially upward shift the quasi-Fermi level of TiO2, which in turn is responsible for the enhancement of VOC in corresponding cell devices. From Fig. 5E, it is observed that at a given forward bias voltage, similar Cμ values were obtained for liquid, GCN, and SGCN electrolytes. These findings indicate that the addition of GCN or SGCN in the pristine polysulfide electrolyte does not affect charge accumulation at the interface of TiO2/QDs.

Moreover, the transport process and recombination dynamics in liquid, GCN and SGCN electrolytes were further studied by IMPS and IMVS, in which the electron transport time (τt) and recombination lifetime (τr) were derived from
τt = 1/(2πfIMPS)
(3)
τr = 1/(2πfIMVS)
(4)
where
fIMPS and fIMVS are the representative frequencies of the lowest imaginary modules acquired by IMPS and IMVS, respectively. In a typical measurement, the cell devices were kept under dark conditions and illuminated by a LED light source (λ = 457 nm) with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. From Fig. 5F and G, the electron transport time (τt) and recombination lifetime (τr) tend to diminish gradually at a higher light intensity. Furthermore, at the same light density, the QDSSCs assembled with the SGCN electrolyte showed smaller τt and larger τr values in comparison with those of both liquid and GCN electrolytes (Fig. 5F and G). These observations indicate that the SGCN electrolyte can enable more effective electron transport and significantly decrease the back transfer of photo-induced electrons from TiO2 to the QDs (path 1) and from TiO2 to the electrolyte (path 2), as shown in Scheme 1A. It has been demonstrated that various polymers or electron rich additives such as N containing additives can form coordination bonds with electron deficient titanium(IV) in the TiO2 surface and be stably adsorbed onto it. Therefore, we assume that SGCN could viably adsorb onto the surface of QD-coated TiO2 through the terminal N of triazine groups upon introduction into the electrolyte matrix and lead to inhibition of the direct contact between QD-coated TiO2 and the electrolyte (Scheme 1A). The adsorption of various polymer additives has already been reported and can be elucidated by the electron deficient nature of titanium(IV) in the TiO2 surface which readily accepts electrons from the electron rich additives. In addition, the electron rich nature of the terminal nitrogen of triazine groups in SGCN is expected to inject more electrons into the valence band (VB) of TiO2 from the SGCN ring by the inductive effect. The plausible electron transfer between the terminal nitrogen of triazine groups and QD-coated TiO2 surface is shown in Scheme 1B. As shown in Scheme 1B, the electron rich nitrogen of terminal triazine groups adsorbs onto the TiO2 surface via the free-electron pairs of nitrogen and π electrons of aromatic groups, thus acting as an electron donor (Lewis base) to titanium(IV) in TiO2 which is a Lewis acid. Consequently, the positive charge accumulated on the nitrogen of terminal triazine groups and the negative charge on TiO2, which results in accumulation of a large amount of electrons in the CB of TiO2. The deposited SGCN nanosheet layer could inhibit the direct contact between the QD-coated TiO2 and electrolyte by providing a shielding/passivation layer on the surface of the photoanode, thus obstructing the back transfer of the photo-induced electron which leads to an increase in the efficiency of the corresponding QDSSCs.

To further evaluate the charge transfer kinetics at the CE/electrolyte interface, Tafel polarization was performed in symmetrical cell devices using different electrolytes. Theoretically, a Tafel plot comprising three different regions in which (i) the polarization zone is present at the low potential curve, (ii) middle potential curves correspond to the Tafel zone, and (iii) the diffusion zone is present at the high potential curve. In a Tafel curve, the diffusion coefficient (Dapp) of S2− can be obtained from the Jlim value and calculated using the following equation
(5)
where
D is the diffusion coefficient of the redox couple at the CE–electrolyte interface, L is the spacer thickness, F is the Faraday constant, C is the concentration of the redox couple, and n is the number of electrons involved in the electrochemical reduction reaction. The Tafel polarization curves (Fig. 5H) of a symmetric cell configuration with different electrolytes demonstrated a higher Jlim value were obtained for the SGCN electrolyte in the diffusion zone, which was estimated by the diffusion of the polysulfide redox couple in the electrolyte. These findings demonstrate that the liquid electrolyte is more susceptible to the recombination process than SGCN and GCN electrolytes. In other words, the SGCN electrolyte not only facilitates the charge transfer process but also augments the reduction of Sn2− to S2−; remarkably, this observation is supporting our proposed mechanism.

In order to determine the electrocatalytic activity of the polysulfide electrolyte on counter electrodes, the cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurement was carried out in different electrolytes (Fig. 5I). In a typical measurement, three-electrode systems were assembled to obtain cyclic voltammograms in which the saturated calomel electrode (SCE), Pt wire and Cu2S were used as a reference, counter and working electrode, respectively. Fig. 5I shows the corresponding cyclic voltammograms of liquid, GCN, and SGCN electrolytes at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 and ranging from −1.5 to +1.5 V. Generally, in the typical CV measurements, two peaks corresponding to the anodic peak current (Ipa) and cathodic peak current (Ipc) are observed as a result of reduction of Sn2− ions and oxidation of S2− ions, respectively. The magnitude of Ipc is quantitatively associated with the number of accessible surface atoms toward the electrocatalytic reduction of oxidized species. Theoretically, the peaks at the negative and positive potential are indicative of the redox reaction which is given according to the following reactions:
S2− + 2h+ → S
(6)
S + Sn−12− → Sn2− (n = 2–5)
(7)
Sn2− + 2e− → Sn−12− + S2−
(8)
Typically, the higher cathodic peak current density is an imperative parameter to evaluate the catalytic activities of different electrolytes. From the CV curves presented in Fig. 5I, the magnitudes of the current densities of the liquid polysulfide electrolyte were enhanced significantly after the addition of GCN and SGCN. We perceived that the current densities of the liquid electrolyte at 52.18 mA cm−2 became a broad profile and positively shifted to 69.71 mA cm−2 in the case of GCN electrolytes. Nevertheless, the highest current density of 85.43 mA cm−2 was observed in SGCN electrolytes, which indicates high electrocatalytic activity and improved charge transfer kinetics at the CE/electrolyte interface. This observation is more similar to that of the Tafel results, where introduction of GCN and SGCN resulted in better charge transfer and also effective reduction of Sn2− to S2−. Moreover, in comparison with the liquid and GCN electrolytes, the CV profile of the SGCN electrolyte that increased significantly might be due to the positive interactions of sulfur with polysulfide species. Considering the Tafel and CV results together, another possible explanation for the expected enhancement in the conversion efficiencies of SGCN QDSSCs is because the existence of SGCN in the polysulfide electrolyte may facilitate the effective reduction of Sn2− to S2−, thereby providing holes towards QDs/electrolyte more efficiently, as shown in Scheme 1A. It has been reported that the existence of sulfur in the polysulfide electrolytes is effective in scavenging the photogenerated holes in QDSSC application. In a recent work, doping of sulfur into GCN sites greatly enhanced the photocatalytic performance due to suppressed photogenerated charge recombination as well as improved electron transfer rate. Similarly, sulfur doped GCN exhibited high photo-electrochemical cell performance compared to pure GCN because of the enhanced transfer of photogenerated carriers and also effective charge separation. Based on these studies, it is reasonable to assume that introduction of sulfur into GCN sites promotes scavenging of the photogenerated holes and reduces the back transfer of photo-induced electrons at the TiO2/QDs/electrolyte interfaces. The following steps are predicted in the transformation of the holes into electrolytes:
(a) Firstly, upon light irradiation, the incident photon can be captured by SGCN that adsorbed on the surface of QD-coated TiO2 and electrons in the VB can be promoted to the CB, thus forming an electron/hole (e−/h+) pair as shown in eqn (9).
(b) In the second step, the photo-excited electrons in the CB of the SGCN (electron donor) may be rapidly injected into the VB of the QD-coated TiO2 electrode (electron acceptor), and result in the oxidation of SGCN which leads to the charge separation process as shown in eqn (10).
(c) Finally, the oxidized species (Sn2−) in the polysulfide redox mediator scavenges the holes from SGCN and diffuses towards the QDs/electrolyte and subsequently reduced back to S2− species (eqn (11)).
SGCN + hv → SGCN (e−/h+)
(9)
SGCN (e−/h+) + QDs/TiO2 → SGCN (h+) + QDs/TiO2(e−)
(10)
SGCN (h+) + Sn2− → SGCN + S2−
(11)
Furthermore, the operational long-term stability is a main factor to accomplish upscaling and practical application of QDSSC technology. Nevertheless, the operational long-term stability of QDSSCs is mainly affected because of the presence of moisture, leaking and volatization of the liquid electrolyte. In order to achieve long-term stability much effort has been made to overcome the leakage and volatization problems by introducing a polymer such as poly(vinyl pyrrolidone), TEOS, sodium carboxymethylcellulose (CMC-Na), and xanthan gum (XG) into the polysulfide electrolyte. As a result, the use of polymer additives in the polysulfide electrolyte is rather straightforward and an efficient strategy to obtain long-term operational stability. Taken together, it is conceivable to consider that the incorporation of a SGCN additive into the polysulfide electrolyte would further the cell performance due to its polymeric nature. Henceforward, to further examine the influence of different electrolytes on the stability of QDSSCs, J–V curves were recorded at different time intervals. The corresponding cell devices were preserved under dark conditions at room temperature after every measurement. The normalized conversion efficiencies and corresponding photovoltaic parameters of liquid, GCN, and SGCN electrolytes-based QDSSCs under one full sunlight are shown in Fig. 6A–D. A steady decrease in efficiencies was observed for Cu–In–S QDSSCs assembled with liquid and SGCN electrolytes. However, the cell devices fabricated with the GCN electrolyte exhibited better stabilities under identical conditions. For example, the efficiency of the liquid and SGCN electrolytes decreased to 20% and 60% of its initial value after 60 h, respectively, whereas GCN electrolytes decreased only to 80% of its initial value in the same time duration. Obviously, the GCN electrolyte is useful in maintaining VOC and FF during the aging test (Fig. 6B–D). The better stability of the GCN electrolyte might be related to (i) the higher electronegativity of nitrogen (3.0) than sulfur (2.5), which may cause the formation of stronger covalent bonds between carbon and nitrogen atoms; (ii) also it might be explained on the basis of bond dissociation energy, in which the bond strength is determined by measuring the amount of energy required to break a chemical bond. According to the literature, the C–N bond (770 kJ mol−1) has more bond dissociation energy than the C–S bond (699 kJ mol−1), thus requiring a higher amount of energy to break the C–N bond; (iii) another interpretation might be attributed to the inferior sensitivity of terminal triazine nitrogen atoms toward O2.

In conclusion, low-cost, polymeric SGCN nanosheets have been introduced as an innovative and efficient additive into the polysulfide electrolyte to enhance the efficiencies of QDSSCs. The use of SGCN in the polysulfide redox couple has substantially passivated the surface trap states between TiO2/QDs/electrolyte interfaces in QDSSCs. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report exploiting SGCN as an additive in the polysulfide electrolyte to fabricate high-efficiency QDSSCs. The Cu–In–S QDSSCs assembled with the SGCN electrolyte has exhibited an efficiency of 7.13%, which is higher than that obtained with either GCN (6.73%) or pristine electrolytes (6.16%) mainly due to the improvement in JSC and FF. The improved conversion efficiencies are ascribed to the better charge transfer kinetics and suppression of carrier recombination at the TiO2/QD/electrolyte interface, which has been systematically investigated using electrochemical analysis and cyclic voltammetry. Furthermore, the experimental results have also proven that the SGCN electrolyte efficaciously improved the efficiency of Cu–In–Se QDSSCs, indicating that this approach may be applicable for other Cu-based QDSSCs. Overall, these findings suggest that modifying polysulfide electrolytes with modern, cost-efficient, and environmentally friendly additives can be one way to boost the photovoltaic performance of QDSSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.

GCN
Graphitic carbon nitride
SGCN
Sulfur-rich graphitic carbon nitride
QDSSCs
Quantum dot-sensitized solar cells
DSSC
Dye-sensitized solar cell
QD
Quantum dots
PCE
Power conversion efficiency
CV
Cyclic voltammetry
FF
Fill factor
EIS
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
TGA
Thioglycolic acid
FTO
Fluorine doped tin oxide
TEM
Transmission electron microscopy
STEM-EDS
Scanning transmission electron microscopy-energy dispersive spectroscopy
PXRD
Powder X-ray diffraction
PEC
Photo-electrochemical cell

The authors would like to acknowledge financial supports from the Ministry of Science and Technology of the Republic of China (Contract No. MOST 108-2218-E-011-017-MY3 and 109-2113-M-011-001). This work was financially supported by the Taiwan Building Technology Center from The Featured Areas Research Center Program within the framework of the Higher Education Sprout Project by the Ministry of Education in Taiwan. Thanks to Ms. C.-Y. Chien of Ministry of Science and Technology (National Taiwan University) for assistance with TEM experiments.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Schematic diagram for the synthesis of GCN and SGCN. STEM, HAADF, and elemental mapping images of GCN and SGCN. HR-TEM images along with the absorption and photoluminescence spectra of Cu–In–S and Cu–In–Se QDs. J–V curves and photovoltaic parameters of the Cu–In–S and Cu–In–Se QDSSCs with different amounts of GCN and SGCN. See DOI: 10.1039/d0nr07963d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021