 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA07732G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23831-23839


Luyao
Zheng
,

Sanjoy
Mukherjee
,

Kai
Wang
,

Martha E.
Hay
,

Bryan W.
Boudouris
* and 

Xiong
Gong
*

Department of Polymer Engineering, College of Polymer Science and Polymer Engineering, The University of Akron, Akron, OH 44325, USA. E-mail: xgong@uakron.edu

Charles D. Davidson School of Chemical Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA

Department of Chemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA

Received
1st September 2017
, Accepted 23rd October 2017
First published on 24th October 2017
We report high performance hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) through the introduction of a radical polymer-based copolymer that contains a second moiety capable of undergoing crosslinking through simple exposure to ultraviolet (UV) light, poly(2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidinyloxy-4-yl methacrylate)-co-(4-benzoylphenyl methacrylate) (PTMA-BP). The PTMA-BP thin film engineered the surface of a poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) hole extraction layer (HEL). Systematic investigations indicate that PTMA-BP can induce better band alignment between PEDOT:PSS and perovskite hybrids, reduce interfacial charge carrier recombination, and improve the crystallization of perovskite hybrids that are cast on the top of the HEL. As a result, the stable PSCs incorporated with PTMA-BP exhibit a 15% power conversion efficiency, which is more than a 15% enhancement compared to cells that lacked the PTMA-BP interfacial modifying layer.

Hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have drawn tremendous attention in the past eight years due to their high power conversion efficiency (PCE) and solution processability. Recently, PCE values over 20% have been observed for PSCs through device engineering and novel materials development. In PSCs, the intrinsic perovskite absorber is sandwiched between a p-type hole extraction layer (HEL) and an n-type electron extraction layer (EEL), where the contact interfaces are critical to the overall device performance. Compared to a conventional n–i–p structure, which is used commonly when high-temperature-sintered mesoporous TiO2 serves as the EEL, complicated 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) serves as the HEL, and expensive gold serves as the anode, inverted p–i–n PSCs fabricated by low-temperature solution processes possess great potential to be manufactured at low-costs and in large scales. In the inverted p–i–n PSCs, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) is typically used as the HEL; however, the strong acidity and typically rough surface of the PEDOT:PSS HEL have hampered device lifetimes and device performances. Imidazole and various other solvents (e.g., methanol, dimethylformamide, and ethylene glycol) have been used to tune the pH value of the PEDOT:PSS solution and the work function and the electrical conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS layer. Moreover, many interfacial materials, for example, poly(N,N′-bis(4-butylphenyl)-N,N′-bis(phenyl)benzidine) (poly-TPD), have been used as a buffer layer between the PEDOT:PSS HEL and perovskite photoactive layers or the HEL through further modification with reduced graphene oxide to improve the device performance and stability of PSCs.

Radical polymers are an emerging class of macromolecular conductors that are composed of a non-conjugated polymeric backbone with stable open-shell chemical functionalities on the pendant groups of the macromolecule. In radical polymers, charge is passed in the solid state through a series of oxidation–reduction (redox) reactions between the high density of open-shell sites within the thin film. Importantly, the electrical conductivity and the transport energy levels of radical polymers are readily tuned by controlling the density and chemistry of the radical sites present on the macromolecular backbone. Additionally, the non-conjugated nature of the radical polymer backbone means that these open-shell materials are weak absorbers of light. Moreover, radical polymers bearing nitroxide chemistries are quite stable in a range of environmental conditions, which allow the materials to provide stability to organic electronic devices as well. Thus, the utilization of a radical polymer to re-engineer the interface between the PEDOT:PSS HEL and perovskite active layer should result in enhanced PCE and increased device stability of PSCs.
Here, we report high-performance PSCs through the utilization of a crosslinkable radical copolymer, poly(2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidinyloxy-4-yl methacrylate)-co-(4-benzoylphenyl methacrylate) (PTMA-BP) with a low-lying transport energy level of −5.1 eV (relative to vacuum) to engineer the surface of the PEDOT:PSS HTL layer. The benzoylphenyl methacrylate portion of PTMA-BP was crosslinked under ultraviolet (UV) light in order to provide a robust surface on which to cast the perovskite (methylammonium lead triiodide, CH3NH3PbI3) precursor solution while the PTMA moieties within the copolymer served as the means by which to transport charge from the photoactive layer to the PEDOT:PSS HTL. The current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics of PSCs as a function of different thicknesses of the PTMA-BP thin film layers processed from precursor solutions with different concentrations indicated that the enhancement of open-circuit voltage (VOC) comes from the combination of better band alignment with the photoactive layer and a surface passivation effect. Also, the addition of the PTMA-BP interlayer reduced the reverse dark current of the PSCs, consistent with the observed increase in VOC. Through contact angle measurements of HELs and scanning electron microscope (SEM) imaging of the CH3NH3PbI3 thin film formed on the chemically distinct modifying layers, the chemically robust and relatively non-wetting surface of the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL improved the crystallization of perovskite hybrids and allowed for the creation of larger and more uniform semiconducting crystalline domains; in turn, this gave rise to improved device performance. In addition, the study on the light intensity dependence of short-circuit current (JSC) and VOC suggested that there was suppressed surface recombination due to the introduction of the PTMA-BP layer. Furthermore, the investigation of PSCs by time-resolved photocurrent (TPC) measurements revealed that the charge extraction at the interface between the HEL and CH3NH3PbI3 active layer was dramatically promoted when we introduced a PTMA-BP thin layer on the top of the PEDOT:PSS HEL. As a result, the JSC, VOC, and fill factor (FF) were all improved through the inclusion of a properly tuned PTMA-BP layer. Thus, our finding of the utilization of a new kind of easily scalable, transparent, and conductive radical polymer provides a facile way to pursue highly efficient and stable PSCs.

The synthesis procedures and characterization of the PTMA-BP are described in the ESI. As investigated and calculated in Fig. S2, the radical content of the synthesized PTMA-BP is 76.5% among the repeat units, which is comparable to those of standard PTMA samples synthesised under laboratory conditions. Lead iodide (PbI2, 99.9985% metals basis) was purchased from Alfa Aesar. PEDOT:PSS (SCA 388-20) was purchased from Heraeus. Phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM, 99.5%) was purchased from Solenne BV. Toluene (anhydrous, 99.8%), dimethylformamide (DMF, anhydrous, 99.8%), ethanol (anhydrous, >99.5%) and chlorobenzene (anhydrous, 99.8%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. All materials are used as received without further treatment. Methylammonium iodide (MAI, CH3NH3I) was synthesized using hydroiodic acid and methylamine in our laboratory following the literature procedure.


After treatment of pre-cleaned ITO (indium tin oxide) substrates with a UV ozone plasma for 20 min under an ambient atmosphere, a ∼30 nm-thick PEDOT:PSS thin layer was spin-coated onto ITO-coated glass, followed by baking at 150 °C for 10 min in air. Afterward, the PEDOT:PSS-coated ITO substrates were immediately transferred into a glovebox under a nitrogen atmosphere. When the substrates were cooled to room-temperature, the PTMA-BP thin films with different thicknesses were spin-coated (at a rotational frequency of 6000 rpm for 30 s) onto the PEDOT:PSS layer from precursor toluene solutions with PTMA-BP concentrations of 0.5, 2, 5, and 10 mg mL−1. The films were then thermally annealed at 80 °C for 10 min under 254 nm UV light in order to crosslink the PTMA-BP thin films.

The transmittance values of either the PEDOT:PSS or the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL were measured on an HP 8453 spectrophotometer in air. The contact angles of either the PEDOT:PSS or the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL were measured on Angle Analysis Equipment from AST Products VCA Optima. Water contact angles of the thin films were measured as they can provide qualitative evidence for the contact properties. The water contact angle measurement was carried out because water is a polar solvent, which is similar to DMF, and used as the solvent of CH3NH3PbI3 precursor solution. The film thickness was measured on a DektakXT surface profile measuring system.

The perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) active layer was prepared in our lab by a two-step method. The PbI2 layer was spin-coated on the preheated (to 80 °C) ITO/PEDOT:PSS or ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP substrates from the warm (80 °C) PbI2 solution (DMF, 400 mg mL−1) at a rotation frequency of 6000 rpm for 20 s with an acceleration time of 5 s, followed by thermal annealing on a hotplate at 80 °C for 10 min. After the PbI2 layer was cooled to room-temperature, the MAI layer was then spin-coated on the top of the PbI2 layer from the MAI precursor solution (ethanol, 40 mg mL−1) at a rotational frequency of 6000 rpm for 35 s with an acceleration time of 5 s, followed by a thermal-annealing at 100 °C for 2 hours on the hotplate. After the CH3NH3PbI3 layer was cooled to room-temperature, a ∼40 nm-thick PC61BM EEL was spin-coated on the top of CH3NH3PbI3 layer at a rotational frequency of 1000 rpm for 40 s with an acceleration time of 1 s from the PC61BM (chlorobenzene, 20 mg mL−1). Finally, a ∼100 nm of aluminum was thermally deposited through a shadow mask in a vacuum with the pressure of 1 × 10−6 mbar. The device areas were measured to be 0.045 cm2 for current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics and 0.0325 cm2 for transient photocurrent (TPC) measurements.

The top view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were obtained by using a field emission scanning electron microscope (JEOL-7401). The samples for the SEM measurements were the CH3NH3PbI3 layers deposited on the pristine PEDOT:PSS layer and PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP bilayer as described above.
The J–V characteristics were obtained using a Keithley model 2400 source measure unit. A Newport Air Mass 1.5 Global (AM1.5G) full-spectrum solar simulator was applied as the light source. The light intensity was 100 mW cm−2, which was calibrated by utilizing a monosilicon detector (with a KG-5 visible color filter) from the National Renewable Energy Laboratory to reduce the spectral mismatch. The incident photo-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra of the PSCs were measured by using a solar cell quantum efficiency measurement system of European Solar Test Installation (ESTI) for cells and mini-modules. A 300 W steady-state xenon lamp provided the source light and up to 64 filters (8 to 20 width, range from 300 to 1200 nm) were available on four filter-wheels in order to produce the monochromatic input, which was chopped at 75 Hz, superimposed on the bias light and measured via the usual lock-in technique; the bias light is necessary to put the device under examination close to the operating irradiance conditions. After collecting the IPCE data, the software also integrated the data with the AM1.5G spectrum and gives the calculated JSC value from this integration.
The home-made setup for the time-resolved photocurrent (TPC) measurement is described as follows: a Stanford Research Systems NL100 nitrogen laser with an attached dye cell, which provided the excitation source for photocarrier generation. When pumping a cuvette of Rhodamine 6G laser dye, the pulsed laser provided 4 ns wide, λ ≈ 590 nm pulses with a frequency of 10 Hz. A set of computer-controlled variable neutral density filters was used to alter the incident light intensity by up to three orders of magnitude, and a 50/50 beam splitter simultaneously sent every pulse to a Coherent J-10Si-le energy sensor and to PSCs under study. Active monitoring of the fluence of every pulse allowed a typical measurement to consist of 512 current transients averaged together, where no pulse deviated by more than 8% from the target fluence of 1500 pJ cm−2. The external voltage bias was applied to PSCs with an Agilent 33519B waveform generator operating in DC mode, connected to the PSCs through a wideband bias tee. The bias tee is an essential, but easily overlooked component in these systems, as it provides a high-frequency shunt for the TPC pulse, dramatically reducing the RC time constant of the circuit, and preventing the bias source itself from interfering with the TPC signal. The time-resolved photocurrent was recorded with a 300 MHz Tektronix DPO3034 oscilloscope by measuring the voltage drop across a 5 ohm RF sensor resistor in series with the device. The value of 5 ohms was chosen to further minimize the RC time constant of the setup.


Fig. 1a presents the device structure of the PSCs and the molecular structure of PTMA-BP. As demonstrated in Fig. 1a, the key requirements for the PTMA-BP layer are that the PTMA-BP thin film should have a good energetic band alignment with both the PEDOT:PSS layer and the CH3NH3PbI3 active layer, a high level of transparency in the visible range, and a relatively large electrical conductivity. Fig. 1b displays the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy levels and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy levels of CH3NH3PbI3 and PC61BM and the work functions of ITO, PEDOT:PSS, PTMA-BP and Al. It is clear that the work functions of the PTMA-BP layer and the PEDOT:PSS thin layer are matched very well. Moreover, a small energy barrier (0.3 eV) between the work function of the PTMA-BP layer and the HOMO energy level of the CH3NH3PbI3 active layer will not greatly affect separated holes and their ability to be extracted from the CH3NH3PbI3 active layer to the ITO anode. Furthermore, in order to confirm the PTMA-PB layer that possesses a good transparency in the visible range for device operation, transmittance spectra of both the PEDOT:PSS and PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HELs were measured (Fig. 2). It was found that the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL has a good transparency from 300 nm to 1000 nm, which indicates that the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL would not block the incident light to be absorbed by the CH3NH3PbI3 active layer.

The appropriate contact properties of the HEL in the inverted PSCs are essential to the thin film quality of the CH3NH3PbI3 active layer in terms of better uniformity, larger crystal size, and fewer grain boundaries.Fig. 3 presents representative contact angle measurements of the PEDOT:PSS HEL and the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL, respectively. Relative to the PEDOT:PSS HEL, the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL does not allow water to wet it well. This indicates that the PTMA-BP surface modification diminishes the surface tension dragging force and enhances the grain boundary mobility, which are favorable for the growth of large crystals, resulting in enhanced PCE of PSCs.

Fig. 4 displays the SEM images of the CH3NH3PbI3 active layers on either the PEDOT:PSS HEL or the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL. The CH3NH3PbI3 active layer on the PEDOT:PSS HEL exhibits small (160 nm) and randomly distributed crystals (Fig. 4a), whereas, the CH3NH3PbI3 active layer on the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL shows larger (220 nm) and homogeneously distributed CH3NH3PbI3 crystals (Fig. 4b). Previous results indicate that larger crystal domains and a homogeneous distribution of the CH3NH3PbI3 crystals (i.e., with less pinholes) result in enhanced photocurrent, negligible hysteresis behavior, and good reproducibility in PSCs. Thus, as expected, the PSCs incorporated with the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL exhibited enhanced short-circuit current density (JSC) values relative to their PEDOT:PSS-only counterparts when the layers were introduced into full PSCs.
The J–V characteristics of PSCs under AM1.5G illumination with a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 are shown in Fig. 5a. The PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS (∼30 nm) HEL show a JSC of 18.45 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.92 V, a fill factor (FF) of 0.76, and a corresponding power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 13.00%. This is in consistent with the reported values from the PSCs with a similar device structure. Whereas, the PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS (∼30 nm)/PTMA-BP (∼12 nm) HEL exhibit a JSC of 20.97 mA cm−2, a VOC of 0.96 V, a FF of 0.76, and a corresponding PCE of 15.37%, which is an ∼18% enhancement relative to the PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS HEL only. Table 1 summarizes device performance parameters of 32 PSCs. Clearly, reproducible device performance with an average JSC, VOC, FF and PCE of 20.05 mA cm−2, 0.99 V, 0.77 and 15.04% is observed from the PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL. In addition, the J–V curves of the PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS HEL exhibit an obvious hysteresis behavior. Whereas, the PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL exhibit a negligible hysteresis behavior (i.e., the difference between the forward scan (scan from reverse bias to forward bias) and reverse scan (scan from forward bias to reverse bias) is negligible), indicating that the PTMA-BP layer can reduce the defects and suppress surface charge carrier recombination.
HEL

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)

a Device average values are based on 32 devices. The deviations are given in parentheses.

PEDOT:PSS
0.91[±0.01]
18.97[±1.03]
0.76[±0.01]
13.13[±0.43]
PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP
0.99[±0.04]
20.05[±1.04]
0.77[±0.01]
15.04[±0.82]

Fig. 5b presents the IPCE data of the PSCs based on either the PEDOT:PSS HEL or the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL. The PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL exhibit a higher IPCE than those based on the PEDOT:PSS HEL, which corresponds well with the observed enhancement of the photocurrent seen in Fig. 5a. The integrated JSC values are 17.62 mA cm−2 and 19.78 mA cm−2 of the PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS HEL and the PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL, respectively. We note that these integrated JSC values are in good agreement with those extracted from the J–V characteristics.
The increased VOC of the PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL could be explained by the lower energy level of PTMA-BP (−5.1 eV), which reduces the energy barrier with the HOMO energy of CH3NH3PbI3 (−5.4 eV). Table S1 displays the thickness dependence of the PTMA-BP layer on the VOC values of the PSCs. The VOC reached a maximum ∼1 V as the thickness of the PTMA-BP layer increased to ∼12 nm and then remained the same for thicker layers, which illustrates that a certain thickness of the PTMA-BP layer is required to form this better band alignment while introducing the PTMA-BP layer between the PEDOT:PSS layer and CH3NH3PbI3 layers. As shown in Fig. S4, the reduced dark current in the PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL conforms to the enhanced VOC. Both of these data sets are consistent with the idea that thicker PTMA-BP layers help to electronically decouple the PEDOT:PSS layer from the perovskite semiconducting active layer.
As discussed above, the electrical conductivity of the PTMA-BP layer is also critical for the ultimate JSC of the PSCs. The PSCs that included PTMA-BP interlayers with different thickness values were investigated. Fig. S5 presents J–V characteristics of the PSCs with the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL, and the device performance parameters are summarized in Table S1. The JSC is first increased with the thickness of the PTMA-BP layer, reaching the maximum value as the thickness of the PTMA-BP layer is at ∼12 nm, and then this value dropped with the thicker PTMA-BP layers. Because the true resistance of the extremely thin PTMA-BP layer is difficult to measure directly, we estimated the series resistance (RS), which is correlated with the resistance of the PTMA-BP layer. The RS is estimated from the slope of J–V curves (Fig. S5) under the short circuit conditions (J = 0 mA cm−2). Fig. S6 shows the increasing tendencies of RS and JSCversus the thickness of the PTMA-BP layer. The increase of the RS in the PSCs with the increase of the PTMA-BP layer thickness can be separated into two regions. First, the RS is constant at thicknesses of 12 nm or less, where the charge transport is taken place in a tunneling type of manner, and this type of result has been observed previously for polymer-based solar cells as well. As the thickness grows to be larger than 27 nm, the RS reaches its maximum value, where high resistance of the PTMA-BP layer restricts the charge transport. The JSC dependence on the thickness of the PTMA-BP layer indicates that the electrical conductivity of the PTMA-BP layer plays a critical role in the device performance of the PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP bilayer; and thus, this aspect must be well-controlled when introducing radical polymers in organic/inorganic electronic devices.
To further investigate the effect of the PTMA-BP layer on the device performance, the light intensity dependence of JSC and VOC was measured in order to evaluate the impact of the interlayer on charge recombination within the PSCs. As shown in Fig. 5c, PSCs based on either the PEDOT:PSS HEL or the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL exhibit a power-law dependence of JSC on the light intensity. By the power-law fitting of JSC ∝ Iα, where I is the light intensity and α is the coefficient, an α of 0.92 is observed from the PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS HEL, and an α of 0.95 is observed from the PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL. The larger α indicates that a weaker non-geminate recombination is seen within the PSCs that incorporate the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL as compared to those with only the PEDOT:PSS HEL. Fig. 5d presents the light intensity dependence of VOC for the PSCs based on either the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL or the PEDOT:PSS HEL. The VOC of the PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS HEL shows a strong dependence on the light intensity with a slope of 2.39kBT/q, where kB is the Boltzmann constant, q is the elementary charge and T is the absolute temperature, according to the relationship of VOC ∝ Sln(I), whereas, S = 1.85kBT/q is observed from the PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL. A smaller S indicates that a diminished trap-assisted charge recombination takes place in the PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL. The reduced charge recombination in the PSCs due to the introduction of the PTMA-BP thin layer is also in agreement with the negligible photocurrent hysteresis observed for the PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL.
Time-resolved photocurrent (TPC) measurements were also carried out in order to inspect the influence of charge extraction in the PSCs based on different HELs. The short-timescale photocurrent curves were collected under various applied bias as shown in Fig. S7a and b. The peak value of transient photocurrent, which is affected by the charge generation, charge extraction, and charge recombination, increased while the applied bias was switched from forward bias towards reverse bias. The maximum transient photocurrent of the PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL was higher than that of the PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS-only HEL under the same bias, especially when the devices were operated in reverse bias. While applying high reverse bias, which results in a high internal potential in PSCs, the contributions of charge recombination were minimized; and thus, the charge extraction process dominated the difference in the photocurrent between the PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS HEL and the PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL. Fig. 6a presents normalized TPC curves of the PSCs based on either the PEDOT:PSS HEL or the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL under the applied bias of −2 V. Charge carrier transit times of 168 ns and 118 ns are observed from the PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS HEL and the PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL, respectively. The shorter charge carrier transit time of the PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL indicates that efficient charge extraction processes take place in the PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL. Moreover, the total extracted charge density can be observed by integrating the current density over time. Fig. 6b presents the integrated charge density versus time for the PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS HEL and the PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL, respectively, under −2 V bias. It is clear that the total extracted charge densities of two devices are almost the same, which indicates that the enhanced photocurrent does not result from the number of photo-generated charge carriers. Therefore, the accelerated charge extraction, originating from the suppressed surface recombination, is responsible for enhanced photocurrent and restrained hysteresis.
The stability of the PSCs based on different HELs was also evaluated. As shown in Fig. 7, the PCEs of the PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL remain over 90% of the original value for a week. While the PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS HEL rapidly drop to about 40% of the original value. The two-fold longer half-life time of the PSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS/PTMA-BP HEL indicates that the introduction of the PTMA-BP layer between the CH3NH3PbI3 active layer and the PEDOT:PSS layer can markedly improve the stability of devices, as was also the case when a radical polymer interlayer was incorporated into polymer-based inverted organic photovoltaics as well.

We modified the HEL of the inverted PSCs by introducing a chemically robust and electronically active radical polymer, PTMA-BP. Through morphological, electrical and optical evaluations, it was clearly demonstrated that, after the modification of the PEDOT:PSS HEL with the PTMA-BP layer, the energy barrier at the interface is reduced by the better energy matching, the interfacial recombination is suppressed by the passivation effect, and more efficient charge extraction is achieved. As a result, efficient and stable PSCs with negligible hysteresis were fabricated. Thus, our finding of the utilization of a new kind of easily scalable, transparent, and conductive polymer provides a facile way to pursue highly efficient and stable PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors at the University of Akron acknowledge the National Science Foundation (EECS 1351785) and Air Force Office of Scientific Research (Grant Number: FA9550-15-1-0292, Program Manager: Dr Kenneth Caster) for financial support. The Purdue University authors also deeply thank the Air Force Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR) for the support of this work through the Organic Materials Chemistry Program (Grant Number: FA9550-15-1-0449, Program Manager: Dr Kenneth Caster).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta07732g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017