 DOI: 10.1039/C9TC01039D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 7947-7952


Xuebin
Chen
,

Bei
Zhu
,

Bin
Kan
,

Ke
Gao
,

Xiaobin
Peng
* and 

Yong
Cao


State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, 381 Wushan Road, Guangzhou 510640, China. E-mail: chxbpeng@scut.edu.cn

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195-2120, USA

Received
23rd February 2019
, Accepted 23rd May 2019
First published on 24th May 2019
An organic solar cell (OSC) usually contains a cathode interlayer (CIL) to enhance the device performance. However, if a cell without a CIL (CIL-free) still shows high performance, the cost of the cell can be reduced. In this study, we demonstrate that methanol soaking of the active layers is efficient to improve the performance of porphyrin small molecule-based bulk heterojunction photovoltaic devices. Compared with the CIL-free devices without treatment, the champion power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the CIL-free OSCs upon 15 s MeOH soaking treatment is improved by 18.7% from 7.55% to 8.96%. The PCE is even higher than those of the devices with widely used PFN-Br cathode interlayers (PCE: 8.55%) (PFN-Br: (poly[(9,9-bis(3′-((N,N-dimethyl)-N-ethylammonium)-propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)]dibromide). Methanol soaking of the active layers improves the exciton dissociation and charge carrier transport and collection in the devices. This work provides a simple approach for preparing highly efficient CIL-free organic solar cells, which can be beneficial for large-scale and commercial applications.

Organic solar cells (OSCs), which show advantages such as low-cost, lightweight, flexibility and solution-processability, have been considered as one of the potential candidates for renewable and clean energy sources. In comparison with polymers, small molecules (SMs) have unique advantages of defined chemical structures and molecular weights, easier purification and better batch-to-batch reproducibility. Among a variety of SM photovoltaic materials, porphyrin analogues are very promising as donor materials due to their high absorption coefficients and flexible functionalization. In particular, high performance OSCs based on conjugated electron donor–acceptor (D–A) porphyrin small molecules have been achieved in binary, ternary, and tandem organic solar cells.

In OSCs, cathode interlayers (CILs) are often used to build a bridge between the active layers and the cathodes, and therefore enhance the device performance. And CILs can be organic or inorganic. However, most organic CILs such as poly[(9,9-bis(6′-(N,N,N-trimethylammonium)hexyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)] (PFN) and its derivatives work efficiently only when the films are ultra-thin and for specific active layers or/and cathodes. On the other hand, though inorganic CILs such as zinc oxide (ZnO) and calcium (Ca) also have been demonstrated to be effective in some OSCs, high energy-demanding processes such as high temperature heating and high degree vacuum are required for deposition, which can limit the commercial applications of OSCs. Therefore, in order to not only simplify the device fabrication but also reduce the cost of OSCs, it is of great significance to develop efficient CIL-free bulk heterojunction (BHJ) OSCs, to which less attention has been paid to date.
Considering that porphyrin small molecules are very promising donor materials and poor solvent treatment on active layers can impact their morphology to reduce the trap densities and therefore improve the performance of organic field effect transistors (OFETs), herein, we report CIL-free BHJ OSCs based on porphyrin DPPEZnP-TOM and PC61BM ([6,6]-phenyl C61-butyric acid) (Fig. 1a) active layers treated with methanol (MeOH) or isopropanol (IPA). In particular, methoxy modified alkyl-thiophene units are employed in DPPEZnP-TOM considering that methoxy modified thiophene units have been demonstrated to lower the HOMO energy levels of the molecules, which helps to improve the Voc values and therefore the performance of the OSCs. MeOH treatment modifies the bulk morphology and the contact properties between the active layers and the cathode, facilitating charge dissociation and transport in the OSCs. As a result, the devices with MeOH treatment achieved a high power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 8.96%, which is enhanced by 18.7% compared with that of non-treated devices and even higher than that of the devices with poly[(9,9-bis(3′-((N,N-dimethyl)-N-ethylammonium)-propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)]dibromide (PFN-Br) CILs (PCE: 8.55%).

The syntheses of DPPEZnP-TOM and several key intermediates are described in Fig. S1 and S2 (ESI). 3-(5-Bromothiophen-2-yl)-2,5-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-6-(thiophen-2-yl)-2,5-dihydropyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-dione was synthesized according to the reported procedures. The target compound DPPEZnP-TOM was synthesized in 62% yield by Sonogashira coupling reactions. DPPEZnP-TOM was purified by gel permeation chromatography and column chromatography on a silica gel (ESI).


The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the OSCs upon MeOH and IPA treatments on the active layers at different soaking times varied with 15 seconds increment from 0 to 30 s are measured. The J–V curves of the OSCs are shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. S7 (ESI) and the device parameters are summarized in Table 1 and Table S2 (ESI). It is apparent that the overall device performance is significantly increased after appropriate methanol soaking for 15 s compared with that of the OSCs without solvent treatment with a champion PCE of 8.96%. Meanwhile, the device performance is slightly improved upon IPA treatment for 15 s and a PCE of 7.85% is obtained.

Treatment

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

J
calsc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
WF (eV)

a The values were calculated by EQE measurement.

Without
0.75 ± 0.01
16.22 ± 0.47
15.78
59.05 ± 0.48
7.18 ± 0.04 (7.55)
4.83
MeOH
0.78 ± 0.01
17.74 ± 0.34
16.64
62.14 ± 0.63
8.59 ± 0.37 (8.96)
4.75
IPA
0.77 ± 0.01
16.75 ± 0.37
15.96
56.60 ± 0.68
7.29 ± 0.55 (7.85)
4.79
For all the devices treated with MeOH, the open circuit voltage (Voc) values are slightly increased from 0.75 to 0.78 V. The enhanced Voc values can be attributed to the interfacial dipole induced by methanol treatment, which can be demonstrated by the work functions (WFs) of the organic active layers investigated with Kelvin probe technology. As shown in Table 1 and Fig. S9 (ESI), while the reference WF of the non-treated active layers exhibits an average WF of 4.83 eV from ca. 200 points, the WF values of the treated active layers upon MeOH and IPA treatment for 15 s are reduced by 0.08 and 0.04 eV, respectively, indicating the formation of surface dipole. Thereby, the interfacial dipole reduces the electron injection barriers on the active layer surface, leading to improved charge transport and collection by the electrode. This result also shows that MeOH is a better solvent to modify the active layer surfaces than IPA, which agrees with the slightly higher Voc for the MeOH-treated devices than that for the IPA-treated ones.
In addition to the enhanced Voc values, MeOH treatment of the active layers with suitable time can also improve the fill factors (FFs) and the short circuit currents (Jsc). As seen in Table 1 and Table S2 (ESI), while the devices without methanol treatment show a FF of 59.05% and a Jsc of 16.22 mA cm−2, those treated with methanol with a soaking time of 0, 15 and 30 s exhibit FF values of 60.51%, 62.14% and 59.62% and Jsc values of 17.50, 17.74 and 17.62 mA cm−2, respectively, suggesting that the morphology of the active layers can be adjusted by MeOH treatment. In contrast, though IPA treatment can also slightly enhance the PCE to 7.29% with slightly increased Jsc and Voc values of 16.75 mA cm−2 and 0.77 V, respectively, it slightly reduces the FF to 56.60%.
The external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves of the devices without alcohol treatment, and with MeOH and IPA treatments are presented in Fig. 2b. Compared with those of the untreated devices, the EQE values of the devices with MeOH treatment are improved almost in the whole region from 300 to 825 nm, which indicated that the photo electron conversion process is more efficient. On the other hand, IPA treatment can enhance the EQE from 300 to 450 nm and from 650 to 825 nm but reduce the EQE from 450 to 600 nm.
To further investigate the positive effects of methanol treatment on porphyrin-based SM OSCs, the DPPEZnP-TEH:PC61BM OSCs without and with MeOH treatment were also fabricated. The PCE increased from 6.63% (without treatment) to 8.54% (with MeOH treatment), which is a 28% PCE enhancement (Table S3, ESI), indicating that the MeOH solvent treatment can be effective to improve the performance of the devices based on other porphyrin small molecules.

To investigate why the alcohol treatment of the active layers impacts on the device performance, the absorption spectra of the DPPEZnP-TOM:PC61BM films without alcohol treatment and with MeOH and IPA treatments are measured. As provided in Fig. 3, upon alcohol treatments, it is apparent that the absorptions of the active layers in a short wavelength region from 300 to 500 nm decrease while those in a long wavelength region from 600 to 1000 nm remain almost unchanged. Since the absorbance of the blend films in short and long wavelength regions can be mainly ascribed to those of PC61BM and DPPEZnP-TOM, respectively, the decreased absorbance of PC61BM upon alcohol treatment suggests that MeOH and IPA treatments can induce morphology change of PC61BM in the blend films, which is consistent with a previous report on the aggregation of more PCBM on the surface after alcohol exposure, decreasing the UV-vis absorption intensity.


To gain more insights into the impacts of MeOH and IPA treatments on the active layers, atomic force microscopy (AFM) is used to investigate the surface morphology. As seen from the height images (Fig. 4), the DPPEZnP-TOM:PC61BM blend film without alcohol treatment exhibits a smooth surface with a root mean square (RMS) roughness (Rq) of 0.607 nm. Upon MeOH treatment, the Rq of the active layer is slightly increased to 0.645 nm. On the other hand, IPA treatment significantly increases the Rq of DPPEZnP-TOM:PC61BM films to 0.962 nm. It is noted that the Rq changes induced by the alcohols are consistent with the absorption changes. Though a rougher surface can enhance the interfacial adhesion interaction between the photoactive layer and the metal cathode to enhance the electron transportation and therefore the Jsc value, too rough surfaces of the active layer such as those upon the IPA treatment can form too many traps at the active layer/Al interfaces to reduce the device performance.

To further investigate the morphology changes of the blend films upon the solvent treatment, grazing-incidence wide angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) measurements were employed (Fig S12, ESI). The active layers with MeOH soaking treatment show a similar profile to the control blends, suggesting that MeOH soaking does not impact the crystallinity of the BHJ films obviously. However, the crystallinity peaks are decreased along the out-of-plane direction for the BHJ films upon IPA treatment, indicating that IPA treatment can reduce the crystallinity of the active layers.


J–V characteristics under dark conditions were measured and also provide some useful information on the morphology changes of the active layers. As shown in Fig. 5, in the reverse and low forward bias regions, the leakage currents of IPA treated devices are obviously elevated and the MeOH-treated devices only show slightly higher leakage currents than the control device. Though the increased roughness induced by solvent treatment can increase the contact between Al and the active layers, the traps in the active layer/Al interfaces also increase. Since the leakage currents are caused by pin holes and traps in the active layers and active layer/Al interfaces, the J–V characteristics under dark conditions indicate the worse morphology of active layers upon IPA treatment. In contrast, MeOH treatment does not increase the traps between the active layer/Al interfaces apparently.

In the exponential regime, which is at intermediate positive bias, there are two key factors depending on the shape of J–V characteristics: the ideality factor n and the reverse saturation current JD. The ideality factor n reflects the recombination behavior with respect to internal BHJ morphology, and this factor could be calculated from the slope of the line. Saturation current JD can be calculated from the y-axis intercepts, which reflects the number of charges able to overcome the energetic barrier in the reverse direction. The saturation current is caused by the diffusion of minority carriers (holes) from the neutral region to the depletion region, which is almost independent of the reverse voltage. All the parameters are calculated from fitting the lines and summarized in Table S4 (ESI). The results reveal that better overall diode characteristics can be achieved for the devices upon MeOH treatment, which show the lowest ideality factor n (1.49) and the lowest saturation current JD (9.51 × 10−9 mA cm−2). The results also indicate that the electron mobility can be enhanced after optimal MeOH treatment. However, in the IPA treated case, the highest ideality factor and saturation current can be observed, indicating the poor ability of blocking holes of the intrinsic photoactive layers and of charge transport.
At high voltages, dark currents are limited by the series resistance. The higher current densities indicate that MeOH treatment helps to decrease the series resistance therefore enhancing the electron transport in BHJ and/or at the BHJ/Al interfaces. On the other hand, the devices upon IPA treatment show the lowest injection current, suggesting the poorest electron injection and diode rectification effects.

To study the impacts of the solvent treatment on charge transport ability, impedance spectra in the dark are obtained. As shown in the inserted model in Fig. 6, the series resistance (RS) consists of the sheet resistance (Rsheet) of the electrodes and the charge transport resistance (RCT) related to the active layer/electrode interfaces and the active layers. As shown in Fig. 6, the RCT values of the DPPEZnP-TOM:PC61BM devices without alcohol treatment and with methanol and IPA treatments for 15 s are 45.54, 30.43 and 50.30 Ω cm2, respectively. The smallest RCT for the MeOH-treated devices indicates that the MeOH treatment improves the charge transport in the OSCs. In contrast, the devices upon IPA treatment show an even larger RCT compared with that of the control devices without any treatment, indicating that IPA treatment is detrimental to the charge transport, which is in line with the decrease of FF and J–V characteristics in the dark.


We also investigated the hole mobilities of the devices upon alcohol treatment using a device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/DPPEZnP-TOM:PC61BM/MoO3/Al by the SCLC (space-charge limited current) method. As shown in Table 2, the devices without alcohol treatment show a hole mobility of 2.76 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. MeOH and IPA treated devices show higher hole mobilities up to 6.99 × 10−4 and 4.64 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. We further measured the electron mobilities of the electron-only devices upon alcohol treatment with a device architecture of ITO/ZnO/DPPEZnP-TOM:PC61BM/Al. While the MeOH treated devices show an enhanced electron mobility of 2.16 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, the IPA treatment significantly reduces the electron mobility to 2.77 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1. These results are consistent with the Nyquist plot analysis that MeOH treatment is beneficial for the charge transport but IPA treatment is detrimental to the charge transport in the OSCs.

Treatment
Hole mobility (cm2 V−1 s−1)
Electron mobility (cm2 V−1 s−1)
Without
2.76 × 10−4
1.65 × 10−4
MeOH
6.99 × 10−4
2.16 × 10−4
IPA
4.64 × 10−4
2.77 × 10−5

We demonstrated that improved device performance can be achieved for the CIL-free OSCs based on DPPEZnP-TOM:PC61BM upon MeOH treatment. Interestingly, our MeOH treated devices even exhibit better performance than those with widely used PFN-Br CILs (PFN-Br: poly[(9,9-bis(3′-((N,N-dimethyl)-N-ethylammonium)-propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)]dibromide). As seen in Fig. S15 and Table S5 (ESI), the solar cells with PFN-Br CILs show a PCE of 8.55% with a Voc of 0.79 V, a FF of 65.99% and a Jsc of 16.20 mA cm−2. Compared with the devices without alcohol treatment and upon MeOH treatment, the improved FF can be ascribed to the better Ohmic contacts of active layer/PFN-Br/Al. However, the much larger Jsc of MeOH treated CIL-free devices than that of the devices with PFN-Br CILs indicates that MeOH treatment is much better to improve the charge dissociation, transport and collection in the devices than the introduction of PFN-Br CILs.


In summary, methanol treatment of the active layers is demonstrated to be effective to enhance the device performance of the CIL-free organic solar cells based on a porphyrin donor and a PC61BM acceptor. Multiple spectroscopic analyses reveal that methanol treatment can improve the charge dissociation, transport and collection by changing the films’ morphology. Furthermore, the methanol treated OSCs even show higher device performance than those with widely used PFN-Br CILs. Therefore, this study opens a wide avenue for fabricating efficient solar cells with simplified architecture but higher device performance.


Solution-processed bulk-heterojunction solar cells were fabricated as follows: ITO-coated glass substrates were sonicated in acetone, detergent, distilled water, and then isopropyl alcohol. After being treated with an oxygen plasma for 5 min, 40 nm thick PEDOT:PSS (poly(styrene sulfonate)-doped poly(ethylene-dioxythiophene) (Bayer Baytron 4083) layers were spin-coated on the substrates at 3000 rpm for 30 s and the substrates were subsequently dried at 150 °C for 15 min in air and then transferred to a N2-glovebox. The active layers, composed of DPPEZnP-TOM (or DPPEZnP-TEH) and PC61BM (1:1.2 w/w, 32 mg ml−1), were spin-coated on top of the PEDOT:PSS layers from a chlorobenzene solution with 0.4 vol% pyridine, and then the active layers were treated with the chloroform solvent vapor annealing (SVA) process. The thicknesses of the active layers were measured to be ∼100 nm by a profilometer. Methanol, isopropanol and PFN-Br methanol solutions were dropped on the active layers and then were dried by spin casting. Finally, Al (∼80 nm) was evaporated using a shadow mask as the top electrode. The effective area was measured to be 0.058 cm2. The devices for WF measurements were fabricated with the structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/DPPEZnP-TOM:PC61BM. The probes were placed at the surface of the blend films which were prepared under the same conditions as the active layers in the corresponding solar cells.

The hole mobilities and electron mobilities of the blend films were calculated by the space charge limited current (SCLC) method according to the Mott–Gurney equation. The hole-only and electron-only devices were fabricated with the structures of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/DPPEZnP-TOM:PC61BM/MoO3/Al and ITO/ZnO/DPPEZnP-TOM:PC61BM/Al, respectively. The blend films of DPPEZnP-TOM:PC61BM were prepared under the same conditions as the active layers in the corresponding solar cells.

The PCEs were determined from the J–V characteristics measured using a Keithley 2400 source-measurement unit under an AM 1.5G spectrum from a solar simulator (Oriel model 91192). Solar simulator illumination intensity was determined using a monocrystal silicon reference cell (Hamamatsu S1133, with KG-5 visible color filter) calibrated by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). The tapping mode atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements of the blend surface morphology were conducted on a NanoScope NS3A system (Digital Instrument). External quantum efficiency (EQE) values of the encapsulated devices were measured using an integrated system (Enlitech, Taiwan, China) and a lock-in amplifier with a current preamplifier under short-circuit conditions. The devices were illuminated by monochromatic light from a 75 W xenon lamp. The light intensity was determined using a calibrated silicon photodiode.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the grants from the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2017YFA0206602), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51773065, 51861145301 and 51473053), and the International Science and Technology Cooperation Program of China (2013DFG52740).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The synthesis and characterization of DPPEZnP-TOM, J–V curves and photovoltaic parameters of the OSCs at different MeOH soaking times, and AFM images of pure DPPEZnP-TOM or PC61BM films upon alcohol treatment. See DOI: 10.1039/c9tc01039d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019