 DOI: 10.1039/C6CP01163B
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 13918-13926


Prabhat
Gautam
,

Rajneesh
Misra
*,

Subhayan
Biswas
 and 

Ganesh D.
Sharma
*

Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Indore, (MP) 452017, India. E-mail: rajneeshmisra@iiti.ac.in

Molecular Electronic and Optoelectronic Device Research Laboratory, Department of Physics, The LNM Institute of Information Technology, Jamdoli, Jaipur 302031, (Raj), India. E-mail: sharmagd_in@yahoo.com; gdsharma273@gmail.com

Received
20th February 2016
, Accepted 16th April 2016
First published on 22nd April 2016
Herein, benzothiadiazole (BTD), as an acceptor A1, has been used as a backbone to link triphenylamine (TPA) as donor and naphthalimide (NPI) as acceptor (A2) moieties through ethylene linkers to design a small molecule. The donor–π–acceptor–π–acceptor (D–π–A1–π–A2) type small molecule denoted as TPA-BTD-NPI was synthesized. In order to use it as an electron donor for solution processed bulk heterojunction small molecule solar cells its photonic and electronic properties were explored. The small molecule organic solar cells based on the optimized blend of TPA-BTD-NPI with PC71BM processed in chloroform showed a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 2.21%, which was significantly improved up to 6.67%, when a two-step annealing (TSA) treated blend was used as an active layer. The increase in the PCE was due to the enhancement in both Jsc and FF. The improvement in Jsc was related to the enhancement in the light harvesting efficiency of a TSA treated active layer relative to the as-cast layer, which is reflected in a better IPCE and better charge collection. The TSA treatment also leads to better nanoscale morphology for exciton dissociation into free charge carriers and improved crystallinity for balanced charge transport.

Organic solar cells (OSCs) based on bulk heterojunction (BHJ) active layers have gained substantial attention because of their practical applications and their low cost fabrication. Since the first report on BHJ active layer based organic solar cells in 1995, significant advancements have been made, including the use of a conjugated polymer or a small molecule as a donor, design of new materials, and optimization of the active layer and device architecture, and their power conversion efficiency (PCE) has been increased up to 10%. The synthesis of D–A small molecules is simple and imparts remarkable versatility.

The PCE of an organic solar cell is directly related to the product of short circuit current (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc) and the fill factor (FF). Therefore, in order to achieve high PCE, it is required to design new electron donor materials that possess (i) a broader absorption range and narrow optical bandgap, (ii) a deep HOMO energy level and (iii) high charge carrier mobility. However, it is difficult to achieve a narrow bandgap without increasing the HOMO energy level. Therefore it is important to obtain a balance between the optical bandgap and energy levels via molecular design. The most successful approach to design low bandgap organic semiconducting materials is the fabrication of D–A structure by introducing an appropriate electron-rich moiety (D) and an electron-deficient moiety (A). In most of the small molecules with D–A structure, the HOMO and LUMO energy levels mainly depend upon the donor and acceptor units, respectively. Therefore, the incorporation of a strong electron donating unit and a strong electron accepting unit in the backbone leads to the enhancement of the HOMO energy level and lowering of the LUMO energy level, respectively, which may be an effective approach to reduce the bandgap and to extend the absorption band of the D–A small molecule. 2,1,3-Benzothiadiazole (BTD) is a strong electron acceptor unit having a high electron affinity and can be easily functionalized. Triphenylamine (TPA) is a well-known electron donating unit used for the synthesis of D–A small molecules. The phenyl groups of TPA are non-planar and the TPA based compounds can be regarded as 3D systems, which can be used for the formation of small molecules with interesting optical and good hole transport properties.
In this manuscript, we wish to report the synthesis, optical and electrochemical properties of a new D–π–A1–π–A2 small molecule consisting of a strong electron accepting (A1) benzothiadiazole (BT) core, a TPA electron donor (D) and a naphthalimide (NPI) acceptor (A2) linked by ethynyl π-linkages between chromophores, denoted as TPA-BTD-NPI. The triple bond containing a linkage between the donor and the acceptor is expected to enhance the extent of conjugation, which in turn is expected to improve the photoelectrical properties. TPA-BTD-NPI showed suitable HOMO (−5.30 eV) and LUMO (−3.36 eV) energy levels and it is used as a donor along with PC71BM as an acceptor for the fabrication of organic BHJ solar cells using a solution processing method. By using the as-cast optimized TPA-BTD-NPI:PC71BM (1:1), the solar cell showed an overall PCE of 2.21%. The device efficiency was further improved up to 6.67%, when the TSA treated TPA-BTD-NPI:PC71BM (1:1) active layer was used. The increase in the PCE has been ascribed to the increase in Jsc and FF. The increase in Jsc was attributed to the higher degree of crystallinity, increase in the light harvesting efficiency and improved exciton dissociation. The improvement in the FF was attributed to an increase in hole mobility, a more balanced charge transport and a higher charge collection efficiency.

The synthesis of an unsymmetrical donor–π–acceptor–π–acceptor (D–π–A1–π–A2) type small molecule denoted as TPA-BTD-NPI is shown in Scheme 1. Triphenylamine-substituted bromo-benzothiadiazole (TPA-BTD-Br) was synthesized by the Pd-catalyzed Sonogashira cross-coupling of 4-ethynyltriphenylamine with 4,7-dibromobenzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole. The Pd-catalyzed Sonogashira cross-coupling reaction of TPA-BTD-Br with 2-butyl-6-ethynyl-1H-benzo[de]isoquinoline-1,3(2H)-dione resulted in TPA-BTD-NPI in 85% yield.


TPA-BTD-NPI was well-characterized by 1H and 13C NMR and HRMS techniques (see ESI for details).

The solution processed organic BHJ solar cells were fabricated using the conventional structure glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TPA-BTD-NPI:PC71BM/Al. The indium tin oxide (ITO) patterned substrates were cleaned sequentially by ultrasonic treatment in detergent, deionized water, isopropyl alcohol and finally dried in air. A thin layer of PEDOT:PSS (30 nm) was spin coated onto the cleaned ITO coated glass substrate and heated at 100 °C for 10 min. Mixtures of TPA-BTD-NPI with PC71BM with different weight ratios of 1:05, 1:1, 1:1.5 and 1:2 in chloroform were prepared and then spin coated onto the PEDOT:PSS layer and dried under ambient conditions. For two-step annealing (TSA), the active layer was thermally annealed at 120 °C for 10 min and then cooled down to room temperature. The active layer was subsequently kept in a Petri dish in a chamber filled with THF solution for 10 min. The thickness of the active layer was controlled by the spinning speed during the spin coating of the active layer and was in the range 90 ± 5 nm. Finally, the aluminum (Al) top electrode was thermally deposited on the active layer at a vacuum of 10−5 Torr through a shadow mask of area 20 mm2. All devices were fabricated and tested in an ambient atmosphere without encapsulation. The hole-only and electron-only devices with ITO/PEODT:PSS/TPA-BTD-NPI:PC71BM/Au and Al/TPA-BTD-NPI:PC71BM/Al architectures were also fabricated in an analogous way, in order to measure the hole and electron mobility, respectively. The current–voltage characteristics of the BHJ organic solar cells were measured using a computer controlled Keithley 238 source meter in dark as well as under simulated AM1.5G illumination of 100 mW cm−2. A xenon light source coupled with an optical filter was used to give the simulated irradiance at the surface of the devices. The incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) of the devices was measured by illuminating the device through the light source and the monochromator and the resulting current was measured using a Keithley electrometer under short circuit conditions.


The UV-visible absorption spectra of TPA-BTD-NPI in dilute CHCl3 solution and in thin films are shown in Fig. 1. The absorption spectrum of TPA-BTD-NPI in solution shows two distinct peaks at 328 nm and 408 nm corresponding to the π–π* transition, and a strong intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) at 494 nm. In thin films, the absorption band corresponding to ICT is significantly red-shifted with an absorption peak at around 548 nm. This change is characteristic of J-stacking, which may be attributed to the ordered packing of TPA-BTD-NPI. Another absorption shoulder peak at 604 nm is also observed, suggesting effective π–π packing between the molecular backbones. The red-shift and the broader absorption band will be beneficial for the improvement of Jsc of the OSCs when used as a donor. The enhanced π–π interaction and the planarity of the molecule are desirable for charge carrier transport in OSCs. The absorption edge of the TPA-BTD-NPI film is at 685 nm, which corresponds to the optical bandgap of 1.81 eV.

The HOMO and LUMO energy levels of TPA-BTD-NPI were estimated from the onset oxidation and reduction potentials observed in the cyclic voltammogram (Fig. 2). The calculated HOMO and LUMO energy levels of TPA-BTD-NPI are −5.30 eV and −3.36 eV, respectively, corresponding to an electrochemical bandgap of 1.94 eV. The electrochemical bandgap is higher than the optical bandgap which is a general phenomenon in the organic semiconducting materials. The LUMO offset between TPA-BTD-NPI and PC71BM is 0.74, which is enough for efficient exciton dissociation and charge separation at the donor–acceptor interface. Moreover, the deeper HOMO level of TPA-BTD-NPI ensures the high Voc of the OSCs, since the Voc of BHJ OSCs is directly proportional to the energy difference in the HOMO of the donor and the LUMO of the acceptor.
We have performed the theoretical calculations by density functional theory (DFT) using B3LYP to understand the molecular geometry and the HOMO and LUMO energy levels of TPA-BTD-NPI. The contours of the HOMO and the LUMO of TPA-BTD-NPI are shown in Fig. 3. The estimated HOMO and LUMO energy levels of TPA-BTD-NPI are −5.11 eV and −2.99 eV, respectively.
The solution processed BHJ OSC was fabricated with a conventional structure ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TPA-BTD-NPI:PC71BM/Al, to study its photovoltaic properties. The active layers were spin coated from their solution in chloroform. We first optimized the photovoltaic performance of SM-OSCs by changing the weight ratios of TPA-BTD-NPI (donor) and PC71BM (acceptor), since there should be a balance between the charge transport and the absorption. The device based on a TPA-BTD-NPI:PC71BM blend with a weight ratio of 1:1 shows the best PCE. The I–V characteristics of devices with and without TSA treatment are displayed in Fig. 4a and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are compiled in Table 1. The optimized as-cast TPA-BTD-NPI:PC71BM (1:1) based device showed a PCE of 2.21% with a Voc of 0.94 V, a Jsc of 6.18 mA cm−2 and a FF of 0.38. The incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectrum of the device is shown in Fig. 4b. The IPCE spectrum closely resembles the absorption spectra of the TPA-BTD-NPI:PC71BM blend film (Fig. 5), indicating that both TPA-BTD-NPI and PC71BM absorb the photons and contributed to the photocurrent generation.
Active layer

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
sh (Ω cm2)

TPA-BT-NPI:PC71BM (as cast)
6.18
0.94
0.38
2.21
34.54
357

TPA-BT-NPI:PC71BM (TSA treated)
11.54
0.90
0.66
6.67
22.15
452
Although the Voc of the device is quite high, attributed to the relatively deep HOMO energy level of TPA-BTD-NPI, the values of Jsc and FF are very low due to the coarse morphology induced by the aggregation, which limit the PCE of the device. The I–V characteristics of the device based on a TSA treated TPA-BTD-NPI:PC71BM blend film are shown in Fig. 4a. After the TSA treatment of the TPA-BTD-NPI:PC71BM active layer, the PCE of the device was significantly increased to 6.67% with Voc = 0.90 V, Jsc = 11.24 mA cm−2 and FF = 0.66. The IPCE spectrum of the corresponding device is shown in Fig. 4b. As shown in IPCE curves (Fig. 4b), a uniform increase in the IPCE value across the whole wavelength region was clearly observed for the device based on a TSA treated active layer as compared to the device prepared from the as-cast counterpart. The value of Jsc estimated from the integration of IPCE spectra is 6.07 mA cm−2 and 11.12 mA cm−2, respectively, in agreement with the J–V characteristics of the devices under illumination. The improved Jsc and FF, attributed to the formation of better morphology with nanoscale phase separation, correlated to the improved charge transport and the reduced recombination of photogenerated charges in the active layer. The decrease in the Voc with TSA treatment may be attributed to the increasing intermolecular interaction between the TPA-BTD-NPI donor and PC71BM. The intermolecular interaction between the donor and the acceptor increases the Jsc and decreases the Voc. Therefore, we assume that TSA treatment increases the intermolecular interaction between the donor and the acceptor in TPA-BTD-NPI and PC71BM, resulting in a decrease in Voc.
The photoluminescence (PL) spectra of active layers also give information about the efficiency of exciton dissociation at the donor/acceptor interface in the device. The PL spectra of the pristine TPA-BTD-NPI and optimized as-cast and TSA treated TPA-BTD-NPI:PC71BM films are shown in Fig. 5. As shown in Fig. 5 the pristine TPA-BTD-NPI film showed a strong peak at around 718 nm. However, when PC71BM is blended with TPA-BTD-NPI, PL is quenched by 72%, relative to the PL of the pristine TPA-BTD-NPI film. Since the LUMO offset between TPA-BTD-NPI and PC71BM provides an adequate driving force for exciton dissociation, the low PL quenching is ascribed to the poor nanoscale morphology initiated by the aggregation of TPA-BTD-NPI, which reduces the exciton dissociation efficiency. The inferior exciton dissociation efficiency of the as-cast device results in a low Jsc observed for the device based on the as-cast active layer. However, the magnitude of PL quenching becomes higher (∼86%) relative to the pristine TPA-BTD-NPI film upon TSA treatment. The higher quenching means the active layer with TSA treatment reduces the aggregation of TPA-BTD-NPI. This facilitates exciton dissociation, which is consistent with the higher Jsc.
In order to investigate the effect of TSA treatment, the optical UV-visible absorption spectra of the optimized TPA-BTD-NPI:PC71BM blend with and without TSA treatment were measured (Fig. 6). As shown in Fig. 6, the absorption peak corresponding to the ICT band of TPA-BTD-NPI in the TPA-BTD-NPI:PC71BM blend film was slightly blue-shifted as compared to that for the absorption spectra of the pristine film, which might arise from the partially disordered stacking of molecules as compared to the pristine film. However, the TSA treated blend film shows a red-shift of 24 nm as compared to the as-cast blend film and a shoulder at 610 nm. The red-shift in the absorption peak is an indication of ordered structure in the film and the shoulder peak at 610 nm may be attributed to the enhanced π–π stacking and molecular interaction inside the TPA-BTD-NPI phase. These effects indicate that the light harvesting efficiency of the active layer was increased leading to the improvement in Jsc, as the Jsc of the photovoltaic device is directly related to the light harvesting efficiency of the active layer.
In order to get information about the modification in the crystallinity and molecular ordering of the active layer induced by TSA treatment, we have measured the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of CF cast and TSA treated blended films and shown in Fig. 7. As shown in Fig. 7, the as-cast blended TPA-BTD-NPI:PC71BM film showed a weak first order diffraction peak at 2θ = 4.34°, corresponding to a d100 spacing of 1.87 nm. The d100 spacing represents the in-plane spacing between the molecular backbones. After the TSA treatment, the intensity of this diffraction peak was significantly increased and the FHWM was reduced, indicating higher crystallinity, more ordered assembly and better molecular packing, which would be favorable for exciton dissociation and charge transport, and may be the reason for higher Jsc and FF.
The atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements in tapping mode were carried out to study the changes in the morphology of the active layer upon TSA treatment (Fig. 8). As shown in Fig. 8, large aggregates (∼100–200 nm in diameter) with a root mean square (RMS) roughness of 1.56 nm were observed in the as-cast TPA-BTD-NPI:PC71BM film, indicating large phase separation in the active layer that limits exciton dissociation. However, in the TPA-BTD-NPI:PC71BM film with TSA treatment, a more uniform and smoother morphology with a RMS roughness of ∼0.68 nm was observed, indicating better nanoscale morphology within the exciton diffusion length, beneficial for efficient exciton dissociation. This is fully consistent with the results of PL quenching.
The charge carrier mobility is also one of the important parameters that is responsible for the overall PCE of the organic solar cells. To determine the influence of TSA treatment on the charge transport within the active layer, we have measured the hole and electron mobilities using the space charge limited current (SCLC) method. We have used hole-only and electron-only devices with configurations ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TPA-BTD-NPI:PC71BM/Au and ITO/Al/TPA-BTD-NPI:PC71BM/Al, to estimate the hole and electron mobilities, respectively. The J–V characteristics of hole- and electron-only devices, in the dark, with as-cast and TSA treated active layers are shown in Fig. 9. Fitting these curves with a SCLC model, the hole and electron mobilities of as-cast and TSA treated active layers are found to be 6.58 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 3.36 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, resulting in a ratio of 5.10 between electron and hole mobilities. The imbalanced electron and hole mobilities may induce the formation of a built-in field which causes a nonlinear recombination and therefore reduces the charge collection efficiency. However, for the TSA treated active layer, the hole and electron mobilities are increased up to 2.48 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 4.13 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. The substantial improvement in the hole mobility may be attributed to the increase crystallinity and better molecular packing of the donor phase. The charge carrier mobility ratio is reduced from 5.10 to 1.66, indicative of the well-balanced charge transport and leading to improved FF. Moreover, the series resistance (Rs) and shunt resistance (Rsh) were calculated from the slope of the J–V characteristics of the devices under illumination around Voc and Jsc, respectively, and complied in Table 1. As illustrated in Table 1, the value of Rs decreased with TSA treatment which can be attributed to the balanced charge transport and hence an improved FF of the device. The Rsh is correlated with the leakage current and thus a slight decrease in Voc was observed for the device with the TSA treated film.
To study the effect of TSA treatment of the exciton dissociation and charge generation in the TPA-BTD-NPI:PC71BM blended solar cell, we measured the photocurrent density (Jph) as a function of effective voltage (Veff) and shown in Fig. 10. The Jph is defined as Jph = JL − JD, where JL and JD are the current densities under illumination and in the dark, respectively and Veff is given by Vo − Vapp, where Vo is the compensation voltage where Jph is zero and Vappl is the applied voltage. In the case of the as-cast device, the Jph varies linearly gradually and does not show any clear saturation in Jph with increasing Veff, indicating significant electron–hole recombination, where a stronger electric field is needed to sweep out the photogenerated charge carriers, which is consistent with the low values of Jsc and FF since Veff corresponds to the internal electric field responsible for the extraction of charge carriers. On the other hand, in the case of TSA treated active layer based devices at high Veff, the Jph saturates and the field independent saturation region suggests a reduced electron–hole recombination due to the more balanced charge transport and efficient charge extraction/collection. The Jph in the saturation region (Jphsat) is related to the maximum exciton generation rate, which is related to the maximum number of photons absorbed in the active layer. The devices with the TSA treated active layer showed a higher value of Jphsat compared to the counterpart devices employing as-cast active layers, indicating that more photons are being absorbed in the TSA treated active layer as established from the absorption spectra of active layers (Fig. 10). We have estimated the maximum generation rate of free charge carriers (Gmax) according to Jphsat = qGmaxL, where q is the electronic charge and L is the thickness of the active layer. The value of Gmax for the TSA treated active layer based device (1.23 × 1022 cm3 s−1) is higher than that of the device without TSA treatment (8.78 × 1021 cm3 s−1). The trend observed for different active layers is consistent with the enhancement of Jsc as well as UV-visible absorption coefficient, indicating more efficient exciton generation and separation in the devices with TSA treatment of the active layer. The charge collection probability (Pc) was estimated according to Pc = Jsc/Jphsat and is 0.61 and 0.83 for as-cast and TSA treated active layer devices, respectively. The large value of Pc for the TSA treated active layer based device is attributed to the improved phase separation in the active layer, increased hole mobility, improved balance in charge transport and improvement in the light absorption capability.

In this manuscript, we reported the synthesis of a new D–π–A1–π–A2 type of small molecule TPA-BTD-NPI with an optical band-gap of 1.81 eV and investigated its optical and electrochemical properties for its potential use as an electron donor along with the PC71BM electron acceptor for the fabrication of solution processed BHJ organic solar cells. The solution processed BHJ organic solar cell based on the optimized TPA-BTD-NPI:PC71BM (1:1) active layer cast from chloroform showed a PCE of 2.21% with Jsc = 6.18 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.94 V and FF = 0.38. In order to improve its PCE, we employed a two-step annealing (TSA) treatment of the optimized active layer and the resultant device showed an overall PCE of 6.67% with Jsc = 11.24 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.90 V and FF = 0.66. This improved PCE is attributed to the improvement in the Jsc and FF. This is a result of the greater IPCE response and compact domain sizes in the active layer, which lead to a more balanced charge transport and enhanced mobility in the BHJ active layer.


RM thanks CSIR and DST, New Delhi, for financial support. PG thanks CSIR for SRF.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Characterization data for BTD3 and BTD4, copies of 1H and 13C NMR and HRMS spectra of new compounds, DFT calculation data and electrochemical data. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp01163b
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016