 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA05955A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 20702-20711


Xuewen
Yin
,

Yu
Zhou
,

Jianhua
Han
,

Hui
Nan
,

Meiqian
Tai
,

Youchen
Gu
,

Jianbao
Li
 and 

Hong
Lin
*

State Key Laboratory of New Ceramics & Fine Processing, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P. R. China. E-mail: hong-lin@tsinghua.edu.cn

Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education for Advanced Materials in Tropical Island Resources, Materials and Chemical Engineering Institute, Hainan University, Haikou 570228, China

Received
21st June 2018
, Accepted 27th September 2018
First published on 27th September 2018
The performance of inverted perovskite solar cells (PSCs) based on graphene oxide hole transporting materials is still unsatisfactory due to the high degree of surface oxygen contents and the insulating properties. In this study, thickness-controlled and full-coverage graphene oxide films prepared using a layer-by-layer self-assembly technique are first developed as hole transporting layers for PSCs. Meanwhile, conductivity-tunable reduced graphene oxide films are in situ prepared using an environment-friendly and efficient reductant system. A superior PCE of 16.28% based on the as-prepared rGO is obtained, resulting in an increment by approximately 33% compared with 12.26% of the device based on GO-1 as mentioned. At the same time, this work reveals an anomalous charge-extraction behavior of PSCs based on GO or rGO HTLs. The competitive effect of interfacial recombination, charge transportation and radiation recombination in this process is proposed to analyze the internal mechanisms. This work provides a facile and novel method to prepare GO or rGO films, which can be used as efficient charge-extraction layers and even as electrodes in inverted PSCs.

In the past few years, perovskites have been widely investigated as light absorption materials for efficient solution-processed solar cells owing to their excellent optoelectronic properties, such as a suitable bandgap, small exciton binding energy, long charge-carrier diffusion length, and high light absorption coefficient (>104 cm−1). So far, high performance perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have been reported with both regular (n–i–p) and inverted (p–i–n) cell structures. Moreover, inverted PSCs are normally hysteresis-free and easy for flexible device manufacture due to simple solution-based fabrication at low temperature (<150 °C), and have been regarded as a promising photovoltaic configuration.

In inverted PSCs, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)–poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) is usually regarded as the most popular p-type hole transporting material (HTM) due to low temperature film-fabrication; however, PEDOT:PSS is detrimental for the long term stability of devices because of its hygroscopicity and high acidity. Recently, many metal oxides have been developed as potential candidates to replace PEDOT:PSS as HTMs in PSCs, such as NiO, CuSCN, CuO and CuI. Nowadays, more and more metal oxides used in PSCs can be prepared at low temperatures; however, to obtain a considerable power conversion efficiency (PCE), most metal oxides still need a high temperature crystallization process or a vacuum-process, which is not suitable for solution-processed flexible PSCs.
In general, graphene has excellent properties, such as ease of modification, high conductivity, and low cost, and has already shown great potential applications as charge-extraction materials and electrodes in solar cells. As an oxygen-containing derivative, graphene oxide (GO) is water-soluble and has already been proved to serve as an alternative for PEDOT:PSS in inverted PSCs. Meanwhile, devices based on GO HTLs have obtained a PCE of over 10% with better stability. However, the photovoltaic performance of PSCs with GO as the HTM is still not satisfactory due to their intrinsic disadvantages such as high degree of oxygen contents on surfaces and insulating properties. To solve this problem, an insulating GO film can be chemically or thermally treated to obtain reduced graphene oxide (rGO) to improve the conductivity of films, which can facilitate the charge transportation. Although thermal reduction is effective, flexible and transparent conductive substrates cannot stand such high temperatures during the reduction process. By contrast, chemical reduction is easier to perform. Up to now, hydrazine, sodium borohydride (NaBH4), and hydriodic acid (HI) have been widely employed to reduce GO quite completely. However, these reductants are relatively dangerous or toxic, as such, some are corrosive to conductive substrates, such as ITO. Thus, to develop a facile film-state reduction method for GO on acid-sensitive conductive substrates is critically important and difficult for high performance PSCs.
Recently, a Sn2+/ethanol solution has been developed as the effective reductant system for GO reduction. By using it, Zhi et al. obtained rGO films that hold a transmittance of over 82% with a relatively low resistance. In the reduction process, the Sn(OH)2 formed by a hydrolysis reaction of Sn2+ serves as an efficient reductant for GO reduction and the generated H+ can be a catalyst for the reduction reaction, which will lead to the reductant Sn2+ being oxidized by GO to Sn4+. At the same time, the residual Sn can achieve the p-type doping behavior, which has been certified to improve the conductivity of rGO films. In sum, this system is an in situ, environment-friendly, efficient, and low-cost reduction method for film-state reduction of GO compared with other chemical reduction methods. The obtained films can serve as hole-transporting layers (HTLs) and even electrodes in PSCs.
In addition, the general method to prepare GO thin films as HTLs for PSCs is spin-coating. Due to the insulating properties of GO, the photovoltaic performance of PSCs is extremely sensitive to the thickness of films. Thus, to obtain high efficiency, the concentration of the GO aqueous solution used must be as low as possible, which causes a problem in that the GO flakes cannot form a full-coverage and continuous film at such a low concentration, thereby causing the PCE of PSCs to worsen due to current leakage. The above problems can be solved using a layer-by-layer (LbL) self-assembly technique. LbL, referring to a method by which molecules and nano-materials spontaneously organize owing to direct/indirect interactions, is a structure- and thickness- controlled way to prepare multilayer films. More importantly, the LbL method is beneficial to large area device fabrication at low solution concentrations. Meanwhile, to the best of our knowledge, the application of LbL-assembled GO thin films used as HTLs in PSCs has not been reported yet.
Herein, we prepared thickness-controlled GO films using the LbL technique, and then the GO films were reduced using a green and safe reductant system, a Sn2+/ethanol solution. At the same time, conductivity-tunable rGO films were obtained by adjusting the reduction time. PSCs with structures of ITO/GO or rGO/perovskite/fullerene/BCP/Ag were fabricated to investigate the effect of HTMs on the performance of inverted PSCs, during which the conductivity, trap state and interfacial charge transfer properties were analyzed by using conductive atomic force microscopy (C-AFM), space-charge-limited-current (SCLC) measurements, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and photoluminescence (PL) measurements. An abnormal crystal orientation and charge transfer behavior between GO and rGO are observed and discussed in this paper. The competitive effect of interfacial recombination, charge transportation and radiation recombination in this process is revealed.


N,N-Dimethylformamide (DMF), chlorobenzene, CsI, PbI2 and PbBr2 were supplied by Alfa-Aesar. A polyelectrolyte, poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA) (Mw = 200000–350000 g mol−1, 20 wt% in H2O), and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. HC(NH2)2I (FAI) and CH3NH3Br (MABr) were provided by GreatCell Solar. [6,6]-Phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) and C60 were purchased from Luminescence Technology Corp. Spiro-OMeTAD was provided by Borun Chemical Co., Ltd. The remainder of the chemicals was supplied by Aladdin Co. Ltd., China. All the chemicals were used without any further purification.


Graphene oxide was synthesized by using a modified Hummers' method from natural graphite. In brief, 2 g flake graphite, 2 g NaNO3, and 96 ml concentrated H2SO4 were cooled in an ice-water bath. Under vigorous stirring, 12 g KMnO4 was slowly added to the above mixture at 0 °C. The solution obtained was stirred at 0 °C for 90 min and then at 35 °C for 2 h. Ultra-pure water (80 ml) was slowly added to the resulting solution drop by drop. Then 200 ml ultra-pure water was added followed by 10 /ml of H2O2 (30 wt%), and the stirring was continued for 10 min to obtain a GO suspension. GO was collected from the GO suspension by centrifugation at 4000 rpm for 10 min and then repeatedly washed with water until pH = 7. A sonication (100 W, 1 h) was employed to exfoliate the GO to obtain a GO suspension. To acquire single-layer GO sheets, a centrifugation at 12000 rpm for 10 min was used to remove thick multilayer flakes.


GO films were fabricated using the LbL technique. In brief, substrates of ITO or glass were cleaned with O2-plasma for 10 min to remove organic contaminants and obtain a hydrophilic surface. To assemble GO, ITO or glass with a positively charged surface was obtained by first immersing the substrates in a 0.2 wt% PDDA solution for 10 min. The substrates obtained were then rinsed completely with water and dried in a N2 gas flow. To assemble the GO flakes, the substrates obtained were then immersed in the above GO solution with a weight concentration of 1 mg ml−1 for another 20 min, followed by the same rinsing process. Successfully, one bilayer of the PDDA-GO film (GO-1) was achieved. The above processes were repeated to obtain the desired number of bilayers (GO-n) (n = 1, 2, 3, 4).

GO films were prepared by spin-coating a GO aqueous solution (0.2 mg ml−1) on ITO at a speed of 4000 rpm for 40 s. The obtained HTL prepared by the spin-coating method is labelled sGO.

The as-prepared substrate (ITO or glass)-supported GO films (GO-n) were first dropped with 100 μl SnCl2/EtOH solution (1 mol l−1 SnCl2·2H2O in ethanol) at a speed of 2000 rpm and dried at 60 °C, and then the substrate was put on a 60 °C hotplate for different reduction times (x = 2, 5, 10, 20), during which the solution was gradually dried and the GO film was reduced to a rGO film. Then, the film was washed with ethanol at a speed of 2000 rpm and dried at 60 °C for 30 min. The above processes were repeated to obtain the desired number of bilayers with different reduction times (rGO-x min or rGO-n-x min (n > 2, x = 2, 5, 10, 20)).


Perovskite precursor solutions were prepared by dissolving FAI (1 M), PbI2 (1.1 M), MABr (0.2 M) and PbBr2 (0.2 M) in an anhydrous solution of DMF:DMSO in a 4:1 volume ratio. Then, CsI, predissolved as a 1.5 M stock solution in DMSO, was added to the mixed perovskite precursor in a 5:95 volume ratio.


Substrates (CSG Holding Co., Ltd.) were cleaned in the solvents of deionized water, ethanol, acetone and isopropyl alcohol subsequently. Then, the substrates were covered with GO films by the LbL method or spin-coating. rGO films were obtained by using the above method. The perovskite precursor solution was then spun on the substrates at 1000 rpm for 10 s and 5000 rpm for 25 s; after 30 s, 100 μl anhydrous chlorobenzene was quickly dropped onto the center of the substrates, and then the substrates were heated at 100 °C for 30 min to form the mixed perovskite Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3, followed by the spin coating of mixed fullerene electron transporting materials (ETMs) at 1000 rpm. Subsequently, a BCP saturated solution in isopropanol was deposited on the obtained films by spin coating at 5000 rpm for 30 s. Finally, silver electrodes were thermally evaporated on the substrates.


Raman spectra are obtained using a HORIBA HR800 microscope with a laser wavelength of 633 nm. The morphology of the samples was characterized with a scanning electron microscope (Merlin, Zeiss, Germany). The C-AFM images were obtained in the contact test mode with a bias of 4 V applied to the samples (C-AFM, Cypher AFM, Asylum Research Oxford Instruments). Static and dynamic emission spectra were acquired using an Edinburgh FLS 920 instrument (Livingston, WL, UK). A picosecond pulsed diode laser with an excitation wavelength of 405 nm was available to record the emission decay curves for lifetimes in the range of 50–1000 ns. Ultraviolet-visible absorption spectra were measured with a Lambda 950 spectrophotometer (Perkin Elmer, USA). X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern data were recorded using a Bruker D8 Advance Diffractometer (40 kV, 40 mA, Cu Kα1, λ = 1.5406 Å.). XPS spectra are collected on an X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (ESCALAB 250Xi, Thermo Fisher SCIENTIFIC INC., UK). The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of PSCs were characterized with a digital source meter (2400, Keithley Instruments, USA) under AM 1.5 G illumination (100 mW cm−2), which was realized with a solar simulator (Oriel, USA, calibrated with a standard crystalline silicon solar cell). The incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra were measured by using a QEX10 solar cell quantum efficiency measurement system (QEX10, PV measurements, USA). EIS was performed at a potential of 0.7 V in the dark at frequencies ranging from 0.1 Hz to 100 kHz by using a Zahner system (Zahner, Zahner-Elektrik GmbH & Co., KG, Germany); the oscillation potential amplitude was adjusted to 10 mV.


The schematic diagram for the process of the LbL assembly of the cationic polyelectrolyte PDDA and anionic GO on ITO substrates is shown in Fig. 1. The ITO was first treated with O2-plasma to obtain a hydrophilic surface. Then, positive PDDA and negative GO flakes were separately assembled on the substrate through charge interactions. By repeating steps 1 and 2, we obtained multilayer GO-n films. The GO-n films were then reduced to rGO films by dropping the SnCl2/EtOH solution. Finally, the inverted PSCs based on GO or rGO HTLs were prepared by spin-coating.

To demonstrate the high efficiency of this preparation technique, Raman spectroscopy was used to test the properties of the deposited GO thin films on substrates. As shown in Fig. 2a, two major features associated with GO, a D band and a G band, are observed at around 1338 cm−1 and 1586 cm−1, respectively. Meanwhile, the increased intensity of Raman peaks with increasing LbL cycles also proves the increased film thickness during the LbL method. Transmittance spectra of the substrates deposited with GO-n films are displayed in Fig. S1. As the cycle of assembly increases, the transmittance of the film has a slight decrease compared with that of bare ITO glass. The devices with structures of ITO/GO-n or sGO/perovskite/fullerene/BCP/Ag are fabricated. J–V curves of the above devices measured under AM 1.5 simulated sunlight (100 mW cm−2) are shown in Fig. S2. The photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table 1. The devices with GO HTLs prepared by the spin-coating method display a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 17.32 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.917 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 52.58%, resulting in the best PCE of 8.35%. The obtained efficiency of the devices using the spin-coating method is equivalent to that of others. By comparison, PSCs based on GO-1 HTLs prepared by the LbL method show a large increase in Jsc and the FF, with a Jsc of 19.95 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.986 V, and a FF of 62.36%, resulting in a PCE of 12.26%. This enormous improvement in Jsc and the FF indicates that it is easier to obtain a full-coverage film with the LbL method than the spin-coating method at a low concentration of GO, which can greatly reduce current leakage caused by incomplete coverage. This proposal was further confirmed by the dark J–V curves as shown in Fig. S3, where both devices present a typical diode behavior. The device based on the GO-1 HTL has the smaller dark current density than that based on the sGO HTL, suggesting that the GO-1 film prepared by the LbL method has better coverage. However, when increasing LbL cycles, the Jsc, Voc and FF of the devices are decreased to 12.06 mA cm−2, 0.655 V and 39.57%, respectively, resulting in a PCE of 3.13% of GO-4 due to increased resistances of HTLs. Here, the steady-state PL spectra of perovskites interfaced with GO-n HTLs are recorded to evaluate the effect of the thickness of HTLs on the charge transfer as shown in Fig. 2b. The perovskite based on the GO-1 HTL shows the maximal PL quenching effect among the investigated films. These results indicate that increasing LbL cycles can improve the resistance of HTLs and thus makes it more difficult for holes to transport between GO layers.
ID

J
sc/mA cm−2

V
oc/V
FF/%
PCE/%
sGO
17.32
0.917
52.58
8.35
GO-1
19.95
0.986
62.36
12.26
GO-2
19.02
0.955
55.57
10.09
GO-3
17.57
0.915
39.08
6.28
GO-4
12.06
0.655
39.57
3.13
Nevertheless, the photovoltaic performances of PSCs with LbL-processed GO HTLs are still not well-pleasing due to the high degree of oxygen contents on surfaces and insulating properties of GO. To solve this problem, an environment-friendly and facile method is developed to in situ reduce GO films for obtaining conductivity-tunable rGO films. From the above results, GO-1 films are selected to evaluate the effect of reduction time on device performance. UV-visible spectra of the substrates are shown in Fig. 3a. Compared with bare ITO and the GO-1 film on ITO, the transmittance of the substrates covered with rGO films decreases as the reduction time increases. XPS is used to evaluate the effect of this reduction technique. Wide survey XPS spectra, and deconvolution of the C1s XPS spectra of GO and rGO films are illustrated in Fig. 3b–c and S4. The backgrounds are subtracted using a Shirley-type background, and all peaks are fitted with a Gaussian function. In the C 1s XPS spectra of GO and rGO with different reduction times, five different peaks centered at 284.5, 285.6, 286.7, 287.8, and 288.8 eV are observed, corresponding to sp2 C, sp3 C, C–O, –CO, and –COO– groups, respectively. In addition, the intensities of the peaks, ascribed to oxygen-containing groups (denoted as C–O at 286.7 eV), decrease distinctly with the increased reduction time as shown in the XPS C1s spectra. In contrast, the peak of sp2 carbon (284.5 eV) increases prominently as the reduction time increases, which indicates removing of the oxygen containing groups and good recovery of the majority of the conjugated graphene networks during the reduction process. To check the conductivity of the films after reduction, C-AFM is used to quantitatively measure the surface roughness and current responses of the films in the contact mode. As illustrated in Fig. 3d, f and S5, the height images of ITO and HTLs on ITO are obtained by 3D topographic mapping, which can be quantified using the root-mean-square of surface roughness (RMS1). In the meantime, the surface color distribution reflects the sign of the current distribution at a bias of 4 V. RMS1 values are 3.776, 2.859, 2.866, 2.887, 2.967 and 3.691 nm for ITO, GO-1, rGO-2 min, rGO-5 min, rGO-10 min and rGO-20 min, respectively. Compared with bare ITO, the RMS1 value has a slight decrease after depositing GO by the LbL method, while surface roughness increases with the reduction time since the GO slice is slightly curled up during the reduction process. From the color bar of the C-AFM images, it can be found that the white areas represent highly conductive parts in films, whereas the dark areas are related to less conductive parts. Root-mean-square of current (RMS2) values are obtained by C-AFM measurements to analyze the conductivity of the films. After depositing GO on ITO as shown in Fig. 3e, the conductivity of the substrate has a sharp decrease with the RMS2 value (Table S1) from 17.718 to 0.091 nA, which also confirms the full coverage of GO on ITO by using the LbL method and the insulating properties of GO. Obviously, the main color of the current mapping becomes lighter on increasing the reduction time, which can also be seen from RMS2 values. In brief, the RMS2 gradually increases from 0.099 nA for rGO-2 min to 10.129 nA for rGO-20 min, and the conductivity exhibits a hundredfold increase, which can largely improve the charge transportation capacity of HTLs. As illustrated in Fig. S6, current–voltage curves for devices with structures of ITO/GO or rGO/Ag are also measured to estimate the conductivity by linear-sweep voltammetry, which is consistent with the above results.
To investigate the effect of reduction time on the photovoltaic performance, J–V curves of PSCs based on different HTLs are shown in Fig. 4a, with the detailed photovoltaic parameters summarized in Table S2. We found that solar cells based on rGO HTLs show a higher Jsc, FF and Voc compared with that based on the GO-1 HTL. In brief, PSCs fabricated with rGO-2 min display a PCE of 13.75% with a Jsc of 20.59 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.071 V, and a FF of 62.31%. When increasing the reduction time to 10 min, the devices show the best performance with a Jsc of 21.46 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.060 V, a FF of 71.61%, and thus a PCE of 16.28%, resulting in an increment by approximately 33% compared with 12.26% for the device based on the GO-1 HTL as mentioned. However, increasing the reduction time sequentially seems to damage the device performance, as the PCE dropped to 13.67%. This originates from increased surface roughness and thus increased recombination as the GO slice is slightly curled up during the reduction process, which will be discussed later. IPCE spectra of PSCs based on different HTLs are recorded from 300 to 850 nm as shown in Fig. 4b. Compared with that of the devices based on GO HTLs, the increase in IPCE values from 400 to 700 nm could be ascribed to the enhancement of charge transportation capacity after the reduction process. The integrated current density derived from the IPCE spectra corresponds well to the results of J–V measurements. In sum, the tremendous improvement in the Jsc of the perovskite on rGO compared with that on GO is ascribed to the improved conductivity of the films after reduction, which can be confirmed by C-AFM and EIS as below. To elucidate the origin of such a prominent improvement in photovoltaic performance, we then moved to deeply investigate the optoelectronic properties and crystalline properties.
The morphology and microstructure of perovskite films on different HTLs are measured by SEM, and the results are shown in Fig. 5a, b and S7, along with statistical distributions and their Gaussian fitting (solid lines) of the perovskite grain sizes determined from the SEM images. A continuous, full coverage and flat perovskite film with a grain size of several hundred nanometers is formed by a chlorobenzene-assisted fast-crystalline method. The average grain size of the perovskite on GO is 183 nm. In contrast, the perovskite on rGO shows a larger grain size with an average grain size of over 200 nm and the grain size distributions become centralized than that on GO. To verify this point, the contact angle measurements had been utilized to investigate the surface properties of the HTLs with or without reduction. Fig. S8 shows the contact angle images of water on rGO and GO films. They are also an indication of the wetting capability of these surfaces to many polar solvents like DMF because of similar hydrophilic properties. The contact angles of water on HTLs are 46.0°, 42.9°, 59.4°, 68.5°, 70.1° and 72.5° for sGO, GO-1, rGO-2 min, rGO-5 min rGO-10 min and rGO-20 min, respectively. The contact angle becomes larger due to the decrease of oxygen-containing groups as the reduction time increases, which can be verified in the XPS test (Fig. 3b and c). Meanwhile, the surface with a larger contact angle possesses lower surface energy. It has been verified that the low surface energy of a HTL could suppress the heterogeneous nucleation, thus contributing to the increase of crystal grain size and the formation of uniform perovskite films.Fig. 5c and d show the typical cross-sectional SEM images of the devices based on GO and rGO-10 min. The thickness of the perovskite, PCBM, and silver is approximately 500, 70, and 80 nm, respectively. XRD patterns of perovskites on different substrates are depicted in Fig. 5e, and the strong Bragg peaks at 14.19°, 20.03°, 24.57°, 28.44°, 31.83°, 34.98°, 40.55°, and 43.13° could be attributed to (110), (200), (202), (220), (310), (312), (224), and (314) planes of the mixed perovskite with an orthorhombic Pnma crystal structure, respectively. Very impressively, the ratio of the peak intensity of (220) to (110) planes of the perovskite increases from 0.66 on GO or ITO to 0.76 on rGO, consistent with previous results for carbon nanotubes and graphene-decorated perovskites. As the (220) crystallographic plane of the perovskite has the relatively small surface energy or interfacial energy, such a preferred (220) grain growth is found to reduce the recombination, which can also be observed in perovskite films by the incorporation of Cl. In order to accurately evaluate the trap density in these devices, we have fabricated hole-only devices with structures of ITO/GO-1 or rGO-10 min/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag. Fig. 5f displays the typical dark J–V characteristics of the hole-only devices with different HTLs. The trap densities are calculated using the SCLC technique. The linear region at a low bias represents the ohmic response; the marked increase of the current injection at the intermediate region corresponds to a trap filling process. The trap density levels are filled by increasing the bias until reaching the trap-filling limit voltage (VTFL). The trap density can be estimated from the following equation:
(1)
where
e is the elementary charge of an electron (1.6 × 10−19 C), nt represents the trap-state density, L is the thickness of the perovskite film, ε (equal to 28.8 for the perovskite) and ε0 (8.85 × 10−12 F m−1) are the relative dielectric constant and the vacuum permittivity, respectively. The hole trap density is calculated to be 7.72 × 1015 cm−3 and 5.99 × 1015 cm−3 for perovskites on GO-1 and rGO-10 min, respectively. We consider that this reduced trap density is attributed to preferred (220) grain growth on rGO HTLs caused by the removing of the oxygen containing groups during the reduction process. In summary, perovskites on rGO HTLs with a larger grain size have low grain boundary densities, which can facilitate charge transport and thus enhance the FF. In addition, the decrease in trap density can enhance Voc by avoiding the recombination of holes on the interfaces of HTLs and perovskites.

The steady-state PL spectra of perovskites interfaced with HTLs are measured to evaluate the effect of GO and rGO with different reduction times on the charge transfer of HTLs/perovskites. As displayed in Fig. 6a, the perovskites show a luminescence peak at 766 nm, and the perovskite on GO-1 has the lowest luminescence intensity among the researched films. The PL quenching effect is ascribed to the fast capture of holes by the oxygen-containing functional groups of GO. The PL intensity increased with the reduction time. We fitted the dynamic PL decay time curves (Fig. 6b and S9) to an exponential (perovskite on glass) or bi-exponential decay function:
y = A1exp(−t/τ1) + A2exp(−t/τ2)
(2)
The fitting results are displayed in Table S3. In this function, the small decay time constant τ1 is associated with the diffusion time of the photogenerated carriers into defects. The large decay time constant τ2 reflects the radiative carrier lifetime of the perovskite on the HTM layer. A smaller value of τ1 indicates a faster trap-filling process at the interfaces of the perovskite and HTL. In this work, the perovskite on GO-1 has a minimum hole-extraction lifetime, τ1 (1.59 ns), which indicates the fastest diffusion process of the photogenerated carriers into defects. After reduction, the decrease of defects results in an increasing τ1, which is consistent with the above calculated results of defect density in Fig. 5f. A smaller value of τ2 means a faster hole-extraction process from perovskites to HTLs. The perovskites with graphene derivatives have a much smaller value of τ2 compared with that on glass (298.89 ns), indicating a strong hole-extraction ability. The perovskite on GO-1 has a minimum τ2 (20.16 ns), while the value of its τ2 increases with the reduction time, which comes from the capture of holes by the oxygen-containing functional groups. The abnormal results could be attributed to the interfacial recombination existing in the interface of the perovskite and HTLs, which will be analyzed as below.
EIS Nyquist plots, parameters and the simulated equivalent circuit model obtained under dark conditions at −0.7 V bias voltage of the devices with different HTLs are illustrated in Fig. 6c, with the enlarged figure of EIS Nyquist plots shown in Fig. S10. Two semicircles could be observed from the Nyquist plots. The higher frequency features of the impedance spectra are usually attributed to the charge transfer resistance (Rct) of the perovskite layer in the devices, though the second arc at lower frequency is generally connected with the charge recombination resistance (Rrec) at the interfaces of the perovskite and HTL. A small semicircle at higher frequency implies an efficient charge transfer process, which results in a small Rct. By fitting the Nyquist plots, the parameters of EIS measurements are obtained and are listed in Table S4. In general, the total series resistance (Rs) values of these devices are alike due to the similar device structure. The clearly different fitted Rct values of the devices with different HTLs of GO-1, rGO-2 min, rGO-5 min, rGO-10 min and rGO-20 min are 4173, 9538, 11036, 21558 and 22160 Ω, respectively. The smallest Rct of the device with GO-1 means the fastest charge transfer in that device, which is consistent with PL results obtained. However, the fitted Rrec values of 18047, 24726, 40330, 230660 and 91291 Ω correspond to the devices with different HTLs. The larger Rrec implies a smaller charge recombination. Due to the existence of a lot of oxygen-containing functional groups, the localized holes on oxygen atoms might enhance the possibility of charge recombination to occur at the HTL/perovskite interface. Thus, the improved Rrec is ascribed to the removing of oxygen containing groups during the reduction process and the decrease of the trap density of the perovskite on rGO HTLs. Considering device performance, obviously, the charge recombination plays a major role in this process. The reduction process not only improves the conductivity of the films, but also affects their work function and the band alignment, which is also related to the charge transfer dynamics. The band alignment is evaluated using ultraviolet photoelectron emission spectra, which can reveal the shift of surface energy levels. As shown in Fig. 6d and S11, the valence bands (VB) of the perovskite and GO thin film are −5.47 and −5.33 eV, respectively, which are in agreement with the literature values. Intriguingly, the reduction process shifts the surface ionization potential to values above that of GO. When changing the reduction time from 2 to 20 min, the VB levels are found to shift from −5.10 to −5.01 eV. The latter is close to graphene prepared by CVD. From PL and EIS measurements, it can be concluded that hole injection from the perovskite to GO-1 is more rapid, while its photovoltaic performance is worse than that of the devices based on rGO HTLs. To explain the anomalous behavior, a schematic picture is illustrated in Fig. 6d. The competitive effect of interfacial recombination caused by the oxygen containing groups and charge extraction capacity contribute to the performance of the devices based on GO-1. As the reduction time increases, the gradual decrease in oxygen-containing functional groups causes a reduced interfacial recombination, which can largely improve the photovoltaic performance. As the reduction time increases, the mismatch of the energy band level between perovskites and HTLs becomes large, which means a significant increase in radiation recombination (denoted as RR in Fig. 6d) between electrons and holes, thus influencing the performance of the devices with a large reduction time. Thus, the performance of PSCs based on rGO is a result of the interactions between interfacial recombination, charge extraction and radiation recombination. We can therefore understand how the most rapid hole extraction of GO produces the poorest performance compared to those of the rGO devices.
The device stability was evaluated through measuring the devices without encapsulation stored in an ambient environment with 40% ± 5% humidity. As illustrated in Fig. S12, for the device fabricated with rGO-10 min, more than 86% of the initial PCE value was maintained after 240 hours of exposure to air. However, the PCE of the devices fabricated with pristine PEDOT:PSS degraded to 57% under the same conditions. These results indicate that more stable devices could be obtained with graphene derivatives than with PEDOT:PSS.
At the same time, we also tried to use rGO films prepared by the LbL method and reduced by a facile solution reduction method as both the electrode and HTL in PSCs. The transmittance spectra of glass and glass/rGO-8–20 min are displayed in Fig. S13a. The sample (glass/rGO-8–20 min) shows a transmittance of over 70%. The device with the structure of glass/rGO-8–20 min/perovskite/fullerene/BCP/Ag is fabricated without using ITO, the J–V curve and cross-sectional SEM image for which are shown in Fig. S13b. A relatively low PCE of 0.67% is obtained due to the large sheet resistance of the rGO electrode, and lots of traps originated from chemical reduction. Next, reducing the resistance of the electrode and adding HTMs between perovskites and rGO films should be adopted to improve the PCEs of the devices.

We report a layer-by-layer self-assembly technique to obtain thickness-controlled and full-coverage GO films and then first used the films prepared as HTLs in PSCs. A decent PCE of 12.26% is obtained, which shows an increment by approximately 47% compared with 8.35% of the device based on sGO prepared by the most commonly used spin-coating. Meanwhile, to further improve the performance, conductivity-tunable rGO films are in situ prepared by a novel environment-friendly reductant system. Thus, a superior PCE of 16.28% based on the as-prepared rGO is obtained, comparable to those of the most state-of the-art high-performance PSCs based on rGO or mixed HTLs prepared by spin-coating as listed in Table S5, and this work also reveals an anomalous charge-extraction behavior of PSCs based on GO or rGO HTLs. To elucidate the origin of such a prominent improvement in photovoltaic performance between GO and rGO, the competitive effect of interfacial recombination, charge transportation and radiation recombination in this process is revealed to explain the anomalous crystal orientation and charge-extraction behavior observed. This anomalous crystal orientation and charge-extraction behavior observed are widely found in perovskites and carbon material heterojunctions. The mechanism proposed in this paper will give some guidance to those who are engaged in similar studies. Finally, LbL prepared rGO for use as an electrode in a PSC is also achieved. This work provides a facile method to prepare GO or rGO films, which can be used as efficient charge-extraction layers and even electrodes in inverted PSCs and a novel way to prepare full-coverage and thickness-controlled films by using even non-graphene materials for solar cells, LEDs and so on.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC, 51772166), the Projects of International Cooperation and Exchanges NSFC (51561145007), the Ministry of Science & Technology, P. R. China: Sino-Italy International Cooperation on Innovation (2016YFE0104000) and the National Energy Novel Materials Center (NENMC-III-1705).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta05955a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018