 DOI: 10.1039/C3SC51841H
(Edge Article)
Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 4389-4394
Qifan Yan, Yan Zhou, Yu-Qing Zheng, Jian Pei* and Dahui Zhao*
Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, The Key Laboratories of Polymer Chemistry and Physics and of Bioorganic Chemistry and Molecular Engineering of the Ministry of Education, College of Chemistry, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. E-mail: dhzhao@pku.edu.cn; jianpei@pku.edu.cn; Fax: +86 10 62751708; Tel: +86 10 62753973
Received 1st July 2013, Accepted 9th August 2013
First published on 9th August 2013
A series of PDI dimers featuring various arylene linkers are developed as electron acceptors in organic solar cells. Using P3HT as the donor, power conversion efficiency of up to 2.3% is achieved with two PDI dimers having spirobifluorene linkers. The results indicate that such non-planar, three-dimensional structures effectively suppress self-aggregation and crystallization of the PDI units, which is favourable for their solar cell performance.

Bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells (OSC) present distinct advantages as they are large, flexible devices, convenient for solution processing, low cost, etc. The best power conversion efficiency (PCE) of OSCs has recently been improved to exceed 10%. This was mainly achieved by developing new donor polymers and harnessing the tandem cell configuration. In contrast to the highly optimized and diversified donor structures, only fullerene derivatives are commonly used as acceptors. Very few non-fullerene electron acceptors have been investigated. In combination with commercially available donor polymers such as P3HT, the PCE of pertinent cells reached over 2%. In spite of the limited efficiency attained thus far, the inherent merits of organic acceptors, such as adjustable orbital levels, tunable electronic properties, stronger sun-light absorbing ability, better compatibility with organic donors and so on, are all compelling reasons for devoting research efforts in this area.

With low LUMO level and rigid, planar π-skeletons conducive to ordered molecular packing, perylenediimide derivatives (PDIs) are among the most intensively investigated organic structures for electron-transport semiconductor development. Relevant molecules have been applied to field-effect transistors as well as OSCs. Both bilayer and BHJ solar-cell devices have exploited PDI-derived acceptors. Compared with polymeric molecules, small-molecule PDIs are easier to purify, which is important for attaining stable material quality and reproducible device performance. With well-defined chemical structures, small molecules are also helpful for delineating the structure–property correlation and drawing molecular design guidelines.
In this contribution, we report a series of arylene-linked PDI dimers designed to function as electron acceptors in OSCs. The results not only reveal a number of new organic acceptors for OSCs, but also help gain a better understanding about how molecular structures influence the electron-transport aptitude of PDI-based acceptors in OSCs. This information is useful for future optimization of relevant acceptor materials.
Specifically, six different arylene linkers, para-phenylene, meta-phenylene, thiophene-2,5-diyl, 2,2′-bithiophene-5,5′-diyl, spirobifluorene-2,2′-diyl, and spirobifluorene-2,7-diyl, are employed to join the bay positions of two PDI units, forming dimers 1–6 (Chart 1). These molecules are designed based on the following considerations. According to previous studies, the strong self-aggregation propensity of PDIs causes undesirable phase separation from the donor component and is harmful to the photovoltaic process.PDIs featuring non-planar structures, which frustrate the intermolecular stacking abilities, are hence investigated in the current work. Our prior study demonstrated that due to steric congestions a significant dihedral angle was assumed by PDI and a phenylene group intimately tethered to its bay position. All current examined PDI dimers possess similar non-coplanar arylene linkers, which are expected to suppress intermolecular stacking and crystallization of PDIs. Moreover, electronic coupling between the PDI units is also disrupted significantly by these arylene linkers due to the non-planar geometry. Therefore, all dimers should manifest LUMO levels similar to that of the monomer PDI (Chart 1), which suitably complements the frontier molecular orbitals (FMO) of the donor, P3HT, ensuring a proper open-circuit voltage (Voc) of the OSC. Such a design strategy has proven successful, as all investigated dimers exhibited substantially improved PCE compared to the monomer PDI. Remarkably, spirobifluorene-linked dimers 5 and 6 achieved PCE up to 2.3%, which is among the highest values so far reported for PDI-derived acceptors using P3HT as the donor.

The synthesis of dimer 1 was reported previously. Dimers 2–6 were prepared via Suzuki or Stille cross couplings between monobromo-substituted PDI and corresponding diboro- or distannyl functionalized arylene reagents (see ESI). All dimers were highly soluble in common organic solvents, such as chloroform and ortho-dichlorobenzene (o-DCB). Such optimal solubility is attributed to both the branched 1-hexylheptyl side chains and the non-planar molecular scaffold of the dimers. Hence, solution processing can be performed with these acceptor materials for fabricating solar cells.


UV-vis absorption properties of these PDI dimers were recorded to assess their optical band gap and solar energy harvesting aptitudes. All six dimers show major absorptions between 450 and 600 nm, with perceptibly reduced band gap relative to that of the monomer PDI, as evidenced by the bathochromically shifted absorption onset (Fig. 1). The particularly narrow band gaps of 3 and 4 implied improved solar-energy harvesting efficiencies (vide infra). Regio-isomers 1 and 2 exhibited very similar absorption bands. Nearly identical absorptions are also manifested by regio-isomers 5 and 6. The absorption spectra of these dimers in thin films were similar to those in solutions, with insignificant differences in wavelength and band shape, indicating minimal intermolecular aggregations in the thin films (Fig. S3–S5).
Cyclic voltammetry (CV) provided specific information about the LUMO levels (Fig. S6 and Table 1) of the molecules. The first reductive potentials of all six dimers generally exhibited minimum difference from that of PDI, suggesting that none of the examined arylene linkers substantially perturbed the LUMO of the PDI moiety. Dimers 5 and 6 possessed slightly raised LUMOs, but the extent of elevation was trivial. Such results are consistent with our expectation that the linker groups should assume non-coplanar orientations with respect to the PDI units. Hence, the LUMOs of all dimers were maintained at a similar level to that of PDI, reassuring for adequate Voc of solar cells.
Compound
LUMO/eV
HOMO/eV
a Measured by CV.b Estimated based on optical band gap values from absorption spectra and LUMO levels determined by CV.c DFT calculated values in parentheses.
PDI
−3.74(−3.46)
−5.99(−6.00)
1
−3.74(−3.51)
−5.81(−5.91)
2
−3.76(−3.49)
−5.86(−5.92)
3
−3.77(−3.59)
−5.68(−5.81)
4
−3.75(−3.53)
−5.54(−5.73)
5
−3.71(−3.42)
−5.71(−5.72)
6
−3.71(−3.44)
−5.71(−5.76)
As the oxidation potentials were not attainable from CV, the HOMO energy levels were estimated based on the optical band gap and LUMO energy of the respective dimers (Table 1). Generally for all these dimers, the shrinkage of the band gap was as a result of the altered HOMO rather than the LUMO. Dimers 1 and 2 demonstrated slightly elevated HOMO levels compared to that of PDI. Although para-phenylene is generally more competent at furnishing electron coupling than its meta-counterpart, the similar FMOs of 1 and 2 corroborate the notion that para- and meta-phenylene units in 1 and 2 both adopted non-coplanar orientation relative to PDI groups and were ineffective at bridging the conjugation. Not surprisingly, the more electron-rich (bi)thiophene-linked dimers 3 and 4 manifested even higher HOMOs. Dimers 5 and 6 bearing regio-isomeric spirobifluorene linkers displayed nearly identical HOMO levels, slightly raised from that of PDI.
DFT calculations were then conducted to assess the conformations and FMOs of these dimers (Fig. S7–S10). The optimized conformations of 1–6 confirmed our anticipation that all installed arylene linkers assumed significant dihedral angles with respect to the PDI units, resulting in overall non-planar structures. It was also shown that the LUMOs of all six dimers were dominantly located in the PDI moieties, with little contribution from the linker groups. This explained the observed similar LUMO energy levels of 1–6 and PDI. The HOMOs of 1 and 2 received contributions from both the phenylene linkers and PDI units. In dimer 3, an increased portion of HOMO was located with the thiophene group, whereas the bithiophene linker in 4 was the predominant contributor to its HOMO. Consistent with the experimental results, very similar HOMO levels were calculated for 5 and 6.

Subsequently, the prepared PDI dimers were combined with P3HT and applied for OSC characterizations. An inverted cell configuration (ITO/ZnO/P3HT:acceptor/MoO3/Ag), first reported by Heeger et al., is employed for the current acceptors, as it proved to give superior performance to the classical device configuration. Specifically, a thin layer of ZnO was first deposited on top of the ITO-coated glass substrates. The active layer was then formed by spin-coating a solution of P3HT with respective PDI acceptor (1:1, w/w) in o-dichlorobenzene. Upon annealing the organic films at 100 °C for 15 minutes, MoO3 (15 nm) and silver anode (65 nm) were sequentially thermo-evaporated onto the active layer covered with shadow masks. All cells possessed an active area of 0.15 cm2 and were tested with AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).

With P3HT as the donor, the control molecule PDI gave a Voc of 0.51 V and Jsc of 1.12 mA cm−2. With a fill factor (FF) of 0.51, the PCE was determined to be 0.29%. This value was in agreement with that previously reported in the literature. With the same donor and under identical conditions, all six newly designed PDI dimer acceptors afforded greatly improved cell performance compared to the monomer PDI (Table 2 and Fig. 2). Specifically, PCEs ranging from 0.90% (2) up to 2.35% (6) were obtained.
Compd
μe/10−5 cm−2 V−1 s−1
Voc/V
Jsc/mA cm−2
FF
PCE/%
a Measured using space charge limited current (SCLC) method.
PDI
0.51
1.12
0.51
0.29
1
1.0
0.54
4.24
0.55
1.27
2
0.6
0.57
2.70
0.58
0.90
3
1.4
0.46
4.18
0.46
0.95
4
2.1
0.52
5.20
0.58
1.56
5
16
0.61
6.27
0.60
2.28
6
7.1
0.61
5.92
0.65
2.35
To further reveal the origin of the cells improvements, systematic analyses were carried out. First of all, although OSCs containing various PDI dimers all displayed comparable Voc values around 0.5 V, minor differences in the LUMO levels of the dimers were reflected in the Voc values. Specifically, dimers 5 and 6 with slightly elevated LUMO of −3.71 eV offered the largest Voc of 0.61 V. Such an evident Voc enhancement may also be related to the three-dimensional structures of the spirobifluorene linkers, which presumably suppressed the intermolecular interactions of PDI units more effectively. Dimer 3 possessing the most deepened LUMO exhibited the smallest Voc of 0.46 V. Other PDI dimers displayed intermediate Voc values.
The difference in the short-circuit currents (Jsc) of cells with these dimer acceptors was nonetheless more pronounced, ranging widely from 2.70 to 6.27 mA cm−2. Although all these Jsc values were more than double relative to that of the monomer PDI, such greatly different Jsc values reflected disparate charge separation and transporting efficiencies among dimers 1–6. Specifically, meta-phenylene linked dimer 2 afforded a small Jsc of 2.70 mA cm−2. With a FF of 0.58, PCE was determined to be 0.90%. The reason why 2 afforded the smallest Jsc among all six dimers was later found to be caused by its crystallization and phase separation from the donor (vide infra). On the other hand, its regio-isomer dimer 1 manifested a much enhanced Jsc of 4.24 mA cm−2, offering a more desirable PCE of 1.27%. Thiophene-linked dimer 3 exhibited a comparable Jsc with that of 1. However, due to the lowered LUMO and smaller Voc, it generated a lower PCE of 0.95%. In contrast, bithiophene linked dimer 4 conferred a considerably larger Jsc of 5.20 mA cm−2. This improvement was in parallel with its higher electron transport property (Table 2). Accordingly, bithiophene-linked acceptor 4 displayed a more favourable PCE of 1.56%. Most impressively, dimers 5 and 6 featuring spirobifluorene linkers demonstrated the most desirable device performance. As mentioned earlier, both these dimers offered the largest Voc of 0.61 V. Moreover, their Jsc values reached 6.3 and 5.9 mA cm−2 respectively. With FF values of 60% or more, PCEs of devices containing 5 and 6 reached 2.28% and 2.35%, respectively.
Electron mobilities in OSCs containing various dimer materials were measured by the space charge limited current method, which showed a roughly parallel trend to the Jsc values (Table 2). Namely, molecule 2 possessed a significantly lower mobility than all other dimers, while 5 and 6 exhibited two largest values.
Incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra were also recorded, showing that all examined active mixtures possessed very similar IPCE spectral shapes, which greatly resembled the absorption spectrum of P3HT (Fig. 3). This is because the absorptions of all active layers were mostly attributable to the P3HT donor (Fig. S11). The IPCE magnitudes displayed a correlation to the Jsc values. Dimer 2 exhibited the lowest peak efficiency, whereas the highest IPCEs were obtained from 5 and 6, with the peak values reaching ca. 38%. The mixture of P3HT:4 showed a moderately enhanced photocurrent in the longer wavelength region around 700 nm, owing to the perceptible absorption of 4 in this regime.

Self-aggregation and crystallization, which cause significant phase separation from the donor, were previously suggested to be a problematic issue for PDI derivatives when applied as acceptors in OSCs. Hence, previously studied devices based on P3HT:PDI derivatives mostly exhibited very limited PCEs. This detrimental effect of self-aggregation could partly be alleviated by attaching branched side chains to the imide groups of PDI. Now we demonstrate that incorporating sterically hindered substituents to the bay position of PDI and thereby conferring non-planar molecular structures can be an additional effective approach to solving the problem. Morphology studies afforded direct evidence for better compatibility of most currently studied acceptors with P3HT donor. Important information is also obtained unravelling the reason for the poor performance of dimer 2.

The surface morphology of active materials was first examined by atomic force microscopy (AFM) and optical microscopy. Spin-cast films of mixtures of P3HT with dimers 1 and 3–6 on an ITO/Zn substrate all exhibited relatively smooth surfaces (Fig. 4 and S12–S14). The film of P3HT:2 was however an exception, which showed large crystalline grains under the optical microscope. In Fig. 5, the evident red fluorescing chunks mainly contained crystallized 2, with the domain size reaching up to tens of a micrometer. Phase separation of such a large scale possibly caused low efficiencies in the exciton migration, charge separation and transportation processes, vastly detrimental to the cell performance. This explains the much lower Jsc of solar cells fabricated with P3HT:2 compared to all other PDI dimers. Such a small Jsc value is also echoed by the significantly lower electron mobility of 2 (Table 2).
The conclusion that crystallization and large-scale phase separation occurred with 2 but not with other dimer acceptors was further confirmed by the X-ray diffraction (XRD) characterization. Thin films of P3HT blended with different dimers were prepared on an ITO/ZnO substrate under the same conditions for solar cell fabrication. Films containing dimers 1 and 3–6 all exhibited nearly identical diffraction patterns, displaying a single, broadened reflection at ca. 5.3°, which corresponded to a d spacing of 1.7 nm (Fig. 6). At a comparable reflection angle of 5.5° (d = 1.6 nm), a relatively sharpened diffraction peak was observed for pure P3HT film on the same substrate (Fig. S15). Such d spacing values are consistent with the previously reported inter-chain distance of P3HT in the lamellar phase, and a similar d spacing was also detected for P3HT:PCBM mixture. However, the film of P3HT:2 displayed a distinct pattern. In addition to this broadened peak similarly observed for other dimers, another diffraction peak was displayed at 5.8°. As this additional peak was relatively sharp, it presumably originated from a disparate phase with higher crystallinity. In combination with the optical images of P3HT:2 showing large, red-emitting crystalline domains (Fig. 5), this additional diffraction signal is attributed to a segregated phase enriched with 2.
The absorption spectra of 2 collected in an aggregation-inducing hydrocarbon solvent provided additional evidence for its stronger self-aggregation tendency. Absorption band shape change was manifested at increased concentrations and lower temperatures, suggesting the occurrence of intermolecular aggregation in solution (Fig. S1 and S2).
As shown by the AFM and XRD characterizations, most arylene linkers investigated in this study effectively prevented large-scale intermolecular aggregation of PDI dimers. Molecule 2 was the only dimer that still manifested phase separation. DFT optimized conformation of 2 offered enlightening information clarifying why, unlike other dimers, this molecule uniquely maintained prominent self-association ability. Based on the calculation, the meta-phenylene linker was indeed oriented out of plane with respect to the PDI groups. However, under energy-minimized conformation, the two PDI units in 2 exhibited a nearly co-planar orientation, due to the unique bond angle imposed by the meta-phenylene linkage. A large, nearly planar aromatic surface void of steric hindrance was thus exposed, allowing 2 to undergo face-to-face intermolecular stacking (Fig. 7). None of the other dimers manifested such unique conformational features upon energy minimization based on the calculations.

Significant self-association and crystallization of the PDI derivatives introduce evident adverse effects in their application as acceptors in BHJ photovoltaic devices. The goal of the current study was to design and acquire suitable PDI-based acceptors void of such problems. PDI dimers featuring various arylene linkers are demonstrated to assume non-coplanar conformations. Such molecular scaffolds are harnessed to mitigate the self-aggregation and crystallization propensities. When a series of PDI dimers designed according to such criteria are applied to OSCs as acceptor materials, greatly improved solar cell performances are achieved compared to the corresponding monomer. Among all studied dimer acceptors, m-phenylene linked molecule 2 exhibits relatively poor photovoltaic properties. Our study shows that this molecule still possesses an evident inclination to self-aggregate and crystallize. On the other hand, spirobifluorene linkers appear to be particularly beneficial for electron transport and overall solar cell performance. With P3HT as a donor, dimers 5 and 6 featuring such spacers manifested the highest Jsc among all studied acceptors, with their PCE reaching 2.3%.

It should be noted that one-dimensional, face-to-face packing of aromatic units is proven favourable for unidirectional carrier transport in OFET and pertinent devices. However in BHJ OSCs, too strong π–π interactions could induce material crystallization and cause inappropriate phase separation, resulting in lower device efficiency. Moreover, due to the typically disordered donor–acceptor phase distributions in BHJ devices, unidirectional charge transport may not be sufficient. Formation of inter-connected charge transport channels of higher dimensions is necessary. By effectively frustrating one-dimensional stacking of the molecules, the spirobifluorene groups in 5 and 6 might facilitate the formation of such an electron-transport network.
In summary, the current study confirms that strong intermolecular aggregation of PDI derivatives disfavours the formation of appropriate active-material morphology and is thus detrimental to OSC performance. By designing and installing suitable steric-demanding substituents on PDI, crystallization and large-scale phase segregation of the acceptor can be effectively suppressed, affording more desirable photovoltaic properties. Further studies are underway to seek alternative donor polymers, which better complement the current acceptors for achieving further optimized solar cell performance.

The work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Projects 21174004, 21222403 and 51073002).

† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Synthesis, characterization, device fabrication, and calculation details. See DOI: 10.1039/c3sc51841h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013