 DOI: 10.1039/D0NJ06067D
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2021, 45, 2734-2741


Maciej
Barłóg
,

Cagdas
Yavuz
,

Abdulrahman K.
Ali
,

Zafer
Kandemir
,

Marc
Comí
,

Hassan S.
Bazzi
,

Mohammed
Al-Hashimi
* and 

Sule
Erten-Ela
*

Department of Chemistry, Texas A&M University at Qatar, P.O. Box 23874, Doha, Qatar. E-mail: mohammed.al-hashimi@qatar.tamu.edu

Institute of Solar Energy, Ege University, Izmir, 35100, Turkey. E-mail: sule.erten@ege.edu.tr; suleerten@yahoo.com

Department of Mechanical Engineering, Eskisehir Technical University, Eskisehir, 26555, Turkey

Received
13th December 2020
, Accepted 12th January 2021
First published on 14th January 2021
The synthesis, characterisation and photovoltaic performance of an indacenodithiophene (IDT)-based organic dye in DSSCs has been presented. The dye was designed with a novel A–D–A system, which combines the advantages of a large, π-extended donor core, flanked with double acceptor/anchoring groups. The studies presented herein illustrate the utility of the IDT core as an efficient energy-level mediator, and fluorescence resonance energy-transfer module operating via intramolecular charge transfer (ITC). In contrast to the current dyes used for DSCCs, the excitation in the IDT moiety occurs symmetrically along the long axis of the molecule, representing a new pathway of development of DSSCs. This compact system when fabricated into a metal free dye sensitized solar cell achieves promising power conversion efficiency of up to 4.2%, with a high short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 11.69 mA cm−2 and open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.6 V and fill factor (FF) of 0.6 under AM 1.5 irradiation (100 mW cm2).

Rapid progress in solar-energy harvesting has led to the development of new photovoltaic materials over the last three decades. The idea of a photovoltaic cell mimicking the principle of photosynthesis in plants by replacing the chlorophyll with light absorbing dyes was first presented in 1991 by O’Regan and Gratzel. Ever since then the dye sensitized solar cell (DSSC) has become one of the major third generation solar technologies attracting attention with a facile fabrication process, low cost, and efficient solar-energy conversion. DSSCs are now surpassing 14% power conversion efficiency (PCE), thus, in line with the current organic solar cell performance. In a typical DSSC device the solar radiation absorbed by the photosensitizer is transferred via an electrolyte, and collected by a semiconductor. The efficiency of the process was improved by choice of chromophore, morphology of the semiconductors, electrical properties of the electrolytes and the type of electrode. The current materials reported for the highest performing DSSCs are based on utilizing the classical design strategies of D–π–A systems. Currently metal-free organic photosensitizers are represented predominantly by electron-rich and electron-poor moieties connected through a conjugated (π) bridge in a push–pull D–π–A structure in order to enhance the photoinduced intramolecular charge transfer (ICT). Classical D–π–A type moieties have gained popularity due to the ease of tuning the optoelectronic properties through alternations of the donor and acceptor units with a variety of π linkers. Indacenodithiophene (IDT) and its analogues are renowned for their highly desirable photo-physical and electronic properties, such as low degree of energetic disorder having high electron density and carrier mobilities. IDT and its analogues have played a role in A–D–A type systems with non-fullerene small molecules acceptors regularly exhibiting PCEs above 14%. The strong push–pull effect from this class of acceptors is due to its low-lying highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level, which can afford both high open-circuit voltage and short-circuit current density on the device, with efficient exciton generation, suppressed bimolecular charge recombination and enhanced charge transport. In 2018 Liu and co-workers reported a series of organic dyes based on the IDT core exhibiting a maximum PCE of 11.2%, with a high VOC of 1.14 V and JSC of 13.0 mA cm−2 under standard AM 1.5G sunlight.

Our approach presented herein is focused on mimicking the structure of a dye inspired by the construction of small molecule acceptors. We have utilized a chromophore based on the IDT core having a large fused electron rich molecular orbital, with additional delocalization through the adjacent phenyl groups. We have demonstrated the proof of concept of how the extended conjugation of the electron rich core can replace classical donors of aniline derivatives, thus affording a new class of photosensitizers.

Indacenodithiophene dibenzoic acid (IDT-DBA) was conveniently prepared, by Stille coupling, followed by saponification with LiOH solution as depicted in Scheme 1. For the detailed procedures and spectra see the ESI, section. This straightforward synthetic pathway provides excellent tunability of the dye via changing the D–A modules, while retaining the reaction sequence.

The UV-vis absorption spectra of IDT-DBA in various solvents are depicted in Fig. 2. The dye exhibits two distinguished absorption maxima, one in the range of 421–426 nm and the second at 440–446 nm (Fig. 2a). The first peak can be attributed to the ICT excitation of the electron-donor moiety conjugation. The presence of this peak in polar solvents indicates change in dipole moment between the ground and excited states, driven by π-electronic decoupling of the D and A subunits leading to a full charge separation in the excited state. The second absorption band corresponds to π–π* electronic transitions (HOMO to LUMO). The dye exhibits the highest absorption in polar coordinating solvents, such as THF and acetone, but weakening in MeOH. Various solvent properties affect the electronic ground state and excited state of the dye in the solution, and altering the size of the energy gap between them changes as the solvent changes. This is visible both in the absorption and emission spectrum of the solution illustrated by the difference in intensity, and shape of the spectroscopic bands. The dye shows low absorption in nonpolar solvents such as CH2Cl2 (dielectric constant ε 8.93) presumably due to the low stabilization of the excited state, opposite to when a more polar solvent such as THF is used, despite its slightly lower ε of 7.58. On the other hand, when using highly polar protic solvents such as MeOH, the excitation of the fluorophore is efficiently quenched, as a result of the extensive solvent reorganization around the newly created charge-transfer excited state via a hydrogen-bonded network.
Interestingly, as depicted in Fig. 1b the dye is highly emissive in solution, clearly visible by the naked eye under ambient light, but this effect disappears in the solid state. This photoluminescence suggests strong ICT properties alongside other transitions observed in similar A–D–A systems. Indeed, when illuminated with 425 nm light the solution exhibits intensive photoluminescence with blue-shifted peaks in the range of 579–599 nm depending on the solvent used. This unusually high 154–174 nm Stokes shift (SS) corresponding to Raman wavenumbers between 6258 and 6839 cm−1 and energy difference of the ground and excited states of 776 to 848 meV suggests substantial charge transfer within the molecule. This value was assigned to a change in the dipole moment between the ground and excited state in polar solvents driven by π-electronic decoupling of the D and A subunits leading to a full charge separation in the excited state. In this way the photoexcitation facilitates the efficient transfer of an electron from the electron rich donor fragment of a molecule to its acceptor in the excited state. This results in the charge distribution of the excited state marked by the difference in the ground state. The ICT character of the excited state of this class of A–D–A materials is the main factor of their unusual optical and electronic properties. It is known that highly efficient luminescent solar concentrators (LSCs) require the design of luminophores having complete spectral separation between absorption and emission spectra (large Stokes shift). The extent of the shift, and thus CT, depends on the electronic nature and molecular geometry of the D and A units, favouring fused IDT like structures with a large planar π system. Therefore, efficient D–A fluorophores often feature rigid, planar and easily polarizable conjugated moieties allowing large changes in the distribution of the charge upon optical excitation. The enhanced degree of conjugation in the coplanar molecular backbone is the source of highly efficient photoluminescence, and remarkable hole mobility. We believe that the electron rich, low resonance energy of the IDT core when flanked with accepting moieties is capable of twisting, bending, or planarizing in their excited state, due to the possible quinoidal form of the IDT unit as depicted in Fig. 2.
Further analysis to evaluate the electrochemical properties and HOMO/LUMO energy levels of IDT-DBA dye was performed using cyclic voltammetry (CV) as illustrated in Fig. 3. The measurement was carried out using 0.1 M tetrabutylammonium tetrafluoroborate as an electrolyte in acetonitrile solution and Pt was used as the electrode. The HOMO energy level was calculated from the onset oxidation potential value relative to ferrocene (Fc/Fc+, i.e, −4.8 eV below vacuum level) using an Ag/AgCl reference electrode. IDT-DBA exhibits an onset oxidation potential (Eox) at 0.75 eV, which represent a HOMO energy level of −5.10 eV. The LUMO energy level at −2.7 eV was calculated by Eox – E0–0, where E0–0 is estimated from the inflection point at the band edge of the absorption spectrum for IDT-DBA (2.4 eV). The results of the HOMO/LUMO energy levels obtained for IDT-DBA confirm a suitable energy level that matches with the conduction level of TiO2 particles for the electron transfer in DSSC devices.

Photo-electrode PE was prepared by deposition on pre-cleaned FTO glass (Solaronix) of a gel paste of titanium oxide TiO2 nanoparticles (TEC15, Dyesol), by the Doctor Blade method. After annealing the TiO2 films at 500 °C for 35 min, a mesoporous thickness around 11 μm was obtained. Then, the TiO2 was immersed in the dye solution (chlorobenzene:acetonitrile:t-butanol; 3:1:1 volume ratio) for 24 hours. After that, it was rinsed and dried carefully using an argon flux. The counter electrodes CE were prepared by deposition of platinum gel (Pt–Dyesol) on FTO, after which the Pt film was annealed to 480 °C for 15 minutes. The DSSC device was fabricated by assembling PE and CE together using thermoplastic as the sealant cascade. The iodide electrolyte (dyesol) was injected through the predrilled hole in the CE, using a vacuum pump. Finally, Surlyn and cover glass were used to seal the hole. The overall performance of the DSSC device depends on the light absorption capability of the dye chromophore and efficiency of diffusion of the ejected electrons through the mesoporous TiO2 film. The optical properties of the dye absorbed on the TiO2 were investigated using UV-vis spectrometry: bare TiO2 and IDT-DBA/TiO2 films are illustrated in Fig. 4.

Mechanistically the multipoint grafting provides better stability of the chromophore on the surface of the photoanode, effective suppression of intermolecular interactions and charge recombination. The accepting groups also bearing the anchoring function influence the binding strength of the dye on the TiO2, which determines the long term stability and electron injection efficiency. The dye exhibits high absorption coefficient in the high energy region of the visible electromagnetic spectrum. Additionally, the presence of the two carboxylic anchoring groups on the flanking acceptors enables convenient adsorption onto the surface of the TiO2 combined with the enhanced grafting stability. This adsorption facilitates the transfer of the injected electron from the dye to the conduction band of TiO2 ultimately enhancing the efficiency of the device. The wide band gap of bare TiO2 (4.0 eV) does not absorb visible light, while the dye's main absorption band is between 400 and 450 nm. The absorption for IDT-DBA deposited on TiO2 is changed and clearly visible in the spectrum with a slight blue shift observed in the maximum wavelength. This can be assigned to the deprotonation of the dye upon anchoring onto the surface of the semiconductor.
The photovoltaic characteristics (I–V) for the prepared DSSC are examined using sun-simulator illumination under AM1.5 (100 mW cm−2) conditions employing a Xenon lamp (450 W, Oriel) as the light source. I–V data have been recorded via LabView. The incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) as a function of the incident wavelength was recorded using Enlitech equipment. EIS measurements were examined on a Zahner (Germany, IM6).

Fig. 5 summarizes the photovoltaic characteristics of the IDT-DBA dye based DSSC, and the optimized conditions under sun-simulator illumination. As shown in Fig. 5a, the short-circuit photocurrent density (Jsc), open-circuit photovoltage (Voc), and fill factor (FF) of the device with an acetonitrile-based electrolyte under an irradiance of AM 1.5G full sunlight are 11.69 mA cm−2, 0.6 V, and 0.6, respectively, achieving an overall conversion efficiency of 4.2%. The incident photon-to collected electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) exceeds 30% in the range from 410 to 450 nm, which is in good agreement with the absorption band (Fig. 1a). EIS measurements further support the interior charge resistance and electron lifetime τe in DSSCs. The Nyquist plot of DSSCs is summarized in Fig. 6a. The utilized frequencies are in the range at mHz–MHz and intensity is fixed at 10 mV. Fig. 6 depicts two circles: the first one at high frequencies (103–106 Hz) which applies to the charge transfer resistance (RCE) at the iodide/Pt interface of CE. The second circle depicted at medium frequencies (1–100 Hz), describes the charge transfer resistance (RPE) at the electrolyte/dye based TiO2 interface at PE. The serial resistance (RS) is related to the Ohmic resistance of contact between FTO and the electrodes. Fig. 6b summarizes the EIS measurement of the Bode plot of DSSCs. Two peaks were detected at low and high-frequency. The frequency at maximum (fmax) can be determined from the second peak at maximum in the Bode plot (Fig. 6b). The τe can be estimated from fmax using eqn (1) and the electron recombination rate Keff can be estimated using eqn (2).
(1)
(2)
In this work, an equivalent circuit that lists the modification of the one proposed by Bisquert was used. Here, the circuit suggests five parts, which are Rs, RCE, RPE, Cμ and CPE; Cμ is defined as chemical capacitance of the TiO2-photo-anode and electrolyte interface, while Cce corresponds to the chemical capacitance of the electrolyte and the Pt-counter electrode interface. Furthermore, CPE and Cμ correspond to RPE and RCE, respectively and can be calculated from eqn (1) below:
(3)
The
RCE, RPE, τe and Keff of the IDT-DBA based DSSC are calculated and listed in Table 1. This clearly illustrates that a longer τe (1.27 ms) provides enough time to efficiently gather more electrons which can minimise the recombination probability. Moreover, PT-DSSC show significant enhancement in RCE (206 Ω), RPE (555 Ω) and τe (1.27 ms), attributed to efficient electron transport and attaining credible electrochemical characteristics. Additionally, the DSSC displays good Keff of 787 s−1 attributed to the enhanced supply of the electrons to the counter electrode and how quickly the dye regenerates. We assume that these properties derive from the efficient ITC process resulting in longer excited state lifetime stabilized by delocalization along the long axis of the dye.

Cells

R
S (Ω)

R
CE (Ω)

R
PE (Ω)

f
max (Hz)

τ
e (ms)

K
eff (s−1)

C
μ (μF)

C
PE (μF)

IDT-DBA

13
206
555
125
1.27
787
180
85

The molecular structure of an IDT-DBA dye molecule was optimized at the levels of the B3LYP hybrid and PBE0 exchange–correlation functional with the 6-31G(d,p) basis set in the gas phase. In the density functional theory (DFT) method, the B3LYP hybrid functional consists of Becke's three parameters exchange functional (B3) combined with Lee, Yang and Parr (LYP) correlation functional. All the DFT calculations are performed by using the Gaussian 09 package program. The optimized geometries of the IDT-DBA dye molecule at the levels of PBE0 and B3LYP with the 6-31G(d,p) are shown in Fig. 7. The molecular structures of the IDT-DBA dye molecule are demonstrated by using the GaussView 5 package program. The atom labels and symbols for this dye molecule are shown in Fig. S1 (ESI) by using the GaussView program. Bond lengths, bond angles and dihedral angles of this dye molecule are given in Table S1 (ESI) for the B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) level, and in Table S2 (ESI) for the PBE0/6-31G(d,p) level. Finally, optimized Cartesian coordinates of the IDT-DBA dye molecule are given in Table S3 (ESI) for the B3LYP and PBE0 functionals with the 6-31G(d,p) basis set.

Optimized structure of the IDT-DBA dye obtained with both methods reveals complete planarity of the core with terminal accepting benzoic acid groups. The planar p-bridge benefits the delocalization over the molecular orbital facilitating electron migration from the donor to acceptor moieties. The large rigidified fused aromatic p-spacer is expected to have small reorganization energy when photoexcited translating to improved stability of the dye. Overall, the structure of the dye exhibits desired features for efficient light harvesting, charge transport, and photovoltaic performance in the DSSCs. The frontier molecular orbitals (FMOs) describe the interactions between the HOMO and the LUMO. After the molecular structure optimization, the FMOs help to understand the electronic properties and orientations of the IDT-DBA dye molecule. The FMOs of the IDT-DBA dye molecule are obtained with the B3LYP method and visualized using the GaussView program. Representation of the frontier HOMO, HOMO−1 and LUMO, and LUMO+1 orbitals are depicted on Fig. 8. To provide efficient regeneration of the dye cation radical, the HOMO levels of the dye should be lower than the I−/I3− redox couple (−4.80 eV vs. vacuum). Simultaneously, to provide enough thermodynamic driving force for the electron injection from the excited state dye to the TiO2 conduction band edge, the LUMO levels of the dye should lie above the TiO2 conduction band edge (−4.00 eV vs. vacuum). As shown in Fig. 8, the energy values of the first two HOMO levels are −4.98 eV and −5.98 eV and the energy values of the first two LUMO levels are −2.45 eV and −1.79 eV for the B3LYP hybrid functional, meeting the above criteria. The energy bandgap of the IDT dye molecule was calculated for 2.53 eV for the B3LYP method. DFT studies revealed an increase in the dipole moment of the excited state suggesting a pronounced charge delocalization during the HOMO–LUMO transition, in line with ICT observed.
The absorption results, excitation energies and oscillator strengths of the IDT-DBA dye molecule are obtained from time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) for two different B3LYP functionals with the 6-31G(d,p) basis set. These results are listed in Tables 2 and 3 in the gas-phase. The first three excited states (S0 → S1, S0 → S2 and S0 → S3) are calculated for two different energy functionals. Both energy functionals revealed the very high oscillator strengths of transitions from the ground state to the first excited state (1.84 and 1.89), indicating the molecule as an efficient sensitizer. For the B3LYP method, the IDT-DBA dye molecule has low electron affinity energy and high energy of ionization potential, so it shows high electrophilic properties. The electrophilicity index of the dye molecule is 5.46 eV. The calculation illustrates how the HOMO is delocalized over the fused system of the IDT while the LUMO is delocalized equally over the whole conjugated system, moving mainly over the carboxylic groups in LUMO+1. It is worth mentioning that TDDFT calculations confirm the occurrence of the second transition at 83 and 90%. This suggests that the photoinduced electron injection over the carboxylic groups to the conduction band of TiO2 can efficiently occur by highly preferred HOMO–LUMO transitions. These results also support the quinoidal form of the molecule in the excited state, providing additional stabilization of the conjugated system in the exited state LUMO and LUMO+1.
Excited states

λ
 (nm)

E
 (eV)

f


Transitions

a Wavelength of excited states.
b Excitation energy.
c Oscillator strength.
d Data given in parentheses are 2 × (CI coefficient)2 × 100%.


1
st (S0 → S1)
531.39
2.33
1.8415
HOMO → LUMO (99.87%)
2nd (S0 → S2)
429.57
2.89
0.0094
HOMO−1 → LUMO (14.87%)
HOMO → LUMO+1 (83.65%)
3rd (S0 → S3)
373.97
3.32
0.0013
HOMO−1 → LUMO (81.13%)
HOMO → LUMO+1 (13.71%)
Excited states

λ
 (nm)

E
 (eV)

f


Transitions

a Wavelength of excited states.
b Excitation energy.
c Oscillator strength.
d Data given in parentheses are 2 × (CI coefficient)2 × 100%.


1
st (S0 → S1)
509.28
2.43
1.8911
HOMO → LUMO (99.20%)
2nd (S0 → S2)
402.66
3.08
0.0084
HOMO−1 → LUMO (8.42%)
HOMO → LUMO+1 (89.56%)
3rd (S0 → S3)
359.04
3.45
0.0012
HOMO−1 → LUMO (88.75%)
HOMO → LUMO+1 (8.05%)
The change in electric dipole moment between the ground and excited state of the dye is calculated by using the TDDFT analysis. The electric dipole moment is a measure of charge densities and bond properties within a system. The electric dipole moment of the IDT-DBA dye molecule was determined as Δμ = 3.5672 Debye and Δμ = 2.8823 Debye for the B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) and PBE0/6-31G(d,p) methods respectively, indicating good charge distribution and increasing bonds lengths. Also, high electric dipole moment of the dye molecule indicates that it accepts more charge, further confirmed by high intramolecular charge transfers observed.
The light harvesting efficiency (LHE) parameter is widely employed to predict the possible photocurrent response properties of the chromophore. LHE is found by using the oscillator strength (f) of the wavelength of maximum absorption for IDT-DBA dye molecules. LHE is defined as 1–10−f. The LHE values are proportional to the oscillator strengths and have no units. For the B3LYP and PBE0 methods, the LHE (%) values are 98.56 and 98.72, respectively confirming the idea of the presented IDT-DBA system.

An organic sensitizer based on the IDT-DBA moieties was synthesized, characterized and used in DSSC applications. The dye represents a new class of chromophores based on the A–D–A system, with π moieties in auxiliary rather than flanking conjugation, having symmetrical flanking accepting/anchoring groups. These types of molecules were successfully used in NFSMA and we have proven that a similar system can be used for DSSC applications. The first proof of concept molecule achieved promising 4.2% power conversion efficiency, with high short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 11.69 mA cm−2 for a metal-free device and without any co-sensitization. The dye displayed good stability and modular structure. The core can be easily tuned and expanded, and either made more electron rich or electron depleted by introducing the readily available moieties of IDTT, IDSe, and IDTz respectively, opening a path for the convenient design of new DSSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the Qatar National Research Fund (QNRF) and the National Priorities Research Program, project number NPRP 12S-0304-190227. The numerical calculations reported here were performed in part at the TUBITAK ULAKBIM, High Performance and Grid Computing Centre (TRUBA resources).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0nj06067d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2021