 DOI: 10.1039/D2CY00890D
(Paper)
Catal. Sci. Technol., 2022, 12, 5408-5417


Wenhua
Li
,

Shule
Zhang
,

Bo
Peng
,

Qianqiao
Chen
* and 

Qin
Zhong
*

Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, 210094, People's Republic of China. E-mail: lwh3203@qq.com; shulezhang@163.com; 913866182@qq.com; cqq@njust.edu.cn; zq304@njust.edu.cn

Received
17th May 2022
, Accepted 17th July 2022
First published on 20th July 2022
Typically, the more intrinsic defects of carbon materials are unfavorable to conductivity, while they are considered to be the active sites of carbon materials in the field of electrocatalysis. Therefore, seeking a balance between conductivity and active sites is the key to improve the catalytic performance of unadulterated carbon materials. Herein, the hierarchical porous carbon (HPC) prepared by the soft-templating approach is accurately adjusted via the facile hydrothermal method using H3BO3 and H3PO3 as structural modulators. The structural characterization indicates that both H3BO3 and H3PO3 reagents can drive the carbon catalyst to produce more intrinsic defects, and H3PO3 can reduce the amount of oxygen-containing groups in the carbon surface to improve conductivity. The structurally optimized HPC used as a counter electrode in polysulfide electrolytes exhibits a charge transfer resistance as low as 2.25 Ω, and the CdS/CdSe quantum dot sensitized solar cell (QDSSC) has a power conversion efficiency of 4.62%. These confirm that the reduction activity towards Sn2− ions in QDSSCs can be effectively improved by adjusting the degree of carbon defects. This report provides a new perspective on intrinsic defects for improving the electrocatalytic activity of the unadulterated carbon material.

Quantum dot sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs), as promising alternative devices for traditional silicon-based solar cells, have attracted extensive attention due to simple preparation, low consumption, and a theoretical power conversion efficiency of up to 44%. Many efforts have been made to optimize various components of QDSSCs for excellent photovoltaic performance, including the structural design of photoanodes, the exploration and modification of various types of redox electrolytes, and the selection and optimization of counter electrode (CE) catalysts. Notably, CEs play a vital role in collecting photoinduced charges from the external circuit and then catalyze the reduction reaction of the oxidized electrolyte (such as Sn2− ions) at the CE/electrolyte interface, which can dramatically affect the short-circuit current density and filling factor of the device. In order to obtain a superior photovoltaic performance, it requires that the CE possesses outstanding catalytic activity, excellent electrical conductivity, great mechanical and chemical stability, and a high surface area. The traditional noble metal Pt electrode is the most common CE in dye-sensitized solar cells with an analogous structure and working principle due to its considerable catalytic activity in reducing I3− to I−. However, for QDSSCs, I−/I3− electrolytes tend to corrode QDs, while S2−/Sn2− electrolytes that can effectively stabilize cadmium chalcogenide QDs are selected as common redox couples. Pt CEs show a poor catalytic activity to polysulfide electrolytes, because the strong chemisorption with S2−/Sn2− couples will poison the Pt electrode surface. Therefore, the exploration and design of alternative CE catalysts with lower prices and higher catalytic performance have become a long-term research topic in the development of QDSSCs. To date, carbonaceous catalysts, metallic compounds, conductive polymers, and composites consisting of the above other catalyst combinations have been successfully used as CEs of QDSSCs and exhibit excellent catalytic activity.

Carbon materials are the most promising CE catalysts due to their low consumption, natural abundance, extraordinary physicochemical properties, and relative stability. Unfortunately, the unsatisfactory conductivity and less active sites of unadulterated carbon materials hinder their application in the field of electrocatalysis. Heteroatom doping (N, P, B, S, etc.) is a common means to adjust conductivity and active sites, and it can optimize the electronic structure and adsorption/desorption behavior of the carbon framework. For instance, studies have indicated that N dopants and B dopants can not only act as electrocatalytic active sites but also improve the electron conduction of carbon materials. However, the effect of abundant intrinsic defects in unadulterated carbon materials on electrocatalytic reactions is rarely studied. The intrinsic defects of carbon materials are usually caused by crystal lattice deformation or atomic loss, which can also promote the charge density redistribution and enhance the ion-adsorption ability. Intrinsic defects have been confirmed to be potential active sites in the field of CO2 reduction reactions, sodium-ion batteries, and supercapacitors, and their effect on polysulfide reduction reactions in QDSSCs is unknown. To date, the common methods to prepare carbon materials rich in intrinsic defects include template-assisted carbonization, potassium hydroxide etching, and plasma technology. It is difficult to accurately control the degree of defects, especially in large-scale synthesis, and excessive defects are unfavorable to conductivity. H3BO3 and H3PO3 reagents as weak acid reagents can become potential structural modulators to accurately regulate the intrinsic defects of carbon. In addition, due to the weak reducibility of H3PO3, H3PO3 is expected to play a role in controlling the oxygen-containing groups on the surface of carbon, thus affecting the conductivity.
Herein, we first use H3BO3 and H3PO3 reagents as structural modulators to further hydrothermally treat glucose-derived hierarchical porous carbon. Significantly, the reagent hydrothermal method not only constructs intrinsic defects in the carbon skeleton, but also regulates the surface groups of carbon. The optimization of these structures balances the relationship between active sites and conductivity, which promotes the polysulfide reduction reaction for QDSSCs. A QDSSC based on a CdS/CdSe photoanode and optimal hierarchical porous carbon CE exhibits a PCE of 4.62%. Therefore, this work provides a new method to improve the electrocatalytic activity of the carbon material by the reagent hydrothermal treatment.

All reagents used in this report are analytical-grade products and were used without further purification. Glucose (C6H12O6·H2O) was obtained from Chengdu Chron Chemical Co., Ltd, sodium chloride (NaCl) was purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd, and poly(ethylene glycol)-block poly(propylene glycol)-block poly(ethylene glycol) (F127, average Mn ∼ 12600), nickel chloride (NiCl2·6H2O), boric acid (H3BO3) and phosphorous acid (H3PO3) were purchased from Aladdin Reagent Co., Ltd. Titanium mesh (80 mesh) and fluorine-doped tin oxide glass (FTO, 6–8 Ω sq−1) were commercially available from Kangwei Metal Wire Mesh Co. Ltd (Hengshui, China) and OPV Tech. Co. Ltd (Yingkou, China), respectively.


2 g of C6H12O6·H2O, 20 g of NaCl, and 1 g of NiCl2·6H2O were dissolved in 70 mL of deionized water, and then this solution was slowly poured into 70 mL of F127 (1 g) solution and stirred for 12 h to mix evenly. After the solution was frozen into a solid, the mixture was freeze-dried to remove water at about −60 °C in a vacuum. The dried mixture was ground in an agate mortar, and then the powder was carbonized in an N2 atmosphere. Specifically, the powder was calcined at 250 °C for 1 h at a heating rate of 1 °C min−1, then calcined at 350 °C for 1 h at a heating rate of 1 °C min−1, and finally calcined at 750 °C for 3 h at a heating rate of 2 °C min−1. The carbonized black powder was washed with deionized water to remove the NaCl template, and then the sample was refluxed in 0.1 M HCl solution at 80 °C for 2 h to remove the Ni element in the sample. Finally, the sample was washed with deionized water until neutral, centrifuged, and dried under vacuum at 60 °C. The hierarchical porous carbon prepared by the above steps was labeled HPC.


60 mg HPC, 100 mg H3BO3, and 397.8 mg H3PO3 were added to 80 mL deionized water and sonicated for 10 min, and then the mixture was transferred to a Teflon-lined stainless-steel autoclave. The stainless autoclave was sealed and heated at 200 °C for 24 h. After cooling to room temperature, it was washed several times alternately with deionized water and ethanol and dried in a vacuum at 60 °C. This prepared sample was labeled B, P-HPC. For comparison, H3BO3-treated HPC and H3PO3-treated HPC were labeled B-HPC and P-HPC, respectively.


About 100 μL of binder was added dropwise to 12 mg catalyst and stirred continuously to form a viscous slurry. The catalyst was coated on 1 cm × 2 cm titanium mesh by a scraping method to obtain a counter electrode with an active area of 0.25 cm2. The binder consists of 5 g of terpineol, 240 μL isopropyl titanate, and 100 μL glacial acetic acid.


CdS/CdSe quantum dot sensitized photoanodes were prepared according to our previous report. The photoanode and CE were assembled into a sandwich structure, filled with polysulfide electrolytes (2 M S, 2 M Na2S, and 0.2 M KCl).


Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM, FEI, Quanta FEG 250) was performed to characterize the morphology and structure of the catalyst. Energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS, Bruker, XFlash 6160) was carried out to characterize the elemental composition of the catalyst. Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD, Bruker, D2 Phaser) with Cu Kα radiation was conducted to investigate the crystal structure of the catalyst. Fourier transform infrared spectra (FTIR) were recorded on an infrared spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Nicolet iS10) in the form of KBr pellets. Raman spectra (Snowy Range Instruments, Sierra IM-52) were recorded with a laser wavelength of 785 nm. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Thermo, ESCALAB 250Xi) was performed using monochromatized Al Kα X-rays to analyze the surface composition and chemical state. The specific surface area was measured using the nitrogen adsorption–desorption technique (Micromeritics ASAP 2460).

Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), Tafel polarization measurements, and cyclic voltammetry tests (CV) were performed using an electrochemical device (Ivium-N-Stat Multichannel potentiostat). Resistivity was tested using an electrochemical device (Ivium-N-Stat Multichannel potentiostat) using the four-probe method. The photocurrent–voltage characteristic (J–V curve) was recorded using an electrochemical device (CHI760E) under a solar simulator. In particular, the light intensity of the simulator is one-sun illumination (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2), and the solar simulator was calibrated using a standard crystalline silicon solar cell.

The hierarchical porous carbon was prepared using NaCl, F127, and NiCl2 as templates to introduce more intrinsic defects into the carbon skeleton (Fig. 1a). In particular, the added nickel chloride can be used not only as a pore-forming agent for carbon materials but also as a catalyst for graphitization in the pyrolysis process. The SEM images show that the carbon material prepared by the soft-templating approach has a three-dimensional interconnected skeleton, and pores with different pore sizes are displayed on the skeleton. This confirms that the soft-templating approach successfully synthesizes hierarchical porous carbon. Compared with the morphology of HPC (Fig. 1b–d), B, P-HPC shows a looser structure and a smaller carbon sheet (Fig. 1e–g). This proves that the H3BO3 and H3PO3 hydrothermal treatment optimizes the morphology of carbon materials.

N2 adsorption/desorption isotherms and pore size distribution curves are shown in Fig. 2. According to the IUPAC classification, all the catalysts exhibit H3 hysteresis loops, which are mainly caused by the flat slit, crack or wedge structure of sheet materials. The SEM images also verify the slit pore structure on the carbon sheets. The curves increase sharply at a relative pressure of P/P0 < 0.1, indicating the existence of some micropores. The hysteresis loops appear in the range of P/P0 from 0.4 to 1.0 and have obvious steep peaks at P/P0 > 0.9, which proves that there are sufficient mesopores and macropores. The pore size distribution curves (Fig. 2b) confirm the hierarchical pore structure with micropores and meso/macropores. Previous studies have proved that micropores play a positive role in reducing local electrical resistance, so it is conducive to promote charge transport in the polysulfide reduction reaction. Also, the pore structure parameters of all the catalysts are listed in Table 1. The results show that after hydrothermal treatment, the surface area of HPC is significantly improved, especially the surface area of B, P-HPC being increased to 546.46 m2 g−1, which may be due to the further stripping of the carbon sheet by acid etching.
Samples
BET surface area (m2 g−1)
Total pore volume (cm3 g−1)
Average pore diameter (nm)
HPC
509.44
0.61
12.37
B-HPC
530.64
0.55
11.83
P-HPC
532.95
0.56
11.05
B, P-HPC
546.46
0.66
13.54
XRD was carried out to study the crystal structure of the catalyst. Fig. S1 (ESI) shows that the two weak diffraction peaks at 23° and 43° belong to the (002) and (101) crystal planes of graphite, respectively. The wide diffraction peak may be caused by the porous structure, which is consistent with the reported results for porous carbon materials. Moreover, the diffraction peak of the hydrothermally treated HPC is weaker, indicating a higher carbon disorder. In addition, no peaks attributed to metal Ni are observed, which confirms that Ni particles can be completely removed by acid treatment. The defective structures of the catalysts were further studied via Raman spectroscopy. The Raman spectra (Fig. 3a) were obtained at a laser wavelength of 785 nm to further study the graphitization degree of the carbon materials. Two characteristic peaks centered at 1285 (D-band) and 1560 cm−1 (G-band) can be observed, which are related to the disordered sp3 structural defects and ordered graphitic structure, respectively. All the catalysts exhibit higher peak intensity of D-band than that of G-band, which confirms that there are abundant disordered structural defects in the carbon matrix, which is consistent with the results of XRD. The ID/IG ratio increases in the following order: HPC (1.32) < P-HPC (1.45) < B, P-HPC (1.47) < B-HPC (1.51). This proves that H3BO3 and H3PO3 hydrothermal treatment can effectively increase sp3 defects, and H3BO3 is more advantageous than H3PO3 in terms of defects.
To investigate the chemical structure, FTIR spectra were obtained from 4000 to 400 cm−1 to detect the functional groups of the catalysts. The FTIR transmission spectra (Fig. 3b) demonstrate that the different HPC catalysts have similar chemical structures. The broad band located at ∼3450 cm−1 is generally considered to be related to the O–H stretching vibration of hydroxyl or carboxyl groups. The bands detected at ∼2950, ∼730 and ∼1630 cm−1 correspond to the anti-symmetric stretching vibration of C–H in –CH2 and –CH3, the C–H group, and the stretching vibration of CC, respectively. Also, the bands located at ∼1730 cm−1 and 1380–1120 cm−1 are attributed to the stretching vibration of –CO in acetyl or carbonyl functional groups and –CO stretching vibration in oxygen-containing groups, respectively. The existence of oxygen-containing groups introduces sp3 defects, which can destroy the conjugated structure of carbon and lose its good conductivity. Therefore, the FTIR spectra (Fig. 3c) are normalized to semi-quantitatively compare the number of oxygen-containing groups of the different catalysts. Fig. 3d exhibits that the oxygen-containing group content of HPC increases after hydrothermal treatment, indicating that H3BO3 and H3PO3 treatment can produce more intrinsic defects in HPC, and the oxidation capacity of H3BO3 is stronger than that of H3PO3. Importantly, the amount of oxygen-containing groups in B, P-HPC is lower than that in B-HPC, proving that H3PO3 plays a role in degrading the amount of oxygen-containing groups on the carbon surface in the hydrothermal process, which is conducive to improving the conductivity of HPC.
XPS spectra were further obtained to characterize the structural defects of the carbon materials. From the full-scale XPS spectra in Fig. 4a, only C and O elements are revealed in HPC and B, P-HPC, with the element contents shown in Table S1. The C1s spectra can be fitted into five peaks at 284.7, 285.6, 286.4, 287.7, and 289.8 eV, which are assigned to sp2 C, sp3 C, C–O, CO and π–π*, respectively. In particular, Fig. 4b shows that the ratio of sp2 C/sp3 C decreases from 2.70 of HPC to 2.01 of B, P-HPC, confirming that the hierarchical porous carbon after hydrothermal treatment presents more defects and edges. These results further verify the conclusions of Raman and FTIR.

The photovoltaic performance of the carbon CEs was evaluated by obtaining the photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves of the QDSSCs assembled with the CdS/CdSe photoanode. Photovoltaic parameters including short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) are summarized in Table 2. In particular, Fig. 5b shows that the B, P-HPC-based QDSSC exhibits the optimal Jsc, Voc, FF, and PCE. It can be clearly observed from Table 2 that the CdS/CdSe QDSSCs with HPC, B-HPC, P-HPC and B, P-HPC exhibit PCE values of 2.01% (Jsc = 8.93 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.486 V, FF = 0.462), 2.89% (Jsc = 11.81 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.475 V, FF = 0.514), 3.51% (Jsc = 13.15 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.484 V, FF = 0.550), and 4.62% (Jsc = 16.03 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.524 V, FF = 0.553). Fig. 5c intuitively shows that the photovoltaic performance of the device can be effectively improved by adjusting the structure of the carbon CE. As shown in the left part of Fig. 5c, the CE plays the role of collecting and transmitting electrons and reducing Sn2− in polysulfide electrolytes. Therefore, the design and optimization of CE catalysts are instrumental to improve the performance of QDSSCs. Based on the above morphological and structural characterization results, the excellent photovoltaic performance of B, P-HPC CE is mainly due to the following aspects: (1) the loose and porous scale structure and large specific surface area increase the contact with the electrolyte; (2) the existence of micropores can effectively promote mass and electron transfer; (3) the regulation of functional groups on the carbon surface and the construction of intrinsic defects can improve electron transfer and provide more active sites. To date, the photovoltaic performance of the CdS/CdSe QD co-sensitized solar cell based on the optimized HPC is superior compared with samples published in previous papers (ESI, Table S4). To further verify the improvement of the photovoltaic performance, electrochemical tests were carried out to detect the catalytic properties of the CE catalysts.

CEs

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)

R
s (Ω)

R
ct (Ω)

Z
N (Ω)

τ (μs)
HPC
8.93
0.486
0.462
2.01
2.41
7.66
56.48
56.48
B-HPC
11.81
0.475
0.514
2.89
2.99
7.03
50.33
50.33
P-HPC
13.15
0.484
0.550
3.51
2.88
4.51
31.75
31.75
B, P-HPC
16.03
0.524
0.553
4.62
2.85
2.25
25.22
25.22

In order to study the redox mechanism of S2−/Sn2− on the catalyst surface, cyclic voltammetry (CV) was carried out with a three-electrode system at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 in polysulfide electrolytes (0.1 M Na2S, 0.1 M KCl, and 0.1 M S). In the three-electrode system, an Ag/AgCl electrode and Pt electrode were selected as the reference electrode and counter electrode, respectively. As shown in Fig. 6a, two sets of peaks can be observed, corresponding to the oxidation of S2− and the reduction of Sn2−. High reduction peak current density and low peak-to-peak separation (Epp) are prominent evidence of excellent polysulfide reduction activity.Fig. 6b exhibits that B, P-HPC has the largest reduction peak current density and the lowest Epp value, which proves that the polysulfide reduction activity can be effectively improved by adjusting the structure of carbon materials.

Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and Tafel polarization were carried out on a symmetrical dummy cell composed of two identical CEs to investigate the charge transfer process on the catalyst surface. Fig. 7a shows the model of the device. Specifically, two titanium meshes with an active area of 5 × 5 mm are assembled into a sandwich structure and filled with polysulfide electrolytes. As shown in Fig. 7b, the Nyquist curve of each catalyst consists of two semicircles. The nonzero intersection of the first semicircle and the real axis is the series resistance (Rs), which is related to the conductivity of the catalyst and the ohmic impedance of the external circuit; the first semicircle corresponds to the charge transfer resistance (Rct) of the catalyst/electrolyte interface and chemical capacitance. The second semicircle is related to the Nernst diffusion impedance (ZN) in the electrolyte. The EIS parameters fitted according to the equivalent circuit diagram (Fig. 7b) are shown in Fig. 7e. Since all the electrodes are tested under the same conditions, the Rs value can reflect the conductivity of the catalyst. Fig. 7e shows that more intrinsic defects can reduce the conductivity of unadulterated carbon materials. In particular, the Rs value of B, P-HPC is lower than that of B-HPC, and the resistivity of B, P-HPC (3.76 Ω cm) is also lower than that of B-HPC (4.12 Ω·cm), indicating that H3PO3 treatment is conducive to improving the conductivity, which verifies the FTIR test results. The Rct values of B-HPC, P-HPC and B, P-HPC are 7.03, 4.51 and 2.25 Ω respectively, while the Rct of HPC is 7.66 Ω, which proves that reasonable structural regulation realizes a more rapid charge transfer at the catalyst/electrolyte interface. Additionally, the lowest ZN value (25.22 Ω) of B, P-HPC confirms the excellent diffusion ability of electrolytes on the electrode surface, which is mainly due to the unique 3D interconnection morphology, the higher specific surface area and abundant pore structures of the catalyst. A small diffusion resistance is conducive to the rapid transfer of electrons, which can also promote the performance of QDSSC devices. The Bode plots (Fig. 7c) show two obvious peaks, in which the marked peaks correspond to the charge transfer process at the catalyst/electrolyte interface. The lifetime of electrons at the catalyst/electrolyte interface can be estimated according to the formula τ = 1/(2πfp), and B, P-HPC exhibits the lowest electron lifetime, indicating its rapid polysulfide reduction interfacial reaction.
Tafel polarization test was performed to further evaluate the electrochemical activity of various CEs. The Tafel curve (Fig. 7d) can be divided into three main regions, from a low voltage to a high voltage, which are the polarization zone, Tafel zone, and diffusion zone. The exchange current density (J0) can be obtained in the Tafel zone by the intercept of the extrapolated linear region of the curve when the overpotential is zero, which is associated with the Rct according to the formula: J0 = RT/(nFRct) (where R is the gas constant, F is the Faraday constant, T is the temperature, and n is the number of electrons participating in the polysulfide reduction reaction at the interface). B, P-HPC exhibits the largest J0, and the other catalysts follow the following order: P-HPC > B-HPC > HPC, which is consistent with the Rct results obtained by EIS. This further confirms the rapid polysulfide reduction rate at the B, P-HPC CE/electrolyte interface.

The electrochemical stability of CEs in the polysulfide electrolyte is critical to the long-term operation of the device, so multicycle successive CV scanning of the CE catalysts at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 is shown in Fig. 8. After 100 successive scan cycles, the curve shape and the peak current density of the HPC CE are substantially the same, mainly due to the inherent physical–chemical properties of carbon. It is worth noting that the catalyst shows outstanding electrochemical stability after hydrothermal treatment, which indicates that the hydrothermal strategy can still maintain excellent electrochemical stability while improving the electrocatalytic activity.


In this report, we regulate the oxygen-containing groups and intrinsic defects of unadulterated carbon by a simple hydrothermal method, realize the coordination of conductivity and active sites, and promote its application in the field of electrocatalysis. The optimized HPC CE shows an Rct as low as 2.25 Ω, and the CdS/CdSe QDSSC based on this CE exhibits an excellent PCE of 4.62%. This report provides a promising strategy for improving the electrocatalytic activity of unadulterated carbon materials.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (52170110 and 21908108), Jiangsu Provincial Key Research and Development Program (BE2019115), and Central University Basic Research Fund of China (30920041108).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2cy00890d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022