 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA08717E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18976-18982


Zhenxiao
Pan
 and 

Xinhua
Zhong
*

College of Materials and Energy, South China Agricultural University, 483 Wushan Road, Guangzhou 510642, China. E-mail: zhongxh@ecust.edu.cn

Received
8th October 2016
, Accepted 7th November 2016
First published on 8th November 2016
Charge recombination at the photoanode/electrolyte interface is one of the priority factors limiting the photovoltaic performance of quantum dot sensitized solar cells (QDSCs). Exploring interfacial engineering with the use of a proper passivation layer around the photoanode is an efficient way to control the charge recombination process and to promote the performance of the resultant cell devices. Herein, an easily synthesised and effective passivation layer making use of a ZnS and metal hydroxide composite material was developed for suppressing charge recombination and therefore improving the photovoltaic performance of a model CdSeTe QDSC. This novel composite passivation layer was formed by mixing the target metal ion with a Zn(OAc)2 aqueous solution during a successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) procedure for overcoating ZnS layers on photoanodes. The influence of the different metal ions (including Be2+, Mg2+, Ca2+, Al3+, and Ga3+) was investigated and photovoltaic measurement results indicate that the formed ZnS and metal hydroxide composite passivation layer contributed to a considerable improvement in the photovoltage and power conversion efficiency of the resultant cell devices in comparison with a plain ZnS layer. The average efficiency was improved from 8.88% to 9.50% and a champion efficiency of 9.64% (Jsc = 21.20 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.702 V, FF = 0.648) was achieved under AM 1.5G full one sun irradiation for the ZnS/Ga(OH)3 composite passivation layer based cells. Impedance spectroscopy (IS) and open-circuit voltage-decay (OCVD) measurements further confirmed that the ZnS and metal hydroxide composite passivation layer outperforms the reference plain ZnS layer in suppressing charge recombination.

Exploiting low-cost photovoltaic techniques, which is an effective way to resolve the energy and environment dilemma, has been a continuous goal in the past few decades. Quantum dot sensitized solar cells (QDSCs), employing colloidal quantum dots (QDs) as light-harvesting materials, have gained increasing research attention in recent years owing to their distinguishing advantages such as low-cost preparation, band-gap tunability, high absorption coefficients, and multiple exciton generation (MEG) potential. In the span of a few years, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of QDSCs has increased steadily, due to the development of panchromatic QD light absorbers as well as effective counter electrodes and suitable interface engineering. However, the further improvement of the photovoltaic performance of QDSCs is mainly restricted by the moderate open-circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF), which are partially caused by severe charge recombination at the photoanode/electrolyte interfaces. Therefore, charge recombination control is a reasonable approach to further improve the PCE of QDSCs.

Due to the high density of surface trap states in QD sensitizers and the large portion of bare TiO2 surface exposed directly to the electrolyte, charge recombination at the photoanode/electrolyte interfaces constitutes one of the major factors that deteriorate the performance of QDSCs. Therefore, modification of the photoanode interface to minimize charge recombination loss has become one of the vital research subjects in QDSCs. The most popular and convenient method to passivate the surface of the photoanode is overcoating a ZnS thin layer around QD sensitized TiO2 film electrodes through the successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) approach. Since the initial work by Shen and Toyoda, ZnS treatment of the QD sensitized photoanode has been widely used in almost all reports of QDSCs. It has been demonstrated that this ZnS treatment can effectively passivate the surface states of the QDs as well as the uncovered surface of the bare TiO2 substrate, therefore suppressing charge recombination at the photoanode/electrolyte interfaces and improving the photovoltaic performance of the resultant solar cells significantly.
Besides ZnS, other wide band gap or insulating materials such as SiO2, Al2O3, MgO etc. have also been used as a passivation layer around the QD sensitized photoanode to prevent electron leakage from the TiO2 or QDs to the electrolyte. Very recently, Zhong's group modified QD sensitized photoanodes by the sequential deposition of a ZnS/SiO2 double layer or a metal oxide/ZnS/SiO2 triple layer, and enhanced performance was observed in comparison with a single layer. Despite the great achievements of single and double passivation layers around photoanodes in QDSCs, several publications indicate that further suppression of the charge recombination can be expected with the use of composite passivation materials. For example, a Mn doped passivation layer has been reported to enhance the photovoltaic performance of QDSCs. However, the potential of composite passivation layers has not been fully explored considering the relatively low PCEs in the mentioned reports. Therefore, the development of a facile method to construct an effective passivation layer in QDSCs is still imperative.
Herein, a novel and facile strategy has been developed to modify a sensitized photoanode with the use of a ZnS and metal hydroxide composite passivation layer. The composite layer was formed by mixing the nitrate salt of the target group IIA or IIIA metal with a Zn(OAc)2 aqueous solution during the conventional SILAR approach for ZnS treatment. It was found that the addition of Mg2+, Ca2+, or Ga3+ into the Zn2+ aqueous solution during the ZnS treatment resulted in the formation of ZnS/M(OH)x (M = Mg, Ca and Ga) composites around the QD sensitized photoanodes, leading to a remarkable improvement in the PCE of the CdSeTe based QDSCs, especially in photovoltage. Impedance spectroscopy (IS) and open-circuit voltage-decay (OCVD) measurements verified that the composite passivation layer notably inhibited the charge recombination process and increased the photo-generated electron lifetime compared to the plain ZnS treated photoanodes. Meanwhile, the composite layer was also found to be beneficial for the long-term stability of the cell device.

Oleic acid (90%), thioglycolic acid (TGA, 97%), cadmium oxide (CdO, 99.99%), beryllium nitrate (Be(NO3)2, 99.99%), magnesium nitrate (Mg(NO3)2, 99.99%), calcium nitrate (Ca(NO3)2, 99%), aluminum nitrate (Al(NO3)3, 98%) and gallium nitrate (Ga(NO3)3, 99.99%) were purchased from Alfa Aesar. Oleylamine (OAm, 95%), selenium powder (200 mesh, 99.99%), tellurium powder (200 mesh, 99.8%) and trioctylphosphine (TOP, 90%) were purchased from Aldrich. Paraffin liquid (chemical grade), sodium sulfide (Na2S, 98%), zinc acetate (Zn(OAc)2, 99%) and all the solvents were obtained from Shanghai Chemical Reagents Company (China). All the chemicals were used as received without further processing.


The synthesis and water solubilization of CdSeTe QDs are described in our previous paper. TiO2 film electrodes with 15.0 μm thickness (a 9.0 μm-thick transparent layer and 6.0 μm-thick light scattering layer) were prepared through the screen printing method. The obtained water soluble CdSeTe QDs were immobilized on a TiO2 mesoporous film electrode through a ligand-induced self-assembly approach as described in our previous paper. After the deposition of the QDs, the electrodes were treated with TiCl4 aqueous solution at 40 °C for 30 min. Then, the composite passivation layer was overcoated around the QD sensitized electrode by four cycles of alternately immersing the film electrode into a 0.1 M Zn(OAc)2 aqueous solution also containing a certain concentration of a group IIA or IIIA metal nitrate salt, and a 0.1 M Na2S aqueous solution, for 1 min per dip. In the control experiment, for the reference sample, no other metal salt was added to the Zn(OAc)2 solution, and a plain ZnS passivation layer was formed. The SILAR process was carried out under ambient conditions. Typical sandwich-type solar cells were constructed with the use of Cu2S/brass as the counter electrode and a polysulfide aqueous solution (2.0 M S and 2.0 M Na2S) as the electrolyte.


The current–voltage (J–V) curves of the cells were recorded using a Keithley 2400 source meter under illumination with simulated AM 1.5G solar light (Oriel, Model no. 94022A) with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The photoactive area was 0.235 cm2, defined by a metal mask. Incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra were measured using a Keithley 2000 multimeter under illumination by a 300 W tungsten lamp with a Spectral Product DK240 monochromator. Impedance spectroscopy (IS) and open-circuit voltage-decay (OCVD) measurements were carried out on an electrochemical workstation (Zahner, Zennium). IS was performed at different forward bias values ranging from −0.4 V to −0.7 V applying a 20 mV AC sinusoidal signal with the frequency ranging from 1 MHz to 0.1 Hz under dark conditions. In the OCVD test, the cells were illuminated by a white LED with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 for 10 s and then the change of the photovoltage with time was recorded after switching off the light.


CdSe0.65Te0.35 QDs (simplified as CdSeTe QDs henceforth) were used as a model QD sensitizer in view of their superior photovoltaic performance in previous reports. Furthermore, multiple component semiconductor QDs have shown potential advantages as optoelectronic materials due to their facile synthesis, wide absorption range and good reproducibility. The concentration of the metal nitrate salt was optimized with the use of Ga(NO3)3 as a demonstration example. It was found that 10.0 mM of Ga(NO3)3 resulted in the best cell performance and the corresponding measurement results are given in Table S1. Therefore, this additive concentration of 10.0 mM was used in the following discussion for all the metal nitrate salts studied.


The successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) approach, which is carried out by immersing the photoanode in cation and anion solutions alternately, was used to overcoat the ZnS passivation layers around all the photoanodes. With the addition of metal nitrate salts in the Zn(OAc)2 solutions, two kinds of possible compounds, namely metal sulfides or metal hydroxides, may be formed during the SILAR process considering the strongly alkaline nature of the Na2S aqueous solution (pH > 11). Which kind of compound can be formed depends on the solubility product constant (ksp) of the metal hydroxide and the corresponding metal sulfide. When the ksp of a metal hydroxide is smaller than that of the corresponding metal sulfide, the metal hydroxide will be the main product. In the opposite case, the metal sulfide will be the main product. According to Lange's Handbook of Chemistry, Be, Mg, Ca, Al and Ga nitrates are inclined to form metal hydroxides during the SILAR process. In this work, we focus on investigating the influence of a ZnS and metal hydroxide composite passivation layer on the photovoltaic performance of QDSCs, so group IIA and IIIA metal nitrate salts (including the Be, Mg, Ca, Al, and Ga nitrate salts) were chosen as additives in the Zn(OAc)2 aqueous solution to form the target composite passivation layers. Other main group metal elements and most of the transition metal elements are not included in this study since mainly their metal sulfides or soluble compounds form in the SILAR process.

To confirm the formation of metal hydroxides, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were performed on the photoanode samples after overcoating with different passivation layers. As shown in Fig. 1a, the Mg containing passivated sample exhibited a distinct Mg 1s signal with binding energy peaks at 1304.4 eV, which can be assigned to the Mg +2 oxidation state. Considering that the sample was treated at ambient temperature and did not undergo high temperature treatment, it is reasonable to deduce that the Mg +2 oxidation state signal was derived from Mg(OH)2 formed in the composite passivation layer. Similarly, the Ca 2p signals in Fig. 1b with binding energy peaks at 347.4/351.0 eV confirmed the formation of Ca(OH)2. Ga 2p signals with corresponding binding energy peaks at 1117.9/1144.9 eV were observed in the Ga(NO3)3 treated sample (Fig. 1c), illustrating the presence of Ga(OH)3 in the passivation layer. It was noted that in the cases of the Be(NO3)2 and Al(NO3)3 additives, the XPS signals were very weak and the Be 1s and Al 2p characteristic peaks could hardly be recognized (Fig. S1), indicating that neither metal sulfides nor metal hydroxides were formed. This phenomenon can be ascribed to the amphoteric nature of the Be and Al hydroxides, leading to the dissolution of the formed metal hydroxides in the strongly alkaline solution of Na2S. These results demonstrate that among the chosen metal salts, only Mg(NO3)2, Ca(NO3)2 and Ga(NO3)3 in Zn(OAc)2 aqueous solution resulted in the formation of a ZnS and metal hydroxide composite passivation layer during the ZnS layer treatment process. For simplicity, the composite passivation layer is abbreviated as ZnS/M(OH)x (M = Mg2+, Ca2+, or Ga3+).

The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the champion cells based on different metal nitrate salt modified ZnS passivation layers and the reference cell are shown in Fig. 2a. The corresponding average and champion photovoltaic parameters (short-circuit current density Jsc, open-circuit voltage Voc, fill factor FF, and power conversion efficiency PCE) are listed in Table 1 and the detailed results for the individual cells are available in Table S2. On the whole, it can be seen that the Mg, Ca, and Ga nitrate salt modified ZnS passivation layers have a remarkable positive effect on the PCE of the cells, while the Be and Al nitrate salts have almost no influence on the performance compared to the reference cells with plain ZnS passivation layers. It was observed that the Jsc and FF values were nearly identical for all of the samples. The observed similar Jsc values for all of the cells with different passivation treatments are consistent with the external quantum yield (EQE) results in Fig. 2b. The calculated integrated Jsc value for the champion cell was 20.75 mA cm−2, which is in good agreement with the J–V measurement. However, the Voc values varied with different passivation treatments. The average Voc values were increased by ∼30 mV with the Mg, Ca, and Ga nitrate salt modified ZnS treatments, while the addition of the Be or Al nitrate salts did not show a positive effect for the improvement of Voc. For clarity, the variation of the photovoltaic parameters (Voc, Jsc and FF) with the different metal nitrate treatments is presented in Fig. 2c and d. It is shown that the improved PCE can be mainly ascribed to the considerable enhancement of the Voc values. Overall, it was found that the Ga(NO3)3 modified ZnS treatment resulted in the best solar cell performance with the average Voc increased from 0.668 to 0.701 V and average PCE increased from 8.88% to 9.50%. A champion PCE of 9.64% (Jsc = 21.20 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.702 V, FF = 0.648) was achieved under these conditions, which is among the best photovoltaic performances of QDSCs under identical conditions (i.e. with the same electrolyte and counter electrode). In view of the diverse solar cell performances, we can expect that the addition of different metal nitrate salts in the Zn(OAc)2 aqueous solution will ultimately result in different passivation effects.


J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)
Reference
20.96 (21.07)
0.668 (0.671)
0.634 (0.640)
8.88 (9.05)
Be2+
20.85 (20.96)
0.668 (0.672)
0.633 (0.639)
8.82 (9.00)
Mg2+
20.98 (21.10)
0.700 (0.701)
0.640 (0.642)
9.39 (9.49)
Ca2+
21.00 (21.04)
0.696 (0.696)
0.635 (0.638)
9.28 (9.34)
Al3+
21.01 (21.13)
0.670 (0.673)
0.635 (0.634)
8.94 (9.02)
Ga3+
21.05 (21.20)
0.701 (0.702)
0.644 (0.648)
9.50 (9.64)
From the above mentioned XPS results where the addition of Mg, Ca, and Ga nitrate salts in the Zn(OAc)2 aqueous solution resulted in the formation of ZnS/M(OH)x composite passivation layers, while the Be and Al additives resulted in the formation of soluble metal hydroxides in the strongly alkaline medium, it is reasonable that the Be and Al additives have nearly no effect on the performance of the cell devices. Meanwhile, the ZnS and metal hydroxide composite layer is beneficial for the improvement of the photovoltaic performance. This should be ascribed to the synergistic effect of the ZnS and metal hydroxide in the formed composite passivation layer in retarding the interface charge recombination process. To confirm this hypothesis, IS and OCVD measurements were carried out to gain insight into the effect of the different treatments on the interface charge transfer dynamics. For simplicity, representative Be, Mg, and Ga nitrate salt treated samples were chosen in the following discussion.

To unravel the mechanisms responsible for the photovoltaic performance of QDSCs with different passivation layer treatments, impedance spectroscopy (IS) was carried out to investigate the dynamics of charge transfer at the photoanode/electrolyte interface. It is well known that the charge recombination characteristics at this interface are quite crucial in determining the resultant solar cell performance. Based on the well established standard simulation circuit, the extracted chemical capacitance (Cμ) and recombination resistance (Rrec) from Nyquist plots are shown in Fig. 3. It was found that the Cμ values were similar with different metal nitrate salt based passivation treatments (Fig. 3a), indicating that different passivation layers did not alter the TiO2 conduction band edge. However, as shown in Fig. 3b, the Rrec values were changed significantly with different treatments. For the samples with Mg and Ga nitrate salt additives, the Rrec values were distinctly higher than that of the reference cell under identical forward bias. Meanwhile, the Be based treatment shows hardly any obvious effect on the Rrec value. It is well known that the Rrec values are inversely proportional to the charge recombination rate at the photoanode/electrolyte interface. A larger Rrec value means a reduced charge recombination rate. Fig. 3c shows the dark current of the cells with different passivation layers. It was found that the dark currents of the composite passivation layer coated cells were remarkably lower than those of the others, which means that the ZnS/M(OH)x composite layer can further inhibit charge leakage from the photoanode to the electrolyte. This result is consistent with the Rrec values. Therefore, the IS results implied that the composite passivation layer is more effective, compared to the plain ZnS coating, at inhibiting the recombination process.

Therefore, we can deduce that the constructed composite layer acted as a robust passivation layer in suppressing charge recombination at the photoanode/electrolyte interface. It has been demonstrated in previous publications that the main function of ZnS treatment is to passivate the surface states of the QDs, inhibiting electron recombination by the trap states in the QDs or with oxide species in electrolyte. However, it should be noted that another vital charge recombination route is electron back transfer from TiO2 to the electrolyte, which is mainly caused by the high ratio of exposed TiO2 surface directly connected to the electrolyte because it has not been covered by the QDs. Thus, the plain ZnS treatment is insufficient to comprehensively inhibit the complex charge recombination process. Hence, the synergistic passivation effect of the ZnS and metal hydroxides in the constructed composite layer can contribute to a better inhibition effect compared to the plain ZnS treatment.

Open-circuit voltage-decay (OCVD) measurement is another effective tool to investigate the overall dynamics of the charge transfer characteristics of cell devices. Firstly, the cells were illuminated by a white LED (100 mW cm−2) for 10 s to get to a steady Voc, and then the transient change of the voltage was recorded after turning off the light.Fig. 4a displays the voltage decay curves of the reference cell and cells with different passivation treatments. It can be observed that Mg and Ga based composite passivation treatments show slower decay rates compared to the reference cell. However, the decay rate of the Be nitrate salt treated cell is similar to that of the reference one. The corresponding electron lifetimes for different cells can be calculated according to the following equation: τn = −(kBT/e)(dVoc/dt)−1 where kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature (298 K), and e is the electronic charge. As shown in Fig. 4b, the composite passivated cells exhibited longer electron lifetimes over the whole range of voltage conditions, indicating that the photo-generated electrons have a smaller probability of being captured by the trap states or the oxidation species in the electrolyte during transport in the TiO2 electrode. The OCVD results are in good agreement with the IS measurements and further illustrate that the composite structure ZnS/M(OH)x is capable of favourably controlling the charge transfer dynamics at the photoanode/electrolyte interface, improving the charge collection efficiency and the resultant solar cell performance.


The long term stability of solar cell devices is a requisite factor for realizing their commercial application. Along with the rapid evolution of the PCE for QDSCs, more attention should be paid to the stability issue. Herein, stability testing of the plain ZnS and ZnS/Ga(OH)3 based composite passivated cells was carried out. Firstly, we measured the stability of the cells under continuous irradiation (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) and the normalized PCEs of the cells with their temporal variation are displayed in Fig. 5a. It can be seen that both of the cells show good stability under continuous irradiation for 120 min without any obvious decay. The PCEs even increased by 10% during the initial 30 min and then reached a plateau. Furthermore, the long term stability was also evaluated. The cells were stored under ambient conditions and tested every 12 hours. As shown in Fig. 5b, the PCE of the reference cell also increased initially and then began to decline after 12 h and reached about 50% of the initial value after a period of 120 h. Meanwhile, the cell with composite passivation displayed better stability compared to the reference one and retained more than 80% of the initial PCE value after 120 h. The improved cell stability may be ascribed to the superior protection effect of the composite passivation layer, preventing the photodegradation of the QDs in the polysulfide electrolyte.


Interface engineering on the photoanode has been proven to be a vital way to achieve high efficiency QDSCs. Herein, a novel composite passivation strategy with the use of ZnS and metal hydroxides as a passivation layer was presented to improve the photovoltaic performance of QDSCs. The composite layer was constructed through a facile method by mixing target metal ions with the Zn(OAc)2 solution during the conventional ZnS treatment process. Among the various chosen metal nitrate salts, the addition of Mg(NO3)2, Ca(NO3)2 and Ga(NO3)3 resulted in the formation of composite passivation layers of ZnS/M(OH)x. It was observed that this composite passivation layer was beneficial for further inhibiting charge recombination at the photoanode/electrolyte interface, thus dramatically improving the performance of the resultant solar cells compared to the plain ZnS treated cell. This study offers a facile way to construct robust passivation layers to control the charge transfer dynamics at the interface and provide a better understanding of interface modification for obtaining high efficiency QDSCs.


This research is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (91433106) and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation Grant (2015M581546).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Photovoltaic parameters of solar cells with the addition of different concentrations of Ga(NO3)3 during ZnS treatment. Individual photovoltaic parameters of CdSeTe based QDSCs with different metal nitrate salt modified ZnS treatments. X-ray photoelectron spectra of the QD sensitized electrodes with Be(NO3)2 and Al(NO3)3 modified ZnS treatments. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta08717e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016