 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA12028E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3336-3343


Xiaohui
Liu
,

Xiaodong
Li
,

Yang
Zou
,

He
Liu
,

Lei
Wang
,

Junfeng
Fang
* and 

Chuluo
Yang
*

Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Polymer Science and Technology, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China

Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Devices and Systems of Ministry of Education and Guangdong Province, College of Optoelectronic Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China

Ningbo Institute of Materials Technology and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Ningbo 315201, China. E-mail: fangjf@nimte.ac.cn

Hubei Key Lab on Organic and Polymeric Optoelectronic Materials, Department of Chemistry, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China. E-mail: clyang@whu.edu.cn

Received
13th December 2018
, Accepted 9th January 2019
First published on 9th January 2019
The electron transport layer (ETL) plays a significant role in advancing the high efficiency and stability of solution-processed perovskite solar cells (PVSCs). Here, three commercialized n-type non-fullerene small molecule acceptors (IT-4X) with modulated energy levels are introduced as excellent alternative ETLs to replace the commonly used fullerene-based ETL in planar inverted PVSCs. The best-performing PVSCs are constructed by using the IT-4M as the ETL with a champion power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 17.65%, which is superior to that of the typical PCBM-based device. Among the PVSCs based on the three IT-4X ETLs, the differences of photovoltaic performances mainly exist in open-circuit voltage (VOC) and PCE, which are closely related to the built-in potential in PVSCs, directly influenced by the varied LUMOs of the IT-4X molecules. Furthermore, because of the superior hydrophobic properties, all the PVSCs based on IT-4X ETLs show improved long-term stability in the ambient atmosphere compared to the reference devices. In addition, the IT-4X molecules also deliver outstanding performance when used as the interfacial layer with PCEs approaching 19%. The results in this work present the promising prospect of non-fullerene small molecule acceptors for application in the PVSC field, and reveal that regulating the energy levels of ETLs is beneficial to maximize the device outputs of VOC and PCE.

Due to their intriguing properties, including high absorption coefficients, low exciton binding energy, long charge carrier diffusion lengths and excellent tolerance to defects, organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites have been used for multiple optoelectronic applications, such as thin film photovoltaics, light-emission diodes, photodetectors, laser devices and sensitive X/γ-ray detection. Particularly, organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PVSCs) have attracted tremendous amounts of research interest in photovoltaic fields, and their reported power conversion efficiency (PCE) has skyrocketed above 23% in the past few years. The combined efforts and advances of delicate device design, composition modulation, a crystal growth approach, additives and interfacial engineering together promote the rapid development of PVSCs.

With the exceptional bipolar carrier transport ability of perovskite materials, various types of device architectures can be adopted flexibly. Typically, PVSCs are composed of a sandwich configuration of an intrinsic perovskite layer, a hole transport layer (HTL) and an electron transport layer (ETL) with conventional n–i–p or inverted p–i–n structures. The ideal transport layer can not only efficiently transfer the charge carriers generated from the absorber to the corresponding electrodes, but also improve the interfacial contact and device stability. Recently, inverted planar p–i–n type PVSCs have gained increasing attention because the device manufacturing can utilize the solution-processable organic transporting materials at low temperature and such devices display a lower current hysteresis effect than the n–i–p structure PVSCs, offering promising potential to produce flexible devices on plastic substrates. Compared to the efforts dedicated to developing organic HTLs to improve the hole collection at anodes, the pace of developing suitable ETLs is slower. Most of the organic ETLs for efficient planar PVSCs are based on fullerene and its derivatives, such as C60, PCBM and indene-C60 bisadduct (ICBA). Despite the attractive properties provided by fullerenes, their synthesis and purification are time-consuming and complicated with multiple steps. Meanwhile, the poor morphological stability under annealing conditions could result in variable device performance and poor reproducibility. Thus, emphasis has been placed on developing alternative organic ETLs with high-quality for solution-processed inverted PVSCs.
Currently, various n-type organic small molecules have been introduced as ETLs in p–i–n PVSCs because their chemical structures can be facilely synthesized and modified with desirable energy levels and charge mobility. Naphthalene diimide (NDI), perylene diimide (PDI), hexaazatrinaphtho[2,3-c][1,2,5]thiadiazole (HATNT) and hexaazatrinaphthylene (HATNA) derivatives were successfully used as ETLs to construct efficient PVSCs. The above-mentioned materials with fused aromatic rings could provide a rigid planar π-conjugated structure and high electron affinity for efficient electron transport. Besides, a well-known multi-fused rigid ladder-type small molecule, named ITIC (3,9-bis(2-methylene-(3-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)-indanone))-5,5,11,11-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-dithieno[2,3-d:2′,3′-d′]-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]-dithiophene), and its analogues have been extensively investigated as non-fullerene acceptors in organic solar cells with excellent photovoltaic performances. However, they have been less applied and reported in PVSCs so far. Zhan and coworkers utilized the INIC and IDIC series as interface modification layers between the perovskite and fullerene ETLs in inverted PVSCs. Lu and coworkers reported that an ITIC-Th molecule could stabilize the perovskite precursor solution and suppress the formation of a yellow δ-phase. Most recently, our group developed indacenodithiophene-based ladder-type molecules as ETLs in inverted PVSCs and demonstrated that the devices incorporating ITCPTC molecules with the largest conjugation length as the ETL presented a leading PCE of 17.42% due to its high mobility and efficient electron extraction. However, the investigations on ITIC-like materials used in PVSCs are still relatively limited, particularly as the ETL to replace fullerene to achieve desirable device performance. In addition, it is well acknowledged that the favorable energy level alignment of charge transporting layers and the perovskite is essential for obtaining a large open-circuit voltage (VOC) and enhancing the performance of PVSCs, which has been confirmed in organic photovoltaics. The energy gap between the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy level of ETLs and conduction band minimum (CBM) of the perovskite is closely related to the VOC and PCE values of PVSCs. Nevertheless, there are extremely limited number of studies to develop the fundamental understanding of the relationship between organic ETL parameters and device performance in PVSCs.
In this work, we report a series of aromatic ladder-type semiconductors based on ITIC-like small molecules (IT-4X) with modulated energy levels. By introducing different substituents such as fluorine (F), hydrogen (H) or methyl (Me) on IT-4X, three compounds, namely, IT-4F, IT-4H and IT-4M, were constructed. Compared to the IT-4H molecule, IT-4F presents a down-shifted LUMO level induced by the electron-withdrawing substituent of F atoms, while IT-4M shows an elevated LUMO level owing to its electron-donating methyl group. These molecules were utilized as ETLs in inverted p–i–n PVSCs, and we systematically investigated their merits based on photovoltaic performance. Eventually, IT-4M as the ETL in PVSCs yields a champion PCE of 17.65%, with a VOC of 1.083 V, a short-circuit current (JSC) of 21.19 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 76.86%, which is superior to the performance of the typical PCBM-based device, while the IT-4F and IT-4H ETL based PVSCs deliver relatively low efficiencies of 15.94% and 17.04%, respectively. The big differences of device VOCs as well as PCEs are closely related to the built-in potential in PVSCs, directly influenced by the varied LUMOs of the IT-4X molecules. Moreover, owing to the strong hydrophobic properties, all the PVSCs with IT-4X ETLs show improved device stability compared to the reference devices in the ambient atmosphere. In addition, the IT-4X molecules also demonstrate remarkable performance when used as the interfacial layer with PCEs approaching 19%. The results in this work present the promising potential of non-fullerene small molecule acceptors as exceptional ETL candidates and provide valuable guidelines for the design of high-performance ETLs for perovskite optoelectronic devices.

CH3NH3I, C60, Bphen and BCP were bought from Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp. PbI2 (99.9985%) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) were obtained from Alfa Aesar. Poly[3-(4-carboxylbutyl)thiophene] (P3CT) was purchased from Rieke, America. Electron transport materials of IT-4F, IT-4H, IT-4M and PCBM were purchased from Solarmer Materials Inc. (China). Dimethylformamide (DMF), chlorobenzene (CB, 99.8%) and 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (TFE) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. All the available chemical reagents were used as received without any further purification.


Patterned ITO substrates (RS ≤ 15 Ω per square) were cleaned with detergent, deionized water, acetone, and isopropanol in an ultrasonic bath continuously, and then were treated with O2-plasma for 10 min. P3CT-N was spin-coated at 4000 rpm for 40 s onto the ITO substrates, followed by annealing at 140 °C for 10 min in the air. Then CH3NH3PbI3 precursor solution (1.425 M in a DMF/DMSO mixture with a 1:1 molar ratio of PbI2 to CH3NH3I) was deposited onto the substrates in a N2-filled glove box at 4800 rpm for 20 s with CB treatment at 8 s after the start-up. Next, the film was annealed on a hot plate at 60 °C for 90 s and then at 80 °C for 120 s. IT-4X or PCBM solutions (10 mg mL−1 in CB) were then spin-coated onto the perovskite layer at 2000 rpm. Next, a s-Bphen solution dissolved in TFE was spin coated onto the ETL at 4000 rpm for 60 s, or C60 and BCP were evaporated under high vacuum (∼2 × 104 Pa). Finally, a 100 nm thick silver electrode was deposited through a shadow mask with a defined active area of 6 mm2. The electron-only devices were made with the structure of ITO/ZnO/IT-4X or PCBM/ZnO/Al.


Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was conducted on a CHI660A electrochemical workstation. UV-vis absorption spectra were recorded on a Perkin Elmer Lambda 950 spectrophotometer. The PL spectra were recorded using a fluorescence spectrophotometer (F-4600, Hitachi) with a 150 W Xe lamp as the excitation source at room temperature. Contact angle measurements were performed on a video-based optical contact angle measuring instrument (OCA20, Data physics Corp.). The film thickness was measured using a surface profiler (Veeco, Dektak 150). The cross-sections of devices and the surface morphology of perovskite/ETLs are observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (S4800, Hitachi). Tapping-mode atomic force microscopy (AFM) images were obtained by using a scanning probe microscope (Dimension 3100 V, Veeco). The J–V characteristics were measured with a Keithley 2400 source meter by using a So13A solar simulator (Newport Inc.) with AM 1.5G irradiation (100 mW cm−2). And the apparent charge carrier mobility (μ) was evaluated with the Mott–Gurney law. The EQE measurements were performed with a Newport quantum efficiency measurement system (ORIEL IQE 200TM) with a lock-in amplifier in the ambient atmosphere. The light intensity at each wavelength was calibrated with a standard Si/Ge solar cell.



Fig. 1a depicts the chemical structures of IT-4X molecules, with a bulky seven-ring fused core (indacenodithieno[3,2-b]thiophene, IT) end-capped with dicycanovinylindan-1-one (DCI). By introducing different groups (F, H or Me) on the phenyl group in DCI, three compounds (IT-4F, IT-4H and IT-4M) were obtained, which are known as IT-4F, ITIC and IT-DM in organic photovoltaics, respectively. The optical properties of the three IT-4X derivatives and PCBM in film states were measured by ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) spectroscopy. All the IT-4X molecules show strong optical absorption from 500 to 750 nm while the PCBM has absorption just in near ultraviolet regions (Fig. 1b). Compared to IT-4H, the main absorption peaks of the IT-4F and IT-4M films are located at 725 and 696 nm, red-shifted by 17 nm and blue-shifted by 12 nm, respectively, which is coincident with previously reported values in the literature. The LUMO and HOMO energy levels measured by electrochemical cyclic voltammetry (CV) are shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). The LUMO levels of IT-4F, IT-4H and IT-4M are calculated to be −4.19, −4.04 and −3.96 eV, respectively. The up-shifted energy levels for IT-4M are attributed to the small electron-donating substituent of methyl without bringing steric hindrance for intermolecular packing. Fig. 1d clearly displays the gap offsets between the CBM of the perovskite (−3.9 eV) and the LUMOs of various ETLs, and indicates that the IT-4M possesses better energy level alignment with the perovskite with less energy loss than IT-4F and IT-4H counterparts, which could benefit the charge transport and enhancement of the VOC value in PVSCs. Furthermore, the electron transport mobilities (μe) of the IT-4X and PCBM films have been measured using the space-charge limited current (SCLC) method (Fig. S2). And the results show that all the three IT-4X have close μe values with remarkable electron mobility (∼10−4 cm2 (V s)−1) similar to the reported parameters, further making it appropriate for them to work as charge carrier transport materials in inverted PVSCs.

In order to evaluate the function of these IT-4X as ETLs, inverted planar PVSCs were fabricated with a device structure of ITO/P3CT-N/perovskite (420 nm)/ETL/s-Bphen/Ag, where P3CT-N was served as the HTL and solution-processed bathophenanthroline (s-Bphen) was inserted between the ETL and metal electrode to improve the interfacial contact, as shown in Fig. 1c. The typical CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite material was adopted as the photoactive layer in this work. Photovoltaic performances were determined under the illumination of AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2). The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of PVSCs with IT-4X ETLs with varied thickness are presented in Fig. S3 and the photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table S1. The optimized thicknesses of ETLs were determined to be 35–40 nm, which could simultaneously suppress the leakage current behavior and provide small series resistance (RS). Fig. 2a shows the best-performing J–V characteristics of PVSCs based on different ETLs. The reference device without an ETL (w/o) showed an extremely low PCE of 4.64% with an inferior JSC and FF caused by poor contact and large RS. At the same time, the most widely used fullerene-type PCBM ETL-based PVSCs were also prepared as reference devices, delivering a highest PCE of 17.60%. For IT-4F based devices, a decent PCE of 15.94%, with a VOC of 1.037 V, a JSC of 20.49 mA cm−2, and an FF of 75.03%, was recorded. With IT-4H as the ETL, the PVSCs achieved a better device performance with a PCE of 17.04%. For the device based on an IT-4M ETL, a peak PCE of 17.65% (average PCE of 17.08% ± 0.54%), with a VOC of 1.083 V, a JSC of 21.19 mA cm−2, and a FF of 76.86%, was obtained, which is comparable to the performance of the typical PCBM-based device. The statistics of device PCEs based on various ETLs are presented in the form of a standard boxplot (Fig. 2b), and the average photovoltaic parameters based on 20 individual devices are summarized in Table 1. Amazingly, the PVSCs based on the IT-4M ETL exhibit the best repeatability with a small standard deviation in contrast to the reference devices without an ETL and IT-4F based devices. The above results indicate that the IT-4X small molecules could be excellent ETL candidates to replace PCBM in planar inverted PVSCs. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the PVSCs based on various ETLs were obtained to confirm the accuracy of JSC values. As displayed in Fig. 2c, both IT-4X and PCBM based devices show strong photo-responses from 350 to 770 nm with maximum values above 85%. The integrated current density values deduced from the EQE spectra are in good accordance with the measured results from J–V curves within 3% deviation.
ETLs

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

R
S (Ω·cm2)

a The values in parentheses are average values from 20 individual devices.

w/o
1.022
11.71
38.82
4.64 (3.73 ± 0.98)
43.34
PCBM
1.088
21.09
76.68
17.60 (17.02 ± 0.56)
3.96
IT-4F
1.037
20.49
75.03
15.94 (15.08 ± 0.73)
4.92
IT-4H
1.072
20.68
76.83
17.04 (16.44 ± 0.62)
4.33
IT-4M
1.083
21.19
76.86
17.65 (17.08 ± 0.54)
4.02
To investigate the current hysteresis characteristic, p–i–n planar PVSCs were examined in both the forward scan and the reverse scan directions. As demonstrated in Fig. 2d and S4, slight hysteresis is observed for the IT-4X based and PCBM based devices while the reference device without an ETL exhibits serious hysteresis behavior, suggesting that the charge accumulation at the interface was largely suppressed by the IT-4X or PCBM ETLs. In addition, we measured the hysteresis of devices using IT-4M as the ETL with different scan speeds from 0.1 to 1.0 V s−1 as well and the results are shown in Fig. S5. It is observed that the J–V curves scanned at different scan speeds just exhibited slight distinctions, further confirming negligible hysteresis in inverted PVSCs using the IT-4M ETL. Table S2 lists all the corresponding device parameters in different scan directions. The steady photocurrent and PCE measured at the maximum power point of the PVSCs with IT-4M as the ETL are presented in Fig. S6. At an applied voltage of 0.900 V, the device generates a stabilized power output of 17.46% and stable JSC of 19.39 mA cm−2, agreeing well with the values tested from the J–V curves, and further confirming the accuracy of our device efficiency characterization.
Among the main photovoltaic parameters, the most notable improvement for devices is VOC, where the VOC values increase from 1.037 to 1.072 V and further increase to 1.083 V for IT-4F, IT-4H and IT-4M ETL based PVSCs, respectively. Considering the gradual changes of LUMO levels caused by different substituents with varied electronegativity for IT-4X molecules, we plot the device VOCs and LUMOs in the same graph to explore the interrelationship between them. As shown in Fig. 2e, the values of device VOCs and LUMO levels present similar changing trends. With the gradually up-shifted LUMO levels (IT-4F, IT-4H and IT-4M are determined to be −4.19, −4.04 and −3.96 eV by CV tests, respectively), the VOCs of PVSCs increase to 1.083 from 1.037 V, indicating that the LUMO level of the ETL is critical to be appropriately regulated to maximize the voltage output of PVSCs. To further explore the intrinsic reasons for the disparity of VOCs, we examined the net photocurrent density (ΔJ, the difference of photocurrent between under illumination and in the dark) as a function of applied voltage as depicted in Fig. 2f. The compensation voltage V0 at which ΔJ = 0 is correlated with built-in potential (Vbi)
where
kB, T, A and e represent the Boltzmann constant, absolute temperature, a material parameter and the magnitude of the electron charge, respectively. The higher V0 of the PVSCs with the IT-4M ETL (V0 = 1.066 V) compared with those of IT-4F (V0 = 0.992 V) and IT-4H (V0 = 1.033 V) is ascribed to the increased forward diffusion of photogenerated carriers in the IT-4M based device. This increased diffusion implies that the Vbi across the IT-4M device is significantly higher than those of IT-4F and IT-4H devices counterparts, thus resulting in the improved VOC and PCE.

The quality of the perovskite films plays an important role in determining the device performances. A cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the completed device (ITO/P3CT-N/perovskite/IT-4X/s-Bphen/Ag) is depicted in Fig. 3a. We can see the perovskite layer with large grains sandwiched between the P3CT-N HTL and the ETL layer and the thickness of perovskite is estimated to be about 420 nm. Fig. 3b–f show the surface morphologies of a pristine perovskite layer (namely w/o) and a perovskite film capped with different ETLs (IT-4X or PCBM) examined by atomic force microscopy (AFM) in tapping mode. As shown in Fig. 3b, the pristine perovskite film presents a well-developed crystalline structure with a grain size of about a few hundreds of nanometers, and its relatively coarse surface has a large root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of 9.87 nm, in which only the s-Bphen thin layer could not prevent the direct contact between the perovskite film and Ag electrode, resulting in the inferior photovoltaic performance for the reference devices without an ETL. In comparison, both IT-4X and PCBM ETLs dissolved well in chlorobenzene (CB) and could easily wet and spread on the surface of perovskite films, so the conformal pinhole-free films with full coverage were clearly observed after coating the IT-4X or PCBM ETLs on the perovskite surface (Fig. 3c and d). In particular for the perovskite/PCBM and perovskite/IT-4M films, the surfaces were smooth and uniform with a decreased RMS roughness of 2.48 and 3.13 nm, respectively. The corresponding insets show the top-view SEM images of the pristine perovskite surface and the perovskite film covered with different ETLs (IT-4X or PCBM), agreeing well with the results of the AFM topography images (Fig. S7). Overall, the ETLs with suitable thickness not only eliminate the adverse contact between the perovskite and cathode and suppress the leakage pathway, but also guarantee efficient carrier transport, which greatly benefits the improvement of PVSC performance.
To gain insights into the electron extraction properties of the developed ETLs, steady-state photoluminescence (PL) quenching measurements were performed on the pristine perovskite film and the perovskite films covered with different ETLs. As shown in Fig. 4a, significant quenching of PL emission by the IT-4X and PCBM ETLs is observed. Obviously, the perovskite film with the IT-4M layer presents similar PL quenching efficiency to that with the PCBM ETL while exhibiting a better quenching effect compared to the other two analogues, indicating that IT-4M possesses the most appealing merits as an exceptional ETL to extract electrons from the perovskite. The relatively weak PL quenching by IT-4F could be attributed to the lower Vbi induced by its low-lying LUMO level compared to the other ETLs. Meanwhile, the pristine perovskite film showed a PL emission peak at 771 nm while the perovskite films covered with IT-4X or PCBM exhibited a slight blue-shifted PL peak from 771 to 767 nm, indicating that all the IT-4X and PCBM ETLs could effectively passivate the trap states on the perovskite surface. We speculate that the carbonyl and cyano groups in the IT-4X molecules could coordinate with the under-coordinated Pb of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite to passivate the surface traps via Lewis acid–base reaction, just as the case of IDIC reported by Huang. Time-resolved PL (TRPL) decay measurements were conducted to further analyze the carrier dynamics behaviors. As shown in Fig. 4b, the TRPL curves exhibited bi-exponential decays with fast and slow components. The pristine perovskite film has an average lifetime of 35.86 ns. The conformal coating of ETLs on the perovskite film promotes the PL decays to 7.40 ns for perovskite/IT-4F, 6.98 ns for perovskite/IT-4H, 3.78 ns for perovskite/IT-4M and 3.55 ns for perovskite/PCBM, respectively. These results suggest that carriers generated from the perovskite absorber are extracted more efficiently by the IT-4M ETL, confirming that the IT-4M ETL has a superior electron transfer property compared to the IT-4F and IT-4H ETLs.
Device stability is another key characteristic to evaluate the performance of PVSCs. The normalized PCEs of the planar inverted PVSCs with various ETLs were measured as a function of storage time in the ambient atmosphere (humidity of 30–40%, in the dark) without encapsulation. As shown in Fig. 5a, the PCE of the reference device without an ETL (w/o) shows a rapid degradation with 88% drop of its original value after 240 h of storage time. It is observed that all the PVSCs based on non-fullerene IT-4X ETLs deliver better stability than the PCBM-based devices. Particularly, the device with the IT-4M ETL retains 63% of its initial PCE value after 336 h, while the device using the PCBM ETL only produces 55% of its original PCE under the same operation conditions. To elucidate this improvement, the water contact angles of the pristine perovskite film, IT-4X or PCBM on the perovskite layer were measured (Fig. 5b). Compared with perovskite/PCBM (85.8°), larger contact angles of about 94.2°, 95.7° and 97.4° were obtained for the perovskite/IT-4F, perovskite/IT-4H and perovskite/IT-4M films, respectively. Thus, the more hydrophobic property of IT-4X could provide a better physical barrier to block H2O and O2 from penetrating the underlying perovskite layer, and contribute to the higher ambient stability of the corresponding PVSCs.
Considering the exceptional electron transport ability of IT-4X molecules, inverted PVSCs with the structure of ITO/P3CT-N/perovskite/IT-4X interlayer/C60/BCP/Ag using IT-4X as the interlayer were fabricated to extend their potential applications. The C60/BCP layers were utilized as the electron transport/cathode modification layer to promote electron collection, and the IT-4X interlayer was inserted between the perovskite layer and C60 ETL. The influences of the film thickness of IT-4X on the device performance have been investigated systematically and the corresponding results are presented in Fig. S8 and Table S3 as below. Obviously, the best device performance incorporating IT-4X as interlayers is obtained with a thickness of several nanometers (about 8 nm), which is different from the case using the IT-4X as ETLs (Fig. 2). Fig. 6a shows the optimized J–V curves of the inverted PVSCs based on different thin interlayers (w/o, PCBM, IT-4F, IT4H and IT-4M, respectively), and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table S4. The device incorporating an IT-4M interlayer presents the highest PCE of 18.92%, with a VOC of 1.086 V, a JSC of 21.84 mA cm−2, and an FF of 79.75%, which slightly outperforms the performance of typical PCBM based devices with a PCE of 18.84%. Simultaneously, the IT-4H as the interlayer also obtains an excellent performance with a PCE up to 18.19%, while the IT-4F offers a comparatively lower efficiency of 17.64%, which still exceeds the reference device (16.31%) without any interlayers. The above results indicate that incorporating the IT-4X interlayers could enhance the electron transport and improve the interfacial contact, thus promoting the device performances. Fig. 6b shows the EQE spectrum of the PVSCs based on IT-4M and PCBM interlayers, in which a strong spectral response over a wide wavelength range from 300 to 800 nm is observed. The integrated current densities calculated from the EQE spectra are both up to 21.2 mA cm−2, which are in good accordance with the JSC values obtained from J–V measurements.

In summary, the energy levels of a series of n-type non-fullerene small molecule acceptors were tuned by introducing various substituents with different electronegativities at the end of the phenyl group. These molecules served as excellent alternative ETLs to replace the commonly used PCBM in inverted PVSCs. IT-4M as the ETL obtains a peak PCE of 17.65%, which is superior to that of the typical PCBM-based device. The big differences of VOCs as well as PCEs are closely related to the internal potential in PVSCs, directly affected by the varied LUMOs of IT-4X molecules. Moreover, all the PVSCs with IT-4X ETLs show improved long-term stability compared to the reference devices under ambient conditions because of their superior hydrophobic nature. In addition, the IT-4X molecules also deliver outstanding performance when used as the interfacial layer with PCEs approaching 19%. The results in this work present the promising potential of non-fullerene small molecule acceptors for application in the PVSC field, and provide valuable insights and guidelines for the design of high-performance ETLs for perovskite optoelectronic devices.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 21572171, 51773213 and 51703131), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation funded project (Grant No. 2018M630983), the Shenzhen Peacock Plan (KQTD20170330110107046), and the National Young Top-notch Talent Support Program.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta12028e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019