 DOI: 10.1039/C5NR04471E
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 14612-14617


Linyi
Bai
,

Qiang
Gao
,

Youyi
Xia
,

Chung Yen
Ang
,

Purnandhu
Bose
,

Si Yu
Tan
 and 

Yanli
Zhao
*

Division of Chemistry and Biological Chemistry, School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 21 Nanyang Link, Singapore 637371. E-mail: zhaoyanli@ntu.edu.sg

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798

Received
4th July 2015
, Accepted 31st July 2015
First published on 31st July 2015
The bulk heterojunction (BHJ) plays an indispensable role in organic photovoltaics, and thus has been investigated extensively in recent years. While a p–n heterojunction is usually fabricated using two different donor and acceptor materials such as poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) and phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM), it is really rare that such a BHJ is constructed by a single entity. Here, we presented a photoirradiation-induced p–n heterojunction in naphthylamine-based organic photovoltaic cells, where naphthylamine as a typical p-type semiconductor could be oxidized under photoirradiation and transformed into a new semiconductor with the n-type character. The p–n heterojunction was realized using both the remaining naphthylamine and its oxidative product, giving rise to the performance improvement in organic photovoltaic devices. The experimental results show that the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the devices could be achieved up to 1.79% and 0.43% in solution and thin film processes, respectively. Importantly, this technology using naphthylamine does not require classic P3HT and PCBM to realize the p–n heterojunction, thereby simplifying the device fabrication process. The present approach opens up a promising route for the development of novel materials applicable to the p–n heterojunction.

Conjugated small molecules and polymers have been widely used as light absorbers in bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells with high performance. Rational contact between donor and acceptor molecules in a blended film facilitates efficient charge generation, and the formation of percolation paths for electrons and holes allows for effective charge extraction from the bulk film to metal electrodes. Over the past few years, significant research progress has been made in this field owing to the development of new donor and acceptor materials, the optimization of processing conditions, and the amelioration of device structures. A power conversion efficiency (PCE) of sunlight to electricity at 10% level has been achieved in organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices based on the BHJ concept. High performance has been accomplished using electron-donating polymers and electron-accepting fullerene molecules cast from a common solvent to yield a BHJ thin film. Nevertheless, the OPV devices are still challenged by the availability of suitable materials. Thus, developing novel molecular structures and device architectures to further improve the performance of photovoltaic devices has been sought after.

Naphthylamine and its derivatives are considered archetypal organic semiconducting and conjugated small molecules containing nitrogen atoms, which are promising building blocks for the realization of organic electronic devices. During the device fabrication process, this class of materials can be easily oxidized in air under photoirradiation, thus limiting their further applications. Just the other way, in our studies, we explored and utilized this oxidation process to achieve a photoirradiation induced p–n heterojunction in an OPV device. The design strategy conceived in this work is illustrated in Scheme 1. A stepwise synthetic strategy based on an oxidation process was adopted, which provided simultaneous control over both the unreacted naphthylamine as the p-type material and its oxidative product as the n-type material. This route presents access to simplify the device fabrication based on the transformation from p-type to n-type. In this case, the subsequent spin-coating process can be omitted, as it is unnecessary. Only one naphthylamine material is needed to prepare the heterojunction solution, because it automatically realizes the p–n heterojunction through the oxidation process. In addition, the ratio of p and n junctions could be controlled by different degrees of oxidation for optimizing the device performance. Such a green transformation from p-type to n-type provides a new route to further explore and extend the utilization range of BHJ in the OPV field.
Chemical structures of naphthylamine derivatives, dinaphthalen-1-yl-amine (DiNA) and its oxidative product (DiNAO), are shown in Scheme 1, and their synthesis and characterization details are included in the ESI. It was well noted that DiNA is a conjugated molecule and used as a p-type semiconductor for hole transporting purpose. Since the lone pair on the N atom is restricted by the CC bond, its electron-pushing ability is decreased while creating the electron-pulling effect, thus allowing DiNA to undergo oxidation easily. This unique property provides a possibility to blend two types (i.e., p-type and n-type) of semiconductors using one material. Herein, it was hypothesized that the oxidation process could lead to a combination of original DiNA and its oxidized compound DiNAO as a donor–acceptor pair in a photovoltaic device. In solar cells, the region where the two types of semiconductors interact is known as the p–n junction. Generally, there are two ways of generating the p–n junction. The first way involves the spin coating of two separated layers, and the second one is the spin coating of a blended solution with a suitable ratio of two different p and n components. Therefore, if this oxidation process could be controlled in a concise manner, we only need to prepare a single component solution, so that the second spin coating process would be omitted. Thus, it is worthy of exploring and studying the practical performance of such single-component-based OPV devices.
According to the analysis on the synthesis and characterization (Fig. S1–5 in the ESI), it was proposed that the oxidation of DiNA involves a radical transfer mechanism that is caused by the photoirradiation in the presence of oxygen. In addition, the choice of reaction solvent was also crucial for the oxidation process. We compared different solvents and found that the yield of oxidation was the highest in acetone, which can reach up to 80% (Table S1 in the ESI). During this process, UV-vis absorption and fluorescence spectra were recorded in an acetone solution (Fig. 1a and b). In a dilute solution, DiNA exhibits an absorption peak at around 365 nm. Upon oxidation, a new absorption peak emerged at around 490 nm with a gradual increase of its absorption intensity. The mixture of DiNA and DiNAO has a wide spectral coverage (300–600 nm), which is beneficial for the solar energy capture. The long-wavelength absorption bands with well-resolved vibronic levels in the range of 300–600 nm were assigned to intramolecular charge transfer from the donor to acceptor units. In order to further analyze the oxidation, the fluorescence of the reaction under photoirradiation upon excitation at 365 nm and 490 nm was recorded, respectively. It was observed that the fluorescence intensity of the solution decreased upon the reaction time when excited at 365 nm, while the fluorescence intensity of the same solution increased upon excitation at 490 nm. This observation thus confirms that there is indeed a charge transfer process occurring in the system for the p–n junction.
After studying photophysical properties of the two components (DiNA and DiNAO), we proceeded to perform the powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) measurements in order to obtain structural insight into the two components (Fig. 1c). From the diffraction patterns, it was found that there was a significant difference between the two components. We observed the appearance of a new peak at 14° and the disappearance of several peaks from 17° to 22° after the oxidation. The diffraction peak at 25° indicates that a strong π–π stacking interaction exists in the sample, further supporting that the two components can be considered semiconductor materials. FTIR measurements (Fig. 1d) were also carried out to understand the difference between the two components. Both the N–H stretching band at 3395 cm−1 and the carbonyl stretching band at 1652 cm−1 could be observed clearly, on account of the structural nature of DiNA and DiNAO.
To evaluate the thermal stability and energy bandgap that are key parameters of the semiconductor materials, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and cyclic voltammetry (CV) were also carried out. As shown in Fig. 1e, both DiNA and DiNAO exhibit high thermal stability up to 320 °C, rendering their suitability for operation under working conditions of BHJ photovoltaic devices. With regard to the energy level, we extracted the optical bandgap (Eg) values from their maximum absorption wavelength. It was observed that the maximum absorption wavelength lies in the region of 600 nm. Based on the equation as shown below:
Eg = 1240/λmax-edge
where
λ is the wavelength in nanometers, the bandgap was obtained to be ∼2.61 eV for DiNA and ∼2.07 eV for DiNAO. From the CV data (Fig. 1f), the HOMO and LUMO energy levels (EHOMO and ELUMO) of two components were calculated through the following equations using ferrocene (Fe(C2H5)2) as the reference potential (Eref):
EHOMO = (−4.8 + Eref − Eox) eV
Eg = ELUMO − EHOMO
where
Eref = (Eox + Ered)/2 and Eox refers to the oxidation potential. The obtained HOMO and LUMO levels of the two components are −5.60 and −2.99 eV for DiNA, and −5.85 and −3.78 eV for DiNAO, respectively.

To characterize photovoltaic properties of the two components, a solution-processed BHJ solar cell device (Fig. 2a) was fabricated on a conventional configuration of ITO glass/PEDOT:PSS/donor–acceptor functional layer/Ca/Al and tested under AM 1.5 G simulated solar light at 100 mW cm−2 (AAA grade). Detailed device fabrication and testing conditions are described in the ESI. The preparation process involves the blending of the DiNA solution for different photoirradiation times before it is spin coated as different functional layers. Thus, the oxidative process is favorable to the formation of ohmic contact as it accelerates the charge extraction and reduces the charge recombination. The proposed charge generation and transport mechanism of this integrated device is shown in Fig. 2b. The photocurrent should be produced in the BHJ layer for the integrated device as described above. The design of the integrated BHJ device is based on the following principles: (1) DiNA used as a functional layer serves as an efficient hole transport channel, which is oxidized under photoirradiation to form DiNAO for electron transportation; (2) both DiNA and DiNAO are direct bandgap materials, and thus the excitons can be easily separated due to weak binding energy; (3) the functional layer is spin-coated with a suitable speed of rotation, allowing sequential deposition of the multilayer structures and reducing the charge recombination to improve the solar cell efficiency.
The morphology of DiNA and DiNA:DiNAO blend films was characterized by atomic force microscopy (AFM). The height and phase images are shown in Fig. S6 (ESI). We also recorded thin film photoluminescence (PL) spectra to detect if the intensity is quenched. It was observed (Fig. S7 in the ESI) that the PL quenching efficiency of DiNA in both DiNA and the DiNA:DiNAO blend was ∼90%, indicating that there was an efficient exciton dissociation at the donor–acceptor interface. Moreover, there is a spectral red shift of ∼25 nm compared with the solution case, which may be attributed to the closed π–π stacking (in the DiNA case) and the charge transfer process (in the DiNA:DiNAO blend case). While AFM only probes the surface morphology of the films, high PL quenching efficiency indicates good intermixing in the DiNA:DiNAO blend between the donor and acceptor materials.
We then tested the efficiency of the solar cell device prepared by the homogeneous process. During the fabrication process, we chose dichlorobenzene as the solvent, as it possesses an appropriate boiling point and viscosity as well as a high solubility for DiNA and DiNAO. In order to determine the optimized conditions for the fabrication of the solar cell device, we prepared the device by varying the ratio between DiNA and DiNAO. As shown from the current density–voltage (J–V) curves in Fig. 2c, the fabrication of the device containing 48% of DiNAO gave rise to the best performance. The key parameters for the device performance are listed in Table 1, from which it can be seen that the short-circuit current density (JSC) from the best cell increases from 0.72 to 5.17 mA cm−2, enhanced by a factor of 3.7. In addition, this device exhibits an open circuit voltage (VOC) in the range of 0.55–0.60 V, which is in good agreement with the HOMO energy levels. Based on the results, the PCE values increased from 0.18% to 1.79% were achieved by increasing the DiNAO percentage. It was proposed that the increase in the PCE value upon the increase of DiNAO ratio is ascribed to higher JSC and fill factor (FF).
Device structure

J
SC [mA cm−2]

V
OC [V]
FF%
PCE [%]
ITO/PEDOT:PSS (30 nm)/DiNA/Al
0.72
0.55
44.27
0.18
ITO/PEDOT:PSS (30 nm)/DiNA:DiNAO (x = 0.09)/Ca/Al
1.80
0.57
44.83
0.36
ITO/PEDOT:PSS (30 nm)/DiNA:DiNAO (x = 0.21)/Ca/Al
3.49
0.57
46.75
0.93
ITO/PEDOT:PSS (30 nm)/DiNA:DiNAO (x = 0.36)/Ca/Al
3.22
0.59
53.16
1.01
ITO/PEDOT:PSS (30 nm)/DiNA:DiNAO (x = 0.41)/Ca/Al
4.28
0.60
54.29
1.39
ITO/PEDOT:PSS (30 nm)/DiNA:DiNAO (x = 0.44)/Ca/Al
4.78
0.57
59.27
1.61
ITO/PEDOT:PSS (30 nm)/DiNA:DiNAO (x = 0.48)/Ca/Al
5.17
0.59
58.74
1.79
The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra were recorded and the obtained curves are shown in Fig. 2d. All the devices with different photoirradiation times and DiNA/DiNAO ratios show the responses in the range of 300–600 nm, with the highest EQE value up to 60%. It was also observed that the shape of the performance curve is consistent with the absorption spectrum of the corresponding blend solution (Fig. 1a), indicating that both the donor DiNA and the acceptor DiNAO contribute to the photon-to-electron conversion. A ∩-shaped valley was observed between 300 and 600 nm, and the range became larger gradually due to the ratio enhancement of DiNAO over DiNA.
To further investigate the contribution of BHJ to the photocurrent of the integrated device, we also fabricated the device in the thin film state for performing various studies. Firstly, DiNA in dichlorobenzene (20 mg mL−1) was spin-coated to form a thin film. The obtained thin film serves as a functional layer to absorb UV-vis light. After forming the BHJ layer under photoirradiation, the conversion of photo-electrons could be realized. Upon photoirradiation, the oxidative product DiNAO was relatively enriched in the top surface of the blend film. The J–V curves of the integrated BHJ solar cells with different photoirradiation times and DiNA/DiNAO ratios are shown in Fig. 3a, and the detailed solar cell performance parameters are summarized in Table S3 (ESI). It was found that the performance in the thin film case was not better than that of the device prepared by the solution process, probably due to the limited conversion of DiNA to DiNAO under photoirradiation. In all of the optimized devices with thermal annealing at 300 °C, the VOC value reached a range of 0.49–0.57 V with a JSC range of 0.86–1.24 mA cm−2 and an FF range of 49.6–60.8%, offering a relatively higher PCE of 0.43%. In addition, the devices showed good reproducibility (Fig. 8 in the ESI).
As a result, the increase in the JSC value upon the extension of the photoirradiation time was observed. Here, we compared the optimized devices fabricated using the thin film with 1:1 ratio of DiNA/DiNAO as the functional layer. In such devices, a suitable ratio between the donor and acceptor contributes significantly to the enhanced JSC from 1.54 to ∼3.50 mA cm−2. Moreover, it was noted that the VOC value was slightly higher for the device with 1:1 ratio of DiNA/DiNAO than that with a random ratio after photoirradiation. The higher VOC may be ascribed to the better conductivity of the 1:1 blended film compared with that of a randomly blended film under photoirradiation. On the other hand, for the device fabricated using a randomly blended thin film under photoirradiation, the excitons generated in the film can be efficiently separated in the blend layer before transporting to the respective electrodes. In addition, it could be observed from Fig. 3b that there is a significant improvement in the performance upon prolonging the photoirradiation time for both devices fabricated from solution and thin film approaches. It is well known that an increased FF is determined by the charge carriers reaching the electrodes when the built-in field is lowered toward the open circuit voltage. In this case, there is a competition between the charge carrier recombination and transport. Thus, efficient separation occurs in the films when the excitons are generated inside, which effectively avoids the recombination and improves the device performance. Therefore, it was fully confirmed that the oxidation of DiNA to DiNAO could create a pair of donor–acceptor combination, contributing significantly to the p–n junction in OPV devices.
In summary, we have developed and demonstrated a photoirradiation induced p–n junction, and applied it in photovoltaic devices by employing DiNA as the functional layer for efficient light harvesting. The absorption of the devices can cover a range of 300–600 nm with gradual conversion enhancement upon the photoirradiation time. The integrated device shows a remarkable potential efficiency of 1.79%. Notably, the integrated devices did not require the utilization of common semiconducting materials such as poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) or phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM). Higher photocurrent density and PCE would be expected by further optimizing the device to minimize the charge recombination and to maximize the light harvesting capacity. Effective optimization of the device fabrication process opens up new opportunities in future applications. Thus, the present fabrication and optimization strategy could be extended to other newly developed devices so as to improve their conversion efficiency.
This research was supported by the National Research Foundation (NRF), Prime Minister's Office, Singapore (NRF Fellowship NRF2009NRF-RF001-015) and the Campus for Research Excellence and Technological Enterprise (CREATE) Programme – Singapore Peking University Research Centre for a Sustainable Low-Carbon Future, as well as the NTU-A*STAR Silicon Technologies Centre of Excellence under the program grant No. 11235100003.
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional synthesis and characterization details. See DOI: 10.1039/c5nr04471e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015