 DOI: 10.1039/C5NR08687F
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6693-6699


Jong Seok
Woo
,

Dong Hun
Sin
,

Haena
Kim
,

Jeong In
Jang
,

Ho Young
Kim
,

Geon-Woong
Lee
,

Kilwon
Cho
*,

Soo-Young
Park
* and 

Joong Tark
Han
*

Nano Hybrid Technology Research Center, Korea Electrotechnology Research Institute, Changwon, 641-120, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jthan@keri.re.kr

Department of Polymer Science & Engineering, Polymeric Nanomaterials Laboratory, School of Applied Chemical Engineering, Kyungpook National University, #1370 Sangyuk-dong, Buk-gu, Daegu 702-701, Republic of Korea. E-mail: psy@knu.ac.kr

Department of Chemical Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology, San 31, Hyojadong, Pohang, 790-784, Republic of Korea. E-mail: kwcho@postech.ac.kr

Received
7th December 2015
, Accepted 23rd February 2016
First published on 24th February 2016
Atomically thin and two-dimensional graphene oxide (GO) is a very fascinating material because of its functional groups, high transparency, and solution processability. Here we show that highly oxidized GO (HOGO) nanosheets serve as an effective interfacial modifier of transparent conducting films with one-dimensional (1D) silver nanowires (AgNWs) and single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs). Optically transparent and small-sized GO nanosheets, with minimal sp2 domains, were successfully fabricated by step-wise oxidation and exfoliation of graphite. We demonstrated that under-coated HOGO further decreases the sheet resistance of the SWCNT film top-coated with HOGO by increasing the contact area between the SWCNTs and HOGO nanosheets by generating hole carriers in the SWCNT as a result of charge transfer. Moreover, HOGO nanosheets with AgNWs contribute to the efficient thermal joining of AgNW networks on plastic substrates by limiting the thermal embedding of AgNWs into the plastic surface, resulting in efficient decrease of the sheet resistance. Furthermore, flexible organic photovoltaic cells with GO-modified AgNW anodes on a flexible substrate were successfully demonstrated.

Currently, one-dimensional (1D) conducting nanomaterials such as single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) and silver nanowires (AgNWs) have emerged as alternative flexible transparent electrode materials for various optoelectronic devices such as touch-panel, solar cells, and light emitting diodes. In terms of their applications, interfacial engineering of network structured films with 1D conducting materials is an important step to improve the performance in terms of electrical conductivity, environmental stability, surface roughness, and work function modulation. Particularly, the opto-electrical performance of the AgNW and SWCNT film can be affected by the wettability and functionality of the substrate and the characteristics of the passivating materials because of junction formation in their network structures and the presence of semiconducting SWCNTs. One way to enhance the opto-electrical properties of transparent conducting films (TCFs) based on 1D conducting materials is a combination of 1D and two-dimensional (2D) materials.

In this context, chemically modified graphene oxide (GO) nanosheets are very useful 2D materials because of their hydrophilic and transparent characteristics, solution processability, and the presence of abundant electron withdrawing groups. GO nanosheets are easily dispersed and exfoliated in an aqueous solution by acoustic cavitation or the use of mechanical apparatus such as a high speed homogenizer and a magnetic stirrer. However, following the deposition of GO nanosheets, the optical transmittance of the transparent film decreases due to the presence of light-absorbing sp2 carbon domains. Therefore, for applications of GO nanosheets in highly transparent components, it is better to minimize the amount of sp2 carbon by an efficient oxidation process. Moreover, the control over functional groups and the lateral size of GO nanosheets are critical if one wants to modify the network structure and the electrical properties of the film by direct deposition of GO nanosheets.
Herein, we show that the opto-electrical properties of the SWCNT and AgNW network films can be further improved by placing highly oxidized and small GO (HOGO) nanosheets below and above the conducting networks. The degree of oxidation and the size of the GO nanosheets were successfully controlled by step-wise oxidation of graphite to make highly transparent GO nanosheets. The HOGO-modified SWCNT films with sandwich structures showed enhanced conductivity of the SWCNT films by p-type doping, resulting from the enhanced contact area between the SWCNTs and GO nanosheets. Moreover, the sheet resistances of the AgNW network films on the HOGO-modified plastic substrates were effectively reduced by thermal annealing because of the limited embedding of AgNWs into the plastic substrate. We also demonstrated that a HOGO-modified AgNW anode can be successfully used as an alternative anode in flexible organic photovoltaic (OPV) cells.

We propose a new approach to prepare highly transparent and conducting network films with AgNWs or SWCNTs on plastic substrates by modifying the plastic substrate with HOGO nanosheets. They can act as a surface modifier of hydrophobic substrates, and as an interfacial modifier of the conducting network and electrical structures of the film via all-solution and low temperature processing. To prepare GO nanosheets (GO-2d), graphite powder was first oxidized by a modified Hummers method for 2 days with pure graphite (Fig. 1a). The degree of oxidation of graphite depends on the reaction time, temperature, and oxidant. However, for applications of GO as an interfacial and electrical modifier of the network film, we need HOGO nanosheets. One way to obtain HOGO from GO is centrifugal separation to remove less oxidized GO nanosheets. Therefore, we oxidized the graphite powder by a two-step process, each step lasting for 2 h (Fig. 1a). Fig. 1b and c show the chemical states of GO-2d and HOGO, in which the epoxy, hydroxyl, and carbonyl groups have been assigned in the FTIR and XPS spectra. The FTIR spectra in Fig. 1b show that a CO stretching peak and other peaks from oxidative functional groups increased after the two-step oxidation. Importantly, it was found that the area percentage of oxidized sp2 carbon decreased from 51% (GO-2d) to 29% (HOGO) after the two-step oxidation (Fig. 1c). The TGA spectrum of GO in Fig. 1d also shows that HOGO nanosheets are easier to thermally oxidize at a lower temperature than GO-2d because of a large amount of oxidized carbon atoms. The difference in the oxidation level of GO nanosheets can also be confirmed by UV-vis absorption measurements of a GO suspension in water. Importantly, a dilute HOGO solution in water is much brighter than a GO-2d solution at the same concentration of 100 mg L−1, which indicates the high oxidation level of HOGO (Fig. 1e). In effectively modifying the electrical properties of the AgNW and SWCNT films, the small HOGO nanosheets are more effective than the large GO nanosheets in terms of the porous structure of the SWCNT network film and the junction area of the AgNW network (Fig. S1). We can obtain the small HOGO nanosheets from GO-2d by centrifugal sorting, as shown in Fig. 2a and b. However, as shown in Fig. 2c, the lateral sizes of HOGO nanosheets are small enough to deposit onto the conducting network films without time-consuming centrifugation.

Based on these advantages, we first deposited the HOGO solution onto hydrophobic plastic substrates to modulate their surface energy because the AgNW and SWCNT suspensions in water can spread easily on moderately hydrophilic substrates. Moreover, the deposited HOGO nanosheets on plastic substrates can interact with the AgNWs and SWCNTs, which will be deposited onto that surface. To optimize the deposition conditions of HOGO nanosheets on the substrate, the HOGO coverage on the substrate was controlled by varying the spraying times of the 100 mg per L HOGO solution. Fig. 2d shows the water contact angles (WCAs) of the substrate before and after HOGO deposition. The WCA of the polycarbonate (PC) sheet was dramatically decreased from 75 to 53 degree even under 30% HOGO coverage without a significant decrease in the optical transmittance of the substrate. Further deposition of HOGO decreased the WCA slightly, and decreased the optical transmittance of the PC sheet to 99.35%, while that of the substrate coated with GO-2d decreased to 98.2% (Fig. S2). Therefore, we carried out spraying of the 100 mg per L HOGO solution 15 times on the bare PC substrate before deposition of the AgNWs and SWCNTs.
To demonstrate the utility of HOGO as a surface modifier of plastic substrates, the SWCNT films were first deposited on bare PC and HOGO-modified PC (HOGO-PC) films by using an automatic air spray coater, from an aqueous dispersion of SWCNTs in a 1% sodium dodecylbenzenesulfonate solution. The surfactant molecules were removed by washing with deionized water two times to recover the electrical conductivity of the SWCNT films. After that, the HOGO solution was deposited onto the SWCNT films by varying the amount of the deposited HOGO nanosheets (Fig. S3). The SWCNT films were almost covered with HOGO after spraying the solution 20 times (Fig. S3c). Importantly, a significant decrease in the transmittance was not observed even after spraying the HOGO solution 20 times. The sheet resistance, Rs of the SWCNT films was slightly decreased on the hydrophilic PC substrates treated with UV-ozone (UVO) owing to enhanced wetting of the coating solution. Furthermore, top-coating with HOGO nanosheets could decrease the Rs of the films. However, top-coating was dominant at high transmittance and very thin films because of the high contact area between SWCNTs and HOGO nanosheets (Fig. S3e). This indicates the limitation of the GO effect in relatively thick SWCNT films. This result motivated us to modify the substrate surface with HOGO to enhance the contact area between SWCNTs and HOGO to maximize the effective charge transfer from SWCNTs. Fig. 3a shows the T vs. Rs change plots of pristine SWCNT films on UVO-treated PC (SWCNT-UVO), SWCNT films on HOGO-PC (SWCNT-HOGO), HOGO-coated SWCNT films on bare PC (HOGO-SWCNT), and HOGO-coated SWCNT films on HOGO-PC (HOGO-SWCNT-HOGO). It was found that the Rs of the films was reduced by applying a HOGO layer below the SWCNT film and further decreased by deposition of HOGO nanosheets onto the SWCNT film. Fig. 3a clearly shows the dependency of the effectiveness of HOGO nanosheets on the film thickness (transmittance). In a highly transparent film (T ∼ 97%), the Rs decrease was dominant, because most of the SWCNTs in thin SWCNT films can come into contact easily with HOGO nanosheets. Moreover, the electrical properties of the HOGO-SWCNT were enhanced more effectively than that of the SWCNT-HOGO because top-coated HOGO nanosheets having small lateral sizes can penetrate into the SWCNT network, which contains pores of several tens of nanometer in size. However, there is a limitation in the contact between SWCNTs on a bare PC surface and top-coated HOGO nanosheets. Importantly, HOGO-SWCNT-HOGO sandwich structured films clearly show that the Rs can be decreased additionally even at 80% transmittance, as shown in Fig. 3a.
The Rs of the SWCNT films was sensitive to the interactions between the HOGO nanosheets and the carbon nanotubes possibly owing to the effects of doping which is clearly seen in the Raman spectra (Fig. 3b). The Raman spectrum at an excitation energy of 1.96 eV is a convolution of several peaks due to the presence of both semiconducting and metallic SWCNTs. Semiconducting SWCNTs (s-SWCNTs) display both G+ and G− peaks with Lorentzian shapes. Metallic SWCNTs (m-SWCNTs) exhibit broad Breit–Wigner–Fano (BWF) line shapes for G−, whereas the G+ peaks exhibit Lorentzian shapes. In this study, the G+ peaks for the HOGO-coated SWCNT film were upshifted by 2.5 cm−1 relative to those of the pristine SWCNT film due to the charge transfer from SWCNTs to HOGO nanosheets. Most importantly, the G+ band peak was further shifted by 1.0 cm−1 in HOGO-SWNT-HOGO sandwich structured films. This result proves that HOGO nanosheets deposited on PC also worked as a p-type doping layer via a charge transfer mechanism. A prominent reduction in the metallic BWF component also indicates that electrons from the nanotubes were withdrawn to the HOGO nanosheets.
Increasing the direct interaction area between SWCNTs and HOGO nanosheets could effectively withdraw electrons from SWCNTs as shown in Fig. 3c. Therefore, generation of hole carriers in the semiconducting SWCNTs can shift the Femi level toward the valence band. Moreover, electron extraction from the metallic SWCNTs can decrease the Schottky barrier height, which reduces the junction resistance between the metallic and the semiconducting SWCNTs.
To further demonstrate the utility of HOGO as an interfacial modifier, we fabricated AgNW networks on HOGO-modified PC substrates (Fig. 4a and b), followed by thermal treatment to reduce the Rs of the network film. The electrical conduction of these network films composed of 1D materials is typically dominated by the tube–tube or NW–NW junction resistance. Self-joining of the network junctions can be one solution to enhance the electrical conductivity of the film via post treatment. Under heating, 1D conducting materials on bare plastic surfaces can be embedded even below the distortion temperature of plastic substrates, because of the depressed glass transition temperature of the plastic surface. However, in terms of the thermal joining of AgNW networks, the thermal embedding of AgNWs can have a detrimental effect on that process by reducing the contact area at the junction before joining if the embedding occurs earlier than the thermal joining. In another point of view, the thermal embedding can promote the interfacial adhesion between AgNW networks and the plastic surface, and can self-passivate AgNWs from thermal oxidation. Therefore, we hypothesized that highly transparent HOGO nanosheets on a plastic substrate can prevent AgNWs from fully embedding into the plastic substrates at high temperatures, which can promote the efficient thermal joining of AgNW junctions maintaining partial self-passivation.

Fig. 4c shows the Rs changes of the AgNW network films on bare PC, HOGO-modified PC, and glass after thermal treatment at 150 °C with the increasing time. The Rs was dramatically reduced by thermal joining of the networks. Interestingly, on HOGO-modified PC, the Rs decrease of the AgNW film was more efficient than on bare PC and on glass. The reduced Rs of AgNW films on PC was stable during thermal treatment, while the Rs of the AgNW film on glass gradually increased after 30 min due to air oxidation. Moreover, the sheet resistance uniformity of the AgNW film was also improved on hydrophilic GO-modified PC substrates as shown in Fig. 4d and e.
The FESEM images in Fig. 5 show why the Rs changes of the film depend on the surface characteristics of the used substrates. On bare PC, the AgNWs were fully embedded in the PC surface, and only partially embedded in the HOGO-modified PC substrate, as shown in the schematic in Fig. 5a and 5b. The AFM image and height profile in Fig. 5c and 5d also verify the partial embedding of AgNWs on the plastic substrate. As mentioned, the AgNW junction on HOGO nanosheets was tightened by thermal treatment, which may induce the efficient Rs decrease of the film. Furthermore, the embedded AgNWs were stable under thermal oxidation at 150 °C. However, silver oxides on the AgNW surface were observed in AgNWs formed on glass and PC covered with HOGO nanosheets (80% coverage) (Fig. S4).
To evaluate the performance of our TCF, OPV cells with a structure of PC/HOGO-AgNW-HOGO/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiphene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS)/photoactive layer/LiF/Al were fabricated (Fig. 6a). Poly({4,8-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl}{3-fluoro-2-[(2-ethylhexyl)carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl}) (PTB7) and [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) were used as the electron donor and acceptor pair in the bulk-heterojunction of the photoactive layer (Fig. 6a). 1,8-Diiodooctane (DIO) was used as a processing additive to control the photoactive layer morphology. The photovoltaic performance and the corresponding external quantum efficiency (EQE) are shown in Fig. 6d and e. The photovoltaic performance was comparable even after the ITO electrode was replaced by the HOGO-AgNW-HOGO electrode.
As a reference cell, an ITO-based OPV cell showed a short circuit current density (JSC) of 15.04 mA cm−2, open circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.72 V, fill factor (FF) of 46.4%, and an overall power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 5.03%. On comparing the photovoltaic parameters with ITO-based OPV cells, those of HOGO-AgNW-HOGO-based OPV cells were found to be similar, with a JSC of 15.11 mA cm−2, VOC of 0.70 V, FF of 43.4%, and PCE of 4.59%. The sheet resistances of ITO and HOGO-AgNW-HOGO were 20 and 30 Ω sq−1, respectively and both electrodes were almost transparent over the entire range of visible light. Furthermore, DIO selectively dissolved PC71BM and evaporated more slowly than processing the solvent, chlorobenzene (CB), during film formation, resulting in similar phase separation in the photoactive layer morphology on both ITO and HOGO-AgNW-HOGO electrodes, which led to similar JSC values even though the wetting properties of ITO and HOGO-AgNW-HOGO substrates were different. The VOC values were also comparable because VOC is generally proportional to the difference between the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of the electron-donor polymer and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level of the electron-acceptor small molecule. However, the VOC of the HOGO-AgNW-HOGO-based OPV cell was slightly lower than that of the ITO-based OPV cell presumably due to the Fermi level difference in the electrodes generating built-in potential inside the OPV cell. FF represents the rectifying properties of OPV cells, and in this study, both OPV cells showed comparable rectifying characteristics.
In order to examine the mechanical flexibility of a TCF-based OPV cell, OPV cells were bended with a bending radius of 4R (Fig. 6d). The photovoltaic parameters were maintained over 10 bending test cycles without any OPV cell deformation, which implied that the HOGO-AgNW-HOGO on the PC substrate can function as a transparent and flexible electrode for soft electronics.

We have demonstrated that HOGO nanosheets can be used as an interfacial modifier for enhanced transparent conducting films with one-dimensional conducting nanomaterials on flexible plastic substrates. HOGO nanosheets were prepared by step-wise oxidation in order to avoid a significant decrease in optical transmittance of the films after deposition of HOGO onto the surface. The electrical conductivity of the SWCNT network films was further improved by placing the HOGO nanosheets below and onto the SWCNT films forming sandwich structures. Moreover, HOGO when placed under the AgNW networks contributed to efficient thermal welding of the AgNWs to reduce the sheet resistance of the film by preventing the AgNWs from embedding into the plastic substrate. Our results give new insights into the application of GO nanosheets as a modifier of conducting materials and plastic substrates to realize flexible transparent conducting films. Flexible OPV cells were also successfully fabricated on flexible HOGO-modified AgNW films replacing the brittle ITO film.


GO nanosheets with different amounts of functional groups were prepared by controlling the time during the process of oxidation of graphite powder (Alfa Aesar, 99.999% purity, −200 mesh) using a modified Hummers method. Briefly, 5 g of graphite and 115 mL of H2SO4 were mixed in a flask, followed by slow addition of 15 g of KMnO4 over a period of approximately 15 min under stirring in an ice-bath. Then the mixture was stirred vigorously for a certain time at room temperature. After that, for neutralization, 230 mL of deionized water was added under stirring in an ice-water bath, followed by addition of 15 mL of H2O2 (30 wt% aqueous solution) and stirring for 2 h at room temperature. The resulting mixture was precipitated and filtered to obtain the graphite oxide powder. To prepare HOGO nanosheets, this process was repeated. The exfoliation of graphite oxide powder into GO nanosheets was performed by horn sonication for 10 min with 1 g L−1 solution.


AgNWs, with an average length of 25 μm and average diameter of 35 nm, dispersed in water (0.5 wt%) were purchased from Nanopixys Inc. and used as received. To prepare the SWCNT ink for spray deposition of TCFs, the SWCNTs (which were purchased from Nano Solutions Inc., Extube) were dispersed in a 1 wt% sodium dodecylbenzenesulfonate solution at a concentration of 1 g L−1 using horn sonication for 1 h. To minimize defect formation on the SWCNT surface by strong acoustic cavitation, a 12.7 mm diameter titanium probe tip was placed 0.5 cm from the liquid surface. Bubbling by aeration at the liquid surface can be helpful in the dispersion of SWCNTs because the bubbling can produce a greater shearing effect on the particles in suspension under a less energetic acoustic flow. The sample was then subjected to two rounds of centrifugation at 10000 rpm for 60 min to remove impurities such as amorphous carbon and residual catalyst particles. The supernatant solution was deposited onto plastic substrates. The surfactant was removed by dipping in deionized water twice, for 10 min each time; this was followed by air drying at 70 °C for 5 min. The fabrication of TCFs and the deposition of HOGO nanosheets with the prepared solutions onto PC substrates were performed by using an automatic spray coater (NCS Co. Ltd, NCS-400) with a 1.2 mm diameter nozzle and 400 × 400 mm2 stage.


UV-vis-IR absorption spectroscopy was performed with a Cary 5000 to measure the absorbance of GO solutions using 1 cm quartz cuvettes and the transmittance of each film. The functional groups of the GO nanosheets were assigned by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) using a Multilab2000 (Thermo VG Scientific Inc.) spectrometer with monochromatized Al K X-ray radiation as the X-ray excitation source and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (JASCO, 4200UP). The thermal oxidation behaviors of graphite oxide powders were confirmed by thermogravimetric analysis (TA Instruments, TGA Q500). Images of the resulting films were obtained using field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, HITACHI S4800) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) (DI Nanoscope Dimension 3100). The Raman spectra were measured to characterize the electronic structure of the film at room temperature, using a high-resolution Raman spectrometer (LabRAM HR800 UV) with an excitation wavelength λ of 633 nm. The sheet resistance measurements were performed using a four-probe tester (Loresta, MCP-T610).


ITO/glass substrates were cleaned with detergent, DI water, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol sequentially under sonication. GO-AgNW-GO/PC substrates were used without further cleaning. The ITO/glass and GO-AgNW-GO/PC substrates were UV-ozone-treated for 10 min and PEDOT:PSS was spin-cast onto them. The PEDOT:PSS-coated substrates were dried at 120 °C for 30 min, and then transferred into a N2-filled glove-box. PTB7 and PC71BM were used as the photoactive materials. A PTB7:PC71BM (1:1.5) blend solution was prepared in CB at 55 °C at a total concentration of 25 mg ml−1. 3% v/v DIO was added into the blend solution at room temperature 1 h before deposition as a processing additive. The photoactive layers were spin-cast onto the PEDOT-coated substrate and dried for 1 h. Then, the LiF/Al cathode was thermally evaporated under a high vacuum (<10−6 Torr). The J–V characteristics were measured using a Keithley 4200 source-measure unit under AM 1.5G illumination with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (Oriel 1 kW solar simulator). EQE was measured using a photomodulation spectroscopy setup (Merlin, Oriel) with a xenon lamp. Bending tests were conducted using a cylinder with a radius of 8 mm inside a glove-box.


This work was supported by the Center for Advanced Soft-Electronics funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning as Global Frontier Project (2014M3A6A5060953), and by the Primary Research Program (16-12-N0101-33) of the Korea Electrotechnology Research Institute.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5nr08687f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016