 DOI: 10.1039/C2NR32946H
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 726-733
Feng Hao, Xingjian Jiao, Jianbao Li and Hong Lin*
State Key Laboratory of New Ceramics & Fine Processing, Department of Material Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, PR China. E-mail: Hong-lin@tsinghua.edu.cn; Fax: +86 10-62772672; Tel: +86 10-62772672
Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education for Application Technology of Chemical Materials in Hainan Superior Resources, College of Materials Science and Chemical Engineering, Hainan University, Haikou 570228, PR China
Received 27th September 2012, Accepted 14th November 2012
First published on 16th November 2012
Molecular modification is certified as a powerful strategy to adjust the energy alignment and electron transfer dynamics of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs). Herein, devices are assembled with three robust solvent (3-methoxypropionitrile, N,N-dimethylformamide and γ-butyrolactone) based electrolytes to elucidate the solvent dipole effects at the semiconductor–dye–electrolyte interface. Photovoltaic results demonstrate that open-circuit photovoltages of the devices vary linearly with the dipole moment of the solvents, along with an adverse dependence of the short-circuit photocurrent density under simulated irradiation. Impedance analysis reveals an apparent dipole moment-modulated conduction band edge shift of the nanocrystalline TiO2 electrodes with respect to the redox potential of the electrolyte. Furthermore, the adverse shifts of the short-circuit photocurrent are explained by a dipole dependence of the driving force for electron injection and the interfacial charge recombination, together with a notably changed charge collection efficiency. Therefore, this study draws attention to the feasibility of tuning the electron transfer dynamics and energy alignment in photoelectrochemical devices by judiciously selecting the electrolyte solvents for further efficiency improvement, especially for those alternative organic sensitizers or quantum dots with inadequate electron injection driven forces.

Recent concerns on global climate changes and increasing demand for fossil fuels have pushed the society to move towards more sustainable and renewable energy resources. Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) are of ever-growing research interest as a cost-effective alternative to conventional solid-state p–n junction silicon photovoltaics. Generally, these devices are composed of a dye-sensitized semiconductive nanocrystalline film, a redox couple in organic solvent together with a platinized cathode. Upon light absorption, excited sensitizer molecules inject electrons into the conduction band of a TiO2 electrode. These carriers are transported through the external load to the cathode to reduce the redox mediator. The oxidized dyes are regenerated by a reducing agent present in the electrolyte, which is converted to the corresponding oxidized species and subsequently regenerated at the cathode. It is generally recognized that electrolyte is a key element in the overall performance by enabling rapid dye regeneration and efficient hole transport. In particular, the solvent should have high boiling and low melting points in order to inhibit evaporation or leakage of electrolyte and meet the stringent requirements of thermal stability, a major challenge for the practical application of high-performance DSCs. Recently, low-volatile 3-methoxypropionitrile (MPN)-based electrolyte was widely applied in such robust photovoltaic devices. A slightly lower but more stable conversion efficiency under prolonged thermal stress and elevated temperatures was achieved in comparison with that of a highly volatile acetonitrile counterpart.

Compared to the massive research efforts devoted to the novel panchromatic-response sensitizer, heterocyclic additives and alternative iodine-free redox couples, little attention has been paid to the influence of organic solvents on the photovoltaic performance of DSCs. Lindquist and Kebede and Arakawa et al. investigated the spectrophotometric properties of I−/I3− based electrolytes in different solvents and postulated that various properties such as donor number (DN), viscosity and dielectric constant affected the photovoltaic properties of the DSCs. Particularly, a tradeoff between the open-circuit photovoltage (Voc) and short-circuit photocurrent density (Jsc) was widely observed as a function of the solvent DN. Recently, Meyer et al. studied the effect of solvents on incident photon-to-current conversion efficiencies (IPCEs) in a DSC sensitized with an Ru-based coordination compound and demonstrated that solvents can be used to fine-tune the spectral responses and efficiencies of the regenerative solar cells. Subsequently, the potential of electrolyte solvents to influence the efficiency of interfacial electron transfer and solar energy conversion was studied by means of resonance Raman spectroscopy. A combined experimental and theoretical approach has also been applied to elucidate the solvent and additive impact on the Voc of ZnO-based DSCs. Recently, Stergiopoulos et al. reported the Lewis DN-dependent photovoltaic responses by means of resonance Raman spectroscopy together with electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). It was revealed that an increase of the solvents' DN resulted in a marked variation of both chemical capacitance and recombination kinetics for different solvents. However, the effect of solvents on the standard redox potential of iodide/triiodide redox couple has been neglected.
Moreover, to the best of our knowledge, only a few previous studies have addressed the solvent effect on the intrinsic electron transport and interfacial charge recombination dynamics of devices with low-volatile electrolytes. However, it has been previously pointed out that organic molecules with different dipole moments, adsorbed onto the surface of semiconductors, can modify the electronic properties such as band bending, electron affinity and work function of the semiconductor electrode. This effect has been used to modify the J–V characteristics of ZnO–Au Schottky junctions, CdS/CdTe thin film solar cells and other solid-state systems. It was also reported that the relative energetics at an organic–inorganic heterojunction, composed of a compact TiO2 layer and an organic p-type semiconductor compound (spiro-OMeTAD), could be modified by organic dipole layers. Recently, the dipole moment-dependent photovoltaic characteristics were also observed with coadsorbent-loaded DSCs and indoline dye sensitized solid-state DSCs. However, this kind of surface energy alignment has not yet been exploited in electrochemical solvent effects in DSCs. As a consequence, an in-depth understanding of the solvent effect from both the energetic and kinetic viewpoints is of fundamental importance.
Herein, devices were assembled with nanocrystalline TiO2 electrodes in conjunction with three different low-volatile solvent (3-methoxypropionitrile (MPN), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), and γ-butyrolactone (GBL)) based electrolytes. The photovoltaic performance was investigated with respect to the physical properties of the employed solvents. Furthermore, the effect of the electrolyte solvent on the standard redox potential has been experimentally determined. In particular, the kinetic electron transport and charge recombination processes in such devices were systematically evaluated by EIS and intensity-modulated photocurrent/photovoltage spectroscopy (IMPS/IMVS) measurements. Interestingly, unlike the previously reported DN-dependent photovoltaic response, such impedance analyses reveal a significant dipole moment-modulated conduction band edge (ECB) displacement of the TiO2 electrodes as well as the driving force for electron injection and the interfacial charge recombination. Therefore, the obtained photovoltaic performance with a given electrolyte proves to be a collective result of the energetic offset and kinetic competition.

All solvents and reagents were used as received. MPN, DMF and GBL (Alfa Aesar), 1,2-dimethyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide (DMPII, Merck AG, Germany), N719 dye (cis-diisothiocyanato-bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato) ruthenium(II) bis(tetrabutylammonium), Solaronix, Switzerland) were used without further purification. Conducting glass plates (FTO glass, fluorine doped tin oxide over-layer, sheet resistance: 15 Ω □−1, Nippon Sheet Glass Co., Japan) were used as electrode substrates. Three different solvent based electrolytes with the same redox shuttle concentrations (0.8 M DMPII and 0.05 M I2) were employed for the device fabrication: A, DMF; B, MPN; C, GBL solvent. It is worth noting that commonly applied additives (such as N-methylbenzimidazole, guanidinium thiocyanate, 4-tert-butylpyridine and lithium iodide) were not included in the electrolytes to exclude the additive effects on the electron transfer dynamics of such devices.


Sealed devices were assembled into a sandwich configuration according to our previous reports. Briefly, TiO2 paste was composed of commercial P25 nanoparticles (Degussa AG, Germany) and ethyl cellulose in terpineol solvent according to the method described in the previous literature. Mesoporous TiO2 electrodes were obtained by successive spreading of TiO2 paste on an FTO glass electrode using a screen printing protocol, and subsequently annealed at 500 °C for 30 min. The thickness of the TiO2 film, characterized using a high-resolution step profiler (XP-1, MTS, USA), was ca. 10 μm. The resultant TiO2 films were then stained by immersing them in a 0.5 mM anhydrous ethanolic solution of N719 dye at room temperature for 16 h. Subsequently, the dye-sensitized TiO2 electrode was rinsed with anhydrous ethanol and dried in moisture free air. The platinized cathode was prepared by sputtering and sealed with the TiO2 electrodes by a 25 μm thick Surlyn hot-melt ring. The internal space was filled with electrolyte through pre-drilling holes. Finally, the electrolyte introduction hole was sealed with a Surlyn sheet under a thin glass cover by heating to produce the complete device. The active area of the devices was 0.16 cm2. Five devices were assembled for each set of electrolyte, and the photovoltaic parameters presented here are the average value.


The J–V characteristics of DSCs were obtained under an illumination of AM 1.5 sunlight (100 mW cm−2), realized by a solar simulator (91192, Oriel, USA, calibrated with a standard crystalline silicon solar cell). J–V curves were measured by applying an external bias voltage to the cell and measuring the generated photocurrent response with a digital source meter (Keithley 2400, Keithley Instruments, USA). Incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) was measured applying an IPCE measurement apparatus (PEC-S20, Peccell Technologies Inc., Japan), which uses an optical fiber (3 mm in diameter) for monochromatic irradiation (incident power, 2 mW cm−2 at 480 nm).


EIS plots were recorded in the dark at various applied negative voltages over the frequency range of 0.03 Hz to 100 kHz by using a CHI 650C electrochemical analyzer with the amplitude of the alternative signal being 10 mV. The obtained spectra were fitted with Z-View software in terms of the appropriate equivalent circuit. The standard potential of the electrolyte was determined from the potential difference between a Pt wire, immersed in the redox electrolyte, and a Ag/Ag+ reference electrode. Square wave voltammetry was performed in a standard three-electrode cell with a 10 μm platinum ultramicroelectrode as the working electrode. IMVS and IMPS were performed on a ZAHNER CIMPS system (Zahner, Zahner-Electrik GmbH & Co. KG, Germany). Stationary as well as sinusoidal modulated light was supplied with a green LED with a maximum wavelength of 530 nm. The LED was controlled by a potentiostatic feedback loop. The selected AC amplitude is in the range of 5% to 15% of the stationary DC value.


Three different robust solvents were chosen in the present study, whose physical properties are tabulated in Table 1. Notably, all the selected organic solvents have a high boiling point above 150 °C to ensure satisfactory low volatility and thus thermal stability, high dielectric constant around 36–42 to dissolve the iodide salts to form free solvated ions, low viscosity in the range of 0.79 to 1.73 cP and high conductivity above 5.42 mS cm−1 to maintain a high diffusion coefficient of I−/I3− redox couples in the electrolytes. The solvent refractive indexes of the three electrolytes lie in the range of 1.4–1.43, rendering sufficient light scattering property, which is beneficial to the light harvesting performance in the mesoporous titania electrodes.

Solvents
Solvent properties
Photovoltaic performance
tbp (°C)
DN
ε
DM
η (cP)
σ (mS cm−1)
n
Jsc (mA cm−2)
Voc (mV)
FF
PCE (%)
a Boiling point.b Donor number.c Dielectric constant.d Dipole moment.e Viscosity at 25 °C.f Conductivity at 25 °C.g Refractive index.h Short-circuit photocurrent density.i Open-circuit photovoltage.j Fill factor.k Overall conversion efficiency.l Photovoltaic parameters presented here denote the mean value of five samples for each set of electrolyte; the devices exhibited pretty good PCE reproducibility of less than ±0.08%.
DMF
158
26.6
36.7
3.82
0.79
8.67
1.428
9.44
754
0.72
5.09
MPN
164
15.4
40
4.04
1.6
5.42
1.403
12.78
720
0.63
5.82
GBL
204
18.0
41.7
4.27
1.73
6.02
1.436
15.66
688
0.54
5.77
Fig. 1 demonstrates the J–V characteristics of DSCs in conjunction with different electrolyte solvents under a simulated air mass of 1.5 global (AM 1.5G) full sunlight intensity. Detailed photovoltaic parameters of the open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF) and the overall power conversion efficiency (PCE) are also gathered in Table 1. Apparently, it is observed that the photovoltaic performance can be greatly tuned by altering the solvent of the electrolyte, despite it having the same redox concentration and photoanode structure. In conjunction with MPN solvent, device B exhibits a Jsc of 12.78 mA cm−2, a Voc of 720 mV, and a FF of 0.63, yielding a PCE of 5.82%. Note that the obtained efficiency is far below the optimum result in our earlier study due to the exclusion of additives (such as N-methylbenzimidazole, guanidinium thiocyanate, 4-tert-butylpyridine and lithium iodide) in the electrolytes and different photoanode configurations. Interestingly, device A with DMF solvent confers a significantly enhanced Voc up to 754 mV and device C incorporated with GBL solvent evokes a prominent Jsc of 15.66 mA cm−2. It is quite impressive that such high values of Voc and Jsc could be obtained in the absence of any additives aforementioned in the electrolyte, which has been widely recognized to enhance the individual photovoltaic parameters. However, these increments are compensated by a decrease in either Jsc or Voc value, yielding a slightly declined power conversion efficiency of 5.09% for device A and 5.77% for device C, respectively. The corresponding photocurrent action spectra of cells with different solvents as a function of the incident wavelengths are also depicted in the right panel of Fig. 1, demonstrating a maximum value of 63.0%, 55.7%, and 36.7% at 540 nm for devices with GBL, MPN and DMF solvent, respectively, which is in accordance with the order of measured photocurrent magnitude.
The photovoltaic properties of the devices with various solvents have been related to their physicochemical properties. Among these properties, it has been generally recognized that a device with a higher donor number (DN) solvent generally led to a promoted Voc as accompanied with a somewhat attenuated Jsc. For instance in this study, device A with DMF solvent with a larger DN of 26.6 with respect to device B with MPN (15.4) yields an enhanced Voc (ca. 34 mV), together with a declined Jsc value (ca. 3.34 mA cm−2). This phenomenon has been widely recognized and explained by the donor–acceptor reaction between the non-aqueous solvents and triiodide anions in the electrolyte in terms of:
solvent + I3− → solvent − I3− → solvent − I2 + I−
(1)
Furthermore, the Lewis basic solvents could easily adsorb onto the nanocrystalline TiO2 electrode surface, leading to the formation of a solvent passivating layer and thus retarding the recombination of electrons from the TiO2 electrode to I3− acceptors in the electrolyte. As explicitly depicted in the dark current curves of Fig. 1, device A with higher DN solvent electrolyte exhibits lower dark current relative to that of device B at an identical applied potential. However, unlike the previously reported DN-dominated photovoltaic response, the Voc of a DSC device is proven to be affected by other factors besides DN. In our study, GBL based device C with a moderate DN (18.0) in the selected three solvents evokes a lowest Voc value of 688 mV together with a highest Jsc of 15.66 mA cm−2, which is in accordance with a recent report by Ho et al. Therefore, an in-depth understanding of the solvent effect on the electron transport and recombination dynamics as well as the energetic alignments of devices with different low-volatile electrolytes is highly desirable.
It is widely recognized that Voc is determined by the energy difference between the quasi-Fermi level (EFn) of electrons in the nanocrystalline titania electrode under illumination and the redox level of the electrolyte (EF,redox), following the formula:
(2)
where
ECB is the titania conduction band edge, kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, Nc is the density of accessible states in the conduction band and nc is the electron density in the conduction band of the TiO2 electrode. The EFn is controlled by the balance between electron injection and back reaction of the photoinduced electrons with the electron acceptor in the electrolyte and the oxidized dye. This balance is affected by three principal factors of light harvesting/injection efficiency, shifts in the position of the titania conduction band edge relative to the redox level of the electrolyte, and retardation of back transfer of electrons to the oxidized species in the electrolyte. To this end, the standard redox potential of I3−/I− redox couple was first measured in electrolytes by employing the ultramicroelectrode in conjunction with the square-wave voltammetry technique. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the standard electrochemical potential EF,redox is estimated from the peak potentials from the square-wave voltammograms. The measured EF,redox increase for MPN, GBL, and DMF, had magnitudes of 0.24, 0.27, and 0.27 V (vs. Ag/Ag+) respectively. It is apparent that the standard redox potential increases by 30 mV when altering the solvent from MPN to GBL and DMF. Such a phenomenon may be attributed to the complex formation between solvents and triiodide in the electrolyte, thus changing the redox concentrations in the electrolytes.
Furthermore, the conduction band edge of the TiO2 electrode is sensitive to the surface molecular modification, e.g., the characteristics of absorbed solvents in the present contribution. To shed light on the influence of the solvents on the electron transport dynamics and energetic alignments, EIS measurements under dark conditions with various applied negative potentials were performed, detailing the current response to a harmonically modulated voltage superimposed on a constant applied bias voltage. The resulting frequency response typically shows three well separated semicircles in the Nyquist diagram, the Nernst diffusion of the redox mediator within the electrolyte, the electron transfer at the sensitizer–titania–electrolyte interface as well as their diffusion in the nanoparticulate network and the electrochemical reaction at the counter electrode–electrolyte interface in the order of rising frequency. The commonly applied transmission line model is presented in Fig. 3, in which two parallel channels representing the electron transport through the TiO2 electrode and the hole transport in the electrolyte within the pores of the nanocrystalline TiO2 film are the fundamental parts of the conceptual model.
On the basis of the transmission line model, the electron transport resistance (Rt) in the mesoporous TiO2 electrode coupled with the charge transfer resistance (Rct) and the corresponding chemical capacitance (Cμ) at the dye–titania–electrolyte interface are obtained by fitting the measured impedance data. Generally, Rt is related to the electron density (nc) in the conduction band of the TiO2 electrode, which is given by
(3)
Thereby, the electron transport resistance Rt can be expressed in terms of the Boltzmann distribution:
(4)
where
R0 represents the electron transport resistance at the transport level and is generally considered invariable for a given film geometry. As represented in Fig. 4(a), Rt exhibits exponential behaviour and decreases as the applied forward bias voltage becomes more negative. Explicitly, device A with DMF solvent shows a much higher Rt value compared to those of devices with MPN and GBL solvents at an identical bias voltage. More importantly, these semi-logarithmic plots for these three devices exhibit parallel behaviour with a displacement of the straight lines arising from a shift of the conduction band edge position (ECB) with respect to the redox potential of the electrolytes (EF,redox). In comparison with the MPN based device B, a notable upward shift of the conduction band edge energy level (ECB) relative to the electrolyte redox level (EF,redox) of approximately 44 mV is observed in device A with DMF solvent. Conversely, a ∼48 mV downward displacement relative to device B is clearly observed in GBL based device C. In combination with the preceding determined electrolyte redox potentials, it is evident that a ∼74 mV upward displacement in device A with DMF electrolyte and a 18 mV downward shift in the TiO2 conduction band edge (ECB) in device C with GBL electrolyte with respect to that of the MPN based device B are observed, as vividly demonstrated in Fig. 5.
Therefore, changes in the Voc in devices with different electrolyte solvents could be qualitatively explained by a dipole-modulated shift of ECB with respect to the redox potential of the electrolyte. This effect is shown in terms of energetic alignment diagrams of the titania–electrolyte interface (Fig. 5). The dipole of the solvent molecule layer at the TiO2 surface shifts ECB in a direction that decreases the energy difference between ECB and EF,redox because the dipole layer consists of solvent molecules with a dipole moment pointing away from the TiO2 surface (positive dipole). This explains qualitatively the correlation between the solvent molecular dipole moment and the Voc. Such a phenomenon is in accordance with the dipole moment-dependent photovoltaic characteristics as observed in the case of coadsorbents of phosphonic, benzoic, and dicarboxylic acid derivatives. Furthermore, a similar dipole-dominated conduction band edge shift is also noticed in the indoline dye (D102, D131 and D149) sensitized solid-state DSCs, however, the surface dipole potential caused by the absorption of the dye was likely modified by other molecular and ionic species, such as protons released during dye adsorption, lithium ions present in the hole transport materials, and the tert-butylpyridine (TBP) additive in the devices.
The charge transfer resistance Rct is further scrutinized to comprehend the charge recombination dynamics at the TiO2–electrolyte interface. On the basis of the Gerischer model, electrons transfer from the conduction band or surface states to unoccupied electronic levels, and an exponential dependence of the interfacial electron-transfer resistance on the quasi-Fermi level position can be expected as follows:
(5)
where
R0 and β are constants. As depicted in Fig. 4(b), device A with DMF solvent shows a higher Rct value as compared to that of devices B and C at an identical applied bias voltage, displaying a significant dipole-dependent interfacial charge recombination. It is worth noting that the surface trap states play a crucial role in the recombination mechanism due to the energetic overlap with oxidized states of the redox electrolyte (Dox).Fig. 6 schematically depicts the density of conduction and valence band states in the TiO2 electrode as a function of energy (DCB and DVB, respectively) with an exponential tail of trap states (DT) below the conduction band edge ECB. Electrons trapped at the surface of the TiO2 nanocrystals can tunnel into oxidized states of the redox electrolyte (Dox), as indicated by the red arrow. The energetic overlap of Dox with TiO2 trap states (solid gray) is depicted in Fig. 6(a) and (b) for an interface without a dipole layer and with a dipole layer (DL), respectively. Obviously, adsorption of a solvent molecule with a positive dipole moment shifts the conduction band edge toward the EF,redox and increases the overlap of the TiO2 trap states with oxidized species of the electrolyte, resulting in a higher recombination rate at the dye–titania electrode–electrolyte interface.
Based on the energetic alignments at the electrolyte–electrode interface, the electron injection efficiency (φinj) is known to be vital to the photocurrent output of a DSC device. On account of the identical dye sensitizer (N719), the φinj is undeniably related to the conduction band edge (ECB) of the semiconducting electrode. Evidently, the ECB shifts linearly with the dipole moment of the electrolyte solvents as illustrated in Fig. 5, which will significantly alter the electron injection from the excited sensitizer to the conduction band of the TiO2 electrode. A device surrounded by a solvent with a large dipole moment will potentially shift the conduction band edge toward the redox level of the electrolyte, thereby prompting the photoinduced electron injection driven force. Moreover, the HOMO or/and the LUMO of the sensitizer can be altered by the different dipolar moment layer at the dye–electrolyte–titania electrode interface, such as the coadsorbents and different indoline dye sensitized solid-state DSCs. More advanced characterization technology is needed to further confirm the energetics of the dye molecules in conjunction with different solvent electrolytes, such as the transient absorption spectroscopy.
Furthermore, assuming that the injected electrons are the sum of electrons collected on the FTO substrate and that the electrons lost by recombination and the rate constants for these processes are independent of each other, the charge collection efficiency (ηcol) can be estimated from the electron collection time and lifetime as follows:
(6)
where
Jinj and Jr are the electron-injection current density from dye to TiO2 photoanode and the recombination current density, respectively. Therefore, IMPS and IMVS measurements were conducted to determine the electron collection time (τc) and lifetime (τn) of photogenerated electrons in a wide range of incident light intensities. Theoretically, IMPS measures the periodic photocurrent response of a testing cell by a small sinusoidal perturbation of the light intensity superimposed on a larger, steady background level, providing information on the charge transport and back reaction under short-circuit conditions, whilst the IMVS uses the same intensity perturbation, however, a periodic modulation of the photovoltage was applied, detailing the dynamics of the photogenerated electron lifetime under open-circuit conditions. Fig. 7 shows the plots of the electron lifetime, electron collection time as well as the derived charge collection efficiency obtained from IMVS/IMPS measurements as a function of the incident light intensities for devices with different electrolyte solvents. Obviously, the difference in the electron collection time (τc) in conjunction with the investigated electrolytes is negligible with respect to the electron lifetime (τn). Generally, the ηcol is determined by the competition between electron transport in the photoanodes and back electron recombination between the injected electrons and triiodide species in the electrolyte. Notably, at a given incident light intensity, device C with GBL solvent confers significantly higher τn and ηcol than that of devices A and B. For instance, under an illumination of 150 W m−2, the ηcol for GBL, MPN and DMF based device is 97%, 94% and 90% respectively, in accordance with the observed magnitude order of photocurrent density. This can be rationalized by the collective effects of the conduction band edge shifts and free conduction band electron densities. Therefore, a dipole-dependent driving force for electron injection and the interfacial charge recombination, together with a notably varied charge collection efficiency, are proven to be the primary contributors for the short-circuit photocurrent density of devices with different solvents.

In summary, the solvent effect on the electron transport and recombination dynamics of three different robust electrolytes based DSCs was clarified. Photovoltaic results demonstrate that Voc of the devices vary linearly with the dipole moment of the solvents, along with an adverse dependence of the Jsc under standard irradiation. Unlike the commonly reported Lewis basicity-dependent behavior, electrochemical impedence analysis reveals an apparent dipole moment-modulated conduction band edge (ECB) shift of the TiO2 electrodes with respect to the redox potential of the electrolyte. Furthermore, the adverse shifts of Jsc are explained by a dipole dependence of the driving force for electron injection and the interfacial charge recombination, together with a notably varied charge collection efficiency. Therefore, the obtained photovoltaic performance of a given device proved to be a collective result of both the energetic offsets and the kinetic competitions. This study draws attention to the feasibility of tuning the electron transfer dynamics and energy alignment in DSC devices by judiciously changing the electrolyte solvents for further improvement of the DSC photovoltaic performance, more importantly, opening a new possibility to improve electron injection efficiencies of alternative sensitizers with LUMO level below the unmodified TiO2 conduction band level, or novel quantum dot-sensitized solar cells with inadequate electron injection driven forces.


Financial support from the National High Technology Research and Development Program of China (2006AA03Z218 and 2011AA050522) and the International Cooperation S&T Cooperation Program of China (2010DFA64360) are gratefully acknowledged.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013