 DOI: 10.1039/C9NJ03212F
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 17980-17990


Ramya
M.
,

Nideep
T. K.
,

Nampoori
V. P. N.
 and 

Kailasnath
M.
*

International School of Photonics, Cochin University of Science and Technology, Kochi, India. E-mail: kailas@cusat.ac.in

Received
20th June 2019
, Accepted 22nd October 2019
First published on 24th October 2019
We report the successful control of the ZnO nanostructure morphology by a simple solution method using alcohols such as methanol, ethanol, butanol, hexanol, octanol and decanol as solvents. Morphology changes were noticed from nanodots to nanorods and back to nanodots with respect to the length of the alkyl group associated with the solvents as revealed by FESEM and TEM analysis. XRD analysis revealed the presence and purity of the prepared ZnO nanostructure. The optical properties of the ZnO nanostructures were investigated using UV-visible spectroscopy and photoluminescence spectroscopy. The changes in the defect state concentration were analyzed using XPS spectra. The PL spectra revealed the dependence of the UV and visible emission intensities on the defect states, size and length of the ZnO nanostructures. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the synthesized ZnO nanostructures are good candidates for the fabrication of photoanodes in Dye Sensitized Solar Cells (DSSCs). The power conversion efficiency of such DSSCs was found to vary according to the ZnO morphology.

The development of a methodology for the growth behaviour of nanoparticles in a colloidal solution has become an interesting subject in nanoscience and nanotechnology. One of the most important tasks in nanotechnology is to prepare nanoparticles in a size selective and controlled manner. The growth behaviour of nanoparticles in a colloidal suspension depends on both the extrinsic and intrinsic physicochemical parameters. Many reports suggest that nanoparticles exhibit unique properties compared to bulk materials due to various intrinsic parameters such as chemical composition, crystalline form, size, shape, porosity, surface area, and surface chemistry. Extrinsic parameters such as the dispersing medium, reaction temperature, pH etc. determine the agglomeration rate, which in turn causes a change in the intrinsic properties. Surface charges strongly depend on the agglomeration rate of the nanoparticles in a colloidal solution. Nanoparticles with definite size and shape can be stabilized by controlling the surface energy. In order to reduce the surface energy, the nanoparticle surface is capped with surfactant ligands or polymers which can control the particle size and shape by preventing agglomeration. In general, uncapped nanoparticles in a colloidal solution exhibit complex growth behaviour and it is very difficult to control their physicochemical properties. Studies show that the nanoparticle core–core interactions are the driving forces for aggregation. Functionalized nanoparticles with long chain ligands prevent aggregation and result in controlled size and shape. Here, the solvent–ligand interactions are said to dominate over the core–core interaction.

Zinc oxide (ZnO) is one of the most important II–VI semiconductors with a direct energy band gap of 3.37 eV and a large exciton binding energy (about 60 meV). ZnO as a material has gained great interest in the nanoworld due to its unique optical properties and wide range of applications. Controlled synthesis of ZnO nanostructures with various morphologies such as nanowires, nanobelts, nanorods, quantum dots, nanohelixes and nanodisks has been a focus point of recent research in the development of many novel materials and devices. Several chemical methods can be employed for the synthesis of ZnO nanostructures. The solution method is considered to be one of the favourite methods, because of its easiness and low cost. In the solution method, various types of growth mechanisms, nucleation, Ostwald ripening, aggregation and coarsening, are the causes of the formation of different nanocrystalline structures. The growth mechanism of nanostructures is highly sensitive to various external parameters, such as the choice of the liquid medium, temperature, pH value of the solution, reaction time, precursors and capping molecules. So the controlled synthesis of different morphologies is a difficult task in the above method. However, one can tailor the growth mechanism by the selection and manipulation of suitable growth control parameters.
The choice of solvent is an important parameter for controlling the aggregation rate in the growth mechanism. The liquid medium can affect the stabilization of the reactants or products, through the non-covalent interaction occurring between them. The kinetics of the growth rate depends on the properties of the medium such as viscosity, dielectric constant, polarity, dipole moment, solubility and coordination ability. These chemical properties of the solvent in coordination with the surface properties of the nanoparticles are expected to influence the particle–particle interactions.
In the present work, we have used alcohols such as methanol, ethanol, butanol, hexanol, octanol and decanol as solvents to tune the morphology of ZnO from nanodots to nanorods and back to nanodots. Since the growth process of ZnO nanoparticles in the alcohol phase is relatively slow compared to that in aqueous solution, one can properly tailor the morphology and physical properties of nanoparticles in an alcohol medium. This is the primary concern to select an alcohol as the reaction medium. Xu Liu et al. synthesized uncapped ZnO quantum dots that emit in the green-orange region using an alcohol as a solvent. As per this report, a regular change in the particle size can be expected with respect to the alkyl group of the solvent. Since the inhibition rate of a longer alkyl group is lower than that of shorter ones, the particle size increases with respect to the length of the alkyl group. In another report, the effect of different parameters like temperature, dielectric constant, viscosity and solubility on the growth kinetics of ZnO nanoparticles in an alcoholic medium has been discussed. To the best of our knowledge, to date only the size tuning of ZnO nanoparticles has been reported with respect to the length of the alkyl group in alcohols. In this context, we report a simple solution method for the morphological tuning of ZnO nanostructures achieved with respect to the length of the alkyl group associated with the alcohols.
Rapid energy consumption and environmental pollution are considered to be major issues in the present and future. Solar cells are important photovoltaic power devices that offer a solution for many environmental and energy problems. They convert solar energy directly into electrical energy on the basis of the photoelectric effect. Specifically, third generation solar cells like polymer-based and dye/quantum dot-sensitized solar cells have attracted research interest due to their low cost and simple fabrication processes compared to their first and second generation counterparts. However, the efficiency of such solar cells is found to be inferior to that of conventional devices due to the increased carrier trapping and recombination probabilities. Due to the above fact, tremendous research activities are on-going for enhancing the efficiency of dye sensitized solar cells.
In 1991, O’Regan et al. fabricated Dye Sensitized Solar Cells (DSSCs) based on TiO2 as a photoanode. A typical DSSC consists of a photoanode with transparent conductive oxides with a visible light harvesting dye, a redox electrolyte and a platinum or carbon coated counter electrode. The efficiency of the DSSC depends on the nature and compatibility of each one of its components. In particular, the photoanode in DSSCs plays a major role in the charge generation and transfer processes. In most cases, TiO2 is used for the fabrication of the photoanode. Nanostructures with various morphologies are employed for the construction of photoanodes, which can suppress the recombination probability and improve the charge transfer. As per the reports, it is very difficult to prepare various morphologies of TiO2 nanostructures due to their high temperature synthesis. Many recent studies proposed that ZnO can be a potential alternative photoanode material in DSSCs because of the following reasons. Compared to TiO2, (i) ZnO has similar physical properties and almost the same direct bandgap and (ii) ZnO has improved electronic properties such as higher electronic mobility as well as the ability to grow in all dimensions through simple techniques.
In this work, the prepared ZnO nanostructures were used for the preparation of photoanodes in the fabrication of DSSCs. The ZnO morphology dependent efficiency of the fabricated DSSCs was also estimated.

A solution method incorporating ultrasonication was employed in the preparation of ZnO nanostructures using zinc acetate dihydrate (Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O, Sigma Aldrich, 99.999%) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH, Merck) as chemical reagents. Ultrasonication in the solution method helps to increase the surface area of the nanostructures and to maintain size uniformity. 0.1 M zinc acetate dihydrate and 0.5 M NaOH were dissolved in solvents such as methanol, ethanol, butanol, hexanol, octanol and decanol under constant magnetic stirring. The NaOH solution was added dropwise to the zinc acetate dihydrate suspension under ultrasonication (EQUITRON, 53 kHz, 100% power factor) at room temperature. After 10 minutes of sonication, a transparent white solution was formed. This solution was heated at a constant rate to a temperature of 80 °C for 2 hours and was kept at room temperature for a day to form the ZnO nanostructures.


The structure and purity of the prepared ZnO nanostructures were examined using various characterization techniques. The phase and crystallinity of the prepared samples were examined using a Bruker AXS D8 Advance X-ray diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation. The morphology of the synthesized samples was analyzed using a high resolution transmission electron microscopy HRTEM (Model: JEM 2100) and Nova Nano FESEM. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was carried out at room temperature using a KRATOS Axis ultra system. The absorption and emission spectra of the prepared ZnO nanostructures were recorded using a JASCO V-570 UV-vis-NIR spectrophotometer and a Cary Eclipse Varian spectrofluorometer respectively. The BET (Brunauer–Emmett–Teller) surface area was characterized using a Tristar-3020.


In order to fabricate DSSCs, 100 mg of the ZnO nanostructure was mixed with 3 ml of Triton X-100 and the mixture was stirred for 2 hours to get a unique paste. The paste was coated on FTO glass by the doctor-blade technique. The resulting film was sintered at 450 °C for 3 hours to remove the organic solvents and was used as the photoanode in the DSSC fabrication. The film was then soaked in a methanol–acetonitrile (1:1) solution containing 0.5 mM N719 dye (Solaronix SA, Switzerland) for 10 hours at room temperature. The photoanode was thoroughly washed with absolute ethanol to remove the excess dye. The counter electrode was prepared by pasting patisol (Solaronix SA, Switzerland) on a clean FTO substrate which has a pre-drilled hole in it. This counter electrode was then sintered at 450 °C for half an hour. To assemble the cell, surlyn film was sandwiched between the dye-sensitized photoanode and the Pt-counter electrode by hot pressing. Iodolyte electrolyte was injected through the hole provided in the counter electrode. The active surface area of the fabricated cell was found to be approximately 0.25 cm2.

The photocurrent density–voltage characteristics (J–V curve) of the DSSC were studied using a Keithley 2400 source meter under stimulated illumination (AM 1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2) provided by a solar light simulator. The fill factor (FF) and the power conversion efficiency (PCE) were estimated by the following equations
where
Pmax is the maximum power output, JSC is the short circuit current density, VOC is the open circuit voltage, Pin is the incident light power, and Jmax and Vmax are the maximum current density and voltage respectively in the J–V curves. The Internal Power Conversion Efficiency (IPCE) was measured using a PVE300 photovoltaic QE system.


The FESEM images of the ZnO nanostructures synthesized in different alcohol solvents are shown in Fig. 1. The nanostructures synthesized using methanol, ethanol, butanol, hexanol, octanol, and decanol were named Sample A, B, C, D, E, and F respectively. The FESEM image of ZnO prepared in methanol as the solvent (Sample A) reveals a nanodot shape with an average particle size of 17 nm. In the ethanol medium (Sample B), both nanodots and rods were formed and it acts as an intermediate state between the formation of nanodots and nanorods. In sample C, regularly arranged nanorods are manifested (∼27 nm in diameter, ∼62 nm in length). In the hexanol medium (Sample D), longer nanorod shapes are shown (∼18 nm in diameter, ∼90 nm in length). In the octanol medium (Sample E), a large number of nanodots along with fewer nanorods with increased rod length were formed. This state is also found to act as a second intermediate stage, which corresponds to the optimum alkyl group length of the medium, above which there is a tendency to inhibit the growth. In the decanol medium, nanodots with particle sizes larger than that in methanol were formed. The size and length distribution of the prepared samples are provided in the ESI, Fig. S1 and S2. As the alkyl group length of the solvent increases, a clear change in the morphological aspect from dots to rods can be noticed.

The morphology of the synthesized ZnO nanostructures was again confirmed using TEM analysis as shown in Fig. 2. The result is in good agreement with the FESEM analysis. Sample A and F show nanodot structures with small and large particle sizes respectively. Sample C and D consist of clearly dispersed nanorods with increasing length with respect to the alkyl group length of the solvent. Sample B and Sample E are the transition states from nanodots to nanorods and vice versa. These results confirm that the alkyl group length of the solvents plays an important role in the growth kinetics of ZnO nanoparticles.
The crystallographic nature of ZnO nanorods and nanodots was further examined using high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) as shown in Fig. 3. The HRTEM images of the nanodots show a crystalline plane with a spacing of ∼0.30 nm, corresponding to the (100) plane, whereas for the nanorods it is ∼0.25 nm, corresponding to the (101) plane of ZnO. The crystal growth velocity is also found to vary in different directions. The growth velocity of the ZnO (101) plane is the fastest compared to the other planes. Therefore the (101) plane is the dominant growth direction that results in the formation of ZnO nanorods. A schematic representation of the ZnO nanostructure formation is shown in Fig. 4.
The FESEM and TEM observations of the prepared samples further revealed the significance of the alkyl group length of the alcohols in the evolution of the ZnO nanostructure morphology. As the alkyl group length of the solvent increases, the obtained morphology of ZnO was found to change from nanodots to nanorods with an increase in the length aspect up to the critical limit. But above the limit, most of the particles assume a dot structure with a very few growing to longer rods. It is very interesting to note that the tuning of the size and structure of ZnO particles is achieved by using different alcohols as the reaction medium. Unlike the previous report of ZnO size control with respect to the alkyl group length of alcohols, the present study successfully demonstrates the control of the nanostructure morphology.
In this study, zinc acetate dihydrate was used as the zinc source and sodium hydroxide acts as a hydrolyzing agent. The resulting morphologies of the ZnO nanostructures are generally affected by various growth controlling factors. The precursor concentration, reaction temperature and reaction time are kept constant for all the reactions. So the solvents are solely responsible for the final morphology of the products and the morphology tuning from nanodots to nanorods. The length of the rods is found to increase with the increase in the number of –CH2 bonds, which in turn affects the polarity, viscosity, and solvency of the alcohol. These factors can greatly influence the growth rate of the structure in the lattice. In agreement with the earlier report, there is a faster growth rate observed in weak polar solvents. In the strong polar solvent methanol, the growth rate is found to be slower as compared to that in the other solvents. But in decanol, the morphological aspect was found to assume a dot like structure. These notable changes in growth kinetics can also affect the physicochemical properties of the nanostructures as shown in Table 1.
Solvents
Formula
Relative polarity
Dielectric constant
Dipole moment (Debye)
Viscosity (cp 20 °C)
Methanol
CH4O
0.791
33
1.6
0.54
Ethanol
C2H6O
0.654
24
1.7
1.08
1-Butanol
C4H10O
0.586
17.5
1.66
2.59
1-Hexanol
C6H14O
0.559
12.5
1.65
4.6
1-Octanol
C8H18O
0.534
10.3
1.7
7.4
1-Decanol
C10H22O
<0.5
8.1
1.6
10.9
The formation of different nanostructure morphologies also depends upon the aggregation rate, which is a function of the surface charge of the colloidal medium. The surface charge of the colloidal solution can be directly estimated by measuring the zeta potential (ζ) and it is an important parameter for determining the stability of nanoparticles in a solution. The zeta potential depends on the external suspension conditions (pH, temperature, ionic strength) and intrinsic particle properties such as size, shape and concentration.
ζ = f(intrinsic property of NPs) + f(environmental parameters)
The zeta potential values of ZnO nanostructures corresponding to Sample A to Sample F are found to be −35.5, −14.9, −7.2, −4.9, −3.4 and −16.2 mV (ESI,
 Fig. S3). The absolute value of the zeta potential was found to be higher in the case of ZnO nanodots prepared in methanol (Sample A). Generally, the presence of positively charged ions increases the zeta potential value. In the present synthesis, the solvent forms hydrogen bonds with the ZnO nuclei. The shorter alkyl group can strengthen the negative charge of the oxygen atom, leading to an increase in the positive charge on the ZnO surface. So the zeta potential value is higher for the methanol medium. For the longer alkyl groups, a reduction in the positive charge on the surface decreases the zeta potential value. So the ζ value decreases with an increase in the alkyl group length of the reaction medium. But in the case of decanol as a medium, an increase in the ζ value is noticed. Earlier reports suggest a decrease in the zeta potential with an increase in the size of spherical particles. For this reason, Sample F shows a low zeta potential value compared to Sample A. An increase in the zeta potential increases the electrostatic repulsive force between the nanoparticles. Hence the growth rate of the nanostructures is inversely proportional to the absolute value of the zeta potential. The measured zeta potential value for ZnO nanodots prepared in decanol is found to be higher compared to the other solvents except for methanol. So there is an inhibition of the growth rate compared to other long chain solvents. Therefore the high zeta potential results in slow growth kinetics in methanol and decanol.

The growth mechanism can also be explained using DLVO theory. In an assembly of nanoparticles in a colloidal solution, mechanisms like coulombic interactions (CI), van der Waals interactions (vdW) and dipole–dipole interactions must be taken into account. In a smaller dimension, the growth kinetics are mainly controlled by CI and vdW interactions.
Derjaugin–Landau–Verwey–Overbeek (DLVO) theory was developed in 1940 to describe the stabilization of nanoparticles in a solution. According to this theory, the van der Waals interactions leading to the aggregation of the particles are opposed by the electrostatic repulsion. Hence, the interaction potential energy is described as the sum of the attractive van der Waals energy (Ea) and repulsive electrostatic energy (Er).
EDLVO = Ea + Er
Here
v1 and v2 are the respective volumes of the two particles, r is the distance between the two particles, q is the atomic concentration of the particles and λ is a constant. In the present work, the volume of the solvent and concentration of the precursors were kept constant for the synthesis of all nanostructures. So the contribution of van der Waals interactions in the growth mechanism is considered to be identical in all the solvents. The Coulombic interaction in the growth kinetics is written as
where
ε is the dielectric constant of the medium, Q1 and Q2 are the charge values of the two particles, and r is the separation between the two particles. The Coulombic force is a repulsive force that hinders the aggregation of nanoparticles. It is proportional to the charge value of ZnO nanoparticles and inversely proportional to the dielectric constant of the solvent molecules. Since no ligands/surfactants were used for the synthesis of the ZnO nanostructures, the charge value of ZnO is closely related to the polarity of the solvent. The values of the relative polarity and dielectric constant of each of the solvents are given in Table 1.

Comparing the growth kinetics in each solvent, it can be found that the repulsive interaction energy, which is inversely proportional to the dielectric constant, plays a more crucial role in the growth than the polarity. In the case of decanol (Sample F), which possesses a low dielectric constant compared to the other long chain solvents (octanol, hexanol, and butanol), the growth rate is found to be slow. So the entire growth mechanism can be explained by considering the polarity, dielectric constant and zeta potential as the major factors responsible for the growth kinetics of ZnO nanostructures in a solvent assisted solution based process.
The growth of the crystal faces is depicted in the XRD pattern shown in Fig. 5. All the peaks in the diffraction pattern are well matched with the ZnO hexagonal wurtzite structure (JCPDS No: 01-089-1397), which indicates high purity. The broadening of the peaks indicates that the size of the products lies in the nanoscale range. The peak positions corresponding to the planes (100), (002), and (101) of all the samples were identical and no other crystalline phases were detected. The UV-vis spectra shown in Fig. 6 imply that the solvent plays an important role in the optical characteristics of the ZnO nanostructures. As the size of the particles gets reduced into the nanoregime, the motion of electrons and holes is confined in a potential well leading to the quantum confinement effect. As a result of the quantum confinement effect, the recorded spectra exhibit strong band edge absorption below 370 nm and a blue shift as compared to the bulk (380 nm). All the prepared samples exhibit a size dependent shift in the absorption edge.
The oxidation state of the prepared ZnO nanostructures was investigated by XPS analysis. Fig. 7 shows the XPS analysis of O1s spectra deconvoluted into three separate peaks. The peak located at 530 eV is indexed to O2− species in the ZnO lattice (OL). The other two peaks at binding energy values 531 eV and 531.7 eV correspond to oxygen vacancies or defects (OV) and chemisorbed or dissociated (OC) oxygen species. The XPS spectra indicate the existence of surface defects on the prepared ZnO nanostructures. According to the XPS result, intensity variations occur for OV and OC in the O1s spectra. ZnO nanoparticles prepared in methanol and decanol are found to have a higher amount of surface defects. This can be confirmed using the photoluminescence (PL) spectra recorded at an excitation wavelength (λexc) of 320 nm as shown in Fig. 8. Generally ZnO exhibits two luminescence peaks, centered in both the UV and the visible region. The UV emission corresponds to the band to band transition and the visible emission is attributed to the defect states in the crystal lattice. As evident from the PL spectra, the defect state emission is maximum for the ZnO nanoparticles (Sample A and Sample F), whereas band to band emission is dominant for Sample C, prepared in butanol. It is also clear from the XPS analysis that the dissociated oxygen (OC) is absent for Sample C, indicating minimum surface defect states in the crystal lattice. In the case of Sample D, the defect state contribution was higher than that of Sample C, which decreases its UV emission intensity. Gurav et al. showed that an increase in the aspect ratio of ZnO nanorods results in enhancement of defect state emission. This is the reason for the increase in the OC contribution from Sample D compared to Sample C. When methanol is used as the solvent, the PL spectrum has comparable contributions from band to band and defect state emission.

The total efficiency (η) of a DSSC depends on the nature, size, and morphology of the nanostructures used for the fabrication of the photoanode. Since the photoanode plays a vital role in the charge generation and transfer process, the size and morphology of the nanostructures are important in optimizing the performance of DSSCs. Larger sized nanoparticles have less surface area per unit volume available for dye adsorption. On the other hand, the existence of a large number of grain boundaries in small sized nanoparticles increases the electron trapping probability. The small pore size can also inhibit dye penetration during the sensitization process. Since all these factors can cause a decrement in the efficiency of a DSSC, tailoring the nanomorphology of the photoanode is key in improving its efficiency. In comparison with 0 dimensional nanoparticles, 1 dimensional nanostructures provide fast electron transport, effective light scattering ability, a slow recombination rate, and a high effective surface area.

In order to evaluate the photovoltaic performance of the ZnO nanostructure based photoanode, the J–V characteristics of the DSSC were studied. Fig. 9(a) presents the proposed schematic representation of the DSSC based on the ZnO nanostructures and Fig. 9(b) shows the corresponding J–V curve. A significant change in the short circuit current density (JSC) was noticed without a distinct variation in the open circuit voltage (VOC). The enhancement in the power conversion efficiency (PCE) can be attributed to the increment in the JSC value.
As shown in Fig. 9(b), the power conversion efficiency is minimum for Sample A and F. These samples consist of ZnO nanodots only. In all other samples, nanorods with different aspect ratios and volume fractions are present. The presence of the rod structure enhances the photovoltaic performance and consequently Sample B shows a better response than Sample A and F (VOC = 0.56 V and JSC = 7.69 mA cm−2). In the morphological analysis section, it was discussed that Sample B acts as a first intermediate state consisting of nanorods with shorter lengths. Evidently the DSSCs assembled with Sample E (second intermediate state), which consists of nanodots along with longer nanorods, show higher power conversion efficiency than the other cells. The presence of longer nanorods in Sample E increases the surface area (31.24 m2 g−1) and the amount of dye uptake (37.6 nmol cm−2) compared to the DSSCs fabricated using Sample C and D, which consists of only nanorods.
In general, the current density (JSC), as well as efficiency (η), was found to be larger in ZnO nanorod based DSSCs than those based on nanodots. Nanorods rendered high JSC due to a large amount of dye adsorption, superior light scattering, and effective charge transport. The large surface area is also important in boosting the efficiency by influencing the effective dye loading and sunlight harvesting. The reflectance spectra of ZnO nanostructure films are shown in Fig. S4 (ESI) wherein the nanorod based cells show higher reflectance than those based on nanodots. The results indicate the superior light scattering ability of the nanorod based cells. Specifically, the reflectance from Sample E is found to be considerably enhanced in this wavelength range.
The incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) would offer detailed information on the electron transport properties of the films. IPCE is defined as the number of collected electrons produced by an incident photon at a given wavelength divided by the number of incident photons.Fig. 10 shows the IPCE spectra of N719 dye loaded ZnO nanostructured devices. Here also, the ZnO nanorod based cells show higher IPCE values than the cells based on nanodots, which can also be correlated with the increased photocurrent density (JSC) values. Specifically, compared to the other cells, the improved PCE of Sample E comes from the better light scattering effect.
The amount of adsorbed N719 dye was measured by recording the UV-vis absorption spectra of eluted dye molecules from the photoanodes by employing a method from the literature as shown in Fig. S5 (ESI). The calculated values of the adsorbed dye concentrations are 23.5, 24.2, 28.9, 34.1, 37.6 and 22.3 nmol cm−2 for Sample A, B, C, D, E, and F respectively as shown in Table 2. From the table, it is obvious that sample E shows a higher dye loading capacity than the other cells. The above results are clear indicators of the higher efficiency exhibited by DSSCs fabricated using Sample E compared to the other samples. The open-circuit voltage (VOC) usually depends on the interfacial recombination rate. Since the photoanode structure can influence the electron transport and recombination rate, the small observed change in VOC may be due to the photoanode morphological change.
Samples

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)

η (%)
Dye adsorption (nmol cm−2)
BET surface area (m2 g−1)
TiO2
0.60
11.87
0.56
3.82
48.2
45–55
A
0.57
7.36
0.49
2.2
23.5
8.12
B
0.56
7.69
0.54
2.34
24.2
10.12
C
0.59
8.60
0.50
2.53
28.9
27.67
D
0.56
8.86
0.52
2.59
34.1
30.91
E
0.56
9.10
0.53
2.69
37.6
31.24
F
0.56
7.95
0.47
2.1
22.3
7.62
The performance of the fabricated cells was also compared with a standard TiO2 based solar cell. Titanium dioxide (TiO2: P25) purchased from Sigma Aldrich was used for the fabrication. The photovoltaic response is shown in Fig. S6 (ESI) and the efficiency is found to be 3.82%. Here, TiO2 behaves as a better photoanode than the synthesized ZnO nanostructures due to its enhanced surface area and dye adsorption ability. For further enhancement of the efficiency we have used 2 dimensional and 3 dimensional morphological nanostructures of ZnO as photoanodes. Work along these lines is in progress in our laboratory.
In summary, the photoanode film composed of ZnO nanorods show better dye loading ability due to their higher surface area than nanodots. The results confirm that the particle size and morphology can influence the performance of DSSCs. Thus a simple, surfactant-free synthesis approach to develop a better and more efficient photoanode for the fabrication of DSSCs at low cost has been discussed.

ZnO nanostructures have been prepared in different types of alcoholic solvents without the use of any capping agent. The growth behaviour of the nanostructures is found to be distinct in various solvents. The role of the alkyl group length of the alcoholic solvents in the morphology tuning of ZnO from nanodots to nanorods and back to nanodots has been investigated. However, the growth kinetics depends also on the solvent physiochemical properties and the zeta potential of the colloidal solution. The contribution of band to band as well as defect state emission to the PL spectra can also be controlled by choosing an appropriate alcohol as a solvent for the synthesis. Synthesized ZnO nanostructures may find potential applications in the fabrication of efficient photoanodes in the development of third generation DSSCs.


The authors declare no competing financial interest.


This work was financially supported by DST-SERB grant number EEQ/2018/000468 and Cochin University of Science and Technology, India. The authors acknowledge the support provided by Mr. Sarath, ACNSMM, Kochi for XPS analysis, and A. Peer Mohamed, NIIST, Trivandrum for BET analysis. The authors also acknowledge the Department of Chemistry, CUSAT and Centre of Excellence in Advanced Materials, CUSAT for solar cell J–V characterization and IPCE measurement. The authors are thankful to the Department of Optoelectronics, University of Kerala and SAIF-STIC for structural characterization.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9nj03212f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2019