 DOI: 10.1039/C8NJ06146G
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 7130-7135


Xiaomeng
Zhu
,

Jing
Sun
,

Shuai
Yuan
,

Ning
Li
,

Zhiwen
Qiu
,

Jinbiao
Jia
,

Yining
Liu
,

Jia
Dong
,

Pin
Lv
 and 

Bingqiang
Cao
*

School of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Jinan, Jinan 250022, Shandong, China. E-mail: mse_caobq@ujn.edu.cn

Department of Physics and Institute of Laser, Qufu Normal University, Qufu 273165, Shandong, China

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Jinan 250100, Shandong, China

Received
5th December 2018
, Accepted 8th April 2019
First published on 9th April 2019
Perovskite solar cells with a single light absorption heterojunction has demonstrated a power conversion efficiency of as high as 23.2% in the past few years. In this work, for the first time, we used quasi-spherical carbon quantum dots (CQDs)-doped PCBM film as the electron transporting layer of an inverted perovskite solar cell. The device structure is FTO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM:CQDs/BCP/Ag. The optimized PCE of 18.1% was achieved and a 13% enhancement was observed compared with those of pure PCBM-based devices. Various advanced characterizations including ultrafast spectroscopy, conductive atomic force microscopy, and electronic impedance spectroscopy elucidate that quasi-spherical CQD doping leads to enhanced electrical conductivity, electron mobility, and charge extraction efficiency. Moreover, we find that such CQD doping helps to prevent I− ions from undergoing interface diffusion and thus enhances the stability of solar cells.

Organic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells are considered as the most promising photovoltaic technology due to their high power conversion efficiency (PCE), bipolar carrier transport ability, high absorption coefficients, long carrier diffusion length, and easy fabrication process. To date, the highest certified PCE value is 23.2% for small-scale devices. However, large-scale industrial production remains to be proven due to its poor long-term stability and the difficulty of large module building. N-i-P (regular) and P-i-N (inverted) heterostructures are most often used in perovskite solar cells. For the conventional planar perovskite solar cells, the most widely used n-type electron transport layers (ETL) are TiO2, ZnO, and phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM). As the initial electron transport layer used in solar cells with an N-i-P structure, TiO2 needs a high temperature (>450 °C) for its fabrication, which is not favorable in the fabrication of P-i-N devices. In the meanwhile, organic electron transport materials such as PCBM, fullerene, and PCBDAN have attracted researchers’ attention and have been widely applied in P-i-N devices owing to their simple and low-temperature fabrication process.

The intensive use of PCBM is on account of its good electron transport property and relatively high electron affinity. However, employing PCBM as the ETL has some significant issues, such as interfacial recombination, current leakage, and easy interface diffusion of the I− from the perovskite layer, which results in poor photovoltaic performance and poor long-term stability. To overcome these problems, researchers introduced some additives such as graphene oxide, graphdiyne, graphene and 1H-benzoimidazole derivatives to improve the electrical properties of PCBM. Carbon quantum dots (CQDs), a new type of carbon material, have an excellent electron reservoir property and good electrical conductivity, which are promising to enhance not merely the PCE but also the stability of devices.
In this work, for the first time, we built planar heterojunction (PHJ) CH3NH3PbI3 solar cells using PCBM with CQDs as the electron transport layer. The introduction of CQDs into PCBM led to improved photovoltaic performance with the PCE increasing from 16.1 to 18.1%. It was found that doping with CQDs could not only increase the electrical conductivity and charge extraction ability of PCBM ETL, but also contributed to preventing I− from diffusing into the Ag electrode to form AgI, which would suppress the dimerization in fullerene and thus improve the stability of perovskite solar cells. Several characterizations, including transmission electron microscopy (TEM), conductive atomic force microscopy (c-AFM), photoluminescence (PL), time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL), external quantum efficiency (EQE), transient photovoltage (TPV), and transient photocurrent decay (TPC), were conducted to give a detailed analysis of the doped PCBM film and accordingly the improved device performances. These results demonstrate that the introduction of CQDs dopant into PHJ perovskite solar cells is an effective strategy to enhance the device performance and stability.

Methylamine iodide (CH3NH3I), poly(3,4-ethylene-dioxythiophene):polystyrenesulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) were all purchased from Xi’an Polymer Light Technology Corp. and used as received. Lead acetate (Pb(CH3COO)2·3H2O) was obtained from Aladdin Industrial Corporation and placed on a hot plate at 80 °C for 24 h to dislodge the bound water. 2,9-Dimethyl-4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline (BCP) was obtained from the Aladdin Industrial Corporation with a purity of 99.8%. Patterned fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass with a sheet resistance of 15 Ω sq.−1 was purchased from Nippon Glass. Anhydrous N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), chlorobenzene (CB) and isopropanol (IPA) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used without further purification. MAI and Pb(CH3COO)2 (PbAc2) were dissolved in DMF (1 M) with a 3:1 molar ratio. The precursor solution was stirred for 12 h at room temperature.


CQDs were synthesized by the microwave-assisted hydrothermal method. Briefly, the CQDs were synthesized by heating ammonium citrate (0.1 g) at 180 °C for 2 h in an oven, followed by dissolution in 10 mL deionized (DI) water. The obtained CQD solution was centrifuged at a relative centrifugal force (RCF) of 30000 × g to remove aggregated particles. Subsequently, the solution was dialyzed using a dialysis membrane (MWCO = 1.0 kDa; Float-A-Lyzer G2, Spectrum Laboratories, Rancho Dominguez, CA, USA) for 6 h in DI water. Finally, the CQD solution was dried at 70 °C for 12 h. The PC61BM solution was prepared by dissolving PC61BM in CB at a concentration of 18 mg mL−1 and then was stirred overnight in a glovebox (MIKROUNA). The CQDs-doped solutions were prepared by dispersing 3 mg, 5 mg and 8 mg CQDs into PC61BM solution separately, and the optimized content was 5 mg.


The FTO-coated glass substrate was etched with Zn powder and diluted HCl solution. The etched substrate was cleaned with ethanol and saturated KOH solution of isopropanol and water, and then dried with clean N2 flow. After that, PEDOT:PSS was spin-coated on the patterned FTO glass substrates at 4000 rpm for 25 s and annealed at 135 °C for 15 min. PEDOT: PSS-coated substrates were placed in a glovebox. The perovskite layer was spin-coated at 2000 rpm for 40 s. Perovskite-coated substrates were kept aside for 5 min and then annealed for 10 min. After cooling down, PC61BM solution or CQDs-doped PC61BM solution was spin-coated on the perovskite layer at 2000 rpm for 40 s. Soon after, a layer of BCP was deposited at 4000 rpm for 30 s by using 0.5 mg mL−1 ethyl alcohol solution. Finally, 55 nm thick Ag electrodes were thermally evaporated onto the BCP layer. The active area was defined as the overlap of FTO and Ag electrodes.


The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the photovoltaic devices were recorded under illumination and dark conditions using a computer-controlled Keithley 2612A source meter under AM 1.5G simulated solar light (0.95 sun due to aging). Before measurement, the lamp was turned on for 15 min and the exact light intensity was calibrated by an NREL-traceable KG5 filtered silicon reference cell. The EQE spectra were measured using a QEX10 photoresponse system (PV Measurement Inc.). The wavelength interval was 10 nm, and the intensity of the incident light from the monochromator was calibrated with a Si photodiode installed inside (1H002). c-AFM imaging was obtained at room temperature in a non-contact mode by using an atomic force microscope (Veeco dimension V) and the cantilever coated with Pt/Ir while applying a 5 V bias. All measurements were performed under ambient atmosphere with a relative humidity of 25%, and solar cells were tested without any encapsulation. The stability study of solar cells was performed in a drybox.


CQDs were synthesized by a microwave irradiation method and more details are presented in the Experimental section. As shown in the HRTEM image in Fig. 1(a), the diameter of CQDs is approximately 4 nm, and the space between the lattice fringes is about 0.196 nm, which belongs to the carbon (002) crystal plane. The optical absorption spectrum of CQDs exhibits a wide peak between 200 nm and 700 nm, which means that we have successfully synthesized CQDs. The chemical structure of CQDs is also schematically shown in Fig. 1(b). The device structure of perovskite solar cells assembled in this work was a typical PHJ, FTO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM:CQDs/BCP/Ag, as shown in Fig. 1(c). The energy levels of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite and PCBM with or without CQD ETLs are shown in Fig. 1(d). The introduction of CQDs can improve the conductivity of PCBM, thus increasing the Fermi level of PCBM. This will be discussed in the following section combined with the device performance.

The J–V characteristics based on the above-mentioned device structure under AM 1.5G (95 mW cm2) irradiation are displayed in Fig. 2(a). The relevant device parameters are summarized in Table 1. The reference solar cells based on pure PCBM ETLs were also fabricated and measured. The best-behaved control device exhibited a short-circuit current density (Jsc) value of 21.9 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.96 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.766, generating a PCE of 16.1% (15.2% on average). The optimized device using PCBM:CQDs ETL displayed a Jsc of 22.3 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.97 V and a FF of 0.796, yielding a PCE of 18.1% (16.7% on average). To confirm the enhancement of the photocurrent, we measured IPCE curves of the absorption spectrum of a CH3NH3PbI3-based device. The spectra in Fig. 2(b) with wide photoresponse values from 350 to 800 nm show the same tendency but different heights. The integrated currents of optimized and controlled perovskite solar cells are also shown in Fig. 2(b), which are consistent with the measured values from J–V characteristics. The increased Jsc after the addition of CQDs may be primarily ascribed to the increased electron extraction ability. In order to exclude the accidental errors made during the experiment, the statistical data of ten devices fabricated with pure PCBM and PCBM:CQDs ETLs are also presented in the form of a standard box plot, as shown in Fig. 2(c). Besides Jsc, the values of FF and PCE are also enhanced when PCBM:CQDs ETLs are adopted. The detailed reasons will be discussed below.
ETL

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
Best PCE (%)
Average (%)

R
S (Ω cm2)
Pure PCBM
0.96
21.9
76.6
16.1
15.2
7.4
PCBM:CQDs
0.97
22.3
79.6
18.1
16.7
5.3
To study whether the remarkable PCE of over 18% was reliable or not, the steady-state photocurrent and output PCE of the device based on optimal PCBM:CQDs under one-sun illumination were measured at the maximum power point of 0.817 V.
As shown in Fig. 2(d), a steady-state PCE of 17.1% was obtained. Only a drop of 1.6% in efficiency was observed. This result indicates that the optimized PCE in our experiment was stable and reliable.
To investigate the charge transfer process at PCBM:CQDs/perovskite interfaces, PL spectra of the perovskite film on different substrates, namely, CH3NH3PbI3/glass, CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/glass, and CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM:CQDs/glass were measured. The results are displayed in Fig. 3(a). An obvious quenching effect was observed when the perovskite layer was coated with PCBM or PCBM:CQDs layers. The PCBM:CQDs coated perovskite layer shows stronger quenching ability than PCBM-coated perovskite layer, illustrating that the CQDs can extract electrons more efficiently and may decrease the charge recombination.
TRPL spectra were used to elucidate the dynamics of the charge transfer process at CH3NH3PbI3/ETL interfaces. The TRPL characteristics probed at 770 nm are shown in Fig. 3(b). The samples were excited with 405 nm picosecond laser pulses and the repetition rate was 20 MHz. The TRPL decay curves could be well fitted with the double-exponential model. The fast decay time τ1 (∼10 ns) reflects the quenching of free carriers at the interface between the perovskite layer and ETL. The slow decay time τ2 (∼100 ns) reflects the recombination of free carriers via radiative channels. The sample of perovskite spin-coated on PCBM:CQDs film shows a τ1 value of 10.0 ns, while that of the reference achieves a value of 14.6 ns. The shorter TRPL lifetime of free carriers indicates that CQDs doping in PCBM exhibits more efficient carrier extraction ability than the pure PCBM substance. The τ2 value of the control sample (τ2 = 20.9 ns) is shorter than that of the sample based on PCBM:CQDs (τ2 = 128.6 ns), indicating that doping of CQDs can reduce the bulk recombination process, which is consistent with the result of the steady-state PL measurement in Fig. 3(a).
To further study the transport and recombination process of charge carriers in the perovskite solar cells, TPV spectra were measured as well. The results are shown in Fig. 3(c). TPV results indicate that the charge recombination rate of PCBM:CQDs-based solar cell is much slower than that of the pure PCBM-based solar cell. It can also be seen that the charge transport rate is somewhat slowed due to the additional CQDs. To further verify the suppression of charge recombination in different devices, we conducted TPC measurements at short circuit conditions under light illumination. The results in Fig. 3(d) demonstrate that the pristine PCBM-based device shows slower decay than that of PCBM:CQDs-based devices, which further confirmed that PCBM:CQDs-based devices possess a comparatively efficient charge transport process, leading to a higher output photocurrent. Conductive atomic force microscopy (c-AFM) measurements can examine the electrical conductivity of pure PCBM film and PCBM:CQDs film directly, clarifying the influence of CQDs-doping on the electronic property of PCBM film, figuring out the origin of the Jsc increment. As shown in Fig. 4, the c-AFM images of PCBM and PCBM:CQDs films grown on ITO/glass substrates indicate that both films have rather uniform electrical conductivity. Moreover, under the same applied bias, CQDs-doped PCBM film is more conductive, which promotes a faster photon-generated carrier separation and is one important reason for the improved PCE of the corresponding solar cell.
The impedance spectrum is another effective tool for investigating the charge recombination in a solar cell. Fig. 5(a) shows the Nyquist plots of PCBM:CQDs and pure PCBM-based solar cells measured at a forward bias of 1 V. Three separated semicircles can be obtained by fitting the frequency curves. The first arc in the high-frequency region is related to the charge transport in ETL, HTL, and/or at the ETL/FTO, or HTL/Ag interface. The second arc in the intermediate frequency region is related to the charge recombination process at HTL/perovskite/PCBM/BCP/Ag interfaces. The third low-frequency arc is associated with a long relaxation process, which can be attributed to ion migration in the perovskite layer. Fig. 5(b) presents the series resistance (RS) as a function of bias by fitting the Nyquist plots, which indicates an Ohmic contact behaviour. Also, the PCBM:CQDs-based device has a lower RS value, suggesting that the addition of CQDs is beneficial for charge transportation. The lower RS value may contribute to the augmented short-circuit current of the device using PCBM:CQDs ETL. The values of charge transfer resistance (RCT) are also derived from the Nyquist plots with a resistance-constant phase element model (R-CPE). As shown in Fig. 5(b), the RCT value of PCBM:CQDs-based solar cell is obviously larger than that of the pure PCBM based solar cell, which is consistent with other results discussed above.
Stability, as a key factor of perovskite solar cells, is a major concern since its invention. For the pristine organic–inorganic halide perovskite, its decomposition should assume the main responsibility for photovoltaic performance degradation on account of the generation of large PbI2 gaps with low conductivity and AgI barriers. Many strategies have been proposed to solve this problem such as using an all-inorganic perovskite layer or charge extraction layers, polymer encapsulation and so on. To compare the device stability, two devices based on PCBM and PCBM:CQDs ETL were placed in a drybox in atmospheric conditions for 20 days. The PCE aging results are shown in Fig. 6(a). We observe that the PCBM:CQDs-based devices exhibit enhanced long-term stability. 20 days later, the PCE of PCBM:CQDs-based devices still remained at about 70% versus 20% of pure PCBM-based devices.
As we all know, CH3NH3PbI3 will decompose at the film grain boundaries with high defect densities, and I− and CH3NH3+ ions can diffuse through the PCBM layer. The loss of CH3NH3I then induces the bulk film decomposition, and generation of PbI2 at the outer margins. Eventually, the photoelectrical property of the CH3NH3PbI3 thin film and the PCE of devices will deteriorate and AgI as a by-product will be generated on the Ag electrode. In this report, we used grazing-incidence XRD (GIXRD) to check if there is an undesired AgI thin layer on pure PCBM-based devices. A GIXRD with a grazing incidence angle (χ) of 0.5° was measured to characterize the phase information of the internal surface of the Ag electrode. The results are shown in Fig. 6(b). The GIXRD pattern of the pure PCBM-based device shows a prominent peak of AgI at around 25°, while this AgI characteristic peak can hardly be seen in the pattern of PCBM:CQDs-based devices. The results illustrate that for the pure PCBM-based solar cell, I− ions can more easily cross the PCBM layer into the Ag electrode and then react with Ag to form a thin AgI layer.
The molecular structures like PCBM and fullerene appear to exhibit a severe burn-in phenomenon under illumination, which will decrease the solar cell performance severely. Filling electron traps with higher electron density materials is one way to eliminate the negative effects of dimerization. Snaith et al. reported that suppressing dimerization in fullerene with n-type doping could restrain the severe burn-in phenomenon and thus enhance the stability of planar perovskite solar cells. This can be explained by the fact that CQDs exhibit electron reservoir properties, and hence the introduction of CQDs in PCBM will fill the electron traps that originated from dimerization of PCBM upon light exposure, alleviating the negative effect of PCBM dimerization. Based on what we have observed above, we propose that the groups on the CQD surface, such as C–OH, CO, C–O–C, and C–H, can absorb I− ions and prevent their diffusion into the Ag electrode through the PCBM layer, as shown in Fig. 6(c). As a result, the decomposition of the perovskite film is effectively suppressed, improving the device stability.

In summary, we used CQDs as a dopant and added them into PCBM ETL in PHJ CH3NH3PbI3 solar cells for the first time. With optimized CQD modification content, the PHJ perovskite solar cell achieved a PCE of as high as 18.1% with a steady-state PCE of 17.1%. Further study of PL, TRPL, Nyquist plots and c-AFM revealed improvement of electron mobility, electron extraction ability, and well-matched energy levels. Moreover, there was a great improvement in the long term stability of perovskite solar cells after preventing the diffusion of I− by adding CQDs into PCBM ETL. The work described here manifested that introducing CQDs into perovskite solar cells is a simple and effective strategy to improve device performances and long-term stability.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work is supported by NSFC (51872161) and Major Program of Shandong Provincial Natural Science Foundation (ZR2017ZB0316).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8nj06146g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2019