 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA10654H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4405-4415


Kun
Wang
,

Volker
Körstgens
,

Dan
Yang
,

Nuri
Hohn
,

Stephan V.
Roth
 and 

Peter
Müller-Buschbaum
*

Technische Universität München, Physik-Department, Lehrstuhl für Funktionelle Materialien, James-Franck-Str. 1, 85748 Garching, Germany. E-mail: muellerb@ph.tum.de; Fax: +49-89-289-12473; Tel: +49-89-289-12451

Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY, Notkestr. 85, 22607 Hamburg, Germany

KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Department of Fibre and Polymer Technology, Teknikringen 56-58, SE-100 44 Stockholm, Sweden

Received
4th December 2017
, Accepted 8th February 2018
First published on 9th February 2018
Based on a method using sol–gel chemistry combined with diblock copolymer templating, a low-temperature route to fabricate zinc oxide (ZnO) films with tunable morphologies including foam-like, worm-like and sphere-like structures is demonstrated. The morphologies are probed using scanning electron microscopy and grazing-incidence small-angle X-ray scattering. Based on controlled nanostructured ZnO films, all solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells (ssDSSCs) are prepared, for which every layer is deposited at low temperature to reduce the energy consumption of the manufacturing process. Transparent active layers for ssDSSCs are obtained, which demonstrates the possibility for building integrated solar cells. The ssDSSCs with a worm-like ZnO morphology, exhibiting relatively better ordered interconnected three-dimensional structures and larger meso-pore sizes, show the highest power conversion efficiencies and almost 100% efficiency of charge separation and collection for the absorbed photons. After 120 days, almost 80% of the initial power conversion efficiency is maintained in ambient air conditions, which demonstrates good long-term stability of the ssDSSCs even without special encapsulation.

In the last decades, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have received considerable interest for solar energy conversion due to their convenient and low-cost fabrication. The most successful DSSCs with regard to the power conversion efficiency (PCE) have been achieved using a liquid electrolyte. Nevertheless, these DSSCs generally suffer from electrolyte leakage and corrosion problems, which poses a challenge to the long-term stability and scalability of the solar cells. One way to address these issues is to replace the liquid electrolyte with a solid-state hole transporting material (HTM), such as poly(3-hexylthiophen-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) and N2,N2,N2′,N2′,N7,N7,N7′,N7′-octakis(4-methoxyphenyl)-9,9′-spirobi[9H-fluorene]-2,2′,7,7′-tetramine (spiro-OMeTAD). Typically, all solid-state DSSCs (ssDSSCs) involve a wide band gap semiconducting nanostructured metal oxide film, such as titanium dioxide (TiO2) or zinc oxide (ZnO) as a photoelectrode, organic complexes or metal-free dyes as sensitizers and p-type organic semiconductors as HTMs. The quantity of work dealing with TiO2 exceeds by far the studies focusing on ZnO in DSSCs. Despite this trend in literature, ZnO, as an n-type semiconductor, has several potential advantages over TiO2 for application in DSSCs such as better electron mobility and lower crystallization temperature. So far, great efforts have been made for the development of DSSCs using high-temperature fabrication routes of ZnO, for example, calcination in the range of 350–500 °C. Such high temperature routes will not allow for future fabrication of lightweight and flexible solar cells due to the heat-sensitivity of polymer substrates, which will undergo thermal degradation at high temperature. Moreover, the high energy input during fabrication will be disadvantageous for real world applications of ZnO based ssDSSCs since it causes high fabrication cost and results in long energy payback time. Instead, low-temperature fabricated ZnO ssDSSCs, which have significantly lower production costs, short payback time and a low environmental impact, will be an alternative for the successfully emerging organic solar cells.

To date, one-dimensional (1D) crystalline ZnO nanostructures were already fabricated at low temperatures such as nanowires and nanorods. Introducing such 1D nanostructures in DSSCs might be promising due to the high conductivity of the 1D nanostructures. However, for solar cells, such 1D structures have limitations with respect to the internal surface area, which is a drawback for having a maximum amount of adsorbed dye molecules. To address this problem, we introduce a novel route to fabricate different morphologies of three-dimensional (3D) mesoporous ZnO (m-ZnO) nanostructures (including foam-like, worm-like and sphere-like structures) through a sol–gel method with processing temperatures well below 200 °C. The resulting 3D ZnO network structures offer a facile methodology to maximize the interfaces between ZnO and dye molecules, which is beneficial for exciton separation and, thus attain higher photocurrents and PCEs.
In addition, concerning the application of ssDSSCs, the building-integration of the solar cells is very interesting to allow for a large-scale use of solar energy and to reduce electrical transmission losses. One approach to realize this would require mostly transparent solar cells. Such transparent solar cells could turn windows or sheets of glass of building claddings into photovoltaic devices. As a consequence, transparent active layers appear interesting although total device efficiencies by definition of having small absorbance of the incoming light are expected to be lower as compared to standard DSSCs.
In the present work, we demonstrate a low temperature route to fabricate such ssDSSCs with mostly transparent active layers. All processing temperatures are well below 200 °C. We combine a sol–gel method with the diblock copolymer polystyrene-block-poly (ethylene oxide) (PS-b-PEO) as a template to fabricate mesoporous nanostructured ZnO films. Depending on the response of the ZnO/PS-b-PEO films to different annealing temperatures, a vast range of reproducible morphologies can be obtained. Both the surface and the inner morphology of ZnO films are detected with real space imaging techniques and with grazing-incidence small-angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS). In addition, the evolution of the most promising ZnO morphology is probed for different annealing times, which is of great significance for a detailed understanding of the mechanisms governing the film morphology. Furthermore, all ssDSSCs with transparent active layers are fabricated having every layer deposited at low temperatures. The different photovoltaic performances arising from different ZnO films are correlated with the corresponding morphologies. It is demonstrated that morphology control of the ZnO thin films at low-temperature via polymer templated sol–gel method results in improved all ssDSSCs.

The amphiphilic diblock copolymer, PS-b-PEO, was purchased from Polymer Source Inc., Canada, and was used as received. The number average molecular weights, Mn of the PS and PEO blocks were 20.5 and 8 kg mol−1, respectively, with a polydispersity of 1.02. Zinc acetate dihydrate (ZAD, 99.999% trace metals basis), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, 99.8%), ethanolamine (MEA, 98%), 2-methoxyethanol (99.8%), 5-[[4-[4-(2,2-diphenylethenyl)phenyl]-1,2,3,3a,4,8b-hexahydrocyclopent[b]indol-7-yl]methylene]-2-(3-octyl-4-oxo-2-thioxo-5-hiazolidinylidene)-4-oxo-3-thiazolidineacetic acid (D205), bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide lithium salt (Li-TFSi), 4-tert-butylpyridine (4-TBP), acetonitrile (99.8%) and chlorobenzene (99.8%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. N2,N2,N2′,N2′,N7,N7,N7′,N7′-Octakis(4-methoxyphenyl)-9,9′-spirobi[9H-fluorene]-2,2′,7,7′-tetramine (spiro-OMeTAD) was purchased from Merck KGaA. All the materials were used as received.


PS-b-PEO (200 mg) and ZAD (483 mg) were each dissolved separately in DMF (2 mL), respectively, to get clear homogeneous solutions. The two solutions were filtered using a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) filter with 0.45 μm pore diameter. 129 μL of MEA was then added to the polymer solution and stirred for half an hour. Both, the polymer and precursor solutions, were then mixed together with the aid of a syringe pump (PHD 2000 infuse/withdraw, Harvard Apparatus) at a constant infuse rate of 1 mL min−1 and stirred at 80 °C for 1 h. In the mixed solution, DMF acted as a good solvent for both the PS and PEO blocks in polymer while MEA not only acted as a selective solvent for the PEO block, but also reacted with ZAD. The final solution was spin-coated (1000 rpm, 60 s) onto silicon or glass substrates for further characterizations. Directly after spin-coating, the composite films were annealed at different temperatures for 1 h. The PS-b-PEO template was extracted from the composite films by UV irradiation for 24 h, which was confirmed as an efficient way to remove all the remaining polymers in the thin films in our previous work. The ZnO film thickness was about 200 nm as detected by Bruker DektakXT stylus profiler.


The fabrication of the ssDSSCs based on 80 °C annealed ZnO is illustrated in Fig. S1. Other ssDSSCs were manufactured using the same route. Fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)-coated glass substrates were patterned to form a desirable electrode by etching with zinc powder and hydrochloric acid (HCl, 12 M) (Fig. S1a). Then, the substrates were cleaned with different solvents (Alconox solution, ethanol, acetone and 2-propanol) and treated by oxygen plasma for 10 min. Afterwards, a compact ZnO layer was spin-coated following the procedure reported by Heo et al. (Fig. S1b). Briefly, 328 mg ZAD and 100 μL MEA were dissolved with vigorous stirring in 2 mL 2-methoxyethanol at 60 °C for 30 min. The ZnO solution was then spin-coated on a cleaned fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass substrate at 2000 rpm for 60 s and then annealed at 150 °C for 10 min. Subsequently, the mesoporous ZnO active layer was fabricated with the method described before (Fig. S1c and d). The films were again treated with oxygen plasma before being immersed in a dye solution (D205, 0.3 mM and 0.6 mM chenodeoxycholic acid in a mixture of acetonitrile and tert-butanol at a volume ratio of 1:1) for about 20 h (Fig. S1e). Subsequently, the spiro-OMeTAD based hole-transport layer was spin-coated at 3000 rpm for 60 s (Fig. S1f) from a solution with a nominal composition of 320 mg spiro-OMeTAD, 4 mL chlorobenzene, 114 μL 4-TBP, and 70 μL Li-TFSI stock solution (520 mg mL−1 in acetonitrile). Finally, a thin layer of Au was deposited by thermal evaporation on the spiro-OMeTAD layer as a back contact (Fig. S1g). The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics measurements (Fig. S1h) were conducted under simulated AM1.5 solar illumination (100 mW cm−2) with a solar simulator (Solar Constant by K. H. Steuernagel Lichttechnik GmbH). The J–V curves were recorded with a Keithley 2400 sourcemeter. IPCE spectra were recorded with the help of Oriel QE/IPCE Measurement Kit. Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) measurements were performed on the ssDSSCs by the electrochemical workstation at ambient temperature and humidity. The data were collected under the same illumination as above at open-circuit potential.


X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were performed at 40 kV and 40 mA on a Bruker D8 ADVANCE X-ray diffractometer using CuKα radiation with a wavelength of λ = 1.54 Å. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images were obtained by a Zeiss Gemini Ultra Plus field emission SEM at an electron accelerating voltage of 3 kV. Optical microscope images were taken with AxiolabA, Carl Zeiss. GISAXS measurements were carried out at the P03/MiNaXS beamline of the PETRA III storage ring at DESY (Hamburg, Germany). A wavelength of λ = 0.954 Å and a sample-detector distance of 3547 mm were used. The selected incident angle was αi = 0.35° which was above the critical angle of ZnO, allowing the X-ray to completely penetrate the full films to probe the inner structure. A Pilatus 1 M (Dectris Ltd.; pixel size of 172 μm × 172 μm, 981 by 1043 array) was used to detect the scattered signal. The transmitted and the specularly reflected beams were both blocked with beamstops to protect the detector from oversaturation due to their high intensities. Photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the ZnO films were measured by a Fluorolog-3 FL3-22 (Horiba Jobin Yvon GmbH) spectrometer. Time-resolved photoluminescence measurements were performed using a time-corrected single photon counting (TCSPC) system (PicoQuant PicoHarp 300) by exciting the samples with 480 nm and monitoring at the PL maxima. Transmittance measurements were performed with a Lambda 35 UV/Vis spectrometer from PerkinElmer covering a wavelength range from 360 nm to 750 nm.


A schematic representation of the steps involved in making foam-like ZnO nanostructures at 80 °C via a block copolymer template-assisted sol–gel route, including a subsequent all ssDSSC fabrication, is shown in Fig. 1. First, a micellar solution is made, consisting of PS-b-PEO combined with ZAD being preferentially incorporated in the PEO block (Fig. 1a). The solution is spin-coated on pre-cleaned substrates to get thin composite films of ZnO and polymer (Fig. 1b) and annealed for 1 h (Fig. 1c) to improve the self-assembly of the nanostructure. After removing the PS-b-PEO template by UV exposure (Fig. 1d), the resulting mesoporous ZnO films (Fig. 1e) are used for further characterization. The presence of the wurtzite phase of ZnO is confirmed by XRD analysis (Fig. S2, Bragg peaks marked with diamonds). This phase is considered to be the most suitable ZnO phase for DSSCs due to best charge transport properties. For the ssDSSCs the device layout (Fig. 1f) is FTO/compact ZnO (c-ZnO)/m-ZnO/dye/spiro-OMeTAD/Au on glass. The annealing temperature turns out to play a crucial role to control the ZnO morphology, which also causes great differences in the device performance.


The annealing temperature of the composite films is varied between 80 and 200 °C. SEM images of the corresponding ZnO nanostructures are presented in Fig. 2 after polymer removal. Although the components in the sol–gel system are maintained, the morphologies of the films change significantly, suggesting that the annealing temperature has a strong influence on the film morphology. The ZnO films annealed at 80 °C (Fig. 2a) exhibit a high interconnectivity of the foam-like pores, which suggests the presence of good percolation paths through the 3D ZnO structure. The amphiphilic diblock copolymer PS-b-PEO introduces a micro-phase separation in the sol–gel system and therefore enables control of the ZnO nanostructure and formation of a foam-like structure. Upon temperature increasing to 100 °C (Fig. 2b), the surfaces of the manufactured thin films are seeded with randomly distributed ZnO nanoparticles, which can be explained through a temperature-induced structure transition of the amphiphilic template. When the temperature reaches 120 °C (Fig. 2c) and 140 °C (Fig. 2d), the morphology is altered to a worm-like structure. It is worth noting that these worm-like structures consist of interconnected ZnO nanoparticles. As a consequence, ZnO films can not only leave vast parts of the volume for filling with dye molecules, but will also exhibit good electron transport properties, which is beneficial for application in ssDSSCs. With temperature further increasing to 160 °C (Fig. 2e) and 200 °C (Fig. 2f), almost monodisperse, sphere-like structures are observed on the sample surfaces. In general, the process of structural change is affected by many parameters, including the evaporation of the solvent from the films, the soft properties of the diblock copolymer and the presence of ZnO nanoparticles in the diblock copolymer matrix. The most important reason for morphological changes of the composite film is presumably owed to phase transitions during the annealing process. These phase transitions are highly dependent on the crystal melting temperature (Tm) of the PEO block, the glass transition temperature (Tg) of PS block and the order–disorder transition temperature (TODT) of the PS-b-PEO template. At a temperature of 80 °C, which is higher than Tm of the PEO and lower than Tg of the PS, the morphology is similar to that of the as-cast composite (Fig. 5a). Probably the lack of mobility of the PS block prevents an efficient structural reorganization. The structure remains relatively stable until reaching Tg of the PS block. For the films annealed at 100 °C (around Tg of PS), the PS matrix softens and allows structural reorganization and surface energy minimization. An increasing temperature up to 120 °C leads to a further decrease of the Flory–Huggins interaction parameter and to a certain extent a decrease in the incompatibility. Due to the presence of ZnO nanoparticles in the PS-b-PEO matrix the overall morphology is influenced and worm-like structures are formed. Upon further heating the film to 200 °C, PS-b-PEO changes from an ordered phase to a disordered structure. Small ZnO nanoparticles are randomly dispersed in the polymer, forming disordered sphere-like structures.

To further explore the uniformity of the films on a larger scale, optical microscopy is used (Fig. S3). It is observed that the films annealed at 80 °C (Fig. S3a), 120 °C (Fig. S3c), 140 °C (Fig. S3d), 160 °C (Fig. S3e) and 200 °C (Fig. S3f) appear homogeneous, whereas the films at 100 °C (Fig. S3b) show many light spots (some are marked with black arrows) which correspond to large scale aggregation during the structure formation process.
For the mesoporous ZnO films, not only the surface morphologies are of significance, but also the inner structures need to be probed since they are of especial importance for ssDSSC applications. As the dye molecules need to be infiltrated into the pores and charge carriers are required to be transported along the corresponding p-type and n-type semiconductors to the respective electrodes, it is of great interest to explore the cluster and the pore sizes of the ZnO nanostructures. In general, GISAXS is a well suited method to investigate the morphology inside thin films. Unlike real space techniques like SEM, GISAXS is able to detect nanostructures within a macroscopic region inside the films, which gives statistically relevant information. Structure length scales ranging from nanometers to micrometers can be probed. The two-dimensional (2D) GISAXS data of ZnO films with different morphologies obtained at different annealing temperatures are shown in Fig. 3. As seen in the 2D data, the directly reflected X-ray beam is blocked by a beamstop to prevent oversaturation of the detector due to the strong specular peak. At the critical angle of ZnO, a maximum intensity is observed which originates from the material-dependent Yoneda peak. In the lateral direction, a characteristic scattering signal from the ZnO nanostructure is seen in the 2D GISAXS data. For a quantitative analysis, horizontal line cuts are performed along this lateral direction (as indicated by the red arrow in Fig. 3a). For different morphologies, the horizontal line cuts of the 2D GISAXS data are plotted in Fig. 4a. The horizontal line cut obtained from the sample annealed at 120 °C shows a distinct peak in contrast to those from the other samples, indicating the presence of a relatively ordered structure in the worm-like ZnO films. To get more detailed information, the data are fitted within the effective interface approximation of the distorted-wave Born approximation (DWBA) using a 1D paracrystal model and assuming Gaussian size distributions for the form and structure factors. Data modeling is described in detail in the ESI. From the form factors and structure factors, the cluster sizes and the pore sizes (calculation is shown in the ESI) are extracted as a function of annealing temperature (Fig. 4b and c). All data are fitted with three characteristic form and structure factors to obtain reasonable good fits. For the foam-like structures prepared at 80 °C, the cluster sizes are below 100 nm and the pore sizes are mainly mesopores and macropores, which is beneficial for the backfilling with dye molecules when fabricating ssDSSCs. Increasing the temperature to 120 °C, the small-sized structure has a cluster size around 3.2 nm, corresponding to the small ZnO nanoparticles in the worms. While the middle-sized structure possesses a critical size around 14.6 nm, which may correspond to the size of the worm-like structure. For the large-sized structure, it may come from the big domains of some aggregated worms. Compared with pore sizes of the foam-like structures, the worm-like structures possess larger small-sized pores, which are preferable for the infiltration with dye molecules and HTM such as spiro-OMeTAD. Upon increasing the temperature further to 200 °C, the large cluster sizes decrease and the pore sizes also decrease, preferring to form well dispersed smaller ZnO domains in the film.
To further characterize the nanostructured ZnO films, the conductivity of the ZnO films is probed (Fig. S5). Despite the increase in crystallinity with increasing annealing temperature, the sheet resistance decreases and then increases when increasing the annealing temperature. ZnO films annealed at 120 °C exhibit the lowest sheet resistance. The corresponding worm-like ZnO nanostructure appears to be the best interconnected network structure compared with the others and therefore provides the best paths for electron transport.

In order to investigate the formation of the worm-like structure which appears promising for application in ssDSSCs, the ZnO/PS-b-PEO composite films are annealed at 120 °C for different annealing times. Fig. 5 shows the SEM images of several stages towards the worm-like structure. The structure changes significantly during the first 2 min (Fig. 5a–d), followed by changes on the large scale (Fig. 5e–g) and then stays almost constant (Fig. 5h–j). For the as-cast composite film (Fig. 5a), an interconnected 3D structure is seen, exhibiting a foam-like characteristic. This observation suggests that regular mesoporous network structures at nanoscale can be generated via the sol–gel method, which is consistent with the previous report. After annealing for 0.5 min at 120 °C (Fig. 5b), some large ZnO clusters appear at random positions. This is possibly due to the comprehensive effect of residual solvent inside the films, the softness of the PS and PEO blocks (as 120 °C is above Tg of the both two blocks) and the presence of ZnO nanoparticles in the films. When annealing the films for 1 min (Fig. 5c), more large domains disperse unevenly at the surface. With further annealing to 2 min (Fig. 5d), we can clearly observe the presence of a worm-like structure, suggesting that some foam-like ZnO clusters already change to worm-like ones. However, there are still some large clusters and they become significantly larger than the previously observed ZnO nanoparticles. Ostwald ripening plays an important role during the growth of the large particles. It is more likely that small particles aggregate to the surface of large particles as small particles on the surface are energetically less stable than the ones already well ordered and packed in the interior. A further increase of the annealing time to 8 min (Fig. 5e–g) induces an ongoing change of the film morphology. The worm-like structure remains unchanged while the large clusters vanish gradually. Fig. 5f and g show the large clusters first become thinner (evident by a semi-transparent appearance in the SEM) and then change to worms constituting to a more homogeneous film. After annealing for 15 min (Fig. 5h–j), no large clusters are observed anymore. Instead, a vast homogeneous worm-like structure is seen, implying that the morphology transition from foam-like to worm-like structure is finished.

To probe the inner morphology of the films, the worm-like structure forming process is also explored with GISAXS. The corresponding 2D GISAXS data are shown in Fig. 6a–j. The scattering data indicate prominent changes during the first 8 min of annealing (Fig. 6a–g), followed by constant scattering signals (Fig. 6h–j) after 15 min. All 2D GISAXS data exhibit semicircular scattering patterns, suggesting a randomly oriented morphology within the entire films. However, compared with the signal from the first 2 min (Fig. 6a–c), the scattering patterns afterwards (Fig. 6d–j) show two vertical Bragg rods (as indicated by the white boxes in Fig. 6d), which we attribute to a perpendicular orientation of the nanostructure with respect to the substrate surface. For a more quantitative analysis, horizontal line cuts along the Yoneda peak are done (Fig. 6k). All horizontal line cuts show a pronounced peak at a constant qy value after 2 min of annealing. These peaks originate from the Bragg rods, indicating the vertically ordered structure segments. Combining the SEM measurements with the results obtained with GISAXS, we can conclude that the worm-like structure appears after 2 min annealing and that vertically oriented ZnO worms exist to some extent in the 3D interconnected films. In order to deduce the cluster size and pore size distributions, horizontal line cuts are fitted with the same model as described above. The obtained results are shown in Fig. 6l and n (Fig. 6m and o show a zoom-in of the first 8 min indicated in the red boxes in Fig. 6l and n, respectively). Three structures are required to fit the data of the samples annealed for the first 8 min, while after 8 min, the data can be fitted with two structures. The large-sized structures disappear, indicating that only the worm-like structure is still present in the films, which is consistent with the changes in the surface morphology observed with SEM. For the large-sized structure, during the first 2 min of annealing, the size of the clusters first increases (except for that at 1 min), and then keeps decreasing until the large clusters vanish at 8 min, while the pore size decreases before 1 min, and then increases until 8 min. These generally imply that large-sized ZnO domains first become dominant at 0.5 min, and then become smaller and denser at 1 min; afterwards, larger and sparser at 2 min and then a little smaller and even sparser from 2 min to 8 min. For the small-sized and middle-sized structures, both the cluster size and pore size increase for the first 2 min, presumably indicating the improvement of crystallization and the formation of mesoporous pores of the worm-like structure along increasing the annealing time. Afterwards, the cluster size and pore size almost stay constant (from 2 min to 60 min). For the final ZnO/PS-b-PEO composite film, the 2D GISAXS pattern differs from that of the pure ZnO film (Fig. 3b) due to the removal of the polymer template, changing contrast and morphology. Nevertheless, both of them show the two vertical Bragg rods at a similar qy position, implying the conservation of the worm-like structure after the UV-treatment. Different to the worm-like ZnO/PS-b-PEO composite film, the pure worm-like ZnO film shows three main structures due to the presence of an additional large scale structure. The aggregation of some worms caused by the removal of the polymer template might cause the formation of these large scale structures. Moreover, despite the presence of similar small-sized structures (3.2 nm for the cluster size and 30.4 nm for the pore size), pure worm-like ZnO films have relatively larger cluster sizes (14.6 nm vs. 12.4 nm) and smaller pore sizes (57.2 nm vs. 78.4 nm) than the worm-like ZnO/PS-b-PEO composite films for the middle-sized structures. Again these differences are attributed to the ZnO nanostructure fusion during polymer removal. The removal of the polymer scaffold causes a certain collapse of ZnO nanostructures.

To investigate the charge separation at the interface between dye molecules and ZnO, time resolved photoluminescence (PL) measurements are performed (Fig. S6). The curves are fitted with a biexponential decay function using Fluofit software to obtain the average lifetime and the fitting results are shown as dashed yellow lines. The PL decay lifetime of D205 on glass is 2.1 ns, which is decreased on all ZnO films due to a charge separation, i.e., 1.1 ns for samples prepared at 80 °C and 120 °C, 1.4 ns for 160 °C and 1.5 ns for 200 °C. Therefore, D205 adsorbed in ZnO films annealed at 80 °C and 120 °C shows the most effective charge separation. Moreover, it is observed that more defects exist in the 80 °C sample than the 120 °C sample as indicated by a stronger defects PL intensity at the peak of around 530 nm shown in Fig. S7. Hence, even though the 80 and 120 °C samples show a similar PL decay, the charge separation in the 120 °C sample is likely more efficient, favoring photovoltaic performance.

In order to investigate the photovoltaic performance of complete devices, the ZnO films with four typically different morphologies achieved at 80 °C, 120 °C, 160 °C and 200 °C are applied for fabricating ssDSSCs. Since all layers of the solar cells are deposited at relatively low temperatures, these devices are also promising for future applications such as flexible solar cells which are prepared on lightweight transparent polymer substrates. Optical images of the corresponding ssDSSCs are seen in the inset of Fig. 7a. All prepared ssDSSCs show mostly transparent active layers with a slight color, which is promising for application as window materials with photovoltaic performance. For a more quantitative analysis, transmittance spectra of the four solar cell devices (excluding top contacts) are shown in Fig. 7a. The absorption of the dye D205 locates at 465–610 nm and at 390 nm. In the range 427–800 nm, the transmittance is above 90%, indicating a good transparency in visible light region. It is also observed that ZnO films annealed at 80 °C and 120 °C adsorb more D205 molecules than those obtained at 160 °C and 200 °C, which originates from the larger meso-pore size. Fig. 7b presents the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the ssDSSCs. The extracted photovoltaic parameters such as short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) are displayed in Fig. S8. The PCEs of ssDSSCs based on worm-like ZnO films (annealed at 120 °C) are comparable to other reported values of DSSCs based on low temperature synthesized ZnO. It is noticed that the device performance is closely associated with the annealing temperature. From Fig. S8, we can observe that the ssDSSCs based on 120 °C annealed ZnO films have higher PCE values (average value is 0.42%, highest value is 0.45%) than the others due to the higher Jsc, Voc and FF. With increasing the annealing temperature from 120 °C to 200 °C, the PCE values of the corresponding ssDSSCs decrease dramatically. To give more detailed photovoltaic properties, incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) measurements are performed (Fig. 7c). The shape of the IPCE spectrum coincides with the absorption spectrum of the used dye D205. The IPCE values are not high as compared with earlier reports which mainly originates from the high transmittance of the active layers in the visible range. Thus, IPCE normalized by (1-transmittance) is a more reasonable technique to characterize the highly transparent active layers. In these normalized IPCE curves, the efficiency is significantly higher in the wavelength range from 450 to 650 nm. The highest efficiency of 98.2% is obtained at 590 nm for ssDSSCs fabricated from 120 °C annealed ZnO films. It is higher than those values from 80 °C (65.5%), 160 °C (58.9%), and 200 °C annealed ZnO films (46.6%) at 590 nm. The reason for this may be the larger meso-pore size as extracted from the GISAXS data and the better conductivity of the 120 °C annealed ZnO films. Larger meso-pores are more likely and easily infiltrated by dye molecules and backfilled by spiro-OMeTAD which leads to a better solar cell performance as reported by Rawolle et al. in case of TiO2 films. In addition, compared with other morphologies (foam-like and sphere-like structures), the worm-like ZnO films show more ordered structures (vertically oriented structures in addition to the interconnected 3D structure) which appears beneficial for the charge carrier transport to the corresponding electrodes. It could also be the reason for the higher FF values of the DSSCs prepared from the worm-like ZnO films (average value 54.9%, highest value 60.6%) compared with other ZnO morphologies in the present study. To further improve the device efficiency, one could optimize the film morphology, increase the conductivity of the ZnO films or replace D205 with more optimized dye molecules in future.
The kinetics of the interfacial charge transfer process in ssDSSCs are probed with EIS measurements (Fig. S9). The Nyquist plots (Fig. S9a) are fitted by the equivalent circuit provided on the top of Fig. S9a. All the EIS spectra exhibit two arcs, which are attributed to charge transfer at the back contact/HTM interface (R1) and charge transfer at the ZnO/dye/HTM interface (R2) in the order of decreasing frequency. It is observed that the ssDSSCs based on 120 °C annealed ZnO films give the smallest R2, indicating the lowest hole–electron recombination action, hence leading to better efficiency. The corresponding data are shown in Table S1. Fig. S9b shows the Bode phase plot of the EIS spectra for the ssDSSCs. The characteristic frequency peaks of ssDSSCs based on ZnO films annealed at 160 °C (2910 Hz), 80 °C (2302 Hz), and 120 °C (1823 Hz) sequentially shift to lower frequency values. As the electron lifetime for the recombination (τ) of ssDSSCs is calculated by τ = 1/2πfmax (fmax: the corresponding characteristic low-frequency peaks), the recombination lifetime for ssDSSCs based on ZnO films annealed at 160 °C, 80 °C, and 120 °C is 0.055 ms, 0.069 ms, and 0.087 ms, respectively. This implies that ssDSSCs from 120 °C annealed ZnO have the longest electron lifetime, which could effectively reduce the electron recombination and consequently lead to a significant enhancement of the cell efficiency. For ssDSSCs built from 200 °C annealed ZnO, the frequency is lower than those of the other three devices. This may be because ZnO films annealed at 200 °C show small pore sizes (as seen in SEM and GISAXS), which results in a bad adsorption of the dye molecules and a poor backfilling of the HTM, therefore leading to both, bad charge injection from the dye to the ZnO films (indicated by highest R2) and low possibility of charge recombination (indicated by longest τ).

To further investigate the device performance of the ssDSSCs prepared with worm-like ZnO structures, the long-term behavior is probed (Fig. 8). Despite that the ssDSSC is fabricated, stored and measured completely under ambient air conditions as well as no encapsulation is used, the device is very stable over 120 days. The PCE values of the ssDSSC show small fluctuations within 20 days, which mainly originates from fluctuations in the measurements of Jsc and Voc. After 20 days, the PCE, Jsc, Voc and FF have changed to 90.4%, 92.8%, 101.6% and 96.0% of the initial values, respectively. The PCE still remains 88.6% after 30 days and 79.4% (T80) after 120 days which is significantly more stable than commonly reported in case of liquid electrolyte DSSCs. The loss of the PCE mainly results from the decrease of the current density. Fig. S10 shows the J–V curves measured after storing the ssDSSC for 0, 10, 20, 30 and 120 days. The curves show similar shape except the slightly decreasing current density.


We demonstrate low-temperature fabricated ZnO films with multiple morphologies (including foam-like, worm-like and sphere-like structures) via diblock copolymer templated sol–gel method. Low temperature annealing turns out to be a promising approach to control the morphology, which is detected with SEM for the surface structures and GISAXS for the inner structures. SEM reveals that the surface morphology changes from foam-like, through worm-like, to sphere-like structures when increasing the annealing temperature. For the inner morphologies characterized by GISAXS, the statistical cluster sizes and average pore sizes are explored. Moreover, both, the surface and inner morphology changes from foam-like to worm-like structure are explored during annealing. The underlying self-assembly process is observed. Besides, the lowest sheet resistance of ZnO annealed at 120 °C indicates the improvement of charge transport by tuning the ZnO morphology. Based on the nanostructured ZnO films, all ssDSSCs with mostly transparent active layers are fabricated, of which every layer is deposited by a low-temperature route. As the worm-like ZnO structure possesses larger meso-pore sizes and an interconnected 3D structure, which is more ordered and vertically oriented compared with the other samples, the ssDSSCs based on the worm-like structure show lowest charge transfer resistance and recombination at the interfaces of ZnO/dye/HTM and also the best device performance. An almost four times improvement of the PCE is found by just tuning the temperature in the annealing step of the ZnO film preparation. The corresponding charge separation and collection efficiency for the absorbed photons by D205 is almost 100%. In addition, the devices also possess very good stability in ambient air conditions. T80 is achieved after 120 days for devices without encapsulation, which render them highly interesting for practical applications.

The presented ssDSSCs are based on low-temperature fabricated and transparent active layers, which are energy-saving and show promising as building-integrated photovoltaic devices. Moreover, the diblock copolymer templated sol–gel method is inexpensive and scalable, which can be used to fabricate multiple morphologies to meet various needs and functionalities, not only in solar cells but also can be extended to a low-cost fabrication routine for other energy conversion devices.

There are no conflicts to declare.


Financial support by TUM.solar in the context of the Bavarian Collaborative Research Project Solar Technologies Go Hybrid (SolTech), by the Nanosystems Initiative Munich (NIM) and by the International Research Training Group 2022. Alberta/Technical University of Munich International Graduate School for Environmentally Responsible Functional Hybrid Materials (ATUMS) is gratefully acknowledged. K. W. and D. Y. acknowledge the China Scholarship Council (CSC). The authors thank Yu Tong from Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München for helping with the SEM and PL measurements. Portions of this research were carried out at the synchrotron light source PETRA III at DESY. DESY is a member of the Helmholtz Association (HGF).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta10654h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018