 DOI: 10.1039/D2TA04381E
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 18014-18020


Tao
Wang
,

Liang
Qiao
,

Tianshi
Ye
,

Weiyu
Kong
,

Fang
Zeng
,

Yao
Zhang
,

Ruitian
Sun
,

Lin
Zhang
,

Han
Chen
,

Rongkun
Zheng
 and 

Xudong
Yang
*

State Key Laboratory of Metal Matrix Composites, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China. E-mail: yang.xudong@sjtu.edu.cn

Center of Hydrogen Science, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China

Zhangjiang Institute for Advanced Study, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 201210, China

School of Physics, Sydney Nano Institute, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia

Received
1st June 2022
, Accepted 22nd August 2022
First published on 25th August 2022
A high quality buried interface is crucial for highly efficient, stable, and scalable perovskite solar cells, especially for p-i-n structure devices. Here, we report a buried interface engineering strategy by doping tetrachloroaluminate anions into buried organic hole transporting layers, which improves the interfacial wettability of perovskite precursor solution, accelerates hole extraction and transport, and minimizes non-radiative recombination at hole-selective interfaces. The present strategy enables the achievement of p-i-n perovskite solar cells with efficiencies of 23.22% and 21.31% for devices over an area of 0.08 and 1.0 square centimeters, respectively. The target device maintained 93% of initial efficiency under standard illumination at 85 °C for 1500 hours.

Inverted (p-i-n) metal halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have shown great advantages in operational stability, compatibility with perovskite-based tandem solar cells, and low-temperature processability. Currently, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of single-junction p-i-n PSCs has been rapidly improved to as high as 25.0%, and further enhancement in efficiency and scalability is expected by overcoming the limitation caused by buried interfaces. On the one hand, several studies reported that perovskite layers near buried interfaces have a large density of deep trap states, even larger than that near top surfaces. These trap states induce undesired non-radiative recombination loss and performance degradation of PSCs. Moreover, the non-radiative recombination loss at buried interfaces becomes severer for large-area PSCs, owing to the difficulty in constructing nano-scale uniform interfaces when the area increases from the millimeter scale to the centimeter scale or larger ones. Most research efforts have focused on passivating top surfaces through post-treatments, while buried interfaces have attracted less attention, in part because of their non-exposed feature. Besides, the perovskite precursor solvent may destroy the as-formed passivating layers under the consideration of solvent compatibility. On the other hand, poly(triarylamine) (PTAA), which served as the hole transporting layer (HTL) for the most efficient p-i-n PSCs, generally creates low-quality buried interfaces due to its hydrophobic nature, hindering the scale-up fabrication of PSCs. The introduced amphiphilic interlayers contributing to improving the interfacial compatibility are normally insulated and can be considered a barrier to carrier transport. Therefore, it is highly desired to find a strategy that can reduce the non-radiative recombination at buried interfaces and improve the interfacial wettability for the achievement of efficient and large-area PSCs.

Here, we report a solution strategy to conduct an advanced buried interface via anion insertion. Tetrachloroaluminate anions (AlCl4−) were doped into the PTAA layers by exchanging with the radical anions of the initiating dopant 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4TCNQ). F4TCNQ mixed doping has been demonstrated to improve the conductivity of HTLs and carrier extraction at hole selective interfaces. However, residual F4TCNQ in HTLs increases the hydrophobicity and will further hinder the scale-up fabrication of PSCs. Our anion insertion strategy solves this dilemma and enables both enhanced hole extraction and transport and improved interfacial compatibility of the perovskite precursor solution. Furthermore, AlCl4− anions retained in the surface of PTAA have a strong interaction with perovskite crystals and minimize non-radiative recombination at the hole-selective interfaces. The modified buried interface allowed us to fabricate p-i-n perovskite solar cells with a PCE of 23.22% for the 0.08 cm2 device and 21.31% for the 1 cm2 device. The device maintained 93% of initial efficiency after an operation at the maximum power point under AM1.5G solar light (100 mW cm−2) at 85 °C for 1500 hours.

The hole transporting layer was post-processed via an anion insertion process (see the Methods for details) with the molecular anions of AlCl4− (Fig. S1) doped into PTAA films, and termed AlCl4-PTAA (Fig. 1a). AlCl4− anions at the PTAA–perovskite interface are supposed to increase the interfacial affinity of the substrate to perovskite and reduce defects near the buried interface. From the time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectroscopy (TOF-SIMS) 2D elemental mapping in Fig. S2, we observed that AlCl4− anions were inserted into the PTAA polymer network and the residual dopants and by-products were removed by washing. We further confirmed the absence of the initiating dopant in the anion-inserted PTAA by Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy (Fig. S3). We also analyzed the inserted AlCl4− anions for the perovskite on AlCl4-PTAA films via depth profiling using TOF-SIMS (Fig. 1b). Obvious Al and Cl signals from AlCl4− almost overlap the C6H3− signals from PTAA, indicating that AlCl4− anions were mainly distributed within the PTAA layers. Few Al and Cl signals in the perovskite layer region demonstrate that AlCl4-PTAA was not dissolved in the perovskite precursor solution during the fabrication of perovskite films, forming a coherent interface between the perovskite layer and AlCl4-PTAA. The injection of AlCl4− anions did not change the surface morphology of the polymer as detected by atomic force microscopy (AFM, shown in Fig. S4).

The water contact angle of 91.5° for pristine PTAA shows its inherent hydrophobic properties and the poor wettability of the perovskite solution (Fig. 1c). Big pinholes were observed in the thin perovskite film on pristine PTAA. After AlCl4− anion insertion, the water contact angle dramatically reduced to 59.2° because of the hydrophilic inorganic anions in the surfaces (Fig. 1d). The perovskite layer fabricated on the AlCl4-PTAA substrate shows a complete surface coverage and homogeneous surface. A large-area perovskite film (60 mm × 60 mm) on AlCl4-PTAA was also prepared successfully (Fig. S5). AlCl4-PTAA also provides a superior substrate to grow perovskite with improved crystallinity, more uniform grains, and fewer horizontal grain boundaries (Fig. S6–S8). We assume that pseudo-halide AlCl4− anions on top of PTAA can act as nucleation sites and promote the uniform nucleation of perovskite grains.
Hole doping of PTAA via anion insertion was assessed by observing the bleaching of the neutral absorption of PTAA at 376 nm and swelling of the new absorption of polymer radicals in the range of 420–540 nm (Fig. 2a). The electron spin resonance spectra (ESR) also confirm the formation of the polymer radical in AlCl4-PTAA. As shown in Fig. 2b, AlCl4-PTAA shows an obvious radical signal, while no appreciable signal is observed in pristine PTAA. Fig. S9 shows that PTAA immersed in only F4TCNQ or 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrachloroaluminate (EMIM-AlCl4) solution has no obvious enhancement of polymer radicals, indicating that the significant improvement in the doping level of AlCl4-PTAA is attributed to the insertion process, including F4TCNQ charge-transfer and EMIM-AlCl4 anion-exchange (see the Methods for details). It should be noted that anion insertion has little effect on the permeability of PTAA thin films (Fig. S10).
To investigate the charge transporting properties of AlCl4-PTAA, electrical conductivity and hole mobility were evaluated using the designed devices (Fig. S11 and S12). The summarized results in Fig. 2c show that the conductivity of AlCl4-PTAA, reaching a value of 6.52 × 10−7 S cm−1, was increased nearly 40 times compared to that of pristine PTAA (Table S1). Moreover, the mobility of AlCl4-PTAA thin films increased by around one order of magnitude compared with pristine PTAA (Table S2). The higher conductivity and mobility of AlCl4-PTAA films are expected to more efficiently extract and transport holes from perovskites.
We determined the change in the energy level after anion insertion by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) as shown in Fig. S13. The Fermi level deduced from the high-binding-energy cutoff downshifts from −4.46 eV of pristine PTAA to −4.69 eV of AlCl4-PTAA, indicating AlCl4− anion insertion enabled p-type doping. We further confirmed the deeper work function of AlCl4-PTAA by Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM, shown in Fig. S14). The valence band maximum of pristine PTAA and AlCl4-PTAA was estimated to be −5.12 and −5.19 eV, respectively, gradually approaching the value of −5.66 eV for the perovskite layer (Fig. S15). The energy-level diagrams of the HTLs and the perovskite film are depicted in Fig. 2d. Favorable energy level alignment between AlCl4-PTAA and the perovskite layer contributes to reduced energy loss during charge transfer, leading to a higher open-circuit voltage (VOC).
We further used steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved PL (TRPL) spectroscopy to assess the charge transfer kinetics between the perovskite layer and HTLs. Table S3 summarizes the decays fit by bi-exponential components using the equation [Y = A1exp(−t/τ1) + A2exp(−t/τ2)] with fast decay lifetime τ1 and slow decay lifetime τ2. For the perovskite layer with a charge transporting layer, the fast decay is attributed to the carrier loss at the interfaces due to charge extraction to the transport layers and/or to interface recombination, and the slow decay to radiative recombination. For pristine PTAA, the PL and TRPL spectra show insufficient PL quenches (Fig. 2e and f). It might be the reason why an ultrathin PTAA layer is required to reduce charge accumulation at the PTAA–perovskite interfaces. After AlCl4− anion insertion, the steady PL spectrum was almost quenched (Fig. 2e). The PL lifetime (τ1, τ2) of perovskite films deposited on bare glass was up to (56 ns, 1741 ns), and was shortened to a lower degree of (18 ns, 461 ns) for AlCl4-PTAA compared with (31 ns, 736 ns) for pristine PTAA (Fig. 2f), indicating that photogenerated charges from the perovskite layer were more sufficiently transferred to AlCl4-PTAA. The AlCl4-PTAA based PSCs were expected to deliver a superior and more stabilized photovoltaic performance.
Defective interfaces were demonstrated to form non-radiative recombination centers and eventually disrupt charge carrier transport across the interfaces. To study the buried interfaces, we peeled off the perovskite films from the pristine PTAA and AlCl4-PTAA substates and flipped the bottom sides up according to previous work (Fig. S16). The mole ratio of iodine to lead (I/Pb) for the bottom side of the (CsPbI3)0.05[(FAPbI3)0.92(MAPbBr3)0.08]0.95 perovskite film on PTAA is 1.81, calculated from the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) results. This serious deviation from the stoichiometric ratio of 2.77 reveals massive iodide vacancy defects on the buried interfaces, which will serve as non-radiative recombination centers and degrade the performance of the devices (Fig. S17a and b). The I/Pb ratio for the bottom side of the perovskite film on AlCl4-PTAA increases to 2.25, which is closer to the nominal value (Fig. S17c and d).
The high-resolution XPS spectrum of Pb 4f for the bottom side of the perovskite film on PTAA was located at 138.36 and 143.24 eV, corresponding to Pb 4f7/2 and Pb 4f5/2, respectively (Fig. 3a). Deposition on the AlCl4-PTAA substrate decreases the binding energies of Pb 4f7/2 and Pb 4f5/2 to 138.0 and 142.9 eV, respectively, which infers more electron density moving towards the Pb ions. It can be explained as the reduction of undercoordinated Pb ions on the buried surfaces through the interaction with pseudo-halide AlCl4− anions. The strong interaction between AlCl4− and Pb ions is also in good agreement with the shifts of Al 2p and Cl 2p peaks to higher binding energy (Fig. 3b and c). We also infer that pseudo-halide AlCl4− anions on the surface of the AlCl4-PTAA substrates can fill the iodide vacancies on the buried interface (Fig. 1a). We monitored the confocal PL mappings of the bottom sides of the perovskite films that were deposited on pristine PTAA and AlCl4-PTAA, under the same excitation conditions (Fig. 3d and e). The inset shows the histogram of PL intensities represented by pixel counts. We found that the PL intensities increased enormously after AlCl4− anion insertion, indicating that non-radiative recombination near the bottom side of the perovskite layer was largely suppressed by AlCl4− anions. We further used space-charge-limited current (SCLC) measurement to characterize the trap density of perovskite films on different substrates (Fig. 3f). The calculated hole trap state density decreases from 2.020 × 1015 to 1.449 × 1015 cm−3, suggesting that AlCl4− anions efficiently passivate charged defects on buried interfaces. Moreover, the AlCl4-PTAA based device delivered a dark current density nearly one order of magnitude smaller than that with pristine PTAA (Fig. S18), further verifying the suppressed non-radiative recombination and increased charge collection.
We further explored the photovoltaic performance of the AlCl4-PTAA based p-i-n PSCs. PSCs were fabricated using a configuration of glass/ITO/AlCl4-PTAA/perovskite/PCBM/BCP/Ag (Fig. S8). Fig. 4a presents the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the best-performing devices (0.08 cm2) with pristine PTAA and AlCl4-PTAA under both forward and reverse scans. The pristine PTAA based device had a maximum PCE of 21.65% with a VOC of 1.127 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 23.75 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 80.88% under forward scan (Table S4). The AlCl4-PTAA based device achieved a maximum PCE of 23.22%, with a VOC of 1.173 V, a JSC of 24.03 mA cm−2, and an FF of 82.38%, almost free of hysteresis. We ascribed the elimination of the J–V hysteresis to the enhanced hole extraction and transport. The stabilized PCE of the AlCl4-PTAA based device under maximum power point tracking (MPP) reached 23.1%, larger than the value of 21.3% for a control PSC mainly because of the enhanced VOC (Fig. S19). The statistical distribution of the measured PCEs (0.08 cm2) with different HTLs shows that AlCl4-PTAA based PSCs had a higher average value (Fig. 4b). We also assessed FeCl4-PTAA as the HTL. Unfortunately, the FeCl4-PTAA based device shows bad photovoltaic performance, mainly because FeCl4-PTAA can be considered a degenerate semiconductor based on its UPS spectrum (Fig. S20).
External quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements were performed to verify the measured JSC. The higher EQE in the absorption region of 300–400 nm and 700–800 nm was attributed to the enhanced hole extraction and improved crystallinity of perovskite on AlCl4-PTAA, respectively (Fig. 4c). The integrated JSC values of the pristine PTAA and AlCl4-PTAA based PSCs were 23.07 and 23.42 mA cm−2, respectively, which were in agreement with the measured JSC under a solar simulator. Light-intensity-dependent VOC was further measured and the diode ideality factor (ηid) was derived from the slope described by ηidkBT/q, where kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, and q is the electron charge, as shown in Fig. S21. The device with AlCl4-PTAA shows an ηid of 1.23, closer to 1 compared with 1.51 of the pristine PTAA based device, resulting from the suppressed non-radiative recombination at the interfaces achieved by AlCl4− anions. We continued to perform electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and used modeling to study the interfacial carrier transfer and transport kinetics. Fig. S22a shows the Nyquist plots of the devices with pristine PTAA and AlCl4-PTAA and the equivalent circuit used for our curves fitting is shown in Fig. S22b. Here the resistor–capacitor (RC) circuits of the interface and bulk recombination were separated to identify their contribution to total charge recombination. Fitting results are summarized in Table S5. The AlCl4-PTAA based device has a lower internal series resistance Rinternal and higher surface recombination resistance Rsurface compared with the device with pristine PTAA, indicating a faster carrier transfer and a lower surface recombination rate, ultimately achieving a higher VOC and FF.
To prove the scalability of our anion insertion strategy, we fabricated large-area devices (1 cm2) using AlCl4-PTAA as shown in Fig. S23. A maximum PCE of 21.31% was achieved (Fig. 4d), with a VOC of 1.170 V, a JSC of 23.79 mA cm−2, and an FF of 76.56% (Table S6). It represents a record PCE for the 1 cm2 PTAA-based p-i-n PSCs so far (Table S7). However, the pristine PTAA based devices exhibited a sudden drop in PCE and poor reproducibility (Fig. 4e), and only obtained a maximum PCE of 9.08%. This behavior is attributed to the low coverage of perovskite films on hydrophobic PTAA substrates.
We monitored the long-term operational stability of PSCs that were encapsulated with a customized glass cover slide with a desiccant, under continuous full-spectrum sunlight at 85 °C by tracking their MPP, as shown in Fig. 4f. The pristine PTAA based device showed a 42% drop after continuous operation for 1500 h, while the AlCl4-PTAA based device maintained 93% of its initial PCE over the same aging period and still retained a PCE of 21.3%. We assume that AlCl4− anions increase the adhesion toughness at the interface between the perovskite and the HTL, resulting in enhanced long-term operational reliability. Less charge accumulation and reduced defects at the hole-selective interfaces are also crucial to slow down device degradation under bias, heat, and light stress.

In summary, our anion insertion strategy provided enhanced surface wettability, sufficient hole extraction and transport, and suppressed interfacial recombination, contributing to superior scalability, and efficiency in planar PSCs based on AlCl4-PTAA. We provide a new idea to modify the carrier transport layers and their interfaces simultaneously. This simple and feasible method is promising to be applied to flexible devices and tandem devices.


X. Y. supervised the project. X. Y. and T. W. conceived the ideas of the project and designed the experiments. T. W., L. Q., T. Y., and W. K. characterized the films and devices. T. W., L. Q., T. Y., W. K., F. Z., Y. Z., R. S., and L. Z. optimized the photovoltaic performance of devices together. H. C. and R. Z. participated in the discussion and revision. X. Y. and T. W. co-wrote the manuscript.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


This work was funded by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (grant no. 2018YFB1500104), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant nos. 11574199 and 11911530142), the Shanghai Pilot Program for Basic Research-Shanghai Jiao Tong University, and the Program for Professor of Special Appointment (Eastern Scholar) at Shanghai Institutions of Higher Learning. We gratefully acknowledge the assistance in measurements from the Instrumental Analysis Center of Shanghai Jiao Tong University (China). Especially, we thank J. Ding for assistance with TOF-SIMS measurements, H. Li for assistance with AFM and KPFM measurements, Z. Bao and X. Li for assistance with SEM measurements, R. Wang for assistance with PL and TRPL measurements, N. Zhang for assistance with XPS measurements, and X. Ding for assistance with UPS measurements. We thank L. Han for the helpful discussions.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta04381e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022