 DOI: 10.1039/D1TA06255G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 21197-21208


Qing
Ji
,

Na
Li
,

Shuxue
Wang
,

Shuai
Li
,

Fangbin
Li
,

Liangmin
Yu
,

Petri
Murto
* and 

Xiaofeng
Xu
*

College of Materials Science and Engineering, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266100, China. E-mail: xuxiaofeng@ouc.edu.cn

Key Laboratory of Marine Chemistry Theory and Technology, Ministry of Education, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266100, China

Open Studio for Marine Corrosion and Protection, Pilot National Laboratory for Marine Science and Technology, Qingdao 266237, China

Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 1EW, UK. E-mail: pm707@cam.ac.uk

Received
25th July 2021
, Accepted 1st September 2021
First published on 1st September 2021
Solar-driven interfacial evaporation has emerged as an innovative and sustainable technology for clean water production. Future development of hybrid systems has been of particular interest for solar power enhancement with a minimized carbon footprint. Herein, a solar-powered water-electricity generator is fabricated via proper integration of a semitransparent photovoltaic (ST-PV) cell and an interfacial steam generator (SG). Taking the advantages of an inverted device structure, and controlled transmission and heat windows provided by ST-PV, the ST-PV/SG hybrid system simultaneously attains a high electrical power output of 122 W m−2 and a stable water evaporation rate of 1.30 kg m−2 h−1 under 1 sun, which maximizes the total solar power efficiency (88.8%) and surpasses water evaporation of a single SG (82.6%). The performance outperforms a majority of emerging water-electricity production systems, where SGs are integrated with other energy conversion technologies such as thermoelectrics, pyro-piezoelectrics, salinity gradient power and so on. For the first time, this work combines solar-powered interfacial evaporation with a rapidly emerging class of organic PV cells and demonstrates one of the few highly efficient water-electricity production systems, scaling up solar power generation for reliable supply of drinking water and electricity.

Water scarcity is increasingly perceived as a global-scale challenge, which has enormous impacts on human well-being and natural ecosystems. Physical water scarcity occurs as a result of natural phenomena (e.g. drought and aridity) and human influences (e.g. desertification). Economic water scarcity results from lack of suitable water infrastructure and mismanagement of water use. Both impacts are often coupled. Conventional water treatment plants are still being used for municipal drinking water throughout most countries, while the quality and availability of common drinking water sources (e.g. surface water and ground water) are increasingly declining worldwide. Pressure to do more with less has motivated a rapid entry of innovative, efficient and sustainable technologies that can continue supplying reliable drinking water of impeccable quality, at acceptable cost and energy consumption levels.

The sun is an essential supplier of clean and renewable energy for our planet. It drives the natural water cycle. Solar-driven water distillation is one of the most affordable and available water treatment solutions, exhibiting a minimized carbon footprint. It mimics the hydrologic cycle and its origins date back to the ancient Greek times. However, clean water output of commercially available solar stills is low (∼0.3–0.7 kg m−2 h−1 under 1 sun), because of the limited energy intensity of the sun (∼4–8 kW m−2 per day) and the massive energy losses caused by volumetric heating of bulk water. In comparison to traditional solar distillation, recent development of interfacial solar evaporation, localizing light-to-heat conversion and steam generation at a liquid/vapor interface, speeds up water evaporation rates and surpasses the theoretical maximum value (1.47 kg m−2 h−1). Design of monolithic three-dimensional (3D) steam generators (SGs) with self-contained properties has become a topic of growing interest. Furthermore, SG-based hybrid systems are highly desired for the realization of efficient water purification in combination with additional functionals such as waste energy harvest, zero liquid discharge, fuel production, environmental stimuli response and so on. Specifically, synergistic generation of irrigation/drinking water and electricity in remote and arid areas is an important step toward sustainable development. In such a conceptual design, light-to-heat conversion is localized on surface of SGs for clean water generation, while simultaneous temperature and salinity gradients, and energy losses into the environment can be recovered and converted to electricity through some energy conversion technologies (e.g. photovoltaic, thermoelectric, pyro-piezoelectric, triboelectric devices and so on). Based on thermal and optical regulation, synergistic enhancement of overall solar power conversion can be achieved in hydrid systems.
Solar power is one of the most flexible energy technologies in a variety of sustainable applications. Apart from solar heating and distillation, photovoltaic (PV) technologies are another vital component in solar power generation, directly converting sunlight into electrical energy. PV panels come in a variety of options in building- and agriculture-integrated applications and serve as principal and ancillary source of electrical power. In addition, there is an obvious synergy when using PV cells for water pumping, desalination and electricity generation, specifically in arid and semi-arid regions at low latitudes with strong sunlight. Recently, solar-driven interfacial SGs have been integrated with PV cells to construct different types of hybrid systems, whose working principles can be generalized as follows: (i) Joule heating: PV-aided electrical heating of solar absorbers for water evaporation enhancement in SGs. (ii) Passive cooling: the use of waste heat from PVs for water evaporation and improved electricity production. (iii) Forced convection: the use of PV-powered ventilation for enhanced vapor condensation and clean water harvesting. In brief, combination of interfacial SGs and PVs enables merging of good system reliability and flexibility in hybrid systems, allowing scaling up of solar power generation and delivering clean energy source to remote electrical and clean water markets.
Crystalline silicon-based solar cells have been construed as the “first wave” of solar cells, which have been employed in the state-of-the-art water-electricity production systems. Their band-like absorption (300–1300 nm) and thick active layers (∼300 μm) result in opaque and bulky PV panels. As one of the longest-standing alternatives to silicon, polymer solar cells (PSCs) are lighter in weight, more flexible, easier to integrate with other systems and more compatible for large-scale manufacturing with a short energy payback time. PSCs provide an opportunity not only to improve the current PV technologies, but also to integrate them with new applications that are unsuited for conventional silicon-based solar cells. For example, PSCs can provide tunable absorption (∼300–1100 nm) and high absorption coefficients (∼105 cm−1) in a thin active layer (∼100 nm). These unique properties have promoted semitransparent PSCs (ST-PSCs) for potential integration with buildings, greenhouses and floating applications. As a rapidly emerging class of PSCs, ST-PSCs have become increasingly efficient with light-to-electricity conversion efficiencies (PCElight-to-electricity) exceeding 13%, which surpass the electricity generation efficiencies (<2%) of most SG-based hybrid systems that have been integrated with thermoelectric, pyro-piezoelectric and triboelectric devices. Apart from efficient electricity generation, one of the main benefits of ST-PSCs is that they enable the control of transmission and heat flow through semitransparent solar panels. In addition, ST-PSCs can be customized in different locations, shapes and colors, allowing combination of desired practical and aesthetic values. New types of water-electricity generators could take the form of ST-PSC/SG hybrid architecture. ST-PSCs could operate as electrical generators, optical and thermal regulators, allowing future design of PV/SG hybrid systems for selective absorption, controlled heat flow and enhanced electrical conversion. To the best of our knowledge, such a proof-of-concept has not yet been reported.
In this contribution, a solar-powered water-electricity production system was developed via proper combination of high-performance ST-PSCs and interfacial SGs based on a monolithic and inverted design of hybrid systems (ST-PSCs on top and SGs on bottom) (Fig. 1). Three PSC/SG hybrid systems using either opaque PSCs or ST-PSCs were fabricated and their solar power generation, energy transfer pathways and energy losses were characterized and elucidated together with single ST-PSC and SG devices. In the PSC/SG system, the opaque solar panel afforded a high PCElight-to-electricity of 15.1%. The solar energy budget indicated that ∼49% of incident photons were converted to heat and drove the interfacial steam generation in SG, leading to a moderate water evaporation rate of 0.89 kg m−2 h−1. In the ST-PSC/SG system, the semitransparent solar panel retained a high PCElight-to-electricity of 12.2%. A thin Ag cathode (15 nm) provided a transmission window with effective transmittance of ∼20% over the whole visible and near-infrared wavelength region (350–2500 nm). Simultaneous light transmission and heat transfer from ST-PSC to SG synergistically boosted the water evaporation rate to 1.30 kg m−2 h−1. The ST-PSC/SG hybrid system combined a PCElight-to-electricity of 12.2% in ST-PSC and a light-to-heat conversion efficiency (PCElight-to-heat) of 76.6% in SG, thereby maximizing the total power conversion efficiency (PCE) to 88.8%. On the other hand, the single SG and PSC/SG hybrid devices presented lower PCEs of 82.6% and 64.2%, respectively. A series of long-term measurements demonstrated good performance stability and salt-rejecting ability of the ST-PSC/SG hybrid system. Our work delivers a new strategy for synergistic water-electricity production and scale-up of solar power generation in PV/SG hybrid systems, taking the benefits of controlled transmission and heat flow of semitransparent solar panels on top of SGs.

The solar-powered water-electricity generator was composed of two solar energy conversion devices, forming a monolithic hybrid system (Fig. 2a). Opaque PSCs and ST-PSCs were employed to study the synergistic optical and thermal effects on enhancement of total PCEs. High-performance PSCs served as upper electric generator, absorbing sunlight in the visible and near-infrared regions and converting photons into electricity. Interfacial SGs were placed under PSCs, which used the non-absorbed photons and heat flows from PSCs for interfacial steam generation. Sunlight shined on the indium tin oxide (ITO) anode side of PSCs. Portions of photons can be transmitted through ST-PSCs. Encapsulated PSCs were directly placed on the solar absorbers (or named P-NC film) of SGs. The P-NC film was prepared via in situ oxidative polymerization of pyrrole on cellulosic nonwoven fabrics (or named NC film). The soft nonwoven fabrics were made from wood pulp (biomass), delivering good water diffusion (Fig. S1, ESI) and water retention (saturated water content: 16 g g−1). Polypyrrole (PPy) served as the solar absorbing material in the P-NC film. PPy has been demonstrated to be a biocompatible polymer that can be used as platform for nerve and cell growth. No harmful effect on aquatic ecosystem has been reported. The presence of PPy on the P-NC film was confirmed via Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy (Fig. S2, ESI). Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) indicated good thermal stability of NC and P-NC films, exhibiting decomposition temperature over 200 °C, which is well above the highest achievable temperature under solar irradiation (Fig. S3, ESI). In addition, P-NC films showed no evident structural deformation or PPy leakage under several harsh conditions (soaked in hot, acidic and alkaline water over 48 h) (Fig. S4, ESI). Numerous non-covalent bonds formed between PPy and cellulosic nonwoven fabrics are expected to promote physical interactions of the two components (Fig. 3a). TGA and soaking tests disclose good thermal and structural durability of the P-NC film and highlight its potential for long-term use in water.

The morphological properties of the P-NC film were studied via a set of optical, electron and scanning probe microscopy techniques. As depicted in Fig. 2b, an interlacing pattern of the warp and weft was found in the P-NC film under a optical microscope. The confocal laser scanning microscope (CLSM) image presented its rough surface topography with an arithmetic mean deviation (Ra) of 34.36 μm. The neat NC film comprised numerous densely packed and tortuous microfibers with a mean diameter of 19.3 μm and a mean porosity (P) of 90.1%, as shown in the scanning electron microscope (SEM) images (Fig. S5, ESI). After in situ polymerization, PPy based aggregates were formed on the microfibers of nonwoven fabrics, leading to an increased mean diameter of 22.3 μm yet a reduced P of 86.0%. The elemental mapping at the microstructural level via SEM with energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDS) exhibited that PPy was evenly distributed throughout the P-NC film. Oxygen (O2) plasma treatments introduced more polar functional groups (e.g. C–O and CO groups) and remove organic contamination on the microfibers, leading to the super-hydrophilic surface of the P-NC film, as indicated in X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and contact angle (CA) measurements (Fig. S6 and S7, ESI). Oxygen (O2) plasma treatments also increased the hydrophilicity of the glass slice (thickness: 1.1 mm) for encapsulation of PSC, where its lower surface was placed on top of the P-NC film. The P-NC film showed an isotropic thermal conductivity of 0.28 and 0.54 W m−1 K−1 in its dry and wet states, respectively (Fig. S8, ESI). The thin glass slice used for encapsulation exhibited a higher thermal conductivity of 1.05 W m−1 K−1, indicating it was capable of effectively transferring heat between PSCs and P-NC films. Tensile tests were conducted to evaluate mechanical properties of the P-NC film. The P-NC film showed a high ultimate tensile strength of ∼3.0 MPa with a fracture strain of ∼74%, indicating its good mechanical strength under tension (Fig. S9, ESI). Three hybrid systems were fabricated based on single SG and ST-PSC devices, as illustrated in Fig. 2c. Integration of an opaque PSC and a SG formed the hybrid device denoted as PSC/P-NC. The hybrid devices (named ST-PSC/P-NC1 and ST-PSC/P-NC2) employed ST-PSCs instead of a opaque PSC, integrating with the same SG. In ST-PSC/P-NC1, ST-PSC was tightly contacted onto the P-NC film, forming a “direct contact” structure. On the other hand, introduction of air gaps (thickness: 1, 3 and 5 cm) between ST-PSC and SG led to the “indirect contact” design of ST-PSC/P-NC2. Associated with solar evaporation and electricity generation, the inverted device structures of the hybrid systems enabled us to harvest water vapor via condensation, where liquid water can be collected in a bottom container.
The bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) active layers of opaque PSC and ST-PSC contained a blend of an electron-donor and an electron-acceptor. The alternating polymer PM6 (also named PBDB-TF) and the small molecular Y6 are the state-of-the-art donor and acceptor materials respectively, which were employed in this study. The chemical structures of PM6, Y6, PPy and cellulose are depicted in Fig. 3a. The absorption spectrum of PM6 in film ranged from 350 to 680 nm with an absorption peak at ∼576 nm. The absorption of Y6 in film was in a wavelength range of 400−950 nm with an absorption peak at ∼826 nm. The PM6:Y6 blend film (donor:acceptor = 1:1.2) afforded a complementary absorption spectrum ranging from 350 to 1000 nm (Fig. 3b). It revealed that the PM6:Y6 based PSCs covered most visible and some near-infrared regions of the solar spectrum (350–1000 nm). Portions of the photons above this absorption band can be directly converted into electricity via the photovoltaic effect in PSCs. The transmittance of PM6 and Y6 agreed well with their absorbance and led to three high transmission bands ranging from 350–625 nm, 625–810 nm and 810–2500 nm (Fig. S10, ESI). Opaque PSCs and ST-PSCs were fabricated by using a conventional configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer (PM6:Y6)/PDINO/Ag (Fig. S11, ESI). The PM6:Y6 based active layer (film thickness: ∼100 nm) was sandwiched between the ITO anode and Ag cathode and the whole device was encapsulated by ultraviolet-curing epoxy resins and glass slices. The PM6:Y6 based opaque PSC and ST-PSC differed in the transmittance spectra, owing to the modulations on thicknesses of Ag cathodes (Fig. 3c). The thick Ag cathode (80 nm) of the opaque PSC served as optical mirror and reflected most non-absorbed photons back into the active layer for reabsorption, resulting in negligible transmittance in the wavelength range of 350–2500 nm. In contrast, ST-PSC showed several transmittance bands in the visible and near-infrared regions. Weighted with the AM 1.5G solar spectrum, the effective transmittances of ST-PSC in the wavelength ranges of 350−1000 nm and 1000–2500 nm were calculated to be 20.3% and 18.9%, respectively. The former transmission band played a key role in the photovoltaic effect of PSCs, while the latter transmission band contributed to the thermalization energy generation of PSCs. The inset images in Fig. 3e depict the good transparency and negligible color aberration of the ST-PSC as compared to the opaque PSC. The color coordinate (x, y) of ST-PSC (0.25, 0.25) was marked in the Commission Internationale de L'Eclairage (CIE) 1931 chromaticity diagram (Fig. S12, ESI). The light bluish color of the ST-PSC stemmed from its strong transmittance in the wavelength range of 380–620 nm. The measured color rendering index (CRI) of the ST-PSC was as high as ∼93, indicating its good transmission and color perception. In SG, the P-NC film as solar absorber afforded strong absorptance (∼95%) in a broad wavelength range of 250–2500 nm (Fig. 3d). Except for being absorbed and reflected, the photons that passed through ST-PSCs can be used by the P-NC film and carried out the light-to-heat conversion in SG.

Fig. 3e plots the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of PSCs under 1 sun. The PM6:Y6-based opaque PSC showed an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.82 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 26.3 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 0.70, leading to a high power PCElight-to-electricity of 15.1%. It reflects the ratio of electrical output from a solar cell to input energy of incident sunlight, which is comparable with a majority of conventional PM6:Y6 PSCs reported to date. By lowering the thickness of Ag cathode from 80 nm to 15 nm, PM6:Y6 based ST-PSCs were fabricated and afforded a Voc of 0.81 V, a Jsc of 22.9 mA cm−2, a FF of 0.66 and a high PCElight-to-electricity of 12.2%. The photons passing through ST-PSC inevitably reduced PCElight-to-electricity as compared to the opaque PSC. The optical and photovoltaic properties revealed that the PM6:Y6 based ST-PSC delivered an optimum trade-off between electric power generation and transparency, which is among the best-performing ST-PSCs reported so far. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) is defined as the flux of free charges extracted from PSC per the flux of incident photons. The EQE spectra of the opaque PSC and ST-PSC reflected that the light-to-electricity conversion mainly occurred in the wavelength range of 350−1000 nm (red area) with the maximal value of ∼75%, which agreed well with the absorption of the PM6:Y6 blend (Fig. 3b) and the transmittance of ST-PSC (blue area) (Fig. 3f and g). For a single ST-PSC or a single PSC, most below-bandgap photons (yellow area, wavelength range: 1000–2500 nm) were not captured, where some were reflected on the surface of the ITO glass and others were undesirably converted to heat and transferred to the ambient air via convection. On the other hand, the ST-PSC/SG hybrid system enabled simultaneous absorption of the above- and below-bandgap photons in a broad wavelength range of 350–2500 nm and conversion of the conductive heat flow from the warmed ST-PSC to the P-NC film, which therefore combined the photovoltaic and solar-thermal processes in this hybrid system for water-electricity generation.

Indoor water evaporation measurements were performed under 1 sun (AM 1.5G, 1000 W m−2, at ∼23 °C and a humidity of ∼50%). A schematic diagram of the artificial setup is depicted in Fig. 4a. The surface temperature of the single ST-PSC, single SG and PSC/SG hybrid systems with direct and indirect structures were measured over time under 1 sun (Fig. 4b). The wet P-NC films in all devices showed comparable temperature of ∼22.7 °C in the dark (Fig. 4c). Under continuous illumination of 1 sun, the highest surface temperature (∼54.0 °C) was observed from ST-PSC, indicating the warm temperature of solar panels under a real sky (Fig. 4e). Some reports have evidenced that PCElight-to-electricity can be hindered when solar cells are overheated on a summer day. The P-NC film in the single SG showed lower surface temperature of ∼37.6 °C due to the evaporative cooling effect (Fig. 4d). Separation of the P-NC film away from bulk water enabled to suppress the conduction loss and promote the interfacial steam generation. Two integrated systems (PSC/P-NC and ST-PSC/P-NC1) that composed of opaque PSC and ST-PSC presented medium surface temperature of ∼39.9 and ∼38.5 °C, respectively. In these integrated devices with “direct contact” structures, the heat flows (conduction) from the solar panels (opaque and semitransparent) to P-NC films prevented the solar panels from overheating via evaporative cooling effect, which also provided SG external energy input for interfacial steam generation. The integrated device (ST-PSC/P-NC2) with an “indirect contact” structure afforded higher surface temperature (∼43.0 °C). This is because the air gap acted as thermal barrier and hindered the conductive heat transfer between ST-PSC and P-NC. A detailed analysis of energy conversion and transfer pathways in different devices was performed in next sections.

Solar-powered water evaporation of single SG and different hybrid devices were characterized by recording the mass losses of water over time. The single SG and ST-PSC/P-NC1 devices exhibited comparable water evaporation rates in the dark (Fig S13, ESI). Under 1 sun, the sharp mass declines of water indicated the faster water evaporation of the single SG and ST-PSC/P-NC1 hybrid devices as compared to the PSC/P-NC and ST-PSC/P-NC2 devices (Fig. 5a). The single SG device showed the highest water evaporation rate of 1.39 kg m−2 h−1. A slightly lower water evaporation rate of 1.30 kg m−2 h−1 was found in ST-PSC/P-NC1. On the other hand, the water evaporation rates of PSC/P-NC and ST-PSC/P-NC2 were significantly lower at 0.89 and 0.82 kg m−2 h−1, respectively (Fig. 5b). Although the single SG showed the highest PCElight-to-heat of 82.6%, ST-PSC/P-NC1 can combine 12.2% of light-to-electricity generation in ST-PSC, boosting the total PCE to 88.8% (Fig. 5c). On the other hand, the PSC/P-NC device showed a lower PCElight-to-heat of 49.1%, because the opaque solar panel precluded most above- and below-bandgap photons from reaching the P-NC film. Although the PSC/P-NC device achieved a high PCElight-to-electricity of 15.1%, the reduced solar energy input played a key role for its lower PCElight-to-heat and its total PCE was ∼25% lower as compared to ST-PSC/P-NC1. The air gap between ST-PSC and P-NC hampered the conductive heat transfer. The reduced heat energy input lowered PCElight-to-heat to 44.3%. Moreover, electrical power densities and water evaporation rates of reported water-electricity production systems are summarized in Fig. 5d and Table S1, ESI. Interfacial SGs integrated with PV technologies deliver one of the most appealing hybrid systems as compared to other SG-based systems in combination with thermoelectrics, pyro-piezoelectrics, thermogalvanics and salinity gradient power (e.g. brine-drenching induced electrical generators). These results disclose that the external energy input from both optical and thermal pathways synergistically contributed to the superior water evaporation and boosted the total solar power conversion in the ST-PSC/P-NC1 device, highlighting the advantages of our design as compared to the opaque and indirect contact structures.
A long-term solar power conversion was performed to evaluate the performance stability of the ST-PSC/P-NC1 device (Fig. 5e). A linear mass loss of water was recorded when ST-PSC/P-NC1 was continuously illuminated under 1 sun over 24 h (Fig. S14, ESI). For light-to-heat conversion, steady PCElight-to-heat of ∼76.2% was observed with an average evaporation rate of 1.30 kg m−2 h−1 over 24 h, which retained the initial evaporation performance in the first 60 min. For light-to-electricity conversion, Jsc and PCElight-to-electricity of ST-PSC showed a burn-in period in the first 2 h (Fig. S15, ESI). This burn-in loss has frequently been observed in most PSCs. The potential origins include light-induced traps, broad polydispersity of polymers and impurities in active layers. After that, PCE went into a steady state (average value: 9.1%) and exhibited ∼75% of initial PCElight-to-electricity after 24 h. In conventional ST-PSCs, hygroscopic and acidic properties of interlayers (i.e. PEDOT:PSS and PDINO) inevitably lead to moisture related defects (interfacial passivation and electrode corrosion), lowering the long-term stability of ST-PSCs. Advanced methods including development of pH-neutral materials, deposition of robust films and management of atmospheric water and oxygen are required for future design of hybrid PV systems. The left inset figure in Fig. 5e shows that a capacitor (1000 μF) was used to form an RC charging circuit and store the free charges generated in the ST-PSC/P-NC1 device. The capacitor can charge up to ∼0.80 V within 30 s. The voltage at the steady state was consistent with the supply voltage from ST-PSC (Voc = 0.81 V). In addition to efficient electricity generation and storage, the same device can synergistically afford a steady water production rate (water collection rate) of 0.73 kg m−2 h−1 over 24 h under 1 sun (right inset images in Fig. 5e). It highlights synergistic water-electricity production of the PV/SG hybrid system. On the other hand, clean water harvesting is not realized in a majority of reported hybrid systems integrated with salinity gradient power and thermoelectrics, as summarized in Table S1, ESI.
Introduction of anti-biofouling properties into interfacial SGs has become a topic of growing interest, because biofouling and biocorrosion are ubiquitous and unavoidable on the warm and wet surfaces of SGs deployed on open water. Accumulation of various organisms (bacteria, fungi, algae and plants and so on) can cause structural deficiencies, degrading the device performance, shortening the lifetime expectancy and threating water quality. In this study, microbial contamination experiments were performed to evaluate the anti-biofouling and antimicrobial properties of the P-NC film. Pristine nonwoven fabrics and P-NC films (PPy concentration: ∼60 g m−2) were immersed in natural lake water for 2 weeks. The population of bacterial cells was thereafter counted and expressed as the number of cells per unit of volume via a flow cytometry analyzer, as shown in 2D dot-plots in Fig. S16, ESI. Each red dot in the cluster represented a bacterial cell, while the x- and y-axis were the corresponding intensity of side scatter and green fluorescence of the cells, respectively. The population of bacterial cells on the P-NC film was significantly lower by ∼3.6 and ∼2.3 folds on average (t-test, p < 0.01) as compared to lake water and pristine nonwoven fabrics respectively, indicating the superior anti-biofouling ability of the P-NC film. PPy is reported to have excellent antibacterial properties and used as antimicrobial treatments for textile materials. The bioactivity of PPy is possibly due to the presence of positive charges generated during the polymerization on the backbones, which can attack bacterial cell walls and prevent synthesis and assembly of peptidoglycan in the cell walls.
Salt rejection experiments were conducted by placing salt powder (0.5 g) on top of a wet P-NC film. Notably, all salt powder disappeared on the surface of P-NC within 75 min, indicating its good salt-rejecting property (Fig. S17, ESI). Moreover, solar desalination was performed by placing the ST-PSC/P-NC1 device on seawater (a salinity of 35 g kg−1), which was collected from the Yellow Sea coast of Qingdao, China. An average water evaporation rate of 1.24 kg m−2 h−1 was recorded over 8 h, which was comparable to the value obtained from freshwater (Fig. 5f). Neither decreases in water evaporation rates nor clear salt crust layers were observed during the 8 hours' test of evaporation under 1 sun. The super-hydrophilic and interpenetrating networks within the P-NC film was suggested to establish a dynamic equilibrium, where the salt sediments can be rapidly re-dissolved and diffused back to bulk seawater. The hydrophilic lower surface of ST-PSC also tended to prevent salt crystals from adhering on the interface of ST-PSC and P-NC. Similarly synergistic properties were evidenced in recent reports of high-performing solar desalination. After solar desalination, the concentrations of primary elements (Na, Mg, K and Ca) were significantly reduced in the purified water as compare to seawater (Fig. S18, ESI). The ion concentrations of the purified water were far below the drinking-water quality standards published by the World Health Organization (WHO). The results highlight the potential of using ST-PSC/P-NC1 for effective and high-quality production of all safe drinking water.

An analysis of energy balance was performed to study the solar energy intake, conversion, transfer and expenditure in different device architecture. The sunlight intensity reaching the surface of all devices was 1000 W m−2 (1 sun), which drove the concurrent light-to-electricity and light-to-heat conversion in the hybrid systems. The energy losses of the hybrid systems can divide into two pathways: optical and thermal losses (Fig. 6a). The optical losses mainly stemmed from the reflection of sunlight on the surface of PSCs and SGs. The solar energy budgets of the single SG, single ST-PSC, PSC/P-NC, ST-PSC/P-NC1 and ST-PSC/P-NC2 devices are summarized in Fig. 6b, c, d, e and f, respectively. In the single SG, the rough P-NC film showed a steady reflectance spectrum in the wavelength range of 350–2500 nm (Fig. S19a, ESI). Weighted with the AM 1.5G solar spectrum, the effective reflectance of the P-NC film was calculated to be 5%. All transmittance and reflectance spectra of thin ITO (135 nm) and Ag (15 and 80 nm) layers were plotted in Fig. S19b and S20, ESI. The opaque PSC showed significantly higher reflectance in the wavelength range of 850–2500 nm due to the synergistic reflection of thin ITO and Ag electrodes (Fig. S19a, ESI). In total, 24.3% of incident sunlight (wavelength range: 350–2500 nm) was reflected on the surface of opaque PSC. The decreased thickness of Ag cathode (from 80 to 15 nm) significantly increased the efficient transmittance to 19.3% (Fig. 3c) and lowered the effective reflectance to 12.8% (Fig. S19a, ESI) of ST-PSC in the wavelength range of 350–2500 nm as compared to the opaque PSC.

The heat losses are classified as radiation, convection and conduction. Convection is the heat transfer from a body to moving molecules (e.g. air and liquids). Radiation is a form of heat loss through infrared rays with no physical contact. Conductive heat transfer occurred through physical contact of two solids or stationary fluid mediums. The single SG showed a low radiation loss (3.9%) and a low convection loss (3.2%). The conduction from the P-NC film to water was negligible, because the indirect and minimized contact between P-NC and bulk water and the good thermal insulation of air (conductivity: ∼0.024 W m−1 K−1) in between, all of which delivered a high PCElight-to-heat of 82.6% in SG. Although the single ST-PSC afforded a good PCElight-to-electricity of 12.2%, it presented increased radiation (15.1%) and convection (11.4%). In the PSC/P-NC hybrid system, the evaporative cooling effect significantly reduced the radiation (4.7%) and convection (4.0%) losses as compare to the single ST-PSC. The calculated conduction (55.6%) from opaque PSC to P-NC served as heat source and drove the interfacial steam generation in SG. The PSC/P-NC device showed a decent PCElight-to-heat of 49.1% yet a high PCElight-to-electricity of 15.1%. The ST-PSC/SG1 device retained the low radiation (4%), low convection (3.5%) and efficient conduction (52.2%) as compared to PSC/P-NC. Associated with transmission, 19.3% of photons can transmit through the semitransparent solar panel and acted as extra solar energy input for the light-to-heat conversion on the P-NC film, leading to a higher PCElight-to-heat of 76.6% in SG. In addition to the high PCElight-to-electricity of ST-PSC, the ST-PSC/P-NC1 device therefore attained the best total PCE of 88.8%. Introduction of the air gap between ST-PSC and SG hampered the pathways of synergistic conduction and passive cooling in the ST-PSC/P-NC2 device (air gap: 1 cm), which agitated the radiation (6.6%) and convection (5.7%) of ST-PSC and decreased the PCElight-to-heat to 44.3% in SG. Further extension of air gaps to 3 and 5 nm continued to reduce heat losses, gradually decelerating water evaporation (Fig. S21, ESI) and lowering the PCElight-to-heat from 36.5% to 28.2%, respectively (Fig. S22, ESI). When the air gap was large enough (5 cm), the surface temperature (54 °C) of the ST-PSC/P-NC device was nearly the same with that recorded on the single ST-PSC (Fig. S23, ESI), implying that ST-PSC and SG operated as separated devices and the downward conduction was blocked. Taking into account the PCElight-to-heat of ST-PSC/P-NC1 and ST-PSC/P-NC2 (air gap: 5 cm), it revealed that the photons passing through ST-PSC and downward conduction contributed ∼28.2% and ∼48.4% of the total light-to-heat conversion (76.6%) in the ST-PSC/P-NC1 device, respectively. It is worth noting that the estimated conductive contribution for water evaporation (∼48.4%) was in good agreement with the calculated conduction (52.2%) from ST-PSC to P-NC in the ST-PSC/P-NC1 device, which verified the accuracy of the efficiencies, energy transfer and heat loss measurements in this study. The analysis of energy balance elucidates the superior performance of ST-PSC/P-NC1 as compared to other devices in this study, and highlights the merits of this hybrid system.

In summary, a solar-powered water-electricity production system was successfully fabricated and demonstrated for synergetic electricity generation and clean water production with a high PCE. Rational integration of ST-PSC and interfacial SG into an inverted structure delivered several unique merits of this PV/SG hybrid system, which are rationalized as follows: (i) ST-PSC attained a high PCElight-to-electricity of 12.2% and a power output of 122 W m−2 under 1 sun. It achieved an optimum trade-off between electricity generation and transparency among the best-performing ST-PSCs reported to date. (ii) The thin Ag cathode provided a transmission window with effective transmittance of 19.3% in a broad spectral region spanning from 350 to 2500 nm. Simultaneous light transmission and heat transfer from ST-PSC to the P-NC film enhanced the interfacial steam generation and boosted the water evaporation rate to 1.30 kg m−2 h−1. (iii) The ST-PSC/SG hybrid system combined a PCElight-to-electricity of 12.2% and a PCElight-to-heat of 76.6%, ramping up the total PCE to 88.8% and importantly surpassing the single SG (82.6%) and other PSC/SG hybrid systems; (iv) long-term solar evaporation and desalination demonstrated a steady water production rate of 0.73 kg m−2 h−1 over 24 h. The purified water met the quality standards required for safe drinking water. As a result, the ST-PSC/P-NC hybrid system ranks among the best-performing synergistic water-electricity generators reported so far. Specifically, its performance surpasses a majority of emerging hybrid systems integrated with other energy conversion technologies such as thermoelectrics, pyro-piezoelectrics, thermogalvanics and salinity gradient power. This work sheds new light on development of synergistic water-electricity production by taking the benefits of customized device structures and controlled energy pathways in semitransparent PV/SG systems, delivering a facile scale-up of total solar power conversion into sustainable electricity and drinking water production.


Water evaporation experiments were conducted by using an artificial optical system at a room temperature of ∼23 °C and a relative humidity of ∼50%. A xenon lamp (CEL-S500, CEAULIGHT) with an AM 1.5G optical filter was used as the light source. The intensity of light (100 mW cm−2) was calibrated by using the solar flux was calibrated by using a thermopile connected to a power meter (CEL-NP2000, CEAULIGHT). The surface temperature of the ST-PSCs was measured via an infrared camera (223s-L19, Fortic Precision Instruments). The temperature of the P-NC was measured via a thermometer (MS-H-Pro+, DLAB). The mass changes of water were measured by using a high-precision electronic balance (QUINTIX224-1 CN, Sartorius, accuracy: 0.1 mg) and recorded via a desktop computer. The active area of all hybrid systems was 1 cm2.



J–V curves of PSCs were recorded in backward scan direction by using a Keithley 2400 source meter under a solar simulator (Oriel Sol3A, 69920, Newport) with simulated AM 1.5G illumination at 1000 W m−2. For EQE measurements of PSCs, the photocurrent was measured by using a Keithley 485 picometer under monochromatic light (MS257) illumination across PSCs. The current was recorded as the voltage over a 50 Ω resistance and converted to a EQE profile by comparing the data with a calibrated Si reference cell.


The authors declare no competing financial interest.


We acknowledge the financial support from Taishan Scholar Program of Shandong Province, China (grant no. tsqn201812026), Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province, China (grant no. ZR2019QB014 and ZR2020ZD33), Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (grant no. 201941011) and Qingdao Science and Technology Program: Youth Project of Applied Basic Research, China (grant no. 19-6-2-15-cg).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta06255g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021