 DOI: 10.1039/D2TA01888H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 12882-12889


Wei-Min
Gu
,

Yue
Zhang
,

Ke-Jian
Jiang
*,

Guanghui
Yu
,

Yanting
Xu
,

Jin-Hua
Huang
,

Yanyan
Zhang
,

Fuyi
Wang
,

Yawen
Li
,

Yuze
Lin
,

Xinning
Jiao
,

Cai-Yan
Gao
,

Haochen
Fan
,

Ningning
Wu
,

Xueqin
Zhou
 and 

Yanlin
Song
*

Key Laboratory of Green Printing, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: kjjiang@iccas.ac.cn; ylsong@iccas.ac.cn

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, P. R. China

School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, 300072, Tianjin, P. R. China

Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, CAS Key Laboratory of Analytical Chemistry for Living Biosystems, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China

Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, CAS Key Laboratory of Organic Solids, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China

Center for Physicochemical Analysis and Measurement, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, P. R. China

Received
9th March 2022
, Accepted 9th May 2022
First published on 10th May 2022
Halide perovskites are highly promising semiconductors for photovoltaics due to their high efficiency and simple solution processing. However, their halide-terminated surface is unstable due to the low binding energy of the Pb–I bond in the perovskites, which allows for surface defect formation and ion migration under external stresses, deteriorating the performance of perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Here, phenethylammonium fluoride (PEAF) is deposited on a perovskite film with controlled thickness via a fast thermal evaporation method at low temperatures and normal pressure, passivating the commonly existing surface halide vacancies without destabilizing the underlying perovskite and sacrificing charge transport in the PSC. Moreover, the fluoride anion in PEAF could undergo a strong interaction with the perovskites due to its high electronegativity, effectively reinforcing the structural stability of the perovskite film. The PEAF-treated PSCs exhibit high power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 23.2% with significantly enhanced stability.

Solution-processed hybrid polycrystalline perovskites have attracted tremendous attention due to their low-cost solution processing and attractive optoelectronic properties. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has increased dramatically from an initial 3.8% to 25.5% within just a few years, rendering them promising candidates for the next-generation photovoltaic technologies. However, the instabilities inherent to the systems could be a primary obstacle to their practical application. Due to the ionic nature of the perovskites and solution deposition approach employed, numerous defects, especially halogen anion and organic cation vacancies, could be formed easily at the surface and grain boundaries of the perovskite films due to the removal of the organic and halogen components from the films, leaving behind the uncoordinated Pb2+ and Pb0 defects. These defects could serve as charge carrier recombination sites and cause nonradiative recombination losses, deteriorating the photovoltaic performance. Moreover, the defects leave the films susceptible to humidity attack, accelerating the degradation of perovskite devices. In addition, these defects can also provide a pathway for ion migration, resulting in significant deterioration of the device performance under operational conditions (light illumination, applied electric field, and thermal stress). In general, the instabilities mainly originate from the surface and grain boundary defects having low formation energies. Thus, it is highly crucial to strengthen the bonding architecture at the surfaces and grain boundaries of the perovskite films, preventing the invasion of external detrimental species and inhibiting the internal halide migration.

Recently, various organic or inorganic passivation agents have been developed to passivate the surfaces and grain boundaries of halide perovskite films to enhance both the performance and stability of the devices. Among the agents, organic ammonium salts with different halide anions (I−, Br−, and Cl−), such as phenylethylammonium iodide (PEAI),n-hexyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (HTAB), and choline chloride, were explored to post-treat the halide perovskite films via a solution-processing approach. The ammonium cations and halide anions in the salts are expected to simultaneously neutralize negatively and positively charged ionic defects on the surface of perovskite films through electrostatic interactions including ionic bonding and hydrogen bonding. Further research showed that ammonium salts with small halogen anions (Cl− or Br−) were more efficient for the defect passivation of the perovskite films, which was assigned to the formation of stronger interaction between organic cations and the halide anions on the surface and the grain boundaries. In addition, it is noted that most of the passivation agents for the perovskites were processed by a solution method with a protic solvent, typically isopropyl alcohol (IPA). This method inevitably resulted in the formation of other large-bandgap perovskite phases such as two dimensional (2D) structures, which may present an energy barrier for charge-carrier transport due to their highly insulating properties. In this case, the formed passivation layers should be ultrathin and compact to ensure effective defect passivation without sacrificing charge transport in the PSCs, posing a great challenge for the solution technology. Additionally, the polar IPA is destructive to the primary perovskite films due to the solvent effect, potentially destabilizing the underlying perovskites and deteriorating the device properties.
In this work, phenethylammonium fluoride (PEAF) was developed as both a passivator and stabilizer for highly efficient and stable PSCs. PEAF was selected as a passivator based on the following rationales: fluoride anion with a smaller ionic radius and higher Lewis basicity can undergo stronger interaction with uncoordinated Pb2+ and form stronger hydrogen bonds (F⋯H–N) with the organic cations in hybrid perovskites, enabling both the defect passivation and structural strengthening at the surfaces and grain boundaries of the perovskite film. The surface strengthening could inhibit the detrimental halide migration in the perovskite film and the device, and simultaneously protect the film from being attacked by water molecules. Likewise, the ingression of lithium ions used as dopants in the hole conductor could be efficiently suppressed in the perovskite film after the PEAF modification, enhancing the operational stability of the device. Additionally, PEAF can be conformally deposited on the perovskite films through a fast thermal evaporation at a low temperature and normal pressure, without damaging the underlying perovskite layer. As a result, the perovskite solar cells exhibit both enhanced power conversion efficiency and stability.

Phenethylammonium fluoride (PEAF) was simply synthesized by neutralizing equimolar amounts of hydrofluoric acid and phenethylamine. The synthesis details are described in the ESI, and the 1H and 13C NMR spectra of the PEAF are presented in Fig. S1.Fig. 1a schematically illustrates the thermal deposition process of PEAF on a typical double-cation perovskite (FA1−xMAxPbI3) film. The perovskite film was prepared using a two-step spin-coating method reported previously. To determine the evaporation temperature for PEAF, thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) was conducted. As shown in Fig. 1b, PEAF started to evaporate at ∼80 °C, about 150 °C lower than that for PEAI conventionally used as a passivator for PSCs. This difference is ascribed to the different halide anions between the salts, and similar results were reported previously. The low evaporation temperature enables the fast deposition of PEAF at normal pressure. For the PEAF deposition, the perovskite film was exposed in a PEAF vapor environment in a closed chamber for about 1 min at 100 °C and normal pressure, followed by annealing at 100 °C for 10 min under ambient conditions. The procedure involved the evaporation and deposition of PEAF on the surface of the perovskite film. We observed that the power conversion efficiency (PCE) reached a maximum for the PSC with PEAF deposited at 100 °C for 1 min (Fig. S2), where the PEAF thickness was evaluated to be about ∼3 nm using an ellipsometer for PEAF deposited on a smooth silicon substrate under the same deposition conditions (Fig. S3a). Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) spectrum was recorded for the pure PEAF and perovskite with and without PEAF treatment (Fig. S4a), where the feature peaks of the alkenyl CC stretching vibrations appear in the range of 1650–1450 cm−1 from the aromatic ring of PEA+, confirming the incorporation of PEAF on the perovskite. It is worth noting that the intensity of the stretching vibration of CC near 1650 cm−1 from PEAF remarkably decreased after its coating on the perovskite, probably due to the interaction between the aromatic ring of PEAF and perovskite. To reveal how PEAF was distributed across the perovskite layer, time-of-flight secondary-ion mass spectroscopy (ToF-SIMS) was conducted to probe the depth profiles of the C6− (fragment ion of PEA+) and the F− anions within the perovskite film. As shown in Fig. 1c, the maximum F signal was observed on the film surface, along with appreciable intensity in the entire film. The result indicates that F− anions were mainly located on the surfaces and grain boundaries of the perovskite film. The C6− ion signal from PEA+ was detected at the front surface of the perovskite film, rapidly decreasing within the film.


Fig. 1d shows the ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra of the control and PEAF-treated perovskite films. Both the films exhibited almost the same absorption property with thresholds at 812 nm, suggesting that the PEAF modification had a negligible effect on the light harvesting properties. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image in Fig. 1e indicates that the PEAF-treated film is uniform and compact with well-defined grains (∼1 μm in size), and the topography is well maintained after the treatment, suggesting a conformal coating of PEAF on the perovskite film. The atomic force microscopy measurements show that the root-mean-square (r.m.s.) roughness (19.6 nm) of the treated film is comparable to that (20.5 nm) of the pristine film (Fig. S5d and e), well consistent with the SEM results. For comparison, a conventional solution method was employed for the PEAF deposition on the perovskite film using IPA as the solvent at a concentration of 20 mM as that of PEAI. As expected, the morphology of the resulting perovskite film was dramatically changed upon the deposition (Fig. S5c), featuring an undulating rough surface and a network of fine cracks with high roughness (37 nm) (Fig. S5f), probably due to the redissolution of the perovskite into the solvent during the treatment. In addition, the resultant PEAF was evaluated to be about 13.5 nm in thickness (Fig. S3b), much higher than that (∼3 nm) from the vapor deposition. The thicker PEAF layer could impede charge separation and transport from the 3D perovskite to the adjacent layer due to its insulating properties. It is noted that a thick passivation layer (tens of nanometers) is a prerequisite for ensuring full coverage of the layer on a rough perovskite film using the solution method, although a thick organic insulator layer could impede charge separation and transport from the 3D perovskite to the adjacent layer. Thus, the thermal evaporation method reported here can provide a facile approach for the formation of a thin and compact PEAF passivation layer on a perovskite film, enabling the realization of high-efficiency and stable PSCs.
To investigate the effect of the PEAF treatment on the crystal structure of the perovskite film, the X-ray diffraction patterns were recorded. As shown in Fig. 1f, the diffraction peaks of the PEAF-treated perovskite film are almost the same as for the control film. In addition, grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) was used to further study the surface structures of the perovskite films. As shown in Fig. 1g and S6a, the treated perovskite film preserves the same crystal structure of the pristine film, and no signal related to low-dimensional perovskite domains are detectable below 0.6 Å−1 in the treated film. The same results are also observed in the perovskite films treated with PEAF solution with various concentrations (4, 20 and 40 mM) (Fig. S6c–e). The result is different from the conventional PEAI-treated perovskite film, where additional 2D perovskites were generated (Fig. S6f).

19F solid-state magic angle spinning (MAS) nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy was used to investigate the interaction between the perovskite and the fluoride anion from PEAF. For the NMR, PEAF was first evaporated on the perovskite film on a glass substrate for 1 min at 100 °C, and then scraped off from the substrate for the measurement. Experimental details are provided in materials and methods. It is well known that 19F chemical shifts are very sensitive to the compositions and local structures of fluorides. As shown in Fig. 2a, the pure PEAF sample displayed a broad resonance at −98 ppm. After the incorporation on the perovskite film, the 19F signal from the PEAF disappeared, followed by the appearance of a strong and sharp peak at −67 ppm in combination with a weak and broad peak at −120 ppm, representing two different environments of the fluoride ions in the perovskite film. For the perovskite film treated by a solution method (PEAF in IPA, 20 mM), the signal at −67 ppm slightly moved to a lower field (−62 ppm), followed by the appearance of two new peaks associated with PbF2 at −21 and −58 ppm, suggesting that PbF2 was formed. Combining with the 19F spectrum from the PbI2–PEAF mixture in Fig. S7, we speculated that the signals at −67 and −62 ppm could be assigned to the interaction between the F− and Pb2+, which are different from those of Pb–F ionic bonding in PbF2, whereas the signal at −120 ppm with a broad resonance could be ascribed to the intermolecular hydrogen bonding (F⋯H–N) from the PEAF–perovskite.
To further confirm the interaction between the Pb and F ions in the treated perovskite film, the binding state of the Pb ion in the perovskite film was measured by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). As shown in Fig. 2b, the pristine film without PEAF displayed the Pb 4f core level at 138.3 and 143.2 eV ascribed to the Pb–I bonding in the perovskite. Besides, two additional weak peaks associated with metallic Pb were observed at 136.8 and 141.8 eV, indicating the existence of iodide deficiencies in the perovskite lattice. After the PEAF treatment, the F 1s signal was detected at 684.1 eV, and the peaks for Pb 4f were shifted to higher binding energy by 0.4 eV as compared to the control sample. The results indicated the decreased electron density on the Pb2+ cations due to the stronger interaction between Pb2+ and F− (Fig. S8). Meanwhile, the peaks from the metallic Pb0 disappeared, suggesting that the fluoride anions could fill the iodide vacancies and coordinate to Pb dangling bonds. In addition, from the spectrum of C 1s (Fig. S9) we found that the CO peak (288.1 eV) which was associated with oxygen/moisture is significantly suppressed after PEAF modification, indicating that the PEAF passivation can slow the degradation of the perovskite layer. Additionally, the valence and conduction bands of the PEAF-treated perovskite film were found to slightly up-shift after the PEAF treatment (Fig. S10 and S11), which would favor carrier extraction at the interface and contribute to the improvement of open circuit voltage (VOC) in the devices.
To further investigate the effect of the PEAF treatment on the electronic properties of the perovskite film, steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements were performed. The time-resolved PL spectra in Fig. 2c show that both the control and PEAF-treated films exhibit a bi-exponential decay with a fast (τ1) and a slow (τ2) component, where τ1 corresponds to non-radiative recombination from defects (surface traps near the grain boundaries), and τ2 to radiative recombination from the bulk perovskite. For the non-radiative recombination (τ1), we deduced an increased lifetime from 20 ns for the control film to 153 ns for the treated sample. Meanwhile, the steady-state PL intensity of the perovskite film is increased by about 4 times after the treatment, as shown in Fig. 2d. The enhanced PL intensity and the prolonged PL lifetime imply that the charge recombination centers could be effectively reduced after the PEAF treatment. Here, the PEA+ cation and F− anion from the PEAF could passivate the defects of the perovskite film, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 2e.
To investigate the influence of the PEAF treatment on the photovoltaic performance, planar n–i–p perovskite solar cells were fabricated with the following architecture: ITO/SnO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au (Fig. 3a). Fig. 3b shows the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of champion devices with and without PEAF treatment, and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table S1. The control device gave a typical PCE of 21.8% with a short circuit current density (JSC) of 25.52 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.107 V and a fill factor (FF) of 0.773, measured at a reverse scan. By contrast, the target device exhibited a higher PCE of 23.2% with a JSC = 25.72 mA cm−2, a VOC = 1.145 V, and a FF = 0.786. In addition, the hysteresis of the target device was much lower (2.55%) than that (4.90%) for the control device. The increase in PCE for the target device was mainly ascribed to the increases in VOC and FF, while JSC remained almost unchanged. The enhanced VOC and FF as well as the suppression of hysteresis could be related to the effective passivation from PEAF. The best target device was certified by a third party (Fig. S12), exhibiting 22.36% under the reverse scan direction (1.2 to 0 V) and 22.14% under the forward scan direction (0 to 1.2 V) under AM 1.5 G full-sun illumination (100 mW cm−2). The histogram of the PCE with 60 PEAF-treated PSCs showed excellent reproducibility as compared with the control device (Fig. S13). In addition, the treated devices presented an average PCE of 22.84 ± 0.22% and VOC of 1.135 ± 0.006 V, while the control devices exhibited an average PCE of 21.22 ± 0.38% and VOC of 1.086 ± 0.012 V (Fig. S14), further confirming that the incorporating PEAF could improve the performance of PSCs. Fig. S15 shows the incident photon to electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra of the control and PEAF treated device, along with the projected photocurrent densities derived from calculating the overlap integral between the IPCE spectrum and the standard AM 1.5 solar spectrum. The integrated current density from the IPCE matches well with the JSC measured by the J–V curves. Furthermore, the evolution of the maximum power output was recorded for the treated device at 0.99 V and the control device at 0.95 V (Fig. 3c), giving steady-state efficiencies of 22.5% and 20.6%, respectively. In addition, we fabricated the PSCs with a larger active area (1 cm2), and the best-performing device exhibits a PCE up to 20.90%, with a VOC of 1.143 V, a JSC of 24.95 mA cm−2, and a FF of 73.28% (Fig. S16). To further examine the passivation effect of the PEAF, the trap density of states (tDOS) was derived from the thermal admittance spectroscopy method. As shown in Fig. 4f, the treated device showed lower tDOS across the whole trap depth region, where the deeper trap state (0.40–0.50 eV) was assigned to traps at the surface, and the shallower trap state (0.30–0.40 eV) was for traps at the grain boundaries. The density of the shallower state for the treated device was about four times lower than in the control device, indicating that fluorine ions could penetrate into the perovskite film and passivated the grain boundaries, in accordance with the above ToF-SIMS result. Additionally, to further detect the effect of the PEAF treatment on the interfacial charge transfer behavior, PL and TRPL spectra of the perovskite film coated with spiro-OMeTAD HTL were measured. As shown in Fig. S17, the PEAF treated sample exhibited higher quenching efficiency than the control sample, indicating that the PEAF interlayer could improve hole extraction at the perovskite/HTL interface.
To illustrate the critical role of the F− anion on the stability of the perovskite materials and the devices, PEAF and PEAI, both having the same cation (PEA+) with different halide anions (F− or I−), were used to passivate the perovskite films, where PEAI and PEAF were deposited on the perovskite films by the conventional solution and thermal evaporation methods, respectively. We firstly tested the stability of the perovskite films stored in ambient air (25–35 °C and 30–45% RH), by recording their UV-vis spectra at different time intervals. As shown in Fig. 4a–c, the control film changed from dark brown to clear yellow after the testing for 4 days, followed by a significant reduction of the absorbance, indicating complete transformation of the α-FAPbI3 to δ-FAPbI3 in the testing. For the PEAI-treated film, partial bleaching could be clearly observed after the aging, although the stability was remarkably improved. By contrast, the PEAF-treated perovskite film exhibited excellent stability, without obvious damage under the same aging conditions. The better moisture stability might be attributed to the surface strengthening and the hydrophobicity enhancement from F− in the PEAF. In addition, the low-temperature thermal evaporation approach could improve the stability of the perovskite film as compared with the conventional solution method.
We further investigated the stability of the control, PEAI and PEAF passivated PSCs, by ageing the unencapsulated devices under different environmental conditions. We first tested the shelf life of the devices stored in ambient air (25 °C and ∼45% RH). As shown in Fig. 4d, the PCE of the PEAI-treated devices degraded to about 76% of the initial efficiency after 1000 h, whereas the PEAF-based devices showed enhanced stability, maintaining about 90% of the initial values. A heat-stability test was also performed for both the devices annealed at 80 °C in a N2 environment. As shown in Fig. 4e, the PEAF-treated device retained around 85% of the initial efficiency after 1000 h aging, whereas the PEAI-treated device retained only about 35%. Furthermore, the long-term operational stability tests were tested for the devices aged in a nitrogen atmosphere, using maximum power point (MPP) tracking under white light LED illumination with 100 mW cm−2 intensity. As shown in Fig. 4f, the PEAF-treated cell retained about 90% of the initial value after 1000 hours, while the PCE of the PEAI-treated device decreased to about 78% under the same conditions. Additionally, the stability of the control device is significantly worse than that of PEAF/PEAI-treated devices. Owing to the ionic nature of the perovskite materials, ion migration such as halide ions in PSCs could be induced by the electric field and light illumination. The accumulation of I− ions at the interface could accelerate the corrosion of the electrode and deterioration of the hole transport layer (HTL), and thus degrading the photovoltaic performance and stability. To explore the stability difference between the devices passivated by PEAF and PEAI, both the devices without encapsulation were operated at MPP under LED illumination (100 mW cm−2) for 500 hours at 65 °C in a N2 atmosphere, and then characterized by ToF-SIMS to detect the elemental distribution in the aged PSCs. Fig. 4g and h show the depth profiles of the I−, Au− and PbI3− anions for the PEAI and PEAF-treated devices, respectively. For the PSC with PEAI, I− ions were found to be remarkably diffused into the Spiro-OMeTAD layer and the Au electrode after the MPP operation. By contrast, the I− ion migration was greatly suppressed in the PEAF-treated device, where the I− signal was about one and two orders of magnitude lower in the Spiro-OMeTAD layer and the Au electrode, respectively, as compared with those in the PEAI-treated device. Moreover, a large quantity of Au from the electrode could be observed across the HTL and perovskite layers in the PEAI-treated device, probably due to the migration of the Au cations generated between the reaction of Au and the I3− ions from the perovskite. The Au diffusion could produce shunts across the device, and created deep trap states within the perovskite film, deteriorating the performance and stability of the devices. Such Au diffusion was remarkably suppressed in the PEAF-treated device, probably due to the presence of a strong interaction between F− anion and perovskite formed on the surfaces and the grain boundaries, which created a physicochemical barrier to the external infiltrating species (such as water and oxygen) and the internal ionic migration in the device. The critical role of the F− anion in the stability of the perovskite materials could be revealed by contact angle measurements. As shown in Fig. S18, the contact angle increases from 58.7° for the pristine film and 72.6° for the PEAI-treated film to 97.5° for the PEAF-treated film, indicating an increased barrier from the strong interaction between PEAF and perovskite formed at the surfaces and grain boundaries of the perovskite film.

In summary, phenethylammonium fluoride (PEAF) is demonstrated as both a passivator and stabilizer for highly efficient and stable PSCs. PEAF was deposited on the perovskite films via thermal evaporation at a low temperature and normal pressure, without damaging the underlying perovskite layer. The ion migration in the PEAF-treated device could be greatly suppressed due to the immobilization of the surface defects by the strong interaction between PEAF and perovskite. As a result, we achieved 23.2% perovskite solar cell performance with significantly improved ambient and operational stability. The passivation technology reported here could be suitable for other perovskite films, and further improvement in performance and stability can be expected through the optimization of the passivation process.


K. J. J., X. Z. and S. Y. conceived the idea and supervised this research. Y. Z. and W. M. G. fabricated and characterized the perovskite devices. G. H. Y., Y. X. and X. J. contributed to the SEM measurement and analyzed the data. Y. Z. and F. W. contributed to the ToF-SIMS measurement and analyzed the data. Y. L. and Y. L. contributed to the TAS measurements. N. W. carried out 19F MAS NMR experiments. K. J. J., W. M. G., Y. Z. and H. F. prepared the manuscript. J. H. H. and C. Y. G. conducted C–V measurements. W. M. G. and Y. Z. contributed equally to this work.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the Beijing Natural Science Foundation (4222088), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51373182, 51773206), the National 863 Program (No. 2011AA050521), the National Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2018YFA0208501), and the “Strategic Priority Research Program” of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Grant No. XDA09020000).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta01888h
‡ These authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022