 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM32993J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15412-15417

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Ricardo K. M.
Bouwer
,

Gert-Jan A. H.
Wetzelaer
,

Paul W. M.
Blom
 and 

Jan C.
Hummelen
*

Stratingh Institute for Chemistry, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4, 9747 AG Groningen, The Netherlands. E-mail: j.c.hummelen@rug.nl; Fax: +31-50-3638751; Tel: +31-50-363-5553

Molecular Electronics, Zernike Institute for Advanced Materials, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4, 9747 AG Groningen, The Netherlands

Dutch Polymer Institute, P.O. Box 902, 5600 AX Eindhoven, The Netherlands

TNO/Holst Centre, High Tech Campus 31, 5605 KN Eindhoven, The Netherlands

Received
11th May 2012
, Accepted 13th June 2012
First published on 14th June 2012
We synthesized three isomeric subpopulations of bisadduct analogues of [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (bis-PCBM) via tether-directed control. Bulk heterojunction solar cells prepared using these isomers together with poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) resulted in an increase of Jsc from 72.4 to 79.6 A m−2, and an improvement in fill factor from 0.55 to 0.62, both with a Voc of 0.72 V resulting in an overall enhancement of the power conversion efficiency (PCE) from 2.9% to 3.5%, compared to conventional bis-PCBM.

This paper compares the performances of three different isomeric subpopulations of bis-PCBM isomers in organic solar cells obtained via tether-directed synthesis using alkyl spacers of increasing length. To the best of our knowledge this study is the first example of a comparison between different isomers or isomer sub-populations of fullerene bisadducts (fullerenes with four sp3-hybridized cage carbon atoms) in organic bulk heterojunction solar cells. The properties of fullerene bis- and higher adducts depend strongly on their substitution pattern because geometry plays a crucial role in their organization in the solid state, thereby influencing the properties of the bulk material. Power conversion efficiencies of up to 4.5% have been reported for bulk heterojunction solar cells comprising a bis-PCBM acceptor and poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT). Due to the significantly higher energies (∼100 mV) of the lowest occupied molecular orbitals (LUMO) of the bis-PCBM isomer mixture compared to the monoadduct, PCBM, these devices exhibit higher open-circuit voltages (Voc). The short-circuit current (Jsc), however, is generally lower, though it approaches the value obtained for PCBM-based cells in P3HT systems in which the morphology has been optimized by solvent annealing. A possible explanation for this decrease in Jsc lies in the isomeric nature of bis-PCBM. The most reactive sites on the fullerene cage are the [6,6]-double bonds between hexagons. Due to the Ih symmetry of C60 all [6,6]-double bonds are equal, leading to a single isomer monoadduct. After this first addition to the [60]fullerene cage, 29 double bonds remain available for the addition of a second addend. However, the presence of the first addend makes the remaining double bonds unequal, leading to eight different regioisomeric sets of bisadducts. Based on their relative orientation these are labeled cis, when both anchor points are on the same hemisphere (three possibilities), trans when the addends are attached on opposite hemispheres (four possibilities) and e when one addend is added to the equator of the fullerene sphere (one possibility if both addends are the same and two when both addends are structurally different). These eight possible regioisomeric positions of the two addends on C60 are shown in Fig. 1 (top). When addends are used that are Cs-symmetric, the relative orientation of the groups attached to the bridging carbon can lead to up to 4 different stereoisomers. Because of the low regioselectivity in bisadduct formation, a mixture of isomers is formed. For bis-PCBM this is a regio- and stereoisomeric mixture of at least 22 isomers. It is expected that the fact that this is a mixture of isomers influences the properties of the bulk and especially the ability to crystallize, which is important in the formation of a bicontinuous interpenetrating network of fullerene and polymer. In addition, this low crystallinity might lower the charge transport characteristics compared to a single isomer. For P3HT-based devices it is likely that the polymer predominantly determines the morphology of the active layer. This explains why bis-PCBM shows better performance compared to the monoadduct PCBM as an acceptor material in bulk heterojunctions with P3HT but that this effect is harder to obtain with other, less-crystalline polymers. The ability of a fullerene derivative to crystallize has been suggested to influence Voc. Moreover, different isomers have different electronegativities, leading to (shallow) trapping. It has been calculated for some of the isomers that there is a difference of 180 mV between the highest and lowest isomers and +82 mV to −98 mV from the average. Even though only one orientation per isomer was used in the calculations and the chosen distribution of isomers of bis-PCBM was not optimal, these calculations still provide useful insight into the distribution of energy levels of the different isomers.

The large-scale production of mixtures of isomers of bis-PCBM is likely to suffer from problems in batch-to-batch reproducibility; different isomer ratio/distribution can occur in the chemical synthesis due to slight differences in reaction time, temperature, and concentration or ratio of the reactants, and isolating single isomers from conventional bis-PCBM is time-consuming and costly. Even fractionation in subpopulations can lead to variations in isomer distributions within a given subfraction. Thus, to obtain a more isomerically pure bis-PCBM, we used a tether-directed synthesis: by linking the addends together through a spacer before reacting them with C60, the formation of certain addition patterns is favored. The first attachment acts as an anchor point, imposing a restriction on the reach of the attachment to specific [6,6] CC bonds, depending on the length of the tether. Ideally this should result in high yield and regioselectivity toward one functionalization pattern, preferably employing spacers that are cheap and can be easily synthesized. The tether must be chosen in such a way that, after it performed its task during synthesis, it can be easily removed, yielding a bis-PCBM subfraction and allowing comparison with the full isomeric mixture. This limits us to tethers that link the ester groups together, leaving the diazoalkane precursor groups relatively far apart. This strategy led us to the synthesis of the tethered adducts and the conversion to the resulting bis-PCBM subfraction as shown in Fig. 1 (bottom). This strategy is in contrast to the short distance obtained by, for example, linking the phenyl groups together or other tethered systems that have been reported to yield high regioselectivity of the desired addition pattern. Moreover, these other tether systems were specifically designed to target specific addition patterns for chemistry reasons only, not in order to improve a molecular semiconductor. Here, we settle for obtaining subpopulations of isomers because we do not know a priori which isomer(s) are the best performing ones. Furthermore, the high temperature needed to form the diazo compound that is a necessary intermediate in the synthesis of (bis-)PCBM, lowers the stereospecificity of the reaction. A practical reason for accepting subpopulations is that since large-scale fabrication of organic solar cells would require large quantities of material, highly diluted reaction conditions that are normally applied in standard tether-directed syntheses to obtain maximized yield of one or two isomers only would be an enormous drawback. For now, we will also accept that concentrated reaction conditions increase the fraction of undesired intermolecular reactions, leading to monoadduct-type impurities and lowering the overall percentage of bisadduct formation.

Interestingly, tether-directed synthesis of bisadducts gives access to isomers that are much less formed in the standard synthetic procedure. We used three different tethers: ethylene- (C2), n-propylene- (C3) and n-butylene- (C4) moieties. The synthesis and characterization of the C2-tethered bisadducts and their conversion to bis-PCBM as well as the analysis of the isomer fraction (t2bis-PCBM) were reported elsewhere. The C3 and C4 analogues were synthesized using a similar route. Details on the synthetic procedure as well as structural confirmation by 1H and 13C NMR are given in the ESI. While overall yields of bisadducts are not as high as with the conventional synthesis, the isomers obtained are much less represented in the standard full isomer mixture, rendering the isolated yield of the isomers comprising the tethered subpopulations higher than from conventional synthesis (∼25% compared to ∼11% without using the tether).


Fig. 2 shows the isomer subpopulations obtained from the three tethered syntheses, analyzed with high performance liquid column chromatography (HPLC). Changes in polarity caused by the different alkyl spacers prohibit a direct comparison of the isomer composition of the three mixtures. However, to a certain extent (overlapping cannot be excluded), the number of peaks corresponds to the number of isomers represented in the respective subpopulation.
The C2-tethered isomer subpopulation (Fig. 2, top) shows the highest regioselectivity with only five resolved peaks between 20 and 45 minutes of retention. The C3-tethered subpopulation (Fig. 2, middle) also shows five peaks between 20 and 45 minutes, but there is also an additional major peak at 55.3 minutes and there are many minor peaks. The chromatogram of the C4-tethered subpopulation (Fig. 2, bottom) shows an expected further increase in the number of peaks; 7 major peaks and 9 minor ones.
Upon transesterification of the C2-, C3-, and C4-tethered bisadduct mixtures to the corresponding bis methyl esters (i.e., bis-PCBMs), all structural differences between the three different isomer mixtures are removed. We have thus obtained three bis-PCBM samples with different isomer composition and the peaks belonging to the same isomers in the different subpopulations are now comparable in retention time. Fig. 3 shows the HPLC chromatograms of the bis-PCBM subpopulations t2bis-PCBM, t3bis-PCBM and t4bis-PCBM, as well as the full isomeric bis-PCBM. The most striking difference between the HPLC chromatograms of the bisadduct subpopulations formed through tethered synthesis and that of conventional bis-PCBM is the absence of peaks with retention times shorter than 25 minutes. Hence, the tether impedes the formation of a subset of isomers, most likely the more ‘stretched’ regioisomers (e.g. the trans-1 and trans-2 type isomers). This is in accord with the expected lower polarity of the trans type regioisomers, leading to a relatively short retention time on the Buckyprep HPLC column. Furthermore, a clear difference between t2bis-PCBM on the one side and t3bis-PCBM and t4bis-PCBM on the other appears. For t2bis-PCBM there are only four major peaks visible in the chromatogram: 38.4 min, 39.8 min, 41.2 min and 50.1 min. These are also visible in the full isomer mixture of bis-PCBM, as well as in both other subpopulations. However, the isomers that represent the peaks at 33 minutes are only present in small quantities in both conventional bis-PCBM and t2bis-PCBM, whereas they become major constituents in t3bis- and t4bis-PCBM.
High resolution 13C NMR spectra of the tethered bisadduct subpopulations and the tbis-PCBM subpopulations (see ESI) support the HPLC result, clearly indicating an increase in the number of isomers formed with increasing tether length.
To gain more insight into the different subpopulations, and the isomers they comprise, we used semi-empirical (PM3) molecular modeling to compare the relative energies of the products with different tether length (Table S1).

Fig. 4 shows the isomers that are within 10 kcal mol−1 (which is considered easily accessible under the reaction conditions) of the lowest-energy isomer within a series. Isomers with both anchor points on the same hemisphere of the fullerene cage are referred to as cis, those with the second attachment point on the equator of the fullerene core as e and those bridging both hemispheres as trans. The orientation of the addends with respect to each other is designated as a when both phenyl groups are pointing towards each other, as b when the esters are pointing towards each other, and as c when one ester is pointing towards a phenyl group. In agreement with the HPLC data, we observed an increase in the total number of isomers for longer tethers. The major isomers of the C2 subpopulation are predicted to be present in both other subpopulations as major isomers, however with increasing tether length the energy difference between the different isomers also becomes smaller. This is because isomers with anchor positions further apart are more easily accessible with long tethers, but the isomers with anchor points in relatively close proximity will suffer more from steric crowding due to the increasing volume of the tether, resulting in smaller energy differences between the different addition patterns.
Molecular modeling predicts all three cis-2, two of the cis-3 isomers, and one of the two e isomers to be the major reaction products. In double cyclopropanations of C60, the trans-3 and e bisadducts are considered to be the major isomers when steric hinder prevents the formation of the cis-1 isomers. The cis isomers are also expected to be the most polar. This is in agreement with the results obtained from HPLC analysis. With increasing tether length the possibility to form trans isomers increases, this is consistent with the appearance of the extra peaks with shorter retention time for both the t3bis- and t4bis-PCBM.
We measured cyclic voltammograms for the three tethered bisadducts C2, C3, and C4, as well as the bis-PCBM subpopulations t2bis-PCBM, t3bis-PCBM, t4bis-PCBM, and conventional bis-PCBM (Fig. 5).
Comparing the tethered isomer mixtures, the C2 mixture has a slightly more negative first reduction potential than both C3 and C4 mixtures, which exhibit similar potentials (E1/2 red = −1.24 V for C2 tethered bisadduct vs. E1/2 red = −1.20 V for C3- and C4- tethered bisadduct). The tbis-PCBM subpopulations show no significant variation in reduction potential (E1/2 red = −1.18 V, −1.19 V, and −1.18 V for t2bis-, t3bis-, and t4bis-PCBM, respectively). The widths of the first reduction wave of the full isomer mixture and those of both t3bis- and t4bis-PCBM subpopulations are larger than that of the t2bis-PCBM subpopulation (120 mV compared 90 mV for t2bis-PCBM, based on the width of the onsets, i.e. base-width). This is in accordance with the fact that there are less isomers present in the t2bis-PCBM subpopulation. In addition, the first reduction of the full isomer mixture is at a more negative potential than that of the three subpopulations (E1/2 red = −1.22 V compared to E1/2 red = −1.18 V/−1.19 V). Apparently the first reduction wave in the full isomer mixture is dominated by isomers that are not (or less) present in the subpopulations formed through tethering with these three alkyl spacers.

In order to investigate the effect of the tethered bisadducts and their transesterified tbis-PCBM subpopulations on photovoltaic performance, bulk heterojunction solar cells were fabricated using regioregular P3HT as the electron donor material. P3HT and the fullerene derivatives were dissolved in a 1:1.2 weight ratio in chloroform and stirred overnight. The photoactive layers were spin-cast under nitrogen atmosphere on clean glass substrates pre-patterned with indium tin oxide and a 60 nm thick film of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)/poly(styrene sulfonic acid) (VP AI4083, H.C. Starck). The as-cast layers were annealed subsequently at 135 °C for 15 minutes. The devices were finished by thermal evaporation of a LiF(1 nm)/Al(100 nm) cathode. Electrical measurements were conducted in an N2 controlled atmosphere in the dark and under illumination of a Steuernagel SolarConstant 1200 metal halide lamp, which was set to 1 Sun intensity using a silicon reference cell and correcting for the spectral mismatch.

As can be seen in Fig. 6, the power-conversion efficiency decreases for increasing alkyl spacer length. This trend is preserved upon removal of the spacer by transesterification to the corresponding tbis-PCBM subpopulation, however, yielding higher efficiencies. The efficiency decrease with increasing spacer length was found to be governed by a decrease in Jsc, showing a similar trend. To assess the origin of this decrease in Jsc, various processes causing a reduced photocurrent generation have to be investigated. Since the thickness of the photoactive layer was the same for all devices (230 nm), a variation in light absorption is unlikely. Another potential cause of a low Jsc is a less balanced or weak hole and electron transport in the donor and acceptor phase, respectively. The hole mobility extracted from hole-only devices of the polymer:fullerene blends was observed to be independent of the fullerene derivatives used, yielding a value of 5 × 10−8 m2 V−1 s−1, consistent with previous measurements on P3HT:PCBM cells. In addition, the dark J–V characteristics (Fig. S1) of the solar cells, dominated by electron transport in the acceptor phase, were similar for all made with the three tethered derivative samples and slightly lower in current (factor 1.5) than devices made with their corresponding tbis-PCBM subpopulations, which also showed no mutual variation. Hence, the transport properties in the blend cannot account for the observed influence on Jsc. In previous reports, a voltage-dependent photocurrent was observed, caused by a too tightly intermixed blend, leading to incomplete charge dissociation from the geminate ion pair (charge-transfer exciton) under short-circuit conditions. At high reverse electric fields, the dissociation is enhanced, finally resulting in the saturation of the photogenerated current. However, in our case, the saturated photocurrents follow the same trend as Jsc for the different fullerene derivatives (Fig. 7), indicating that the amount of charge transfer excitons generated decreases for increasing alkyl spacer lengths. This suggests that less photogenerated excitons undergo charge transfer to the acceptor, which, considering the small exciton diffusion length, could be indicative of a too large phase separation.
Another issue that should be addressed is the difference in polarity of the tbis-PCBM subpopulations compared to that of the full isomer mixture. A large contribution of the polar cis-isomers is expected to cause an increase in the average relative permittivity of the blend, which may cause an enhanced dissociation of charge transfer excitons. Lenes et al. observed an increased charge dissociation in a polymer:fullerene blend system by using a polymer with enhanced permittivity. However, in our measurements the observed Jsc trend for different acceptors is caused by a difference in saturated photocurrent, rather than a change in voltage dependence of the photocurrent, as observed by Lenes et al. (Fig. 7). Therefore, the difference in fullerene polarity is not expected to be the main cause of the reduction in Jsc upon using larger alkyl tethers.
In addition to the observed Jsc dependence, variations in Voc and fill factors were also observed (Fig. 6), where the latter depends mainly on the presence or absence of the spacer. This can be attributed to the aforementioned decrease in the electron transport for the tethered fullerene derivatives, increasing the layer resistance and thereby inducing a decrease in fill factor. The Voc exhibits an almost opposite dependence, indicating that it is also determined, in addition to minor changes in the reduction potential, by a variation in electron transport.
In order to investigate how the performance of the t2bis-PCBM subpopulation compared to that of the full isomer mixture, P3HT-based solar cells were fabricated simultaneously, using the exact same conditions for both fullerene derivatives. The J–V characteristics of the 300 nm thick devices in the dark and under illumination are depicted in Fig. 8.
A clear improvement was observed when using t2bis-PCBM, yielding a PCE of 3.5% compared to 2.9% obtained for conventional bis-PCBM. This improvement can be attributed to an enhanced microstructure upon using suitable isomer subpopulation. The results obtained here are in line with previous research, pointing out the large polymer domain sizes in thermally annealed P3HT:bis-PCBM films, compared to their PCBM based analogues. It is therefore expected that an increase in Jsc can also be obtained for P3HT:t2bis-PCBM when using the beneficial solvent annealing approach, for which a PCE of 4.5% was obtained using the full isomer mixture.

Three subpopulations of bis-PCBM isomers were synthesized via tether-directed synthesis using different alkyl spacers of increasing length. Molecular modeling (PM3) shows the formation of the more polar cis-2, cis-3 and e isomers to be favored, which is in good agreement with HPLC results. bis-PCBM isomers with both addends on the same hemisphere have a relatively large part of the electronic surface of the fullerene unblocked by their aliphatic tails, similar to their monoadduct analogues, and π–π interactions are relatively undisturbed in all directions which could lead to improved mobilities. However, in our measurements on P3HT-based solar cells, a more favorable morphology and, as a result, increased charge generation are more likely to be the main origin of the higher performance of the t2bis-PCBM subpopulation. A clear improvement in PCE was found (3.5% compared to 2.9% for conventional bis-PCBM) to be caused mainly by an increase in both Jsc (72.4 compared to 79.6 A m−2) and fill factor (0.55 compared to 0.62). This is promising with regard to other bis-PCBM–polymer combinations, in which current density is still the limiting factor on the performance in bulk heterojunctions. Based on these results the reduction of the number of bisadduct isomers can have a beneficial effect on the morphology and performance in other combinations of polymer and bisadduct. Improving the performance even further will require more rigid tethers that offer more control over the accessibility of double bonds to further reduce the number of isomers of bis-PCBM that are formed, ultimately to single isomers. Morphology studies of blends of single isomers can then give even more insight into which addition patterns would lead to the best performing morphologies. Analysis of the cyclic voltammograms shows the existence of isomers with even more negative reduction potentials, suggesting that further improvements in Voc are possible. This extra increase in the LUMO level should manifest itself as an increased Voc which, depending on the balance between the highest LUMO and best performing addition pattern, can then lead to further improvements in higher adduct fullerene/polymer bulk heterojunction solar cells. Future work will focus the development of methods to access and isolate these isomers.


This research forms part of the research programme of the Dutch Polymer Institute (DPI), projects 524 and 678.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, NMR spectra and molecular modeling results. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm32993j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012