 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM32173D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13057-13063

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Ming-Jun
Jin
,

Teng
Ma
,

Tao
Ling
*,

Shi-Zhang
Qiao
 and 

Xi-Wen
Du
*

Tianjin Key Laboratory of Composite and Functional Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, P. R. China. E-mail: lingt04@tju.edu.cn; xwdu@tju.edu.cn; Fax: +86 22 87894128; Tel: +86 22 27406794

School of Chemical Engineering, The University of Adelaide, SA5005, Australia

Received
7th April 2012
, Accepted 10th May 2012
First published on 11th May 2012
When serving as the electrode of semiconductor sensitized solar cells (SSSCs), conductive transparent nanofibers can enlarge the surface area and accelerate the electron transport, and can thus be expected to enhance the final power conversion efficiency of the device. Here we report the fabrication of three dimensional networks of indium tin oxide (ITO) nanofibers on a conductive glass substrate with a low sheet resistance of 15 Ω sq−1 by using an electrospinning technique. A post-treatment involving polyethylene glycol impregnation and calcination is developed to realize the excellent electrical contact of ITO nanofibers with the substrate, and maintain the fibrous morphology of the nanofibers also. Light-harvesting CdS nanocrystals are electrodeposited onto ITO nanofibers, and then the obtained ITO/CdS coaxial nanofibers are constructed into SSSCs. We find that the performance of this novel SSSC is remarkably improved compared with CdS nanocrystals directly deposited on a flat conductive substrate, and an unprecedented photocurrent density of 9.27 mA cm−2 is achieved under the illumination of one sun (AM1.5, 100 mW cm−2). Our work indicates that the special designation of three-dimensional coaxial nanofibers can pave a new avenue to efficient photovoltaic devices.

Dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) developed by Grätzel represent the mainstream of next generation solar cells which feature high efficiency and low cost. Similar to organic dyes, semiconductor nanocrystals, such as CdS, CdSe, PbS, PbSe, InP and InAs exhibit obvious advantages of cost reduction and efficiency enhancement, owing to their adjustable band gap, high extinction coefficient, large intrinsic dipole moments, and potential processes of multiple exciton generation. Therefore, they are highly expected to be light harvesters in semiconductor sensitized solar cells (SSSCs).

Despite these advantages, the performance of SSSCs still lags significantly behind that of DSSCs up to now. In the common structure of SSSCs, the light harvesters, semiconductor nanocrystals, are anchored on mesoporous metal oxide (TiO2 or ZnO) nanoparticles, and the photo-generated electrons must diffuse for a long distance through the metal oxide nanoparticles before reaching the collecting electrode; thus serious carrier loss is caused by nonradiative recombination processes occurring at numerous interfaces between adjacent oxide nanoparticles. Therefore, an expedite channel between the semiconductor nanocrystals and the collecting electrode is very crucial for improving the conversion efficiency of SSSCs.
One-dimensional nanostructures, such as nanowires, and nanotubes are believed to be superior to porous metal oxide nanoparticles for electron transport. If one-dimensional nanostructures were built into the collecting electrodes, the total surface area can be remarkably enhanced, and the transmission distance can be shortened as well. A few attempts have been made to incorporate conductive and transparent nanowires or nanofibers into the electrodes of DSSCs. For example, Cao et al. prepared ITO/TiO2 core–shell nanowires which acted as the electrode of DSSCs, and Wang and Iskandar embedded thin ITO nanowire/nanofiber layers into TiO2 films. However, the electrons must be transported through the TiO2 layer before arriving at the ITO nanostructures; thus, the high conductivity of ITO nanowires/nanofibers has not been fully utilized, and the improvement of the conversion efficiency is limited.
Among various techniques for the synthesis of one-dimensional nanostructures, electrospinning is considered a simple, versatile, and cost-effective to fabricate large scale nanofibers, such as TiO2, ZnO and ITO. For device applications, nanofibers must be deposited onto a conductive substrate. However, as-electrospun nanofibers usually peel off from the substrate due to the shrinking effect and poor adhesion. Although a hot press process has been proposed to enhance the adhesion, such a post-treatment can seriously destroy the morphology of the nanofibers . Hence, it still remains a challenge to strengthen the adhesion and maintain the original fibrous morphology as well.
In the present work, we suggest a new photoanode structure for SSSCs where semiconductor light harvesters are deposited directly onto ITO nanofiber networks which serve as the transparent electrode (Fig. 1a). The TiO2 layer designed for the adsorbance of dye molecules in DSSCs is omitted due to the easy adhesion of semiconductor nanocrystals onto ITO nanofibers, and thus a direct channel is constructed between the light harvesters and the electrode. This architecture brings several advantages for SSSCs: first, the large surface area of the ITO nanofiber networks enables the efficient loading of photo-active CdS nanocrystals. Second, the coaxial structure facilitates the transfer of photo-generated electrons from CdS nanocrystals to ITO nanofibers and then the electrode. Third, the charge separation is accelerated by the quick transfer of electrons into ITO and the fast elimination of holes by the infiltrated electrolyte because of the reasonable coordination of energy levels (Fig. 1b).
To obtain this structure, we first fabricate the networks of ITO nanofibers on a conductive glass substrate by an electrospinning method, and then develop a post-treatment technique to realize excellent adhesion and electrical contact of ITO nanofibers with the conductive glass substrate. In the next step, we deposit light harvesters of CdS nanocrystals onto the three-dimensional networks of ITO nanofibers to form coaxial ITO/CdS nanocables. The experimental results indicate that the electron transport and conversion efficiency have been improved in the newly designed SSSCs as compared with flat SSSCs, with the CdS nanocrystals directly assembled onto the conductive glass substrate. A photocurrent density of 9.27 mA cm−2 under the illumination of one sun (AM1.5, 100 mW cm−2) is achieved, which is much higher than the values generated from any solar cells sensitized by CdS nanocrystals.

In a typical procedure, 1 g poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) (PVP, Mw = 1300000) is dissolved in 9 g of mixed solvent of DMF–EtOH (volume ratio 1:3) and vigorously stirred for 2 h; then 0.094 g SnCl2·5H2O and 0.9 g In(NO3)3·4.5H2O with an atomic Sn/In ratio of 1:9 is added to the above solution with stirring for 1 h. The obtained precursor solution is then loaded into a 1 ml plastic syringe which is attached to a syringe pump (KDS200, KD Scientific Inc.) and the pinhead is connected to a high voltage supply. During electrospinning, a voltage of 15 kV and a flow rate of 0.3 ml h−1 are applied and the electrospun nanofibers are collected with a FTO glass slide on grounded aluminium foil, which is perpendicularly placed 15 cm away from the spinneret.

The FTO substrates with electrospun nanofibers are heated in air at 260 °C for half an hour. After natural cooling to room temperature, poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG, Mw = 2000) solution, dissolved in distilled water with a concentration of 10 wt%, is spin-coated onto the calcined nanofibers to connect the nanofibers with the conductive glass substrate. The as-treated nanofibers are then heated at 500 °C for half an hour.

CdS nanocrystals are deposited onto the ITO nanofibers using electrochemical deposition. In a typical procedure, a dimethyl sulfoxide solution of 0.055 M cadmium chloride and 0.19 M sulfur is used as the precursor. The electrodeposition is carried out galvanostatically at a current density of 0.5 mA cm−2 and 110 °C in a two-electrode electrochemical cell, with the ITO nanofibers on the FTO substrate as the cathode and platinum metal as the counter electrode. Finally, the ITO nanofibers decorated with CdS nanocrystals are annealed at 400 °C in air for 1 h to improve the conductive performance.


The photoanodes with an effective area of 0.24 cm2 are assembled and sealed with a transparent hot-melt Surlyn ring to the counter electrodes (Pt-coated FTO glass). The iodide-based electrolyte, consisting of 0.5 M LiI, 0.05 M I2, 0.3 M tert-butylpyridine, and 0.3 M tetrabutylammonium iodide in acetonitrile, is injected into the interelectrode space from the counter electrode side through a predrilled hole.


The morphology of the samples is observed using a Hitachi S-4800 scanning electron microscope (SEM) operated at 5 kV and a FEI Technai G2 F20 with a field emission gun operated at 200 kV. X-Ray diffractometer (XRD) analysis of the crystal structure is performed in a Rigaku D/max 2500v/pc diffractometer. UV-vis absorption spectra are recorded on a Hitachi 3010 spectrophotometer. Photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves are recorded at an illumination intensity of air mass 1.5 using a Keithley 2611 digital source meter. The light source is a 150 W Xenon lamp (Sciencetech, SS150), calibrated to 100 mW cm−2 with a standard Si solar cell. Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) measurements are carried out at a constant temperature of 20 °C in dark conditions, using a Versastat 3 Potentiostats-Electrochemistry workstation. The EIS spectra are obtained at forward bias over −0.15 to −0.42 V with the frequency ranging from 0.05 Hz to 200 kHz and oscillation potential amplitudes of 10 mV.


To achieve excellent electrical contact, the as-electrospun nanofibers on the FTO substrate are firstly calcined at low temperature (260 °C) to decompose the organic components; then viscous polyethylene glycol (PEG) solution is spin-coated onto the nanofiber networks to release the tension generated by volume shrinkages during calcination; finally the nanofibers are calcined at high temperature (500 °C) for crystallization. The SEM image shows that the as-synthesized nanofibers preserve the morphology of the original polymer nanofibers with diameters of 200 ± 50 nm (Fig. 2a). Fig. 2b presents the fused cross junctions among the ITO nanofibers, which are generated during the annealing processes and play an important role in enhancing the conductivity and mechanical integrity of the nanofiber networks. The side view SEM image (Fig. 2c) shows that ITO nanofibers with a thickness of 2.5 μm are in direct contact with the conductive substrate, thus providing a smooth pathway for carrier transport. The microstructure of the ITO nanofibers is further investigated by TEM. Fig. 2d and e demonstrate that the ITO nanofibers are compact and the surface is smooth with a roughness of less than 5 nm. The selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern (Fig. 2d, inset) exhibits polycrystalline rings corresponding to (211), (222), (400) and (440) rings of the body-centered cubic phase of In2O3. The high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) image (Fig. 2e) illustrates that the ITO nanofibers are polycrystalline with grain sizes of around 10 nm. Lattice fringes corresponding to the (222) planes of In2O3 are clearly observed in Fig. 2e, indicating that the ITO nanofibers are highly crystalline. The chemical composition of the as-synthesized nanofibers is determined by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) (Fig. 2f), which indicates an In/Sn atomic ratio of 9:1. The crystal structure of the nanofibers is further verified by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis; the spectrum exhibits diffraction peaks of the (211), (222), (400), (411), (332), (431) and (440) planes (Fig. 2g), corresponding to the body-centered cubic phase of In2O3 (JCPDS file no. 06-0416), and no other phase related to tin compounds is detected. Based on EDS, SAED and XRD characterizations, it is collectively concluded that tin is incorporated in the In2O3 lattice and substitutes for indium.

The electrical transport properties of the ITO nanofibers on a FTO substrate are investigated by a standard four-probe method, with fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) conductive glass and ZnO nanowires on a FTO substrate as references. As seen in Table 1, the average sheet resistance of the ITO nanofibers (15 Ω sq−1) is close to that of FTO glass (12 Ω sq−1) and well below that of ZnO nanowires on FTO (570 Ω sq−1). Moreover, this value is much lower than those reported for ITO nanofibers electrospun on a glass substrate. Such a high conductivity can be mostly attributed to the innumerable junctions (Fig. 2a and b) formed during the annealing process, which bond the ITO nanofibers together and dramatically decrease the junction resistance. Additionally, the highly crystalline nature of these ultra long nanofibers also helps to achieve a lower sheet resistance.
ITO nanofibers
FTO
ZnO nanowires
Sheet resistance 1 (Ω sq−1)
16
12
592
Sheet resistance 2 (Ω sq−1)
16
12
391
Sheet resistance 3 (Ω sq−1)
14
11
727
Average (Ω sq−1)
15
12
570
The transmittance spectrum of the as-synthesized ITO nanofibers is shown in Fig. 3. The networks of ITO nanofibers show nearly 80% transmittance in the visible and near infrared range, which is beneficial for solar cell applications. By plotting (αhν)2 as a function of hν, the work function of ITO is extrapolated as 3.18 eV, consistent with the values reported in the literature and ideal for electron injection from semiconductor nanocrystals.
Photo-active CdS nanocrystals are electrodeposited onto the surface of the ITO nanofiber networks. After CdS deposition, the surface of the ITO nanofibers becomes rough, and a conformal and uniform CdS coating is obtained (Fig. 4a). By measuring the shell thickness in the TEM image after a certain deposition time, the electrochemical deposition rate is determined as 5 nm per minute under a deposition current density of 0.5 mA cm−2. Hence, the thickness of the CdS shell can be facilely tuned by controlling the deposition time. After 10 min deposition, the diameters of the nanofibers increase to approximately 300 nm (Fig. 4b). The crystal structure of the ITO/CdS coaxial nanofibers is determined by XRD. As shown in Fig. 4c, new peaks emerge in addition to ITO and the FTO substrate, which can be indexed to the wurtzite structure of CdS (JCPDS file no. 41-1049). Fig. 4d is a TEM image of the as-deposited ITO/CdS nanofibers, showing that the ITO nanofiber core is densely surrounded by CdS. The SAED pattern (Fig. 4d, inset) exhibits polycrystalline rings corresponding to (100), (002), (101) and (110) rings of wurtzite CdS, in addition to the intensive (222) ring of In2O3, which coincide well with the XRD analysis (Fig. 4f). The HRTEM image illustrates that the size of the CdS nanocrystals is about 20 nm with clear (101) lattice fringes of CdS. Furthermore, the spatial distributions of the atomic composition are obtained along the line in the inset of Fig. 4f by EDS line-scan analysis. In the intensity profile shown in Fig. 4f, the In and Sn signals are mainly confined to the core area, while a higher intensity for Cd and S is found in the shell region, which is consistent with the ITO-core/CdS-shell coaxial configuration observed in the TEM image (Fig. 4d). All of these results demonstrate the formation of ITO/CdS coaxial nanostructures.

Fig. 5 shows a typical absorption spectrum of the post-annealed ITO/CdS nanofibers on a FTO substrate, showing a steep absorption edge at around 510 nm. The extrapolated Eg value for the CdS nanocrystals is 2.41 eV (Fig. 5, inset). By using the empirical equation proposed by Kayanuma, the average size of the CdS nanocrystals is estimated as 16 nm, which agrees well with the HRTEM image in Fig. 4e.
ITO/CdS nanofibers and a flat CdS layer are evaluated for their photovoltaic performance. The photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) characteristics are shown in Fig. 6, and the related physical parameters, such as JSC (short circuit current), VOC (open circuit voltage), FF (fill factor), and η (light to electricity conversion efficiency), are summarized in Table 2. As shown in Fig. 6 and Table 2, all of the SSSCs with ITO/CdS coaxial nanofibers present a higher performance than that composed of a flat CdS layer (with the same CdS deposition time). In contrast, the flat CdS layer exhibits a higher open circuit voltage, implying relatively low charge recombination in this photoanode.
Samples

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF

η (%)
Flat CdS
0.59
0.53
0.35
0.11
ITO 10 min/CdS
0.51
1.22
0.35
0.22
ITO 20 min/CdS
0.48
9.27
0.38
1.66
ITO 30 min/CdS
0.44
3.29
0.38
0.55
The electrospinning time can have a remarkable impact on the thickness of the ITO nanofiber networks and the performance of the solar cells. At a short electrospinning time (10 min), the total amount of ITO nanofibers is very limited, and they cannot load enough CdS nanocrystals for sufficient light absorption. A longer time (30 min) for electrospinning induces an excessively thick layer of ITO nanofibers which partially drop off from the FTO substrate due to serious volume shrinkage during the calcination treatment. As a result, the electron transport is blocked, and then the photocurrent, as well as the final conversion efficiency, deteriorates. At an optimized electrospinning time (20 min), the ITO nanofiber network attains a thickness of about 2.5 μm, and the highest conversion efficiency, 1.66%, is achieved.
Several kinds of SSSCs were constructed by using CdS nanocrystals as the light harvester. Yu et al. designed a photoanode with CdS quantum dots adsorbed on TiO2 nanoparticles, and obtained a photocurrent of 7.53 mA cm−2. Tak et al. achieved a photocurrent of 7.23 mA cm−2 by coating a CdS layer on ZnO nanowires. Peng et al. reported a photocurrent of 7.82 mA cm−2 by using a CdS quantum dot sensitized TiO2 nanotube array as a photoelectrode. Our solar cell composed of ITO/CdS coaxial nanofibers achieves a photocurrent density of 9.27 mA cm−2; to the best of our knowledge, such a value is hitherto the highest value for SSSCs based on CdS nanocrystals or quantum dots, which may originate from the network structure and the superior conductivity of the ITO nanofibers.
To discover the origin of the performance difference between the ITO/CdS coaxial nanofibers and the flat CdS layer, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is employed to investigate the carrier transport and recombination that take place in the devices. The EIS measurements are carried out at different negative biased voltages in dark conditions, and Fig. 7a shows the results taken at −0.30 V. In the high frequency range of the EIS spectra, a straight line termed as Warburg behavior which is characteristic of a transmission line is clearly observed (Fig. 7a, inset). Hence, the transmission line model equivalent-circuit mode is used to fit the EIS results (Fig. 7b). In this model, the electron transport resistance of the photoanode, Rt, is given by Rt = rtl; the interfacial charge recombination resistance, Rct, is given by Rct = rctl, and the chemical capacitance, Cμ, is given by Cμ = cμl, where rt, rct, and cμ are the components of the transmission line model shown in Fig. 7b, and l is the thickness of the photoanode. The impedance of the redox species in the electrolyte is modeled using a finite Warburg element Ws and the Pt counter electrode is described by RPt and CPt. Similarly, RFTO and CFTO are the interface charge transfer resistance and chemical capacitance between the exposed FTO and the electrolyte, respectively.
The potential dependencies of the transmission line parameters (Rt, Rct, and Cμ) are extracted from the EIS fits and are shown in Fig. 8a–c. As seen in Fig. 8a, the observation of a smaller transport resistance Rt for the ITO/CdS coaxial nanofibers, especially at more negative potentials, supports previous expectations that the highly conductive ITO nanofiber network can improve the electron transport effectively. Fig. 8b represents the typical behavior of the chemical capacitances (Cμ) that are related to the total density of electrons, n, by the expression Cμ = n(e2/kT), where e is the electron charge, k is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature. The chemical capacitance of the ITO/CdS nanofibers is larger than the flat CdS, indicating that the ITO nanofibers can accumulate carriers sufficiently and enhance the density of free electrons. As seen in Fig. 8c, the ITO/CdS coaxial nanofibers exhibit a lower Rct than flat CdS. According to the recently developed interfacial electron transfer model, the behavior of Rct for the ITO/CdS coaxial nanofibers can be explained by the recombination via electron transfer from surface trap states on ITO to accepting states in CdS or the electrolyte, and Rct for the flat CdS layer depends on the recombination via electron transfer from CdS to the electrolyte. The lower Rct value for the ITO/CdS coaxial nanofibers can be attributed to the extra recombination path from ITO to the CdS nanocrystals, which is absent in the flat CdS layer. As a result, the recombination rate increases in the ITO/CdS coaxial nanofibers, resulting in a reduction of the photovoltage and a relatively low fill factor compared with conventional TiO2 nanoparticle based SSSCs.
According to the above analysis, the ITO nanofibers can improve the electron transfer and accumulation, thus enhancing the photocurrent and hence the final performance significantly. Considering the smaller interfacial charge recombination resistance in the ITO/CdS nanofibers, further efforts will be devoted to designing a reasonable interface structure to decrease charge recombination in the ITO/CdS coaxial nanofibers, such as incorporating an ultra-thin, compact hole blocking layer between the ITO nanofibers and the CdS nanocrystals.

Continuous ITO nanofibers with excellent conductivity are stacked on a conductive glass substrate by an electrospinning method, and the post treatments of PEG impregnation and calcination improve the bonding of the nanofibers and substrate effectively. Photo-active CdS nanocrystals are directly electrodeposited onto the 3D ITO nanofiber networks, and the obtained ITO/CdS coaxial nanofibers are then employed as the photoanode of solar cells. The solar cell has attained a decent conversion efficiency of 1.66% with the highest photocurrent density of 9.27 mA cm−2 for pure CdS sensitized solar cells. Our specifically designed ITO/nanocrystal nanofiber solar cell paves a new avenue for photovoltaic devices based on semiconductor nanocrystals, and the further enhancement of the conversion efficiency can be anticipated by applying near-infrared absorption nanocrystals, such as CdSe or CdTe, as well as improving the interface between the ITO nanofibers and the semiconductor nanocrystals.


This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China (nos 51102176, 50972102 and 50902103), National High-tech R&D Program of China (nos 2007AA021808 and 2009AA03Z301), the Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education of China (no. 20100032120021), the Natural Science Foundation of Tianjin City (nos 11JCYBJC02000, 09JCZDJC22600 and 08JCYBJC02900) and the Seed Foundation of Tianjin University.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012