 DOI: 10.1039/C6TC03676G
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 10610-10615


Kyu Chan
Song
,

Ranbir
Singh
,

Jaewon
Lee
,

Dong Hun
Sin
,

Hansol
Lee
 and 

Kilwon
Cho
*

Department of Chemical Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH) and Center for Advanced Soft Electronics (CASE), Pohang 790-784, Korea. E-mail: kwcho@postech.ac.kr; Fax: +82-54-279-8291

Received
25th August 2016
, Accepted 6th October 2016
First published on 6th October 2016
Three-dimensional (3D) non-fullerene small molecule acceptors with imide-linked perylene diimides (iPDI) on a 9,9′-spirobi[9H-fluorene] core were designed, synthesized and characterized for use in organic solar cells. The best power conversion efficiency of 5.31% is obtained using SF-iPDI2 in a solution-processed bulk heterojunction solar cell. These results demonstrate that PDI derivatives with 3D molecular structures could serve as high-performance electron acceptors in non-fullerene solar cells.

Organic solar cells (OSCs), featuring a bulk heterojunction (BHJ) architecture with an electron donor and an electron acceptor, have received intensive attention because of their advantages of low cost, light weight, potential for roll-to-roll production, and feasibility of flexible devices. Recently, record power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) exceeding 11% have been achieved for single-junction OSCs based on polymers and fullerenes. Alternatives to fullerenes as electron acceptors could improve the applicability of OSCs, because fullerene derivatives suffer from high production costs, limited spectral breadth, poorly tunable electronic structures, and inferior ambient stability. Non-fullerene acceptors, including small molecules and polymers, have been vigorously explored in recent years, yielding PCEs exceeding 8%. But this is still inferior to PCEs obtained using fullerene derivatives, so new molecular design strategies to develop high-efficiency non-fullerene OSCs are needed.

Small molecule acceptors have the advantages of high purity, batch-to-batch reproducibility, well-defined molecular structures and 3D geometry compared to polymer acceptors. Perylene diimide (PDI) derivatives have been extensively investigated as n-type materials for non-fullerene OSCs because of their high electron mobility, intense light absorption, high environmental/thermal stabilities, and relative ease of functionalization. Despite their beneficial properties, monomeric PDI molecules usually show a strong tendency to form microscale aggregates within the polymer donor matrices in BHJ active layers due to their highly planar conformations, generally leading to poor photovoltaic performances in OSCs. To alleviate this problem, 3D structured or twisted PDI derivatives have been designed by linking the PDI units at bay, ortho, or imide positions either by direct attachment or indirectly using functional groups. Controlling the 3D architectures of non-fullerene small molecules is an emerging topic in the field of OSC development.
9,9′-Spirobifluorene (SF) has an orthogonal molecular structure in which two planar and rigid fluorene units are connected with a spiro-sp3 carbon. Our previous work demonstrated that the SF-core unit could serve as a promising framework on which to construct a 3D molecular architecture with “bay-linked” PDI molecules. Recently, Jen and co-workers reported a systematic comparison between “bay-linked” and “imide-linked” twisted PDI dimers as non-fullerene small molecule acceptors. They demonstrated that the bay-linked PDI dimer with a relatively flexible molecular geometry disrupted the π–π stacking of the donor polymer, whereas the relatively rigid imide-linked PDI dimer not only maintained appropriate aggregation but also better miscibility with the donor polymer. In view of the above-mentioned important design strategies, we designed in the present study two 3D non-fullerene small molecule acceptors using the orthogonal SF-core and imide-linked PDI (SF-iPDI2 and SF-iPDI4, Fig. 1(a)). A promising PCE of 5.31% was obtained upon blending the acceptors with a low-bandgap donor polymer, namely poly[[4,8-bis[5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophene-2-yl]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl][3-fluoro-2-[(2-ethylhexyl)carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl]] (PTB7-Th). These results suggested that imide-linked PDI derivatives on the SF-core could provide efficient electron acceptors for non-fullerene OSCs.
To synthesize SF-iPDI2 and SF-iPDI4, we used two types of SF-cores with bis- and tetra-amines substituted to connect with the carboxylic anhydride functionality of the perylene monoimides via an imidation reaction (Schemes S1–S3, ESI). The products were fully characterized using 1H NMR, 13C NMR, MALDI-TOF mass spectroscopy, and elemental analysis (Fig. S1–S4, ESI). These compounds are readily soluble in common organic solvents such as chloroform and chlorobenzene (CB) at room temperature. As measured via thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), SF-iPDI2 and SF-iPDI4 exhibited good thermal stability with a decomposition temperature (Td, 5% weight loss) of 399 °C and 396 °C, respectively under a nitrogen atmosphere (Fig. S5, ESI). Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) analysis detected neither melting nor recrystallization peaks; this absence suggests that the 3D structural conformations of SF-iPDI2 and SF-iPDI4 suppress the overwhelming aggregation of planar PDI subunits (Fig. S6, ESI).
The 3D molecular conformations of SF-iPDI2 and SF-iPDI4 were investigated via density functional theory (DFT) calculations using the B3LYP/6-31G* basis applied to model molecules bearing methyl-trimmed alkyl chains to simplify the computations. As shown in Fig. 1(b), the iPDI planes have interplanar angles of ≈80° to the fluorene plane of the SF-core for both SF-iPDI2 and SF-iPDI4. In the top view (Fig. 1(c)), two fluorene planes within the SF-core were orthogonally arranged, and the iPDI subunits were oriented almost vertically. Interestingly, the iPDI subunits in SF-iPDI2 or SF-iPDI4 have a planar conformation, whereas the bay-linked PDI subunits in SF-PDI4 have a core-contorted conformation (Fig. S7, ESI). Thus, the good planarity of the iPDI might potentially improve intermolecular packing and enhance electron transport. The frontier molecular orbital diagrams of SF-iPDI2 and SF-iPDI4 are shown in Fig. S8 and S9 (ESI). The calculated results suggested that the HOMOs of both iPDIs consisted mainly of molecular orbitals on the SF-core and LUMOs consisted mainly of those on the iPDI rings.
The UV-vis absorption spectra of SF-iPDI2 and SF-iPDI4 in chloroform solutions and in the thin films are presented in Fig. 2(a) and Fig. S10 (ESI), and their corresponding data are summarized in Table S1 (ESI). These two SF-iPDI small molecules displayed an intense UV absorption band in the range of 400–600 nm, which complemented the absorption band of PTB7-Th. The optical band gaps calculated from the absorption onset wavelength (λonsetfilm) were 2.18 eV for SF-iPDI2 and 2.19 eV for SF-iPDI4. Both iPDIs showed similar absorption features in terms of the absorption range, position of the transitions, and band edges, because the SF-core and the iPDI subunits were linked without conjugation. SF-iPDI2 and SF-iPDI4 exhibited three vibronic peaks, as did the PDI monomer. In the film absorption spectra, SF-iPDI2 exhibited a 0–1 (I01) transition that was more intense than the 0–0 (I00) transition, whereas SF-iPDI4 exhibited a weaker I01 compared to I00. The blue-shift in the absorption maxima (a decrease in the ratio of I00 to I01) from the solution to the solid state in SF-iPDI2 (Fig. S10, ESI) indicates that SF-iPDI2 adopts the formation of H-aggregates more favourably than SF-iPDI4; this observation implies stronger intermolecular π–π interactions and a higher packing order in SF-iPDI2 than in SF-iPDI4, which are beneficial for charge transport.
The electrochemical properties of SF-iPDI2 and SF-iPDI4 were characterized using cyclic voltammetry (Fig. 2(b)) and are summarized in Table S1 (ESI). The onsets of the reduction potentials versus FeCp+/02 (0.51 V) were −0.47 V for SF-iPDI2 and −0.44 V for SF-iPDI4. Thus, the LUMOs were estimated to be −3.82 eV for SF-iPDI2 and −3.85 eV for SF-iPDI4, assuming that the absolute energy level of FeCp+/02 was 4.8 eV below vacuum. The energy diagrams (Fig. S11, ESI) of the three photoactive materials, the interlayers, and the electrodes used in our study of the photovoltaic characteristics demonstrated that the LUMO levels of SF-iPDI2 and SF-iPDI4 provided LUMO offsets sufficient for efficient exciton dissociation when blended with PTB7-Th.
BHJ OSC devices with an inverted structure of glass/indium tin oxide (ITO) (110 nm)/zinc oxide (ZnO) (40 nm)/active layer (85–90 nm)/V2O5 (2 nm)/Ag (80 nm) were fabricated and characterized using blend films of PTB7-Th:SF-iPDI2 (or SF-iPDI4) as photoactive layers. The current density (J)–voltage (V) characteristics of the devices, measured under AM 1.5G solar illumination at 1 sun (100 mW cm−2), are shown in Fig. 3(a) and are summarized in Table 1. The optimal performances of the OSCs were achieved in 1:1.4 and 1:0.8 (wt/wt) blend compositions for SF-iPDI2 and SF-iPDI4, respectively, spin-cast from a CB solution containing (Table S2, ESI). At this blend ratio, the PTB7-Th:SF-iPDI2 solar cells exhibited PCEs of 4.53%, with an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.84 V, a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 10.23 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 52.9% without any additives. The device results demonstrate that these iPDI-based acceptors show very similar Voc values (0.82–0.84 V) due to their similar LUMO energy levels.
Acceptor
DIO (vol%)

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCEmax (ave.) (%)

a 1,8-Diiodooctane.
b Average values from over eight devices.

SF-iPDI2
—
0.84
10.28
52.9
4.53 (4.47)
0.5
0.84
10.53
59.9
5.31 (5.22)
SF-iPDI4
—
0.82
10.73
48.1
4.25 (4.19)
1.0
0.82
11.36
50.1
4.68 (4.61)
In order to further improve the PCEs, 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) was used as a processing additive (Table S2, ESI). The optimal concentration of DIO was 0.5 vol% for PTB7-Th:SF-iPDI2 and 1.0 vol% for PTB7-Th:SF-iPDI4. Using these optimal DIO concentrations, Jsc and FF were both increased for both iPDI-based OSCs. The highest efficiency devices were obtained using DIO in PTB7-Th:SF-iPDI2, yielding the best PCE of 5.31% and an average PCE of 5.22%.
The incident photon conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra (Fig. 3(b)) of the solar cells covered a broad range of wavelength 300 ≤ λ ≤ 800 nm and corresponded well to the UV-vis absorption spectra of the corresponding blend films (Fig. S12, ESI). The EQE fell in the range of 40–58% between 450 and 550 nm, indicating that these iPDI-based small molecules contributed significantly to photocurrent generation in BHJ solar cells. The Jsc values calculated from the IPCE spectra agreed well with the trends in the direct J–V measurements (Table S2, ESI). Compared to the PTB7-Th:SF-iPDI2 OSCs, the higher Jsc values of the PTB7-Th:SF-iPDI4 OSCs were attributed to the larger light absorption in the range of 550–750 nm due to the presence of PTB7-Th (Fig. S12(c), ESI).
The bulk charge transport properties of the blend films were investigated using the space charge limited current (SCLC) method. Hole- and electron-only devices were fabricated to have the structures ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTB7-Th:SF-iPDIs/Au and ITO/ZnO/PTB7-Th:SF-iPDIs/Ca/Al, respectively (Fig. S13 and Table S3, ESI). The PTB7-Th:SF-iPDI2-based devices showed higher electron mobilities compared to the PTB7-Th:SF-iPDI4-based devices, probably due to the relatively stronger aggregation tendency of SF-iPDI2 with H-aggregate features, as confirmed from the UV-vis spectra (Fig. 2). Addition of DIO improved the balance between the hole and electron mobilities in the SF-iPDI2-based blend device (Table S3, ESI), thereby significantly improving the FFs and PCEs of the OSCs.
The morphologies of the blend films were studied using atomic force microscopy (AFM). As shown in Fig. S14 (ESI), the AFM height images showed that the surfaces of the PTB7-Th:SF-iPDI2 and PTB7-Th:SF-iPDI4 blend films without DIO were smooth and uniform with root-mean-square (RMS) roughness values of 0.47 and 0.57 nm, respectively. After DIO treatment, the RMS roughness of the blend surface was increased to 0.77 nm for SF-iPDI2 and 0.62 nm for SF-iPDI4 indicating enhanced aggregation, which is beneficial for increasing charge mobility.
In order to determine whether the aggregation is caused mainly by the donor or acceptor, the surface morphologies of the PTB7-Th, SF-iPDI2, and SF-iPDI4 neat films with and without DIO at optimal concentrations of their blend films (0.5 vol% for SF-iPDI2 and 1.0 vol% for SF-iPDI4) were investigated using AFM (Fig. S15, ESI). The addition of DIO increased the RMS surface roughness of the SF-iPDI2 neat film, compared to that of the SF-iPDI4 neat film, indicating that SF-iPDI2 was more sensitive to DIO and had a stronger tendency to form aggregates. The trends in the electron mobilities are very consistent with the trends observed from AFM. In PTB7-Th, DIO induced more distinct enhancements of polymer aggregates compared to the iPDIs. Thus, addition of DIO predominantly produced morphological changes by forming PTB7-Th agglomerates in the blend films, leading to significant improvements in the hole mobilities.
Photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy was used to investigate charge dissociation in the BHJ films to provide better understanding of the degree of intermixing between polymer donors and iPDI-based acceptors (Fig. S16, ESI). The PL spectra of the blend films with and without DIO display efficient electron transfer (PTB7-Th to iPDIs) with >97% PL quenching for both iPDIs even though there is a slight difference between those. Noticeably, SF-iPDI2 and SF-iPDI4 display strong fluorescence emissions, but are completely quenched by PTB7-Th, indicating that efficient hole transfer (iPDIs to PTB7-Th) occurs at the interfaces between the PDIs and PTB7-Th.
Grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) measurements were performed to determine the molecular packing and the orientations of active layer components in the neat and blend films (Fig. S17 and Table S4, ESI). The PDI neat films showed Bragg reflections at qxy = 0.227 Å−1 with a d-spacing of 27.6 Å for SF-iPDI2 and at 0.179 Å−1 with a d-spacing of 35.0 Å for SF-iPDI4. The smaller d-spacing in SF-iPDI2 than in SF-iPDI4 indicates that intermolecular packing is closer in SF-iPDI2 than in SF-iPDI4, probably due to differences in the 3D molecular configurations. Compared to the neat film, the lamellar (100) peaks of PTB7-Th were changed when blended with SF-iPDIs (Fig. S17(b), ESI) probably due to the intercalation of SF-iPDIs between PTB7-Th polymers. In terms of molecular structural features, SF-iPDI4 is bulkier compared to SF-iPDI2, because SF-iPDI4 has two more imide-linked PDI units with bulky alkyl chains than SF-iPDI2. Thus, we speculate that SF-iPDI2 can be intercalated between the PTB7-Th polymers more easily than SF-iPDI4 and the d-spacing of PTB7-Th in the PTB7-Th:SF-iPDI2 blend films was increased compared to that in the PTB7-Th:SF-iPDI4 blend films.
The recombination mechanisms in SF-iPDI2 and SF-iPDI4-based BHJ OSCs were investigated by measuring the light intensity (I) dependence of Jsc, and the I dependence of Voc (Fig. 4). All OSCs showed a relatively linear dependence of Jsc on I, with coefficients of α = 0.973 for PTB7-Th:SF-iPDI2, α = 0.991 for PTB7-Th:SF-iPDI2 with DIO, α = 0.945 for PTB7-Th:SF-iPDI4 and α = 0.939 for PTB7-Th:SF-iPDI4 with DIO, corresponding to a power law Jsc ∝ Iα. The SF-iPDI4 based-OSCs deviated from unity to a larger degree than the SF-iPDI2-based OSCs, indicating that the SF-iPDI4-based OSCs were strongly limited by geminate and non-geminated recombination.Fig. 4(b) shows a fit of the incidence I dependent Voc to the equation Voc ∝ n(kBT/e)ln(I), where kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, and e is the electron charge. The values of n obtained from the fits were 1.18 (PTB7-Th:SF-iPDI2), 1.07 (PTB7-Th:SF-iPDI2 with DIO), 1.35 (PTB7-Th:SF-iPDI4), and 1.31 (PTB7-Th:SF-iPDI4 with DIO), respectively. The stronger dependence of Voc on I for the SF-iPDI4-based devices suggests that recombination at the open circuit occurred via a combination of bimolecular and monomolecular recombination (mainly due to trap-based recombination) whereas in the SF-iPDI2-based-OSCs, bimolecular recombination is the dominant recombination mechanism. The charge carrier traps in the PTB7-Th:SF-iPDIs BHJ blend films may have resulted from incomplete phase separation between the PTB7-Th and SF-iPDIs, thereby producing interfacial defects or traps.
The distributions of charge carrier traps were investigated by conducting temperature-dependent charge carrier mobility measurements using the hole-only devices (Fig. S19, ESI). We then extracted the activation energy (Ea) by fitting the results to the Arrhenius equation. The Ea obtained from PTB7-Th:SF-iPDI2 (0.29 eV), PTB7-Th:SF-iPDI2 with DIO (0.22 eV), PTB7-Th:SF-iPDI4 (0.34 eV), and PTB7-Th:SF-iPDI4 with DIO (0.33 eV) clearly supported the existence of higher-order energetic disorder or deeper traps, in the case of the SF-iPDI4-based devices, which could contribute to trap-based recombination. Hence, we can state that the differences in the energetic disorder or the nature of traps promoted non-geminated recombination in the SF-iPDI4-based device may have lowered the FF and PCEs.
In summary, new 3D structured non-fullerene small molecules based on perylene diimide and a 9,9′-spirobi[9H-fluorene] core with imide-linkage were designed, synthesized and characterized. The SF-iPDIs showed good solubility properties, and photophysical and electrochemical properties that were appropriate for use in solution-processable non-fullerene OSCs. SF-iPDI2 exhibited a PCE of 5.31% when blended with the conjugated donor polymer PTB7-Th. This result indicated that the number of iPDI subunits in the target molecules was important for optimizing the molecular packing, blend morphology, and device performance. These results demonstrated that fine-tuning the 3D molecular configuration offers a promising way to develop high-performance non-fullerene small molecule acceptors for BHJ OSCs.
This work was supported by a grant (Code No. 2011-0031628) from the Center for Advanced Soft Electronics under the Global Frontier Research Program of the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning, Korea. The authors thank the Pohang Accelerator Laboratory for providing the synchrotron radiation sources at 9A beam lines used in this study.
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6tc03676g
‡ K. C. Song, R. Singh, and J. Lee contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016