 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA10212C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5701-5708


Dongyang
Liu
,

Yong
Li
,

Jianyu
Yuan
*,

Qiuming
Hong
,

Guozheng
Shi
,

Daxing
Yuan
,

Jian
Wei
,

Chenchao
Huang
,

Jianxin
Tang
 and 

Man-Keung
Fung
*

Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices, Institute of Functional Nano and Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University, 199 Renai Road, Suzhou Industrial Park, Suzhou, 215123, China. E-mail: jyyuan@suda.edu.cn; mkfung@suda.edu.cn

Received
27th November 2016
, Accepted 27th January 2017
First published on 27th January 2017
Rational hole transport layer (HTL) material design is regarded as one of the most important approaches to improve the efficiency and stability of perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Herein, we investigate the effect of a widely spread p-type dopant 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4-TCNQ) on the optical and electrical properties of conventional poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly-(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) HTLs, as well as the photovoltaic performance of the corresponding perovskite solar cells. Doping F4-TCNQ at a low concentration can efficiently adjust the electrical properties of the PEDOT:PSS film and lower the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level. As a result, the enhanced electrical conductivity and energetically favorable energy level alignment of the doped film allow efficient carrier transport from the perovskite absorber layer to the HTL. Finally, the PSCs with the F4-TCNQ doped HTL exhibited simultaneously increased short-circuit current (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF). The highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) was notably improved from 13.30% (undoped) to 17.22% (0.30 wt% of F4-TCNQ doping), suggesting that the F4-TCNQ doped PEDOT:PSS film is an efficient HTL to achieve high performance perovskite solar cells.

Solution-processed solar cells made of organic–inorganic lead halide perovskite materials are potential low-cost alternatives for renewable energy generation. Due to their superior optical and electrical properties, such as tunable bandgaps, low exciton binding energy, high absorption coefficients, long diffusion length and high carrier transport, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted tremendous scientific and industrial interest in recent years. During the past 7 years, synergistic efforts in materials engineering, device architecture design and lead halide perovskite film processing optimization have rapidly boosted the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of PSCs up to 22.1%. Inspired by dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), a considerable number of researchers have chosen mesoporous TiO2 or Al2O3 structures to prepare PSCs, wherein the mesoporous TiO2 or Al2O3 functioned as scaffolds to absorb the perovskite dye. Despite the fact that a relatively high PCE has been achieved with meso-structures, the inevitable high sintering temperature (>450 °C) to prepare mesoporous TiO2 or Al2O3 is not only time wasting but also incompatible for wearable electronic devices on flexible substrates. Thus, in order to avoid this problem, inverted planar-structured PSCs comprising the ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/PC61BM/metal cathode have been introduced and exhibit comparable device performance with the mesoporous counterparts. Due to its excellent film forming properties, high transparency, and most importantly, low temperature (<150 °C) processing conditions under an ambient atmosphere, PEDOT:PSS has been widely used as an anode buffer layer in organic light emitting diodes, organic solar cells and other electronic devices. However, typical inverted mixed halide PSCs (MAPbI3−xClx) with PEDOT:PSS as the HTL exhibited relatively low open circuit voltages (Voc) (<1 V) due to the energy level mismatch of PEDOT:PSS with the perovskite absorber. Therefore, there is a need to modify the HTL for improved efficiency.

The doping strategy has been extensively investigated and adopted as an effective method to modify the opto-electrical properties of transport layers in organic electronic devices. For instance, lithium salt and tBP doped spiro-OMeTAD were utilized to increase the hole mobility and electrical conductivity of HTLs, and shortly after they have been widely adopted by worldwide researchers. Gong et al. reported that PEO doped PEDOT:PSS could efficiently increase the conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS film and reduce internal series resistance, resulting in highly efficient perovskite solar cells with low hysteresis. Kim et al. reported a PEDOT:MoO3 composite to reduce energy barriers between the HTL/perovskite interface and enhance the crystallinity of perovskite. However, previously reported PSCs using modified PEDOT:PSS as the HTL exhibited a tradeoff between Jsc and Voc. Therefore, it is imperative to modify PEDOT:PSS with a suitable dopant to simultaneously increase the Voc and Jsc as well as overall cell performance. 2,3,5,6-Tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4-TCNQ), a fluorinated molecular p-type dopant with a very low lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO, −5.24 eV) energy level, has been widely used in organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs) to reduce the hole injection barrier. Meanwhile, the molecular doping of F4-TCNQ could also enhance photoconductivity in polymer bulk heterojunction solar cells, which resulted in improved Jsc, FF and PCE in BHJ organic solar cells. Quite recently, F4-TCNQ was found to have a passivation effect on exposed uncoordinated Pb atoms, resulting in improved solar cell performance. Therefore, there is a need to combine the merits of low-cost solution processability of PEDOT:PSS together with the low LUMO level of F4-TCNQ.
In this paper, we demonstrated F4-TCNQ doped PEDOT:PSS as the HTL in CH3NH3PbI3−xClx based planar perovskite solar cells for the first time. The optical transmittance, electrical properties, morphology, and charge collection capability of the doped PEDOT:PSS film as well as their consequent effects on photovoltaic performance were systematically investigated in comparison with the pristine PEDOT:PSS film. The doped PEDOT:PSS film exhibited an enhanced electrical conductivity and lower work function with retarded recombination of charge carriers, leading to a simultaneously increased short circuit current density and open circuit voltage. Thus, by controlling the doping concentration (0–0.6 wt%), we demonstrate that the optimized device yields a significantly increased PCE of 17.22% in comparison with the reference device with a PCE of 13.30%. To our knowledge, the PCE achieved is among one of the best reported for PEDOT:PSS based perovskite (MAPbI3−xClx) solar cells. Meanwhile, the hysteresis and stability issues were also solved with this simple doping strategy.

Inverted perovskite solar cells with a structure of ITO/HTL/MAPbI3−xClx/PCBM/BCP/Ag were fabricated (Fig. 1a) and the doping concentration of F4-TCNQ in the HTL was optimized. Fig. 1b and c show the corresponding energy level and cross-sectional SEM image of a whole device, respectively. The MAPbI3−xClx layer and hole transport layer are well distinguished and their thicknesses are about 300 nm and 40 nm, respectively. The chemical structures of PEDOT:PSS and F4-TCNQ are shown in Fig. 1d.


Sunlight penetrates through the PEDOT:PSS film to the perovskite layer, and thus, a high optical transparency of the HTL in the range of 300–800 nm is required to facilitate the absorbance of the light harvesting perovskite layer. We first measured the transparency of the HTL film before and after the doping of F4-TCNQ (Fig. 2a). Interestingly, the ITO/PEDOT:PSS films showed higher optical transparency than the bare ITO, which may be due to the smoother surface upon modification of PEDOT:PSS. The doped films with trace amounts of F4-TCNQ are still highly transparent in the visible range with average transmittance up to 85%. The transmittance slightly decreased in the range between 400 and 500 nm, which may be attributed to the absorbance of F4-TCNQ. We also measured the lateral electrical conductivity of the pristine and F4-TCNQ doped PEDOT:PSS films using a four-point probe method. As shown in Fig. 2b, the electrical conductivity of the F4-TCNQ doped PEDOT:PSS film (0.3 wt%) was 1.36 × 10−1 S cm−1, almost 7 times higher than that of the pristine PEDOT:PSS film (0.02 S cm−1). This may be attributed to the strong electron accepting property of F4-TCNQ, or the conformal change of PEDOT chains driven by the interaction between the dipoles of F4-TCNQ− and PEDOT+. The increased conductivity of the HTL film can lead to a decrease in series resistance (RS) thus giving rise to enhanced charge collection efficiency. Ultra-violet photoemission spectroscopy (UPS) was then utilized to measure the work function of the pristine and F4-TCNQ doped PEDOT:PSS films. Fig. 2c shows the UPS spectra, where the inset is the magnified region of the secondary-electron cutoff. It can be found that after doping with F4-TCNQ into the PEDOT:PSS film, the work function of the HTL is increased from 5.08 eV to 5.18 eV. A deeper work function can minimize the energy barrier between the work function of PEDOT:PSS and the valence band of perovskite, forming a larger internal electrical field for charge transfer. It is well known that the Voc is determined by the difference of the HOMO of the hole transport layer and the LUMO of the electron transport layer. Thus, solar cells based on F4-TCNQ doped PEDOT:PSS would be anticipated to provide larger Voc values than the reference device.

Previous studies have demonstrated that the charge dissociation and charge transport processes are strongly determined by the HTL/perovskite interfacial morphology. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements were carried out to investigate the surface morphology of the pristine PEDOT:PSS and F4-TCNQ doped PEDOT:PSS films. As shown in Fig. 3, the root-mean-square (RMS) roughness slightly increases when increasing the doping concentration of F4-TCNQ. The pristine PEDOT:PSS exhibits a relatively smooth surface with an RMS roughness of 1.45 nm; the surface roughness increased to 1.61 nm after doping 0.3 wt% F4-TCNQ into PEDOT:PSS. A slightly increased surface roughness can increase the contact area with the perovskite layer and is beneficial for charge extraction.

To verify the correlation between the improved hole transport properties of the F4-TCNQ doped PEDOT:PSS film and device performance, the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of perovskite solar cells based on F4-TCNQ doped PEDOT:PSS as a function of doping concentration (0–0.6 wt%) were measured under AM 1.5G illumination (Fig. 4a). The corresponding device parameters are summarized in Table 1 and Fig. S1 (ESI). The reference device with the pristine PEDOT:PSS film exhibits a PCE of 13.30% with a Jsc of 19.93 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.95 V, and an FF of 71%. In contrast, the performance of devices with the doped PEDOT:PSS layer is dependent clearly on the doping ratio of F4-TCNQ. Increased Voc, Jsc and FF for the doped devices were clearly observed. The reduction of RS for doped devices indicates a faster carrier extraction and less recombination loss. The best device performance was achieved when the doping concentration is 0.3 wt%, which yields a power conversion efficiency of 17.22% with a Jsc of 21.93 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.02 V, and an FF of 76%. Further increasing the doping ratio of F4-TCNQ higher than 0.3 wt% would degrade the solar cell performance to some extent. This can be attributed to the aggregation nature of F4-TCNQ that may deteriorate the interfacial contact with PEDOT:PSS. Our AFM study also showed that the PEDOT:PSS film intentionally doped with 5 wt% of F4-TCNQ has a rougher surface (RMS roughness of 1.75 nm) with enhanced phase separation, as seen in Fig. S2 (ESI).

Doping con. (wt%)

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)

R
S (Ω cm−1)

a 30 cells were measured under AM 1.5G simulated sunlight with an active area of 0.0725 cm2. The data shown here indicate the best value. The mean and its standard deviation are also shown in the bracket (mean ± SD).

0
0.94, (0.90 ± 0.01)
19.93, (18.33 ± 0.89)
0.71, (0.66 ± 0.03)
13.30, (12.18 ± 0.77)
3.0
0.15
0.98, (0.96 ± 0.01)
20.64, (19.43 ± 0.76)
0.73, (0.70 ± 0.02)
14.76, (13.46 ± 0.75)
2.2
0.30
1.02, (0.99 ± 0.02)
21.93, (20.95 ± 0.62)
0.77, (0.74 ± 0.02)
17.22, (15.85 ± 0.75)
1.8
0.60
0.99, (0.97 ± 0.02)
21.55, (20.23 ± 0.70)
0.76, (0.72 ± 0.03)
16.19, (14.27 ± 0.92)
2.5
The external quantum efficiency spectrum (EQE) of the optimized PSCs (0.3 wt%) is shown in Fig. 4b. Compared with the reference device, solar cells based on the F4-TCNQ doped PEDOT:PSS film exhibit higher EQE values in the range from 450 to 780 nm, implying that the doped device facilitates charge extraction and charge-carrier transport. The calculated photocurrents for solar cells with PEDOT:PSS and F4-TCNQ doped PEDOT:PSS based on EQE results are 20.63 mA cm−2 and 18.85 mA cm−2 respectively, which accord quite well with the experimental data obtained from the J–V curves in Fig. 4a.
Understanding the origin of hysteresis of perovskite solar cells is undoubtedly critically important to develop stable perovskite solar cells with commercial viability. Anomalous hysteresis is usually observed in TiO2 based perovskite solar cells which require high temperature sintering. Previous reports proposed that hysteresis might originate from ion migration, trapping/de-trapping of charge carriers, ferroelectricity and so on. We then measured our solar cell devices in different scanning directions. As shown in the J–V curves in Fig. S3 (ESI), severe hysteresis is observed for the reference device, while hysteresis behavior is significantly alleviated for the F4-TCNQ doped PEDOT:PSS based devices. The reduced hysteresis effect may be attributed to reduced charge accumulation and favorable energy level alignment at the HTL/MAPbI3−xClx interface. Minor hysteresis can help us to accurately determine the real PCE, which is also reflected in a steady-state power output operating at a constant bias (Fig. 4c). Besides, we also investigated the device stability of PSCs with doped PEDOT:PSS under an ambient atmosphere (around 40% humidity). The results in Fig. S4 (ESI) depict that the stability of doped solar cells outperformed that of the reference device, which may be attributed to a better interfacial contact and the hydrophobic nature of F4-TCNQ. From the above, it is realized that a simple doping strategy using F4-TCNQ could remarkably increase the PCE of PSCs with enhanced stability.
To verify the reproducibility of our efficiency data, 30 solar cells with doped/undoped HTLs were fabricated and tested under AM 1.5G illumination. As shown in the PCE histogram of Fig. 4d the doped devices have relatively narrow PCE distribution, substantiating the consistency of our device data and the versatility of the aforementioned facile method for the enhancement of device performance. We have also compared the device performance of PSCs reported from other literature, which is summarized in Table S1 (ESI).

The observation of simultaneously increased Jsc, Voc and FF with F4-TCNQ doping indicates the retardation of carrier recombination in the doped PEDOT:PSS based perovskite solar cells. Since the light absorber layer and the sequent ETL layer were maintained throughout our device fabrication, it is then assumed that F4-TCNQ itself plays a critical role in the enhancement of power conversion efficiency and device stability. Also, whether the underlying doped PEDOT:PSS would influence the quality of the perovskite film or not is worthy of studying.


Fig. 5a depicts the crystallinity of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx films deposited either on doped or pristine HTLs, as unveiled by X-ray diffraction (XRD). The strong peaks at 14.10° and 28.24° correspond to (110) and (220) crystallographic planes respectively, which confirm the formation of a perovskite tetragonal structure. The preferred crystalline orientation at (110) was reported to be vital for an increase of open circuit voltage as well as the fill factor in PSCs. Both the perovskite films grown on doped and pristine PEDOT:PSS films are homogeneous with large crystalline domains, as seen in the SEM images of Fig. S5 (ESI), which means that the doped HTL has a negligible effect on the growth mechanism of MAPbI3−xClx. Furthermore, it can be seen from the UV-visible spectroscopy (Fig. 5b) that the doped PEDOT:PSS also does not alter the spectral shape of the perovskite film. The identical onset at around 785 nm is in correspondence with the optical bandgap of 1.5 eV for MAPbI3−xClx. From all these above results, it can be verified that the high EQE of the F4-TCNQ doped HTL film is not due to the optical and structural changes of MAPbI3−xClx grown on different HTLs.
To further scrutinize the improved Voc, we measured the J–V curves of perovskite solar cells incorporated with doped (0.3 wt%) and pristine PEDOT:PSS films in the dark, as depicted in Fig. 6. The dark current density of the doped solar cell is about one order of magnitude lower than that of the standard cell, which indicates that the leakage current density of perovskite incorporated with the doped HTL was suppressed. Therefore, in the photovoltaic process, photo-generated charge carriers are dissociated effectively instead of recombination. Furthermore, based on the equation below, the reduced leakage current density of the perovskite solar cell incorporated with the doped HTL would result in a higher Voc.
where
n is the ideal factor, R and F are the ideal gas and Faraday constants, respectively, Isc is the short circuit current, T is the temperature, and Io is the dark current. It is obvious that the open circuit voltage increases with decreasing leakage current, and therefore our solar cell devices with the doped HTL have higher Jsc and Voc values.


Fig. 7a and b show steady state photoluminescence (PL) spectra (excited at 600 nm) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra (excited at 630 nm) of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx deposited on the doped and pristine PEDOT:PSS substrates, respectively. From Fig. 7a, a significant quenching effect was observed when the perovskite layer was spin-coated on the doped PEDOT:PSS film. For the perovskite layer deposited onto the F4-TCNQ doped PEDOT:PSS, 90% PL intensity was quenched, while only around 70% was quenched for the control undoped device, indicating more efficient charge carrier dissociation in the doped films. In addition, the TRPL experiments were utilized to examine the charge dissociation and recombination processes.Fig. 7b shows the TRPL spectra of perovskite films deposited on pristine and doped HTLs. The TRPL curves for each sample were fitted with a bi-exponential decay function and the corresponding detailed parameters are summarized in Table S2 (ESI). The fast decay lifetime T1 is attributed to the quenching of the photogenerated free carriers transporting from the perovskite layer to the HTL or ETL, and the slow decay lifetime T2 originates from the radiative recombination of free carriers before charge collection. In the case of the PEDOT:PSS based device, the fast decay lifetime of 2.77 ns with a weight fraction of 9.30% and the slow decay lifetime with a weight fraction of 90.67% indicate that the radiative recombination is dominant in the depopulation of photo-generated carriers. On the contrary, for the doped device, both T1 and T2 decayed rapidly (2.41 ns with a weight fraction of 81.04% and 5.38 ns with a weight fraction of 18.96%). It is interpreted that the photogenerated carriers (holes in our case) are more efficiently extracted and transferred from the perovskite film to the ITO rather than undergo recombination, which is consistent with the results from the steady state PL spectra. The fast charge collection with reduced recombination may originate from the enhanced conductivity of the doped HTL and the favorable energy alignment between the doped HTL and perovskite layer.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements are widely utilized as a powerful technique to investigate the electrical properties of interfaces such as charge transfer and carrier recombination as well as the inner series resistance (RS) within perovskite solar cells. Typical RS consists of the sheet resistance (Rsheet) of the electrodes, and charge-transfer resistance (RCT) at the interface between the electrode and the adjacent charge carrier layer, as well as the interface between the MAPbI3−xClx and the adjacent charge carrier layer. Fig. 8 shows the EIS results of the doped and pristine PEDOT:PSS based devices, in the form of Nyquist diagrams. The spectra were recorded at a bias close to the Voc of the corresponding devices at frequencies ranging from 0.5 Hz to 4 MHz. From the plots, RCT values of 440 and 670 Ω were obtained for perovskite solar cells incorporated with F4-TCNQ doped PEDOT:PSS and solar cells incorporated with pristine PEDOT:PSS, respectively. Since the only difference between the two cells is the HTL layer, it can then be postulated that the smaller RCT is attributed to an improved interfacial contact between the doped PEDOT:PSS and perovskite, and the holes could be extracted efficiently when photo-generated charges are transported from the perovskite layer to the anode. Thus, better device performance is expected for the doped device.

In conclusion, we have demonstrated a simple and robust method to improve the overall performance of PSCs by doping a conventional PEDOT:PSS layer with F4-TCNQ. Substantial improvement was achieved with a PCE of 17.22%, a Jsc of 21.93 mA cm−2 and a Voc of 1.02 V, in comparison with a PCE of 13.30%, a Jsc of 19.93 mA cm−2 and a Voc of 0.94 V for an undoped control device. Systematic investigations on the mechanisms for the enhancement of photovoltaic performance revealed that the improvement is mainly attributed to the enhanced electrical conductivity, and favorable energy level alignment as well as efficient charge carrier dissociation with retarded recombination. Therefore, the modified HTL approach provides a promising strategy to boost the efficiency of perovskite solar cells. It may also be applicable to other PEDOT:PSS-based thin film transistors, LEDs and other organic electronic devices.


Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(p-styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS. Clevios AI 4083) was bought from Heraeus (Germany). PC60BM, bathocuproine (BCP) and F4-TCNQ were manufactured by Nichem Fine Technology Co. Ltd. (Taiwan). All other chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and were used as received without further treatment. Methylammonium iodide was synthesized by hydroiodic acid and methylamine according to previous literature. F4-TCNQ was first dissolved in ethanol at 1 mg ml−1. The solution was then stirred and heated at 100 °C for 12 hours in an ambient atmosphere. The prepared F4-TCNQ solutions were added into the PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution at various volume ratios. Perovskite precursor solution: the MAPbl3−xClx solution of 30 wt% was prepared by mixing PbCl2 and MAI in DMF with a molar ratio of 1:3. The mixed solution was stirred at room temperature in a glovebox.


Patterned ITO coated glass substrates were first cleaned with Decon 90, and then ultra-sonicated in deionized water, acetone, and isopropanol sequentially. After that, the ITO substrates were treated with UV-ozone for 20 minutes in an ambient atmosphere. F4-TCNQ doped PEDOT:PSS and pristine PEDOT:PSS thin films were obtained by spin-coating the corresponding solutions on cleaned ITO substrates at 4000 rpm for 40 s and then annealed at 100 °C for 20 minutes. The substrates were then transferred into a N2 filled glovebox. For perovskite layers, the prepared perovskite precursor solutions were then spincoated on the surface of either the pristine PEDOT:PSS layer or the F4-TCNQ doped PEDOT:PSS layer at 4000 rpm for 40 s, followed by annealing on a hot plate based on a gradient increased temperature (60–100 °C at a ramp rate of 10 °C/10 minutes). Afterwards, the PC60BM (20 mg ml−1 in chlorobenzene) and BCP (0.5 mg ml−1 in absolute ethanol) were sequentially spincoated at 2000 rpm for 40 s and 4000 rpm for 40 s, respectively. Finally, 100 nm Ag electrodes were vacuum deposited through a shadow mask under 10−6 Torr, to obtain a device area of 7.25 mm2.


The surface morphologies of F4-TCNQ doped PEDOT:PSS were measured by field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, Quanta 200 FEG, FEI Co.) and atomic force microscopy (AFM, Veeco Multimode V instrument). The absorption and transmittance of F4-TCNQ doped HTL and MAPbI3−xClx films were evaluated by using a UV/vis spectrophotometer (PerkinElmer Lambda 750). UPS analysis was carried out to measure the energy level of HTLs with an unfiltered He I (21.2 eV) gas discharge lamp and a hemispherical analyzer. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of PSCs were measured in an ambient atmosphere using a programmable Keithley 2400 source meter under AM 1.5G solar irradiation at 100 mW cm−2 (Newport, Class AAA solar simulator, 94023A-U). The steady state PL spectra and time-resolved PL spectra were obtained by using a Horiba Jobin-Yvon LabRAM HR800 and a single photon counting spectrometer which is combined with a Fluorolog-3 spectrofluorometer (Horiba-FM-2015). A 630 nm laser source was used in the time-resolved PL measurements. The EQE was measured using a certified IPCE instrument, whereas the light intensity was calibrated with a standard Si-SC (Zolix Instruments, Inc., Solar Cell Scan 100). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed on an IM6 electrochemical workstation (Zahner Zennium, Germany) in the dark with a bias near the corresponding Voc of individual cells. The oscillating voltage was 10 mV and the frequencies ranged from 4 MHz to 1 Hz.


The work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61475106), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK20151264), the National Key Research Projects (Grant No. 2016YFA0202402), the Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science & Technology (NANO-CIC), and the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions. The authors thank Mr Kaicheng Zhang, Ms Jianxia Sun and Mr Guanqun Ding for the PL and AFM measurements. D. Y. L. appreciates Prof. Liangsheng Liao for providing experimental facilities.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta10212c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017