 DOI: 10.1039/C9SE00338J
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 3182-3190


Bhavita
Mistry
,

Hiren K.
Machhi
,

Ravi S.
Vithalani
,

Dikin S.
Patel
,

Chetan K.
Modi
*,

Meha
Prajapati
,

Kiran R.
Surati
,

Saurabh S.
Soni
*,

Prafulla K.
Jha
 and 

Sanjeev R.
Kane


Applied Chemistry Department, Faculty of Technology & Engineering, The Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda, Vadodara-390 001, Gujarat, India. E-mail: chetank.modi1@gmail.com; Tel: +91 265 2434188

Department of Chemistry, Sardar Patel University, Vallabh Vidyanagar, 388120, Gujarat, India. E-mail: soni_b21@yahoo.co.in; Tel: +91 2692 226856 ext. 216

Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, The Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda, Vadodara-390 002, Gujarat, India

Indus Synchrotrons Utilisation Section, Raja Ramanna Centre for Advanced Technology, Indore-452013, India

Received
30th May 2019
, Accepted 1st September 2019
First published on 2nd September 2019
Nowadays, green materials are being prepared to a greater extent to conserve the environment. Due to their outstanding properties, carbon quantum dots (CQDs) are becoming the alternatives of the conventional semiconductor-based quantum dots and organic dyes. We reported the one-step synthesis of CQDs and nitrogen-doped carbon quantum dots (NCQDs) by the solvothermal treatment of green and renewable non-centrifugal cane sugar. The successful syntheses of CQDs and NCQDs were substantiated by various physicochemical techniques such as Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), Raman spectroscopy, transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The photoluminescence quantum yields of CQDs and NCQDs were observed to be 5.2% and 9.8%, respectively. Due to their commendable photostability, these NCQDs with different loadings of nitrogen were applied as green sensitizers in TiO2-based solar cells. These NCQDs achieved the highest power conversion efficiency of 1.20% under 0.1 sun illumination (AM 1.5). We believe that this competitiveness of the fabrication of CQDs from the cheapest and green source is the most promising and useful for light harvesting.

In the last more than two decades, inorganic semiconductor quantum dots (ISQDs) have received much attention due to their unique and versatile characteristics such as a tunable band gap, high absorption coefficient, better fluorescence properties, and control of photophysical and electronic properties. These salient features of ISQDs have paved the way for a wide range of applications such as photovoltaic devices, photocatalysts, sensors, bioimaging elements and medicine. Among all these applications, to satisfy the global energy requirement, the use of ISQDs in photovoltaic devices as one of the prominent light harvesting materials is emerging. As a third generation solar cell, a quantum dot solar cell (QDSC) has evolved as an alternative of a dye-sensitized solar cell, where the dyes have been replaced by ISQDs. Due to the tunable band gap and high absorption coefficient of the quantum dots, QDSCs have been well developed and have exhibited the best power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 12.75% along with good stability. However, the main disadvantage of the ISQD-based solar cell devices is their toxicity due to the presence of heavy metal elements and they produce harmful effects on the environment. Moreover, the synthesis of ISQDs with a controlled size and shape requires complicated processes. Apart from this, the corrosion of ISQDs in the presence of the conventional I−/I3− electrolyte affects the stability and causes decrement in PCE of the solar cell devices. Hence, considerable research efforts must be driven towards the development of alternatives of ISQDs that possess low toxicity and are less harmful to the environment with good optical and electrical properties, which will facilitate the development of eco-friendlier systems for photovoltaic devices.

In recent times, carbonaceous nanomaterials, particularly carbon quantum dots (CQDs), a new class of carbon materials, have become the centre of attraction. This quasi-spherical-shaped zero-dimensional material consists of an sp2/sp3 carbon core with diverse functional groups on the surface having a size of around 10 nm. Since the first report by Xu et al. on CQDs, due to their prominent properties such as low toxicity, abundance, biocompatibility, easy, convenient and inexpensive synthetic process, inertness, exceptional fluorescence properties, chemical stability, and superior resistance towards photo-bleaching, these nano forms of carbon-based materials have been widely used in various applications.
One of the important applications of CQDs is their use as co-sensitizers or sensitizers in ISQD-based solar cell devices. This is because in CQDs, the optical absorbance or fluorescence emission arises due to π-electrons and integration with surface-bound electrons rather than due to the band gap. Over the past decade, a drastic improvement in PCE from 0.49 to 12.75% has been reported for ISQDs, where CQDs or other nanomaterials of carbon were used as co-sensitizers. However, so far, sensitized CQD-based solar cells have not been able to cross PCE greater than 1%. P. Mirtchev et al. reported water soluble CQDs obtained via the dehydration of g-butyrolactone as a light harvester with PCE of 0.13%. Zhang et al. used a hybrid TiO2/CQD-based photoanode for solar cell fabrication and reported PCE of 0.87%. Carbon nanodots synthesized through the microwave technique were utilized as the sensitizers in a solar cell with 0.24% PCE. Up to now, CQD-sensitized solar cell devices suffer from poor PCE, which might be due to the lower short-circuit current density. This occurs because of the wide gap between the conduction band (CB) of TiO2 and CB of CQDs (Fig. S3); thus, a majority of the photoinduced carriers recombine rather than being injected into the CB of TiO2. Moreover, CQDs have narrow light absorption in visible light compared with a broad band in the UV region, which can also be one of the reasons for poor PCE. One of the ways to reduce the gap between the CB of TiO2 and CQDs is heteroatom doping. Heteroatoms such as nitrogen (N) and sulphur (S) allow the creation of intermediate electronic levels inside the band gap, which can be excited by visible light that leads to the effective injection of the photocarriers into the CB of TiO2. Nitrogen doping is favoured over sulphur doping because its p states contribute to band gap narrowing by mixing with the 2p orbital of carbon. Moreover, the energy required for the insertion of nitrogen is less than that for other heteroatoms. Zhang et al. fabricated a solar cell device with nitrogen-doped CQDs, which achieved only 0.13% PCE. Wang et al. prepared nitrogen-doped CQDs (NCQDs) through the direct pyrolysis of citric acid with ammonia and obtained 0.79% PCE in a CQD-based device. In view of this, much efforts are still required for the effective insertion of nitrogen in CQDs as sensitizers to improve the PCE of CQD-based solar cells.
In this work, we reported the easy synthesis of highly fluorescent CQDs by the one-step solvothermal treatment of green and renewable non-centrifugal cane sugar. As it contains over 90% carbohydrates, the most important component, i.e., sucrose is ∼76.55–89.48%, followed by reducing sugars, and it is very important from the view point of components. In addition to being economical, it is technologically and culturally environmentally benign. These CQDs were used to produce NCQDs using urea as a non-toxic, cheaper, and innocuous nitrogen doping agent. These NCQDs were characterized successfully by various physico-chemical techniques including photoluminescence spectroscopy. The maximum photoluminescence quantum yields of CQDs and NCQDs were observed to be 5.2 and 9.8%, respectively. The as-prepared NCQDs were used as green sensitizers in the fabrication of TiO2-based quantum dot solar cells. The study provided us with the fascinating result of 1.20% PCE at 0.1 sun with nitrogen doping. As a result, we found that constructive alteration with nitrogen-doped CQDs can help in the fabrication of solar cells with an excellent standard that can enhance the PCE beyond belief of this class of quantum dot-based devices.

Non-centrifugal cane sugar (jaggery) was purchased from a local market, Vadodara, Gujarat, India. All the other chemical reagents and solvents employed in this study were procured from S D Fine-Chem Ltd. India. All the materials were of analytical grade and used as received without further purification. Lithium iodide (99.9%), iodine (99.9%), 4-tert-butyl pyridine (TBP) (99%), guanidinium thiocyanate (GSCN) (99%), and chloroplatinic acid hydrate (98.5%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used as received. TCO substrates (14 Ω cm−2) and hot melt tape were purchased from Solaronix Inc. Switzerland. TiO2 nanoparticle paste (99% anatase) was purchased from Dyesol, Australia.

The photocurrent density–voltage (J–V), open circuit voltage decay (OCVD), and transient current of the fabricated devices were measured using a CHI660E electrochemical workstation (CHI instruments, Austin TX) by sweeping the potential from 0 to 0.6 V at a scan rate 20 mV s−1 under the illumination of white light with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (Photoemission Tech., USA). The incident light intensity was adjusted and calibrated to 100 mW cm−2 (1 sun) using an NREL approved standard photodiode prior to measurements. A black mask was used to cover the non-active area of the device. J–V and transient current measurements at different intensities were measured using appropriate filters. Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) of the devices were obtained by sweeping in the frequency range from 1.2 MHz to 0.1 Hz with an AC signal amplitude of 10 mV using a Solartron 1260 + 1287 interface. Incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) measurements were obtained using a Quantum Efficiency Measurement System. FTIR (4000–400 cm−1) of the as-prepared catalysts was performed on FTIR8400S Shimadzu using KBr pellets. Raman microscopy was performed with a Technos Raman spectrometer using 532 nm DPPS laser (Laser Quantum Gem 100 mW), 785 nm DPPS Laser (Integrated Optical Match Box 500 mW), and a Peltier cooled CCD detector. XPS spectra were measured on a Specs Phoibios 225 spectrometer with Al Kα radiation (1486.6 eV). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was performed on a Philips Tecnai 20 transmission electron microscope.

The synthesis of highly efficient fluorescent C-dots through the carbonization of non-centrifugal cane sugar is discussed. In a typical reaction, 30 g of non-centrifugal cane sugar was weighed up to prepare a jaggery syrup; this was then dissolved in 25 mL methanol. The carbonization of non-centrifugal cane sugar was carried out at 140 °C for 2.5 h in a Teflon-coated stainless steel pressure chamber of the autoclave. The pressure and temperature were controlled throughout the reaction. Pressure control prevents the solvent and other gaseous molecules from escaping out of the autoclave and causes the formation of bright green fluorescent CQDs. After the completion of the reaction, the autoclave was allowed to cool down naturally to room temperature and the resulting carbonized product (dark brown solution) was rinsed with dichloromethane (DCM) several times to remove un-reacted particles. To obtain highly fluorescent nano-ranged (<10 nm) CQDs, the solution was then centrifuged at 12000 rpm for 30 minutes with different solvents such as acetone, methanol, and DMF.


To initiate nitrogen doping onto the surface of CQDs, jaggery syrup and urea (1 mol with respect to the weighed non-centrifugal cane sugar) were dissolved in 25 mL methanol. The remaining conditions of the reaction were kept the same as that for carbonization of jaggery syrup. The reaction mixture was then subjected to a hydrothermal treatment at 140 °C for 2.5 h in the Teflon-coated stainless steel pressure chamber of the autoclave. The pressure and temperature were controlled throughout the reaction. Pressure control prevents the solvent and other gaseous molecules to escape out from the autoclave and causes the formation of bright green fluorescent CQDs. After the completion of the reaction, a deeply black coloured solution was obtained for centrifugation at 12000 rpm for 30 minutes to achieve highly luminous nano-ranged (<10 nm) NCQDs. In order to vary the proportion of N-doping, different % values of urea were introduced, viz., 0.125%, 0.25%, and 0.50%.


Solar cells were fabricated according to our previous reports. A fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass substrate was cleaned with detergent, water, and ethanol, followed by 10 minutes of sonication at each step. For the photoanode, the cleaned FTO was coated with a titania compact layer by spin coating of titanium isopropoxide solution and mesoporous titania layer (Dyesol paste) was screen printed and calcined at 450 °C for 20 minutes at each step, resulting in a 9 μm thick film with an active area of 0.16 cm2. The resulting electrode was sensitized in a solution of carbon quantum dots for 20 h in dark and was used as the photoanode. A pre-drilled FTO was spin-coated with a solution of H2PtCl6 and calcined at 450 °C for 20 minutes. The photoanode and the platinized cathode were sealed together using a thermal melt polymer film. The electrolyte consisting of 0.5 M 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide (BMII), 0.05 M I2, 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP), and 0.5 M guanidinium thiocyanate (GSCN) in 3-methoxypropionitrile was injected through the pre-drilled holes of the counter electrode. The holes were sealed using epoxy adhesive and a cover glass. The devices were stored in the dark at room temperature for 12 h prior to the measurements.



Fig. 1 shows the high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images of NCQDs; it reveals a thick layer with well separated forms of the carbon dots that exhibit no aggregation of the CQD particles. These CQDs appeared to have nearly spherical morphology, forming a core–shell structure. Further close inspection of CQDs divulged a narrow particle size of 9.5 ± 1.9 nm. The selective area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern, shown in Fig. 1(c), confirmed the crystalline nature of NCQDs or CQDs. The mediocre crystallinity of the sample observed in the SAED pattern might be due to the insertion of nitrogen onto the surface of CQDs.

Usually, for N-doping of CQDs, the dopant prefers to occupy a single triangular sub-lattice of CQDs as graphitic-N, which is the most achievable type of a dopant and preserves the high mobility of charge carriers. This n-type behaviour of NCQDs was also confirmed by Mott–Schottky plots (ESI Fig. S4), revealing higher current donation due to the hetero nitrogen atom. Many researchers studying the characterization of dopant confinement revealed that the hydrothermal treatment alters the dopant bonding configuration of nitrogen, which converts some of the graphitic nitrogen species into pyridinic- and pyrrolic-N. This state of nitrogen was also confirmed by XPS analysis.
In order to understand the surface elemental analysis and the bonding constitution of the as-prepared NCQDs or CQDs, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed, which provided more convincing evidence for the N-doping surface state as well. As shown in the XPS survey spectra (Fig. 2(a)), the as-prepared NCQDs are composed of carbon, oxygen, and nitrogen, and their peaks can be detected at the binding energies of around 287.33, 400.5, and 532.17 eV, respectively. The high-resolution C 1s spectra of NCQDs (Fig. 2(b)) display four peaks at 285.1, 286.2, 287.6, and 289.5 eV. The peak at around 285.1 eV could be assigned to the graphitic structure of C–C (sp2), while the peak observed at 286.2 eV suggested the presence of C–N (sp3). However, the binding energies at 287.6 and 289.5 eV were associated with CO and CN/O–CO, respectively.
The high-resolution O 1s spectrum (Fig. 2(c)) demonstrates a major peak at 531.7 eV, suggesting the insertion of oxygen into carbon as C–O/CO. Moreover, the additional peak observed at 534.8 eV provided an evidence for the insertion of nitrogen as N–CO, which was in agreement with the C 1s spectrum. The deconvoluted high-resolution N 1s spectrum (Fig. 2(d)) exhibited three peaks at 399.5, 400.5, and 403.1 eV due to pyridinic-N, pyrrolic-N, and pyridinc-N, respectively. These data again endorsed the FTIR results for the presence of nitrogen doped on the graphitic surface.
Raman spectra were acquired to determine the crystalline nature of the as-prepared CQDs and NCQDs. It is known that the D band is a dispersed band that arises due to the vibrational modes of the dangling bond, while the G band corresponds to the scattering of the stretching vibration mode E2g that arises due to an sp2 carbon. As shown in Fig. 3(a), two peaks at 1451 and 1515 cm−1 are assigned to the D and G bands, respectively, in the Raman spectra of CQDs.
However, in contrast to the Raman spectrum of CQDs, in the Raman spectrum of NCQDs (Fig. 3(b)), approximately 13 and 11 cm−1 blue shifts can be observed for the D and G bands, respectively. Usually, the prominent intensity ratio of the D and G bands (ID/IG) is calculated to judge the degree of disorder of a carbon-based material. In this work, it was observed that the ID/IG ratio for NCQDs showed a higher value (1.01) than that for CQDs (0.87). A shift in the G band was also seen for NCQDs and this was believed to be due to the structural distortion caused by the bond distances of C–C and C–N. Consequently, the increase in the ID/IG ratio and the blue shift of the G band for NCQDs proved the successful insertion of nitrogen and this was in good agreement with the XPS results.
FTIR spectroscopy is an imperative tool to determine the surface functional groups. To confirm the presence of various functional groups such as carboxyl, epoxy, carbonyl, and hydroxyl groups over the surface of NCQDs, we obtained the FTIR spectra of NCQDs prepared in different solvents, viz., methanol, DMF, and acetone. Fig. 4(A)–(C) exhibit a broad peak centered at 3480 cm−1, which can be assigned to the O–H stretching vibration, whereas the peak at 2931 cm−1 is attributed to the C–H stretching vibrations. In addition, the band at 1553 cm−1 corresponds to the N–H bending vibration, while the N–H stretching vibrations are supposed to be merged with the O–H stretching vibrations. The band detected at 1641 cm−1 confirms CO/CN, which is also substantiated by the XPS results; however, the peak observed at 1309 cm−1 indicates the formation of amide bonds. The presence of epoxy groups was also confirmed by the peak observed at 1041 cm−1. All these results confirmed the successful insertion of the nitrogen dopant into the carbon skeleton of CQDs.

The photoluminescence quantum yields were measured for CQDs and NCQDs in their diluted methanol solutions at the concentration of 4.5 × 10−5 mol L−1 with the refractive index η = 1.33 relative to a standard of quinine sulphate in (0.1 M) H2SO4 at the concentration of 4.5 × 10−6 mol L−1.

The quantum yield Φ(x) was calculated using the following expression:
here, r = reference sample, x = unknown sample,
Φ = quantum yield, Abs = absorbance, Area = area of the entire emission, and η = refractive index of the solvent. The maximum photoluminescence quantum yields of CQDs, NCQDs, and quinine sulphate were observed to be 5.2%, 9.8%, and 54%, respectively.


The comparative current density–voltage characteristics are shown in Fig. 5(a) and (b), where CQDs (un-doped and doped) are used as light harvesters with the traditional I3−/I− electrolyte. Upon light irradiation, the valence band electrons were excited and migrated to the conduction band of CQDs, leading to the separation of the electron–hole pairs. The excited electrons were quickly transferred to the titania semiconductor and migrated towards the counter electrode through the external circuit. Meanwhile, the oxidized CQD species were regenerated by the electrons coming from the redox couple. Here, the typical un-doped CQD device showed short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 0.92 mA cm−2, open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.51 V, and fill factor (FF) of 63.9%, resulting in PCE of 0.3% under 1 sun (100 mW cm−2) intensity. In contrast, in the nitrogen-doped device, device C gave a superior performance with Jsc of 1.60 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.54 V, and FF of 64.8%, yielding PCE of 0.56%. The results showed that NCQDs are better performing devices compared to CQDs only. This was attributed to the facile transfer of the excited electrons as per the energy level shifting of the CB of NCQDs near the CB of TiO2 (ESI Fig. S3) and higher current donation due to the hetero nitrogen atom, as can be seen from the Mott–Schottky plots (ESI Fig. S4). This figure clearly shows that the n-type character of CQDs increases with the increase in nitrogen doping. Hence, higher donor density was obtained for a high % N content in CQDs.

To investigate the charge transfer kinetics, electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were recorded, which typically consist of two semicircles; the large and smaller semicircles at the middle and higher frequency ranges represent the resistance at the TiO2/QD/electrolyte interface (Rrec) and at the Pt/electrolyte interface (Rs), respectively. The EIS plots were fitted with an appropriate circuit (ESI Fig. S5) and the extracted values are given in Table 1. From the data, it is revealed that higher Rrec of device C induces lesser recombination that leads to larger electron density transfer towards the external circuit, thus giving rise to the highest Jsc value among all.
Device

J
sc
 (mA cm−2)

V
oc
 (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

R
s
 (Ω)

R
rec
 (Ω)

a Device A, pure carbon quantum dot device without nitrogen doping; device B, 0.125% nitrogen-doped carbon quantum dot device; device C, 0.25% nitrogen-doped carbon quantum dot device; device D, 0.50% nitrogen-doped carbon quantum dot device.
b Performance of the devices with 0.16 cm2 area under 1 sun irradiation.
c Fitting values from the EIS plot.

Device A (CQDs)
0.92
0.51
63.95
0.30
10.78
69.48
Device B (0.125% NCQDs)
1.22
0.53
64.92
0.42
10.01
94.71
Device C (0.25% NCQDs)
1.60
0.54
64.81
0.56
10.90
149.02
Device D (0.50% NCQDs)
1.28
0.53
64.85
0.44
12.25
124.26
To investigate the quick light response and stability, the measurements were obtained with light ON/OFF at fixed time intervals of 10 seconds using a mechanical shutter, as shown in Fig. 6(a). Upon light illumination (100 mW cm−2), a quick increment in the chronoamperometry current was observed and a sudden drop was observed after we cut off the light up to 200 s. The incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) is plotted in Fig. 6(b), which comparatively matches with the UV-Vis spectra (ESI Fig. S1(a)), and represents the highest (76%) conversion in the device C compared to that in other devices; this is nearly double the conversion observed in the un-doped CQD device.
Since an interesting report from J. Yang et al. showed the photoelectric conversion of CQD-sensitized solar cells beyond sunny days, it prompted us towards low-intensity J–V measurements and characterization of the highest performing device C at various light intensities of 75, 50, 25, and 10 mW cm−2 using appropriate filters, as represented in Fig. 7(a).
A gradual increment was observed in PCE with the decrement in light intensity, as summarized in Table 2. The low light photon-to-electron conversion may be attributed to the absorption of light and the subsequent emission.
Intensity (mW cm−2)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
100
1.60
0.54
64.81
0.56
75
1.27
0.54
65.62
0.60
50
0.91
0.54
65.12
0.64
25
0.70
0.53
64.70
0.96
10
0.36
0.51
65.30
1.20
The chronoamperometry measurements of device A (ESI Fig. S6) and device C were also obtained (represented in Fig. 7(b)) with an ON/OFF mechanical shutter.

In conclusion, we provided a facile route for the preparation of CQDs with various % of nitrogen as the dopant. The introduction of N as the dopant decreased the band gap by reducing the CB of CQDs, which facilitated photocarrier injection in the TiO2 layer that improved the photocurrent of the solar cell device. Using the featured photophysical and electrochemical properties of CQDs afforded 0.92 mA cm−2 with overall PCE of 0.30% and tuning with N doping generated 1.60 mA cm−2 with PCE of 0.56%. The devices were further evaluated with a lower light intensity study, yielding the maximum PCE value reported so far: 1.20%. This study opens a wide range of possibilities for many technologically important applications, especially for lower light/in house power generating devices.


There are no conflicts to declare.


We express our gratefulness to the Head, Applied Chemistry Department, Faculty of Technology & Engineering, The Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda, Vadodara, Gujarat, India for providing the necessary laboratory facilities. The authors would like to present their deep thanks and gratitude to Dr R. J. Choudhary, UGC-DAE Consortium for Scientific Research, Indore for the help in carrying out the work on the Indus-1 synchrotron source. S. S. Soni thanks the Department of Science and Technology, New Delhi for financial support (DST/TM/CERI/C285) for fabrication of devices and characterization.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9se00338j
‡ Authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019