 DOI: 10.1039/C2CP42746J
(Communication)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 13175-13179

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Bing-Xin
Lei
,

Qiu-Ping
Luo
,

Xiao-Yun
Yu
,

Wu-Qiang
Wu
,

Cheng-Yong
Su
 and 

Dai-Bin
Kuang
*

MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinorganic and Synthetic Chemistry, KLGHEI of Environment and Energy Chemistry, State Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Materials and Technologies, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, P. R. China. E-mail: kuangdb@mail.sysu.edu.cn; Fax: +86-20-8411-3015; Tel: +86-20-8411-3015

Received
6th August 2012
, Accepted 6th August 2012
First published on 8th August 2012
A novel hierarchical TiO2 flower consisting of anatase TiO2 nanotubes on a Ti foil substrate has been prepared via a mild hydrothermal reaction of TiO2 nanoparticles/Ti foil. The photovoltaic performance of DSSC based on hierarchical TiO2 flowers/Ti (7.2%) is much higher than that of TiO2 nanoparticle/Ti (6.63%) because of its superior light scattering ability and fast electron transport. Moreover, full flexible DSSC based on the novel hierarchical TiO2 flowers/Ti foil photoelectrode and electrodeposited poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) on indium tin oxide-coated poly(ethylene terephthalate) (ITO-PET) counter electrode shows a significant power conversion efficiency of 6.26%, accompanying a short-circuit current density of 11.96 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage of 761 mV and a fill factor of 0.69.

Since O'Regan and Grätzel reported a photovoltaic performance of 7.1% for a new type of solar cell based on the nanocrystalline titania photoelectrode in 1991, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have attracted enormous academic and industrial interest due to the attractive power conversion efficiency, low cost for material and production. Recently, light weight flexible DSSCs have been of tremendous interest for their wide and potential applications in wearable electronics and mobile electricity (e.g. lap-top computers, mobile phones, watches, etc.). Significant progress has been made in the front-illumination flexible DSSCs using an ITO-PET or an ITO-coated polyethylene naphthalate (ITO-PEN) substrate based photoanode prepared by spray pyrolysis, a press method or a doctor-blade method. However, the plastic substrates have thermal instability at high temperatures (450–550 °C) which are required for sintering TiO2 photoelectrodes of the DSSCs. Low temperature (<150 °C) sintering of the TiO2/plastic substrate results in poor connection between TiO2 particles which may hinder the further improvement of the photovoltaic performance. Hence, in order to overcome the high temperature sintering of the TiO2 photoelectrode/plastic substrate, various metal substrates including Ti, Zn, W and stainless steel are variedly used as flexible substrates for DSSCs.

A TiO2 nanoparticle photoelectrode was found to limit the electron transport because of the electron trapping–detrapping process within the nanoparticles and at the grain boundaries. In contrast, one-dimensional (1D) nanostructures, such as nanorods, nanowires or nanotubes, have shown significant improvement of the electron transport by providing a direct transport path, decreasing the grain boundaries and trapping–detrapping process. Recently, TiO2 nanotube arrays on the Ti foil or polyimide film (Kapton HN) substrate based photoelectrode combined with the Pt/ITO-PET counter electrode have been variedly used for flexible DSSCs showing a power conversion of less than 5.5%, which is mainly attributed to the small surface area resulting from the larger diameter of nanotubes and larger gap between the nanotubes. Hence, it is a strong desire for the development of a novel 1D TiO2/Ti photoelectrode to enhance the photovoltaic performance of flexible DSSCs based on the metal substrate.
In this communication, a hierarchical TiO2 flower consisting of ultrafine anatase TiO2 nanotubes on the Ti foil substrate is prepared via one-step direct hydrothermal treatment of TiO2 nanoparticle/Ti foil (see Scheme 1), which shows a significant photovoltaic performance (7.2%) and is superior than that of TiO2 nanoparticles/Ti (6.63%). Interestingly, the full flexible DSSC based on the hierarchical TiO2 flowers/Ti photoelectrode and low cost PEDOT/ITO-PET counter electrode exhibits a power conversion efficiency of 6.26% under back-side illumination, which is the highest value for the flexible DSSCs based on the 1D TiO2 based photoelectrode and Pt-free counter electrode.

Fig. 1 shows the XRD patterns of the TiO2 nanoparticle (I) and the TiO2 flower (II). All the diffraction peaks of the two samples are consistent with the anatase phase (JCPDS No. 84-1285). The crystal structure of the two samples is further characterized by Raman spectroscopy, as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI), the samples I and II have similar Raman scattering peaks corresponding to typical features of anatase TiO2 crystals. The five peaks are assigned to the Eg (143 cm−1), Eg (196 cm−1), Btg (398 cm−1), B2g (516 cm−1) and Eg (639 cm−1) modes of anatase phase.
A FESEM image (Fig. 2a) and a TEM image (Fig. 2c) of the sample I show that the TiO2 is a single crystalline anatase nanoparticle with a size of 20 nm. The thickness of TiO2 nanoparticles/Ti films is about 15 μm as shown in the cross-sectional SEM image (Fig. 2b). After the hydrothermal reaction of the TiO2 nanoparticle/Ti in alkaline, flower-like materials (sample II) with a size of ca. 3–5 μm are produced (Fig. 2d), which are composed of nanotubes with an inner diameter of ca. 5 nm and outer sizes of ca. 10 nm (HRTEM, Fig. 2f). The lattice fringes of the nanotube are clearly observed, indicating that the nanotube is single crystalline with good crystallinity. From the distance between the adjacent lattice fringes, an interplanar spacing of 3.5 Å matching well with the anatase TiO2 (101) plane can be obtained. Fig. 2e shows that the thickness of the flower film is ∼15 μm which is similar to that of the nanoparticle film (Fig. 2b).
The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the DSSCs based on TiO2 nanoparticle (cell I) and flower (cell II) photoelectrodes (15 μm in thickness) were measured under the AM 1.5 G simulated sunlight with a power density of 100 mW cm−2 (Fig. 3 and Table 1). The hierarchical TiO2 flowers based DSSC (cell II) shows a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 13.45 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 754 mV, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.71 with an energy conversion efficiency (η) of 7.20%. For the TiO2 nanoparticles based cell (cell I), a Jsc of 12.27 mA cm−2, Voc of 761 mV, FF of 0.71 and η of 6.63% are achieved. Evidently, the enhancement of the photovoltaic performance of TiO2 flowers compared to the TiO2 nanoparticle can be mainly attributed to the improvement of the Jsc. The incident monochromatic photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the two DSSCs (the inset of Fig. 3) reveals an enhancement in the range 450–650 nm of TiO2 flower based DSSC compared to the TiO2 nanoparticle based DSSC, which is in good agreement with the increased photocurrent density for the former. However, the dye uptake results (UV-vis absorption) show that the amount of dye adsorbed on the TiO2 flower photoelectrode (15.49 nmol cm−2) is lower than that of the TiO2 nanoparticle (19.44 nmol cm−2). As expressed by the equation: Jsc = qηlhηinjηccI0, where q is the elementary charge, ηlh is the light harvesting efficiency, ηinj is the charge injection efficiency, ηcc is the charge-collection efficiency, and I0 is the light flux, the higher Jsc for TiO2 flowers compared to the TiO2 nanoparticles must be attributed to the superior light scattering ability (enhance ηlh) or faster electron transport (enhance ηcc) assuming similar ηinj for them because of the same N719 dye adsorbed on the TiO2 semiconductor material. UV-vis diffused reflectance spectra (Fig. S2, ESI) show that the reflectance of the TiO2 flower is higher than that of the TiO2 nanoparticle at the wavelength range from 400 nm to 750 nm, confirming that the former has a higher light scattering ability than the latter, which can contribute to the light harvesting efficiency (ηlh) and hence to the Jsc.

J
sc/mA cm−2

V
oc/mV

η/%
FF
Cell I
12.27
761
6.63
0.71
Cell II
13.45
754
7.20
0.71
Cell III
11.96
761
6.26
0.69
Intensity-modulated photocurrent and photovoltage spectroscopy (IMPS and IMVS) measurements were further used to gain insight into the superior performance of the TiO2 flowers and nanoparticles based DSSCs. Fig. S3 (ESI) shows the transport (τd) and recombination time (τr) of the two DSSCs (cells I and II) as a function of the incident light intensity, which derived from IMPS and IMVS respectively. Clearly, transport time (Fig. S3a, ESI) decreases with increasing light intensity and a smaller τc for TiO2 flowers based DSSC compared to that of the TiO2 nanoparticles, which can be ascribed to the shorter electron transport pathway for the former due to its 1D building unit (nanotube). Hence, the results of diffuse spectra and IMPS show that the hierarchical TiO2 flower photoelectrode has larger light scattering ability and faster electron transport rate compared to the TiO2 nanoparticle, which lead to the higher photocurrent density and photovoltaic performance for the former. The electron lifetime derived from the IMVS measurements of the two DSSCs is shown in Fig. S3b (ESI). It shows that τr for both DSSCs are comparable, which explains that the two cells have similar Voc observed from the J–V measurement.
Given that platinum is an expensive (US $50 g−1) and less abundant metal (37 p.p.b.), the development of cost-effective counter electrodes is paramount for I3− reduction. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) is of special interest due to its high conductivity, electrochemical reversibility, transparency, stability, and high catalytic activity. Since back-side irradiation is required for flexible DSSCs based on the nanocrystalline TiO2 films/Ti foil photoanode, the transparency of the counter electrode is an important determinant of the photovoltaic performance. The present PEDOT on ITO-PET was synthesized by electrodeposition. And the light transmission spectra of two counter electrodes are given in Fig. S4a (ESI), which show that the transmittance of the PEDOT/ITO-PET is over or close to 80% within the range of 450–800 nm. The photographs (Fig. S4b, ESI) of Pt/FTO-glass (FTO: fluorine-doped tin oxide) and PEDOT/ITO-PET show that the colour and transparency do not have obvious variation. These results indicate that PEDOT/ITO-PET is suitable for back-side illumination.
Compared with the rigid one, full flexible DSSCs have outstanding properties such as lower thickness, light weight, and lower cost, which can be potentially applied to mobile or wearable devices. Here, the hierarchical TiO2 flower/Ti is used as a photoelectrode and the electrodeposited PEDOT on the ITO-PET substrate is used as a counter electrode to assemble full flexible DSSCs (cell III). The J–V curve and photovoltaic parameters (Jsc, Voc, η and FF) of such a flexible DSSC device (cell III) are shown in Fig. 3 and summarized in Table 1, respectively. For the full flexible DSSC with the PEDOT/ITO-PET counter electrode, the values of Jsc, Voc, FF and η were 11.96 mA cm−2, 761 mV, 0.69 and 6.26%, respectively. The result shows that the Jsc and η of the DSSC based on the PEDOT/ITO-PET counter electrode are slightly lower than those of the Pt/FTO-glass counter electrode. The lower Jsc for the PEDOT/ITO-PET counter electrode compared to that of Pt/FTO-glass can be mainly ascribed to the lower transmittance of the former (Fig. S4a, ESI). Fig. S4a (ESI) shows that the transmittance of PEDOT/ITO-PET is lower than that of Pt/FTO-glass in the range of 300–800 nm, which reduces the incident light density and leads to the lower Jsc. The inferior Jsc for the flexible DSSC was further confirmed by the IPCE spectrum (the inset in Fig. 3).
Cyclic voltammetry (CV) is an efficient method for analyzing the catalytic mechanism that occurs in an electrochemical system. CV was carried out in an acetonitrile solution comprising 5 mM LiI, 0.25 mM I2 and 0.1 M tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate with a Zennium electrochemical workstation (ZAHNER). In the case of Pt/FTO-glass, a typical curve with two pairs of redox peaks was obtained (Fig. 4a).
The left redox peaks correspond to eqn (1) and the right ones correspond to eqn (2).
3I− ↔ I3− + 2e−
(1)
2I3− ↔ 3I2 + 2e−
(2)
On the other hand, the reduction peak current density of the PEDOT/ITO-PET was slightly greater than that of the Pt/FTO-glass, which was caused by high active surface area of PEDOT/ITO-PET.
 The CV result shows that the PEDOT/ITO-PET is more electrochemically active, which indicates a much faster reaction rate on PEDOT. Hence, PEDOT is expected to replace the expensive Pt as a promising counter electrode catalyst.

Impedance spectroscopy (EIS) has been regarded as a powerful technique to characterize the transport and recombination in DSSCs. Generally, three characteristics semicircles can be obtained from EIS spectra in the frequency range between 106 Hz and 10−2 Hz. The high-frequency semicircle corresponds to the charge-transfer resistance at the interface of the counter electrode and the electrolyte (Rct1). The middle frequency semicircle is related to electron transfer and recombination at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interfaces (Rct2). The low-frequency semicircle corresponds to Nernst diffusion of I−/I3− within the electrolyte (Zw).Fig. 4b shows the impedance spectra of TiO2 flowers based DSSCs associated with Pt/FTO-glass and PEDOT/ITO-PET counter electrodes. The obtained spectra were fitted with Z-View software in terms of the equivalent circuit shown in the inset of Fig. 4b. The EIS results are summarized in Table 2. From the Nyquist plot (Fig. 4b) and Table 2, DSSCs fabricated with Pt/FTO-glass and PEDOT/ITO-PET had different series resistance (Rs) values. The series resistance (Rs, 29.79 ohm) of PEDOT/ITO-PET based DSSC is larger than that of Pt/FTO-glass (15.09 ohm) which leads to lower FF for the former. The charge transfer resistance (Rct1) of PEDOT/ITO-PET (4.675 ohm) is similar to Pt/FTO-glass (4.777 ohm). Moreover, a similar recombination resistance (Rct2) at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte implies that the two DSSCs have a similar Voc.
Cathode

R
s/ohm

R
ct1/ohm

R
ct2/ohm
Pt/FTO-glass
15.09
4.777
18.12
PEDOT/ITO-PET
29.79
4.675
18.46

In summary, novel hierarchical TiO2 flowers consisting of anatase TiO2 nanotubes have been successfully prepared via a facile hydrothermal process of TiO2 nanoparticles/Ti foil. DSSC based on the TiO2 flowers/Ti photoelectrode shows a significant photovoltaic performance of 7.2%, which is much higher than that of TiO2 nanoparticles/Ti (6.63%). The enhancement of Jsc and η can be attributed to the superior light scattering ability and faster electron transport for the TiO2 flowers based DSSC which is confirmed by the UV-vis diffuse spectra and IMPS. Furthermore, full flexible DSSC based on the TiO2 flowers/Ti photoelectrode and electrodeposited PEDOT/ITO-PET counter electrode shows an exciting photovoltaic performance of 6.26%, which is the highest for the nanotube photoanode and Pt-free counter electrode based full flexible DSSC. The present work provides a facile method for the fabrication of hierarchical TiO2 flowers and potential applications in low-cost flexible DSSCs or QDSSCs.


Synthesis of anatase TiO2 nanocrystalline powder: the anatase TiO2 nanoparticle powder was prepared using the synthesis procedure similar to that of the previous report. The precursor solution containing 10 mL Ti(OBu)4 and 20 mL ethanol was magnetically stirred for 10 min at room temperature. Then, the precursor solution was added dropwise to a solution of 18 mL of acetic acid and 50 mL of deionized water under vigorous stirring for 1 h at room temperature. The mixture solution was transferred to a Teflon-lined stainless-steel autoclave and kept at 200 °C for 12 h, and then allowed to cool to room temperature naturally. Finally, the precipitate was filtered from the solution, washed with deionized water and ethanol several times to remove impurities, and dried in air at 50 °C for 6 h.

The synthesized TiO2 nanocrystalline powder (1.0 g) was ground for 40 min in the mixture of ethanol (8.0 mL), acetic acid (0.2 mL), terpineol (3.0 g) and ethyl cellulose (0.5 g) to form slurry, and then the slurry was sonicated for 5 min in an ultrasonic bath and finally form a viscous white TiO2 paste.
The TiO2 photoelectrodes (about 15 μm in thickness) were prepared via screen-printing of the above TiO2 paste on the Ti foil substrate (called TiO2 nanoparticles/Ti electrode). TiO2 films were heated under an air flow at 500 °C for 30 min.
Synthesis of TiO2 flowers consisting of TiO2 nanotubes: briefly, TiO2 nanoparticles/Ti films were immersed in 40 mL of 5 M NaOH aqueous solution and placed into a Teflon-lined autoclave. The autoclave was heated to and maintained at 120 °C for 6 h, and then allowed to cool to room temperature naturally. TiO2/Ti films were washed thoroughly with distilled water, and treated in 0.1 M HCl aqueous solution. After washing and air-drying process, TiO2 flowers were heat treated in air at 500 °C for 2 h, and a final product was obtained.
Preparation of the counter electrode: the Pt-coated FTO as a CE was prepared by dropping H2PtCl6 (5 mM) solution on the FTO glass followed by heating at 400 °C for 15 min in air.
PEDOT CE was prepared by an electrochemical deposition approach modified from the previous literature. In a typical experimental procedure, the electrodeposition of PEDOT was performed in a two-electrode electrochemical cell with the ITO-PET substrate as the cathode, a gauze platinum as the counter electrode, in an acetonitrile solution containing 0.1 M EDOT, 0.1 M lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)amide. The films were grown at constant current density (1.25 mA cm−2) for 3 s.
The detailed fabrication and characterization of DSSCs are demonstrated in ESI.

The authors acknowledge financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (20873183, U0934003), the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University (NCET-11-0533), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, and the Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education (20100171110014).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Raman spectrum, UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra, IMPS and IMVS measurements, UV-vis curves. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cp42746j
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012