 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA09837E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2942-2951


Pengjie
Chao
,

Huan
Wang
,

Daize
Mo
,

Hong
Meng
,

Wei
Chen
* and 

Feng
He
*

Department of Chemistry, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, 518055, P. R. China. E-mail: hef@sustc.edu.cn

Materials Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory, 9700 Cass Avenue, Lemont, Illinois 60439, USA. E-mail: wchen@anl.gov

Institute for Molecular Engineering, The University of Chicago, 5640 South Ellis Avenue, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA

School of Advanced Materials, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen 518055, China

Received
8th November 2017
, Accepted 1st December 2017
First published on 18th December 2017
Two chlorinated medium-band-gap polymer donors with fully two-dimensional (2D) conjugated thiophene side chains, named 2D-PBTCl and 2D-PBTCl2, have been designed and successfully synthesized for application in non-fullerene solar cells to elevate the open-circuit voltage and optimize the power conversion efficiency (PCE). Chlorine atoms were directly attached to the backbones of the polymers, which induced non-ignorable steric hindrance because of the relatively large size of chlorine. To overcome this influence, a structural design of extended conjugated thiophene units was further introduced to increase the π–π interactions. In this way, two new chlorinated D–A polymers were developed that combined two-dimensional thiophene conjugated side chains for enhanced intermolecular interactions with chlorine atoms for an elevated open-circuit voltage in photovoltaic devices. As a result of chlorination, which substantially changed the charge distribution along the polymer backbone through its electron-withdrawing nature and resonance effect, the two polymers exhibited deep-lying HOMO levels and blueshifted absorbances for more complementary light absorption with a non-fullerene acceptor, such as ITIC. By taking advantage of the synergistic chlorination of the backbone and the introduction of conjugated thiophene side chains, the optimized bulk heterojunction device based on 2D-PBTCl and ITIC showed a PCE of 8.81% compared to the PCE of PTB7-Th of 6.91%, which corresponds to an approximately 28% improvement in solar energy conversion. These results demonstrated that the combination of chlorination and the design of fully 2D conjugated side chains is a promising strategy for fine-tuning the energy levels and film morphologies of conjugated polymers.

Bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) polymer solar cells (PSCs) have attracted considerable interest in the last decade owing to their advantages and potential for the fabrication of lightweight and efficient devices from large, flexible and semitransparent substrates. Recently, substantial progress has been made, and so far, the PCEs of single BHJ PSCs based on fullerene derivatives (PC61BM or PC71BM) have reached 11.7%, and the PCEs of those based on fullerene-free solar cells have reached 13.8% through the use of novel conjugated polymers and non-fullerene acceptors as well as novel fabrication techniques. According to the equation PCE = Jsc × Voc × FF/Pin, a direct strategy for improving PCEs is to simultaneously improve the open-circuit voltage (Voc), the short-circuit current (Jsc), and the fill factor (FF). For example, the Voc of BHJ PSCs can be improved by lowering the intrinsic highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of the donor. In the last few years, to maximize the PCE, many efforts toward improving the Voc of PSCs by lowering the HOMO level of the donor polymer have been made by introducing fluorine atoms into the donor–acceptor (D–A) backbone polymer, yielding the typical polymer PTB7-Th (Scheme 1) with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 8.2% when PC71BM is utilized as an acceptor. From this perspective, the introduction of halogen atoms would be a very efficient way of adjusting the molecular energy levels and improving the PCE to high values for commercial applications. Among the halogen substituents, after F, chlorine is the second-most electrophilic candidate with free 3d molecular orbitals. Recent reports demonstrated that chlorinated polymers with reduced backbone planarity showed appropriate phase separation from the acceptor and comparable or better electron mobility and ambient stability than their fluorinated counterparts. Our previous studies on polymer solar cells illustrated that polymer backbones containing chlorine atoms possess comparable or even deeper HOMO levels because of the steric hindrance caused by the larger chlorine atom. Moreover, the intermolecular interactions of chlorine-substituted polymers will be partly restrained in both the pristine and blend films, therefore resulting in changes in the band gap and a blueshift in the absorption. Consequently, the blueshift will strengthen the absorption of sunlight by the blend film through the complementary absorptions of the chlorine-substituted polymer and the most popular non-fullerene acceptor, ITIC, eventually boosting the PCE to a desired value. For example, chlorinated PBTCl (Scheme 1), in which the F in PTB7-Th was replaced with Cl (Scheme 1), showed an approximately 13% enhancement in the PCE with ITIC compared with its fluorine analogues from our recent study. In this case, the chlorine atoms were directly attached to the backbone of the thieno[3,4-b]thiophene-based polymer, which induced non-ignorable steric hindrance to decrease the intermolecular interactions because of the relatively large size of the chlorine atoms. To minimize the influence of the relatively large chlorine atoms, a structural design strategy of extended conjugated substituted units, thiophene in this case, has been further explored to increase the π–π interactions through the extended π-conjugated side chains. In this way, we developed two new chlorinated D–A polymers, 2D-PBTCl and 2D-PBTCl2 (Scheme 1), which combined two-dimensional conjugated thiophene side chains on thieno[3,4-b]thiophene units for enhanced intermolecular interactions and chlorination of the TT backbone for the enhancement of Voc in photovoltaic devices. Accordingly, by introducing chlorine atoms into the backbone of the D–A polymers, the UV-vis absorption spectrum indicated an obvious blueshift both in solution and for the film of those polymers, leading to substantially more complementary absorption with low-band-gap acceptors, such as ITIC. The non-fullerene polymer solar cells of 2D-PBTCl:ITIC showed a high PCE of 8.81% with a Voc of 0.91 V, a Jsc of 15.79 mA cm−2 and an FF of 61.32%. Compared to its fluorinated model compound, PTB7-Th, the PCE of this two-dimensional chlorinated polymer reported here showed an approximately 28% improvement after chlorination and the formation of a 2D structural design, which mainly contributed to the enhanced Voc through the electron-withdrawing ability of the chlorine atoms and the optimized current density from the two-dimensional conjugated side chains. These results indicate that the introduction of chlorine atoms into the backbone of the polymer donors increases the Voc, and the two-dimensional conjugated side chains play a synergistic role by optimizing the film morphology with extra π–π interactions. Combined with these two major considerations, a strategy for chlorinating the backbones of fully two-dimensional polymer donors would be a promising approach for establishing complementary sunlight absorption with a deep HOMO energy level and optimized film morphology for application in efficient non-fullerene organic solar cells.


Compounds 2 and 3 and monomer M3 shown in Scheme 2a were synthesized according to the previously reported methods in high yields (ESI). In addition, as described in Scheme 2a, monomers M1 and M2 were synthesized through similar procedures by a Stille-coupling reaction between compound 1 and compound 2 or 3 with toluene/N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) (v/v = 5/1) as the solvent and Pd(PPh3)4 as the catalyst. Then, bromination by N-bromosuccinimide (NBS) was performed in DMF after oxidation with m-chloroperbenzoic acid (m-CPBA) in dichloromethane at −78 °C. Polymers PBTCl and PTB7-Th were synthesized according to previous reports. The two polymers 2D-PBTCl and 2D-PBTCl2 were synthesized through Stille-coupling reactions under similar conditions as those shown in Scheme 2b. The monomers and polymers were thoroughly characterized by 1H-NMR and 13C-NMR spectroscopies and high-resolution mass spectrometry (HRMS). The molecular weights and polydispersity indexes (PDIs) were evaluated through high temperature gel-permeation chromatography (GPC) at 150 °C using 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene as the eluent. From the GPC measurements, the number average molecular weights were approximately 41.37 kDa and 41.86 kDa for 2D-PBTCl and 2D-PBTCl2, respectively. The PDIs of the two polymers were 1.59 (2D-PBTCl) and 1.91 (2D-PBTCl2). The two polymers showed excellent thermal stability, having onset temperatures with 5% weight-loss of 361 °C and 385 °C for 2D-PBTCl and 2D-PBTCl2, respectively, both exceeding 350 °C, as shown in Fig. S1, indicating that both 2D-PBTCl and 2D-PBTCl2 had good thermal stability for application in PSCs.


The UV-vis absorption spectra of the polymers and ITIC in solution (10−5 M) and as thin films are depicted in Fig. 1a and b, respectively, and the specific characteristics of the polymer absorption are summarized in Table 1. As shown in Fig. 1a, all polymers in chlorobenzene solvent displayed strong absorptions in the 300–650 nm region, with peaks at 590 nm and 629 nm for 2D-PBTCl and 2D-PBTCl2, respectively. The strong absorption in the 300–400 nm region could be attributed to the contribution of the extended conjugated thiophene side chains on the TT backbone. As shown in Fig. 1b, the film of polymer 2D-PBTCl2 exhibited an approximately 60 nm redshift compared with that in solution, whereas the 2D-PBTCl film showed only a slight shift from its solution state, in which the main absorption peaks were maintained at nearly the same position in both the film and solution states. Interestingly, compared to the absorptions of PTB7-Th and ITIC in films (Fig. 1b, both peaks are 704 nm and 709 nm), the absorption spectra of the two new polymers in thin films both exhibited an evident blueshift of at least 60 nm. As illustrated in Fig. 1b, the main absorption of ITIC was in the range of 600–800 nm, which effectively complemented the absorption spectra of 2D-PBTCl and 2D-PBTCl2 with blue-shifted absorptions, resulting in a broad absorption in the visible range for more efficient solar conversion.

Polymer
Solution
Film
HOMO (eV)
LUMO (eV)

λ
max (nm)

λ
onset (nm)

λ
max (nm)

λ
onset (nm)

E
optg (eV)

2D-PBTCl

625
693
627
719
1.72
−5.45
−3.60

2D-PBTCl2

583
709
642
745
1.66
−5.43
−3.63
The optical band-gaps of 2D-PBTCl and 2D-PBTCl2 estimated from the film absorption edges were 1.72 and 1.66 eV, respectively (Table 1). Cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements were further used to evaluate the energy levels of the polymers, and as shown in Fig. 1c and d, the HOMO energies of 2D-PBTCl and 2D-PBTCl2 determined from their onset oxidation potentials were similar, with values of −5.45 and −5.43 eV, respectively. The electrochemical band-gaps were approximately 1.85 and 1.80 eV, which showed the same trend as that in the optical band-gap calculation. In both cases, the two-chlorine-substituted 2D-PBTCl2 showed a smaller band-gap than the one-chlorine-substituted 2D-PBTCl. The introduction of one more chlorine atom in a head-to-head connecting manner resulted in better planarity between the thiophene and TT units because of Cl–S interactions and simultaneously enhanced the π–π intermolecular interactions in the polymer films, thereby decreasing the band-gap. Furthermore, considering the deeper-lying HOMO levels of 2D-PBTCl and 2D-PBTCl2 compared with PTB7-Th, a larger Voc would be obtained when these polymers were blended with non-fullerene acceptors. As discussed above, based on the more complementary absorption and optimized HOMO levels obtained after the introduction of chlorine and the structural design of extended conjugated side chains, the two developed polymers are very promising for enhancing the solar conversion efficiency of the PTB7 family of materials, especially in non-fullerene organic solar cells.
Photoluminescence (PL) quenching experiments were carried out to investigate if there was efficient exciton dissociation and charge transfer in the polymer donor/ITIC blends. Fig. 2 displays the PL spectra of 2D-PBTCl, 2D-PBTCl (excited at 620 nm) and ITIC films (excited at 700 nm) as well as the blend films of 2D-PBTCl:ITIC (1:1, w/w) and 2D-PBTCl2:ITIC (1:1, w/w) (excited at 620 nm and 700 nm, respectively). For both the 2D-PBTCl:ITIC and 2D-PBTCl2:ITIC blends, the PL emissions (excited at 620 nm) of 2D-PBTCl and 2D-PBTCl2 were mostly quenched by blending with ITIC, indicating efficient electron transfer from 2D-PBTCl or 2D-PBTCl2 to the ITIC acceptor. At the same time, for both the 2D-PBTCl:ITIC and 2D-PBTCl2:ITIC blends, the broad PL emission peak (excited at 700 nm) of ITIC in the range of 700–1100 nm was also completely quenched in the blend films, which provided obvious evidence that highly efficient hole transfer and separation could easily occur with a comparable HOMO energy level for application in non-fullerene PSCs.

To evaluate the photovoltaic performance, inverted non-fullerene solar cells were fabricated with the device architecture of ITO/ZnO/polymer:ITIC/MoO3/Ag, where ITO is indium tin oxide and Ag was used as the cathode. For the devices based on the two polymers blended with the ITIC acceptor material, different D/A weight ratios were used to investigate the photovoltaic performance. Moreover, to make sure that the optimized film morphology was achieved by the blends in the active layer, the effect of adding an additive, such as 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO), was also studied systematically. It was noted that the blend film with a D/A weight ratio of 1:1 and 0.25% DIO gave the best performance during the device screening. The J–V curves and the corresponding data for the PSC devices are provided in Fig. 3a and Table 2. More detailed data of the optimized device performance are summarized in Tables S1 and S2 (ESI), and the corresponding current density–voltage (J–V) curves are displayed in Fig. S2a and b (ESI). According to our previous study, the device based on PBTCl:ITIC showed a PCE of 7.57%, with a Voc of 0.91 V. Evidently, when introducing Cl atoms to replace F atoms, the photovoltaic performance of the device based on PBTCl:ITIC was significantly improved, as indicated by an especially high Voc. However, the chlorine atoms directly attached to the backbone of the conjugated D–A polymer induce relatively strong steric hindrance, which minimizes the enhancement of the current density as well. For this reason, the introduction of extra conjugated thiophene units could help to improve the molecular planarity and intermolecular interactions. Compared to the parent polymer, PTB7-Th, with a PCE of 6.91% as well as the chlorinated PBTCl polymer mentioned above, the 2D-PBTCl-based device showed the best PCE of 8.81%, with a Voc of 0.91 V, a higher Jsc of 15.79 mA cm−2 and an improved FF of 61.32%. It was clearly observed that the introduction of a conjugated thiophene unit into chlorinated TT further enhanced the crucial parameters Jsc and FF while leaving Voc unchanged, which could be ascribed to the better complementary absorption with ITIC and the improved morphology of the blend, which provided more efficient charge transport. Meanwhile, a PCE of 7.38% with a Voc of 0.87 V, a Jsc of 14.52 mA cm−2 and an FF of 58.43% were obtained for polymer 2D-PBTCl2, which might result from the higher HOMO energy level with a slightly lower Voc and the morphology change caused by the introduction of multiple chlorine atoms. In comparison with the corresponding fluorinated counterpart, PTB7-Th, the chlorine- and 2D-TT-containing polymers, 2D-PBTCl and 2D-PBTCl2, both showed a much higher PCE. In addition, significant simultaneous improvements in the Voc, Jsc and FF values occurred in the 2D-PBTCl-based devices, which could be attributed to the synergistic effects of single chlorination and the extended conjugated side chains, resulting in a blueshifted absorption, a lower HOMO level, an optimized morphology, and an excellent charge transport ability for efficient photovoltaic conversion.

Polymer
Thickness (nm)

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
(PCE)max (%)
PCEave (%)

a The average PCE was obtained from at least 25 devices.


2D-PBTCl

100
0.91
15.79
61.32
8.81
8.67

2D-PBTCl2

90
0.87
14.52
58.43
7.38
7.17

PTB7-Th

90
0.82
14.76
57.09
6.91
6.80
To verify the accuracy of the PCE measurements, the corresponding external quantum efficiency (EQE) plots of the devices were measured and are shown in Fig. 3b. The non-fullerene polymer solar cells based on the combination of the donor polymers and ITIC yielded broad EQE spectra from 300 nm to 800 nm, in agreement with the corresponding absorption spectra of the polymers. Moreover, the EQE values of the 2D-PBTCl and 2D-PBTCl2 polymers between 350 and 500 nm are much higher than that of PTB7-Th, and the EQE values for both polymers in the wavelength range of 530 to 720 nm were observed to be higher than 60%; the maximum values for the non-fullerene PSCs based on 2D-PBTCl and 2D-PBTCl2 were 74% and 70%, respectively. These results suggested that efficient photon harvesting and charge collection occurred in both blend films. The Jsc values calculated from the EQE spectra were 15.03 mA cm−2 and 14.01 mA cm−2 for the 2D-PBTCl- and 2D-PBTCl2-based devices, respectively, which agreed with the Jsc values obtained from the J–V curves to within 5%.

The charge-carrier mobility is another important factor for achieving highly efficient PSC devices. The hole mobilities of the blend films with the hole-only device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/polymer:ITIC/MoO3/Ag were measured through the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) method. As shown in Fig. S3 (ESI), the hole mobilities were calculated to be 4.9 × 10−4 and 1.1 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the polymers 2D-PBTCl and 2D-PBTCl2, respectively. 2D-PBTCl possessed a relatively higher hole mobility compared with the two-chlorine-substituted 2D-PBTCl2, which could be attributed to the fact that single-chlorine substitution is enough to maintain the planarity between the thiophene side chains and the TT units through Cl–S interactions for better intermolecular interactions. Although the two chlorine atoms would further help to enhance the planarity mentioned above, they obviously minimized the interactions between the polymer chains, slightly decreasing the carrier mobility. These SCLC results were roughly consistent with the PCE data of the polymers, where a higher μhole value was beneficial for higher Jsc and FF values.

It's well known that the performance of PSCs is closely related to the blend film morphology, and to further obtain insight into the surface microstructure the morphological properties of the BHJ active layer were investigated using atomic force microscopy (AFM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). As displayed in Fig. 4a and b, the blend films exhibited a smooth surface with a root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of 2.09 and 0.68 nm for 2D-PBTCl:ITIC and 2D-PBTCl2:ITIC, respectively, indicating good miscibility of the donor and acceptor components. Fig. 4c and d show the typical phase images of blend films prepared under the same conditions as those in the device fabrication. The real space image of the phase separated morphology of the polymer:ITIC blends could be obtained through TEM. As observed in Fig. 5a, the optimized blend film of 2D-PBTCl:ITIC exhibited nanoscale phase separation with the appropriate feature size, which was favorable for efficient charge separation and transport, beneficial to BHJ polymer solar cells. The microstructure of the 2D-PBTCl2:ITIC (Fig. 5b) blend film showed relatively too small phase separation to further improve the performance of the 2D-PBTCl2:ITIC based device. Therefore, the proper morphology of the 2D-PBTCl:ITIC film might be advantageous for the bicontinuous and interpenetrating networks required for efficient charge separation and transport, and as a result, the high Jsc and FF were obtained.
To comprehensively understand the excellent device performance of the polymer:ITIC blend films, we used the grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) method to investigate the microstructures and aggregation behavior of the blend thin films. All the polymer films were prepared by spin-coating from chlorobenzene solutions under the same conditions as those used for the device fabrication (10 mg mL−1). The GIWAXS images and the corresponding out-of-plane (OOP, Fig. 6d) and in-plane (IP, Fig. 6e) line-cuts of the polymer:ITIC blends with 0.25% DIO are shown in Fig. 6. As illustrated in Fig. 6a and b, strong diffraction peaks from the blend films were obviously observed in the out-of-plane direction, indicating a strong preference for the face-on orientation in the blend films. Predominantly face-on ordering is commonly associated with higher device performance. Moreover, the values of qz were 1.71, 1.70 and 1.66 Å−1, so the corresponding “π–π stacking” distances were 3.7, 3.7 and 3.8 Å for the polymers 2D-PBTCl, 2D-PBTCl2 and PTB7-Th, respectively. Obviously, according to the “π–π stacking” distance, the intermolecular packing of 2D-PBTCl and 2D-PBTCl2 was more compact than that of PTB7-Th, which could be attributed to the stronger π–π intermolecular interactions resulting from the introduction of extended conjugated thienyl units into the TT group. Furthermore, the multiple large chlorine atoms in the polymer could weaken the π–π stacking interactions in the OOP direction, whereas the extended conjugated thienyl units could partially enhance the π–π overlap and thereby strengthen the π–π stacking effect. Consequently, the convenient introduction of chlorine atoms, such as in the 2D-PBTCl polymer described here, would not distort the lamellar distance of the blend films. As a result, the charge carrier transport could be improved, and high Jsc and FF values could be obtained for 2D-PBTCl, which were consistent with the former device performance.

In conclusion, we have designed and synthesized two medium-band-gap conjugated polymers, 2D-PBTCl and 2D-PBTCl2, composed of a chlorine-substituted TT backbone and conjugated thiophene side chains for photovoltaic applications. The chlorine atoms were directly attached to the backbones of the polymers to induce a large change in the molecular energy levels, and in particular, to realize deep-lying HOMO levels. To overcome the steric hindrance caused by the chlorine atoms introduced into the backbone, extended conjugated thiophene units were further connected to the TT units to create stronger π–π interactions. The two chlorinated polymers with extended conjugated side chains exhibited deep-lying HOMO levels and blue-shifted absorbances, which resulted in more complementary light absorption with a low-band-gap non-fullerene acceptor and an obviously elevated Voc in the fabricated devices. The optimized 2D-PBTCl:ITIC device showed an efficiency of up to 8.81%, which was an approximately 28% improvement compared to that of the parent PTB7-Th-based device. Through this method, the photovoltaic performance of the polymers was greatly improved by the synergistic effects of the chlorinated backbone and the extended conjugated thiophene side chains, which indicated that the conjugated 2D structural modification with appropriate chlorine atom replacement could provide a new avenue for designing prospective donor materials for application in high-performance non-fullerene polymer solar cells with fine-tuned energy levels through chlorination and an improved film morphology through extended conjugation.


The authors declare no competing financial interest.


The authors acknowledge financial support from SUSTech, the Recruitment Program of Global Youth Experts of China, the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51773087, 21733005), the Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province (2016A030313637) and the Shenzhen Peacock Program (KQTD20140630110339343). W. C. gratefully acknowledges financial support from the US Department of Energy, Office of Science, Materials Science and Engineering Division.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta09837e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018