 DOI: 10.1039/D0TC04624H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 17211-17221


Chenyang
Wang
,

Yongjin
Long
,

Xiaohui
Liu
*,

Shiqiang
Fu
,

Jiahao
Wang
,

Jing
Zhang
,

Ziyang
Hu
 and 

Yuejin
Zhu
*

Department of Microelectronic Science and Engineering, School of Physical Science and Technology, Ningbo Collaborative Innovation Center of Nonlinear Calamity System of Ocean and Atmosphere, Ningbo University, Ningbo, 315211, China. E-mail: liuxiaohui@nbu.edu.cn; zhuyuejin@nbu.edu.cn

School of Information Engineering, College of Science and Technology, Ningbo University, Ningbo, 315300, China

Received
28th September 2020
, Accepted 9th November 2020
First published on 10th November 2020
Carbon-based all-inorganic cesium lead bromide (CsPbBr3) halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted tremendous attention owing to their low cost, simplified preparation, and outstanding stability even under harsh conditions. However, the CsPbBr3 perovskite always suffers from an undesirable crystallization and film morphology with incomplete coverage and numerous grain boundaries. Herein, a novel dual promotion strategy combining interface modification with ion doping is proposed to achieve highly efficient and stable carbon-based planar CsPbBr3 PSCs. A thin CsBr modified layer was first inserted between the compact TiO2 (c-TiO2) and PbBr2 layers, wherein the crystallization of PbBr2 can be enhanced and then assist the growth of perovskite grains can be provided, so that CsPbBr3 films can reduce pinhole generation and accelerate carrier extraction, and decrease the hysteresis effect. Then an appropriate cobalt (Co2+) ion is doped into the CsPbBr3 film, which not only increases the grain size with decreasing grain boundary, but also ameliorates the energy level and recombination. Consequently, the champion power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the CsPbBr3 PSCs reaches up to 8.67% with an increment of about 30%. Moreover, the best-performing PSC without encapsulation also displays excellent humidity and thermal stability, maintaining above 98% of its initial PCE in an air atmosphere after 100 days, and over 95% under heat treatment at 85 °C after 600 hours, respectively. This study provides a promising route to boost the performance of all-inorganic perovskite solar cells.

Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have exhibited unprecedented development and have been widely recognized as promising next-generation photovoltaic technology due to their outstanding photoelectric properties, low-cost processing techniques, and abundant raw materials. To date, their certified power conversion efficiency (PCE) has exceeded 25%. However, high-efficiency PSCs are always fabricated with organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites as active absorber materials, and their long-term stability is seriously limited by the volatility of organic components (MA+, FA+, etc.), especially under the evaluated environment or illuminated conditions. In comparison, substituting organic cations with inorganic cesium ions (Cs+) to form all-inorganic cesium lead halide (CsPbX3) PSCs is an effective approach to address the stability issues. In particular, compared to the iodine-containing halides including CsPbI3, CsPbI2Br, and CsPbIBr2, the full-brominated CsPbBr3 perovskite presents superior moisture and thermal tolerances even under harsh conditions, making it the ideal light-harvesting absorber for stable all-inorganic PSCs. Also, planar all-inorganic CsPbBr3 PSCs with a typical configuration of FTO/c-TiO2/CsPbBr3/carbon free of precious hole transporting materials (HTMs) and noble metal electrodes have attracted extensive attention due to their cost-effective and simplified fabrication process. However, the PCE outputs of typical CsPbBr3 PSCs are generally low, mainly originating from the intrinsic narrow light absorbance ranges, and inferior film quality with undesirable crystallization and morphology, which cause severe charge recombination at interfaces and within the perovskite film by the defect states.

A variety of strategies have been developed to prepare high quality CsPbBr3 films and enhance the photovoltaic performance. It is well known that uniform and pinhole-free perovskite films with large grain size and few grain boundaries are prerequisites for obtaining high efficiency PSCs. Unfortunately, the poor solubility of CsBr makes it difficult to fabricate CsPbBr3 films via a one-step deposition solution route. Teng et al. reported a face-down liquid-space-restricted deposition to inhibit the decomposition and fabricate high-quality CsPbBr3 films to obtain a PCE of 5.86%. Tang and co-workers created a multistep spinning method to prepare high-purity CsPbBr3 films by adjusting the number of deposition cycles of CsBr solution. With this technique, more than 10% PCE of the mesoscopic PSCs can be obtained. It is worth mentioning that Tang and co-workers demonstrated a WS2/CsPbBr3 van der Waals heterostructure to release interfacial tensile strain and to maximize the photovoltaic performances of all-inorganic CsPbBr3 PSCs, improving the efficiency up to 10.65% with an ultrahigh Voc of up to 1.70 V. Similarly, in another of their studies, they used a CuInS2/ZnS QD layer as a hole-conductor and a fluorescent carbon film as a cathode, balancing the surface dipole induced charge coulomb repulsive force and quantum tunneling distance obtaining a champion efficiency as high as 10.85%. In addition, the all-inorganic CsPbBr3 PSC with a device structure of FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/CsPbBr3/Cu(Cr,M)O2/carbon achieves an efficiency up to 10.18% and it increases to 10.79% by doping Sm3+ ions into perovskite halide, which is much higher than 7.39% for the hole-free device. Liu et al. adopted a modified multistep spin-coating strategy to fabricate CsPbBr3 films, wherein the CsBr solution is further coating atop the perovskite films. It can be found that most of the studies are focused on the CsBr deposition to improve the perovskite film quality, while some attention was paid to explore the crystallization behavior of the PbBr2 layer. Recently, a novel anti-solvent-washing method for the PbBr2 film was utilized to prepare high quality CsPbBr3 films, and it demonstrated that the interface modification possesses a critical influence on the nucleation and growth of PbBr2 crystals, thus further regulating the morphology of the upper CsPbBr3 layer, indicating the huge significance of paying more attention to the film quality of the PbBr2 framework. Tang and co-workers by carefully adjusting the PbBr2 crystallization temperature, effectively pre-expanded the PbBr2 films with a great deal of holes for the effective diffusion of the CsBr precursor and complete conversion into CsPbBr3. By further interfacial modification with N-CQDs to improve hole extraction, the all-inorganic CsPbBr3 PSC achieves a champion PCE as high as 10.71% and an ultrahigh voltage of 1.622 V. In addition, metal ion doping is another common approach to boost the photovoltaic performance of CsPbBr3 PSCs for its effectiveness in improving the morphology, adjusting the energy level, and suppressing trap defects. For example, the larger grain size of CsPbBr3 is partially substituted for part of the Cs+ site by alkali metal cations to reduce charge trap states and charge recombination. Furthermore, part of the lead ion (Pb2+) site is replaced by covalent or polyvalent metal ions, including divalent hard Lewis acids, divalent transition metal ions, and lanthanide ions, respectively, in which the grain size can increase and non-radiative recombination can reduce. Studies in this field show that doping foreign small metal ions in the lattice of a perovskite is a useful route to adjust its crystallography or photoelectron properties and improve the PCE of CsPbBr3 PSCs. However, to date, almost all the reports on improving the CsPbBr3 morphology and device efficiency have shown unilateral optimization with just a single strategy. And research into a promotion strategy integrated together to construct high performance PSCs is rather scarce, especially for the low-cost planar carbon-based CsPbBr3 PSCs free of HTMs and metal electrodes.
Herein, we propose a novel dual promotion strategy combining interface modification with ion doping to achieve highly efficient and stable carbon-based planar CsPbBr3 PSCs (Scheme 1). Firstly, by depositing a thin CsBr layer between the PbBr2 and compact TiO2 (c-TiO2), the crystallization of PbBr2 can be enhanced and then assist the growth of perovskite grains, so that CsPbBr3 films have better continuity, reduce the generation of pinholes, enhance the carrier extraction at the interface, and greatly reduce the hysteresis effect of devices. Based on the optimized CsBr modification result, the cobalt (Co2+) ion is then directly doped into the CsPbBr3 film through a multistep solution casting technique. The appropriate Co2+ dopant not only increases the grain size of CsPbBr3, and reduces the grain boundary density, but also regulates the energy level, which accelerates the transport and extraction of holes. As a result, the highest PCE of the CsPbBr3 PSCs modified with 2.5 mg mL−1 CsBr and doped with 0.2% Co2+ reaches up to 8.67% with an increment of about 30%. Furthermore, the best-performing PSC without encapsulation also displays excellent humidity and thermal stability in an ambient atmosphere.

PbBr2 (99%), CsBr (99%) and CoBr2 (99%) were purchased from Xi’an Polymer Light Technology Corp. N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, 99.9%), isopropanol (IPA, 99.5%), and methanol (99.9%) were purchased from Aladdin. Unless stated otherwise, all materials and reagents were used without further purification. Commercial carbon paste was purchased from Guangzhou Saidi.


In detail, 0.5 mol isopropyl titanate and 0.5 mol ethylene glycol amine were dissolved in 1 mL IPA. Then it will be annealed in air at 450 °C for 1 hour. After that, the c-TiO2 substrate was immersed in 40 mM TiCl4 aqueous solution at 70 °C for 30 min. Finally, the treated c-TiO2 substrate was cleaned with ethanol and annealed once in air at 500 °C for 1 hour.


Fluorine-doped Tin Oxide glass (FTO, Nippon, 14 Ω sq−1) was etched with zinc powder and dilute hydrochloric acid before the preparation of solar cell devices. The PSCs adopted a plane heterojunction structure: FTO/c-TiO2/perovskite/carbon. FTOs with a size of 2.5 × 2.5 cm2 were successively cleaned using a detergent, ethanol, and UV-ozone treatment. After UV-ozone treatment for 15 min, the c-TiO2 layer with a thickness of 40 nm was deposited on the FTO substrate by spin-coating at 4000 rpm for 30 s, and sintered for 30 min at 450 °C. Then, the substrates were treated with 40 mM TiCl4 aqueous solution at 70 °C for 30 min. After washing with deionized water and drying out, the substrate is again sintered at 500 °C for 30 min.

The perovskite film was made by a multi-step solution-processed method. All operations were carried out in an air atmosphere without temperature and humidity control. Before spinning the solution of PbBr2, a low concentration CsBr solution (1 mg mL−1, 2.5 mg mL−1 and 5 mg mL−1) was spin-coated onto the TiO2 substrate at 4000 rpm for 30 s, followed by heating at 90 °C on a hot plate for 5 min. Then, 1.0 M PbBr2 solution in DMF was spin-coated onto a substrate at 2000 rpm for 30 s. After drying at 90 °C for 1 h, the 0.07 M solution of CsBr methanol was spin-coated on the PbBr2 film at 2000 rpm for 30 s and annealed at 250 °C for 5 min. This process was repeated 4 times. The obtained perovskite film was rinsed with isopropanol and dried at 250 °C for 5 min. Finally, a carbon black electrode was deposited by a doctor blade method and annealed at 90 °C for 30 min. A Co2+ doped CsPbBr3 perovskite was fabricated by adding a certain proportion of CoBr2 to PbBr2 solution. The remaining processes were the same as the abovementioned procedures.

The surface morphology of the membrane and the cross-sectional morphology of the device were detected by using a Hitachi SU-70 scanning electron microscope (SEM), which was combined with the energy dispersive X-ray spectrum (EDS) to detect the element content and distribution. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of FTO-based films were scanned using a Bruker D8 advance instrument using Cu Kα radiation (λ = 6.162 Å). Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) was obtained using a fluorescence spectrophotometer (Agilent, USA). The time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra of perovskite films on glass were measured by using a PL spectrometer (Horiba, Japan) with an excitation wavelength of 510 nm. The absorption spectra of films on substrates were determined using a UV-vis spectrophotometer (Cary). The chemical states of the ions were tested by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Kratos Axis Ultra DLD) using Al Kα radiation and the C 1s line at 284.6 eV for spectral correction. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) patterns were measured using Axis Ultra DLD and He I (21.22 eV) emission lines. The surface flatness of the film was measured with a Kelvin Probe Force Microscope (KPFM, Asylum Research Cypher, UK). The characteristic J–V curves, maximum power output (MPP) tracking test and the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) were measured using a Keithley 4200 meter and a sunlight simulator (Newport, 91192A, AM 1.5, 1 sun). The solar cell is covered with a black hole to define a mobile area of 0.07 square centimeters. The transient photo-current (TPC) decay and transient photo-voltage (TPV) decay were recorded using an electrochemical workstation (Zahner, Germany). The white LED supplied 80 mW cm−2 light intensity to excite the PSCs. The incident-photo-conversion-efficiency (IPCE) of the device was tested using a Newport EQE system in the wavelength range of 300–800 nm.


In this study, a high quality CsPbBr3 perovskite film was induced by adding low concentration CsBr by a modified multi-step solution spin coating method due to the large difference between CsBr and PbBr2 concentrations. The specific details of device fabrication were described in the Experimental section. In the first place, we systematically investigated the effect of a thin CsBr layer on the crystallization and morphology of the PbBr2 layer, as well as the influence on the film quality of the final CsPbBr3 perovskite. Therefore, it is necessary to observe the influence of the modified layer on the crystallization of PbBr2 films when low concentration CsBr isopropanol solution (0–5 mg mL−1) is used as the modified layer.Fig. 1a–d shows the top-view SEM images of the pristine PbBr2 film and modified PbBr2 film with different concentrations of CsBr. It is obvious that the pristine PbBr2 film surface has a large number of pinholes (Fig. 1a). The reason for this phenomenon is relative to the viscosity of PbBr2 solution and the rapid evaporation of solvent. After being modified by 1 mg mL−1 CsBr, the PbBr2 film is more uniform and its continuity is greatly improved (Fig. 1b). With a further increase in CsBr concentration to 2.5 mg mL−1, the PbBr2 film has better morphology and fewer pinholes, which were conducive to the formation of CsPbBr3 perovskite. However, when excessive CsBr (5 mg mL−1) is introduced, the number of pinholes decreases, but the size of the pinholes increases. Several previous studies have shown that the disgusting pinholes and large grain boundaries degrade the performance of the device because these defects hinder carrier diffusion and lead to serious charge recombination. Certainly, the underneath PbBr2 layer may make a direct influence on the film quality of the upper perovskite layer. Thus, to verify the increase of CsPbBr3 perovskite grain size, the SEM images of pristine CsPbBr3 and modified CsPbBr3 films with different concentrations of CsBr are observed and presented in Fig. 1e–h. Although the pinholes on the surface of the pristine CsPbBr3 are significantly lower than those on the surface of the original PbBr2, there were still a large number of voids (Fig. 1e). With modification by CsBr, the coverage of CsPbBr3 films was significantly enhanced. When the CsBr concentration was 1 mg mL−1, the pinholes were distinctly eliminated. After being modified with 2.5 mg mL−1 CsBr, the as-prepared CsPbBr3 perovskite film exhibited a compact and homogenous morphology with greatly increased grain sizes, which helps to reduce the recombination of charge carriers. After excessive CsBr modification, the morphology of CsPbBr3 films remained intact, but the grain size decreased obviously (Fig. 1h). This may be due to the large surface pores of the PbBr2 film modified by excessive CsBr, which limits the further growth of the CsPbBr3 perovskite and thus limits the grain size.

In order to study the effect of CsBr on thin film crystallization, XRD measurement was carried out. XRD patterns of the as-prepared PbBr2 films are depicted in Fig. 2a. When the PbBr2 film is modified by CsBr with an appropriate concentration of 2.5 mg mL−1, the diffraction peaks at 16.7°, 21.6°, 33.9° and 39.5° assigned to the (110), (020), (201) and (031) planes of PbBr2 (PDF#31-0679) are increased, indicating that the crystallinity of PbBr2 is improved after CsBr modification. To further explore the existence of the CsBr interlayer, XRD tests were carried out on PbBr2 modified by CsBr with higher concentrations, as shown in Fig. S1 (in the ESI). When the concentration of CsBr increased to 10 mg mL−1, a weak peak of CsPb2Br5 was detected from the XRD image. This means that since the optimal modification concentration is 2.5 mg mL−1, even if the CsPb2Br5 phase is generated, it is hard to be detected by an instrument due to low concentration. Therefore, we conclude that the CsBr modifier does not exist in the device as a single layer, but assists in the formation of the PbBr2 modifier to achieve better device performance.
To evaluate the electron extraction property, CsPbBr3 films w/o and with CsBr modification on the FTO/TiO2 substrates were fabricated, and their corresponding steady-state PL spectra were recorded, as shown in Fig. 2b; both samples exhibit an emission peak at 530 nm, which is the typical characteristic of the CsPbBr3 perovskite. A significant quenching effect is observed when the perovskite layer was modified by low-concentration of CsBr, implying that a suitable CsBr modifier is beneficial for charge extraction due to remarkable reduction in defect states. To further evaluate the recombination of CsPbBr3 PSCs w/o and with CsBr modification, EIS is applied to track the interface charge behavior. Measurements are taken at a bias of 1.1 V in the frequency range from 106 to 10 Hz under dark conditions. Fig. 2c shows the Nyquist plots of two devices, and the inset shows the equivalent circuit. The equivalent circuit diagram is simulated by series resistance (Rs), contact resistance (Rco) and recombination resistance (Rrec). Moreover, the arc at the low-frequency region corresponds to the recombination resistance, which is mainly attributed to the charge transporting from each interface. It is clear that the device with CsBr shows larger Rrec (10554.16 Ω) than that without the CsBr device (5219.83 Ω), which suggests a more efficient charge-transfer property and highly suppressed charge recombination in the device modified by CsBr. The detailed simulated results are summarized in Table S1 (ESI). Subsequently, the influence of CsBr modification on the photovoltaic performance was also explored, as depicted in Fig. 2d. The CsPbBr3 PSCs based on optimized CsBr modification could realize a moderate PCE of 6.60%, with a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 6.64 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.21 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.82, while the CsPbBr3 device without CsBr modification only obtained a poor PCE of 6.02%. Furthermore, the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the devices at forward and reverse scan directions show that the hysteresis phenomenon of the device after CsBr modification is significantly reduced, and the hysteresis index (HI) of the device can be calculated using formula: . When the concentration is 2.5 mg mL−1, the hysteresis index is reduced by 32% (Table S2, ESI). In addition, from the J–V characteristics of the devices, we found that the modification effect of CsBr still has some limitations, for instance, it is hard to improve the JSC of the PSCs.
Based on the above results, distinctly, the modification of CsBr is mainly reflected in the increase of film coverage and the reduction of charge recombination at the interface, and device hysteresis, while the ultimate device efficiency is still relatively mediocre owing to the unimproved JSC. According to previous reports, alkaline earth metal ion doping has been proven to be a feasible and effective approach to regulate the perovskite morphology and promote the device JSC and PCE. Consequently, we attempted to further improve the photoelectric properties of the CsPbBr3 perovskite film by doping appropriate concentrations of CoBr2. Four different doping amounts of Co2+ (0.1%, 0.2% and 0.5%, molar ratio) were doped into CsPbBr3 perovskite films, and the specific details are provided in the Experimental section. For the sake of description, we denote these perovskites as CsPbBr3, CsPbBr3-0.1%Co, CsPbBr3-0.2%Co and CsPbBr3-0.5%Co, respectively. Fig. 3a–d shows the SEM images of CsPbBr3 doped with different concentrations of CoBr2. It can be seen that the surface morphology of the pristine CsPbBr3 film is not uniform (Fig. 3a). As the concentration of CoBr2 increases, the grain size of the perovskite enlarges and the distribution becomes more uniform. When doped with 0.2% CoBr2, the film has better crystallization with more homogeneous surface morphology and increased grain size. The corresponding histogram of frequency distribution of grain size statistics is shown in Fig. S2 in the ESI. The average grain size of the pristine CsPbBr3 is 0.77 μm, while that of CsPbBr3-0.2%Co increases up to 1.25 μm, indicating that an appropriate CoBr2 dopant can tremendously increase the grain size. Simultaneously, the grain boundary density can be significantly reduced, which suppresses the shallow state formation near the valence band edge of the perovskite and improves the device performance of PSCs. When the doping concentration continues to increase, excess CoBr2 accumulates at the grain boundary, destroying the integrity of film crystallization as well as pinholes appearing on the film surface (Fig. 3d). It can also be seen from the KPFM 3D-morphology (Fig. S3, ESI) that an appropriate CoBr2 dopant can greatly improve the morphology of CsPbBr3, which is consistent with the result of SEM images. The EDS element mappings shown in Fig. 3e confirm the uniform distribution of Co2+ ions in the CsPbBr3 film, suggesting that our doping strategy is feasible and successful.
Next, XRD and XPS measurements were performed to gain further insights into the doping mechanism of Co2+ in the host CsPbBr3 lattice. Fig. 4a shows XRD of CsPbBr3 films with various doping amounts of Co2+ after annealing at 250 °C 4 times in an air atmosphere. The obvious diffraction peaks at 15.2°, 21.5°, 30.7°, and 34.2° are indexed to the (100), (110), (200), and (210) planes of the cubic CsPbBr3 phase (PDF#18-0364). It can be distinguished that the diffraction peak strength of 30.7° is significantly enhanced, indicating that the Co2+ doped CsPbBr3 films possess better crystallinity. At the same time, no impurity phase is observed in the prepared films, which imply that the doping of Co2+ ions into CsPbBr3 does not change the perovskite phase. However, when we zoom in the XRD pattern around 30°, we can observe that the (200) diffraction peak of the CsPbBr3 perovskite is slightly shifted to a larger angle under the influence of the Co dopant, as shown in Fig. 4b. With the increase of doped CoBr2 concentration, the peak position shifts slightly to the larger diffraction intensity, which means that the lattice constant becomes smaller. We believe that this is due to the fact that Co2+ radius (65 pm) is smaller than Pb2+ radius (119 pm), and the perovskite lattice shrinks when Co2+ replaces part of Pb2+. This also indicates that Co2+ doping has been successfully incorporated into the CsPbBr3 perovskite. In order to identify the compositions and chemical states of the CsPbBr3 film and CsPbBr3-0.2%Co films, XPS measurements are performed. With the binding energy of C 1s set at 284.6 eV, the high-resolution XPS spectra for Pb 4f are shown in Fig. 4c. As expected, by doping Co2+ ions in the CsPbBr3 film, the peaks of Pb 4f in the XPS spectrum shift slightly to lower binding energy, indicating a change in the chemical state. Obviously, the binding energy of Pb 4f shifts from 138.3 eV to 137.9 eV. Similarly, the binding energy of Br 3d5/2 is shifted from 68.5 eV to 67.9 eV and the peak position of Cs 3d is slightly shifted towards the direction of reduced binding energy (Fig. S4, ESI). In addition, the optimal doping concentration of the Co dopant is 0.2%, which is too tiny to be detected. Specially, due to the very low doping concentration of CoBr2, the sample with 5-fold higher concentration of CoBr2 is used for measuring the XPS spectrum of Co 2p, as shown in Fig. S5 (ESI), a weak peak of Co 2p is observed, confirming the existence of the Co element in the CsPbBr3-1%Co film. The effect of Co2+ doping on the photophysical properties of CsPbBr3 films was investigated. As shown in Fig. 4d, upon doping with a low concentration of Co2+ into the CsPbBr3 perovskite, the absorption intensity of UV-vis spectra increases but the absorption edge does not change significantly. Obviously, the CsPbBr3-0.2% film has the strongest light absorption because of its optimal film quality compared to the other perovskite films. All samples with different doping amounts of Co2+ show an almost identical absorption onset, corresponding to ∼2.31 eV bandgap, which was obtained from the Tauc plots shown in Fig. S6 (ESI). In order to further clarify the carrier dynamics of the CsPbBr3 films, we carried out PL and TRPL on glass substrates as shown in Fig. S7 (ESI) and Fig. 4e. Compared with the CsPbBr3 film, the CsPbBr3-0.2%Co film shows stronger PL strength, indicating higher crystallinity and fewer defects. The TRPL lifetime (τave) for the CsPbBr3 film is calculated to be 0.325 ns, while the τave for the CsPbBr3-0.2% film is about 0.798 ns. The carrier life of the CsPbBr3-0.2%Co film is improved by the improvement of crystallization and the optimization of film quality, which is in accordance with SEM and XRD results as mentioned above.
To verify the effect of Co2+ doping on the energy band, UPS spectra are measured to determine the energy levels of CsPbBr3 and CsPbBr3-0.2%Co. As shown in Fig. 4f, Ecutoff is the high binding energy cutoff and Eonset is the onset of films relative to the Fermi energy of Au. This demonstrates that the Ecutoff of CsPbBr3 and CsPbBr3-0.2%Co is 17.30 and 17.44 eV, and Eonset of CsPbBr3 and CsPbBr3-0.2%Co is 1.73 and 1.86 eV, respectively. The valence band maximum energy (EVBM) of CsPbBr3 and CsPbBr3-0.2%Co can be obtained according to the formula: EVBM = hν − (Ecutoff − Eonset), where hν is the incident photon energy (21.22 eV), and EVBM values of CsPbBr3 and CsPbBr3-0.2%Co perovskite films were calculated to be 5.65 and 5.64 eV, respectively. Combined with the bandgap obtained from the Tauc plot, the energy level diagrams were plotted as illustrated in Fig. S8 (ESI), in which the energy differences between the VBM of these perovskite films and carbon are determined to be 0.65 and 0.64 eV, and the energy differences between the conduction band minimum of these perovskite films and TiO2 are determined to be 0.86 and 0.87 eV, respectively. The CsPbBr3-0.2%Co film has the smaller energy difference, indicating that the energy loss for hole-transfer from its VBM to carbon is lower, the ability of charge extraction is accelerated and the recombination at the interface is reduced.
To explore the potential enhancement of the Co2+ doping on the photovoltaic performance, planar all-inorganic PSCs with a configuration of FTO/c-TiO2/CsPb1−xCoxBr3/carbon free of the hole transporting layer and precious metal electrodes were fabricated in an air atmosphere without any oxygen or humidity control, which significantly reduces the production cost and simplifies the preparation process, presenting promising potential for commercial application (Fig. 5a). The corresponding cross-sectional SEM image of a whole device with a closely contacted multilayer structure is depicted in Fig. 5b. To compare the effect of doping with different concentrations of Co2+ on the photoelectric properties of devices, the typical J–V curves of different devices were measured under AM 1.5G illumination with a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2, and the detailed test parameters are listed in Table 1. As demonstrated in Fig. 5c, the doped PSC with CsPbBr3-0.2%Co achieves a champion PCE of 8.67%, with JSC of 7.48 mA cm−2, VOC of 1.38 V, and FF of 0.84, which are much higher than those of the pristine CsPbBr3 device with a PCE of 6.68%, JSC of 6.72 mA cm−2, VOC of 1.21 V, and FF of 0.82, respectively. Excessive Co dopant leads to a huge decrease in voltage, which may be due to the destructive effect of excessive Co on the film, presented from the previous SEM and 3D-KPFM images. To confirm the repeatability of the PSC performance, 40 independent devices were collected for each type of device. As can be seen from Fig. 5d, the PCE distribution is narrow and the PCE value is high for the CsPbBr3-0.2%Co PSCs, indicating that the device has excellent performance and good repeatability in contrast with the non-doped CsPbBr3 PSCs. The average PCE for the cells fabricated with pristine CsPbBr3 is estimated to be 6.37%. Remarkably, the average PCE remarkably increased to 8.42%, an increase of 32.1% compared with the pristine sample.
Devices

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF
PCE (%)
PCEave (%)
CsPbBr3
6.72
1.21
0.82
6.68
6.37
CsPbBr3-0.1%Co
7.15
1.24
0.83
7.41
7.24
CsPbBr3-0.2%Co
7.48
1.38
0.84
8.67
8.42
CsPbBr3-0.5%Co
7.34
1.18
0.67
6.24
6.01
In addition, we performed the MPP tracking test of PSCs with CsPbBr3 and CsPbBr3-0.2%Co PSCs, as shown in Fig. 5e. The stable output photocurrent densities of CsPbBr3 and CsPbBr3-0.2%Co PSCs are 6.23 and 7.39 mA cm−2 and the corresponding PCEs are 6.52% and 8.46%, respectively, which are close to the corresponding values from J–V tests, confirming the good reliability of our PSC performance. Both devices display high spectral response with the IPCE values above 70% in the wavelength range of 300–600 nm (Fig. 5f). The integrated Jsc value of the CsPbBr3-0.2%Co device is 7.42 mA cm−2 and the value of the CsPbBr3 perovskite is just 6.70 mA cm−2. The IPCE spectra of these devices further reveal the enhancement in Jsc for the CsPbBr3-0.2%Co devices. The higher IPCE of CsPbBr3-0.2%Co indicates that the optical absorption and charge transfer performance of the device are superior to those of the CsPbBr3 device.
The J–V curves of a hole-only device with a structure of FTO/NiOx/perovskite/carbon are tested in the dark to assess the trap state density in perovskite films. It is well known that the trap-state density (Nt) can be determined via the SCLC model by utilizing single-charge carrier devices. Generally, the first linear stage of the curve is Ohm response under low bias and the next linear phase of the curve is a trap-filling limit (TFL) region. Based on this, the junction points between the two mentioned regions represented the trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL). The Nt value can be calculated according to equation: , where ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, εr is the relative dielectric constant of the CsPbBr3 film (16.46),q is the elemental charge and L is the films thickness (380 nm). VTFL is the onset voltage of the TFL region, which is linearly proportional to Nt. As shown in Fig. 6a, the calculated trap densities Nt significantly decrease from 3.38 × 1015 cm−3 to 2.5 × 1015 cm−3, respectively, for the CsPbBr3 film and CsPbBr3-0.2%Co films. The dramatically decreased Nt of the latter film is strongly related to the improved morphology and crystallization with larger grains and smaller grain boundaries. In addition, we tested the J–V curves of the control CsPbBr3 PSC and CsPbBr3-0.2%Co PSC devices in the dark. As shown in Fig. 6b, the current density of the CsPbBr3-0.2% device is lower under the dark conditions within the voltage range of −0.5 to 1.5 V, suggesting that the leakage current is reduced, which provides a reasonable explanation for the improvement of VOC after Co2+ doping in CsPbBr3. The TPC decay and the TPV decay are performed to investigate the dynamic charge extraction and recombination properties of the devices. As shown in Fig. 6c, TPC response reduces from 12.72 μs of the CsPbBr3 device to 5.81 μs of the CsPbBr3-0.2%Co device, proving that carrier extraction and transmission in CsPbBr3-0.2%Co PSC is much faster than that in CsPbBr3 PSC. In Fig. 6d, the TPV response of the CsPbBr3-0.2%Co device exhibits nearly twice longer lifetime (1.69 ms) than the CsPbBr3 solar cell (0.41 ms), which means that the charge recombination is effectively reduced in the CsPbBr3-0.2%Co device. The above results indicate that CsPbBr3-0.2%Co with high quality crystal morphology, favorable energy levels, fast carrier transport, reduced trap defect density and charge recombination together boosts the photovoltaic efficiency of the PSCs.
It is acknowledged that the current CsPbBr3 is the most stable all-inorganic perovskite material, so the CsPbBr3 PSCs hold huge commercial development space. To further demonstrate the influence of the Co dopant on device stability, we put the devices without any encapsulated in the constant temperature and humidity cabinet, or on an outdoor heating plate for stability tests, respectively. The corresponding test results are exhibited in Fig. 6e and f. At constant temperature and humidity (T = 25 °C, RH = 10%), the initial performance of CsPbBr3-0.2% Co PSCs can be maintained above 98% after 100 days, and there is almost no efficiency degradation. Under the continuous heat treatment of 85 °C (RH = 40–80%) in air, the CsPbBr3-0.2% Co device presents excellent thermal stability and still can preserve over 95% of the initial efficiency after 600 hours, superior to the CsPbBr3 PSCs. These positive results not only indicate that CoBr2, as a dopant, does not destroy the original stability of start materials while improving the photoelectric performance of the PSCs, but also indicates that the doped device has extraordinary humidity stability and thermal stability.

In summary, a novel dual promotion strategy combining the interface modification with ion doping is developed for HTM-free carbon-based CsPbBr3 all-inorganic PSCs in an air atmosphere. Firstly, the interface modification was conducted by inserting a CsBr thin film between the TiO2 and perovskite layers. The CsBr modifier could reduce the pinholes of the PbBr2 film, thus further benefiting the formation of CsPbBr3 with better coverage and uniform morphology, resulting in a relatively enhanced device performance, while the PSCs still yield a limited JSC value. Then, we further improved the photovoltaic performance of CsPbBr3 PSCs via doping appropriate concentrations of CoBr2 into the perovskite films. The high quality perovskite films with improved crystal morphology, favorable energy levels, reduced trap states and charge recombination were obtained. Consequently, the CsPbBr3-0.2%Co PSC realizes the highest PCE of 8.67%, obtaining an enhancement by 30% in comparison with 6.68% for the CsPbBr3 device. Moreover, the optimized CsPbBr3-0.2%Co PSC without encapsulation also displays excellent humidity stability and thermal stability, by keeping above 98% of its initial PCE after 100 days in an ambient atmosphere, and over 95% after 600 hours under the continuous heat treatment at 85 °C, respectively. This study provides a promising route to boost the performance of all-inorganic CsPbBr3 PSCs.


The authors declare no competing financial interest.


The authors acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No 11374168 and 51302137), the Ningbo S&T Innovation 2025 Major Special Programme (2018B10055), and K. C. Wong Magna Fund in Ningbo University, China.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0tc04624h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020