 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA08772D
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3689-3696


Jianhang
Qiu
,

Gaoxiang
Wang
,

Wenjing
Xu
,

Qun
Jin
,

Lusheng
Liu
,

Bing
Yang
,

Kaiping
Tai
,

Anyuan
Cao
* and 

Xin
Jiang
*

Shenyang National Laboratory for Materials Science (SYNL), Institute of Metal Research (IMR), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), No. 72 Wenhua Road, Shenyang 110016, China. E-mail: xjiang@imr.ac.cn

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. E-mail: anyuan@pku.edu.cn

Received
30th October 2015
, Accepted 26th January 2016
First published on 27th January 2016
To date, numerous approaches have been developed for fabricating high quality organometal halide perovskite thin films, however, perovskite films obtained by such methods reveal a brown or dark-brown color, which might restrain their light absorption ability. Here we report a route to synthesize dark-blue mirror-like perovskite dense films via a two-step spin-coating process assisted by treatment of nonpolar solvent scouring. Photovoltaic cells based on such dark-blue films demonstrate a high short-circuit current density (Jsc) of ∼23 mA cm−2 and a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 16.1%. Our method would provide a new candidate method for the fabrication of perovskite solar cells with high performance.

Hybrid organic–inorganic solar cells based on organometal halide perovskites have been considered as promising next generation photovoltaic devices, as they integrate the desirable advantages of low cost and facile fabrication procedure and the superb photovoltaic properties of the hybrid perovskite materials, such as a large absorption coefficient, high charge carrier mobility and long electron–hole diffusion length. During the past few years, remarkable progress in the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells, from 3.8% to ∼20%, has been achieved through device design, material interface engineering and synthesis strategy optimization. It has been demonstrated that the device performance is mainly determined by the crystallization quality of the perovskite thin films obtained in the preparation process. Most of the reported high performance perovskite solar cells are achieved by utilizing uniform, pinhole-free perovskite absorption layers, for both mesoporous and planar device architectures. To date, high quality perovskite thin films have been synthesized by multiple groups employing different approaches, which can be summarized as vacuum thermal evaporation, sequential solution deposition, or vapor-assisted solution deposition processes. Compared to the vacuum evaporation methods, solution deposition approaches have the advantages of short overall processing time and facile fabrication facilities, both can reduce the fabrication cost. However, because of the difference in the crystallization rate of PbI2 and CH3NH3I in γ-butyrolactone (GBL), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), or dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), which are typically used as solvents for perovskite precursor solutions, perovskite films obtained by a simple spin-coating process appear as inhomogeneous crystalline islands with pinholes of different sizes. Such non-continuous films give rise to shunting pathways, thus restricting their photovoltaic performance.

To overcome the nonsimultaneous crystallization of the perovskite precursors, a solvent engineering approach is introduced into the spin-coating process, in which DMSO is employed as a cosolvent in GBL or DMF solutions containing PbI2 and CH3NH3I, while a nonpolar solvent that is immiscible with perovskite precursor substances but miscible with GBL and DMF is dripped to wash the as-prepared film during the spin-coating process, allowing the fast crystallization of the precursors. Typically, an intermediate phase of CH3NH3I–PbI2–DMSO is formed after the solvent engineering spin-coating process, which can be transformed into organometal halide perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 after heating at 100 °C for 1–3 min. This solid-state conversion from the intermediate phase of CH3NH3I–PbI2–DMSO to CH3NH3PbI3 leads to the formation of a flat and uniform dense film, and eventually efficient photovoltaic performance. However, due to the centrifugal force, the spinning substrate cannot be fully infiltrated by the nonpolar solvent fluid dripping in the spin-coating process, which might induce the incomplete conversion of the intermediate phase. Thus, perovskite thin films fabricated by this solvent engineering approach reveal a brown or dark-brown color, which might limit their light absorption performance.
Here we report a solvent-treated two-step spin-coating route to synthesize high quality, uniform and dense perovskite thin films. This approach is developed on the basis of the conventional solvent engineering spin-coating method but implanted with scouring of a nonpolar solvent between the first- and the second-step spin-coating processes. The synthesized dark-blue mirror-like perovskite films exhibit enhanced light absorption ability with respect to the dark-brown films produced by the conventional solvent engineering one-step spin-coating approach. As a result, photovoltaic cells based on such dark-blue mirror-like films demonstrate a best short-circuit current density (Jsc) of ∼23 mA cm−2 and a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 16.1%, both are higher than those of the dark-brown film-based devices. We believe that this solvent-treated two-step spin-coating method can provide a new candidate way for improving the performance of perovskite solar cells.

Fig. 1 presents the schematic diagram of the nonpolar solvent-treated two-step spin-coating approach we have developed for preparing perovskite thin films (see ESI for details). First, a perovskite precursor solution, which is obtained by dissolution of equal moles of PbI2 and CH3NH3I in DMF/DMSO where DMSO is added as the cosolvent, is spin-coated on a TiO2-coated FTO substrate at the desired rotation speed. After this first-step spin-coating process, in which most of the solvent has already been evaporated, a nonpolar solvent that is immiscible with CH3NH3I but miscible with DMF and DMSO, is immediately spread over the substrate to wash the as-prepared film. Then the substrate is accelerated again to remove the excess solvent left in the nonpolar solvent scouring process, resulting in a transparent intermediate phase film formed on the substrate (the second-step spin-coating process), which can be transformed into a dark-blue mirror-like film by heating at 100 °C for 2 min. The treatment of the nonpolar solvent is crucial for preparing high quality perovskite thin films. One should make sure that such a nonpolar solvent must be added after the substrate is completely frozen, because the spinning substrate is likely to induce insufficient infiltration of the nonpolar solvent into the substrate, and thus incomplete conversion of the intermediate phase. Furthermore, the nonpolar solvent should be continuously dripped onto the substrate, ensuring that the whole surface of the substrate is scoured by the solvent. It is found that inappropriate nonpolar solvent treatment, for example, dropwise dripping, could cause supersaturation variation over the substrate, thus resulting in a non-continuous film with a large number of pinholes formed at the surface of the as-prepared film (Fig. S4, ESI). Morphological characterization of the perovskite films prepared by the solvent-treated two-step spin-coating route, where diethyl ether, toluene, chloroform, dichloromethane, chlorobenzene, and n-butanol were employed as the nonpolar solvent added between the first- and the second-step spin-coating processes, is summarized in Fig. S5–7 (ESI). From the statistical histograms of the pinhole sizes (Fig. S6, ESI), one can see that the film produced by diethyl ether scouring possesses the least number of large pinholes over the entire substrate. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis (Fig. S7, ESI) demonstrates that the films produced by scouring of diethyl ether, toluene, and chloroform are composed of 50–500 nm crystalline grains with high dense features, while dichloromethane, chlorobenzene, and n-butanol give rise to small pinholes with a size of 50–200 nm formed within the as-prepared perovskite films. Absorbance spectra shown in Fig. S8 (ESI) reveal that the film produced by diethyl ether scouring exhibits the highest absorption ability in the visible wavelength. We thus chose diethyl ether as the representative nonpolar solvent for further studies.
The optical microscopic image of the perovskite film prepared by the diethyl ether-treated two-step spin-coating approach is presented in Fig. 2a. For comparison, we also introduced the conventional solvent engineering one-step spin-coating method, where diethyl ether is added to the substrate while spinning. The corresponding morphological image is depicted in Fig. 2b. As can be seen from these images, the films obtained by these two methods both exhibit full surface coverage and high homogeneity on a centimetre scale. Compared to the one-step-processed sample, the film obtained by our solvent-treated two-step method reveals less number of large pinholes over the whole substrate (Fig. 2c and d). Further morphological information can be acquired from SEM analysis. As can be seen from Fig. 2e and f, both of these two films possess a highly dense nature, but the two-step-processed film is composed of crystalline grains with a size of 200–500 nm, whereas the crystalline grain size of the one-step-processed film is mainly in the range of 100–200 nm.

Fig. 3 demonstrates the atomic force microscopy (AFM) characterization of the surface of the as-prepared perovskite films. The calculated root mean-square roughness of the film fabricated by our two-step method is 16.9 nm, for an area of 15 × 15 μm2, which is comparable to the film produced by the one-step route (14.8 nm). AFM line segments also exhibit that the two-step-processed film possesses slightly higher roughness compared to the one-step-processed film, which can be rationalized by the larger crystalline grains produced in the film, as obviously presented in Fig. 2e and f. The difference in the film microstructure can be further demonstrated by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis. Shown in Fig. 4a are the diffraction spectra of the as-prepared films, from which it is evident that the films fabricated by these two approaches with different strategies exhibit the same crystal structure; both can be assigned to the typical tetragonal perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 phase. However, the value of the full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) of the 110 XRD peak for the film obtained by our two-step process is smaller than that of the film produced by the one-step process (Fig. S9, ESI), which can be ascribed to the larger size of the crystalline grains in the film as well (Fig. 2e and f). Another feature that can distinguish the two-step-processed film is the diffraction peaks in the range of 5–10 degree in the spectrum for the one-step-processed film, which is induced by the difference in the constituents of the as-prepared films.
To get further insight into the microstructure of the films produced by these two solvent-treated spin-coating methods, we probed the evolution process of the as-prepared films. The intermediate phase exhibits fast crystal evolution properties, moreover, it is very difficult to find the in situ XRD equipment that can be applied on film samples at low temperature, we thus measured the XRD patterns immediately after the finishing of each stage of the solvent-treated one- and two-step spin-coating approaches to get precise information of the crystal evolution. Fig. 4b gives the XRD result of the evolution process of the two-step-processed film. The XRD pattern (black) of the film obtained after the first-step process presents the same features of CH3NH3I–PbI2–DMSO powder, whereas there are also some weak diffraction peaks that can be attributed to CH3NH3PbI3, suggesting that the intermediate phase of the film produced in the solvent-treated spin-coating approach is mainly composed of CH3NH3I–PbI2–DMSO. After diethyl ether scouring, the perovskite features, including the 110 peak at 14.12 degree and the 220 peak at 28.48 degree, are enhanced, but the CH3NH3I–PbI2–DMSO diffraction peaks still prevail for the intermediate phase, as obviously demonstrated by the red pattern of Fig. 4b. This film can be completely converted into tetragonal perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 by heating at 100 °C for 2 min, as confirmed by the blue pattern of Fig. 4b and the black pattern of Fig. 4a, where only the perovskite diffraction peaks can be detected. The film produced by the conventional one-step spin-coating method undergoes a similar crystal evolution route as the two-step process, as presented in Fig. 4c. However, there are diffraction peaks at low angles, including 6.68, 7.24, and 9.24 degrees, which can be ascribed to the CH3NH3I–PbI2–DMSO intermediate phase, shown in the XRD pattern of the final film (the red pattern in Fig. 4a and the blue pattern in Fig. 4c). These features indicate that the as-prepared film obtained by the one-step spin-coating process is not fully converted into CH3NH3PbI3, mainly arising from the insufficient infiltration of the nonpolar solvent into the spinning substrate.
The photograph of the perovskite thin films produced by these two spin-coating approaches is provided in Fig. 5. Because of the difference in the microstructure and crystallinity discussed above, the one-step-processed film exhibits a dark-brown color, which is in good agreement with the results of other groups. In contrast, the film obtained by our solvent-treated two-step spin-coating approach is obviously dark-blue mirror-like, indicating that such film possesses improved light absorption performance with respect to the dark-brown one. The corresponding absorbance spectra are summarized in Fig. 6a. The dark-blue mirror-like perovskite film exhibits larger absorbance than the dark-brown one, especially in the red region of the visible spectrum (600 to 750 nm). Note that such a difference in the color of the as-prepared films does not result from film thickness. We also prepared some thicker perovskite films by reducing the rotation speed of the one-step spin-coating approach (Fig. S10 and 11, ESI), of which the absorption behaviour is depicted in Fig. S12 (ESI). All the films produced by the one-step spin-coating approach exhibit a dark-brown color regardless of thickness (Fig. S11, ESI). Besides, their absorption features are similar, all of which exhibit low absorbance in the wavelength of 600 to 750 nm, as compared to the dark-blue film. Photoluminescence (PL) characterization was performed to further probe the optical properties of the dark-blue mirror-like and dark-brown perovskite films (Fig. 6b). Similar PL spectra are observed for these two films, where the spectrum of the dark-blue one is slightly red-shifted with respect to the dark-brown one, further indicating the improved absorption ability in the red region of the visible spectrum of the dark-blue perovskite film. This variation is likely caused by the larger crystalline grains in the film, as depicted in Fig. 2e and f, and is consistent with the reports of other researchers, where they also attributed the red-shifted PL emission to the enlarged size of the perovskite crystalline grains.
We fabricated photovoltaic cells by using the dark-blue mirror-like perovskite films prepared from the solvent-treated two-step spin-coating process, the cross-sectional SEM image of which is shown in Fig. 7. It can be seen that the corresponding device is composed of a ∼150 nm TiO2 layer, a ∼350 nm dense perovskite layer, a ∼200 nm spiro-MeOTAD layer and a ∼150 nm Au contact layer. For comparison, we also prepared solar cells based on the dark-brown perovskite films by employing the same device fabrication procedure, where the thickness of the obtained perovskite films is also in the range of ∼350 nm (Fig. S13, ESI). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the resulting devices exhibited in Fig. 8 reveal that the dark-blue mirror-like perovskite film possesses significantly high incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) values (almost above 80% in the range of 400–700 nm) in the visible spectrum, indicating that the ∼350 nm thick perovskite film is sufficient for absorbing the entire range of the visible light, thus a high short-circuit current density (Jsc) could be expected.
The black lines in Fig. 9 present the photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves of the solar cells based on the dark-blue mirror-like and dark-brown perovskite films, measured with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and a delay time of 40 ms in reverse mode (from open-circuit to short-circuit status) under simulated AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) solar irradiation in air. Apparently, the dark-blue mirror-like film-based device exhibits the best Jsc value as high as 23.13 mA cm−2, which is relatively higher than that of the device fabricated with the dark-brown film, of which the Jsc is 21.12 mA cm−2. We attributed the improvement in Jsc to the enhanced photon-to-current conversion efficiency in the visible wavelength, especially in the range of 600 to 750 nm, resulting from the improved light absorption ability of the dark-blue film (Fig. 6a and 8). To probe the effect of film thickness, we modified the experimental parameters of the two-step spin-coating approach to produce dark-blue perovskite films with different thicknesses, which are depicted in Fig. S14 (ESI). Enhanced absorbance is observed for the thicker films (Fig. S15, ESI). As we increase the film thickness from 300 to 350 nm, an improvement in Jsc can be achieved (Fig. S16 and Table S1, ESI). However, further increasing the thickness from 350 to 450 nm induces a decline in photovoltaic performance, which might be ascribed to the long transport pathway for the photogenerated carriers. Similar behaviour is observed for the dark-brown films, as shown in Fig. S17 and Table S1 (ESI), demonstrating that ∼350 nm is the best thickness for the perovskite films employed in photovoltaic devices.

Table 1 summarizes the deduced Jsc, open-circuit voltage (Voc), and fill factor (FF) of the devices with the best performance, which are fabricated with the ∼350 nm perovskite films. Besides the enhancement in Jsc, the dark-blue mirror-like film-based device presents comparable Voc and higher FF values to those of the dark-brown film-based one. Altogether, it is because of the improvements in IPCE, Jsc, and FF that the solar cell fabricated by the dark-blue mirror-like film could achieve an overall power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 16.1%, almost ∼10% higher than that constructed with the dark-brown perovskite film. Histograms of the cell-performance characteristics measured for 60 separate devices are presented in Fig. S18 (ESI). As can be seen from the results, the photovoltaic devices produced by these two methods both demonstrate good reproducibility. The dark-blue mirror-like film-based devices exhibit an average Jsc of 22.68 ± 0.35 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.951 ± 0.013 V, FF of 0.695 ± 0.016, and PCE of 14.99 ± 0.57%, while the average Jsc, Voc, FF, PCE of the dark-brown films are 20.70 ± 0.34 mA cm−2, 0.955 ± 0.015 V, 0.674 ± 0.018, and 13.34 ± 0.52%, respectively. These results agree well with the best-performing devices shown in Fig. 9 and Table 1, further confirming that the dark-blue perovskite film possesses higher photovoltaic ability than the dark-brown one.
Perovskite film
Scan direction

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)
Dark-blue mirror-like films
Reverse
23.13
0.96
0.723
16.1
Forward
23.04
0.95
0.571
12.5
Dark-brown films
Reverse
21.12
0.97
0.699
14.3
Forward
21.20
0.96
0.542
11.0
Since the reverse scan could induce overestimation of the device performance due to the hysteresis effect in the J–V curves, we also recorded J–V curves in the forward mode (from short-circuit to open-circuit status), which are exhibited in Fig. 9 (red lines). For the dark-blue mirror-like perovskite film-based device, a FF of 0.571 and PCE of 12.5% can be observed using the forward mode, while the forward scan yields a FF of 0.542 and PCE of 11.0% for the dark-brown perovskite solar cell. The performance is apparently declined compared to that obtained from the reverse mode. We thus measured the steady-state photocurrent held at the maximum power point to explore the stabilized power output as a function of time (insets of Fig. 9). The photocurrent density of the dark-blue film stabilizes to about 19.9 mA cm−2 within one minute, demonstrating a stable PCE of 15.4%, which is 96% of the best performance deduced from the reverse scan, whereas the stable PCE under working conditions for the dark-brown perovskite film is 13.7%, 5% smaller than that obtained from reverse mode, indicating that the overestimation caused by the reverse scan is low, both for the dark-blue and dark-brown films. Besides, the similar behaviour of the steady-state performance of the solar cells fabricated by different perovskite films demonstrates that the J–V hysteresis does not result from the properties of the perovskite films used in our solar cells. Recently, researchers found that the TiO2 layer in perovskite photovoltaic cells might be a reason that leads to the J–V hysteresis. As can be seen from Fig. 7 and S13 (ESI), the thickness of the mesoporous TiO2 layer employed in our devices is about 130–150 nm, which is relatively low compared to most of the reported devices based on mesoporous TiO2 structures, where the thickness of the TiO2 layer is usually in the range of 200–350 nm. Thus, further work should be concentrated to eliminate the hysteresis effect in the J–V curves, especially the influence caused by the TiO2 layer. By precisely controlling the device constituents, hybrid photovoltaics based on the dark-blue mirror-like films with higher performance can be achieved.

In summary, we have developed a nonpolar solvent-treated two-step spin-coating approach to synthesize high quality dark-blue mirror-like perovskite thin films. XRD analysis reveals that the film is converted from an intermediate phase that is mainly composed of CH3NH3I–PbI2–DMSO. We find that this two-step method could provide improved infiltration of the nonpolar solvent into the intermediate phase film, which in turn affects the film microstructure and the light absorption efficiency. EQE spectra reveal that the dark-blue mirror-like perovskite films present higher incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) values in the visible spectrum, especially in the range of 600 to 750 nm, than the dark-brown films prepared by the conventional solvent engineering one-step spin-coating process, thus giving rising to a best Jsc value as high as 23.13 mA cm−2 and a PCE of 16.1%. Our method could provide a new candidate way for the fabrication of high performance perovskite solar cells.


The authors gratefully thank the support of the National Nature Science Foundation of China (No. 51402308, 51325202) and One Thousand Talent Plan of China. This work was also supported by the Young Talent Program of Shenyang National Laboratory for Materials Science (No. 2015FP29) and Innovation Foundation of Institute of Metal Research (No. SCJJ-2013-PY-07).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental procedures, characterization details and ESI data. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta08772d
‡ J. Q. and G. W. contributed to this work equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016