 DOI: 10.1039/C7CC00537G
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 3209-3212


Jialong
Duan
,

Jing
Wang
,

Qunwei
Tang
*,

Benlin
He
 and 

Wei
Wang


Institute of Materials Science and Engineering, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, 266100, P. R. China. E-mail: tangqunwei@ouc.edu.cn

Aramco Research Center-Boston, Aramco Services Company, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA

Received
20th January 2017
, Accepted 20th February 2017
First published on 20th February 2017
We present here a rational design and fabrication for all-weather dye-sensitized solar cells tailored with long-persistence phosphor materials, yielding a maximized photoelectric conversion efficiency of 8.86% under simulated sunlight and up to 26% in the dark.

Rapid developments of advanced mesoscopic-structured photovoltaics, including dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), quantum dot solar cells and perovskite solar cells, have recently attracted growing interest because of high efficiency, simple fabrication processes and scalable performances. Until now, the photoelectric conversion efficiency of DSSCs has been maximized to 14%; however, the climate-dependent solar cell efficiency limits stable electric energy generation in rainy and night conditions. Realization of solar cells that can persistently generate electricity in all weathers would be a highlighted object for future photovoltaic devices because of no climate limitations. How to break this impasse and to extend electricity-generating time has emerged in recent studies. In order to increase power output of solar cell modules, multi-functional devices including solar-to-electric conversion and machine-to-electric conversion (such as triboelectrification, piezoelectricity) have been constructed to harvest more energy. Recently, all-weather dye-sensitized solar cells (AW-DSSCs), proposed by our group for the first time, have provided a promising strategy to generate electricity in virtually any weathers via energy conversion in different ways. Following this line of thought, we have previously created a graphene tailored DSSC with sensitivity to sunlight and rainwater, demonstrating the feasibility to resolve weather-limited electricity generation on rainy days.

Although AW-DSSCs that can persistently generate electricity on rainy days have been successfully demonstrated, it is still a challenge to generate power in the dark. In current work, a robust step has been taken forward via incorporating long-persistence phosphor (LPP) materials into the photoanode of traditional DSSCs by the drop casting method and subsequent sintering treatment in air atmosphere, realizing experimental electricity generation in the dark. Fig. 1a shows a schematic diagram of an AW-DSSC, comprising an FTO glass-supported dye-TiO2/LPP photoanode, a transparent Pt counter electrode and an I−/I3− redox electrolyte. The operation principle shown in Fig. 1b suggests that the unabsorbed visible light can be absorbed by LPP materials, emitting monochromatic green or cyan light for electron injection from organic N719 dyes to the conduction band of TiO2. In a real power station application, partial light is reflected by the front side of the DSSC device to the rear side of front-row photovoltaics. After permeating the counter electrode and electrolyte, the light can be absorbed by LPP materials. In this fashion, the green- or cyan-emitting LPPs play a role of the “Sun” in the dark.
Due to the fact that DSSCs are sensitive to visible light, it is crucial to control luminescence wavelength for dye excitation. We have made two LPP materials with appropriate emission wavelength to match well the absorption wavelength of N719 dye. The compositions of the two different LPP materials are SrAl2O4:Eu2+Dy3+ (labeled as LPP1) and Sr4Al14O25:Eu2+Dy3+ (labeled as LPP2), and the crystalline structures are confirmed from XRD and EDS characterizations (see Fig. S1, ESI). In order to understand the luminescence properties of the LPP materials, they are characterized by their photoluminescence (PL) spectra, as shown in Fig. 1c and d. LPP1 and LPP2 exhibit sharp emission peaks centered at 512 and 493 nm, respectively. This phenomenon demonstrates that the two LPP materials can absorb ultraviolet and visible light, which can also be cross-checked by the absorption spectrum in Fig. S2 (ESI).
The re-absorption of fluorescence emitted from LPP materials by N719 dye is the foremost issue for an AW-DSSC to realize photoelectric conversion in the dark. How does one identify the electron jump from HOMO to LUMO energy level of N719 dye for electron production upon illumination by fluorescent LPP materials? The absorption spectrum of N719 dye manifests two characteristic peaks centered at 382 nm and 526 nm, demonstrating the great match with corresponding emission monochromatic light, as shown in Fig. 1c and d. With this consideration, impressive power conversion efficiency beyond that of a traditional device is expected to rely on the AW-DSSC when ceasing solar light irradiation.
Determination of typical photovoltaic performances is a precondition to establish advanced all-weather solar cells. Therefore, a traditional DSSC and LPP-tailored AW-DSSCs are fabricated, the J–V curves for which are stacked in Fig. 2a and all the parameters are summarized in Table 1. Upon illumination by simulated sunlight (100 mW cm−2, AM1.5), the traditional DSSC composed of a TiO2 photoanode, a redox electrolyte and a transparent Pt counter electrode yields a photoelectric conversion efficiency of 7.96%. By incorporating LPP materials into all-weather solar cells, the solar cell efficiencies are increased to 8.32% and 8.86% for LPP1- and LPP2-tailored photovoltaics, respectively. A mechanism behind this enhancement is the re-absorption of reflected light across FTO/Pt/electrolyte by the LPP layer and consequential emission of green or cyan fluorescence for helping dye excitation. This conclusion can be confirmed by the optical transmittance spectra in Fig. 2b. The reflected light has transmission in the range of 300–1000 nm and it reduces to a wavelength range of 400–1000 nm across FTO/Pt/electrolyte layer, and the maximized transparency is around 60% at 600 nm. Due to the down-conversion ability of as-mentioned LPP materials, some visible light will be re-absorbed to emit green fluorescence. By comparing the LPP1- and LPP2-tailored AW-DSSCs, the improved photovoltaic behaviors for the LPP2-based device may stem from the higher absorption by LPP2 material of visible light. In conclusion, the extraordinary LPP absorption ability for reflected visible light and subsequent monochromatic emission light to excite the dye molecules contribute to the improved performance of AW-DSSCs without increasing charge transfer resistance (see Fig. S3, ESI).
Devices

J
sc
 (mA cm−2)/Jsc (μA cm−2)

V
oc
/Voc (V)

η
/η (%)
FF/FF (%)

a Under simulated solar light (100 mW cm−2; AM1.5).
b In the dark.

Standard DSSC
15.08/—
0.736/—
7.96/—
71.7/—
(AW-DSSC)LPP1
15.75/43.17
0.736/0.404
8.32/25.6
71.7/58.7
(AW-DSSC)LPP2
16.29/51.47
0.743/0.437
8.86/26.8
73.2/59.6
Intriguingly, the dark J–V curve from the traditional DSSC starts from the coordinate origin, as shown in the inset of Fig. 2a, demonstrating no electron excitation within the interior. On the contrary, upon incorporating LPP materials into photovoltaics, expected power output appears in the dark (see Fig. 2c), and the corresponding parameters are summarized in Table 1. Owing to the irradiation by monochromatic light (LPP1, λ = 512 nm; LPP2, λ = 493 nm), the power conversion efficiencies can be up to 25.6% and 26.8% calculated from the light intensities of 40 μW cm−2 and 50 μW cm−2 according to η = (Pmax/Pinput)dark, where Pinput is characterized by a standard Si-solar cell-based irradiatometer. Moreover, ten devices for each AW-DSSC are repeatedly measured for a comprehensive comparison. The parameter statistical histograms corresponding to Jsc (short-circuit current density), Voc (open-circuit voltage), η and FF (fill factor) are distributed over a small range (see Fig. S4, ESI), representing an excellent reproducibility. In order to substantially analyze these data, error bars are delineated to show standard deviations (see Fig. 2d), depicting visually higher average values of the LPP2-based AW-DSSC than those of the LPP1-based AW-DSSC. Superior electricity generation of the LPP2-tailored DSSC in the dark is ascribed to higher absorption of visible light (see Fig. S2, ESI). The high dark efficiencies for the two AW-DSSCs arise from the relatively high conversion from monochromatic fluorescence to electricity. Thus, we can draw a conclusion that the incorporation of LPP materials into traditional DSSCs is a promising strategy to realize all-weather photovoltaics, which can persistently generate electricity in the daytime and in the dark.
Apart from the ability to generate electricity, persistent luminescence of TiO2/LPP electrodes is equally crucial for AW-DSSC devices. A long afterglow time means that LPP materials can reserve more solar energy and therefore produce considerable power output. The fluorescence for the two LPP materials under investigation can last for several hours after ceasing solar irradiation. Here, time-resolved PL delay spectra of LPP1 and LPP2 are employed to monitor their luminescence durability (Fig. 3a) and the corresponding optical images are captured for an hour (Fig. 3a and Fig. S5, ESI). Unlike other photo-response materials with ultrashort PL lifetimes of nanosecond and microsecond magnitudes, such as quantum dots and perovskite, LPP1 and LPP2 show prolonged fluorescent lifetime and intensity, ensuring efficient electricity generation of AW-DSSCs in the dark. As expected according to PL delay spectrum, the power output of the AW-DSSC based on LPP2 material has an abrupt reduction within the first several minutes and subsequently delays slowly over hours. By recording the dark J–V characteristics (Fig. 3b) for the LPP2-tailored AW-DSSC, the corresponding normalized parameters (including Jsc, Voc, Pmax, and FF) as a function of storage time in the dark are investigated as shown in Fig. 3c. Obviously, after operating in the dark for 30 min, ∼40% of initial power output still remains. Meanwhile, in order to cross-check the origin of photocurrent in the dark, the J–V curves for the AW-DSSCs at an afterglow time of 12 h are also determined, generating photocurrent values of approximately zero (see Fig. S6, ESI), demonstrating that there is no photocurrent for the solar cell with no fluorescence. In this fashion, further extension in luminescence lifetime with superior intensity of LPP materials or exploration of other advanced energy-storage materials, such as thermal-to-luminescence materials owing to the existence of thermal energy anywhere and anytime in the atmosphere, could open the way to the generation of electricity in the dark.
The high photo and dark solar cell efficiencies along with persistent power generation in the dark make the AW-DSSCs promising for advanced photovoltaics. Aiming to understand whether LPP materials have an adverse effect on the charge transfer, the on–off measurement is also studied in Fig. 3d. The photo-induced current density is up to the maximum synchronous with light irradiation for both LPP1- and LPP2-based AW-DSSCs, demonstrating that the charge transfer is unhindered when incorporating the LPP layer into the device (which can be confirmed by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy; see Fig. S3 and Table S1, ESI). Moreover, when removing the simulated solar light, the circuits quench to zero value for pristine DSSC, and positive values for AW-DSSC devices (see Fig. S7, ESI), which is highly consistent with dark J–V curves (Fig. 2c).
In summary, we have demonstrated the experimental realization of AW-DSSCs by incorporating LPP material into traditional DSSCs. Upon re-absorbing reflected light across the FTO/Pt/electrolyte and emitting monochromatic light, remarkable power conversion efficiencies of 25.6% and 26.8% are yielded for LPP1- and LPP2-tailored devices in complete darkness, respectively. Moreover, considerable luminescence durability at a delay time of an hour prolongs electricity generation time. This work represents a significant step forward in the struggle for producing electric energy in all weathers. With the pursuit of advanced luminescence materials, higher power output could be arguably obtained.
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21503202 and 61604143).
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cc00537g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017