 DOI: 10.1039/C2TA00771A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2217-2224

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Po-Yen
Chen
,

Rebecca
Ladewski
,

Rebekah
Miller
,

Xiangnan
Dang
,

Jifa
Qi
,

Forrest
Liau
,

Angela M.
Belcher
* and 

Paula T.
Hammond
*

Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. E-mail: hammond@mit.edu

Department of Material Science and Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. E-mail: belcher@mit.edu

The David H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

Received
20th October 2012
, Accepted 10th December 2012
First published on 11th December 2012
Layer-by-layer (LbL) assembly is a versatile approach to generate hybrid materials with unique properties. Here, LbL is employed to insert genetically engineered M13 bacteriophage nanowires into a porous polymeric network for efficient dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) photoanodes. Both dip and spray LbL processes can be utilized in fabricating novel porous titanium dioxide (TiO2) photoanodes that exhibit advantageous electron transport properties, characterized by a longer electron diffusion length compared to the nanoparticle DSSC. Incorporation of the high aspect-ratio M13 bacteriophage, which yields electron percolation pathway and facilitates electron diffusion within the photoanode, is shown to further enhance the efficiency and the diffusion length in DSSCs.

To preserve dwindling non-renewable energy resources and to reduce carbon dioxide emissions, solar energy is expected to play a crucial role as a future energy source. Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) represent a promising next-generation solar technology because of their ease of fabrication and high power conversion efficiency (PCE). In contrast to silicon solar cells, DSSCs rely on a series of interfacial events to collect a current from incoming photons. Visible light is absorbed by photosensitizers (i.e. dye) on the surface of the nanostructured titanium oxide (TiO2) photoanode. An electron is injected from the excited state of the dye into the conduction band of the TiO2, where it diffuses to the current collector (e.g. fluorine-doped tin oxide, FTO). The oxidized dye molecule is reduced by an electrolyte, and the circuit is completed by the reduction of the electrolyte at the platinum cathode. The architecture of the TiO2 phase is crucial to the performance of the device, determining the surface area available for light harvesting and the electron pathway for electron collection. Existing architectures, which rely on networks of randomly packed nanoparticles, are optimized for light harvesting but not necessarily for electron collection. The randomly packed architecture leads to longer pathways for diffusing electrons, and limits electron collection due to recombination with the excited dye or electrolyte (e.g. I3−).

Controlling the nanoscale morphology of the TiO2 photoanode to minimize electron recombination is crucial to improve the efficiency of DSSCs; however, this control is not necessarily accessible via doctor blading or screen printing. To address this challenge, strategies have been developed to create oriented nanostructures, such as nanotubes, nanorods, and nanofibers, and process them into photoanodes to form directional electron pathways and to improve the electron collection. While these methods improve the electron collection of DSSCs, complicated processing conditions limit their application in mass production.
Layer-by-layer (LbL) assembly is a widely used thin film deposition method that offers several advantages. It is a simple and cost-effective process with strong potential for scalability. Equally important, it allows for a high degree of nanoscale control over the thickness, morphology, and chemical composition of the resulting thin films. In the LbL process, polymeric, colloidal, nanoscale and biological components can be deposited on a substrate using complementary functionality such as hydrogen bonding or alternating charge. Nano- and micro-porous LbL assemblies have been formed using a simple pH post-treatment developed by Rubner et al., and these porous films have been used to template DSSC photoanodes. However, these earlier LbL-templated photoanodes resulted in efficiencies of approximately ∼1 to 2%; there is a need for greater control of the morphology and a better fabrication process to optimize the TiO2 electrode surface area, film thickness and electron pathways to achieve a higher PCE. By tuning the conditions for formation of microporous templates and optimizing the final structure, we show that an open-cell interconnected porous structure can contribute significantly to enhanced electron diffusion.
Traditionally, dip LbL requires a significant amount of time to form a thick coating. In recent years, great efforts have been devoted toward increasing the processing speed and adapting the process to roll-to-roll manufacturing. Thus, an extension of the LbL technique has been developed in which solutions of charged species are sprayed onto the desired substrate. While film buildup still occurs via complementary functionality, as it does in dip LbL, the automated spray LbL process enables rapid fabrication, and the process time can be reduced by more than a factor of 25 by convectively transporting the material to the substrate, instead of relying on diffusion for species movement. In this study, both dip and spray LbL were employed to fabricate porous TiO2 photoanode films, and the resulting device performances of the two assembly methods are compared.
To further optimize electron collection, a charged nanowire template, M13 bacteriophage (phage), was incorporated into the LbL-assembled porous films. The M13 phage is a type of filamentous virus composed of ∼2700 major coat proteins helically stacked around a single-stranded DNA. It exhibits a high aspect ratio, being ∼880 nm in length and 6.6 nm in diameter. Phage show excellent molecular recognition and self-assembly behavior and provide a genetically engineered platform to nucleate and to bind a wide variety of inorganic materials. Harnessing the power of nature to finely control nanostructures based upon the aggregation of weak interactions with peptide sequences has been increasingly studied for templating nanomaterials with a wide-variety of applications. Lee and co-workers demonstrated M13 phage as a sacrificial template that provides uniform complexation and alignment of TiO2 nanoparticles and resulted in the three-dimensional interconnected porous nanostructure of DSSC photoanodes.
Herein, we present a facile templating process to generate a three-dimensional porous TiO2 photoanode via dip and spray LbL assemblies. The resulting open and porous architectures enhance electron collection and exhibit improved PCE. Moreover, the presence of the high aspect ratio phage as a sacrificial nanowire template generates interconnections among the TiO2 crystallites. This network enhances the electron pathway inside the oriented photoanode, further increasing PCE and electron collection (as measured by electron diffusion length). This work indicates the potential power in using TiO2 architecture in combination with high aspect ratio structures to enhance performance. We anticipate that this approach can be also extended to other electrode materials for various types of energy applications.

Linear poly(ethyleneimine) (LPEI, ∼250000 Mw, Polysciences) and poly(acrylic acid) (PAA, ∼345000 Mw, 25 wt% aqueous solution, Polysciences) were used as received and dissolved in water at 20 mM concentration with respect to the repeating unit. The pH was adjusted to 4.75 using HCl and NaOH. The E3M13 (AEEE expressed on the pVIII major coat protein) phage was purified through the standard polyethylene glycol 8000 (PEG, AMRESCO) and NaCl solution precipitation and redissolved in phosphate buffered saline (PBS, Sigma Aldrich) to generate a stock solution. Aliquots of this stock solution for dip and spray LbL assemblies were further diluted with 5 mM sodium acetate (NaAc) buffer, pH 4.90, to achieve the final concentration to 2 × 1012 phage per mL. All water was deionized (18.2 MΩ, mill-Q pore).


The LbL films were constructed on FTO substrates (TEC15; thickness, 2.2 mm, 15 Ω □−1; Pilkington; USA) cleaned by sequential ultrasonication in Alconox solution, Milli-Q water, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol for 15 minutes each. After treatment in an oxygen plasma system for 15 minutes, the substrates were deposited with either a bilayer architecture (LPEI/PAA)n or a tetralayer architecture (LPEI/PAA/LPEI/Phage)m using a programmable slide stainer for dip LbL and an automatically programmable spray system for spray LbL. For dip LbL, each layer deposition involved four separate dip baths at the following conditions: 3 minute submersion in the polymer solution, followed by 3 water rinse steps at 30 seconds, 60 seconds, and 90 seconds (with agitation only in the third rinse bath). For the phage deposition, substrates were submerged for 15 minutes and rinsed in 2 separate baths of 5 mM NaAc buffer solution at pH 4.90 for 90 seconds each. Every 5 tetralayers, the phage solution was doped to maintain the original bath concentration. Spray LbL used a 5 second polymer or phage spray followed by 5 seconds for draining and then a 3 second water rinse spray. All solutions were sprayed at a flow rate of 0.25 mL s−1.


Oregon Green (OG) (488 carboxylic acid, succinimidyl ester, 5-isomer, Invitrogen) solution was prepared at 1.25 mg mL−1 in PBS solution. Meanwhile, a phage solution with a concentration of 5 × 1013 phage per mL was prepared in PBS. The phage solution and the OG solution were mixed at a 5 to 1 volume ratio and incubated in the dark on a rotator for 8 hours at room temperature. Following incubation, phage were precipitated with standard PEG–NaCl solution twice to minimize the residual free fluorophore. The final pellet was redissolved and diluted with 5 mM NaAc solution at pH 4.90 to achieve the final concentration of 2 × 1012 phage per mL for LbL deposition. The films with fluorophore-labeled phage were imaged simultaneously on a blue light transilluminator (Safe Imager™, Invitrogen), and the signal intensities were calculated by ImageJ.


Dried LbL films were exposed to 5 mM (NH4)2TiF6 (Alfa Aesar) aqueous solution at pH 2.25 for 30 minutes to achieve a porous microstructure. The top skin of the porous polymer films was removed using oxygen plasma treatment and erosion in 2 M NaCl solution at pH 2.25 (followed by a thorough water rinse) (Fig. S1(a)–(d)). A thin layer of TiO2 was then nucleated on the open, porous LbL templates using an in situ liquid phase deposition that involved immersion in equal volumes of 100 mM (NH4)2TiF6 and 200 mM B(OH)3 (Alfa Aesar) at 50 °C for over 10 hours. To burn off the template and anneal the TiO2, the films were sintered in a furnace at 300 °C for 6 hours and at 450 °C for 1 hour. The dip LbL procedure was repeated twice to achieve an appropriate pore size and thickness for the photoanodes. For the nanoparticle photoanodes, FTO glass substrates were immersed in a 40 mM aqueous TiCl4 solution at 80 °C for 30 min and washed with water and ethanol. A layer of commercial TiO2 paste (Solaronix, 13/400 nm, Ti-Nanoxide D/SP) was doctor-bladed on the substrates, and then annealed at 450 °C for 15 minutes. This doctor blading procedure with paste (coating, storing, drying and annealing) was repeated twice to achieve an appropriate photoanode thickness of ∼15 μm. Film thickness was monitored using a surface profilometer (Veeco Dektak). SEM images were obtained using JEOL instruments (JSM-6060 and 6700F) and sputtered with approximately 4 nm of Pd and Au before imaging. The surface morphologies after the deposition of phage within the film were monitored using AFM (Dimension 3100 Nanoman, Veeco Metrology). TEM observations of synthesized phage-nanowires were performed using JEOL 200CX TEMs with an accelerating voltage of 200 kV.


After annealing, the photoanodes were cooled to 80 °C and immersed in a 0.2 mM N749 dye (Ruthenium 620-1H3TBA, Solaronix) and 20 μM chenodeoxycholic acid (Sigma Aldrich) in pure ethanol (200 proof, KOPTEC), and kept at room temperature over 24 hours. The counter-electrode was a 100 nm-thick platinum film sputtered on a FTO substrate. The electrolyte employed was a solution of 0.6 M 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide (Sigma Aldrich), 0.03 M I2 (Sigma Aldrich), 0.10 M guanidinium thiocyanate (Sigma Aldrich) and 0.5 M 4-tert-butyl pyridine (Sigma Aldrich) in a mixture of acetonitrile and valeronitrile (volume ratio, 85:15). The dyed TiO2 photoanodes and platinum counter-electrodes were assembled into a sandwich-type cell and sealed with a hot-melt 25 μm Surlyn (Solaronix). The photoanode had dimensions of ∼0.16 cm2 (4 mm × 4 mm), further determined from a calibrated digital camera image. Masks made of black plastic tape were attached on the other side of FTO to prevent the light reflection (Fig. S6). Photovoltaic measurements were performed using an AM 1.5 solar simulator (Photo Emission Tech.). The power of the simulated light was calibrated to 100 mW cm−2 by using a reference silicon photodiode with a power meter (1835-C, Newport) and a reference silicon solar cell to reduce the mismatch between the simulated light and AM 1.5. J–V curves were obtained by applying an external bias to the cell and measuring the generated photocurrent with a Keithley model 2400 digital source meter. The voltage step and delay time of photocurrent were 10 mV and 100 ms, respectively. The dye loading of the photoanode was determined by eluting the N749 dye from the TiO2 electrode into a known amount of 0.1 M NaOH and using a UV-Vis calibration curve to determine the concentration of dye in solution and thus to total amount of dye per film volume.


EIS of DSSCs were measured using a Solartron 1260 frequency response analyzer. The obtained impedance spectra were fit to a reduced transmission line model with Z-view software (v3.2b, Scribner Associates). The spectra were measured at various forward bias voltages (from 0.85 to 0.45 V) in the frequency range ∼0.1 Hz to ∼1 MHz with oscillation potential amplitudes of 10 mV at room temperature. The photoanode was connected to the working electrode. The platinum electrode was connected to the auxiliary electrode and reference electrodes. The impedance measurements were carried out at forward bias in dark conditions.


IPCE spectra were measured with a commercial IPCE measurement system (Model QEX7, PV Measurements, Inc.). Under full computer control, light from a xenon arc lamp was focused through a grating monochromator, equipped with two 1200 g mm−1 diffraction gratings, onto the photovoltaic cell under test. The monochromator was incremented through the spectrum from 350 nm to 900 nm to generate the spectral response of IPCE with a spectral resolution of 10 nm. The incident photon flux was determined using a calibrated silicon photodiode (calibrated by PV Measurements, Inc.). Measurements were performed in a short-circuit condition, while the cell was under background illumination from a bias light of 50 mW cm−2. Bias illumination was from the same direction as the monochromatic light, which was from the FTO side. The monochromatic beam was chopped using a computer-controlled shutter at a frequency of 4 Hz, and averaging of up to 40 shutter cycles was employed.



Scheme 1(a) illustrates the processes of dip and spray LbL assembly using alternating layers of positively charged LPEI, negatively charged PAA and phage. Traditional approaches involve dipping the substrate into solution for several minutes during each adsorption step. During this period, the polyelectrolytes or phage diffuse from the bulk solution and deposit on the surface in an equilibrium conformation. Spray LbL assembly involves short spray exposures of a few seconds per cycle for each charged species, which results in a kinetically trapped adsorption. Because of the different mechanisms, deposition through spray LbL is orders of magnitude faster than dip LbL.

In the current study, bilayer architectures without phage (LPEI/PAA)n and tetralayer architectures with phage (LPEI/PAA/LPEI/phage)m are assembled both via dip LbL and spray LbL. As shown in Scheme 1(b), a porous transition occurs for (LPEI/PAA)n and (LPEI/PAA/LPEI/phage)m films upon exposure to a low pH environment (pH 2.25). The acidic condition changes the charge density of the polyelectrolytes, neutralizing the acid groups of PAA and protonating the amine groups of LPEI extensively, resulting in breakage and reformation of ionic crosslinks within the swollen LbL films. Syneresis occurs, creating pockets of water within the film that become microscale to nanoscale pores when the films are recovered and dried. Having established the porous morphology desired for the photoanode, a liquid phase deposition reaction is then used to achieve a conformal surface coating of TiO2. A subsequent calcination step removes the sacrificial polymer and phage template to generate an anatase TiO2 photoanode. The resulting structures (with and without the phage) are depicted in Scheme 1(c). Photoexcited electrons are injected into the interconnected porous TiO2 architecture, which transports the electrons directionally to enhance electron collection and lower recombination at the anatase TiO2–electrolyte interface. The incorporation of the phage templates improves the interconnection between TiO2 crystallites and optimizes the electron pathways within the oriented photoanodes.

Fig. 1(a) and (b) show the dip and spray (LPEI/PAA)n growth curves (film thickness versus bilayer numbers), respectively, before and after the porous transition. While the film thickness increases linearly for both dip and spray LbL, the increase in thickness per dip bilayer is much greater than that per spray bilayer, indicating that more material is adsorbed in each dip cycle. Although spray and dip LbL typically yield very similar bilayer thicknesses, LPEI/PAA is a system that undergoes exponential growth that is caused by interdiffusion of polymer during adsorption. In dip LbL, the longer adsorption provides time for greater and more extensive interdiffusion of excess polymer and more rapid film growth compared to the more kinetically controlled adsorption in spray LbL.
These variations in the thickness and nature of film composition cause differences in the pore size and morphology between the dip and spray LbL-templated photoanodes, as shown in the cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images (Fig. 1(a) and (b)). The dip LbL-templated photoanode displays large, elongated pores, while the spray LbL-templated photoanode contains small, spherical pores. The pore volume, calculated by the ratio of the difference between final and initial thickness to the final thickness, also depends on the number of deposited bilayers and can be as high as ∼80%. Since pore size, shape and volume strongly affect the surface area available for dye adsorption on the photoanode, different fabrication parameters for dip and spray LbL processes are chosen to generate high dye loading photoanodes (see Fig. S2 for details). X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns shown in Fig. 2 indicate that anatase TiO2 photoanodes are generated; a commercial TiO2 nanoparticle photoanode is used as a reference.
After assembling the dye-adsorbed photoanodes with electrolytes and counter electrodes to complete the device, the PCE and incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the LbL-based DSSCs were compared to those with a nanoparticle photoanodes (Fig. 3). Table 1 summarizes the related photovoltaic parameters of the DSSCs: open circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF) and short circuit current density (JSC). The nanoparticle device gave an efficiency of 5.86%, whereas the PCE of dip and spray LbL-templated device were 5.13% and 5.66%, respectively. The trend results from the different JSC and dye loading of the DSSCs. In general, JSC is determined by light harvesting efficiency, charge injection yield and charge collection characteristics. Since the charge injection efficiency approaches unity when N749 dye (commonly known as black dye) and TiO2 are used in this study, the light harvesting and electron collection are investigated separately. The dip and spray LbL-templated devices show ∼98% and ∼106% of JSC with only ∼52% and ∼64% of the adsorbed dye compared to the nanoparticle device, respectively. This evidence indicates both interconnected porous LbL-templated photoanodes exhibit efficient electron collection, while the randomly packed nanoparticle photoanode is designed for sufficient light harvesting but is not ideal for efficient electron collection.
Type
Thickness (μm)

V
OC (mV)
FF (%)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
PCE (%)
Dye loading (mmole cm−3)
Dip LbL
14.8 ± 0.1
706
60.0
12.31
5.13
34.3 ± 0.7
Spray LbL
10.6 ± 0.2
708
59.8
13.39
5.66
42.1 ± 0.9
Nanoparticle
14.7 ± 0.3
718
64.7
12.61
5.86
66.0 ± 1.9
This observation is supported by electron diffusion length (Ln) measurements, which characterize the average distance that electrons travel before recombination occurs. The Ln of DSSC photoanodes are calculated from EIS and are shown in Fig. 8(a), and the EIS diagrams and fitting results (solid lines) at 600 mV are also shown in Fig. 8(b). Ln can be calculated from Ln = L × (RREC/RT)1/2, where L is the film thickness, RREC is electron recombination resistance, and RT is electron transport resistance. RREC and RT were obtained by fitting the measured EIS to the equivalent circuit (known as transmission line model, shown in Fig. S5). LbL-templated DSSCs show a longer Ln (∼4 to 5 times the film thickness) than the nanoparticle DSSC (∼2 times). Therefore, the interconnected structure of the TiO2 network has a favorable impact on electron transport, which is able to compensate for losses in light harvesting and thus still enables high PCE. Further developments in the porous structure to yield a higher surface area through the generation of increased porosity and finer pores would lead to further enhancements in the PCE.
To further optimize electron pathways within the photoanode, a phage nanowire template was incorporated within the LbL templates. A transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image reveals that the phage-templated TiO2 nanowires formed via the liquid phase deposition reaction are composed of ordered crystallite interconnections (Fig. 4), indicating a nanowire network can be formed after the calcination process that has the capability to transport electrons more effectively and thus retard recombination. To maximize phage adsorption and to minimize phage bundling in the LbL films, manipulation of the pH of the phage deposition bath is required (Fig. 5(a)). At lower pH values where the phage is less charged, the phage bundle into aggregates and appear to deposit in thick, rope-like layers. Conversely, at higher pH, phage deposition decreases. To minimize phage bundling, which would adversely affect the aspect ratio of the resulting nanowires, and to maximize phage adsorption, the intermediate condition of pH 4.90 was chosen for all experiments for phage bath.
To ensure that the phage remain distributed throughout the film, high MW polyelectrolytes are used to reduce phage interdiffusion and surface segregation after LPEI and PAA deposition (Fig. 5(b)). After the porous transition, the phage-containing LbL films show a similar morphology as those without phage (growth curves for these films are shown in Fig. S3). To quantify the amount of phage incorporation, the fluorescent signal intensities of the dip and spray tetralayers containing a fluorophore-labeled phage were measured (Fig. 6). The linear growth behavior of the fluorescent signal indicates a consistent increment of phage is incorporated into each tetralayer for both dip and spray LbL. These experiments also indicate that more phage particles are adsorbed in dip tetralayers than in spray LbL tetralayers. By tracking the amount of phage depleted from the dip baths and comparing the fluorescent signals between dip and spray LbL (see ESI), the volume fraction of phage was calculated to be ∼9% and ∼5% in the as-formed dip and spray LbL films (prior to the porous transition), respectively. These volume fractions greatly exceed the electronic percolation threshold based on the calculation for the phage aspect ratio, and thus the phage templates form a percolative network to generate interconnected TiO2 crystallite chains throughout the photoanode.
To realize the effect of the interconnected TiO2 wires embedded in the architecture, the phage-containing LbL-templated device performance and IPCE were investigated, and the results are shown in Fig. 7, with corresponding parameters summarized in Table 2. The PCE was found to increase to 6.15% from 5.13% and to 6.21% from 5.66% for phage-containing dip and spray LbL-templated devices, respectively. Both the phage-containing dip and spray LbL-templated devices can further achieve 114% of the JSC compared to the nanoparticle device, while the dye loadings (and thus light harvesting) are almost the same as the non-phage LbL-templated devices. These results demonstrate that the phage-containing photoanodes exhibit excellent electron collection and thus generate a high JSC. Moreover, the extent of enhancement correlates with the amount of phage templates assembled, so the larger incorporation levels of phage in dip LbL leads to a larger increase in PCE and JSC. Also, the inclusion of phage-templated nanowires enhances the Ln of LbL-templated devices, shown in Fig. 8(a). The Ln of the LbL-templated devices with phage templates were further improved to ∼7 to 8 times the film thickness (EIS data are shown in Fig. 8(b)). These results show that the inclusion of phage-templated nanowires in LbL-templated photoanodes can help TiO2 interconnection and suppress random aggregation crystallites inside the three-dimensional photoanodes, which enhances electron lifetimes further and reduces the chance of interfacial recombination on the grain boundaries.
Photoanodes type
Thickness (μm)

V
OC (mV)
FF (%)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
PCE (%)
Dye loading (mmole cm−3)
Phage-containing dip LbL
12.3 ± 0.9
712
59.9
14.42
6.15
35.4 ± 2.5
Phage-containing spray LbL
14.3 ± 0.2
692
62.5
14.37
6.21
45.7 ± 1.9

In summary, porous photoanodes were obtained using an inexpensive, water-based LbL procedure. The DSSCs employing the LbL-templated photoanodes show excellent photocurrent and high PCE despite relatively low dye loading compared to nanoparticle DSSC. Inclusion of phage allowed for the formation of a percolative network, yielding further enhancements in the PCE and JSC due to the improved electron diffusion length. Further modification of the LbL-templated DSSC to systematically vary pore size and achieve increased dye loading is currently underway. This study demonstrates that the formation of a percolation network of TiO2 nanowires can promote enhanced electron transport properties of DSSC photoanodes, ultimately leading to higher efficiencies. It also illustrates a simple and readily scalable approach to DSSC manufacture that can be adapted to many types of substrates, and which may ultimately be designed to replace more traditional nanoparticle technologies.


This work was supported by Eni, S.p.A (Italy) through the MIT Energy Initiative Program and by NSF Grant #0645960.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2ta00771a
‡ These authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013