 DOI: 10.1039/C4CC06071G
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 12738-12741


Yihui
Wu
,

Bin
Zhou
,

Mingrun
Li
,

Chi
Yang
,

Wen-Hua
Zhang
* and 

Can
Li
*

State Key Laboratory of Catalysis, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy, Dalian 116023, China. E-mail: whzhang@dicp.ac.cn; canli@dicp.ac.cn

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China

Received
4th August 2014
, Accepted 26th August 2014
First published on 1st September 2014
A facile colloidal approach was developed to prepare cubic Cu2(Ge1−x,Snx)(S3−y,Sey) nanocrystals (NCs) (0 ≤ x ≤ 1, 0 ≤ y ≤ 3). The band gaps of the NCs can be tuned in the range of 1.35–2.45 eV by varying the chemical compositions, and the NCs display promising applications in solar energy utilization.

Colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals (NCs) have been widely studied and their great promising applications have been demonstrated in photovoltaics, photodetectors, light-emitting diodes (LEDs), bioimaging, thermoelectrics, and so on. The field of semiconductor NCs synthesis has been dominated by binary systems, in which precise control over their morphology and crystal phase has been well developed. In contrast, multi-component NCs offer the advantages of tunable optical and electronic properties that cannot be achieved in binary systems. Moreover, the band gaps of the multi-component NCs can be consecutively tailored by varying the ratios of the constituents over a wide range, providing an alternative to the quantum confinement effect that occurs for materials with sufficiently small size. Currently, it is highly desirable to extend the colloidal synthesis to the multi-component NCs, while the success is very limited compared to the binary system.

As environmentally benign materials with the capability of band gap tailoring in a wide range, Cu-based ternary and quaternary chalcogenides have received considerable interest in electronics. High-quality Cu-based multi-component NCs, including Cu2(S,Se), CuIn(Te,Se)2, Cu2Ge(S,Se)3, Cu2Zn(Cd)Sn(S,Se)4, Cu2Zn(Sn,Ge)S4, and Cu(In,Ga)Se2, have recently been prepared via colloidal chemistry, showing a remarkable promise in photovoltaic cells. Nevertheless, in comparison with the binary ones, it remains a much bigger challenge to balance the reactivity of each precursor for a multi-component system.
Cu2MX3 (M = Ge, Sn, X = S, Se) bulk materials are p-type semiconductors with a band gap of 1.5 eV, 0.78 eV, 0.8–1.35 eV and 0.8–1.1 eV for Cu2GeS3, Cu2GeSe3, Cu2SnS3 and Cu2SnSe3, respectively. All of these materials exhibit a high absorption coefficient and high carrier mobility, which make them attractive for fabricating photoelectronic devices. Cabot et al. have developed the colloidal synthesis of Cu2GeSe3 nanoparticles along with their thermoelectric properties. Meng et al. have prepared Cu2Sn(Sx,Se1−x)3 NCs with tunable composition in the range of 0 < x ≤ 1. We have realized the synthesis of a family of monodisperse Cu2Ge(S3−x,Sex) alloyed colloidal NCs with well-controlled composition and engineered their band gaps across the entire range (0 ≤ x ≤ 3). However, due to the different reactivity of Ge and Sn precursors in colloidal synthesis, fabrication of monodispersed Cu2(Ge1−x,Snx)(S3−y,Sey) NCs with tunable Ge–Sn compositions by colloidal chemistry remains undeveloped. In this work, we report the successful synthesis of Cu2(Ge1−x,Snx)(S3−y,Sey) (0 ≤ x ≤ 1, 0 ≤ y ≤ 3) NCs in a highly controlled way via colloidal chemistry. The chemical compositions of the resulting NCs are tunable in the entire compositional range (0 ≤ x ≤ 1, 0 ≤ y ≤ 3), accompanied by the simultaneous tailoring of their band gaps in the range of 1.35–2.45 eV. The application potential of the as-synthesized NCs as photovoltaic materials was finally demonstrated by fabricating nanocrystal solar cells consisting of n-type CdS nanorods and p-type Cu2(Ge1−x,Snx)(S3−y,Sey) (0 ≤ x ≤ 1, 0 ≤ y ≤ 3) NCs through a cost-effective solution process.
The synthesis of Cu2(Ge1−x,Snx)(S3−y,Sey) colloidal NCs was performed on the basis of our previous report incorporated with modifications. Typically, copper(II) acetylacetonate [Cu(acac)2] and tin(II) bromide (SnBr2) were dissolved in dried oleylamine (OLA). The flask was heated to 120 °C under vacuum, into which a specific ratio of germanium tetrachloride (GeCl4)/tin bromide (SnBr2) was then injected. Meanwhile, S and SeO2 were dissolved respectively in dried OLA and octadecylene (ODE), and were then injected into the above OLA solution at 160 °C. The mixed solution was finally heated to 280 °C and the reaction lasted for 2 hours to yield the targeted NCs. Full experimental details can be found in the ESI.

Fig. 1 presents the powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the as-synthesized Cu2(Ge1−x,Snx)S3 NCs with 0 ≤ x ≤ 1. All diffraction peaks of the Cu2GeS3 NCs match well with the major peaks of cubic-structured Cu2GeS3 (JCPDS No. 65-5562, F3m). For Cu2SnS3 NCs, it was found that our XRD patterns cannot be indexed to any existing patterns in the standard JCPDS database. Therefore, a diffraction pattern was simulated for Cu2SnS3 on the basis of the F3m cubic structure with an experimental lattice parameter of a = b = c = 5.442 Å. As presented in Fig. 1, the experimental XRD pattern matches very well with the simulated one (details are given in Table S1, ESI), indicating that the as-synthesized Cu2SnS3 exhibits the same cubic structure (F3m) as Cu2GeS3, which is in line with the reported results. Additionally, the major diffraction peaks systematically shift toward lower angles with increasing Sn contents, meaning that the larger Sn atoms have replaced the smaller Ge atoms in the lattices of the resulting NCs. Very importantly, no additional peak or peak splitting can be detected by XRD, which rules out the possibility of phase separation that often takes place in the preparation of multi-component colloidal NCs. Elemental line scan of Cu2(Ge0.5,Sn0.5)S3 NCs (Fig. S1, ESI) disclosed the homogenous distribution of the four elements involved. These results demonstrate that pure phase Cu2(Ge1−x,Snx)S3 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) NCs with cubic structure were successfully obtained, featured by their highly tunable compositions across the entire range (0 ≤ x ≤ 1). This is in good agreement with the behavior of homogenous alloys, thus confirming the formation of alloyed NCs with homogeneous distribution of Ge and Sn in the Cu2(Ge1−x,Snx)S3 matrix.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was then performed to reveal the microstructures of the Cu2(Ge1−x,Snx)S3 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) NCs, as shown in Fig. 2. The low-magnification TEM displays a uniform size distribution of the Cu2(Ge1−x,Snx)S3 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) NCs. The polycrystalline selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns of the NCs show clearly three diffraction rings that match well with the (111), (220), and (311) lattice planes of the cubic Cu2(Ge1−x,Snx)S3, which is consistent with the XRD results (shown in Fig. 1). High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images show that all Cu2(Ge1−x,Snx)S3 NCs are highly crystalline with continuous lattice fringes across the NC. Moreover, the interplanar crystal spacing of d111 increases from 0.307 nm to 0.314 nm with increasing Sn contents, confirming that the larger Sn atoms have successfully substituted the smaller Ge atoms in the lattices of the resulting NCs. Elemental composition of the as-prepared Cu2(Ge1−x,Snx)S3 NCs was analyzed by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) (Table S2, ESI), disclosing that all samples have a similar Cu/S molar ratio of ∼2/3, and the increase of Sn content was accompanied by the decrease of Ge content in the range of 0 ≤ x ≤ 1. Therefore, we have achieved the controlled growth of well-crystalline Cu2(Ge1−x,Snx)S3 NCs with a narrow size distribution (Fig. S2, ESI) and varied Sn/Ge ratios across the whole compositional range (0 ≤ x ≤ 1). It is well known that semiconducting alloys are characteristic of the tunable band gaps that change in a nearly linear manner with their compositions. UV-vis-NIR absorption spectra of Cu2(Ge1−x,Snx)S3 NCs (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) were therefore acquired to study their optical properties and to determine their band gaps. A clear solution of each Cu2(Ge1−x,Snx)S3 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) NC sample showed a continuous absorption spectrum spanning the whole visible spectrum (shown in Fig. 3a). Tauc plots (Fig. S3, ESI) were performed to assess the optical band gaps with a relationship of α2versus energy, revealing that Cu2GeS3 NCs exhibit a direct band gap of 2.45 eV. Moreover, as expected, the band gap energies are progressively reduced from 2.45 eV to 1.57 eV upon increasing the Sn content in Cu2(Ge1−x,Snx)S3 NCs (0 ≤ x ≤ 1), presenting a nearly linear relationship between the band gaps and the Sn/Ge contents (Fig. 3b). These results further manifest the successful formation of homogeneous alloyed Cu2(Ge1−x,Snx)S3 NCs (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) in the present experiment.
To further expand the present colloidal synthesis of Cu2(Ge1−x,Snx)S3 NCs to a complex multi-component system, we have exploited the synthesis of Cu2(Ge1−x,Snx)(S3−y,Sey) NCs (0 ≤ x ≤ 1, 0 ≤ y ≤ 3), where the Ge/Sn molar ratio was kept at 1 (i.e., x = 0.5) for simplicity. Fig. 3c shows the XRD patterns of Cu2(Ge0.5,Sn0.5)(S3−y,Sey) (0 ≤ y ≤ 3) NCs. No diffraction peaks due to impurities can be observed and the major reflection peaks systematically shifted toward lower angles with increasing Se content, again indicating that the larger Se atoms have successfully incorporated into the lattice of the resulting NCs. TEM, HRTEM, SAED, EDS (Fig. S4 and Table S2, ESI), and UV-vis-NIR absorption spectra (Fig. S5, ESI) all confirm the formation of the alloyed Cu2(Ge0.5,Sn0.5)(S3−y,Sey) (0 ≤ y ≤ 3) NCs with a narrow size distribution (Fig. S6, ESI). Moreover, the band gap energies further varied gradually from 1.95 eV to 1.35 eV with increasing Se content (Fig. 3d) with a nearly linear relationship. Therefore, we have presented a facile solution approach for complete synthesis of Cu2(Ge1−x,Snx)(S3−y,Sey) (0 ≤ x ≤ 1, 0 ≤ y ≤ 3) NCs in a highly controlled way, achieving control over their chemical compositions, optical properties, and band gaps across the entire compositional range (0 ≤ x ≤ 1, 0 ≤ y ≤ 3).
We then turned to study the photoelectrochemical (PEC) properties of the Cu2(Ge1−x,Snx)(S3−y,Sey) (0 ≤ x ≤ 1, 0 ≤ y ≤ 3) NCs by measuring the transient photocurrents of the NC films on fluoride tin oxide (FTO) substrates in a photoelectrochemical cell. Photocurrent obtained from the Cu2(Ge0.5,Sn0.5)(S2,Se) NCs electrode was negative (cathode current) (Fig. 4a), indicative of p-type semiconductor behaviour. And the photocurrents of the NC film increased rapidly upon illumination, and dropped immediately to their pre-illumination values without apparent degradation over many cycles upon turning the illumination on and off. Similar phenomena were also observed for other Cu2(Ge1−x,Snx)(S3−y,Sey) (0 ≤ x ≤ 1, 0 ≤ y ≤ 3) NC films (Fig. S7, ESI). Therefore, the Cu2(Ge1−x,Snx)(S3−y,Sey) NCs are sensitive to light illumination and are chemically stable under experimental conditions.
Currently, the demand for low-cost photovoltaic cells boosts the development of solar cells consisting of semiconductor NCs via scalable, solution-processed device fabrication. We have hence employed the p-type Cu2(Ge0.5,Sn0.5)(S2,Se) NCs as a model material to assemble photovoltaic devices due to their relative simplicity in the formation of smooth nanocrystal films and their relatively suitable band gap (1.75 eV). The devices were fabricated with the configuration of FTO/TiO2 compact layer (c-TiO2)/CdS nanorods (NRs)/Cu2(Ge0.5,Sn0.5)(S2,Se) NCs/Spiro-MeOTAD/Au. The Cu2(Ge0.5,Sn0.5)(S2,Se) NCs were deposited by spin coating of a nanocrystal solution via a layer-by-layer approach. A typical cross-sectional SEM image (Fig. S8, ESI) indicates that the resulting NC film has a thickness of ∼1000 nm, slightly greater than the height of the CdS NRs (∼800 nm), thus separating the top of the CdS NRs from the Spiro-MeOTAD/Au to avoid the short circuit. The corresponding device performances are characterized by current density–voltage (J–V) measurements under simulated AM 1.5 G (100 mW cm−2) solar irradiation in air. Fig. 4b presents the photovoltaic characteristics of Cu2(Ge0.5,Sn0.5)(S2,Se) NC-based solar cells. An open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.60 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 1.32 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.39 were obtained, resulting in a power conversion efficiency (η) of 0.31%. A control cell device was also fabricated under the same conditions as the NC cell while no NCs were involved, showing negligible efficiency. Therefore, these results demonstrate the application potential of the Cu2(Ge1−x,Snx)(S3−y,Sey) NCs in solar energy conversions. The efficiency is low for the present device. One possible reason is that the solution processed NCs are capped by organic ligands, which results in insulating barriers between NCs that militate against efficient carrier transports when processed into films, thus decreasing the photocurrent generated from them. Moreover, small NCs show high specific surface areas, thus a large interface exists in the resulting NC film, leading to high charge recombination probability, thereby deteriorating the device performance. It is expected that the device performance could be improved significantly for the NC-based photovoltaic cells by optimizing the device fabrication, for example, by annealing the nanocrystal films using Se vapour to form large crystal grains.
In summary, we have shown a complete synthesis of Cu2(Ge1−x,Snx)(S3−y,Sey) NCs in a highly controllable way across the entire compositional range (0 ≤ x ≤ 1, 0 ≤ y ≤ 3) via a facile colloidal approach. The cubic-structured Cu2(Ge1−x,Snx)–(S3−y,Sey) NCs displayed uniform size distributions along with the highly crystalline nature. The band gaps of the NCs could be effectively tuned in the range of 1.35–2.45 eV by varying their chemical compositions. Preliminary application in photovoltaic devices has been demonstrated by using Cu2(Ge1−x,Snx)(S3−y,Sey) NCs as a light absorber in fully solution-processed solar cells, generating 0.31% power conversion efficiency under AM1.5 illumination. These results manifest that Cu2(Ge1−x,Snx)(S3−y,Sey) NCs are potential candidates for solar energy utilization.
We are grateful for financial support from the “Hundred Talents Program” of the Chinese Academy of Sciences and the National Science Foundation of China (No. 20873141)
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, XRD patterns, TEM and HRTEM images, EDX spectra, UV-vis spectra and Tauc plots. See DOI: 10.1039/c4cc06071g
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014