 DOI: 10.1039/C2NR11317A
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 448-450

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Cho-Tung
Yip
,

Min
Guo
,

Haitao
Huang
*,

Limin
Zhou
*,

Yu
Wang
 and 

Chuanjun
Huang


Department of Applied Physics, the Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR, China. E-mail: aphhuang@polyu.edu.hk; Fax: +852-23337629; Tel: +852-27665694

Department of Mechanical Engineering, the Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China. E-mail: mmlmzhou@polyu.edu.hk; Fax: +852-23654703; Tel: +852-2766 6663

Received
16th September 2011
, Accepted 26th November 2011
First published on 12th December 2011
We demonstrate a simple method to fabricate open-ended TiO2 nanotube (NT) based dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), where the NTs are attached to either TiO2 nanorods (NRs) grown on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) or FTO directly by nanoparticles (NPs). A completely hole-through TiO2 NT layer is fabricated via a two-step anodization with heat treatment immediately after the first anodization. DSSCs with the open-ended NTs show better photovoltaic performance than those with close-ended NTs, due to the enhanced charge transport in the open-ended structure. Under optimum conditions, DSSCs fabricated with the open-ended NT layer exhibit a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 19.10 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.68 V, a fill factor (FF) of 0.49, and a power conversion efficiency (eff) of 6.3%.

By making good use of the large surface area of interconnecting TiO2 NPs, O'Regan and Grätzel achieved a breakthrough in producing efficient DSSCs. With the improvement in light absorption, dye anchoring and electron injection from dye molecules to the electron transporting layer, the power conversion efficiency of DSSCs can be enhanced to be greater than 10%. Although the interconnecting TiO2 NP networks provide large surface area for dye loading, due to the photoelectron recombination induced by the random network and grain boundaries between NPs with a longer electron transportation path before reaching the electrode, the thickness of efficient NP-based DSSCs is limited to 10 to 14 μm. In contrast, 1-D TiO2 NT-based photoanodes are expected to show better photoelectron collection efficiency by virtue of the 1-D pathway for electron transport. It has been reported that the recombination time of photoelectrons in the NT layer is 10 times greater than that in the NP layer, while the electron transport times for both layers are similar. Hence, the effective thickness of the NT layer is 3 times that of the NP layer, leading to increased dye loading and enhanced light harvesting.

A variety of synthesis methods have been reported for 1-D metal oxide nanostructures, including template-assisted fabrication,hydrothermal method,thermal evaporation,electrospinning, and electrochemical anodization. Due to the simplicity of fabrication and high reproducibility, particular attention has been paid to the anodization method for DSSCs. However, with electrochemically anodized NTs, the close-ended morphology results in poor hole transport, low dye loading due to trapping of air inside the NTs, and less photon flux due to light reflection at the caps of the NT arrays.
To overcome the above limitations, open-ended TiO2 NTs are preferred. Many methods have been proposed for the fabrication of open-ended TiO2 NTs, including acid etching and reduction of anodization voltage. The latter method has the advantage of simplicity in fabrication and is acid free. However, this method can only form a small orifice at the bottom of the NTs. A completely open-ended NT array needs a very high voltage step, and this brings the potential hazard of overheating the electrolyte during the anodization process due to high current, resulting in poor quality of the film. Here we use a simple method to fabricate a free-standing NT array with a flat bottom and fully opened NT ends for the photoanode of a DSSC, where the transparent TiO2 NT array is transferred and attached to the FTO substrate without any cracks. Efficiency of 6.3% can be achieved in the open-ended NT-based DSSC, compared with 4% and 2.5% for P25-based and close-ended NT-based DSSCs, respectively.
Two-step anodization is adopted for fabrication of the free-standing open-ended TiO2 NT layer. NTs of various lengths can be formed by varying the duration of anodization. The wall thickness and inner diameter of the NTs are about 20 and 50 nm, respectively. Fig. 1c shows the two-layer structure of NTs after the second anodization. Heat treatment at 270 °C should be conducted after the first anodization and while the obtained NT layer is still in amorphous state (ESI, Fig. S5). During the second anodization, further etching occurs from the amorphous close-ended bottom of the first layer and hence the second layer is formed with the ends of the first layer opened. Due to the difference in chemical stability between the heat treated first layer and the as-anodized second layer, the open-ended first layer can be detached from the second layer by either H2O2 etching or a prolonged second anodization (Fig. 1). A flat and free-standing open-ended TiO2 NT membrane is thus fabricated.
Four different types of photoanodes were fabricated for comparison, referred to as P25/FTO, NT(C)/NP/FTO, NT(O)/NP/FTO, and NT(O)/NP/NR/FTO. They were named after their stacking sequence, with (O) and (C) standing for open- and close-ended NTs. TiO2 nanorods (NRs) were grown on FTO substrates by a hydrothermal method (see ESI). The cross-section of the NT(O)/NP/NR/FTO photoanode heat treated at 450 °C for 3 h in air is shown in Fig. 1d. An interconnecting network of TiO2 NPs and NRs was formed.
DSSCs with various thicknesses of the open-ended TiO2 NT layers were fabricated and their photovoltaic performance was compared under front-side illumination (ESI, Table S1 and Fig. S6). It can be observed that, when the thickness of the NT layer was increased from 15 to 28 μm, the short circuit current density increased correspondingly (from 10.56 to 15.38 mA cm−2), while the fill factors remained more or less the same. The results can be attributed to: (1) increased dye loading on longer tubes, leading to more photons being harvested and thus higher current densities and (2) effective electron and hole transport for the NT layer less than 28 μm in thickness, thus keeping the fill factor at a high value. However, when the NT length was further increased beyond 28 μm, the fill factor and short circuit current decreased with increasing NT length to 0.41 and 7.73 mA cm−2, respectively, for a NT layer of 42 μm. In this study, the optimum open-ended NT length for DSSC electrodes was 28 μm, longer than that of the close-ended NTs which is around 20 μm. One possible reason for this is the different iodide and tri-iodide ion transport conditions in the close- and open-ended channels of the NTs.
With the thickness of the NT layer fixed at 28 μm, the photovoltaic performances of DSSCs with different types of photoanodes are compared in Fig. 2. It can be seen that the DSSC with an open-ended NT layer performs better than that with a close-ended NT layer. By using a NR layer on top of the FTO substrate and then a TiCl4 treatment on the whole photoanode, the photovoltaic performance of the DSSC can be further improved, with Voc = 0.64V, Jsc = 19.10 mA cm−2, FF = 0.49, and eff. = 6.3% (Fig. 2).
To study the influence of the open-ended structure on the electron lifetime, stepped light-induced transient measurement of photocurrent and photovoltage (SLIM-PCV) was performed and the results are summarized in Fig. 3. The electron lifetime was estimated by fitting the photovoltage decay exponentially with time, i.e., ΔV = ΔV0exp (−t/τ), where ΔV is the change of voltage induced by a laser source under Voc conditions (see ESI), ΔV0 the pre-exponential term, t the time and τ the electron lifetime. In the case of front side illumination, the lifetime of the open-ended NT sample (∼0.11 s) was about twice that of the close-ended NT sample (∼0.056 s) and the NP sample (∼0.048 s). Electron lifetime is mainly controlled by the back reaction of iodide and tri-iodide ions. The shorter electron lifetime in the NP sample can be ascribed to the random structure of the interconnecting NP network and the less efficient tri-iodide ion transport, leading to more electron recombination with tri-iodide ions. The greatest difference between the open- and close-ended NT samples lay in their tri-iodide and iodide concentrations in the NP layer. Photo-generated holes in this layer could be easily transported to the Pt counter electrodevia the reduction and oxidation (redox) couple in the open-ended NT structure, whereas such transport would be difficult with the close-ended structure.

Fig. 4 schematically illustrates the transport of I3− and iodide (I−) ions in the two NT structures. The high concentration of tri-iodide (I3−) below the close-ended cap of the NTs leads to a shorter electron lifetime with higher probability of recombination of the photoexcited electrons.
The electron lifetime of the NT(O)/NP/NR/FTO sample (∼0.13 s) was a little longer than that of the NT(O)/NP/FTO sample. This might be attributed to better transport of the iodide and tri-iodide ions in the space regions among the NRs, leading to a slightly longer electron lifetime.
Another characteristic of the SLIM-PCV measurement is that the electron lifetime of the close-ended NT sample (∼0.168 s) was increased by almost 3 times when switched from front side illumination to the back side one. For the open-ended NT sample, the lifetime under back side illumination (0.133 s) was only slightly longer than that under the front side illumination (0.111 s). In the case of front side illumination, the photo-generated holes are more concentrated near the front electrode and need to be transported over a longer distance to the counter-electrode than in the case of back side illumination, leading to shorter electron lifetime. However, for the open-ended NT sample, the efficient charge transport through the open structure resulted in no great difference in the lifetimes of the two cases. In the case of NP/NR/FTO, the electron lifetime for front side illumination (0.136 s) was also slightly lower than that of back side illumination (0.154 s). Compared to the samples with NTs, the electron lifetime of NP/NR/FTO was slightly longer and the difference in electron lifetime between front and back side illuminations was smaller than the case with NTs (ESI, Fig. S7). These differences may be attributed to the shorter path and lower concentration of I3− for hole transport.
In summary, a free-standing open-ended TiO2 NT layer was successfully fabricated by the two-step anodization method and was applied to the photoanode of DSSCs. It was shown that the effective length of the NT layer in the DSSCs was increased in the open-ended NT structure, and the electron lifetime also increased. These two factors contributed to the enhanced photovoltaic performance of the DSSC. Open-ended NT-based photoanodes are particularly useful for applications where the use of solvent-free viscous electrolyte is advisable.
This work was supported by the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (PolyU 5349/10E and PolyU 5187/09E) and the Hong Kong Polytechnic University (A-PJ46).
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, XRD data of the samples with and without heat treatment, I–V characteristic DSSCs with different TiO2 NT lengths, and photovoltage decay of DSSCs under open circuit conditions. See DOI: 10.1039/c2nr11317a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012