 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA10892G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1499-1508


Hua
Zhang
,

Huan
Wang
,

Yinglong
Yang
,

Chen
Hu
,

Yang
Bai
,

Teng
Zhang
,

Wei
Chen
 and 

Shihe
Yang
*

Department of Chemistry, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China. E-mail: chsyang@ust.hk

Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Nanobiomechanics, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518055, China

Guangdong Key Lab of Nano-Micro Material Research, School of Chemical Biology and Biotechnology, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, Shenzhen 518055, China

Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Luoyu Road 1037, Wuhan, 430074, China

Received
13th November 2018
, Accepted 7th December 2018
First published on 8th December 2018
Carbon-based hole-conductor-free perovskite solar cells (C-PSCs) are considered as a promising photovoltaic technology toward commercialization, owing to their low cost and superior stability. However, efforts to further improve their efficiency have been hampered by the hole-extraction barrier at the Schottky contact between carbon and the perovskite. A conventional approach to resolve this issue is incorporating a hole-transport material (HTM) into the mesoscopic skeleton or chemical modification of the carbon electrode. Here, we show an innovative strategy that uses solution-processed hydrogen molybdenum bronze (HxMoO3−y) nanobelts, an n-type HTM with high work function and electrical conductivity, as the sole electrode material to enhance the hole-extraction process and realize efficient PSCs for the first time. The mesoscopic cell configuration of FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/m-Al2O3/HxMoO3−y with perovskite infiltration delivered a champion power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 14.5%, which compares favorably with 13.3% of typical high temperature C-PSCs. This increase in cell efficiency stems primarily from the enhancement in open circuit voltage and short circuit current, which is due to the HxMoO3−y electrode with more favorable energy alignment and higher hole-extraction ability than the carbon electrode. These results show the potential of HxMoO3−y nanobelts as an efficient electrode for realizing high-performance mesoscopic PSCs.

In just the last few years, organic-inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have stimulated an upsurge in the photovoltaics sector, with the power conversion efficiency (PCE) rapidly soaring to a certified value of 23.3%. In parallel with achieving the record efficiency, the frontline to tackle the long-term stability issue has continued to make steady technological progress. In particular, carbon-based hole-conductor-free PSCs (C-PSCs) have proved promising as a solar cell technology toward market penetration, due to their low cost and superior stability. However, compared to state-of-the-art PSCs, C-PSCs still suffer from a severely lower efficiency, which has motivated most of the initial studies aiming to enhance it by modulating carbon morphologies and improving perovskite crystallization. Currently, efforts to make further improvement in the efficiency are hampered by the Schottky contact between carbon and perovskite, in which the energy level misalignment coupled with the inherently inefficient hole-selectivity of carbon materials largely accounts for poor hole-extraction in C-PSCs. Thus, further progress calls for developing a facile strategy to fundamentally facilitate hole extraction in C-PSCs.

One effective strategy to address this issue is to create additional heterojunctions for hole extraction by introducing a hole-transport material (HTM) into C-PSCs. For instance, the most common p-type nickel oxide (NiO) nanoparticles have been used as the HTM in C-PSCs via sol–gel processing to assist in hole extraction, boosting the PCE up to 14.9%. A very recent study by our group has also revealed this desirable role of HTMs by incorporating a sub-monolayer of NiO nanoparticles into the perovskite layer to substantially enhance the device performance from 14.07% to 15.8%. Therefore, it is suggested that the incorporation of HTMs into C-PSCs is an efficient approach to promote hole extraction and suppress undesirable recombination at the carbon electrode, consequently enhancing the performance of C-PSCs.
However, the aforementioned approach requires additional fabrication processes on top of the common architecture of C-PSCs. This provides a straightforward way to directly enhance the hole-selectivity of carbon electrodes by element doping strategy, which has been regarded as a general route to manipulate the electrical transport behavior of carbon nanomaterials. In fact, this strategy has been successfully implemented in organic solar cells, where N- and B-doped carbon nanotubes were incorporated into the active layer to selectively enhance electron and hole transport, respectively. As for C-PSCs, both Yang's and Han's groups have recently employed B-doped carbon nanotubes and graphite as high work function carbon electrodes to efficiently facilitate hole extraction, respectively. Other than these strategies, research activities in this area have thus far been restricted exclusively to using various forms of carbon, such as carbon black, carbon nanotubes and graphene, as electrode materials for mesoscopic PSCs.
Herein, we propose using hydrogen molybdenum bronzes (HxMoO3−y), an n-type HTM with high work function and electrical conductivity, as the sole cathode material for mesoscopic PSCs to overcome the above-mentioned bottlenecks. Our first attempt as a proof of concept has resulted in efficient mesoscopic PSCs beyond the carbon-based ones. Bronzes with the layered orthorhombic structure, as illustrated in Fig. 1a, have been previously investigated in quantum dot solar cells, organic solar cells and supercapacitors. Particularly, in the case of solar cell applications, they have been demonstrated as an efficient n-type HTM to deliver superior device performance due to their outstanding electronic properties, such as the high work function and shallow gap states that provide favorable energy level alignment and efficient hole extraction, respectively. In light of this, we reasoned that the HxMoO3−y material can function as an outstanding HTM for PSCs. Moreover, benefiting from the partial oxide reduction and hydrogenation within the lattice, the as-prepared one-dimensional (1D) HxMoO3−y nanobelts are highly conductive and can be easily assembled into a conductive porous film with a sheet resistance as low as 50 Ω sq−1, which is very much comparable to that (∼40 Ω sq−1) of high temperature carbon electrodes. Thus, the combination of high work function and conductivity, as well as the capability of hole transport, makes HxMoO3−y nanobelts attractive as an alternative material to carbon electrodes. To examine the effectiveness of the HxMoO3−y film as the cathode of mesoscopic PSCs, a mesoscopic PSC consisting of FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/m-Al2O3/HxMoO3−y (Fig. 1b) was employed with the principle of energy level alignment (Fig. 1c), following by drop-casting technology to consequently yield a champion PCE of 14.5%, surpassing the value of 13.3% derived from typical high temperature carbon-based hole-conductor-free PSCs.

All the starting materials were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich or TCI and used as received without further purification.


MoO3 and HxMoO3−y nanobelts were prepared according to the previous literature. In a typical procedure, 2.0 g pure Mo powder with 10 mL deionized water was mixed with strong stirring in an ice-water bath. Then, 20 mL of H2O2 aqueous solution (30% w/w) was added dropwise to form a transparent, yellow peroxo-polymolybdic acid solution. Subsequently, the solution was transferred into a 25 mL Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave and hydrothermally treated at 150 °C for 8 h. After naturally cooling to room temperature, the white product was washed with deionized water and ethanol several times. For the typical synthesis of HxMoO3−y nanobelts, 0.2 g of the as-obtained MoO3 nanobelts was dispersed in 10 mL acetic acid and stirred to obtain a completely homogeneous solution. Then, 1 mL of hydriodic acid (57 wt%) was added and the mixture was stored at 30 °C for 72 h with constant stirring. The resulting product was washed with acetic acid, ethanol, and deionized water, followed by vacuum drying overnight.


HxMoO3−y films were fabricated via a spin-coating process using a well-dispersed solution, which was prepared by ultrasonically dispersing the as-synthesized HxMoO3−y nanobelts in deionized water, and ethanol and isopropanol solvents, respectively. Structural characterization was performed by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Philips X′ Pert Pro) with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.54184 Å), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy (UPS) using a Kratos Axis Ultra DLD multitechnique surface analysis system. Morphological characterization was performed with a transmission electron microscope (TEM, Tecnai G20) and field emission scanning electron microscope (SEM, JEOL 6700F). The sheet resistance was measured using the four-point-probe technique (KeithLink Technology, Taiwan). Steady-state and time-resolved PL (TRPL) measurements were carried out using a PicoQuant FluoTime 300 instrument with an excitation wavelength of 510 nm.


FTO-covered glass substrates were cleaned using ultrasonic treatment in detergent solution, deionized water, acetone and isopropanol. A compact TiO2 layer was then deposited on the substrates by spray pyrolysis at 540 °C using a commercial titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) solution diluted in ethanol (1:39, v/v) as the precursor and air as the carrier gas. After cooling, a 400 nm-thick mesoporous TiO2 layer was deposited by a spin-coating method using a commercial TiO2 paste diluted in ethanol (1:2.5, w/w). After drying at 125 °C, a similar procedure was sequentially applied to prepare Al2O3 films, which serve as a space layer to reduce charge recombination.

Then, the mesoporous films were gradually heated to 540 °C, baked at this temperature for 30 min, and cooled to room temperature. Following this, the HxMoO3−y electrode was spin-coated on the FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/m-Al2O3 mesoscopic skeleton using an HxMoO3−y isopropanol solution (22 mg mL−1) at 600 rpm for 70 s and then at 7000 rpm for 30 s. The electrode thickness was controlled by adjusting the number of times the spin-casting process was repeated, for instance, performing the spin-casting process 3 times typically corresponds to a thickness of ∼4 μm for the HxMoO3−y electrode. Afterward, 2–2.5 μL of the previously prepared perovskite precursor solution, containing 1.2 M MAI and 1.2 M PbI2 in a mixture of DMSO and DMF (1:9 v/v), was dropped on the electrode and dried at 100 °C for 10 min. For the control device, all the procedures are similar except that a 10 μm-thick carbon paste was screen printed on the mesoporous films and sintered at 400 °C for 30 min. To guarantee the accuracy, the devices were measured by using a mask to determine the active area, typically 0.16 cm2.

The J–V curves were recorded using an IM6x electrochemical workstation (ZAHNER-Elektrik GmbH & Co., KG, Germany) under simulated AM 1.5 sunlight at 100 mW cm−2 irradiance. The IPCE spectra were collected with monochromatic incident light in direct current mode (CEP-2000BX, Bunko-Keiki). The time dependence of the power output under maximum power-point conditions was obtained using a Keithley 2400 Source Meter using a 450 W Oriel xenon lamp as the light source. The CV measurements were performed at a frequency of 1 kHz using the IM6x electrochemical workstation.


In this study, bronzes were synthesized by chemical reduction of the parent molybdenum trioxide (α-MoO3) in the presence of hydriodic acid with acetic acid which serves as a reducing agent system that allows partial oxide reduction and hydrogenation within the lattice of α-MoO3, resulting in the formation of HxMoO3−y retaining the parent crystal structure. This has been confirmed by structural characterization using X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements. As shown in Fig. 2a, the main diffraction peaks for the as-synthesized material can be readily indexed to the standard pattern of JCPDS no. 05-0508, corresponding to the orthorhombic phase of α-MoO3. After the chemical treatment, the crystal structure appears identical, but has a highly ordered orientation, which is evident from the enhanced intensity of (020), (040) and (060) peaks. Close inspection reveals that these peaks undergo a shift toward lower degrees, indicative of an increase in the layer spacing. This can be rationalized in terms of the partial oxide reduction and hydrogenation within the lattice of α-MoO3, resulting in the formation of HxMoO3−y with lattice expansion.

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was further employed to characterize the elemental composition of the as-obtained HxMoO3−y sample. As shown in Fig. 2b, the peaks in the high-resolution Mo 3d spectra are broader and shifted to lower binding energies with less intensity, as compared to that of the parent α-MoO3 with two distinguished peaks located at 232.7 eV and 235.8 eV, corresponding to the Mo 3d3/2 and Mo 3d5/2 components, respectively. This discrepancy of the Mo 3d spectra is ascribed to the obtained HxMoO3−y sample with an imbalanced Mo/O stoichiometry. As revealed by peak fitting, three spin–orbit doublets were distinctly observed. Apart from the doublet related to Mo6+ states, the other two could be readily ascribed to a lower Mo5+ oxidation state (peaks at 234.8 eV and 231.5 eV) and the lowest Mo4+ (peaks at 232.4 eV and 229.2 eV) oxidation state, respectively. Thus, the multiple valence states of the Mo component were observed in the HxMoO3−y sample. By virtue of the deconvolution process, we further established the contributions of different valence states to the Mo component, which were calculated to be about 50%, 30% and 20% for Mo6+, Mo5+ and Mo4+ states, respectively. Therefore, the Mo/O ratio in the obtained HxMoO3−y sample is estimated to be 2.6, suggesting a sub-stoichiometric oxide. This is further confirmed by the O 1s spectra in which there is an additional broad peak at 531.6 eV, indicative of the apparent oxygen vacancies in the HxMoO3−y sample.
The above result provides evidence that the as-obtained HxMoO3−y sample consists of a sub-stoichiometric composition, which is closely related to changes in the electronic properties. For instance, the intrinsic conductivity change has been determined by the current–voltage measurements. As shown in Fig. S2a, the current response for the parent α-MoO3 was significantly enhanced by the HxMoO3−y sample instead, implying a greatly improved conductivity produced by the sub-stoichiometric composition. This finding is further supported by quantitative evaluation of the specific conductivities, as shown in Fig. S2b. The conductivity of HxMoO3−y is higher than that of the α-MoO3 by almost four orders of magnitude, with the value reaching 5000 S m−1. Such an excellent conductivity could be ascribed to the introduction of oxygen vacancies and protons (H+) into the HxMoO3−y sample, which indeed reduces the coulomb scattering effect of the lattice, leading to the substantially enhanced conductivity. Benefitting from this attribute, the fabricated HxMoO3−y film with the optimum thickness (∼4 μm) via the spin-coating technique was measured with a sheet resistance of 50 Ω sq−1, which is comparable to that (∼40 Ω sq−1) of high temperature carbon electrodes in the mesoscopic PSCs, as illustrated in Fig. 2c. This inspired us to tentatively explore HxMoO3−y as a sole electrode material in further studies.
Following this attempt, ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy (UPS) characterization was further performed to disclose the position of energy levels in the HxMoO3−y sample. As shown in Fig. S3a, the work function was measured to be 5.2 eV, and the valence band maximum (VBM) is 2.8 eV below the Fermi level (EF), corresponding to a VBM level of −8.0 eV relative to the vacuum level. The band gap deduced from the Tauc plot of the absorbance spectrum (Fig. S3b) is 3.0 eV. Thus, the conduction band minimum (CBM) with respect to the vacuum level is estimated to be −5.0 eV. Since the energy difference between the CBM and Fermi level is only 0.2 eV, the as-obtained HxMoO3−y exhibits n-type characteristics, which is in agreement with other reports. For the device application, n-type HxMoO3−y has been previously employed as the HTM in both organic and inorganic solar cells, where hole-extraction proceeds via injecting electrons into the valence band of the active layer, thus prompting hole transfer to the HTM by thermal equilibrium. Such a hole-extraction mechanism was further applicable to the PSCs here, as shown in Fig. 2d. The schematic energy diagram clearly shows the feasibility of charge-transfer between methylammonium lead triiodide perovskite (MAPbI3) and HxMoO3−y due to their flat energy level, indicating a novel HTM for PSCs. Furthermore, we proposed that the observed shallow gap states in the UPS spectra (Fig. S3a), originating from the oxygen vacancies, provide additional pathways for the enhancement of hole extraction from the valence band of MAPbI3 to the HxMoO3−y HTM for the nearly alignment energy level.
To verify this hole extraction capability of the HxMoO3−y HTM in PSCs, steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) measurements were performed on the samples of glass/MAPbI3, glass/carbon (MAPbI3) and glass/HxMoO3−y (MAPbI3), respectively. As shown in Fig. S4, the HxMoO3−y-based sample exhibited a higher degree of PL quenching than the high temperature carbon-based sample, manifesting better hole transfer from the valence band of perovskite, in accordance with its higher work function and shallow gap states resulting in a better energy level alignment and enhanced hole extraction as discussed above. Correspondingly, the carrier lifetime obtained from time resolved PL decay spectra was significantly shortened, as shown in Fig. 2e. It yields a fitted average lifetime (Table S1) of 10.03 and 4.55 ns for the HxMoO3−y and high temperature carbon films, respectively, demonstrating the superior hole extraction capability of the HxMoO3−y HTM. Thus, the above demonstrations of comparable conductivity and higher work function, as well as the superior hole extraction ability, render HxMoO3−y a promising electrode material for mesoscopic PSCs.

To characterize the morphology of the as-obtained HxMoO3−y sample, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) characterization was performed. As shown in Fig. 3a, the prepared HxMoO3−y sample possesses the geometry of one-dimensional (1D) nanobelts with the Mo and O elements homogeneously distributed in the nanobelts. To further demonstrate the crystal sizes of HxMoO3−y nanobelts, a SEM image with the statistical data is shown in Fig. S5, where the width and length are estimated to be 155 ± 30 nm and 2.5 ± 1.5 μm, respectively.

To investigate the characteristics of the low-temperature solution-processed HxMoO3−y film, a well-dispersed HxMoO3−y solution is desirable. As shown in Fig. S6, an optical picture reveals that a homogeneous HxMoO3−y nanobelt suspension can be readily achieved by using deionized water, ethanol and isopropanol owing to the typically hydrophilic nature of inorganic materials. This facilitates the production of HxMoO3−y films with an adjustable thickness by spin-coating technology. As revealed by the SEM images in Fig. 3b, the morphology of the as-fabricated HxMoO3−y film consists of the interpenetrating network architecture, resulting in the formation of numerous interconnected pore channels in the conductive film. This porous structure, resembling the typical high temperature carbon porous film, would be beneficial for perovskite fabrication via drop-casting technology. Given the initial small contact angle of the HxMoO3−y film against N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) solvent (Fig. S7), it is expected that the perovskite precursor solution can completely permeate the film leading to high pore filling of the whole film. This is confirmed by the cross-sectional SEM views of the HxMoO3−y-based PSCs, as shown in Fig. 3c. The mesoscopic scaffold consisting of FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/m-Al2O3/HxMoO3−y exhibits a significant amount of pore channels (left panel in Fig. 3c), while upon penetration of the perovskite they are efficiently filled to form a dense and continuous morphology from the top HxMoO3−y film to the bottom TiO2 electron-transporting layer (right panel in Fig. 3c). Thus, the excellent loading of perovskite plus the desired electronic properties demonstrates the possibility of using HxMoO3−y nanobelts as an efficient electrode to realize high-performance mesoscopic PSCs.

To further testify the efficacy of the HxMoO3−y film as the electrode, a mesoscopic PSC with the configuration of FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/m-Al2O3/HxMoO3−y was fabricated in parallel with a control device based on the typical high temperature carbon electrode. Initially, we investigated the dependence of photovoltaic performance on the thickness of the HxMoO3−y electrode. The J–V characteristics are shown in Fig. S8 and their corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table S2. Apparently, the thinner HxMoO3−y electrode (for instance, 1.5 μm) delivered an inferior device performance with a low open-circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF). This could be attributed to the sluggish conductivity of the thinner electrode resulting in a large series resistance (Rs) during device operation. For sufficient conductivity, a thicker HxMoO3−y film has to be employed by repeating the spin-coating process. As expected, the derived device showed a significant enhancement of the Voc and FF when the thickness reaches about 4 μm. Yet further increase results in a reduced FF, due to an increasing Rs. Thus, the optimum thickness for the HxMoO3−y electrode is suggested to be around 4 μm. As revealed by the cross-sectional SEM image in Fig. 3c, the individual layers of m-TiO2/m-Al2O3/HxMoO3−y in an optimized device can be distinguished with thicknesses of 0.4, 0.4, and 4 μm, respectively. By employing this optimized structure, we consequently achieved a champion device performance, as shown in Fig. 4a. The J–V curves with negligible hysteresis show a Voc of 0.96 V, a Jsc of 22.54 mA cm−2, and a FF of 0.67, leading to an overall PCE of 14.5% under standard AM 1.5 G illumination (see Table 1). By contrast, the control device based on the high temperature carbon electrode gave a PCE of 13.3%, with the Voc, Jsc, and FF values of 0.91 V, 21.45 mA cm−2, and 0.68, respectively. It should be noted that these values are similar to previously reported metrics of the control device prepared by one-step solution processing. Thus, we conclude that an enhancement of photovoltaic performance has been achieved by adopting the HxMoO3−y electrode.

Electrodes
Scan direction

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

a The averaged values were obtained from over 20 devices. In the parentheses are the values corresponding to the champion devices.

HxMoO3−y
Reverse
0.93 ± 0.03 (0.96)
21.7 ± 0.84 (22.54)
0.61 ± 0.06 (0.67)
12.5 ± 2.0 (14.5)
Forward
0.96
22.50
0.66
14.3
Carbon
Reverse
0.87 ± 0.04 (0.91)
20.3 ± 1.15 (21.45)
0.63 ± 0.05 (0.68)
11.2 ± 2.1 (13.3)
Forward
0.91
21.32
0.67
13.0
By analysis of photovoltaic metrics, we infer that the key parameter contributing to the enhanced PCE is the Voc, which improves from 0.91 to 0.96 V. We attribute this improvement to the higher work function (−5.2 eV) of the HxMoO3−y electrode than that of the high temperature carbon electrode (−5.0 eV), resulting in a better energy level alignment, consequently enhancing the built-in electric field of the devices. This observation is also detected from the dark J–V characteristic, where the built-in voltage of the diodes shifts to higher potential when using the HxMoO3−y electrode instead. To gain further insight into the origin of enhanced built-in electric fields, capacitance–voltage measurements were performed, and the results are shown in Fig. 4b. The built-in potential (Vbi) extracted from capacitance–voltage (C−2–V) plots is 0.82 and 0.88 V for the high temperature carbon and HxMoO3−y electrodes, respectively. Accordingly, it can be rationalized that the augmentation of Voc is caused by the HxMoO3−y-based device with larger Vbi.
The enhancement of Jsc should be mainly ascribed to the above demonstrated HxMoO3−y electrode with superior hole extraction ability, leading to faster hole extraction and substantially suppressing undesirable charge recombination at the photocathode. This analysis is supported by the comparison of the incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectrum in Fig. 4c, in which the HxMoO3−y-based device displays a broader IPCE plateau between 375 and 500 nm, followed by an obvious increase of spectral response in the long-wavelength region. Given their identical composition and thickness of the photoanode (FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/m-Al2O3), we ascribe this observed spectral feature to the more efficient hole extraction and collection caused by the HxMoO3−y electrode. This result is further confirmed by the light-intensity dependence of Jsc, as shown in Fig. S9. The higher slope value (0.94) for the HxMoO3−y-based device compared to that of the control device (0.91) indicates that the HxMoO3−y electrode can efficiently mitigate the charge recombination behavior at the perovskite/HxMoO3−y interface. To further probe the charge recombination mechanisms in the devices, the relationship between the Voc and light-intensity was also investigated. As presented in Fig. 4d, the plot of Vocversus log-scaled light intensity was fitted linearly with a slope of 1.82 kBT/q and 1.56 kBT/q (where kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, and q is the elementary charge) for the control and HxMoO3−y-based devices, respectively. In principle, the slope of Voc on the logarithm of light intensity is more approximate to KBT/q, suggesting the less monomolecular Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination is involved in the device operation. Therefore, the HxMoO3−y-based device possesses a smaller slope which is an indicator of less SRH recombination occurring in the device, supporting the achieved higher Jsc and Voc. Therefore, the improved Voc and Jsc as well as the comparable FF achieved by the HxMoO3−y electrode substantially boost the performance of mesoscopic PSCs.
Moreover, we move on to further ascertain the boosting effect of the HxMoO3−y electrode by the statistical distribution of photovoltaic parameters obtained from over 20 devices. As illustrated in Fig. 4e, the control device showed typical performance with a Voc of 0.87 ± 0.04 V, a Jsc of 20.3 ± 1.15 mA cm−2, and a FF of 0.63 ± 0.05, yielding an average PCE of 11.2 ± 2.1%. In contrast, the device with the HxMoO3−y electrode showed an improved Jsc and Voc, which resulted in enhancing the average PCE up to 12.5 ± 2.0% (see Table 1). Thus, the obtained higher average PCE value indeed highlights the advantage of the HxMoO3−y electrode for device performance.
Regarding the device stability issue, the time dependence of the power output was analysed on both champion devices by tracking their efficiencies under maximum power-point conditions. It is evident from Fig. S10 that both devices exhibited a highly stable power output, which may rule out the efficiency variation associated with the light soaking effect. Furthermore, the long-term ambient stability of unencapsulated devices was also investigated, and the results are shown in Fig. 5. Both devices are seen to retain nearly full functional performance in the case of exposure to ambient air at a controlled relative humidity (RH) of 35 ± 10%. While increasing the humidity to the local level (RH 65–85%) of Hong Kong, the HxMoO3−y-based device shows a more drastic PCE decay during the aging test (Fig. S11). This should be related to the hydrophilic feature of the HxMoO3−y electrode (Fig. S6), which can accelerate the decomposition of the perovskite at higher RH, as revealed by the XRD measurements after aging under the same conditions (Fig. S12). Obviously, the characteristic perovskite (110) and (220) peaks gradually diminished, accompanied with the appearance of new peaks at lower degrees that can be ascribed to a decomposed intermediate of MAI–PbI2–H2O, as evidenced by the increasing peak intensity upon aging. Thus, further work focusing on surface modification of the HxMoO3−y electrode is in progress to improve device stability against high humidity.

In summary, we have demonstrated an efficient HxMoO3−y nanobelt electrode as an excellent alternative to its carbon counterpart in mesoscopic PSCs. The HxMoO3−y nanobelts were synthesized by a facile solution process. Thanks to the better energy alignment and the more efficient hole-extraction, the optimized HxMoO3−y-based device exhibits an impressive PCE of 14.5%, which is higher than that of the devices using typical high temperature carbon electrodes. To our knowledge, this is the first example of a mesoscopic hole-conductor free PSC based on a non-carbon electrode. This work thus offers a new perspective for developing non-carbon electrode materials for more efficient mesoscopic PSCs in future.


There are no conflicts to declare.


H. Z. and H. W. contributed equally to this work. This work was supported by the Hong Kong Research Grants Council (HK-RGC) General Research Funds (GRF No. 16312216 and 16300915), the HK Innovation Technology Funds (ITS/219/16 and GHP/079/17SZ), the Shenzhen Peacock Plan (KQTD2016053015544057), the Guangdong Natural Science Foundation (2017A030313342), and the Basic Research Project of Shenzhen Science and Technology Plan (JCYJ20170307165905513).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta10892g
‡ These authors contribute equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019