 DOI: 10.1039/C6CC04229E
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 8873-8876


Gi Eun
Park
,

Hyung Jong
Kim
,

Suna
Choi
,

Dae Hee
Lee
,

Mohammad Afsar
Uddin
,

Han Young
Woo
,

Min Ju
Cho
* and 

Dong Hoon
Choi
*

Department of Chemistry, Research Institute for Natural Sciences, Korea University, 5 Anam-dong, Sungbuk-gu, Seoul 136-701, Republic of Korea. E-mail: chominju@korea.ac.kr; dhchoi8803@korea.ac.kr; Fax: +82 2 925 4274; Tel: +82 2 3290 3140

Department of Nanofusion Engineering, Department of Cogno-Mechatronics Engineering, Pusan National University, Miryang 627-706, Korea

Received
19th May 2016
, Accepted 16th June 2016
First published on 16th June 2016
New M- and V-shaped perylene diimide (PDI)-based small molecules using a non-conjugated 1,1-diphenylcyclohexane linker (CP-M and CP-V, respectively) were designed and synthesized as new n-type acceptors for nonfullerene-based polymer solar cells. The blended film with poly[(2,5-bis(2-hexyldecyloxy)phenylene)-alt-(5,6-difluoro-4,7-di(thiophen-2-yl)benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole)] (PPDT2FBT) and CP-V displayed a higher power conversion efficiency of 5.28% due to higher short circuit current and fill factor values.

Nonfullerene acceptors have recently been intensely investigated for fullerene replacement in bulk heterojunction (BHJ)-type polymer solar cells (PSCs). These molecules have the advantages of facile molecular energy level tunability, spectral absorption broadening, good thermal/photochemical stability, molecular structure design flexibility, easy purification and low production costs. Among the nonfullerene-accepting small molecules reported previously, perylene diimide (PDI) derivatives have received much attention due to a relatively easy synthesis and purification, effective light harvesting properties in the range of 400–600 nm, low-lying lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) levels, high-electron mobilities, and chemical and thermal stabilities. However, the individual PDI molecules have strong intermolecular interactions induced by a highly planar conformation, which leads to a strong self-association behaviour with undesired large crystalline domains in the nonfullerene BHJ solar cells. This hampers the exciton diffusion and charge transport to the electrodes, limiting the PSC performances. Several molecular design approaches have been reported to achieve an optimal morphology in BHJ PSCs, such as introducing alkyl side-chains at the N-positions of the imide units or the bay position of PDI. PDI dimers were also synthesized by linking two PDI units through various functional linkers such as thiophene, benzene, and spirofluorene as well as direct anchoring through C–C bonds. A quasi-3D non-planar structure was recently reported to modulate the twisted angle to reduce the intermolecular interactions. An sp2 π-bridge was often used to grasp two PDI molecules to design the aforementioned dimers. In contrast, the use of an sp3 σ-bridge has rarely been explored to date as a bridge moiety.

We report new cyclohexane core-based n-type PDI molecules with a unique sp3 σ-bridge to connect two PDI units. The sp3 σ-bridge might enable the formation of a p-type polymer with the appropriate morphology for nonfullerene PSCs by relieving the self-aggregation between the highly rigid PDI molecules. The cyclohexane core included in 1,1-bis[4-{N,N-di(p-tolyl)-amino}phenyl]cyclohexane (TAPC) has been used in organic light-emitting diodes as a carrier transporting material because the moiety distinctly maintains good carrier mobility.
Based on these previous reports, we designed two new kinds of PDI-based small molecules with different geometries by employing 1,1-diphenylcyclohexane (Fig. 1). One contains two PDI units tethered into 1,1-diphenylcyclohexane in a side-on manner (labelled CP-M). The other bears two PDI units tethered to the core in an end-on manner (labelled CP-V). The structures of CP-M and CP-V resemble the capital letters “M” and “V,” respectively. The influence of the molecular geometry on the PSC performance was investigated by studying optical, photophysical and morphological properties in the BHJ blended films with PPDT2FBT.
The synthesis of the cyclohexane cores and PDI-based small molecules is outlined in Schemes S1 and S2 (ESI), respectively. Detailed synthetic procedures are provided in the ESI. The M-shaped molecule (CP-M) was synthesized by a Suzuki coupling of borylated diphenylcyclohexane (M3) with monobrominated phenylene diimide (M4). The typical imidization method was used for the coupling between 1,1′-bis(4-aminophenyl)cyclohexane (M1) and perylene monoimido anhydride (M5) for the V-shaped molecule (CP-V). The structures of the new M- and V-shaped molecules were confirmed by elemental analysis, NMR and MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. [The analysis data are illustrated in the ESI.] Both molecules had good solubilities in dichloromethane, chloroform, dichlorobenzene and chlorobenzene.
Theoretical calculations were also performed using density functional theory (DFT) at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level to understand the effect of the tethering mode of PDI (with respect to the core) on the electron distribution in CP-M and CP-V. As shown in Fig. S1 (ESI), the π-electrons of CP-M were extended to the benzene of the 1,1-diphenylcyclohexane core, and two PDI units were twisted due to steric hindrance. In contrast, the π-electrons of CP-V were localized only in the PDI units because the imide-linkage blocks the extension of electrons. The two PDIs were parallel to each other, which resulted from the relative freedom of rotation of the PDIs (Fig. S2, ESI).
The UV-vis absorption spectra of CP-M and CP-V are depicted in Fig. 2 and Fig. S4 (ESI), and the spectral data are summarized in Table S1 (ESI). The absorption spectra of both CP-M and CP-V in the film states were red-shifted and broadened compared to the solution states.
The optical properties of CP-V in solution were the same as those of the N,N′-bis-(1-pentyl)hexyl-3,4,9,10-perylene diimide (PDI5) molecule itself (Fig. S4, ESI) even though the two PDI-units were tied into cyclohexane in an end-on manner; however, the spectra in the film states were different. Therefore, CP-V not only maintained the intrinsic absorption properties of the PDI-units (as shown in the solution spectra), but also underwent the suitable intermolecular interactions in the film states. Additionally, CP-M exhibited a broad absorption in the range from 450 to 600 nm, both in solution and in the film state, due to the extended π-electron distributions. As shown in Fig. S5 (ESI), the broad absorption spectrum of CP-M in solution is similar to that of PS-PDI (a π-extended moiety by tethering the phenyl group without the cyclohexane linkage), confirming the extended π-conjugation. Moreover, the molar extinction coefficient (ε) of CP-M (ε = 14.8 × 104 M−1 cm−1 at 536 nm) was lower than that of CP-V (ε = 23.2 × 104 M−1 cm−1 at 528 nm) in the solution state (Table S1, ESI). The color of the CP-M and CP-V solutions showed clear differences (Fig. S6, ESI), although the maximum absorption peaks were similar.
Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was performed to investigate the electrochemical properties of CP-M and CP-V (Fig. S7 and Table S1, ESI). The LUMO values of PDI5, CP-M, and CP-V (estimated from their onset reduction potentials) were −3.79, −3.85, and −3.98 eV, respectively. The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy levels were calculated using the absorbance cutoff wavelength.
The photovoltaic properties were studied in nonfullerene-based BHJ PSCs using PPDT2FBT and new n-type molecules with an inverted device configuration of ITO/ZnO/PPDT2FBT:n-type molecule/MoO3/Ag. An optimized blend ratio of the active layer, the solvent additive effect, and the conventional device performance are also displayed in Fig. S8–S10 and Tables S2–S4 (ESI).
As shown in Fig. 3, the nonfullerene-based BHJ PSCs exhibited a dramatically different device performance. The PPDT2FBT:PDI5 (1:4 wtratio) device showed the maximum power conversion efficiency (PCEmax) of 0.94% with a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 3.33 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.73 V and a fill factor (FF) of 38.78. These results revealed a low current density and FF induced by the high self-association of the planar PDI molecules. In addition, while some degree of intermixing of blend components (PPDT2FBT and PDI5) is obviously essential for proficient exciton quenching, excess of it can result in significant loss of achievable voltage because the morphological characteristics of PDI5 were not suitable. In comparison, the devices with CP-V (or CP-M) and PPDT2FBT for the active layer displayed an enhanced photovoltaic performance. In particular, the PPDT2FBT:CP-V (1:2 wtratio) device showed a better performance with a PCEmax of 5.28% (a Jsc of 10.04 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.87 V, and a FF of 60.16). The performance data were very different from those of the PPDT2FBT:CP-M (a PCEmax of 2.14% with a Jsc of 6.04 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.89 V, and a FF of 39.84).
From these results, it can be inferred that the V-shaped molecular structure played a crucial role in improving the BHJ morphology and providing an efficient charge transfer and favorable molecular orientation in the active layer of the PSCs. These advantages contributed to the increased Jsc and FF values. Fig. 3(b) shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the optimum PSCs. The EQE responses covered a wavelength range from 320 to 700 nm, and the broadband spectral response for both the polymer donors and nonfullerene acceptors was attributed to the generation of excitons and charge transport (Fig. 3(b)). It could be confirmed unequivocally that the V-shaped structure of the acceptor material provided a marked increase of the Jsc value.
Atomic force microscopy (AFM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images supported the differences in Jsc and FF values among the PDI5, CP-M, and CP-V blended films with PPDT2FBT (Fig. 4). Moreover, the effect of the cyclohexane core was found to be remarkable when we compared the device performance of the CP-M and CP-V-based PSCs with that of the blended film of PPDT2FBT and PDI5 itself (Fig. S11, ESI). The PPDT2FBT:PDI5 blended film had significantly larger domain sizes of over 1 μm. However, the CP-M and CP-V blended films showed much smaller domain sizes and fine surface morphology by bridging the PDIs with an sp3 σ-core. The root-mean-square (RMS) roughness (Rrms) of PDI5, CP-M, and CP-V based blended films is 7.96, 2.10 and 1.47, respectively.
Among them, CP-V (end-on geometry) formed the finest interpenetrating BHJ networks in conjunction with the donor polymers, yielding a multi-dimensional interconnectivity between the crystallites that could be attributed to the interlocking geometry between PPDT2FBT and CP-V. TEM images provided more evidence to support the better performance of PSC with CP-V rather than that with CP-M. As shown in Fig. 4(e and f), the internal morphology of the PPDT2FBT:CP-V blended film was much more homogeneous with a uniform nano-scale structure, which might be more favorable than that of the PPDT2FBT:CP-M blended film for the effective generation of excitons for a good separation along a continuous pathway. These results could lead to a higher Jsc value for CP-V than for CP-M.
Furthermore, the 2D grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GI-XRD) patterns of the neat PPDT2FBT film, PPDT2FBT:CP-M film, and PPDT2FBT:CP-V film were obtained to investigate the influence of the intermolecular organization between CP-M and CP-V with PPDT2FBT (Fig. 5). More crystalline peaks were observed for the PPDT2FBT:CP-V blends than for CP-M, even though the PPDT2FBT:CP-V blends contained uniform nanoscale phase domains (Fig. 5). These properties of CP-V with the cyclohexane core overcame the drawback of forming a large crystalline domain of individual PDI small molecules and exhibited an intrinsic suitable crystallinity by maintaining the nanophase blend morphology. These results indicate more efficient exciton diffusion and continuous pathways of charge carriers to each electrode for the PPDT2FBT:CP-V blended film, which might result in higher charge mobilities (μh and μe) and Jsc values for the CP-V blended film with PPDT2FBT.
The hole (μh) and electron (μe) mobilities of the blended films were determined using the space charge-limited current (SCLC) method to prove the charge transport properties in the vertical direction (Fig. S12 and Table S5, ESI). The device configuration and fabrication method for the devices are described in the ESI. The PPDT2FBT:CP-V blend displayed higher μh and μe mobilities (μh = 1.07 × 10−4 and μe = 1.39 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1) than the PPDT2FBT:CP-M blend (μh = 4.26 × 10−5 and μe = 1.15 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1). These results unambiguously indicate that PPDT2FBT:CP-V has appropriate multi-dimensional interconnectivity of donor and acceptor phases, compared to PPDT2FBT:CP-M with the side-on geometry. The smaller carrier mobility asymmetry (μh/μe ≈ 7.70) could explain the relatively high FFs (∼60%) in the PPDT2FBT:CP-V BHJ devices.
Furthermore, the light intensity dependent Jsc data to indicate the charge recombination in the PSCs also support smaller non-geminate recombination losses that induce a relatively higher FF of CP-V (∼60%) than that of CP-M (∼40%) (Fig. S13, ESI).
In conclusion, we have newly synthesized M- and V-shaped PDI-based small molecules (i.e., CP-M and CP-V) including 1,1-diphenylcyclohexane, which were rarely used to connect PDIs to overcome the drawback of the strong self-association of PDI5s. In addition to the dependence of the binding geometry of the PDIs into the cyclohexane core, the intrinsic and photovoltaic properties were investigated in detail. In the case of the V-shaped n-type material rather than the M-shaped molecule, the best PSC performance with PPDT2FBT was revealed to give a PCE of 5.28% with a Jsc of 10.04 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.87 V, and a FF of 60.16. CP-V with the end-on PDI geometry could mix well with PPDT2FBT and maintained the appropriate nano-phase aggregated crystallite domains to facilitate exciton dissociation/diffusion and provide suitable percolation pathways for charge transport. Therefore, this work demonstrated that both the sp3 σ-bridge as a core to grasp the rigid PDI small molecules and the side-on and end-on molecular geometries played important roles in affecting the BHJ morphology and the corresponding PSC performance.
The authors acknowledge the financial support from the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF2012R1A2A1A01008797) and from the Key Research Institute Program (NRF20100020209). We are grateful to Pohang Accelerator Laboratory (Pohang, Korea) for allowing us to conduct the grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GI-XRD) measurements.
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: UV, PL, CV, AFM, SCLC etc. based on n-type small molecules. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cc04229e
‡ These authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016