 DOI: 10.1039/C8TC00705E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 4457-4463


Jingyang
Xiao
,

Ziming
Chen
,

Guichuan
Zhang
,

Qing-Ya
Li
,

Qingwu
Yin
,

Xiao-Fang
Jiang
,

Fei
Huang
,

Yun-Xiang
Xu
,

Hin-Lap
Yip
* and 

Yong
Cao


State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, School of Materials Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, P. R. China. E-mail: msangusyip@scut.edu.cn

South China Institute of Collaborative Innovation, Dongguan 523808, P. R. China

College of Polymer Science & Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Polymer Materials Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, P. R. China

Received
8th February 2018
, Accepted 12th March 2018
First published on 13th March 2018
In recent years, the use of non-fullerene acceptors in organic solar cells has rapidly advanced with new acceptor materials, which have enabled devices to achieve a power conversion efficiency greater than 13%. In addition to new acceptor materials’ design, device engineering plays an important role in improving the device performance. In this study, we develop effective device engineering strategies, including thermal annealing and interlayer modification, to improve the device performance from 7.39% to 9.39%. With the use of PTB7-Th as the donor and IDT-BT-R as the non-fullerene acceptor, we achieved an efficient non-fullerene organic solar cell based on an inverted device architecture with a power conversion efficiency as high as 9.39%. It is worthy of note that the energy loss of the optimized device is only around 0.5 eV, which can be attributed to weak recombination and the appropriate high energy level of the charge transfer states within the optimized device.

Solution-processable bulk-heterojunction organic solar cells (OSCs) are a competitive photovoltaic technology due to their advantages of being light weight, flexible, and low cost. For much of the development of OSCs, most studies focused on the design of new donor materials to improve the power conversion efficiency (PCE). In recent years, non-fullerene acceptors have developed dramatically as a result of their advantages, such as low cost, tunable absorption properties and energy levels compared to their fullerene counterparts. Among non-fullerene acceptors, small molecular acceptors (SMAs) are among the best candidates because they have little batch-to-batch variation and a well-defined molecular structure. Many SMAs based on fused rings like perylene bisimide, perylene diimide, naphthalene diimide and indacenodithiophene (IDT) have shown good performance in non-fullerene OSCs. In particular, SMAs with an IDT-based backbone have shown potential as a promising candidate to boost the PCE of OSCs. In 2015, Zhan's group reported an IDT-based SMA, called IEIC, that showed a decent PCE of 6.3% when blended with PTB7-Th. A year later, McCulloch et al. designed a new acceptor with a linear side chain to attain a device PCE of 6.4% using P3HT as a donor. More impressively, a new type of IDT-based SMA, named as ITIC (3,9-bis(2-methylene-(3-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)-indanone))-5,5,11,11-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-dithieno[2,3-d:2′,3′-d′]-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene), and its derivatives have recently been reported to give an outstanding performance, with the PCE greater than 10% and even up to 13%. These exciting results successfully exceed those of the best fullerene-based OSCs and show the possibility for SMAs to replace fullerene acceptors. One major advantage of IDT-based SMAs is their ability to achieve higher open circuit voltage (VOC) than their fullerene-based counterparts. In our previous work, we have obtained VOC values as high as 1.02 V and PCE of 8.34% without sacrificing short-circuit current density (JSC) in conventional solar cells by blending PTB7-Th with an IDT-based SMA, called IDT-BT-R, which also demonstrated excellent thermal stability at 150 °C for 1 hour.

However, most of these studies have focused on the material design of the SMAs. In fact, device engineering has been proven to be an effective means to further improve device performance in the field of fullerene-based OSCs with methods such as thermal and solvent vapor annealing, interface engineering, and solvent additives. It was recently reported that non-fullerene OSCs with an inverted configuration possess better stability than conventional ones when both types of OSCs were kept in a dark glovebox at room temperature for an aging test. Indeed, to the best of our knowledge, all of the reported burn-in free non-fullerene OSCs in the literature were fabricated with an inverted configuration. However, few studies have reported the investigation of the interlayer modification for inverted non-fullerene OSCs. For these reasons, a systematic investigation of the device engineering of inverted non-fullerene OSCs is urgently needed to further improve performance.
In this paper, we report two effective device engineering methods for inverted non-fullerene OSCs based on the PTB7-Th:IDT-BT-R system as shown in Fig. 1a. Through combinatorial strategies of thermal annealing and interface modification on the ZnO surface using a crosslinkable polyelectrolyte, PFN-ox, we could facilitate the donor/acceptor blend film to form better continuous interpenetrating morphology, increase carrier mobility, improve charge transport and extraction properties and reduce the charge recombination in OSCs. As a result, the PCE of inverted configuration PTB7-Th:IDT-BT-R based OSCs was successfully increased by 30% via our device engineering methods. The optimized device showed a best PCE of 9.39%, with a VOC of 1.04 V, a JSC of 15.09 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 59.85%. In addition, combining light-dependent J–V curves, transient photovoltage and photocurrent measurement, highly sensitive external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurement, and morphological studies, we found that the weak recombination and high energy of charge transfer states (ECT) were responsible for the low energy loss and high VOC of PTB7-Th:IDT-BT-R based non-fullerene OSCs.

The chemical structures and energy levels of SMA IDT-BT-R and the polymer donor PTB7-Th are shown in Fig. 1a and b. In this study, we fabricated inverted solar cells with the device structure shown in Fig. 1c. In the regular inverted architecture of ITO/ZnO/BHJ/MoO3/Ag, the IDT-BT-R based non-fullerene solar cells showed a PCE of 7.10% (VOC = 1.02 V, JSC = 13.23 mA cm−2, and a FF = 52.48%; also summarized in Table 1). As mentioned in our previous study, we found that the optimal performance of a conventional solar cell could be achieved by thermal annealing of the PTB7-Th:IDT-BT-R blend film at 150 °C. The same phenomenon was also observed in the case of inverted cells. After annealing at 150 °C for 30 min, the devices showed a simultaneous enhancement with a JSC of 13.89 mA cm−2 and a FF of 55.06%, resulting in a higher PCE of 7.82%. This indicates that OSCs based on the IDT-BT-R acceptor have an obvious advantage of better thermal stability than OSCs based on fullerene acceptors, which are well-known for serious degradation after heating at a high temperature like 150 °C. It was also reported that a crosslinked PFN-ox ultra-thin layer between ZnO and active layer in the inverted cells could improve the PCE by decreasing the work function of ITO. Inspired by this work, we also applied this interfacial modification strategy to our non-fullerene OSCs. After a PFN-ox ultra-thin layer was inserted between the ZnO and active layer, the device demonstrated significant enhancement, with a PCE of 9.20% (VOC = 1.05 V, JSC = 14.62 mA cm−2 and FF = 59.91%). This high PCE was comparable to that of PC71BM based PSCs, which showed a PCE of 9.50% (VOC = 0.78 V, JSC = 16.73 mA cm−2, and FF = 73.28%). The EQE spectra of these devices are shown in Fig. 2. The calculated JSC from the EQE spectra were all comparable to those measured by J–V measurements (within 5% mismatch). These results suggest that thermal annealing and interface modification by PFN-ox are effective methods to improve the performance of inverted non-fullerene OSCs. Therefore, they were further investigated to better study the origin of these improvements.

Acceptor
ETL
Thermal annealing

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (best) (%)
IDT-BT-R
ZnO
Without
1.02
13.23
52.48
7.10 (7.39)
ZnO
With
1.02
13.89
55.06
7.82 (8.17)
ZnO/PFN-ox
With
1.05
14.62
59.91
9.20 (9.39)
PC71BM
ZnO/PFN-ox
Without
0.78
16.73
73.28
9.50 (9.65)
Because both JSC and FF increased while the VOC remained the same for the device after thermal annealing at 150 °C for 30 min, we first carried out the UV-vis absorption measurement to study its optical property before and after thermal annealing. Fig. S2 (ESI) shows that the absorption of the PTB7-Th:IDT-BT-R blend film increased slightly in the wavelength region between 600 and 700 nm after thermal annealing at 150 °C for 30 min, which could be attributed mainly to the enhanced ordering of the molecules. The enhanced absorption does account for the increased photocurrent in the device with thermal annealing, which was confirmed by the devices’ EQE spectra (Fig. 2a).
Atomic force microscopy (AFM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) were carried out to further study the morphological evolution of the active layer that resulted from thermal annealing. Fig. 3a and b shows no obvious surface morphological changes in the PTB7-Th:IDT-BT-R blend film after thermal annealing, but the average roughness was reduced slightly from 1.96 to 1.85 nm. In the PTB7-Th:PC71BM blend film (Fig. S3, ESI), phase separation deterioration was evident due to the aggregation of PC71BM molecules with the average roughness increasing from 1.73 to 2.67 nm after thermal annealing, which was in agreement with previous results. The PC71BM aggregation behaviour upon thermal annealing was also observed in the TEM images of PTB7-Th:PC71BM blend film, which was consistent with the AFM measurement. Moderate phase separation and domain size were believed to be beneficial for exciton separation and charge transport in bulk-heterojunction solar cells. As shown in the TEM images (Fig. 3c and d), thermal annealing facilitated the PTB7-Th:IDT-BT-R blend film to form a better interpenetrating network so that the separated free carriers could transport more efficiently along the continuous channel of the pure donor or acceptor, which well explained the advanced performance and particularly the enhancement of FF in the non-fullerene device after thermal annealing.
Because it has been reported that the high mobility of the charge carriers is related to the high FF in bulk-heterojunction OSCs, the carrier mobility of PTB7-Th:IDT-BT-R blend film was measured based on the space-charge limited current model described as J = (9/8)ε0εrμ((V2)/(d3)). We then fabricated hole-only devices (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/blend film/MoO3/Ag) and electron-only devices (ITO/Al/blend film/Ca/Al) to measure the hole and electron mobility, respectively. The results are plotted in Fig. 4, which shows that the electron mobility increased significantly from 4.55 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 to 1.03 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 after thermal annealing. In the meantime, the hole mobility remained nearly the same after thermal annealing with a value around 7 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1. As a result, the transport of hole and electron within the devices became more balanced, leading to less space charge and reduced recombination which was responsible for the device's increased FF with thermal annealing.
Above all, thermal annealing could optimize the nanoscale morphology and improve optical absorption and the charge transport property, which led to the enhanced JSC and FF of the non-fullerene devices. However, PFN-ox interface modification is not likely to change the morphology or optical properties of the active layer, so it is hypothesized that PFN-ox not only reduces the ITO/ZnO surface work function, but also passivates the traps on the ZnO surface, resulting in less recombination within the OSC devices. It is well-known that both VOC and JSC are dependent on the incident light intensity (I), which can provide basic information on monomolecular recombination and bimolecular recombination in the device. In the case of OSCs, the monomolecular recombination is usually considered to be trap-assisted Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination. It has been proven that the slope of VOCversus the natural logarithm of light intensity ln(I) is proportional to nkT/q, where k is Boltzmann's constant and q is the elementary charge. The ideality factor n will be close to 1 if bimolecular recombination is dominant and tends to be 2 when trap-assisted SRH recombination is involved.Fig. 5a shows the relationship between VOC and the light intensity of the studied devices with different treatments. It can be seen that the ideality factor n decreased from 1.35 to 1.22 after thermal annealing, which indicates a suppression of SRH recombination in the devices. Moreover, the ideality factor n can be further reduced to 1.19 after modification of the ZnO interlayer with PFN-ox, which indicated that PFN-ox can further mitigate the SRH recombination by reducing the ZnO surface traps. In the short-circuit condition, all photo-generated carriers should be swept out of the device by the built-in field so that bimolecular recombination should be inhibited. Thus, the expression of JSC ∝ Iα is used to describe the relationship between JSC and light intensity (I), where the value of α is believed to be 1 if there is little bimolecular recombination in the device. As shown in Fig. 5b, with a thermal annealing strategy, bimolecular recombination within the IDT-BT-R based OSCs was found to be restrained, with an increased slope from 0.851 to 0.940, in agreement with the findings from TEM images and the increased electron mobility after thermal annealing. Furthermore, the slope of the PFN-ox interlayer-modified device was nearly 1 (α = 0.990), revealing that very little bimolecular recombination occurred within this device. For comparison, the PC71BM based control device showed a more severe bimolecular recombination with a slope of α = 0.978.
Transient photovoltage and photocurrent measurements are helpful methods to study the dynamics of free charge recombination, transport, and extraction on a microsecond or nanosecond time scale. First, transient photovoltage measurement was used to analyse the recombination of free charges within the working devices by recording the transient voltage decay of the device under open circuit conditions under continuous illumination before a small perturbative light pulse was injected.Fig. 6a presents the transient photovoltage measurement of PTB7-Th:IDT-BT-R based devices with different treatments. The ZnO-based device without annealing treatment of the active layer showed a relatively short lifetime (τ = 3.298 μs), whereas the lifetime increased to 5.406 μs after annealing treatment, which may be ascribed to less charge recombination due to improved morphology and fewer traps within the active layer supported by the TEM and the light intensity dependence of the VOC and JSC data discussed above. Furthermore, the device with a PFN-ox layer on top of ZnO possessed a much longer lifetime (τ = 6.195 μs), which verified our hypothesis that PFN-ox modification can passivate the traps on the ZnO surface and thus suppress charge recombination. The lifetime of the PTB7-Th:PC71BM based device is extracted to be 3.630 μs, which reflects that less recombination occurred within the IDT-BT-R based device than the PC71BM based ones, in agreement with the conclusion from JSC measurement dependent on light intensity. In addition, the dynamics of charge extraction efficiency can be obtained by transient photocurrent measurement carried on the devices under the short circuit condition. According to Fig. 6b, the lifetime of the optimized PC71BM based control device was extracted to be τ = 0.137 μs, which was consistent with the literature. In the case of IDT-BT-R based devices, both ZnO/PFN-ox and ZnO based non-fullerene OSCs showed a very short lifetime of around 0.09 μs. The shorter lifetimes suggested that photo-generated carriers were extracted more efficiently in the IDT-BT-R based devices than the PC71BM based ones, leading to less bimolecular recombination in the IDT-BT-R based devices. In addition, the device with the PFN-ox modification had a slightly shorter lifetime (τ = 0.089 μs) than that without the modification (τ = 0.095 μs), which suggested that the PFN-ox interlayer was slightly better for free charge extraction. However, the ZnO based device without annealing treatment of the active layer had the shortest lifetime. This strange phenomenon could be ascribed to the very severe trap-assisted and bimolecular recombination of free charges in the device without annealing treatment of the active layer instead of more efficient charge extraction, which is consistent with the conclusion from the light intensity dependence of VOC and JSC.
In addition to the improvement of JSC and FF for the thermally annealed and interfacial modified non-fullerene OSCs, their high VOC (1.05 V) also caught our attention because it is a vital factor to achieve excellent performance comparable to fullerene OSCs with a limited VOC (0.78 V). It is worthy of note that the energy loss between the optical bandgap Eg and qVOC is only 0.54 eV for the PTB7-Th:IDT-BT-R based device, even exceeding the limited value of 0.6 eV from previous reports. To gain insight into this low energy loss, we further studied the charge transfer states (CTs) in the blends of PTB7-Th:IDT-BT-R and PTB7-Th:PC71BM because CTs, which are found to be intermediate states formed at donor/acceptor interface, have a great effect on the charge separation and VOC. The energy of the CTs (ECT) is generally considered as the theoretical upper limit of VOC achieved in bulk-heterojunction OSCs. We performed high-sensitivity EQE measurement for IDT-BT-R and PC71BM based OSCs to calculate the value of ECT as reported in the literature. As plotted in Fig. 7, the EQE spectra of pure donor and acceptor materials sandwiched between ITO/ZnO/PFN-ox and MoO3/Ag are also shown for comparison and to accurately define the absorption region of CTs in the blends. By fitting the shoulders of the EQE spectra in the sub-bandgap region with the Gaussian function derived from Marcus theory (a detailed description is shown in the ESI), the extracted values of ECT for the PTB7-Th:IDT-BT-R and PTB7-Th:PC71BM blends are 1.54 eV and 1.50 eV, respectively. Although the higher ECT will result in a higher VOC of the non-fullerene OSCs, there is a very big difference in the voltage deficit (given by q−1ECT − VOC) for the PTB7-Th:IDT-BT-R (0.49 V) and PTB7-Th:PC71BM (0.72 V) based solar cells. According to the remarkable studies of McGehee et al. and Vandewal et al., this smaller voltage deficit in the non-fullerene OSCs can be attributed to the lower charge recombination discussed above. The values of the reorganization energy λ extracted from fitting are 0.11 eV and 0.24 eV for the PTB7-Th:IDT-BT-R and PTB7-Th:PC71BM based solar cells, respectively. The lower reorganization energy indicates that during the charge dissociation and transfer process in PTB7-Th:IDT-BT-R based device, less exciton energy is required to compensate for the D+–A− excited state reorganization transformation. To some extent, less reorganization energy also means less energetic disorder of CTs in the PTB7-Th:IDT-BT-R blends, leading to a smaller voltage deficit. Our result is in agreement with the conclusion drawn by Nguyen et al. that the total energy loss resulted mainly from energetic disorder and charge recombination, particularly bimolecular recombination.

We successfully increased the PCE of non-fullerene OSCs by 30% via device engineering methods including thermal annealing and interface modification. A best PCE of 9.39% (VOC = 1.04 V, JSC = 15.09 mA cm−2 and FF = 59.85%) was achieved in the optimized PTB7-Th:IDT-BT-R based non-fullerene OSC, indicating the potential to substitute fullerene as the acceptor in organic photovoltaic. A detailed study found that the optimized active layer morphology, more balanced charge transport, more efficient charge extraction, and suppressed recombination were the main reasons that these device engineering methods worked well. Furthermore, we found that the high VOC of PTB7-Th:IDT-BT-R based non-fullerene OSCs is due to its high ECT, weak recombination and thus low energy loss. Our work shows that thermal annealing and interface modification are two efficient and facile methods in device engineering to reduce energy loss and improve the overall performance of inverted non-fullerene OSCs, which is meaningful for the future development of high performance OSCs.


The SMA IDT-BT-R was synthesized by the method we reported recently. The sol–gel ZnO precursor solution was prepared by the conventional sol–gel method as reported elsewhere. PTB7-Th was purchased from 1-M, PC71BM was purchased from Nano-C and the other chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used as received. A 25 mg mL−1 PTB7-Th:IDT-BT-R solution was prepared with a weight ratio of 1:1.5 in DCB. A 20 mg mL−1 PTB7-Th:PC71BM solution was prepared with a weight ratio of 1:1.5 in the mixed solvent CB:DIO (volume ratio of 97:3).


The ITO-coated glass (sheet resistance = 10–12 Ω □−1) was cleaned sequentially with detergent, deionized water and isopropanol under sonication for 30 min each and dried at 70 °C in a baking oven overnight. The ZnO layer was prepared by spin-coating the sol–gel ZnO precursor solution onto the cleaned ITO substrates at 3000 rpm for 30 s, followed by annealing at 200 °C for 1 hour in air. For the PFN-ox modified devices, a 0.5 mg mL−1 solution of PFN-ox was spin-coated on top of the ZnO layer at 2000 rpm and annealed at 140 °C for 15 min. Subsequently, the substrates were transferred into a N2-filled glove box for spin-coating of the photoactive layer with a thickness of 100 nm. Finally, 10 nm MoO3 and an 80 nm silver electrode were deposited by thermal evaporation. A shadow mask was put on the sample to define an active area of 0.04 cm2 before the Ag electrode deposition.


The J–V curves of all devices were measured by a masking the active area with a metal mask of 0.04 cm2. The device photocurrent was measured under an AM 1.5G solar simulator (Taiwan, Entelich). The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics for the devices were recorded with a Keithley 2400 source meter. The illumination intensity of the light source was calibrated before testing using a standard silicon solar cell with a KG5 filter, calibrated using a silicon photodiode calibrated at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory, giving a value of 100 mW cm−2 in the test.

The EQE spectra were measured with a Solar Cell Spectral Response Measurement System QE-R3011 (Enlitech Co., Ltd). The light intensity at each wavelength was calibrated using a standard single-crystal Si photovoltaic cell.
The UV-vis absorption spectra were recorded on an HP 8453 spectrophotometer and an FLS920 spectrofluorometer (Edinburgh Instruments), respectively. The AFM measurements were carried out using a Digital Instrumental Multimode Nanoscope IIIa in the tapping mode. The TEM measurements were performed with a JEM-2100F field emission transmission electron microscope.
Transient photocurrent and photovoltage measurement: for transient photocurrent measurements, an attenuated 580 nm laser pulse with a pulse width of 120 fs was used as the light source. The device was serially connected to a Tektronix TDS 3052C digitizing oscilloscope with the input impedance of 50 Ω. For transient photovoltage measurements, with a setup similar to that used for the photocurrent measurements, the device was connected to the oscilloscope using a 1 MΩ input impedance to form the open-circuit condition. 0.3 sun background illumination was used and the laser-pulse-induced photovoltage perturbation was less than 5% of the VOC produced by the given background illumination intensity.

There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


The work was financially supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology (No. 2017YFA0206600 and 2014CB643505), the Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21761132001, 91633301, 51573057), and the Science and Technology Program of Guangzhou, China (No. 201607020010).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8tc00705e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018