 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA01151J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 12635-12644


Yu
Liu
,

Benlin
He
*,

Jialong
Duan
,

Yuanyuan
Zhao
,

Yang
Ding
,

Mixue
Tang
,

Haiyan
Chen
 and 

Qunwei
Tang
*

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266100, P.R. China. E-mail: blhe@ouc.edu.cn

Institute of New Energy Technology, College of Information Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, P.R. China. E-mail: tangqunwei@jnu.edu.cn

Received
29th January 2019
, Accepted 22nd April 2019
First published on 23rd April 2019
Carbon-based inorganic cesium lead bromide (CsPbBr3) perovskite solar cells have attracted considerable interest because of their excellent environmental stability, simple preparation in air, and good cost effectiveness. However, the poor hole extraction and serious charge recombination at the CsPbBr3/carbon interface caused by a large energy level difference and the inefficient hole selectivity of the carbon cathode as well as surface defect states have remarkably limited the further improvement of the power conversion efficiency of such solar cells. Here, a poly(3-hexylthiophene)/zinc phthalocyanine (P3HT/ZnPc) composite with a tunable energy level was employed as a hole-transport material (HTM) in carbon-based CsPbBr3 perovskite solar cells to reduce the energy level difference and to passivate the surface defect states of perovskites, promoting charge separation and reducing charge recombination at the CsPbBr3/carbon interface. The photovoltaic performance of a solar cell with an architecture of FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/CsPbBr3/P1Z1/carbon was significantly improved, achieving a champion power conversion efficiency as high as 10.03% with a short-circuit current density of 7.652 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage of 1.578 V, and a fill factor of 83.06% under one sun illumination. Moreover, the unencapsulated device exhibited excellent long-term stability in air with 70% relative humidity over 30 days. These results suggested that the P3HT/ZnPc composite is an efficient HTM for high-efficiency and stable carbon-based CsPbBr3 perovskite solar cells.

Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted considerable attention over the past few years due to their excellent optoelectronic performances and due to the outstanding advantages of perovskite materials, such as an extremely high molar absorption coefficient, bipolar transfer charge, wide absorption spectrum, and long carrier migration length. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of hybrid PSCs has substantially increased from 3.8% to 23.7% with the rapid development of solar cell materials, preparation techniques, and device structures. However, the poor stability of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites caused by the volatilization of organic components [e.g., methylammonium (MA+), formamidinium (FA+)] for thermal treatment and from perovskite decomposition in moisture and oxygen environments is still a serious problem hindering the commercialization of PSCs. A promising solution to significantly improve the stability in thermal environments is to replace organic cations with cesium (Cs+) for all-inorganic perovskites. Among all the cesium lead halide perovskites, the full brominated CsPbBr3 is considered as the most stable photoactive layer in comparison with iodide-containing perovskites; moreover, CsPbBr3 presents a high carrier mobility and can be made in air and oxygen atmospheres free of humidity control.

However, the first carbon-based CsPbBr3 PSC with an architecture of FTO/TiO2/CsPbBr3/carbon fabricated in ambient air had a PCE of only 6.7%, which is far behind the state-of-the-art PCEs for organic–inorganic hybrid PSCs. The main reasons for the low PCE are the narrow light absorption from the wide bandgap of CsPbBr3 as well as the poor hole extraction and serious charge recombination at the CsPbBr3/carbon interface caused by the large energy level difference, inefficient hole selectivity of the carbon cathode, and surface defect states. Although the bandgap of CsPbBr3 can be reduced by partially replacing Br− with I− for a broadened spectral absorption range and enhanced PCE output, the stability serious decreases in humidity and an oxygen atmosphere. An effective way to solve this impasse is to set an intermediate energy level layer between the CsPbBr3 and carbon to promote charge separation and to suppress charge recombination. Recently, quantum dots or hole-transport materials (HTMs) have been introduced into carbon-based CsPbBr3 PSCs for energy level alignment to promote hole extraction. However, the poor coverage of quantum dots on the CsPbBr3 surface cannot maximize the hole-extraction ability, and therefore the incorporation of HTMs is more effective and feasible in charge-transport processes.
To date, 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) is the preferred HTM for high-performance PSCs, and it is usually doped with p-type chemicals to increase the hole mobility and electrical conductivity, although the hygroscopicity of commonly used lithium-salt dopants causes serious instability. Furthermore, spiro-OMeTAD is very expensive, which is always an economic burden for commercial PSCs. Therefore, some cost-effective and stable candidates, such as small molecules (aniline-based enamine, triphenylamines, etc.), inorganics (NiO, CuI, etc.), polymers [poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)–poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS), poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), etc.], have been developed as HTMs for PSC applications. P3HT, a thiophene-containing polymer with comprehensive commercial applications because of its low cost and excellent stability originating from its moisture-resistance and fine hydrophobicity, has been widely used as an HTM in PSCs, and also P3HT has a passivation effect on the surface defect states of perovskites due to the coordination of sulfur with under-coordinated Cs+ and Pb2+ ions, which reduces the trap states and thus promotes charge separation at the perovskite/P3HT interface. However, the lower hole mobility of P3HT compared with that of spiro-OMeTAD leads to a reduced photoelectric conversion performance of PSCs. Some inorganic, organic, and polymeric materials have been introduced to P3HT to form composite HTMs with high conductivity. Gold nanoparticles (Au-NPs) have been added into the P3HT matrix, leading to a ∼4-fold enhancement in the carrier mobility and in the electrical conductivity of the pure P3HT film. Further, the PCE of PSCs with P3HT:Au-NP HTMs has been increased from 7.81% to 10.71%. Tetrafluoro-tetracyano-quinodimethane is also sometimes introduced as an efficient p-type dopant, and then the PCE can be significantly enhanced to 14.4% compared with 10.3% for pristine P3HT-based PSCs. Poly(3-thiopheneacetic acid) and P3HT copolymer HTMs are also useful in improving cell efficiency and stability under ambient conditions. P3HT/carbon composites, including P3HT/bamboo-structured carbon nanotubes, P3HT/graphene, P3HT/graphdiyne and P3HT/single-walled carbon nanotubes, have also been employed as efficient HTMs, with the PCEs of the corresponding PSCs remarkably improved due to the increased hole mobility and conductivity of these P3HT-based composite HTMs.
Phthalocyanine compounds, incorporating p-type centrally symmetric organic semiconductor molecules with uniform electron distribution on the ring, have recently been investigated as HTMs for PSCs because of their low cost, high thermal and chemical stability, and high hole mobility. Until now, a high PCE of 17.8% as well as good stability for organic–inorganic hybrid PSCs employing phthalocyanine HTM have been obtained. However, the insolubility of phthalocyanine compounds makes it difficult to use a simple wet chemical method to form printed and spin-coated films. In recent years, a few studies have verified that the incorporation of a soluble substituted phthalocyanine compound into conjugated polymers has a promoting effect on the hole mobility and electrical conductivity enhancement of conjugated polymers. For instance, a PCE of 16.61% was achieved for PSCs based on insoluble non-peripheral octamethyl-substituted copper(II) phthalocyanine–P3HT composites. Devices with nickel phthalocyanine tetrasulphonate sodium salt-PEDOT:PSS composite HTMs have obtained a PCE of 19.0%. The PCE of a PSC with copper phthalocyanine–3,4′,4′′,4′′′-tetrasulfonated acid tetrasodium salt-doped PEDOT:PSS HTM also increased from 13.29% to 17.29%. However, the preparation and purification of soluble substituted phthalocyanine compounds are complicated, thus increasing the difficulty and cost of their application. Also, considering the energy level of the soluble substituted copper or nickel phthalocyanine compounds, they are often used to incorporate with conjugated polymers as composite HTMs in organic–inorganic hybrid PSCs.
In this study, zinc phthalocyanine (ZnPc), a low-cost organic semiconducting material with a suitable highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy level of about −5.33 eV as well as a lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy level of about −3.17 eV and good solubility in chlorobenzene, was incorporated into P3HT by changing the mass ratios (P3HT:ZnPc = 2:1, P3HT:ZnPc = 1:1, and P3HT:ZnPc = 1:2 as P2Z1, P1Z1, and P1Z2, respectively) based on solution processing to improve the hole mobility of P3HT and to tailor the energy level of P3HT to match well with that of CsPbBr3. The composites were prepared and used as HTMs for carbon-based CsPbBr3 PSCs, and the incorporation of ZnPc to P3HT not only enhanced the hole mobility and downshifted the HOMO energy level of P3HT to approach the valence band (VB) of CsPbBr3, but it also showed a passivation effect on the surface defect states of CsPbBr3. These advantages caused an improved charge separation as well as decreased energy loss and charge recombination within a PSC device. Owing to the higher hole mobility and well-matched energy level with CsPbBr3, the PSC with the architecture of FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/CsPbBr3/P1Z1/carbon fabricated completely in ambient air free of any encapsulation achieved a champion PCE of 10.03%, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 7.652 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.578 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 83.06%, and also exhibited long-term stability in air atmosphere with 70% relative humidity over 30 days. These findings suggest that setting an intermediate energy level layer of P3HT/ZnPc composite HTMs provides a new strategy for tailoring the energy level difference and passivating the surface defect states as well as for further improving the photovoltaic performances of CsPbBr3 PSCs.

All the materials and reagents were used without further purification.


Zn powders and 2 M HCl aqueous solution were used to etch fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass to get an etched line. The FTO glass containing a strip of the etched line was rinsed in turn with ethanol and deionized water. A compact TiO2 (c-TiO2) film supported by the FTO was prepared by spin-coating an ethanol solution of 0.5 M titanium isopropoxide and 0.5 M diethanol amine at 7000 rpm for 30 s and then annealing at 500 °C in a muffle furnace for 120 min. The mesoscopic TiO2 (m-TiO2) film was deposited onto the c-TiO2 layer by spin-coating colloidal TiO2 paste at 2000 rpm for 30 s, followed by annealing at 450 °C for 30 min. Ultimately, the FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2 film was fully immersed in 40 mM of TiCl4 aqueous solution at 75 °C for 30 min, after rinsing with deionized water and anhydrous ethanol, the film was annealed at 450 °C for another 30 min in a muffle furnace.


The CsPbBr3 film was prepared by a multi-step spin-coating method developed by our group. In detail, 1 M PbBr2 solution in N,N-dimethyl formamide (DMF) was spin-coated onto the pre-heated FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2 film at 80 °C at 2000 rpm for 30 s, then heated at 80 °C for 30 min on a hotplate. Next, 0.07 M CsBr methanol solution was spin-coated onto the FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/PbBr2 film at 2000 rpm for 30 s and heated at 250 °C for 5 min on the hotplate. This course was repeated four times to acquire a dense and uniform CsPbBr3 film. Ultimately, a carbon electrode (purchased from Shanghai MaterWin New Materials Co., Ltd) was coated onto the FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/CsPbBr3 film via a doctor-blade technique with an average area of 0.3 cm × 0.3 cm, and then heated at 120 °C for 5 min to fabricate an HTM-free device. Devices based on HTMs were prepared using similar procedures. Here, P3HT, ZnPc (Fig. S1), and the mixtures of P3HT and ZnPc with different mass radios were just dissolved in chlorobenzene (CB) under ultrasound for 30 min, and then the solution was spin-coated on a CsPbBr3 film at 2000 rpm for 30 s, and subsequently the FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/CsPbBr3/HTM film was heated at 200 °C for 10 min on a hotplate before coating the carbon electrode.


The top-view morphologies of the CsPbBr3 films and cross-sectional image of a PSC device and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) mapping images were observed using field-emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM, S4800, Hitachi). Ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra of the perovskite films were recorded on a Meipuda UV-3200 spectrophotometer in the wavelength range of 300–800 nm. The TRPL measurements were carried out by time-resolved fluorescence (Horiba JobinYvon, FL) under a 510 nm laser. Ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy measurements (UPS) were characterized on a Kratos AXIS ULTRA system with a helium discharge lamp, and with a concentric hemispherical analyzer for photo-excited electron detection. The crystal structures of the CsPbBr3 film were obtained by X-ray diffraction (PHILIPSPW1800 diffractometer with Cu-Kα radiation). The steady-state photoluminescence was accessed at room temperature by an FLS920 all functional fluorescence spectrometer. The photocurrent–voltage (J–V) curves of the PSCs were measured using a CHI660E electrochemical workstation at a scan rate of 0.1 V s−1 under irradiation of simulated solar light intensity controlled at AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2). The J–V curves of the hole-only device with the architecture of FTO/NiO/perovskite/HTM/carbon were characterized in the voltage range from 0 to 3 V under dark conditions to examine the trap state density and hole mobility by the space-charge limited current (SCLC) method. Electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) plots were measured in the frequency range of 1 MHz to 0.1 Hz with an amplitude of 10 mV at Voc in the dark. The Voc decay curves were measured by illuminating the device under the irradiation of simulated solar light intensity controlled at AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) at open-circuit for a period of time (2 or 3 s) to achieve the photostationary state; then by instantaneously switching off the light and covering the device with a shading box. Capacitance–voltage (C–V) characterizations were performed at a frequency of 5 kHz with an amplitude of 30 mV under dark conditions against different bias voltages.


The device structure and the energy level diagram of the materials in PSCs are depicted in Fig. 1. In this setup, under the irradiation of light, the excited electron–hole pairs are generated from perovskite and extracted by the electron-transporting layer and hole-transporting layer, respectively. The HOMO energy levels of P3HT, P2Z1, P1Z1, P1Z2, and ZnPc were examined by UPS characterizations (Fig. S2) according to the formula EHOMO = hv − (Ecutoff − Eonset), where hv is the incident photon energy (21.2 eV), Ecutoff is the high binding energy cutoff, and Eonset is the onset of the various HTM films relative to the Fermi energy of Au. Then the LUMO energy levels could be calculated according to the energy bandgap obtained from the UV-vis absorption measurements (Fig. S2), and the corresponding values are summarized in Table S1. As shown in Fig. 1b, the LUMO energy levels were −3.01, −3.02, −3.03, −3.15, and −3.17 eV for P3HT, P2Z1, P1Z1, P1Z2, and ZnPc, respectively, which were higher than the conduction band (−3.3 eV) of CsPbBr3, indicating that the incorporation of P3HT, ZnPc, and the composite HTMs could effectively block electron migration from the perovskite to the carbon electrode and thus could reduce charge recombination. The HOMO energy level was −5.13 eV for P3HT, −5.15 eV for P2Z1, −5.16 eV for P1Z1, −5.29 eV for P1Z2, and −5.33 eV for ZnPc. All the values of the HOMO energy levels were between the VB (−5.6 eV) of CsPbBr3 and the work function (−5.0 eV) of the carbon electrode, which demonstrates that the introduction of HTMs reduces the energy level difference and promotes hole extraction and charge separation. It was found that the addition of ZnPc to P3HT made the HOMO energy level of P3HT downshift and move close to the VB of CsPbBr3, leading to an enhancement of the hole-extraction ability of P3HT.

The top-view SEM images of pristine CsPbBr3 and CsPbBr3 covered with different HTMs are presented in Fig. 2a–f. All the CsPbBr3 films showed a uniform surface, and the grain size of CsPbBr3 remained almost unchanged after spin-coating P3HT, ZnPc, and the composite HTMs, but the films become compact, resulting in a reduced trap state density on the CsPbBr3 surface, which may be attributed to the interface passivation of P3HT and ZnPc due to the almost unchanged morphologies (Fig. S3) of the CsPbBr3 films after 200 °C annealing, CB treatment, and 200 °C annealing after CB treatment. It was obvious that a layer of HTM covered the CsPbBr3 film, and a few composite HTM nanoparticles could be seen on the surface of CsPbBr3 from the inset high-magnification images, which may be attributed to the micro-coagulation of P3HT and ZnPc composite in the solvent. In order to further investigate the coverage of HTM on the CsPbBr3 film, EDS mappings of the P1Z1 composite deposited on the CsPbBr3 film are shown in Fig. 2g–i. The Zn from ZnPc, C from ZnPc and P3HT, and S from P3HT had a homogeneous distribution without any phase separation, and Zn, C, and S elements were observed in the EDS also, as shown in Fig. S4. All the results confirmed that P1Z1 covered the CsPbBr3 surface as a hole-transporting layer, which is advantageous for facilitating hole extraction and therefore for suppressing charge recombination at the CsPbBr3/HTM interface.
The X-ray diffraction (XRD) profiles of pristine CsPbBr3 and P1Z1-coated CsPbBr3 are shown in Fig. 3a, with all the characteristic diffraction peaks of CsPbBr3 determined, indicating that the coating of P1Z1 did not alter the crystallization behavior of CsPbBr3. The diffraction peaks of P1Z1 were almost obscured by CsPbBr3, with there being only three new peaks, corresponding to the characteristic diffraction peaks of ZnPc in P1Z1 at around 23.4°, 27.8°, and 35.4°, as shown in Fig. S5, which suggests the coverage of P1Z1 on CsPbBr3. Meaningfully, the diffraction peak intensity of CsPbBr3 increased after spin-coating P1Z1 as an HTM, demonstrating the enhancement of CsPbBr3 crystallinity through the passivation effect of the P1Z1 layer. Fig. 3b shows the UV-vis absorption spectra of pristine CsPbBr3 and CsPbBr3 films covered with different HTMs. It is noted that all the CsPbBr3 films covered with HTMs showed a blue-shift and enhanced absorption peak compared with pristine CsPbBr3, which is attributed to the increased crystallinity of CsPbBr3 and the change in the dielectric constant on the CsPbBr3 surface owing to the passivation of the covered HTMs. These results could be cross-checked by the negligible difference between the UV-vis absorption spectra of the CsPbBr3 film prepared under different conditions without being covered with HTMs and that of the control film, as shown in Fig. S6. The higher absorption of CsPbBr3 films covered with HTMs resulted in enhanced photon absorption and thus an improvement in PSC performance.
To probe the charge-transfer behavior of various HTMs in CsPbBr3 PSCs, the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra were characterized to elucidate the hole-extraction efficiency, as shown in Fig. 3c. The CsPbBr3 films covered with P3HT, ZnPc, and the composite HTMs had a blue-shifted PL peak, which is consistent with the UV-vis absorption spectra, indicating a passivation of the trap states on the CsPbBr3 surface by the coating of HTMs. Moreover, it was observed that the PL quenching was dramatic when introducing single or composite HTMs in PSCs, suggesting an increased hole-extraction ability for PSCs employing HTMs. The P1Z1-tailored PSC had the most efficient PL quenching, indicating the best hole-extraction ability and charge-separation efficiency. Equally, the time-resolved PL (TRPL) spectra of the CsPbBr3 PSCs are presented in Fig. 3d to characterize the hole-extraction ability and carrier-transfer dynamics. TRPL spectra were fitted by the bi-exponential decay function: I = Ae−(t−t0)/τ1 + Be−(t−t0)/τ2, where τ1 is attributed to the faster component of non-radiative recombination time and τ2 is the slower component to the radiative recombination time, and A and B are constants. The corresponding specific parameters of τ1, τ2, and τave (average lifetime) are summarized in Table S2. Obviously, the control CsPbBr3 film showed a longer τave, which was decreased for P3HT-, P2Z1-, P1Z1-, P1Z2-, and ZnPc-coated CsPbBr3 films. The results strongly indicated that the incorporation of P3HT, ZnPc, and the composite HTMs could passivate the trap states on the CsPbBr3 surface and promote hole extraction at the CsPbBr3/HTM interface. Compared with CsPbBr3 covered with P3HT-only or ZnPc-only, the shorter τave values of the CsPbBr3 covered with the composite HTMs, especially the shortest decay lifetime of CsPbBr3 covered with P1Z1, could be ascribed to their high hole-extraction ability and matched energy levels.
The cross-sectional SEM image of CsPbBr3 PSC with an architecture of c-TiO2/m-TiO2/CsPbBr3/HTM/carbon is presented in Fig. 4a. The cell device consisted of closely contacted multilayers, in which the CsPbBr3 grains were monolayer vertical for promoting charge migration to the electron-transporting layer and hole-transporting layer. The photocurrent–voltage (J–V) curves of the CsPbBr3 PSCs were measured under simulated AM1.5G (100 mW cm−2) solar illumination, as shown in Fig. 4b. All the photovoltaic parameters, including the Jsc, Voc, FF, and PCE, are summarized in Table 1. As a control experiment, the J–V curves of the relationship between the photovoltaic performance and concentration of the P1Z1 composite are presented in Fig. S7, with the corresponding parameters summarized in Table S3, indicating the optimal concentration of HTM at about 5 mg mL−1. The control HTM-free PSC had poor photovoltaic performance with a Jsc of 6.15 mA cm−2, Voc of 1.390 V, FF of 71.59%, and PCE of 6.12%. Also, the J–V curves of HTM-free devices fabricated under different conditions are shown in Fig. S8, while the corresponding photovoltaic data in Table S4 are almost the same as those from the control device. This comparison suggests that the annealing at 200 °C and CB treatment had little effect on the photovoltaic performances. By introducing P3HT, ZnPc, and the composite HTMs, the photovoltaic performance of CsPbBr3 PSCs was remarkably increased and the divergence of the photovoltaic performances under forward and reverse scan directions was decreased (Fig. S9), which could be ascribed to the interface passivation, enhanced light absorption, high hole-extraction ability, and matched energy levels of the HTMs. A champion PCE as high as 10.03% was achieved for the P1Z1-tailored CsPbBr3 PSC with a Jsc of 7.652 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.578 V, and a FF of 83.06%, and the PCE was much higher than the efficiency of inorganic CsPbBr3 PSCs with and without an intermediate energy level layer as reported in the recent literature. The PCE increase from 6.12% to 10.03% was mainly due to the enhancement in the Voc and FF. A high Voc originates from the low energy losses (Eloss) according to the formula: Eloss = Eg − eVoc, where Eg represents the optical bandgap of the perovskite materials, and e is the charge of an electron. Therefore, Voc and PCE were improved through decreasing Eloss. The increased FF was attributed to the reduced trap state density and charge recombination. Owing to the well-matched energy level and high hole-extraction ability, the device based on P1Z1 HTM had a reduced Eloss and charge recombination, while its Voc was increased by 13.5% in comparison with 1.390 V for the HTM-free PSC, and FF and PCE were enhanced by 16.02% and 63.89%, respectively. In addition, CsPbBr3 PSCs based on P3HT, P2Z1, P1Z2, and ZnPc HTMs achieved PCEs of 8.5%, 9.22%, 8.34%, and 7.67%, respectively. To confirm the reproducibility, 30 individual PSCs were measured to obtain the statistical distribution of Jsc, Voc, FF, and PCE, as shown in Fig. S10. The narrow distribution refers to a high reproducibility using the method reported here. Incident-photon-conversion-efficiency (IPCE) spectra were performed to cross-check the improvement of photovoltaic performance of CsPbBr3 PSCs, as shown in Fig. S11. The IPCE value of the device with P1Z1 HTM was obviously higher than that of the HTM-free one in the response wavelength range of 325–550 nm, which is in agreement with the UV-vis absorbance spectra. Furthermore, the Jsc of 7.430 mA cm−2 integrated from the IPCE spectra for the device based on P1Z1 HTM matched well with the value of 7.652 mA cm−2 obtained from the J–V results. Fig. 4c shows the steady power output curves recorded under a bias voltage at the maximal power point. All the devices showed a stable power output over 100 s, while the output current density and PCE were close to the corresponding values from the J–V characterizations, and they were higher for devices with HTMs than HTM-free PSCs, which was also consistent with the J–V results. The results of integrated Jsc and steady power output verified the good reliability of the photovoltaic performance analysis, which indicated that the introduction of HTMs improves the performance of carbon-based CsPbBr3 PSCs and the hole-extraction ability of P3HT was increased greatly by incorporating ZnPc with the same mass ratio.
HTMs

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
HTM-free
6.15
1.390
71.59
6.12
P3HT
7.27
1.537
76.07
8.50
P2Z1
7.48
1.571
78.46
9.22
P1Z1
7.652
1.578
83.06
10.03
P1Z2
7.32
1.516
75.06
8.34
ZnPc
7.12
1.477
72.93
7.67
Non-radiative recombination dominated by defects and impurities and bimolecular charge recombination are the main factors affecting effective charge separation and device efficiency. Therefore, the relationships of Jsc and Voc for the carbon-based CsPbBr3 PSCs using different HTMs as a function of incident light intensity were tested to explore the photogenerated carrier recombination kinetics in individual devices. As shown in Fig. 5a, the dependence of Jsc on light intensity could be studied according to the following equation: Jsc ∝ Iα (α ≤ 1), where I represents the incident light intensity, and α is a fitting factor related to bimolecular recombination. An α value closer to 1 demonstrates more effective charge separation and lower bimolecular recombination in PSCs. Here, the α values increased from 0.967 for the HTM-free device to 0.997 for the P1Z1-tailored device, suggesting reduced radiative recombination due to the high hole-extraction ability and the matched energy levels of P1Z1 HTM. Meanwhile, the slope of the relationship between Voc and light intensity is shown in Fig. 5b. According to the following equation from the Shockley–Read–Hall recombination mechanism, Voc = nkTln(I)/q + constant, where T represents the absolute temperature, k is the Boltzmann constant, q is the elementary charge, n is an ideal factor associated with monomolecular recombination. The slope value was 1.83 kT/q for HTL-free PSCs, and it decreased to 1.66 kT/q, 1.60 kT/q, and 1.45 kT/q for PSCs with P3HT, ZnPc, and P1Z1 HTMs, respectively. The reduced slope means the non-radiative trap-dominated recombination is decreased by applying HTMs at the perovskite/carbon interface. Both examinations of Jsc and Voc clarified that the use of P3HT, ZnPc, and the composite HTMs was beneficial to suppress charge recombination, arising from a reduced trap state density and rapid charge transfer at the CsPbBr3/HTM interface. The J–V curves of a hole-only device with the architecture of FTO/NiO/perovskite/HTM/carbon were characterized in the dark to examine the trap state density (ntrap) of the device by the space-charge-limited-current (SCLC) method, as shown in Fig. 5c. The trap state density could be ascertained by the trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL) according to the following relation: VTFL = entrapL2/2εε0, where L is the thickness of the perovskite films, ε is the relative dielectric constant of CsPbBr3 (≈22), and ε0 is the vacuum permittivity. It was found that the trap state density remarkably decreased from 4.14 × 1015 cm−3 for the HTM-free device to 3.77 × 1015, 3.43 × 1015, and 3.92 × 1015 cm−3 for P3HT-, P1Z1-, and ZnPc-tailored solar cells, respectively. This result agrees well with the Voc–I characterization, and confirmed the passivation effect of P3HT, ZnPc, and P1Z1 on the surface defects of CsPbBr3. Furthermore, the hole mobility (μh) of the HTMs could also be calculated by the SCLC method according to Mott–Gurney's square law:μh = 8JDL3/9εε0V2, where JD is the dark current density, and V is the applied voltage. The μh value of P1Z1 was calculated to be 9.57 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, which was higher than the 8.56 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 of P3HT and 8.16 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 of ZnPc, indicating that the addition of ZnPc to P3HT increased the hole mobility of the composite HTM. The results were cross-check with the PL and TRPL characterizations as well as against the photovoltaic performance improvement of P1Z1 HTM-based CsPbBr3 PSCs. The influence of HTMs on charge-transfer processes was evaluated by EIS characterization in a frequency range of 1 MHz to 0.1 Hz at Voc in the dark. Fig. 5d shows the Nyquist plots of CsPbBr3 PSCs, where it can be seen that all the plots have large semicircles and could be fitted by an equivalent circuit (inset of Fig. 5d), where Rs represents the series resistance of the whole device, corresponding to the intercept on the real axis, and Rrec is charge-recombination resistance corresponding to the semicircle. As summarized in Table S5, the Rs values for the HTM-based devices were smaller than that of the control device, which is also in favor of the FF improvement. The P1Z1-based solar cell presented a maximized Rrec, which demonstrated that the P1Z1 HTM had an efficient suppression of charge recombination due to the low trap state density and rapid charge extraction of the device. In addition, the smaller CPE value of the P1Z1 HTM-based device in comparison with those of other PSCs demonstrated less charge accumulation at the device interface, which is mainly attributed to the high mobility and charge extraction of P1Z1, also leading to a reduced charge recombination and enhanced charge transfer.
To evaluate the charge recombination rate in the devices, Voc decay curves of CsPbBr3 PSCs are shown in Fig. 5e. The slowest decay time for the P1Z1 HTM-tailored PSC demonstrated the lowest charge-recombination rate and the longest charge lifetime. This causes an enhanced Voc output, which is in an agreement with the J–V measurement. Mott–Schottky curves measured in the dark by performing capacitance–voltage (C–V) characterization were used to better understand the charge recombination, as shown in Fig. 5f. According to the fact that the interfacial charge density is inversely proportional to the straight lines slope of Mott–Schottky curves, the larger slops for the composite HTM-tailored solar cells than that of the HTM-free, P3HT-only, and ZnPc-only devices indicated a lower interfacial charge density. In other words, the charge recombination at the CsPbBr3/HTM interface was reduced, which is consistent with the EIS analysis. In addition, the device with P1Z1 HTM had a built-in potential (Vbi) as high as 1.428 V, meaning that it presented a larger driving force for charge extraction and transportation. Through a careful investigation of the charge-transfer mechanism, we can conclude that the improvement of the photovoltaic performance was related to the reduced charge recombination, which is attributed to the decreased trap state density, the good energy level alignment between the CsPbBr3 and HTMs, and the high extraction ability of the HTMs.
To date, the PCE of state-of-the-art PSCs have rapidly risen through material design, preparation optimization, and structure innovation, but the performance degradation in atmosphere environments with high humidity, high temperature, and/or ultraviolet light illumination is still a stability burden for their commercialization applications. To address this issue, we performed long-term stability measurements by storing the P1Z1-tailored CsPbBr3 PSC free of encapsulation in ambient air with 70% RH at 20 °C, as shown in Fig. 6. The normalized photovoltaic parameters showed no obvious attenuation after storing in air with 70% RH over 30 days; notably, the PCE retained nearly 98% of its initial efficiency. These results demonstrate that carbon-based CsPbBr3 PSCs present superior stability toward high humidity. In addition to the inherent crystal stability of CsPbBr3 and the hydrophobicity of carbon electrodes, the hydrophobicity of P1Z1 HTM was also important for maintaining the remarkable stability of devices. As shown in Fig. S12, the water droplet contact-angle as large as 101.2° at the P1Z1 composite film indicated a good hydrophobicity; therefore, the stabilized perovskite crystal, hydrophobic carbon electrode, and P1Z1 HTM film promoted excellent moisture tolerance together. The champion PCE output and excellent stability demonstrate that the P3HT/ZnPc composite is a promising HTM for high-performance carbon-based CsPbBr3 PSCs.

In summary, we present here the successful realization of P3HT/ZnPc composites as HTMs for carbon-based CsPbBr3 PSCs. Due to the interface passivation, matched energy levels, and high hole-extraction ability, the composite HTM-tailored inorganic PSCs exhibited enhanced photon absorption and hole extraction, and reduced charge recombination. A maximum PCE as high as 10.03% under one sun illumination was achieved for a P1Z1-based device, which was increased by 63.8% in comparison with 6.12% for an HTM-free PSC. Furthermore, the encapsulated-free device employing P1Z1 as an HTM showed excellent long-term moisture tolerance in ambient air with RH of 70% over 30 days. This work highlights the potential to attain more efficient and stable carbon-based CsPbBr3 PSCs through the incorporation of low cost and high mobility conjugated polymers–phthalocyanine compound composite HTMs at the perovskite/carbon interface.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


The authors acknowledge financial supports from National Natural Science Foundation of China (61604143, 61774139, U1802257).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta01151j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019