 DOI: 10.1039/C8TC02507J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 8234-8241


Chenglin
Gao
,

Hongzhou
Dong
,

Xichang
Bao
*,

Yongchao
Zhang
,

Aziz
Saparbaev
,

Liyan
Yu
,

Shuguang
Wen
,

Renqiang
Yang
* and 

Lifeng
Dong
*

College of Materials Science and Engineering, Qingdao University of Science and Technology, Qingdao 266042, China. E-mail: donglifeng@qust.edu.cn

CAS Key Laboratory of Bio-based Materials, Qingdao Institute of Bioenergy and Bioprocess Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao 266101, China. E-mail: baoxc@qibebt.ac.cn; yangrq@qibebt.ac.cn

Department of Physics, Hamline University, St. Paul, MN 55104, USA

Received
23rd May 2018
, Accepted 13th July 2018
First published on 16th July 2018
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have received extensive attention due to their excellent photovoltaic performance. The quality of perovskite films is crucial to device performance, and introducing additives to the precursor solution is an effective way to control the film morphology and to reduce the defect density. In this paper, formamidine acetate salt (FAAc) is introduced into the precursor solution as an effective additive to greatly improve the quality of perovskite films. With the addition of 5 mol% FAAc, the PSCs with a bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine (PTAA) hole extraction layer demonstrate desirable performance in terms of the open-circuit voltage (1.04 V), the short-circuit current density (23.16 mA cm−2), the fill factor (close to 80%), the power conversion efficiency (18.90%), negligible hysteresis, and the device stability (up to 80 days). These results will provide a new avenue for fabricating commercial perovskite solar cells.

Inorganic–organic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have demonstrated high power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of over 20% and attracted wide attention due to low-cost solution processing methods. Perovskite materials have extraordinary and unique optoelectronic properties because of their long carrier diffusion length and high mobility. In addition, the PCEs of PSCs are very close to those of crystalline-silicon solar cells as well as other inorganic thin-film solar cells (i.e., GaSe2 and CdTe). These advantages make them an ideal candidate for high-efficiency and low-cost alternative photovoltaics.

For PSCs, a perovskite absorber is sandwiched between a hole extraction layer (HEL) and an electron extraction layer (EEL), and the quality of the perovskite absorber is critical to the overall device. Good surface morphology and a low density of trap states and defects are necessary for high-quality perovskite films because they are not only essential to ensure sufficient light harvesting and cut down the shunting loss, but also can provide high-speed charge-transport channels by reducing recombination loss. However, it's challenging to control the film morphology and crystalline quality simultaneously. Miscellaneous components in the perovskite-precursor solution (i.e., methylammonium iodide CH3NH3I (MAI), NH2CHNH2I (FAI), and lead iodide (PbI2)) strongly affect the quality of perovskite crystalline films and ultimately the PCE of devices. A lot of techniques have been used to prepare uniform, homogeneous perovskite films such as one-step spin-coating, two-step sequential deposition, anti-solvent dripping, and doctor blading. In addition, an additive strategy was often used to get high-quality perovskite layers. For instance, Sun et al. reported a very simple process to prepare a film in ambient air through adding 2-pyridylthiourea to the perovskite precursor solution. Han et al. obtained a uniform perovskite film by using an ionic-liquid additive of methylammonium acetate and a molecular additive of thio-semicarbazide. Jahandar et al. used CuBr2 as an additive material and introduced it into the perovskite precursor solution, resulting in improved film morphology, reduced electron recombination, and an enhanced PCE from 13.18 to 17.09%. The approaches above were used to modulate the film morphology or enhance the crystalline quality.
Formamidine acetate salt (FAAc) is an excellent additive material due to its light molecular weight and easy removal during thermal annealing. In this work, an FAAc additive engineering strategy is proposed to optimize both the film morphology and crystalline quality. The introduction of FAAc into the perovskite precursor solution is capable of generating highly uniform perovskite films with full coverage morphology and few trap states. The PCE of PSCs with PEDOT:PSS as the HEL can be improved from initial 12.30% to 16.59% with negligible hysteresis. Besides the PCE of the device with bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine (PTAA) being further enhanced to 18.90%, the devices show less hysteresis and greatly improved stability. This work provides a very easy and repeatable approach to get compact high-quality perovskite film, thus suitable for high performance perovskite solar cells.

CH3NH3I, FAAc and PbI2 were bought from Xi’an Polymer Light Technology Corporation. Anhydrous N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) and dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) were purchased from Aladdin Reagent (China). PEDOT:PSS (Clevious PVP Al4083) was bought from H. C. Starck and phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) was supplied by American Dye Sources. PTAA was bought from Derthon Optoelectronic Materials Science Technology. ITO glass substrates with a sheet resistance of 15 Ω sq−1 were from Shenzhen Display (China).


ITO glass substrates were first cleaned with detergent, and then sequentially cleaned with acetone, ultrapure water, and isopropyl in an ultrasonic bath for 15 min, respectively. The ITO glass was dried with N2 and treated with O2 plasma for 10 min to improve the wettability. PEDOT:PSS was fabricated on the ITO substrates by spin-coating at 5000 rpm for 25 s, and then thermally treated at 140 °C for 10 min. The substrates were taken into a glovebox filled with nitrogen. PTAA with a concentration of 5 mg mL−1 dissolved in toluene was spin-coated on the ITO substrates at different speeds (3k, 4k, 5k and 6k rpm) for 40 s and then annealed at 105 °C for 10 min. The CH3NH3PbI3 precursor solution was prepared by mixing CH3NH3I and PbI2 (1:1 molar ratio) into anhydrous DMF and DMSO (9:1 by volume), with a concentration of 1.2 M. The perovskite precursor solutions were stirred at room temperature overnight to promote dissolution of solid materials. The additive (0–15 mol% FAAc) was added into the perovskite solution before spin-coating. A 0.45 μm PTFE filter was used to filter the perovskite precursor solution before spin-coating. Specifically, the perovskite solution was spin coated onto PEDOT:PSS at 4000 rpm for 40 s. During spin coating, the perovskite surface was disposed by toluene to get high quality surface coverage as Seok reported. The perovskite films were annealed on a hot plate at 100 °C for 10 min. A thin film of PCBM (circa 30 nm) was deposited onto the top of the perovskite layer with a concentration of 12 mg mL−1 at a speed of 1500 rpm for 20 s. At the end, the samples were taken into a thermal evaporation chamber, where 100 nm Al was deposited. At the same time, the device area was defined as 0.1 cm2 for each cell by a shadow mask.


The thicknesses of the perovskite films were estimated using a Veeco Dektak150 surface profiler. The surface morphology of the films was characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi S-4800). The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the films were obtained with a Bruker D8 ADVANCE. Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra were measured using a Fluoromax 4 spectrometer (HORIBA JobinYvon) with photoexcitation at 507 nm. The absorption spectra of the perovskite films on ITO glass were observed using a spectrophotometer (Varian Cary 50 UV/vis) in the range from 500 to 850 nm. Current–voltage (J–V) curves of devices were obtained under illumination of AM 1.5G through a Keithley 2420 source measurement unit, 100 mW cm−2, with a Newport solar simulator. The light intensity was calibrated using a standard silicon solar cell. The scan rate of the reverse scan and forward scan was set to 0.1 V s−1. A certified Newport incident photon conversion efficiency (IPCE) measurement system was used to analyze the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the PSCs.


Planar perovskite films with low densities of defects and smooth surfaces are helpful for high-performance PSCs. The perovskite films were prepared by spin-coating perovskite precursor solution (PbI2:MAI = 1:1) with FAAc additive at different molar ratios x (x changes from 0 to 0.15 with a 0.05 step). To study the effects of FAAc on the crystal structure, the X-ray diffraction patterns of the perovskite films with different FAAc ratios were measured and are given in Fig. 1a. There is a PbI2 peak at 12.7° for the film without doping with FAAc. The intensity of the PbI2 peak becomes very weak with the addition of 5 mol% FAAc. With the increase of the amount of FAAc, the PbI2 peak disappears and a small non-perovskite phase (δ-FAPbI3) shows at 11.8°.

The peak intensity of δ-FAPbI3 continues to increase with the amount of FAAc until 15 mol%. The optical properties of the perovskite films with different additive ratios were investigated by UV-vis absorption as shown in Fig. 1b. However, there are no obvious differences in absorption between doped and undoped FAAc perovskite films. This indicates that the intrinsic characteristics of MAPbI3 are not influenced by a small amount of foreign matter.
The anion of FAAc can strongly interact with the perovskite precursor to affect the crystallization process. Moreover, the suitable additive can be easily removed during thermal annealing due to its light molecular weight. The effect of FAAc modification on perovskite films was further studied by SEM.
As shown in Fig. 2(a–d), the perovskite film without FAAc additive shows poor surface morphology with low density and small grains. After incorporating 5 mol% FAAc, high quality perovskite films with relatively large and dense grains are obtained. On further increasing the doping ratio, the perovskite films have smaller grains without pinholes. The additive-free surface exhibits poor surface coverage compared to those with additives (Fig. S1, ESI). As discussed above, the formation of the δ-FAPbI3 phase can inhibit the growth of perovskite grains and lead to charge recombination centers, causing energy loss and thus reducing device performance. Decreasing the defect and trap density can decrease the recombination centers of charge carriers, which significantly improves device performance. The perovskite films were prepared on quartz glass for avoiding the influence of charge injection between the perovskite absorber layer and the electrode, and investigated through PL spectra. As shown in Fig. 2e, the PL intensity of the perovskite films starts to increase as the FAAc concentration increases from 0 to 5 mol%. The XRD results above indicate that the addition of FAAc leads to a decrease of impurity phase PbI2 in the perovskite films. But further addition of FAAc can generate the non-perovskite phase (δ-FAPbI3); the PL intensities of the perovskite films doped with 10 mol% and 15 mol% FAAc are lower than that of the film doped with 5 mol%, but still higher than that of the control film (0 mol%), which is consistent with the SEM results indicating that the quality of perovskite films with additives is superior to the control. These results imply that proper FAAc can effectively eliminate the defect and trap density in the perovskite film and thus improve the charge transport efficiency. This effect can be attributed to the enhanced quality of perovskite films through improved crystallinity and higher coverage by doping with FAAc as discussed above.
Inverted planar PSCs were prepared to investigate the effect of FAAc on photovoltaic performance. The optimized perovskite layer of 300 nm is sandwiched between the PEDOT:PSS layer (40 nm) and the PCBM layer (30 nm). The fabricated PSCs show a well-defined layer-by-layer structure with clear interfaces (Fig. S2, ESI). The J–V curves of all PSCs under reverse scan and detailed device parameters are shown in Fig. 3a and Table 1, respectively. There are significant differences in the solar cell performance with and without FAAc additive. Without FAAc, the PSCs exhibit poor photovoltaic performance with a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 18.81 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.91 V, a fill factor (FF) of 0.70 and a PCE of 12.13%. With the addition of 5 mol% FAAc, the device exhibits an improved PCE of 16.59%, with a high JSC of 21.49 mA cm−2, a VOC of 0.94 V and an excellent FF of 81%. Interestingly, the incorporation of a small amount of FAAc in the MAPbI3 precursor solution leads to a highly reproducible FF over 80%. With increasing the amount of FAAc to 10 mol% and 15 mol%, the PCEs of the devices have a slight decrease to 14.69% and 13.89% with decreased JSC and almost constant VOC and FF, respectively. As discussed above, an appropriate amount of FAAc additive can remove excess PbI2 without generating the non-perovskite phase and result in compact high-quality perovskite film with large grains, which can significantly inhibit internal recombination and improve device efficiency. However, the decrease of JSC with the increase of the FAAc ratio is due to δ-FAPbI3 recombination centers, which is further confirmed by PL data.
Doping content

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
0 mol% FAAc (reverse)
0.91
18.81
70
12.13
0 mol% FAAc (forward)
0.91
16.77
66
10.10
5 mol% FAAc (reverse)
0.94
21.49
81
16.09
5 mol% FAAc (forward)
0.95
21.67
80
16.59
10 mol% FAAc (reverse)
0.94
19.66
80
14.69
15 mol% FAAc (reverse)
0.96
18.33
78
13.89
The EQE is an excellent method to well reflect the light-harvesting efficiency, charge separation efficiency, and charge collection efficiency of photovoltaic devices. Fig. 3b shows the EQE spectra of the control and the optimized device, and the integrated current densities are 18.53 mA cm−2 and 20.46 mA cm−2, respectively, which agree with the JSC values obtained from the detailed device parameters (Table 1). It confirms that the introduction of an appropriate amount of FAAc into the perovskite precursor solution can not only effectively enhance the quality of perovskite films but also improve charge transfer, and thus increase JSC relative to the control.
Hysteresis of the J–V curve is an important issue that seriously affects the actual PCE of the perovskite solar cell, and commercial solar cells should work under the forward scan. In order to study the hysteresis of PSCs, the J–V curves under reverse and forward direction scans were investigated to compare the photo response behavior of PSCs without and with FAAc (Fig. 3c and d). There is significant hysteresis for the PSCs without FAAc. Such inconsistency mainly happens for the bias near VOC, leading to an underestimated or overestimated FF and PCE. It has been suggested that this effect could be attributed to ion motion, charge-trapping or ferroelectricity, which cause the accumulation of charge or specific ions in the vicinity of the contact area to re-shield the electric field and change the internal built-in electric field. Interestingly, the hysteresis characteristics can be completely eliminated with the optimized addition of FAAc. The hysteresis index (HI) for these perovskite devices is calculated according to eqn (1)
(1)
where
JFS (0.8VOC) and JRS (0.8VOC) denote the currents in the forward and reverse scanning directions, respectively, at a bias of 0.8VOC. The HI for the reference PSC was 0.207, whereas it becomes a negative value (−0.0184) for the PSC with optimized FAAc doping. The eliminated hysteresis enables a higher consistency of PCE between both scan directions, which facilitates practical applications. These results indicate that the addition of FAAc additive improves the quality of perovskite film and reduces the density of defects to mitigate the undesirable hysteresis in PSCs, and the high-quality perovskite film is a key reason for reducing hysteresis in PSCs.

To explore the effect of FAAc on the perovskite solar cell stability, the maximal steady photocurrent and its corresponding power output at the maximum power output point (0.87 V) are shown in Fig. 3e. The current density and PCE are stabilized at 18.85 mA cm−2 and 16.10%, respectively. This shows that incorporation of an appropriate amount of FAAc additive does not deteriorate the perovskite solar cell stability. All in all, doping with an appropriate amount of FAAc has a very positive passivation effect on perovskite film, resulting in a significant improvement in the PCE. As far as commercialization is concerned, the effect of FAAc doping on the stability of PSCs is studied. The PSCs with FAAc were stored in a glovebox without any encapsulation and tested periodically as shown in Fig. 3f. The PCE retains 90% of its initial value even after being stored in a glovebox for 30 days. It can be found that the degradation of the PCE is mainly attributed to the decreased FF. One possible reason for such degradation can be interfacial degradation, i.e., PEDOT:PSS as a hole transport layer material could etch ITO due to its acidic nature, which causes degradation in the long-term stability. The improved device stability is mainly due to the improvement of the perovskite layer with FAAc doping modification. For further enhancement of the stability, other hole transport materials should be used instead of strongly acidic PEDOT:PSS.
Sixty devices were prepared and measured under the optimized conditions to investigate the reproducibility of the PSCs. The statistics of the device performance parameters are shown in Fig. 4. The Gaussian fit of the distribution was used to plot the histogram. As can be seen in Fig. 4, the averages of VOC, JSC and FF are close to the best device parameters. The average FF (close to 80%) is very good for all devices, which is mainly attributed to the high-quality perovskite film. As discussed above, the perovskite films prepared with an appropriate doping amount of FAAc are smooth and pinhole-free and can be fully covered with a thin layer of PCBM, together with a low density of defects of the perovskite film, which leads to high photovoltaic performance.
In order to further study the effectiveness of FAAc additive, another HEL, PTAA, was used instead of PEDOT:PSS. Given in Fig. 5a and Table 2 are the J–V curves and detailed device parameters of the PSCs doped with 5 mol% FAAc additive and fabricated with PTAA as the HEL. A significant enhancement in the PCE (18.90%) is obtained for PTAA devices, compared to PEDOT:PSS devices (16.59%). The enhanced device efficiency results from a significant improvement in JSC (from 21.49 to 23.16 mA cm−2), an increase in VOC (from 0.95 to 1.04 V), and an excellent FF close to 80%. Fig. 5b shows the EQE spectra of the PSCs doped with 5 mol% FAAc additive and using a PTAA HEL. The integrated current density is 21.06 mA cm−2, which agrees with the JSC values obtained from the detailed device parameters (Table 2). At the same time, Fig. 5c shows that the hysteresis characteristics can be nearly eliminated for planar PSCs doped with 5 mol% FAAc additive by using PTAA instead of PEDOT:PSS. For commercialization, the effect of FAAc doping on the stability of PSCs by using PTAA is further studied. The PSCs were also stored in a glovebox without any encapsulation and tested periodically as shown in Fig. 5d. The PCE retains 90% of its initial value even after being stored in a glovebox for 80 days.
Different speed

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
3k PTAA (reverse)
1.07
22.01
75
17.63
4k PTAA (reverse)
1.04
23.16
78
18.90
4k PTAA (forward)
1.04
22.97
77
18.40
5k PTAA (reverse)
1.03
21.98
80
18.08
6k PTAA (reverse)
1.02
21.61
80
17.55

In this study, FAAc was used as an effective additive for the preparation of high quality perovskite films. A certain amount of FAAc in the perovskite precursor solution can not only control the film morphology and crystallinity, but also improve the optical and electrical properties of the perovskite photoactive layer. Therefore, a champion PCE of 18.90% with high FF (80%) and negligible hysteresis is achieved for planar PSCs doped with 5 mol% FAAc additive, which is much higher than that of control devices without FAAc. The PCE of the optimized devices has increased by 37% compared to the control device using PEDOT:PSS as the HEL. More importantly, the stability of the PSCs can be greatly improved for the optimized device. These results are promising for fabricating efficient and low-cost commercialized PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21776147), Shandong Provincial Natural Science Foundation, China (ZR2017ZB0314), the International Science & Technology Cooperation Program of China (2014DFA60150, 2016YFE0115000), the Department of Science and Technology of Shandong Province (2016GGX104010), and the Department of Education of Shandong Province (J16LA14). X. Bao thanks the Youth Innovation Promotion Association CAS for financial support (2016194), and L. F. Dong thanks the Malmstrom endowment fund from Hamline University.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8tc02507j
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018