 DOI: 10.1039/D0CC05528J
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 14337-14352


Lijiao
Ma
,

Shaoqing
Zhang
*,

Jingwen
Wang
,

Ye
Xu
 and 

Jianhui
Hou


Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, State Key Laboratory of Polymer Physics and Chemistry, CAS Research/Education Center for Excellence in Molecular Sciences, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: shaoqingz@iccas.ac.cn

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P. R. China

School of Chemistry and Biology Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, P. R. China

Received
13th August 2020
, Accepted 13th October 2020
First published on 14th October 2020
Recently, the laboratory-scale power conversion efficiency (PCE) of organic solar cells (OSCs) has reached 18% in single-junction devices due to a combination of the rapid development of novel light-harvesting/interfacial materials and device engineering. Thus, such materials show considerable application prospects in the near future. It is of great importance to develop economically achievable, highly efficient, thickness-tolerant photovoltaic materials and processing methods for the manufacture of large flexible solar panels. Research in this area has been conducted from the very early stages of the development of organic photovoltaic materials and has never stopped. Herein, we focus on the fundamental requirements of photoactive materials and the processing methods used for commercialization based on the recent advances of the booming PCEs, to provide guidelines for future material design and mass production. In this review, the progress toward high-performance materials is briefly summarized, and the essential requirements for large-area printing modules, such as thickness tolerance and cost issues, and the latest findings on non-fullerene OSCs are introduced. In particular, important advances in the material design and device optimization of thick-film OSCs have been discussed. Significant advances in the processing methods used to prepare efficient non-fullerene OSCs and the challenges for the industrialization of OSCs are presented. Furthermore, the prospects and opportunities in this emerging field of research are also discussed.

Lijiao Ma

Lijiao Ma has been a PhD candidate in Polymer Physics and Chemistry since 2018 under the supervision of Prof. Jianhui Hou. Her research interests focus on the synthesis and applications of polymer donors and non-fullerene acceptors used in high-performance organic solar cells.

Shaoqing Zhang

Shaoqing Zhang received her PhD degree in Organic Chemistry from University of Science and Technology Beijing (USTB) in 2017. Currently, she is an assistant professor at school of chemistry and biological engineering in USTB, and her research focuses on molecular design, synthesis, and the application of highly-efficient organic photovoltaic materials.

Jingwen Wang

Jingwen Wang has been a PhD candidate in Polymer Physics and Chemistry since 2018 under the supervision of Prof. Jianhui Hou. He is now focusing on designing and synthesizing polymer donors and non-fullerene acceptors for high-performance organic solar cells.

Ye Xu

Ye Xu has been a PhD candidate in Polymer Physics and Chemistry since 2017 under the supervision of Prof. Jianhui Hou. He is now focusing on designing and synthesizing polymer donors and non-fullerene acceptors for high-performance organic solar cells.

Jianhui Hou

Jianhui Hou received his PhD degree in Physical Chemistry from ICCAS in 2006 (Adviser: Prof. Yongfang Li). Then he worked as a postdoctoral researcher at Prof. Yang Yang's group in University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) from 2006–2008 and then as Director of Research of Solarmer Energy Inc. from 2008–2010. After that, he became a Full Professor at ICCAS in 2010 and an Adjunct Professor at USTB in 2012. His present research focuses on design, synthesis, and application of organic/polymer photovoltaic materials.

Organic solar cells (OSCs) have attracted a significant amount of attention over the last few decades due to the prospect of manufacturing highly efficient, semi-transparent, and large flexible solar panels via affordable solution processing methods. In an OSC device, the photoactive layer materials consisting of electron donors and acceptors are the core components for photoelectric conversion. Typically, conjugated polymers and small molecules can be used as electron donors. During the early stages of OSC development, fullerene derivatives such as PC61BM, PC71BM, and ICBA were used as electron acceptors, and were the main focus of research, which achieved many significant results. Recently, non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs) have shown immense potential in increasing the PCE of OSCs. Sustained advances in understanding the mechanism, material design and synthesis, and optimization of these devices have paved the way for outstanding PCEs over 18%. Moreover, stability tests have shown that it is possible for OSCs to have a life span of up to 10 years, which shows their potential for practical application. To push forward OSCs from the laboratory to commercial applications, many challenges from varying the photoactive materials to the manufacturing techniques used need to be recognized and overcome.

Generally, PCEs diminishing by 20–40% from the champion laboratory-based devices to industrially accessible modules are acceptable in established photovoltaic technologies, such as crystalline silicon solar cells. For OSCs, the active layer thickness used for most high-performance cells is currently limited to 80–120 nm and the PCEs significantly decrease upon increasing the cell thickness and area. From the perspective of high-throughput large area production, it is difficult to prepare the active layer because it is significantly affected by its thickness due to the following reasons: (a) the point defects in a thin active layer seriously reduce the product yield, which increases exponentially upon increasing the area of the blended film in the OSC device, (b) restricting the layer thickness causes the PCE of the OSC device to exhibit poor reproducibility, and (c) the preparation of a thin active layer poses serious challenges for large-scale printing technology, although the photoactive materials can be saved. Therefore, active layer materials possessing thickness tolerance and low-cost features are of great significance toward the large-scale production of OSCs. Furthermore, the methods used for the mass production of OSCs are quite different from those used for their small surface area counterparts. At present, scalable printing/coating technology that can be used to prepare highly flexible and processable functional materials printed layer by layer on flexible substrates is one of the most promising potential techniques reported to date. Researchers have generally arrived at the consensus that, other than the essential active/interfacial materials, the combination of high-throughput processing and large-area manufacturing is key to the future large-scale production of OSCs. However, the champion laboratory OSCs suffer from PCE roll-off upon scaling up the area of the device via roll-to-roll (R2R) processing. To reach a compromise between the device efficiency and large-scale processing, it is important to ensure the high efficiency of the large-area device using a thicker active layer by utilizing various donor:acceptor combinations.
In this review, we have summarized the recent progress in NF-OSCs from the laboratory to industrial application. First, the fundamental design principles for highly efficient OSCs are introduced and the significance of high active layer thickness tolerability for their future large-scale production has been highlighted. The factors that limit the realization of thick-film OSCs have been analyzed with an emphasis on the introduction and analysis of popular material systems that enable the preparation of efficient thick-film devices. We have then summarized the conventional processing methods used in the laboratory, such as knife coating, slot-die coating, inkjet printing, and brush coating, and highlight the challenges for the future large-scale production of OSCs. We hope that this review will provide useful guidelines for the future design of practically applicable photovoltaic active materials and device optimization protocols for large-area thick-film OSCs and further promote the development of OSCs as a practical technology.

Organic semiconductor materials possess the intrinsic properties of high extinction coefficient and adjustable absorption spectra, which make it possible to absorb more sunlight and boost the efficiency of OSC devices. To maximize the PCE, photoactive materials should have the following characteristics: (a) A broad and strong absorption spectrum matched with the solar spectrum is important for light harvesting and high short-circuit current density (JSC); theoretically, the ideal band gap (Eg) is in the range of 1.3–1.4 eV. (b) OSCs constructed with a bulk heterojunction (BHJ) structure should form a bicontinuous network with nanoscale phase separation and high domain purity, which are beneficial for exciton diffusion and charge separation. (c) A suitable energy level offset/sufficient electrostatic potential difference between the donor and acceptor is essential as a driving force to promote charge separation and maximize the open circuit voltage (VOC). (d) High charge mobilities can facilitate charge transport and effectively reduce charge recombination. According to the Shockley–Queisser limit, a theoretical maximum PCE of ∼33% under AM 1.5G solar irradiation can be attained at Eg = 1.4 eV. To date, when compared with silicon- or perovskite-based solar cells with the same bandgap, the main factor restricting the improvement in the efficiency of OSCs is the large energy loss (Eloss), especially non-radiative energy losses (Enon-radloss). Enon-radloss can be calculated by the following equation:
where
kb is the Boltzmann constant, T is the device temperature, and q is the elementary charge. Numerous attempts have been reported to reduce the energy loss in order to obtain an increased VOC. Hence, remarkable PCEs can be achieved along with high FF and JSC values. According to the latest certified efficiency chart available from the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), OSCs exhibit a much lower PCE of 17.5% than crystal silicon solar cells (c-Si-SCs) (27.6%) under 1 sun illumination. Recently, Hou et al. predicted the maximum theoretical performance of NFA-based OSCs under AM 1.5G solar irradiation. Fig. 1a shows the maximum efficiencies available under various energy losses and the theoretical maximum PCE was calculated to be ∼19% at a bandgap of 1.38 eV and energy loss of ∼0.5 V. When the energy loss was further reduced to 0.44 eV, the efficiency increased to ∼21%. Furthermore, if the non-radiative recombination loss can be reduced to ∼0.21 V, a high PCE of 19% can also be achieved in the bandgap range of 1.35–1.55 eV (Fig. 1b). Although the molecular design of light-harvesting materials requires more development to realize OSCs with enhanced performance, these studies highlight the significant potential of the industrialization of OSCs and it is of great importance to study the critical factors for the scale-up of laboratory-based OSCs toward their industrial application.

On the other hand, as mentioned beforehand, active layer materials possessing thickness tolerance are of great importance for the large-scale production of OSCs. For OSC devices, determining the optimum active layer thickness requires one to consider the photogenerated carrier rate and charge extraction efficiency. In fact, it is impossible for the optically active layer to absorb 100% of the incident light because the optically inert layer can also absorb a small amount of light and light can scatter and reflect in each layer of the device. For a ∼100 nm thick device (all the thickness values refer to the active layers in BHJ-OSCs), the external quantum efficiency (EQE) scarcely surpasses 85% even assuming that the internal quantum efficiency (IQE) reaches 100% due to the loss of 20–40% of the incident photon flux. Thicker active layers can utilize a larger number of solar photons and therefore obtain higher JSC values, but sharp reductions in the FF values usually occur at the same time in these devices, which are responsible for the inferior PCEs observed. Practically, maintaining a high JSC value in a thick-film device is not easy because the charge carriers are likely to suffer from severe bimolecular recombination or trapping by defects in the blended films before reaching the electrode due to the low mobilities of the organic semiconductor materials. Fig. 1c shows the simulated photocurrent generated at various IQEs obtained for the P3HT:PCBM blends with different layer thicknesses. Clearly, the device with a thick light-harvesting film has the potential to achieve a higher EQE. However, the simulated photocurrent does not improve monotonically upon increasing the film thickness, but remains nearly constant when the thickness is >400 nm. In devices with thick BHJ active layers, sharp decreases in the FF value usually occur because of the low mobility of the photoactive material. Bartelt et al. simulated the mobility requirements for attaining high FF values at different active layer thicknesses based on the P3HT:[60]PCBM blend (Fig. 1d and e). The results disclosed that when the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) hole mobility of the blend was low, the FF values of the OSCs significantly decreased upon increasing the thickness; when the mobility was increased up to 5 × 10−2 cm−2 V−1 s−1, the FF values remained almost unchanged for the different thicknesses studied. For the 300 nm thick device, a hole mobility of 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 is required to obtain an FF value of 0.8. In addition, drift-diffusion simulations suggest that the charge-carrier mobility (balanced) requirement is highly related to the recombination rate constant (k). Fig. 1f shows that the charge carrier mobility required for a high FF is significantly reduced upon decreasing the k value of the OSC device. On this basis, further effort is needed in the future to reveal the factors that influence the k value and to provide guidance on how to reduce the recombination rate. In fullerene-based OSCs, the electron mobility (∼5 × 10−3 cm−2 V−1 s−1) of the fullerene derivatives is much higher than the hole mobility of either the conjugated polymer or small-molecule donors. For fullerene-free OSCs, the limited electron mobility (typically <10−4 cm−2 V−1 s−1) makes it difficult to fabricate highly efficient thick-film devices. Some notable work has been carried out toward designing NFAs with high electron mobility and the corresponding devices exhibited similar or higher PCEs when the thickness was increased to a few hundred nanometers. To date, researchers have reached the consensus that highly efficient thick-film devices can be achieved by designing photoactive materials with high mobility. Very recently, we found that the trap-state density plays a vital role in an ultra-thick-film NFA-OSC and further studies are underway to reveal the factors that influence the trap-state density in these blended films and to provide guidelines for their molecular design to reduce the trap-assisted recombination in NFA-OSCs with thicker active layers.
The thickness tolerance of the active layer in OSC devices can effectively reduce the difficulties observed in the manufacturing process, which is one of the major research areas toward realizing OSC devices. In fact, complicated factors should be considered during this process. For example, most highly-efficient OSC materials currently available in the laboratory are so complex that they are too expensive to be employed in an industrial setting. Therefore, the development of highly efficient, low-cost photoactive materials is particularly important for the industrialization of OSCs. According to the published literature, an increase in the number of synthetic steps results in a linear increase in the cost of photoactive materials. The authors also pointed out that materials prepared in <6 steps can reduce the impact on the final cost of the OSC device. Taking P3HT as an example, it is estimated that a 50 MW photovoltaic plant consumes about several hundred kilograms of polymer per year and it is the only polymer donor available on a large scale (>10 kg). However, the number of synthetic steps used to prepare conventional donor–acceptor (D–A) polymers and NF acceptors is usually >6 steps. Consequently, the simplicity and low cost of photovoltaic materials have inevitably become the primary criteria for future molecular design strategies.
In general, photoactive materials play a leading role in the commercialization of OSCs. Qualified photoactive layer materials should be of high efficiency and stability, and affordable cost. At present, the photovoltaic materials have complex chemical structure, tedious synthetic steps, low overall product yield and high thickness sensitivity. Additionally, for mass production in the future, material design should take practical application into account. Therefore, new materials possessing the features of a simple post-treatment process, green solvent manufacturing etc. need to be further explored.

When compared with fullerene-based OSCs, NF-based OSCs are more beneficial toward achieving higher PCEs. Fullerene derivatives possess the intrinsic properties of poor absorption in the visible-light region and limited tunability of their energy levels, which results in inferior JSC values and PCEs. In contrast, it is easier to tailor the absorption spectra in the visible-light region and modulate the energy levels of NFAs, which means that NF-OSCs have great potential to achieve higher PCEs. Furthermore, in a fullerene-based cell, the ionization potential and electron affinity of the donors must be at least 0.3 eV higher than those of the acceptors to afford an adequate driving force for charge dissociation, which causes additional energy loss (Eloss) in the OSC device. Recently, many NFA-OSCs have exhibited quite high EQE values when the energy offsets between the donors and acceptors are very small. In this case, the energy losses can be reduced and the PCEs can be effectively maximized.


Before 2016, fullerene derivatives such as PC61BM and PC71BM were widely used as receptors in high-performance OSCs. In 2015, a star NFA named ITIC (Fig. 3) was reported by Zhan et al. When compared with fullerene derivatives, ITIC showed broader absorption in the visible-light region, an up-shifted LUMO, and improved miscibility with the polymer donor. In 2016, Zhao et al. fabricated a variety of NF-based OSCs by blending a polymer donor (PBDB-T) and ITIC and emphasized the superiority of NFAs in achieving high efficiency. The PBDB-T:ITIC-based device with an area of 0.13 cm2 exhibited an outstanding PCE (11.21%) (Fig. 2a). Moreover, a certified efficiency of 10.78% was attained for a 1.00 cm2 cell, indicating a bright future for achieving high efficiencies in NF-OSCs.

Tremendous work has been carried out to optimize the molecular structure of NFAs and polymer donors since then. Tuning the end groups and fused core of the acceptor is one of the most effective approaches used to boost the device performance. In 2016, Li et al. designed a new ITIC derivative (IT-M) by tuning the intramolecular electron push–pulling effect. The methyl substituent, which possesses weak electron-donating properties, was introduced onto the end-capping units in ITIC and a new acceptor with an elevated LUMO level was obtained. The absorption spectrum of IT-M was blue-shifted by 6 nm, while the LUMO level of IT-M was 0.06 eV higher than that of ITIC, so the larger energy offset between the LUMO of the acceptor and HOMO of the donor was beneficial to achieving a higher VOC. A PCE of 12.05% was achieved for the PBDB-T:IT-M-based device (VOC = 0.94 V, JSC = 17.40 mA cm−2, and FF = 0.735), which was a new record among the NF-OSC devices reported at that time. In 2017, Zhan and co-workers reported a fluorinated acceptor (ITIC-Th1), which exhibited broader absorption and higher electron mobility when compared to its non-fluorinated counterpart. Upon coupling with a polymer donor (FTAZ), an improved PCE of 12.1% was achieved. In the same year, another ITIC derivative (IT-4F) was designed and synthesized by Hou and co-workers, in which electron-deficient fluorine was incorporated into the end-capping groups, resulting in a lower LUMO level. The enhancement in the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) effect upon increasing the electron-pulling effect of the end groups causes a red-shift in the absorption. IT-4F exhibits a reduced LUMO level, and a broader and stronger absorption spectrum. A high efficiency of 13.1% and JSC of 20.5 mA cm−2 were achieved upon blending IT-4F with the PBDB-T-SF polymer. In 2018, Zhang et al. replaced the critical fluorine substituents in the polymer donor (PBDB-TF) with chlorine and synthesized a new chlorinated polymer donor (PBDB-T-2Cl) using a simplified synthesis route. The device presented an impressive PCE of >14% with a higher VOC (0.86 V) than that of its fluorinated counterpart (0.84 V).
When compared with PCBM-based OSCs exhibiting large intrinsic Eloss values (generally >0.8 eV), the Eloss values obtained for NF-OSCs based on ITIC and its derivatives discussed above are generally <0.7 eV and thus cause an enhancement in the PCE with values approaching 15%. Recently, Yuan et al. synthesized two NIR-absorbing NFAs (Y1 and Y2) (Fig. 3). From diluted CF solutions to their thin films, the maximum absorption of Y1 and Y2 varied from 738 to 802 nm and 758 to 827 nm, respectively (Fig. 2b). The estimated optical bandgaps obtained for the two NFAs were 1.44 and 1.40 eV, respectively. PBDB-T was chosen as the polymer donor to fabricate OSCs and remarkable PCEs of 13.42 and 13.40% were attained for the Y1- and Y2-based cells with VOC values of 0.87 and 0.82 V, respectively. The Eloss values observed for the two cells were ∼0.57 eV. In particular, high electroluminescence quantum efficiency (EQEEL) values of ∼0.5 × 10−4 were obtained and the calculated non-radiative loss (Enr-loss) values for the two cells were 0.25 and 0.26 eV, respectively (Fig. 2c), which were indicative of the low Enr-loss in the two blends. Such low non-radiative energy losses are relatively rare in previously reported work. Moreover, they found that although the ΔHOMO offsets between the donor and acceptors appeared to be negligible, the charge generation was still efficient and a decent JSC value of >22 mA cm−2 was achieved, providing clues for the design of new photoactive materials with high VOC and JSC values. Later, they used a benzothiadiazole (BT) group to replace the benzotriazole in Y1 and synthesized another new NFA (Y6) (Eg = 1.33 eV and LUMO = −4.10 eV) (Fig. 2d). Upon blending with PM6 (also known as PBDB-TF), an outstanding PCE of 15.7% (VOC = 0.83 V, JSC = 25.3 mA cm−2, and FF = 0.748) was recorded with relatively low Eloss (∼0.5 eV) and the EQE peak value reached ∼85%, implying highly efficient charge generation and low charge recombination in the cell. Subsequently, Neher et al. investigated the charge generation as a function of temperature, internal field, and excitation energy in the PM6:Y6 blend. They performed temperature-dependent time-delayed collection field (TDCF) measurements at 1.55 and 2.33 eV (exciting both components in the blend), and observed that the charge generation efficiency was independent of the variation in the device temperature and field intensity, which demonstrated the very small (if any) dissociation barrier of the device (Fig. 2e). To decrease the energy losses of OSC cells of blends, improving the electroluminescence efficiencies of donor:acceptor blends is very critical. Recently, it has been reported that the luminescence efficiency of blends is highly associated with the hybridization degree of the charge-transfer and local exciton states, which can be tuned through the modification of the intermolecular interaction between the donors and the acceptors. Based on Y6, Hou and coworkers replaced the halogen atoms in the fluorinated acceptor with chlorine atoms and synthesized a chlorinated low bandgap acceptor (BTP-4Cl). BTP-4Cl showed extended optical absorption and a downshifted LUMO level when compared to its fluorinated counterpart. As a result, the corresponding cell yielded a higher VOC (0.867 V) than that of its Y6-based analog (0.834 V). Electroluminescence spectroscopy revealed that the BTP-4Cl-based blend film exhibited a higher EQEEL value (3.47 × 10−4) than its Y6 counterpart (1.40 × 10−4), indicating that the non-radiative energy loss decreased by ∼24 meV (Fig. 2f) and was beneficial to the improved VOC. A high PCE of 16.5% was attained due to the simultaneously enhanced JSC and VOC. At present, cutting-edge Y6 derivative-based OSCs can produce PCEs approaching 18%, showing great potential for industrial application. Very recently, the Ding group reported a new polymer donor (D18) based on a fused-ring acceptor unit [dithieno[3′,2′:3,4;2′′,3′′:5,6]benzo[1,2-c][1,2,5]thiadiazole (DTBT)]. The D18:Y6-based device exhibits a very high PCE of 18.22%. These advances have led to the recent rapid development of NFA-OSCs. The molecular structures discussed above are shown in Fig. 3 and their corresponding photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table 1. The rapid development in the PCE has enabled the study of OSCs prepared with thick active layers. In fact, as depicted in Fig. 1 and summarized in Section 2, research related to thick-film OSC devices has been consistently carried out in the field of organic photovoltaics since its very early stage of development.
Active layer

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
Ref.
PBDB-T:ITIC
0.899
16.81
0.742
11.21

80

PBDB-T:IT-M
0.94
17.4
0.735
12.05

84

FTAZ:ITIC-Th1
0.849
19.33
0.737
12.1

85

PBDB-T-SF:IT-4F
0.88
20.5
0.719
13.0

86

PBDB-2Cl:IT-4F
0.86
21.8
0.76
14.4

87

PBDB-T:Y1
0.87
22.44
0.691
13.42

81

PBDB-T:Y2
0.82
23.56
0.694
13.40

81

PBDB-TF:Y6
0.83
25.3
0.748
15.7

13

PBDB-TF:BTP-4Cl
0.867
25.4
0.750
16.5

83

PBDB-TF:BTP-eC9
0.839
26.2
0.811
17.8

38

D18:Y6
0.859
27.7
0.766
18.22

89


In general, the best-performing OSCs have relatively thin active layers with thicknesses of ∼100 nm due to the limited exciton diffusion length and inferior hole/electron mobility of the photoactive materials used. However, the mass production of OSCs usually results in significant fluctuations in the film thickness. Therefore, it is necessary to develop photoactive layer materials possessing thickness tolerance features. Similar to fullerene-OSCs, photoactive materials with high charge carrier mobility are significant for highly efficient thick-film NFA-OSCs. Simultaneously, polymers with face-on orientations are helpful for charge carrier transport, which is beneficial for low bimolecular recombination.

In addition to the distinct advantages of highly tunable chemical structures as well as the photovoltaic properties of NFAs, their low mobility when compared to fullerene acceptors is regarded as the major problem hindering the realization of highly efficient thick-film OSCs. Some notable work has been conducted with regard to the design of NFAs with high electron mobility in order to achieve high PECs in thick-film OSCs. In 2017, a new electron acceptor named IDT-BO bearing asymmetric side chains was designed and synthesized by Bo et al. They found that the asymmetric side chains enabled a face-on orientation in the blend films and thus higher charge mobility. As a result, remarkable PCEs of 10.12 and 9.17% were obtained using film thicknesses of 130 and 210 nm, respectively. In the same year, Zhang and coworkers reported a new thiazolothiazole-containing polymer donor (PTZ1) and fabricated a range of devices upon coupling with a small molecular acceptor (IDIC). The thermally annealed blends demonstrated face-on π–π stacking, which is favorable toward high charge mobility. Due to the enhanced crystallinity, balanced charge transport, and more appropriate molecular orientation, the JSC and FF values of the devices were improved. A PCE of 11.5% was obtained using a 100 nm thick layer, which yielded a PCE of 9.6% upon increasing the thickness of the active layer to 210 nm. In 2018, Luo et al. synthesized a new electron acceptor (IDTPC) bearing n-hexyl side chains. IDTPC exhibited a lower bandgap, more ordered face-on π–π stacking, and higher electron mobility when compared its 4-hexylphenyl counterpart (IDTCN). The 145 nm thick PTQ10:IDTPC-based device delivered an efficiency of 12.2% and a PCE of >10% was achieved upon increasing the active layer to ∼400 nm (Fig. 4a). Similarly, Zhang et al. fabricated various NFA-OSCs based on PBTIBDTT:ITIC-F in 2018. The OSCs achieved efficiencies of 11.2 and 9.35% in the 120 and 350 nm thick devices. In particular, the large-area OSC device with an active surface area of 3.48 cm2 delivered a record PCE of 8.6%.
In addition, halogenation on the backbone of the conjugated polymer is favorable for down-shifting the HOMO level of the polymer and enhancing the hole mobility. Higher VOC values can be achieved due to the fluorination-dependent electron-withdrawing effect. In 2017, Hou and co-workers fabricated various PBDB-T-SF:IT-4F-based cells, in which the 200 nm thick device yielded a PCE of >12%. In 2018, Fan et al. fabricated a series of NFA-OSCs based on the PM6:IDIC system; the strong π–π stacking alignment in the blend film was beneficial for charge carrier transport and hence reduced the recombination rate. Furthermore, the incorporation of an electron-deficient element (F) in the conjugated polymer was favorable toward increasing the purity of the polymer domains and enhancing the nanoscale phase separation morphology. As a result, the devices yielded a remarkable PCE of >11% at various active layer thicknesses (95–255 nm) and device areas (0.20–0.81 cm2). Besides, a high PCE of 6.54% was obtained in the 1.25 cm2 flexible device, which exhibited immense potential for large-scale manufacturing. The aforementioned study mainly aimed at improving the efficiency of thick-film devices via synthesizing photoactive materials with high mobilities. The other inherent limitations of thick-film devices have been rarely studied in the literature. Very recently, our group processed 1000 nm thick-film OSCs employing PBDB-TF as the polymer donor and two NFAs (BTP-4Cl and IT-4F). The two blends (PBDB-TF:BTP-4Cl and PBDB-TF:IT-4F) exhibited comparable charge carrier mobility and outstanding photovoltaic performance in their response regions in ∼100 nm thick-film devices, while in the 1000 nm thick devices, the IT-4F-based blend showed a much higher trap-state density than its BTP-4Cl-based analogue. Therefore, the BTP-4Cl-based ultra-thick-film device displayed lower trap-assisted recombination and thus a significantly higher JSC value. A remarkable PCE of 12.1% was achieved in the BTP-4Cl-based device, which was much higher than that observed for its IT-4F-based counterpart (4.72%) (Fig. 4b). Moreover, a single 4 cm2 BTP-4Cl-based cell with an active layer thickness of 1000 nm was fabricated and exhibited an efficiency of 10.1%; this indicated its considerable potential for large-scale production. In future work, high JSC and FF values can be realized in thick-film OSCs by increasing the mobilities of photoactive materials and reducing the trap-state density in the BHJ blends. In this premise, thick-film devices will display superior efficiency when compared to their thin-film counterparts.
Compared to traditional binary OSCs, ternary OSCs have the potential to exhibit high efficiency in thick-film devices due to the introduction of a third component with high mobility. In 2017, Wei and co-workers reported a highly efficient thick-film device by incorporating a small molecule [p-DTS(FBTTH2)2] into the PTB7:PC71BM binary system. The introduction of the third component enhances the crystallinity and face-on orientation of the blend, and, as a result, the 270 nm thick device showed a PCE of 10.78%. Similarly, Ameri et al. processed a thick-film OSC exhibiting an efficiency of >11% in 2017 by introducing a near-infrared polymer (PBTZT-STAT-BDTT-8) into the PTB7-th:PC71BM system. For the PTB7-th:PBTZT-STAT-BDTT-8 blend, the emission peaks from PTB7-th are enhanced, whereas the PBTZT-STAT-BDTT-8 emission peaks were effectively quenched, indicating that energy transfer occurs from PBTZT-STAT-BDTT-8 to the PTB7-th polymer. Effective energy transfer is beneficial toward enhancing the device performance. In the same year, a liquid crystalline small molecule donor (BTR) was added to PTB7-th:PC71BM by Huang et al. The morphology of the ternary blend was improved by decreasing the π–π stacking distance, enlarging the coherence length, and increasing the domain purity, which was more favorable for efficient charge separation and transport, and reduced bimolecular recombination. Therefore, an efficiency of 11.4% was achieved in a 250 nm thick device (Fig. 4c and d). In 2018, the Zhu group prepared a ternary OSC by adopting a small molecular donor featuring high crystallinity (BTR), a moderately crystalline small molecular acceptor (NITI), and PC71BM to form a cascade energy level alignment. These molecules have complementary absorption spectra covering the visible-light to NIR region (300–850 nm). Subsequently, 300 nm thick binary and ternary cells were fabricated and the BTR:PC71BM-based cell delivered an efficiency of 8.66% (VOC = 0.89 V, JSC = 13.42 mA cm−2, and FF = 0.7167). For the BTR:NITI blend cells, a high VOC of 0.95 V and low Eloss of 0.54 eV were recorded. An inferior FF value (0.4699) was observed because of the poor morphology caused by the good miscibility observed between BTR and NITI. The BTR:NITI:PC71BM (1:0.4:1)-based ternary cell yielded a high PCE of 13.20% (VOC = 0.94 V, JSC = 19.53 mA cm−2, and FF = 0.7196), maintaining high VOC and FF values (Fig. 4e). They found that the enhanced efficiency was attributed to the improved morphology, complex NF phase-separated pathway network, and PCBM transporting pathway formed in the blend, which are beneficial for obtaining a balance between the material crystallinity and phase separation (Fig. 4f). Recently, our group fabricated a ternary device based on PBDB-T-2Cl:Y6:PC61BM. The addition of the third component PC61BM simultaneously enhances the mobilities of holes and electrons, thus accelerating charge transport as well as suppressing charge recombination in the thicker active layers, leading to an improved PCE of 14.3% for the 300 nm thick cell. To sum up, the addition of a third component in a binary system has been proven to be capable of improving the performance of thick-film devices for the following reasons: (a) The third component usually has a distinct absorption band that is complementary to the absorption spectra of the other materials, which enhances the light absorption capability of the blend, resulting in a significant enhancement in JSC. (b) The phase separation, mobilities, molecular orientation, and charge transfer state can be effectively tuned by adding the third component, which can realize higher PCEs in ternary devices. Moreover, in some other cases, when the added donor or acceptor has a comparatively lower HOMO or higher LUMO level than the donor and acceptor in the binary system, the VOC and PCEs of the ternary OSCs will be enhanced. The typical molecular structures and performances of these devices are summarized and shown in Fig. 5 and Table 2.
Active layer
Thickness (nm)

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
Ref.
PBDB-T:IDT-OB
130
0.88
16.18
0.711
10.12

90

210
0.88
15.64
0.669
9.17
PTZ1:IDIC
100
0.92
16.40
0.762
11.50

91

210
0.90
15.90
0.668
9.50
PTQ10:IDTPC
145
0.930
17.5
0.746
12.2

92

400
0.913
17.9
0.613
10.0
PBTIBDTT:ITIC-F
120
0.921
16.4
0.741
11.19

93

350
0.894
18.01
0.581
9.35
PM6:IDIC
150
0.97
17.8
0.69
11.9

94

255
0.97
17.2
0.68
11.3
PBDB-TF:BTP-4Cl
1020
0.834
27.3
0.531
12.1

75

PTB7-th:pDTS(FBTTH2)2:PC71BM
270
0.737
21.67
0.675
10.78

95

PTB7-th:PBTZT-SATA-BDTT-8:PC71BM
300
0.770
19.35
0.741
11.03

96

PTB7-th:BTR:PC71BM
250
0.751
21.4
70.0
11.4

44

BTR:NITI:PC71BM
300
0.940
19.5
0.738
13.6

34

PBDB-T-2Cl:BTP-4F:PC61BM
100
0.842
26.4
0.733
16.3

97

300
0.802
26.8
0.667
14.3

The cost of OSC manufacture is estimated based on the material costs, overheads, output power, labor costs, lifetime etc. Krebs et al. concluded a cost of 174.62 $ per m2 when assessing P3HT:PC61BM-based OSC modules and pointed out that the materials accounted for 33.65% of the total cost. When replacing the photoactive materials with C60, CuPc and SnPc, the cost can be decreased to 93.85 $ per m2. It is obvious that the cost of the materials dominates a large proportion of the total cost. To date, the efficiencies of OSCs has essentially met the requirements for commercialization. However, the high cost of photovoltaic materials restricts their industrialization, which is decided by the magnitude of the reaction, raw material costs, number of synthetic steps, and overall yield. The most widely used and commercially available photoactive materials with desirable photovoltaic properties are shown in Table 3. For a cell based on PBDB-TF:BTP-eC9, although the device exhibits an outstanding PCE of 17.8%, the price is too high for large-scale OSC manufacture (the price of PBDB-TF and BTP-eC9 is 2687.4 and 3245.7 $ per gram, respectively). The cost of the photoactive materials is considerably increased because of the multi-step synthesis and complex molecular structures used. Therefore, simplifying the molecular structure, reducing the number of steps used in the synthesis, and increasing the overall yield are considered to be the most effective strategies. P3HT with the simplest chemical structure has the advantages of low cost and facile mass production. As an electron donor, P3HT:fullerene-based OSCs exhibited inferior PCEs (<7.5%) due to the poor light absorption capability of the two active materials used. Recently, it has been possible for P3HT:NFA-based devices to achieve higher PCEs due to the emergence of NFAs and broadened absorption spectra. In 2015, McCulloch et al. synthesized an NFA (FBR) (Fig. 6), which enables the synthesis of low-cost NFA materials. The P3HT:FBR-based device achieved a PCE of 4.1%. The core of FBR consists of an indacenodithiophene unit (IDTBR), which possesses a more planar molecular skeleton, and the P3HT:IDTBR-based device exhibited an improved PCE of 6.3%. Subsequently, they incorporated IDFBR as a third component into the P3HT:IDTBR binary system and a PCE of 7.7% was achieved. The low-cost of P3HT and IDTBR shows great potential for the commercialization of OSCs. In 2019, the Peng group designed and synthesized a novel NFA (TrBTIC) (Fig. 6) utilizing electron-rich truxene as the core and electron-deficient 2-(3-oxo-2,3-dihydroinden-1-ylidene)malononitrile-benzothiadiazole (BTIC) units as the end groups. They observed that P3HT can be readily dissolved in 1,2,4-trimethylbenzene (TMB) (60 °C), a green solvent, and slowly crystallized at room temperature. Pre-phase separation can occur before the deposition of the blends, which can be tuned by adjusting the aging time. As a result, a PCE of 8.25% was attained for these P3HT-based devices. Very recently, Zhang et al. synthesized a new NFA named ZY-4Cl by replacing the cyano-substituted end groups in BTP-4Cl with the carbonyl-substituted counterpart. To simulate the interaction between the donor and the acceptors, two model compounds (TT-CN and TT-O) were designed, and relevant measurements showed that P3HT:TT-CN exhibited much stronger miscibility than that of P3HT:TT-O. Inferior phase separation formed in the P3HT:BTP-4Cl based device and it delivered a poor efficiency of 1%. The P3HT:ZY-4Cl based cell output a new record PCE of ∼9.5%. Nevertheless, when compared with other high-performance NF-OSCs, P3HT:NFA-based cells show inferior PCEs. In future work, the development of highly efficient NFAs with simple structures and broader absorption spectra will be key to the industrialization of P3HT-based OSCs.

Materials
Synthetic steps
Prices ($ per g)
Supplier
P3HT
3
425.7
Ossila
PTB7-th
9
2333.8
Ossila
PBDB-T
9
1471.3
Solarmer Materials, Inc.
PBDB-TF
13
2687.4
Solarmer Materials, Inc.
PBDB-T-2Cl
10
3149.2
Solarmer Materials, Inc.
FTAZ
7
3253.2
Solarmer Materials, Inc.
PTQ10
2
2121.6
Solarmer Materials, Inc.
J52
9
1718.8
Solarmer Materials, Inc.
PC61BM
3
1165.4
Ossila
PC71BM
3
1144.3
Ossila
ITIC
7
1244.7
Solarmer Materials, Inc.
IT-4F
10
2499.7
Solarmer Materials, Inc.
IT-M
10
1731.3
Solarmer Materials, Inc.
Y6
11
3111.7
Solarmer Materials, Inc.
BTP-4Cl
11
3111.7
Solarmer Materials, Inc.
BTP-eC9
11
3245.7
Not available
In 2018, the Li group designed and synthesized a D–A polymer donor (PTQ10), in which thiophene and difluorine-substituted quinoxaline were applied as the donor and acceptor units, respectively. This polymer can minimize the number of synthetic steps used to two and the overall yield was 87.4%, which was ∼5–20 times higher than that obtained for other polymer donors. However, it should be noted that the two-step method mentioned here is based on an intermediate that is not easily synthesized, so the synthesis of PTQ10 is not very easy at present. To date, PTQ10:Y6-based OSCs exhibit outstanding PCEs (16.5%), which are much higher than those obtained for their P3HT-based counterparts (9.5%). Besides this, PDI-based acceptor materials, such as N2200, which possess the advantages of facile synthesis, low cost, and high yields, exhibit considerable potential for future commercial solar panels. Zhao et al. applied a simple synthetic route to prepare a PDI-based derivative (SF-PDI2) via coupling with a polymer donor (P3TEA). This device achieved a PCE of 9.5%. Meanwhile, another PDI-based NFA diPBI prepared with a 45% yield over two steps was reported by Wang et al., and its cost was estimated to be as low as ∼$500 per gram. Therefore, on the premise of ensuring high efficiency, it is the most direct and practicable route to simplify the synthesis and reduce the material cost. Meanwhile, it should be noted that the Sn and boron polymerization reactions widely used to synthesize these photoactive materials are harmful to the environment, especially during large-scale production. Therefore, it is necessary to develop new methods to prepare new polymers without the need for Sn and boron polymerization reactions, such as direct C–H arylation polymerization (DARP). DARP holds great promise for the green and atom-efficient synthesis of π-conjugated copolymers, which is a promising alternative to Sn–Br polymerization. In 2018, Aldrich et al. reported the synthesis of PBDTT–DPP using DARP. They fabricated DARP- and Stille-derived PBDTT–DPP:PC71BM OSCs and found that the two cells display similar photovoltaic parameters, revealing that the Sn–Br polymerization reaction could be replaced. Fig. 6 summarizes the molecular structures of the above-mentioned materials.

Manufacturing highly efficient, semi-transparent, and large flexible solar panels via an affordable solution processing method is a great advantage for OSCs when compared to other photovoltaic devices, such as c-Si and perovskite cells. Currently, the spin-coating method is the most common processing method used to prepare thin-film OSCs in the laboratory, which cannot meet the requirements for large-surface area production due to the following reasons: (a) The spin-coating process may cause serious waste of materials and increase the cost sharply. (b) The spin-coating process uses high boiling point and toxic organic solvents and additives, such as chlorobenzene (∼132.2 °C), 1,8-diiodooctane (∼168 °C), and 1-chloronaphthalene (∼260 °C), which are necessary for high efficiency. During the slow drying of the high boiling point solvents, the donor and the acceptor have enough time to self-assemble into an interpenetrating network. Highly toxic solvents are environmentally unfriendly and the slow drying process makes it difficult to enhance the production throughput. (c) The spin-coating method also relies on centrifugal force to form the requisite films. The variation in the centrifugal force during large-scale production is not conducive to obtaining uniform films without defects. For mass production, “coating” and “printing” methods should be the most suitable and economical.

The coating method involves transferring the active layer solution onto the substrate via pouring, spraying, casting, or painting, in which there is no contact between the substrate and the coating head. This technique can be further divided into spin-coating, slot-die coating, knife/blade coating, casting, spray coating, painting, slide coating, knife-overedge coating, and so on. Printing technologies can be classified into two categories depending on whether a template is used. Inkjet printing is the only method that does not require a template and template-based printing methods include flexographic printing, screen printing, letterpress printing, offset printing, pad printing etc. In fact, inkjet printing can also be classified as a coating technique. Currently, printing methods, which allow highly flexible and processable functional materials printed in an orderly layer by layer process on flexible substrates, are the most promising techniques used for the mass production of OSCs. Researchers have generally arrived at the consensus that the combination of high-throughput processing and large-area manufacturing is key to the future large-scale production of OSCs. It is easy for highly flexible organic semiconductor materials to create functional inks. Moreover, they can be processed on flexible substrates at low temperature. At present, several advanced types of printing equipment, such as screen printers, inkjet printers, and gravure printers, are used commercially to produce flexible electronic devices. Among them, inkjet printing, which has the advantages of freedom of design, low material consumption, and good compatibility with various flexible substrates, is the most promising technique used for large-surface area production.
The active layer morphology can vary due to the different processing techniques used. For instance, the knife coating method is only appropriate for coating a smooth layer on the substrate, slot-die coating offers striped patterns on the substrate via a coating head, and various patterns of any shape can be realized on the substrate through inkjet printing. It is challenging to find an ideal processing technique for the fabrication of multilayer films. In principle, various patterns and multilayer structures can be realized using these techniques. However, each coating/printing method has a set pattern of operations, such as the processing speed, and the layer thickness is limited upon the type of ink being used and its interaction with the surface coating. Thus, optimizing the parameters of various layers is yet another challenge. Therefore, under ideal conditions, the number of processing steps should be as low as possible, the used materials and processing solvents should be environmentally friendly, and the flexible substrates should be recyclable with a low environmental impact.

Currently, a number of established film-forming technologies have been developed, many of which may be suitable for processing one or more layers in OSCs. For efficient large-scale cells, the R2R method usually involves very long flexible substrates, and wet films are usually obtained via most printing/coating methods, and other processes such as drying or curing are needed to remove the solvent and optimize the morphology. During the production process, the substrate is unrolled from the reel, passed through the printer/coater, and the pattern/ink is then deposited onto the substrate. Ideally, the machine would be like this, the raw materials are sent to the processing machine from one end and the flexible OSCs obtained at the other end, which helps to reduce the processing losses and achieve an improved output. This is indeed an enticing prospect for industrial-scale printers and coaters. In fact, establishing an integrated system may not be so simple because it requires the parameters for each step to be similar. Therefore, a step-by-step processing method is more suitable for this type of large-surface area device. In this case, each layer is prepared separately and then transferred to the next machine for further processing.

In recent years, the knife coating/doctor blading method (Fig. 7a) has become a common method used in the laboratory-scale preparation of OSCs. This method is well compatible with roll-to-roll (R2R) processing and is a promising approach for large-scale production in the future. A sharp blade is placed at a fixed distance from the coating surface and the coating solution dropped onto the substrate. The blade is then moved onto the coating surface and forms a wet film on the substrate. Initially, an MDMO-PPV:PC60BM-based blend film was fabricated using the knife coating method to study the crystallinity of the blend by Mens et al. in 2008. Solid-state NMR spectroscopy revealed that the crystallinity of PC60BM was much higher in the knife-coated films when compared to their corresponding spin-coated films because of the slower solvent evaporation rate observed using the knife coating method. In 2016, DeLongchamp et al. demonstrated a PffBT4T-2OD:PC70BM-based device prepared via the blade coating method with a PCE of 9.9%, which was comparable to that obtained for its corresponding spin-coated device. In 2018, Zhao et al. prepared a PBTA-TF:IT-M-based cell using environmentally friendly solvents via the blade coating method and achieved a promising PCE of 11.7%. Moreover, a PCE of 10.6% was attained for a 1.0 cm2 single-junction device. In the same year, Liu and co-workers reported a flexible large-area (2.03 cm2)-based device fabricated via the doctor-blading method with a high PCE of 7.6%, whereas its spin-coated counterpart showed an efficiency of 5.86%. They found that the addition of 0.6 vol% of 1,8-diiodooctane was favorable for the migration of the acceptors from the bottom to the top layer during the comparatively slow drying process and the improvement in the PCE was attributed to the optimal D–A interface structure, morphology, and crystallinity. In 2019, Guo and co-workers demonstrated the influence of the substrate temperature on the molecular ordering and phase separation of blade-coated PM6:IT-4F devices and they found that the device prepared via blade-coating at 50 °C exhibited an ordered array of IT-4F molecules along the skeleton of acceptors. As a result, a high PCE of 10.22% was obtained using an active layer thickness of 400 nm. Moreover, a 306 nm thick device with a surface area of 90 mm2 showed a PCE of 9.76%.
As mentioned earlier, previous studies have shown that the solution processing layer by layer (LbL) method is a promising approach to highly-efficient small-area OSC fabrication. It has been reported in some literature that the LbL approach could effectively improve the stability of OSCs. Recently, Min et al. reported printable highly-efficient large-scale cells and modules via the LbL approach (Fig. 7f); this method combined the advantages of high optical absorption, high practicability, and suitable vertical phase separation, which is beneficial to charge transport and extraction. As a result, a higher PCE of 16.35% was attained in the PM6-Y6 LbL-bladed coated cell than the BHJ-bladed counterpart (15.37%) (Fig. 7e). Furthermore, three other NF-blends PM6:Y6-2Cl, PTQ10:Y6, and PM6:Y6-C2 were selected to investigate the universality of this method and excellent universality of this method was displayed. Meanwhile, they adopted this strategy to fabricate large-area solar modules. Notably, a 11.52 cm2 module output an impressive PCE of 11.86% with a geometric fill factor of over 90%, which was the highest efficiency for large-area solar panels. Those results implied that the LbL method can significantly reduce the PCE roll-off effect, which was considered as a token of technological maturity. Very recently, Wang et al. reported a sequential blade casted OSC with a PCE of 12.27% by utilizing polymer PTB7-Th and acceptors FOIC and N2200; the efficiency was superior to the as-cast BHJ counterpart (11.01%). They found that this strategy is beneficial for forming a stable film morphology, and thus can improve the stability of the device. Even so, there are some drawbacks for this method; during the film forming process, the wet film curing needs a much longer time in comparison with the films processed via the spin-coating approach. The slow solidification makes the photoactive materials slowly aggregate and crystallize, leading to excessive phase separation and large domain formation in the films, especially for the highly-efficient NFAs and polymers with strong aggregation tendency and high crystallinity.
The slot-die coating technique (Fig. 7b) is capable of coating one or more layers on top of another layer in the form of stripes without any loss of material. It is therefore very suitable for printing multiple layers in OSCs. During slot-die coating, the solution is delivered to the meniscus through a pump and a slot so that the wet thickness can be adjusted by controlling the web speed and the solution supply. The achievable film thickness is mainly determined by the web surface properties, the solution properties, and the geometry of the coating. It has been previously reported that the active and buffer layers of OSCs can be manufactured using this method. Zimmermann et al. processed P3HT:PCBM-based cell modules on PET foil using the slot-die method and an FF value of 0.64% was achieved. Similarly, Tsao and co-workers reported a PTB7:PC71BM-based device exhibiting a PCE of 7.32% prepared via a facile R2R slot-die coating approach. In 2018, Min et al. reported a PCE of 12.90% for a PBDB-T-SF:IT-4F-based cell prepared via the slot-die coating method. The efficiency was comparable to that obtained for devices prepared using spin coating and doctor-blading processes. They further coupled the large-scale printed module to a water splitting system, which yielded a solar-to-hydrogen efficiency of 6.15%. In 2019, printed PTzBI:N2200 cells exhibiting a PCE of 9.10% were reported by Russell et al. At the same time, Na's group fabricated flexible OSCs with PCEs >7% prepared via a R2R hot slot die coating process. Moon and co-workers prepared a flexible OSC module based on an SMD2:ITIC system using an industrial production line and a PCE of 5.25% was achieved with an active area of 80 cm2. However, the slot-die technique has a limitation on the minimum film thickness available. Since the active layers of OSCs are nanometer functional films, very slow flow rates of the ink would be needed, which may cause film rupture. It is also worth mentioning that for a specific active layer solution, the speed of the web is usually constant to achieve a high-performance device; a too high or too low speed will lead to poor device efficiency.
In addition to the above-mentioned coating techniques, 2D inkjet printing (Fig. 7c) used for the fabrication of OSCs has been reported in many studies, which is a computer-controlled technique and suitable for the fabrication of dots, lines, films, etc. Unlike ordinary office printers, the solvents in the ink are quite difficult to replenish. The working principle is that droplets are sprayed onto the substrate and then diffuse and coalesce to form a solid film after evaporation of the solvent. In 2009, Eom et al. studied the effect of additives on the efficiency of inkjet-printed devices and the results showed that the surface morphology and charge collection were improved by adding various additives. Eggenhuisen and co-workers reported the use of environmentally friendly solvents toward the fabrication of an inkjet-printed OSC and attained a PCE of 4.1%. Similarly, an all inkjet-printed, all-air-processed OSC has been fabricated with a PCE of 5%. In 2019, Corzo et al. reported efficient P3HT:O-IDTBR-based NFA-OSCs fabricated via the inkjet printing method. They systematically optimized various printing parameters, such as the deposition temperature and drop spacing. As a result, PCEs of 6.47 and 6% were achieved for the 0.1 and 2 cm2 inkjet-printed devices. Furthermore, large-area marine-like devices were fabricated with a PCE of 4.76%. Their results show the versatility of the inkjet-printing process for the fabrication of highly efficient OSCs.
Brush coating (Fig. 7d) is another promising fabrication technique used for the large-scale production of OSCs, which possesses the features of high-speed fabrication, low material loss, and easily controlled film thickness. In 2007, Kim et al. deposited a mixed solution of P3HT:PCBM onto a PEDOT:PSS layer on an ITO substrate by applying a nylon paintbrush for the first time. An excellent efficiency close to 5.4% was attained, which preceded its spin-coated counterparts. In 2018, Mao et al. processed organic active layers using a Chinese ink brush made from the hair of animals such as goats and weasels. Surprisingly, they found that the surface of the brush has a directional micron-scale structure, which leads to a dynamic balance between the Lagrange pressures, asymmetric retention forces, and gravity. This allows more stable ink storage inside the brush, leading to an enhancement in ink utilization and a more controllable coating process. They set up an electromotor-driven, computer-controlled coating system to fabricate a large-surface area (18 cm2) device based on the PBDB-T:ITIC system, which achieved a PCE of 6.3% with a VOC of 11.6 V.
For almost all of the methods mentioned above, heat treatment or thermal annealing during the fabrication process is necessary, which plays a vital role in the nanoscale morphology of the active layers and hence affects the performance of OSCs. The efficiencies of the devices are controlled by a number of parameters, and it is difficult to infer from a single experimental result which method is universal for large-surface area production. Although many new methods have been used effectively, each method provides different approaches in terms of achieving a satisfactory morphology and efficiency, while showing different processing difficulties. In addition, a combination of various techniques is required during the R2R fabrication process. Thus, researchers need to assemble an efficient system to ensure ease of handling and maximum profit. In general, slot-die coating technology is considered the most promising method used for the fabrication of large-scale solar panels because of its ability to apply the coating so that the layers can be easily stacked and cross-oriented to align the modules with the serial-connected cells. Furthermore, this approach has the advantages of low material loss and ease of handling, which is favorable toward reducing the overall cost of the device. Other methods, such as screen printing and blade coating, are more difficult to utilize because they are almost incompatible with flexible substrates. Most of the current research has focused on the enhancement of the efficiency of small-surface area devices and numerous attempts will be needed in the future to design a new and efficient large-scale production method.

Krebs et al. established a complete manufacturing process of OSCs and reported detailed work on mass production from the lab to the fab (Fig. 8a). They analyzed the aspects neglected during industrial production, such as labor, materials, and electricity costs, and emphasized that attempts have to be made to find ITO alternatives. Some studies have reported the preparation of ITO-free large-surface area OSCs using the R2R method. In 2009, Krebs fabricated flexible OSCs comprised of five layers via a R2R process. A 130-micron thick polyethyleneternaphthalate (PEN) layer was employed as the substrate, silver nanoparticles on the substrate were used as the bottom electrode, zinc oxide nanoparticles were applied as the electron transporting layer, and P3HT:PCBM and PEDOT:PSS were used as the active and hole transporting layers, respectively. These five layers were prepared using the slot-die coating method and the final electrode was a screen-printed grid structure with 80% light transmittance. The device was fabricated from a solution in air without any steps performed under a vacuum and exhibited a PCE of 0.3%. In addition, Bundgaard et al. demonstrated flexible slot-die coated cells prepared in the solution phase in air. Similarly, Wei et al. fabricated flexible slot-die coated single OSCs and OSC devices on PET substrates, in which the active layers and electron transport layers were prepared via a slot-die coating method (Fig. 8b). PCEs of 5.75 and 5.18% were achieved for the single cell and four-stripe devices, respectively (Fig. 8b). Furthermore, the latter was capable of powering LED lamps under a simulated light source in the laboratory (Fig. 8b). These results highlight the possibility of large-scale device fabrication utilizing currently available equipment.


Currently, PCEs over 18% have been reported in laboratory-scale single-junction small-surface area OSCs with an active layer thickness of ∼100 nm, which is very close to the standard required for industrialization. From an industrial production point of view, active layers with high thickness tolerability are necessary for the fabrication of large-surface area solar devices. However, the optimal thickness of the active layer in most highly efficient OSCs is limited to ∼100 nm, so the development of material systems with thickness tolerance plays a vital role toward the industrialization of OSCs. On the other hand, in order to obtain broader absorption spectra that match the solar spectrum, appropriate molecular level and highly efficient molecular design methods are becoming increasingly complicated. Therefore, the development of new active materials with high efficiency and low cost is of great importance for OSCs.

In addition, from the perspective of the manufacturing process, three-dimensional control is of great meaning for the fabrication of multilayer films, which can be realized by incorporating the aforementioned techniques. However, optimizing the processing parameters of these processing methods is another challenge due to their different operation modes. Therefore, ideally, the manufacturing process should involve fewer steps and exhibit low environmental impact and a high degree of recyclability. Furthermore, when considering the transformation from lab-scale OSCs to industrial production, the R2R method is undoubtedly the most promising approach, possessing several advantages compared with the traditional spin-coating method adopted in the lab. Hence, by combining efficient low-cost thick film photoactive materials with appropriate processing methods, the mass production of OSCs can be successfully achieved in the near future.

There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21835006, 21704004, 91633301, and 51673201), and the Chinese Academy of Sciences (No. KJZD-EW-J01). We would like to thank the Innovation Project supported by Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences (BNLMS-CXXM-201903).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020