 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA01964A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9765-9798


A.
Kostopoulou
,

E.
Kymakis
 and 

E.
Stratakis
*

Institute of Electronic Structure and Laser, Foundation for Research and Technology – Hellas, Vassilika Vouton, Heraklion, 71110, Crete, Greece. E-mail: stratak@iesl.forth.gr

Center of Materials Technology and Photonics, Electrical Engineering Department, School of Applied Technology, Technological Educational Institute (T.E.I) of Crete Heraklion, 71 004 Crete, Greece

Received
1st March 2018
, Accepted 20th April 2018
First published on 20th April 2018
Exploring prospective materials for efficient energy production and storage is a big challenge in this century. Numerous research groups working in this field focus on novel materials for such applications and this is reflected in the large number of articles on the topic. At the same time, there has recently been increasing interest in fabricating entirely new types of devices and even exploring new physics, by structuring matter at the nanoscale. Nanostructured materials are acknowledged as viable materials to effectively replace conventional energy materials in such energy applications. Among these nanostructured materials, in this review article we focus on perovskite nanomaterials, such as perovskite oxides and halide perovskites, utilized in high performance energy technologies, including photovoltaics, supercapacitors and batteries. The various approaches used for the fabrication of perovskite nanostructures with centrosymmetric or non-centrosymmetric morphologies are particularly reviewed, while the impact of the structure, morphology, and composition on energy device performance is extensively discussed.
A. Kostopoulou
Dr Athanasia Kostopoulou received her B.Sc. degree in Physics (2004) and her M.Sc. degree (2006) in Materials Physics & Technology from the Physics Department at the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki. Since 2012, upon receiving her Ph.D. from the Chemistry Department at the University of Crete, she has been a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Institute of Electronic Structure and Laser at FORTH (Heraklion). Since 2016, she has been part of the group of the Ultrafast Laser Micro and Nano Processing Laboratory and she has been working on the chemical synthesis and elucidation of microscopic physical or photo-induced mechanisms involving nanocrystal systems.
E. Kymakis
Emmanuel Kymakis is a Professor of Electrical Engineering at TEI of Crete and the head of the Nanomaterials & Advanced Electronics group. He received his Ph.D. degree from Cambridge University in 2003. His interests is on the synthesis and solution processing of graphene and other 2D crystals with tailored properties, for the development of low cost next generation solar cells, compatible with r2r large area manufacturing methods. He has 100 SCI publications and over 6000 citations. He has been an honorary lecturer at UConn and a recipient of an Isaac Newton and an EPSRC studentship. He was named as a 2014 ChemComm Emerging Investigator and has received two National Excellence Awards. He is the director of the MSc in Organic Electronics and an elected member of the general assembly of the Greek Foundation of Research & Innovation. He is currently the deputy leader of the Energy Generation WP of the FET-Flagship Initiative Graphene and a member of Engineering sectoral scientific council of the National Council for Research & Innovation of Greece.
E. Stratakis
Dr Emmanuel Stratakis is a Research Director at the Foundation for Research and Technology—Hellas (FORTH). He received his Ph.D. in Physics from the University of Crete in 2001 and then he joined the University of California Berkeley as a visiting researcher. He is currently leading the Ultrafast Laser Micro- and Nano-Processing group of FORTH (https://www.iesl.forth.gr/ULMNP). He has over 130 SCI publications and 4500 citations and he has coordinated many National and EU grants. Since 2015, he has directed the European Nanoscience Facility of FORTH, part of the NFFA-Europe EU Infrastructure, where he is a member of the General Assembly. He is a National Representative to the High-Level Group of EU on Nanosciences, Nanotechnology and Advanced Materials. He is also a member of the COST Scientific Committee and a National Expert in the NMBP Program Committee of the Horizon 2020.

In recent years there has been significant interest in renewable energy sources. Solar energy harvesting through photovoltaic conversion is one of the most promising technologies for long-term renewable energy production. At the same time, low-cost and efficient electrochemical energy storage systems are urgently needed to meet the ever-increasing demand for clean energy. Batteries and supercapacitors are among such energy storage devices. Supercapacitors have a much higher capacity than conventional parallel-plate capacitors (up to ∼30 W h kg−1) and a faster discharge rate than batteries. Exploring prospective energy materials for efficient energy devices, it has been found that perovskite materials hold great promise. Perovskite is the term used to represent any material with a structure similar to that of prototype CaTiO3 mineral and a formula ABX3, where the cation ‘A’ occupies the corner positions of the unit cell, cation ‘B’ is situated at the center of the cell and anion ‘X’ is located at the unit cell faces. The perovskite material family includes several types of oxides, as well as halide perovskites. Typical perovskite oxides of technological importance are ferroelectric BaTiO3 and PbTiO3, dielectric (Ba,Sr)TiO3, piezoelectric Pb(Zr,Ti)O3, electrostrictive Pb(Mg,Nb)O3, magnetoresistant (La,Ca)MnO3, and multiferroic BiFeO3. In the case of metal-halide perovskites, M is a divalent metal from group 14 (Pb,Sn) or rare earth elements (Eu), and X is a halogen (X = F, Cl, Br, I, or a combination of them) and they can be further divided into two groups according to the nature of the cations: alkali-metal halide perovskites and organometal halide perovskites. In the alkali-metal halide perovskites, the cation A is a monovalent alkali metal (like Cs and K), while in the organometal perovskites there is a small organic cation (such as CH3NH3). Perovskite materials have been utilized to replace the dye molecules in mesoscopic sensitized solar cells, due to their high absorption coefficient and broad absorption spectrum.

Nanostructured materials are acknowledged as viable materials to effectively replace conventional energy materials. Nanostructures are unique materials because they display completely different properties than their bulk counterparts. A variety of synthesis procedures for nanomaterials have been developed to produce nanostructures of different chemical nature and morphologies. These approaches have been effectively modified in order to develop nanostructures of high crystallinity quality and finely tuned size, shape, and composition. Over the last few years, perovskite nanostructures of different morphologies have shown to exhibit promising shape-dependent properties.
Metal-halide perovskite nanostructures have emerged as efficient, low cost, light-active materials for photovoltaic applications. For example, spherical nanoparticles of (CH3NH3)PbI3 have shown a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 6.54%, while this efficiency is improved to 10% for nanosheets of MAPbI2Br, nanowires of CH3NH3PbI3 or nanocubes of a-CsPbI3. Their strong optical absorption, low non-radiative recombination rates, tunable band gaps, relatively high charge-carrier mobility, long diffusion lengths and solution processability make them uniquely suited for photovoltaic applications. In particular, the recombination rate has been found to be lower in nanostructured perovskites than their thin-film counterparts, leading to an increased diffusion length. The latter is one of the main factors affecting the PCE of photovoltaic devices. More importantly, the optical properties of perovskite nanostructures can be tuned through the halide component or the dimensionality (or morphology) of the structures. For instance, the chemical composition and the optical properties of pre-synthesized nanostructures can be finely tuned from green emitting CsPbBr3 to bright emitters in any other region of the visible spectrum. This phenomenon can be reversible upon displacement of Cl- or I-ions and re-insertion of Br-ions. The anion exchange reaction may be carried out by mixing the nanostructures with the reactive anion exchange in solution or by photoexcitation triggering. Besides this, the size effect on the optical properties has been evaluated by investigating different morphologies of metal halide perovskites. Among them, studies on nanoplatelets of organometal perovskite halides or all-inorganic halides have shown that upon decreasing the structure size down to the exciton Bohr radius, quantum size effects and blue-shift of the absorption onset are observed.
Among the efforts of fabricating efficient energy storage systems, perovskite materials have attracted much attention as new electrode materials. Perovskite oxides due to their unique tunability in composition, shape and functionalities can be used as efficient and stable oxygen catalysts in metal–air batteries or as electrode materials in supercapacitors. Owing to such properties, perovskite materials with rational nanostructure designs have offered major performance improvements over the last few years. The first reported perovskite oxide nanostructure utilized as a catalyst in Li–air batteries was in 2014, where spherical or randomly shaped nanoparticles have been incorporated, while the lifetime of the device did not exceed 50 cycles. In 2016, by utilizing LaNiO3 nanoparticles, the cycling ability was enhanced up to 155 cycles. Besides this, perovskite oxide nanostructures such as nanofibers or nanosheets displayed one of the highest specific capacitances in supercapacitors. Moreover, while micrometer-sized MAPbX3 organometal halide perovskites have been studied as lithium-storage anode materials and shown a very promising storage capacity (∼330 mA h g−1), no other metal halide nanostructure has been demonstrated as a storage material.
Hence, this review highlights the state-of-the-art synthesis strategies for the preparation of perovskite nanostructures, including perovskite oxides and metal halides, as well as focusing on recent developments in perovskite nanostructures employed in renewable energy applications (Fig. 1). It also provides a critical outlook on the effect of the size, shape and composition of such nanostructures on the performance of photovoltaic and energy storage devices.

The fabrication methods used for the synthesis of lead halide perovskite nanostructures can be divided into two general categories: colloidal and template-assisted methods. The morphologies attained by these methods are summarized in Table 1. The main advantages and disadvantages of each method are also included.

Synthesis method
Morphologies
Chemical phase
Advantages
Disadvantages
Colloidal methods
Ligand assisted
Low-temperature-precipitation method
Nanospheres, nanocubes, hexagons, nanorods nanowires, nanoplatelets,, nanosheets
CH3NH3PbX3MAPbX3, (C8H17NH3)2(CH3NH3)2Pb3(IxBr1−x)10 (0 > x > 1), CsPbX3, CsPb2Br5, Cs4PbBr6, where X = Cl, Br, I
- Quick procedure
- Only lead-based perovskite nanostructures
- No need for a Schlenk line and continuous inert gas flow
- Many times, difficult to centrifuge the particles
- Low-T procedure
- Reproducible
- Size and shape control
- Centrosymmetric or non-centrosymmetric morphologies
- Narrow size distribution
- Well crystalline products
- Confined nanostructures
- Possibility for scale-up production
Hot injection methods
Nanospheres, nanocubes, nanorods, nanowires, nanoplatelets, nanosheets. Core-shell
CsPbX3, Cs4PbX6, CsPbBr3−xIx (0 ≤ x ≤ 3), CsSnX3, CsSn(Cl0.5Br0.5)3, RbPbI3, Cs2SnI6, CH3NH3PbBr3, FA0.33Cs0.67PbBr3−xIx (0 ≤ x ≤ 3), CsPbX3@TiO2
-Size and shape control
- Need for specific apparatus (Schlenk line and inert gas flow)
- Centrosymmetric or non-centrosymmetric morphologies
- Low production
- Narrow size distribution
- High temperature process
- Well crystalline product
- Purification step is necessary
- Multiple compositions
- No capability for scale up
-Reproducible
-Confined nanostructures
Solvothermal methods
Nanocubes, nanowires, nanorods
CsPbX3, CsSnX3
- Size and shape control
- Time consuming
- Centrosymmetric or non-centrosymmetric morphologies
- Limited morphologies and compositions
- Narrow size distribution
- High temperature reactions
- Well crystalline products
- Reproducible
External stimuli-induced
Photo-induced
Nanocubes
CH3NH3PbBr3
- Simple, clean route
- Limited morphologies and compositions
- Fast method
- Wide size distribution
- Low-temperature synthesis
- Need for a laser source
- High crystallinity products
-Two step synthesis (synthesis of CH3NH3PbBr3 crystals first)
- Free of ligands
- No use of high-boiling point solvents
- 100% conversion efficiency of the starting materials
- 100% product formation
Ultrasound-irradiated
Nanocubes
APbX3, A = CH3NH3, Cs, or FA, and X = Cl, Br, or I
- Simple, efficient, low-cost, and environmentally friendly approach
- Limited morphologies and compositions
- Low temperature synthesis
- All-inorganic and organic–inorganic nanostructures
- Homogeneous samples
- Confined nanostructures
- Ultrasonic irradiation accelerated dissolution of the precursors
Liquid-phase exfoliation
Nanoplatelets
CH3NH3PbX3
- Low-temperature procedure
- Limited morphologies and compositions
-Well crystalline nanoplatelets
- Organic–inorganic perovskites
- Confined nanostructures
- Two step synthesis
- Size control of nanoplatelets
- Thickness of nanoplatelets down to a single layer
Template-assisted
Nanoparticles in silica template, nanoparticles in silica and alumina, nanowires in alumina, nanorods in silicon nanotube
CH3NH3PbBrxIx−3, APbX3 (A: Cs, MA, FA, CH3NH3SnI3)
- Confined growth of nanostructures
- Limited morphologies and compositions
- Isolated structures
- Size and shape control of the crystallites governed by the porous structure
- Porous size determines the size of the nanostructures
- Centrosymmetric and elongated nanostructure fabrication
- Highly crystalline structures
- Vertical arrangement of elongated nanostructures
- Practical approach to stabilize the cubic phase of CsPbI3 material

The metal halide nanostructures, which have been synthesized by this process, are presented extensively in Table S1. Structural and morphological characteristics, as well as the important parameter of the synthesis method are included in the same table.

The first report on the fabrication of metal-halide perovskite nanocrystals was in 2014, by the group of Pérez-Prieto. They used a re-precipitation method to synthesize organometal CH3NH3PbBr3 spherical nanocrystals of 6 nm in diameter. In this synthesis, a mixture of CH3NH3Br and a medium of long chain alkyl ammonium bromide was reacted with PbBr2 in a solution of oleic acid and octadecene at 80 °C. The nanoparticles were precipitated immediately after the addition of acetone. The methyl ammonium cations were embedded in the voids of a set of corner-sharing PbX6 octahedra, while the longer alkyl chain cations only attached on the periphery of the octahedra set with their chains extended out of it. Thus, the methyl ammonium cations in this case play a dual role, on the one hand acting as capping ligands and on the other hand limiting the growth of the nanocrystals. Later, utilizing the same synthesis procedure and by varying the ratio of the organic cations, namely a long organic molecule, e.g., octylammonium and a shorter methylammonium, Feldmann and co-workers synthesized two-dimensional nanoplatelet-shaped structures with dimensions on the order of several hundred nanometers (Fig. 2c). The idea behind the formation of the nanoplatelets is that the longer cation cannot be incorporated into the perovskite crystal structure. Instead it binds to the perovskite with the alkyl chain sticking outward and arrests crystal growth in that dimension. The ratio of longer and shorter chain alkyl cations can be varied to obtain nanoplatelets of different lateral dimensions. When the content of the oleic acid in the precursor suspension was varied, nanoplatelets of thickness down to one single octahedral layer can be achieved. Furthermore, by varying the ligands ratio, it is possible to obtain different morphologies than nanoplatelets. In particular, nanorods of about 10 nm length and crystalline in the (C8H17NH3)2(CH3NH3)2Pb3(IxBr1−x)10, 0 > x > 1, tetragonal structure have been formed.
Later, in order to propose a simpler re-precipitation for the preparation of colloidal organometal perovskite nanocrystals, commercially available precursors and capping ligands (n-octylamine, and oleic acid) have been used (Fig. 2a). Spherical quantum dots of the same chemical phase but of smaller dimensions (3 nm) have been synthesized (Fig. 2b). During the synthesis, N-dimethylformamide (DMF) was used for dissolving the precursors and the capping ligands. A fixed amount of this solution was dropped in toluene solution (Fig. 2a). It is assumed that the crystallization process is controlled by the supersaturation induced by the solubility change with solvent mixing. The n-octylamine has been found to control the kinetics of crystallization and mainly contributes to the size control of the nanoparticles, while the oleic acid plays an important role in suppressing the aggregation effects and contributes to the colloidal stability. Later, this simpler approach was also found to be facile for the fabrication of larger particles in the form of nanoplatelets. The layer thickness of the nanoplatelets can be precisely modulated as a function of the chain length and concentration of the added alkylammonium cations. Crystal growth can be confined to yield nanoplatelets with tunable unit cell thickness spanning between one and six layers, which allows for precise tuning of the emission properties of 2D perovskite nanoplatelets in the range of 430–520 nm depending on the layer thickness. By changing the polar solvent (acetonitrile, γ-butyrolactone, and DMF) in which the precursors are dissolved, an elongation of the particles along the [110] or [001] crystallographic directions of tetragonal CH3NH3PbI3 or cubic CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskites, has been observed. Varying the initial rate of precursor addition, as well as the initial concentrations of lead(II)-, methyl-, and n-octyl-ammonium halides, allows the control of the relative aspect ratio of the final nanocrystals (from bulk to wires to rods to dots in the case of CH3NH3PbI3, and from bulk to wires to plates or sheets in the case of CH3NH3PbBr3) (Fig. 2e).
In order to reduce the steps for the synthesis of organic–inorganic perovskite (MAPbBr3) nanocrystals and to use less toxic chemicals, as well as suppressing the total cost of their fabrication, N-methylformamide (NMF) has been used by the group of Manna as the source of MA ions. Nanocubes of around 20 nm were prepared though a transamidation reaction between the NMF and the oleylamine (Fig. 2d). This method proceeds without first synthesizing and purifying MAX, as well as avoiding the procurement of expensive MAX salts. Also, it is important to note the elimination of using toxic DMF. Moreover, only through this NMF hydrolysis strategy, can bulk crystals be grown without heating and any antisolvent.
The re-precipitation method has also been proposed for the synthesis of all-inorganic perovskite nanocrystals of different morphologies and chemical phases (Fig. 2f–j). Using such a method, CsPbX3 nanocubes crystalline in the monoclinic phase and of about 10 nm have been fabricated in toluene-based solution (Fig. 2h). The obtained nanocubes display one of the highest photoluminescence values (95%) in the literature. The Br-rich surface states found in these systems endow the CsPbBr3 quantum dots with interesting anion exchange reactions and self-passivating and self-soldering behaviors. This method has been extended for the synthesis of other, all-inorganic perovskite morphologies and structures including quite spherical nanostructures (Fig. 2g), ultra-thin nanowires (Fig. 2i), nanoplatelets (Fig. 2j) and nanosheets. The spherical nanostructures are crystalline in the Cs4PbBr6 rhombohedral phase, the nanowires in the CsPbBr3 orthorhombic phase, the nanoplatelets in tetragonal CsPb2Br5 and the nanosheets in the tetragonal CsPb2Br5 crystal phase. The effect of the ligand on the morphology of the final nanostructure has been studied extensively by Deng 's group. This method is also important, as shown recently, due to its flexibility to obtain nanocrystals of different dimensionalities and crystal structures, e.g., perovskites of Cs4PbBr6, CsPb2Br5 and CsPbBr3 crystal structures.
The role of the anti-solvent is also important in such a synthesis method. When the antisolvent is ethyl acetate the morphology obtained is varied from dots to nanoplates to nanobars by increasing the reaction time. When the solvent is toluene the same reaction parameters give nanocubes, nanorods and nanowires.

The hot-injection method has been proposed as a synthesis route for the fabrication of highly monodisperse and well-crystalline, highly luminescent semiconductors. This method has been utilized previously for the synthesis of metal dichalcogenide nanocrystals and generally involves the injection of a precursor solution in a hot liquid of the surfactants. The injection leads to the instantaneous formation of nuclei, which are together with a considerable amount of precursors. The temperature increase leads to a slow growth of the existing nuclei but not the formation of new nuclei. During the process, the surfactant molecules coordinate on the surface of the nanocrystals. Relatively high temperatures allow the nanocrystal annealing and the formation of well-crystalline, defect-free nanocrystals.

This method has been utilized for the synthesis of all-inorganic and organic–inorganic metal halide nanocrystals (Table S2,Fig. 3a–i). The number of all-inorganic perovskite nanostructures is really great but the organic–inorganic perovskites synthesized with the hot injection processes are still limited. CH3NH3PbBr3 (Fig. 3a) and FA0.33Cs0.67PbBr3−xIx perovskites in the form of nanospheres and nanowires (Fig. 3b) or nanosheets (Fig. 3c) have been particularly realized.
The impact of temperature and the type of ligand on the morphology of perovskite nanostructures is illustrated in Fig. 3j. The first reported synthesis was by Kovalenko's group for cube-shaped CsPbX3 nanocrystals of 4–15 nm edge length (Fig. 3d). Controlled arrested precipitation of the Cs+, Pb2+ and X− ions into CsPbBr3 nanocrystals has been obtained by the injected Cs-oleate with Pb(II)-halide in a high-boiling point solvent, e.g., octadecene at 140–200 °C; the capping agents were oleylamine and oleic acid. In the process, the nucleation and growth were rapid (1–3 s), while the size of the nanocubes has been tuned mainly by the reaction temperature, rather than by the growth time. All the CsPbX3 nanoparticles were crystalline in the cubic phase, which could be attributed to the combined effect of the high temperature reaction and contributions from surface energy. This process has been utilized by other groups as well, in order to synthesize similar shaped CsPbX3 or lead-free Sn-based (Fig. 3f) perovskite nanocrystals. All these syntheses use ligands such as oleic acid and oleylamine except of the synthesis of nanocubes by Kanaras' group in which poly(maleic anhydride-alt-1-octadecene) (PMA) was used. It is shown that the PMA bonds more tightly at the nanocrystal surface and this leads to nanocrystals of increased chemical and optical stability, as well as processability.
The reaction medium is also a key parameter of the hot injection method, particularly for the fabrication of all-inorganic perovskites. For example, the impact of solvents with different polarities (ethylene glycol dibutyl ether, diethylene glycol dibutyl ether, and tetraethylene glycol dibutyl ether) on the nucleation and growth of the CsPbBr3 nanostructures has been investigated. The nanocrystals exhibited a cubic profile and 10 nm edge length when the reaction temperature and time were kept the same and ethylene glycol dibutyl ether was used as the solvent. In contrast, the nanostructures obtained were quite spherical with a smaller size (∼3–4 nm), when a solvent with increased polarity (diethylene glycol dibutyl ether and tetraethylene glycol dibutyl ether) was utilized. At the same time, the size dispersity is better controlled in a solvent with low polarity. Such nanocubes have been covered recently by a TiO2 layer, forming a core@shell morphology upon calcination at 300 °C for 5 h.
Lowering the temperature from 140–200 °C to 90–130 °C, while keeping the rest of the parameters the same, quasi-2D morphologies have been obtained. In particular, reactions conducted at 150 °C produce mostly symmetrical CsPbX3 nanocubes with green-color PL emission, while reactions conducted at lower temperatures present blue-shifted PL spectra, for example at 130 °C lower-symmetry nanoplatelets with cyan emission are formed. At 90–100 °C, very thin nanoplatelets were observed along with lamellar structures ranging from 200 to 300 nm in length. Nanoplatelets or nanosheets have been synthesized by different research groups and their lateral dimensions are ∼100 nm × 5 μm and all of them are found to be crystalline in the orthorhombic phase (Fig. 3i). It is also shown that the lateral dimensions and thickness can be tuned by the reaction temperature and the ligand type. Such thickness control, via the reaction temperature, is different from nanoplatelets prepared at room temperature in which the thickness is tuned by the amount of HBr.
Besides this, high-aspect ratio nanostructures with a length up to μm have been synthesized with the same methods at reaction temperatures ranging from 150 to 250 °C. In this case, oleic and oleylamine have been utilized as capping agents and the structures obtained are crystalline in the orthorhombic phase. Furthermore, nanowires of RbPbI3 have been synthesized with the same method (Fig. 3h). By using short acids and lower temperatures, nanowires of thickness down to 2.8 nm and similar quality have also been realized (Fig. 3g).
Finally, centrosymmetric quasi-spherical nanocrystals have been fabricated by using oleic acid and oleylamine at a reaction temperature of 80–90 °C and are crystalline in the CsPbBr3 orthorhombic or the Cs4PbX6 hexagonal phase (Fig. 3e). CsSnI6 has been found to be formed at higher temperatures between 80 and 220 °C, while no ligand has been used for the stabilization of this kind of nanocrystals.

The solvothermal method is similar to the hydrothermal one, except that organic solvents are used instead of water. This method can effectively prevent the products from oxidizing and has been used to synthesize a variety of materials. In this method, the reactants and a solvent are mixed and closed in a sealed reaction container (stainless steel autoclave), while the temperature is raised above the solvent boiling point and maintained at this temperature for a desired period. The solvothermal method has been utilized for the synthesis of well-crystalline and monodispersed nanocrystals such as III–IV semiconductors for example, InP, GaN, and InAs or ZnO.

The first synthesis of perovskite nanocrystals with this approach has been reported in 2016 by Chen's group. In particular, lead-free cesium tin halide perovskite nanorods have been synthesized, to be used in photovoltaics (Fig. 4a–e). Two colloidal solutions have been pre-prepared; one is composed of SnBr2 in octadecene, oleic acid and oleylamine and the second is Cs-oleate in octadecene, oleic acid, hydrochloric acid, trioctylphosphine oxide and diethylenetriamine. The two different colloidal precursor solutions were loaded in a Teflon lined-autoclave together with diethylenetriamine and heated at 180 °C for 6 h. The CsSnI3 nanorods were identified to be orthorhombic, CsSnBr3 cubic and CsSnCl3 monoclinic, at room temperature and have a diameter of about 5 nm.
Using the same method, nanocubes of 8 nm edge-length and ultra-thin nanowires of 2.5 nm diameter of the same chemical phase have been synthesized, but with commercially available cesium acetate instead of the Cs-oleate precursor (Fig. 4f and g). The capping agents for CsPbBr3 were oleic acid and oleylamine, while for CsPbCl3 and CsPbBr3 it was TOPO and TOP respectively. The reaction temperature for both of them was 160 °C and the reaction took place in a rolling oven. It is shown that when the precursors are heated directly, without pre-dissolution, the concentrations of precursor ions are relatively low at the beginning due to undissolved precursors. As a result, the precursors gradually dissolved along with the temperature increase, so a relatively small amount of CsPbX3 nanocrystals nucleate into nanocubes at a certain precursor concentration. In contrast, when the precursors are heated at high temperature with pre-dissolution, surprisingly, the morphology changed from nanocubes to nanowires (Fig. 4h). This is due to the higher concentration of precursor ions that can be achieved at the very beginning, giving rise to the formation of more and smaller nuclei as the temperature is increased. It has been further reported that the extension of the growth time can also lead to the morphology change from nanocubes to nanowires.

Organolead bromide perovskite nanocrystals have been synthesized through a one-step photo-induced process. A similar process has been reported for the fabrication of metallic, semiconducting or oxide nanoparticles. This method uses, as a starting material, the powder obtained upon grinding of a bulk CH3NH3PbBr3 crystal grown by inverse temperature crystallization. This powder was dispersed in chloroform and irradiated for 10 min with 532 nm (9 ns, 10 Hz, 0.8 J cm−2) laser pulses of a Nd-YAG laser. Following laser irradiation, the originally pale orange HyP dispersion turned into a deep yellow colloid (Fig. 5a). The average size of the crystals converted from 1.5 μm to 61 nm and a well-crystalline cubic morphology was obtained (Fig. 5b). This result can be explained by the laser-induced photo-fragmentation of micrometric crystals (stage I), followed by re-growth of fragments into larger nanoparticles by coalescence and vapour condensation (stage II) (Fig. 5c). Coalescence and condensation can be limited by the presence of ligands in the liquid solution, which bind to the nanocrystals' surface.


Ultrasound irradiation has been used for the synthesis of all-inorganic as well as organic–inorganic lead halide nanostructures. In particular, ultrasonic irradiation of precursor colloidal solutions provides a wide range of compositions of APbX3 perovskite nanocrystals, where A = CH3NH3, Cs, or formamidinium, and X = Cl, Br, or I. A series of mixed halides with the formula APbBr3−xClx and MAPbBr3−xIx has been additionally synthesized by mixing MAX (CCl, Br, I) and PbX2 with different halides. Initially, the reaction vessel of the precursor solution (AX, PbX2 and oleylamine) was positioned in a high-density probe-type ultrasonicator. Subsequently, the sonication tip was pulsed for 10 s on and 2 s off to avoid excessive heating, while the mixture was sonicated for 10 min to 3 h. Well-crystalline nanocubes of 10 nm length and thickness less than 5 nm and crystalline in the cubic crystal structure have been obtained with an AX:PbX2:oleylamine molar ratio of 1:1:3 (Fig. 6a–d).

The solubility of the precursors in the solvent has been found to be a key factor in such a synthesis. Ultrasonic irradiation favors dissolution and thus accelerates the reaction, resulting in the precipitation of products. The mixture of toluene and oleylamine did not dissolve the precursors well and the sonication helps in this direction. Furthermore, toluene is an appropriate solvent in which the solubilities of the two precursors (AX and PbX2) are similar to each other and are higher than that of the product, allowing for the precipitation of the perovskite nanocrystals. Instead of toluene, other solvents such as dimethyl formamide (DMF), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), and isopropyl alcohol (IPA) have been tested but the result was not satisfactory, also due to the reason that DMSO did not mix with oleylamine. All precursors were soluble in DMF without sonication, making DMF unsuitable for the synthetic mechanism. In the case of IPA, the solubility of PbX2 was almost negligible compared to that of MAX, and thus the yield of perovskite nanocubes was much lower than when using toluene.

This synthesis approach has been proposed for the fabrication of 2D organic/inorganic halide perovskite nanoplatelets of varied thickness. It is based on a previously reported technique for obtaining high-quality 2D materials, such as graphene and metal chalcogenides.

This synthesis approach included two different steps. In the first step perovskite microcrystals of 1–10 μm and various morphologies are obtained through a solid-state reaction (Fig. 6e). The precursors are ground by using a mortar and pestle. The coloration of the precursors' mixture changes from white to orange indicating the formation of the bulk-perovskite; the colors of the prepared bulk perovskite powders appear to be white, orange-yellow, and black for CH3NH3PbCl3, CH3NH3PbBr3, and CH3NH3PbI3, respectively. The resulting powders showed a strong fluorescence upon UV excitation. In the second step, the perovskite microcrystals were dispersed in toluene together with oleylamine and subjected to tip sonication. The colorless toluene quickly gave way to an opaque orange dispersion and following centrifugation, nanocrystals of a few tens of nanometers up to several hundreds have been collected. These solutions contained different nanostructures, which were separated in further steps of centrifugation and dilution. The resulting nanoplatelets can be reduced in thickness down to a single unit cell.

Template-assisted methods involve the embedding of perovskite nanocrystals into highly ordered mesoporous or nanoporous templates. Silica or alumina templates have been used to guide the confined growth of nanostructures and keep them isolated.

The first reports on the synthesis of perovskite nanocrystals via template-assisted processes were in 2016, simultaneously from Yamauchi's and Kovalenko's groups. In the former group, hybrid organic–inorganic CH3NH3PbBrxIx−3 perovskite nanocrystals were grown inside mesoporous silica templates in the powder form with a porous size ranging from 3 to 7 nm (Fig. 7a–c). In the latter, APbX3 nanostructures (A = Cs+, CH3NH3+ (MA) or CH(NH2)2+ (FA); X = Br− or I−) were grown in commercial silica templates of various arrangements, e.g., hexagonally ordered one-dimensional channels (2.5–7 nm pore widths), interconnected cubically ordered cavities (3 nm), or disordered porous networks (15–50 nm pore widths) of a specific characteristic size (Fig. 7d–f). The size of the perovskite nanocrystals is governed by the templates' pore size. The precursor solutions were mixed with the mesoporous powders using vortex stirring. This solution filled the channels of the porous silica templates with minimal resistance due to the relatively low interfacial surface tension between the N,N dimethylformamide (DMF) solvent and the silica. Capillary forces have been used to fill the pores of the template. After the solutions had thoroughly impregnated the pores, the powders were dried at a higher temperature. Crystallization is induced by gradual supersaturation as the solvent evaporates, while the color of the powders changed within 5 min. The final color of each powder depended on the pore size, dpore, of the silica template and the Br concentration (x), showing a clear spectral shift from black/brown to yellow/green as dpore decreases and x increases (Fig. 7a). The samples obtained were a mixture of spherical and rod-shaped particles enclosed in the silica channels (Fig. 7b and c). Possible detergents which give good dispersion of meso-SiO2 templates were also investigated. Usually, polar solvents are able to suspend silica particles but also completely dissolve perovskite nanocrystals. Detergents like octadecylsilane (ODS) or octadecyltrimethoxysilane (OTMS) help to partially disperse silica particles in toluene without a noticeable drop in PL brightness, even after a few days. Interestingly, bis(2-ethylhexyl) sulfosuccinate (also known as docusate or AOT) can disperse silica microparticles completely and very quickly.
The impact on the nanocrystal growth of perovskite nanocrystals into alumina templates compared to that grown into silica templates has been investigated in the same year. The first template comprises nanoporous anodic aluminum oxide nanotubes with diameters of ∼6–8 nm and lengths from 20 up to hundreds of nanometers. The second template is composed of a tens of micrometers thick, electrochemically etched nanoporous Si layer, renowned for its 3D spongy network of nanopores with a tunable size from 2 to 10 nm (Fig. 7i and j). In both cases the nanopores were partially filled by the spherical perovskite nanocrystals (Fig. 7h and i). A similar alumina template is also used for the fabrication of well-ordered inorganic three-dimensional vertical CsPbI3 perovskite nanowires (Fig. 7j and k). The nanowires in this case were grown with a vapor growth method starting from Pb metal nanoclusters. Excellent physical confinement and passivation of these nanowires, mediated by this template, provide extraordinary resistance against moisture and help in-phase stabilization of CsPbI3 nanowires.
A different nanoscale template, comprising Si nanotubes, has been used for the formation of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite nanorods (Fig. 7l and m). The nanostructure width and dimensionality have been controlled by the selection of Si nanotube template dimensions. The perovskite nanostructure length is ideally kept fixed by the amounts of reactants infiltrated into a given nanotube, with comparable average lengths for each system (≈300 nm).

Solid-state reactions as well as colloidal methods have been employed for the synthesis of perovskite oxide nanostructures (Table 2). Conventional solid-state methods lead to nanostructures of wide size-distribution, irregular shapes and uncontrolled morphologies. In order to obtain homogeneous nanoparticulate systems, colloidal synthesis methods at relatively low temperature such as the sol–gel, hydrothermal, solvothermal and sonochemical, have been proposed. Despite the fact that the solid state and molten-salt syntheses are more convenient, cheaper and non-time-consuming, compared to the colloidal ones, the latter have the advantage of achieving a better control of the size and the size-distribution of the final nanostructures. The synthesis parameters as well as the advantages and disadvantages of each method are summarized in Table 2. Examples of the nanocrystal morphologies attained are illustrated in Fig. 8.

Synthesis method
Morphology
Chemical phase
Advantages
Disadvantages
Solid state methods
Irregular-shaped/spherical nanoparticles, nanocubes or nanowires
BaTiO3, BaZrO3, LaCoO3, PbTiO3, SrTiO3, Ba0.9Co0.5Fe0.4Nb0.1O3−δ
- Convenient and simple process
-High temperature reactions
- Well established method
- High amount of energy required
- Simple equipment
- Wide size-distribution
- Precursors are commercially available
- Irregular morphologies
- Ligand free structures
- Large particles
- Well crystalline products
- No control on the morphology
Molten salt methods
Irregular-shaped, nanostripes, nanotubes, nanowires, platelets
BaTiO3, SrTiO3, PbTiO3, BiFeO3, SrTiO3, SrFeO3, LaFeO3
- Simplicity of the process equipment
- Versatile and large-scale synthesis
-Environmentally friendly
- Moderate temperatures
- ligand free structures
- Well crystalline products
Colloidal methods
Sol–gel
Nanospheres, irregular-shaped nanoparticles, polyhedral nanoparticles, nanocubes, honey-comb-like
BaTiO3, PbZrxTi1−xO3, BaxSr1−xTiO3, Tm3+ (5%)-doped BaTiO3, BaTi1−xScxO3−δ, Ba(Ti1−x,Zrx)O3, Ba1−xLaxTiO3, BaTi1−xFexO3, [KNbO3]1−x[BaNi0.5Nb0.5O3−δ]x, Ba0.5Sr0.5TiO3, La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3, LaNi1−xMgxO3, La0.65X0.35MnO3
- Mild temperatures
- Need for specific apparatus
Microwave-assisted sol–gel
Nanospheres
BaTiO3, Ba0.95La0.05TiO3
- Better control of the size
- Need for controlled temperature and mixing
Hydrothermal
Irregular-shaped, nanospheres, nanocubes, nanotubes, nanowires, dendrites, star-like particles, sea-weed particles, torus-shaped
BaTiO3, SrTiO3, BaTi1−xFexO3, BaTiO3:Er3+, BaTiO3:Yb3+, Zn2SnO4, LaNiO3
- Narrow size-distribution
- Low production
Sol-hydrothermal
Nanospheres, irregular-shaped nanoparticles, hollow-like, nanowires
BaTiO3, Ba1−xTi1−xGdxScxO3, Dy-doped BaTiO3, K1−x NaxNbO3
- Various morphologies
Microwave hydrothermal
Nanocubes
BaTiO3
- Small sizes
Solvothermal
Nanospheres, worm-like, nanocubes, hollow
BaTiO3, BaZrO3, LiNbO3, SrTiO3, LiNbO3, PbTiO3, LaNiO3
- Low temperatures
Sol–gel-Solvothermal
Nanospheres
BaTiO3
- Ligand-free and covered with ligand structures
Sonochemical
Nanospheres, irregular-shaped, clusters, nanorods, polygons
BaTiO3, SrTiO3, BiFeO3, Bi0.9Ba0.1Fe0.9Mn0.1 O3, Bi0.9 Ca0.1Fe0.9Cr0.1O3
- Various morphologies
- Various compositions
- Well crystalline products

The solid-state reaction method is the conventional method to fabricate perovskite oxide nanoparticles. This process starts with the weighing and mixing of the starting materials. Then milling and calcination at elevated temperature are carried out to form the perovskite structures. The final products of this method are dependent on parameters such as the particle size, morphology, purity, and chemical composition of the precursors, since these parameters influence the atomic diffusion during the solid state reaction. This process has been used to synthesize irregular-shaped or spherical nanoparticles, nanocubes or nanowires (Fig. 8a and b) of BaTiO3, BaZrO3, LaCoO3, PbTiO3, SrTiO3 or Ba0.9 Co0.5 Fe0.4Nb0.1O3−δ.


In this approach, an inorganic molten salt serves as the medium to enhance the reaction rate and to reduce the temperature of the reactant oxides. Such reactions are carried out at moderate temperatures (600–800 °C), due to the short diffusion distances and large mobilities of the reactant oxides in the molten salts. Using this method, various nanostructure morphologies have been obtained, ranging from irregular-shaped nanoparticles (Fig. 8c) to high-aspect-ratio ones (Fig. 8c) and platelets. The important parameters that determine the final morphology are the types and quantities of the molten salts, heating duration, temperature and heating/cooling rates.


Due to the variety of morphologies and structures attained via these methods, a summary is presented in Table S3.


The sol–gel method is one of the most popular colloidal methods for the preparation of perovskite oxides such as BaTiO3 (Fig. 8e and f) and PbTiO3 (ref. 126) as well as more complex stoichiometries namely doped perovskite oxides with metals such as lanthanum, strontium, thulium, zirconium, scandium, iron and neodymium.

The metal alkoxide, metal–organic, or metal–inorganic salt precursors are dissolved in an appropriate solvent and form a sol. This gel is then dried, followed by calcination and sintering at high temperature to form perovskite oxide nanostructures. The temperatures required are much lower than that in the corresponding solid-state reactions for the same oxides. Among the parameters that influence the morphology and the stoichiometry of the perovskite nanostructures are the type of reactant, the concentration, the PH and the temperature of the reaction. Barium and titanium alkoxides are the first metallic precursors used to synthesize BaTiO3 nanocrystals, which were published in 1995, but other barium-based precursors such as barium acetate, barium chloride, barium carbonate or barium nitrate have been used. The different rates in the hydrolysis and condensation of Ba and Ti precursors often give rise to chemical component segregation in the obtained gels. To solve this problem, acetic acid or acetylacetone was often used to control the hydrolysis rate of the Ti precursor, since these complexing agents act as chelating agents to coordinate with Ti species. Control of the size and its size distribution can be obtained via optimization of the heat treatment process parameters (temperature, time, atmosphere and heating rate) or utilizing a capping agent such as oleic acid or hexanedioic or hexanoic acids or disodium EDTA. The nanostructures obtained by this approach are randomly shaped or spherical and only a few become cubic or honey-comb-like. An alternative approach to the conventional high temperature and long duration sintering is microwave reactive sintering. Indeed, the microwave-assisted calcination of ceramic samples such as BaTiO3 and Ba0.95La0.05TiO3 saves energy, and it is cost effective and substantially affects the electrical properties of the final nanostructures.

The hydrothermal synthesis involves the heating of an aqueous suspension of insoluble salts in an autoclave at a moderate temperature and pressure, where the crystallization of the desired phase takes place. The process involves precipitation from the solution at temperatures between the boiling point and the critical point of water. This method has the advantage of producing fine and homogeneous perovskite nanostructures with a controllable size distribution and morphology. The precursors used are similar to those of sol–gel procedures, for example the barium precursors are alkoxides, acetates, chlorides and nitrates. For the titanium precursors, chlorides or alkoxides have been utilized. Furthermore, perovskite oxide nanostructures have been synthesized by means of a hydrothermal reaction at low temperatures, using TiO2 particles as a precursor and without employing any organic template molecules. Crystalline BaTiO3 nanostructures were precipitated via the reaction of TiO2 particles with a strongly alkaline solution of Ba(OH)2 under hydrothermal conditions at moderate temperature.

Hydrothermal nanoparticulate perovskite oxides exhibit various morphologies from random shapes  to spheres, cubes, nanowires and nanotubes, as well as more complex dendrite or star-like structures. The size and the crystal structure of such nanostructures can be controlled by tuning the Ba/Ti molar ratio in the starting materials, or by changing the reaction temperature. The effect on the BaTiO3 nanostructures' size has also been investigated by the synthesis of perovskite oxides in supercritical water.
In another approach, well-crystalline perovskite oxides have been synthesized using a hydrothermal method, combined with TiO2 sol, prepared by a sol–gel method at temperatures below 220 °C. Using this combined method, rounded/randomly shaped, hollow, or elongated nanocrystals have been synthesized. Finally, nanocubes of BaTiO3 have been synthesized with a microwave hydrothermal method.

A general solvothermal approach has been proposed by Antonietti's group for the synthesis of ABO3 perovskite oxide nanostructures. To prove the generality of the synthetic approach, BaTiO3 and BaZrO3 have been prepared as representatives of the perovskite family, and LiNbO3 with the ilmenite structure. This synthetic procedure is a ligand-free procedure and is based on the dissolution of lithium or barium metal in benzyl alcohol and subsequent reaction with the corresponding metal alkoxide at temperatures between 200 and 220 °C. Benzyl alcohol has proved to be a versatile solvent and reactant for controlled crystallization and stabilization of oxidic nanoparticles. The solvothermal method has been utilized for the fabrication of different perovskite oxide stoichiometries such as BaTiO3 PbTiO3, SrTiO3, LaNiO3 or LiNbO3 at the nanometer scale. Such perovskite oxides have been formed in spherical (Fig. 8i), cubic or hollow morphologies and most of them are free of capping agents.

The effect of the solvent polarity on the shape and the size of the solvothermally-prepared perovskite nanostructures has been extensively evaluated by Caruntu's group (Fig. 8j). The shape of the BaTiO3 nanocrystals can be varied from spheroidal to cubic by tuning the polarity of the solvent, while their size can be controlled via adjusting the concentration of the precursors and the reaction temperature. Indeed, the BaTiO3 nanocrystals obtained from solutions containing benzyl alcohol, diethylene glycol and diethylene glycol monobutyl ether are quasi-spheroidal with an average diameter of 32, 18, and 16 nm, respectively, whereas nanocrystals obtained from toluene, phenyl ether and benzyl ether are cubic with an average edge length of 10, 10 and 8 nm, respectively.
Besides this, nanoporous BaTiO3 was prepared through a sol–gel method combined with solvothermal and supercritical drying treatment. It is shown that the porosity can be regulated by adjusting the solvothermal temperature, while the grain size is found to increase with the reaction temperature.

The first perovskite nanoparticulate oxide prepared with this method has been reported by the group of Lin in 2003. In particular, a SrTiO3 nanoporous material has been synthesized in a mixture of ethanol–water under ambient pressure and temperature. The first-reported synthesis of BaTiO3 nanostructures has been recorded much later in 2010. BaTiO3 (Fig. 8k and l), BiFeO3, SrTiO3 and NiTiO3 nanostructures, with irregular, spherical, rod-like and polygonal shapes, have been formed, under ultrasonic irradiation and all of them are free of capping agents.


Nanostructured materials display important features, such as a large surface area, efficient carrier transport, high absorption coefficient, long-term stability, and tunable bandgap, which act independently or in synergy towards the enhancement of the solar cell performance. Along with these features, the bandgap of semiconductor nanocrystals can be modulated via quantum confinement effects. An important consequence of the spatial confinement effect is the energy increase (blue-shift) of the band-to-band excitation peaks, as the size of the semiconductor nanoparticles is reduced, in relation to the Bohr radius of the material. This characteristic size effect makes nanostructures perfect candidates to be incorporated into the absorber layer of efficient solar cell devices, considering that their band-gap can be tuned to match the different parts of the sunlight spectrum. Besides this, the morphology variations of the crystal grains and facet orientation have a direct impact on the macroscopic photovoltaic performance. Moreover, high-aspect-ratio nanostructured materials, due to the absence of grain boundaries along their length, behave as direct conduction paths for charge carriers, giving rise to an enhanced charge transport rate and small carrier recombination probability. Finally, the recombination rate has been found to be lower in nanostructured perovskites than their thin-film counterparts, leading to an increased diffusion length, which is one of the main factors affecting the PCE of photovoltaic devices.

This section provides an overview of the current progress and future prospects for the use of perovskite nanostructured materials in solar cell applications. The various achievements attained to date are summarized in Table 3.
Chemical phase
Morphology
Size (nm)
Synthesis of perovskite nanostructure-film formation
Ligand type
Efficiency (%)
Date
Ref.

Metal-halide perovskite nanostructures


Silicon solar cells

CH3NH3PbBr3
Spherical nanoparticles
6–8
Low-T precipitation method-spin coating
Methyl ammonium cations
14.3
2017

188

CsPbCl1.5Br1.5:Yb3+, Ce3+
Nanocubes
7–9
Hot injection method-assembly via a liquid-phase deposition
Oleic acid–oleylamine
21.5
2017

187


Dye sensitized solar cells

CH3NH3PbI3
Irregular-shaped nanoparticles
2–3
Self-organization process from precursor solution-spin coating
Methylamine
3.8
2009

189


Semi-transparent organic–inorganic solar cells

CH3NH3PbI3−xClx
—
12–17
Spin coating of the precursor solution with PVP
Free
7.11
2016

190


Perovskite quantum dot sensitized solar cells

(CH3NH3)PbI3
Semi-spherical nanoparticles
2–3
Growth of perovskite nanocrystals on TiO2
Free
6.54
2011

22

(CH3CH2NH3)PbI3
Spherical nanoparticles
1.8
Growth of perovskite nanocrystals on TiO2
Free
2.4
2012

191

MAPbI2Br
Nanosheets
Film deposited using a precursor solution
Free
10
2014

23

a-CsPbI3
Nanocubes
9
Hot injection method-spin casting-dipping
Oleylammonium surface ligands
10.77
2016

25

CsSnX3
Nanorods
Diameter: 5, length: several tens
Solvothermal method-spin coating
Free
9.66–12.96, depending on the halide
2016

81

CsPbBr3
Aggregates of small particles
15–20
Room temperature synthesis-spin coating
Butylamine
5.4
2016

194

CsPbBr3
Irregular-shaped nanoparticles
16
Hot injection-layer-by-layer deposition + thermal annealing
Oleic acid, oleylamine
5.5
2017

193

CsPbBr3
Nanocubes
5–7
Hot injection method-spin coating
Oleic acid
4.21
2017

192

CsPbX3
Nanowires
Diameter: 50–100
Solution-dipping
Free
0.11–1.21
2017

186


Transition metal dichalcogenide quantum dot sensitized solar cells

MAPbI3-capped PbS quantum dots
Core@shell hexagons
∼5
Hot-injection method-antisolvent method-spin casting
Oleic acid
8.95
2015

195

p-Doped MAPbI3-capped PbS quantum dots
Core@shell hexagons
∼5
Hot-injection method-antisolvent method-spin casting
Oleic acid
8.8
2017

196

PbS covered with CsPbI3
Nanospheres
∼15
Hot injection method-spin coating
Oleic acid
10.5
2017

197

CsPbBr3
Nanocubes
8–12
Hot injection method-dip coating
Oleic acid
7.2
2017

198


Perovskite oxide nanostructures


Dye sensitized solar cells

Zn2SnO4
Quite spherical nanoparticles
8
Hydrothermal method-screen-printing
Free
4.7
2012

181

BaSnO3
Quite spherical nanoparticles
25
Liquid-phase reaction at room temperature-calcination
Free
5.2
2013

199


Perovskite solar cells

Zn2SnO4
Spherical and irregular-shaped nanoparticles
∼10
Sol–gel method-spin coating
Free
14.85
2015

200

Zn2SnO4
Quite spherical nanoparticles
∼12
Hydrothermal-spin coating
Free
17.7
2016

201

La-Doped BaSnO3
Irregular-shaped nanoparticles
A few nm
Crystalline superoxide-molecular cluster colloidal route-spin casting
Free
21.2
2017

202


An attempt to combine promising perovskite materials with c-Si solar cells has been recently demonstrated (Fig. 9). For that purpose, organic–inorganic or all-inorganic metal-halide perovskite nanostructures have been used and a higher solar cell efficiency has been achieved for the latter one.

In the first effort, a “field-effect” solar cell was successfully developed and implemented by combining spherical all-inorganic metal-halide perovskite nanostructures, prepared with a low temperature precipitation method (Fig. 9f), with an organic/c-Si heterojunction associated with light-induced CH3NH3+ molecular alignment, providing an efficiency of 14.3% (Fig. 9a–f). This approach makes use of short-wavelength light. The short wavelengths are converted into an electrical polarization that enhances the internal electric field and drives photogenerated carriers towards the respective contacts. Actually, in this report a c-Si solar cell architecture, based on a heterojunction between n-type c-Si and a conducting polymer (PEDOT:PSS), has been used to demonstrate an alternative concept of field effect solar cells. It is known that field-effect solar cells are usually designed by using a ferroelectric material or a dielectric material with fixed charges to improve the device performance. However, such field-effect solar cells consume extra electric energy from external bias (an extra and constant voltage across the dielectric material). Here, the extra potential is generated by light instead of traditionally used external bias; indeed the perovskite nanospheres, deposited on top of the PEDOT:PSS electrode act as the potential generation layer (Fig. 9a). The working principle of the device is illustrated in Fig. 9b. The device operates as a Schottky heterojunction solar cell between n-type c-Si and metallic PEDOT:PSS, while the light-induced electric polarization in the perovskite nanospheres is used to enhance the electric field in the c-Si depletion region. The permanent dipoles associated with CH3NH3+ are free to rotate within the perovskite cage and screen the electron–hole Coulomb interaction, generating a polarized electrical field (Fig. 9c and d). The corresponding optical absorption change with the incorporation of the perovskite nanostructures is illustrated in Fig. 9e. As a comparison, the device with an analogous structure without perovskite nanostructures only exhibits an efficiency of 12.7%. It is also worth noting that no enhancement of the PCE is recorded upon using a continuous perovskite thin film on top of PEDOT:PSS, due to the rapid electron delocalization in the continuous film.
In the second approach, all-inorganic perovskite nanostructures have been used as quantum cutting materials to improve the photoelectric conversion efficiency of c-Si solar cells (Fig. 9g–n). Quantum cutting can give rise to the emission of multiple near-infrared photons for each ultraviolet/visible photon absorbed. Based on this principle, rare earth-doped all-inorganic perovskite nanocubes, synthesized by a hot injection method (Fig. 9m), were explored as downconverters to enhance the photovoltaic performance, due to their excellent quantum-cutting properties and the exact spectral matching with silicon absorption. The mechanism of the down-conversion process for Yb3+,Ce3+ co-doped perovskite nanocubes is shown in Fig. 9n. The nanocubes were self-assembled on the surface of commercial single crystal silicon solar cells via liquid-phase deposition and the thickness was controlled in the range from 60 to 770 nm (Fig. 9g). Besides this, the transmittance can be modified by the thickness of the layers; when the thickness is less than 230 nm the transmittance in the range of 450–1000 nm is as high as 80–90% in the optimum response region of the silicon solar cells, indicating a weak influence on the light harvesting capability of the solar cell device (Fig. 9h). A bright blue emission from the perovskite layer (≈230 nm) was observed upon irradiation with AM 1.5 G standard sunlight with a 400 nm short-pass filter (Fig. 9i, c1,c3). The resulting infrared emission can be recorded as a pink color in the picture via an infrared camera (Fig. 9i, c2). This directly indicates that the UV light can be effectively converted to infrared light by the perovskite nanostructure film. Compared to the PCE of 18.1% of the uncoated silicon solar cell, the performance for the 110, 230 and 350 nm perovskite nanocube-coated samples increases to 20.7, 21.5, and 18.8% respectively. The solar cell performance is deteriorated upon further increase of the thickness of the nanocube layer (Fig. 9j). For the silicon solar cell with the 230 nm perovskite nanocube coating, the PCE reaches 21.5%, with an open-circuit voltage of 0.65 V and a short-circuit current of 39.8 mA cm−2 (Fig. 9k). The PCE of the perovskite nanocubes doped with other rare-earth ions is illustrated in Fig. 9l. The luminescence intensity of the perovskite nanocubes decreases by less than 5%, while the respective PCE of the solar cell, with the 230 nm perovskite nanostructure coating, decreased by only about 5%, when the device was in the dark and exposed to air for 700 h, indicating its high stability. Furthermore, the PCE of the solar cells with perovskite nanocube coatings changed rarely upon continuous, AM 1.5, irradiation for 50 h, indicating their excellent photostability. It should also be highlighted that the PCE enhancement in the perovskite nanocube-coated silicon solar cells is even comparable with that of various perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells.

Irregular-shaped hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite nanostructures (CH3NH3PbI3) of diameter 2–3 nm were used to enhance the light absorption of dye-sensitized solar cells employing liquid electrolytes, resulting in a photovoltaic efficiency of 3.8%. Nanocrystalline particles of CH3NH3PbX3 (X = Br, I) were deposited onto a TiO2 surface by a self-organization process, starting with the coating of a precursor solution containing stoichiometric amounts of CH3NH3X and PbX2. This CH3NH3PbX3-deposited TiO2 electrode has been used as the photoelectrode (anode) together with a Pt-coated FTO glass as the counter electrode (cathode) and a 50 μm-thick separator layer. The gap between the electrodes was filled with an organic electrolyte solution containing lithium halide and halogen as a redox couple. A higher PCE has been measured for the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite sensitizer (3.8%) compared to the CH3NH3PbBr3 one.


A polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP)-doped hybrid-organic photovoltaic device has been fabricated using hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) nanocrystals. The fabrication of an ≈90 nm-thick film of perovskite in the presence of a polar polymer, 3 wt% PVP, showed an increase in the thermal stability against decomposition into PbI2. It also showed a stable crystal size and morphology inside the polymer, and enabled the reproducible fabrication, under ambient air, of semitransparent solar cells with an increased open circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), and PCE. The stability of such solar cells originates from the formation of PVP-coated nanocrystals with a minimum average grain size of 15–17 nm. When the film is made without PVP, the grain size is increased to a minimum grain size of 35–40 nm, while the film decomposes into PbI2 at 60 °C in air (24–30% humidity), undergoing a reversible cubic-to-tetragonal transition at 52–55 °C. In contrast, the perovskite film doped with 3% PVP is much more resistant to decomposition to PbI2 and maintains a cubic lattice between 5 and 100 °C. The PCE value varies depending on the molecular weight of the PVP from 6.17 to 7.11%. Also, the PCE increases with the increase of the film thickness, in the case of 0 wt%, while it decreases for the 3 wt%-PVP perovskite films. Finally, the incorporation of PVP increases the stability of the solar cells from 120 h without PVP to 400 h.


Hybrid organic–inorganic metal-halide perovskite nanostructures have been utilized as active layers in perovskite quantum dot solar cells. Utilizing (CH3CH2NH3)PbI3 nanospheres of 1.8 nm directly grown on TiO2 from a precursor solution, a solar cell performance of 2.4% was measured. However, the use of quite larger semi-spherical nanoparticles of (CH3NH3)PbI3, of 2–3 nm, led to a superior performance of 6.54% (Fig. 10a–e). The solar cell efficiency has been further optimized by the incorporation of different, than the nanospheres, morphologies. It is shown that the nanosheet morphology led to an enhanced performance of 10%.

The use of all-inorganic metal halide nanostructures in photovoltaics has also been recently demonstrated. For example, CsPbBr3 nanostructures are a potential candidate for stable solar cells, although the solar cell efficiency is limited by their relatively large band gap. a-CsPbI3 nanocubes of 9 nm edge length (Fig. 10f) have also been used and the high efficiency of the resulting solar cells (10.77%) was attributed to the stable cubic phase (and not to orthorhombic) (Fig. 10g and h). It is well reported that the CsPbI3 chemical phase which exhibits the smallest band gap is not structurally stable in the bulk form. Direct deposition of the CsPbI3 nanocubes by spin casting, followed by stabilization of the perovskite structure via post-deposition chemical treatment or annealing contributed positively to the high quality of the active layer.
In another approach, inks of CsPbBr3 nanostructures of 15–20 nm (Fig. 10k), synthesized with a fast room temperature synthesis using short, low-boiling-point, ligands and environmentally friendly solvents, have been utilized in solar cells. Requiring no lengthy post-synthesis treatments, the inks are directly used to fabricate films of high optoelectronic quality. An active layer of 550 nm prepared by nine sequential depositions exhibited a PCE of 5.4% and a Voc = 1.5 V, which is among the highest reported for perovskite halides (Fig. 10l–n). Another method to fabricate quite compact films of irregular-shaped CsPbBr3 nanostructures, proposed by Kamat's group, is through a layer-by-layer deposition process followed by thermal annealing. To test the light-harvesting applications of this deposition method, devices with a planar architecture using a 30 nm thick TiO2 compact layer have been fabricated. The benchmark materials of spiro-OMeTAD and gold were used to complete the solar cell assembly. The thickness of the film can be varied through the deposition cycles. Solar cells with CsPbBr3 layers of 6 and 24 deposition cycles were fabricated and the average PCE was improved from 1.35% to 2.25% and from 1.15% to 2.13% for the forward and reverse scan directions, respectively. Device optimization with respect to both nanoparticle spin-casting concentration and overall CsPbBr3 thickness produces champion devices that reached a PCE of 5.5% with a Voc value of 1.4 V.
Finally, lead-free cesium tin halide nanorods, free of ligands and synthesized with a low cost solvothermal method free of toxic compounds, have been introduced into the active layer of perovskite solar cells. The efficiency of the respective devices with different halides can range from 9.66 to 12.96% and the best solar cell performance measured was in the case of the device using CsSnI3 perovskite nanorods. The photovoltaic parameters recorded for such a device were short-circuit current density (Jsc) = 23.21 mA cm−2, open-circuit voltage (Voc) = 0.86 V, fill factor (FF) = 0.65, and a PCE of 12.96%, respectively. These nanorods exhibit colloidal stability in air for more than 2 months and a decomposition temperature that was significantly higher than that of MAPbI3. The encapsulated cells were also more stable in the case of CsSnI3 compared to the hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite.

To improve the device power conversion efficiency and the stability of quantum dot sensitized solar cells, surface passivation of the quantum dots with hybrid inorganic–organic metal halide perovskite materials is performed. Films of core–shell nanostructures with PbS as the core and a hybrid perovskite MAPbI3 as the shell and diameter around 5 nm (Fig. 11a), have been incorporated, by Sargent's group, into a photovoltaic device with a graded band structure, leading to a PCE of 8.95% (Fig. 11b and c). It is found that a controlled electron removal (p-doping) from the 1,2-ethanedithol (EDT)-treated colloidal quantum hole transport layer (HTL) should effectively deepen its fermi energy, EF (Fig. 11d and e). This could be achieved via remote doping with small redox-active molecules. Doping would in turn result in a favorable band bending at the hole-accepting interface which improves charge extraction and therefore the solar cell performance (Fig. 11e). The optimally, p-doped, HTL led to a FF enhancement, compared to the undoped control solar cells, which ultimately led to a ca. 10% increase in the respective PCE.

The solar light conversion can be further improved when an all-inorganic metal halide such as CsPbI3 is used for the coverage of the colloidal quantum dots. The respective solar cell exhibited a high PCE of 10.5% under AM 1.5 G-100 mW cm−2 illumination. Furthermore, it exhibited high photostability and high-level performance during the illumination aging test. This high photovoltaic performance has been attributed to the increased depletion width, lower trap density, reduced recombination, and enhanced built-in electric field within the solar cell.
In a different approach, all-inorganic metal halide perovskite spherical nanostructures of about 15 nm have been utilized as a back layer between the quantum dot PbSe absorber layer and the metal contact (Fig. 11f). The corresponding solar cell efficiency reached a value of 7.2% (Fig. 11g). The CsPbBr3 nanostructures have been chosen for their good air-stability and high photoluminescence quantum yield and their ability to be synthesized independently. Furthermore, the PbSe quantum dot layer features, such as the lattice constant and polarity, are unlikely to affect the quality of the perovskite material. Furthermore, their relatively large Eg (2.4 to 2.7 eV) compared to that of PbSe quantum dot solar cells (1.2 to 1.5 eV) was an important parameter for employing them as carrier blocking layers for the device. The PbSe quantum dot solar cell with this configuration showed a PCE of 7.2%, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 482 mV, a current density (Jsc) of 23.9 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 62.4% under one-sun conditions (Fig. 11g and h). This was the first report on PbSe quantum dot solar cells with PCE over 7% and FF over 60%. The improvement can be attributed to either the reduced number of defect trapping states or secondary electron blocking effects and hence suppression in surface recombination at the PbSe/Au contact interface.

Owing to their fine size and visible-transparency, quite spherical Zn2SnO4 nanoparticles of 8 nm in diameter enabled the fabrication of transparent photoelectrodes for efficient dye-sensitized solar cells. The energy conversion of such solar cell devices is 4.7%, which is mainly due to an improvement of light harvesting properties. The performance was further improved to 5.2% upon using BaSnO3 perovskite nanoparticles.


A highly crystalline Zn2SnO4 nanoparticle film obtained via spin coating of sol–gel synthesized nanoparticles has been used as an efficient electron transporting layer to realize highly efficient flexible perovskite solar cells. It is shown that the introduction of such a film significantly improves the transmittance of a flexible polyethylene naphthalate/indium-doped tin oxide (PEN/ITO)-coated substrate from ∼75 to ∼90% over the entire range of wavelengths. The corresponding solar cell exhibited a steady-state PCE of 14.85% under AM 1.5 G-100 mW cm−2 illumination. This was due to an anti-reflection effect, attributable to the low refractive index of ∼1.37. The performance has been further increased to a PCE of 17.7% upon introducing hydrothermally prepared Zn2SnO4 nanoparticles. The Zn2SnO4 nanoparticles have been proven to be promising for perovskite solar cells, as they possess a high electron mobility of 10–25 cm2 V−1 s−1, a wide optical bandgap (3.8 eV), and a well-aligned conduction band edge (∼−4.1 eV) to that of CH3NH3PbI3. Furthermore, they are chemically stable in acid/base and ambient environments.

Furthermore, in the quest to find a new type of electron-transporting layer to replace mp-TiO2 and fabricate stable perovskite solar cells, compact (La)-doped BaSnO3 perovskite oxide films have been fabricated. These La-doped perovskite oxide films have been formed by spin-coating of a crystalline superoxide-molecular cluster colloidal solution containing well-dispersed nanoparticles. The important attribute of this process is that the superoxide colloidal solution for preparing the perovskite oxide electrode was prepared under very mild conditions (below 300 °C). The best-performing perovskite solar cell using this electrode and methylammonium lead iodide as a light harvester exhibited a steady-state PCE of 21.2% and a very high photostability, below a 10% change of the PCE after 1000 hours of full-sun illumination.

The increasing demand for renewable energy resources urgently requires the development of high performance and low cost energy storage devices. Batteries and supercapacitors are among such technologies in which perovskites have been effectively utilized. Owing to their unique tunability in composition, shape and functionalities, perovskite oxides can be used as efficient and stable oxygen catalysts in metal–air batteries or as electrode materials in supercapacitors. Among the materials used for fabricating efficient energy storage devices, perovskite materials, with rational nanostructure designs, have contributed to major performance improvements over the last few years. This section reviews the recent progress in the application of perovskite nanostructures in energy storage systems and highlights the fundamental understanding of such nanomaterial design, as well as the correlation between the microscopic material properties and the macroscopic device performance.


The prohibitive cost and limited availability of noble metals as catalysts in the oxygen reduction and evolution reactions (ORR/OER), in metal–air batteries, increase the cost towards the commercialization of such systems. In the last few years, perovskite oxides have been explored as efficient and stable catalysts in oxygen-reduction electrodes for metal–air batteries. Such oxides have been found to display a significant ORR activity and can replace the metal platinum. The ORR activity of oxide catalysts primarily correlates with σ*-orbital occupation and the extent of B-site transition-metal–oxygen covalency, which serves as a secondary activity descriptor. Perovskite oxides such as LaMnO3+δ and LaNiO3 are characterized by an intrinsic ORR activity which is comparable to that of the state-of-the-art Ct/C. Besides this, electrochemical results showed that nanosized perovskites exhibited a higher surface area and displayed superior catalytic activity for oxygen reduction, as well as a higher discharge plateau and specific capacity than their bulk counterparts. Consequently, nanosized perovskites are promising materials for the commercialized production of rechargeable batteries employing bifunctional electrocatalysts with a large specific area and an adequate number of effective active sites for high efficiency of ORR/OER activity and long-term stability. Furthermore, perovskite oxides have been also used in lithium sulfur (Li–S) batteries, which have been considered as next-generation rechargeable cells due to the low cost of the starting materials, Li and S. These cells already showed up to 40% higher energy densities than the best lithium ion cells today.

The perovskite nanostructures used in metal–air batteries are summarized in Table 4. The first perovskite nanocatalyst was reported in 2014, exhibiting less than 50 battery cycles, while in 2016 an enhanced cycling ability up to 155 cycles was reported for LaNiO3 nanoparticles. Various morphologies of a single perovskite oxide phase ranging from spherical or randomly shaped nanoparticles to nanocubes and elongated morphologies have been used as catalysts for such applications. Synergetic effects and their impact on the catalytic activity have been evaluated by fabricating complex structures, including core–shell morphologies and decorated structures with a second material (metal, carbon or oxides) or composites. Various factors, such as the structural quality, doping in the A and/or B site of the perovskite structure, morphology and synergetic effects, were found to strongly affect the catalytic properties of perovskite oxides.
Morphology
Chemical phase of the perovskite
Synthesis of the perovskite
Type of battery
Important characteristics of each storage device
Aggregated nanoparticles
La0.6Sr0.4CoO3 (80 nm)
Solution combustion method
Li–air
- Cycle life of 7 cycles
- Impedance of the battery increased as the cycle number increased
Quite spherical nanoparticles
Ba0.9Co0.5Fe0.4Nb0.1O3−δ (∼200 nm)
Solid-state reaction
Li–air
- Maximum current density close to that of Pt/C
- Lower inset potential for the OER and bigger anodic current compared to C and Pt/C electrodes
- Considerable catalytic activity for the ORR
- Better catalytic activity for the OER than that of a commercial Pt/C catalyst
Honeycomb-like nanoparticles
LaNi1−xMgxO3 (∼100 nm)
Sol–gel
Li–air
- ORR and OER current densities and battery performance enhanced in the order of LaNiO3 < LaNi0.92Mg0.08O3 < LaNi0.85Mg0.15O3
Randomly shaped nanoparticles
LaNixCo1−xO3−δ (100–200 nm)
Solution combustion method
Li–air
- Cycle life of 49 cycles
- Reduced polarization and improved discharge capacity of the oxygen electrode containing a carbon-supported perovskite oxide catalyst compared with that without the catalyst
- LaNi0.25Co0.75O3−δ catalyst showed the best catalytic activity for the OER
Spherical nanoparticles
BaTiO3−x (100 nm)
Sol–gel
Li–air
- OER activity exceeds that of the IrO2 catalyst at relatively low potentials
- High catalytic efficiency due to oxygen vacancies in the h-BaTiO3 crystal structure
Porous spherical nanoparticles
LaNiO3 (∼100 nm)
Reverse homogeneous precipitation method
Li–air
- Much enhanced cycling ability (>155 cycles)
- High charge–discharge efficiency
- Superior electrocatalytic activity
Spherical NPs
La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3 (60 nm)
Sol–gel method
Li–air
- Cycle life of 20 cycles
- Reduction of the overpotential
Irregular-shaped nanoparticles
La0.6Sr0.4CoO3−δ (from 250 nm to 11–13 nm after ball-milling)
Pechini method
Li–air
- Cycle life of 30 cycles
- Ball-milled nanoparticles exhibited better electrocatalytic activity than non-ball milled ones
Spherical nanoparticles
La0.65X0.35MnO3 (X = Pb, Ba, Sr) (∼200 nm)
Sol–gel
Li–air
- Coulombic efficiencies ranging from 95 to 97% with superior performance of the La0.65Pb0.35MnO3 cells compared to that of La0.65Ba0.35MnO3 and La0.65Sr0.35MnO3
- The overpotential value was decreased by approximately 300 mV by the use of La0.65Sr0.35MnO3 as a catalyst, whereas no change in the overpotential value was observed by the use of La0.65Ba0.35MnO3 and La0.65Pb0.35MnO3 as a promoter
- La0.65Pb0.35MnO3 actually improved both the cell discharge capacity and the cycling ability as a promoter
Loose nanoparticles
La0.6Sr0.4Co1−xMnxO3 (100–120 nm)
Solution combustion method
Li–air
- Performance is enhanced in the following order: Super-p < La0.6Sr0.4CoO3< La0.6Sr0.4Co0.95Mn0.05O3 < La0.6Sr0.4Co0.9Mn0.1O3
- Good stability of the La0.6Sr0.4Co0.9Mn0.1O3/Super P electrode
Quite-spherical nanoparticles
La0.6Sr0.4Co1−xNixO3 (100–120 nm)
Solution combustion method
Li–air
- Cycle life of 17 cycles
- Best catalytic activity for the La0.6Sr0.4Co0.9Ni0.1O3
- Enhanced performances for the La0.6Sr0.4Co0.95Ni0.05O3 and La0.6Sr0.4Co0.9Ni0.1O3 catalysts compared to that of the La0.6Sr0.4CoO3 catalyst
- Initial discharge specific capacity increase in the following order: Super-p < La0.6Sr0.4CoO3 < La0.6Sr0.4Co0.95Ni0.05O3 < La0.6Sr0.4Co0.9Ni0.1O3
Irregular-shaped nanoparticles
La0.8Sr0.2Mn1−xNixO3 (14–30 nm)
Sol–gel
Li–air
- Improvement in the intrinsically poor OER catalytic performance of La0.8Sr0.2MnO3 with chemical doping of Ni (more oxygen vacancies)
- Lower total overpotential of La0.8Sr0.2Mn0.6Ni0.4O3 than that of La0.8Sr0.2MnO3, and the value is even comparable to that of commercial Pt/C
- Optimized electrochemical performance (in terms of specific capacity and cycle life) for the electrodes with La0.8Sr0.2Mn0.6Ni0.4O3
- Highest Ni content (La0.8Sr0.2Mn0.6Ni0.4O3) enabled a practical rechargeable Li–air battery with a smaller voltage gap and longer lifespan
Nanoparticles decorated with nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes
La0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3
Calcination and chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
Li–air
- Synergetic effect: enhancement of the ORR and improvement of the OER
- Comparable performances to Pt/C and Ir/C
- Superior electrochemical durability
- Stable discharge and charge voltages at various applied current densities
Porous nanocubes
LaNiO3 (250 nm)
Modified hydrothermal process
Li–air
- Excellent charging performance with a significantly reduced overpotential
- Nanocube catalyst significantly reduces the overpotential compared to LaNiO3 NPs and commercial Vulcan XC-72 carbon (VX-72) electrodes
Porous nanotubes
La0.75Sr0.25MnO3
Electrospinning + heating method
Li–air
- High specific capacity
- Superior rate capability
- Good cycle stability
Mesoporous/microporous nanotubes
La0.5Sr0.5CoO3−x
Electrospinning + post annealing
Li–air
- Cycle life of 50 cycles
- High specific discharge capacity (5799 mA h cm−2 at 0.1 mA cm−2)
- Good rate capacity
- Long cycle stability
Porous nanotubes
La0.5Sr0.5CoO2.91
Electrospinning + post annealing
Li–air
- High cyclability (85 cycles)
Microporous nanorods
La0.8Sr0.2MnO3
Soft template method
Li–air
- High first discharge specific capacity
- Low overpotential
- Good rate capability
- Cycle stability
Core@shell nanorods
NiCo2O4@La0.8Sr0.2MnO3
Soft template method (core) + infiltration method (shell)
Li–air
- Good rate capability
- Excellent cycle stability
- Avoidance of structure damage of catalysts coming from gas evolution
Nanorods/graphene composite decorated with Ag nanoparticles
LaMnO3
Hydrothermal reaction + heat treatment (silver mirror reaction for the Ag NPs)
Zn–air
- Charged and discharged reversibly
- Stable cycle performance
- High performance
- Excellent cycle durability compared with the commercial Pt/C catalyst in zinc–air batteries operated in an ambient air environment
Mesoporous nanofibers
PrBa0.5Sr0.5Co2−xFexO5+δ
Electrospinning
Zn–air
- High performance of the ORR and OER
- High stability
Nanofibers functionalized with RuO2 nanoparticles and non-oxidized graphene nanoflakes
LaMnO3
Electrospinning (polyol method for Ru NPs and eutectic-based method for graphene)
Li–air
- Excellent electrochemical performance
- Superior cyclability for over 320 cycles
Synergetic effects: the RuO2 nanoparticles help to improve the OER activity and the electrical conductivity on the surface of the nanofibers
The graphene helps provide a fast-electronic pathway as well as improved ORR kinetics
Porous nanofibers loaded with RuO2 nanosheets
La0.6Sr0.4Co0.8 Mn0.2O3
Electrospinning (wet impregnation for the loading of the RuO2 nanosheets)
Li–air
- High specific discharge capacity
- Improved cyclability and rate capability – low voltage gap

Besides the electrocatalytic activity related to the intrinsic compositional and the shape features, it is reported that the nature of crystal defects plays an important role in the final catalytic efficiency. For instance, ball-milled La0.6Sr0.4CoO3−δ perovskite nanoparticles exhibited better electrocatalytic activities in the ORR and OER than non-ball milled ones. The superior catalytic activity of the ball-milled particles has been attributed to the structural change and the crystal defects formed due to the synthesis process.


The effect of the A-sites' substitution on the catalytic performance has been investigated in La-based perovskite oxide nanocatalysts. In this direction, La0.65X0.35MnO3 perovskite oxides (X = Pb, Ba, Sr), free of ligands, prepared with the sol–gel method, were utilized as cathode additive materials in Li–air batteries. These materials have been compared in terms of discharge capacity, cycle lifetime and stability. Capacity values of 7211 mA h g−1, 6205 mA h g−1, 6760 mA h g−1 and 5925 mA h g−1 have been measured for La0.65Pb0.35MnO3, La0.65Ba0.35MnO3, La0.65Sr0.35MnO3, respectively, while the number of cycles (operating times) for each case at 0.1 mA cm−2 were 35 (650 h), 18 (300 h) and 20 (76 h) respectively. The cells with La0.65Pb0.35MnO3 showed coulombic efficiencies ranging from 95 to 97% with superior performance compared to La0.65Ba0.35MnO3 and La0.65Sr0.35MnO3 with a coulombic efficiency of about 87%. The overpotential value was decreased by approximately 300 mV upon using La0.65Sr0.35MnO3 as a catalyst, whereas no change in the overpotential value was observed upon using La0.65Ba0.35MnO3 and La0.65Pb0.35MnO3 as promoters. These results indicated that there is no straightforward trend observed due to the A-site substitution.

The effect of the doping on the B-site of perovskite oxides is found to be more systematic. It is shown that the B-substitution is mainly correlated with the ORR activity. In terms of the ORR current densities, it is demonstrated that in La-based perovskite oxides (LaMO3, M = Ni, Co, Fe, Mn and Cr), the performance is enhanced in the order of LaCrO3, LaFeO3, LaNiO3, LaMnO3, and LaCoO3. In particular, the LaNi0.92Mg0.08O3 and LaNi0.85Mg0.15O3 cathode catalysts exhibit improved performances compared to the LaNiO3 one. A similar trend is also found for Mn-doped perovskite oxides. Beside this, Ni-doping in manganite perovskite oxides (La0.8Sr0.2Mn1−xNixO3) introduces more oxygen vacancies than those in undoped La0.8Sr0.2MnO3, as well as a certain amount of Ni3+ on their surface, leading to higher bifunctional catalytic activities. Furthermore, La0.8Sr0.2Mn0.6Ni0.4O3 exhibited a lower total overpotential between the oxygen evolution reaction and the oxygen reduction reaction than that of undoped La0.8Sr0.2MnO3, and the value is even comparable to that of commercial Pt/C.

The morphology and the surface porosity can also affect the electrocatalytic activities of perovskite oxides due to (a) the formation of direct current pathways that facilitate electron transport, contrary to their nonporous bulk counterpart, (b) short O22−/Li+ diffusion lengths that can improve ion transfer rates to the oxygen electrode, (c) a more efficient electrolyte–electrode contact, (d) more active sites for the ORR/OER during Li–O2 batteries operation, and (e) more space to store discharged products.

In particular, porous nanocube catalysts based on La0.75Sr0.25MnO3 showed an excellent charging performance with a significantly reduced overpotential in Li–air batteries. In the charge process, the catalyst significantly reduced the overpotential up to ∼260 mV and ∼350 mV compared with LaNiO3 particles and commercial Vulcan XC-72 carbon (VX-72) electrodes (at a current density of 0.08 mA cm−2). The devices also displayed an enhanced capacity of 3407 mA h g−1 and a good cycle stability of 75 cycles without any obvious capacity decay at a 500 mA h g−1 capacity limitation.
The application of high-aspect ratio perovskite porous nanostructures as electrocatalysts in metal–air batteries has been the subject of intensive research due to their unique advantages such as a large specific surface area, fast electron mobility and controlled porous size. The first morphology reported in 2013 was that of nanotubes of La0.75Sr0.25MnO3 of 100 nm diameter and a thickness of 15 nm, synthesized by combining the electrospinning technique with a heating process, showing an excellent intrinsic catalytic activity for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). Two years later, nanorods of La0.8Sr0.2MnO3 prepared via a soft-template method were reported to be beneficial to the ORR and OER in discharge and charge processes respectively. Lithium–air batteries based on these nanostructures exhibited enhanced electrochemical performances, including high first discharge specific capacity, low overpotential, good rate capability, and cycle stability. A NiCo2O4 layer has been used to cover the La0.8Sr0.2MnO3 nanorods to protect them from structure damage due to gas evolution. Such a core–shell structure has been designed so that the ORR takes place mainly at the core, while the OER at the nanoscale shell and their synergetic effect lead to the enhanced catalytic performance observed.
In another direction, bifunctional mesoporous PrBa0.5Sr0.5Co2−xFexO5+δ nanofibers prepared via electrospinning have been studied as bifunctional electrocatalysts in Zn–air batteries (Fig. 12). The well-controlled B-site metal ratio and large surface area (∼20 m2 g−1) of mesoporous nanofibers resulted in high performance for the ORR/OER and battery stability. This perovskite nanostructure improved the bifunctionality for the ORR/OER, especially the OER performance by about 9 times that of the state-of-the-art precious metal oxide, IrO2, at an overpotential of 0.3 V. Furthermore, notable charge–discharge stability even at a high current density (10 mA cm−2) was also demonstrated. In more detail, the nanofibers can serve as an excellent electrocatalyst since many active sites can be provided (Fig. 12a inset). The OER performance of the nanofibers has been compared to that of bulk PrBa0.5Sr0.5Co2−xFexO5+δ (PBSCF-P), IrO2 and Ba0.5Sr0.5Co2−xFexO5+δ (BSCF, a competitive candidate electrocatalyst) (Fig. 12a). As shown in Fig. 12b, the nanofibers exhibited a small onset potential of 1.52 V, which was much smaller than that of the state-of-art IrO2 (1.56 V). In addition, the Tafel slope of the perovskite nanofibers (81 mV dec−1) was significantly lower than those of PBSCF-P (121 mV dec−1), IrO2 (115 mV dec−1), and BSCF (196 mV dec−1). Because of the low Tafel slope, the OER current of PBSCF-NF increases rapidly with the increase of overvoltage, which makes the nanofibers more competitive in practical applications. At a current density of 10 mA cm− 2, PBSCF-NF showed a lower overpotential (0.3 V) compared to PBSCF-P, IrO2, and BSCF (0.42 V, 0.45 and 0.54 V) as shown in Fig. 12c. The superior OER electrocatalytic activity has been indicated by the current density (Fig. 12d). This superior performance can be explained by the presence of faster mass transport active sites provided by the mesoporous morphology and the oxygen deficiency on the oxide surface. A Zn–air battery was fabricated by using a gas diffusion layer loaded with catalysts for the cathode, a Zn plate anode, and 6 M KOH electrolyte (Fig. 12e). Current density–voltage curves are illustrated in Fig. 12e. Even though the PBSCF-NF cathode showed notably stable discharge voltage during a whole cycling test (150 cycles), the discharge voltage of the Pt/C + IrO2 composite cathode rapidly decreased during the long-term cycling (Fig. 12g and h).

Complex nanostructures incorporating two or more materials have recently been proposed to improve the catalytic activity of single-phase perovskite oxides through synergetic functionalities. Among the most important ones are La0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3 nanoparticles decorated with nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes, LaMnO3 nanorods/graphene composites decorated with Ag nanoparticles, LaMnO3 nanofibers functionalized with RuO2 nanoparticles and non-oxidized graphene nanoflakes, and La0.6Sr0.4Co0.8Mn0.2O3 porous nanofibers loaded with RuO2 nanosheets. According to half-cell testing, the incorporation of nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes into perovskite oxide nanoparticles not only dramatically enhanced the ORR performance but also played a key role in improving the OER activity through a synergistic effect, giving comparable performances to Pt/C and Ir/C. The unique composite morphology of Ag/perovskite nanorods/r-GO displayed not only enhanced electron transport properties, by increasing conductivity, but also facilitated the diffusion of electrolytes and oxygen in Zn–air batteries. In another example, the synergistic coupling of RuO2 nanoparticles with perovskite oxide nanofibers led to the improvement of the OER activity and the electrical conductivity on the nanofiber surface, while the use of graphene nanoflakes provided a fast electronic pathway as well as improved ORR kinetics. The enhanced ORR/OER performances of the perovskite oxide nanorods loaded with the RuO2 nanosheets have been attributed to the high catalytic activity of RuO2 nanosheets toward the OER.


Carbon electrochemical double layer supercapacitors and analogous metal-based pseudocapacitors play an intermediate role between traditional electrostatic capacitors and batteries, in terms of energy density and power density. A pseudocapacitive electrode material is based on the redox reaction that occurs on the surface or near the surface of the electrode active material producing pseudocapacitance with a higher specific capacitance and energy density. Among various pseudocapacitance materials, perovskite oxides are promising ones due to their abundant reversible redox reactions and high intrinsic capacity as well as their good thermal stability and low cost. When the dimensions of the crystals are reduced to be in the nanoscale range the pseudocapacitive response is markedly increased. In this section, we highlight the effect of the nanostructure on the properties of supercapacitors including specific capacitance, rate capability and cycle stability (Table 5).

Morphology
Chemical phase of the perovskite
Synthesis of the perovskite
Important characteristics for each case
Irregular-shaped nanoparticles
LaMnO3 (20–50 nm)
Reverse-phase hydrolysis approach
- At low scan rates, the specific capacitances of the two materials approach each other
- High specific capacitances of 586.7 F g−1 and 609.8 F g−1 for the oxygen excess and oxygen-deficient samples
- Cycle life of 500 cycles
Quite spherical nanoparticles
(La0.75Sr0.25)0.95MnO3−δ (500 nm)
Commercial
- Highest specific capacitance of the carbon paper–perovskite electrode is 108 F g−1, while the net capacitance coming from the perovskite is 56 F g−1
- Good cycling stability at a constant current of 5 mA for 1000 cycles
Nanofibers
LaxSr1−xCoO3−δ (0.3 < x < 1) (length: several μm)
Electrospinning method
- Maximum specific capacitance value of 747.75 F g−1 at a current density of 2 A g−1 generating free hydroxyl
- Excellent electrochemical performance with a high energy density of 34.8 W h kg−1 at a low power density of 400 W kg−1
- Superior cycling stability
Nanowires
Y2NiMnO6
Hydrothermal method
- Specific capacitance of 17.4 F g−1, energy density of 0.197 W h kg−1, power density of 7.81 W kg−1 and 85% retention efficiency after 1800 cycles
Hollow nanoparticles
LaNiO3 (600 nm)
Solvothermal method
-High specific capacitance of 422 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 with good cycling stability
Nanosheets
LaNiO3 (thickness: 50 nm)
Sol–gel + heating treatment
- High specific capacitance (501.9 F g−1 at a current density of 1.0 A g−1)
- Good rate capability
- Excellent cycle stability
-When coupled with a graphene electrode, the facile LNO//graphene asymmetric supercapacitor device delivers a high energy density of 65.84 W h kg−1 at a power density of 1.8 kW kg−1, as well as an outstanding cycling stability (92.4% retention after 10000 cycles)
The first nanostructure of perovskite oxides reported for use as a pseudocapacitive electrode material was irregular-shaped nanoparticles of LaMnO3−δ (where δ = 0.09 ± 0.02), crystalline in the cubic phase and synthesized by a reverse-phase hydrolysis reaction (Fig. 13a and b). Thin films of LaMnO3±δ with a loading of 30 wt% on mesoporous carbon showed nearly rectangular current–voltage curves for LaMnO3.09 and reduced r-LaMnO2.91, respectively, characteristic of an ideal pseudocapacitive response with redox peaks appearing near E1/2 = 0.3 V for both materials (Fig. 13c and d). As can be seen from the specific capacitance versus scan rate presented in Fig. 13e, the capacitive envelope of the cyclic voltammograms and the specific capacitance increases with an increase in oxygen vacancies in LaMnO3. However, at sufficiently low scan rates, the specific capacitances of the two materials approach each other, with high specific capacitances of 586.7 F g−1 and 609.8 F g−1 for the oxygen-excess and oxygen-deficient samples, respectively. Interestingly, the increase in capacitance for the oxygen-deficient sample of ∼4% is similar to the 6% difference in oxygen content between the two materials. Considering the low surface area of the material, the high specific capacitances and remarkable response of the samples to increased oxygen vacancies as charge storage sites indicate that pseudocapacitive charge storage in LaMnO3±δ extends into the bulk structure through a mechanism of oxygen (anion) intercalation, in contrast to traditional metal oxide pseudocapacitors based on the protonation and deprotonation of the surface oxygen or intercalation of alkali cations.
A reduced specific capacitance has been found for a carbon paper–perovskite electrode based on commercial nanoparticles of (La0.75Sr0.25)0.95MnO3−δ of around 500 nm in size. The highest specific capacitance of the carbon paper–perovskite electrode was measured to be 108 F g−1, while the net capacitance attributed to the perovskite was 56 F g−1 at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1. It is shown that the current increased upon increasing the scan rate, while the shape of the CV curve deviated from the rectangular shape of an ideal capacitor, while the specific capacitance decreased. The perovskite powders used in this work exhibited serious aggregation effects, which resulted in a reduced specific surface area. Furthermore, the low porosity of the perovskite electrode also gives rise to a reduction of the effective contact area when the nanoparticles are in contact with an electrolyte. This, in turn, is unfavorable for ion adsorption and diffusion at the electrode/electrolyte interface.
To improve supercapacitance properties, by obtaining an enhanced surface area and better change transportation, high aspect ratio perovskite nanostructures have been used. An enhanced specific capacitance has been obtained when LaxSr1−xCoO3−δ nanofibers of micrometer length have been utilized. The sample with x = 0.7 showed a longer charging time and also displayed the highest average capacitance. In particular, the specific capacitance measured for these nanofibers at a current density of 2 A g−1 was 747.75 F g−1. The specific capacitance increases with the addition of Sr to LaxSr1−xCoO3−δ in a certain content range (0.7 < x < 1) and decreases gradually when x < 0.7. This change of the specific capacitance can be explained by the increase of oxygen vacancies and the appearance of lattice distortion. Furthermore, it is shown that Y2NiMnO6 in the form of nanowires exhibits higher specific capacitance, power density, and energy density compared to its bulk counterpart.
Recently, LaNiO3 nanostructures in the form of hollow nanoparticles and nanosheets have shown remarkable electrochemical performance. The hollow structure significantly improves the ionic and electronic transport leading to an enhanced electrochemical performance of 422 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1. At the same time, the uniform porous sheet-like morphology of 50 nm thickness exhibited an electrochemical performance of 501.9 F g−1. The spherical nanoparticles (Fig. 14a–f) have been obtained by a solvothermal method and become hollow via a Kirkendall effect (Fig. 14g), while the nanosheets have been fabricated by a sol–gel method. In the case of the LaNiO3 nanoparticles, it is interesting to see the cyclic voltammetry curves for nanoparticle electrodes annealed at different times (Fig. 14h). The surface roughness becomes more pronounced upon increasing the annealing time from 2 to 6 h (Fig. 14b–d). As a result, the nanoparticles annealed for 2 h exhibited a porous surface, while the nanoparticles annealed for 6 h displayed a hollow structure. When the annealing was prolonged to 10 h, the hollow structures tended to deteriorate and led to the collapse of the hollow particles. Distinct redox peaks are observed for all the samples during the anodic and cathodic sweeps, which are characteristic of electrochemical supercapacitors delivering reversible capacitance based on surface reactions (Fig. 14h). The area enclosed under the CV curve for 6 h annealed LaNiO3 is much larger, indicating that the hollow spherical LaNiO3 has the highest specific capacitance (Fig. 14i). The durations for charging and discharging were almost identical for all the samples, indicating the excellent reversibility of redox reactions (Fig. 14j). The specific capacitances as a function of current density (Fig. 14l) revealed that the LaNiO3 annealed for 6 h with a hollow spherical structure exhibited the highest specific capacitance of 422 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1; the corresponding stability was evaluated by repeated charging and discharging (Fig. 14m). It is also observed that the hollow spherical LaNiO3 exhibited the lowest internal resistance and charge transfer resistance (Fig. 14n). Following cycling, it was observed that the morphology of the electrode remains unaffected (Fig. 14o).

Recent developments in the growth of perovskite nanostructures and their application in photovoltaics and energy storage devices have been reviewed. A variety of synthesis procedures for perovskite nanostructures of different chemical nature and morphologies have been summarized and compared. These approaches have been effectively modified in order to develop nanostructures of high crystallinity quality and finely tuned size, shape, and composition. The nanostructure intrinsic properties and structural and morphological flexibility make such low-dimensional perovskites promising materials for the fabrication of new devices and the elucidation of new physical phenomena. It is extensively demonstrated that the perovskite formation processes play a paramount role in determining the final device performance.

Nanostructured semiconductor materials display important features, such as a large surface area, efficient carrier transport, high absorption coefficient, long-term stability, and tunable bandgap, which act independently or synergically for the enhancement of photovoltaic performance. Besides this, the recombination rate has been found to be lower in nanostructured perovskites than their thin-film counterpart, leading to an increased diffusion length. As a consequence, the morphology and the crystallinity of perovskite nanostructures have a direct impact on the macroscopic photovoltaic power conversion efficiency. High-aspect ratio morphologies behave as direct conduction paths for charge carriers and owing to their superior charge transport rate and reduced carrier recombination probability provide various benefits in photovoltaic applications. The use of a capping ligand during crystal growth can tailor the nanoparticle morphology but also affects their assembly during a film formation. The performance improvement for the solar cells is attributed primarily to the morphology/properties of the individual nanostructures and also to their alignment during the film formation. Indeed, compact and smooth films are necessary to realize high-efficiency devices, considering that insufficient film coverage on the substrate gives rise to pronounced electron–hole recombination. Many assembly methods have been proposed to reduce the pinholes and the cracks towards the fabrication of high-performance solar cells but many parameters remain unexplored.
Unfortunately, reports on environmentally friendly nanostructures, that are free of lead compounds, are limited. Non-toxic Sn-based perovskite nanostructures have shown promising properties and there are theoretical predictions for enhanced photovoltaic performance. Sn-based perovskite solar cells experience more serious instabilities due to the naturally favorable oxidation of Sn(II), which inevitably requires device encapsulation. With regard to the application of perovskite nanostructures in photovoltaics, the current research effort needs to be focused on (i) the understanding of the correlation between the structure and/or the morphology and the photovoltaic performance, (ii) the development of new strategies for fabricating compact and defect-free layers, (iii) the improvement of the stability of nanostructures and respective devices, and (iv) the discovery of new efficient and environmentally friendly perovskite nanostructures.
The utilization of perovskite nanostructures in air–Li batteries has also been reviewed in this article. The different factors affecting the catalytic properties, including the structural quality, doping in the A and/or the B site of the perovskite oxide structure, the nanostructure morphology or the introduction of synergetic effects, are analyzed and discussed. For the commercialized production of perovskite oxide-based rechargeable batteries, it is extremely important to develop bifunctional electrocatalysts with a large specific area and enough effective active sites for highly efficient ORR/OER processes and long-term stability. Research issues that have to be addressed in the future are (i) the understanding of the correlation between the structure/morphology and the catalytic properties, (ii) the understanding of electrochemistry mechanisms on the surface of the perovskite nanostructures in Li–air batteries, (iii) the development of nanostructures with a large specific area (i.e., high-aspect ratio and porous nanostructures), (iv) the fabrication of stable nanostructured morphologies with long-term mechanical strength, an essential characteristic for long cycle life, (v) the fabrication of complex structures or composites and (vi) the understanding of the effect of synergy on the catalytic properties.
Finally, the application of perovskite oxide nanostructures as electrode materials in supercapacitors has been discussed. The effect of the nanostructural features on the supercapacitor properties, including the specific capacitance, rate capability and the cycle stability, is evaluated. Additional effort needs to be placed on (i) optimizing the interface between such nanostructures and charge collective electrodes and (ii) the reduction of the pore size to realize improved electrolyte accessibility.

There are no conflicts to declare.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta01964a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018