 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA06923E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21414-21421


Kuan
Liu
,

Shuixing
Dai
,

Fanqi
Meng
,

Jiangjian
Shi
,

Yusheng
Li
,

Jionghua
Wu
,

Qingbo
Meng
* and 

Xiaowei
Zhan
*

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, College of Engineering, Key Laboratory of Polymer Chemistry and Physics of Ministry of Education, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. E-mail: xwzhan@pku.edu.cn

CAS Key Laboratory for Renewable Energy, Beijing Key Laboratory for New Energy Materials and Devices, Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: qbmeng@iphy.ac.cn

Received
6th August 2017
, Accepted 16th September 2017
First published on 16th September 2017
Three fused-ring n-type semiconductors based on 6,6,12,12-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-indacenobis(dithieno[3,2-b;2,3-d]thiophene) end-capped with 1,1-dicyanomethylene-3-indanone substituted by different numbers of fluorine atoms (INIC series) are employed as interfacial materials to modify the surface of the perovskite film in inverted planar perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Due to fast interfacial charge extraction and efficient trap passivation, PSCs based on INIC series exhibit a maximum power conversion efficiency of 19.3% without any hysteresis, which is superior to control devices without INIC series (16.6%). Moreover, the strong water-resistance ability of fluorinated INIC significantly enhances the ambient stability of the PSCs. The effects of fluorine atom number on the device performance are discussed.

Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite materials (e.g., methylammonium lead halides CH3NH3PbX3, where X = Cl−, I−, Br−) present broad absorption from the visible to the near-infrared region, ambipolar charge transport, and long carrier diffusion length and lifetime, and can be solution processed at room temperature. The power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have rapidly increased from 3.8% to 22%, thanks to the development of different processing techniques, device architectures and novel materials.

Originated from organic solar cells, the inverted structure of planar heterojunction PSCs (p–i–n) generally consists of a poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) hole-transporting layer (HTL), perovskite active layer and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) electron-transporting layer (ETL), and can eliminate the obvious hysteresis in J–V curves under different scanning directions usually observed in most conventional device structures (n–i–p) of planar heterojunction PSCs, owing to the ultra-fast charge carrier extraction of involved organic materials. Since the first attempt by Guo et al. in 2013, the PCEs of inverted planar PSCs have also reached over 20% with a rapid speed. This type of PSC has some advantages, such as high efficiency, low-temperature processing, simple device structures, reduced hysteresis and compatibility with flexible substrates, and is promising for scale-up commercialization in the future.
The device stability of PSCs in outdoor environments is one of the key issues towards their commercial application. Optimizing the composition of perovskite (such as mixed-halide engineering and cation substitution) is an important way to solve the stability issue of perovskite thin films, while interface engineering is another simple and feasible approach since the interface can prevent moisture penetration into perovskite films. Some studies focused on the HTL/perovskite interface, replacing the widely used PEDOT:PSS with water-resistance HTLs or modifying PEDOT:PSS with water-resistance interfacial layers. Some studies dealt with the perovskite/ETL interface, inserting an additional waterproof tunneling interfacial layer or doping ETL. Some studies concerned about the ETL/electrode interface, employing a water-resistance cathode interfacial layer.
In this work, we demonstrate interface engineering for efficient and stable inverted PSCs, employing three fused-ring n-type semiconductors based on 6,6,12,12-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-indacenobis(dithieno[3,2-b;2,3-d]thiophene) end-capped with 1,1-dicyanomethylene-3-indanone units with 0 to 2 fluorine substituents, named INIC, INIC-1F and INIC-2F (Fig. 1). With increasing F atom number from 0 to 2, the LUMO levels of the INIC series down shift from −3.9 eV to −4.0 eV, while the electron mobilities increase from 6.1 × 10−5 to 1.7 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. The LUMO well aligning with the conduction band of the perovskite (Fig. 2c) and the high electron mobility of the INIC series are beneficial to the extraction of photogenerated electrons from the perovskite film and transfer to the ETL. Moreover, INIC series provide Lewis bases carbonyl (CO) and cyano (CN), which can efficiently passivate the trap state on the surface and at the grain boundaries of the perovskite thin film through the Lewis acid–base reaction with the under-coordinated Pb atoms. In addition, fluorinated IC units have excellent water-resistance ability, which is beneficial to the ambient stability of the device. Therefore, the INIC series are employed as efficient interfacial materials to modify the surface of the perovskite thin film in order to promote interfacial charge extraction, reduce charge recombination and prevent moisture penetration into the perovskite active layer. The modified devices based on INIC-2F exhibit the best performance with a maximum PCE of 19.3%, which is superior to those of the INIC-1F (18.8%) and INIC (17.4%) based devices. In contrast, the control devices without the INIC series interfacial layer only exhibit a maximum PCE of 16.6%. In addition, compared with the control devices, the stability of the modified devices with the INIC series interfacial layer in ambient atmosphere is significantly enhanced. Finally, we investigate the effects of the fluorine atom number on photovoltaic properties.

Inverted planar heterojunction PSCs with the configuration of indium tin oxide (ITO)/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx (MAPbI3−xClx)/INIC series/PCBM/PDIN/Ag are fabricated (Fig. 2a), in which the MAPbI3−xClx based perovskite thin film is deposited on the ITO/PEDOT:PSS substrate by a two-step method. The crystalline structure of the MAPbI3−xClx perovskite film on the ITO/PEDOT:PSS substrate is characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) (Fig. S1, ESI). The XRD pattern of the MAPbI3−xClx film exhibits diffraction peaks at 14.2°, 28.5°, 31.9° and 43.2°, assigned to the (110), (220), (310) and (330) planes, respectively, confirming the formation and crystalline structure of the deposited perovskite thin film. According to the cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image (Fig. 2b), almost no grain boundary is observed parallel to the substrate, suggesting single-crystalline perovskite grains through the layer thickness. This monolayer of single-crystalline perovskite grains should be an ideal structure for the p–i–n planar device, promoting fast charge transport in the vertical direction. The SEM image of the deposited perovskite thin film (Fig. S2, ESI) reveals the uniform and densely packed perovskite grains with sizes in the range of 300–600 nm.

Ultrathin INIC series interfacial layers are deposited on the top of perovskite thin films using their solution in chloroform (CF). Subsequently, an ETL of PCBM is deposited using its solution in chlorobenzene (CB). It should be noted that INIC series are almost insoluble in CB, so the spin-coating of PCBM cannot destroy INIC series interfacial layers. Although INIC series possess strong absorption in the region of 550–850 nm, the absorption spectra of INIC series modified perovskite films are almost identical to that of neat perovskite films (Fig. S3, ESI), suggesting that the interfacial layer is indeed ultrathin. An ultrathin cathode buffer layer PDIN is employed in order to efficiently overcome the energy barrier between PCBM and Ag counter electrodes.
Interfacial charge carrier characteristics are investigated by steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence (PL). The PL light excitation region is confined close to the surface of the perovskite film by choosing a short wavelength of 550 nm. Fig. S4 (ESI) shows the steady-state PL spectra of the INIC series coated perovskite thin films. The perovskite/INIC-2F thin film exhibits the lowest PL intensity, implying the fastest electron extraction speed. Fig. 3a shows the steady-state PL spectra of the neat perovskite, perovskite/INIC-2F, and perovskite/INIC-2F/PCBM thin films. The neat perovskite film on the SiO2 substrate presents the highest PL intensity with the peak at 768 nm. After modifying the surface of the perovskite with INIC-2F, a significant PL quenching of 74% is observed, indicating efficient electron extraction from the perovskite to INIC-2F. Further quenching (89%) is observed when PCBM is coated on the INIC-2F interfacial layer, demonstrating a fast electron extraction and transfer to the back contact through the ETL. On the other hand, a blue-shift of the PL peak from 778 to 774 nm is observed for the perovskite/INIC-2F and perovskite/INIC-2F/PCBM films. It's well known that the presence of trap states can cause band bending close to the surface of the perovskite film, leading to a bandgap lower than that of the bulk with a red-shifted PL peak. Filling the trap states enables the recovery of the bandgap and blue-shifts the PL peak. The PL result also confirms the efficient passivation of trap states by the INIC-2F interfacial layer.
Interfacial electron extraction is further investigated by time-resolved PL. Fig. 3b shows the time-resolved PL spectra of the neat perovskite, perovskite/INIC-2F, and perovskite/INIC-2F/PCBM thin films. The experimental data are fitted with a bi-exponential decay function, and the fitting parameters are summarized in Table S1. The neat perovskite film exhibits an average decay time of 165.26 ns. After modifying the surface of the perovskite with INIC-2F, the sample exhibits much faster PL quenching, with an average decay time of 4.94 ns, indicating efficient electron extraction from the perovskite to INIC-2F. The perovskite/INIC-2F/PCBM film exhibits even faster PL quenching with an average decay time of 2.01 ns, indicating faster electron extraction and transfer to the back contact through the PCBM ETL.
To further unravel the underlying charge recombination and transfer dynamics of the inverted planar PSCs with and without the INIC-2F interfacial layer, transient photovoltage (TPV) and transient photocurrent (TPC) measurements are employed. The TPV (Fig. 4a) and TPC (Fig. 4b) measurements are performed under dark conditions, excited by a 532 nm pulse laser with certain intensity; the experimental results are fitted by a bi-exponential decay function, and the fitting parameters are summarized in Tables S2 and S3 (ESI). The decay time (τv) of photovoltage in the INIC-2F based devices is 0.16 ms, which is longer than that of the control devices without INIC-2F (0.13 ms). The prolonged lifetime suggests less recombination in the modified devices with INIC-2F, due to the efficient trap-passivation on the surface and at the grain boundaries of the perovskite thin film. On the other hand, the INIC-2F based devices exhibit a larger photocurrent (Fig. 4b) than the control devices without INIC-2F. Furthermore, a shorter charge transfer time is obtained for the modified devices with INIC-2F (0.93 μs) compared with the control devices (1.21 μs) according to the following equation:
where
τv is the photovoltage decay time, τc is the photocurrent decay time and τj is the charge transfer time. This result is well coincident with the steady-state and time-resolved PL results.

The reduction of trap states in the perovskite thin film caused by the passivation of INIC series is quantitatively analyzed by a thermal admittance spectroscopy (TAS) method. The control device exhibits a relatively large trap density of states (tDOS) in the order of 5 × 1019 to 5 × 1020 m−3 eV−1. After modifying the perovskite surface with INIC-2F, the tDOS decreases by one order of magnitude in the energy depth of 0.40–0.52 eV, indicating efficient passivation of deep traps by the INIC-2F interfacial layer (Fig. 4c).
The photovoltaic performance of the inverted planar PSCs with and without INIC series interfacial layers is investigated in detail. We first optimize the thickness of INIC series interfacial layers. The thickness of INIC series interfacial layers is hard to measure by SEM, and is basically controlled by varying the concentration of their solution. The optimized thickness of the INIC-2F interfacial layer corresponds to the concentration of 3 mg mL−1 (Fig. S5 and Table S4, ESI). A thicker INIC-2F interfacial layer leads to a lower short-circuit current density (JSC) and lower fill factor (FF) mainly due to higher series resistance, while thinner INIC-2F also leads to lower JSC and lower FF mainly due to weaker electron-extraction and trap-passivation.
The J–V curves of the optimized devices with and without the INIC series interfacial layer are shown in Fig. 5a. The modified devices based on INIC-2F exhibit the best performance, with a maximum PCE of 19.3%, JSC of 23.1 mA cm−2, open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.01 V and FF of 82.7% (Table 1). The INIC-1F modified devices show the maximum PCE of 18.8%, with a JSC of 22.8 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.01 V and an FF of 81.5%. The INIC modified devices show the maximum PCE of 17.4%, with a JSC of 22.4 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.00 V and an FF of 77.6%. In contrast, the control devices without INIC series show relatively inferior performance: a maximum PCE of 16.6%, JSC of 21.4 mA cm−2, VOC of 1.00 V and FF of 77.3%. With the introduction of the INIC series interfacial layer, the JSC and FF increase obviously, mainly attributed to efficient electron extraction and trap passivation. Increasing the number of substituted fluorine atoms enhances the performance, mainly due to increased electron mobility.
Devices

J
SC (mA cm−2)
Calculated JSC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Average
Best
INIC-2F/PCBM
23.1
21.9
1.01
82.7
18.0
19.3
INIC-1F/PCBM
22.8
21.6
1.01
81.5
17.7
18.8
INIC/PCBM
22.4
21.0
1.00
77.6
16.2
17.4
PCBM
21.4
20.4
1.00
77.3
15.6
16.6
As shown in Fig. 5b, the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the modified devices based on the INIC series interfacial layer is higher than that of the control devices without INIC series, which is consistent with the trend of JSC. Fig. S6 (ESI) shows the steady-state JSC of the best-performing devices with and without the INIC series interfacial layer at the maximum power point. The INIC-2F based devices exhibit the highest steady-state JSC and power output, with a stabilized efficiency of 18.9%, superior to those of the INIC-1F (18.4%) and INIC (17.0%) based devices. All the devices with the INIC series interfacial layer exhibit higher stabilized efficiency than the control devices without INIC series (16.1%). This steady-state result is well coincident with the efficiency obtained from the J–V measurement. Fig. S7 (ESI) shows the hysteresis effect in J–V curves of the inverted planar PSCs with and without the INIC-2F interfacial layer. INIC-2F based devices show coincident J–V curves under forward and backward scanning, while for the control device without INIC-2F, an apparent hysteresis effect in J–V curves is observed. The trap states in the perovskite/ETL interface are one of the origins of the photocurrent hysteresis in PCBM-based PSCs. Therefore, the decrease of trap states is beneficial to the elimination of the hysteresis effect. Fig. S8 (ESI) shows the statistical PCE distribution histogram of 20 individual devices based on INIC series interfacial layers and the control devices without INIC series.
We study the ambient stability of the modified devices based on INIC series, and compare it with that of the control devices without the INIC series interfacial layer. The stability test of these unencapsulated devices (10 devices for each condition) is carried out under ambient conditions (20 ± 5 °C, 20 ± 5% relative humidity). The average PCE of the INIC-2F based devices maintains around 85% of the initial value after 65 days of storage, while the average PCE of the control devices maintains only 61% of the initial value under the same conditions (Fig. 6). The INIC-2F based devices show better ambient stability than the INIC-1F and INIC based devices (maintaining around 80% and 67% of the initial values, respectively, Fig. S9, ESI). Increasing the number of substituted fluorine atoms enhances the ambient stability of the modified devices. We measure the water contact angle of the INIC series coated perovskite and neat perovskite films. The water contact angles of the perovskite/INIC-2F, perovskite/INIC-1F, perovskite/INIC and perovskite thin films are 97.5°, 91.1°, 73.0° and 55.9°, respectively (Fig. 6 and S8, ESI). The stronger water-resistance ability of the fluorinated INIC is the main reason for the better ambient stability.

In summary, we use fused-ring interfacial materials to enhance the efficiency and ambient stability of inverted planar PSCs. The modified devices with the INIC series interfacial layer exhibit better efficiency and stability than the control devices without INIC series. The modified devices with the fluorinated INIC interfacial layer exhibit even better efficiency and stability than the modified devices with nonfluorinated INIC. The modified devices with the INIC-2F interfacial layer exhibit the highest efficiency without any hysteresis, which is mainly attributed to higher electron mobility, faster charge extraction from the perovskite, faster charge transfer to the PCBM ETL and more efficient trap passivation on the surface and at grain boundaries of the perovskite thin film. Moreover, due to stronger water resistance, the modified devices with fluorinated INIC series show enhanced stability in ambient atmosphere. Increasing the number of substituted fluorine atoms enhances electron mobility and water resistance, leading to improved device performance. This work demonstrates that fluorinated fused-ring n-type semiconductors are promising interfacial materials for high-efficiency, hysteresis-free and air-stable PSCs.


Unless stated otherwise, solvents and chemicals were obtained commercially and were used without further purification. INIC series interfacial materials were synthesized according to our previous work. PCBM was purchased from American Dye Inc. PDIN was purchased from SunaTech Inc. PbI2 was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Inc. N,N-Dimethylformamide (DMF), dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) and chlorobenzene (CB) were purchased from Alfar Aesar. Isopropanol (IPA) was purchased from J&K Scientific Ltd. Methylamine (AR, 27% in methanol) was purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co. Ltd. Methylammonium iodide (MAI) and methylammonium chloride (MACl) were synthesized according to the literature.


First of all, the ITO glass substrate (sheet resistance = 15 Ω □−1) was cleaned in an ultrasonic bath of soap water, deionized water, acetone and ethanol for 20 min each, and treated in an ultraviolet-ozone chamber for 20 min. Next, a thin layer (30 nm) of PEDOT:PSS (Baytron PVP AI 4083, Germany) was spin-coated onto the ITO glass at a speed of 4000 rpm for 30 s and annealed at 130 °C for 20 min. Then, an MAPbI3−xClx based perovskite layer (500 nm) was deposited by a sequential deposition method according to the literature. 1.25 M PbI2 was dissolved in a solvent mixture of DMF and DMSO (v/v = 9:1) and stirred at room temperature. MAI and MACl (m/m = 9:1) were dissolved in IPA with a total concentration of 30 mg mL−1. The PbI2 solution was spin-coated onto the ITO/PEDOT:PSS substrate at a speed of 3000 rpm for 60 s and heated at 70 °C to remove the solvent. After cooling down to room temperature, the solution mixture of MAI and MACl was spin-coated onto the PbI2 film at a speed of 4000 rpm for 20 s. The perovskite film was annealed at 85 °C for 1 h. INIC series interfacial materials were dissolved in CF with different concentrations (5, 3, 1 and 0.5 mg mL−1) and spin-coated onto the top of the perovskite film at a speed of 5000 rpm for 30 s. Subsequently, PCBM (dissolved in CB, 20 mg mL−1) and PDIN (dissolved in methanol, 1.5 mg mL−1, 2% acetic acid, v/v) were spin-coated at a speed of 1000 rpm for 60 s and 5000 rpm for 30 s, respectively. The thickness of PCBM is ca. 50 nm, while the thicknesses of the INIC series interfacial layer and PDIN buffer layer are negligible. Finally, an 80 nm thick Ag counter electrode was deposited on the top of the buffer layer by thermal evaporation at the pressure of 10−6 Torr.


X-ray diffraction (XRD) was performed using an Empyrean series 2 X-ray diffraction system with CuKα as the radiation source. UV-vis absorption spectra were measured on a UV-vis spectrophotometer (UV-2550, Shimadzu) with wavelengths ranging from 350 to 850 nm. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were obtained with a FEI-SEM (XL 30 S-FEG). Transient photovoltage (TPV) and transient photocurrent (TPC) measurements were performed with a self-designed system excited by using a 532 nm (Brio, 20 Hz, 4 ns) pulse laser. A digital oscilloscope (Tektronix, DPO 7104) was used to record the photocurrent or photovoltage decay process with a sampling resistor of 50 Ω or 1 MΩ, respectively. Thermal admittance spectroscopy (TAS) was performed using an IM6ex electrochemical workstation (Zahner), in which the scanning frequency was set between 0.1 and 106 Hz, and the amplitude of the sine perturbation bias was set to 10 mV. The photovoltaic performance was determined using a Keithley 2602 system source meter and an Oriel solar simulator 91192 with an irradiation of AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2, calibrated with a standard silicon reference cell. When testing, individual devices were masked with a black aperture to confine the active area of the device to 0.1 cm2. External quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra were measured with a lab-made spectrometer with wavelengths ranging from 350 to 800 nm. Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra were measured using a PL spectrometer (Edinburgh Instruments, FLS 900) with a Xenon lamp as the excitation source (excitation at 550 nm). The detected emission wavelength of the steady-state PL was from 700 to 850 nm. Time-resolved PL decay transient spectra were obtained using a PL spectrometer (Edinburgh Instruments, FLS 900), excited with a pulsed diode laser (EPL-445, 0.8 mJ cm−2) and measured at 775 nm after excitation at 445 nm.


There are no conflicts to declare.


We thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21673011) for financial support.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: XRD pattern, SEM image, UV-vis absorption spectra, steady-state PL spectra, J–V curves, steady-state current density, statistical PCE distribution histogram and stability test. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta06923e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017