 DOI: 10.1039/D1TA04520B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 16178-16186


Lu
Huang
,

Zhi
Xing
,

Xianglan
Tang
,

Dengxue
Li
,

Xiangchuan
Meng
,

Xiaotian
Hu
,

Ting
Hu
* and 

Yiwang
Chen
*

College of Chemistry, Nanchang University, 999 Xuefu Avenue, Nanchang 330031, China. E-mail: ywchen@ncu.edu.cn

Institute of Polymers and Energy Chemistry, Nanchang University, 999 Xuefu Avenue, Nanchang 330031, China. E-mail: huting@ncu.edu.cn

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanchang University, 999 Xuefu Avenue, Nanchang 330031, China

Institute of Advanced Scientific Research (iASR), Jiangxi Normal University, 99 Ziyang Avenue, Nanchang 330022, China

Received
28th May 2021
, Accepted 7th July 2021
First published on 9th July 2021
Polycrystalline perovskite films generally have high-density defects due to the numerous crystal nuclei and randomly oriented fine grains in the film formation. These defects are commonly regarded as the source of non-radiative recombination, which seriously damages the photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Therefore, ideal perovskite films with a suitable grain size and preferred orientation are significant for PSCs. In this paper, an effective planar imprint (PiP) method was applied to promote perovskite film recrystallization. The formation process of a superior perovskite grain was revealed by analyzing the morphology and the mechanical simulation results. Meanwhile, trimethoxy (1H,1H,2H,2H-heptadecafluorodecyl) silane (FAS) oligomers were introduced as a bifunctional barrier to passivate the defects and protect the perovskite film through the PiP process. Ultimately, the improved film quality enabled a significant improvement in power conversion efficiency (PCE) and superior stability. In comparison with the PCE of 18.35% for the pristine device, the champion PCE of the PiP treated device achieved 20.52%. In addition, there was almost no obvious degradation in the PiP treated film after 35 days of being stored in air with ≈60% humidity at 25 °C.

In recent years, organic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have drawn monumental attention due to their high optical absorption coefficient, steep sub-bandgap absorption edge, long carrier diffusion length and low exciton binding energy. The certified efficiency of PSCs has exceeded 25% (ref. 5) in the past decade. Nevertheless, the poor stability of perovskite is the primary problem hindering its sustainable development and commercial application. According to the literature, perovskite films are susceptible to extrinsic factors, such as water, oxygen, and light, which may cause poor device performance. So, the quality of the light absorbing layer based on PSCs is vitally important for the performance. Among the various preparation techniques for perovskite films, a simple deposition method, spin-casting, from a precursor solution, directly followed via thermal annealing at a corresponding temperature, is widely used. However, the perovskite films prepared by solution-processing are polycrystalline, which leads to the formation of grain boundaries (GBs), and a large number of defects are gathered in the GBs. For example, the spin-casting process may exhibit anomalous perovskite clusters and sometimes a heterogeneous surface coverage which may lead to more uncoordinated lead ions or halide ion vacancies mainly located in the GBs and the interface. Ion vacancies are always considered to be the primary reason for nonradiative recombination, which can lead to energy loss in perovskite photovoltaic devices. Moreover, the existence of GBs is adverse for the PCE and stability of the device by serving as a channel for moisture to destroy the perovskite. Consequently, the controllable growth of perovskite films accompanied by greater grain size, fewer GBs and lower defect densities has been demonstrated to be a significant research path for producing admirable PSCs.

Tremendous methods have been utilized to acquire an unexceptionable perovskite film accompanied by large grain size and less defect density, such as solvent engineering, additive strategies, printing deposition, vapor assisted methods and spray deposition methods. Among these, pressure, as the basic thermodynamic parameter of PSCs, can notably affect the dynamic growth kinetics and change the photovoltaic properties of the perovskite film. Recently, pressure has been applied to create photonic nanostructures in methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) film for application in photo-detectors and photonic-crystal lasers. In these studies, a conducive effect of pressure on the polycrystalline perovskite layer morphology has been demonstrated. Moreover, the concomitant external conditions of pressure and heat lead to the recrystallization of a polycrystalline MAPbI3 layer by promoting the growth of small grains to be larger and smoother. The traditional thermal/pressure assisted process usually focuses on the optimization of the crystallization quality of perovskite films, but deep defects in the interface are vulnerable to being ignored. Concretely, the performance and long-term stability of perovskite solar cells will be seriously inhibited by dangling bonds on the surface of the perovskite crystal. Hence, the aim of improving the crystallinity and building double barriers is proposed in our work. Here, the method of using a flat stamp with a given temperature and pressure (planar imprint: PiP) was employed to regulate the perovskite grain growth in this work. During the PiP process, the perovskite film recrystallization, which delivered significantly improved perovskite film quality was accompanied by an obviously smoother surface, bigger perovskite grains and fewer defects. The impact of the PiP process can be demonstrated and further explained from a mechanical point of view. Simultaneously, hydrophobic FAS oligomers, as a passivation agent, could be incorporated into the perovskite film to modify GBs during the PiP procedure, which realized the in situ passivation of the perovskite film. Simultaneously, hydrophobic FAS oligomers, as a passivation agent, could be incorporated into the perovskite film to modify the surface and GBs during the PiP procedure, which realized an efficient barrier to prevent moisture invasion and to passivate surface defects. So, higher device performances and environmental stability were expected and could be proved.


Scheme 1 depicts that the PiP process was carried on in an air atmosphere at a given temperature and pressure. Except for the cover of the silicon stamp at a given pressure, the perovskite film was placed in a vacuum of 3 MPa during the PiP process. The silicon flat stamp was made by depositing a thin layer of FAS as an anti-stiction layer because of its hydrophobicity. As reported in the literature, hydrolysis and condensation can happen easily for FAS in air to form FAS oligomers. It should be noted that the FAS layer is in direct contact with the perovskite layer, implying that some of the FAS oligomers not interacting with the silicon substrate will move to the surface of the perovskite film during the PiP procedure. On account of the FAS oligomer passivation effect on the –OH group, FAS oligomers could be anchored to the surface of the perovskite layer. Besides, FAS oligomers can also aggregate in the GBs with recrystallization of the perovskite, which will be demonstrated in this work.

In this work, three different PiP temperatures were used for comparison and classical perovskite, MAPbI3, was utilized. The perovskite films with PiP treatment at 100 °C, 150 °C and 180 °C were abbreviated to PiP 100 °C, PiP 150 °C and PiP 180 °C, respectively. Details of the PiP procedure are recorded in the Experimental section and ESI. First, the morphology of pristine and PiP perovskite films was investigated by employing scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM). As depicted in Fig. 1a–h, the grains of pristine perovskite film are relatively small with an average size of ∼300 nm. By contrast, the grain size of the PiP perovskite films increased dramatically with an average size of around ∼1200 nm (PiP 150 °C), which also was observed in the cross-sectional SEM results. In addition, the cross-sectional SEM image of pristine perovskite film was rough with a disordered crystal orientation, while the PiP treated perovskite films, especially the PiP 150 °C treated perovskite film, show regular crystals. With a higher PiP temperature of 180 °C, the grain size decreased and some small holes appeared in the PiP perovskite film, because decomposition of the perovskite at high temperature could not be ignored even in a vacuum. AFM results (Fig. S1 and ESI) show the same tendency where the PiP perovskite films reveal a much smoother surface with a larger grain size in comparison to the pristine perovskite film. Intuitively, X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of both pristine and PiP perovskite films (Fig. 1i) show similar peaks, revealing that the PiP process did not alter the perovskite crystal structure. Nevertheless, the increase in the intensity ratio of the (110) and (310) XRD peaks demonstrates that the crystallinity of the perovskite increased and the preferred orientation of the perovskite grains obtained during the PiP procedure was perpendicular to the substrate. To fully verify this phenomenon, the distribution histograms of the XRD patterns from different batches are exhibited in Fig. S2. The intensity of the peaks corresponding to PbI2 get a little bit higher with the increased PiP temperature because of the decomposition of the perovskite, which was explained above.
To better observe the growth process of perovskite grains in the PiP process, PiP perovskite films with different PiP times (0 min, 5 min, 10 min, 15 min, 20 min) at 150 °C were investigated. By comparing the SEM images of the same magnitude (Fig. S3), the grain size gets larger and the number of perovskite grains become smaller with a longer PiP time from 0 to 10 minutes. This phenomenon implies that recrystallization took place in the PiP process, in which a large grain may “swallow” a small grain, contributing to a diminished number of GBs and an augmented average grain size. To verify this speculation, the effective stress on the perovskite during the PiP process was calculated through mechanical simulation in Fig. 1j. The freshly spin-coated perovskite film was a pseudo-solid-like intermediate state accompanied by polymeric mechanical strength. The PiP process provided compression stress for the perovskite film, allowing it to form a liquid-like flow under pressure. Simultaneously, because of heating in the PiP procedure, the compressed perovskite film can be formed by concretion into a film under the force of direction. Owing to the largest compressive stress at the edge of the silicon template, perovskite grains extended outward and formed larger grains. Therefore, the perovskite films become denser with better morphology and higher crystallinity on account of providing compressive pressure and temperature. In addition, the perovskite grains were guided to form a preferred orientation because of the z-direction compressive stress in the geometric space. Overall, these results indicate that the quality of the PiP perovskite film can be efficiently ameliorated with compact grains, larger grain sizes, and fewer GBs.
It is known that FAS can form Si–OH groups after hydrolysis and quickly condense into oligomers in air. The Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) spectrum of FAS displays the peaks of C–F3 (1262 and 1209 cm−1) and Si–O–Si (1160–1011 cm−1), proving the existence of the oligomers (Fig. 2a). Meanwhile, the same peaks were found in the FTIR spectrum of PiP perovskite film but were not observed in that of pristine perovskite film, confirming that FAS oligomers on the silicon stamp move to the perovskite layer after the PiP process. In addition, the F element was detected in the X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) and the amount of F element increased when the PiP temperature went higher, illustrating that the amount of FAS oligomers in the PiP perovskite layer was enhanced with higher PiP temperature (Fig. S4 and Table S1). Notably, by comparison with the pristine perovskite film, both the I 3d (Fig. 2b) and Pb 4p (Fig. 2c) characteristic peaks of the PiP 150 °C film shift to a higher binding energy, proving the interaction between FAS oligomers and perovskite. Due to the Si–OH groups in the FAS oligomers, the O in the hydroxyl group formed a bond with Pb and a hydrogen bond with I atom in the perovskite structure. To further inquire into the influence of the FAS oligomer, two possible absorption models of the FAS oligomer and MAPbI3 (MA: methylammonium) from density functional theory (DFT) are shown in Fig. S5. The overall binding energies for the optimized structure were calculated to be −0.7 eV and −1.07 eV, indicating that the absorption process was readily exothermic, and the absorption of the FAS oligomer on perovskite was conducive to the stability of the system. In addition, energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) (Fig. 2d) shows that F and Si (characteristic elements in FAS) were distributed over the entire perovskite film, especially in the GBs. It is well known that ionic defects are located mostly at the GBs and at the interfaces. Because of the interaction between FAS oligomers and perovskite, FAS oligomers mainly fill in the GBs to modify the perovskite. As reported in the literature, cross-linked silane can effectively protect the perovskite grain, thereby significantly improving the moisture stability of the device. Due to the hydrophobicity of FAS, the contact angle of PiP perovskite films was higher than that of pristine perovskite (Fig. 2e). Among them, PiP perovskite film with 180 °C exhibits the most hydrophobic surface with the highest contact angle of 84 °C owing to having more FAS oligomers. To verify the moisture resistance of the PiP perovskite film, pristine perovskite film and PiP 150 °C were unencapsulated and placed under air conditions with a relative humidity of 60% at 25 °C for 50 days. In Fig. 2f, it is found that the color of the pristine perovskite film faded from dark brown to yellow, while the well-maintained morphology of the PiP 150 °C film showed no difference after 50 days, demonstrating that the PiP perovskite film possesses better moisture resistance. The reason is that hydrophobic FAS oligomers existing in the perovskite film and in the GBs provide a protective effect to inhibit water.
The defects were healed partly by the FAS oligomers because of the interaction between FAS oligomers and perovskite, which was also further verified by TRPL measurements (Fig. 3b). A significantly increased PL lifetime of τ = 408 ns is found for the PiP 150 °C film, compared to the pristine perovskite film (τ = 149 ns). Taken together, these results strongly support the conjecture that PiP could improve perovskite film quality for optoelectronic applications. Note that the PiP (100 °C and 180 °C) treated films lead to some increase in the PL lifetime but fall short compared to the PiP 150 °C treated samples, underlining the importance of temperature in the PiP process. At the same time, a little absorption enhancement in the UV-vis spectra will be conducive to the device performance (Fig. 3c). A study of the photovoltaic performance of the pristine and optimized PSC devices (glass/ITO/SnO2/perovskite/spiro-MeOTAD/Ag) was conducted, as displayed in Fig. 3d and Table 1. Compared with pristine devices, the photovoltaic parameters of the PiP devices show different degrees of improvement. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the champion devices are presented in Fig. 3d for pristine perovskite and PiP 150 °C perovskite films. The champion PCE of PSCs with PiP 150 °C perovskite film is 20.52%, with an open circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.13 V, a short-circuit current (JSC) of 23.57 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 77.19%. In comparison to the recorded PSCs on the basis of diverse pressure conditions, the improved perovskite (MAPbI3) is exhibited in Table S2. So far, the state-of-the-art PCE of 20.52% was acquired in this work by using flat stamp under 150 °C. In order to demonstrate the superiority of the PiP process, the FAS oligomers were directly deposited on the perovskite rather than introduced by the PiP process for comparison and the corresponding device showed a PCE of 19.43%, which was better than the pristine device, but lower than the PiP 150 °C device (Fig. S6). This result proved that the enhanced performance of the PiP 150 °C device was not only attributable to the passivation effect of FAS oligomers but also attributable to the recrystallization effect of the PiP process. In conclusion, the better perovskite film quality induced by the recrystallization effect with larger grain size could efficiently reduce GBs and the FAS oligomers could efficiently passivate the defects in GBs, which could suppress charge carrier recombination and reduce non-radiative recombination, contributing to increased device parameters. The integrated JSC from the EQE spectra also agrees well with the measured JSC (Fig. 3e). In particular, the hysteresis effect has been significantly alleviated (Fig. S7). In addition, 20 cells were tested to evaluate the reproducibility of device performance and the maturity of the PiP procedure. The distribution histograms of PCE coupled with the Gaussian fitting of PSCs from different batches are exhibited in Fig. 3f. It can be seen that the PiP PSCs have a higher average efficiency. Benefiting from the higher perovskite film quality and defect passivation of FAS oligomers, charge carrier recombination was effectively reduced, which enabled the superior reproducibility of the PiP 150 °C treated devices. In an attempt to better understand the distribution of carrier recombination and defects, an electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) experiment was conducted with a bias voltage of 0.8 V in the dark over a frequency range of 100–4 MHz.
Devices

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Average PCE (%)

a Average and standard deviation values were calculated from over 20 cells.

Pristine
1.10
22.89
72.97
18.35
17.84 ± 0.77
PiP 100 °C
1.09
23.79
73.71
19.07
18.37 ± 0.70
PiP 150 °C
1.13
23.57
77.19
20.52
19.79 ± 0.53
PiP 180 °C
1.10
23.83
73.71
19.31
18.61 ± 0.70
The Nyquist diagrams of the pristine device and PiP 150 °C device are shown in Fig. 4a. The PiP 150 °C device shows a larger semicircle, which indicates the increased recombination resistance and reduced carrier recombination rate. The enhancement in the recombination resistance for the PiP device is attributable to the defect passivation of FAS oligomers at the GBs and in the perovskite film. In addition, the trap density of states (tDOS) (Fig. 4b) was further employed to confirm that the PiP treated device has fewer grain boundaries with fewer defects. According to formulae (1) and (2), the x-axis is converted from frequency to energy, and the differential capacitance spectrum at a specific temperature is superimposed to obtain the energy defect distribution (formula (3)).
(1)
ω = 2πf
(2)
(3)
where
kB, T, q, ω, ω0, Vbi, W, and C represent Boltzmann's constant, the Kelvin temperature, elementary charge, applied angular frequency, relative angular frequency, built-in potential, depletion width, and capacitance. In general, the shallower trap region (<0.3 eV) and the deeper trap region (>0.3 eV) are regarded as defects at GBs and the surface, respectively. In consequence, the energy defect distribution of the PiP device is obviously reduced, which reduces the probability of charge recombination. The I–V response of the crystals in the space-charge-limited-current (SCLC) regime was also measured (Fig. 4c). According to the characteristic I–V trace, the carrier trap density of a device based on the PiP 150 °C perovskite film is calculated to be 7.4 × 1015 cm−3, which was lower compared with the pristine device (8.5 × 1015 cm−3). Here, J–V measurements in the dark demonstrate that the dark current of the PiP device is shortened by two orders of magnitude compared to the pristine device, which manifests enhanced shunt resistance and inhibited charge carrier recombination and leakage current. In addition, the dependency of JSC and VOC on the illumination intensity curves (Fig. 4e and f) was tested to further illustrate the difference in the charge dynamics as well as recombination mechanism, and the unit slope α (β) deviation from 1 (1 kBT q−1) indicated the recombination probability. The higher α for the PiP 150 °C device indicates less bimolecular recombination. Meanwhile, the slope of VOC (β) versus log-scaled light intensity for the PiP 150 °C device decreased, which revealed a less trap-dominated recombination. These results prove that PiP treatment can obtain better perovskite film with fewer defects, which may provide a way to prepare excellent devices.

Since the quality of perovskite film was improved when the hydrophobic FAS oligomers were introduced, better stability of the device is expected. We measured the steady-state photocurrent and output PCE over 10 minutes (Fig. S9). The PiP devices deliver a higher and more stable photocurrent (≈23.05 mA cm−2) and output PCE (≈20.28%) under a constant voltage bias (0.88 V). Furthermore, the long-term stability of unencapsulated devices on the basis of the pristine and PiP 150 °C perovskite films was tested. As shown in Fig. 5a, the moisture stability was examined by storing the devices in ambient conditions with ≈60% humidity at 25 °C for 35 days, and the degradation of the pristine device was significant. By contrast, the PiP 150 °C device retained 90% of the original PCE 35 days later. Meanwhile, the thermal stability of the devices was also examined by placing the devices at 80 °C in a glovebox with N2 and the PCE evolution during the 4 h aging was monitored and recorded (Fig. 5b). Notably, the PiP 150 °C device exhibited better thermal stability with 78% of the initial performance being retained, which was ascribed to the modified PiP perovskite film and the FAS oligomers with F atoms. It is reported that the strong hydrogen bonding of F⋯H–N between the fluorinated molecule and methylamine ion can significantly prevent perovskite from decomposing, enhancing the thermal stability of the device.

In summary, an effective but relatively simple method using pressure and temperature to prepare high-quality perovskite film was demonstrated and successfully applied to PSCs with excellent photoelectric performances. The PiP treated perovskite film presents a much smoother surface and larger grains with fewer defects than the pristine perovskite film, which facilitated charge collection and reduced trap-assisted recombination. Simultaneously, the hydrophobic FAS oligomers appeared in the perovskite film after the PiP process as bifunctional molecules to passivate and stabilize the perovskite crystals by forming a protective barrier, thereby constructing PSCs with high moisture resistance. Consequently, the PiP 150 °C device delivered the most outstanding performance. This work provides a valid tactic to ameliorate perovskite film quality in photonics applications.


L. H. and Z. X. contributed equally to this work. Y. C. and T. H. conceived and designed the experiments. L. H., Z. X., X. T., D. L., X. M. and X. H. conducted the experiments, analyzed the data and wrote the manuscript. Y. C. and T. H. supervised the project. All the authors participated in discussions of the research.


The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.


This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (51803085, 51833004, 22005131, and U20A20128).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta04520b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021