 DOI: 10.1039/D3TA00633F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2023, 11, 6615-6624


Chulhee
Lim
,

Youngwoong
Kim
,

Seungjin
Lee
,

Helen Hejin
Park
,

Nam Joong
Jeon
* and 

Bumjoon J.
Kim
*

Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea. E-mail: bumjoonkim@kaist.ac.kr

Division of Advanced Materials, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT), Daejeon 34114, Republic of Korea. E-mail: njjeon@krict.re.kr

Green and Sustainable Materials R&D Department, Korea Institute of Industrial Technology (KITECH), Cheonan, Chungcheongnam 31056, Republic of Korea

Department of Advanced Materials and Chemical Engineering, University of Science and Technology (UST), Daejeon 34113, Republic of Korea

Received
4th February 2023
, Accepted 2nd March 2023
First published on 3rd March 2023
Triarylamine (TAA)-based conjugated polymers have been extensively used as hole-transporting layers (HTLs) for inverted perovskite solar cells (PSCs), but their hydrophobic nature often causes insufficient wetting of the perovskite precursor solution on the HTL. This feature not only results in the deposition of a nonuniform perovskite layer on the HTL, but also generates detrimental defects at the interface, limiting the performance and stability of the PSCs. In this study, we develop a series of poly(triarylamine) (PTAA)-based hole transporting materials (HTMs) (MEG-PTAA, DEG-PTAA, and TEG-PTAA) with hydrophilic oligo(ethylene glycol) (OEG) side chains of different lengths to realize efficient and stable inverted PSCs. Incorporating prolonged OEG side chains progressively increases the wettability of the HTLs by perovskite precursor solution, enabling the deposition of a uniform perovskite layer. Moreover, additional oxygen atoms in the longer OEG side chain reinforce the passivation effects of the HTLs on interfacial Pb-based defects, effectively suppressing trap-assisted recombination of charge carriers. Among the series, the DEG-PTAA-based HTL demonstrates the most efficient and stable inverted PSCs, achieving a maximum power conversion efficiency (PCEmax) of 22.26%. Importantly, the DEG-PTAA-based PSC, which retains 80% of its initial PCE after 970 h under 1 sun illumination, is significantly more stable than the reference PTAA-based PSC, which retains only 57% of its initial PCE after the same period.

Inverted perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are promising renewable power generators owing to their excellent photovoltaic performance and simple device fabrication processes. In the structural configuration of the inverted PSCs, hole transporting layers (HTLs) are deposited above the bottom electrode (e.g., indium tin oxide (ITO)), onto which the perovskite layer is then deposited. Accordingly, HTLs are significant determinants of the film quality of the perovskite layer, necessitating the careful selection of hole transporting materials (HTMs) to realize high-performance inverted PSCs. Numerous studies have focused on developing various kinds of efficient HTMs including inorganic materials, organic small molecules, and polymers. Among them, triarylamine (TAA)-based polymeric HTMs (e.g., poly-TPD and PTAA) are widely used in inverted PSCs owing to their advantageous features; those HTMs afford smooth thin-film morphology on the bottom electrode, excellent electrical properties, and well-matched frontier energy levels with perovskite. However, despite their benefits, the strong hydrophobicity of TAA-based polymeric HTMs often prevents the corresponding HTL films from being completely wetted by perovskite precursor solutions, resulting in the formation of nonuniform perovskite layers. In particular, the insufficient interactions between the HTL and perovskite layer at their buried interface produce local defects that sacrifice device performance and stability. Therefore, the excessive hydrophobicity of these TAA-based polymeric HTMs should be carefully alleviated.

The surface characteristics of the existing HTLs can be physically/chemically tuned using various strategies. For example, the poor wettability of TAA-based polymeric HTLs can be improved through the insertion of interlayers (e.g., polyelectrolyte, poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), and Al2O3), oxygen plasma treatment, or pre-wetting with a hydrophilic solvent. Nevertheless, the aforementioned strategies might have some disadvantages in terms of industrial manufacturing; they accompany additional coating or treatment processes, which often require delicate optimization processes and consequently increase the overall cost of production. For example, the physical/chemical surface treatment methods can typically optimize the PSC performance at a very specific condition (e.g., in terms of parameters such as thickness, processing condition, and exposure time), which reduces the reproducibility of the performance. In this regard, tuning the chemical structures of HTMs can be an alternative way to intrinsically modulate the surface characteristic of HTLs. A few studies have demonstrated that the properties of HTMs can be systematically optimized through the introduction of various functional groups or the adjustment of their numbers or positions in the molecules of HTMs.
Incorporating hydrophilic functional groups into conjugated polymers has been utilized to increase the surface energy of the resulting thin films, thereby modulating their interaction with the subsequently deposited perovskite precursor solution as well as their wettability with various solvents. For instance, polar functional groups such as amine, pyridine, methoxy, and oligo(ethylene glycol) (OEG) units have been proven to be effective to enhance the hydrophilicity of polymers. Additionally, the oxygen and nitrogen atoms in these functional groups can act as Lewis bases and strongly coordinate with transition metals, passivating defects at the interface between the resulting HTL and perovskite layer. Among them, OEG units are considered one of the most versatile modifiers because the hydrophilic nature of polymers can be easily tuned by the insertion of OEG chains having different lengths and branching structures. Also, it is expected that the passivation capability of HTMs may be reinforced by increasing the number of oxygen atoms in the OEG chain. Therefore, we envision that TAA-based conjugated polymers containing well-designed OEG side chains have great potential to be efficient HTMs, enabling the formation of a high-quality perovskite layer.
In this study, we develop a series of PTAA-based HTMs, poly(4-(2-methoxyethoxy)-2,6-dimethyl-N,N-diphenylaniline) (MEG-PTAA), poly(4-(2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethoxy)-2,6-dimethyl-N,N-diphenylaniline) (DEG-PTAA), and poly(4-(2-(2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethoxy)ethoxy)-2,6-dimethyl-N,N-diphenylaniline) (TEG-PTAA) to afford efficient and stable inverted PSCs. The OEG units are incorporated as side chains into poly(2,4,6-trimethyl-N,N-diphenylaniline) (PTAA) to impart targeted molecular properties (e.g., hydrophilicity and Lewis base characteristics), while preserving the favorable material properties originating from the main conjugated backbone of PTAA. The wettability of the OEG-incorporating HTMs by the perovskite solution is superior to that of PTAA, enabling the deposition of uniform perovskite layers. Then, the molecular characteristics of the HTMs are systematically optimized via tuning the length of OEG side chains. The ability of the HTMs to passivate Pb-based interfacial defects increases with increasing length of the OEG side chains, suppressing trap-assisted charge recombination. Among them, the optimized DEG-PTAA-based PSC shows the highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 22.26%. Importantly, the DEG-PTAA-based PSC exhibits a high operational stability (∼80% of the initial PCE retained after 970 h of maximum power point tracking (MPPT) under 1 sun illumination), surpassing that of the reference PTAA-based PSCs (only 57% of the initial PCE retained after the same period).

The chemical structures and design strategy of the HTMs developed in this study are shown in Fig. 1. Three OEG units having different chain lengths (i.e., ethylene glycol monomethyl ether (MEG), diethylene glycol monomethyl ether (DEG), and triethylene glycol monomethyl ether (TEG)) were incorporated as a side chain into the reference PTAA to obtain a series of PTAA-based HTMs. The incorporation of hydrophilic OEG side chains is expected to afford HTLs with enhanced wettability by perovskite precursor solution, resulting in the formation of uniform perovskite layers. In addition, oxygen atoms in the OEG side chains can passivate Pb-based defect sites as Lewis bases at the HTL/perovskite interface.

The synthesis of OEG-containing TAA (OEG-TAA) monomers and OEG-containing PTAA (OEG-PTAA) HTMs is depicted in Fig. 1a and Scheme S1. The OEG-PTAA and reference PTAA were polymerized by Yamamoto polycondensation reaction of N,N-bis(4-bromophenyl)-4-(2-methoxyethoxy)-2,6-dimethylaniline, N,N-bis(4-bromophenyl)-4-(2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethoxy)-2,6-dimethylaniline, N,N-bis(4-bromophenyl)-4-(2-(2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethoxy)ethoxy)-2,6-dimethylaniline, and N,N-bis(4-bromophenyl)-2,4,6-trimethylaniline, respectively. The HTMs were characterized by 1H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, size exclusion chromatography (SEC), UV-vis spectroscopy, photoelectron spectroscopy in air (PESA), and space-charge-limited current (SCLC) method (Fig. S1–S14). The results are summarized in Table 1. All the HTMs were synthesized with similar number average molecular weight (Mn) of 36–39 kg mol−1 to exclude the influence of molecular weight on the material characteristics and device performance.
HTM

M
n (Đ) [kg mol−1]

λ
max [nm]

E
optg
 [eV]

E
HOMO
 [eV]

E
LUMO
 [eV]

μ
h
 [cm2 V−1 s−1]

a Determined by SEC using THF as an eluent.
b Evaluated from the absorption edges in corresponding UV-vis absorption spectra.
c Determined by PESA spectra.
d Calculated by ELUMO = EHOMO + Eoptg.
e Averaged from at least 3 cells.

PTAA
36.3 (1.36)
379
2.97
−5.18
−2.21
5.2 × 10−5
MEG-PTAA
39.2 (1.89)
383
2.95
−5.15
−2.20
3.8 × 10−5
DEG-PTAA
39.6 (1.35)
385
2.96
−5.13
−2.17
2.7 × 10−5
TEG-PTAA
39.1 (1.39)
386
2.95
−5.11
−2.16
1.3 × 10−5
The optical properties of the HTLs were analyzed by UV-vis spectroscopy measurements, and the obtained spectra are displayed in Fig. S11. The OEG-PTAA HTLs absorbed light in the wavelength range of 300–420 nm, and their optical band gaps (Eoptgs) were obtained to be 2.96–2.97 eV, which are almost identical to the reference PTAA (Fig. S11a). The transmittance of ITO/HTL substrates was also investigated. The ITO/HTL substrates for OEG-PTAA polymers exhibited negligible change in transmittance in the UV-vis range, when compared to that for the reference PTAA (Fig. S11b). Therefore, employing OEG-PTAA polymers as HTLs would not compromise light harvesting of the corresponding inverted PSCs.
To evaluate the energy levels of frontier molecular orbitals of the HTMs, PESA measurement was performed (Fig. 2b and S12). The samples for the measurement were prepared by spin-coating each HTL on the glass substrate. Then, the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy levels (EHOMOs) of the HTLs were acquired by evaluating the onset point of emission yields in the corresponding PESA spectra. The lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy levels (ELUMOs) were calculated by ELUMO = EHOMO + Eoptg. Consequently, the energy levels of the OEG-PTAA polymers increase with increasing length of the OEG side chains; the EHOMO/ELUMO were estimated to be −5.18/−2.21, −5.15/−2.20, −5.13/−2.17 and −5.11/−2.16 eV for the PTAA, MEG-PTAA, DEG-PTAA, and TEG-PTAA. The slight upshift in the energy levels of the OEG-PTAA polymers can be attributed to the electron-donating nature of the OEG side chains. Additionally, the valence band maximum (VBM) and conduction band minimum (CBM) levels of the perovskite layer were obtained by following the same procedures described above (Fig. S13). And, we investigated the effect of the different HTL on the energy levels of the perovskite layer. The VBM and CBM levels of the perovskite layers deposited on the DEG-PTAA and reference PTAA HTLs were found to be the same, i.e., −5.49 and −3.97 eV, respectively. These results indicate that the electronic structure of the bulk perovskite was not affected by the incorporation of OEG side chains in the PTAA, preserving the appropriate alignment between the energy levels of the HTL and perovskite layer.
The charge carrier mobility of the HTLs was measured using the SCLC method. The vertical hole mobility (μh) of the HTLs was investigated by fabricating devices with a structure of ITO/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS)/HTL/Au (Fig. S14 and Table 1). When the methyl group as a side chain in the reference PTAA was replaced by longer OEG units, the μh of the OEG-PTAA was slightly decreased. Nevertheless, all the OEG-PTAA polymers showed comparable μh values with the same order of magnitude of 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1.
Next, the contact angles of water droplets on each HTL were measured to evaluate wettability of the HTLs by the perovskite precursor solution. The decrease in the water contact angles on the HTLs indicates enhancement of their hydrophilic nature. Thus, the perovskite precursor solution, which contains hydrophilic solvents such as N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), can easily spread out on the relatively hydrophilic HTLs, facilitating the formation of homogeneous perovskite layers. The average water contact angle on the PTAA layer was 87.3°, whereas it gradually decreased to 65.5°, 60.3°, and 59.8° on the MEG-PTAA, DEG-PTAA, and TEG-PTAA layers, respectively (Fig. 2c). Consequently, uniform perovskite layers could be obtained when employing the OEG-PTAA polymers as the HTLs, whereas an incomplete perovskite layer was formed on the PTAA layer (Fig. 2d). Since solvent orthogonality is important for the solution processing of multiple layers, we monitored UV-vis absorption profiles of the HTLs before and after the deposition of DMF, DMSO, and their co-solvents (Fig. S15 and S16). The results indicate that pure DMF partially dissolved the thin films of OEG-PTAA polymers, but DMSO did not. Interestingly, the OEG-PTAA HTLs were not significantly dissolved in DMF:DMSO cosolvent (4:1 v/v, which is the actual ratio for producing the perovskite precursor solution in this study) as indicated by the negligible change in the absorbance of the HTLs after the deposition of the cosolvent (Fig. S16). The addition of DMSO cosolvent minimized dissolution of the HTLs, endowing sufficient solvent orthogonality during the deposition of the perovskite layer and allowing for the formation of a homogeneous perovskite layer on the HTL.
To investigate the crystalline structures of the perovskite layer on top of each HTL, X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurement was conducted (Fig. S17 and Table S1). In the spectra, characteristic peaks of the perovskite structure were observed. Among them, the (110) diffraction peak was selected to compare the crystalline properties of the perovskite. The full width at half maximum values of the (110) diffraction peaks in the XRD spectra of the perovskite layers on the PTAA and OEG-PTAA HTLs were similar. Additionally, the size of the crystal grains on the surfaces of the perovskite layers deposited on the different HTLs (observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM); Fig. S18) is similar. These results indicate that the introduction of OEG-PTAA polymers did not affect the crystal growth of the perovskite layer.
The interfacial properties between the HTL and perovskite layer were carefully examined, because they determine the electronic and physical interactions between the HTL and perovskite layer and significantly influence the charge transfer efficiency and overall device performance. First, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was conducted to evaluate the capability of the HTLs to passivate defects of the perovskite layer (Fig. 3a and Table S2). It is known that under-coordinated Pb2+ and Pb clusters at the interface or grain boundaries mainly consist of deep-level traps; thus, passivating these defects is crucial for improving the photovoltaic performance and stability of PSCs. For the sample preparation, perovskite layers grown on ITO substrates were covered with each HTL to simulate the buried interface in the inverted structure. Then, the surface of neat perovskite, and the interface between the perovskite layer and HTL were analyzed by tracking Pb 4f5/2 and 4f7/2 peaks in the XPS spectra. In the spectrum of neat perovskite, two main peaks corresponding to Pb 4f5/2 and 4f7/2 were observed at 143.41 and 138.55 eV, respectively. For the case of the reference PTAA, Pb 4f5/2 and Pb 4f7/2 peaks were located at 143.43 and 138.57 eV, which are similar to those of the corresponding peaks in the spectrum of neat perovskite. Interestingly, the Pb 4f peaks linearly shifted to the lower binding energy when employing the HTLs with longer OEG side chains. For example, the Pb 4f5/2/Pb 4f7/2 peaks for the DEG-PTAA and TEG-PTAA were observed at 143.25/138.40 eV and 143.13/138.28 eV, respectively. Meanwhile, small peaks at 141.84 and 136.94 eV in the neat perovskite originated from the unsaturated Pb2+ ions and they clearly disappeared due to the existence of moderate interactions between the polymer and Pb2+ ion at the perovskite/HTL interface. These results suggest that the passivation capability of the PTAA HTL is enhanced by the incorporation of OEG side chains of increasing length.
Next, Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra of pristine OEG-PTAA polymers and their blends with PbI2 were obtained to verify the existence of coordination bonding between the OEG side chain and Pb molecules (Fig. S19). We monitored the change in the characteristic absorptions of ethylene glycol units (e.g., C–O bond stretching) in each HTM. It was found that the locations of the characteristic peaks for each HTM were shifted with the addition of PbI2. For example, the peak in the spectrum of pristine DEG-PTAA at 1067.4 cm−1 corresponding to C–O bond stretching shifted to 1064.1 cm−1 with the addition of PbI2, indicating the presence of the interaction between the DEG side chain and Pb molecule. In addition, similar shifts in the corresponding peaks were observed in the other series (MEG-PTAA: 1068.9 → 1064.5 cm−1; TEG-PTAA: 1065.5 → 1063.1 cm−1).
To examine the applicability of OEG-PTAA polymers as HTLs, photovoltaic performance of the PSCs was investigated with an inverted device structure of ITO/HTL/perovskite/C60/polyethyleneimine ethoxylated (PEIE)/Ag (Fig. 2a and S20). Fig. 4a shows current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the PSCs based on different HTLs, and relevant photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table 2. The PTAA-based PSCs showed a maximum PCE (PCEmax) of 19.33% in a reverse scan with a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 23.02 mA cm−2, open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.06 V, and fill factor (FF) of 79.5%. Interestingly, the OEG-PTAA-based PSCs exhibited higher PCEmaxs than the PTAA-based PSCs, mainly attributed to enhanced VOC and FF. For example, the VOC value increased from 1.06 V for PTAA-based PSC to 1.09 V for MEG-PTAA-based PSC and 1.10 V for DEG-PTAA-based PSC. In addition, the FF value of the DEG-PTAA-based PSC was 81.8%, which was higher than that of the PTAA-based PSC (79.5%). Notably, the photovoltaic performance of the DEG-PTAA-based PSCs outperformed the other HTL-based PSCs, showing a PCEmax of 20.81% with lower hysteresis. Further optimization of the perovskite composition and interlayer led to an increase in PCEmax to 22.26% with a very high FF value of 84.0% for the DEG-PTAA-based PSCs (Table 2 and Fig. S21). Meanwhile, the performance of TEG-PTAA-based PSCs was not higher than that of DEG-PTAA-based PSCs, which might be due to the decreased hole mobility of TEG-PTAA originating from its longer OEG side chains. The calculated JSC values from external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra were well-matched with the JSC values in the J–V curves within 5% error ranges (Fig. S22a). The PCEs of the PSCs at maximum power point (MPP) were investigated, which are consistent with the trend observed in their J–V curves (Fig. S22b).
HTL
Scan

V
OC [V]

J
SC [mA cm−2]
FF [%]
PCEmax (avg) [%]

a PCE of PSC was obtained with further optimization of perovskite composition and interlayer, and with an anti-reflection film.

PTAA
Rev.
1.06
23.02
79.5
19.33 (6.92)
Fwd
1.03
23.07
71.6
17.04 (5.72)
MEG-PTAA
Rev.
1.09
23.13
80.1
20.14 (19.92)
Fwd
1.06
23.08
75.3
18.41 (18.16)
DEG-PTAA
Rev.
1.10
23.13
81.8
20.81 (20.51)
Fwd
1.07
23.08
77.2
19.13 (18.76)
TEG-PTAA
Rev.
1.10
23.04
81.2
20.57 (20.29)
Fwd
1.07
22.95
74.7
18.42 (18.05)
DEG-PTAA
Rev.
1.12
23.73
84.0
22.26
Fwd
1.10
23.72
77.8
20.24
The reproducibility of the photovoltaic performances of each PSC was evaluated by obtaining statistical distributions of their PCEs (Fig. 4b). The PCEs of the reference PTAA-based PSCs were scattered in a wide range with a high standard deviation, which was caused by the nonuniform perovskite layers on the PTAA HTL (Fig. 2d). In contrast, the OEG-PTAA-based PSCs exhibited significantly narrower distributions of the PCEs. We speculate that the improved PCE values and narrower distributions of the OEG-PTAA-based PSCs were mainly due to enhanced wettability and defect passivation capability of the OEG-PTAA HTLs, which were supported by the results of the contact angle, XPS, and FTIR measurements.
Finally, the operational stability of PSCs was evaluated (Fig. 4c). For comparison, the performance of encapsulated PSC devices based on the PTAA and DEG-PTAA HTLs, respectively, was tracked at the MPP under 1 sun illumination without temperature control (surface temperature: 40–50 °C). The DEG-PTAA-based PSCs exhibited significantly superior operational stability compared to the reference PTAA-based PSCs. For instance, the time required for reaching 80% of the initial PCE (PCE80%) was ∼310 h for the PTAA-based PSCs, whereas that for DEG-PTAA-based PSCs was much longer (∼970 h). Since it is known that interfacial defects of the perovskite layer can induce accumulation of excited charges and lead to degradation of the adjacent layers, the enhancement in the operational stability of the DEG-PTAA-based PSCs may be attributed to effective stabilization of the defect sites at the DEG-PTAA HTL/perovskite interface.
To better understand the different photovoltaic performances of the PSCs with different HTLs, their charge recombination and transfer properties were examined (Fig. 5 and S23). First, JSC values as a function of light intensity (P) were measured to evaluate degree of bimolecular recombination in each device (Fig. S23). The slope in the ln(P) − ln(JSC) plot, denoted as α, reaches unity when the bimolecular recombination is considerably suppressed. Similar α values (0.87–0.89) were observed for all the devices, suggesting that bimolecular recombination was not the main factor that caused the difference in device performance. Next, trap-assisted recombination behavior was explored by monitoring the P-dependent VOC values (Fig. 5a). The degree of trap-assisted recombination can be estimated by the slope (S) in the semi-log plot of ln(P) − VOC, with the unit of kT q−1 (k = Boltzmann constant, T = absolute temperature and q = elementary charge). In general, the S value is close to unity when trap-assisted recombination is substantially suppressed. Trap-assisted recombination in the OEG-PTAA-based PSCs decreased with increasing length of the OEG side chains of the OEG-PTAA HTLs, as indicated by the decrease in the S values. The S value for PTAA-based PSCs was 1.57, while it was decreased to 1.31 for MEG-PTAA and 1.26 for DEG-PTAA. These results signify that employing HTLs with longer OEG side chains can effectively reduce trap-assisted recombination in the corresponding PSCs.
Photoluminescence (PL) measurements were carried out to investigate charge transfer behavior and recombination characteristics. The samples were prepared with a structure of ITO/HTL/perovskite. Then, the incident light was irradiated onto the ITO side to explore the charge carrier dynamics at the buried interface of HTL/perovskite layer. First, steady-state PL measurement was conducted with an excitation wavelength of 470 nm. As shown in Fig. 5b, PL intensity was gradually increased for the system based on the HTLs bearing longer OEG side chains. These results may be attributed to two different possibilities of inefficient charge transfer from the perovskite to the HTL and reduced defect sites at the HTL/perovskite interface. Thus, to further elucidate the origin of the enhanced luminescence for the case of OEG-PTAA HTLs, time-resolved PL spectra were recorded (Fig. 5c and Table S3). PL decay curves of each sample were displayed, and they were fitted by the bi-exponential function.τ1 and τ2 are lifetimes for fast and slow components, respectively; the fast component (τ1) is related to charge carrier extractions at the HTL/perovskite interface and the slow component (τ2) is associated with charge carrier recombination of perovskite, respectively. The τ1 values for the PTAA, MEG-PTAA, and DEG-PTAA films were in a similar range of 56.3–73.3 ns, suggesting that the charge carrier extractions of these films were similar. In contrast, the τ2 values for the MEG-PTAA and DEG-PTAA were much higher compared to that for the reference PTAA. The τ2 values were significantly increased from 237.8 ns for PTAA, to 622.0 ns for MEG-PTAA and 1191.6 ns for DEG-PTAA. The prolonged τ2s for the MEG-PTAA and DEG-PTAA can be associated with the suppressed trap-assisted recombination in the OEG-PTAA HTL/perovskite systems due to the effective passivation of defects at the interfaces.

A series of PTAA-based HTMs featuring OEG side chains was developed, by which efficient and stable inverted PSCs were successfully demonstrated. The material properties of the OEG-PTAA HTMs were systematically modified by regulating the length of the OEG side chains. First, as the longer OEG side chain was incorporated into the HTM, excessive hydrophobicity of the PTAA HTL was alleviated, enabling homogeneous coating of the perovskite layer on the OEG-PTAA HTLs and, thus, the reproducible fabrication of the PSCs. At the same time, incorporated OEG side chains reinforced the passivation ability of the HTLs to the Pb defects at the HTL/perovskite interface, suppressing trap-assisted recombinations. Consequently, the optimized DEG-PTAA-based PSCs achieved the highest PCEmax of 22.26% among the series. Importantly, the DEG-PTAA-based PSC exhibited excellent operational stability by retaining 80% of the initial PCE after 970 h under 1 sun illumination at the MPP, which outperformed the PTAA-based PSC (only 57% of the initial PCE retained after same period). Therefore, our design of the OEG-incorporated HTM provides effective means to simultaneously control the electronic and physical interactions between the HTL/perovskite layer for realization of efficient and stable inverted PSCs.


The authors declare no competing financial interest.


This research was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (2017M3A7B8065584). This work was supported by the Technology Innovation Program (20022592) funded by the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy (MOTIE, Korea). This research is additionally performed as a Project No. KS2322-20 and a cooperation project of “Basic Project”, supported by the Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT). This work was partly supported by Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) grant funded by the MOTIE (20203040010320).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3ta00633f
‡ These authors contributed equally to this research.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023