 DOI: 10.1039/C6NR00401F
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 9676-9681


Guiqiang
Wang
*,

Juan
Zhang
,

Shuo
Hou
,

Wei
Zhang
 and 

Zengdian
Zhao


School of New Energy, Bohai University, Jinzhou 121013, China. E-mail: wgqiang@bhu.edu.cn

School of Chemical Engineering, Shandong University of Technology, Zibo 255049, China

Received
16th January 2016
, Accepted 8th April 2016
First published on 11th April 2016
Edge-nitrogenated graphene nanoplatelets (ENGNPs) are prepared by a simple and eco-friendly mechanochemical pin-grinding process using flake graphite as the precursor in the presence of nitrogen and investigated as the counter electrodes of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs). SEM images and nitrogen adsorption analysis indicate an effective and spontaneous delamination of the pristine graphite into small graphene nanoplatelets by a mechanochemical pin-grinding process. The mechanochemical cracking of the graphitic C–C bond generates activated carbon sites that react directly with nitrogen at the broken edges. The resultant ENGNPs are deposited on a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrate by spray coating, and their electrocatalytic activities are investigated systemically in the I−/I3− redox electrolyte. Electrochemical measurements show that the ENGNP electrode possesses excellent electrocatalytic activity for the redox reaction of I−/I3− as evidenced by the low charge-transfer resistance at the interface of the electrode and electrolyte. Under 100 mW cm−2 illumination, the DSC with the optimized ENGNP counter electrode achieves a conversion efficiency of 7.69%, which is comparable to that of the device with Pt counter electrode.

Since they were first reported by O'Regan and Grätzel in 1991, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) have been attracting wide-spread attention because of their low cost, simple fabrication process, and relatively high conversion efficiency. Typically, a DSC consists of a dye-sensitized TiO2 photoanode, an electrolyte with an I−/I3− redox couple, and a counter electrode. The counter electrode is one of the most crucial components regulating the photovoltaic performance of DSCs by collecting the electrons from the external circuit and catalyzing the reduction of I3− to I−. Therefore, the ideal counter electrode should possess excellent electrocatalytic activity, high electrical conductivity, and good stability. So far, the Pt electrode is still the preferred counter electrode in DSCs owing to its fantastic properties of outstanding electrocatalytic activity and superior conductivity. However, the high cost of Pt and its limited stability in corrosive electrolytes hinder its large-scale application in DSCs. Thus, some alternative materials to Pt have been extensively studied, such as conducting polymers, inorganic compounds, and carbonaceous materials. In particular, carbonaceous materials have been under intensive investigation in recent years due to their low cost, good conductivity, high stability, and appropriate catalytic activity, enabling them to serve as promising candidates to replace Pt in the counter electrodes of DSCs. However, their intrinsic electrocatalytic activities still cannot match that of Pt.

Recently, the introduction of nitrogen atoms into carbon nanomaterials has been demonstrated as an efficient approach to improve their electrocatalytic performances due to the high charge polarization caused by the difference in electronegativity between carbon and nitrogen, which can improve surface hydrophilicity, provide more active sites, and enhance the conductivity of carbon. Nitrogen-doped graphene, carbon nanotubes, and porous carbon have been employed as the counter electrodes of DSCs and exhibited even higher electrocatalytic activity than Pt electrodes. These results make nitrogen-doped carbon nanomaterials ideal as low-cost and effective counter electrodes in DSCs. However, the commonly used nitrogen-doping methods include tedious preparation procedures, high-temperature and hazardous ammonia treatment, which limit the scalability of nitrogen-doped carbon nanomaterials for large-quantity production.
This paper therefore aims to provide a simple and cost-effective method for the production of nitrogen-doped carbon nanomaterial as the counter electrode to achieve highly efficient DSCs. A simple and eco-friendly mechanochemical pin-grinding method was developed to prepare graphene nanoplatelets doped with nitrogen at its edges using flake graphite as the precursor at room temperature. The electrocatalytic activities of the obtained edge-nitrogenated graphene nanoplatelets (ENGNPs) were studied by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and Tafel polarization measurements. The DSC with an ENGNP counter electrode exhibited a power conversion efficiency of 7.69%, which is comparable to that of a cell with a Pt counter electrode fabricated under the same conditions.

ENGNPs were prepared by pin-grinding flake graphite in a magnetic grinding machine in the presence of nitrogen at room temperature. 15 g of pristine graphite (200 mesh) was placed into a capsule (750 mL) containing stainless steel pins (500 g, 5 mm in length and 100 μm in diameter). The capsule was sealed and charged with nitrogen, and then it was fixed on the magnetic grinding machine. The steel pins were driven by the magnetic force to grind the pristine graphite into small graphene nanoplatelets (schematically shown in Fig. S1). At the same time, nitrogen reacted with the graphene nanoplatelets at the broken edges of the graphite framework to obtain ENGNPs.

100 mg of the as-prepared ENGNPs was dispersed in a 20 ml mixed solvent of isopropanol and n-butanol with the volume ratio of 5:5. Then, 10 μL of tetrabutyl titanate was added into the above dispersion and sonicated for 50 min. The resultant dispersion was sprayed onto precleaned fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass using an airbrush. Subsequently, the as-prepared electrodes were heated at 300 °C for 15 min.

TiO2 electrodes were prepared by depositing a TiO2 colloidal paste onto FTO substrates using the doctor-blade method and then sintered at 450 °C for 30 min. The thickness of the TiO2 film was controlled to be about 10 μm. The as-prepared TiO2 electrodes were immersed into the ethanol solution of N3 dye (0.5 mM) for 12 h at room temperature. The dye-sensitized TiO2 electrodes were then rinsed in ethanol and dried in air. A DSC was fabricated by assembling a dye-sensitized TiO2 electrode and a counter electrode using a thermal adhesive film (Surlyn, 60 μm) to produce a sandwich-type cell. The interelectrode space was filled with an electrolyte consisting of 0.4 M LiI, 0.4 M 1-methyl-3-propylimidazolium, 0.05 M I2, and 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine in 3-methoxypropionitrile. The active area of the cell is 0.2 cm2.


The morphology of the sample was investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, FEI Sirion 200) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEM-2011). Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra were recorded on a Perkin-Elmer Spectrum 100 spectrometer using KBr disks. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was performed on a Bruker D8 instrument using Cu Kα radiation. Raman spectra were recorded with a Renishaw Raman system 1000 with an excitation wavelength of 514 nm. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy analysis was carried out on an ESCA Lab220i-XL spectrometer with Al Kα radiation. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed on a Solartron 1287/1255B electrochemical system using the symmetric thin-layer cell consisting of two identical electrodes, at 0 V bias and 10 mV amplitude. The electrolyte was the same as that used in DSCs. Tafel polarization measurements were performed with a CHI660D electrochemical workstation at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1 using dummy cells. The photocurrent–voltage curves of DSCs were recorded using a Keithley 2400 digital source meter under illumination by a solar simulator (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2). The light intensity was calibrated by a standard Si solar cell.


ENGNPs were prepared by pin-grinding flake graphite in the presence of nitrogen at room temperature. The pristine graphite was broken into graphene nanoplatelets through a pin-grinding process driven by magnetic force. The mechanochemical cracking of graphitic C–C bonds can create the activated carbon sites that react directly with nitrogen at the broken edges. Therefore, the doping of nitrogen at the graphite edges during the cleavage of the pristine graphite is a spontaneous process. As schematically shown in Fig. 1, two kinds of cracking patterns are expected to form aromatic pyrazole (2) and pyridazine (1) rings, respectively, from the cyclization between activated edges and nitrogen. The FTIR spectra (Fig. S2) confirm that a C–N stretching peak at 1410 cm−1 is observed only in the spectrum of the ENGNPs and not in that of the pristine graphite. Further evidence for the presence of nitrogen at the edges of the ENGNPs comes from the XPS measurements. Fig. 2 shows the XPS spectra for the pristine graphite and the ENGNP. As expected, the pristine graphite shows a pronounced C 1s peak only at a binding energy of 284.3 eV and a weak O 1s peak at a binding energy of 533 eV. In addition to the C 1s and O 1s peaks, the ENGNPs show a characteristic N 1s peak at a binding energy of 399 eV. The high-resolution N 1s peak of the ENGNPs shown in Fig. 2b is deconvoluted into two components at binding energies of 398.2 and 399.7 eV, corresponding to aromatic C–N in the pyrazole (pyrrolic nitrogen) and pyridazine (pyridinic nitrogen) rings, respectively. Both pyrrolic nitrogen and pyridinic nitrogen are at the edges of the graphene framework. It is noteworthy that the ratio of pyrrolic nitrogen to pyridinic nitrogen calculated from the peak area is 2.5, implying that the pyrazole edge path (2) is the dominant process.


Fig. 3a and b show SEM images of the pristine graphite and ENGNPs. From Fig. 3, it can be seen that the large graphite flakes were broken into small graphene nanoplatelets during the mechanochemical pin-grinding process. The dramatic size reduction of the pristine graphite is a strong indication of the cleavages of graphitic C–C bonds. The TEM image (Fig. 3c) clearly shows relatively small ENGNPs with an irregular round shape compared with the pristine graphite flake. The high-resolution TEM image of the ENGNPs (Fig. S3a) displays edge stripes with a few graphene layers. The selected area electron diffraction pattern (Fig. S3b) reveals that the obtained ENGNPs have minimal damage on their basal plane. The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface areas of the pristine graphite and the resultant ENGNPs were measured by a Micromeritics ASAP2020 physisorption analyzer using nitrogen adsorption at 77K. The BET surface area (see Fig. S4 and Table S1) of ENGNPs is 679.15 m2 g−1, which is much higher than that of pristine graphite (0.27 m2 g−1). The dramatic increase in the BET surface area of the ENGNPs further confirms an effective and spontaneous delamination of the pristine graphite into small graphene nanoplatelets by the pin-grinding process.

Fig. 4a shows the XRD diffraction patterns of the pristine graphite and ENGNPs. The XRD pattern of the pristine graphite shows a strong peak at 26.5° corresponding to the reflection of (002) plane with an interlayer distance of 0.34 nm and a clearly observed (004) diffraction peak at 54.7°. Compared with pristine graphite, the as-prepared ENGNP sample exhibits only one weak peak (002) at 26.3°, indicating the occurrence of breakage and delamination of the pristine graphite flake into few layer graphene nanoplatelets. Fig. 4b displays the Raman spectra of the pristine graphite and ENGNPs. Both the pristine graphite and ENGNPs exhibit three peaks corresponding to the D band, G band, and 2D band. The G band is related to the E2g vibration model of sp2 carbon domains, while the D band is associated with disordered structure and/or graphene edges.Fig. 4b reveals a more intense D band for ENGNPs than that for the pristine graphite; the intensity ratio of D band to G band (ID/IG) is 0.07 for the pristine graphite and 1.01 for the ENGNPs, indicating the dramatic size reduction arising from cracking and the significant edge distortion caused by edge-nitrogenation. The 2D peak of ENGNPs appears at 2702 cm−1. Compared with the spectrum of single-layer graphene, the as-prepared ENGNPs exhibit a broader and blue-shifted 2D peak, demonstrating a few-layer structure.
To investigate their electrocatalytic performances, ENGNPs were deposited onto FTO glass substrates by a spraying method. Five ENGNP electrodes with different thicknesses of ENGNP layers were fabricated, which were designated as ENGNP1, ENGNP2, ENGNP3, ENGNP4, and ENGNP5, corresponding to ENGNP layer thicknesses of 1.8, 3.2, 4.5, 5.6, and 7.1 μm, respectively. The electrocatalytic performances of ENGNP electrodes were explored by EIS measurements using symmetric thin-layer cells consisting of two identical electrodes. Fig. 5 presents the Nyquist plots of ENGNP electrodes. For comparison, the Nyquist plot of the pristine graphite electrode is also exhibited in Fig. 5 (the thickness of the pristine graphite layer is about 6.5 μm). In all ENGNP cases, the plots show two semicircles, which are assigned in order of increasing frequency to the Nernst diffusion process of the redox couple in the electrolyte and the charge-transfer process at the interface of the electrode and electrolyte. However, the pristine graphite electrode shows only one big semicircle corresponding to the charge-transfer process at the electrode/electrolyte interface. For a porous carbon electrode, the Nernst diffusion impedance in the pores of the electrode material should be considered. However, a third semicircle in the high-frequency region is not observed in the Nyquist plots shown in Fig. 5b. Thus, the diffusion of the I−/I3− redox couple in the pores of ENGNP can be ignored, and the charge-transfer process at the electrode/electrolyte interface is controlled only by the charge-transfer resistance (Rct) term. Therefore, EIS plots were simulated using the equivalent circuit shown in the inset of Fig. 5a, where Rs is the series resistance, Rct is the charge-transfer resistance at the electrode/electrolyte interface, ZN is the Nernst diffusion impedance, and CPE is the constant phase element describing the deviation from the ideal capacitance. The impedance of the CPE is
ZCPE = B(iω)−β
(1)
where
B and β are the frequency-independent parameters of the CPE. According to the equivalent circuit, Rct can be determined from the diameter of the high-frequency semicircle, and Rs can be calculated from the intercept on the real axis in the high-frequency region. Table 1 summarizes the value of EIS parameters estimated from Nyquist plots. Rs does not vary significantly with the varying thickness of the ENGNP layer. This is because the electrodes were prepared on the same FTO substrate, and Rs is dominated mainly by the electrical conductivity of the FTO substrate. The CPE increases gradually with the thickness of the ENGNP layer due to an increase in the surface area. The Rct is a major parameter for evaluating the electrocatalytic performance of the electrode. As shown in Table 1, the Rct of pristine graphite electrode is 82.9 Ω cm2, indicating a very poor electrocatalytic activity for the redox reaction of the I−/I3− couple. The values of Rct of ENGNP electrodes are much lower than that of the pristine graphite electrode, demonstrating that the increased surface area and the doped nitrogen at the edges that resulted from the mechanochemical cracking can effectively improve the electrocatalytic activity of ENGNPs. In addition, it is observed that the value of Rct decreases with the increase in the thickness of the ENGNP layer. As the thickness of the ENGNP layer increases from 2 to 3.5 μm, the Rct value decreases from 2.7 to 1.3 Ω cm2. The optimized Rct value of the ENGNP electrode is 0.6 Ω cm2 at a thickness of 5.6 μm (ENGNP4). It is worth noting that the value of Rct exhibits relatively weak thickness dependence when the thickness of the ENGNP layer exceeds 3 μm. The Rct values of ENGNP3, ENGNP4, and ENGNP5 are 0.8, 0.6, and 0.7 Ω cm2, respectively. This result is different from other reported results for carbon-based electrodes, which are usually optimized using carbon films of tens of micrometers in thickness with strong thickness dependence.

Electrode

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
ct (Ω cm2)
CPE: B (Ssβ)
CPE: β
ENGNP1
7.7
2.7
2.8 × 10−5
0.91
ENGNP2
7.6
1.3
4.6 × 10−5
0.89
ENGNP3
7.8
0.8
8.2 × 10−5
0.86
ENGNP4
7.7
0.6
9.6 × 10−5
0.85
ENGNP5
7.9
0.7
1.1 × 10−4
0.83
Pristine graphite
7.8
82.9
—
—
Pt
7.8
0.5
—
—

Fig. 6a compares the Nyquist plots of ENGNP4 and Pt electrodes. The Pt electrode was prepared by electrodepositing a Pt film onto FTO glass and then sintering at 390 °C for 20 min. The thickness of the Pt film is about 70 nm. The Rct of the Pt electrode determined from the high-frequency semicircle of the Nyquist plot is 0.5 Ω cm2. Clearly, the value of Rct for the ENGNP electrode is nearly equal to that of the Pt electrode. This result demonstrates that the ENGNP electrode possesses an electrocatalytic activity similar to the Pt electrode in the I−/I3− redox electrolyte. Tafel polarization measurements were carried out to further verify the electrocatalytic activity of the ENGNP4 electrode. Tafel curves shown in Fig. 6b indicate that the exchange current density of the ENGNP4 electrode is comparable to that of the Pt electrode, meaning that the ENGNP4 electrode can catalyze the redox reaction of I−/I3− couple as effectively as the Pt electrode.
Since FTO glass has negligible electrocatalytic activity for the I−/I3− redox reaction (see Fig. S5), the excellent electrocatalytic activity and the weak thickness dependence on the Rct of the ENGNP electrode must be due to its intrinsic properties. The high surface area, the unique edge-nitrogenation structure, and the undamaged basal plane of ENGNPs are believed to be responsible for its superb electrocatalytic performance. The high surface area along with the doped nitrogen at the edges is in favor of providing more electrocatalytic activity and improving the surface wettability of the electrode in the electrolyte. The restored basal plane structures can enhance the charge transport to facilitate the charge transfer at the interface between the electrode and electrolyte.
The electrochemical stability of the ENGNP electrode is evaluated by characterizing the electrocatalytic activity in terms of monitoring Rct with time. Fig. S6 displays the variation of Rct with time measured in a sealed symmetric thin-layer cell consisting of two ENGNP4 electrodes. The value of Rct of the ENGNP4 electrode remains nearly constant at around 0.6 Ω cm2 during the test period of 90 days. This result demonstrates the excellent stability of the electrochemical activity of the ENGNP electrode in the I−/I3− redox electrolyte.
The excellent electrocatalytic activity implies effective reduction of I3− to I− at the electrode/electrolyte interface, and the facilitation of the dye-regeneration process at the surface of the photoanode, which makes the ENGNPs potential counter electrodes of DSCs to replace expensive Pt. DSCs were assembled with different counter electrodes including ENGNP and Pt electrodes. EIS characterization of the DSCs would provide useful information on the electrocatalytic performance of the counter electrodes. Fig. S7 shows the Nyquist plots of DSCs with ENGNP4 and Pt counter electrodes obtained at open-circuit condition under 1 sun illumination. The semicircle at the highest frequency region is related to the counter electrode/electrolyte event. Clearly, the Rct at the ENGNP4 electrode/electrolyte interface is comparable to that at the Pt electrode/electrolyte interface.
The photovoltaic performances of DSCs were measured under simulated solar illumination (100 mW cm−2, AM 1.5). The photocurrent density–voltage characteristic curves of DSCs with ENGNP and Pt counter electrodes are shown in Fig. 7. The detailed photovoltaic parameters, such as the open-circuit voltage (Voc), the short-circuit current density (Jsc), the fill factor (FF), and the conversion efficiency (η), are summarized in Table 2. The pristine graphite as the counter electrode of DSCs brings a poor energy conversion efficiency of 2.42% due to its insufficient electrocatalytic activity (Fig. S8). Obviously, the conversion efficiencies of DSCs with ENGNP counter electrodes are much higher than that of the cell with a pristine graphite counter electrode. Such performance enhancement is mainly attributed to the improvement of the electrocatalytic activity of the ENGNP electrodes. The η of the ENGNP electrode-based DSCs increases with the increase in the ENGNP layer thickness up to 5.6 μm and decreases slightly with further increase in the thickness. The DSC with an ENGNP4 counter electrode achieves the highest η of 7.69% with an open-circuit voltage of 0.719 V, short-circuit current density of 16.15 mA cm−2, and fill factor of 0.66. The Pt electrode-based reference DSC exhibits a Voc of 0.712 V, Jsc of 16.65 mA cm−2, FF of 0.68, and η of 8.06%. Clearly, the photovoltaic performance of the DSC with an ENGNP4 electrode is comparable to that of the cell with Pt electrode. This result indicates that the low-cost ENGNP is a fairly promising candidate for replacing the expensive Pt as a high-efficiency electrocatalyst in the counter electrode of DSCs.
Counter electrode

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF

η (%)
ENGNP1
0.666
14.26
0.56
5.32
ENGNP2
0.685
15.26
0.61
6.37
ENGNP3
0.702
15.51
0.64
6.97
ENGNP4
0.719
16.15
0.66
7.69
ENGNP5
0.710
15.66
0.64
7.12
Pt
0.712
16.65
0.68
8.06

ENGNPs was prepared by a simple pin-grinding process at room temperature using flake graphite as the precursor and was demonstrated to be an efficient and Pt-free counter electrode for DSCs. The combination of high surface area, unique edge-nitrogenated structure, and an undamaged basal plane endows the resultant ENGNPs with excellent electrocatalytic activity for the redox reaction of I−/I3−. Thus, the DSC using the ENGNP4 counter electrode achieves a conversion efficiency of 7.69%, which is comparable to that of the cell using a Pt counter electrode. The simple preparation process, low cost, and excellent electrocatalytic performance enable ENGNPs to be a promising alternative to expensive Pt as the counter electrode of DSCs.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 21273137).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Schematic illumination of preparation of ENGNPs, FTIR, TEM, SAED, and N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm of ENGNPs, Nyquist plot of FTO glass, variation of Rct of ENGNP electrode with time, and the current density–voltage curves of pristine graphite-based DSC. See DOI: 10.1039/c6nr00401f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016