 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA11925B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6450-6458


Yi
Yang
,

Huirong
Peng
,

Cheng
Liu
,

Zulqarnain
Arain
,

Yong
Ding
*,

Shuang
Ma
,

Xiaolong
Liu
,

Tasawar
Hayat
,

Ahmed
Alsaedi
 and 

Songyuan
Dai
*

State Key Laboratory of Alternate Electrical Power System with Renewable Energy Sources, North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102206, P. R. China. E-mail: dingy@ncepu.edu.cn; sydai@ncepu.edu.cn

Beijing Key Laboratory of Novel Thin-Film Solar Cells, Beijing Key Laboratory of Energy Safety and Clean Utilization, North China Electric Power University, Beijing, 102206, China

NAAM Research Group, Department of Mathematics, Faculty of Science, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia

Energy System Engineering Department, Sukkur IBA University, Sukkur, Pakistan

Received
11th December 2018
, Accepted 11th February 2019
First published on 14th February 2019
Even though organic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have rapidly emerged as one of the most promising candidates for photovoltaic applications, simultaneously achieving a controlled microstructure and subdued trap states has proven to be challenging. In this work, ammonium benzenesulfonate (ABS) is introduced as a coordination and passivation molecule into a perovskite to improve the film quality and reduce defect densities. ABS can not only form the intermediate phase with precursor materials to decrease the crystallization rate, but also passivate both cationic and anionic defects at grain boundaries due to its zwitterionic structure. The trap density is significantly reduced, as demonstrated qualitatively by the confocal photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) mapping images and quantitatively by trap density of states measurement, leading to suppressed trap-induced non-radiative recombination and elongated carrier lifetimes. The highest device efficiency of 20.62% is achieved by the introduction of ABS, mainly originating from the improvement of Voc and FF. The moisture and oxygen tolerance of unencapsulated devices are also enhanced, with only 15% degradation of the initial efficiency after storage for 1400 h in an ambient environment with ≈30% humidity. This strategy offers a simple method to fabricate high-quality and low-defect perovskite films, demonstrating the potential of these high-performance PSCs for large-scale production.

Hybrid organic–inorganic PSCs have attracted tremendous research interest due to their outstanding photoelectric properties along with cost-effective preparation processes. Following unremitting efforts by researchers in recent years, PSCs have achieved remarkable progress with a record power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 23.3%, offering potential for scaling up to production levels in the field of photovoltaic technology. However, the intrinsic low thermal stability and low formation energy of perovskite materials release a high density of defects at the film surface and grain boundaries of polycrystalline films that are electrically detrimental. These defects can degrade device performance and cause instability issues due to energy disorder, reduced carrier concentration and exposed invasion sites for moisture. Thus, it is highly desirable to eliminate the defects both to boost the PCE and prolong the durability of PSCs.

One of the major approaches to suppress the defects is to improve the film coverage and reduce the number of grain boundaries. Several strategies have been researched to regulate the surface morphology, including the manipulation of the deposition method and adjustment of the film composition. They may either inevitably increase the complexity of the fabrication process hindering its large-scale production or cause phase separation upon photoexcitation due to the mixed halide perovskite component. As an easier and reproducible method, additive engineering has been demonstrated to be superior in enhancing the quality of perovskite films. Some additives such as DMSO, acetonitrile and thiourea are able to coordinate with perovskite precursor materials and form the intermediate phase, which could mediate the dynamic process of crystal growth and thus reduce grain boundaries.
Of course, the grain boundaries cannot be eliminated completely no matter how the film microstructure is improved. Hence, reducing defect activity at grain boundaries has been proposed as the second approach to heal defects in polycrystalline perovskites. Different passivation molecules have been researched to interact with the charged defects at grain boundaries. Fullerene derivatives, as good electron transport materials, could passivate the halide-induced deep traps. Pyridine or thiourea, as electron donors, could bind to the under-coordinated Pb2+ ions and thus passivate positively charged defects. Zwitterionic compounds, trimethylammonium chloride and choline chloride are capable of passivating both positively and negatively charged defects, whereas the additionally introduced halides may migrate into the perovskite lattice and lead to light-induced phase separation as mentioned above. It thus appears that healing multiple defects in polycrystalline perovskites is necessary but very complicated. There is a scarcity of known additives to simultaneously improve the film morphology and passivate defects at grain boundaries. It is imperative to explore a bi-functional additive for fabricating high-quality perovskite films with reduced grain boundaries and less trap densities.
Herein, we introduced a novel and effective additive of ammonium benzenesulfonate (ABS) into the CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3) precursor to grow large-grain and low-defect perovskite films. ABS could act as a multiple O-donor to strongly coordinate with PbI2 and form an intermediate phase with MAI, which effectively retarded the crystallization process and produced a high-quality perovskite film. Meanwhile, the zwitterion-structured ABS remaining in the perovskite efficiently passivated both positively and negatively charged defects. The negatively charged phenylsulfonate group (phenyl-SOOO−) as an electron donor can neutralize the positively charged Pb clusters and uncoordinated Pb ions. The positively charged and electron-deficient ammonium ions (NH4+) are capable of passivating negatively charged MA vacancies and Pb–I anti-sites. Visible PL and TRPL mapping characterization techniques were used to demonstrate the reduction of trap-induced carrier recombination and improved uniformity of the ABS assisted perovskite film. The morphology improvement and passivation effect remarkably reduced the trap density of the perovskite, suppressing non-radiative recombination and extending the charge carrier lifetime, which increased the PCE from 17.29% to 19.64% and the highest efficiency of 20.62% was obtained for the FA0.85MA0.15PbI2.55Br0.45-based PSC. The long-term stability of PSCs was also enhanced with only 15% efficiency loss after degradation for 1400 h under ambient conditions. This approach provides an easy fabrication method for less defective and highly homogeneous perovskite films, showing potential for the commercialization of efficient and stable PSCs in future.

Different concentrations of ABS were introduced into the perovskite precursor solution and spin-coated onto the substrate by a simple one-step method. The surface morphology of the corresponding perovskite films is shown in the top-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images (Fig. 1a–d). The grain size of the perovskite increases, and the surface morphology becomes more uniform with increasing concentration of ABS (Fig. 1e). Further enhancing the ABS content to over 2 mg mL−1 (Fig. S1) results in the irregularity of thin films, and a crystalline flake-like material appears which might be attributed to the disruption of the ordered perovskite structure by ABS.

X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurement was performed to investigate the role of ABS in perovskite crystallization (Fig. 2). The crystallinity of perovskite films prepared using ABS is clearly improved. Although an excessive amount of ABS slightly reduces the crystallinity, no additional peaks appear, indicating that there is no substantive second phase (Fig. 2a). We further isolated the intermediate phase and compared its XRD pattern with that of PbI2, ABS and PbI2–ABS to find out how ABS regulates the crystal growth in the formation of the perovskite film. As shown in Fig. 2b, there are two new diffraction peaks for the PbI2–ABS sample, confirming a strong interaction between PbI2 and ABS. The multiple O donors in ABS may coordinate with PbI2 to form the PbI2–ABS complex. The isolated material from the PbI2–ABS–MAI compound exhibits new and unreported diffraction peaks, and the low-angle peaks indicate a longer interplanar distance in the crystal structure of the intermediate phase. Thus, we speculate that the MAI–PbI2–ABS complex as a possible intermediate compound is formed during the deposition of the perovskite film. The existence of this intermediate phase slows down the crystallization process and leads to larger grains and better crystallinity in perovskite films, well-consistent with the SEM measurements. After annealing at 100 °C, the MAI–PbI2–ABS phase disappears, and the MAPbI3 phase forms. Similar XRD patterns and the same characteristic peak positions of the (110) and (220) crystal plane were observed for films with different ABS contents (Fig. S2), indicating that ABS has not entered the crystal structure. It is assumed that most ABS still remains in the as-prepared film and is likely to exist at the vicinity of the MAPbI3 grain boundaries and the surface of MAPbI3 films because of its high cohesive energy. To check this assumption, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was first conducted on the ABS powder to demonstrate that ABS could not evaporate from the film even after annealing at 100 °C (Fig. S3). In addition, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurement was performed on the ABS-1 film to determine the location of ABS, according to previous research. The XPS depth profiles of I and S elements are shown in Fig. 2c and d. The characteristic peak intensity of S 2p decreases a lot after etching for 60 s compared to the nearly unchanged peak of I 3d, suggesting the higher ABS content on the film surface than in the bulk. It is well-known that the film surface consists of large amounts of grain boundaries while many internal components will be exposed after etching. Therefore, it is concluded that ABS is possibly located at the grain boundaries.
On the basis of the above morphology and crystallographic conditions, we propose a plausible mechanism for the transition from the precursor to monolithic perovskite grains. As illustrated in Fig. 3, MAI, PbI2 and ABS are first dissolved in the mixed solvent, then the transparent precursor solution is spin-coated onto the substrate. In the intermediate stage, the film composition is concentrated by the evaporation of the solvent, and the spatial steric hindrance of ABS and DMSO impedes the transformation from layered-phase PbI2 to a tetragonal-phase perovskite. Afterwards, chlorobenzene accelerates the perovskite nucleation and crystallization via the quick extraction of the DMSO solvent, and then the MAI–PbI2–ABS phase forms. During the annealing procedure, the intermediate phase MAI–PbI2–ABS is gradually converted into the crystalline MAPbI3 and finally developed into a large-grain and uniform film.
To understand the influence of ABS on the photophysical properties of perovskite films, ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption and confocal PL mapping measurements were conducted. The ABS-1 film shows a stronger absorbance over the full light-absorption range and a slight red-shift (Fig. S4). Since the film thickness is unchanged with the addition of ABS (Fig. S5), this could be attributed to the enlarged crystal grain size and increased crystallinity. From the PL intensity images (Fig. 4a and b), a much higher PL intensity of the ABS-1 film with more uniform distribution in emission is observed, suggesting the homogeneous and low-defect film surface, consistent with the single-point PL measurement (Fig. 4c). Confocal TRPL mapping was used to further understand the non-radiative recombination of the ABS-0 and ABS-1 films, using an excitation wavelength of 485 nm (Fig. 4f). The corresponding decay parameters listed in Table 1 are obtained by fitting the data with a bi-exponential decay function, as follow:
(1)
where
Ai is the corresponding decay amplitude, τ1 and τ2 are the fast and slow decay times, respectively, and C is a constant. The fast decay component is attributed to the surface recombination, and the slow component usually reflects the trap recombination in the perovskite bulk, so the slower PL decays are generally associated with high-quality films. As TRPL mapping images of the extracted τ2 reveal (Fig. 4d and e), the slow lifetime is obviously increased, and the heterogeneity in PL decay is avoided over the entire surface by using the ABS additive. It is demonstrated that trap induced non-radiative recombination in the bulk film is substantially suppressed, demonstrating the reduced trap density which results from the zwitterionic nature of the ABS molecule. The strong N–O polar bond could split the molecule into negatively and positively charged components: phenyl-SOOO− and NH4+, respectively (Fig. S6). The electron-donating phenyl-SOOO− is able to neutralize the positively charged Pb clusters and uncoordinated Pb ions. In addition, the electron-deficient NH4+ can passivate negatively charged MA vacancies and Pb–I anti-sites. Therefore, an appropriate amount of ABS could simultaneously passivate both cationic and anionic defects of perovskite films, representing great potential to obtain highly efficient PSCs.

PSCs

τ
1 (ns)

τ
2 (ns)

t (ms)

n


R
s (Ω cm−2)

E
a (eV)

N
t (cm−3 eV−1)
ABS-0
6–10
50–90
0.122
1.73
13.99
0.267
4.82 × 1016
ABS-1
6–18
80–100
0.663
1.40
9.92
0.189
3.04 × 1016
As illustrated in Fig. 5a, mesoporous perovskite solar cells were fabricated with the structure of a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)/compact titanium dioxide (cTiO2)/mesoporous titanium dioxide (mTiO2) ETL/MAPbI3 absorber with or without ABS/2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) HTL/Gold (Au). Fig. 5b demonstrates the photovoltaic performance of the best-performing PSCs under simulated illumination of AM 1.5G (1000 W m−2). The photovoltaic parameters of each sample are summarized in Table 2. Compared with the reference, the ABS incorporated device exhibits a higher open-circuit voltage (Voc), increasing from 1.03 V to 1.09 V, which mainly results from both the reduced defects and less carrier recombination. The short-circuit current density (Jsc) is slightly increased because of the stronger light absorption. The difference in device photocurrents can also be confirmed by the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) curves, which are shown in Fig. S8. Another parameter that determines the PCE is the fill factor (FF), and this is affected by the complex energy losses from series resistance, shunt resistance and electrode surface reflection. In the ABS-based device, the series resistance is decreased due to better crystallinity and enlarged grains, while the shunt resistance is increased due to the reduced bulk and surface defects, which leads to a significantly improved FF from 75.68% to 78.62%. Consequently, the overall PCE is greatly elevated from 17.29% to an impressive 19.64% for the champion cell, and the problematic photocurrent hysteresis is also alleviated (Table S1). When the ABS concentration is increased to 1.5 mg mL−1, the device begins to deteriorate because of the disruption of perovskite crystals, as supported by SEM, XRD, and UV-vis absorption measurements.
PSCs

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
ABS-0
22.23
1.03
75.68
17.29
ABS-0.5
22.75
1.05
76.95
18.31
ABS-1
22.92
1.09
78.62
19.64
ABS-1.5
22.83
1.06
78.04
18.88
The steady-state PCEs were measured by applying a constant bias equal to the voltage at their respective maximum power point. Fig. S9 shows the corresponding curves for the reference and optimized devices as a function of time. The PCEs rapidly stabilize at 19.31% and 17.01% for the device using ABS-1 and ABS-0 absorbers, respectively, well-matched with the J–V measurement. The statistical distribution of PCEs for 30 individual devices based on different absorbers are displayed in Fig. 5c. Apparently, the statistical parameters of ABS-1-based devices show a much narrower distribution in comparison with the ABS-0-based cells, signifying that the additive engineering of ABS is an effective method to fabricate more reproducible devices. The PSCs based on FA0.85MA0.15PbI2.55Br0.45 films (Fig. S10) were also fabricated via this additive engineering to achieve the highest efficiency of 20.62%, with the Voc of 1.12 V, FF of 78.54% and Jsc of 23.53% (Fig. 5d), suggesting that ABS can also take effect in mixed halide perovskites.
In order to understand the passivation effect of ABS, thermal admittance spectroscopy (TAS) was used to quantize the trap densities in different perovskite films. The distribution of trap density of states (tDOS) can be obtained from the frequency dependent capacitance using the following equation:
(2)
where
Vbi denotes the built-in potential, W is the depletion width, q is the elementary charge, C is the capacitance, ω stands for the applied angular frequency, k is the Boltzmann factor, and T is the absolute temperature. More details on the determination of the tDOS are given in Fig. S11 and Table S2. The typical trap state distributions and trap activation energy (Ea) for ABS-0 and ABS-1 based devices are shown in Fig. 6a and b. As we expected, the passivation of ABS not only decreases Ea from 0.267 eV to 0.189 eV, but also reduces tDOS over the most of the energy region. Generally, the deeper trap region (>0.3 eV) is assigned to the defects at the film surface, while the shallower trap region (<0.3 eV) is indexed to traps at the grain boundaries. Lower tDOS in the deep region corresponds to a better surface morphology with less defects, as also evidenced by SEM images. It is well known that there are redundant grain boundaries in perovskite films, giving rise to plentiful shallow traps and thus severe charge recombination along these sites. The much smaller trap density values in the shallow region indicate that ABS may exist around grain boundaries in already-formed perovskite films to passivate numerous defects. This result confirms the higher Voc values of ABS modified devices, as the majority of Voc losses in solar cells are proven to be affected by the surface charge traps. Furthermore, the light intensity dependence of Voc (Fig. 6c) elucidates more information on the carrier recombination process. This linear relationship is commonly recognized to give a slope of nkT/q, which shows the influence of the ideality factor (n). The n value is generally unity when trap-assisted recombination is absent in the device, i.e., a slope of Voc = kT/q should be expected for a trap-free system. In our present study, the reduced ideality factor demonstrates that the non-radiative trap-assisted recombination is effectively suppressed by ABS addition (Table 1).

To gain further insight into the charge recombination kinetics, transient photovoltage decay measurement was performed on the operating devices under open-circuit conditions and the decay constant for this process was calculated according to recent reports. The ABS-1-based device displays much slower photovoltage decay, revealing a slow recombination rate of injected electrons (Fig. 6d). The carrier lifetime in the ABS-1 based device was measured to be ∼5 times longer than that of the ABS-0 based device, which supports the concept that the charge carrier recombination throughout the entire device has been suppressed in the ABS-1-based cell. Our observations of the reduced trap densities and repressed carrier recombination demonstrate that the passivation effect of ABS could efficiently enhance the photovoltaic performance, primarily reflected in the higher Voc and FF values.
Long-term stability of PSCs is one of the most intractable challenges due to the hygroscopic and thermodynamically unstable nature of the perovskite materials, affecting the transition from the experimental stage to practical applications. The normalized PCEs of the unencapsulated solar cells as a function of storage time are presented in Fig. 6e and f. The cells were kept in the dark at 25 °C under open-circuit conditions prior to the measurement. The device based on ABS-1 maintains 85% of its initial efficiency after 60 days of storage in air at ≈30% humidity (as metered), and 80% after 400 hours in air at ≈65% humidity (as metered), while the cell without ABS degrades by 52% and 50%, respectively, under the same conditions. Such superior environmental stability of ABS-1 based PSCs could be attributed to the larger-grain morphology, higher crystallinity and decreased defect sites, which suppresses the moisture and oxygen permeation through vulnerable sites when exposed to ambient air.

In conclusion, a novel and reproducible approach based on bi-functional additive engineering has been successfully developed to fabricate large-grain and low-defect perovskite films. The trap density is characterized qualitatively and quantitatively by PL and TRPL mapping coupled with tDOS measurement. The synergistic effect of crystal growth regulation and defect passivation by ABS efficiently reduce the defect density and increase the carrier lifetime. The resulting ABS-1-based device using MAPbI3 as the absorber demonstrates an improved PCE of 19.64% over that of 17.29% for the reference ABS-0-based device, and the highest efficiency of 20.62% is achieved by the FA0.85MA0.15PbI2.55Br0.45-based device. The environmental stability of the PSC is also enhanced when ABS is employed. It is expected that the bi-functional additive-engineered perovskites can further promote the development of high-performance and low-defect PSCs towards large-scale commercialization.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors acknowledge support from the National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2016YFA0202400), the 111 Project (No. B16016), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. U1705256, 51702096), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No. 2018ZD07) and the Double Top Construction Program of North China Electric Power University (No. XM1805314).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta11925b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019