 DOI: 10.1039/D1NJ05232B
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2022, 46, 2837-2845


Xiaofang
Ye
,

Hongkun
Cai
*,

Qinghe
Sun
,

Tie
Xu
,

Jian
Ni
,

Juan
Li
 and 

Jianjun
Zhang
*

Department of Electronic Science and Technology, College of Electronic Information and Optical Engineering, Nankai University, Tianjin 300350, China. E-mail: caihongkun@nankai.edu.cn; jjzhang@nankai.edu.cn

Key Laboratory of Photoelectronic Thin Film Devices and Technology of Tianjin, Tianjin, 300350, China

Received
3rd November 2021
, Accepted 5th January 2022
First published on 5th January 2022
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted widespread attention owing to their adjustable band gap, easy manufacturing, and longer carrier diffusion length. However, the influence of environmental factors such as water, oxygen, light and heat, as well as the inherent ionic characteristic of the perovskite crystal, make the stability of the device relatively poor. Here, organic cation ammonium salts, due to their hydrophobicity, are used as the 2D/3D hybrid perovskite isolation layer, and the spacer cation and inorganic [PbI6]4− octahedral structure could form multiple NH⋯I hydrogen bonds, which make the devices not only have the excellent long-term stability of 2D perovskites but also the high efficiency of 3D perovskites. At the same time, the EDS mapping results prove that ion migration and diffusion are significantly suppressed. As a result, in comparison with the control device (PCE = 19.41%), the PCE of the solar cell with a 2D capping layer based on PMAI is slightly increased to 20.02%, and the stability still maintains 93.02% of the original efficiency after 720 hours. In addition, both the long alkyl chain and the benzene ring can improve the hydrophobicity of the film, while the benzene ring can better enhance the humidity stability. This work provides a guide for developing 2D/3D PSCs to balance high efficiency and good long-term stability.

In recent years, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted widespread attention owing to their excellent performance, adjustable band gap, high light absorption coefficient, low exciton binding energy, long carrier life and other properties. PSCs have achieved a shocking achievement and the current international certification efficiency has exceeded 25.5%. However, different sensitive environmental factors such as a water and oxygen atmosphere, change of temperature, and ultraviolet light are well known to affect the chemical stability of PSCs. The ionic properties of perovskite materials could also lead to insufficient stability, which seriously hinders the commercialization process of PSCs.

Two-dimensional (2D) perovskites possess large spacer cations, which could hinder the movement of internal ions. Moreover, interaction with appropriate organic groups is conducive to improving moisture resistance, while the inherent stability of the perovskite material itself is also improved. However, pure 2D PSCs have anisotropic charge transport properties that hinder the transport of charge carriers, resulting in device efficiencies far lower than those of 3D perovskite devices.
In order to have both the favorable humidity stability of 2D PSCs and the excellent photoelectric properties of 3D PSCs, 2D/3D engineering has attracted increasing attention. Wang et al. rationally designed a 2D–3D perovskite stacked layer structure using a process of in situ growing a 2D PEA2PbI4 capping layer on a 3D perovskite film, reducing non-radiative recombination and making the extraction of holes in the perovskite film more efficient. Meanwhile, it suppressed ion migration, improving the long-term stability of the 2D–3D PSCs and achieving a high efficiency of 18.51%. Gratzel et al. inserted superhydrophobic (FEA)2PbI4 between the 3D absorbing layer and the hole transport layer (HTL) to prepare high-efficiency double-layer 2D/3D PSCs with excellent moisture stability, while the diffusion of ions in the device was reduced. In humid air under simulated sunlight, the unsealed 2D/3D PSCs can maintain 90% efficiency for 1000 hours. Chen et al. introduced 11MA through additive engineering, which has carbonyls (carboxyl and amide) and a long hydrophobic alkyl chain structure. The strong coordination interaction between carbonyl and Pb2+ passivated the defect states and improved crystallinity, and finally achieved 23.34% of free-hysteresis devices. At the same time, the modified device maintained 91% of the initial efficiency after 3000 hours under environmental conditions, which contributed to improving the efficiency and stability of the device simultaneously. Nevertheless, the 2D/3D hybrid PSCs used for comparing the effects of long alkyl chain ammonium salts with or without a benzene ring structure on the performance of perovskite films and devices have rarely been reported.
In this work, a series of organic ammonium salts (EAI, PEAI, PMAI) with different structures were introduced to 2D/3D hybrid PSCs for satisfactory stability and high photovoltaic performance. We found that PMAI spacers successfully formed a capping layer, leading to the inhibition of perovskite decomposition, reduced defect state density, and extended charge carrier lifetime. An improved power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 20.02% and a surprising open circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.174 V were obtained for the PSCs with PMAI modification. Importantly, the PMAI-based solar cell exhibited high humidity stability, which held 93.02% of the initial performance after 720 hours in a drying tower, while only 69.26% of the original efficiency remained for the control 3D PSCs. After three months, devices with the PMAI-modified layer still had negligible ion migration.

The ITO glass substrates (sheet resistance = 7–9 Ω per sq, ADVANCED ELECTION TECHNOLOGY CO., LTD) were ultrasonically cleaned by deionized water mixed with detergent, acetone, and ethanol. After that, the cleaned substrates were treated by UV-O3 for 10 min. Next, the SnO2 solution (Alfa Aesar, 15% in H2O colloidal dispersion) mixed deionized water (1:5 by volume) was spin-coated onto the pre-cleaned ITO substrates at 3000 rpm for 30 s, and the deposited SnO2 films were annealed at 100 °C for 1 h on a hot plate.

The cesium-containing triple cation perovskite precursor solution was prepared by dissolving FAI (Shanghai Materwin New Materials, >99%), PbI2 (Shanghai Materwin New Materials, 99.999%), PbBr2 (Shanghai Materwin New Materials, 99.999%), MABr (Shanghai Materwin New Materials, >99%) and CsI (Xi'an Polymer Light Technology, >99.9%) with the molar ratio of 1:1.1:0.2:0.2:0.063 in a mixed solvent of DMF/DMSO (Aladdin, 4:1 volume ratio) and stirred for about 2 h. Then, a two-step spin-coating was programmed to prepare the perovskite light absorber at 1000 and 6000 rpm for 10 and 30 s, respectively, and 200 μL CB was added when the program ran for 15 s in the second step. Then, the prepared films were annealed at 100 °C for 1 h in nitrogen condition, and further treated with EAI (PEAI, PMAI) (Xi’an Polymer Light Technology, ≥99.5%) isopropanol solution (Aladdin, ≥99.5%), and subsequently annealed at 100 °C for 10 min.
The Spiro-OMeTAD solution was prepared by dissolving 72.3 mg Spiro-OMeTAD (Shanghai Materwin New Materials, 99.5%) into 1 mL chlorobenzene (CB, Aladdin, 99.9%), and 29 μL of tBP (Beijing Yinuokai Technology), 18 μL of Li-TFSI (Shanghai Materwin New Materials) and 10 μL of Co salt (FK209, Shanghai Materwin New Materials) were added to the mixture. The corresponding films were cooled down to room temperature, and the above solution was spun at 4000 rpm for 30 s. Finally, the gold electrodes were evaporated to constitute the whole PSCs.

The Keithley 2611 source measurement was performed with a standard xenon-lamp-based solar simulator (Newport, 81904) under one sun illumination (AM 1.5G, 100 mw cm−2) to obtain the current density–voltage (J–V) characterizations. Furthermore, the J–V curves were measured by forward scans (−0.2 to 1.2 V) or reverse scans (1.2 to −0.2 V). For external and quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra, a measurement system (Crowntech, Inc., QTest Station 500AD) was used to determine the photoelectric response of the devices. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra were measured on a X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku MiniFlex ii, Cu Kα) with a scan speed of 6° min−1 from 5° to 45°. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JSM-7800F) and atomic force microscopy (AFM, Bruker Dimension Icon) were carried out to investigate the surface morphology and roughness of the films, respectively. Photoluminescence (PL) was recorded by using a steady state fluorescence spectrometer (Edinburgh, FLS 920P), and the PL signal was extracted at a wavelength of 470 nm. In addition, the transient fluorescence spectrometer was applied to measure time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was used for determining the composite resistance and transmission resistance of PSCs by an electrochemical workstation (AMETEK, Versa STAT 4). The water contact angles were investigated by a contact angle measuring instrument (POWEREACH, JC-2000C1). The room temperature 1H NMR spectra were recorded on a Bruker Avance III WB 800 spectrometer.



Fig. 1(a) shows the chemical structures of EAI, PEAI and PMAI, which all consist of –NH2 and a long alkyl chain. Among them, PEAI and PMAI both contain a benzene ring structure, while the lengths of the alkyl chain of EAI and PMAI are the same. The architecture of the planar nip-type device with ITO/SnO2/Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3/2D/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au was constructed, as shown in Fig. 1(b). As shown in Fig. 1(c), multiple NH⋯I hydrogen bonds can be formed between the –NH2 in the spacer cation and the I atom in the inorganic [PbI6]4− octahedral. Their interaction could promote better crystal growth and passivate the defective state, which can be further confirmed by 1H NMR spectral measurements, as shown in Fig. 1(d and e). The peak of 1H NMR from the –NH2 group in PMAI is 8.097 ppm, while the peak in the mixed PMAI/PbI2 sample is 8.071 ppm. The lower chemical shift indicates the strong NH⋯I hydrogen-bonding interactions. For the protons, there is also a slight chemical shift in the benzene ring of PMAI because of the different chemical environment result from the NH⋯I hydrogen bonding at the same time. Furthermore, the presence of a hydrophobic long alkyl chain and the benzene ring was shown to improve the moisture stability of the perovskite films. In a word, the modification layer was expected to achieve both enhanced PCE and stability.

According to previous reports, 2D materials can receive good hydrophobic properties by spin-coating a layer of organic ammonium salt solution on the surface of the fabricated 3D perovskite film to react with excess PbI2 and form an in situ grown 2D capping layer, as shown in Fig. 2. The moisture resistance of perovskite materials is closely related to the hydrophobicity of different ammonium salts. Because of this, it is necessary to study the specific chemical structure for the hydrophobicity of the perovskite films. Therefore, we measured the surface contact angles (CAs) with water droplets. As shown in Fig. 3, we note a tendency that the water CA increased from 59.21° to 77.48° after inserting the organic ammonium salts modification layer. Apart from the CA increasing with enhanced length of alkyl chain spacers (CAPEAI > CAPMAI), it appears that the structure containing the benzene ring instead of a simple alkyl chain is favorable for better hydrophobic characteristics of the perovskite films (CAPMAI > CAEAI). This is because the hydrophobicity of a phenyl is equal to 3.5 CH2, which is conducive to long-term stability of the material in an ambient environment.
XRD patterns further verified this result after recording at 0 and 2 weeks, as demonstrated in Fig. S1 (ESI). The perovskite films modified with different 2D capping layers were placed in the drying tower at room temperature. On the one hand, the fresh films exhibited a PbI2 peak at 12.7°, which may be related to the residual excess PbI2. Furthermore, compared to the film without any treatment, the 2D/3D hybrid perovskite films exhibited a more weakened XRD intensity ratio of PbI2 and (110) peaks in Fig. S1(c) (ESI). On the other hand, the (110) peak intensity of the PMAI-modified film is stronger than that of the 3D perovskite film, indicating that PMAI treatment enhances the crystallinity of the film.
The SEM images of different magnifications in Fig. 4 and Fig. S2, (ESI) as well as the frequency distribution histograms of particle size in Fig. S3, (ESI) show the surface topography of the perovskite films with different 2D capping layers. All film samples are compact and uniform without pinholes. Meanwhile, the grain size of the perovskite films with 2D capping layer increased to a certain extent compared with the pure 3D perovskite film. Finally, we found that the white phases, which proved to be unreacted lead halide, gradually decreased in terms of quantity after introducing the organic ammonium salts layer, which is consistent with the XRD patterns.
With the 2D modification layer, the surface roughness of the perovskite film was reduced and became smoother, as shown in Fig. S4 (ESI). On the one hand, as the length of the alkyl chain increased, the surface roughness of the film also increased (RMSPEAI > RMSPMAI). On the other hand, the perovskite films with PEAI or PMAI (containing a benzene ring structure) capping layer have greater surface roughness than the EAI (only has an alkyl chain structure)-based perovskite films. The roughness will affect the subsequent spin coating and contact of the film, and then affect the quality of the films, as well as the transport and recombination of the carriers.
The steady-state PL spectra of films deposited on glass were measured to explore the defect state densities of perovskite films with different 2D capping layers. As shown in Fig. 5(a and b), the absorption spectra of the control and 2D/3D perovskite films almost overlap with each other, and are slightly lower than that of the pure 3D perovskite film in the long wavelength range, which indicates that the light absorption rate of the perovskite layer modified with different 2D materials is similar under light. By comparison, it is easy to see that the PL intensity rises slightly after the PMAI modification, which could be attributed to the 2D modification layers with proper chemical structure having passivated the defects on the surface of the perovskite film and the perovskite/HTL interface, thereby greatly reducing the non-radiative recombination and improving the short-circuit current density (JSC) in some degree. The passivation effect is related to the electron-donating ability of R-NH3I. The TRPL spectrum is exhibited in Fig. 5(c), which fits a double exponential decay function and the corresponding specific parameters are summarized in Table S1 (ESI). According to the average life (τave) calculated by the formula, it can be seen that after EAI and PEAI modification, the average life is lower than that of the pure 3D perovskite, which is consistent with the low density of the corresponding solar cell short circuit density.

Fig. 6(a) shows the current density–voltage (J–V) curves and a summary of the cell parameters, including the JSC, VOC, fill factor (FF) and PCE, for both the control and with different 2D capping layer devices. The PMAI-modified device shows improved JSC and FF compared with the control device, which could be attributed to the defect passivation, thus yielding an improvement in the PCE from 19.41% to 20.02%. Fig. 6(b) shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the champion PSCs under different experimental conditions, where the integrated JSC is in good agreement with the result of the J–V curves.
We further analyzed the influence of the modified layer on the device performance from the aspect of the electrical characteristics. The Mott–Schottky curves obtained from the capacitance–voltage measurement are shown in Fig. 7(a), which allows the study of the built-in potential in the PSCs. The built-in potentials of the devices with the EAI/PEAI/PMAI modification layers were calculated to be 1.185 V, 1.331 V and 1.302 V, respectively, as well as 1.158 V for the control device, which could be obtained from the intersection of the linear region with the X-axis of the Mott–Schottky plot. The larger built-in potential facilitates the separation, transport, and extraction of the charge carriers. All of these can be attributed to the growth of a 2D film on top of the 3D film, resulting in the formation of a complete 2D/3D heterojunction and thus achieving an enhanced built-in potential, which ultimately leads to a high photovoltage in the device. Meanwhile, another point of view is that the 2D capping layer in the 2D–3D perovskite films induces greater Fermi level splitting under illumination, which increases the VOC. This corresponds to the statistical trend of the average VOC.
The Nyquist plots of PSCs are shown in Fig. 7(c). It is easy to see that the PMAI-based device demonstrated smaller charge transfer resistance (Rct), as compared to the 3D device. However, the EAI or PEAI-modified device exhibited bigger Rct, maybe owing to the balance between the spacer cations hindering the charge transport and the heterojunction mechanism promoting carrier transport.
For trap density measurements, the hole and electron trap density of the control and 2D/3D perovskite films were measured by the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) method (Fig. 7b). In other words, this was achieved by means of a diode configuration for the hole only by taking the dark current density from 0 V to 7 V. The values of the trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL) without and with the PMAI-modified perovskite films were found to be 2.23 V and 1.52 V, respectively, by further calculation analysis. Furthermore, the charge trap density (Nt) of the corresponding perovskite films were calculated to be 3.44 × 1016 cm−3 and 2.35 × 1016 cm−3. Consequently, the difference in the density of trap states indicated that the 2D capping layer based on PMAI could possibly passivate the defect states in the surface and interface of the perovskite films, which is consistent with the increased carrier lifetimes as we discussed above. Once again, this proved that the appropriate alkyl chain length and chemical structure are of great importance for the devices.
More data are given in Fig. 8 and Table 1. The photovoltaic parameters of PSCs with different 2D/3D structures are summarized to compare their performance. The study found that the JSC of PSCs tends to decrease after the incorporation of the organic ammonium salts modification layer. It has been reported that the introduction of the 2D perovskite layer makes the charge transport more difficult. When PMAI is selected as the capping layer, the best device performance can be achieved, which should be attributed to the effective passivation of the defects, as well as the suppression of ion migration at the surface and interface of the perovskite films. All data except JSC have been significantly improved. On the other hand, the uniformity of the device is improved and the data are very concentrated. Finally, a champion solar cell with a VOC of 1.174 V, a JSC of 23.07 mA cm−2, an FF of 73.92% and a PCE of 20.02% was obtained. In addition, after EAI and PEAI modified the 3D perovskite film, the device performance was slightly attenuated. More results, including the J–V curves of the champion PSCs without and with PMAI-based 2D capping layer measured at reverse and forward scans, as well as the hysteresis effect index corresponding to the statistical photovoltaic device, are shown in Fig. S5 (ESI). The PMAI-modified devices showed a significantly smaller hysteresis effect than the control solar cells.

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Without
1.147 ± 0.038 (1.174)
21.35 ± 1.50 (22.90)
68.46 ± 5.84 (72.22)
16.86 ± 2.47 (19.41)
EAI
1.160 ± 0.006 (1.167)
20.84 ± 2.23 (22.19)
69.65 ± 1.92 (71.06)
16.82 ± 1.81 (18.39)
PEAI
1.166 ± 0.011 (1.174)
19.19 ± 1.36 (21.72)
62.35 ± 2.68 (61.88)
13.94 ± 1.02 (15.77)
PMAI
1.164 ± 0.007 (1.174)
21.22 ± 1.06 (23.07)
71.29 ± 2.29 (73.92)
17.61 ± 1.11 (20.02)
PSCs were stored in a drying tower at room temperature, and we tracked the device stability for 720 hours, as shown in Fig. 9, as well as performed the J–V scan again after 186 days (4464 h), as shown in Fig. S6 (ESI). The efficiency of PSCs with different 2D modification layers maintained 69.26%, 81.41%, 90.72%, and 93.02% of the original efficiency. Among them, the devices modified with 2D materials (PEAI and PMAI) containing benzene rings have better stability than devices modified with alkyl chain 2D materials, and the device efficiency remained above 90% of the initial efficiency. The final highest efficiency is the PMAI-modified solar cell with a PCE of 18.28%. It is not only related to the hydrophobicity of the modified layer material itself, but also related to the defects and quality of the perovskite film, which is a comprehensive manifestation of efficiency and hydrophobicity. The light soaking effect caused by the trap filling during illumination makes the degradation of the solar cell in the early degradation stage reversible. Most of these light-activated trap states will disappear or self-heal when the solar cells are kept in the dark, and the device performance could be self-recovered in the dark state. Therefore, the parameters of the devices fluctuate up and down during the stability-tracking process. Furthermore, the PSCs without and with PMAI-based capping layer obtained the PCE values of 12.72% and 14.87% after 186 days (4464 h), which maintained 65.53% and 74.28% of the initial efficiency, respectively. The stability result is quite satisfactory.
Tracing back to the source is precise because of the ionic nature of the perovskite crystal; the stability of the device is not good enough, which leads to high hygroscopicity and extensive ion diffusion. It can be seen from Fig. 10 that after three months of storage, the Au+ in the electrode of PSCs will gradually penetrate and migrate to the perovskite light absorption layer. Meanwhile, the devices containing the 2D modification layer inhibits the migration of Au+. The ion basically still exists in the position of the electrode in the corresponding cross-sectional SEM image. Obviously, the presence of the 2D modification layer is beneficial to inhibit ion migration and is conducive to the stability of the internal structure of the PSCs.
To further illustrate that ion migration is inhibited, we performed the Arrhenius plots of the conductivity of the 2D/3D films, as shown in Fig. 11. The ln(σ) − 1/kT curve is approximately a linear region, and the activation energies (Ea) of the perovskite films without and with PMAI modification layer are 496 meV ± 1.63 meV and 514 meV ± 2.39 meV, respectively. After adding the PMAI modification layer, the Ea of ion migration increases and ion migration becomes difficult, thereby improving the stability of the device, which is also consistent with the EDS mapping results.

In summary, we have introduced organic ammonium salts with a benzene ring structure or long alkyl chain (EAI, PEAI and PMAI), which has been demonstrated to inhibit ion migration so as to improve the moisture stability of the perovskite film and the device. Meanwhile, the PMAI (with suitable chemical structure and alkyl chain length)-modified devices also passivated the defect trap states at the surface and interface of the perovskite films, owing to the multiple halogen hydrogen bond interaction between –NH2 and inorganic [PbI6]4− octahedral. This helped us prepare a superior device with a PCE exceeding 20%, as well as a VOC of 1.174 V, and maintain 93.02% of its initial PCE after 720 hours of storage. Our work provides a possibility for developing PSCs that improves stability and efficiency simultaneously.


Xiaofang Ye and Hongkun Cai discussed and conceived the project together. Xiaofang Ye carried out the specific experimental design, prepared and characterized the PSCs and related film samples, as well as completed the writing of the manuscript. Hongkun Cai proposed suggestions on revision of the manuscript. Qinghe Sun and Tie Xu also contributed to the characterization of the thin films. Jian Ni and Juan Li participated in the discussion and analysis of the experimental results. Hongkun Cai and Jianjun Zhang supervised the research.


There are no conflicts to declare.


We acknowledge the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 61974074 and 61974076). This project has received funding from the Natural Science Foundation of Tianjin (No. 17JCYBJC21200 and 18JCQNJC71800) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, Nankai University (No. 63191101, 63191740 and 63191745).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1nj05232b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2022