 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA09165A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11688-11695


Wenzhe
Li
,

Jiangwei
Li
,

Guangda
Niu
 and 

Liduo
Wang
*

Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. E-mail: chldwang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Received
12th November 2015
, Accepted 2nd December 2015
First published on 16th December 2015
The interface modification of perovskite thin films has shown great potential to boost the performance of perovskite solar cells during the last few years. Here we demonstrate that cesium chloride (CsCl) as crystal seeds can markedly enhance the coverage of the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx absorber layer on TiO2 in planar heterojunction solar cells, thus boosting the power conversion efficiency (PCE) to 16.8%, with a fill factor (FF) of 0.79. Also, the introduction of CsCl significantly improved the stability of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx under ultra violet (UV) irradiation, which has been verified by XRD, XPS and SEM measurements. The CsCl-treated devices maintained 70% of the original PCE after a prolonged intensive UV irradiation of 200 min while the untreated devices being almost exhausted. Furthermore, we proposed the mechanism concerning CsCl as the modification layer to improve the UV-induced stability issue of perovskite solar cells.

Organic–inorganic hybrid materials, such as perovskite CH3NH3PbBr3/CH3NH3PbI3, have been employed as light harvesters for solar cells. Owing to several advantages of the materials, such as small band-gaps, high extinction coefficients, and high carrier mobility, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted intensive attention. Moreover, the high power conversion efficiency as well as the low-cost and convenient fabrication process all makes PSCs highly suitable as the next generation thin film solar cells. Thanks to efforts from many research groups, the efficiencies of lead halide perovskite-based photovoltaic devices have increased from 3.8% to more than 20.1% in just 5 years. The key to the breakthrough was due to the introduction of the organic hole-transport material spiro-OMeTAD to replace the liquid electrolytes. Unexpected PCEs of up to 9.7% and 10.7% were achieved, respectively. In parallel to the mesoporous architecture, planar heterojunction solar cell structures (normal and inverted) were also developed while the perovskite layer was sandwiched between electron and hole collection layers, either by a solution process or a dual source evaporation technique, showing a respectable PCE above 15%. This kind of solar cell architecture has several advantages compared to the mesoporous structure, such as simple interface structures and tunable crystal grain size.

However, the application of PSCs in real life requires not only a high PCE, but also a stable photovoltaic performance under outdoor conditions. In previous work, the film of CH3NH3PbI3 in moisture was reported to decompose to PbI2, CH3NH2 and HI. Seok and co-workers have shown that by partially replacing iodide in CH3NH3PbI3 with bromide, the stability toward humidity could be greatly improved. In addition, perovskites with layered structures, such as (PEA)2(MA)2[Pb3I10] (PEA: C6H5(CH2)2NH3+ and MA: CH3NH3+), also exhibited enhanced stability toward humidity due to the hydrophobicity of long chain organic molecules. Moreover, modification at the interface of the perovskite and hole transport layer (HTL) with a thin layer of Al2O3 could also enhance the stability of the device toward humidity. For planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells, the typically used p-type organic semiconductor is 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD). However, the device performance will be unstable caused by moisture-sensitive dopants Li[(CF3SO2)2N] (Li-TFSI) and tert-butylpyridine (tBP). Most recently, Han and co-workers have demonstrated hole-conductor-free PSCs with carbon electrodes replacing spiro-OMeTAD and Au electrodes. These devices have shown excellent stability for >1000 hours in ambient air under full sunlight. Conings and co-workers studied the stability of perovskites under 85 °C with/without water and oxygen. So far, the studies about the stability of PSCs mainly focused on environment with moisture and oxygen, overlooking the importance of the stability toward UV light. It should be noted that although the integrated intensity of UV light (at wavelengths of less than 400 nm) is only 4.61 mW cm−2 considering the AM1.5 solar spectrum at an irradiance of 100 mW cm−2, the UV light is detrimental to the devices.
In both mesoporous architecture and planar heterojunction structure perovskite solar cells, a TiO2 compact layer is commonly used as an electron collection layer for high performance devices. However, TiO2 is also known for its chemical and physical properties as catalytic agents. Upon UV light exposure, photo-generated holes in TiO2 will react with oxygen adsorbed at the surface oxygen vacancies, which then become deep traps leading to charge recombination. Ito and colleagues introduced a blocking layer of Sb2S3 between mesoporous TiO2 and perovskite layers to improve light stability. We found that MgO could also serve as the modification layer to decrease the amount of hydroxyl groups on the TiO2 surface, thus improving the stability under UV irradiation. However, the study on the effects of UV light irradiation on the perovskite structure and the corresponding interface is rarely reported. It is highly important to develop stable PSCs toward UV irradiation with high conversion efficiencies.
Herein, we introduced CsCl as a modification layer between TiO2 and perovskite. The CsCl could not only regulate and control the structure of perovskite on TiO2, but also enhance the stability of perovskite toward UV light. After modification, the coverage of perovskite on TiO2 was greatly enhanced, thus improving the absorbance of the film. Finally, through the modification of CsCl at the interface of TiO2 and perovskite, the PCE, as well as the stability was tremendously improved, resulting in a champion device with an efficiency of 16.8%. A potential mechanism concerning UV aging and stability enhancement with the approach of CsCl interface modification was presented.

Devices were fabricated on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass (YINGKOU OPV TCH NEW ENERGY CO.,LTD, OPV-FTO22-7). Initially FTO was etched with 2 mol L−1 HCl and zinc powder. Substrates were then cleaned sequentially in 2% Hellmanex™ detergent, deionized water, acetone, ethanol, isopropanol (IPA) and UV exposure. A compact TiO2 layer was deposited by spin-coating a mildly acidic precursor solution (the concentrations of titanium isopropoxide/2 M HCl/ethanol = 254 μL/34 μL/2 mL) at 1300 rpm for 60 s, which was then annealed in air at 500 °C for 30 min.


The CsCl modification layer was prepared by spin-coating a solution of 5.0 mg mL−1 (unless otherwise stated) CsCl (Sigma-Aldrich, 203025-10G) dissolved in water/IPA (1:1 v/v), directly on the TiO2 compact layer at 2500 rpm for 45 s, and then annealing for 30 min at 150 °C in air.


The perovskite precursor solution was made by mixing MAI (Dyesol) with PbCl2 (Sigma-Aldrich, 449865-5G) at molar ratio of 3:1 in DMF at 35 wt%, which was spin-coated from a room temperature solution on the substrate at room temperature in a nitrogen-filled glovebox at 2000 rpm for 45 s with the gas circulation on. After spin-coating, the films were left to dry at room temperature in the glovebox for 30 minutes, to allow slow solvent evaporation prior to any annealing. This drying process is likely to be partly responsible for the highly continuous films. They were then annealed on a hotplate in the glovebox at 90 °C for 150 min followed by 120 °C for 20 min. A hole-transporting layer was then deposited via spin-coating a 0.8 M solution of 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) in chlorobenzene, with additives of 30 mol% lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide and 80 mol% 4-tert-butylpyridine. Spin-coating was carried out at 2000 rpm for 45 s. Devices were then left overnight in air with a relative humidity (RH) of ≈30%. Finally, 70 nm gold electrodes were thermally evaporated under a vacuum of ≈10−6 Torr, at a rate of ≈0.05 nm s−1, to complete the devices. The Au attached area was fixed at 0.16 cm2.


The ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy (UPS) spectra were obtained with an ESCALab250Xi. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained with Smart LAB instruments CuKα beam (λ = 1.54 Å). UV-vis absorption spectra were employed to assess the absorption properties of the perovskite sensitized TiO2 thin film with a Hitachi U-3010 spectroscope. The morphology of the film was tested with a scanning electron microscope (SEM; JEOL JSM-7401F). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed with a PHI 5300 ESCA Perkin-Elmer spectrometer. All spectra were shifted to account for sample charging using inorganic carbon at 284.80 eV as a reference. The UV aging process was carried out by using a UV resource MEJIRO GENOSSEN-MUA-165.


The current density–voltage (J–V) curves were measured with a 2400 Series SourceMeter (Keithley Instruments) under simulated AM 1.5 sunlight at an irradiance equivalent to 100 mW cm−2 generated by using an thermo oriel 91192-1000 simulator, with the intensity calibrated with an VLSI standards incorporated PN 91150V Si reference cell. The mismatch factor was calculated to be less than 1%. The solar cells were masked with a metal aperture to define the active area, typically 0.090 cm2.


To clarify the role of the modification layer, the impact of CsCl on TiO2 was first studied. Since the solubility of CsCl in DMF is low, IPA together with water was chosen as the solvent to dissolve CsCl. The concentration of CsCl was denoted as CsCl-x, with x representing the amount (mg) of CsCl in 1 mL solvent. The energy level of the TiO2 compact layer before and after CsCl modification was studied through UPS (Fig. 1a). The work function of TiO2 dropped to 0.1 eV after CsCl modification, which is attributed to the doping effect of Cs+ on the TiO2 surface, similar to the reported Cs+ as a dopant on TiO2. In addition, the high resolution XPS spectra (Fig. S1) of Cs 3d and Cl 2p were shown to verify the existence of CsCl. The SEM image showed the surface profile of CsCl on TiO2 (Fig. S2). At a lower concentration, the morphology of CsCl crystals is unclear. When the concentration of CsCl is 5 mg mL−1, we observed crystals with a diameter of about 5 nm dispersing on the TiO2 compact layer. Then, with the increase of the concentration, the star-like crystals disappeared, indicating a whole coverage with CsCl.


Fig. 1b demonstrates the evolution of the absorptance of perovskite thin films with modification of different CsCl concentrations. Compared with the film without modification, the absorptance of CsCl-5/perovskite was enhanced by 15.4%. The normalized absorptance at 700 nm was listed with different amounts of CsCl as the modification layer. At a concentration of 5 mg mL−1, the film exhibited maximum absorptance.

Fig. 1c displays the evolution of XRD patterns of the perovskite thin film modified with different amounts of CsCl. For the film without modification, the XRD pattern is consistent with previously reported results. The peaks at 14.2° and 28.5° correspond to the (110) and (220) facets of perovskite, respectively. With the CsCl concentration increasing from 0 to 5 mg mL−1, the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the (110) facet increases from 0.138 to 0.148 by 8% (Fig. 1d). As for a high CsCl concentration (Cs-perovskite-20), the FWHM further increases to 0.202, with 46% enhancement compared to pure perovskite. It is noted that the optimized concentration of CsCl would not influence the crystallinity degree obviously. Fig. 1e shows the peak intensity ratio of (110)/(310) and (220)/(310), which decreased as the concentration of CsCl increased. The result demonstrated that the CsCl modification weakened the preferred orientation of perovskite along (110) and (220) facets.

Fig. 2 exhibits the SEM images of perovskite films prepared by adjusting the CsCl concentration to tune the coverage of the film. It was found that from perovskite to CsCl-5/perovskite, the coverage of the film increased from 91.8% to 99.8% with a reduced amount of pin-holes, which is calculated by using Image-J software. However, when the concentration further increased to 10 and 20 mg mL−1, the coverage decreased.
According to previous reports, perovskite tended to grow in (110)-oriented films on TiO2, due to the small lattice mismatch between perovskite surface halides and TiO2 under coordinated Ti atoms. After modification, the structural matching between the perovskite (110) facet and TiO2 cannot lead to the oriented film since the dispersing CsCl has totally different cell parameters, with a = b = c = 4.12 Å. To a certain extent, the dispersing CsCl on the TiO2 surface acts as the crystal seeds to form a uniform perovskite thin film without obvious pinholes, shown in Fig. 2. In addition, the results from Fig. 1c proved that the relative intensities along (110) and (220) facets reduced with increasing CsCl concentration. The weakened growing orientation enhances the coverage of perovskite thin films on the TiO2 compact layer.
To study the influence of CsCl on the UV stability of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx thin films, we carried out XRD measurements of the perovskite thin films under UV irradiation in air atmosphere. The UV light was set upon the glass side with an intensity of 364 mW cm−2 at 365 nm for 12 h. The films were placed on a thermostat plate to achieve a constant temperature of 41 °C. During the UV aging process, the RH was about 40%. As shown in Fig. 3a, for the film without modification, the peak located at 12.7°, was attributed to PbI2 decomposed from the perovskite layer in ambient atmosphere. After CsCl modification, no detectable PbI2 peaks were found. The CsCl modification before deposition of perovskite thin films suppressed the degradation of perovskite under UV irradiation.
Furthermore, XPS was also used to verify the degradation products under UV irradiation, as shown in Fig. 3b. For Pb 4f spectra, the main peak at 138.6 eV is ascribed to the binding energy of Pb–I in perovskite. The peak located at 139.1 eV is ascribed to the binding energy of Pb–I in PbI2, which is considered as the degradation products of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx. As expected, we did not detect such a peak in the case of CsCl modified films after UV aging. Besides, the small peaks observed in the control films after UV aging which appeared at 136.8 eV are ascribed to the binding energy of Pb0 at a low binding energy (137.0 eV). This could simply be due to the fact that highly unsaturated Pb may show metallic characteristics. The presence of a substantial amount of unsaturated Pb is a further indication of the existence of iodide deficiencies in the perovskite lattice of the control sample, and the metallic lead species in the film are likely to act as recombination centres. For the CsCl modified films after UV aging, the peaks for PbI2 and Pb0 were not found. With CsCl modification, the stability of the perovskite films under UV irradiation is markedly improved. In Fig. 3c, the peak with the binding energy at 402.7 eV is attributed to the N element in perovskite. In the case of the control film after UV aging, the intensity of the XPS peaks for N is very low, which is caused by the consumption of CH3NH3+ in the process of UV aging.

Fig. 4a and c exhibit the top-down SEM images of the pristine perovskite thin films before and after UV aging for 12 h. It is noted that after UV aging the perovskite thin films turned out to be porous. According to the XRD and XPS results, it is expected that the porous film was caused by the loss of CH3NH3I. Fig. 4b and d show the SEM images of CsCl modified thin films, without obvious changes before and after UV aging. The results verified that after CsCl modification, the stability of the perovskite thin film was enhanced under UV irradiation. The inset images are the photographs of the UV-treated perovskite thin films. The film without modification was yellowish, which further proved that CsCl modification improves the endurance of the films under UV light. Fig. 4e and g show the cross-sectional images of control films before and after UV aging. We can easily observe that the thickness of the perovskite layer decreases after UV aging. Besides, the junction between the perovskite and TiO2 compact layer started to separate after degradation. We also find a porous structure at the bottom of the perovskite layer. After CsCl modification, the films are quite stable without significant changes during the UV aging process.
As mentioned above, an optimized amount of CsCl is beneficial for the formation of stable perovskite thin films. The photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells prepared with pristine perovskite thin films and CsCl-modified perovskite thin films was further studied. Fig. S3 shows the PCE of the devices with CsCl modification of different solution concentrations. The results show that the optimized concentration is 5 mg mL−1. As shown in Fig. 5a and Table 1, the open circuit voltage (VOC) and short circuit current density (JSC) were improved obviously when CsCl was applied, leading to a substantially improved average PCE from 12.7% to 14.6%. The statistic data of PCEs are obtained from 236 devices of different batches. In order to rule out the transient photocurrent density and power output of the cells, we performed the photocurrent density and power conversion efficiency as a function of time for Cs-PVK-0 and Cs-PVK-5 devices. Fig. 5b shows that the stabilized PCEs are 10.1 and 14.8% before and after CsCl modification, held at close to 0.71 V and 0.84 V bias voltages, respectively, in a 300 s testing. The IPCE results are shown in Fig. S4. With CsCl modification, the IPCE increased covering all wavelength ranges. Fig. 5c shows the J–V curves of the champion cell measured at backward scan direction (from open circuit to short circuit, VOC = 1.045 V, JSC = 20.4 mA cm−2, FF = 0.79, PCE = 16.8%) and forward scan direction (PCE = 14.1%). Meanwhile, we studied the UV stability of devices, while the PCEs were measured every 10 minutes, shown in Fig. 5d. The aging process was carried out at a temperature of 41 °C and a RH of 30%. For Cs-PVK-0 devices, the PCE decreased to nearly 0% in 200 min. With CsCl modification, the PCE was maintained above 70%.
Samples

J
SC
 [mA cm−2]

V
OC
 [V]
FF
PCE [%]
SPO [%]

a 
J
SC short-circuit current density.
b 
V
OC open circuit voltage.
c FF, fill factor.
d PCE, power conversion efficiency.
e SPO, stabilized power output.

Cs-PVK-0
19.0 ± 0.65
0.93 ± 0.03
0.71 ± 0.02
12.7 ± 0.72
10.1
Cs-PVK-5
20.2 ± 0.86
0.99 ± 0.02
0.72 ± 0.03
14.6 ± 1.09
14.8
In order to rule out the effect of atmosphere on the degradation of perovskite under UV light, we conducted the aging process in different atmospheres. Fig. S5a shows the XRD patterns of the degraded perovskite thin films on the TiO2 compact layer during UV aging. For the sample stored in nitrogen for 12 h, the XRD results did not show any obvious difference, indicating no obvious degradation in the film. In contrast, if oxygen existed, such as in ambient or dry air atmosphere, the peak at 12.7° attributed to PbI2 was found. In addition, in the presence of moisture, the degradation process was greatly expedited. The peaks for (004) and (220) facets of perovskite are magnified in Fig. S5b. It is worth noting that the area ratio of (220)/(004) peaks is decreased from 27.9 to 3.5 after degradation. It could be inferred that the (220) facet degraded faster than the (004) facet. The reason is probably due to the fact that during the film formation, (110) and (220) facets are parallel to TiO2, and thus can receive holes and hydroxyl radicals more easily during photocatalytic reactions. In order to study the chemical state during degradation, XPS was conducted on the inner layer of the perovskite films with the outer layer shaved (Fig. S6). The spectra of Pb 4f are shown in Fig. S6a. In the nitrogen atmosphere the perovskite was stable without any significant changes. For the film stored in ambient and dry air, we found Pb(0) peaks with a binding energy of 137.0 eV, which show metallic characteristics. In the ambient atmosphere, the peak at 139.1 eV, which is attributed to PbI2, was observed. Combined with the N 1s spectra shown in Fig. S6b, we found that after UV aging, the content of N elements is reduced obviously. Therefore we inferred that CH3NH3PbI3−xClx materials in ambient atmosphere decompose to PbI2 with the consumption of CH3NH3I.

Formula (1), (2) and (6). In the presence of oxygen, O2 fills in the vacancies of TiO2. The electrons in the conduction band of TiO2 could induce the oxygen into hydroxyl radicals in the presence of UV light. Furthermore, when stored in ambient atmosphere, CH3NH3+ ions in the perovskite crystals will combine with water as CH3NH3+–H2O, which ends up in a hydrolysis equilibrium with CH3NH2–H3O+, as shown in Formula (3). In the case of a cathodic reaction, the materials with high redox potential should be reduced on the surface of TiO2. Considering all the candidates, the oxygen molecules absorbed on the TiO2 trap states are more likely to be reduced to OH· and H2O as shown in Formula (3). The consumption of H+ in the reduction reaction leads to a loss of CH3NH2 (b.p. < 0 °C). At last, both OH· and hVB+ could oxidize I− in the perovskite crystal, leading to the decomposition of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx to PbI2.
(1)
hVB+ + I− → I·
(2)
CH3NH3+ + H2O ⇌ CH3NH2 + H3O+
(3)
3eCB− + O2 + 3H+ → H2O + OH·
(4)
I− + OH· → I· +OH−
(5)
2I· → I2
(6)
The possible mechanism concerning CsCl interface modification and UV irradiation stability of the perovskite layer is proposed. We spin-coated CsX (X = Cl, Br, and I) salt solution of the same concentration of 6 mmol mL−1 on the compact TiO2 layer. After 12 h of UV aging, 100 μL deionized water was spotted on the films. The pH values of the CsX-coated TiO2 film are shown in Fig. S7. All the three films were identically pH neutral right after CsX treatment, but only the TiO2 thin film treated with CsI became alkalescent after UV irradiation. This is due to the decomposition of CsI under the UV induced TiO2 catalysis effect as mentioned above. The other two relatively stable films indicate that CsCl and CsBr can be the candidates of modification materials. Considering the relatively better oxidation stability of CsCl, we chose CsCl as the final modification material. Apart from the intrinsic UV stability of the CsCl modification layer and its potential effect on covering UV-induced catalytic reaction activity sites of TiO2. The schematic view of the CsCl as a function of blocking layer is shown in Fig. 6. In addition, we attributed the improved UV stability of the CsCl-treated perovskite layer to the partial replacement of CH3NH3+ ions with Cs+ ions. For that reason, we measured the Cs contents in a square with an area of 25 × 25 mm (Table S1). The overall ratio of the Cs/Pb content in the annealed film is 0.025 as determined by the ICP-Mass test. But when we scraped the upper film by using a doctor-blade, the ratio of the Cs/Pb content decreases to 0.004, which means most of CsCl locate at the interface of TiO2 and perovskite with a few Cs+ ions in perovskite films. The disadvantages of CH3NH3+ in the aspect of UV stability have been stated above. Cs+ and its hydrolytic analogue are not volatile and cannot escape from the system easily like CH3NH2. Considering the higher lattice energy of Csx(CH3NH3)1−xPbI3, we suppose a small amount of Cs+ in films while CsCl modification paves a way for achieving a tough perovskite film under UV irradiation.

In conclusion, CsCl crystals with a size of ∼5 nm on the TiO2 compact layer act as crystal seeds and control the perovskite orientation growth process, which are favorable to the realization of a dense perovskite film with a nearly whole coverage. The optimized parameters allow fabricating an efficient perovskite solar cell with a PCE of 16.8% and a stabilized power output of over 14.8% in 300 s. Meanwhile, CsCl at the interface greatly enhanced the UV-induced stability of the perovskite films. The device stability shows that the PCE only decreases to 70% within 300 s UV aging, compared with the inoperative control devices. The CsCl probably works as a function of UV barrier. In addition, the trace amount of Cs replacing CH3NH3+ in films depresses the generation of CH3NH2 and changes the crystal energy of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx. The present study provides an effective protocol for fabricating efficient and UV stable perovskite material-based solar cells. Further studies via interfacial engineering for carbon electrode structural devices with high efficiency and stability are underway.


The research was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant no. 51273104 and 91433205.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: High resolution XPS of CsCl on a TiO2 compact layer. Top-down SEM images of CsCl on a TiO2 compact layer. Device performances with different CsCl concentrations. XRD patterns of a PVK film deposited on a compact TiO2 layer with UV aging in different conditions, (004) and (220) diffraction peaks of the PVK film and the PVK film on FTO glass and Cs-PVK-5 film w/ and w/o UV aging. The high resolution XPS of PVK on the TiO2 layer w/ and w/o UV aging in different atmospheres. A digital camera picture of pH value changes of CsCl, CsBr and CsI water solution on TiO2 films before and after UV aging. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta09165a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016