 DOI: 10.1039/C3TC32430C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 3820-3825


Ye Eun
Ha
,

Gyeong Eun
Lim
,

Mi Young
Jo
,

Juyun
Park
,

Yong-Cheol
Kang
,

Sang-Jin
Moon
 and 

Joo Hyun
Kim
*

Department of Polymer Engineering, Pukyong National University, Nam-gu, Yongdang-dong, Busan 608-739, Korea. E-mail: jkim@pknu.ac.kr; Fax: +82 51-629-6429

Department of Chemistry, Pukyong National University, Nam-gu, Daeyeon-dong, Busan 608-737, Korea

Energy Materials Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology, Daejeon 305-600, Korea

Received
9th December 2013
, Accepted 23rd February 2014
First published on 25th February 2014
A non-conjugated polymer with a polar hydroxyl group as a side group, poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA), is applied to polymer solar cells (PSCs) and polymer light-emitting diodes (PLEDs) as a buffer layer at the active layer/cathode interface. The best power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs with the PVA film as a cathode buffer layer is 3.27%, which is a 27% increase compared to that of PSCs without the PVA film (2.58%). The PCE improvement is due to enhancement of the short circuit current, the fill factor, and the open circuit voltage, simultaneously. Also, the performances of polymer light-emitting diodes with the PVA film as a cathode buffer layer are better than those of the devices without PVA. Improvement of the performances of the devices is due to the fact that the PVA film reduces a Schottky barrier by the formation of favorable interface dipoles and improves the interface properties.

Opto-electronic devices such as solar cells and light-emitting diodes based on π-conjugated polymers have received attention over the past decades. The charge transporting and injecting/collecting properties are crucial factors for improving the performances of the devices. Among them, the charge injecting/collecting properties are related to the interfacial properties between the semiconducting layer and the cathode or the anode. Insertion of an interfacial (or a buffer) layer at the interfaces was used to optimize the properties between the semiconducting layer and both the electrodes. A thin layer of PEDOT:PSS, thermally curable triarylamine derivatives, self-assembled monolayer (SAM) modification, or metal oxides such as WO3 (ref. 16 and 17) and MoO3 (ref. 18–20) were mainly used for improving the hole injecting/collecting properties between the semiconducting layer and the anode to achieve highly efficient devices. Water or alcohol soluble conjugated polymer electrolytes (CPEs) such as cationic π-conjugated polymer electrolytes (cCPEs), anionic π-conjugated polymer electrolytes (aCPEs), and alcohol-soluble neutral conjugated polymers (NCPs) have been mainly applied to the solution processable cathode interface layer of opto-electronic devices. Solution processable n-type metal oxides such as TiOx (ref. 30) and ZnO (ref. 31) have been used as a solution processable cathode interface layer to improve the electron injecting/collecting properties of the opto-electronic devices. The photovoltaic parameters of the devices such as the open circuit voltage (Voc), the short circuit current (Jsc), and the fill factor (FF) with these materials as an interface layer (IFL) at the active layer/metal cathode interface were dramatically improved by the formation of a favorable interface dipole and the reduction of contact resistance. Recently, non-conjugated cationic and anionic polymer electrolytes, such as dialkylviologen (PVs), zwitterionic conjugated polymer electrolytes and non-conjugated small-molecule electrolytes, and non-conjugated anionic poly(sodium 4-styrenesulfonate) (PSS–Na), have also been demonstrated for a cathode interface layer to improve the performances of the opto-electronic devices. Non-conjugated polymers with a high dielectric constant such as poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) and poly(4-vinyl pyrrolidone) (PVP) have also been used for a cathode interface layer. Even though the polymers consist of a non-conjugated backbone, these polymers can be used as the electron transporting and injecting/collecting layer for PSCs. These reduce a Schottky barrier at the interfaces leading to improvement of Jsc and FF. In addition, enhancement of the Voc of the devices is explained in terms of the formation of the interface dipole between the active layer and the cathode.

Poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) is a well known water soluble non-conjugated polymer with a polar hydroxyl (–OH) group, which is widely used as a binder for light-emitting electrochemical cells and solar cells based on small molecules because of their excellent film forming and adhesive properties. Like CPEs, complicated synthetic procedures are not necessary at all. Also, this has the advantage of being very cheap. As depicted in Fig. 1, like the other materials such as conjugated or non-conjugated polymer electrolytes, PVA might also be used as a cathode buffer layer in polymer solar cells (PSCs) and polymer light-emitting diodes (PLEDs). The hydrophobic semiconducting layer surface will push away the hydrophilic hydroxyl side groups from the surface of the semiconducting layer. Consequently, the interface dipoles will be generated at the interface between the active layer and the cathode by the permanent dipole moment of hydroxyl groups. To the best of our knowledge, PSCs and PLEDs with the PVA film as a cathode buffer layer have never been tested and reported before. In this paper, we report and demonstrate the application of PVA as an IFL in PSCs (and PLEDs) in terms of the formation of interface dipoles and wetting properties on the active layer.

Chemicals were purchased from Aldrich Chemical Co. and Alfa Aesar and were used as received unless otherwise described. PVA (99+% hydrolyzed, cat. no. 41243, Mw = 88000–97000 g mol−1) was purchased from Aldrich. Regioregular P3HT (cat. no. 4002-EE) and PCBM (cat no. nano-cPCBM-BF) were purchased from Rieke Metals Inc. and nano-C, Inc., respectively. PF9B was used as an emissive layer (EML) and synthesized according to the literature procedures.


The work function measurements were carried out using a UPS (VG Scientific Co.) with a He I source (hν = 21.2 eV) at a pressure of 1 × 10−8 Torr. −3 V was applied to a sample during the measurements to distinguish between the analyzer and the sample cut-off. The thickness of the film was measured using an Alpha-Step IQ surface profiler (KLA-Tencor Co.). As for the PVA film, we measured the thickness of the PVA film on silicon wafers by using an ellipsometer (J. A. Woollam Co., Inc., M-2000D). The PVA films were prepared under the same spin-coating conditions as in the device fabrication. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images were taken on a Digital Instruments (Multi ModeTM SPM). AFM images were obtained by the tapping mode and a scan rate of 2 Hz. The surface energy (γ) of the layer with and without the PVA thin film was evaluated by the measurements of the static advancing contact angle with deionized water and diiodomethane (CH2I2). The contact angles (KRUSS, Model DSA 100) were entered in the Wu model (harmonic mean) for the calculation of the dispersive and polar components of the surface energy The J–V measurements under a 1.0 sun (100 mW cm−2) condition from a 150 W Xe lamp with an AM 1.5G filter were performed using a KEITHLEY Model 2400 source-measure unit. A calibrated Si reference cell with a KG5 filter certified by the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology was used to confirm the 1.0 sun condition.


For fabrication of PSCs with a structure of the ITO/PEDOT/active layer (P3HT:PCBM)/PVA/Al, a thickness of 40 nm of PEDOT:PSS (Baytron P, diluted with 2-propanol 1:2 by volume) was spin-coated on a pre-cleaned indium tin oxide (ITO) glass substrate (sheet resistance = 15 ohm sq−1). After being baked at 150 °C for 10 min under the air, the active layer was spin-cast from the blend solution of P3HT and PCBM (20 mg of P3HT and 20 mg of PCBM dissolve in 1 mL of o-dichlorobenzene (ODCB)) at 600 rpm for 40 s and then dried in a covered Petri dish for 1 hour. Prior to spin coating, the active layer solution was filtered through a 0.45 μm membrane filter. The typical thickness of the active layer was 200 nm. An IFL was prepared by spin coating with a solution of PVA at 4000 rpm for 60 s. The thickness of the PVA layer was controlled by the concentration of PVA solution. The Al layer was deposited with a thickness of 100 nm through a shadow mask with a device area of 0.13 cm2 at 2 × 10−6 Torr. After the cathode deposition, the device was thermally annealed at 150 °C for 20 min in the glove box (N2 atmosphere). For fabrication of PLEDs with a structure of the ITO/PEDOT/emissive layer (PF9B)/PVA/Al, the deposition of a PEDOT:PSS layer is the same as the fabrication of PSCs. After being baked at 150 °C for 10 min under the air of a PEDOT:PSS layer, an emissive polymer solution (15 mg mL−1 in toluene) was spin coated onto the PEDOT:PSS layer at 2000 rpm for 60 s. Prior to spin coating, the emissive polymer solution was filtered through a 0.45 μm membrane filter. The deposition procedures of the IFL and the cathode were the same as the fabrication of PSCs. The typical thickness of the emissive layer was 80 nm.



Fig. 2 shows current density–voltage curves of devices with and without the PVA film as a cathode buffer layer. The PCE (power conversion efficiency) of the devices with the PVA film spun-coated from the solution in an aqueous alcoholic solvent (water:methanol = 2:8 by volume, 20 vol% of water is the minimum amount for dissolving PVA) was 2.67–2.70% (see Fig. S1 and Table S1, ESI). The PCEs of the devices were slightly higher than that of the device without PVA (reference device, PCE = 2.58%). Also, the Voc and FF of the devices with PVA were almost the same as the data of the reference device. One possible reason is the poor wetting properties of PVA on the active layer. It is known that the amount of water in the solvent for the buffer layer is a critical factor affecting the film quality or the wetting properties on the active layer and should be less than 20 vol%. In order to get highly efficient devices, it is necessary to optimize the processing solvent for PVA coating. As shown in Fig. 2 and Table 1, the devices with the PVA film deposited from the solution in the dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO)–methanol mixed solvent (DMSO:methanol = 5:95 by volume, found to be optimum solvent composition for deposition of the PVA film on the active layer surface) showed better performances than that of the reference device. In addition, we varied the PVA film thickness to optimize the device performances by varying the concentration of PVA solutions. We refer to the fabricated device with the spin-coated PVA film from the concentration of 0.2 mg mL−1, 0.5 mg mL−1, and 1.0 mg mL−1 as PVA0.1, PVA0.5, and PVA1.0, respectively. We could not measure the thickness of the PVA film directly on the active layer by using a thickness monitor (Alpha-Step IQ surface profiler) or an AFM due to the fact that the surface roughness of the active layer (Fig. 4) is very similar to the thickness of the PVA film. Thus, we estimated the thickness of the PVA layer by using an ellipsometer. The thickness of the PVA film prepared from the concentration of 0.2 mg mL−1, 0.5 mg mL−1, and 1.0 mg mL−1 on Si wafers was 1.76 ± 0.06, 2.22 ± 0.03, and 4.16 ± 0.04 nm, respectively. Even though the surface properties (i.e. energy) of the active layer are different from those of Si wafers, the thickness of the PVA film on the active layer would be similar to that on Si wafers.


V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

R
s
b (Ω cm2)

R
p
c (kΩ cm2)

a The [b] series and [c] parallel resistance (estimated from the device with the best PCE value).

Without PVA
0.59
−8.04
54.0
2.58
5.34
46.5
(0.59 ± 0.01)
(−7.89 ± 0.19)
(54.7 ± 0.9)
(2.55 ± 0.03)
PVA0.2
0.63
−8.21
59.9
3.10
2.78
7.84
(0.63 ± 0.01)
(−8.04 ± 0.15)
(59.4 ± 0.6)
(3.03 ± 0.03)
PVA0.5
0.63
−8.33
60.4
3.17
2.46
7.97
(0.62 ± 0.01)
(−8.12 ± 0.18)
(59.4 ± 0.1)
(3.11 ± 0.04)
PVA1.0
0.63
−8.70
59.7
3.27
2.72
15.3
(0.62 ± 0.01)
(−8.36 ± 0.24)
(59.3 ± 0.9)
(3.17 ± 0.05)
The PCE of the device with PVA1.0 showed the highest PCE of 3.27%, which is a 27% increase compared to that of the device without an IFL. The increase in the device efficiency resulted from the 8% enhancement in the short circuit current (Jsc) and the 11% improvement in the fill factor (FF), respectively. For the devices with PVA0.2 and PVA0.5, the PCE was 3.10 and 3.17%, respectively, which is a 20% and a 23% PCE increase, respectively, compared to those of the devices without PVA. The performances of PSCs were dependent on the thickness of the PVA film. The devices with PVA1.0 showed a Voc of 0.63 V, a Jsc of −8.70 mA cm−2, and a FF of 59.7%, respectively, which were significantly higher than those of the device without the PVA film. The Jsc and FF of the devices with PVA were in the range from −8.21 to −8.70 mA cm−2 and from 59.9 to 60.4%, respectively, which are higher than those of the devices without the IFL (Jsc = −8.04 mA cm−2, FF = 54.0%). Also, the Voc values of the devices were higher than the Voc of the reference device.
Generally, a large Schottky barrier inhibits the facile injection/collection of electrons at the organic (or polymer) semiconductor/Al interface. Thus, Ohmic contact by the reduction of a Schottky barrier at the interfaces is required to obtain high Jsc. Therefore, more efficient injection/collection of electrons is expected in the device with the PVA thin film as a cathode buffer layer. Enhancement of Jsc can be achieved by introducing the PVA film leading to the reduction of a Schottky barrier, which is due to the formation of interface dipoles at the cathode interface. We performed ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) to confirm that the reduction of the work function and a Schottky barrier at the interface. As shown in Fig. 3, the work function was calculated from the Fermi level and the secondary cut-off energy in the UPS spectrum. The work function of Al and PVA coated Al figured out from the UPS spectra was 4.30 and 4.09 eV, respectively. The reduction of a Schottky barrier is 0.21 eV, which is very comparable to the case of PEO, PSS-Na, PVP, CPEs, NCPs, and PVs. The Voc value of the devices with the PVA film prepared from the mixed solvent having DMSO was 0.63 V, which is higher than that of the device without PVA (0.59 V) and very comparable to the data of the device with CPE as a cathode buffer layer. However, the Voc values of the device with the PVA film prepared from the solution in the water–methanol mixed solvent were the same as that of the device without PVA (see Fig. S1 and Table S1, ESI). This is also possibly due to the fact that the quality of the PVA film prepared from the mixed solvent having water is poor. The current density–voltage curve under the dark conditions (inset of Fig. 2) provides information about the series resistance (Rs) and the parallel resistance (Rp), which were calculated from the inverse slope near high current regime and the slope near the lower current region in the dark J–V curves, respectively. The devices with the PVA film showed smaller Rs values than that of the device without PVA. Interestingly, the Rp values of the devices with PVA were smaller than that of the reference device, while both the Jsc and the FF are increased. Even though smaller Rp values were observed in the device with PVA, the devices with PVA exhibited better Jsc and FF than those of the devices without PVA.
The surface morphology of the active layer (Fig. 4) with the PVA film showed quite different features from that of the active layer without the PVA film. This is due to the fact that the PVA film covers the roughness of the active layer surface. As shown in Fig. 4(b)–(d), the r.m.s. surface roughnesses of the active layer with the PVA were 2.23, 2.18, and 2.40 nm, respectively, which were smaller than that of the active layer without PVA (Fig. 4(a), 3.45 nm). The surface roughness of the PVA coated active layer was smoother than that of the active layer without the PVA film, indicating that the PVA film can form uniformly on the active layer. The r.m.s. surface roughness of the active layer reflects that the quality of the PVA film deposited from the solution in methanol–water is poor (see Fig. S2, ESI). We measured the surface energy of the active layer with and without the PVA layer to investigate the change of the properties of the active layer surface. The surface energies (see Fig. S3 and Table S3, ESI) of the active layer with PVA0.2, PVA0.5, and PVA1.0 prepared from the solution in the DMSO–methanol solvent were 27.2, 26.8, and 26.8 mN m−1, respectively, which were higher than that of the active layer without PVA (23.6 mN m−1). The surface energy (Fig. S2 and Table S2, ESI) of the active layer with the PVA film prepared by using a mixed solvent containing 20 vol% of water was 24.0 mN m−1, which was almost the same as the surface energy of the active layer without the PVA film (23.6 mN m−1), indicating that the surface properties were not much changed by the poor quality of the PVA film. The surface morphology and energy data indicate that the performances of the device depend on the quality of the PVA film. The processing solvent is also a very important parameter affecting the efficiency of the devices.
We also fabricated the PLED with PVA1.0 at the cathode interface to investigate the effect of the PVA film on the device. As shown in Fig. 5(a), the devices showed the typical diode characteristics. The device without the PVA film (ITO/PEDOT/PF9B/Al) showed a turn on voltage of light (Von, defined as the literature procedure) of 6.5 V, a maximum luminance efficiency (LEmax) of 0.316 cd A−1 at 89.7 mA cm−2, and a maximum brightness (Bmax) of 476 cd m−2, respectively. Contrarily, the device with PVA1.0 exhibited a Von of light of 5.0 V, a LEmax of 3.612 cd A−1 at 2.68 mA cm−2, and a Bmax of 961 cd m−2, respectively, which are better than those of the devices without the IFL. PLEDs in this research seem to need to be optimized further because of lower performances than previously reported data. However, one can easily notice that the performances of PLEDs with the PVA film were better than those of the devices without the IFL.

A non-conjugated polymer with a polar hydroxyl group, PVA, has been demonstrated as a cathode buffer layer for PSCs to modify the contact properties at the semiconducting layer/Al interface. The performances of PSCs were dependent on the thickness of the PVA film and the processing solvent. The increase in the PCE resulted from enhancement of the Jsc, the FF, and the Voc, simultaneously. The surface roughness of the active layer with the PVA film was smaller than that of the active layer without the PVA film and the surface energy of the active layer with the PVA film was higher than that of the active layer without PVA, indicating that the hydrophilic PVA layer is well coated on the surface of the active layer. The results support that enhancement of the Jsc and FF is related to the contact properties and the surface morphology as well as the surface energy at the interface. Also, a Schottky barrier between the semiconducting layer and the Al cathode was reduced by the formation of a favorable interface dipole by insertion of the PVA film. As a result, the performance of the opto-electronic devices with the PVA film as a cathode buffer layer was better than that of the devices without the PVA film. This research provides a very simple, facile, and cheap strategy for the enhancement of the efficiency of opto-electronic devices.


This research was supported by the Converging Research Center Program through the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (2013K000196) and Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (2013020225).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The photovoltaic properties of the devices with a PVA film deposited from the solution in aqueous alcoholic solvent and the surface energy data. See DOI: 10.1039/c3tc32430c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014