 DOI: 10.1039/C3NR00508A
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4362-4369

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Wu-Qiang
Wu
,

Yang-Fan
Xu
,

Hua-Shang
Rao
,

Cheng-Yong
Su
 and 

Dai-Bin
Kuang
*

MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinorganic and Synthetic Chemistry, KLGHEI of Environment and Energy Chemistry, State Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Materials and Technologies, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, P. R. China. E-mail: kuangdb@mail.sysu.edu.cn; Fax: +86-20-8411-3015

Received
29th January 2013
, Accepted 5th March 2013
First published on 12th March 2013
We report the innovative development of a double layered photoanode made of hierarchical TiO2 flowers (HTFs) as the overlayer and TiO2 nanoparticles (TNPs) as the underlayer, for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). They were prepared via a mild and simple one-step hydrothermal reaction of TiO2 nanoparticles/FTO glass substrate in an alkaline solution. The underlayer made of TNPs with a small size (20 nm in diameter) serves as a transparent photoanode for efficient dye adsorption. The overlayer consisting of HTFs (3–5 μm in diameter) embedded by TiO2 nanosheets plays multiple roles in enhancing light-scattering and fast electron transport. DSSCs based on this novel double layered photoanode (5 μm TNPs + 5 μm HTFs) exhibit greater than 7.4% power conversion efficiency (PCE), which is higher than that of single layer TNP based photoanodes (6.59%) with similar thickness (∼10 μm), and this is mainly attributed to the superior light scattering ability and fast electron transport of the former. Meanwhile, the thickness of the TNP underlayer has been optimized to further improve the PCE and an excellent PCE of over 9% has been achieved based on a 15 μm TNP + a 5 μm HTF double layered photoanode, accompanied by a short-circuit photocurrent density of 17.85 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage of 763 mV and a fill factor of 0.67.

Human society today is experiencing soaring global energy demand and rapid depletion of fossil fuels. This has driven the development of new types of renewable and sustainable alternatives, such as the cost-effective use of renewable sources such as solar energy. Solar cells, serving as photovoltaic devices to directly convert the solar light into electricity for domestic applications, have attracted extensive academic and industrial interest. Of particular interest are dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), which have been regarded as one of the most promising candidates for low-cost energy resources in the near future when compared with traditional silicon-based solar cells due to their easy fabrication process, low-cost, light weight and high efficiency.

Conventionally, a porous photoelectrode made of anatase TiO2 nanocrystals (20 nm in diameter), with a high internal surface area serves as the carrier for loading large amounts of dye molecules. However, such films normally show poor light harvesting efficiency due to their high transparency for a portion of light transmittance in the visible range. Worse still, the existence of surface defects and grain boundaries within mesoporous TiO2 nanocrystal based photoelectrodes could greatly retard electron transport, inflict electron recombination, and thus impede the further improvement of DSSC performance. In general, high specific surface area, fast electron transport, and outstanding light-scattering properties play salient roles in achieving high-efficiency DSSCs, but these factors are always incompatible with one another. To tackle this issue, some kind of double-layered photoanode made up of a different TiO2 nanostructure with an underlayer and an overlayer to combine their specific advantages has been demonstrated to accommodate all of these favourable characteristics. For example, a film of larger TiO2 particles covering the nanocrystalline TiO2 film as a light-scattering layer, has been adopted to fabricate photoanodes for efficient DSSCs. Especially noteworthy is the fact that several multi-functional hierarchical TiO2 nanostructures such as mesoporous microspheres, hierarchical microspheres, hollow spheres, nanospindles,etc. have been employed as efficient and effective light-scattering layers. These offer both strong light harvesting efficiency and large dye uptake since their hierarchical structure is proven to posses a comparably large surface area for dye adsorption and superior light scattering compared to low dimensional counterparts. However, all of these double-layered structures were obtained on a base of separate TiO2 materials with different morphologies, which would bring in additional production procedures and cost. A recent example concerning a bilayer TiO2 photoelectrode consisting of a rutile 1D nanowire bottom array and a 3D microsphere top layer has been reported which yielded a PCE of 7.2%.
Herein, we establish a mild one-step hydrothermal method to directly convert the single-layered TiO2 nanoparticle film to a novel double layered anatase TiO2 photoanode consisting of hierarchical TiO2 flowers and TiO2 nanoparticles on a FTO glass substrate. Specifically, the underlayer made of TiO2 nanoparticles with a diameter of 20 nm serves as the dye adsorption layer and the overlayer consisting of hierarchical TiO2 flowers with a diameter of 3–5 μm, built from curly TiO2 nanosheets, plays a dual role for both efficient light-scattering and electron transport. As a result, DSSCs based on a HTF + TNP double layered photoanode and a Pt/FTO glass counter electrode showcase an excellent efficiency of up to 9.08%. To the best of our knowledge, this is a significant breakthrough in preparing a double layered TiO2 photoanode that combines favourable functions for enhancing the power conversion efficiency of DSSCs (Scheme 1).

The anatase TiO2 nanoparticles (TNPs, 20 nm) were prepared through a hydrothermal treatment with a precursor solution containing 10 ml of Ti(OBu)4, 20 ml of ethanol, 18 ml of acetic acid and 50 ml of deionized water in a Teflon-lined stainless-steel autoclave and kept at 200 °C for 12 h. The obtained TNP powder was mixed with ethanol, acetic acid, terpineol, ethyl cellulose and vigorously stirred to form a viscous paste. The TNP paste was then coated onto the FTO glass substrate via screen-printing. The thickness of the TNP layer can be easily controlled via different multiple times of screen-printing. For comparison of DSSC performance and optimization of thickness, five different thicknesses of TNP films (7 μm, 10 μm, 15 μm, 20 μm and 25 μm) were prepared.


Briefly, the as-prepared TNP/FTO films were immersed into 40 ml of 3 M NaOH aqueous solution and placed into a Teflon-lined autoclave with the conducting layer facing down and maintained at 150 °C for 6 h, then allowed to cool to room temperature naturally. The as-prepared TiO2/FTO film was washed with distilled water thoroughly and underwent an ion exchange process in 0.1 M HCl, following a heat treatment in a muffle furnace at 500 °C for 3 h.


The as-obtained photoanodes were soaked in a 0.04 M TiCl4 aqueous solution for 30 min at 70 °C following by a sintering process at 520 °C for 30 min. Then the TiO2 photoelectrode films were immersed into N719 dye solution (0.5 mM N719 in a mixture of acetonitrile and tert-butyl alcohol, 1:1 volume ratio, and sensitized for 16 h at room temperature.) The dye-sensitized TiO2 photoanode on FTO substrate and Pt coated FTO glass were assembled into a sandwich type cell. Platinized counter electrodes were fabricated by thermal deposition of H2PtCl6 solution (5 mM in isopropanol) onto FTO glass at 400 °C for 15 min. For comparison, a single-layered TiO2 nanoparticle photoanode (without hydrothermal reaction) based DSSC was prepared to compare its photovoltaic performance with the double layered photoanode of similar thickness (10 μm). In addition, an electrolyte solution composed of 0.6 M 1-methyl-3-propylimidazo-lium iodide (PMII), 0.1 M guanidinium thiocyanate, 0.03 M I2, 0.05 M LiI, 0.5 M tert-butylpyridine dissolved in acetonitrile and valeronitrile (85:15) was injected into the interspace between the photoanode and the counter electrode. The active area of the TiO2 photoelectrode film was approximately 0.16 cm2, which was measured by a profilometer (Ambios, XP-1).


X-ray diffraction (XRD) was used to characterize the crystalline phase purity of the prepared products on a Bruker D8 Advance X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å). Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, JSM-6330F), transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JOEL-2010 HR) and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) were conducted to characterize the morphology, size and the intrinsic crystalline structure of the samples. The photovoltaic parameters including open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current (Jsc), fill factor (FF), and conversion efficiency (η) were studied using a Keithley 2400 source meter under simulated AM 1.5 G illumination (100 mW cm−2) provided by a solar light simulator (Oriel, Model: 91192). The incident light intensity was calibrated with a NREL-calibrated Si solar cell. A Spectral Products DK240 monochromator was employed for the IPCE measurement as a function of wavelength from 400 to 800 nm. The dye uptake (after desorption in 0.1 M NaOH aqueous solution) and the diffuse reflectance spectra of the TiO2 films were measured on a UV/Vis-NIR spectrophotometer (UV-3150).

Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were measured with an electrochemical workstation (Zahner, Zennium) at a bias potential of −0.80 V in dark conditions with the frequency range from 10 mHz to 1 MHz. Intensity-modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS) and intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) measurements were also performed on an electrochemical workstation (Zahner, Zennium) with a frequency response analyzer under a modulated green light emitting diode (457 nm) driven by a source supply (Zahner, PP211) in a frequency range from 1 KHz to 0.1 Hz. The impedance parameters were determined by fitting of the impedance spectra using Z-view software.


Fig. 1 shows the XRD patterns of the FTO glass substrate (a), the TiO2 nanoparticle film (b) and the synthesized double layered TiO2 film (c). Evidently, the SnO2 peaks were observed for all three XRD curves, which illustrated that the prepared products were constructed on FTO substrates. XRD studies suggest that the prepared nanoparticle film was pure anatase TiO2 (Fig. 1b). After the hydrothermal reaction and annealing process, the obtained double layered TiO2 film was still well-crystallized as the anatase phase without detectable impurities (Fig. 1c). Above all, the TiO2 nanoparticle and double layered TiO2 films exhibit the same diffraction peaks regardless of a slight difference in intensity, and are indexed to anatase phase (JCPDS card no. 21-1272).

The surface and cross-sectional morphology of the TiO2 nanoparticle film and the double layered TiO2 photoanode film were characterized by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM). Fig. 2a shows that the TiO2 nanoparticle film is apparently formed by close packing of the 20 nm nanoparticles. Quite interestingly, after the hydrothermal reaction in alkaline solution and calcination process, a portion of the TiO2 nanoparticles (top layer) were transformed into TiO2 flower clusters, and there are no apparent cracks on the surface (Fig. 2b). It reveals that each flower is assembled by thin nanosheets, approximately 5 nm in thickness, as building units (inset in Fig. 2b), and the diameter of the flowers is in the range of 3–5 μm. Fig. 2d shows that the thickness of the double layered film was ∼10 μm (5 + 5 μm), which is similar to that of the original TiO2 nanoparticle film (Fig. 2c), indicating that the hydrothermal transformation process has no effect on the thickness. Clearly, as shown in Fig. 2d, a strong mechanical connection between the nanoparticle underlayer and flower overlayer was observed, and these two layers are in good attachment with no evident sign of delamination. This is due to the fact that hierarchical TiO2 flowers are synthesized in situ with the TiO2 nanoparticles as the precursor material. In addition, some more information about the morphological and structural characteristics of the prepared double layered photoanode consisting of a HTF overlayer and a TNP underlayer was obtained by using transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Clearly, for the samples scraped from the prepared DL-TNPs + HTFs/FTO photoanode, both the small sized nanoparticles and the thin nanosheets were observed in the TEM image as shown in Fig. S1. Specifically, the observed size of the nanoparticles is still around 20 nm, indicating that no changes occurred for the unreacted portion of the TiO2 nanoparticles. And the inset HRTEM image taken from the area in the marked white square of the nanosheet shows clear lattice fringes, confirming good crystallinity of the nanosheet. The observed interplanar spacing of 0.35 nm for the distance between the adjacent lattice fringes, correlates well with the anatase TiO2 {101} plane, which further illustrates that the each flower is composed of intelligently assembled single crystalline anatase TiO2 nanosheet.
The anatase TiO2 nanoparticles with a size of 20 nm are advantageous for anchoring large amounts of dye molecules and the large-sized hierarchical TiO2 flowers can serve as a scattering layer for enhancing light scattering. The present novel double layered TiO2 photoanode will simultaneously combine these functions for superior DSSC application. Fig. 3 shows typical photocurrent density–photovoltage (J–V) curves of the DSSCs made from photoanodes with the following configurations: single layered TiO2 nanoparticle (TNPs, ∼10 μm in thickness) and double layered TiO2 photoelectrodes consisting of TNPs plus HTFs (DL-TNPs + HTFs, ∼5 + 5 μm in thickness). The detailed photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. As noted in Table 1, the 10 μm thick TiO2 film based DSSC made of nanoparticles, attained a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 12.47 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 794 mV, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.67, leading to an overall power conversion efficiency (PCE) of only 6.59%. Interestingly, the DSSC based on the double layered TiO2 photoanode composed of TNPs and HTFs outperformed the single layered one, with a Jsc of 13.49 mA cm−2, an Voc of 806 mV, a fill factor of 0.68, and thus a higher PCE of up to 7.44% was obtained. Evidently, the remarkable enhancement of PCE for DL-TNPs + HTFs compared to the single layered TNPs is mainly attributed to the improvement of the Jsc and the Voc. Specifically, although the amount of dye uptake on the double layered film (100.71 nmol cm−2) is lower than that of single layered TiO2 nanoparticle film (124.01 nmol cm−2), the enhanced Jsc for the former can be understood as a result of improved light harvesting by the hierarchical TiO2 flower overlayer and fast electron transport, which is discussed further below in the section on the diffused reflectance spectra and IMPS measurements. Also, the Voc witnessed an increase from 794 mV for the TNPs to 806 mV for the DL-TNPs + HTFs, which is mainly due to the fact that the existence of hierarchical TiO2 flowers as efficient electron transport materials can effectively suppress electron recombination and exhibit longer electron lifetimes (see following EIS and IMVS measurements). As a result, our successful design of such novel double layered nanostructured solar cells achieved a pronounced PCE of 7.44%, leading to an enhancement of 13% over the single layered TNP based DSSC (6.59%).
Cell

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (mV)
FF

η (%)
Dye uptake (nmol cm−2)
TNPs
12.47
794
0.67
6.59
124.01
DL-TNPs + HTFs
13.49
806
0.68
7.44
100.71
To investigate the difference in photovoltaic performance of the two DSSCs (i.e., the single layered TNP-based and double layered TNP + HTF-based DSSC), the incident-photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra were measured (Fig. 4a). Clearly, the IPCE spectra of both cells with N719 dye exhibited a maximum value at approximately 530 nm. The IPCE of the DL-TNPs + HTFs is higher than that of single layered TNPs over the entire wavelength region, which correlates well with the aforementioned higher Jsc for the former, indicating that more photocurrent was generated within the double layered DSSC because the flower-based overlayer can better utilize the light and generate more photoelectrons, which to some extent can also be collected efficiently. Moreover, it is well known that enhancement of light scattering by TiO2 photoanode films is crucial for boosting the light harvesting efficiency. To study the scattering efficiency in detail, the reflectivity of each film was also evaluated. As shown in Fig. 4b, the reflectance of the DL-TNP + HTF film is much higher than that of the bare TNP film, suggesting better light scattering capabilities for such a kind of double layered photoanode compared with a bare TNP photoanode in the visible and near-infrared regions, which can be attributed to the following facts. Firstly, photoanode films made from a nanoparticle underlayer exhibit high transparency, which allows the transmission of the unabsorbed light into the hierarchical TiO2 flower overlayer, leading to subsequent photocurrent generation and photoelectron collection within the overlayer. Secondly, the larger size of the hierarchical flowers enable them to reflect the transmitted light back to the nanoparticle underlayer, which effectively prolongs the optical transfer length of the photoanode, resulting in enhanced light harvesting efficiency. Therefore, the higher Jsc for the DL-TNPs + HTFs compared to the single layered TNPs is a consequence of a superior light scattering ability for the former.
To further elucidate the characteristics of the electron transport/recombination occurring within the DSSCs based on a single layered TiO2 nanoparticle film and a double layered TiO2 film, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was carried out in dark conditions at −0.80 V bias, as illustrated in Fig. 5. The fitted results are summarized in Table S1 (see ESI). In the EIS Nyquist spectra, two well-defined semicircles were observed in the high frequency (1 K–1 MHz) and medium frequency (103–10 Hz) range. According to the EIS model for TiO2 reported in the literature, the smaller semicircle in the high frequency represents the redox charge transfer at the counter electrode and the larger semicircle in the medium frequency denotes the electron transfer at the TiO2–dye–electrolyte interface. From Table S1, one can notice that the value of R1 for both cells is similar due to the utilization of the same Pt/FTO counter electrode and electrolyte prepared in the nearly same manner. However, R2, which is generally considered to be primarily determined by the charge recombination resistance, displays significant discrepancy, i.e., 162.1 Ω and 109.9 Ω for the double layer- and single layer-based DSSCs, respectively. This suggests a slower recombination rate for the double layered cells. Here, the difference in the R2 values mostly results from the difference in the interfacial recombination resistance of the photoelectrode/electrolyte, since both cells have nanoparticles contacted with the FTO directly. The results can be ascribed to the fact that the unique hierarchical structure of the TiO2 flower overlayer consisting of thin nanosheets is beneficial for electrolyte penetration and electron transport, and hence leads to a slower recapture of conduction band electrons by I3− ions occurring in the recombination process. Moreover, the electron lifetime τr fitted by using Z-view software for the DL-TNPs + HTFs (138 ms) is longer than that of the TNPs (99 ms), signifying the electron would transport through a longer distance. This means there is a reduction of electron recombination and consequently leads to an enhanced Voc for the DL-TNPs + HTFs compared with the TNPs, which corresponds well with the aforementioned J–V characterization data.
To obtain better insight into the electron transport and recombination properties within DSSCs, the intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) and intensity-modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS) measurements were further carried out under an illumination of 457 nm from an LED light source as a function of light intensity from 30 to 150 W m−2. Fig. 6a and b depict the primary results in the form of transport time τd and electron lifetime τr for the two DSSCs, where τd and τr give information about electron transit time across the photoanode films and recombination time of electrons with I3− in the electrolyte, respectively. These two parameters were derived from the equations as τd = 1/2πfd or τr = 1/2πfr, where fd and fr are the characteristic minimum frequencies of the IMPS and the IMVS imaginary component, respectively. Obviously, the DSSC based on the double layered TiO2 photoanode shows a shorter transport time and longer electron lifetime than that of the single layered TiO2 nanoparticle based DSSC, indicating a faster electron transport rate and a slower electron recombination rate for the former. Moreover, the calculated electron diffusion coefficient (Dn; Dn = d2/(4τd)) for both of the cells was plotted in Fig. 6c as a function of light intensity. One can notice that the Dn curve of the double layer-derived DSSC lies above that of single layer-derived DSSC, again confirming faster electron transit capability for the former. It is thus clear that such novel double layered photoanodes consisting of hierarchical TiO2 flowers and nanoparticles, possess prominent electron transport properties. From this result, several aspects merit attention. First, it is believed that electron transport depends very much on the morphology. The fast electron transport rate for the DL-TNPs + HTFs can be ascribed to the hierarchical TiO2 flower overlayer being assembled from the tiny nanosheet building units. This hierarchical nanostructure has been proven to have fewer surface trapping sites and defects for impeding electron recombination with I3− in the electrode. In the mean time, the intelligently assembled hierarchical structure on the base of the 2D nanosheets, results in good neighbouring contacts among adjacent nanosheets and close linkage of flowers, which builds a sort of highway to boost electron transport. Second, unlike other double layered films fabricated from successive screen-printing or subsequent overlayer deposition using TiO2 materials with different nanostructures, the present micron-sized flower overlayer was obtained via in situ hydrothermal growth and transformation by using the nanoparticles as raw materials. Hence, the seamless connection between the hierarchical TiO2 flower overlayer and the TiO2 nanoparticle underlayer is clearly recognizable. This junction type between the two layers can further promote the Dn of the DL-TNPs + HTFs, compared to that of the single layered TNPs. Last but not least, it is reported that electron lifetime is related to the internal trapping and detrapping through bulk traps within DSSCs. The higher the bulk trap density, the longer the electron lifetime. This is because quick trapping and slow releasing of the electrons by the bulk traps could effectively delay the sacrifice of injected electrons. The hierarchical flowers in the overlayer can effectively and efficiently passivate the surface states and increase the density of bulk traps and thus enlarge the lifetime of the electrons. Furthermore, to gauge the charge transport and recombination characteristics in a combined manner, electron diffusion length (Ln) is calculated by using the formula Ln = (Dnτr)1/2. Generally, Ln represents the average travel distance of electrons before recombining with acceptors. This meaningful parameter is related to the range of thicknesses that is suitable for semiconductor material layers, which determines whether the injected electron can effectively transit to the external circuit in photovoltaic devices. Fig. 6d illustrates that the Ln value for the DL-TNPs + HTFs is longer than that of the single layered TNPs in all varieties of light intensity. This suggests that the double layered photoanode film with hierarchical flower overlayer is favourable for electron diffusion through a longer distance with less grain boundaries. Above all, the superior light scattering properties and fast electron transport rate, which were confirmed by the diffuse reflectance spectra and IMPS measurements, greatly contribute to the enhanced photocurrent density for DL-TNP + HTF based DSSCs. The slower electron recombination rate (longer electron lifetime) within DL-TNPs + HTFs derived from the EIS and IMVS measurements correlates well with its higher Voc for DSSC applications. Consequently, an enhanced η was achieved for the DL-TNPs + HTFs based DSSC (7.44%) compared with the single layered TNP based DSSC (6.59%).
The enhanced efficiency of DSSCs achieved by such a novel doubled layered TiO2 photoanode consisting of a TiO2 nanoparticle underlayer and a hierarchical TiO2 flower overlayer demonstrates our success strategy for combining the high specific surface area of the small-size nanoparticles and the prominent light scattering and fast electron transport of the large-size hierarchical flowers. It is well known that the photovoltaic performance of DSSCs strongly depends on the thickness of underlayer and overlayer of double layered photoanodes. Three additional thicknesses (7, 15 and 20 μm) of the TiO2 nanoparticles/FTO were prepared and then underwent the hydrothermal reaction at 150 °C for 6 h in a 3 M NaOH aqueous solution. This produced double layered TiO2 films with a thickness of 2 + 5 μm (Fig. 7a); 10 + 5 μm (Fig. 7c) and 15 + 5 μm (Fig. 7e), respectively. Interestingly enough, the increased thickness of the initial TNP film, however, has no effect on increasing the thickness of the HTF overlayer. Instead, by doing so, we were able to acquire a double layered photoanode film made up of a HTF overlayer (ca. 5 μm) plus a TNP underlayer with different thicknesses (ca. 2, 10, 15 μm; respectively). Fig. 7b, d and f show the J–V curves of the three double layered photoanode film based DSSCs (2 + 5 μm; 10 + 5 μm; 15 + 5 μm). The resultant photovoltaic performance parameters are collated in Table S2. As shown in Fig. 3, 7, Tables 1 and S2, the Jsc increased from 8.41 mA cm−2 to 17.85 mA cm−2, as the thickness of the TNP underlayer rose from 2 μm to 15 μm. The enhanced Jsc can be understood as a result of increased dye loading as well as increased light scattering effects due to the increased thickness of the TNP underlayer. Namely, it is the increased amount of dye uptake and superior light scattering capability that can excite more photogenerated electrons and improve light harvesting efficiency, and thus leads to an enhanced Jsc. On the other hand, the Voc decreased gradually as the TNP underlayer thickness increased, which is ascribed to the augmentation of the surface area and hence probably provides additional trapping sites for charge recombination within the DSSC. Moreover, continuously increasing the TNP underlayer thickness to 20 μm (double layered photoanode: 20 + 5 μm) led to a slight decline of Jsc to 17.47 mA cm−2, and a significant decay of Voc to 742 mV (seen in Table S2), which indicates a serious recombination within this DSSC due to larger amount of defects and recombination centres existing in a thicker film. On balance, the DSSC based on a TNP (ca. 15 μm)/HTF (ca. 5 μm) double layered TiO2 photoanode, with a Jsc of 17.85 mA cm−2, an Voc of 763 mV and a FF of 0.67, showed an overall power conversion efficiency of 9.08% under one sun illumination. For comparison, a conventional double layered photoelectrode (15 μm TNPs + 5 μm ETSs) which is based on a screen-printed large-sized ellipsoid TiO2 spheres (ETSs, 350–400 nm in length) scattering layer, was used to assemble the DSSC. Interestingly, Table S2 shows the power conversion efficiency of the present double layered photoelectrode (15 μm TNPs + 5 μm HTFs, 9.08%) is superior to the conventional one (8.79%), which highlights the potential wide application of hierarchical TiO2 flowers consisting of tiny and thin nanosheets.

In summary, a facile, scalable and cost-effective method was demonstrated to prepare a novel double layered photoanode consisting of an anatase hierarchical TiO2 flower overlayer and a TiO2 nanoparticle underlayer on a FTO glass substrate via a simple one-step hydrothermal treatment of a TiO2 nanoparticle/FTO film. The microscopy technique confirms that the hierarchical flower structure is embedded intelligently by curling thin TiO2 nanosheets, which possesses less defects and grain boundaries for effective electron transport and electrolyte penetration. The double layered nanostructure simultaneously combines the high specific surface area of the TiO2 nanoparticle underlayer for a large amount of dye loading and pronounced light-scattering effects as well as efficient electron transport performance of the hierarchical TiO2 flower overlayer. For photovoltaic applications, DSSCs based on such double layered photoanodes with a total thickness of 10 μm (5 μm TNPs + 5 μm HTFs) yielded a remarkably enhanced PCE of up to 7.44% compared with the DSSC solely composed of TiO2 nanoparticles (6.59%) with a similar thickness (10 μm). The enhanced PCE of such double layered DSSCs are attributed to the superior light scattering ability, faster electron transport and slower charge recombination. Furthermore, an overall PCE up to 9.08% was achieved for the DSSC fabricated from a 15 μm TiO2 nanoparticle underlayer plus a 5 μm hierarchical TiO2 flower overlayer. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time the direct fabrication of an anatase double layered TiO2 photoanode with nanoparticle underlayer and hierarchical flower overlayer on a FTO substrate has been reported, which may open up an alternative avenue for fabricating double layered photoanodes with combined advantages in a large-scale manner and highlights a promising way to pursue high-performance solar cells.


The authors acknowledge the financial support from the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in the University (NCET-11-0533), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, and the Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education (20100171110014).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3nr00508a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013