 DOI: 10.1039/C6DT03190K
(Paper)
Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 16859-16868


Yanxia
Jiang
,

Yulin
Yang
*,

Junjiang
Zhu
,

Liangsheng
Qiang
,

Tengling
Ye
,

Liang
Li
,

Ting
Su
 and 

Ruiqing
Fan
*

MIIT Key Laboratory of Critical Materials Technology for New Energy Conversion and Storage, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, 150001, P. R. China. E-mail: ylyang@hit.edu.cn; fanruiqing@hit.edu.cnl; Fax: +86-451-86418270

No. 4 High School of Xiang Yang, Hubei, 441021, P. R. China

Received
11th August 2016
, Accepted 14th September 2016
First published on 14th September 2016
A new type of polyoxometalate material, K6SiW11O39Ni(H2O)·xH2O (denoted as SiW11Ni), was successfully synthesized and introduced to a dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) with modified traditional Pt as a novel composite counter electrode. The new counter electrode showed superior electrochemical catalytic activity for the reduction of I3− to I− in analysis utilizing a Tafel-polarization curve, cyclic voltammetry (CV), and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). The DSSC assembled with the SiW11Ni/Pt photocathode exhibited an enhanced performance (7.03%) under the standard AM 1.5G illumination compared to the DSSC with a pristine Pt photocathode (6.65%). Furthermore, the DSSC based on the SiW11Ni/Pt photocathode had an increased light-harvesting efficiency and was very stable. The results demonstrate that SiW11Ni/Pt is an alternative and highly efficient counter electrode for dye-sensitized solar cells. Moreover, the facile design strategy is promising for fabricating efficient and inexpensive composite counter electrode catalysts for DSSCs.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are among the photovoltaic devices with the most potential and are appealing to both researchers and manufactures as a result of their unrivaled advantages, for example, relatively high efficiency, inexpensiveness, facile fabrication, and high power conversion efficiency for colorization. DSSCs even have the potential to replace conventional Si-based solar cells, especially in low-light situations. A lot of attention has been paid to the optimization of sensitizers, photoanode materials, and electrolytes for more efficient DSSCs, but not much work has been done on counter electrodes. So far, the “champion cells” of DSSC with a power conversion efficiency of more than 13% use Pt as a counter electrode. A DSSC typically comprises a dye-sensitized TiO2 semiconductor film as a working electrode, a counter electrode, and a widely used electrolyte containing the I−/I3− redox mediator between the two photoelectrodes. The counter electrode significantly contributes to the improvement of the performance of DSSCs. The counter electrode gathers electrons from the external circuit and transfers them from the counter electrode interface to the electrolyte. This is followed by catalyzing the reduction of I3−, resulting in the regeneration of the sensitizer. Although Pt is an effective counter electrode material for DSSCs, its high cost and scarcity have hampered the further development of DSSCs. Researchers are therefore aiming to replace Pt with materials that are cheaper and more abundant. Currently, a lot of research is being done on Pt-like alternatives, such as graphene, transition metal carbides, nitrides, oxides, and sulfides. However, so far these studies have shown that there are few candidate materials good enough to replace Pt in DSSC systems. Another option being tried therefore is to reduce the amount of Pt on the counter electrode by developing Pt-loaded composite catalysts, which provide synergistic effects that make them good potential counter electrodes in DSSCs. This has led to the development of a series of composite counter electrodes, such as TiN/CNTs, TiN/NG, CoS, and graphene/PEDOT. A number of methods to modify the Pt counter electrodes have been proposed; however, research on how to improve the Pt anodes’ catalytic activity and to reduce the charge transfer resistance at the Pt/electrolyte interface is still ongoing.

Polyoxometalates (POMs), a popular class of transition metal oxide clusters, with a rich variety of properties have been applied in the fields of catalysis, magnetism, energy storage, and as building blocks for a variety of materials. POM-modified electrodes present superior catalytic activity in electrocatalysis. It is worth pointing out that POMs are soluble and stable in a variety of conventional organic solvents. The aforementioned outstanding properties illustrate that POMs represent good potential candidates to optimize the performance of DSSCs. For example, Wang et al. applied SiW9Al3 as a counter electrode with poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) in DSSCs and improved the conversion efficiency to 6.76%, while Chen et al. fabricated a POM/PEDOT hybrid film as a counter electrode and achieved a comparable efficiency with the Pt electrode. All these studies showed enhanced efficiency of the DSSCs by taking advantage of the catalytic activity and reversible electrochemical activity of the materials. However, there are few efforts so far focused on the progress of the catalytic properties toward the electrolyte or studies done on the application of POMs in DSSC systems, especially in terms of modifying the counter electrode.
In this work, we reduced the amount of costly Pt used as the counter electrode in traditional DSSCs by introducing a kind of Keggin-type polyoxometalate (SiW11Ni). We designed a SiW11Ni-modified Pt as the counter electrode and monitored its progress in terms of its catalytic properties toward the electrolyte. It was indicated that the new composite as a counter electrode showed high electrocatalytic activity for I3− in the electrolyte and an energy conversion efficiency of 7.03%. To summarize, the introduction of a polyoxometalate into the counter electrode as a new composite counter electrode (SiW11Ni/Pt) presents a good synergistic effect for speeding up the reversibility of I−/I3− circulation and has a superior catalytic ability. Furthermore, the greater I− can expeditiously regenerate the oxidized sensitizer, which helps in improving the characteristics of DSSCs. Furthermore, the injected electrons from the counter electrode reduce the I3− rapidly, which decreases the recombination between the returned back electrons from the TiO2 conduction band (CB) and triiodide, and thus prolongs the lifetime of the electrons. All of these results were confirmed by EIS, Tafel-polarization, and open-circuit voltage decay curves of DSSCs based on Pt and SiW11Ni/Pt. We believe that this work is the first report of a mono-transition-metal-substituted Keggin-type structure polyoxometalate being introduced into counter electrodes as a way of improving the catalytic activity of DSSCs.

SiW11Ni was synthesized according to the method proposed and discussed by Tézé and Hervé. The detailed method is listed in the ESI. The Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectrum and XRD of SiW11Ni confirmed the Keggin structure of SiW11Ni, while the thermogravimetric curve showed a high thermal stability (Fig. S1). The EDS results of the SiW11Ni are given in Fig. S2 and the data for the elemental distribution are listed in Table S1. It is clear that the K, Si, W, Ni, and O elements could be detected in the EDS spectrum, and thus we can assume that the compound was pure.


SiW11Ni powders were mixed with ethyl cellulose and α-terpineol and then stirred for 3 days to form a uniform slurry. The different layers SiW11Ni were first deposited onto fluorine-doped tin oxide conductive glass (FTO, 15 Ω cm−2) by screen-printing and then the layers of Pt paste (purchased from Wuhan Geao Co., China) were screen-printed onto the different layers of SiW11Ni film (one layer SiW11Ni denoted as SiW11Ni/Pt, two layers SiW11Ni denoted as 2SiW11Ni/Pt, and three layers SiW11Ni denoted as 3SiW11Ni/Pt). Subsequently, the film was sintered for 30 min at 400 °C. Finally, the SiW11Ni/Pt counter electrode film was obtained. The thickness of the obtained counter electrode was around 400 nm. For comparison, a conventional pure platinum counter electrode was also prepared by printing three layers of H2PtCl6 isopropanol solution onto the FTO glass and then thermal decomposing the H2PtCl6 at an equivalent temperature with the SiW11Ni/Pt counter electrode under air ambient.


A 10 μm-thick layer of TiO2 particles (commercial P25) was fabricated on FTO glass and sintered at 500 °C. It was then cooled to 80 °C and finally stored in a solution of N719 for 24 h. The liquid electrolyte for the solar cell contained 0.05 M I2, 0.5 M LiI, and 0.1 M 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) in absolute acetonitrile. The DSSCs were fabricated with photoanodes, counter electrodes, and an electrolyte. The photoelectrode film of 0.16 cm2 and the active symmetrical cell of 0.64 cm2 area were fabricated by placing an electrolyte between the photoanode and counter electrode.


Thermogravimetric (TG) experiments were conducted on a Perkin-Elmer STA 6000 Simultaneous Thermal Analyzer under a nitrogen flow. The scanning electron microscope (SEM) micrograph images were analyzed on a Helios Nanolab 600i focused ion electron double beam SEM, manufactured by the FEI Company. Recording of the absorption spectra of the electrodes was done by using an Agilent Technologies Cary 60 (America). An AAA Class 150 W solar simulator (SAN-EI ELECTRIC, model XES-40S2-CE, Japan) was employed to investigate the photovoltaic properties. The utilized AM 1.5 global sunlight intensity was calibrated by a Newport Oriel PV reference cell and meter (model 91150 V). The cyclic voltammetry measurement was conducted in a three-electrode system in an acetonitrile electrolyte containing 0.001 M I2, 0.01 M LiI, and 0.1 M LiClO4, all scanned at a rate of 50 mV s−1. The open-circuit voltage decay (OCVD) measurements were performed by using a CHI660D electrochemical workstation system (Chenhua, China). EIS analyses were characterized with a bias voltage (−0.8 V) and the frequency set from 0.01 Hz to 10 MHz. Using an electrochemical workstation system (CHI660, Shanghai) in the dummy cells with the scan rate of 10 mV s−1, we carried out Tafel-polarization measurements.


The performance of the DSSCs with the new counter electrodes were evaluated in comparison with that of the DSSC with a conventional Pt counter electrode. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the DSSCs were measured under the illumination of AM 1.5G. Both Fig. 1 and Table 1 show that the highest energy conversion efficiency of the DSSC is 7.03%, relating to the DSSCs fabricated with monolayer-SiW11Ni-modified Pt. Compared with the traditional Pt counter electrode, the short-circuit current density (Jsc) increased from 14.19 to 16.83 mA cm−2. The fill factor (FF) depended on the series resistance, built-in voltage, and fabrication technology among other factors, while the degradation of the FF was mainly attributed to the higher series resistance (Rs) (listed in Table 1) under illumination. It is noted that as the modified layers of SiW11Ni increases, the Jsc first rises and then descends. The Jsc of DSSCs with monolayer-SiW11Ni-based counter electrodes was greater than that of the traditional Pt counter electrode in DSSC, which can compensate for the slight loss of FF in the SiW11Ni/Pt counter electrodes. The increased Jsc of the modified photocathodes is related to the superior catalytic activity for the electrolyte and the smooth electron transmission. As shown in Table 1, the performance of the DSSCs with the SiW11Ni-only-based counter electrode has the lowest efficiency, which may be due to the SiW11Ni nanoparticles, which act as conductors and hardly have any catalytic function. The large difference of the performance between DSSCs based on various layers SiW11Ni modified Pt counter electrodes indicate that the notable increase in the performance of the DSSCs can be attributed to the combination of the POMs and Pt. We introduce a POM as a synergic catalyst for accelerating the reversibility of I−/I3− circulation, which ultimately results in the improvement of the performance of the SiW11Ni/Pt counter electrodes DSSCs. Therefore, according to the above analysis, it can be concluded that the monolayer-SiW11Ni-modified Pt counter electrode has the best catalytic ability. As a result, further experiments were conducted based on the SiW11Ni/Pt counter electrode.

Counter electrodes

J
sc/mA cm−2

V
oc/V
FF

η/%

R
s/Ω

R
ct/Ω
Pure Pt
14.19 ± 0.21
0.76 ± 0.01
0.62 ± 0.01
6.65 ± 0.1
19.47
12.67
SiW11Ni/Pt
16.83 ± 0.23
0.75 ± 0.01
0.56 ± 0.01
7.03 ± 0.1
20.85
8.54
2SiW11Ni/Pt
14.24 ± 0.28
0.74 ± 0.01
0.51 ± 0.02
5.19 ± 0.2
24.43
18.76
3SiW11Ni
9.26 ± 0.32
0.59 ± 0.02
0.12 ± 0.02
0.65 ± 0.2
24.72
54.29
The stability of the DSSC with the SiW11Ni/Pt photocathode, which had the best overall cell performance, was tested under illumination and in the dark at room temperature. The results are shown in Fig. 2. From Fig. 2a (under illumination), the photovoltaic parameters Jsc, Voc, and FF of the SiW11Ni/Pt cell were 16.40 mA cm−2, 0.73 V, and 0.54, respectively, indicating that the η value of the new cell retained a good stability of its initial value. Fig. 2b (in the dark) also showed a good stability of the solar cell based on the SiW11Ni/Pt counter electrode. This excellent stability further indicated that the SiW11Ni/Pt films are suitable materials for the counter electrode in DSSCs.
We also studied the J–V curves of the DSSCs by using NiSO4 and K8SiW11O39 instead of SiW11Ni as counter electrodes and the results are listed in Fig. S3. We can see that the performance of the solar cell with SiW11Ni/Pt counter electrode is the highest, while the efficiencies of the other two are lower relatively. This result is attributed to the decreased of Jsc, which are influenced by the electronic transmission and recombination directly. Therefore, we applied SiW11Ni/Pt as an efficient counter electrode in this study.
The morphology of the assembled samples was investigated and the results shown in Fig. 3. It is shown that the surface of both the pristine platinum electrode and SiW11Ni/Pt electrode are compact. The generation of platinum possibly attributes to the rapid decomposition of H2PtCl6 solution (H2PtCl6 → Pt + 2HCl + 2Cl2) and the volatilization of HCl and Cl2. As shown in Fig. 3b, Pt nanoparticles were well-dispersed in the SiW11Ni/Pt sample. The well-dispersed Pt nanoparticles of the new counter electrode were available for the adsorption of liquid electrolyte, consequently resulting in a great improvement of electrocatalytic activity for the I−/I3− redox reaction. However, in the pristine Pt film, Pt was found to be in a somewhat aggregated state (Fig. 3a). This may be the main reason for the reduced catalytic activity. The cross-sectional image of the SiW11Ni/Pt composite counter electrode is presented in Fig. S4. To further confirm that the Pt was successfully loaded with SiW11Ni, energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) was also performed (Fig. S5).
The Tafel-polarization test is a significant method for verifying the counter electrodes electrocatalytic activity. There are three zones in Tafel curves, whereby the low potential (|V| < 120 mV) of the curve can be ascribed to the polarization zone; a sharp slope at middle potentials is in the Tafel zone; the high potential of the horizontal section belongs to the diffusion zone. The latter two zones are closely related to the catalytic activities of the catalysts. The logarithmic current density (J) as a function of voltage (V) is shown by the curves according to eqn (1). The limiting diffusion current density (Jlim) is obtained from the crossing point of the cathodic branch. The exchange current density (J0) is obtained from the crossing point of the cathodic branch and the potential line of equilibrium.
(1)
Theoretically,
J0 is inversely proportional to the charge transfer resistance Rct, as shown in eqn (2). On the basis of eqn (3), Jlim is positively related to the diffusion coefficient (D, thus showing the diffusion property of the redox couple in the electrolyte media). Both J0 and Jlim are quantitatively calculated from eqn (2) and (3), respectively.

(2)
where
R is the gas constant, T is the temperature, α is the distribution coefficient, F is Faraday's constant, n is the electron number involved in the reaction, and Rct is the charge transfer resistance.

(3)
where
l is the thickness of the spacer, c is I3− concentration, NA is Avogadro's constant, and n and e have their standard meanings.


Fig. 4 shows the Tafel curves for the SiW11Ni/Pt and Pt counter electrodes plotted as a logarithmic function of the current density against the applied voltage. The slope of the tangent to the SiW11Ni/Pt curve is a bit higher than that of the Pt electrode, showing that the new modified counter electrode presents a greater exchange current density. This means that the new counter electrode exhibits a better catalytic effect than Pt in catalyzing the I3− reduction. Besides, we can see that the Jlim of these dummy cells is of the same order of magnitude, showing that the same diffusion property is used as a catalyst in the electrolyte. These results agree with the results from the J–V, CV, and EIS analyses.
CV tests were carried out to verify the electrocatalytic activity of the counter electrodes for the electrolyte. As documented in the existing literature, a typical CV curve has two pairs of oxidation and reduction peaks: a relatively negative pair, ascribed to the triiodide/iodide redox reaction shown in eqn (4), and a positive pair, corresponding to the redox reaction shown in eqn (5). The performance of DSSCs was directly affected by eqn (4), whereas eqn (5) showed only a slight effect on it. Therefore, all efforts should be made to increase the redox reaction, eqn (4).
I3− + 2e ⇆ 3I−
(4)
3I2 + 2e ⇆ 2I3−
(5)

Fig. 5a shows the cyclic voltammetry of the SiW11Ni/Pt and traditional Pt counter electrodes. We can see that the new modified counter electrode possesses a similar profile and location of the relatively negative pairs of the redox peak, indicating that the composite counter electrode has excellent Pt-like catalytic ability for reducing I3− to I−. Furthermore, the SiW11Ni/Pt has both higher anodic and cathodic peak current densities, illustrating the catalytic ability of SiW11Ni/Pt toward the reduction of I3−. The enhanced electrocatalytic activity can be attributed to the synergistic catalytic result of Pt and SiW11Ni, which exhibits excellent intrinsic electrocatalytic activity. This super character was proved in the following tests.
The reversibility of the catalytic reaction of a redox reaction is linked to the peak separation of the anodic and cathodic peaks. As supported by the available literature, the peak separation (Epp), which correlates negatively with the electron transfer rate of the redox reaction, is a vital parameter used to measure the electrocatalytic activities of different counter electrodes.Epp values, for the SiW11Ni/Pt electrode and the conventional Pt electrode, were estimated to be 621 mV and 673 mV, respectively. This indicated that the SiW11Ni/Pt electrode with a smaller Epp has better catalytic activity. Moreover, the SiW11Ni/Pt counter electrode possesses an even higher exchange current density, indicating that it has stronger electrocatalytic ability than the traditional Pt counter electrode.
Another key factor of concern to researchers is the stability of the potential counter electrodes. Fig. 5b and c show 100 sequential voltammetry cycles of SiW11Ni/Pt counter electrode and traditional Pt electrode in the I−/I3− based electrolyte, respectively. During 100 successive CV cycles scanned at a rate of 50 mV s−1, the peak current densities of the SiW11Ni/Pt counter electrode remained stable as the number of cycle increased, which was the same result as that of the Pt counter electrode. This suggests that the SiW11Ni/Pt photocathode has outstanding electrochemical stability in the I−/I3− electrolyte. During the scans, the nearly unaltered curve shape and the nearly unaltered current density peaks of oxidation and reduction indicated that the new composite counter electrode was uniform, homogeneous, and very stable.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) has been widely used to show the electrochemical processes of counter electrodes that affect the catalytic reaction and subsequently the performance of DSSCs. EIS was tested under illumination at an applied voltage value of open voltage and fitted with the ZSimpWin software according to the circuit model: Rs(C1(R1O))(R2Q2) (included in Fig. 6) the results are shown in Table 1. As shown in Fig. 6, the well-defined single semicircles over the high frequency range intercept on the real axis and illustrate the series resistance (Rs), which mainly consists of the bulk resistance of the counter electrodes, the resistance of the substrate, and the contact resistance. The semicircle is assigned to the charge transfer resistance (Rct) at the counter electrode/electrolyte interface, which turns inversely with the catalytic ability of the counter electrodes for the reduction of I3− to I−. Compared to the traditional Pt counter electrode, the Rs value becomes larger as the number of SiW11Ni layers increases as a result of the weakening bond strength between the SiW11Ni nanoparticles and the FTO glass caused by an increase in the interfacial stress. Moreover, a larger Rs value greatly lowers the FF and consequently affects the performance of the solar cell. This result is very much consistent with the J–V analysis in Fig. 1. Notably, the monolayer-SiW11Ni-modified Pt counter electrode shows the lowest Rct, one reason for suggests that SiW11Ni anions act as a good catalyst to regenerate I3−. As we know, the low Rct value depicts an increase in the rate of transfer of electrons at the counter electrode/electrolyte interface. Compared to the monolayer-modified electrode, an obvious increase in Rs and Rct values of two and three layers SiW11Ni-modified Pt photocathodes are higher, which may be attributed to there being enough SiW11Ni between Pt and FTO, which reduces the conductivity and synergetic electrocatalytic ability. Furthermore, the SiW11Ni/Pt counter electrode shows a higher η value, reflecting the large active specific area, which is a key point for high catalytic activity. Therefore, a good electrocatalytic activity of the SiW11Ni/Pt counter electrode results in a higher Jsc, leading to a better photovoltaic performance. This result is in line with J–V result we discussed earlier.
Despite the above observations, the synergistic catalytic effects of the composite counter electrode catalysts for DSSCs still need to be examined further. We thus concentrated our effort on monitoring what happened to the electrolyte under standard AM 1.5G illumination. We systematically characterized the UV–vis absorbance of the electrolyte (containing LiI ∼10 mM and I2 ∼1 mM in anhydrous acetonitrile) after intervallic illumination of every 5 min. Fig. S6 shows the UV–vis absorption spectra of the electrolyte as a function of time with the different counter electrodes (Pt, SiW11Ni and SiW11Ni/Pt). We can see three peaks in the UV–vis spectra located at 247 nm, 292 nm, and 362 nm. The summary curves based on the three peaks are shown in Fig. 7. The peak located at 247 nm belongs to the absorption of I− and the other two peaks belong to the I3−. It is worth noting that the concentration of I− is an important factor that influences the performance of DSSCs. The higher the concentration of I−, the faster the regeneration of electrolyte, which results in a better catalytic activity of the counter electrodes. Fig. 7a shows that the SiW11Ni film has the highest absorption, attributed to its outstanding catalytic activity for the I−/I3− redox couple. After composing SiW11Ni with Pt, the new counter electrode presents a good synergistic effect for retarding the increase of the concentration of I3− in the electrolyte and speeds up the reversibility of I−/I3− circulation, while for the pristine electrolyte, the absorption intensity of I− is the lowest and the content of I3− is the highest after illumination. These results show that the SiW11Ni/Pt counter electrode can increase the redox reaction of the electrolyte, which generates positive effects on the device performance.
After demonstrating the direct role of the SiW11Ni film in the catalysis of the counter electrode, we then monitored the absorption of the electrolyte with the existence of the photoanode and photocathode in the conditions of in the dark and under illumination. Fig. 7b shows the UV–vis absorption peaks of the electrolyte as a function of time in the dark for 60 min. The absorbance of I− and I3− almost remain in a stable state, which means that the internal system reaches a balance immediately. Fig. 7c was carried out under an intervallic standard AM 1.5G irradiation of every 5 min. For the cells with different counter electrodes, the absorbance of I− in the electrolyte presents a declining trend, while that of I3− shows an increasing trend. The absorption intensity of I− is in the order of SiW11Ni > SiW11Ni/Pt > Pt, while the absorption intensity of I3− is the order of Pt > SiW11Ni/Pt > SiW11Ni. This means that the SiW11Ni has good performance in terms of accelerating the concentration of I− and reducing the content of I3− in the electrolyte. More iodide ions can effectively regenerate more oxidized dye molecules and improve the performance of DSSCs. This result is in line with what we have discussed above.
In order to further illustrate the function of SiW11Ni in the composite counter electrode, we tried to analyze what happened under dynamic conditions of the electrolyte, measured as an applied potential at 1 V without illumination. Fig. 7d shows the absorbance of I− and I3− in the electrolyte with the existence of the photoanode and photocathode. For the first 15 min, the decreasing rate of I− is in the order of Pt > SiW11Ni/Pt > SiW11Ni, which indicates that SiW11Ni can efficiently retard the decreasing rate of I−. From 15 to 35 min, an improvement of the intensity of I− is found for the SiW11Ni/Pt counter electrode compared with that for the Pt counter electrode, which indicates an increasing circulation of I−/I3−. Then, the system of the device reaches a balanced state. Meanwhile, the ability to inhibit the increase in the concentration of I3− is in the order SiW11Ni> SiW11Ni/Pt > Pt, which indicates that SiW11Ni can control the production of the concentration of I3− efficiently. Based on the above results, it can be concluded that POM is a good potential material for counter electrode catalysts in DSSCs.
Furthermore, open-circuit voltage decay (OCVD) measurements can qualitatively give information about the interfacial recombination process of dye-photoinjected electrons in the TiO2 between photoinjected electrons and the electrolyte in the dark.Fig. 8 (insert graph) depicts the OCVD curves of the DSSCs with the traditional Pt and the modified counter electrodes. It can be observed that the OCVD responses of the cell with the SiW11Ni-modified counter electrode shows a photovoltage decay rate that is slower than that of the cell using traditional Pt, resulting in a gradual recombination kinetics between electrons and the oxide electrolyte and finally leading to much longer electron lifetimes. Fig. 8 depicts the electron lifetime (τn) calculated from the following eqn (6):
(6)
Compared with the traditional Pt, the electron lifetime of the composite counter electrode is much longer, which in turn leads to increased
Jsc. All of these results agreed with what we discussed in the J–V and EIS analyses.

In addition, we compared the reflection spectra and found that the reflective intensity of the modified photocathode was superior to the traditional Pt counter electrode (Fig. S7). This can be regarded as another advantage of using SiW11Ni as a potential material for the counter electrode. Because the increased light reflectance can meet the demand to reduce the losses of light and enhance the light-harvesting efficiency, it contributes to enhancing the photocurrent.
Based on the above analysis, a possible working mechanism of the SiW11Ni-modified Pt has been proposed to interpret the efficient DSSCs and is shown in Fig. 9. After excitation by standard sunlight, the sensitizer molecules (Dye) reach an excited state (Dye*) and then the photoelectrons are injected into the CB of TiO2. Afterwards, some of the photoelectrons are collected by the counter electrode through the external circuit to the electrolyte, while some return back to the ground state of the dye and some recombine with the I3− in the electrolyte. The electron recombination is not expected in DSSCs. POMs, as a synergic catalyst, were introduced into the counter electrode. The new modified counter electrode (SiW11Ni/Pt) showed outstanding electrocatalytic activity for the reduction of I3− to I−, which can reduce the amount of I3− effectively. That is to say, POMs decrease the recombination process of photoelectrons and prolong the electrons lifetime. Meanwhile, more I− can regenerate the oxidized dye molecules rapidly and speed up the circulation of electrons in the cell. In addition, the new counter electrode possesses a good ability of light reflectance, which can enhance the utilization rate of light. In general, the introduction of SiW11Ni can increase the catalytic activity of the counter electrode and restrain the backward recombination that occurs in the system of a dye-sensitized solar cell, resulting in a higher photocurrent. All the above advantages enhance the performance of DSSCs.

In summary, a new SiW11Ni-modified Pt counter electrodes was successfully introduced into a counter electrode, which had decent catalytic activity for I−/I3− circulation, and demonstrated better stability. By using it as the counter electrode in DSSCs, the energy conversion efficiency of the DSSC was raised to 7.03%, which represents an enhancement compared with that of the pristine platinum counter electrode. According to the Tafel, CV, EIS, UV, and OCVD curves, the superior catalytic activity of the modified counter electrode can be attributed to the synergetic catalytic effects. Thus, POMs represent a good potential material that can not only allow reducing the dosage of the costly Pt, but also can significantly enhance the overall performance of DSSCs. The present study in this work provides a promising strategy of using POM materials as an efficient and facile modified counter electrode catalyst for DSSCs.


This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant 21571042, 21371040 and 51502058) and the National Key Basic Research Program of China (973 Program, No. 2013CB632900). This work was also supported by the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant No. 2015M570284).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6dt03190k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016