 DOI: 10.1039/D2TC02685F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 15638-15646


Xiang
Li
,

Xinghuan
Hu
,

Hua
Liao
,

Shuai
Yang
,

Xinyu
Li
,

Qiulian
Li
,

Xin
Liu
,

Yonggang
Zhao
 and 

Shurong
Wang
*

Key Laboratory of Rural Energy Engineering in Yunnan Province, Yunnan Normal University, Kunming 650500, P. R. China. E-mail: shrw88@aliyun.com

Received
25th June 2022
, Accepted 25th September 2022
First published on 27th September 2022
In this study, a simple and reproducible two-step annealing process was demonstrated to prepare Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTSSe) thin film with band-gap grading by selenization followed by post-sulfo-selenization (PSS) treatment. The effects of PSS treatment on the composition and electrical properties of the CZTSSe thin film were investigated. The crystal structure, surface morphology, surface roughness and element composition of the CZTSSe thin film were characterized by GIXRD, SEM, AFM and EDS tests. The composition of elements at different depths of the thin film was also investigated. It was confirmed that CZTSSe thin film with high sulfur element content on the surface and low at the bottom were obtained after PSS treatment. The electrical performance of the CZTSSe solar cells was measured by Hall test, EQE and J–V. The results showed that the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the CZTSSe thin film without PSS treatment was only 7.62%, while the PCE of the CZTSSe thin film after PSS treatment increased to 10.11%.

With the severity of the energy crisis and environmental pollution, renewable energy represented by solar energy is coming to play a significant role in human life. Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTSSe) thin film is a potential solar cell absorber layer material due to its P-type conductive semiconductor, non-toxic constituents and high absorption coefficients. Interestingly, the band-gap of CZTSSe thin film is adjustable from 1.0 eV to 1.5 eV through different absorber layer chalcogenide S/(S + Se) ratios. Therefore, CZTSSe solar cells that better match the solar spectrum can be prepared by modifying the S/(S + Se) ratio. Although CZTSSe solar cells have more significant advantages compared with Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGS) solar cells, to date, the highest PCE that has been achieved for a CZTSSe solar cell is only 13%, which is far lower than the 23.35% for CIGS cells. Thus, the performance of CZTSSe devices needs to be further improved.

Currently, many methods for preparing CZTSSe thin films have been reported, such as magnetron sputtering, nanocrystal coatings, hydrazine solution, and sol–gel. In 2010, Guo et al. prepared CZTS nanocrystals by thermal injection method and prepared the precursor layers, and then prepared CZTSSe thin film by selenization. The final PCE of the device was 7.2%. In 2014, IBM prepared a CZTSSe solar cell with a record efficiency of 12.6% through the hydrazine solution method. In 2019, the record efficiency was broken by Kim's research group, who fabricated Cu/Zn/Sn precursor by magnetron sputtering, then selenized it under a H2S atmosphere to obtain a CZTSSe device with a PCE of 12.62%. In 2021, Xin et al. prepared a CZTSSe solar cell by spin-coating a DMSO solution, and obtained a CZTSSe cell with a PCE of 12.4%. Meanwhile, research shows that Sn4+ is essential for improving the photovoltaic performance of device. Later, a research group improved the efficiency of a CZTSSe device to 13%, which is the highest in the world at present. As is well known, CZTSSe can easily form some secondary phases during the preparation process owing to the complex and narrow phase formation region in the pseudoternary phase diagram. In other words, it is prone to form some secondary phases, such as ZnS, Cu2−xS, and Cu2SnS3, which affect the quality and the performance of the CZTSSe device. The low band-gap Cu2S and Cu2SnS3 will introduce a leakage path into CZTSSe thin film and deteriorate the open circuit voltage (Voc) of the CZTSSe device, which is one of the inherent reasons for the low PCE of current CZTSSe thin-film devices. In this context, many research groups have investigated the reaction mechanism of the CZTSSe absorber layer and adjusted the S/S + Se ratio to improve the efficiency. Among them are CZTSSe films with band-gap gradients. Similar to a CIGS device, CZTSSe thin film with a progressively increasing band-gap from the bottom to the surface of the absorber has many advantages, such as: (1) the Voc is improved by the locally increased band-gap in the space charge region, and (2) the additional drift field formed in the CZTSSe thin film can improve the collection efficiency of photogenerated carriers. It should again be emphasized that in the CZTSSe absorber layer, the band-gap value can be changed from approximately 1.0 eV to 1.5 eV by adjusting the S/S + Se ratio.
In this work, we proposed a two-step annealing process to form a CZTSSe thin film with a positive band-gap gradient. The first step is normal selenization, and the second step is post-sulfo-selenization (PSS) treatment. The detailed process is as follows: Firstly, the Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) precursor layers were deposited on the Mo-coated soda-lime-Glass (Mo-SLG) substrate by spin-coating method. Secondly, the CZTSSe layer was prepared by selenization under high temperature of about 530 °C. In order to form a positive band-gap-grading CZTSSe absorber layer, the prepared CZTSe thin film was subjected to PSS treatment for a short time. Finally, the band-gap-graded CZTSSe device with a common structure of SLG/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/i-ZnO/ITO was completed. The CZTSSe device with a positive band-gap gradient demonstrated the best efficiency of 10.11%.

In this work, the CZTS precursor film was prepared by spin-coating in the air and the precursor solution was prepared by the following method. Firstly, 2.00 g of thiourea (99.99%, Aladdin) was dissolved in 5 mL of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) (99%, Aladdin) in Vial I, then 0.76 g of CuCl (99.999%, Aladdin) was added. Secondly, 1.37 g of SnCl4 (99.995%, Aladdin) together with 1.02 g of C4H6O4Zn·2H2O (99.99%, Aladdin) were added to 4 mL of DMSO in Vial II. After a long time stirring, the two completely dissolved solutions were mixed together to obtain the desired precursor solution. The solution was spin-coated on Mo-SLG at 3500 rpm for 30 s, followed by baking on a hot plate at 320 °C for 2 min. This coating–baking–cooling cycle was repeated ten times to obtain the precursor film with a required thickness. Subsequently, the prepared precursor film together with 0.5 g Se pellets were put into a graphite box and annealed in a quartz tube furnace at 530 °C for 18 min to form the CZTSSe absorber film with Ar flow. It should be noted that the heating rate was 30 °C min−1 and the annealed samples were cooled to room temperature by natural cooling. In order to fabricate the band-gap-graded CZTSSe film, the prepared CZTSe thin film was treated with PSS. Specifically, the prepared CZTSe thin film together with 500 mg of sulfur and selenium powder mixture (weight ratio: S/(S + Se) = 0.3) were placed in a graphite box. The furnace was heated to 510 °C at a heating rate of 30 °C min−1, then the graphite box was pushed into the quartz tube with Ar flow and the temperature dropped rapidly to 430 °C. After a while, the temperature increased again to 510 °C, and was maintained there for 3 min to carry out PSS treatment. The PSS treatment time was 3 min and the obtained CZTSSe film was named PSS-3. Then, the CdS (∼50 nm) buffer layer and the i-ZnO (∼50 nm)/ITO (∼220 nm) window layers were prepared by chemical bath deposition and magnetron sputtering, respectively. Finally, the Ni/Al contact grids were deposited on the top of the device through thermal evaporation. The specific preparation process is consistent with the previous published paper and the total device area was 0.135 cm2.


In order to characterize the prepared CZTSSe film, the crystal structure was analyzed using grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD, Bruker D8 Advance). The morphologies of the CZTSSe absorption layers were characterized by field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, Zeiss SUPRA 55VP), the surface roughness of the CZTSSe thin film was analyzed by atomic force microscope (AFM, FM-Nanoview 800(T-AFM)), and the chemical composition and element distribution were determined by energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS, Oxford Aztec). Meanwhile, the electrical properties of the samples were characterized with a Hall test system (Hall, Nanometrics HL 5500 PC). Finally, the performance of the CZTSSe device was determined using the J–V curves obtained under AM 1.5 G illumination (100 mW cm−2) from a solar simulator (Zolix SS150A) and the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra obtained using an Enlitech QE-R test system. The capacitance–voltage (C–V) curves of the CZTSSe samples were obtained using an electrochemical workstation (DH7001) at 300 K and 100 kHz.


According to theoretical simulation, a CZTSSe solar cell with a positive band-gap-grading is beneficial for improving the PCE. On the one hand, the introduction of sulfur (S) into CZTSe can increase the band-gap and then improve the Voc of the device. On the other hand, CZTSSe with positive band-gap grading will bring an additional electric field in the CZTSSe layer, as shown in Fig. 1(a). An additional electric field opposite to the direction of the built electric field is generated because of the different S content in the absorber layer, and the additional electric field is not strong. Meanwhile, an enhanced built-in electric field is formed between the CZTSSe layer and the CdS layer interface owing to the growing Eg2 (Fig. 1a). The enhanced electric field can improve carrier transport. In addition, the CZTSSe film layer with a positive band-gap gradient can absorb incident photons more effectively. In order to analyze whether there is the S element gradient in the CZTSSe thin film prepared by a short-duration post-sulfur-selenization to form a positive band-gap grading, GIXRD analysis was performed on the CZTSSe sample.

The mechanism of GIXRD measurement is Bragg diffraction, as described in eqn (1) and (2).
2dsinθ = nλ
(1)
(2)
where
d is the interplanar spacing and θ is the diffraction angle. For the kesterite CZTSSe, the interplanar spacing (d) and the lattice constants (a and c) have the relationship shown in eqn (2). The h, k, and l are the Miller indices of the CZTSSe crystal planes. The interplanar spacing and diffraction angles of different materials are usually different. The diffraction peaks of CZTS and CZTSe crystals are at different positions in the XRD pattern. In addition, the penetration depth (L) of X-rays depends on the incident angle of the GIXRD test. The L of X-rays increased with increasing incidence angle, as shown in Fig. 1(b).

In order to explore the thin-film structure at different depths, the GIXRD test was used in this study; the corresponding XRD pattern for CZTSSe without PSS and the GIXRD pattern for CZTSSe with PSS treatment are shown in Fig. 2(a). Among them, the CZTSSe sample without PSS treatment is marked non-PSS. In this study, we used five different incident angles of 0.1°, 0.2°, 0.5°, 1° and 5° to perform GIXRD measurements. Relevant studies have proved that the incidence depth of a GIXRD test changes with the incidence angle. When the incidence angles are 0.1°, 0.2°, 0.5°, 1° and 5°, the incidence depths are about 1, 2.2, 156, 644 and 1531 nm, respectively. The S composition of the CZTSSe absorber layer at different depths was analyzed by the corresponding GIXRD patterns shown in Fig. 2(a).
As show in Fig. 2(a), the diffraction peaks of samples PSS-3 and non-PSS are similar. By comparing with the XRD patterns of CZTSe and CZTS, the three main diffraction peaks are (112), (204) and (312) crystal orientation, which are located between the peaks for CZTSe and CZTS. These diffraction peaks confirmed that the PSS-3 sample was still kesterite CZTSSe after PSS treatment. Fig. 2(b) and (c) are the enlarged (112), (204) and (312) diffraction peaks of the CZTSSe films with and without PSS. Obviously, the 2θ values of three main diffraction peaks of the CZTSSe film with PSS treatment changed with different incident angles. When the incident angle is small, corresponding to low penetration depth, the positions of the diffraction peaks of the CZTSSe sample are shifted toward those of the CZTS crystal. When the incident angle becomes large, meaning deep penetration depth, the (112), (204) and (312) diffraction peaks of the CZTSSe sample moved toward those of the CZTSe crystal. The above results show that the S content on the surface of the sample is higher than that at the bottom, which confirms that a S element gradient was formed by PSS treatment for 3 minutes. It was also considered that more Se on the surface of the CZTSe film could be replaced by more S after PSS treatment.
As shown in Fig. 2(b), the results show that the (112) peak of the sample PSS-3 is located at 27.93° when the incident angle is 0.1°. Furthermore, the (112) peak is located at 27.35° when the incident angle is 5°. The 2θ values of the two diffraction peaks differ by 0.58°. Since the (112) diffraction peaks of pure phase CZTS and CZTSe are located at 28.5° and 27.2°, respectively, the 2θ values of the two (112) diffraction peaks differ by 1.3°, and the corresponding band-gap value differs by 0.5 eV. Obviously, when the incident angles are 0.1° and 5°, the resulting band-gap difference of sample PSS-3 is about 0.22 eV due to different S contents at different positions. Although the PSS treatment is only 3 min, the S element has been incorporated into the film sample to replace some of the Se, resulting in the internal S element content being lower than that of the surface.

Fig. 3 shows the SEM morphologies of the non-PSS thin film samples and PSS-3. It can be seen from Fig. 3(a) and (b) that the average grain size of the two samples is approximately 1 μm. The crystal grain of the PSS-3 sample becomes a little smaller after PSS treatment for 3 minutes. The reason is that part CZTSe crystal is transformed into the small-grained CZTS crystal after PSS treatment. It can be seen from Fig. 3(c) and (d) that the thickness of the CZTSSe layer is about 1.3 μm. At the same time, the PSS treatment reduced the voids between the CZTSSe layer and the Mo layer and the crystal grains became dense due to recrystallization. For CZTSSe cells, the voids will seriously affect the longitudinal transportation of photogenerated holes. The reduction of voids can improve the collection efficiency of holes, thereby increasing the short-circuit current density and the PCE of the CZTSSe device.
The roughness of the non-PSS and PSS-3 samples was characterized and analyzed by AFM. The results are shown in Fig. 4 and Table 1. The area of the AFM test is 5 × 5 μm. Fig. 4 shows that the large grains on the surface are transformed into small grains and the roughness is reduced after the PSS treatment. It can be seen that the grains become more uniform and the quality of the CZTSSe thin film crystals is improved due to recrystallization. The corresponding average roughness (Ra) and root mean square roughness (Rms) parameters are shown in Table 1. Both the Ra and Rms of sample PSS-3 are lower than those of the non-PSS sample. The results confirmed that the roughness of the sample decreased after PSS treatment. The growth of grains can be explained by the nucleation process and the surface of the CZTSSe thin film becomes rougher when the grain size is larger.
Sample

R
a (nm)

R
ms (nm)
Non-PSS
87.4
112.8
PSS-3
65.7
92.3
EDS mapping was used to analyze the chemical element distribution on the surface of the non-PSS and PSS-3 samples and the results are shown in Fig. 5. It can be clearly seen that the constituent elements of the non-PSS sample are unevenly distributed due to the pinholes on the surface, but this phenomenon is not observed in the PSS-3 sample. It is important to note that the PSS-3 sample surface has a uniform distribution of S element due to the PSS treatment, which also proves that the PSS treatment process at 510 °C is a better condition to promote the uniform distribution and replacement of elements. Table 2 shows the contents and ratios of different chemical elements. The results show that the content of cations in the PSS-3 and non-PSS samples are almost identical, except that the Sn element content decreased slightly from 12.81% to 12.37%, which may be due to the loss of Sn during the PSS treatment. However, the post-sulfur-selenization is only done for 3 minutes, so the change of its element content is not obvious. Specially, the Cu/(Zn + Sn) atomic ratios of the two samples are 0.86 and 0.88, respectively, and the Zn/Sn atomic ratios are 1.04 and 1.09, respectively. The elemental compositions of both samples are Cu-poor and Zn-rich, which is consistent with high-efficiency thin-film solar cells. In addition, the contents of anions and cations in the two samples are equivalent because the (S + Se)/M atomic ratios are 1.05 and 1.06, respectively. The contents of S and Se chemical elements in sample PSS-3 are 11.86% and 39.54%, respectively. In this study, the element ratio of S/(S + Se) is 0.23, which is close to the element ratio in published studies. It can be considered that some Se elements on the surface of the sample are replaced by S elements after PSS treatment for 3 minutes, because the S element content accounts for 23% of the total content of S and Se elements.
Sample
Cu
Zn
Sn
Se
S
Cu/(Zn + Sn)
Zn/Sn
(S + Se)/Metal
S/(S + Se)
Non-PSS
22.52
13.34
12.81
51.33
0
0.86
1.04
1.05
0
PSS-3
22.72
13.51
12.37
39.54
11.86
0.88
1.09
1.06
0.23
The contents of S and Se elements in the cross-section of the PSS sample were analyzed by cross-sectional EDS mapping, as shown in Fig. 6. It can be seen that the S and Se elements have different concentration distributions at different depths in the sample. Obviously, the content of S element has a concentration gradient along the surface. This result is consistent with the post-sulfur-selenization assumption. The element contents at different positions in the thin film were also analyzed by the EDS line scans, and the results are shown in Fig. 7. This test shows that the thickness of the CZTSSe absorber layer is about 1200 nm. The three metal elements Cu, Zn, and Sn are uniformly distributed in the thin film and the ratio is 2:1:1, which conforms to the atomic ratio in the chemical formula of Cu2ZnSn(Sx,Se1−x)4.
In the prepared CZTSSe thin film, the ratio of the chemical elements S and Se is about 1:5 at the bottom and 2:5 on the surface. The S/(S + Se) ratio on the surface is 0.286, which is similar to the S/(S + Se) weight ratio of 0.3 during PSS treatment. The S/(S + Se) ratio inside the film is 0.167. Although S replaced Se in the thin film due to PSS treatment, only some of the Se is replaced owing to the short PSS treatment time. Meanwhile, there is more S element content on the surface than internally because the surface of the sample is in contact with the vapor of S and Se elements during the PSS treatment. The result shows that a gradient of S element is formed from the surface to the inside and the depth of the S element gradient is about 400 nm. Fig. 7(d) demonstrates that the S/(S + Se) ratio changes from 0.2% at the bottom to 0.34% at the surface of the sample PSS-3. In summary, it can be considered that CZTSSe thin film with an S element gradient along the cross-section was prepared by the PSS process, which resulted in a positive band-graded CZTSSe thin film.
The electrical properties of the CZTSSe absorber films (5 × 5 mm) were investigated by Hall tests. The corresponding results are shown in Table 3. The carrier concentrations of the non-PSS and PSS-3 samples were 3.24 × 1017 cm−3 and 2.75 × 1017 cm−3, respectively. The carrier concentration of the PSS-3 sample is slightly lower than that of the non-PSS sample. The possible reasons for this result are as follows: On the one hand, the Vse donor defects in the CZTSSe sample were reduced after PSS treatment. On the other hand, the band-gap of CZTSSe became larger after PSS treatment, both of which led to a decrease of the carrier concentration. In addition, the crystal quality of the sample was also improved after PSS treatment, which could lead to increased mobility and decreased resistivity, thus improving the performance.
Sample
Carrier concentration (cm−3)
Mobility (cm2 V−1 S−1)
Resistivity (Ω cm)
Non-PSS
3.24 × 1017
4.13
4.67
PSS-3
2.75 × 1017
5.77
3.94

In this study, solar cell devices (total area = 0.135 cm2) with a complete structure were prepared, and the EQE measurement results are shown in Fig. 8. It can be seen from Fig. 8(a) that the EQE of both the non-PSS and PSS-3 thin film solar cells exceed 80% at wavelengths ranging from 500 nm to 700 nm. However, the EQE of the CZTSSe device is decreased as a result of PSS treatment, especially in the long wavelength region. This may be due to the increased band-gap of the CZTSSe film after PSS treatment. At the same time, when the wavelength of the incident light is between 300 nm and 500 nm, the EQE of the PSS-3 thin-film solar cell is improved, which is mainly attributed to decreased CZTSSe/CdS interface recombination due to the CZTSSe layer with a positive band gradient, which can increase the effective interface recombination energy ΔEi. In addition, the top region of the CZTSSe layer with large band-gap would absorb the high-energy photons and the CZTSSe layer with small band-gap at the bottom could continue to absorb the photons passing through the surface absorption layer. As a result, the EQE in the 300–500 nm region could also be improved to a certain extent due to enhancing the built-in electric field near the surface by increasing Eg2. Fig. 8(b) shows the band-gap values of the non-PSS and PSS-3 samples by plotting the [E × ln(1 − EQE)]2versus energy. The corresponding band-gap values of the two samples are 1.045 eV and 1.148 eV, respectively. Obviously, the band-gap value of the CZTSSe thin film with PSS treatment increased to 1.148 eV due to more S element incorporation. In addition, the band-gap value of the CZTSSe thin film is determined by the hybridization of different amounts of S and Se atoms. The band-gap value of the CZTSSe absorber layer is calculated using eqn (3).

Eg(x) = (1−x)Eg(CZTSe) + xEg(CZTS) − bx(1−x)
(3)
where
b is the bowing parameter of about 0.1 eV and x is the S/(S + Se) ratio. It can be seen from Table 2 that the S/(S + Se) ratio of the PSS-3 sample is 0.23, and the calculated EEDSg = 1.097 eV.

According to Fig. 7(d), the S/(S + Se) ratios of the sample PSS-3 on the surface of the film and at the bottom of the film are 0.33 and 0.20, respectively. According to eqn (3), we can calculate ETopg = 1.143 eV and EBotg = 1.084 eV, respectively. However, the EEQEg is 1.148 eV calculated by EQE, and the difference with the EEDSg value is 0.051 eV. Particularly, the difference between EEQE and ETop is only 0.005 eV. These results further prove the accuracy of the band-gap value of the CZTSSe. In ESI, we have provided data for a sample without a band-gap gradient after PSS treatment. It is used to illustrate the degree to which the band-gap-grading effect can improve the performance of the thin-film solar cell. The sample is named PSS-ng. It can be seen from Fig. S1 (ESI) that the band-gap of the PSS-ng sample is 1.083 eV. It is higher than the band-gap of the non-PSS sample, but lower than that of the PSS-3 sample. This result confirms the effect of PSS treatment on the band-gap of the sample.

Fig. 9 shows the J–V characterization results and Table 4 presents the corresponding device parameters for CZTSSe devices with and without PSS treatment. It can be seen that the Voc of the CZTSe cell is improved from 494.91 mV to 531.25 mV due to the increasing Eg2 shown in Fig. 1(a) after PSS treatment. This is because the Voc value of the CZTSSe device is mainly dominated by Eg2 in the space charge region. Although the large band-gap can decrease the short-circuit current density (Jsc) of the CZTSSe device, the Jsc decreases slightly from 33.62 to 32.41 mA cm−2, which is attributed to forming a positive band-gap-grading to absorb incident photons more effectively after PSS treatment. Meanwhile, the fill factor (FF) of the CZTSSe solar cell increases from 45.77% to 58.73% after PSS treatment. It is well known that the FF is determined by factors such as series resistance (Rs), shunt resistance (Rsh) and Voc. The large improvement of FF in this study may be explained by the parameters shown in Table 4. First of all, the increased Voc after PSS could improve the FF. Secondly, the reduced Rs due to forming a positive band-gap-grading by PSS treatment also increased FF. Finally, the increased Rsh that is attributed to reducing the internal defects and improving the crystalline quality of the CZTSSe film due to recrystallization after PSS could increase FF. All these favourable effects led to the FF increasing by about 13% after PSS treatment. The Voc, Jsc, and FF of the band-gap-graded CZTSSe thin-film device prepared by PSS are 531.25 mV, 32.41 mA cm−2, and 58.73%, respectively. The corresponding PCE is 10.11%. However, the PCE of the non-PSS CZTSSe solar cell is only 7.62%. As expected, the efficiency of the CZTSSe solar cell device is improved greatly after PSS treatment. From Fig. S2 and Table S1 (ESI), the PCE of the PSS-ng sample is 8.23%, and it can be seen that PSS treatment improves the device performance. As shown by the SEM results, this performance improvement is attributed to the fact that PSS treatment also improves the crystallinity of the thin film and optimizes the holes present in the thin film. These factors increase the PCE of the solar cell. However, when the band-gap gradient is present in the sample, the PCE of the PSS-3 sample is 10.11%. The band-gap gradient improves the device performance more obviously.
Sample

V
oc (mV)

J
sc
 (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
sh (Ω cm2)

a 
J
sc is obtained on the basis of a total area of 0.135 cm2.

Non-PSS
494.91
33.62
45.77
7.62
4.08
72.93
PSS-3
531.25
32.41
58.73
10.11
3.71
155.80
Finally, the junction capacitance, depletion region width (Wd) and space charge density (NC–V) of the CZTSSe device were explored by C–V measurement. The junction capacitances of the samples were tested under a reverse bias of 0 to −2 V. NC–V and Wd can be calculated according to the following equations:
(4)
(5)
where
C is the measured capacitance, A is the device area, q is the electron charge (1.602 × 10−19 C), ε0 is the vacuum permittivity (∼8.854 × 10−12 F m−1) and εs is the relative permittivity (8.6). The results are shown in Fig. 10.

For the PSS-3, PSS-ng and non-PSS samples, the measured capacitances decrease monotonically with increasing reverse bias voltage. This shows that the reverse bias voltage can increase the width of the depletion layer in the CZTSSe device, thereby reducing the capacitance of the p–n junction. In addition, the NC–V of the non-PSS sample is 1.31 × 1018 cm−3, which is much higher than the Hall test result of 3.24 × 1017 cm−3. This may be due to certain defects in the samples. After the PSS treatment, the Nc–v is closer to the Hall test result, which means that some defects are eliminated.

In this work, a CZTSSe thin film was prepared by solution method. On this basis, CZTSSe thin layers were subjected to a PSS treatment at 510 °C for 3 min. The influence of the PSS treatment on the element distribution and phase composition of the absorber layer was investigated. GIXRD and EDS tests confirmed that the CZTSSe film formed a positive band-gap gradient after PSS treatment, which meant that the PSS-3 sample had a high S content on the top and a low S content at the bottom, and a surface S/(S + Se) ratio of about 0.23. Moreover, the chemical element composition of the CZTSSe film remained Cu-poor and Zn-rich. In addition, the surface roughness of the PSS-3 sample was reduced and the thin film became more uniform, which also improved the electrical properties of the sample. The band-gap value of the sample after PSS treatment calculated by EQE test is 1.148 eV. Finally, compared with the efficiency of 7.62% for the CZTSSe cell device without PSS treatment, the efficiency of the CZTSSe device with a positive band-gap-grading introduced by PSS treatment is improved to 10.11%, with a Voc of 531.25 mV, a Jsc of 32.41 mA cm−2 and FF of 58.73%. The PSS treatment provided in this study appears to be an effective method for the preparation of a positive band-gap-graded CZTSSe absorber layer with high efficiency. In the future, higher efficiency solar cells could be obtained by further optimizing the preparation process.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (U1902218) and also by Zhou Guo Fu expert work station in Yun Nan province (202005AF150028).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2tc02685f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022