 DOI: 10.1039/C4NR00137K
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4691-4697


Xiang
Chen
,

Zhiming
Bai
,

Xiaoqin
Yan
,

Haoge
Yuan
,

Guangjie
Zhang
,

Pei
Lin
,

Zheng
Zhang
,

Yichong
Liu
 and 

Yue
Zhang
*

State Key Laboratory for Advanced Metals and Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China. E-mail: yuezhang@ustb.edu.cn; Tel: +86-10-62334725

Key Laboratory of New Energy Materials and Technologies, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China. E-mail: yuezhang@ustb.edu.cn; Tel: +86-10-62334725

Received
9th January 2014
, Accepted 1st February 2014
First published on 3rd February 2014
The fabrication of photoanodes with a high light-harvesting ability, direct electron pathway and low exciton recombination is a key challenge in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) today. In this paper, large-scale patterned ZnO–ZnS core–shell nanowire arrays (NWAs) are designed and fabricated as such photoanodes for the fist time. By using the NWA photoanodes with a hexagonal symmetry and FTO-Pt cathodes with an Al reflecting layer, the resulting DSSCs demonstrate a maxiumum efficiency of 2.09%, which is an improvement of 140% compared to the reference cells with line symmetry and no reflecting layer. This improvement is attributed to the enhanced light-harvesting ability of the patterned NWAs, as well as to the remarkable double absorption caused by the Al reflecting layer. Additionally, the ZnO core provides a direct electron pathway and the ZnS shell simultaneously reduces exciton recombination. This study shows an effective method to improve the performance of DSSCs which could be extended to other nanodevices and nanosystems.

Due to their advantages of being inexpensive, flexibility and biocompatibility, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have received considerable interest as one of the most promising devices for converting solar energy into electricity in recent years. Mesoporous TiO2 nanoparticle film has been commonly used in conventional DSSCs due to its sufficient dye adsorption and high conversion efficiency (up to 12.3% by Michael Grätzel). However, a further increase in power conversion efficiency (η) has been limited by energy loss due to recombination occurring at the interfaces (TiO2/TiO2, FTO/TiO2 and FTO/electrolyte) during the charge transport process. Such a recombination will become more significant as the thickness of the TiO2 film is increased. Therefore, maximum charge injection and minimum recombination are the key to achieving higher efficiency DSSCs.

ZnO has a higher electron mobility (205–1000 cm2 V−1 S−1) than TiO2 (0.1–4 cm2 V−1 S−1). Replacing the TiO2 nanoparticle film with an array of single-crystalline ZnO nanowires is an effective way to facilitate electron collection, because it can provide higher crystallinity and a direct rather than a zigzag pathway for electron transfer. However, the reported efficiencies of ZnO-based DSSCs to date still remain lower than those of DSSCs based on TiO2, leaving plenty of room to improve the efficiency through structural and morphological modification of the electrode. There are two major reasons for the observed poorer performances. One is the recombination of the electrons (injected into the ZnO) with either the dye or the redox electrolyte. The other is the chemical instability of ZnO in acid dye, which blocks the electron injection from the dye into ZnO. To overcome these limitations, one of the most promising treatments is the addition of a thin layer on the ZnO nanowire surface to passivate the recombination sites and increase the chemical stability. A ZnS layer is proved to be an effective option as a shell layer on the ZnO nanowire arrays (NWAs) for the application of DSSCs. For instance, Lim's group reported that DSSCs with ZnO–ZnS core–shell NWAs prepared in NH4OH (ZTA) solution exhibited a significant increase in cell performance (η = 2.72%) compared with the analagous DSSCs without a shell structure (η = 0.11%). Furthermore, Chen's group also found that the performance was significantly improved for the ZnO–ZnS core–shell photoanode fabricated in thiacetamide (TAA) solution (η = 1.92%) compared with the as-synthesized ZnO photoanode (η = 0.12%). To summarize, there are three important functions that the ZnS shell performs. First of all, ZnS prevents tunneling of the electrons from the ZnO core to the ZnS shell due to the higher band gap of ZnS, so the excited electrons can be confined inside the ZnO. Moreover, the ZnS shell forms a type II band alignment with the ZnO core through the induction of charge separation at the interface of the two different materials. Thus the electrons and holes are localized in different regions and the recombination of the charge carriers can be reduced. In addition, the ZnS shell with a coarse surface can enlarge the internal surface area in order to absorb more dye molecules, resulting in an increase of the short-circuit current density (Jsc).
To further improve solar cell efficiency, one of the most accessible and attainable routes is the modification of a cell’s optical design to enhance the harvesting of total incident light within the cell. That is, maximizing light absorption on the photoanode and also maximizing light reflection on the cathode are key to achieving higher efficiency DSSCs. Many light-harvesting approaches have recently been proposed, such as 3D hierarchical nanostructures, photonic crystals, plasmonic effects and nanopatterned electrodes. Among them, nanopatterning is a renowned method for constructing photonic nanostructures, and has received tremendous attention as a means of boosting the efficiency in silicon and polymer solar cells. For DSSCs, Kim's group reported that a patterned TiO2 nanoparticle film gives 40% and 33% enhancements in the Jsc and η, respectively. Jung's group found that patterned ZnO hemispheres-embedded TiO2 nanoparticle films demonstrate the highest η of 11.12%, which is a 46.5% improvement compared to the reference cell without ZnO hemispheres. Despite all this, the facile synthesis of large-scale patterned ZnO–ZnS core–shell NWAs and their effects on the performance of DSSCs have rarely been reported. There are also few reports focusing on light management of the FTO-Pt cathode, which is commonly used in DSSCs.
Herein, the first large-scale patterned ZnO–ZnS core–shell NWAs were fabricated by using two-beam laser interference lithography (2BLIL), hydrothermal synthesis (HTS) and chemical conversion synthesis (CCS). 2BLIL is a simple, quick and maskless tool for fabricating large-area, nanometer-scale and periodically patterned structures. Moreover, HTS and CCS are both low temperature techniques with merits of low cost, high yield and easy scale-up. We found that the arrangement and density of the patterned ZnO–ZnS core–shell NWAs show remarkable influences on the light absorption of the photoanodes and the performance of the corresponding DSSCs. The application of patterned ZnO–ZnS core–shell NWAs with hexagonal symmetry resulted in 60% and 88% enhancement of the Jsc and η compared with the reference cells based on patterned NWAs with line symmetry. Moreover, a FTO-Pt cathode with an Al reflecting layer on the reverse side was employed in this study, playing an important role in further increasing the Jsc and η. Overall, enhancing light harvesting on both the photoanode and the cathode is the key to these gratifying results.

AR-N 4340, AR 300-12, AR 300-475 and AR 300-72 (Allresist GmbH); Aquatar (AZ Electronic Materials); acetone, isopropyl alcohol (IPA), zinc nitrate (M = 297.49 g mol−1) and hexamethylenetetramine (HMTA) (M = 140.19 g mol−1) (Sinopharm Chemical Reagent); thiacetamide (TAA) (M = 75.13 g mol−1) (Tianjin Kermel Chemical Reagent); N719 dye (DHS-N719, M = 1187.7 g mol−1), Surlyn sealing spacer (DHS-SN1725, 25 μm), liquid electrolyte (DHS-E23, redox couple: I3−/I−, solvent: acetonitrile) (Dalian Heptachroma SolarTech).


Firstly, AZO–ZnO films (AZO: ∼900 nm, resistance: ≤10 Ω sq−1, transmittance: ≥80%; ZnO: ∼50 nm) were successively deposited on float glass by radio frequency magnetron sputtering (RFMS). As electrode and growing substrate, it was cut into small pieces (15 mm × 10 mm), ultrasonically cleaned in acetone, IPA and deionized water for 5 min each, and blow-dried using N2 gas. Secondly, negative photoresist (PR) AR-N 4340 was diluted with thinner AR 300-12 (1:1 weight ratio), and spin-coated onto the substrate at 4000 rpm min−1 for 20 s to form a PR film (∼400 nm), which was followed by a soft baking process at 85 °C on a hotplate for 2 min. Aquatar was then spin-coated onto the PR film at 3000 rpm min−1 for 30 s to form a top anti-reflective coating (TARC) (∼56 nm). Thirdly, the PR + TARC coated substrates were exposed by 2BLIL. Herein, four exposure modes and two exposure times (single exposure at 0° for 80 s, double exposure at 0° + 30°, 0° + 60° and 0° + 90° for 35 + 35 s) were employed. Finally, the substrates were postbaked at 95 °C on a hotplate for 80 s, developed in a mixed solution of AR 300-475 and deionized water (1:1 volume ratio) for 6 min, rinsed with deionized water for 30 s and blow-dried using N2 gas to obtain four kinds of PR templates (period of 1 μm) on the substrates (Fig. S1, ESI). These PR templates (with line, long hexagonal, hexagonal and square symmetries) were applied to define the nucleation sites and arrangements of patterned ZnO–ZnS core–shell NWAs.


Patterned ZnO NWAs were firstly synthesized in 50 ml aqueous solution of equimolar (0.05 mol L−1) zinc nitrate and HMTA, with the templated substrates top-side down at 95 °C for 3 h. After the solution was cooled down, the substrates were taken out and cleaned by rinsing with PR remover AR 300–72 for 30 s, deionized water for 1 min, IPA for 1 min and dried in an oven at 60 °C for 10 min. Then, the substrates covered with patterned ZnO NWAs were immersed in TAA aqueous solution (0.2 mol L−1) at 90 °C to form the ZnS shell. Note that the Jsc and η can reach a maximum after 6 h sulfidation time (Ts), thus Ts is fixed at 6 h in this study. Finally, the substrates were cleaned with deionized water for 1 min and dried in an oven at 60 °C for 30 min.


For dye adsorption, the patterned ZnO–ZnS core–shell NWAs as photoanodes were immersed in 0.3 mmol L−1 N719 dye in ethanol solution at 60 °C for 40 min, followed by briefly rinsing with ethanol and drying in air. Pt-coated FTO glass (15 mm × 10 mm, resistance: ≤10 Ω sq−1, Dalian Heptachroma SolarTech) (with or without Al reflecting layer) was used as the counter electrode. Two holes (0.75 mm diameter) were pre-drilled in the FTO glass for injecting electrolyte. After that, a dye-adsorbed NWA photoanode and FTO-Pt cathode were stacked and sealed with Surlyn sealing spacer at 120 °C for 10 s. The effective area of the photoanodes was ∼0.25 cm2. Liquid electrolyte was introduced into the sandwiched solar cells through the drilled holes. Then the holes were sealed by parafilm at elevated temperature.


The morphological investigations of the PR templates and the patterned ZnO–ZnS core–shell NWAs, and X-ray energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) analysis, were conducted by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, FEI QUANTA 3D). The crystal structure and orientation of the NWAs were investigated by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku DMAX-RB, CuKα). UV-vis absorption spectroscopy of the NWA photoanodes and reflectance spectroscopy of the FTO-Pt cathodes were carried out using a UV-vis spectrometer (Varian Cary 5000). The current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the cells were measured by an electrochemical workstation (Solartron SI 1287/SI 1260) under AM 1.5G illumination provided by a solar simulator (Oriel, 91159A, 100 mW cm−2).


The fabrication sequence of patterned ZnO–ZnS core–shell NWAs via 2BLIL, HTS and CCS is shown in Fig. 1a. More details are provided in the “Experimental” section. Note that the color of the substrate will be changed in each step, especially when the substrate is covered with patterned NWAs (Fig. 1b). The bright color caused by light diffraction indicates a layer of large-scale patterned ZnO–ZnS core–shell NWAs over the surface, which will be of benefit in the realization of efficient DSSCs. Based on the PR line template (Fig. S1a, ESI), patterned ZnO NWAs with a period of 1 μm and with line symmetry were fabricated first (Ts = 0 h) (Fig. 1c). It is clear that the ZnO NWAs (diameter: ∼200 nm, length: ∼2.2 μm) are uniformly distributed and vertically aligned on the substrate, and multiple NWAs grow out of each line due to the PR space being so wide that lots of small ZnO grains were exposed. After sulfidation in the TAA solution (Ts = 6 h), many adjacent NWAs stick together and the surface of the ZnO NWAs becomes coarse (Fig. 1d). This is because during the sulfidation process, a ZnS shell is fabricated on the ZnO core by the following reactions:

CH3CSNH2 + H2O → CH3CONH2 + H2S
(1)
ZnO + H2S → ZnS + H2O
(2)
When the solution reaches a certain temperature, TAA is hydrolyzed and releases H2S due to reaction (1). Ions exchange occurs between H2S and ZnO by reaction (2) as sulfur ions react with zinc ions to form the initial ZnS shell on the ZnO surface. As reaction (2) proceeds, the ZnS shell becomes thicker due to more and more ZnS nanoparticles being deposited on the initial ZnS shell. However, the growth of the ZnS shell will then be limited by the insufficient sulfur source at the low concentration of TAA. Therefore, the final result is the fabrication of a thin and porous ZnS shell on the patterned ZnO NWAs core.
The crystal structure and chemical composition of the NWAs were characterized by XRD and EDS. For Ts = 0 h, the XRD pattern shows only two main peaks at 34.45° and 72.56°, corresponding to the ZnO (002) and (004) planes. This indicates that the NWAs consist of pure single-crystalline highly c-axis oriented ZnO (Fig. 2a). For Ts = 6 h, the diffraction peak of ZnO is still very strong. However, there is also a weak peak corresponding to the ZnS (111) plane, which is similar to the one presented in previous works and proves the existence of ZnS phase. Besides, the EDS spectrum demonstrates that the patterned ZnO NWAs are composed of only Zn and O elements (Fig. 2b). After sulfidation, Zn, O and S are the primary elements due to the fact that lots of O atoms were replaced by S atoms (Fig. 2c). Moreover, the elemental atomic ratio of S is 12.67%, which is smaller than that of O. This is because the ZnS shell is very thin (∼50 nm), and some of the ZnO core will be partially exposed if we want to obtain a cross-sectional view SEM image. In addition, the inserted cross-sectional view SEM images show that the NWAs have relatively small diameters at their roots due to the confinement of the PR templates, and have a uniform triangular space between each adjacent units, which will be conducive to sufficient dye absorption during the sensitization process.
To achieve patterned ZnO–ZnS core–shell NWAs with tunable arrangement and density, PR hole templates (Fig. S1b–d, ESI) were also utilized. Based on a PR line template, there are ∼7.5 × 104 nanowires in each line unit, and the unit density is 2.0 × 104 cm−2 (Fig. 1d). In contrast, by using the PR hole templates with long hexagonal, hexagonal and square symmetries, the numbers of nanowires in each hole unit are adjusted from approximately 13, 7 to 10, and the unit densities are changed from 0.5 × 108, 1.1 × 108 to 1.0 × 108 cm−2, respectively (Fig. 3a, c and e). Obviously, the patterned NWAs with hexagonal symmetry have the minimum nanowires in each unit and the maximum unit density, and the patterned NWAs with line symmetry are just the opposite. An even larger unit density could be achieved by using a shorter wavelength laser or a larger incident angle. Furthermore, all the patterned NWAs show a smooth ZnO core and a coarse ZnS shell (Fig. 3b, d and f), which is consistent with the SEM and TEM results reported in previous works. Additionally, both the patterned NWAs and the substrates are covered with the ZnS shell, which will help to reduce the recombination of the electrons with either the dye or the electrolyte more effectively.
As we mentioned, maximum light absorption at the photoanode and maximum light reflection at the cathode are the key to achieving higher efficiency DSSCs. Therefore, the light absorption properties of the patterned ZnO–ZnS core–shell NWAs with four different symmetries were investigated under the same conditions after they were sensitized by N719 dye. Interestingly, the UV-vis absorption spectra show that all of the patterned NWAs have a wide absorbance band in the visible region, and that the NWAs with a hexagonal symmetry demonstrate the highest absorption of the four symmetries tested (Fig. 4a). In general, ZnO–ZnS has a low and smooth visible absorption due to its wide band gap property. Hence, the enhanced absorption in visible region may be attributed to the light scattering effect of the patterned NWAs, and the wavy absorption may result from the light interference caused by the patterned NWAs with a fixed period of 1 μm. Furthermore, the absorption trend in UV region is nearly opposite to the one in the visible region, and the NWAs with line and square symmetries show higher results due to their higher nanowire densities (1.5 × 109 and 1.0 × 109 cm−2). Besides, it is clear that an absorption peak is centered around 505 nm, which originates from the N719 dye molecules, and the patterned NWAs with hexagonal symmetry present the highest value again. Generally, as the surface area of a photoanode is enlarged, the amount of dye will be increased and more light can be harvested. The NWAs with hexagonal symmetry have the minimum number of nanowires in each unit and maximum unit density, which is beneficial in terms of increasing the surface area. Hence, the enhanced light harvesting of the patterned NWAs photoanode is attributed to not only the superior light scattering effect but also the enlarged surface area.
As the incident light can not be totally absorbed by the ZnO–ZnS core–shell NWAs photoanodes at once, in this study, a FTO–Pt cathode with an Al reflecting layer on the reverse side was employed to reflect the unabsorbed light back to the photoanodes in order to realize double absorption. The reflectance spectra of the FTO–Pt cathodes with or without an Al reflecting layer are presented in Fig. 4b. Before Pt deposition, FTO with an Al reflecting layer has a high reflectivity, in stark contrast to pure FTO, especially when the wavelength is longer than 350 nm. After Pt (∼20 nm) was deposited, the reflectance of FTO was increased from ∼10% to ∼20%. Although the reflectance of FTO–Pt with an Al reflecting layer is decreased, it is still much higher than FTO–Pt, which also can be obviously seen from the optical images (Fig. S2a, ESI). Therefore, the DSSCs assembled with patterned ZnO–ZnS core–shell NWAs photoanode and FTO–Pt cathode with an Al reflecting layer can collect the incident light in three ways, including direct absorption by the dye, and secondary absorption by the dye through reflection of the unabsorbed light by both the Pt and Al layers (Fig. S2b, ESI). In this way, the incident light can be collected more efficiently, which will be helpful for the improvement of Jsc. Thus Jsc will be increased by enhanced light harvesting on both the patterned NWAs photoanode and the FTO–Pt cathode. Note that Jsc can be further enhanced by the ZnS shell, because it can reduce the defect sites on the ZnO surface and form a higher band gap than ZnO, which suppresses the recombination of injected electrons with either the N719 dye or the redox electrolyte (Fig. S2c, ESI).
The photoelectric characteristics of the DSSCs, such as open circuit voltage (Voc), short circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (η), are summarized in Table 1. Before using the Al reflecting layer, the DSSCs based on patterned ZnO–ZnS core–shell NWAs photoanodes with line symmetry exhibited a Voc of 0.49 V, a Jsc of 3.66 mA cm−2, a FF of 0.44 and a η of 0.87%, and with hexagonal symmetry demonstrated a Voc of 0.53 V, a Jsc of 6.24 mA cm−2, a FF of 0.49 and a η of 1.78% (Fig. 5a). After using the Al reflecting layer, the cells showed no significant changes in Voc and FF, but exhibited an increased Jsc and thus a higher η of 1.11% and 2.09%, respectively. Therefore, the Al reflecting layer is proved to be helpful by facilitating the double absorption of incident light and therefore improving the efficiency of the DSSCs. In addition, the improvement of η for the photoanode with hexagonal symmetry is 17.4%, whereas it is 27.6% for the photoanode with line symmetry, due to less light absorption on photoanode in the first instance leading to more light absorption after reflection.
DSSC
Photoanode
Cathode

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF

η (%)
Symmetry
Unit density (cm−2)
1
Line
2.0 × 104
FTO + Pt
0.49
3.66
0.44
0.87
2
Hexagonal
1.1 × 108
0.53
6.24
0.49
1.78
3
Line
2.0 × 104
FTO + Pt (Al)
0.49
4.64
0.44
1.11
4
Long hexagonal
0.5 × 108
0.51
5.15
0.46
1.34
5
Hexagonal
1.1 × 108
0.52
7.44
0.48
2.09
6
Square
1.0 × 108
0.51
6.32
0.47
1.68
In general, the number of photo-generated carriers in DSSCs is the most important factor to determine the Jsc and η, and can be affected by the light-harvesting capability of the photoanodes with different configurations. Hence, a comparison was made among the DSSCs assembled with the four different NWAs photoanodes and FTO–Pt cathodes with the Al reflecting layer (Fig. 5b). Obviously, the hexagonal symmetry photoanode results in the highest Jsc and η of 7.44 mA cm−2 and 2.09%, respectively, which are approximately a 60% and 88% enhancement with respect to the photoanode with line symmetry. The results are consistent with the UV-vis absorption spectra shown in Fig. 4a, and furthermore, indicate that the arrangement and density of patterned ZnO–ZnS core–shell NWAs have a remarkable influence on the performance of the DSSCs. In this case, the patterned ZnO–ZnS core–shell NWAs with a minimum number of nanowires in each unit, a maximum unit density and hexagonal symmetry are the best option for the realization of efficient DSSCs.

In summary, we have developed an effective method to fabricate large-scale patterned ZnO–ZnS core–shell NWAs in order to boost the light-harvesting efficiency of DSSCs. The arrangement and density of the NWAs have remarkable influence on the performance of the cells. The DSSCs based on the NWAs photoanode with hexagonal symmetry and a FTO–Pt cathode with an Al reflecting layer, achieve the highest efficiency of 2.09%, which is an improvement of 140% compared to the reference cells with line symmetry and without a reflecting layer. This improvement can be explained by the excellent light-scattering effect and enlarged surface area of the patterned NWAs, as well as the remarkable double absorption caused by the Al reflecting layer. Additionally, the ZnO core provides a direct and quick pathway for electron transfer, and the ZnS shell reduces the recombination of injected electrons with either the dye or the electrolyte. Although we focus on ZnO–ZnS as a model here, this method is highly generic for application in various semiconductors, including inorganic oxides, quantum dots and organic materials, and can be applied to many other nanodevices and nanosystems in the future.


This work was supported by the National Major Research Program of China (2013CB932602), the Major Project of International Cooperation and Exchanges (2012DFA50990), the Program of Introducing Talents of Discipline to Universities, NSFC (51232001, 51172022, 51372023), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, and the Program for Changjiang Scholars and Innovative Research Team in University.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: SEM images of the PR templates obtained by using 2BLIL with four exposure modes, optical images of the FTO-Pt cathodes with or without Al reflecting layer, schematic illustration of the presented DSSCs and light transport path, and energy level diagram for the ZnO–ZnS core–shell NWAs with N719 dye in electrolyte. See DOI: 10.1039/c4nr00137k
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014