 DOI: 10.1039/C8TA11059J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3072-3082


Yu-Che
Lin
,

Yi-Ju
Lu
,

Cheng-Si
Tsao
,

Akinori
Saeki
,

Jia-Xing
Li
,

Chung-Hao
Chen
,

Hao-Cheng
Wang
,

Hsiu-Cheng
Chen
,

Dong
Meng
,

Kaung-Hsiung
Wu
,

Yang
Yang
 and 

Kung-Hwa
Wei
*

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 30010, Taiwan. E-mail: khwei@mail.nctu.edu.tw

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan

Institute of Nuclear Energy Research, Taoyuan 32546, Taiwan

Department of Applied Chemistry, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka University, 2-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan

Department of Electrophysics, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 30010, Taiwan

Department of Material Science and Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA

Center for Emergent Functional Matter Science, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 30010, Taiwan

Received
18th November 2018
, Accepted 5th January 2019
First published on 6th January 2019
This paper reports two new fluorine-substituted polymer donors (BO2FC8, BO2FEH), with different side-chain architectures, and a new chlorine-substituted small-molecule acceptor (m-ITIC-OR-4Cl) that are capable of simultaneous charge and energy transfer as the binary blend active layer for organic photovoltaics. We first resolved the single-crystal structure of m-ITIC-OR-4Cl and then used simultaneous grazing-incidence wide- and small-angle X-ray scattering to decipher the multi-length-scale structures—such as the shape and size of aggregated domains and molecular orientation—of the blends of BO2FEH and BO2FC8 with m-ITIC-OR-4Cl. The linear side chains of BO2FC8 facilitated its packing and, thus, induced m-ITIC-OR-4Cl to form smaller disc-shaped aggregated domains (thickness: 2.9 nm) than its aggregate domain (thickness: 5.4 nm) in the blend of the branched BO2FEH. That is, the binary blend system of linear-side-chain BO2FC8 with m-ITIC-OR-4Cl featured larger interfacial areas and more pathways for charge transfer and transport, as evidenced by their carrier mobilities. The highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 11.0% was that for the BO2FC8:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl device, being consistent with the predicted PCE of 11.2% using machine learning based on random forest algorism; in comparison, the PCE of the BO2FEH:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl device was 6.4%. This study has not only provided insight into the photovoltaic performances of new polymer donor/small-molecule acceptor blends but has also, for the first time, deciphered the hierarchical morphologies—from molecule orientation to nano-domain shape and size—of such blend systems, linking the morphologies to the photovoltaic performances. The use of side-chain architectures suggests an approach for tuning the morphology of the polymer/small-molecule binary blend active layer for use in organic photovoltaics.

Bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic photovoltaics (OPVs) have potential applicability in inexpensive, large-area, flexible, and light-weight solar energy conversion technologies. Although these devices usually feature fullerene derivatives as electron acceptors, fullerenes typically have relatively low absorption coefficients, and only a few derivatives are available—resulting in hard-to-adjust energy levels—and devices incorporating them can suffer from high voltage losses. In recent years, the development of small-molecule acceptors as active layer components for organic photovoltaics has progressed rapidly, because their chemical structures are tunable, through a variety of reaction pathways, to exhibit various desirable properties. Several approaches—including the use of novel and functional organic materials to cover different absorption regions and optimizing the BHJ morphologies of the active layers through the use of solvent additives or thermal annealing—have been adopted to improve the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of OPVs.

From various molecular design strategies, three main systems of small-molecule acceptors—ITIC, IDTBR, and PDI derivatives—have emerged as providing, when blended with conjugated polymers, high PCEs for their devices. The state-of-the-art PCEs have reached beyond 15% for small-molecule acceptor OPVs with tandem cell structures. Suitable combinations of these polymer donors and small-molecule acceptors usually require (i) off-set energy bands to provide a driving force for exciton separation and subsequent charge transfer, (ii) complementary absorption behavior to broaden the spectrum to harvest more sunlight. (iii) Suitable aggregated domain sizes of the small-molecule acceptors to optimize the phase separation and BHJ morphology. Several effective strategies for optimizing the small-molecule acceptor include using a fused-ring core structure, tuning the energy level and gap, and side-chain engineering. For polymer donor/small-molecule acceptor blends, optimization of the energy levels, aggregation, and packing orientations has also been studied extensively; side-chain engineering is also an effective method for optimizing the properties of these materials. Nevertheless, the effects of side-chain of the polymer donors on the hierarchical structures of the small-molecule acceptor aggregated domain—such as the shape, size and molecule orientation—are less well understood in devices containing small-molecule acceptors.
In this paper we report two new fluorine-substituted polymers (BO2FC8, BO2FEH), with different side-chain architectures, and a new chlorine-substituted small-molecule acceptor (m-ITIC-OR-4Cl) that are capable of simultaneous charge and energy transfer. When BO2FC8 or BO2FEH combine with m-ITIC-OR-4Cl to form binary blend, their mutual interactions in the blends result in dramatically different morphologies that affect their carrier mobilities and photovoltaic performances, depending on the side-chain architecture of the polymer. Structural analyses—such as single-crystal analysis—of m-ITIC-OR-4Cl revealed that this small molecule tended to adopt a compact coplanar conformation, attributable to its functionalized side chain and chlorinated end group. Moreover, simultaneous two-dimensional grazing-incidence wide- and small-angle X-ray scattering (2-D GIWAXS and GISAXS) quantitative analyses indicated that BO2FEH or BO2FC8 crystallization affect the sizes of the disc-shaped aggregated m-ITIC-OR-4Cl domains that have the preferred orientation parallel to film surface and different dispersion models in the blends. The analyzed molecule orientation, geometry, size and formation model of m-ITIC-OR-4Cl aggregated domains in the binary blends under the influence of BO2FC8 or BO2FEH provide us a fundamental understanding on the link between the hierarchical structures of materials and their photovoltaic performances. This observation suggests the effectiveness of a strategy of side-chain engineering of polymers to optimize the BHJ structure in binary blend films.
We synthesized BO2FC8 and BO2FEH by replacing two of the hydrogen atoms of the bis[5-(2-ethylhexyl)thien-2-yl]benzodithiophene (BDTT) units with two fluorine atoms, in PBDTTBO(OC8)2 and PBDTTBO(OC2C6)2, respectively; we anticipated that these primary structures would have lower energy levels and stronger intermolecular interactions. For the small-molecule acceptor, we chose the primary structure of m-ITIC-OR to ensure greater solubility and a preferred packing orientation, resulting from the meta-alkoxyl side chains, and incorporated four chlorine atoms to match the energy levels of the donors, strengthen the intermolecular interactions, and broaden the absorption range. Furthermore, we altered the side chains—linear or branched—of the isomeric fluorine-substituted conjugated PBDTTBO-2F polymers BO2FC8 and BO2FEH. The linear alkyl side chains of the polymer BO2FC8 provided a superior packing orientation and increased the crystallinity of the polymer and led to the more favorable BHJ structure, relative to that of the polymer BO2FEH presenting branched side chains. As a result, the PCEs of the BO2FC8:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl devices were substantially enhanced relative to those of the corresponding BO2FEH:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl binary blend devices, each having inverted device structures. The large disparity in PCEs of the two cases indicates that the nature of the side chains of the polymer donor can be a more influential factor affecting the multi-length-scale BHJ morphology when blended with small-molecule acceptors, than in the case of using fullerene acceptors in the fabricated devices. The PCE reached 11.0% in the case of the BO2FC8:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl device—the highest value ever reported for a device based on an additive-free benzooxadiazole-incorporating polymer donor and a small-molecule acceptor. We also used machine learning software based on random forest algorism, according to the procedure in the previous report, to predict the PCEs of these two cases by adopting the chemical structure, weight-averaged molecular weight, highest occupied molecular orbitals (HOMO) level, and bandgap from BO2FC8, BO2FEH, and m-ITIC-OR-4Cl as the parameters.

We use Knoevenagel condensation and Stille coupling to synthesize m-ITIC-OR-4Cl and polymers, respectively. Fig. S1 reveals that the decomposition temperatures (Td) of the two polymers and the small molecule were all higher than 300 °C, implying that they all had robust thermal stability. BO2FC8 had a higher value of Td (314 °C) than BO2FEH (300 °C), implying that branched side chains are more likely to decompose than linear side chains, presumably because of greater steric effects within the BO units.


Fig. 1a presents the chemical structures of the isomeric PBDTTBO-2F polymers BO2FC8 and BO2FEH and the small-molecule acceptor m-ITIC-OR-4Cl—the components in the active layers of our inverted devices. The synthesis procedure of materials, molecular weights, and thermal properties are presented in ESI Scheme S1, Table S1, and Fig. S1, respectively. Fig. 1b shows energy bands of the PBDTTBO-2F isomeric polymers BO2FC8 and BO2FEH and the small-molecule acceptor m-ITIC-OR-4Cl. These polymers have deep lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals (LUMOs), owing to the strong electron-withdrawing effects of the BO groups. The HOMOs are slightly down-shifted; fluorine-substitution lowered the HOMOs slightly relative to those of the original PBDTTBO isomeric polymers (from −5.46 to −5.5 eV and from −5.55 to −5.59 eV for BO2FC8 and BO2FEH, respectively), due to the high electronegativity of the fluorine atoms. The slight differences in the HOMO energy levels of BO2FC8 and BO2FEH presumably because of slight differences in the steric effects of the side chains, consistent with our previous findings. For m-ITIC-OR-4Cl, the energy levels of both the LUMO and the HOMO decreased (LUMO: from −3.95 to −4.05 eV; HOMO: from −5.71 to −5.78 eV) after introducing the electronegative chlorine atoms at the termini. Although the energy levels of the polymer donors and small-molecule acceptor had all decreased, there remained a sufficient driving force for electron transfer between their LUMOs (>0.3 eV) in both the BO2FC8:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl and BO2FEH:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl blends. Fig. 1c displays the UV-Vis absorption spectra of diluted solutions of the pristine materials. The polymer solutions' UV-Vis absorptions ranged from 300 to 700 nm; we attribute the small band from 300 to 450 nm (peaking at 360 nm) and the broad band from 450 to 710 nm (peaking at 588 and 568 nm for BO2FC8 and BO2FEH, respectively) to localized π–π* transitions and intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) between the donor (BDTT) and acceptor (BO) units, respectively. Fig. 1d displays the UV-Vis absorption spectra of films of BO2FC8, BO2FEH, and m-ITIC-OR-4Cl. Compared with the UV-Vis absorption spectra recorded in solution (Fig. 1c), the peaks in the UV-Vis spectra of the solid films (Fig. 1d) were slightly red-shifted, implying some degrees of aggregation of the polymer chains. The shoulder peaks of BO2FC8 and BO2FEH appeared at 628 and 610 nm, respectively, indicating that BO2FC8 was more likely to undergo π-stacking of its conjugated planes to form J-aggregates, consistent with a lower degree of steric hindrance. The UV-Vis absorption of m-ITIC-OR-4Cl, ranging from 550 to 850 nm, was complementary to those (300–700 nm) of the polymers. The BO2FC8:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl and BO2FEH:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl blends had similar absorption ranges (owing to the isomeric structures of polymers). Of the two, the BO2FC8:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl blend had the higher absorption coefficients from 620 to 750 nm, indicating that BO2FC8 aggregated more strongly than did BO2FEH. The optical and electrochemical properties of the materials are summarized in Table S2 (Scheme 1 and 2).

Fig. 2 reveals that BO2FC8 and BO2FEH both exhibited broad photoluminescence (PL) in the range from 650 to 850 nm when excited at a wavelength of 540 nm, while the PL of m-ITIC-OR-4Cl ranged from 760 to 870 nm when excited at 700 nm. The PL peaks of BO2FC8 and BO2FEH (650–800 nm) were within the UV-Vis absorption range (550–850 nm) of m-ITIC-OR-4Cl. The PL curves of the blends of BO2FC8 and BO2FEH with m-ITIC-OR-4Cl were substantially quenched by m-ITIC-OR-4Cl when excited at either 540 or 700 nm. The overlap of the UV-Vis absorption signals of m-ITIC-OR-4Cl with the PL signals of the two polymers, and the strong quenching of the latter in the blends of either polymer with the small molecule, led us to speculate that energy transfer and charge transfer might occur between the polymer donors and the small-molecule acceptor.
To investigate the mechanism of exciton generation and charge transfer (CT) in our polymer/small molecule devices, we used ultra-broadband pump-probe spectroscopy to measure the time- and photon energy-resolved transient absorption difference (ΔA) in the visible range (550–750 nm). Fig. 2b presents the ultrafast transient absorption (TA) spectra for the BO2FC8:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl and BO2FEH:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl blends at 0.5 ps; we compared these two cases to gain insight into the possible conformations of the polymer chains. The BO2FC8:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl blend featured a higher 0–0/0–1 intensity ratio and a red-shifted absorption when compared with those of the BO2FEH:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl blend. A stronger 0–0/0–1 intensity ratio typically indicates more extended chains (J-aggregates). Sharp and narrow bands in a TA spectrum correspond to the allowed transitions between the ground states and a set of distributed levels of an excited state. The spectrum of the BO2FC8:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl blend features stronger absorption and suggests higher interchain order. In the TA spectrum of the BO2FEH:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl blend, the 0–1 peak approaches the intensity of the 0–0 peak, indicating significant disorder. We compared the CT processes in these blends by tracking their ground-state bleaching (GSB) signals (see Fig. 2c and 2d). The normalized GSB signal in the BO2FC8:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl blend had a much longer exciton lifetime when compared with that of the BO2FEH:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl blend, inferring a higher efficiency of charge separation.

The best PCEs of devices incorporating these blends were dramatically different: the PCE of BO2FC8 (linear alkyl side chains):m-ITIC-OR-4Cl (1:1.5, w/w) was significantly higher than that of BO2FEH (branched alkyl side chains):m-ITIC-OR-4Cl (1:1.5, w/w)—11.0 and 6.4%, respectively.


Fig. 3a and b display the J–V and external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves, respectively, of devices incorporating the isomeric polymers and the small molecule. Table 1 summarizes the photovoltaic parameters of the OPVs. To understand why the PCEs differed so greatly depending on the degree of branching of the side chains of the polymers, we compared the open-circuit voltages (VOC), short-circuit current densities (JSC), and fill factors (FFs) of the devices. The values of VOC of the linear and branched polymer blends were 0.83 and 0.88 V, respectively, consistent with the differences between the HOMO energy levels of the polymers and the LUMO energy level of m-ITIC-OR-4Cl. The values of JSC in the BO2FC8:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl and BO2FEH:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl cases were 20.2 and 14.4 mA cm−2, respectively. Thus, the value of JSC for the device incorporating the polymer presenting the linear alkyl chains was about 40% higher than that of the device based on the polymer presenting the branched chains.
Active layer

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

J
SC, cal (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCEavg (%)
PCEmax (%)

a Weight ratio = 1:1.5.
b Twenty devices were fabricated.

BO2FC8:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl
0.83 ± 0.01
20.2 ± 0.2
19.8
63.3 ± 0.05
10.6 ± 0.20
11.0
BO2FEH:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl
0.88 ± 0.01
14.4 ± 0.2
14.1
48.5 ± 0.02
6.1 ± 0.10
6.4
To confirm these values of JSC, we compared them with the values obtained from the integrated EQE curves in Fig. 3. The deviations between the measured values of JSC and those calculated from the integrated EQE curves of the BO2FC8:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl and BO2FEH:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl devices were 2.0 and 2.1%, respectively, suggesting sufficiently high accuracy for our measurements. In Fig. 3b, we observe that both of the devices provided EQE curves with absorptions from 550 to 800 nm of strong intensity, mainly arising from the contributions of the ICT absorptions in the two blends. The BO2FC8:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl device not only presented a curve with much larger EQEs than those in the branched case but also a much wider active region in the EQE spectrum. The difference in the FFs of the BO2FC8:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl and BO2FEH:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl devices was also substantial (63.3 and 48.5%, respectively), consistent with our suspected variations in J-aggregation, phase separation, and morphology. We measured the hole and electron mobilities of devices prepared from these blends (Fig. S3) to examine the effects of their morphologies. The hole and electron mobilities for BO2FC8 (linear side chains):m-ITIC-OR-4Cl were higher than those for BO2FEH (branched side chains):m-ITIC-OR-4Cl: the hole mobility (3.0 × 10−3 and 2.7 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively) and the electron mobility (2.5 × 10−3 and 1.8 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively). The ratio of hole-to-electron mobilities in the BO2FC8:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl case (1.2) was also closer to one than that (1.5) in the BO2FEH:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl case, implying that a device incorporating BO2FC8:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl would display not only a higher degree of charge transport but also more balanced mobility, thereby decreasing the rate of charge recombination.

We use machine learning based on random forest algorism to predict the PCEs of our material combination; the simulation procedure is presented in ESI. The predicted PCE of linear-side-chain BO2FC8:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl case is 11.2%, being consistent with our experimental result of 11.0%. The predicted PCE for the case of branch-side-chain BO2FEH:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl is 10.9%, which is much higher than the experimental result of PCE of 6.4%; this discrepancy in the branch-side-chain case is possibly due to the fact the morphology effect was not taken into account in the machine learning prediction model currently. It seems that the more homogeneous blend structures result in the better prediction in the current model. Fig. S4 indicates the histogram of polymer:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl screening (∼1700), and the high-performing polymer is very limited (∼127 out of 1700). Since the predicted PCEs of the best 10 polymers (11.5–12.0%, shown in Fig. S5) are mostly comparable to that of BO2FC8 (11.2%), indicating that BO2FC8 is a reasonable choice for m-ITIC-OR-4Cl.


To elucidate the geometry and molecular conformation, we obtained a single crystal of m-ITIC-OR-4Cl through slow solvent vapor diffusion and used X-ray crystallography to determine its solid-state structure. In Fig. 4, the unit cell of the m-ITIC-OR-4Cl single crystal had the following lattice parameters: a = 8.6 Å; b = 14.5 Å; c = 16.5 Å; α = 80.3°; β = 75.4°; γ = 85.6°. Compared with the reported structure of ITIC (a = 14.9 Å; b = 15.5 Å; c = 18.1 Å; α = 99.3°; β = 101.5°; γ = 108.4°), the lattice structure of m-ITIC-OR-4Cl was compact, due to the meta-alkoxy side-chain modification.

The core IDTT structure was coplanar, with a torsional angle between the IDTT core and vinyl unit of 1.45°. The torsional angle between the CO group and the vinyl unit attached to the IDTT structure was 4.78°, indicating that the chlorinated end group possessed a nearly coplanar geometry. In contrast, the carbon atoms attached to the two cyano units at the termini were slightly twisted out of the plane, with a torsional angle of 14.6°.
We attribute this slight twist to the interactions between the molecules. To verify that interactions existed between and within the molecules, the side view in Fig. 4c reveals interactions similar to those of previously reported derivatives, in both A–A and A–D packing modes. After the side-chain engineering, m-ITIC-OR-4Cl featured a different A–D packing angle, due to the meta-n-hexyloxyphenyl group substitution. The alkoxyl chain would not extend in the perpendicular direction; instead, they tended to extend in the direction parallel to the main conjugation plane, providing more opportunity to form a compact coplanar structure (evident from the side view) and, thus, lead to a more parallel A–D packing angle. On the other hand, there were also interactions between the meta-n-hexyloxyphenyl groups, with an average distance of 4.4 Å. Interestingly, one of the chlorine atoms at the terminal group interacted with carbon and oxygen atoms in the meta-n-hexyloxyphenyl groups, providing another opportunity for m-ITIC-OR-4Cl molecules to aggregate into a larger “disc shape” geometry while also retaining the π–π overlap. This interaction has not been reported previously for a halogen-substituted end group, and thus suggests that adopting both functional side-chain engineering and halogen-substitution might have induced the aggregation of molecules to form a more planar disc-shaped aggregation; thus, the π–π interactions in the A–A and A–D packing modes were parallel to each other, with average distances of 3.26 and 3.25 Å, respectively (Fig. S7). Moreover, the cyano units in the terminal group interacted with the phenyl side chain with an average distance of 3.22 Å, resulting in the carbon atoms attached to the two cyano units on the terminal group undergoing repulsive twisting to an angle of 14.6°. This analysis of the single-crystal packing suggested that the molecular inter-interaction and intra-interaction or packing of m-ITIC-OR-4Cl had more opportunities to form a disc shape aggregation and that its interactions were stronger than those of n-hexylphenyl-incorporated ITIC derivatives. The atomic force microscopy (AFM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of the two blend films in are presented in Fig. S8 and S9 of the ESI. Nevertheless, the difference in device performance was very large, and this structural analysis failed to indicate how the isomeric polymers, with such similar properties, could have led to such a significant variation; accordingly, we turned our attention to the multi-length-scale phase-separated structure using the two-dimensional grazing-incidence wide- and small-angle X-ray scattering (2-D GIWAXS and 2-D GISAXS) analyses of these BHJ films.


Fig. 5 reveals that the 2-D GIWAXS patterns and the corresponding 1-D GIWAXS profiles had lower intensities reduced along the out-of-plane (qz) and in-plane (qxy) directions, respectively. Here, the qz direction was perpendicular to the film or substrate surface, while the qxy direction was parallel to the film surface. In Fig. 5a, the pristine m-ITIC-OR-4Cl film exhibits its main diffraction spot at qz = 0.445 Å−1 in the out-of-plane direction, followed by second- and third-order spots at qz = ca. 0.9 and 1.3 Å−1 (also see Fig. 5g). These features indicate the presence of m-ITIC-OR-4Cl having self-organized into a lamella structure with an ordered spacing between (100) planes of 14.1 Å (2π/0.445 Å−1), being consistent with the lattice parameter b that was obtained from the single crystal analysis. The strong diffraction spot in the qz direction represents the (100) plane of m-ITIC-OR-4Cl lamellar crystallites that were mainly oriented in the qz direction or predominantly parallel to the substrate surface with most of their b-axis perpendicular to the substrate. The variation of spacing between (100) planes is related to the degree of side-chain stacking or extension. The arc-shape of spots reflected the small angular distribution of the crystal orientation (±20°). For the other signal labelled (010), the peak signals with qxy = 1.7–1.9 Å−1 (shown in Fig. 5a) indicates that the spacing was 3.8–3.3 Å, being consistent with spacing in the A–A and A–D packing modes. In the case of arc shape signals at q = 1.3–1.5 Å−1 (shown in Fig. 5a and g), the corresponding spacing of 4.8–4.3 Å is close to the packing distance between the meta-n-hexyloxyphenyl groups.

Thus, the main orientation of the m-ITIC-OR-4Cl lamellar crystallites was an edge-on orientation, because the conjugated main plane was almost perpendicular to the substrate. The GIWAXS analysis not only reflects the detailed packing structure obtained from the single crystal analysis (Fig. S7) but also the crystal orientation of m-ITIC-OR-4Cl in the film. Fig. 5c and e reveal that the lamellar (100) peaks of the polymer crystallites in the pristine BO2FC8 and BO2FEH polymer films appeared at 0.30 and 0.32 Å−1, respectively. The difference in the corresponding (100) lamellar spacings (21.0 and 19.6 Å, respectively) was due to the linear side chains of BO2FC8 and the branched side chains of BO2FEH. The BO2FC8 lamellar crystallites adopted a random or isotopic orientation, as evidenced by the (100) ring. In contrast, the main (100) spot of the BO2FCEH crystallites was located in the in-plane direction, revealing that the (100) plane was perpendicular to the film surface. The (010) peak associated with π-stacking was located in the out-of-plane direction. The main orientation of the BO2FEH lamellar crystallites was face-on. A few other BO2FEH lamellar crystallites adopted the edge-on orientation, as revealed by the weak (100) spot in the out-of-plane direction in Fig. 5e. According to the intensities of the (100) peaks in the GIWAXS profiles (Fig. 5g), the relative crystallinity of the BO2FC8 film was much greater than that of the BO2FEH film. The distinct differences in both the crystallinity and orientation of the lamellar crystallites may have been related to the steric and geometric effects of the side chains in the pristine polymer films.
After incorporating the small molecule m-ITIC-OR-4Cl into the blend films, the crystallinity of the BO2FC8 and BO2FEH crystallites in the blend films decreased substantially in the presence of the m-ITIC-OR-4Cl phase, as revealed by the decrease in the (100) peak heights in the GIWAXS profiles of both blend films (Fig. 5g). For both the BO2FC8:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl and BO2FCEH:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl blend films, the main orientation of the m-ITIC-OR-4Cl lamellar crystallites did not change and remained edge-on, as revealed in Fig. 5b and d. Interestingly, the face-on BO2FEH crystallites in the qxy direction were almost suppressed by the m-ITIC-OR-4Cl crystallites oriented edge-on in the blend film (see Fig. 5d and f). Notably, the crystallinity of the m-ITIC-OR-4Cl phase in the BO2FEH:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl blend film was much lower than that in the BO2FC8:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl film, as evidenced by the (100) peak height in Fig. 5g. We attribute this behavior to the nucleation of the m-ITIC-OR-4Cl crystallites being limited by the more dispersed BO2FEH molecules in the amorphous BO2FEH/m-ITIC-OR-4Cl matrix (arising from the lower crystallinity of BO2FEH in the blend film). Nevertheless, the growth of the m-ITIC-OR-4Cl crystallites was not limited (see our discussion of the GISAXS analysis). The branched side chains of the dispersed BO2FEH molecules might also have hindered the nucleation of the m-ITIC-OR-4Cl crystallites. We suspect that the chlorine atoms in m-ITIC-OR-4Cl induced some interactions between the small molecule and the isomeric polymers; both of the polymers possessed alkoxy side chains attached to the BO unit, therefore we might predict interactions similar to that between the chlorine atoms at the terminal groups and the oxygen atoms on the meta-n-hexyloxyphenyl side chains, as mentioned above. Because the branched side chains of BO2FEH fill more space, they might possibly have hindered such an interaction dramatically. These results suggest that the mutual interactions among polymers and acceptor molecules can affect the crystallization and crystal orientation of both phases in a blend film.
The geometries, sizes, and roles (in BHJ structures) of the crystalline domains of ITIC derivatives in blend films have not been reported previously. Accordingly, we were motivated to use GISAXS analysis to quantitatively investigate these issues. GISAXS has been an effective tool for investigating the domain morphologies of the BHJ structures of active layers in polymer solar cells.
According to the GISAXS profiles of films of the pristine m-ITIC-OR-4Cl, BO2FC8, and BO2FCEH and the blends BO2FC8:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl and BO2FEH:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl (Fig. S11 and Table S4 in ESI), the main GISAXS intensities of the m-ITIC-OR-4Cl, BO2FC8:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl and BO2FEH:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl films were dominant in the low-q region (<0.01 Å−1) with upturned profiles. In contrast, the GISAXS intensities of the pristine BO2FC8 and BO2FCEH films were much lower, with Gunier shoulders dominating in the high-q region (>0.01 Å−1). A comparison of the GISAXS profiles revealed that the domain sizes, and the GISAXS intensity contributions, of the m-ITIC-OR-4Cl domains in the blend films were much larger than those of the polymer domains. Therefore, the GISAXS profiles of the blend films could be modeled approximately by considering the m-ITIC-OR-4Cl domains.
The GISAXS profiles of both blend films, as displayed in Fig. 6, exhibited power-law scattering behavior [I(q) ∝ Q−n; n = ca. 2] in the low-q regions: <0.01 Å−1 for the BO2FEH blend film and <0.03 Å−1 for the BO2FC8 blend film. The value of the exponent n of approximately 2 provides direct evidence that the nanoscale m-ITIC-OR-4Cl domains had a plate- or disc-like shape, according to the theory. Both GISAXS profiles also demonstrated power-law scattering of the exponent having a value n of 4, in this case contributed by the sharp boundary surface of domains. In this study, a form factor of polydisperse discs having a Schulz distribution of their thickness provided a more accurate fit than did other models, including a simple disc model. The SAXS profile of polydisperse disc-like domains having a radius R and a Schulz distribution of the thickness t can be expressed as
(1)
where
η is the volume fraction of domains, Δρ is the scattering length density contrast between the nanodomains and the surrounding amorphous donor/acceptor matrix, f(t) is the normalized Schulz distribution of the thickness, and Vp is the mean volume of the polydisperse discs. The polydispersity p of the thickness is related to σ/Tavg (where σ is the variance of the Schulz distribution and Tavg is the mean thickness). Here, j0 and j1 are the zero- and first-order Bessel functions, respectively. The integral over α averages the form factor over all possible orientations of the disc-like domains, with the solid angle α with respect to q. The product of η and Δρ2 can be regarded as a pre-factor. The scattering vector q is determined by 4π/λsin(θ/2), where θ is the GISAXS scattering angle and λ is the wavelength of the incident radiation.

The GISAXS profiles were fitted well by eqn (1), as revealed in Fig. 6. The mean thicknesses, determined by model-fitting, for the BO2FC8:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl and BO2FEH:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl films were 2.9 and 5.4 nm, respectively; the polydispersities, determined by model-fitting, were 0.1 and 0.3, respectively. The fitted diameters for both blend films were approximately the same (ca. 150 nm), but beyond the length scale corresponding to the lowest measured value of q of 0.004 Å−1. The determined diameter of 150 nm was based on the extrapolation fitting, providing a reference for the minimum possible size. The large diameter of the disc-like domains can be regarded as representing the side-by-side aggregation of some smaller domains having the same thickness. The reason why the m-ITIC-OR-4Cl domain was thicker in the BO2FEH blend film can be explained by considering the fact that the lower crystallinity of the polymer BO2FEH provided more room in the amorphous matrix for the growing of the m-ITIC-OR-4Cl domains.
The total crystallinity is related to the product of the domain crystallinity volume and the domain number. The total crystallinity of the m-ITIC-OR-4Cl phase in the BO2FEH blend film was far lower than that in the BO2FC8 blend film, based on the peak intensities in the GIWAXS profiles. Since the volume of a thick m-ITIC-OR-4Cl aggregated domain in the BO2FEH blend film was larger than that of a thin m-ITIC-OR-4Cl aggregated domain in the BO2FC8 blend film, we deduce that the number of aggregated domain of m-ITIC-OR-4Cl in the BO2FEH blend film was far fewer than that in the BO2FC8 blend film. The crystal sizes of the BO2FC8 and BO2FEH phases in the blend films can be estimated roughly to be approximately 8 nm, based on the peak widths in the out-of-plane GIWAXS profiles (Fig. 5).
Taken all the structural parameters that were provided by the GISAXS, GIWAXS and single crystal analyses together, we plotted a schematic drawing of the multiple-length-scale hierarchical structures in both blend films, revealing the lamellar structures, molecular orientations, domain shapes, and sizes of the m-ITIC-OR-4Cl and polymer structures as demonstrated in Fig. 7. Our present study has revealed quantitatively phase-separated polymer/small molecule structures that were tuned effectively through varying the side-chain architectures of polymers when blended with m-ITIC-OR-4Cl. A comparison of the BHJ structures of the two blends films revealed that the BO2FC8:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl film had relatively larger interfaces between the small molecule acceptor and polymer donor phase; moreover, the larger number of BO2FC8 crystallites and m-ITIC-OR-4Cl domains might have led to the formation of a more favorable interpenetrated network for charge transport, relative to that in the BHJ structure of the BO2FEH blend film.

We have synthesized two new fluorine-substituted polymer donors (BO2FC8, BO2FEH) with different side chains and one new chlorine-substituted small-molecule acceptor (m-ITIC-OR-4Cl) that, when blended, can have simultaneous charge and energy transfer within the binary blends. The crystallinity of these polymer donors with different side chains substantially affected the degree of aggregation of the small-molecule acceptors; the linear side chains on BO2FC8 facilitated its packing and, thus, induced m-ITIC-OR-4Cl to form more, in terms of number, but smaller, in terms of sizes, disc-shaped aggregated domains (with thickness: 2.9 nm), relative to those in the blends of the branched BO2FEH, where m-ITIC-OR-4Cl formed aggregated domains having a larger thickness of 5.4 nm. Thus, the blend system of the linear-side-chain BO2FC8 and m-ITIC-OR-4Cl provided greater interfacial areas, more nanodomains and more network pathways for charge transfer and transport when used for photovoltaics. The PCEs were dramatically different in the two cases; the highest PCE was 11.0% for the device featuring the linear-side-chain benzooxadiazole-incorporated polymer donor/small-molecule acceptor—BO2FC8:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl (1:1.5, w/w)—that is consistent with the predicted PCE of 11.2% using machine learning based on random forest algorism; it was only 6.4% for the corresponding branched-side-chain device—BO2FEH:m-ITIC-OR-4Cl (1:1.5, w/w). The hierarchical structures—deduced from the grazing-incidence wide- and small-angle X-ray scattering and single crystal analyses—for the binary polymer/small molecule systems provide the insight into the influence of the polymer side chain on the aggregation of the small molecule, revealing the link between the structures and photovoltaic performances. Side-chain engineering of the polymer donor is, therefore, another important strategy that can be used to affect the aggregation of small-molecule acceptors and, thereby, improve the PCEs of state-of-art materials.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


This study was supported financially by the Center for Emergent Functional Matter Science of National Chiao Tung University from The Featured Areas Research Center Program within the framework of the Higher Education Sprout Project by the Ministry of Education (MOE) in Taiwan, as well as by the Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan (M MOST 106-2221-E-009-132-MY3). We thank Mr Kuan-Liang Yeh for help with the synthesis. We also thank Dr Pei Cheng, and Dr Saeed Khan for providing important insights on this paper.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. CCDC 1879646. For ESI and crystallographic data in CIF or other electronic format see DOI: 10.1039/c8ta11059j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019