 DOI: 10.1039/C7NR04739H
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 17207-17211


Hyewon
Hwang
,

Jihoon
Ahn
,

Eunsong
Lee
,

Kyungmi
Kim
,

Hyeok-Chan
Kwon
 and 

Jooho
Moon
*

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Yonsei University, Seoul 03722, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jmoon@yonsei.ac.kr

Received
1st July 2017
, Accepted 19th October 2017
First published on 19th October 2017
Copper nanowires (CuNWs) have been applied to hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) as a window electrode. By sandwiching the CuNW network between aluminum-doped zinc oxide and adopting a poly(ethylenimine) buffer layer, the compatibility between the CuNWs and the perovskite layer could be dramatically improved. PSCs containing the CuNW-based composite electrode exhibited an average power conversion efficiency of 8.65%.

Metal nanowire (MeNW)-based transparent conducting electrodes (TCEs) are the leading alternatives to the typical fluorinated tin oxide (FTO) and indium tin oxide (ITO) based TCEs because the MeNW-based TCEs possess competitive properties in terms of sheet resistance and transparency, along with being highly flexible, stretchable, and compatible with various solution-based deposition techniques. While Ag-based MeNWs (AgNWs) have been widely investigated, Cu-based MeNWs (CuNWs) have recently received attention because Cu is economical and much more abundant in the earth's crust (0.07 ppm for Ag and 50 ppm for Cu) than Ag.

Such MeNW-based TCEs have replaced conventional TCEs as a bottom window electrode, which transmits light in hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs). MeNW electrode-based PSCs show reasonable performance, thus enabling the fabrication of all-solution-processed and/or flexible PSCs. However, MeNW-based electrodes are not chemically compatible with the hybrid perovskite phase (i.e., methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3)). Specifically, metal iodides are likely formed on the MeNWs exposed to the iodide ion-containing precursor solution during the deposition of the absorber layer or the diffusion of the iodide ion from the MAPbI3 layer by light and/or thermal activation, both of which seriously deteriorates the electrode's conductivity and device performance. Therefore, resolving this problem is a pre-requisite to implementing MeNW-based PSCs.
To resolve the chemical stability issue, several researchers have introduced the concept of a MeNW-based composite electrode. Han et al. demonstrated a AgNW-based window electrode overcoated with fluorinated zinc oxide; however, their device showed a low power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.29%. Kim et al. also demonstrated the all-solution-processed TCEs in which the sandwich structure of ITO/AgNWs/ITO was proposed for PSCs with a high PCE of 8.44%. However, the AgNW-based electrodes need to be replaced by low cost CuNW-based electrodes. In addition, it has been reported that Cu is less prone to form metal iodide as compared to Ag. Recently, Im et al. reported PSCs containing CuNW-based composite TCEs with a PCE of 12.95%. However, the composite electrodes contained vacuum-deposited ITO as a protective layer wherein the scarce In poses a hurdle to the full exploitation of the CuNW-based TCEs in PSCs.
Herein, we developed a silver and indium-free CuNW-based composite as a bottom window electrode for PSCs. Aluminum-doped zinc oxide (AZO) and CuNW networks were constructed using a sandwich-type composite electrode with the configuration of AZO/CuNWs/AZO to improve chemical durability against copper iodide (CuI). Moreover, a poly(ethylenimine) (PEI) layer was inserted between MAPbI3 and ZnO as an electron transporting layer (ETL). We found that the compact polymeric buffer layer could prevent the interaction of CuNWs and an iodine-containing solution during deposition, as well as iodine ion migration during cell operation. The PSCs containing the AZO/CuNW/AZO composite window electrode with a sheet resistance of 37 Ω □−1 and a transparency of 84.6% at a wavelength of 550 nm exhibited an average PCE of 8.65%, comparable to that of the conventional FTO electrode-based control PSCs (PCE of 10.85%). Our study demonstrates the potential suitability of the low-cost silver/indium-free CuNW composite as a bottom electrode for efficient PSCs.
CuNWs were synthesized by a previously developed method. Several hundred micrometers long CuNWs with ca. 50 nm width were prepared (Fig. 1a and Fig. S1, ESI), and the AZO/CuNW/AZO electrodes were fabricated by the layer-by-layer deposition technique. First, a 30 nm-thick bottom AZO layer was deposited on a soda-lime glass by magnetron sputtering. Then, the CuNW network film formed on a cellulose membrane through the filtration of the CuNW solution was transferred onto the bottom AZO layer. Subsequently, a 40 nm-thick top AZO layer was deposited on the CuNW network film via two-step deposition by magnetron sputtering (see the ESI for details) to produce the AZO/CuNW/AZO composite electrode. The AZO/CuNW/AZO composite electrode can show great anti-oxidation stability, while the surface oxidation of CuNWs can deteriorate the sheet resistance of the electrode (Fig. S2, ESI). Such a sandwich-type electrode can enhance not only the chemical durability, but also adhesion, thermal stability, and areal charge collection efficiency of the MeNW-based electrode.
The morphology of the AZO/CuNW/AZO composite characterized by using a scanning electron microscope (SEM) clearly shows distinguishable surface texture as compared to bare CuNWs (Fig. 1a and b). The sheet resistance measured by using a four-point probe meter was in the range of 38–40 Ω □−1. The transmittance of the electrode was examined using a UV-Vis spectrophotometer equipped with an integrating sphere (Fig. 1c). For comparison, a conventional FTO electrode and a CuNW network electrode without the AZO layers were characterized. As seen in Fig. 1c, the transmittance at 550 nm and averaged visible transmittance (AVT) of the AZO/CuNW/AZO composite are 87.6% and 84.0%, respectively. Although the sandwiching AZO layers reduced the transmittance, it is still comparable to that of FTO (87.1% at 550 nm and 86.0% AVT). Furthermore, it is worth mentioning that the sandwich structure improves light transmittance as compared with the non-sandwich structured electrode (CuNWs/AZO), as shown in Fig. S3 (ESI). A similar phenomenon was also observed in our previous results, and the flattened surface is responsible for the decrease in diffusive reflectance. This further justifies the utilization of such a sandwich-type electrode.
Further, ZnO was coated onto the AZO/CuNW/AZO composite electrode as an ETL by magnetron sputtering producing the AZO/CuNW/AZO/ZnO composite (note that the layers in the right side of this denotation were deposited later). Although it has been reported that AZO can act as an ETL, in the course of optimization experiments, neither the individual AZO nor ZnO could afford high performance devices. Hence, the AZO/CuNW/AZO/ZnO configuration was used for device fabrication.
Initially, we attempted to deposit the perovskite layer directly onto the AZO/CuNW/AZO/ZnO substrate. However, it was noticed that in this structure, the underlying electrode was severely damaged after the deposition of the MAPbI3 layer by spin coating. In order to analyze the deterioration of the underlying composite electrodes, the MAPbI3 layer coated on the composite electrode was removed by γ-butyrolactone (GBL) and ethanol (EtOH), as depicted in Fig. 2a (see the ESI for details). The coated MAPbI3 layer was aged for 120 h before its removal with GBL and EtOH. It was noted that the sheet resistance of AZO/CuNWs/AZO/ZnO without (w/o) PEI significantly increased, implying that the coating of MAPbI3 causes chemical deterioration of the composite electrode (Fig. 2b). In addition, it was revealed that the CuNWs in the composite electrode were the victim of this chemical deterioration. The XRD patterns in Fig. 2c show the disappearance of the Cu peak after MAPbI3 removal, evidencing that the CuNWs in AZO/CuNWs/AZO/ZnO w/o PEI chemically transformed from metal to ionic compounds such as CuI, which could be dissolved out by GBL and EtOH treatment. Moreover, decoloration of the CuNW film in the region where MAPbI3 had been coated supports the reaction of MAPbI3 with CuNWs and the disappearance of the Cu peak in the XRD pattern (Fig. 2d).
Furthermore, comparison of the resistance changes of AZO/CuNWs/AZO/ZnO w/o PEI and AZO/CuNWs/AZO w/o PEI revealed that the ZnO layer acting as an ETL accelerated the deterioration of the electrode (Fig. 2b). This can be rationalized by the fact that the ZnO layer can decompose the MAPbI3 layer. According to Yang et al., the basic surface of ZnO possibly deprotonates the methylammonium cations of MAPbI3 at the interfaces. The deprotonated form of methylammonium (methylamine) easily escapes from MAPbI3, resulting in the decomposition of the MAPbI3 layer, leaving the iodide ion behind. Therefore, the decomposition of MAPbI3 promotes the supply of the iodide ions into the CuNWs, and thereby the formation of CuI species is likely prompted.
In order to solve this problem, Cheng et al. suggested the insertion of a thin PEI layer as a protection layer between ZnO and MAPbI3 to prevent the decomposition of MAPbI3. Inspired by this report, we applied a thin PEI layer on the ZnO layer. When the PEI layer was employed as the protection layer, the stability of the electrode against MAPbI3 was impressively enhanced. As seen in Fig. 2b–d, the composite electrode with the PEI layer (AZO/CuNWs/AZO/ZnO w/ PEI) presents a stable sheet resistance after sequential coating and removal of MAPbI3. Additionally, the preservation of the Cu peak in the XRD pattern (Fig. 2c) and apparent integrity of the electrode film, as shown in the photograph (Fig. 2d), clearly support the improved chemical durability. The enhancement in chemical compatibility can be attributed to the role of PEI in preventing the decomposition of the MAPbI3 layer. As mentioned above, the deprotonation of the methylammonium cations by the basic ZnO surface and subsequent elimination of methylamine destroy the MAPbI3 crystal, thereby supplying the iodide ions into the CuNWs. The branched PEI used here also contains sufficiently basic primary amines (pKa of the conjugated acid of the primary amines is approximately 9), so it is reasonable to consider that the PEI layer is able to deprotonate the methylammonium cations. Indeed, it has been proven that PEI can make methylammonium deprotonated in solution. However, the protonated amine groups of PEI can stably retain the perovskite crystal, as demonstrated in previous reports. Thus, it is hypothesized that the protonated amines of PEI can substitute the vacancies of the methylammonium cations in the MAPbI3 crystal. Therefore, the MAPbI3 layer became chemically stable after an interfacial proton exchange between methylammonium and PEI as opposed to ZnO. This explanation is schematically illustrated in Fig. S4 (ESI). In order to support the hypothesis, we tried to determine a new crystalline phase developed by the reaction between MAPbI3 and PEI. Unfortunately, the new crystalline phase could not be observed between MAPbI3 and PEI when reacted in the form of a thin film probably due to small interfacial area between the films (Fig. S5, ESI). However, when the reaction was performed using MAPbI3 powders and PEI in an aprotic toluene solution, a newly developed crystalline phase appeared in XRD (Fig. S5, ESI). This phase can be assigned to the PEI-based perovskite. Therefore, it can be concluded that PEI can act as a protective layer by forming a stable interfacial layer with MAPbI3.
Furthermore, it should be noted that the resistance change of the composite electrode without ZnO but with PEI (AZO/CuNWs/AZO w/ PEI) was smaller than that of AZO/CuNWs/AZO w/o PEI (Fig. 2b). This indicates that the PEI layer prevents the deterioration of the electrode by not only inhibiting the decomposition of MAPbI3, but also by serving as a compact barrier layer that prohibits the permeation of the iodide ions during spin coating.
Finally, PSCs were fabricated on the AZO/CuNW/AZO/ZnO/PEI substrate. MAPbI3 was spin-coated as a light absorber, and spiro-OMeTAD was employed as a hole transporting layer (HTL) by spin coating. Subsequently, a Au electrode was vacuum-deposited as a back contact. The final structure of the prepared PSC is illustrated in Fig. 3a. The SEM image shows the structure of a PSC (Fig. 3b), although the ultra-thin PEI layer cannot be clearly observed by SEM. Please note that an observably thick PEI layer (Fig. S6) in the reference cell with an FTO electrode would have deteriorated the cell performance because of extremely high series resistance. The performance of PSCs was measured under 1 sun illumination (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) irradiated onto the bottom electrode. The current density–voltage (J–V) plot of the champion cell using the AZO/CuNWs/AZO electrode shows an open circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.02 V and a short circuit current (JSC) of 15.10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 3c). With the fill factor (FF) of 62.1%, the best PCE was calculated as 9.6%. The JSC value provided by the external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurement for the same device was 14.88 mA cm−2, which indicates high reliability of the performance measurement. In addition, the statistics of cell parameters revealed that the PSCs with the CuNW-based electrodes present reasonably converged values, i.e., VOC = 1.03 ± 0.01 V, JSC = 14.47 ± 1.05 mA cm−2, FF = 58.33 ± 2.77%, and PCE = 8.65 ± 0.64% (Fig. 3d and Table 1). Meanwhile, the comparable FTO-based PSCs with other identical layers showed relatively higher performance (best PCE = 12.49% and average PCE = 10.85 ± 1.25%) than the PSCs fabricated with the AZO/CuNW/AZO electrode. While the VOC of these cells do not significantly differ, the difference in performance can be attributed to the slightly lower JSC and FF. We suggest that the main reason for the low performance is the higher sheet resistance of AZO/CuNWs/AZO (38–40 Ω □−1) than that of FTO (≈15 Ω □−1) since their transparency values are similar (Fig. 1c) and the other layers were similarly fabricated. A high sheet resistance of the electrode increases the series resistance of the corresponding device, which in turn decreases the JSC and FF. Indeed, we can find that the series resistance of the PSCs with CuNWs was 278.7 ± 52.1 Ω, while that of the PSCs with FTO was 142.9 ± 15.6 Ω. Meanwhile, it was found that both PSCs with AZO/CuNWs/AZO and the FTO electrode showed typical hysteresis behavior of PSCs (Fig. S7, ESI). Similar hysteresis behavior observed in both cells can be attributed to other layers such as the absorber layer and the electron transport layer in PSCs rather than our CuNW-based electrodes. In order to eliminate the over-estimation, the PCE was measured at the maximum power voltage (0.807 V) as a function of time. It was observed that the current density and PCE were stabilized at 9.64 mA cm−2 and 7.8% with a slight deviation from the best PCE value. Solutions to resolve the hysteresis issue by modifying the perovskite layer itself or interfacial properties have been suggested, and further engineering efforts are underway to accomplish hysteresis-free PSCs with metal nanowire electrodes. Nevertheless, the results indicate that it is feasible to use our CuNW-based electrode in PSCs. It should be emphasized that this is the first report demonstrating that silver/indium-free CuNW-based electrodes can be utilized in PSCs. In addition, this report reveals that the PEI layer, which has only been discussed in terms of protecting the hybrid perovskite layer from other layers, can simultaneously protect the MeNW-based electrodes from chemical attack of the hybrid perovskites. As the polymeric PEI layer is suitable for solution-processing and flexible device applications, this demonstration would pave the way for realizing advanced MeNW-based PSCs.
Device type

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
AZO/CuNWs/AZO
Best
1.02
15.10
62.1
9.6
Mean
1.03 ± 0.01
14.47 ± 1.05
58.33 ± 2.77
8.65 ± 0.64
FTO
Best
1.08
16.93
68.20
12.49
Mean
1.00 ± 0.04
16.63 ± 1.42
65.08 ± 4.06
10.85 ± 1.25

In summary, we, for the first time, demonstrated PSCs fabricated with silver and indium-free CuNW-based composite electrodes. The composite electrode with the AZO/CuNW/AZO sandwich configuration presents a sheet resistance of 38–40 Ω □−1 and an AVT of 84.0%. We found that the sole AZO/CuNW/AZO electrode is not compatible with the MAPbI3 layer. Furthermore, when ZnO was employed as an ETL, the chemical deterioration of the CuNW electrode was accelerated because the deprotonation of methylammonium at the interface of ZnO and MAPbI3 can promote the decomposition of MAPbI3, which supplies an immoderate amount of iodide ions into the CuNWs. In order to solve this problem, a PEI layer was applied between the ZnO and MAPbI3 layers. The protonated PEI layer maintained the hybrid perovskite by substituting the deprotonated methylammonium at the interface, thereby effectively preventing the decomposition of the MAPbI3 layer. In addition, the permeation of the MAPbI3 solution during fabrication was effectively blocked by the PEI layer. As a result, the CuNW network electrode could be integrally protected. PSCs fabricated on this substrate showed the best PCE of 9.6%, demonstrating the feasibility of PSCs based on CuNW-based cost-effective transparent electrodes.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) (grant no. 2012R1A3A2026417) funded by the Korean government (MSIP).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr04739h
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017