 DOI: 10.1039/C5TC01076D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 6209-6217


Ganesh D.
Sharma
*,

S. A.
Siddiqui
,

Agapi
Nikiforou
,

Galateia E.
Zervaki
,

Irene
Georgakaki
,

Kalliopi
Ladomenou
 and 

Athanassios G.
Coutsolelos
*

R&D Centre for Engineering and Science, JEC Group of Colleges, Jaipur Engineering College Campus, Kukas, Jaipur, Raj 303101, India. E-mail: gdsharma273@gmail.com

Department of Electrical Engineering Vivekanand Institute of Technology, Jagatpura, Jaipur

Department of Chemistry, Laboratory of Bioinorganic Chemistry, University of Crete, Voutes Campus, P.O. Box 2208, Heraklion, Crete 71003, Greece. E-mail: acoutsol@uoc.gr

Received
16th April 2015
, Accepted 15th May 2015
First published on 18th May 2015
In the present article bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solution processed organic solar cells have been prepared using a mono(carboxy)porphyrin-triazine-(bodipy)2 triad (PorCOOH)(BDP)2 as a donor and ([6,6]-phenyl C71 butyric acid methyl ester) (PC71BM) as an acceptor. This donor–acceptor system aims to increase the light capturing process efficiency of the device. The solution processed BHJ organic solar cell with an optimized weight ratio of 1:1 (PorCOOH)(BDP)2:PC71BM processed with THF as a solvent showed an overall power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.48% with short circuit current Jsc = 8.04 mA cm−2, open circuit voltage Voc = 0.94 V and fill factor FF = 0.46. The relatively high value of Voc was attributed to the deeper highest occupied molecular orbital energy level of (PorCOOH)(BDP)2. When the active layer of the solar cell was processed using a mixture of 4% v/v of pyridine in THF solvent, it achieved a PCE value of 5.29% with Jsc = 10.48 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.90 V and FF = 0.56. This was ascribed to the enhancement of both the Jsc and the FF values. The higher value of Jsc is explained by the increased absorption profile of the blend, the stronger incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) response and the higher crystallinity of the active layer, induced by the solvent additive while the enhancement of FF may be due to the better charge transport capability and the charge collection efficiency in the later device.

Organic solar cells (OSCs), based on a bulk heterojunction (BHJ) active layer that typically consists of a blend of a photoactive polymer or a small molecule as an electron donor and fullerene derivatives as an electron acceptor, have been promising candidates and have attracted much attention due to certain advantages such as solution processability of their active layer, lightweight, flexibility and potential low costs. With the rapid progress over the last few decades, power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) over 9% for single junction and 11% for tandem junction solar cells have been achieved. These are based on BHJ polymer solar cells with a low bandgap conjugated polymer as an electron donor and fullerene derivatives as an electron acceptor, after the optimization of the interface layer and the morphology. Recently, Tan et al. reported high-performance single-junction OSCs with an efficiency of 10% by implementing deterministic aperiodic nanostructure (DAN) patterning for broadband self-enhanced light absorption with optimum charge extraction. However, the polymer used in such a device is still expensive, suffering from difficulties of multi-step synthesis, reproducibility, purification of uniform molecular weight components, and high dispersity.

Recently, alternative to organic polymers, small organic molecules have been utilized as photoactive electron donors, owing to their potential advantages in terms of definite molecular structure and molecular weight, high purity, facile synthesis and good batch-to-batch reproducibility. To date, OSCs based on a small molecule as an donor along with PC71BM as an electron acceptor have reached efficiencies in the range of 8–10%.
Among other small molecules that could function as electron donors in OSCs porphyrins – the synthetic analogues of chlorophylls – are of special interest, since they are known to model nature's choice as light harvesting antenna systems that are involved in energy and electron transfer processes in many biological systems. Furthermore, they exhibit large molar absorption coefficients, tunable and photophysical properties via central metal modification and/or introduction of suitable substituents at the macrocycle peripheral positions. Despite the successful use of porphyrins as sensitizers in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) (devices with PCE values higher than 12% have been reported), their utilization as donors in solution-processed BHJ organic solar cells is rather limited because of their poor solubility in common organic solvents. However, the appropriate selection of peripheral substituents can increase their solubility. Recent progress in this area of research resulted in solution-processed BHJ solar cells based on suitable porphyrin derivatives as donors, along with PC71BM as an electron acceptor, which displayed PCEs from 2.5% to 7.23%, after device optimization. Furthermore, an OSC based on a porphyrin based on a two dimensional (2D) donor–acceptor (D–A) polymer used as a donor, along with the PC71BM acceptor, showed a PCE value of 8.0%, without using any additives, which was further improved up to 8.68% when a cathodic interlayer was used to diminish the leakage current.
Despite the strong Soret- and moderate Q band absorptions of porphyrins (in the range of 400–450 and 550–700 nm, respectively), they exhibit poor absorption characteristics in the range of 450 and 550 nm. Efforts have been made towards the design and synthesis of π-extended porphyrins which absorb in this wavelength region. Boron-dipyrromethane (BDP) belongs to a class of fluorescent dyes that exhibit spectral characteristics in that particular area. By incorporating BDP as an additional antenna group in porphyrin structures, new dyes with enhanced overall absorption profiles can be obtained. In order to enhance the absorption band in the visible region, a molecular system consisting of energy donors and energy acceptors was widely used to design fluorescence resonance energy transfer molecular assemblies. Additionally, to maximize the light harvesting ability of such dyes, the two chromophores can also be linked through appropriate linkers. 1,3,5-Triazine has been successfully used as a linker in metal free organic dyes, which were used as sensitizers in DSSCs and other photoconductive materials. The structural, chemical and electronic properties of this moiety allow the design and facile synthesis of complex π-conjugated multi-chromophores, and offer improved light harvesting ability, as well as electron injection and transportation rates.
Herein, we present the use of a BDP-porphyrin triad bridged by a triazine linker (PorCOOH)(BDP)2 (Scheme 1) along with PC71BM (Scheme 1) as an electron donor and an electron acceptor, respectively, for the fabrication of solution processed BHJ organic solar cells. The solar cell based on (PorCOOH)(BDP)2:PC71BM in 1:1 by weight ratio and cast from THF solvent showed an overall PCE value of 3.48% with Jsc = 8.04 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.94 V and FF = 0.46. Remarkably, when the active layer of the solar cell was processed by using a 4% v/v mixture of pyridine–THF as the solvent, its photovoltaic characteristics were significantly improved resulting in a PCE value of 5.29%. This was ascribed to an increase in hole mobility, resulting in better values of charge transport and charge collection rates due to the optimized crystallinity and the nanoscale morphology of the active layer, induced by the solvent additive.

As shown in Scheme 1 the porphyrin triad that is used in the present work, PorCOOH(BDP)2, consists of a meso aryl-substituted free base monocarboxy-porphyrin unit bridged by a central 1,3,5-triazine moiety to 4-aminophenyl-boron dipyrrin units through their aryl amino groups. Its synthetic approach involves the stepwise amination reactions of cyanuric chloride with amino-phenyl monocarboxy porphyrin (PorCOOH) and 4-aminophenyl-boron dipyrrin (NH2-BDP) in the presence of a weak base (DIPEA).

The optical absorption spectrum of (PorCOOH)(BDP)2 in dilute THF solution and thin film cast from the THF solvent is shown in Fig. 1. The spectrum of (PorCOOH)(BDP)2 exhibits the characteristic absorption bands for free-base porphyrin (strong Soret band: λmax = 422 nm, and weaker Q-bands: λmax = 552 nm, 596 nm and 652 nm) in addition to one more absorption band centered at 502 nm which is attributed to the π–π* transition of the BODIPY moiety. The fact that the absorption spectrum appears to be the sum of the absorption spectra of the porphyrin PorCOOH and BODIPY moiety indicates that their connection through the triazine bridge does not cause significant electronic interactions between them in the ground state of the triad. The absorption spectrum of (PorCOOH)(BDP)2 thin film (Fig. 1, red line) is similar but with broader bands than those of the solution spectrum, which may be attributed to porphyrin aggregation. The optical bandgap was calculated from the onset absorption edge of the band on thin film to be about 1.84 eV.
The HOMO and LUMO energy levels of (PorCOOH)(BDP)2 were estimated from its first oxidation potential (0.91 V vs. SCE) and first reduction potential (−1.19 V vs. SCE) and correspond to −5.62 eV and −3.52 eV, respectively. The deeper energy value of the HOMO of (PorCOOH)(BDP)2 is beneficial for the higher value of Voc. Moreover, the LUMO energy level of (PorCOOH)(BDP)2 is sufficiently higher than that of PC71BM (∼−4.0 eV) and favorable for the photo-induced charge transfer between (PorCOOH)(BDP)2 and PC71BM.

The performance of an organic BHJ solar cell that combines a donor and an acceptor species is not surprisingly influenced by the relative concentrations of these materials used in the active thin film, as there should be a balance between the absorbance of photons and the subsequent charge transporting process in the active layer. When the concentration of the acceptor material is low, the electron transporting ability will be limited while with the higher amount of acceptor concentration, the absorbance and hole transport ability in the active layer will be decreased. In our system, the optimum device performance was measured in a blend of 1:1 weight ratio of the mixture (PorCOOH)(BDP)2 and PC71BM in THF, after testing a series of three different weight ratios (1:0.5, 1:1 and 1:1.5). The normalized absorption spectrum of (PorCOOH)(BDP)2:PC71BM (1:1) blend (Fig. 2) shows the combination of both (PorCOOH)(BDP)2 and PC71BM absorption features and it becomes obvious that both moieties participate in light absorption and exciton generation, and thus photocurrent generation.

The current–voltage (J–V) characteristics under AM 1.5 (100 mW cm−2) stimulated solar illumination of BHJ organic solar cells with optimized (PorCOOH)(BDP)2:PC71BM (1:1 w/w) processed using THF solvent are shown in Fig. 3a and photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. The device showed an overall PCE value of 3.48%, with Jsc = 8.05 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.94 V and FF = 0.46. The respectable value of Voc can be explained by the lower energy of the HOMO of (PorCOOH)(BDP)2, since the Voc of the BHJ organic solar cells is directly related to the energy difference between the HOMO of the donor and the LUMO of the acceptor.
Solvent

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)

R
s (Ohm cm2)

R
sh (Ohm cm2)

a Best result.
b Average of five devices.

THF
8.04
0.94
0.46
3.48 (3.36)
53
483
Pyridine (4% v/v)–THF
10.48
0.90
0.56
5.29 (5.18)
29.4
594
The incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectrum of the BHJ organic solar cell based on (PorCOOH)(BDP)2:PC71BM (1:1 w/w) is shown in Fig. 3b and it closely resembles the optical absorption spectrum of (PorCOOH)(BDP)2:PC71BM blended thin film (Fig. 2), indicating that both (PorCOOH)(BDP)2 and PC71BM contribute to the exciton generation after the absorption of photons by the active layer. The IPCE values of both Soret and Q bands are almost similar, which indicates that despite the differences in absorption, all the electronic transitions are equally efficient in converting photons into electrons. Nevertheless, the overall PCE value of the organic solar cell based on the (PorCOOH)(BDP)2:PC71BM active layer processed from THF is smaller than that reported in the literature when other small molecules are used as donors.
Although the Voc of the present device is quite high (Voc = 0.94 V), the lower PCE value is mainly due to the low values of both Jsc and FF. These two parameters are directly related to the light harvesting efficiency of the active layer and the resulting charge generation as well as to the charge transport and collection to the respective electrodes, and processes that depend on the film morphology. A well defined nanomorphology and phase separation between donor and acceptor components in the active layer within the range of exciton diffusion lengths are necessary for efficient exciton dissociation and charge transport. All the above factors that influence the overall PCE value of our device are explained below.
It is reported that controlling the morphology of the active layer, induced by the appropriate treatment methodologies, i.e., thermal annealing, solvent annealing and solvent additives, the photovoltaic performance of BHJ organic solar cells based on either conjugated polymers or small molecules can be significantly improved. Particularly, the choice of solvent is a main factor and influences greatly the overall PCE value of the organic solar cell based on the BHJ active layer. Recently, the solvent additive method was used to improve the performance of BHJ organic solar cells using porphyrins as electron donors and PC71BM as an electron acceptor with remarkable results. Aiming to improve the overall PCE value of our device based on the optimized PorCOOH(BDP)2:PC71BM active layer, we have employed the solvent additive treatment method using a small amount of pyridine as a solvent additive, as it is known to be more effective than other solvent additives for porphyrin based BHJ solar cells. We have added different concentrations of pyridine (1, 2, 3, 4, and 5% v/v) into the host THF solvent and then we tested their photovoltaic performance. The optimum efficiency was achieved in the concentration of 4% v/v pyridine in THF (added to the host THF solvent before spin coating of the active layer). The J–V characteristics of the BHJ solar cell processed with this solvent mixture are shown in Fig. 3a while the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are shown in Table 1. The PCE value of the organic solar cell based on the BHJ active layer processed with solvent additives was significantly enhanced from 3.48% to 5.29% with Jsc = 10.48 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.90 V and FF = 0.56. This improvement is due to higher values of both Jsc and FF parameters of the device. The improvement in the Jsc value is consistent with the IPCE spectra of the device processed with pyridine–THF solvent, i.e. higher values of IPCE throughout the wavelength range (Fig. 3b). The Jsc values estimated from the integration of IPCE spectra are found to be 7.95 mA cm−2 and 10.32 mA cm−2, for the solar cells based on THF and pyridine–THF cast active layers, respectively. These values are consistent with the experimentally observed values in J–V characteristics of the respective devices.
In order to investigate the morphology and surface roughness of the active layers processed with and without pyridine additives, atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements were performed and are shown in Fig. 4. The root mean square (rms) roughness values were found to be 3.54 nm and 1.26 nm for the active layer processed without and with pyridine solvent additives, respectively. This result indicates that the pyridine additive induces the improvement in the phase separation with reduced domain sizes which is beneficial for exciton dissociation and charge transport.
The crystallinity of the active layer is also a key participant in the charge transport and collection, thereby increasing the overall PCE value of the organic solar cell. To get information about the change in the crystallinity of the (PorCOOH)(BDP)2:PC71BM film with the addition of pyridine in the host solvent, prior to spin casting, we have recorded the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the spin cast thin film processed with and without pyridine additives. In addition, we have also recorded the XRD patterns of pristine (PorCOOH)(BDP)2 thin film cast from THF and pyridine–THF solvents, for comparison (Fig. 5a). Pristine (PorCOOH)(BDP)2 cast from THF as well as from pyridine–THF shows a strong diffraction peak at 2θ = 7.12°, but the intensity of the later is stronger than that of the former, indicating that the crystallinity of the film is increased with the addition of pyridine additives. The blend (PorCOOH)(BDP)2:PC71BM cast from THF (black color in Fig. 5b) also shows a diffraction peak at around 2θ = 7.12°, corresponding to the (PorCOOH)(BDP)2 unit but its intensity becomes weak, suggesting an effective mixing of PC71BM and (PorCOOH)(BDP)2. However, this diffraction peak becomes more intense in the corresponding blend cast from pyridine–THF solvent, while its width at half maximum height is decreased. These results indicate that the blend film cast from the THF solvent has low crystallinity, while in the case of blend film cast from pyridine–THF solvent, the crystallinity and the π conjugation of (PorCOOH)(BDP)2 in the blend increase. This is probably due to the difference in the boiling point of THF and pyridine, which makes the spin coated film to dry slowly, assisting in the formation of a better self-ordered structure of the blend. The increase in the crystallinity leads to an enhancement in the light absorption properties of the active layer and higher hole mobility in the blend film, leading to the increase in Jsc, FF and PCE values of the organic solar cell.
The difference in the PCE value of the solar cell, when the active layer was spin cast from pyridine–THF solution, may be due to the difference in exciton dissociation efficiency, after the exciton generation. Photoluminescence (PL) quenching provides direct evidence for the exciton dissociation, which influences the Jsc and is used as a measure of photoinduced charge transfer between the donor and acceptor interface present in the active layer. PL was measured to investigate the exciton dissociation efficiency. Fig. 6 shows the PL spectra of spin coated (PorCOOH)(BDP)2 (THF cast) and (PorCOOH)(BDP)2:PC71BM (1:1) (THF and pyridine–THF cast) blend films. As can be seen from this figure, pristine (PorCOOH)(BDP)2 showed PL with a peak at around 664 nm. Upon blending (PorCOOH)(BDP)2 with PC71BM, the PL peak is quenched. The degree of quenching is more with the addition of pyridine. This effective PL quenching suggests that the exciton separation was highly efficient in the active layer cast from pyridine–THF as compared to that for the THF cast active layer. More effective quenching in the pyridine–THF cast film than in THF cast film implies two possibilities: (i) better exciton dissociation in the pyridine–THF cast film, and (ii) a larger interfacial area between the (PorCOOH)(BDP)2 and PC71BM through the optimal nanoscale phase separation. The former could be ruled out, because this is mainly the energy difference between the HOMO of the donor and the LUMO of the acceptor used in the blend. The second mechanism is mainly responsible for the effective PL quenching as confirmed from the active layer film morphological studies. Thus the optimized phase separation and crystallinity of the active layer are important factors for efficient exciton dissociation. The morphology and quenching of PL intensity revealed that the active layer processed with pyridine–THF exhibits more favorable features for higher Jsc.
We further studied the effect of pyridine on the charge generation in the (PorCOOH)(BDP)2:PC71BM BHJ solar cells by investigating the saturation point where the internal field is large enough to sweep out all the carriers to the electrodes prior to recombination. Fig. 7 shows the variation of photocurrent density (Jph) with the internal voltage (Vint) of the device processed with and without additives, under illumination at 100 mW cm−2. The Jph value is estimated as Jph = JL–Jd, where JL and Jd are the current density under illumination and in the dark, respectively. The Vint value is determined as Vint = Vo − V, where Vo is the voltage at which the Jph value is zero and V is the applied voltage. Therefore, Vint corresponds to the strength of the electric field within the device to extract the charge carriers. As it can be seen from Fig. 7, the Jph value increases linearly with voltage at low Vint, but saturates at high Vint (1.8 V or higher). Therefore, we assume that almost all the photogenerated charge carriers within the device are collected at high Vint and Jph saturated and independent of Vint. The Jph at Vint = 3.2 V is found to be about 12 mA cm−2 and 9.8 mA cm−2 for the devices, processed with and without pyridine additives, respectively, suggesting that the charge generation in the devices is influenced by the solvent additives. The charge collection probability (Pc) of the solar cells based on the active layers processed with and without pyridine additives was estimated by Pc = Jsc/Jph,sat, and was found to be about 0.87 and 0.78, respectively. The low charge generation could be explained in terms of deficient photon absorption and/or charge separation. Concerning the former parameter, the UV-visible absorption bands of the (PorCOOH)(BDP)2:PC71BM BHJ active layer processed with pyridine additives are stronger than those of the corresponding processed without additives (see Fig. 2) proving that there is indeed a difference in photon absorption. Nevertheless, the charge separation is another significant parameter that cannot be neglected, as there is a difference between the two devices in terms of domain size of the phase separation, as confirmed by AFM images, which is critical for charge recombination. So as the excitons are generated away from the D/A interfaces, they are not able to reach the interfaces in the large domain size of phase separation in the device processed in THF and the chances of recombination before the excitons are dissociated into free charge carriers are increased. However, the solvent additive reduces this domain size and increases the D/A interfacial area, so that, more excitons are dissociated into free charge carriers.
The charge carrier mobility in the BHJ active layer is critical in the BHJ organic solar cell efficiency because the photogenerated charge extract at the electrode depends on the competition between carrier sweep out, which is limited by the carrier mobility, and the loss of photogenerated carriers by recombination. The hole and electron mobility of the optimized (PorCOOH)(BDP)2:PC71BM BHJ active layer processed with and without pyridine additives were estimated by the space charge limited current (SCLC) method (J–V characteristics in the dark) using the hole only device (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/(PorCOOH)(BDP)2:PC71BM/Au) and the electron only device (ITO/Al/(PorCOOH)(BDP)2:PC71BM/Al), respectively. The results were analyzed using the SCLC model described by the Mott–Gurney law which includes a small field dependent term, as shown in the following equation.
where
εrεo is the dielectric permittivity of the active layer, L is the thickness of the active layer, Vapp is the applied voltage, Vbi is the built in voltage, μo is the zero field mobility, and β is the field activation factor.

The J–V characteristics of the hole only device in the dark are shown in Fig. 8. The fitting of the experimental results (solid lines) revealed that the hole mobilities are found to be 8.5 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 8.15 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the device without and with pyridine additives, respectively. The increase in the pyridine additives agrees well with the results revealed by the morphology analysis, in which the domain size and the crystallinity decreases and increases, respectively with the pyridine additives. The electron mobility of the active layer processed with and without pyridine additives is quite similar, i.e. 2.29 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 2.34 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. The ratios of electron to hole mobilities in the active layer processed with and without additives were found to be about 2.80 and 27.53, respectively. Therefore it seems that in the active layer processed with pyridine, the charge carrier transports in the donor (holes) and acceptor (electrons) phase are more balanced as compared to the active layer processed without pyridine, a feature that increases Jsc and FF values, of the device, leading to a higher overall PCE value.
We finally investigated the variation of Jsc as a function of illumination intensity to gain insight into the charge recombination kinetics occurring in the device. The dependence of Jsc on the light intensity is shown in Fig. 9, in which the data (open circles) are plotted on the log–log scale and fitted to a power law (solid lines). Generally, a power law dependence of Jsc upon light intensity (I) is observed in organic solar cells, i.e. Jsc ∝ Iγ. For an ideal solar cell, the exponential factor (γ) must be unity which is indicative of efficient sweep out of carriers prior to recombination. From Fig. 9, we have extracted the values of the exponential factor for the devices processed with and without pyridine additives and were found to be 0.93 and 0.84, respectively. The increase in the exponential factor i.e. closer to unity for the device processed with pyridine additives implies that the sweep out and extraction of charge carriers are more efficient in this device as compared to the device processed without additives. This is in agreement with the balanced charge transport observed from the mobility measurement. The deviation from γ = 1 in the device based on the active layer processed without additives suggests that the bimolecular recombination is more important in this device. Unbalanced hole and electron mobilities in this device, as discussed earlier, can also be attributed to the deviation of the γ value from unity.
We have estimated the series resistance (Rs) and shunt resistance (Rsh) from the slope of the J–V characteristics of devices, under illumination, around the Voc and Jsc, respectively and complied in Table 1. In general, the Rs of the organic solar cell composed of the bulk resistance of the active layer depends on the charge transport ability within the active layer and the morphology of the active layer. It can be seen from Table 1 that Rs of the device processed with pyridine–THF solvent is significantly lower than that processed with THF, and may be attributed to better morphology and balanced charge transport. Therefore, a higher boiling point of pyridine offers more time for the adjustment of molecular aggregation to improve the morphology and the interpenetrating pathway network for charge transport, reducing the Rs and increasing the Jsc and FF. The increase in Rsh is related to the decrease in leakage current and depends on the intermolecular interaction (or electronic) coupling between the donor and acceptor materials in the active layer. Therefore, the slight decrease in the Voc value for the device processed with additives could be due to the increasing intermolecular interaction between the donor and the acceptor.

In this report, we presented the use of (PorCOOH)(BDP)2 as an electron donor for the fabrication of solution processed BHJ solar cells, along with PC71BM as an electron acceptor. The optical and electrochemical properties of (PorCOOH)(BDP)2 suggest that (PorCOOH)(BDP)2:PC71BM blend can effectively harvest photons and transfer electrons from (PorCOOH)(BDP)2 to PC71BM, resulting in a photovoltaic effect. The solar cell based on a (PorCOOH)(BDP)2:PC71BM BHJ active layer with an optimized 1:1 weight ratio, processed with THF, displayed a PCE value of 3.48%. In order to improve the efficiency of this organic solar cell, the (PorCOOH)(BDP)2:PC71BM BHJ active layer was processed with a solvent mixture of 4% v/v of pyridine in THF. The PCE value of the resulting solar cell was improved up to 5.29%, as a result of the enhancement of its Jsc and FF values, parameters that are related to the charge generation/separation/mobility/transport are found to be significantly improved by the morphology and crystallinity change in the active layer upon addition of pyridine.


All synthetic manipulations were carried out using standard Schlenk techniques under a nitrogen atmosphere. 2,4,6-Trichloro-1,3,5-triazine (cyanuric chloride), diisopropylamine (DIPEA), PC71BM, and other chemicals and solvents were purchased from usual commercial sources and used as received, unless otherwise stated. 4-Aminophenyl-boron dipyrrin (BDP), 5-(4-carboxyphenyl)-15-(4-aminophenyl)-10,20-bis(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)-porphyrin (PorCOOH) and triad PorCOOH(BDP)2 were prepared according to literature procedures. Tetrahydrofurane (THF) was freshly distilled from Na/benzophenone.


UV-vis absorption spectra were recorded on a Shimadzu UV-1700 spectrophotometer using 10 mm path-length cuvettes.


The BHJ organic solar cells were fabricated using the glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PPT:PC71BM/Al device architecture. The indium tin oxide (ITO) patterned substrates were cleaned by ultrasonic treatment in aqueous detergent, deionized water, isopropyl alcohol, and acetone sequentially, and finally dried under ambient conditions. The anode consisted of glass substrates percolated with ITO, modified by spin coating with a PEDOT:PSS layer (60 nm) as a hole transport layer and heated for 10 min at 100 °C. Mixtures of (PorCOOH)(BDP)2 with PC71BM with weight ratios of 1:0.5, 1:1, and 1:1.5 in THF were prepared and then spin-cast onto the PEDOT:PSS layer and dried overnight in an ambient atmosphere. For the (PorCOOH)(BDP)2:PC71 BM blend processed with 1, 2, 3, 4% and 5% v/v of pyridine in the THF solvent mixture only the 1:1 weight ratio mixture was used. The total concentration of the mixture was 10 mg mL−1 for each active layer. The approximate thickness of the active layers was 90 nm. Finally, the aluminum (Al) top electrode was thermally deposited on the active layer at a vacuum of 10−5 Torr through a shadow mask area of 0.20 mm2. All devices were fabricated and tested in an ambient atmosphere without encapsulation. The hole-only and electron-only devices with ITO/PEDOT:PSS/(PorCOOH)(BDP)2:PC71BM/Au and ITO/Al/(PorCOOH)(BDP)2:PC71BM/Al architectures were also fabricated in a similar way, in order to measure the hole and electron mobility, respectively.


The current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the BHJ organic solar cells were measured using a computer controlled Keithley 238 source meter in the dark and under a simulated AM 1.5G illumination of 100 mW cm−2. A xenon light source coupled with the optical filter was used to give the stimulated irradiance at the surface of the devices. The incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) of the devices was measured illuminating the device through the light source and the monochromator and the resulting current was measured using a Keithley electrometer under short circuit conditions.


XRD measurements were recorded using a Bruker D8 Advanced model diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.542 Å) at a generator voltage of 40 kV.


Financial support from the European Commission (FP7-REGPOT-2008-1, Project BIOSOLENUTI No. 229927) is greatly acknowledged. This research has also been co-financed by the European Union (European Social Fund) and Greek national funds (Heraklitos II) through the Operational Program “Education and Lifelong Learning” of the National Strategic Reference Framework Research Funding Program (THALIS-UOA-MIS 377252).


† To the memory of our colleague and friend, John Mikroyannidis.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015