 DOI: 10.1039/C7TC05276F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 2311-2318


Ju
Huang
,

Chunhua
Wang
,

Ziye
Liu
,

Xueqing
Qiu
*,

Junliang
Yang
* and 

Jingjing
Chang
*

School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Guangdong Pharmaceutical University, Guangzhou 510006, China

Hunan Key Laboratory for Super-Microstructure and Ultrafast Process, School of Physics and Electronics, Central South University, Changsha 410083, China. E-mail: junliang.yang@csu.edu.cn

State Key Discipline Laboratory of Wide Band Gap Semiconductor Technology, Shaanxi Joint Key Laboratory of Graphene, School of Microelectronics, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China. E-mail: jjingchang@xidian.edu.cn

State Key Laboratory of Pulp and Paper Engineering, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, China. E-mail: xueqingqiu66@163.com

Received
18th November 2017
, Accepted 24th January 2018
First published on 25th January 2018
Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) is widely applied in inverted perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Its relatively low work function (WF) and high hydrophilicity hinder the achievement of high power conversion efficiency and device stability. This article describes a novel and readily available approach to enhancing the WF and waterproofness of PEDOT by copolymerising dopamine (DA) with a PEDOT backbone via an efficient radical coupling reaction between 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT), DA and sustainable lignosulfonate as the dopant under mild oxidation. The product, PDA:PEDOT:LS, had a WF of 5.45 eV due to electron transfer in the phenol–quinone–PEDOT backbone. The open-circuit voltage of PDA:PEDOT:LS was 1.02 V, compared with 0.86 V for PEDOT:PSS, and it had a higher power conversion efficiency. PDA:PEDOT:LS exhibited much lower acidity, with a pH of 5.3, excellent waterproofness and lowered hydrophilicity due to the cross-linking copolymerisation between 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT), DA and lignosulfonate. The greater waterproofness will have a key practical application in improving the durability of PSC devices.

In recent years, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have become a focus of both fundamental research and industrial applications as a promising renewable energy source. In view of the clear advantages of PSCs, including low-cost manufacture, low weight and flexibility, the most important issues to be solved are power conversion efficiency (PCE) and device durability.

The organic hole extract layer (HEL), which realises directional hole migration and transport, plays a key role in improving the PCE by optimising the anode interface and achieving energy level matching. For the conventional type of PSCs, the PCE has greatly increased from 3.8% to 22.1% based on doped 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9-spirobifluorene-(Spiro-OMeTAD) as the HEL. However, taking into account the high cost and poor device stability due to the spongy nature of doped Spiro-OMeTAD, an alternative cheap and efficient HEL is urgently needed.
For the inverted planar heterojunction PSCs, the PCE using poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) as the HEL is limited by the relatively lower open-circuit voltage (Voc) compared with that of TiO2-based mesoporous PSCs. In addition, as reported previously, PEDOT:PSS is one of the most widely used HELs, but the high acidity and water absorption corrode indium-tin oxide (ITO), which seriously reduces device durability. Some shortcomings of the material itself, such as the insulation of PSS, have led to poor electrical/electronic homogeneity in PEDOT:PSS, as noted in previous studies. Lignosulfonate (LS), a branched macromolecule, has been considered as a potential alternative to PSS to improve homogeneity. Li's group reported that when PEDOT:LS was applied as an alternative to PEDOT:PSS, the performance was comparable to that of PEDOT:PSS.
Dopamine (DA), a monomer with an o-dihydroxybenzene group and an amino group, has the potential to act as an anode modifier to enhance hole transport. It is readily oxidised and spontaneously self-polymerises into polydopamine (PDA), which is insoluble in water. Furthermore, PDA is capable of fine-tuning electronic properties such as the work function (WF), due to electron transfer during the conversion between phenol and quinone. Motivated by the factors mentioned above, we copolymerised DA with PEDOT:LS with the aim of changing the WF of PEDOT:LS (see the preparation of Scheme 1). In addition, we hypothesised that the basicity of DA would reduce the acidity and hydrophilicity of PEDOT:LS, and the intrinsic crosslinking effect between LS, DA and PEDOT would potentially produce waterproofness, which is important for enhancing the durability of PSC devices. The detailed mechanism for these effects was carefully studied and is discussed below.
Electron transfer in the cross-linked PDA:PEDOT:LS copolymerisation is shown in Scheme 1c. Quinone electrochemistry has been studied and has revealed interesting potential for applications in charge transport materials, as well as in energy storage materials. Lignin and LS can be readily self-crosslinked or crosslinked with another monomer under mild oxidation, microwave or heating conditions. We therefore chose LS as the dopant for dopamine copolymerised PEDOT, as the cross-linking effect would provide the water resistance of the entire polymer after the rapid thermal annealing of PDA:PEDOT:LS, similar to that of PEDOT:PSS. The raw materials for the synthesis of PDA:PEDOT:LS are presented in Scheme 1. The energy levels of the materials used in the PSCs are shown in Scheme 1c.

An aqueous dispersion of PDA:PEDOT:LS was prepared via the polymerisation of 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT) and DA monomer using LS as the dispersant and template. To verify the successful preparation of our product, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) was performed. The result is shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). The bending vibration peak of PDA:PEDOT:LS at 892 cm−1 disappeared, compared with EDOT. As a result of the LS doping, the stretching vibration absorption band of the thiophene ring changed. The weak absorption band between 700 and 800 cm−1 indicated that the hydrogen of the aromatic ring was replaced after polymerisation. The peak around 3349 cm−1 can be attributed to amidogen and disappeared in the spectra of PDA:PEDOT:LS. The strong absorption at 1630 cm−1 can be attributed to the indole structure due to the self-polymerisation of DA. The peak at 2924 cm−1 was considered to be the stretching vibration of methyl and methylene of LS. The absorption intensity strengthened at 1092 and 980 cm−1, which we attributed to the stretching modes of the SO bond in sulfonic groups in LS.

UV-vis spectra were used to further confirm the structure of PDA:PEDOT:LS. The UV-vis spectra of aqueous dispersions of PEDOT:PSS and PDA:PEDOT:LS are shown in Fig. S2 (ESI). PDA:PEDOT:LS showed stronger absorption than the commercial PEDOT:PSS in the UV-vis range, and a visible region between 250 and 600 nm, owing to the π–π conjugate in the complex lignin structure (Fig. S1, ESI) and the absorption resulting from PDA in that region. Thus, more light was absorbed in our system. As expected, a bipolaron absorption band at 800 nm was present in all spectra, which was ascribed to the π–π transition in the PEDOT polymer chain. PEDOT:PSS and PDA:PEDOT:LS in aqueous dispersions showed broad absorption from 600 to 900 nm. The results suggest that our products were successfully prepared.

Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was used to study the redox process of our product. PDA:PEDOT:LS was deposited on a working electrode in 0.1 M Bu4NPF6 (in CH2Cl2) solution; the results are shown in Fig. 1. PEDOT:LS exhibited an onset potential at 0.67 V, which means that its WF is 5.37 eV according to the empirical formula. The CV of PEDOT:LS did not show a reversible curve due to the nonreversible oxidation process of LS. In obvious contrast, in the presence and after copolymerisation of PDA, a quasi-reversible oxidation process occurred. The oxidation curve of PDA:PEDOT:LS showed an oxidation potential at 0.75 V. Consequently, its WF was determined as 5.45 eV, higher than that of PEDOT:LS. We reasoned that the WF of PDA was enhanced after copolymerisation with PEDOT. More interestingly, PDA improved the reversibility of the oxidation process. The reversibility of PDA:PEDOT:LS was still obvious after multi-circle scanning. In comparison, there was no obvious initial oxidation potential in the CV curve of PEDOT:PSS, but rather good repeatability. The underlying reason is that PEDOT:PSS is more like a polymer with high conductivity. PDA:PEDOT:LS was semi-conductive, similar to typical triphenylamine derivatives, which exhibit excellent hole transport properties and stability.


The surface morphologies of PEDOT:PSS and PDA:PEDOT:LS were obtained by atomic force microscopy (AFM) (Fig. 2). PEDOT:PSS was observed to be a long-chain compound and its surface was quite smooth. In contrast, PDA:PEDOT:LS was composed of many compact nano-aggregates with a uniform distribution, so the surface was rougher than that of PEDOT:PSS. More obvious spherical particles and less roughness were observed after the introduction of PDA. A waterproofness test and a static contact angle test were conducted. The difference in water erosion effect on PEDOT:PSS and PDA:PEDOT:LS could clearly be observed. There was almost no change in the PDA:PEDOT:LS film, unlike PEDOT:PSS under the same conditions (see Fig. 3).


The conductivities of the PEDOT:PSS and PDA:PEDOT:LS film samples are shown in Table S1 (ESI). It can be seen that the conductivity of the PDA:PEDOT:LS film (0.004 S cm−1) is lower than that of PEDOT:PSS (0.02 S cm−1).


As shown in Fig. 4, the absorption of PDA:PEDOT:LS showed a downward trend from 600 to 900 nm, similar to PEDOT:PSS in the transmittance spectra. Both were lower than the blank glass substrate. As shown in Fig. 5, the pH of the samples was measured by dropping them on pH indicator paper. The pH of PDA:PEDOT:LS was about 5, as expected, which was obviously higher than that of PEDOT:PSS (close to 1). It is assumed that the alkaline electron-rich amino group of dopamine reduced the acidity of the solution.


The fabrication of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite films was carried out in a N2-filled glove box (both H2O and O2 <1.0 ppm). To obtain high-quality perovskite films, a solvent-induced fast-crystallisation deposition technique was used during the preparation of the CH3NH3PbI3 thin films. Anhydrous chlorobenzene (∼65 μL) was quickly dropped onto a substrate covered with perovskite solution during the spin process to induce fast crystallisation. The surface morphologies of the CH3NH3PbI3 films deposited onto PEDOT:PSS and PDA:PEDOT:LS are shown in Fig. 6a and b. A compact and uniform hole-free CH3NH3PbI3 film was obtained on the two types of HTL. The size distribution of CH3NH3PbI3 grains is shown in the inset in Fig. 6b. It can be seen that the crystal size of the CH3NH3PbI3 films deposited on the two HTLs is very similar, with average grain sizes of 220 nm and 225 nm, respectively. Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra and PL time decay traces, for which tests were carried out under laser excitation at 408 nm, are shown in Fig. 6c and d, respectively. Both CH3NH3PbI3 films exhibit a peak at ∼800 nm, in accordance with the band gap of CH3NH3PbI3. Similar PL peaks and intensities were observed for the two CH3NH3PbI3 films (Fig. 6c), indicating that the inner recombination mechanism was not affected by the different HTL layers. Fig. 6d presents time-resolved traces for both perovskite films. Exponential fits were used to quantify the carrier dynamics and evaluate the carrier lifetime. The PL lifetime reduced slightly with PDA:PEDOT:LS as the HTL, from 11.2 ns to 9.8 ns, suggesting that PDA:PEDOT:LS/CH3NH3PbI3 enhanced the hole extraction and transport.

Based on the same preparation conditions, planar heterojunction (PHJ) PSCs with an architecture of ITO/HTLs/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Al were fabricated via a one-step low-temperature, solution process to check the influence of the HTLs on the device performance. The photovoltaic device preparation process (except HTLs) was completed in a N2-filled glove box. The typical J–V curves of the PHJ-PSCs based on PEDOT:PSS and PDA:PEDOT:LS as the HTL, for which the measurement was carried out at 300 mV s−1 from −1.5 V to +1.5 V under AM 1.5 illumination, are shown in Fig. 7. For the reference device with PEDOT:PSS as the HTL (Fig. 6a), the Voc, short circuit current (Jsc) and fill factor (FF) were 0.86 V, 20.62 mA cm−2, and 67.5%, respectively, resulting in a PCE of 11.98%. Using PDA:PEDOT:LS instead of PEDOT:PSS slightly improved the photoelectric performance. Fig. 7b presents the J–V curve of the champion PHJ-PSCs device using PDA:PEDOT:LS, which had a PCE of 12.05% with a Voc of 1.02 V, Jsc of 18.19 mA cm−2 and FF of 65.14%, respectively. The change trends for Voc and PCE are shown in Fig. 7c. The results of measurements under different scan speeds are shown in Fig. 7d. PCEs of 12.05%, 12.05%, 11.95%, and 11.83% were obtained at scan speeds of 500 mV s−1, 300 mV s−1, 150 mV s−1, and 100 mV s−1, respectively. These results indicate that PHJ-PSCs based on PDA:PEDOT:LS had negligible hysteresis regardless of the scan direction or scan speed.
To objectively evaluate the photovoltaic performance, the distributions of performance parameters are shown in Fig. 8, and detailed performance parameters typical of PHJ-PSCs are presented in Table 1. It should be noted that Voc increased after replacing PEDOT:PSS with PDA:PEDOT:LS, with the average Voc improving from 0.86 V to 1.00 V (Fig. 8 and Table 1), and the average PCE sharply increased to 11.45% from a reference PCE of 10.92%, representing impressive improvements in the average Voc and PCE of 16.3% and 4.9%, respectively. The increase in Voc can be attributed to the enhancement of WF (Fig. 5), given that it would reduce the energy loss during hole migration from CH3NH3PbI3 to HTL.
Sample

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
PEDOT:PSS
0.86
20.32
68.53
11.98 (10.92 ± 0.52)

PDA:PEDOT:LS

1.02
18.19
65.14
12.05 (11.45 ± 0.51)

UV radiation on the PSCs is a crucial factor in poor device stability as it can accelerate the degradation of the perovskite layer. Interestingly, lignin and LS are untraditional luminogens with strong UV-absorptivity and green-yellow fluorescence. We therefore studied the effects of the waterproofness and UV-absorptivity of LS on the degradation of the pervoskite layer. The normalised UV-vis absorption spectra of PEDOT:PSS and PDA:PEDOT:LS in aqueous solutions are shown in Fig. S2 (ESI). Compared with PSS, LS and PDA showed obviously higher absorbance from 250 nm to 500 nm. Compared with PEDOT:PSS, the absorptivity of PDA:PEDOT:LS in both UV and visible areas will stabilise the PSCs. Meanwhile, the greatly improved waterproofness of the PDA:PEDOT:LS film will greatly contribute to device stability. The results of our device durability test including the normalised stability characteristics of the PSCs using a PEDOT:PSS control and PDA:PEDOT:LS as the HTLs are shown in Fig. 9. Under UV 254 nm irradiation in air conditions, the devices without encapsulation using PDA:PEDOT:LS as the HTL were more durable than those using PEDOT:PSS.

It is known that the conductivity of PEDOT-based HELs strongly correlates with the doping ratio of the dopant. It was confirmed that the conductivity of PDA:PEDOT:LS is 0.08, which is higher than that of PEDOT:PSS. Another sample, PDA:PEDOT:LS-h, in which the amount of LS was three times greater than in PDA:PEDOT:LS and the other components were unchanged, was fabricated according to the method described in the Experimental section. The conductivity was enhanced and the work function is around 5.15 eV. In order to further improve the device performance, PDA:PEDOT:LS-h was applied as the HTL in a device (ITO/HEL/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/PC61BM/BCP/Ag). As a result, PDA:PEDOT:LS-h showed a higher PCE and better device durability and the details are discussed in the following part.
The UV-vis spectra of PDA:PEDOT:LS-h aqueous dispersions are shown in Fig. S3 (ESI), which indicated that there is absorption from 600 to 900 nm. The CV spectra of PDA:PEDOT:LS-h are displayed in Fig. S4 (ESI), and the onset oxidation potential was determined as 0.34 V vs. SCE. The work function (WF) of PDA:PEDOT:LS-h was estimated as 5.14 eV, which was lower than 5.45 eV of PDA:PEDOT:LS. It is gratifying that the film was still stable after running 30 repetitive CV cycles. Moreover, Kelvin probe measurements were carried out to further verify the results. The WF of PDA:PEDOT:LS-h is 5.15 eV, which is lower than PDA:PEDOT:LS (5.31 eV).
The device performances and average J–V curves of the PSCs with PEDOT:PSS and PDA:PEDOT:LS-h as the HELs are presented in Fig. S5 and S6 (ESI). The enhanced conductivity of PDA:PEDOT:LS-h contributes to higher Jsc values of the devices compared to PEDOT:PSS. However, the Voc showed no increase in comparison to PEDOT:PSS as they showed a similar work function. The PCE was enhanced to 13.42% with a Voc of 0.96 V, Jsc of 19.69 mA cm−2, and FF of 0.71, while the PEDOT:PSS-based devices had a PCE of 12.39%. The steady output characteristics and the hysteresis behaviour of the devices were also checked. The results are shown in Fig. S7 (ESI). At a voltage bias of 0.77 V, the Jsc and PCE of the PDA:PEDOT:LS-h-based devices remained stable after a 130 s scan, and a PCE of over 13.31% was demonstrated compared to 12.81% for the PEDOT:PSS-based devices. Only a small hysteresis could be observed between reverse and forward scans for the different HELs. The stability of the devices was tested by storing the unencapsulated devices under ambient air conditions (≤30 RH%) for 32 days, and taking measurements under ambient conditions. The results are summarised in Fig. S8 (ESI). It can be seen that the use of PDA:PEDOT:LS-h dramatically improved device stability compared to PEDOT:PSS. After 32 days aging, the PCE and Jsc of the devices remained almost unchanged, compared to reductions of 58.1% in PCE and 72.5% in Jsc for PEDOT:PSS.

3,4-Ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT), with a purity of 99.5%, was bought from Energy Chemical Co., Ltd (Shanghai, China). 3-Hydroxytyramine hydrochloride (DA), with a purity of 98%, was bought from Energy Chemical Co., Ltd (Shanghai, China), and kept at 0 °C. Ammonium persulfate (APS) was supplied by Sigma. All other chemicals were of analytical grade, including hydrochloric acid (HCl) of 36.5 wt%. The water used in the laboratory was deionised. Patterned ITO glass substrates were supplied by NSG group. PEDOT:PSS (Clevios PVP Al 4083) was purchased from Heraeus Holding GmbH. Methylammonium iodide (MAI) was obtained from Dyesol Ltd. [6,6]-Phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) was bought from ADS. Other materials, including high quality lead(II) iodide (highly purified PbI2 crystal, 99.999% purity), lead chloride (PbCl2, 99.999%, Sigma), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, anhydrous, ≥99.9% purity), γ-butyrolactone (GBL, ≥99% purity), rhodamine 101, LiF (≥99% purity), chlorobenzene (anhydrous, 99.8% purity) and isopropanol (IPA), (anhydrous, 99.5% purity), were supplied by Sigma-Aldrich.


LS (2 g) was dissolved in 250 mL of distilled water, then EDOT monomer (1 g) was added with slow stirring for 30 min and the pH value of the solution was adjusted to 2 with aqueous HCl. Then, 2.17 g of oxidant APS solution was slowly added to the mixed solution at high stirring speed. After stirring for 24 h, the solution gradually turned dark blue. The DA·HCl monomer (0.2 g) was injected into the above solution and the reaction lasted for another 12 h. The purified product was obtained by dialysis. Finally, we obtained deep black PDA:PEDOT:LS with good water solubility.


The complex was prepared following a procedure similar to that described above. The only difference was the ratio of the amount of LS:EDOT:DA, which was changed from 2:1:0.2 to 6:1:0.2.


The infrared spectra of the samples were recorded using Fourier transform infrared spectrometry (XL/I-series/Spectrum2000; Thermo Nicolet Co., Madison, WI, USA). A mixture of the sample and KBr was dried and tableted for infrared spectrum analysis, recording between 4000 and 500 cm−1. The UV-vis absorption spectra of PDA:PEDOT:LS and the commercial product PEDOT:PSS-4083 in aqueous dispersions were measured using a UV-3600 spectrophotometer (Shimadzu, Japan), and the transmittance spectra of PDA:PEDOT:LS and PEDOT:PSS-4083 films were tested with a UV-2600 spectrophotometer (Shimadzu, Japan). A dynamic light scattering (DLS) experiment was performed to measure the particle size. Cyclic voltammetry measurement was made with a CH760D Electrochemical Workstation (CH Instruments, Austin, Texas, USA). Ag/AgCl and Pt were chosen as the reference electrode and counter electrode, respectively. A glassy carbon electrode acted as a working electrode. The purified product was dropped onto the surface of a prepolished glassy carbon electrode, followed by natural drying. CV curves in 0.1 M Bu4NPF6 (in CH2Cl2) at a scanning rate of 100 mV s−1 were obtained. For PDA:PEDOT:LS-h, CV measurement was performed with a CHI600D electrochemical Workstation (shanghai CH instruments Co., China). A saturated calomel electrode (SCE) and Pt were chosen as the reference electrode and counter electrode, respectively. A glassy carbon electrode acted as a working electrode. The morphology of the samples was observed by AFM using a Park XE-100 instrument in tapping mode. The sample films were spin-cast on the ITO-coated glass substrate. The conductivities of the sample films were determined by a four-point probe. The work function of different HELs-modified ITO was measured by scanning Kelvin probe force microscopy (SKP5050, Cross-Tech).


PEDOT:PSS and PDA:PEDOT:LS films were prepared by dropping their dispersed solution onto the ITO treated substrate and drying at room temperature. The coated samples were then annealed on a constant-temperature heating plate at 140 °C for 15 min, which is consistent with the device conditions. The samples were then placed in water and their condition was recorded every 5 min.


For the inverted PSC structure: ITO/HTL/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Al, indium tin oxide (ITO) substrates were ultrasonically cleaned with acetone, detergents, distilled water and isopropyl alcohol for 20 min, respectively. After the cleaning and drying by nitrogen flow, the ITO-coated substrates were treated with UV-ozone for 20 min to remove the organic substance. The HTL materials PEDOT:PSS and PDA:PEDOT:LS were spin-coated onto the ITO substrate, and then annealed on a hot plate at 150 °C for 15 min and 110 °C for 10 min, respectively, resulting in a thickness of about 35 nm for PEDOT:PSS and 30 nm for PDA:PEDOT:LS. It is noted that the PEDOT:PSS solution was agitated for 20 min and the PDA:PEDOT:LS solution was ultrasonically treated for 10 min before spin-coating. The solvent-induced-fast-crystallization deposition method was used to fabricate the perovskite layer to obtain dense and smooth high-quality perovskite films in a nitrogen-filled glovebox (both H2O and O2 <1.0 ppm), and ca. 300 nm thick red brown CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite films can be ultimately obtained. PCBM solution was spin-coated onto a perovskite layer at a speed of 3000 rpm for 30 s, resulting in a thickness about 30 nm. Finally, a 100 nm Al electrode was deposited by thermal evaporation under a vacuum of about 8.0 × 10−6 mbar, the active area of the devices is 0.09 cm2, determined by the size of the Al pads.

For the fabrication of inverted planar heterojunction solar cells (ITO/HELs/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/PC61BM/BCP/Ag), the bottom of the ITO-coated glass electrodes was cleaned first by acetone, de-ionized water and isopropyl alcohol, then the surface was treated in UV-ozone plasma. PDA:PEDOT:LS-h and PEDOT:PSS were spin-coated onto separate preprocessed ITO glass electrodes, the latter for comparative experiments. Then, the coated samples were annealed on a constant-temperature heating plate at 140 °C for 15 min to make the excess solvent evaporate. Following this, they were quickly put into a glove box filled with pure N2. A CH3NH3PbI3−xClx precursor solution (1.26 M PbI2, 0.14 M PbCl2 and 1.35 M MAI in a co-solvent of DMSO:GBL at a volume ratio of 3:7) was also spin-coated to overlap the modified ITO substrate to form a perovskite layer of about 280 nm. A PCBM layer (∼55 nm) was spin-coated onto the surface of the perovskite layer after annealing at 100 °C for 20 min. Finally, 0.5 mg mL−1 BCP solution was spin-coated onto the PCBM layer. The devices were completed by thermal deposition of a layer of 100 nm of Ag as a cathode in a vacuum of <1 × 10−6 Torr. The device areas were 0.07 cm2 as defined by a shadow mask.
The J–V curves of the devices were tested with an SS-F5 solar simulator. The photovoltaic performance of the PSCs was measured using a computer-programmed Keithley 2400 source/meter and a Newport's Oriel class solar simulator in air, which simulated AM1.5 sunlight with an energy density of 100 mW cm−2 and was certified to the JIS C 8912 standard. The IPCEs of the PSCs were measured using a 300 W xenon lamp (Oriel 6258) and a Cornerstone 260 Oriel 74125 monochromator. The photovoltaic stability of the PSCs was investigated in ambient air by storing the unencapsulated devices in a desiccator with relative humidity less than 30 RH%. The UV-visible absorption spectra were measured using a Perkin-Elmer Lambda 950 spectrophotometer. Photoluminescence spectra in which the excitation wavelength was 630 nm were measured by an Edinburgh Instruments FLS920 spectrofluorometer. SEM images were collected on a JSM-7800F scanning electron microscope. Thin film X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were obtained on a Bruker D8 Advance XRD instrument.

Based on our previous finding that LS can act as a dopant for PEDOT because it shows p-type charge-transport capability with impressive hole mobility, dopamine was selected to copolymerise with EDOT to prepare PDA:PEDOT:LS, which has a different backbone from PEDOT:PSS. We report an approach to increase the WF and waterproofness of water-dispersed PEDOT. The product PDA:PEDOT:LS, with a WF of 5.45 eV, matched well with the valence band of the perovskite layer. Moreover, the PDA:PEDOT:LS-based PSC exhibited enhanced PCE due to an enhanced Voc of 1.02 V. Furthermore, PDA:PEDOT:LS had lower acidity, with a pH value of 5.2–5.4, and excellent waterproofness and a lower hydrophilicity. Significantly enhanced waterproofness is desired to improve the device durability of PVSCs. These results encourage us to modify PEDOT:PSS to solve the disadvantages such as acidity, low work function and limited intrinsic conductivity of 4083 in the future tailoring of its chemical structure.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors gratefully thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51203026, 51673214 and 21401029) and the Program for Young Innovation Scholars of Guangdong Province (No. 2014KQNCX144) for the financial support.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7tc05276f
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018