 DOI: 10.1039/C9NR10382A
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 7330-7338


Han
Pan
,

Xiaojuan
Zhao
,

Gong
Xiu
,

Hao
Li
,

Xiao Li
Zhang
,

Guijie
Liang
,

Yan
Shen
 and 

Mingkui
Wang
*

Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, School of Optoelectronic Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China. E-mail: mingkui.wang@mail.hust.edu.cn

Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Utah State University, Logan, Utah 84322, USA

State Centre for International Cooperation on Designer Low-Carbon and Environmental Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhengzhou University, 450001, China

Hubei Key Laboratory of Low Dimensional Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, Hubei University of Arts and Science, Xiangyang, Hubei 441053, China

Received
7th December 2019
, Accepted 8th March 2020
First published on 9th March 2020
Layered Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) phase perovskites, with a formula of A′2MAn−1Pbn3n+1 (where A′ is an organic cation, MA is methylammonium, n is the integer for the number of inorganic sheets [PbI6] between the organic cation spacers), are of high interest due to their chemical stability. However, the low-n phases (e.g., n = 1, 2) not only act as carrier traps, but also hinder carrier transport within the layered RP perovskites, leading to a decreased photovoltaic performance for their corresponding devices. Herein, we report that a solvent additive-induced Ostwald ripening process effectively promotes the reduction of low-n phases and uniform RP perovskites composition. Note that the solvent added, such as ethylene glycol as an example, should have selective solubility to organic cations, and be less volatile but have a higher boiling point than the host solvents such as N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF). During fast spin-coating at room temperature, the host solvent DMF quickly evaporates while the low-n phase perovskite films are formed due to a smaller nucleation barrier, allowing the contained solvent additive, ethylene glycol, to act as a plasticizer. Then, annealing at 100 °C, causes a slow release of the restrained solvent additive which recrystallizes the perovskite grains with low-n phases into high-n phases (e.g., n ≥3) in the (ClPEA)2MA3Pb4I13 (where ClPEA is 2-(4-chlorophenyl)ethanaminium) layered RP phase perovskites. When used in solar cells, the device with a configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/RP perovskite/PC61BM/BCP/Ag showed an enhanced 11% power conversion efficiency, which can be attributed to the decreased trap-state density and the increased carrier transport induced by the solvent additive.

Three-dimensional (3D) AMX3 (where A stands for methylammonium (MA), formamidinium (FA) or cesium (Cs), M for Pb2+ or Sn2+, X for a halide anion) has achieved rapid progress in photon-to-electron conversion efficiency due to its outstanding optoelectronic properties, such as high absorption coefficient, long carrier lifetime and diffusion length, and high defect tolerance. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) based on (CsFAMA)PbIxBr3−x organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite has reached 25.2%. Unfortunately, when the relevant hygroscopic organic compositions are exposed to environmental moisture, they can accelerate the decomposition of the 3D organic–inorganic hybrid halide lead perovskite compounds, which limits large-scale deployment of this emerging technology to commercialization.

To address the above mentioned issues, the layered Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) perovskites, containing sheets of 3D phases sandwiched by long organic ligands, have been introduced for solar cell applications. The hydrophobic ligands, such as long alkyl chains or cyclic ammonium cations, could slow down the permeation of moisture into the active layers and thus reduce the decomposition of perovskite compounds. The chemical formula of RP perovskites is generally given as (A′)2(MA)n−1MnX3n+1, where A′ is a spacer cation such as C6H5(CH2)2NH3+ (PEA+), CH3(CH2)2NH3+, etc., and the integer n is the number of inorganic sheets [PbI6] between the organic cation spacers. Although a large-sized organic cation with the capacity of impeding the erosion of perovskites by water could largely improve device stability, the device efficiency is lower than that of 3D PSCs. This could be attributed to the fact that layered RP perovskite films are actually composed of multiple perovskite phases (with n = 1, 2, 3, 4 to near ∞), in which the low-n phases (n = 1, 2) could act as traps to easily capture charge carriers. When the free carriers funnel into the low n phases surrounded by a high n phase environment, it is hard for them to move toward the contact electrodes due to the existence of an energy band structure, which consequently degrades the photovoltaic device performance. Additionally, the low-n phases always exhibit in-plane orientation in spite of using a hot-casting deposition method which is widely used to promote the out-of-plane orientation of high-n phases (n ≥ 3) in RP pervoskites. In an in-plane orientation, the insulating spacer blocks the movement of charge carriers to the electrode. Therefore, it is necessary to reduce the low-n phases in the resulting RP perovskites.
PEA-based organic cations have been widely investigated since their first introduction into RP perovskites. Significant progress has been made with PEA-based RP perovskites by means of optimization of constituents and processing conditions. For example, Quan et al. focused on tailoring the value n of PEA-based RP perovskites to obtain efficient and stable devices. Moreover, chemical tuning of PEA+ has also been explored. Furthermore, Zhang et al. used NH4SCN as an additive to induce vertical orientation of perovskites with PEA. Very recently, efforts have been made to chemically tune spacer cations to have an impact on the structure of RP perovskites and the performance of related devices. Yet, investigations to control low-n phases in the PEA-based perovskites has barely been demonstrated.
In this work, we report an approach, i.e., solvent additive-induced Ostwald ripening, to suppress the low-n phases in layered RP perovskite films. The solvent additive has two central properties: one is that the solvent additive can selectively dissolve ClPEAI (where ClPEA is 2-(4-chlorophenyl)ethanaminium) and MAI instead of PbI2; and the other is that the solvent additive is less volatile but has a higher boiling point than the host solvents such as N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF). Herein, we used ethylene glycol (EG) as the solvent additive as an example to demonstrate the validity of this approach. During spin-coating at room temperature, the host solvent DMF evaporates quickly, leaving EG embedded in the low-n phase perovskites. Based on the Ostwald ripening model, EG induces a dissolution recrystallization process in which the low-n phases recrystallize into high-n phases (n ≥ 3) in the (ClPEA)2MA3Pb4I13 perovskite. This treatment (abbreviated as “EG treated” below) makes a perovskite with reduced low-n phases and more uniform composition. This results in a notable improvement in power conversion efficiency for the solar cell device with EG treatment.

Briefly, the layered RP (ClPEA)2MA3Pb4I13 perovskite thin films were fabricated by a fast spin-coating mixture of ClPEAI, MAI, and PbI2 with a molar ratio of 2:3:4 in DMF containing various amounts of EG, followed by annealing treatment at 100 °C for 15 minutes. We first carried out photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy characterization on the films deposited onto glass substrates to probe the phase distribution of RP perovskite with various n values. The film thickness with and without EG treatment was 305 ± 4 nm and 295 ± 5 nm, respectively. We defined photo-illumination (laser beam with 532 nm) from the air side as front-excitation and from the glass substrate side as back-excitation. In the case of front-excitation, both samples with and without EG exhibited a main peak at ∼760 nm (Fig. 1a). The observed strong PL intensity with a narrow half peak width for the perovskite films with EG treatment indicates its high-quality. The PL peaks were significantly quenched after deposition onto ITO/PEDOT:PSS, suggesting the remarkable charge transfer from the absorber layer to the charge collection layer. In the case of back-excitation, three additional emission peaks were observed for the perovskite films without EG, corresponding to the RP phases with n = 2, 3 and 4 (Fig. 1b). This result clearly demonstrates the preferred location of low-n phases close to the substrates, and high-n phases at the upper surface of the RP perovskite film. Impressively, the RP perovskite with EG showed negligible emission peaks attributed to low-n phases (Fig. 1b). This implies that adding EG into the precursor solution induces a uniform composition for RP (ClPEA)2MA3Pb4I13 perovskite films. Fig. 1c shows the UV-vis absorption spectrum of the corresponding perovskite films. Obviously, there are 4 excitonic peaks at ∼518 nm, ∼567 nm, ∼610 nm, ∼648 nm and ∼758 nm, which could be assigned to the single phase with n = 1, 2, 3, 4 and ∞, respectively. The treatment with EG increases the absorbance peak intensity at 610 nm, 648 nm, and 758 nm, but decreases the peak intensity at 518 nm and 567 nm. This clearly verifies that the EG treatment can reduce the low-n phases as well as increase large-n phases.

Furthermore, we studied the effect of EG on perovskite formation with X-ray diffraction (XRD) characterization. The (ClPEA)2MA3Pb4I13 films were deposited onto substrates with spin-coating technology at RT and then further annealed at 100 °C for 5 min, 10 min and 15 min. As shown in Fig. 1d, the EG treated samples after annealing for different time exhibited strong diffraction peaks around 14.3° and 28.6° corresponding to the (111) and (202) planes, respectively. Fig. 1d shows the XRD pattern in a small angle (from 4.5° to 13°). For the film without annealing processess, the diffraction peaks at ∼5.2° and 10.4° can be ascribed to the (100) and (200) planes in the n = 1 phase, respectively, and the peaks at ∼7.8° and 11.7° to the (200) and (300) planes in the n = 2 phase, respectively, and the peak at ∼6.4° to the (200) plane in the n = 3 phase RP perovskite compounds. This matches well with the calculated diffraction peaks for the RP perovskite with n = 1, 2 and 3. By annealing films for 5 min, the XRD peaks corresponding to the n = 1 phase disappeared. It is the same with the n = 2 phase for 10 min. This could be due to a gradually reduced amount of the n = 1 and 2 phases by heat treatment. Upon further increasing the annealing time for 15 min, no diffraction peaks in a small angle could be detected, which probably results from vertical growth of the perovskite compounds. For comparison purpose, we studied the XRD pattern of the samples without EG addition. The XRD patterns in a large angle showed the same trend with those of the samples with EG (Fig. S1). However, those peaks in a small angle corresponding to the n = 1, 2 and 3 phases could be detected during the whole post-annealing process (Fig. 1e). As EG is capable of dissolving ClPEA+ and MA+, we presume the EG induces a dissolution–recrystallization process based on the Ostwald ripening model which could be the potential origin of the above-mentioned diffraction change. Specifically, DMF evaporates first during the spin-coating process, accompanied with the formation of low-n phase RP perovskite crystals due to the lower nucleation barrier (Fig. 2a and b). In this period EG is embedded in the intermediates due to its higher boiling point (197.3 °C) and lower saturated vapor pressure (0.06 Torr at 20 °C) compared to the host solvent DMF with a boiling point of 152 °C and saturated vapor pressure of 2.7 Torr at 20 °C.
The presence of EG was further confirmed by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) characterization. Fig. 3a shows the OH stretching vibrations from EG at 3435 cm−1. After annealing, these representative peaks of EG disappeared, thus confirming the removal of EG during the conversion of the intermediate phase to the final perovskite compounds. We further verified the interaction between the hydroxyl of EG and the benzene ring of ClPEA+via the O–H⋯π hydrogen bond using liquid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. Fig. 3b shows the 1H NMR of perovskite components, without and with EG, in deuterium with DMSO. Clearly, in the case of EG-free samples, the chemical shift for proton signals from the benzene ring are located at δ = 7.34, 7.33, 7.28, and 7.26 ppm. For the samples with EG, these characteristic peaks shifted to lower values at δ = 7.31, 7.29, 7.24, and 7.22 ppm. The phenomena could be rationalized by the de-shielding effect of O–H⋯π hydrogen bonds, which increases the electron density of the benzene ring and causes the chemical shift of 1H NMR for the benzene ring to move higher. This clarifies that EG remains in the intermediate via hydrogen bond interactions with the organic cation ClPEA+ during the perovskite film preparation. This type of interaction has been widely observed by others. For example, the hydrogen bond (X–H⋯Y, where X and Y stand for electronegative atoms) strength rests with the Lewis acidity of the X–H bond and on the Lewis basicity of the Y center. Therefore, herein we propose ClPEA+ not only interacts with inorganic sheets via the N–H⋯I hydrogen bond, but also with EG via the O–H⋯π hydrogen bond in the transformation states. Considering the Lewis acidity of the O–H bond being stronger than that of N–H and the Lewis basicity of the π center being stronger than that of the I center, the interaction between ClPEA+ and EG becomes stronger than that between ClPEA+ and the inorganic sheets. Therefore, the ClPEA+ cations of low-n phase perovskites can be easily dissolved within EG and can readily escape from the inorganic sheets. Consequently, upon annealing what we expect is that the high-n phase RP perovskite can self-assemble into perovskite crystalline thin layer. The concentration of the dissolved ClPEA+ near the low-n phases is always higher than that near high-n phases on the air side. The concentration gradient leads to mass transport of ClPEA+ along the vertical direction of the perovskite according to Fick's first law. For the components rich in MA near the air side, the migrated ClPEA+ suppresses the formation of high-n phases (e.g., n = 6, 7, …) because of the competition between ClPEA+ and MA+ (Fig. 2c and d). Thus, the EG treated perovskites possess reduced low-n phases and a more uniform composition.
Herein, the effect of the solvent additive can be verified easily by comparing common solvents used in perovskite device fabrication, such as ethanol and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). Ethanol can selectively dissolve ClPEAI and MAI, and has higher volatility (43.5 Torr at 20 °C) with a lower boiling point (78 °C) than the host solvent DMF. In contrast, DMSO has less volatility (0.42 Torr at 20 °C) with a higher boiling point (189 °C) than DMF, and possesses high solubility towards both PbI2 and organic components. We conducted PL tests of perovskite films treated with ethanol or DMSO in a back-excitation model. As shown in Fig. S2, the emission peaks of low-n phases were found in both films. This indicates that these kind of solvent additives could not induce the formation of a uniform phase distribution of RP perovskites. The details are discussed in the ESI.
Fig. S3 depicts the top surface scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images for the samples with and without EG treatment. Both films showed smoothness and compact surface coverage. The film with EG treatment possesses uniform and large crystal grains. The time-resolved PL decay (TRPL) measurement with excitation at 470 nm, 125 kHz, 1 μJ cm−2 (n ∼ 5 × 1016 cm−3) was carried out to quantify the carrier dynamic fitted by a bi-exponential decay function: Y = A1exp(−t/τ1) + A2exp(−t/τ2) + y0 (Fig. S4). The fast decay component (τ1) is associated with surface recombination, and the slow decay component (τ2) is attributed to the bulk component recombination process, and A1 and A2 are the relative amplitudes. The EG treated film shows longer carrier lifetimes of τ1 = 34.7 ns and τ2 = 92.1 ns compared with the film without EG treatment (τ1 = 10.2 ns and τ2 = 27.8 ns). The longer lifetime indicates a reduced recombination which is related to a lower defect density, in favour of carrier transport.
Furthermore, we investigated the recombination of films from TRPL curves with the recombination rate equation
(1)
where
n is the charge carrier density, t is the time, and k1, k2, k3 are the monomolecular, bimolecular and Auger recombination rate constants, respectively. We focus on the monomolecular and bimolecular recombination. k1 is related to the exciton, free electron or hole. As the low-n phase perovskites have high exciton binding energy at RT and may act as traps, the obtained k1 for the film decreases from 1.65 × 107 s−1 to 0.50 × 107 s−1via EG treatment presumably due to the reduction of low-n phases. The bimolecular rates for the perovskite without and with EG treatment were estimated to be 1.67 × 10−9 s−1 and 1.00 × 10−9 s−1, respectively. The lower k2 of the perovskite films with EG treatment could be attributed to their high-quality crystalline properties.

The corresponding device photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table S1 and S2. The device with moderate EG exhibited improved efficiency. Specifically, the reference device without EG exhibited a PCE of 7.9% with an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.94 V, short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 12.41 mA cm−2, and fill factor (FF) of 0.68. The optimized device with an EG ratio of 2% yielded an enhanced PCE of 11% with a Voc of 1.01 V, Jsc of 15.456 mA cm−2, and FF of 0.71. Moreover, the average PCE (∼10.89%) of the EG treated device was about 45% higher than that of reference devices (∼7.56%) and exhibited highly efficient reproducibility. This could result from the reduction of low-n phases in the layered RP perovskites. Besides, the photocurrent hysteresis behaviour of the devices with treated EG has been suppressed (Fig. 4a). This could originate from the reduced defects of perovskites acting as traps for charges and the efficient charge transfer in the perovskite films as discussed below. Fig. 4b shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) (the left coordinate) and the integrated photocurrent curve (the right coordinate) for the devices treated with and without EG. The EQE of the devices treated with EG showed a much improved spectra response in the wavelength range 600–780 nm, from which the obtained integrated currents match well with the Jsc values from J–V characterization.
The density of trap states (NT) in the perovskite films was estimated from the angular-frequency-dependent capacitance (Fig. S5b) according to eqn (1)
(2)
where
q is the elementary charge of the electron, C is the capacitance, ω is the frequency, k is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature. Eω (Eω = ET − EV) denotes the difference between trap energy (ET) and the valence band edge (EV). The Vbi and W represent the built-in potential and depletion width, respectively, which can be measured with a Mott–Schottky plot (Fig. S5a). The Vbi of perovskite cells with EG treatment was found to be 0.977 V, larger than that of the device without treatment (0.853 V). A large Vbi contributes to charge separation and collection and further attains a high Voc and FF. As shown in Fig. 4c, the introduction of EG could reduce the trap density by nearly an order of magnitude to around Ew = 0.15 eV, corresponding to a shallow trap state, which could partly explain the decrease in photocurrent hysteresis.

Photocurrent density (Jph) versus effective voltage (Veff) was examined to investigate the photoexcitation behavior of the devices with and without EG treatment. The Jph is defined as Jph = JL − JD, where JL and JD are the current density under AM 1.5G illumination, and in the dark, respectively. And Veff is calculated by Veff = V0 − V, where V0 is the voltage at Jph = 0, and V is the applied bias. Jsat is the saturation current density at large Veff. As shown in Fig. 4d, the Jph/Jsat ratio increases from 98.2% to 99.8% under the short circuit condition after EG treatment, indicating the enhancement of exciton dissociation efficiency, and from 85.4% to 89.8% under the maximal power output condition, suggesting the increase of the charge collection efficiency. The optimized results of the device with EG treatment are consistent with higher FF.
Electronic impedance spectroscopy (EIS) characterization was further carried out to investigate the charge transfer and recombination. Fig. 5a shows the Nyquist plots of the devices under the same forward bias (−0.85 V) serving as an example. The first arc in the high frequency region is possibly associated with the charge transport which is represented as contact resistance (RCE), at the HTM /ITO and ETL/Ag interface. The second arc in the intermediate frequency region is assigned to the charge recombination process in the HTM/perovskite and ETL/perovskite interface, expressed by the recombination resistance (RCT). As the resistance-capacitance (RC) time constant of the two arcs are close to each other, the two arcs look like a compressed semicircle. The third semicircle in the low frequency region is attributed to ion migration in the perovskite layer. The inset of Fig. 5c shows the equivalent circuits for impedance spectroscopy dates. The EG treated device possesses a larger charge recombination resistance (RCT) compared with the device without EG treatment as shown in Fig. S6, indicating a retarded interfacial charge recombination and better charge transport at the perovskite/selective contact interface. The result could be ascribed to the decreased proportion of low-n phases acting as trap states, and the increased proportion of high-n phases favouring the charge transport in the EG treated perovskites.
Transient photovoltage/photocurrent decay (TPV/TPC) measurements were further performed to characterize the charge transport in the RP perovskite devices. Fig. 5b presents the charge recombination lifetimes of the device with and without EG treatment, which were obtained by fitting the TPV. The device with EG treatment shows longer recombination lifetime of both the electron and hole (τrec,electron, ∼228.0 μs at 770 mV, τrec,hole, ∼15.9 μs at 770 mV), than that of the device without EG treatment (τrec,electron, ∼157.0 μs at 770 mV, τrec,hole, ∼8.6 μs at 770 mV) at the same forward bias, indicating that the device with EG treatment has less defect traps or less recombination at the PEDOT:PSS/perovskite and perovskite/PCBM interface. This could explain the improvement of VOC and FF for the devices with EG treatment. Similarly, in Fig. 5c, the charge transport lifetimes were obtained by fitting the TPC. We can find that the charge transport lifetimes of the devices with EG treatment are shorter (τtr,electron, ∼10.7 μs at 770 mV; τtr,hole, ∼2.2 μs at 770 mV) than those of the devices without EG treatment (τtr,electron, ∼15.2 μs at 770 mV; τtr,hole, ∼4.2 μs at 770 mV). A fast charge transport lifetime indicates enhanced charge collection and transport performance, which could explain the increase in Jsc. Besides, the diffusion length (L) of the devices could be calculated based on:
(3)
where
d is the film thickness. After EG treatment, the electron and hole diffusion length increased from 628 to 903 nm and 280 to 526 nm, respectively, which contributes to improved charge collection (Fig. 5d). The EG treated devices exhibit higher electron mobility (μe = 1.76 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1) and hole mobility (μh = 1.72 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1) compared to those without EG treatment (μe = 1.22 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, μh = 2.73 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) obtained from electron-only and hole-only devices (Fig. S7). The higher charge carrier mobility could be ascribed to the decrease of the low-n phases.

To investigate the phase stability, the devices with and without EG treatment were kept working for 300 s under simulated AM 1.5G illumination at a forward bias of −0.8 V in Ar. Then we carried out PL spectroscopy measurements of these cells. Compared with the before-work and after-work dates of the back-excitation, we found the intensity of emission peaks of the RP phases with n = 2, 3 and 4 increases in the perovskite without EG treatment (Fig. 6a). We speculate that this probably derives from inefficient hole transfer and increased hole accumulation. The excess carrier would induce the perovskite instability. While for the perovskite with EG treatment, the PL is almost the same before and after working for 300 s (Fig. 6b). In addition, the perovskite devices without encapsulation were stored in air with 40% humidity under dark conditions to test the ambient stability. The devices with and without EG treatment maintained 90% and 83% of their original efficiency after 1000 h, respectively (in Fig. S8). The improved ambient stability of the devices with EG treatment is probably ascribed to the reduced defeat of the perovskite film which resists the erosion of water molecules.
The solvent additive-induced Ostwald ripening process to suppress low-n phase perovskites can be extended to new compounds of other cations. For instance, we fabricated various layered Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites using n-butylammonium (BA) and phenylethyl ammonium (PEA) as the cations (Fig. S9). Table S3 lists the corresponding devices photovoltaic performance. Clearly, the devices using the layered perovskites treated with EG exhibited much improved power conversion efficiency. After EG treatment, the average PCE of the devices based on BA increased from 6.41% to 8.32%, and those of the devices based on PEA increased from 7.25% to 9.47%. We believe the easy preparation of perovskite film without high annealing temperatures could be capable of large-scale production of layered RP perovskite solar cells on flexible substrates.

This work illustrates that a solvent additive-induced Ostwald ripening process can initiate the reduction of low-n phases and a more uniform composition in RP (ClPEA)2MA3Pb4I13 perovskites. Because the low-n phases can act as hole traps and hinder the charge transport in PSCs, the formation of solvent additive EG treated device suppresses the low-n phases process and reduces the density of trap states, improving charge mobility. The EG treated devices have achieved a PCE of 11%, showing near 40% enhancement compared with the devices without EG treatment. Our work provides a direction for boosting the photovoltaic performance of layered RP perovskites.


The authors declare no competing financial interest.


Financial support from the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2018YFB1502900), the National Natural Science Foundation of China Major International (Regional) Joint Research Project (no. 51661135023 and 51961165106), and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 21673091 and 21975088) is acknowledged. This project was also funded by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2018KFYXKJC034 and 2019kfyRCPY040) and the double first-class research funding of the China-EU Institute for Clean and Renewable Energy (3011187029). The authors thank the Analytical and Testing Centre of Huazhong University of Science and Technology and the Nano-devices and Characterization Centre of WNLO-HUST for the measurements of the samples.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9nr10382a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020