 DOI: 10.1039/D2SE01043G
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2022, 6, 4962-4969


Shun-Hsiang
Yang
,

Chia-Hao
Tsai
,

Xiao-Feng
Wang
,

Tai-Chou
Lee
 and 

Cheng-Liang
Liu
*

Department of Chemical and Materials Engineering, National Central University, Taoyuan 32001, Taiwan

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan. E-mail: liucl@ntu.edu.tw

Key Laboratory of Physics and Technology for Advanced Batteries (Ministry of Education), College of Physics, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China

Received
27th July 2022
, Accepted 25th September 2022
First published on 30th September 2022
The scaling up of perovskite films to generate prototypes with large surface area requires the development of scalable solution-processing techniques along with the optimization of precursor solution formulations to achieve enhanced performance and stability. Herein, high-quality and uniform perovskite films are realized by ambient ultrasonic spray deposition without the need for an antisolvent by using various amounts of the ionic liquid 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (BMIMBF4) as the additive. The concentration of BMIMBF4 in the precursor solution is found to affect the morphologies and photoexcited lifetimes of the resulting spray-coated films. With the addition of the optimal amount of BMIMBF4 (0.30 mol%) and the use of vacuum-assisted solvent extraction, the power conversion efficiency of the device reaches 17.43% with negligible hysteresis, and over 86% of the initial efficiency is retained after 386 h of operation under ambient conditions. This demonstrates that the use of a limited amount of ionic liquid additive can help to improve the crystallinity and reduce the trapping state density of the perovskite film, and to suppress the formation of PbI2 during the perovskite crystallization process. However, higher BMIMBF4 contents lead to negative effects on the perovskite morphology. Finally, the perovskite film formed from the 0.30 mol% BMIMBF4-containing solution is scaled to a large area of 5 × 10 cm2 and cut into 8 samples to achieve a consistent device performance with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 14.83 ± 0.62%. These findings demonstrate that the rational control of the additive-containing perovskite ink composition and upscaling of the thin film deposition is essential for the large-scale manufacturing of perovskite layers for future commercialization of perovskite photovoltaics.

Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites are poised to generate a significant breakthrough in the field of solar cell technology due to their superior sunlight-to-electricity conversion efficiencies and dramatically reduced production costs via solution-based processing, thereby offering the possibility for fast, industrial-scale production. Most perovskite thin film coatings currently employed in the laboratory-scale fabrication of cells are prepared using spin-coating – a simple and reliable technique capable of producing uniform films, but generally only suitable for the coating of small substrates. Hence, research efforts are now geared towards the investigation of scalable coating methods. Thus, a recently developed precision spray-coating method has been employed for the high-speed coating of large-area substrates for both traditional and inverted planar perovskite solar cells with high solution utilization and low waste. Process optimization, which is mainly aimed at accelerating the evaporation of the precursor solvent, along with rational precursor formulation (i.e., perovskite composition, solvents, and additives), have enabled the deposition of high-quality perovskite layers with higher power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) in the photovoltaic devices. In addition, approaches for addressing the various challenges in the spray-coating of all layers of the perovskite solar cells (including charge transport layer or electrode), and for module representation have been proposed.

Nevertheless, while the proposed techniques have shown notable progress in upscaling perovskite solar cells, the resulting PCEs continue to lag behind those of the small-scale devices fabricated by spin-coating. To control the growth and morphology of the perovskite crystals, and further improve the photovoltaic performance and stability of the device, ionic liquids that combine large, asymmetric imidazolium-containing organic cations with various anions have been proposed and developed as functional additives or solvents in the precursor solution. In 2019, Snaith et al. incorporated the triple cation-containing ionic liquid 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (BMIMBF4) into a perovskite absorber to obtain an enhanced PCE of up to 19.8% in the complete photovoltaic cell. Moreover, the initial PCE of the BMIMBF4-containing inverted perovskite solar cell was reduced by only around 5% under continuous illumination for more than 1800 h. This demonstrated the stabilization of the perovskite by the formation of chemical bonds with the additive, thereby suppressing the formation of defects in the perovskite crystal and impeding the interface-related energy loss.
Given that such ionic liquid additives might also be used to enhance the efficiency and stability of large-area, spray-coated perovskite solar cells, a detailed investigation on how the thin film conditions and device performance are influenced by the amount of ionic liquid in the precursor solution is required. Hence, in the present work, ultrasonic spray-coated perovskite thin films are successfully fabricated under ambient conditions from BMIMBF4-containing precursor solutions (with the molar concentration between 0.15 to 0.60 mol%). In addition, the use of vacuum-assisted extraction after spraying is shown to accelerate the solvent evaporation process and contributes to the crystal nucleation and growth. Further, the introduction of the BMIMBF4 additive is shown to improve the morphology and optoelectronic properties of the spray-coated perovskite film. The results demonstrate that the presence of BMIMBF4 leads to the passivation of defects and enhanced crystallinity, thereby improving the energy band alignment at the perovskite/charge transport layer interface. Moreover, a stronger photoluminescence (PL) intensity and prolonged lifetime demonstrate the suppression of non-radiative recombination in the perovskite layer. Consequently, the perovskite device with a low BMIMBF4 concentration of 0.30 mol% is shown to provide the highest PCE of 17.43% by increasing both the short-circuit current (Jsc) and the open-circuit voltage (Voc). More importantly, the optimized device provides a significantly enhanced stability, retaining 86% of its initial efficiency after 386 h under dark ambient conditions. Thus, the spray-coating of the perovskite film from the optimized precursor formulation helps to minimize the PCE loss arising from the scaling-up process and demonstrates a highly consistent device performance.

A planar device structure with an inverted p–i–n architecture (ITO glass/NiOx/perovskite/C60/BCP/Ag) was used for perovskite solar cells and prepared under ambient conditions (relative humidity, approximately 40%; temperature, 25 °C). Specifically, ITO glass was cleaned with acetone, isopropanol, and deionized water. The cleaning time is at least 10 min for each step. After O2 plasma treatment of ITO glasses for 6 min, a thin NiOx HTL was coated on pre-cleaned ITO by spinning a precursor solution containing nickel(II) 2,4-pentanedionate (51.2 mg; Alfa Aesar, 95%) in ethanol (2 ml) and hydrochloric acid (20.8 μL) and annealed at 100 °C for 8 min and 350 °C for 1 h under ambient. To form the pristine perovskite precursor solutions, methylammonium iodide (MAI; GreatCell Solar) and lead iodide (PbI2; Alfa Aesar, 99.9985%) were mixed at a 1:1 stoichiometric ratio in a mixed organic solvent system (24% in anhydrous DMF:NMP = 8:9 (v/v)) together with 5% of methylammonium chloride (MACl; Alfa Aesar, 99%) additive. In parallel, the 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (BMIMBF4; Aldrich, >97%) ionic liquid-containing perovskite precursor solutions were prepared by dissolving the same perovskite components as the non-ionic liquid containing perovskite precursor solutions in the DMF/NMP mixed solvent system with BMIMBF4 in the desired molar ratios (0.15, 0.30, 0.45, and 0.60 mol%). The perovskite precursor solutions were stirred overnight and used without any further treatment. The filtered precursor solutions were then injected into an ultrasonic atomizer (Sono-Tek Co.; impact shaping nozzle with actuation frequency of 130 kHz) using a syringe pump with a fixed feed rate of 6 ml h−1. During the spraying process, the substrate temperature was simultaneously set to 40 °C; the nitrogen carrier gas at 0.01 MPa was introduced to help shape the spray droplet beam; the spray head moved over the substrate at a working distance of 4 cm at a scanning rate of 0.5 cm s−1. The entire coating procedure was performed under ambient air. It should be noted that the spray head was placed on a motorized apparatus, which can move in a 2-dimensional plane at a specific scanning speed, facilitating the large area coating by using ultrasonic spraying, and the experimental parameters were the same as the small area coating, except for the moving path of the nozzle. The spray nozzle was scanned in a serpentine pattern with a spacing of 1.8 cm for the large area coating of perovskite film, as shown in Fig. S1. All the perovskite films were baked at 40 °C for 1 min, vacuum extracted for 2 min (final pressure is approximately 0.6 torr), and further annealed at 100 °C for 45 min. The substrates were then transferred to a thermal evaporator, and C60 (20 nm), BCP (7 nm), and Ag (100 nm) were sequentially deposited through a shadow mask under the chamber base pressure maintained at <4 × 10−6 torr.


The photovoltaic measurement was conducted under ambient conditions and without encapsulation under 1 sun illumination from a 300 W Xe lamp (Yamashita Denso YSS-80S, AAA grade) solar simulator as a light source. The AM 1.5G sunlight spectrum was adjusted to be 100 mW cm−2 at the substrate holder based on a calibrated Si reference cell. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves were collected with a Keithley 2400 digital source meter with a voltage sweep between −0.1 and 1.1 V at a scan rate of 0.1 V s−1. The active area was defined by a non-reflective metal mask with an aperture area of 3 × 3 mm2. The device performance parameters were statistically collected based on 15 data points from different cells.


In previous work by the present authors, perovskite films were prepared by ultrasonic spray-coating in ambient air with a relative humidity of ∼40%. The perovskite precursor solution, broken into tens of micron-sized droplets by an ultrasonic nozzle, was uniformly deposited onto the substrate at a constant moving speed to obtain wet films. Typically, the choice of antisolvent for the post-treatment enables further control of the perovskite thin film morphology, which determines the photovoltaic properties. The antisolvent method yields perovskite films with dense and compact grains in a few hundred nanometers range for enhanced device efficiency. However, the antisolvent post-processing uses a large amount of volatile solvent, which causes an unfavorable environmental issue. In the present work, vacuum-assisted solvent extraction is suggested as an alternative strategy, in which the spray-coated wet films are transferred to a chamber from which the air can be extracted by a mechanical pump, followed by thermal annealing.

The photographic and scanning electron microscope (SEM) images in Fig. S2 demonstrate that the use of a well-controlled, abrupt vacuum procedure to evaporate the solvents promptly can accelerate the formation of heterogeneous nucleation sites under the conditions of increased perovskite concentration and fast supersaturation, thereby assisting the growth of perovskite grains with higher crystallinity and fewer non-radiative trap states. Here, the reference perovskite films obtained without vacuum post-treatment exhibit poor coverage and a lack homogeneity (Fig. S2a and S2c), thereby resulting in exposure of the bottom NiOx layer. By contrast, the perovskite films that were post-treated under vacuum exhibit a significantly improved coverage of compact perovskite crystals (Fig. S2b and S2d), which is mainly due to increased nucleation density. The ultra-low humidity atmosphere under low pressure reduces the influence of moisture upon the solvent drying and nucleation processes, even though the spraying process is operated under ambient conditions. From the top-view and cross-sectional SEM images, the vacuum post treatment results in the formation of uniform and pinhole-free perovskite films, thereby providing good contact from the bottom to the top of the channel. Further, the accelerated removal of excess solvent from the substrate under vacuum results in the formation of a dark mirror-like perovskite film (Fig. S2b), in contrast to the hazy and brown film obtained without vacuum post-treatment (Fig. S2a). This is expected to allow enhanced charge transport across the perovskite film to the selective contacts at the interfaces between the perovskite and the hole and electron transport layers. In addition, it clearly demonstrates that the addition of MACl into the PbI2 and MAI precursor solution slows the intermediate-related crystallization during the annealing process, thereby further enhancing the quality of the perovskite films fabricated by the vacuum extraction method.
Thus, the addition of BMIMBF4 improves the precursor solution chemistry and provides further control of the spray-deposited perovskite thin film morphology. The setup for the ultrasonic spraying of the perovskite-forming solution is show ultrasonic spraying of the perovskite-forming solution is show schematically in Fig. 1a. This process, including the addition of MACL and the vacuum-assisted post treatment, was used to fabricate inverted planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells with the ITO/NiOx/CH3NH3PbI3/C60/BCP/Ag device architecture shown schematically in Fig. 1b. Under light illumination, photogenerated excitons in the photoactive perovskite layer can be separated and transported to the lower (hole transport) or upper (electron transport) layer and collected by the indium tin oxide (ITO) and Ag electrodes, respectively. To investigate the effect of the BMIMBF4 concentration on the photovoltaic performance, devices were prepared with concentrations of 0.15, 0.30, 0.45, and 0.60 mol%, and the resulting current density–voltage (J–V) curves were obtained under AM 1.5G conditions are presented in Fig. 2a. For comparison, a control perovskite solar cell was produced without any BMIMBF4. The extracted key photovoltaic parameters, including the open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current (Jsc), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (PCE), are summarized in Table 1 and plotted in Fig. S3 of the ESI Material. In total 15 cells for each concentration of BMIMBF4 were taken into account when calculating the distribution of device performances. Thus, the control perovskite solar cells deliver a maximum PCE of 16.40%, with a Voc of 0.98 V, a Jsc of 21.42 mA cm−2, and an FF of 0.78. With the addition of a small amount of BMIMBF4 (0.15 mol%), the PCE is increased to 16.98%, with Voc, Jsc, and FF values of 1.00 V, 21.90 mA, and 0.78, respectively. However, increasing the BMIMBF4 concentration to 0.30 mol% results in an impressive increase in the PCE (to 17.43%), along with corresponding Voc, Jsc, and FF values of 1.00 V, 22.04 mA cm−2, 0.80, respectively. This is seen to be the optimal result, as further increasing the BMIMBF4 content to 0.45 and 0.60 mol% decreases the PCE slightly to 16.40 and 15.91%, respectively. Even though the addition of ionic liquids and vacuum-assisted thermal annealing can help obtain a perovskite film with uniformity and fewer trap densities, a slightly low Voc of 1.00 V can be ascribed to the surface recombination at the interface between NiOx and perovskite layer. Nickle or oxygen vacancies are considered as surface defects; when holes drift from the perovskite to the NiOx layer, they may be trapped by these defects for possible Voc loss. Moreover, the optimized photovoltaic device exhibits negligible J–V hysteresis between the forward and reverse scan directions (Fig. S4), which may be attributed to the reduced defect density and increased efficiency of charge transport from the perovskite absorber layer, the latter being reflected by the substantially increased Jsc through the optimization of the BMIMBF4 content. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurement of the 0.3 mol% BMIMBF4 is performed to confirm photocurrent density, and the integrated Jsc is 21.16 mA cm−2. This is within a 5% deviation with respect to the J–V curve obtained under simulated illumination. Further, when stored under ambient air with 30–40% relative humidity without encapsulation, the perovskite solar cells incorporating various concentrations of BMIMBF4 exhibit significantly improved stability relative to the control device, maintaining 86% of their initial PCE values after 386 h (Fig. 3).
BMIMBF4 concentration

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
0 mol%
0.98 (0.97 ± 0.01)
21.42 (20.88 ± 0.41)
0.78 (0.77 ± 0.01)
16.40 (15.74 ± 0.43)
0.15 mol%
1.00 (0.99 ± 0.01)
21.90 (21.29 ± 0.28)
0.78 (0.77 ± 0.02)
16.98 (16.20 ± 0.46)
0.30 mol%
1.00 (1.00 ± 0.01)
22.04 (21.52 ± 0.30)
0.8 (0.78 ± 0.01)
17.43 (16.66 ± 0.40)
0.45 mol%
0.99 (0.98 ± 0.01)
21.52 (21.11 ± 0.36)
0.78 (0.76 ± 0.01)
16.40 (15.65 ± 0.52)
0.60 mol%
0.97 (0.97 ± 0.01)
20.65 (20.37 ± 0.60)
0.79 (0.76 ± 0.02)
15.91 (14.93 ± 0.70)
The effects of the BMIMBF4 additive at various concentrations upon the crystallinity and crystal structures of the perovskite films are further elucidated by the XRD patterns in Fig. 4. Here, all the perovskite samples with the BMIMBF4 additive exhibit almost identical diffraction peak positions to those of the control sample, thereby indicating that perovskite crystal structure is not altered by the presence of various concentrations of BMIMBF4, and that the BMIMBF4 functions as an additive rather than a dopant. In detail, two prominent diffraction peaks are observed at 2θ = 14.1° and 28.4°, which can be indexed to reflections of the (110) and (220) crystal planes, respectively. This is consistent with the previously reported data, and indicates a preferred orientation in the (110) direction. Notably, the intensity of the (110) peak is seen to increase with the addition of 0.15–0.30 mol% BMIMBF4, relative to that of the control sample, whereas the addition of higher proportions leads to a decrease in the peak intensity. This demonstrates that the addition of 0.30 mol% BMIMBF4 optimally promotes the phase purity and crystallinity of the perovskite layer and may facilitate the transfer of charge carriers. Moreover, the small peak at 12.6° in the XRD pattern of the control sample can be attributed to the presence of unreacted PbI2, and this peak is seen to decrease in intensity with the addition of BMIMBF4. This suggests that the addition of MACl effectively suppresses the PbI2 crystallization to provide a purer perovskite phase with a higher degree of transformation.
The effects of additive engineering on the morphologies of the perovskite photovoltaic active layers are demonstrated by the cross-sectional SEM images of the complete devices in Fig. S5. In each sample, the thickness of the perovskite layer is around 300 nm, and the perovskite grains appear well-connected, without any differences in vertical grain packing. Further, the effects of BMIMBF4 addition upon the surface morphologies of the perovskite films are revealed by the top-view SEM images in Fig. 5. Here, the addition of up to 0.30 mol% BMIMBF4 results in no obvious changes in morphology relative to that of the control film (Fig. 5a–c). In each case, large areas of smooth, continuous, pinhole-free perovskite films are observed, with dense rounded grains. This smooth perovskite film is expected to be more favorable for charge transfer because it can suppress the energy loss between the domains. However, when the concentration of BMIMBF4 is further increased, numerous sheet-shaped precipitates are generated within the platelet grain boundaries, thereby reducing the smoothness of the perovskite film (Fig. 5d and e). This may be due to the distribution of excess BMIM cations on the surface of film during the crystallization process and becomes more evident with the addition of 0.60 mol% BMIMBF4, which is consistent with the reduced XRD peak intensity.
The optical properties of the spray-coated perovskite films without and with 0.30 mol% BMIMBF4 are revealed by the UV-Vis spectra in Fig. S6a. In each case, the typical broad absorption band of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite film is observed, ranging from 400 to 800 nm, with no change in intensity, shape, or position in the presence of the additive. This is probably due to the relatively similar grain size and thicknesses of the samples. Moreover, there is no shift in the band-edge absorption and band gap, as estimated from the Tauc plot (Fig. S6b).
The effects of BMIMBF4 addition upon the trap passivation and charge extraction process are further elucidated in terms of the Voc and FF values by the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) (Fig. 6a) spectra and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) (Fig. 6b) spectra of the perovskite films deposited on quartz glass. Here, the PL intensity of the film with 0.30 mol% BMIMBF4 exhibits a 10-fold increase relative to that of the control film, thereby confirming that the additive suppresses non-radiative recombination and results in fewer traps and defects. This trap state passivation is further demonstrated by a slight blue-shift in the PL emission peak from 783 nm in the absence of BMIMBF4 to 780 nm in the presence of 0.30 mol% BMIMBF4. Besides, the FWHM values of the perovskite films without and with BMIMBF4 are 50 nm and 43 nm, respectively. The film with the BMIMBF4 treatment has a sharper peak than the pristine one, proving that the BMIMBF4 additive can help passivate the trap states. With respect to carrier recombination, the average lifetime is calculated by fitting the TRPL curves in Fig. 6b with the biexponential decay function:
(1)
where
A1 and A2 are the weighted amplitudes and τ1, and τ2 are the decay time constants. The fitted parameters are summarized in Table S1. Here, the addition of BMIMBF4 is seen to increase τavg by about 2.2 times (from 8.39 to 18.39 ns), thereby enabling better and longer transport of the photogenerated carriers before possible recombination. Overall, the enhanced PL intensity and lifetime of the perovskite film with the BMIMBF4 additive are attributed to the increased crystallinity and the decreased concentration of surface and/or grain-boundary defects.

A further insight into the effects of BMIMBF4 upon the electronic properties of the perovskite is obtained via photoelectron spectroscopy in air (PESA), as shown in Fig. S7a, whereby the energy band gap (Eg) correlated to the difference between the conduction band minimum (CBM) and the valence band maximum (VBM) can be obtained from the corresponding Tauc plots. The detailed energy level diagrams are shown schematically in Fig. S7b. As in the previous report, the up-shifted VBM/CBM position ensures better energy level matching, thereby eliminating the barrier against photogenerated hole/electron extraction from the perovskite to the NiOx/C60. In other words, this result explains the improved charge extraction and small voltage loss at both interfaces with the perovskite layer, thereby contributing to the increased Voc of the device with the BMIMBF4 additive.
The light intensity dependence of the photovoltaic parameter can also be used for understanding the dominant recombination mechanism. The dependence of Voc on the light intensity of the device with and without the BMIMBF4 additive is shown graphically in Fig. 7. Here, the semilogarithmic plot of Voc and Plight exhibits a monotonically linear relationship given by the formula:
Voc ∝ (nkT/q)·ln(Plight)
(2)
where
k is Boltzmann's constant, T is the absolute temperature, q is the elementary charge, and n is the ideality factor. The latter is an indicator of the predominant type of recombination, with n = 1 indicating bimolecular recombination, and n = 2 indicating trap-assisted recombination. As shown in Fig. 7, the perovskite devices with and without 0.30 mol% BMIMBF4 additive have n values of 1.13 and 1.41, respectively, thereby indicating that the BMIMBF4 additive suppresses the trap-assisted recombination.

Finally, the scalability of the ultrasonic spray coating is assessed by fabricating a large-area, BMIMBF4-containing perovskite film (5 × 10 cm2) on an ITO/NiOx substrate. The entire spray deposition process takes about 20 s under ambient conditions because two spray passes are required for deposition onto the upper and lower sides of the substrate. The photographic image of the coated substrate in Fig. 8a reveals a uniform film that is similar to the corresponding small-area film. The large-area perovskite film was then cut into 8 pieces, each with the dimensions of 2.5 × 2.5 cm2, which were used to fabricate and test perovskite devices with active areas of 3 × 3 mm2. The J–V curves of the 8 devices are presented in Fig. S8. It can be found that all the devices on 1–8 substrates exhibit consistent device performance (Fig. 8b) with a maximum PCE of 15.67% and an average PCE of 14.83 ± 0.62%. Commonly, the performance of solution-processed perovskite film deteriorates with increasing film dimension because the induced surface defects trigger charge recombination. Thus, the consistent PCE of the spray-deposited large-area perovskite film at the device level clearly demonstrates that spray-coating is a better technique for obtaining highly scalable and uniform perovskite films.
In summary, the present study has demonstrated the effectiveness of an ionic liquid additive for improving the quality of spray-coated perovskite films and the photovoltaic performance of the corresponding device via defect passivation. The enhanced PCE and stability were attributed to the increased crystallinity and reduced defect density of the perovskite layer. While too small an amount of additive did not afford the trap passivation, and too much additive hindered the charge carrier transport between the perovskite grains, the optimal loading of 0.30 mol% exhibited the desired effects. The results of this study are therefore expected to help advance the progress in spray-coated perovskite solar cells. Moreover, the results suggest that further improvements in device performance might be achieved by extending the proposed strategy to the development of higher-efficiency perovskite compositions (e.g. mixed halide, triple or quadruple cation perovskite absorber). Hence, the use of an ionic liquid additive should become a universal strategy in the fabrication of hybrid perovskite materials with other compositions.

Herein, the ionic liquid 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (BMIMBF4) was introduced as the precursor additive for the fabrication of perovskite films by ultrasonic spray-deposition under ambient conditions, followed by vacuum-assisted solvent extraction. In addition, the corresponding photovoltaic devices were fabricated and characterized. The as-proposed strategy was shown to enable the high-throughput coating of inverted planar structured perovskite solar cells, and to provide high-quality perovskite films. The best-performing device was obtained with the addition of 0.30 mol% BMIMBF4, exhibiting a PCE of 17.43%. This was attributed to the improved crystallinity and decreased number of inherent defects in the perovskite film. Further, the environmental stability of the device was remarkably improved without any encapsulation, with 86% of the initial PCE being retained after 386 h. Moreover, perovskite films that were spray-coated onto large area substrates exhibited a highly consistent PCE of 14.83 ± 0.62%, thereby demonstrating the potential for scalable ambient manufacturing. Hence, the use of an ionic liquid additive provides the potential for the performance improvement of perovskite solar cells via spray-coating technology.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors acknowledge the financial support from the Young Scholar Fellowship Program (Columbus Program) and 2030 Cross-Generation Young Scholars Program by the National Science and Technology Council (NSTC) in Taiwan, under grants 110-2636-E-002-021 and 111-2628-E-002-014, respectively.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See https://doi.org/10.1039/d2se01043g
‡ The authors contributed to this work equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022