 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM35342C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23492-23496

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Zhenhuan
Lu
,

Chuanlang
Zhan
*,

Xiaowei
Yu
,

Weiwei
He
,

Hui
Jia
,

Lili
Chen
,

Ailing
Tang
,

Jianhua
Huang
 and 

Jiannian
Yao
*

Beijing National Laboratory of Molecular Science, CAS Key Laboratory of Photochemistry, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, P. R. China. E-mail: clzhan@iccas.ac.cn; jnyao@iccas.ac.cn; Fax: +86-10-82616517

Received
9th August 2012
, Accepted 18th September 2012
First published on 20th September 2012
Vertically standing π–π stacks play a key role in advancing the charge transporting properties in the fields of some organic materials and devices such as organic solar cells, organic light-emitting diodes and photodetector. However, realization of large-scale, ultra-dense and vertically standing π–π stacks of organic semiconductors is still a big challenge. By using an amide armed ZnPc–COOH molecule, we show herein a facile solution deposition method to prepare large-scale (>2 × 3 mm2), ultra-dense (completely covering the ITO surface) and vertically standing π–π stacks through supramolecular self-assembly. These vertically standing π–π stacks show a high conductivity and hole mobility, of the order of 10−3 S cm−1 and 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, and act as the hole-transporting layer on the ITO electrode in organic solar cells.

Hole and electron transporting properties are determined mainly by the interactive nature of organic semiconductor π-chromophores and optimization of the intermolecular π–π stacking ordering and directions relative to the substrate represents a key issue toward high performance organic electronic materials and devices. For example, being distinctly different from the horizontal π–π stacks along the substrate's surface, π–π stacks standing vertically to the substrate are desired packing arrangements for the charge transporting layer and the active layers in organic solar cells (OSCs), organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs), and photodetectors. These applications not only require perpendicular carrier transport but also require controllable preparation of large-scale, ultra-dense and highly arrayed π–π stacks. Approaches toward the preparation of organic nanoarrays, for example, by molecular beam epitaxy, vapour deposition, electrophoretic deposition, and template method are possible routes towards desired vertically standing π–π stacks relative to the substrate. However, achievement of large-scale, ultra-dense and vertically standing π–π stacks is still a big challenge. Herein, we present a straightforward solution deposition (SD) approach toward large-scale, ultra-dense and vertically standing π–π stacks on indium tin oxide (ITO) substrate.

To form perpendicular π–π stacks and functional nanoarrays, we selected a zinc phthalocyanine (ZnPc) molecule with four terminal carboxylic acid functions armed through four amide bonds (Scheme 1a) as the molecular model. First, the four terminal carboxylic acid functions act as the bonding site to anchor the Pc molecule facing-on the ITO substrate, forming a single molecular layer of ZnPc on the ITO surface (Scheme 1b). Second, co-operations of the strong, hydrophobic π–π stacking interactions provided by the two faces of the ZnPc and the amide-to-amide (Scheme 1c) and carboxylic acid-to-carboxylic acid H-bonds (Scheme 1d) drive formation of coherent, perpendicular π–π stacks on the single molecular layer (Scheme 1c). Third, the terminal carboxylic acid to carboxylic acid H-bonds (Scheme 1d) also provide sticking forces between the vertically standing ZnPc π–π stacks, toward the formation of the large-scale, ultra-dense and highly arrayed π–π stacks (Scheme 1e), and further to nanorod arrays.

The ZnPc nanorod arrays were prepared by immersing detergent/solvent cleaned and UV–ozone (UVO) treated ITO glass substrates into a 0.1 mM solution of ZnPc in methanol (MeOH)–tetrahydrofuran (THF, VMeOH/VTHF = 1/3) for several days (25–30 cm2 ITO glass in 10–20 mL solution). Normally, evaporation of the solvent first produces arrayed ZnPc nanorods, while it also gradually produces disordered ZnPc nanofibers randomly precipitating on the surface of the nanorod-arrays (Fig. S1a, ESI) as the immersion time is increased typically beyond 2 days. Such fibril precipitates can be easily removed by sonicating the ITO glasses in the 1:3 mixed MeOH and THF for several to tens of seconds, while the nanorod-arrays remain attached (Fig. S1b, ESI).

Scanning electron microscopy (SEM, 300 × 300 μm and 5 × 5 μm) (Fig. 1a and b) and atomic force microscopy (AFM, 5 × 5 μm) (Fig. 1d) images both reveal that large-scale, ultra-dense and highly arrayed ZnPc nanorods grow vertically on the ITO substrate, forming a dense nanorod-arrayed ZnPc film. The cross-section view (Fig. 1c) showed both the vertically standing nature and vertically growing nature of the ZnPc nanorods. The typical diameters of the nanorods range from 30 to 45 nm. Fig. 1e and f show high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) images of a typical nanorod. From these images it is seen that the dark dots are highly aligned, forming arrayed dark lines. The sizes of the dots and the dark lines are about 1.0 nm, well consistent with the width of a Pc core, spanning left to right phenyl (Scheme 1), implying that the Pc molecules adopt face-to-face stacking along the dark line. Between two dark lines, the relatively light gap is about 1.6 nm in width, agreeing well with twice the length of a fully extended arm, two of which are connected through carboxylic acid-to-carboxylic acid H-bonds between two Pc molecules (see Scheme 1d and e and also discussion below). The selected area electron diffraction pattern (SAED) (Fig. 1g) indicates the crystalline nature of the nanorods.
How do the Pc molecules interact with the ITO surface and with each other? In MeOH–THF solution the ZnPc molecules are deposited too rapidly to form a single molecular layer. We thus then chose a high boiling-point and low-volatile solvent (DMF) and then immersed the detergent/solvent cleaned and UVO treated ITO substrates into the DMF solution of 0.1 mM ZnPc. Also, DCC (N,N-dicyclohexylcarbodiimide, 4.2 equiv.) and DMAP (4-dimethylaminopyridine, 1.0 equiv.) were both added to catalyse the esterification between carboxylic acid groups of the Pc and hydroxide on the ITO surface. After immersion for 2 days, the ITO substrate became light green from the original light blue. It was then carefully washed with DMF, H2O and THF several times. As shown in Fig. 2a, XPS absorption peaks are evident from ester–O, Sn–O and In–O. However, no obvious hydroxide–O absorption was observed from the ZnPc deposited ITO glass. In comparison, bare ITO glass shows clear hydroxide–O absorption (Fig. 2b). The ester–O absorption clearly reveals the existence of the Pc molecules and formation of the ester functions, whereas no obvious hydroxide–O absorption strongly suggests all the carboxylic acid functions form into esters, evidence of Pc molecules lying on the ITO surface in a face-on mode. Formation of a single molecular layer of ZnPc is further supported by monitoring cyclic voltammetry (CV): from which both the reduction/oxidation current is gradually depressed with the increase of the reaction time, suggesting the gradual coverage of the ZnPc molecules on the ITO surface (Fig. S2, ESI).

Fig. 2c shows the O1s XPS region of the dense nanorod-arrayed ZnPc film, in which the strong absorption of hydroxide–O (533.15 eV) and carbonyl–O (532.08 eV), both come from the aligned ZnPc molecules. The strong absorption from Sn–O (531.80 eV), but the very weak absorption of In–O (530.96 eV) both are in accord with the bonding of the carboxylic acid to the ITO surface. In the XRD pattern (Fig. 2d), the strong diffraction peak appearing at 2θ = 23.37° reveals highly ordered π–π stacking of ZnPc molecules with a face-to-face distance of 0.38 nm. Due to formation of the amide–amide H-bonds, this value is a little larger than the typical π–π stacking distance of 0.34 nm. The broad shoulder around 2θ = 5.44° corresponds to a d-spacing of 1.62 nm, which corresponds to the column-to-column distance between the aligned ZnPc π–π stacks and is consistent with the light gap width between the dark lines observed from the HR-TEM image (Fig. 1f). The FTIR spectrum (Fig. 2e) verifies the specific H-bonding interactions between the ZnPc molecules: the splitting stretching vibrations of the carbonyl group of –COOH, respectively, at 1718 and 1700 cm−1 are characteristics of formation of the laterally H-bonded and bifurcated carboxylic acid, while no free –COOH is observed. The strong vibration band around 3500–3010 cm−1 with a peak at 3317 cm−1 further indicates the presence of H-bonded –OH and –NH functions. The amide-I, -II and -III bands, which appear at 1648, 1546 and 1337 cm−1 respectively, indicate the formation of amide-to-amide H-bonds.
The thickness of the dense nanorod-arrayed ZnPc film is controlled, typically, from 7 nm up to 80 nm by controlling the SD conditions such as solvent evaporation rate and immersion time. As shown in Fig. 2f, the absorption in the region of 320–1000 nm increases continuously with an increase of the average film thickness. The density of the arrayed nanorods can be controlled also by varying the solvent evaporation rate and immersion time (Fig. S3, ESI).
To explore the conductance of the arrayed ZnPc nanorods, we prepared sparse ZnPc nanorod-arrays (Fig. 3a). The conductance of vertically standing nanorods was carried out on an individual basis with a conductive AFM tip (c-AFM, Fig. 3b), and 16 nanorods were measured (Fig. S4 and S5, ESI). Fig. 3c shows two typical current–voltage (I–V) curves, which were obtained from two typical ZnPc nanorods with diameters of 41.2 and 39.5 nm and lengths of 32.7 and 46.0 nm, respectively. Such I–V characteristics are well consistent with the semiconductor nature of ZnPc. The asymmetric nature of the I–V curve is due to the different work functions of the c-AFM tip, ITO glass and ZnPc nanorod: 5.65/5.27 eV for the c-AFM tip (Pt/Ir coated), 4.6 eV for ITO glass and 4.14 eV for ZnPc. These generate different Schottky barriers at the ITO–ZnPc nanorod interface and at the interface of the ZnPc nanorod and the c-AFM tip, and further asymmetric I–V characteristics when scanning the voltage applied on the ITO glass, scanning from −1.5 to 1.5 V.
Statistically, the conductivity (σ) of the 16 ZnPc nanorods is estimated to be of the order of 10−3 S cm−1 (ESI and Table S1), approximately 20–100 times greater than that of an amorphous ZnPc film (av. 2.0 × 10−5 S cm−1) (Fig. S6, ESI). The value of 2.0 × 10−5 S cm−1 is comparable to the reported conductivity of an MPc film, typically, of the order of 10−5 to 10−12 S cm−1. The hole mobilities (μh) of the ZnPc nanorods are also estimated from the space charge limited currents (SCLC) region (I–V2) of the I–V curves (blue lines in Fig. 3c, ESI and Fig. S7). The average μh value of the 16 nanorods is estimated to be 2.9 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Table S1, ESI). This μh value is smaller than the reported values, typically of the order of 10−2 to 101 cm2 V−1 s−1, measured from MPc nanostructures, discotic liquid crystals and bulk crystals, likely due to the larger π–π stacking distance (0.38 nm) in our case. We could not obtain the hole mobility of the amorphous ZnPc film using the SCLC method (Fig. S8, ESI).

Fig. 3d shows that the 16 σ and μh values both linearly depend on the length of the nanorods. This implies that the molecular π–π stacking ordering within the different nanorods are similar to each other, yielding similar hole conductance from the experimental 16 nanorods. Accordingly, our SD method is a highly reliable approach to synthesize crystalline nanorod-arrays, showing high, and especially reproducible hole transporting properties.
Owing to the hole conductivity of the arrayed ZnPC nanorods, we then investigated the possibility of the dense nanorod-arrayed ZnPc film acting as a hole-transporting layer on the ITO substrate for construction of OSCs. This is motivated partially because the traditional, acidic poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) is corrosive to the ITO electrode which has an influence on the device lifetime. The devices were constructed conventionally with the configurations of ITO|dense nanorod-arrayed ZnPc film (av. 36 nm)|poly-(3-hexyl)thiophene (P3HT):[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) (200 nm)|Ca (20 nm)|Al (60 nm). The best OSC, with an active area of 2 × 3 mm2 exhibits a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 7.25 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.58 V, a fill factor (FF) of 0.58, and a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 2.44% (Fig. 4a). Also, the OSCs are reproducible; the average data from 8 devices are: JSC = 7.50 mA cm−2, VOC = 0.56 V, FF = 0.55 and PCE = 2.31%. As controls, conventional OSCs using the traditional constructions of ITO|PEDOT:PSS (30 nm)|P3HT:PCBM (200 nm)|Ca (20 nm)|Al (60 nm) prepared using our equipment gave an average PCE of 3.50% with JSC = 8.18 mA cm−2, VOC = 0.63 V, FF = 0.68 (Fig. 4a). The decrease of the OSC performance using the dense nanorod-arrayed ZnPc film as the hole transporting layer rather than a PEDOT:PSS layer is likely due to (1) the mismatch of the energy levels between ZnPc (LUMO, −3.48 eV; HOMO, −5.22 eV, Fig. S9, ESI), P3HT (LUMO, −2.74 eV; HOMO, −4.76 eV) and PCBM (LUMO, −3.91 eV; HOMO, −5.93 eV)  and (2) the lower conductivity of the ZnPc nanorods (typically, 10−3 S m−1) than that of the PEDOT:PSS film (typically, 10−1 to 102 S m−1). In addition, we replaced the dense nanorod-arrayed ZnPc film (av. 36 nm) with 40 nm amorphous ZnPc film. In this instance, only <10% OSCs were active and the working cells showed very poor photovoltaic properties, for example, with a highest PCE of 0.14, a JSC of 1.71 mA cm−2, a VOC of 0.41 V and FF of 0.20, respectively (Fig. S10, ESI). This strongly suggests the impact of oriented π–π stacks of ZnPC on OSC performance.
In order to more deeply ascertain the role of the dense nanorod-arrayed ZnPc film we measured the external quantum efficiency (EQE) characteristic of the best device based on the dense nanorod-arrayed ZnPc film, for example, as shown in Fig. 4b. The maximum EQE occurs around 550 nm and is as high as 50%, which are both very close to that of the traditional PEDOT:PSS based OSC (550 nm and 53%). The EQE shape from the nanorod-arrayed ZnPc film based device is close to that of a conventional PEDOT:PSS based device. In particular, there are no peaks or even shoulders detected in the wavelength region of 660–750 nm, within which region the dense nanorod-arrayed ZnPc film shows a strong absorption band (Fig. 4b). This indicates that the dense nanorod-arrayed ZnPc films do not participate in the photon-to-current conversion of the solar cell; rather it acts as the hole-transporting layer only.
The film thickness influences the OSC performance significantly. We prepared five dense nanorod-arrayed ZnPc films with different average film thicknesses of 8, 10, 30, 40 and 60 nm, respectively, to construct OSCs with average PCE (of eight devices each) of 1.48, 1.55, 1.86, 2.08 and 1.33%, respectively. Influences of the film thickness are likely due to the surface roughness either from the thinner films because of unmatured depositions (Fig. S11a, ESI) or from the thicker films with some micro-/nano-scale domains of disordered ZnPc nanofibers randomly precipitating on the surface of the nanorod-arrays, which are difficult to remove by sonication (Fig. S11b, ESI).

In conclusion, we have developed a solution deposition approach to prepare large-scale, ultra-dense and vertically standing ZnPc π–π stacks via supramolecular self-assembly, forming ultra-dense nanorod-arrayed ZnPc films on ITO glass substrates. Both the average film thickness and arrayed nanorod density are controlled by the deposition conditions. Hole conductance of the single vertically standing nanorods shows a conductivity and a hole mobility, respectively, of the order of 10−3 S cm−1 and 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1. The large scale, ultra-dense and vertically standing ZnPc π–π stacks can be applied as a hole-transporting layer for the construction of OSCs. Such a low-cost and easy-handling solution deposition method provides a new approach to prepare vertically standing π–π stacks of organic semiconductors with promising charge transporting ability, and accordingly, showing potential applications in the fabrication of high performance organic electronic devices.


This work was financially supported by NSFC (no. 20973182), the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Projects 973 (2011CB808400) and 863 (2009AA03Z323).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, calculations of conductivity and hole mobilities, additional SEM and AFM images, and supporting tables. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm35342c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012