 DOI: 10.1039/C3RA23155K
(Paper)
RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 6036-6043

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


G. D.
Sharma
*,

Surya Prakash
Singh
,

Rajnish
Kurchania
 and 

R. J.
Ball


R & D center for Engineering and Science JEC Group of Colleges, Jaipur Engineering College campus Kukas, Jaipur (Raj.) 303101, India. E-mail: sharmagd_in@yahoo.com; gdsharma273@gmail.com

Inorganic and Physical Chemistry Division, CSIR – Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Uppal Road, Tarnaka, Hyderabad, 500607, India

Department of Physics, Maulana Azad National Institute of Technology (MANIT), Bhopal 462051, (MP), India

Department of Architecture and Civil Engineering, University of Bath, Bath, BA2 7AY, UK

Received
4th December 2012
, Accepted 12th February 2013
First published on 12th February 2013
A stepwise approach has been applied for the cosensitization of a thiocyanate free Ru sensitizer (SPS-01) with a metal free dye containing thienylfluorene conjugation (JD1) for dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). The cosensitized SPS-01 + JD1 based DSSC showed a significant enhancement in both the open circuit voltage (Voc) and the short circuit current (Jsc) relative to the individual single dye based DSSCs. The DSSC based on the SPS-01 + JD1 system yielded a Jsc of 15.38 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.72 V, a fill factor (FF) of 0.76 and a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 8.30%. This performance was superior to that of the DSSCs sensitized with the individual dyes SPS-01 (PCE = 5.98%) or JD1 (PCE = 4.76%) fabricated under the same conditions. Results show that the JD1 dye effectively overcomes the competitive light absorption by I3−/I− and also prevents dye aggregation and reduces the charge recombination. To understand the effects of the charge recombination of the injected electrons with I3− in the electrolyte, the dark current–voltage characteristics and electrochemical impedance spectra of the DSSCs sensitized with the SPS-01 and SPS-01+JD1 systems were measured. It was observed that the recombination of the electrons in the conduction band with I3− in the electrolyte in the DSSC sensitized with SPS-01 +JD1 was significantly reduced relative to the DSSC based on SPS-01.

Dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), as an alternative to silicon solar cells, are considered to be one of the most promising candidates for the next generation of solar cells because they can exhibit a high power conversion efficiency (PCE) and lower fabrication costs. Typically DSSCs are composed of a mesoporous dye sensitized TiO2 coated on a transparent conductive oxide substrate (TCO) i.e. the photoanode, a platinum coated TCO counter electrode and an electrolyte that consists of a redox mediator such as an iodide/tri-iodide redox couple. Various modifications of these three components can improve the overall PCE of the DSSCs. In particular, extensive studies on the development of high efficiency dyes have been carried out as they play a crucial role in the photovoltaic performance. Owing to the efforts of many researchers over the past twenty years, DSSCs based on Ru(II)–polypyridyl complex dyes have yielded a power conversion efficiency of around 11%. The DSSCs based on Ru complex dyes generally yield an optimum efficiency when used with thick TiO2 photoanode films. This is attributed to lower maximum molar extinction coefficients of less than 20000 M−1 cm−1, which are due to metal ligand charge transfer molecular excitations. Compared to these metal complex dyes, metal free dyes generally have larger molar extinction coefficients allowing the use of a thinner TiO2 film for the photoanode. This minimizes charge transport losses and achieves an improved organic hole (pore) filling for organic transport materials. In recent decades, various organic dyes composed of a donor–π–acceptor (D–π–A) configuration have been designed and synthesized. These are promising alternatives to Ru based dyes due to their high molar absorption coefficients and convenient structural modifications. However, metal free organic dyes have a limited practical use due to their relatively narrow absorption bands, and unfavorable aggregation on the semiconductors. They also exhibit a weaker light stability compared to the metal based sensitizers, and hence the cosensitization strategy is applied to broaden the light absorption spectra.

Cosensitization is an effective approach to enhance the photovoltaic properties of the DSSCs through a combination of two or more dyes (having complementary absorption bands) sensitized together on a semiconductor film. This strategy extends and increases the light harvesting ability and hence the photocurrent. Therefore, a feasible strategy to further improve the PCE is to develop new compounds that can be used as co-adsorbents in Ru based DSSCs. The ideal candidate for a co-adsorbent should have the following three characteristics: (i) a large molar extinction coefficient in the infrared to 400 nm region to recover the incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) spectral dip induced by I3−, (ii) the structure of the molecule should be suitable for avoiding competitive adsorption among dyes, while effectively suppressing the aggregation of the dye on the TiO2 surface, and (iii) it should be able to reduce the recombination of electrons in the TiO2 film with I3− and other acceptors species through the formation of a compact molecule monolayer covering the bare TiO2 surface.
Here we report a DSSC based on a thiocyanate free Ru dye (SPS-01) cosensitized with a metal free dye JD1, containing thienylfluorene conjugation. The synthesis and optical properties of these photosensitizers are published elsewhere and the corresponding molecular structures are shown in Fig. 1. Both the Jsc and the Voc of the cosensitized DSSCs were significantly enhanced relative to their corresponding single dye sensitized DSSCs, resulting in a PCE of 8.30% for the DSSC based on the SPS-01 + JD1 system.

The syntheses of the thiocyanate free Ru dye SPS-01 and the metal free dye JD1 (the chemical structures are shown in Fig. 1), have been reported by Singh et al. and Thomas et al., respectively. The working electrode was manufactured as follows: a TiO2 paste was prepared by mixing 1 g of TiO2 powder (P25 Degussa), 0.2 mL of acetic acid and 1 mL of water. Then, 60 mL of ethanol was slowly added while sonicating the mixture for 3 h. Finally Triton x-10 was added to the mixture and stirred for 4 h at 80 °C to form a transparent colloidal TiO2 paste. The pre-cleaned fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass substrates were immersed in 4.0 × 10−2 mol L−1 TiCl4 (aq) at 70 °C for 30 min and washed with water and ethanol. Mesoporous nano-crystalline TiO2 films 10–12 μm thick were deposited on to the FTO glass substrates using the doctor blading technique with the paste described previously. The TiO2 coated FTO electrodes were heated at 450 °C for 30 min. After sintering, the TiO2 electrodes were immersed in a solution containing SPS-01 (2 × 10−4 M) in a 1:1 acetonitrile and tert-butyl alcohol mixture at room temperature for 4 h, washed in ethanol and dried in air. After that, the SPS-01 sensitized TiO2 films were immersed in a solution containing JD1 (2 × 10−4 M) in tetrahydrofuran (THF) and kept at room temperature for 4 h. The cosensitized working electrode was assembled with a Pt coated FTO electrode into a sandwich type cell and sealed with a hot-melt thin film (meltronix-30, thickness 30 μm) at 120 °C. To complete the DSSC fabrication, the electrolyte solution containing LiI (0.1 M), I2 (0.05 M), PMII (1.0 M) and 4-tert-butylpyridine (0.5 M) in a mixture of acetonitrile and valeronitrile (volume 1:4) was introduced into the space between the two electrodes. DSSCs have also been prepared based on the individual dyes i.e.SPS-01 and JD1 with an identical electrolyte and counter electrode, for the comparison of experiment results. The photovoltaic performance of the DSSCs was characterized through a semiconductor analyzer (Keithley 4200 SCS) and a solar simulator (AM 1.5) with an illumination intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) spectra of the DSSCs was measured using a Bentham IPCE system and a source meter (Keithley 2400 computer controlled). Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) measurements under illumination were carried out by applying a forward bias equivalent to the open circuit voltage of the DSSCs and were recorded over a frequency of 0.1 Hz to 10000 Hz with an ac amplitude of 10 mV using an Autotab electrochemical analyzer equipped with FRA software. We have fabricated four devices under identical conditions and the data reported in this manuscript is the average of these devices.


We have used a metal free dye, JD1, containing thienylfluorene conjugation and a thiocynate free Ru based dye SPS-01 in the present investigation. The electronic distributions of the frontier molecular orbitals of the JD1 dye in THF using TDDFT/MPWIK/6-31G, are shown in Fig. 2. The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of JD1 contributes to the thienylfluorene conjugation unit and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) contributes to the cyanoacryclic acid acceptor unit. The optical properties and electrochemical parameters, i.e. the HOMO and LUMO energy level of JD1, estimated from DFT calculations are −5.31 and −2.88 eV, respectively. The HOMO and LUMO levels of the JD1 dye were also estimated using cyclic voltammetry and are about −5.28 and −2.96 eV, respectively. The HOMO and LUMO levels of SPS-01 are about −5.3 eV and −3.47 eV, respectively. Fig. 3 shows the absorption spectra of SPS-01 in a 1:1 acetonitrile and tert-butyl alcohol mixture and JD1 in THF. The JD1 dye exhibited a single prominent band, with an absorption peak at 418 nm, probably representing the superposition of the π–π* and charge transfer transitions. The peak molar extinction coefficient of JDI is 5.3 × 104 M−1 cm−1, which is much higher than that of the SPS-01 dye (1.8 × 104 M−1 cm−1) and I3− (2.5 × 104 M−1 cm−1). A peak molar extinction coefficient around this wavelength indicates that the JDI dye possesses a higher light harvesting ability in this wavelength region compared with SPS-01 and I3−. Hence it can be predicted that the photon lost due to the light absorption by I3− will be suppressed by the use of the JD1 as a cosensitizer due to the competition between JD1 and I3− to absorb light. The absorption spectra of SPS-01 and SPS-01 + JD1 are shown in Fig. 4. It can be seen from this figure that the mixed dye shows a higher absorption coefficient than that of SPS-01 over the wavelength region of 380–720 nm.

When the SPS-01 dye was adsorbed onto the TiO2 surface, the absorption band located around 532 nm became significantly broader and was shifted to 546 nm compared to the SPS-01 dye in solution. Following the cosensitization of SPS-01 with JD1 on the TiO2 surface, the maximum of the absorption band corresponds to SPS-01 in the higher wavelength region shifted back to 536 nm. This observation indicates that J type aggregation occurs for the SPS-01 dye adsorbed on the TiO2 surface. The adsorption of the dye onto the TiO2 film is affected by many factors such as the interactions between the dye and the TiO2 surface, the amount of dye adsorbed on the TiO2 surface and the interactions between the dyes. The change in the absorption spectrum after the cosensitization may be due to the competition between the SPS-01 and JD1 dyes to adsorb onto the TiO2 surface, which leads to the enhancement in the amount of dye adsorption on the TiO2 surface as compared to individual dye sensitization. Since the molecular size of the JD1 dye is smaller than that of the SPS-01 dye, during the cosensitization, molecules of JD1 penetrate through the SPS-01 dye and adsorb onto the TiO2 surface. As shown in Fig. 3, the JD1 dye possesses a higher absorption coefficient over the wavelength region of 380–480 nm, whereas the absorption of the SPS-01 dye is relatively lower over this wavelength region. Therefore, upon cosensitizing SPS-01 with JD1, the absorption spectrum of the cosensitized film shows a panchromatic feature to provide an increased light harvesting efficiency.
To investigate the binding ability of SPS-01, JD1 and SPS-01 + JD1, we recorded the FTIR spectra of pure SPS-01, JD1 and SPS-01 + JD1 adsorbed on to the TiO2 film. Pure JD1 and SPS-01 showed strong peaks due to CO stretching at 1682 cm−1 and 1694 cm−1. Upon the adsorption of SPS-01 + JD1 onto the TiO2 surface, these peaks disappear and are replaced by weaker peaks at 1652 cm−1 and 1405 cm−1, which are indicative of the symmetric (COO−) and asymmetric (COO−) modes. This result indicates that there is strong binding and electronic coupling between the TiO2 and both dyes upon cosensitization.

The current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the DSSCs based on SPS-01, JD1 and SPS-01 + JD1 are shown in Fig. 5 and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. The results clearly show that, upon cosensitization, the performance of the SPS-01 + JD1 device improved to yield a Jsc of 15.38 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.72 V, a fill factor (FF) of 0.76 and a PCE of 8.30%. The value of the PCE is significantly greater than the PCE's of 5.98% for the SPS-01 dye and 4.76% for the JD1 dye recorded for the separate devices under identical fabrication conditions. For the DSSCs based on the cosensitized system, the enhancement of the Jsc is shown in the IPCE spectra shown in Fig. 6. The DSSC containing only the SPS-01 dye has a broad IPCE spectrum extending across the whole visible range and into the near IR region as far as 850 nm and displays a value maximum value around 76% in the wavelength range from 550 to 700 nm, suggesting that electrons are efficiently collected in the device. As shown in Fig. 6, the decrease of the IPCE in the wavelength range 360–450 nm (with 38% at 416 nm) was due to the competitive light absorption between I3− and SPS-01. The addition of JDI restored the dip in the IPCE spectrum at around 416 nm, which is attributed to the fact that the JD1 dye had adsorbed onto the TiO2 surface more effectively and also contributed to the electron injection into the conduction band of the TiO2. The addition of JD1 to the SPS-01 dye enhanced the platform of the IPCE over a large spectral wavelength from 300 nm to 700 nm. This result is consistent with the absorption spectrum of JD1. Since the LUMO levels of both SPS-01 (−3.47 eV) and JD1 (−2.96 eV) lie above the TiO2 conduction band edge (−4.2 eV) they facilitate the injection of electrons from both SPS-01 and JD1 to the TiO2 conduction band edge (as shown in Fig. 7). The lower HOMO levels of both JD1 (−5.28 eV) and SPS-01 (−5.3 eV) compared to that of the redox couple of I−/I3− (−4.85 eV) facilitate the transfer of electrons from I− to JD1 and SPS-01i.e. dye regeneration. The efficient injection of electrons from JD1 into the TiO2 film recovers the dip in the IPCE spectrum of the DSSC based on the SPS-01 dye near 418 nm and leads to an enhancement in the Jsc. Therefore, cosensitization enhances the light harvesting efficiency and carrier generation across the whole wavelength range (350–800 nm) (as shown in the IPCE spectrum), and therefore cosensitization with a dye combination is more effective than just using individual dyes. As a result, the value of Jsc for the SPS-01+JD1 cosensitized DSSC is 15.38 mA cm−2 which is almost 39% and 13.6% higher than that of the JD1 and SPS-01 sensitized DSSCs, respectively.

Dye system
Short circuit current (Jsc) (mA cm−2)
Open circuit voltage (Voc) (V)
Fill factor (FF)
Power conversion efficiency (PCE) (%)

JD1

11.8
0.64
0.63
4.76

SPS-01

13.53
0.66
0.66
5.98

JD1 + SPS-01

15.38
0.72
0.75
8.30
We have also measured the amount of dye adsorbed on the TiO2 film by dipping the photoanode into a 0.05 M NaOH solution for 2 min. We found that the total number of dye molecules (SPS-01 and JD1) was significantly higher than that for the individual dyes. This indicates that the total dye coverage has been improved by the penetration of small JD1 dye molecules into the gaps within the SPS-01 sensitized TiO2 film. The SPS-01 dye is adsorbed on the TiO2 surface via its carboxylic group, whereas the JD1 dye is adsorbed not only via its carboxylic group but also via the nitrogen atom in the cyano group. Therefore, the anchoring sites for the TiO2 nanocystalline film are different for both dyes, which enhances their adsorption–dispersion on the TiO2 surface.
Compared to the DSSCs based on the SPS-01 dye, the SPS-01 + JD1 based DSSCs also showed an enhancement in the Voc. The Voc value of a DSSC is related to the energy level of the TiO2 conduction band (Ecb) and the conduction band electron density (n) in the TiO2 film by eqn (1). 
(1)
Where
kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature in K and q is the elementary charge. The term n0 can be estimated under vacuum conditions using eqn (2).

(2)
Where
NC is the density of the conduction band states and Eredox is the potential of the redox species I−/I3−. From eqn (1) and (2), we can deduce that a negative shift of the Ecb or a change in the electron density in the conduction band is related to the electron lifetime (τe) in the TiO2 and may increase the Voc. The suppression of the charge recombination with I3− also leads to an increase in Voc. The dark current–voltage characteristics of the DSSCs based on the SPS-01 + JD1 and SPS-01 dyes show that the dark current is lower for the cosensitized system compared to the SPS-01 dye based DSSC (as shown in Fig. 7). The dark current in the DSSC is a measure of the recombination of injected electrons with I3− in the electrolyte. The onset potential was observed to shift to a larger voltage for the DSSC with SPS-01 + JD1. This indicates that the DSSC with the cosensitized system exhibits a potential shift down (cathodic shift) relative to the SPS-01 sensitized DSSC. Therefore, the cosensitization of SPS-01 with JD1 on a TiO2 film has the effect of stabilizing the TiO2 potential, which can be explained as follows. As shown in the absorption spectra, the spectral broadening feature indicates that Ru molecules aggregate in two geometries on the surface of TiO2. A blue spectral shift corresponds to parallel (H-type) orientations and a red shift corresponds to titled (J-type) orientations. Cosensitization of SPS-01 with JD1 on TiO2 produces a blue shift, indicating that the SPS-01 molecules orientate themselves in a more parallel conformation thereby leaving space for the JD1 cosensitizer. Such a structural modification would allow an additive, such as Li+, to reach a new equilibrium state on the TiO2 surface at a lower potential to that observed. The enhancement in the Voc is generally associated with a negative shift of the conduction band edge or a suppression of charge recombination. However in this study, positive shifts were observed as indicated from the dark current–voltage characteristics (Fig. 7). This suggests that the suppression of charge recombination compensates the voltage loss arising from the shifting of the conduction band edge. This resulted in a slight increase in the Voc for the DSSCs with cosensitization.

A high value of Voc is regarded as the result of a low recombination of injected electrons with I3− in the electrolyte.Fig. 8a and 8b show the Nyquist and Bode plots of the electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) for DSSCs based on SPS-01, JD1 and SPS-01 + JD1, measured in the dark at bias voltage equivalent to the Voc of the devices. We have also shown the fitted curves in the Nyquist plots in Fig. 8a. In the Nyquist plots, three semicircles were observed in the frequency range of 0.1 to 10000 Hz. As reported in the literature, the three semicircles located in high, middle and low frequency regions (left to right) are attributed to the redox reaction at the Pt counter electrode, the electron transfer at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface, and carrier transport by ions within the electrolyte, respectively. Therefore the larger semicircle observed in middle frequency region represents the resistance of the charge transfer from the TiO2 to the electrolyte (back recombination resistance). A larger middle frequency semicircle is observed for the DSSC based on SPS-01 + JD1 compared to the DSSCs based on the individual SPS-01 and JD1 dyes indicates that the charge recombination resistance (Rct) is higher for the device based on the SPS-01 + JD1 (78.8 Ω cm−2) dye as compared to the other two DSSCs based on SPS-01 (58.4 Ω cm−2) and JD1 (43.7 Ω cm−2), which is consistent with the smaller value of dark current for the DSSCs based on SPS-01 + JD1. This indicates that it is more difficult for the electrons to transfer from the TiO2 to the electrolyte, and the back recombination has been suppressed in the DSSC based on the SPS-01 + JD1 dye as compared to SPS-01 and JD1 based DSSCs. Fig. 8b shows the Bode plots of the EIS in the dark and it was observed that the main peaks in the Bode plots corresponds to the larger semicircles in the Nquist plots. The reciprocal of the peak frequency for the peaks in the Bode plots is regarded as the electron lifetime in TiO2 since it represent the charge transfer process at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface. Peaks in the Bode plots are shifted to a lower frequency from JD1 to SPS-01 and SPS-01 + JD1, indicating that the electron lifetime for the DSSC based on the SPS-01 + JD1 dye is longer than that for the DSSCs based on the SPS-01 and JD1 dyes. The electron lifetime values derived from the Bode plots for the DSSCs of JD1, SPS-01 and SPS-01 + JD1 are 18.6 ms, 26.8 ms and 34.2 ms, respectively. The large value of the Rct and the longer electron lifetime for the DSSCs based on SPS-01 + JD1 explains the larger value of the Voc for this device.
We have also recorded the EIS of the DSSCs in the dark under different bias voltages and values for the charge recombination resistance (Rct) and electron lifetime (τe) for each device were estimated from the fitting the EIS plots (Nquist plots) with an equivalent circuit as reported in the literature. The Rct and τe have a characteristic exponential dependence with forward bias and it is found that at any forward bias voltage, the SPS-01 + JD1 based DSSCs have a larger Rct and a longer electron lifetime than both the SPS-01 and JD1 based DSSCs, indicating that the SPS-01 + JD1 based DSSCs have a reduced recombination rate in comparison to the DSSCs based on individual dyes.
A Nyquist plot of EIS under illumination at an applied forward voltage equivalent to the Voc was used to obtain information about the charge transport at the TiO2/dye/electrotyte interface of the DSSCs sensitized with SPS-01 and SPS-01 + JD1. Fig. 9 shows the Nyquist plots of EIS for the DSSCs sensitized with SPS-01 and SPS-01 + JD1 under an illumination intensity of 100 mW cm−2. Generally, the Nyquist plots of EIS show three semicircles, which are assigned to the electrochemical reaction at the Pt/electrolyte interface (high frequency region), the charge transfer at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface (middle frequency region) and a Warburg diffusion process of the I−/I3− in the electrolyte (low frequency region). However for the DSSCs reported in this study only two semicircles are observed. This can be explained as the conventional diffusion resistance of the redox couple is greatly overlapped by the charge transfer resistance due to the short length of the I− ion diffusion available with the thin spacer and the low viscosity of the solvents used in the electrolyte. EIS under illumination was utilized to analyze the charge transport resistance at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface, i.e. a semicircle in the intermediate frequency region (1–104 Hz) corresponds to different sensitizers in the DSSCs. The radius of the larger semicircle is a measure of charge transport resistance at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface in the DSSC. The radius of the larger semicircle of the DSSC based on the SPS-01 + JD1 dye is significantly smaller than that observed for DSSCs sensitized with SPS-01, indicating a low charge transport resistance for cosensitization.
According to the EIS analysis, the resistance for charge recombination and the electron lifetime were larger and the charge transport resistance was smaller for the DSSCs based on SPS-01 + JD1 than that for the DSSCs based on SPS-01 and JD1, indicating that cosensitization has effectively modified the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface and increased the Jsc and the Voc. In the cosensitized system, a better dye coverage helps to passivate the TiO2 surface, and thus reduces the recombination due to electron back-transfer between TiO2 and I3−, which ultimately increases the Voc compared to those of individual sensitized devices.

A cosensitized system which consists of a thiocyanate free Ru dye (SPS-01) enveloped with a metal free dye containing thienylfluorene conjugation (JD1) has been used for the fabrication of a DSSC. The amount of dye adsorption onto the nanocrystalline TiO2 film sensitized with a mixed SPS-01 + JD1 dye is higher due to the different molecular sizes and anchoring groups in the SPS-01 and JD1. The DSSC based on the cosensitized system exhibited a significant improvement in both the Jsc and the Voc which yielded an overall PCE of 8.30%, which is greater than that of the DSSC sensitized with only the SPS-01 (5.98%) or JD1 dye (4.76%). The Jsc enhancement is attributed to offsetting the competitive light absorption around 418 nm due to I−/I3−, reducing the dye aggregation and recombination of electrons in the TiO2 film with I3− in the electrolyte, and complementary absorption spectra and favorable energy alignments of both dyes. Enhancement of the Voc is attributed to the retardation of the recombination of the injected electrons with I3− ions, which compensates the shift down of the conduction band edge of TiO2 upon cosensitization. The enhancement in both the Jsc and the Voc leads to the improvement in the overall PCE of the DSSC. To get more information about the details of the mechanism of cosensitization, we are in the process of repeating the cosensitization in a reverse sequence i.e.JD1 will be bound first followed by SPS-01 to achieve cosensitization with the mixed solution of SPS-01 and JD1. This will be communicated separately.


We thank Dr K. R. Justin Thomas, Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee, India for providing the metal free organic dye JD1 used in this study. The authors also wish to thank the UK India Education and Research Initiative (UKIERI II) coordinated by the British Council, New Delhi, India for financial support through a Thematic Partnership.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013