 DOI: 10.1039/C1NR10943J
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4888-4900

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Junshuai
Li
,

HongYu
Yu
* and 

Yali
Li


School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore, 639798, Singapore

Institute of Microelectronics, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China. E-mail: hyyu@ntu.edu.sg

Received
27th July 2011
, Accepted 18th September 2011
First published on 4th November 2011

Si
nanowires (Si NWs), as one of the fundamental building blocks for nano sciences and technologies, have attracted significant attention recently for solar cell applications, owing to the following: (1) Si NWs can significantly reduce materials consumption, and thus the solar cells fabrication cost; (2) NWs' capability to decouple light trapping and carrier collection, which is critical to achieve high power conversion efficiency. In this paper, recent progress on aligned-Si-NW-based solar cells are reviewed from optical and electrical characteristics to experimental demonstrations. Based on the understanding of each preparation process, the issues regarding the realization of highly efficient Si NW based solar cells are discussed.
Junshuai Li
Dr Junshuai Li has been with Nanyang Technological University as a Research Fellow since 2008. Before that, he pursued his doctor degree in China and Japan, focusing on preparation and growth mechanism study of Si films with controlled crystallizing orientations at low temperatures, and related solar cells fabrication. Now his research interests mainly concentrate on designing and fabricating nanostructured surface textures incorporating high efficient and ultrathin film-based solar cells. He has authored and coauthored one book chapter and more than 50 peer-reviewed papers on top-tiered international conferences and journals, including IEDM.
HongYu Yu
Dr Yu HongYu received his BEng degree from Tsinghua University, MASc degree from the University of Toronto, and PhD from the National University of Singapore. His current research covers Si-based sustainable nanoscale electronic devices, including low-power IC/memory and green photonics/solar cell devices. He has authored or co-authored more than 240 publications in top-tiered international journals and conferences. He has received many awards including the NUS president graduate fellowship, IEEE EDS PhD fellowship, Nanyang Assistant Professorship, Tan Chin Tuan Academic Exchange Fellowship, one highlight paper in Tech. Sym. VLSI (2007), and more recently the “Young 1000 Talent Plan” award from China.
Yali Li
Dr Yali Li received her Bachelor and Master Degrees of Science from Lanzhou University, and Doctoral Degree of Engineering from Saitama University. She is currently with Nanyang Technological University as a Research Fellow since 2009. Her current research work focuses on highly efficient Si thin film-based solar cells with the incorporation of nanostructural surface textures, including Si nanowire, nanocone, and nanohemisphere arrays. She has published more than 20 papers in prestigious international conferences and journals such as IEDM, Small.

Solar electricity, as a source of clean and renewable energy free from contaminations and carbon emissions, is regarded as one of the best solutions to replace fossil-based electricity for future electricity supply. The direct conversion from solar energy to electricity can be realized by solar cells based on the photovoltaic (PV) effect. Currently, Si wafer based modules dominate the PV market, with a share of >80%, largely benefiting from the mature and advanced integrated circuit industries. On the other hand, the cost of the Si wafer-based PV modules is still high for civil utility such that its total installation capacity is only about 0.1% of the global electricity generation (mainly distributed in the developed countries). The high costs of the PV modules partially stem from the materials consumption, e.g., Si wafers alone account for about 50% of the module costs.

To reduce the cost of the PV modules, several approaches have been actively pursued, including using thin and/or low quality Si wafers, and developing (advanced) thin film based technologies. In particular, Si nanowires (NWs), especially the aligned ones, attract much attention for achieving high performance with lower quality and less materials. It is well documented that besides excellent light antireflection properties, aligned Si NWs provide opportunities to design light trapping and carrier collection processes independently, similar to the multijunction solar cell configuration proposed by Green, but with much lower materials consumption.
In this paper, the progresses related to aligned Si NW based solar cells are reviewed. Firstly we discuss the optical and electrical properties of aligned Si NWs. Then we will focus on preparation and research status of the related solar cells. Following that, the issues concerning the realization of high efficient Si NW based solar cells will be pointed out.

For solar cell applications, optical and electrical characteristics are the two major concerns. A solar cell firstly should have an excellent light trapping capability for generating free carriers; then effective carrier separation and collection are necessary to achieve high efficiency. The decoupling between light absorption and carrier collection in Si NWs provides opportunities to independently optimize the optical and electrical properties via adjusting NWs dimensions, i.e., diameter, periodicity, and length etc. On the other hand, manufacturability, reproducibility and stability of the related solar cells should also be considered when designing the devices. Therefore, an understanding of the relationship between optical and electrical properties and NWs' dimensions, and as set of design rules to guide manufacturing are in high demand.

Aligned Si NWs have demonstrated excellent antireflection, as compared to Si NW mats.Fig. 1(a)–(c) show the SEM images of periodically aligned Si NW arrays prepared on Si wafers via mask-assisted Ag catalyzed wet etching, with a fixed periodicity of 500 nm, and variable diameters of ∼385, 280, and 190 nm. A typical cross-sectional SEM image of the sample shown in Fig. 1(b) is depicted in Fig. 1(d). The reflection measurements shown in Fig. 2 demonstrate that light reflection is significantly suppressed in a wide wavelength range after incorporating the Si NW arrays, as compared to polished wafers. However, one notes that efficient antireflection is not equivalent to effective light absorption because light transmission can be significant if the dimensions of the Si NW arrays are not optimized.Fig. 3 shows the calculated reflection and transmission spectra for the Si NW array with a square lattice, and the Si NWs’ length of 2.33 μm, array periodicity of 100 nm and diameter of 50 nm. Compared to the Si thin film with the same thickness, although the light reflection for the Si NW array is well suppressed, its light transmission is surprisingly high in the low energy region, corresponding to the high photon density regime of Si. Accordingly, poor performance for the solar cell based on this Si NW array can be expected compared to the Si thin film counterpart. Moreover, surface defects created during NW growth also can trap photons and thermally dissipate them without contribution to electricity output. This degrades the cell performance through the thermal effect, owing to the reduced thermal conductivity, especially in rough or thinSi NW solar cells.

Fig. 4(a) shows the cross-sectional SEM image and the corresponding optical spectra of randomly aligned Si NWs on glass prepared by wet etching of laser crystallized Si thin films without mask printing. The length and diameter of the Si NWs varies from 2300 to 2500 nm, and 20 to 100 nm, respectively. It is seen that there is significant absorption enhancement (> 20%) for wavelengths longer than ∼1127 nm, corresponding to photon energy lower than 1.1 eV, e.g., the bandgap of Si, which is mainly from the surface defect absorption, as shown in Fig. 4(b). The surface defect absorption becomes dominant when the diameter of Si NWs is thin, owing to the increased surface-to-volume ratio. Accordingly, it necessitates quenching surface defects to relieve the solar-thermally induced cell performance degradation, especially for the Si NW-based solar cells with large surface-to-volume ratios (from the electrical aspect, surface passivation is also important to Si NW-based solar cells). Tsakalakos et al. compared the absorption spectra of the Si NW sample before and after forming gas annealing at 400 °C for 30 min. It is observed that after passivation, the absorption decreases noticeably in the long wavelength regime (below the energy bandgap of Si), but varies negligibly in the visible light region, indicating that the surface defects are more sensitive to near-infrared light.
Besides experimental demonstration, theoretical studies have also been actively pursued. Hu and Chen studied the optical characteristics of Si NW arrays with a fixed array periodicity of 100 nm, but different wire diameters and lengths. They found that using Si NW arrays can boost light absorption mainly in the high energy regime of the solar spectrum (> ∼2.8 eV). Light transmission for these Si NW arrays at low energy is very high (close to 100%), resulting in the total poor light trapping when compared to the flat Si thin films. Our group found that light transmission is very sensitive to the array periodicity, and it can be effectively suppressed when the array periodicity is around 600 nm, as shown in Fig. 5(c)). In the meanwhile, effective antireflection can be well maintained (see Fig. 5(b)). From Fig. 5(a), the enhanced light absorption can be realized in the full energy range from 1 to 4 eV, covering the major energy region of the solar spectrum.Fig. 5(d) summarizes the calculated ultimate efficiency with various array periodicities, for the sake of quantitative comparison of the light trapping capability. One notes that when the array periodicity is >300 nm, the total light trapping capability of Si NW arrays becomes superior to the Si thin film with the same thickness. There is a wide “window” of periodicity variation till 1200 nm for light trapping enhancement, which offers flexibility to manufacture the related high efficient solar cells. In the meanwhile, the optimized ratio of wire diameter to array periodicity is found to be around 0.8. Following the calculations of the optical characteristics, a self-consistent explanation based on wave optics is provided below to guide the related designs for high efficient Si NW based solar cells, nanostructure surface textures-incorporated thin film based solar cells, and even for related photodetectors. Here we briefly introduce the mechanism governing the interaction between nanostructures incorporated system and incident light. From the point of view of wave optics, if the feature size of the object is much smaller than the light wavelength, light could directly bypass the object. If the wavelength of the incident light is comparable with the interacted object, the light will be strongly scattered, resulting in the elongated optical path length and thus the enhanced light trapping. However, when the light wavelength is much shorter than the object feature size, the interaction between the incident light and the objects would be dominated by the reflection process.
As for the Si NW arrays studied in Fig. 5, when the array periodicity (P) is much shorter than the incident light wavelength (λ), e.g., for the case with P of 100 nm in the low energy regime (< 2 eV, corresponding to the long wavelength region, i.e., λ > ∼620 nm), the incident light easily penetrates through the Si NW array, leading to strong transmission (almost 100%, see Fig. 5(c)), and thus very poor light trapping (Fig. 5(a)) in the corresponding energy region, although the antireflection is excellent, as indicated in Fig. 5(b). However, for this Si NW array in high energy, the scattering to the incident light is significantly enhanced due to the comparable P and λ, and the optical path length is significantly elongated, resulting in an enhanced light absorption of almost 100%. Accordingly, when P further increases, the energy region where the boosted light absorption can be observed should shift toward low energy, i.e., long wavelengths. In the meanwhile, the absorption edge should also shift to low energy with increased P. Both can be observed from the absorption spectra shown in Fig.5 (a), as P increases. With the further increase in P, both light reflection and transmission, especially in the high energy regime, becomes strong due to the increased reflection area on the top and the enlarged spacing of neighboring wires at the bottom of the Si NW arrays, which leads to energy loss. If this energy loss cannot be compensated by the absorption edge shift, the total light trapping capability would be degraded, as shown by the calculated ultimate efficiency change with P in Fig. 5(d).
When fixing P and varying Si NWs' diameter, the optical characteristics demonstrate the similar change trend to the case of varying P and fixing the ratio of the Si NWs' diameter (D) to P, as summarized in Fig. 6. It can be found that D/P is optimized to be ∼0.8 to achieve efficient light trapping, which is applicable in a wide P range from 300 to 900 nm. Our recent experimental studies indicate that when the length of the Si NWs with the optimized P and D is > 200 nm, the enhanced light absorption can already be observed. For the Si NWs, the length of ∼2 μm is deemed enough for efficient light absorption. When the length exceeds 3 μm, light absorption becomes almost saturated, which indicates that highly efficient Si NW solar cells do not need very long wires, and thus materials consumption can be saved.
Recently, Bao and Ruan studied the effects of randomization in aligned amorphous Si NWs' position/diameter/length on the optical characteristics. They observed that the optical characteristics of the Si NW arrays are not sensitive to the position if the diameter and average spacing are fixed. However, optical absorption varies significantly for the random diameter distribution, which can be attributed to the broadened range for enhancing light scattering, and thus elongating the optical path length after incorporating the Si NWs with random diameters. In the case of random wire lengths, light absorption is enhanced for Si NW arrays with both small and large Si NW volume fractions. More significant absorption enhancement in a wider energy region is found for conditions with the larger Si NW volume fraction. In principle, the random length in Si NW arrays can create an intermediate layer with an effective refractive index lager than the air, but smaller than the underlying Si NW layer, which thus serves as an antireflection layer to suppress light reflection accordingly. For the higher Si NW volume fraction, the refractive index difference between air and the Si NW array becomes larger, and thus the light reflection suppression from the intermediate layer can be more significant.

Si NWs also demonstrate excellent electrical properties. The most significant electrical property potentially beneficial to the solar cell applications is the capability of forming radial (or core–shell) pn junction to facilitate carrier collection along a short collection path, i.e., the radial direction. Based on this cell configuration, Kayes et al. calculated the electrical output characteristics of the concerned solar cells under different cell thicknesses, carrier diffusion lengths and trap densities, with the assumption of no light reflection and scattering effects between the incident light and Si NWs. In other words, the light absorption in the Si NWs here (100% packaging density) follows a similar behavior to the bulk material. Fig. 7 shows the calculated short circuit current density, Jsc, as a function of cell thickness, L, and minority carrier diffusion length, Ln, (here the shell is n doped, and the core is p doped.). Compared to planar pn junction solar cells, Si NW based ones with a radial pn junction configuration are superior in carrier collection due to the short collection length along the radial direction. Fig. 8 shows the calculated open circuit voltage, Voc, as a function of L and Ln. As can be seen, Voc of Si NW based cells is more sensitive to the trap density in both the depletion and quasineutral regions due to the increased effective area of the radial pn junction, as compared to the planer ones. Especially for long and thin Si NWs (>100 μm in length), Voc approaches 0 when the trap densities in both the depletion and quasineutral regions vary from 7 × 1012 to 7 × 1018 cm−3. Fortunately, long Si NWs are not needed in device applications, as the efficient light absorption can already be achieved for 2–3 μm long Si NWs with optimized array periodicities and diameters, i.e., ∼600 and 500 nm, respectively, as aforementioned. Moreover, the radial pn junction configuration can alleviate the negative impact of Si NWs' surface defects. Eventually, combined with the efficient carrier collection, the merit of radial pn junction Si NW solar cells becomes more evident compared to the planer pn junction wafer or thin film based ones.
Our recent study indicates that for Si NW incorporated solar cells, even with the planar pn junction configuration, can also facilitate carrier collection due to the improved light trapping in the Si NWs.Fig. 9 schematizes the planar pn junction Si NW incorporated solar cells. The squarely arranged Si NWs are standing on a 0.8-μm-thick Si thin film substrate. The array periodicity of 500 nm and Si NW diameter of 250 nm are adopted here. The doping concentrations in n+ emitter, p-type base, and p+ layer are 1020, 1016, and 1020 cm−3, respectively. A 50-nm thickness for the n+ emitter and p+ layer is used, which is similar to conventional thin film-based solar cells. Fig. 10(a) shows the predicted power conversion efficiency (PCE) as a function of the minority carrier (here, an electron) diffusion length, Ln. The PCE curve of the flat thin film solar cells with the same thickness, i.e., 1.8 μm, serves as a reference. It is observed that cell performance is significantly boosted after incorporating the Si NW absorber, as compared to the flat ones. In the meantime, PCE for the Si NW incorporated cells is saturated when Ln is > 0.5 μm. As a comparison, the saturation is only seen for the flat reference solar cells when Ln is ∼1.2 μm, indicating the superior carrier collection efficiency and/or the high tolerance in low material qualities for the Si NW incorporated solar cells. Profiling the photogenerated carrier density distribution explains why the improved carrier collection is observed in SiNWs incorporated solar cells: it is due to the concentrated photogenerated carriers in the Si NW region (see Fig. 10(b)), originating from the excellent light confinement of NWs.
It is worth noting that the impact of Si NWs' surface defects on electrical characteristics should be considered when manufacturing related solar cells.Fig. 11 depicts the relationship between the calculated PCE and the surface recombination velocity (SRV). With increasing SRV from 0 to 103 cm s−1, the predicted PCE has a relatively gradual decrease from 17.3% to 15.2%. However further increase of the surface recombination velocity to 105 cm s−1 would significantly reduce PCE to only 6.1%. Recently, several groups have started to tackle the issues on Si NWs' surface passivation. Gunawan and Guha studied the effects of Al2O3 passivation on the performance of Si NW based solar cells. It demonstrates that after incorporating a 10-nm-thick Al2O3 conformal passivation layer onto the Si NWs' surfaces, PCE is improved from 1% to 1.8%, with an increment of 47 mV and ∼5 mA cm−2 in Voc and Jsc, respectively. Demichel et al. achieved a surface recombination velocity as low as 20 cm s−1 on Si NWs using thermal oxidation and subsequent forming gas annealing, indicating an excellent passivation function of SiO2 to Si NWs. Using a thin a-Si layer, Danet al. passiviated Si NWs, and reduced SRV by nearly 2 orders of magnitude, i.e., from ∼3 × 105 for the as-prepared Si NWs to ∼4.5 × 103 cm s−1. As the traditional surface passivation and antireflection materials, a-SiN:H was also introduced to passivate Si microwire based solar cells by Kim et al., and the cell efficiency was enhanced from 8.9% to 10.6%. It is expected that a-SiN:H films are also applicable to Si NW based solar cells for surface defects passivation.

Stimulated by the excellent optical and electrical properties of aligned Si NWs, fabrication of related solar cells has been active in these years. Following the paradigms of Si NWs realization, the preparation of the Si NW based solar cells can also be generally categorized into two approaches, i.e., bottom-up and top-down.

The bottom-up method is based on the metal catalyzed vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) process, firstly reported by Wagner and Ellis in 1964. In 2007, Tsakalakos et al. fabricated the first Si NW based all-inorganic solar cell using this method with an Au catalyst.Fig. 12 shows (a) the schematic of the solar cell configuration, and (b) SEM images of the Si NWs under various views (the cross-sectional view on the top left). Here the p-type Si NWs with an estimated doping concentration of ∼1018 cm−3, diameter of 109 ± 30 nm and length of ∼16 μm are grown on a stainless steel foil coated by a 100-nm-thick Ta2N film, with the precursor gases of SiH4, H2, HCl and B(CH3)3. The Ta2N film serves as the back electrode and also prevents the interdiffusion between Si atoms and the steel substrate. As indicated by the SEM images, the synthesized Si NWs randomly distribute on the substrate owing to the non-patterned Au catalyst. The pn junction is introduced by depositing a 40-nm-thick n-type a-Si:H layer viaPECVD, which also serves as a passivation layer to the Si NWs. This is followed by the ITO layer deposition with a thickness of ∼200 nm to connect electrically the Si NWs. Then the top finger electrode consisting of 50-nm-thick Ti and 2000-nm-thick Al is prepared by shadow evaporation. Fig. 13 shows (a) the measured specular reflection specular spectrum, and (b) photograph of the Si NW-based solar cell. The other one is from an a-Si thin film solar cell for comparison. It is obvious that Si NWs significantly suppress light reflection. However, the measured power conversion efficiency and external quantum efficiency of the related solar cells with the size of 1.2 × 1.5 cm2 are relatively poor, as demonstrated in Fig. 14, which can be attributed to the poor photogenerated carrier separation capability, poor pn junction, and poor electrical contact, all related to the randomly grown Si NWs.
To improve the poor electrical properties in the solar cells made of randomly aligned Si NWs, regularly aligned ones are preferred. Normally, for the regularly aligned Si NWs grown using VLS growth, pre-patterned metal catalysts are needed. Kayes et al. employed photolithographically patterned oxide buffer layers to pattern and confine Au or Cu catalysts, and then prepared highly ordered vertically aligned Si NWs with area >1 cm2. They also skilfully transferred and embedded these Si NWs into polymer substrates, demonstrating the technical feasibility of flexible Si NWs based solar cells. Kendrick et al. prepared the related radial pn junction solar cells using the similar method, and achieved a power conversion efficiency of 2.3% for a 2.5 × 2.5 mm2cell, with improved Voc and Jsc of 500 mV and 7.6 mA cm−2, respectively. More importantly, the fill factor of the illuminated I–V curve at AM 1.5 G is about 57%, much larger than the one from the aforementioned randomly aligned VLS grown Si NW based solar cells.
Here it is worth noting that the photolithography employed here would be challenging for industrial production of related solar cells with low costs. To overcome this bottleneck, several cost effective patterning techniques are explored, including a self-assembled SiO2 or polystyrene nanosphere monolayer, anodic aluminum oxide (AAO)etc. Hsu has achieved self-assembled close-packed SiO2 nanosphere monolayers on 4 inch Si wafers using the Langmuir–Blodgett method, paving the way for the large-area patterning required in solar cell applications. In contrast, although the well-patterned catalysts with areas larger than 1 cm2 are achievable using AAO templates, their applications in solar cell production would be still greatly challenging due to the high costs and low throughput associated with the redundant procedures of preparing the AAO templates etc. Recently, nano-imprint lithography, which is expected to pattern metal catalyst layers with low costs and high throughput, has also been actively studied. Anyway, the most important concern regarding catalyst patterning of preparing regularly aligned Si NWs for solar cell applications is that the method must be low cost, high throughput, and scalable.
Besides catalyst patterning, for VLS grown regularly aligned Si NWs, several issues need to be concerned. The first is the deep level defects introduced by Au catalyst, which can trap minority carriers and severely degrade the electrical properties and thus the cell performance. The other one is the high thermal budget for cracking Si-containing radicals such as SiCl4, and for maintaining the required high substrate temperatures. To address the first issue, Cu,Al,Snetc. are employed to act as catalysts, which would not introduce deep level defects, and adversely act as dopants such as Al. In the meantime, they are much cheaper than Au. Putnam et al. prepared Si NWs with the minority carrier diffusion length up to 10 μm using Cu-catalyzed VLS growth. To reduce the thermal budget, Rathi et al. employed plasma to crack Si-containing precursors, and used Sn as the catalyst, which has an eutectic temperature of 232 °C with Si, much lower than the one of 363 °C for Au with Si.
In the meanwhile, top-down processing has also been actively explored to prepare Si NWs and related solar cells. Similar to the bottom-up based approaches, the Si NWs prepared using the top-down techniques also can be grouped into two classes, i.e., randomly and regularly aligned arrays. Through immersing Si wafers or thin films into the aqueous solution of AgNO3 and HF, randomly aligned Si NWs can be easily formed via an electroless etching process. In 2008, Garnett and Yang reported the first Si NW solar cell with a radial pn junction based on this method. The starting material is phosphorus doped n-type Si wafers with a resistivity of 0.6 Ω cm, corresponding to a 1016 cm−3 doping concentration. After obtaining the electrolessly etched Si NWs, a p-type a-Si layer was deposited using LPCVD at 450 °C with the precursor gases of disilane and boron trichloride, followed by RTP annealing at 1000 °C for 10 s in forming gas to form the p-type (estimated doing concentration: 1.7 × 1019 cm−3) poly-Si shell. Fig. 15(a) and (b) show the schematic of the radial pn junction Si NW based cell configuration and the cross-sectional SEM image of a completed cell, respectively. The Si NWs have lengths of ∼18 μm, with a packing density of ∼50%. The typical wire diameter is 350–400 nm, including the 150-nm-thick poly-Si shell and 50–100 nm Si NWs core. TEM measurements confirm the single crystalline core and polycrystalline shell (see the inset of Fig. 15(c)), and the TEM image taken near the wire edge indicates nanocrystalline domains, as demonstrated in Fig. 15(d). I–V measurements for the solar cells with the size of 1 × 1 cm2 confirm a Voc of 290 mV, a Jsc of 4.28 mA cm−2, and a power conversion efficiency of 0.46% under AM 1.5G illumination. From the I–V curves shown in Fig. 16, it is seen that the contact and junction leakage issues (as indicated by Fig. 16(b), a high diode ideality factor of 2.1 is extracted.) need to be optimized for cell performance improvement.
In 2009, Sivakov et al. transferred this technique to crystalline Si thin film p–i–n planar junction cells on glass substrates, which are preferred in production due to the low materials consumption and costs. Fig. 17 shows the illuminated I–V behaviors of the Si NW-based solar cell with the size of ∼2.5 × 2.5 cm2 at four different measurement points. Although the cell performance is improved to a certain extent (an efficiency of 4.4% with a Jsc of ∼ 40 mA cm−2 is achieved), it is still necessary to further improve the poor contact and junction, as indicated by the I–V curve slopes around 0.6 V and 0 V, respectively. In addition, measurements at different points (see Fig. 17) show strong variation in I–V outputs, indicating the poor uniformity of the solar cell.
Here one notes that electroless wet etching for forming Si NWs in the aqueous solution of AgNO3 and HF can be much easily scaled up because it is only limited by the solution container. During the etching process, Ag elements do not incorporate into the resulting Si NWs to form deep level defects like Au in the VLS grown ones, and the Ag particles formed in the redox reaction can be easily removed using concentrated nitric acid or boiling aqua regia. However, the controllability over the achieved Si NWs' diameter, spacing etc. is poor, leading to the resulting poor cell performance as aforementioned. Moreover, the electroless wet etching in the aqueous solution of AgNO3 and HF is not applicable for etching a-Si films and heavily doped Si wafers to form Si NWs due to the peeling off of a-Si and porous Si formation in Si wafers.
Besides randomly aligned Si NW-based solar cells, the top-down techniques are also employed to prepare periodically aligned Si NWs for solar cell applications. In 2010, Garnett and Yang conducted a proof of concept study of the periodically aligned Si NW-based solar cells, which are prepared using deep reactive ion etching (RIE) combined with the self-assembled SiO2 nanosphere monolayer as the mask.Fig. 18 schematizes the fabrication process of the related solar cells. Firstly SiO2 nanospheres (average diameter chosen is ∼530 nm) are self assembled on n-type Si wafers via a dip-coat processing. Then RIE is done to create the Si NWs with the assistance of the self-assembled SiO2 mask. Following that, the residual SiO2 nanspheres are removed by HF solution, and the radial pn junction with a depth of ∼160 nm is formed viaboron diffusion. Here it is worth noting that to mimic the PV response of the stand-alone Si NW layer, a highly doped Si wafer is used as the substrate to eliminate the PV contribution from the substrate, and an epitaxial Si thin layer on the wafer is employed to manufacture the Si NW array. Fig. 19(a) shows the tilted SEM image of the resulting Si NW array standing on a ∼3 μm thick Si film, with the Si NWs' diameter of ∼390 nm, length of ∼5 μm, and array periodicity of ∼530 nm, corresponding to the average diameter of the starting SiO2 nanospheres. The illuminated I–V characteristics of the related solar cell with a size of ∼0.67 × 0.67 cm2 is recorded under AM 1.5G (see Fig. 19(b)), and exhibit a PCE of ∼4.83% (Voc: 525 ± 2 mV; Jsc: 16.45 ± 0.19 mA cm−2; FF: 0.559 ± 0.002), which is ∼20% higher than that of the Si ribbon solar cell with the same total thickness, i.e., 8 μm. Moreover, compared to the randomly aligned Si NW-based solar cells aforementioned, the pn junction quality here is much improved, i.e., similar to the pn junctions in flat cells, as indicated by the flattened I–V curve around 0 V in Fig. 19(b). Here it should be noted that the electrode configuration is yet to be optimized. They further declare that the light absorption enhancement mainly occurs in the Si NW array, and an optical path length enhancement factor of ∼73 is achieved, which is much larger than the randomized scattering limit (∼25 without a back reflector).
Recently, Lu and Lal developed the periodically aligned Si NWs with a nano-conical-frustum shape, as shown in Fig. 20(a) using self-powered parallel electron lithography and RIE. Due to the excellent antireflection stemming from the spatial modulation of the effective refractive index, the nano-conical-frustum shaped Si NWs show the excellent light absorption (see Fig. 20(b)). The resulting solar cell configuration is schematically shown in Fig. 21(a). It consists of a 3.5 μm n-type (doping concentration: 2 × 1018 cm−3) Si NW array standing on a 1.5 μm Si film, with an array periodicity of 800 nm, and top and bottom wire diameters of 340 and 800 nm. The radial pn junction is formed viaboron ion implantation, with a doping concentration of 1020 cm−3, and an estimated junction depth of 20 nm on the side walls. Then, rapid thermal annealing at 900 °C is performed for 60 s to activate dopants and remove the implantation damage. Following that, a 20 nm SiO2 passivation layer is coated. After the above thermal processes, the final boron doping and junction depth is 2 × 1019 cm−3, and 100 nm. Fig. 21(b) shows the measured I–V characteristics of the Si NW based solar cell under the AM 1.5G illumination. In line with the excellent light absorption, the Si NW based solar cell has an enhanced performance, with a Jsc of 26.4 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.59 V, and power conversion efficiency of 10.8%. As a comparison, the 5 μm flat film-based control cell delivers a Jsc of 13.6 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.54 V, and a PCE of 5.2%.
Besides RIE, electroless wet etching is also employed to fabricate regularly aligned Si NWs through combining self-assembled SiO2 or polystyrene nanosphere monolayers to pattern the metal catalyst, e.g., Ag. Different from VLS growth, the catalyst patterning for wet etching is performed on Si wafer or film surfaces, not on the substrate surfaces. After patterning the metal catalyst, the sample is immersed into the mixture of HNO3, H2O2 and H2O, and the Si materials underneath Ag are etched off and then the Si NWs are formed following the below redox reaction,
With Ag:
H2O2 + 2H+ → 2H2O + 2h+,
2H+ + 2e → H2 ↑,
With Si:
Si + 4h+ + 4HF → SiF4 + 4H+,
SiF4 + 2HF → H2SiF6,
Overall reaction:
Si + H2O2 + 6HF → 2H2O + H2SiF6 + H2 ↑.
It is obvious that the patterned catalyst-assisted electroless wet etching can prepare highly ordered Si NWs arrays with a low thermal budget and cost. Liet al. employed this method to fabricate Si NW incorporated solar cells on Si wafers. The solar cell with a size of ∼1 × 1 cm2 exhibits a power conversion efficiency of ∼9.2%. However, compared to the Si NWs prepared by RIE, the surface for the ones prepared by electroless wet etching is much rougher, severely affecting the formation of high quality pn junction and electrical contact. Moreover, high defects on the rough surface would be detrimental to free carrier collection. Accordingly, post treatments are needed to smooth and passiviate the corresponding Si NWs for improving cell performance.
From the above brief review, several conclusions on aligned Si NW based solar cells can be drawn,
(i) Regularly aligned Si NWs are preferred for achieving improved cell performance due to the manipulation advantages in forming high quality pn junctions (especially for the radial ones) and electrical contacts;
(ii) Self-assembled SiO2 or polystyrene nanosphere monolayers can be employed as a cost-effective and scalable mask for patterning metal catalysts either in VLS growth or in top-down etching;
(iii) Top-down based methods can effectively reduce the thermal budget and avoid catalyst contaminations to the resulting Si NWs, as compared to VLS (or bottom-up) based methods;
(iv) For mass production, compared to RIE, patterned catalyst-assisted electroless wet etching is preferred due to the low cost. But the rough surface of the resulting Si NWs need to be smoothed and/or passiviated for achieving a high quality pn junction and electrical contact;
(v) Dry etching using RIE can prepare Si NWs with smooth surfaces, but cost effective dry etching sources such as plasma etching should be developed for replacing RIE in solar cell applications.
Here it is worth emphasizing again that for solar cell applications, only the cost-effective, high throughput, and scalable methods are applicable.

In this review, the potential of aligned Si nanowires for highly efficient and cost effective solar cell applications has been discussed based on their unique optical and electrical properties. A design guideline to achieve high efficiency for Si nanowires based solar cells is introduced by optimizing the Si nanowires array dimensions (optimized array periodicities and wires' diameters are around 600 and 500 nm, respectively). At present, the most challenging tasks are believed to be related to technological developments: how to prepare cost-effectively high quality aligned Si nanowires on a large scale and high throughput manner; and how to realize the high quality pn junctions and electrical contacts on Si nanowires for effective photogenerated carrier collection. Although the best achieved power conversion efficiency for the Si nanowires based solar cells is around 11% at present, still far from the record efficiency of 25% for Si wafer based solar cells, the huge potential for improving cell performance based on the unique optical and electrical properties, the much reduced materials- and energy-consumption and high tolerance of low material-quality will make aligned Si nanowires based solar cells shine in the near future.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011