 DOI: 10.1039/C6CP06931B
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 2791-2796


Kazuma
Hara
,

Chutiparn
Lertvachirapaiboon
,

Ryousuke
Ishikawa
,

Yasuo
Ohdaira
,

Kazunari
Shinbo
,

Keizo
Kato
,

Futao
Kaneko
 and 

Akira
Baba
*

Graduate School of Science and Technology, Niigata University, 8050, Ikarashi 2-nocho, Nishi-ku, Niigata 950-2181, Japan. E-mail: ababa@eng.niigata-u.ac.jp

Center for Transdisciplinary Research, Niigata University, 8050, Ikarashi 2-nocho, Nishi-ku, Niigata 950-2181, Japan

Received
10th October 2016
, Accepted 14th December 2016
First published on 16th December 2016
In this study, we demonstrate improved photovoltaic properties in inverted organic thin-film solar cells by simultaneous excitation of grating-coupled surface plasmons and grating-coupled waveguide modes on gold grating surfaces. The cell consists of a glass–ITO substrate/titanium dioxide/poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl):phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate)/gold structure. The grating structures were fabricated on P3HT:PCBM layers using a nanoimprinting technique with a PDMS stamp. The grating-structured PDMS stamps were fabricated using a DVD-R grating template with a grating pitch, Λ, of 740 nm. Reflectivity measurements made using p-polarized light clearly indicate 2 types of excitation modes, i.e., surface plasmons and waveguide modes, while s-polarized light produces only waveguide modes. Incident photon-to-current efficiency measurements exhibited increased photocurrent wavelengths corresponding to the wavelengths of surface plasmon excitations and waveguide mode excitations. Through the simultaneous excitation of surface plasmons and waveguide modes, short-circuit photocurrents in the grating-structured cells exhibited an improvement of up to 11% in the solar cells, leading to an efficiency increase of 16%.

The potential applications of organic thin-film solar cells (OSCs) have been widely explored for the creation of inexpensive and flexible photovoltaic cells based on organic materials. Recently, organic photovoltaic technology has achieved increases in power conversion efficiencies in organic solar cells of up to 13.2% for a multi-junction cell. However, a key issue in OSCs is maintaining their stability in ambient air. To improve the stability in ambient air, the development of inverted-type OSCs, which use a relatively air-stable top electrode/PEDOT:PSS layer on the active layer, has recently been reported. Another issue in the development of OSCs is their limited light absorption. Because organic materials exhibit relatively high resistance, the photoelectric conversion layers are typically 100–200 nm thick, resulting in low absorption. An important challenge in advancing OSCs is to enhance light absorption in the organic layers while maintaining the organic layer thickness. Many researchers have tried to improve the light absorption in OSCs, for example by tuning the bandgap of conjugated polymers to a large range of light absorption using chemical synthesis, adding anti-reflection structures on OSCs to reduce light reflection via imprinting techniques, and by using the plasmonic properties of gold or silver nanoparticles as light amplifiers by blending them into OSCs.

Because surface plasmon resonance provides an enhanced optical field, i.e., increased absorption in the cell, the use of surface plasmons is a promising technique for improving organic thin-film solar cell performance. Due to the enhanced electric field resulting from localized surface plasmon resonance and light scattering, known as Mie scattering, strong light absorption can be obtained in OSCs containing AuNPs. Therefore, AuNPs have been favored for use as light-trapping materials in OSCs. Aside from metal nanoparticles, several groups have also reported the use of periodic and non-periodic nanostructures to enhance solar cell efficiency. Another plasmon type consisting of propagating surface plasmons can be excited on metallic corrugated nanostructures. These propagating surface plasmons can efficiently enhance the electric field in the active layer, resulting in light being trapped and guided into active layers. We have also reported an enhancement in the OSC performance using metal nanoparticles and grating-coupled surface plasmons that exploit the synergistic effect of both types of plasmons. Furthermore, inverted-type OSCs with grating structures have recently been reported. Li et al. reported that inverted OSCs can be improved by the excitation of waveguide modes at around 400 nm as well as surface plasmon excitation at around 700 nm. Kim et al. theoretically investigated that both the waveguide modes and surface plasmon can be simultaneously excited in inverted OSCs with the optimization of the thickness of the TiO2 layer as an optical spacer. Although these studies exhibited the advantages of grating structures in inverted OSCs, there have been very limited studies on the experimental observation of waveguide modes in inverted OSCs for the improvement of performance.
In this study, we demonstrate an improvement in photovoltaic properties in inverted OSCs by simultaneous excitation of grating-coupled surface plasmons and grating-coupled waveguide modes on gold grating surfaces. One important difference between inverted OSCs and standard OSCs is that the former contain a TiO2 layer that generates another optical mode inside the cells. Grating structures were fabricated on P3HT:PCBM layers using a nanoimprinting technique with a PDMS stamp. The grating-structured PDMS stamps were fabricated using a DVD-R grating template with a grating pitch, Λ, of 740 nm. Reflectivity measurements made using p-polarized light clearly indicate 2 types of excitation modes, i.e., surface plasmons and waveguide modes, while s-polarized light produces only waveguide modes. Both surface plasmons and waveguide modes were clearly observed in the wavelength region of 600–800 nm. Incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) measurements exhibited increased photocurrent wavelengths corresponding to the peak wavelengths of surface plasmon excitations and waveguide mode excitations. Through the simultaneous excitation of surface plasmons and waveguide modes, short-circuit photocurrents in the grating-structured device exhibited an improvement of up to 11% in the solar cells, leading to an efficiency increase of 16%.

P3HT, PC61BM, nitric acid (HNO3), ethanol, titanium(IV) butoxide, and 1,2-dichlorobenzene were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Japan). PEDOT:PSS (Clevios™ HTL Solar) was obtained from Heraeus (Germany). All chemicals were used as received without any additional purification. An indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass with a conductivity of 10 Ω cm−2 was purchased from Furuuchi chemical (Japan).


The PDMS moulds were prepared using a DVD-R grating structure as a master template. The DVD-R material was cut into small pieces. After removing a dye layer, the DVD-R pieces were successively sonicated in detergent–water and DI–water. The liquid PDMS was cast on the DVD-R substrates. Any trapped air bubbles in the liquid PDMS were removed by placing the material in a vacuum chamber before curing at 79 °C for 3 h. After curing, PDMS moulds with a negative DVD-R grating structure were obtained.

To fabricate the solar cells, the patterned ITO substrate was treated with UV/O3 for 20 minutes in order to remove any dirt and to improve the wettability of the electrode. TiO2 layers were prepared by a sol–gel method, in which 0.1 M nitric acid in water was added to 0.147 mM titanium(IV) butoxide in ethanol with a mass ratio of 1:21, and stirred at 70–80 °C for 1 hour. The obtained titanium sol solution was spin-coated on the ITO/glass slide substrate at 3000 rpm for 60 s, followed by annealing at 100 °C for 10 min and at 300 °C for 30 min to form a TiO2 layer. This process was repeated twice to obtain the desired film thickness and smoothness. Then, a blend of P3HT and PCBM with a mass ratio of 1:0.8 dissolved in 1,2-dichlorobenzene was spin-coated on the TiO2 layer at 2000 rpm for 60 s followed by annealing at 120 °C for 11 min. A grating pattern was created on the P3HT:PC61BM layer by a nanoimprinting technique using a PDMS stamp. PEDOS:PSS was then spin-coated on the patterned P3HT:PC60BM layer at 3000 rpm for 60 s followed by annealing at 120 °C for 11 min. An Au layer was deposited on the PEDOT:PSS as a top electrode by a vacuum evaporation technique. The device was finally annealed at 150 °C for 1 hour. A schematic diagram of the fabricated plasmonic inverted organic solar cell is shown in the inset of Fig. 1. As shown in the ESI (Fig. S1), the grating structures on the P3HT:PCBM and Au electrode were imaged by atomic force microscopy (AFM), which indicated that the grating structures between the Au and PEDOT:PSS layers were indeed maintained in the fabricated product even after spincoating of PEDOT:PSS and evaporation of the Au electrode.

The morphologies of the fabricated devices were observed using an AFM (SPM-9600 from Shimadzu Corporation). The electrical properties of the fabricated devices were measured using an electrometer (B2901 from Keysight) and the solar cells were illuminated using a solar simulator (HAL-C100 from Asahi Spectra USA Inc.) with an intensity of 75 mW cm−2. For reflectivity scan measurements, we mounted the fabricated cells on a θ–2θ goniometer. A halogen lamp was used as the white light source for SP excitation. p-Polarized (p-pol) light was collimated using objective lenses and was used to irradiate the grating-structured sample, and the reflected zero-order light was detected using a spectrometer. We carried out SPR excitation experiments at fixed incident angles as a function of the wavelength. Details on the principles of the grating-coupled SP-excitation technique can be found elsewhere. Impedance spectroscopy was performed using a Parstat 4000 potentiostat from Princeton Applied Research at frequencies in the range of 0.1–100 kHz with an excitation amplitude of 15 mV.


Surface plasmons are known to be excitable in OSCs and to enhance the photovoltaic properties of OSCs. On the other hand, due to the limited thickness between electrodes in organic solar cells, waveguide modes are not readily observed in reflectivity measurements. In the case of inverted OSCs, the additional TiO2 layer increases the thickness between the electrodes, resulting in the excitation of waveguide modes as well as surface plasmons. In this study, we examined the effect of a grating structure in inverted OSCs. Fig. 2 shows the zeroth-order reflectivity curves of the fabricated inverted OSCs at fixed incident angles from 35 to 60° by illumination with either p-pol or s-pol white light. For comparison, the reflectivity curves of a reference inverted OSC without a grating structure are also shown in Fig. 2(a) and (b) (with a TiO2 thickness of 120 nm), while Fig. 2(c) and (d) show the reflectivity curves of an inverted OSC with a grating structure (with a TiO2 thickness of 120 nm). In the case of non-grating-structured solar cells, no obvious dips were observed in the wavelength region above 500 nm. On the other hand, sharp dips were observed for devices with a grating structure under both p-pol and s-pol light. The dips were shifted from 718 nm at 35° to 645 nm at 50° in the shorter wavelength side and from 790 nm at 45° to 711 nm at 60° in the longer wavelength side by illumination of p-pol light. In the case of s-pol light, the dips were shifted from 785 nm at 35° to 662 nm at 60°. As previously observed in standard-type OSCs, these dips with p-pol light should be due to surface plasmon excitations. By plotting the experimental results to the SP dispersion relation, we found that the reflectivity dips with p-pol light in the shorter wavelength side corresponds to m = 2nd and 1st order of SP dispersion curves in the following equation.

(1)
Here,
G is the grating vector, Λ is the diffraction grating pitch, λ is the wavelength, m is the diffraction order, and εm(ω) is the wavelength-dependent dielectric constant of silver given by the classical Drude's free-electron model. Experimental dip angles and calculated SP dispersion branches are shown in the ESI, Fig. S2. On the other hand, dips with s-pol light have not been observed in standard-type OSCs. Because surface plasmons cannot be excited by s-pol light, the sharp dips in s-pol light reflectivity should be due to waveguide mode excitation. This is a reasonable explanation, considering that the inverted OSCs have an additional TiO2 layer with a high dielectric constant compared to standard OSCs. Fabricated inverted OSCs without a grating structure did not exhibit waveguide modes because the grating structure generates an additional dispersion through the grating vector, 2πm/Λ, which is added to the wave vector of the incident light for both p-pol and s-pol lights. In this case, waveguide modes should be observed for s-pol light as well as p-pol light. As shown in Fig. 2(c), the number of sharp dips is clearly greater for p-pol illumination than for s-pol illumination (Fig. 2(d)). This indicates that both surface plasmon and waveguide modes can be excited in this case. To further study the surface plasmon and waveguide mode excitations in inverted OSCs with a grating structure, we increased the thickness of the TiO2 layer, as shown in Fig. 2(e) and (f). For grating-structured inverted OSCs with a 500 nm TiO2 layer, the number of sharp dips clearly increased for both p-pol illumination and s-pol illumination. It should be noted that the number of surface plasmon excitation modes does not increase with the increase of the thickness, while the number of waveguide modes increases, meaning that the increased number of sharp dips is due to the increased thickness of the TiO2 layer. When we reduce the thickness of the TiO2 layer to 70 nm (Fig. S3, ESI), the wavelengths of the reflectivity dips in both p-pol and s-pol move to shorter wavelength compared to the inverted OSCs with a 120 nm-thick TiO2 layer. For instance, the dip wavelength of inverted OSCs shifted from 718 nm (with a 120 nm-thick TiO2 layer) to 665 nm (with a 70 nm-thick TiO2 layer) under p-pol light at an incident angle of 35°. For s-pol light, the dip wavelength shifted from 785 nm to 761 nm at an incident angle of 35°. This is reasonable because the dispersion curves shift to higher angular frequency (i.e. shorter wavelength) in both plus and minus mth modes as the thickness of the deposited layer increases on the metallic grating. The results indicate that the presence of a TiO2 layer and a grating structure constitutes an important technique for enhancing electric fields in inverted organic thin-film solar cells.


Next, we investigated the photovoltaic properties of fabricated inverted OSCs. Fig. 3 shows the current density (J)–voltage (V) properties of inverted OSCs with and without grating structures under solar light illumination. As described in the results below, short-circuit photocurrents and efficiency in grating-structured devices indeed exhibited improvements in performance of up to 11% (from 6.13 to 6.83 mA) and 16% (from 3.03 to 3.53%), respectively, compared to the device without a grating structure. The enhancement is a little less than the previously reported efficiency enhancement of 19% in plasmonic inverted OSCs which use MoO3/silver as a top electrode. Because the surface plasmon excitation on Au is weaker than that on silver, the difference should be mainly due to the difference of surface plasmon enhanced electric field. Photovoltaic parameters of short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage, (Voc), fill factor (FF) and efficiency (η) are obtained from the J–V curves and summarized in Table 1. IPCE measurements (Fig. S4, ESI) showed an increase of the photocurrent in the broad region of the wavelength. To study the effect, we plotted the enhancement factor of power conversion efficiency under p-pol or s-pol light illumination as a function of the TiO2 layer thickness from 30 to 270 nm in inverted OSCs with and without a grating structure (Fig. 4(a)). The J–V properties and photovoltaic parameters as a function of TiO2 layer thickness are also summarized in Fig. S5 and Table S1 (ESI). For solar cells without a grating structure, the efficiency under p-pol light was nearly the same as that under s-pol light. The efficiency of a grating-structured device under s-pol light exhibited an improvement compared to that under s-pol light without a grating structure. This indicates that a grating structure itself can improve the performance even without surface plasmon excitation due to the excitation of waveguide modes. The efficiency was further improved for grating-structured devices compared to devices without a grating structure under p-pol light, indicating the effect of simultaneous excitations of surface plasmons and waveguide modes. Greater enhancement was especially observed for TiO2 layer thicknesses in the range of 30 to 120 nm. The highest efficiency was observed for a 70 nm-thick TiO2 layer with a grating structure under p-pol illumination. For TiO2 layer thicknesses above 200 nm, the enhancement factor decreased. The reason for this is not yet clear, but one possibility is that TiO2 layers of more than 200 nm might be thick enough to excite waveguide modes even without a grating structure, so that the efficiency difference between devices with and without a grating structure becomes smaller. The efficiency enhancement factor was plotted as a function of the incident light angle, as shown in Fig. 4(b). The enhancement trend for each polarization type was similar to the result in Fig. 4(a). The enhancement factor gradually increased with increasing incident light angles. This result is consistent with the reflectivity measurements (Fig. 2). The dip angle shifts to a lower wavelength region as the incident light angle increases, which moves closer to the absorption peak of the P3HT:PCBM layer. This means that the wavelength region of the electric field enhancement gradually overlaps with the peak wavelength of the photoelectric conversion layer as the incident angle increases, resulting in generation of more photocarriers in the P3HT:PCBM layer. Upon comparing the efficiency between p-pol and s-pol light illumination for grating-structured devices, the performance under p-pol light exhibits greater enhancement than under s-pol light. To study this effect, we plotted the IPCE enhancement factor, which is the IPCE value under p-pol light divided by the IPCE value under s-pol light (both with a grating structure) as shown in Fig. 4(c). In this figure, both peaks and dips can be clearly observed. The regions of the peaks and dips correspond to the surface plasmon and waveguide mode excitations, respectively, observed in Fig. 2. For instance, the IPCE peak and dip were observed at 640 and 710 nm, respectively, while the dip angles with p-pol and s-pol (Fig. 2(c) and (d)) were observed at 662 and 711 nm, respectively. The reflectivity dip wavelengths and the IPCE peak and dip wavelengths are summarized in the ESI, Fig. S6. The wavelengths of the IPCE peaks of the longer wavelength side and reflectivity dips correspond well. Although the wavelengths of the IPCE peaks of the shorter wavelength side and IPCE dips do not correspond exactly to the wavelengths of reflectivity dips due to complicated effects of surface plasmons and waveguide modes in solar cells, the trend in the wavelength shifts corresponds well to the results of the reflectivity measurements. This result clearly exhibits that the IPCE peaks indicate enhancement by surface plasmons or waveguide excitation with p-pol light, while the IPCE dips indicate enhancement by waveguide excitation with s-pol light. In previous reports, photocurrent enhancements by waveguide modes and surface plasmon have been mainly confirmed by FDTD simulations. On the other hand, we could confirm the relationship between the waveguide modes/surface plasmon excitation in reflectivity measurements and photocurrent enhancement in IPCE measurements.


J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF

η (%)
Without grating
6.13
0.63
0.59
3.03
With grating
6.83
0.63
0.62
3.53

Impedance spectroscopy is a useful technique for investigating the interfacial properties in solar cells. To determine the differences in the interfacial properties of the studied inverted OSCs, impedance spectra were measured under p-pol or s-pol light. The Nyquist plots of the impedance spectra are shown in Fig. 5. Because single semi-circle curves were observed in all cases, we assume a simple circuit model as shown in the inset. In this model, the Rs value of the left-hand side of the semi-circle corresponds to the series resistance of the circuit, which was approximately 8.3 Ω in all cases, indicating that the series resistance was affected by neither the light polarization nor the grating structures. The Rct value, which corresponds to the diameter of the semi-circle at this frequency, represents the bulk resistance of TiO2/P3HT:PCBM. The phase constant element (CPE) in parallel with R1 is used to explain a distribution of relaxation time at interfaces and is nearly the same as the differential capacitance. In a previous report, two semicircles were observed in the Nyquist plot with inverted-type OSCs and they were derived from n-type semiconductors and the P3HT:PCBM layer. Hence, the single semi-circles observed in our result should be a superposition of the two semi-circles. As shown in the figure, the Rct value decreases slightly in the case of inverted solar cells with a grating structure. The decease of the Rct value is attributed to an increase of photocarriers in the TiO2/P3HT:PCBM layer. As increased photocarriers contribute to an increase of short-circuit current, the result corresponds to the J–V property observed in Fig. 3. Furthermore, the Rct value for p-pol light was 24.1 Ω, which was smaller than that for s-pol light (23.2 Ω) in the grating-structured inverted OSC, while the values for both p-pol light and s-pol light were nearly the same (24.5 Ω) for the inverted OSC without a grating structure. These results clearly indicate that the grating structure enhances photocarrier generation, especially under p-pol light.


We demonstrated that surface plasmons and waveguide modes can be simultaneously excited in inverted OSCs by fabricating a grating structure on the P3HT:PCBM/Au interface. We found that the TiO2 layer plays an important role in the excitation of waveguide modes. Reflectivity measurements with p-polarized light clearly indicate 2 types of excitation modes, i.e., surface plasmons and waveguide modes, while s-polarized light produces only waveguide modes. Incident photon-to-current efficiency measurements exhibited increased photocurrent wavelengths corresponding to the wavelengths of surface plasmon excitation and waveguide mode excitation. Through the simultaneous excitation of surface plasmons and waveguide modes, short-circuit photocurrents in the grating structures exhibited an improvement of up to 11% in the solar cells, leading to an efficiency increase of 16%. The results of this study provide not only a better understanding of nanostructured systems in OSCs but also help indicate how future performance enhancements in solar light-harvesting applications may be achieved.


The authors declare no competing financial interest.


This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP25390051 and JP16K13662.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: AFM images of grating structures of Au and P3HT:PCBM surfaces, J–V properties and IPCE properties of inverted OSCs with various conditions. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp06931b
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017