 DOI: 10.1039/D2SE00144F
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2022, 6, 2727-2733


Ilya V.
Martynov
*,

Alexander
Akkuratov
,

Pavel A.
Troshin
,

Iris
Visoly-Fisher
 and 

Eugene A.
Katz


Institute for Problems of Chemical Physics of the Russian Academy of Sciences (IPCP RAS), Academician Semenov Avenue 1, Chernogolovka, Moscow region, 142432 Russian Federation. E-mail: martinov@mitht.org

Department of Solar Energy and Environmental Physics, Swiss Institute for Dryland Environmental and Energy Research, Jacob Blaustein Institutes for Desert Research, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Midreshet Ben-Gurion 8499000, Israel

Received
31st January 2022
, Accepted 1st May 2022
First published on 2nd May 2022
While high efficiencies were achieved for organic photovoltaic (OPV) cells, the commercialization of this technology requires addressing the challenge of long-term device stability. The application of stabilizers is one of the promising approaches to suppress OPV degradation since it is inexpensive and easily scalable. However, only limited progress has been achieved in the development of such stabilizing additives. Herein, we proposed and practically evaluated naphthalene dithiol (NDT) as a promising stabilizing additive, which mimics the action of the natural glutathione system scavenging radicals and reactive oxygen species in animals. Using NDT did not lead to any significant drop in the characteristics of the assembled solar cells, whereas the operational stability was improved: the devices maintained more than 90% of their initial efficiency after 200 h of outdoor aging under real sunlight illumination in the Negev desert. A decrease in the non-geminate recombination has been achieved by reducing the number of traps and suppressing their formation in the course of device operation. These results suggest that using NDT as a stabilizing additive might facilitate the development of the OPV technology with the required long device operational lifetimes.

Organic photovoltaics may play a key role in future sustainable energy generation. Organic solar cells are easy to manufacture (e.g., using Roll-to-Roll technology), and their production cost is lower than that of their inorganic counterparts. Organic devices can be thin, light-weight, semitransparent, and mechanically flexible, providing new opportunities for their integration in wearable textile electronics and other emerging technologies. Most importantly, their power conversion efficiency (PCE) has significantly increased over the last few years, reaching a current record above 18%. However, the organic nature of such solar cells also makes them susceptible to degradation caused by environmental stresses such as oxygen, heat, light, and humidity. Although encapsulation of these devices can mitigate or even eliminate some of the aforementioned adverse effects, overcoming these limitations at the molecular level is the most desirable solution for this problem.

We have previously demonstrated that the most efficient donor materials undergo photochemical and thermal degradation pathways. These processes result in the generation of radicals that can act as traps for charge carriers. Moreover, photo-induced crosslinking of the conjugated polymers can lead to the formation of defects, which can also act as traps. It was shown that the accumulation of radical species, such as polarons, radical anions etc., has a significant adverse effect on the stability of organic solar cells. Towards this end, designing a stabilizing agent, capable of reducing the number of radical species in the photoactive layer, is highly desirable to limit the formation of new traps. Stabilizing additives often are based on sterically hindered phenols, UV-light absorbers, hydroperoxide quenchers,etc. and were widely used in the plastic industry. Such stabilizers prevent photooxidation of polymers and suppress subsequent chain reactions. There have been attempts to use some conventional radical scavengers, but these stabilizers lead to a drop in PCE. Herein, we introduce naphthalene dithiol NDT as a highly promising radical scavenger. The ability of dithiols to trap radicals and their antioxidant properties are well known. Furthermore, naphthalene derivatives are often used as components of the OPV active layer and, therefore, we could expect that using NDT as an additive will not compromise the efficiency of organic solar cells.
We assessed the stabilizing behavior of NDT in bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells using electron donor conjugated polymer P1 based on the popular BDT and CPDT blocks and the fullerene derivative [60]PCBM as acceptor component (Fig. 1a). We show that the application of NDT as a stabilizing additive suppresses trap-assisted recombination in organic solar cells and improves their operational stability under outdoor conditions in the Negev desert.

All solvents and materials were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich or Acros Organics and used as received or purified according to the standard procedures. The synthesis of conjugated polymers P1 was reported previously. 1,8-naphthalene dithiol (NDT) was purified by vacuum sublimation (vacuum 10−3 mbar); the achieved purity was >99% as revealed by HPLC.


The solar cells were fabricated in the standard ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P1:[60]PCBM/Mg/Al architecture (Fig. 1b). The ITO glass substrates were sequentially cleaned by soaking in an ultrasonic bath with deionized water followed by acetone and isopropanol. The substrates were dried with nitrogen blow and treated with RF oxygen plasma (40 kHz, 150 W) for 5 min. The PEDOT:PSS (Clevios HTL) solution, filtered through a 0.45 μm PES membrane, was spin-coated in air at 3000 rpm for 60 s onto the cleaned substrates. The coated films were annealed in air at 160 °C for 10 min. The conjugated polymers P1 (10 mg) and [60]PCBM (15 mg) were dissolved together in 1 mL of 1,2-dichlorobenzene while stirring at 60 °C for 12 h. The NDT additive was optionally added to the blend solution in the amounts of 1–10% with respect to the weight of P1. The blend solutions were filtered through a 0.45 μm PTFE syringe filter and spin-coated on top of the annealed PEDOT:PSS films. The active layer thickness was ca. 120 nm as estimated by AFM operating in a profilometer regime. The obtained films were transferred immediately inside the glove box and thermally annealed in an argon atmosphere at 95 °C for 10 min. The top electrode comprising Mg (30 nm) and Al (60 nm) was deposited by thermal evaporation at the pressure below 4 × 10−6 mbar in a vacuum chamber integrated into the MBraum glove box. The active area of the photovoltaic cells was ∼20 mm2 as defined by a shadow mask.

The fabricated organic solar cells were encapsulated using top glass plates and UV curable DELO 575 glue as adhesive.

The current density–voltage(J–V) characteristics of the devices were measured under simulated AM1.5G (100 mW cm−2) illumination using an Oriel LCS-100 solar simulator (Newport). Light-intensity dependence measurements were performed with PAIOS instrument (Fluxim) using a white LED delivering 150 mW cm−2 irradiance as a light source for steady-state and transient measurements. Short circuit current density (JSC) and open-circuit voltage (VOC) dependences on the light intensity were recorded using a white LED as the light source with the maximum power (100%) of 60 mW. Due to the mismatch of the LED radiation spectrum and AM1.5G solar spectrum, the intensity of 75% corresponds to 1 Sun AM 1.5G, according to the JSC values.

The stability of OPV cells was investigated under real outdoor conditions (Sede Boker in the Negev desert, Israel, latitude, 30.8°N; longitude, 34.8°E; altitude, 475 m), following the ISOS-O-1 protocol during September 2019, with the exposure of the OPV samples to natural sunlight for cumulative 10 days under ambient atmospheric conditions on a stationary platform tilted at 30 deg. facing south. The average day-time light intensity during the experiment was 65 mW cm−2 at ambient temperatures not exceeding 40 °C. The OPV devices were kept at an open circuit during the light exposure. Details of outdoor aging experiments were described previously. The device characteristics were assessed every evening using indoor measurements of their J–V characteristics under simulated AM1.5G (100 mW cm−2) illumination conditions. The cells were stored indoors for the night. Transient photovoltage (TPV) and transient photocurrent (TPC) measurements were also performed during “night-time” using a PAIOS platform (©Fluxim).
Transient photovoltage (TPV) measurements were realized by applying a small optical perturbation at various constant illumination levels at open-circuit. The magnitude of light intensity change resulted in small changes in the VOC by < 3%, so that ΔVOC ≪ VOC. The photovoltage decay kinetics was monitored for all devices and it followed a monoexponential decay.
The transient photocurrent (TPC) technique was used to estimate the charge carrier density accumulated in the cells under the open-circuit voltage condition. The devices were exposed to short LED pulses (∼200 μs long) under the short-circuit conditions and the rise and decay of the photogenerated current signal in the device were monitored. Furthermore, we applied short optical perturbations under constant light bias exactly as used for TPV measurements described above, but under short circuit conditions. Integration of the transient photocurrent profiles allowed us to estimate the changes in the charge carriers' density due to the aforementioned perturbations (see below the description of the analysis of the experimental data and the results).
The capacitance measurements were performed in the dark in impedance regime within the frequency range from 10 MHz to 10 Hz using the offset voltage of 0 V and the probing pulse amplitude of 70.0 mV. A distinct plateau the frequencies of 10–1000 kHz corresponded to the geometric capacitance. Taking into the account the device active area of 0.4 cm2, the Cg values of 88 nF and 86.8 nF were obtained for pristine and aged device w/o NDT, respectively, and also 89.6 nF and 88.8 nF for pristine and aged devices with NDT additive, respectively.

The devices with 5 wt% loading of the NDT stabilizing additive exhibited optimal photovoltaic performance compared to the cells assembled with other NDT concentrations varied in the range of 1–10 wt%. Fig. 2 shows the representative current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics for P1:[60]PCBM (1:1.5 w/w) cells fabricated without and with 5% NDT in the pristine state and after aging. The NDT-stabilized devices demonstrated higher Voc and Jsc values, lower fill factors (FF) and similar PCEs (within an error) compared to the reference cells (Table 1). These results prove that the introduction of NDT does not significantly affect the device performance.

Additive

V
OC, mV

J
SC, mA cm−2
FF, %
PCE, %

a Average parameters for eight devices.

W/o
Pristine
590 ± 2
14.1 ± 0.3
60 ± 1
5.0 ± 0.1
Aged
593 ± 2
13.2 ± 0.2
53 ± 2
4.2 ± 0.1
5% NDT
Pristine
605 ± 6
15.1 ± 0.2
56 ± 1
5.1 ± 0.1
Aged
600 ± 1
14.7 ± 0.5
56 ± 2
4.9 ± 0.1
Particularly interesting was the effect of NDT on the operational stability of organic solar cells. Fig. 3 shows that the PCE of the reference cells (w/o NDT additive) dropped by 15% after 10 d under outdoor aging conditions. The most significant changes occurred within the first 4 d such as a considerable decrease in the fill factor (20% loss) and a slight decrease in the short circuit current density (10% loss). The devices incorporating NDT stabilizing additive have shown a similar drop in their characteristics within the first 3–4 d, but then showed almost complete recovery of their initial performance after 6 d of aging. This observation suggests that NDT slowly healed the defects formed at the initial stage of device operation (burn-in process). It should be noted that some minor self-healing effect was also observed for the cells assembled w/o NDT additive, which could be due to the relaxation of the system after initial cross-linking or evolution of some of the aged interfaces.
Considering our recent findings, light-induced cross-linking of the polymer molecules might be responsible for the burn-in degradation.
The cross-linking occurs within the first tens of hours under light exposure and self-terminate when the polymer chains become immobile and therefore can hardly react further with each other. It should be noticed that NDT additive does not affect the rate of P1 cross-linking as revealed by the gel permeation chromatography (GPC) analysis (Fig. S2, ESI), which points to the [2 + 2]cycloaddition pathway of the intermolecular coupling.
The photochemical transformation of polymer chains produce traps for charge carriers, some of which are related to stabilized radical species. We could assume that NDT could heal such traps by radical hydrogenation (R is converted to RH) producing the corresponding naphthalene disulfide (NDS) as shown in Scheme 1a. It should be emphasized that the radical scavenging action of NDT is biomimetic since similar antioxidative properties are provided in animals by glutathione, a natural peptide with SH group (GSH) which is converted to the corresponding disulfide (GSSG) upon oxidation (Scheme 1b).
The dependence of the device JSC upon the light intensity (Fig. 4a) was investigated to assess the bimolecular charge recombination using the standard JSC ∝ Iα power law equation. Briefly, a value of α equal to unity reflects weak/no bimolecular recombination. In contrast, smaller α values indicate competition between carrier recombination and extraction. In our case, all devices with and without the NDT additive delivered α values of ∼1, thus indicating weak bimolecular recombination and efficient charge extraction under the short circuit conditions.

Fig. 4b shows the linear part of the dependence of VOC on the light intensity plotted in a semilogarithmic scale (full-scale graph including low light intensities is shown in Fig. S1, ESI). These data were fitted according to the basic photodiode theory:
VOC ∝ nkT/q ln(I)
(1)
where
k, T, and q are the Boltzmann constant, temperature expressed in Kelvin, and the elementary charge, respectively. The ideality factor n reflects the presence or absence of carrier traps in the active layer or at interfaces with the electrodes. Deviations from n = 1 (the trap-free condition) point to the existence of trap-assisted recombination. The reference devices assembled without NDT show the slope of n = 1.67, which indicates significant trap-assisted recombination near the open-circuit condition. The devices with NDT additive delivered the n value of 1.60, which was slightly less than for the reference devices. However, aging for 10 d hours resulted in a dramatic increase of n from 1.67 to 2.03 for the reference NDT-free cells, which evidences the appearance of a high density of traps facilitating charge recombination. On the contrary, the devices loaded with NDT showed just a minor increase in the ideality factor from 1.60 to 1.68. These results strongly suggest that the NDT additive was able to heal the traps and thus suppress the trap-assisted recombination of charge carriers. Transient electrical measurements were additionally used to compare the cells with and without NDT additive. The device response to a 200 μs square-pulse LED excitation was monitored by measuring the photocurrent profile under short circuit conditions (Fig. 5). The transient photocurrent (TPC) profiles showed rapid rise and decay within several tens of μs as well as a slow adjustment to a quasi-stationary value. Fast rise and decay are often attributed to the transport of mobile charge carriers, while the slower transfer region is attributed to charge trapping/de-trapping.

An increased photocurrent in the NDT-stabilized device (Fig. 5a) may suggest a suppressed recombination of charge carriers due to decreased number of trap states. It is also notable that the introduction of NDT results in somewhat faster TPC profile rise and decay kinetics (Fig. 5b and c), which is also consistent with the suppressed formation of trap states in the system.
To evaluate the effects of the NDT additive on the recombination dynamics during the sample aging, we have analyzed the charge carrier lifetimes (τΔn), carrier density (nCR), and recombination reaction orders (δ) using the TPV/TPC measurements (Fig. 5 and 6). Charge carrier lifetime τΔn depends exponentially on the cell open-circuit voltage, as follows from the eqn (2), where β is the rate constant defining the charge carriers recombination:
τΔn = τΔn0e−βVOC
(2)
To determine the carrier density (nCR), the TPC measurements were performed under short-circuit conditions using the same optical perturbation and the illumination intensities as in the TPV experiment. The charge carrier concentrations in the samples were calculated following the previously reported approach:
(3)
where
A is the device active area, q is the elementary charge, d is the device thickness, C is the effective capacitance, n0 is the carrier concentration prefactor, and γ is a constant.

The reference NDT-free devices showed an increase in the charge carrier lifetime from 3.5 × 10−6 to 3.9 × 10−6 s after degradation for 10 d when measured under the illumination equivalent of 1 sun. On the contrary, the NDT-stabilized devices showed a decrease in the carrier lifetime from 3.2 × 10−6 to 2.8 × 10−6 s under the same conditions. The carrier density (n) increased from 1.5 × 1017 to 1.8 × 1017 cm−3 for the reference cells and from 1.4 × 1017 to 1.5 × 1017 cm−3 for the devices incorporating NDT additive. Considering that trapping of the charge carriers increases their effective lifetime and concentration, the obtained results are consistent with the presented above findings strongly suggesting that NDT additive suppresses the formation of defects in the active layer of organic solar cells under the outdoor operation conditions.
The apparent charge carrier recombination order δ can be deduced from the slope of the double logarithmic plot of the carrier lifetime as a function of the charge carrier density. The obtained δ values of >2 (Fig. 6) indicate high trap density in the cells, which is consistent with the high ideality factors presented above. The effective recombination orders >2 were previously reported for P3HT:[60]PCBM solar cells.
It is notable that the introduction of the NDT additive notably decreases the δ value from 2.58 to 2.12 for the pristine cells. This finding indicates that the addition of the NDT can effectively suppress trap-assisted recombination in as-fabricated devices. Furthermore, the aging of NDT-containing cells results in just a small increase of δ from 2.12 to 2.39, which features the remarkable stabilization effect of the NDT additive. On the contrary, the reference non-stabilized cells demonstrated a massive increase of δ up to 3.04 thus pointing to the accumulation of traps under light exposure.

To summarize, we introduced in this work NDT as a promising additive improving the operational stability of organic solar cells via biomimetic antioxidative pathways. Using a set of complementary techniques, it has been shown that NDT is capable of efficient defect healing in the device active layer and reducing the density of traps. Most importantly, NDT prevents the accumulation of new traps in the devices under light exposure under realistic outdoor solar cell operation conditions in the Negev desert. Consequently, the NDT-stabilized devices exhibited improved operational stability and a strongly pronounced self-healing effect. Indeed, the efficiency of the devices incorporating 5% NDT in the active layer decreased by less than 4% after 10 day outdoor aging under real sunlight illumination in the Negev desert, whereas the reference cells assembled without NDT stabilizer lost 15% of the initial performance under the same conditions. Considering the fact that NDT does not negatively impact the device photovoltaic performance, it represents a highly promising stabilizing additive for the development of efficient and stable organic solar cells.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the Russian Science Foundation (project No. 18-13-00205-P). I. V. Martynov acknowledges the support from the Israeli Council for Higher Education within the framework of the Research Academic Internship Program for PhD students.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See https://doi.org/10.1039/d2se00144f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022