 DOI: 10.1039/C2CP43002A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 15046-15053

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Sungho
Nam
,

Minjung
Shin
,

Soohyeong
Park
,

Sooyong
Lee
,

Hwajeong
Kim
* and 

Youngkyoo
Kim
*

Organic Nanoelectronics Laboratory, Department of Chemical Engineering, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 702-701, Republic of Korea. E-mail: ykimm@knu.ac.kr; khj217@knu.ac.kr; Web: http//one.knu.ac.kr Fax: +82 53 950 6615; Tel: +82 53 950 5616

Solar Cell Business Team, LG Innotek, Gyeonggi-do 447-705, Republic of Korea

Priority Research Center, Research Institute of Advanced Energy Technology, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 702-701, Republic of Korea

Received
28th August 2012
, Accepted 10th September 2012
First published on 10th September 2012
We report the improved performance of all-polymer solar cells with bulk heterojunction nanolayers of an electron-donating polymer (poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT)) and an electron-accepting polymer (poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-benzothiadiazole) (F8BT)), which were both doped with 4-ethylbenzenesulfonic acid (EBSA). To choose the doping ratio of P3HT for all-polymer solar cells, various EBSA doping ratios (0, 1, 3, 5, 10, 20 wt%) were tested by employing optical absorption spectroscopy, photoluminescence spectroscopy, photoelectron yield spectroscopy, and space-charge-limited current (SCLC) mobility measurement. The doping reaction of P3HT with EBSA was followed by observing the colour change in solutions. The final doping ratio for P3HT was chosen as 1 wt% from the best hole mobility measured in the thickness direction, while that for F8BT was fixed as 10 wt% (F8BT-EBSA). The polymer:polymer solar cells with bulk heterojunction nanolayers of P3HT-EBSA (EBSA-doped P3HT) and F8BT-EBSA (EBSA-doped F8BT) showed greatly improved short circuit current density (JSC) and open circuit voltage (VOC), compared to the undoped solar cells. As a result, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) was enhanced by ca. 300% for the 6:4 (P3HT-EBSA:F8BT-EBSA) composition and ca. 400% for the 8:2 composition. The synchrotron-radiation grazing incidence angle X-ray diffraction (GIXD) measurement revealed that the crystallinity of the doped nanolayers significantly increased by EBSA doping owing to the formation of advanced phase segregation morphology, as supported by the surface morphology change measured by atomic force microscopy. Thus the improved PCE can be attributed to the enhanced charge transport by the formation of permanent charges and better charge percolation paths by EBSA doping.

The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of organic solar cells has been recently enhanced up to ∼10% since the early breakthroughs. The 10% PCE could be achieved by employing a tandem structure that is composed of two individual cells stacked vertically via evaporation of small molecules or spin-coating of polymer:fullerene blends. Considering the low-cost benefit of organic solar cells compared to conventional inorganic solar cells, wet-processable polymer:fullerene bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells are preferred to small molecular solar cells that require an expensive vacuum chamber system used similarly for inorganic solar cells. To maximize the benefit of wet processes for polymer:fullerene BHJ solar cells, a continuous roll-to-roll production method including slit-die coating, spray coating, gravure printing, ink-jet printing etc. is required for high throughput production of flexible solar cell modules.

In most cases of polymer:fullerene solar cells, regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and soluble fullerene derivatives ([6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) etc.) have been used as a standard electron-donating polymer and an electron acceptor, respectively, before sulfur-containing copolymers have been introduced for high PCE solar cells. However, fullerene derivatives are inherently one of small molecules so that the polymer:fullerene solar cells are not considered real polymer (plastic) solar cells. In addition, it is a concern that the long-term stability of polymer:fullerene solar cells might be affected by continuous aggregation/crystallization of fullerene derivatives (molecules), even in the solid state matrix of electron-donating polymers, under solar light illumination for a long time.
In this context, all polymer BHJ (polymer:polymer) solar cells have been studied but their efficiencies are still inferior to those of polymer:fullerene solar cells. The reason why so low efficiency in polymer:polymer solar cells can be mainly attributed to the poorly optimized morphology for charge percolation owing to the intrinsic nature of polymers that have long chains compared to soluble fullerenes that easily undergo aggregation/crystallization. Hence unmatured morphology in polymer:polymer nanolayers causes high charge blocking resistances between donor and acceptor components by the presence of still high portion of intermixed states (between electron-donating polymer chains and electron-accepting polymer chains). In contrast, the charge separation yield becomes low in the case of overmatured morphology because of a lowered donor–acceptor interfacial area. Another reason is that most of the electron-accepting polymers have lower electron mobility than fullerene derivatives because of their low crystallinity compared to the fullerene derivatives. In order to improve the electron mobility of electron-accepting polymers without new synthesis, recently, we tried chemical doping using an organosulfonic acid (2-ethylbenzenesulfonic acid – EBSA) and achieved improved PCE.
In this work, we attempted to fabricate polymer:polymer solar cells with BHJ nanolayers in which electron-donating (P3HT) and electron-accepting (poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-benzothiadiazole) (F8BT)) polymers are both doped with EBSA, because the hole mobility of the electron-donating polymer (P3HT) was found to greatly increase after the EBSA doping in a geometry of organic field-effect transistors (OFETs). In this study, the trend of hole mobility in the thickness direction of the EBSA-doped P3HT (P3HT-EBSA) nanolayers was measured by employing a space-charge limited current (SCLC) model, while their ionization potential according to doping ratios was examined with a photoelectron yield spectroscopy (PEYS). The surface nanostructure and the polymer chain ordering in the P3HT-EBSA:F8BT-EBSA nanolayers were investigated using an atomic force microscopy and a synchrotron-radiation grazing incidence angle X-ray diffraction, respectively.

P3HT (regioregularity = 92.2%; weight-average molecular weight = 5.9 × 104; polydispersity index = 2.32) as an electron-donating polymer was used as received from Rieke Metals (USA), while F8BT (weight-average molecular weight = 6.7 × 104; polydispersity index = 3.3) as an electron-accepting polymer was purchased from American Dye Sources (Canada). EBSA as a dopant was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. PEDOT:PSS solutions (PH500; nanolayer conductivity = 300 S cm−1) were used without further purification as received from H.C. Starck. The doping reaction between F8BT and EBSA was carried out by adding EBSA into F8BT solutions (10 wt% EBSA doping), followed by stirring with a magnetic stirrer at 60 °C for 24 h, as reported in our previous report. To dope P3HT with EBSA, the EBSA content was varied up to 20 wt% (0, 1, 3, 5 10 and 20 wt%). The mixture solutions of P3HT and EBSA in chlorobenzene (solvent) were subject to stirring with a magnetic stirrer at 60 °C for 24 h. As the reaction time increased, the solution colour changed gradually and became darker depending on the EBSA content (see the Fig. 2c inset), which finally led to the P3HT-EBSA solutions. For the examination of the doping ratio-dependent properties, the P3HT-EBSA solutions were spun on quartz substrates (for the measurement of optical and photoelectronic characteristics). The blend solutions of P3HT-EBSA (1 wt% EBSA) and F8BT-EBSA (10 wt% EBSA) were prepared using chlorobenzene (as a solvent) with two compositions (P3HT-EBSA:F8BT-EBSA = 6:4 and 8:2 by weight) at a solid concentration of 20 mg ml−1. The blend solutions were vigorously stirred on a hot plate to achieve a well-mixed state at 60 °C for 24 h.


Prior to device fabrication, indium-tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrates were photolithographically patterned to have 8 mm × 10 mm ITO stripes. Just before the spin-coating process, the patterned ITO-glasses were cleaned using the wet process (acetone/isopropyl alcohol) and UV-ozone treatment. For the fabrication of hole-only devices for the SCLC mobility measurements, the PEDOT:PSS layer (thickness = 40 nm) was spin-coated on the cleaned ITO-glass substrates and annealed at 230 °C for 15 min. Then the P3HT-EBSA nanolayers (thickness = 45 nm) were spin-coated on the PEDOT-PSS layer and soft-baked at 60 °C for 15 min. Finally, depositing the top electrode (Al, thickness = 100 nm) on the P3HT-EBSA nanolayers resulted in the hole-only devices with an active area of 0.09 mm2. To fabricate solar cells, the PEDOT:PSS layer was similarly prepared on the ITO-glass substrates as done for the hole-only devices. Next, the P3HT-EBSA:F8BT-EBSA nanolayers (thickness = ∼60 nm) were spin-coated on the PEDOT:PSS layer. After soft-baking under the same conditions for the fabrication of hole-only devices, all samples were moved into a vacuum chamber that is equipped inside a nitrogen-filled glove box system. After evacuating the chamber down to ∼1 × 10−6 torr, lithium fluoride (LiF, thickness » 1 nm) and Al (thickness = 100 nm) were sequentially deposited on top of the P3HT-EBSA:F8BT-EBSA layer. Then all devices fabricated were subjected to thermal annealing at three different temperatures (130 °C, 140 °C, and 150 °C) for 30 min inside a nitrogen-filled glove box in order to avoid the moisture or oxygen attack. The undoped devices with the P3HT:F8BT nanolayers were also fabricated as similarly for the doped devices.


The nanolayer thickness was measured using a thickness profiler (Alpha Step 200, Tencor Instruments), while the ionization potentials of the P3HT-EBSA nanolayers were measured using a photoelectron yield spectrometer (AC-2, Riken-Keiki, Japan). The optical absorption and photoluminescence spectra of nanolayers were measured using a UV-visible spectrophotometer (Optizen 2120, MECASYS) and a fluorescence spectrometer (FS-2, Scinco). The nanostructures of nanolayers were measured using a synchrotron-radiation grazing incidence angle X-ray diffraction (GIXD) system at Pohang Accelerator Laboratory (PAL, U-SAXS, 9A beamline, X-ray wavelength = 0.1112 nm, incidence angle = 0.14°). The surface morphology of nanolayers was measured using an AFM system (Nanoscope IIIa, Digital Instruments). The performance of polymer:polymer solar cells was measured using a specialized solar cell measurement system (1 sun condition, 100 mW cm−2) equipped with a solar simulator (92250A-1000, Newport-Oriel) and an electrometer (Model 2400, Keithley).


The doping reactions of P3HT and F8BT were carried out using EBSA as a dopant (Fig. 1). The doping ratio was fixed as 10 wt% for F8BT because the best performance of P3HT:F8BT-EBSA solar cells was obtained at this doping ratio in our previous report (Fig. 1b). In the case of P3HT (Fig. 1a), the EBSA content was varied as 0, 1, 3, 5, 10, and 20 wt% in order to find the best doping ratio for the highest hole mobility in the thickness direction (normal to the nanolayer plane), though the highest hole mobility (parallel to the nanolayer plane) was measured in an OFET structure (note that the maximum EBSA doping ratio in our previous report was 1 wt%). The details of doping conditions are described in Experimental section. As shown in Fig. 2a, the optical density (OD) at wavelengths between ca. 700 nm and 1100 nm increased as the EBSA content increased for the P3HT-EBSA nanolayers. This result evidences that the degree of EBSA doping is dependent on the amount of EBSA, which is also supported by the gradually changed solution colour according to the EBSA content (see the photograph in the Fig. 2c inset). Here we note that the overall spectral shape of P3HT at the wavelengths below 650 nm was almost unchanged, though the optical density (absorbance) was reduced with the EBSA content (not shown here). In particular, we find that the intensity (OD) at around 615 nm became marginally increased as the EBSA content increased, which may be assigned to the slightly enhanced P3HT stacking (ordering) of undoped parts when the P3HT-EBSA solutions are spun on substrates. However, the ionization potential was found almost unchanged because the onset point in the PEYS plot was measured at nearly the same energy though the relative PE yield seems to be lowered as the EBSA content increased (see Fig. 2b). This result is in agreement with our previous report that was basically dealt with the EBSA contents lower than 1 wt%. Hence the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy of the present P3HT-EBSA nanolayers is calculated to be ∼4.9 eV after calibration.

As shown in Fig. 2c, the SCLC hole mobility in the direction normal to the plane of the P3HT-EBSA nanolayers was slightly improved by 1 wt% EBSA doping and became almost similar to the mobility of the undoped (pristine) P3HT nanolayer by 3 wt% EBSA doping. Further increasing the EBSA doping ratio gradually reduced the hole mobility, resulting in one order lower mobility for the 20 wt% EBSA-doped P3HT nanolayer than the pristine P3HT nanolayer. Here we need to pay attention to the result that the hole mobility reduction became small after 5 wt% EBSA doping, which may reflect trade-off between the improved charge transport by the formation of permanent charges (by EBSA doping) and the increased insulating nature by the added EBSA molecules. The increased permanent charges with the EBSA content are supported by the gradually increased dielectric constant of the P3HT-EBSA nanolayers (Fig. S1, ESI).
On the basis of the information obtained above, we chose 1 wt% EBSA doping for P3HT for the fabrication of P3HT-EBSA:F8BT-EBSA solar cells (Fig. 3a). To briefly study the composition effect of electron-donating and electron-accepting polymers, two different compositions, P3HT-EBSA:F8BT-EBSA = 6:4 and 8:2 by weight, were selected for preparing solutions. As shown in Fig. 3b, we can observe that the solutions with doped polymers (P3HT-EBSA and F8BT-EBSA) showed much darker colours than those with undoped polymers (P3HT and F8BT). Considering the energy band diagram shown in Fig. 3c, we expect that the charge separation can occur at the interface between P3HT-EBSA and F8BT-EBSA by the offset energy (∼0.5 eV) from their lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energies, as proven from the photoluminescence quenching experiment in our previous report. However, it is considered that the charges separated (from excitons) at the donor–acceptor interfaces in the doped BHJ (P3HT-EBSA:F8BT-EBSA) layer could transport more quickly than those in the undoped BHJ layer because the doped polymers have a permanently charged part that is effective in charge transport. Hence the present P3HT-EBSA:F8BT-EBSA solar cells are expected to exhibit improved performances.
As seen from the current density–voltage (J–V) curves for the devices with the 6:4 composition (Fig. 4a), which were thermally annealed at 140 °C for 30 min, the doped solar cell showed greatly increased short circuit current density (JSC) (from 0.36 mA cm−2 to 0.97 mA cm−2). In addition, the open circuit voltage (VOC) showed a noticeable increase from 1.07 V to 1.18 V (see Table 1). Similarly, JSC (from 0.45 mA cm−2 to 1.07 mA cm−2) and VOC (0.83 V to 1.26 V) were improved for the devices with the 8:2 composition (Fig. 4b). This enhancement can be attributed to the improved charge transport in the BHJ layer because the series resistances (RS) of devices were significantly lowered from 26.1 kΩ cm−2 to 10.7 kΩ cm−2 for the 6:4 composition and from 18.4 kΩ cm−2 to 7.1 kΩ cm−2 for the 8:2 composition. Thus this result does basically support our expectation that the charge transport could be improved by doping both P3HT and F8BT with EBSA, because both the EBSA-doped electron-donating polymer (P3HT-EBSA) and the EBSA-doped electron-accepting polymer (F8BT-EBSA) have permanent charges so that the electrons (or holes) generated upon solar light illumination can hop easily from one site to another site in the doped BHJ nanolayer. However, as observed from the shape of J–V curves, the fill factor (FF) was marginally reduced from 29.6% to 27% for the 6:4 composition, even though the 8:2 composition showed slightly improved FF (from 26.7% to 29.7%). As a result, the PCE value increased from 0.11% to 0.31% for the 6:4 composition and from 0.1% to 0.4% for the 8:2 composition (see Fig. 4c, d and Table 1). Therefore the PCE improvement is ca. 300% and 400% for the 6:4 composition and the 8:2 composition, respectively. As shown in Fig. 4c and d, the trend of PCE improvement was similar for other annealing temperatures (see the J–V curves of the devices annealed at different temperatures in Fig. S2 and S3 and solar cell parameters in Table S1, ESI).
Parameters
D:A = 6:4
D:A = 8:2
Undoped
Doped
Undoped
Doped

J
SC (mA cm−2)
0.36
0.97
0.45
1.07

V
OC (V)
1.07
1.18
0.83
1.26
FF (%)
29.6
27.0
26.7
29.7
PCE (%)
0.11
0.31
0.10
0.40

R
S (kΩ cm−2)
26.1
10.7
18.4
7.1
To understand the different performance between the 6:4 composition and the 8:2 composition, the optical absorption spectra of each BHJ nanolayer were measured. As shown in Fig. 5a, the spectral shape was basically different between the 6:4 composition and the 8:2 composition for both doped and undoped nanolayers. First, we discuss for the undoped (P3HT:F8BT) nanolayers. In the case of the 6:4 composition the shoulder peaks at wavelengths of ca. 550 nm and 600 nm, which are associated with the P3HT stacking/ordering, showed significantly lower absorption coefficient (α) than the main peak at ca. 480 nm. However, those shoulders at ca. 550 nm and 600 nm considerably increased for the 8:2 composition (note that the main peak was shifted to slightly longer wavelength of ca. 510 nm). As expected, this result is clearly attributed to the larger P3HT content for the 8:2 composition than the 6:4 composition. Therefore the better light harvesting (optical absorption) is considered to be responsible for the relatively higher JSC value for the 8:2 composition than the 6:4 composition (see Table 1). In addition, the improved hole transport (mobility) by the better P3HT stacking in the nanolayer of the 8:2 composition could also contribute to the better performance of the 8:2 composition than the 6:4 composition, because the RS value was lowered from 26.1 kΩ cm−2 to 18.4 kΩ cm−2 (undoped devices). For the doped (P3HT-EBSA:F8BT-EBSA) nanolayer, the trend was similar to the undoped (P3HT:F8BT) nanolayer.
Looking at the photoluminescence (PL) spectra in Fig. 5b, most of the excitons generated in the F8BT domains are thought to migrate to the P3HT domains by the Förster energy transfer mechanism, though excitons are made in both F8BT and P3HT domains by the optical excitation (see the excitation wavelengths). Here we find that the PL intensity of both undoped and doped nanolayers is lower for the 8:2 composition than the 6:4 composition, indicating higher PL quenching owing to more stacking of P3HT chains for the 8:2 composition than the 6:4 composition. Interestingly, the PL intensity was lower for the doped nanolayers than the undoped nanolayers irrespective of the compositions. The reduced PL intensity for the doped nanolayers can be ascribed to the presence of permanently charged parts in the polymer chains as reported in our previous reports. Hence the PL intensity trend supports the existence of permanent charges in both P3HT-EBSA and F8BT-EBSA which contributed to the greatly improved charge transport (see RS values in Table 1).
Next, we investigated the nanostructure change before and after doping by employing a sychrotron-radiation GIXD technique. As shown in Fig. 6a (6:4 composition) for the 1D GIXD diffractograms in the out-of-plane (OOP) direction, a small diffraction peak of F8BT (P1) was observed along with the relatively big P3HT (100) peak for the undoped nanolayer (A1) (note that the diffraction angles are slightly different from other reports because of the different wavelengths of the incident X-ray beam as mentioned in the Experimental section). For the doped nanolayer, interestingly, the peak intensity (both P1 and P2) greatly increased and the peaks became more pronounced in terms of peak shape. This result implies that the extent of phase segregation (and crystallinity) between the electron-donating polymer domains and the electron-accepting polymer domains was increased by EBSA doping. A similar trend was also observed for the 8:2 composition. As shown in Fig. 6b, the intensity of P1 and P2 peaks was higher for the doped nanolayer than the undoped nanolayer as they were for the 6:4 composition. The slopy part (around the P2 peak) at the diffraction angles below 2θ = 3.5° for the 8:2 composition may be a sign for the existence of F8BT-related nanoscale phase-segregated parts or interfaces (larger than ∼2 nm) because the d-spacing of the F8BT peak (P1) is calculated to be around 2 nm using the Bragg equation. Here we note that the lower content of F8BT for the 8:2 composition than the 6:4 composition is responsible for the lower peak intensity of P2 than that of P1. Hence we think that the improved phase segregation by EBSA doping could also contribute to the enhanced performance of the present polymer:polymer solar cells.
Finally, the surface nanomorphology of nanolayers was measured using atomic force microscopy (AFM). As shown in Fig. 7 for the 3D AFM images, the surface nanomorphology of undoped nanolayers was inherently different between the 6:4 composition and the 8:2 composition. In particular, the nanoparticle-like domains became smaller and were more pronouncedly observed for the 8:2 composition than the 6:4 composition, which might result in the increased surface roughness (from 0.49 nm to 0.86 nm). The different surface nanomorphology was also clearly observed from the phase images. However, unfortunately, this morphology change was not effective in improving the performance of solar cells with the undoped BHJ nanolayers (see Table 1). Interestingly, the surface nanomorphology was noticeably changed by EBSA doping, while the surface roughness increased from 0.49 nm (undoped nanolayer) to 0.83 nm (doped nanolayer) for the 6:4 composition and from 0.86 nm to 1.41 nm for the 8:2 composition. In principle, this surface nanomorphology change upon EBSA doping can be evidence for the bulk nanostructure change in the BHJ nanolayers. Unlike the case of undoped nanolayers, this nanomorphology change was considerably effective in enhancing the solar cell performance of both compositions.

Both P3HT (electron donor) and F8BT (electron acceptor) were chemically doped using EBSA (dopant). The doping ratio of F8BT was fixed as 10 wt% (F8BT-EBSA), while that of P3HT was examined by varying the EBSA contents. As the EBSA content increased, the intensity of newly generated absorption parts at the wavelengths between 700 nm and 1100 nm gradually increased, which was assigned to be evidence for successful doping reaction between P3HT and EBSA leading to the P3HT-EBSA. The highest SCLC hole mobility of the P3HT-EBSA nanolayers was measured at 1 wt% EBSA doping ratio, though their ionization potential values were almost unchanged. The performance of solar cells was greatly improved by EBSA doping irrespective of donor–acceptor compositions. The EBSA doping significantly enhanced both JSC and VOC, leading to the PCE improvement of ca. 300% for the 6:4 composition and ca. 400% for the 8:2 composition. The 0.4% PCE achieved in this work is the highest efficiency for the polymer:polymer solar cells with blend nanolayers of P3HT and F8BT so far. The significantly improved performance of solar cells has been attributed to improved charge transport and subsequent bulk nanostructures/surface nanomorphology changes by EBSA doping. Hence the present double doping method for both electron-donating polymer and electron-accepting polymer is proven to indeed improve the solar cell performance, and we believe that this method can contribute to the performance improvement in other types of organic electronic devices.


This work was financially supported by Korean Government grants (Basic Research Laboratory Program_2011-0020264, Pioneer Research Center Program_2012-0001262, Priority Research Center Program_2009-0093819, NRF_2012-000523, NRF_2011-0007085, NRF_2010-0004164, and NRF_2012-027883). The authors thank Profs D. D. C. Bradley, J. Nelson, J. R. Durrant, and I. McCulloch for their help at the early stage of F8BT-polymer solar cell research.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Summary of solar cell performances, dielectric constant of the P3HT-EBSA nanolayers, all light J–V curves with 6:4 and 8:2 compositions. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cp43002a
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012