 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM35102A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 25311-25315

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Chung-Te
Liu
,

Ying-Chiao
Wang
,

Rui-Xuan
Dong
,

Chun-Chieh
Wang
,

Kuan-Chieh
Huang
,

R.
Vittal
,

Kuo-Chuan
Ho
* and 

Jiang-Jen
Lin
*

Institute of Polymer Science and Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan. E-mail: jianglin@ntu.edu.tw; Fax: +886-2-3366-5237; Tel: +886-2-3366-5312

Department of Chemical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan. E-mail: kcho@ntu.edu.tw; Fax: +886-2-2362-3040; Tel: +886-2-2366-0739

Received
31st July 2012
, Accepted 24th September 2012
First published on 25th September 2012
A nanohybrid of platinum and carbon nanotubes (Pt/CNT) with dual functions of catalytic activity and conductivity was synthesized. The selection of the poly(oxyethylene)-backboned polyimide dispersant was essential for preparing the dispersion with the de-bundled CNTs and platinum salts in ethanol/water. Subsequent solution casting and annealing at the optimized temperature of 390 °C led to the in situ reduction of platinum salts and the formation of a thin film of Pt/CNT nanohybrids on the glass substrate. The film was used directly as the counter electrode (CE) in a dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC), which exhibited a short-circuit current density of 16.6 ± 0.2 mA cm−2 and a power conversion efficiency of 6.96 ± 0.09% at 100 mW cm−2 illumination. This performance is comparable with a DSSC with a conventional Pt-CE, and feasible for replacing the conventional transparent conductive oxide (TCO) conductive layer in DSSCs.

Continuing efforts have been made to improve the devices of DSSCs, due to their high light-to-electricity conversion efficiency (η) and low cost. Superior electrochemical activity and high conductivity of the CE of a DSSC are imperative for its high performance. A CE is generally fabricated by sputtering a layer of platinum on a TCO substrate; this layer is intended for the reduction of I3− ions to I− ions in the electrolyte of the DSSC. Typically, the sputtered platinum counter electrode (Pt-CE) shows many islands of Pt nanoparticles (PtNPs). Such nanoparticles are clustered and isolated; although they provide uniform catalytic active sites for the reduction of I3− ions, they usually render a low electrical conductivity under an extended area of the CE. The CE of a DSSC requires an additional layer of TCO for electrical conductivity. It has been noted that the TCO layer is the most expensive component in a DSSC, and thus development of alternative materials to TCO or new deposition techniques for it can contribute to the reduction of fabrication cost of DSSCs. Recently, for the first time, Park et al. fabricated a DSSC with a TCO-free CE, using a conducting polymer of poly(3,4-alkylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) to replace TCO. However, the photovoltaic performance of this TCO-free DSSC was considerably lower, due to the fact that the PEDOT-based CE had a higher sheet resistance of 1.3 × 102 Ω square−1 and a relatively low root mean square surface roughness (Rms) of 1 nm. The DSSC also showed a weak short-circuit density (JSC) of 11.6 mA cm−2.

To have both high conductivity and high Rms is rather difficult, because a conducting film with several electric paths of large area is required for rapid transport of electrons; this, however, leads to a decay in the surface area of the film, and thereby a decrease in its Rms value. In our previous study, we achieved a high Rms value for a catalytic film on the CE, because one of the components of the film, i.e. CNTs, could be well-dispersed in our synthesized polymer, poly(oxyethylene)-segmented imide (POEM). Hence, we prepared a nanocomposite film of PtNPs and CNTs for the CE of a DSSC using this POEM, and the thus fabricated DSSC showed a high performance. However, at the same time the PtNPs had agglomerated in the slurry and formed some non-conducting Pt blocks after thermal decomposition. Based on this result, we must use TCO substrates in our previous works for DSSCs. On the other hand, our experience suggests that well-conducting silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) could be obtained only through the reduction of AgNO3 by its solvent, due to the fact that this type of uniform and small (<30 nm) AgNPs possesses higher surface free energy than the aggregated AgNPs obtained through reduction by sodium borohydride (NaBH4). Herein, we surmounted the problem of high reduction voltage for Pt by using a co-solvent, ethanol/water. We present here a solvothermal technique for obtaining a CE with a composite film of Pt/CNT. The CE in this case shows both high electric conductivity and high roughness, and thereby an extraordinary catalytic ability for the reduction of triiodide ions.

We synthesized a nanohybrid solution, consisting of POEM, platinum (in situ solvothermal reduction of H2PtCl6, ACS, Premion, 99.95%), and multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs, diameter = 40–60 nm, length = 0.5–10 μm, 95% purity, with 5% catalyst, i.e., Fe, Co, and Ni) in a co-solvent of ethanol (99.5%) and deionized water (weight ratio of ethanol and water in the co-solvent was 1:1). Fig. S1 shows the TEM image of the mentioned nanohybrid, obtained by dispersion in POEM. The weight ratio of POEM, Pt and MWCNTs in the nanohybrid was 20:20:1. The well-dispersed solid content of the nanohybrid was 14.17 wt%. Using a different procedure from that which we reported previously, we removed the reductant NaBH4 and dispersed the POEM, Pt and MWCNTs in the aforementioned co-solvent. The thus obtained solution was drop coated on glass substrates, i.e., on plane glass substrates without the usual fluorine-doped SnO2 layer (FTO). After this, the glasses were annealed at 80, 110, 200, 300, 350 and 390 °C for 20 min at each temperature. As a result, TCO-free Pt/CNT CEs were obtained.


The dispersion of the nanohybrid of POEM/Pt/CNT was examined by transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JOEL JEM-1230), with a Gatan Dual Vision CCD Camera, by operating it at 100 keV. For this, the sample was dropped on a copper grid coated with a carbon film. Surface sheet resistance was measured for the film with Pt by using a Keithley 2400 digital four-point probe sourcemeter The surface and fracture morphologies of the films were observed by a field emission scanning electronic microscope (FE-SEM, Zeiss EM 902A) at 80 KV. This was to examine the morphologies of the Pt samples. An energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS, NovaTM NanoSEM230) was used to analyze the elemental composition of the nanohybrid film. Furthermore, the morphology and roughness of the films were also analyzed by tapping mode atomic force microscopy (TM-AFM; Seiko SPI3800N, Series SPA-400HV; cantilever type: SI-DF20, f = 139 kHz, spring constant = 16 Nm−1). The composition of the Pt/CNT film was analyzed by obtaining wide-angle X-ray diffraction (WAXRD) patterns at a scanning rate of 2° min−1, using a Philips X'Pert X-ray diffractometer provided with a copper target and a Ni filter.


The FTO glass (sheet resistivity = 7 Ω square−1) was cleaned sequentially by a neutral cleaner of water, acetone and IPA, as the initial step. Then a compact layer of TiO2 was coated on the FTO substrate using a solution consisting of titanium(IV) isopropoxide (TTIP, +98%, 0.5 g) in 2-methoxy ethanol (1.5 g), not only to obtain a good mechanical contact between the FTO and the TiO2 film, but also to isolate the contact between the FTO and the electrolyte. Another TTIP solution was then hydrolyzed to acquire TiO2 in a media containing 0.1 M HNO3 by adopting a sol–gel method. The thus obtained TiO2 solution was autoclaved through a hydrothermal process at 240 °C for 12 h. By concentrating the autoclaved solution to 13 wt%, a paste of nanocrystalline TiO2 was obtained. In order to prevent the paste from cracking and to control the pore size of the TiO2, 30 wt% PEG corresponding to the amount of TiO2 was added to the paste. The photoanode for the DSSC was prepared through the following procedure. The TiO2 paste prepared above was coated on the FTO glass using a doctor-blade method. The thus coated FTO glass was annealed at 450 °C for 30 min. After repeating such a coating and sintering, another layer of TiO2 containing light scattering particles of 300 nm was coated on the FTO glass, and the sintering was performed in the same way. A TiO2 projected area of 0.16 cm2 was selected as the active area and was soaked overnight in a solution, containing 0.3 mM N719 in acetonitrile–tert-butanol (v/v = 1:1). The DSSC was assembled with the photoanode and the CE, which was prepared by annealing the nanohybrid of POEM/Pt/CNT on the glass. A cell gap of 25 μm was maintained between the two electrodes by using an ionomer resin (Surlyn®, SX1170–25) as the spacer, and then the electrolyte was injected into the space created by the Surlyn® via a capillary effect. The electrolyte contained 0.6 M 1,2-dimethyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide (DMPII), 0.1 M LiI, 0.05 M I2, and 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP, 96%) in 3-methoxypropionitrile (MPN, 99%).


The catalytic ability of the CEs was measured using cyclic voltammetry (CV) equipped with a three-electrode system (CHI, electrochemical workstation, model 440). The photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) characteristics and electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) of the DSSCs were recorded by a potentiostat/galvanostat (PGSTAT 30, Autolab, Eco-Chemie, the Netherlands).


The conducting composite film of Pt/CNT was prepared by a solvothermal technique, using a polymeric dispersant. The dispersant was synthesized, according to a procedure reported by us previously, from poly(oxyethylene)-diamine (POE2000) and 4,4′–oxydiphthalic anhydride (ODPA), as described in Scheme 1. The CNT and H2PtCl6 were dispersed in the ethanol/water co-solvent in the presence of POEM, in order to obtain the composite of PtNPs and CNTs, through an in situ reduction of PtCl62− (Scheme 1). The reduction mechanism for a transformation from Pt4+ to Pt2+ and then from Pt2+ to Pt0 can be written as follows.

PtCl62− + CH3CH2OH → PtCl42− + CH3CHO + 2H+ + 2Cl−
(1)
PtCl42− + CH3CH2OH → Pt0 + CH3CHO + 2H+ + 4Cl−
(2)
It is noteworthy that the POEM, as an effective dispersant, has enabled the formation of homogenous and uniform Pt nanoparticles. After the solution casting on glass and annealing at 80 °C, PtNPs became interconnected through particle coalescence or melting (110 and 390 °C). By varying the weight ratio of POEM/Pt/CNT, a number of nanohybrid films could be prepared. Fig. 1a shows a SEM image of one such Pt/CNT film on TCO-free glass, obtained using POEM; the film had a thickness of 400 nm and showed a low sheet resistivity of 1.2 × 101 Ω square−1. In addition, as a result of the well-dispersed CNTs, the Pt/CNT film assumed a shape and roughness in accordance with the templating effect of the CNTs. Hence, the Rms of the film of Pt/CNT was as high as 164.3 nm. Fig. S2a–d show, respectively, the SEM image of the counter electrode with Pt/CNT, its EDS mapping, XRD pattern, and EDS spectra. Fig. 1b shows the SEM image of a film of pure platinum on TCO-free glass, for comparison. The sheet resistances of the CNT film, obtained using POEM (Fig. 1c) and the Pt/CNT film, obtained without using POEM (Fig. 1d) were 5.1 × 102 and 1.2 × 103 Ω square−1, respectively. The former shows the original conductivity of CNTs, owing to their good dispersion in POEM. The Pt/CNT film, obtained in the absence of the dispersant POEM, shows aggregates of PtNPs and CNTs (Fig. 1d). The TEM image of the film of such aggregations of PtNPs and CNTs, obtained by annealing the film at 80 °C, is shown in Fig. S3.
The Pt/CNT film in the absence of POEM is expected to have less surface area and therefore cannot endure the required thermal energy. As a result, the film shows aggregated Pt particles with sizes in micrometers.
The irregular and patchy thin film of Pt/CNT formed in the absence of POEM is not expected to have smooth and short electron transfer pathways, which is the reason the film obtained in the absence of POEM showed a far higher sheet resistance of 1.2 × 103 Ω square−1, compared to that of the Pt/CNT film obtained in the presence of POEM (1.2 × 101 Ω square−1). Furthermore, the pure Pt film (Fig. 1b) showed a sheet resistance as low as 4.7 × 100 Ω square−1. Owing to the excellent dispersion for PtNPs and CNT in the POEM system, a continuous phase of platinum was formed in this case and it showed a high electrical conductivity.

CV was performed to estimate the catalytic ability of the CEs with Pt on TCO glass, Pt on TCO-free glass, and Pt/CNT on TCO-free glass. In Fig. 2 each CV curve shows an anodic peak current (Ipa) and a cathodic peak current (Ipc), corresponded to the oxidation of I− ions and the reduction of I3− ions, respectively.

The superior catalytic property of the Pt/CNT-CE can be attributed to high surface roughness. The roughness of these two electrodes could be seen through AFM images (Fig. 3).

Fig. 3a shows a great number of worm-like projections of CNTs among Pt nanoparticles (Rms was 164.3 nm), while this clearly is not the case with the film of pure Pt (Fig. 3b, Rms was 82.7 nm). Fig. 3c shows the SEM image of the film of Pt/CNT on TCO-free glass and Fig. 3d shows that of pure Pt on such a glass. The Pt film is rather uniform and flat, while the film of Pt/CNT is very rough due to the CNT and Pt on it. The SEM images are consistent with those of AFM. The rougher surface of Pt/CNT is expected to give a larger surface area for its CE, compared to that of the CE with Pt, for catalysis of I3− reduction.


Fig. 4 shows Nyquist plots of the DSSCs with TCO-glass Pt-CE, TCO-free Pt-CE, and TCO-free Pt/CNT-CE. The EIS spectra were obtained at frequencies ranging from 65 kHz to 0.01 Hz, under an illumination of 100 mW cm−2. The Nyquist plots represent the interfacial charge transfer resistances (Rct) of the cells. The equivalent circuit is shown in the inset of the figure. The EIS data provide the interfacial charge-transfer resistance at the CE and the electrolyte (Rct1), the interfacial charge-transfer resistance at the dye-adsorbed photoanode and the electrolyte (Rct2), and the resistance of Warburg diffusion in the electrolyte (Rw). As the photoanode and the electrolyte were the same for all the DSSCs, the variation in the impendence is expected to be due only to the CEs. The first semi-circle representing Rct1 of the cell with TCO-free Pt/CNT-CE is smaller than that of the cell with TCO-glass Pt-CE; this is because the former has a higher catalytic ability for I3− reduction than the latter (Fig. 2). In addition, the TCO-free Pt/CNT-CE shows about the same low surface sheet resistance as TCO-glass Pt-CE.


Fig. 5 shows the photocurrent J–Vcharacteristics of the DSSCs with TCO-glass Pt-CE, TCO-free Pt-CE, and TCO-free Pt/CNT-CE, obtained both at 100 mW cm−2 and in the dark.
The DSSC with TCO-free Pt/CNT-CE shows the same fill factor (FF) and higher open-circuit voltage (VOC), with reference to those of the cell with TCO-glass Pt-CE. It is very important to note here that the cell with a TCO-free Pt/CNT-CE shows almost the same performance as that of a cell with a TCO-glass Pt-CE. That is to say, the film of Pt/CNT plays a dual role in conducting the electrons for its substrate and catalyzing the reduction of triiodide ions. Both the cells with TCO-glass Pt-CE and TCO-free Pt/CNT-CE show the same VOC, because their photoanodes are the same. The reference cell with the conventional Pt on TCO glass shows a JSC of 17.3 ± 0.5 mA cm−2, FF of 0.60 ± 0.01, VOC of 0.68 ± 0.01 V, and η of 7.02 ± 0.16%. The cell with TCO-free Pt/CNT-CE shows nearly the same performance, because its CE has a high catalytic ability due to its CNT-based roughness and a high conductivity due to the same CNTs. The DSSC with the TCO-free Pt/CNT-CE shows a JSC of 16.6 ± 0.2 mA cm−2, FF of 0.60 ± 0.01, VOC of 0.69 ± 0.01 V, and η of 6.96 ± 0.09%. The dark currents in Fig. 5 are consistent with the VOC values. The DSSC with the TCO-free CE shows an η of 6.96 ± 0.09%, which, to the best of our knowledge, is the highest efficiency yet reported for a DSSC with a TCO-free CE.

A new method of fabricating a CE with a Pt/CNT nanohybrid film without using conventional TCO conductive glass has been proved to be feasible. The nanohybrid film, which has dual functions of catalytic activity and conductivity, was prepared by using a poly(oxyethylene)-backboned polyimide dispersant and solution casting the dispersed Pt and CNT precursors in aqueous solution, and was deposited on a glass substrate in order to make the Pt/CNT-CE of a DSSC by heating. Analysis of the thin film showed clusters of Pt particles interconnected by CNT matrices and a low electrical resistance. The catalytic ability of the TCO-free CE with a film of Pt/CNT was found to be better than that of pure platinum for the reduction of I3− ions. The superior catalytic property of the Pt/CNT-CE is attributed to high roughness of its surface, which consequently renders the high catalytic activity of the electrode for reduction of I3− ions. The DSSC with the novel TCO-free CE has demonstrated comparable performance with a DSSC with the conventional platinum CE with a TCO layer on its substrate. The conventional expensive TCO layer could thus be totally eliminated. In the future, this could be applied in photocatalysts or the electrodes of fuel cells.


We acknowledge financial support from the Ministry of Economic Affairs and the National Science Council of Taiwan. This literature contains work presented at the ACS National Meeting & Exposition held in Anaheim, California, USA.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm35102a
‡ These authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012