 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA04129E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16313-16319


Wenchao
Huang
,

Eliot
Gann
,

Zai-Quan
Xu
,

Lars
Thomsen
,

Yi-Bing
Cheng
* and 

Christopher R.
McNeill
*

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Monash University, Wellington Road, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia. E-mail: yibing.cheng@monash.edu; christopher.mcneill@monash.edu

Australian Synchrotron, 800 Blackburn Road, Clayton, VIC 3168, Australia

The Melbourne Centre for Nanofabrication, 151 Wellington Road, Clayton 3168, Victoria, Australia

Received
8th June 2015
, Accepted 3rd July 2015
First published on 7th July 2015
In this paper, it is found that residual 1,8-diiodoctane (DIO) which is used as a solvent additive in the manufacture of high-performance polymer solar cells accelerates chemical degradation of the donor polymer PBDTTT-EFT under light and air exposure especially in its blend with PC71BM. Here we report an anti-solvent treatment which can significantly improve device stability while maintaining a device efficiency of ~ 9%. The morphological changes after anti-solvent treatment are also investigated by a combination of synchrotron based techniques.

Over the past decade, organic solar cells have been the subject of continuously increasing research interest. Solution processing offers a promising method for producing organic solar cells through continuous roll-to-roll processing, enabling a low manufacturing cost. Organic solar cell efficiency is continuing to increase with single junction efficiencies approaching 11% recently demonstrated. Among the various electron donor materials employed, low bandgap, polymers based on benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene (BDT) have emerged as one of the most attractive electron donor families. In particular, devices based on the polymer poly[[2,6′-4,8-di(5-ethylhexylthienyl)benzo[1,2-b;3,3-b]dithiophene]3-fluoro-2[(2-ethylhexyl)carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl (PBDTTT-EFT) (molecule structure shown in Fig. 1(a) and (b)) exhibit a high efficiency of over 9% for polymer/fullerene devices and over 5% for polymer/polymer devices. In contrast to the significant efforts devoted to achieving high efficiencies through synthesizing new chemical structures, optimising morphology and interfacial layers, less effort has been paid to improving the stability of high performance polymer cells which represents a major obstacle to commercialization.

The use of a high-boiling point solvent additive is a common tool employed to optimize the morphology of high performance polymer solar cells. High performance cells based on the polymer PBDTTT-EFT are no exception where the use of the additive 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) has been shown to improve the crystallization of polymer while inhibiting the formation of large-scale fullerene aggregates. However, due to the low vapour pressure of the solvent additive, residual DIO remains in the blend long after spin-coating. The trapped residual DIO is shown here to facilitate the degradation of PBDTTT-EFT, particularly under light and air exposure and especially in blends with the fullerene derivative PC71BM. While DIO has not previously to our knowledge been linked with accelerated degradation of PBDTTT-EFT, degradation of similar polymers based on BDT units has been studied in previous papers, with Kim et al. recently linking DIO with accelerated degradation in PTB7-based cells. Alem and co-workers in particular found that photo-excited BDT units react with oxygen under light illumination. Specifically, a blue shift of the main absorption peak was observed in the UV-vis spectra after only two hours of light illumination. In addition, the degradation of another polymer containing the BDT unit, PTB7, both in neat films and in blends with PC71BM has also been probed by several different groups. Strikingly, Soon et al. found that blends of PTB7 with PC71BM were less stable than neat films of PTB7, with the accelerated ageing in the blend facilitated by the generation of singlet oxygen from PTB7 triplet excitons that in turn are produced via non-geminate recombination. Razzell-Hollis et al. also confirmed that blends of PTB7 with PC71BM show a faster degradation rate than for pristine PTB7 with in situ Raman spectroscopy.
Although several approaches have demonstrated to improve device stability such as through the introduction of air-stable interfacial layers, understanding and improving the stability of donor materials such as PBDTTT-EFT remains largely unexplored. In this work, we demonstrate that residual DIO plays an important role in accelerating the degradation of the polymer PBDTTT-EFT in completed devices by facilitating the ingress of oxygen or/and water molecules. We furthermore demonstrate that a simple anti-solvent treatment is effective in dramatically improving the stability of PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM solar cells through prompt removal of residual DIO from PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM films, enabling the fabrication of stable devices under ambient conditions. Fig. 1(c) schematically depicts the anti-solvent treatment used in this study: during spin-coating of the PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM blend solution, drops of the anti-solvent isopropanol (IPA) are dispensed onto the rotating substrate that induces rapid precipitation of the polymer and fullerene. Such alcohol treatment has been previously reported to improve the device performance and reproducibility. Here, we have found that this method facilitates removal of DIO that is important for alleviating the photochemical degradation of the polymer blend. The morphological changes after anti-solvent treatment are also fully examined by a combination of synchrotron based X-rays techniques.

Polymer PBDTTT-EFT (also called PCE-10) (Mw: 114000, PDI: 2.2) was purchased from 1-Materials and PC71BM was ordered from Nano-C company. The solvent additive 1,8-diiodoctane (DIO) was purchased from Sigma Aldrich.


The solar cells were constructed using the inverted structure of ITO/PEIE/PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag. The PEIE solution was prepared by diluting PEIE in methoxyethanol to a weight concentration of 0.4%. Indium-tin-oxide (ITO) coated glass substrates were cleaned by acetone and isopropanol respectively. The PEIE solution was spin coated on ITO/glass at the speed of 5000 rpm for 30 s, then annealed at 100 °C for 5 min. On top of the PEIE layer, the active layer (∼70 nm) of PBDTTT-EFT/PC71BM (1:1.5, w/w) was spin-cast from solution in the co-solvent of dichlorobenzene/1,8-diiodooctane (97:3, v/v) at a speed of 1000 rpm. For the solvent-treated sample, IPA (200 μL) was dropped onto the film with after 120 s spin-coating process; a significant colour change was observed immediately. The composite electrode of molybdenum oxide (15 nm) and silver (100 nm) were thermally deposited atop the active layer through a shadow mask which defined the active area. Devices were encapsulated with epoxy resin in the glove box.


Current–voltage (J–V) characteristics were measured under 100 mW cm−2 by using a model SS50AAA solar simulator (Photo Emission Tech.). Devices were soaked under solar simulator for 10 min before J–V curve measurements. The intensity of simulated sun light was calibrated using a standard silicon diode with a KG3 filter. For testing the shelf stability of the devices, polymer solar cells were stored in ambient atmosphere under the illumination of room light for up to 40 days. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured by dispersing light from a tungsten filament (Newport 250 W QTH) through a monochromator (Oriel Cornerstone 130) with a spot size smaller than the device active area. The short circuit current at each wavelength was recorded by using a Keithley 2635 sourcemeter.

Grazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) was collected at the SAXS/WAXS beamline at Australian Synchrotron. X-ray incident beam was monochromatic with 9 keV photons. 2D scattering patterns were collected by a Dectris Pilatus 1M with an exposure time of 3 s. This short exposure time effectively avoided X-ray induced beam damage in the samples. The GIWAXS results were analysed by an altered version of the NIKA analysis package. Near edge X-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS) spectra at the carbon edge were measured at the soft X-ray beamline at Australian Synchrotron. Surface sensitive total yield electron (TEY) was detected by measurement of the drain current. The results were analysed according to our previous studies.
Resonant soft X-ray scattering was collected at beamline 11.0.1.2 of the Advanced Light Source at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. Films were floated off of sodium polystyrene sulfonate (NaPSS) coated glass substrates using deionized water, and then transferred onto 100 nm thick SiN2 windows (purchased from Norcada company). Horizontally polarized X-rays at 284.0 eV were incident normal to the film surface. 284.0 eV was chosen by calculating the scattering materials contrast between PBDTTT-EFT and PC71BM. Comparison with non-resonant 270 eV photons determined that the low-q component of scattering was from roughness, and not materials contrast. Scattered photons were collected by a Princeton PI-MTE in-vacuum CCD detector with 27.6 μm × 27.6 μm pixels. Two scattering patterns of 100 s exposure time were collected at 30 mm and 150 mm sample to detector distances, and combined in software. Two dimensional scattering patterns were reduced to one dimensional profiles by using a customized version of NIKA.
The absorption spectra of polymer blends were acquired with a PerkinElmer Lambda 950 UV/VIS/NIR spectrometer.

Devices were fabricated with an inverted structure of ITO/PEIE/polymer:PC71BM/MoOx/Ag. Polyethylenimine ethoxylated (PEIE) was used as an interfacial layer to lower the work function of ITO, enabling electron collection from the ITO electrode. Compared with the traditional electron transporting metal oxides such as ZnO, PEIE provides an effective way to fabricate devices via solution processing at low temperature, enabling continuous processing on flexible substrates. Conventionally prepared devices were fabricated by spin-coating the active layer from a solution of 1:1.5 PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM by weight dissolved in 97:3 chlorobenzene:DIO by volume with no anti-solvent treatment. Current density–voltage (J–V) curves measured under simulated AM 1.5G with irradiance of 100 mW cm−2 are shown in Fig. 2(a) with the corresponding photovoltaic parameters of the best performing cells summarized in Table 1. The best conventionally prepared device exhibits a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 17.3 mA cm−2, open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.80 V and fill factor (FF) of 0.67, yielding a power conversion efficiency of 9.3% with an average value of 9.1%. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra (Fig. 2(b)) of organic solar cells based on PBDTTT-EFT covers the range from 350 nm to 800 nm with the Jsc values predicted from integrating EQE spectra (as shown in Table S1) showing a good agreement with a discrepancy of less than 10% with the measured short circuit currents under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G. The conventionally prepared device however shows a poor stability, see Fig. 2(c)–(f). Fig. 2(c) shows the normalized efficiency of organic solar cells as a function of the ageing time, with device efficiency normalized to their initial value. During the degradation studies, solar cells were stored in ambient atmosphere between testing, subject only to light present in the laboratory (no direct sunlight or prolonged high intensity illumination). The stability test in this study is similar to the protocol ISOS-D-1 shelf and the details of stability test are summarized in Table S2. A rapid decrease of efficiency in the conventional device is observed dropping to practically 0% after 30 days of storage. As shown in Fig. 2(d)–(f), the open circuit voltage of the device remains constant, but with a rapid drop in short circuit current and fill factor. An accompanying colour change of the active layer is also observed that starts from the edge of the substrate and progressing into the centre (Fig. S1), suggesting that this degradation is linked to oxygen and/or water ingress (devices were simply encapsulated using epoxy and a glass cover slide).

Device

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%) (average)
Conventionally prepared
0.80
17.3
0.67
9.3% (9.1%)
Anti-solvent treated
0.79
18.3
0.62
9.0% (8.5%)
In contrast, the device prepared with the anti-solvent treatment process shows a remarkable improvement in device stability. A number of anti-solvents were tested with isopropanol treatment found to produce the best efficiency, see Fig. S2. Compared with conventionally prepared device, the performance of the anti-solvent device shows a similar, albeit slightly lower starting efficiency with a Jsc of 18.3 mA cm−2, FF of 0.62, Voc of 0.79 and overall PCE of 9.0% with an average efficiency of 8.5%. However over same period for which the conventionally prepared device has lost all functionality the anti-solvent treated device retains 80% of its initial efficiency. Similar to the conventionally prepared device, the drop in efficiency for the anti-solvent device is linked to a decrease in Jsc and FF with Voc remaining more constant. Although the anti-solvent treated device still shows degradation over this time scale, the combination of this anti-solvent treatment with more effective barrier materials and better encapsulation techniques is a promising route to long term stability.
To further investigate the mechanism behind the degradation of device performance, UV-vis optical absorption spectra were acquired of films (as shown in Fig. 3) as a function of ageing time (samples were left in ambient under laboratory lighting). Neat PBDTTT-EFT films and neat PC71BM films processed without DIO show good ambient stability under illumination see Fig. 3(a) and (c). As shown in Fig. 3(b), neat PBDTTT-EFT processed with DIO experiences a systematic increased in absorption strength as a function of time associated with changes in polymer conformation during the slow evaporation of DIO; however no degradation of the neat PBDTTT-EFT processed with DIO is observed over the time frame investigated. Furthermore, the blend of PBDTTT-EFT with PC71BM processed without DIO also shows excellent stability of its UV-vis spectrum (Fig. 3(d)). However, the blend processed with DIO exhibits extremely poor stability upon exposure to light and air. After 2 hours of illumination, the colour of film starts to change from an initial dark green colour to yellow (as shown in Fig. S3). The colour of the whole film is observed to change within 6 hours of light illumination under ambient environment. This colour change is spectroscopically confirmed by the UV-vis absorption spectra shown in Fig. 3(e). The two main absorption peaks located at 710 nm and 645 nm which are attributed to PBDTTT-EFT continuously decrease in intensity with time, indicating the degradation of PBDTTT-EFT with air and light exposure. After 10 hours the UV-vis absorption spectrum of the blend resembles that of neat PC71BM indicating that the optical absorption strength of the polymer has been almost entirely bleached. Degradation of the packing behaviour of polymer is also observed by grazing incident wide angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS), see Fig. S4. The scattering intensity of the in-plane alkyl stacking peak (at qxy = 0.30 Å) shows a remarkable decrease in intensity after 1 day of air and light exposure as the polymer starts to lose its crystalline structure. In contrast, the blend prepared with the anti-solvent treatment shows very little change in the absorption spectrum, Fig. 3(f).
The observations from the UV-vis experiments are consistent with the following interpretation. (1) PC71BM and PBDTTT-EFT are relatively stable or at least sufficiently stable so as not to degrade over the timescale investigated. (2) Blends of PBDTTT-EFT with PC71BM processed without DIO are similarly stable over the time scale investigated. (3) DIO itself does not render PDBTTT-EFT or PC71BM unstable indicating there is no chemical reaction between DIO and PBDTTT-EFT or DIO and PC71BM. (4) The UV-vis absorption spectrum of PBDTTT-EFT processed with DIO, while showing no degradation, does show an evolution in vibronic structure consistent with changes in polymer conformation as DIO slowly evaporates from the film indicating that DIO remains over the time scale of investigation. (In contrast, an anti-solvent treated pristine film shows no evolution in vibronic structure (Fig. S5) with the absorption spectrum matching that of a film prepared without DIO indicating that DIO has been removed by the anti-solvent treatment.) The presence of DIO in the film over this timescale is furthermore likely to result in an increased permeability of water and oxygen. (5) The degradation of the blend processed with DIO is explained by the mechanism proposed by Soon et al. whereby singlet oxygen is generated by reaction of triplet excitons on PBDTTT-EFT reacting with molecular oxygen. Such triplet excitons are only formed on PBDTTT-EFT following non-geminate recombination of free carriers that in turn are produced following photo-induced charge transfer thus requiring the presence of PC71BM. This reaction also requires the presence of molecular oxygen whose presence in the bulk of the blend is facilitated by residual DIO that increases the permeability of the film to molecular oxygen. Thus the anti-solvent treatment is effective in increasing the stability of the blend by preventing ingress of oxygen which is required for this somewhat complicated photo-bleaching reaction to occur. The link between residual DIO and device stability is further confirmed by ageing studies of devices prepared without DIO, Fig. S7. While such devices have a lower initial efficiency, they exhibit a similar stability to the anti-solvent treated device. The similar stability of the device prepared without DIO also indicates the effectiveness of the anti-solvent treatment in removing DIO from the film.
We have also investigated the influence of our anti-solvent treatment on the microstructure of PBDTTT-EFT films with a combination of synchrotron techniques. Two dimensional GIWAXS patterns from conventionally prepared and anti-solvent-treated films are shown in Fig. 4(a) and (b). Both samples were prepared on PEIE coated silicon wafers, matching preparation conditions for devices. In Fig. 4(a), a broad out-of-plane (OOP) peak located at qz = 1.52 Å−1 corresponding to polymer π–π stacking is observed while an intense in-plane (IP) peak located at qxy = 0.30 Å−1 corresponding to alkyl stacking or lamellar of the polymer is observed. PBDTTT-EFT in the untreated film shows a preferential face-on configuration with the π–π stacking direction (important for hole transport between polymer chains) perpendicular to the substrate. The distances between crystallographic planes in these directions are calculated by Bragg's law with a π–π stacking distance of 0.41 nm and alkyl stacking distance of 2.09 nm. The isotropic ring at 1.30 Å−1 is attributed to the PC71BM aggregation. As shown in Fig. 4(b), the anti-solvent treated blend shows a similar microstructure with a face-on configuration corresponding to a π–π stacking direction perpendicular to the substrate. In addition, no peak position shift is observed in the anti-solvent treated samples, indicating that the molecular packing behaviour is unchanged upon the anti-solvent treatment.
The full width at half maximum (FWHM) of each peak has been calculated from the corresponding line profiles, with Fig. 4(c) showing both of out-of-plane (OOP) and in-plane (IP) scattering profiles. Both of OOP π–π stacking and IP alkyl lamella peaks are fit by Gaussian functions and their FWHMs summarized in Table S4. The FWHM of both OOP π–π stacking and IP alkyl lamella peaks does not change appreciably upon the anti-solvent treatment, indicating again that the crystal structure within the film remains unchanged. The anti-solvent treated polymer film shows a slightly lower coherence length of 2.16 nm for OOP π–π stacking and 7.66 nm for IP alkyl stacking compared to values of 2.22 nm (OOP π–π-stacking) and 7.95 nm (IP alkyl stacking).
Complementary to GIWAXS, resonant soft X-ray scattering (R-SoXS) provides information on the size of compositionally similar domains on the 10 nm to 1 μm length scale. R-SoXS results (Fig. 5) were acquired with a photon energy of 284 eV which provides maximum chemical contrast between polymer and fullerene, see Fig. S8. The scattering profiles indicate that PBDTTT-EFT/PC71BM blends with and without anti-solvent treatment have a similar average domain size of around 30 nm. This value is close to that observed for other highly efficient polymers such as PTB7 and PffBT4T. AFM has also been performed on conventionally prepared and anti-solvent treated films, see Fig. S9. From the AFM images it is seen that there is an increase in surface roughness even though the bulk domain size remains unchanged.
Surface sensitive near edge X-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS) spectroscopy has also been employed to provide information about interfacial composition and molecular orientation. Angle-resolved NEXAFS spectra at the surface of the anti-solvent treated blend are shown in Fig. S10. The π* resonance intensity in the anti-solvent treated blend film shows a continuous increase as a function of X-ray incident angle, indicating a slight edge-on configuration of the polymer at the polymer/air interface. In addition, Fig. 6 shows the typical NEXAFS spectra of the pristine polymer film, the pristine fullerene film and the blend film. These NEXAFS spectra were taken at 55° to disregard orientational differences. As shown in Fig. 6(b), fitting the blend spectrum to a linear combination of neat spectra (Fig. 6(a)) give a polymer surface composition of 62.8% for the conventionally prepared blend and 63.7% for the anti-solvent treated blend. Thus the anti-solvent treatment does not significantly affect the surface composition, with a polymer enrichment at the air/film interface observed in both cases.
It is interesting to compare our results to others who have reported the effects of alcohol treatment on the performance of PTB7:PC71BM devices. In particular previous work has found alcohol treatment leads to improved performance and optimised morphology. In our work, alcohol treatment was not found to improve device performance although device stability was improved. Additionally, we found no change in the characteristic domain size with alcohol treatment. The reason for these different observations is not clear, however we note that our work uses the polymer PBDTTT-EFT which has a different side-chain to PTB7 used in previous studies suggesting that the influence of alcohol treatment is different for different BDT systems. Secondly, the molecular weights used in these different studies are likely to be different, with the potential for alcohol treatment to affect film morphology likely to be molecular weight dependent. Finally, we note that we use a polymeric interlayer instead of a metal oxide interlayer with alcohol treatment likely affecting these interlayers in different ways.

We have reported a simple approach to significantly improve the chemical stability of high efficiency PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM solar cells. The introduction of an anti-solvent during the spin-coating process induces the fast deposition of the active layer and, importantly, the prompt removal of residual DIO from the film. Removal of residual DIO inhibits ingress of oxygen suppressing photobleaching leading to a significantly improved device lifetime. Devices prepared with the anti-solvent treatment retain 80% of their initial efficiency over the period that conventionally prepared devices have lost all device function, and also exhibit an initial efficiency close to that of the control device. Microstructural investigations indicate that anti-solvent treated films possess a similar microstructure to conventionally prepared films, with average domain sizes of ∼30 nm. There is also no significant change in polymer crystallization and chemical composition at the top surface. The simplicity of this process also makes it an industrially-relevant process enabling solvent additives with a low volatility to be used in a high through-put manufacturing environment.


NEXAFS spectroscopy and GIWAXS experiments were performed at soft X-ray and SAXS/WAXS beamlines at the Australian Synchrotron, Victoria, Australia. The authors thank Dr Nigel Kirby for GIWAXS beamline setup. RSoXS experiments were conducted at beamline 11.0.1.2 (ref. 40) of the Advanced Light Source at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. Support from the Australian Renewable Energy Agency (ARENA) is acknowledged; C. R. M acknowledges support from the Australian Research Council (FT100100275) and veski.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta04129e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015