 DOI: 10.1039/D2TC02762C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 15573-15581


Xiang
Zhang
,

Dan
Zhang
,

Tonghui
Guo
,

Chunqiu
Zheng
,

Yuan
Zhou
,

Junjun
Jin
,

Zhenkun
Zhu
,

Zhen
Wang
,

Xiaxia
Cui
,

Sujuan
Wu
,

Jing
Zhang
 and 

Qidong
Tai
*

The Institute of Technological Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, P. R. China. E-mail: qdtai@whu.edu.cn

Department of Microelectronic Science and Engineering, Ningbo University, Zhejiang 315211, P. R. China

Institute for Advanced Materials, South China Academy of Advanced Optoelectronics, South China Normal University, Guangzhou 510006, P. R. China

Received
30th June 2022
, Accepted 18th September 2022
First published on 19th September 2022
Carbon-based CsPbI2Br perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted widespread attention due to their low cost and superior thermal stability. Unfortunately, the bulk defects and interfacial energy level mismatch limit the improvement of device performance. To solve the above issues, we introduce aromatic phenylethylammonium halides (PEAI and PEABr) and their fluorinated derivatives of 4-fluorophenylethylammonium halides (P-F-PEAI and P-F-PEABr) as a passivation layer to post-treat low-temperature CsPbI2Br films. Benefiting from reduced perovskite defects and better energy level alignments, the charge non-radiative recombination is effectively suppressed, and the hole extraction is promoted. Compared with the reference PSCs, the optimized devices achieve a maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 13.97%. To the best of our knowledge, it should be one of the highest PCEs reported among those of low-temperature carbon-based CsPbI2Br PSCs. In addition, nonencapsulated devices exhibit improved moisture and thermal stability in ambient air.

Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are regarded as the most promising photovoltaic alternatives owing to their excellent optoelectronic properties. Up to now, their power conversion efficiency (PCE) has increased from initial 3.8% to certified 25.7%. However, the formamidinium (FA+) and methylammonium (MA+) components in the hybrid perovskites are volatile and have thermal instability. In fact, the α-phase FAPbI3 is only stable above 160 °C and easily transforms into the β-phase and the γ-phase at room temperature. MAPbI3 undergoes a phase transition at 55 °C and degrades to MAI and PbI2 at 85 °C. In addition, the low glass transition temperature (125 °C) of 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD) can degrade device performance under thermal stress. The metal electrodes are susceptible to ion migration from perovskites, and the hygroscopic and deliquescent additives in organic hole transport layers (HTLs) can also accelerate device degradation. Because Spiro-OMeTAD requires oxygen, it is difficult to control its oxidation process. In terms of costs, both organic HTLs and metal electrodes are quite expensive, for example, the costs of poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA), Spiro-OMeTAD, Au and Ag are 19.80 $ per ml, 23.96 $ per ml, 60500 $ per kg and 8500 $ per kg, respectively. The above disadvantages seriously hinder the practical application of PSCs. In principle, CsPbX3 (X = I, Br, or mixed halides) carbon-based inorganic PSCs (C-IPSCs) can solve the above issues owing to the absence of organic components. Meanwhile, hydrophobic and environmentally friendly carbon materials as the HTLs and back electrodes also simplify the fabrication process, decrease the cost (300 $ per kg), and protect perovskite films from moisture erosion.

Among all the CsPbX3 perovskites, CsPbI3 has a narrow band gap (Eg) of 1.73 eV, which is suitable for efficient PSCs but easily turns into the non-perovskite phase. Though CsPbBr3 displays better phase stability, its wide Eg (2.3 eV) leads to substantial optical losses, limiting the short-circuit current density (Jsc) of PSCs. Fortunately, mixed-halide CsPbI2Br can achieve a good trade-off between Eg and phase stability, but the PCEs of reported C-IPSCs are still far from their Shockley–Queisser (S–Q) limits and counterparts based on organic HTLs and metal electrodes. In general, there are two vital factors for the low PCE of C-IPSCs: one is the bulk defects (e.g. point defects, grain boundaries, pinholes, etc.) of perovskites, and the other is the energy level mismatch at the perovskite/carbon interface. Due to the ionic nature and low formation energy of perovskites, harmful defects are inevitably generated during the crystal growth and/or the post-treat process. The abundant dangling bonds and mobile ions on the perovskite surface and/or grain boundaries will not only induce charge non-radiative recombination to cause the hysteresis effect, but also be easily invaded by the moisture and result in a phase transition. The interfacial energy level mismatch, i.e., large energy offset between the valence band maximum (VBM) of CsPbI2Br and the work function (WF) of the carbon electrode, limits hole extraction at the perovskite/carbon interface, resulting in significant open-circuit voltage (Voc) losses. To repair perovskite defects and boost hole transport, several strategies have been proposed, including the insertion of p-type semiconductors as HTLs (e.g., poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT)–multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) composites, Co3O4, tin phthalocyanine (SnPc), copper phthalocyanine (CuPc) and its derivatives, Cs2SnI6,etc.), bulk heterostructure engineering, surface passivation engineering (e.g. polymers, organic small molecules, organic ammonium halide salts, ionic liquids,etc.) and so on. Among them, organic ammonium halide salts are considered as the most potential passivation layers owing to their hydrophobicity, interaction with uncoordinated ions, and ease of solution processing. At present, a series of organic ammonium halide salts, such as MAX, phenethylammonium halides (PEAX), and alkyl-ammonium halides (BAX), are developed to passivate perovskite defects through the hydrogen or ionic bonding. It has been identified that the fluorinated organic functional groups can further increase the hydrophobicity of materials, optimize the morphology of films, modify the energy level of molecules, and eventually improve the device performance. As far as we know, fluorinated organic ammonium halide salts are rarely used to optimize the performance of C-IPSCs.
Based on the above considerations, we introduced a passivation layer based on phenylethylammonium iodide (PEAI) and phenylethylammonium bromide (PEABr) and their fluorinated derivatives of 4-fluorophenylethylammonium halides (4-fluorophenylethylammonium iodide (P-F-PEAI) and 4-fluorophenylethylammonium bromide (P-F-PEABr)) that were inserted between CsPbI2Br and the carbon electrode. The short-chained aromatic cations (PEA+ and P-F-PEA+) formed a cation termination onto the CsPbI2Br surface to passivate pinhole/grain boundary defects instead of a two-dimensional (2D) capping layer. Meanwhile, a small number of halogen ions diffused into the CsPbI2Br lattice, resulting in lattice distortion, improved crystallinity, and fewer ionic defects. Due to surface dipole formation, the better interfacial energy level adjustment also suppressed charge non-radiative recombination and promoted hole extraction. Accordingly, the optimized C-IPSCs achieved a highest PCE of 13.97%. Moreover, the nonencapsulated devices exhibited improved moisture and thermal stability in ambient air. This work provides a simple and feasible strategy toward efficient and stable C-IPSCs.

As shown in Fig. 1, the CsPbI2Br film was fabricated by a one-step spin-coating method with a green anti-solvent ethyl acetate (EA) treatment, followed by the low-temperature annealing and the post-treatment by the passivation layers (Fig. S1, ESI). According to the defect categories of perovskites, a hypothesis model was proposed for the passivation mechanism of CsPbI2Br, as illustrated in Fig. 2a. Different from organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites, the PEA+ and P-F-PEA+ ions containing a benzene ring and an amino group cannot go through either a solid state or a sequential cation exchange to form a 2D phase on the top of inorganic perovskite films. Therefore, we speculate that the PEA+ and P-F-PEA+ ions will terminate on the CsPbI2Br surface to passivate pinhole/grain boundary defects and act as the H2O-barrier molecules. The benzene ring is hydrophobic, and its π-conjugation structure is favourable for the charge transport. The amino group can connect the molecule to the Pb–X framework by coordinating with the under-coordinated Pb2+ or hydrogen bonding with the halogen ions. Moreover, the halogen ions are easily gradient-doped into the perovskite lattice during the post-annealing process to eliminate structural disorder and ionic defects. Specifically, I− ions from PEAI and P-F-PEAI fill I vacancies to complete the perovskite lattice. Besides filling original Br vacancies, Br− ions in PEABr and P-F-PEABr can also partially replace the I-site of perovskite to enhance crystallinity and thus obtain fewer defects. The electron-rich F atoms can strongly interact with the electron-deficient Pb2+ and thus passivate perovskite defects and suppress ion migration. Compared with PEA+, the larger dipole moment in fluorinated P-F-PEA+ is more favourable for the charge transport at the interface. The hydrophobic fluorinated materials can prevent the intrusion of H2O molecules into perovskite films. Therefore, the above four organic ammonium halide salts are expected to further improve the performance of CsPbI2Br C-IPSCs.

We first performed the energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) elemental mapping and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements. As shown in Fig. S2 and S3a–c (ESI), the appearance of N and F verified the existence of passivation layers. In addition, we also found a satellite peak (292.9 eV) in the passivated CsPbI2Br films (Fig S3d, ESI), which is consistent with the π–π bonding from the phenyl group in PEA+ and P-F-PEA+ ions. More importantly, the increased binding energies of Cs 3d, Pb 4f, I 3d and Br 3d core levels indicated localized charge transfer that occurred between the Pb-X framework and passivation layers (Fig. 2b–e). Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) spectra were used to further investigate the interaction between organic ammonium halide salts and perovskite. As shown in Fig. S4 and S5 (ESI), all the organic ammonium halide salts displayed a similar shape in the high wavenumber range from 2750 to 3250 cm−1, which corresponds to the N–H stretching vibration peak of the amino group. Considering that the O–H and C–H vibrational frequencies also populate this region, we referred to the N–H bending vibration peak of organic ammonium halide salts found at around 1600 cm−1. When lead halides (PbI2 or PbBr2) were mixed with organic ammonium halide salts, the N–H bending vibration peak shifted to a higher wavenumber, which is ascribed to the formation of hydrogen bonds (N–H⋯I or N–H⋯Br). These hydrogen bonds play a critical role in affecting the passivation of halogen ion vacancies. Meanwhile, the C–N stretching vibration peak in the organic ammonium halide salts at about 1100 cm−1 was shifted to a higher wavenumber in the organic ammonium halide salts/lead halides complex samples. This spectral change could be ascribed to the coordination interactions between C–N and Pb2+. In addition, the stretching vibration peak of the C–F bond located at about 1230 cm−1 shifted to lower wavenumber in the fluorinated organic ammonium halide salts/lead halides complex samples, indicating the reinforced interaction, which is also expected to passivate Pb2+ defects. Based on the above results, we concluded that the amino group and C–F bond could connect molecules to the Pb–X framework by coordinating with the under-coordinated Pb2+ or hydrogen bonding with the halogen ions and finally passivated CsPbI2Br defects.
According to the XRD patterns in Fig. 2f, all perovskite films exhibited the same cubic α-phase CsPbI2Br. Simultaneously, there were no small angle diffraction peaks related to the 2D phase in the whole spectra due to the strong resistance of Cs+ to larger ions (PEA+ and P-F-PEA+) exchange. Fig. 2g shows the magnified spectra of the (200) plane peak. The XRD peaks shifted to lower angles after PEAI and P-F-PEAI passivation, which indicated the expansion of the CsPbI2Br lattice. While for PEABr and P-F-PEABr, the XRD peaks shifted to higher angles, resulting in the shrinkage of the CsPbI2Br lattice. The above results mainly originated from the fact that I−/Br− ions successfully enter the CsPbI2Br lattice, resulting in enhanced crystallinity. To further illustrate the distribution of passivation layers, the depth-dependent XPS spectra of the perovskite film were measured by Ar ion etching. As shown in Fig. S6 (ESI), the peak intensities of I 3d and Br 3d turned from high to low as the etching time increased from 0 to 250 s, indicating that I−/Br− ions in passivation layers were gradient-doped into CsPbI2Br films during the post-annealing process. This result is beneficial for eliminating structural disorders and film defects. Furthermore, we tested the distribution of F− ions by taking P-F-PEABr passivated CsPbI2Br films as an example. As shown in Fig. S7 (ESI), the peak intensity of F 1s at 687 eV turned from high to low as the etching time increased from 0 to 30 s, and finally almost disappeared at 40 s. It confirms that P-F-PEA+ (PEA+) ions were only terminated on the CsPbI2Br surface to passivate pinhole/grain boundary defects and act as the H2O-barrier molecules.
The surface morphology of perovskite was investigated by top-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM). As shown in Fig. 3a–e, there were some pinholes in the reference film while no pinholes in the passivated one. Meanwhile, the surface of passivated films became smoother, which could be attributed to the fact that the passivation layers filled the pinholes/grain boundaries of the CsPbI2Br film (Fig. 3f–j). The reduced roughness facilitates good contact with carbon electrodes, thus decreasing interface chemical states.Fig. 3k and l describe the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved PL (TRPL) decay spectra of reference and passivated CsPbI2Br films on the glass substrate. As shown in Fig. 3k, all the samples displayed an obvious emission peak at about 650 nm, which is consistent with the previous report. Compared with the reference film, the PL peaks of PEAI and P-F-PEAI passivated CsPbI2Br films showed a red-shift, while the PEABr and P-F-PEABr passivated samples showed a blue-shift. This further demonstrated the incorporation of I−/Br− ions. Simultaneously, the increased PL intensity of passivated samples indicated suppressed trap-assisted non-radiative recombination. According to the TRPL decay spectra in Fig. 3l (the fitting results are listed in Table S1, ESI), the larger average carrier lifetime (τpl) values were obtained for passivated samples, which is mainly attributed to fewer perovskite defects and suppressed charge non-radiative recombination. To further quantify reduced defects, the hole-only devices with the architecture of indium-doped tin oxide (ITO)/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly (styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS)/CsPbI2Br/with or without the passivation layers/carbon were fabricated and the space-charge-limited-current (SCLC) model was performed. As shown in Fig. 3m and n and Table S2 (ESI), the reduced trap-state density (Ntrap) values meant fewer defects in the passivated CsPbI2Br films, which is beneficial for suppressing charge non-radiative recombination and ion migration. Ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra were carried out to investigate the light-harvesting ability of perovskite films, as shown in Fig. 3o and p. Compared with the reference sample, all passivated CsPbI2Br films displayed slightly increased absorption intensity, indicating better film quality, consistent with the XRD and SEM results. Moreover, the absorbance edges of PEAI and P-F-PEAI passivated samples exhibited a slight red-shift caused by the I-rich CsPbI2+xBr1−x films. For the PEABr and P-F-PEABr treatments, this position appeared a slight blue-shift caused by the Br-rich CsPbI2−xBr1+x films. This phenomenon is consistent with the steady-state PL results and previous reports. According to the Tauc plots (Fig. 3q and r), the altered Eg values could be attributed to the incorporation of I−/Br− ions into the CsPbI2Br lattice.
To investigate the effect of passivation layers on the performance of CsPbI2Br C-IPSCs, the planar devices with a structure of ITO/SnO2/ZnO/CsPbI2Br/with or without the passivation layer/carbon were assembled (Fig. 4a). Fig. 4b presents the cross-sectional SEM image of typical C-IPSC, in which the average thickness of SnO2/ZnO, CsPbI2Br and carbon is about 40 nm, 340 nm and 22.5 μm, respectively. The energy level diagram was shown in Fig. 4c, where the organic ammonium halide salts acted as both the passivation and dipole layer. However, the thicker passivation layers caused inferior device performance, probably because insulating organic ligands increased internal series resistance (Rs) and hindered hole transport at the CsPbI2Br/carbon interface (Fig. S8 and Table S3–S6, ESI). The optimal current density–voltage (J–V) curves and photovoltaic parameters are presented in Fig. 4d and Table 1, in which the passivated devices achieved a maximum PCE of 13.97%. To the best of our knowledge, it should be one of the highest PCEs reported among low-temperature CsPbI2Br C-IPSCs (Fig. 4e and Table S7, ESI). We also observed decreased hysteresis index (HI) in the passivated devices (Fig. 4f and Fig. S9 and Table S8, ESI), which could be attributed to suppressed interfacial charge accumulation and ion migration. The integrated Jsc values obtained from the external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves were comparable to J–V curves (errors less than 5%), indicating that the latter was well calibrated (Fig. 4g and Table 1). Meanwhile, we observed a red-shift in the EQE wavelength of PEAI and P-F-PEAI passivated C-IPSCs, while a blue-shift in the devices using the PEABr and P-F-PEABr passivation (Fig. S10, ESI). This phenomenon is consistent with the steady-state PL and UV-vis absorption spectra results. The steady power output (SPO) curves of PCE were measured under their maximum power points for 400 s, and the results were very close to the PCE values obtained from J–V results (Fig. 4h). In addition, the SPO curves of Jsc in the passivated devices saturated faster than the reference device, which could partly explain smaller J–V hysteresis effect (Fig. S11, ESI). The narrower distribution of all parameters indicated good reproducibility in the passivated devices (Fig. 4i and Fig. S12, ESI).
Device

V
oc (V)

J
sc
 (mA cm−2)

J
sc
 (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)

a Best PCE.
b Average PCE from 30 individual C-IPSCs.
c Measured Jsc values from the J–V curves.
d Integrated Jsc values from the EQE curves.

Reference
1.217
14.69
14.13
0.681
12.18 (11.65)
PEAI
1.244
14.81
14.24
0.720
13.27 (12.88)
PEABr
1.254
14.84
14.43
0.726
13.51 (13.24)
P-F-PEAI
1.261
14.88
14.55
0.740
13.89 (13.52)
P-F-PEABr
1.269
14.91
14.61
0.738
13.97 (13.61)
To gain insight into the reasons for improved performance in the passivated devices, the dark J–V curves were measured at first. As depicted in Fig. 5a, the passivated devices possessed a smaller leakage current than the reference device, which is in favor of the improvement in Jsc and fill factor (FF). The ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was conducted to illustrate the origin of increased Voc in the passivated devices, as shown in Fig. S13 and Table S9 (ESI). The passivated CsPbI2Br films presented the upshift of the VBM edge, resulting in a smaller energy level difference between CsPbI2Br and the carbon electrode, which is beneficial for suppressing the interfacial energy loss and thus promoting the hole extraction. On the other hand, the Fermi levels of all samples were close to conduction band minimum (CBM), meaning they were n-type semiconductors, and thus p–n junctions were constructed between CsPbI2Br and the carbon electrode. Meanwhile, the Fermi levels of passivated samples are higher than that of the reference film, which can be attributed to fewer charged defects on the surface and/or grain boundaries that can pin the Fermi level at a low energy level. The elevated VBM and Fermi levels in passivated CsPbI2Br films may be associated with the formation of a dipole layer, which are beneficial for increasing the built-in electric field between CsPbI2Br and the carbon electrode, resulting in higher Voc in the passivated devices. As further evidence, the built-in potential (Vbi) was estimated by the capacitance–voltage (C−2–V) curves and analyzed according to the Mott–Schottky equation. As shown in Fig. 5b, the Vbi values of passivated devices were higher than that of the reference device, and the trend was similar to the Voc values obtained from J–V curves. In this sense, the higher Vbi values provided a stronger driving force for carrier separation and an extended depletion region to reduce interfacial charge accumulation, which directly contributes to increased Voc and inhibited J–V hysteresis.
Moreover, several characterization techniques, including transient photocurrent (TPC), transient photovoltage (TPV), electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), and light intensity (Plight)-dependent J–V measurements, were carried out to evaluate the carrier dynamics of CsPbI2Br C-IPSCs. As shown in Fig. 5c and d and Table S10 (ESI), the shorter charge extraction time and longer charge non-radiative recombination lifetime were obtained in the passivated devices, indicating that organic ammonium halide salts can suppress charge non-radiative recombination and improve the hole extraction efficiency.Fig. 5e presents the Nyquist plots obtained from the EIS measurements, where the solid lines are the fitting curves using the inserted equivalent circuit model. Here, Rs is equal to the value of the starting point at the real part (Z′). The transport resistance (Rtra) and constant phase angle element CPEtra are ascribed to high-frequency arc, which is related to the charge transport process from the cathode to the anode. The low-frequency arc is assigned to the charge recombination process by integrating the recombination resistance (Rrec) and constant phase angle element CPErec. According to the fitting results given in Table S11 (ESI), the Rs and Rtra values of passivated devices were lower than that of the reference device, suggesting better contact and hole transport at the CsPbI2Br/carbon interface. Therefore, the passivated devices obtained higher Jsc and FF. In addition, the higher Rrec values in the passivated devices indicated a lower charge non-radiative recombination loss, which may also explain the increase in Voc. The dependence of Voc on Plight was plotted as a function of Plight in natural logarithm scales as shown in Fig. 5f. Here, the slope of Vocversus Plight can be expressed by nkT/q, where n, k, and T represent the ideality factor, Boltzmann constant, and absolute temperature, respectively. Under ideal conditions, it is equal to kT/q when there is no trap-assisted non-radiative recombination inside the devices. The lower slopes of passivated devices indicated greatly suppressed trap-assisted non-radiative recombination that possibly benefits from reduced defects (Table S12, ESI). Fig. S14 (ESI) describes Plightversus Jsc based on the power law relationship. The exponential factor (α) values of passivated devices were slightly increased and close to one compared to that of the reference device, indicating negligible bimolecular radiative recombination (Table S12, ESI).
Finally, the long-term stability of perovskite films and devices without encapsulation was evaluated. As illustrated in Fig. 6a, the passivated samples revealed larger H2O contact angles than the reference film, indicating that the organic ammonium halide salts are beneficial for preventing the invasion of moisture. Apart from the hydrophobicity of organic ammonium halide salts, the hydrophobic surface of passivated films may also be related to reduced defects. The temporal evolution of photographs was displayed in Fig. 6b. The passivated films exhibited improved moisture stability after aging in ambient air (25 °C, 20–30% relative humidity (RH)) for 1200 h. In contrast, the reference film decomposed to form a yellow phase at 300 h. As shown in Fig. 6c, the reference device retains only 30% of its initial PCE after storage in ambient air for 1200 h, whereas the passivated devices display less degradation (greater than 78% of their initial PCE). The thermal stability of devices at 80 °C was also recorded in an air glove box (20–30% RH), as illustrated in Fig. 6d. All devices had different degrees of PCE degradation after aging for 360 h. This result may be attributed to the fact that the polymer binder in the commercial carbon pastes is easy to be damaged under long-term high-temperature operation, which affects the conductivity of the carbon electrode and the device performance. Fortunately, the optimized CsPbI2Br C-IPSCs still demonstrated better thermal stability than the reference device due to the defect passivation effect.

In summary, we have successfully demonstrated that the organic ammonium halide salts as the passivation layers can effectively improve the photovoltaic performance of low-temperature CsPbI2Br C-IPSCs. A series of characterization studies indicated that the PEA+ and F-PEA+ groups terminated on the CsPbI2Br surface led to the passivation of pinhole/grain boundary defects, and simultaneously the I−/Br− ions diffused into CsPbI2Br lattice led to lattice distortion and thus improving crystallinity and reducing ionic defects. Benefiting from reduced perovskite defects, better energy level alignments, suppressed charge non-radiative recombination and enhanced hole extraction efficiency, the optimized devices obtained a maximum PCE of 13.97%. Meanwhile, the unencapsulated devices displayed improved moisture and thermal stability in ambient air. This facile strategy provides a promising avenue for fabricating efficient and stable C-IPSCs.


X. Zhang and Q. Tai conceived the idea and designed the experiments. X. Zhang carried out the experimental study on device fabrication and basic characterization. X. Zhang and D. Zhang synthesized the PbI2(DMSO) and PbBr2(DMSO) adducts. X. Zhang performed the J–V, dark J–V, UV-vis absorption, XRD, XPS, FTIR and UPS tests. D. Zhang measured the SEM, EDX elemental mapping and contact angles. T. Guo performed the TPC, TPV and C−2–V tests. C. Zheng performed the EQE and EIS tests. Y. Zhou, J. Jin, and Z. Zhu performed the steady-state PL and TRPL tests. Z. Wang and X. Cui performed the AFM and stability measurements. X. Zhang wrote the first manuscript of paper. Q. Tai revised the manuscript. S. Wu and J. Zhang coordinated the research. All authors contributed to manuscript development and have approved the final version of the manuscript.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61974106) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2042020kf0195). We thank Dr Mingyuan Du from the Core Facility of Wuhan University for her assistance with FTIR measurements and data analyses.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2tc02762c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022