 DOI: 10.1039/C3TA11485F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11665-11673

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms

Vanira Trifiletti,
Riccardo Ruffo,
Christian Turrini,
Dario Tassetti,
Rosaria Brescia,
Fabio Di Fonzo,
Claudia Riccardi* and 
Alessandro Abbotto*

Department of Materials Science and Milano-Bicocca Solar Energy Research Center – MIB-Solar, University of Milano-Bicocca, INSTM unit, Via Cozzi 53, I-20125, Milano, Italy. E-mail: alessandro.abbotto@unimib.it

Department of Physics and Plasma Prometeo Centre, University of Milano-Bicocca, Piazza della Scienza 3, I-20126, Milano, Italy. E-mail: claudia.riccardi@unimib.it

Center for Nano Science and Technology @PoliMi, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Giovanni Pascoli 70/3, 20133 Milano, Italy

Department of Nanochemistry, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Morego 30, 16163, Genova, Italy

Received
14th April 2013
, Accepted 19th July 2013
First published on 22nd July 2013
The investigation of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) using a very thin (0.8 to 4.7 μm) transparent photoanode based on a hierarchically nanostructured TiO2 film prepared via Plasma Assisted Supersonic Jet Deposition (PA-SJD), in combination with the DSC benchmark photosensitizer N719, is presented. The cell photovoltages (nearly 0.8 V) and the amount of adsorbed dye and photocurrent densities, normalized over the film thickness, are higher than those of DSCs prepared with thicker (9 μm) conventional screen-printed TiO2 films. A record efficiency value of 5.7% (standard AM 1.5G solar irradiation) for very thin nanostructured titania photoanodes is obtained with a 2 μm PA-SJD TiO2 film. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy shows that PA-SJD devices are endowed with higher charge recombination resistance (lower recombination losses) and electron lifetimes compared to conventional nanocrystalline films.

The current energy crisis and its damaging environmental effects have accelerated the study of efficient exploitation of renewable energy sources, making this sector one of the most strategic scientific challenges of this century. In this context, cheap and stable innovative photovoltaic devices are demanded to represent one of the leading technologies for a possible more sustainable future. Nano-crystalline dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) have proven to be a promising candidate for low-cost and efficient photovoltaic devices.

One of the key components of a DSC is the photoanode based on a wide band-gap semiconductor thin film coated on a fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) glass, which is responsible for electron transport and collection following the photosensitizer excitation upon light harvesting. Although a number of metal oxides have been tested as n-type semiconductors, titanium oxide (TiO2), to which the photosensitizer molecules are chemically grafted, has given so far the best results because of its large surface area, good light absorption, and high photoelectrical response as a porous photo-electrode.
Grätzel and co-workers have optimized the device fabrication using a colloidal paste of TiO2 nanoparticles which is screen-printed on the FTO glass via a multilayer deposition process until the desired film thickness has been reached followed by sintering to ca. 500 °C. The active layer of the photoanode is composed, typically, of a 12 μm thick film of transparent 10–20 nm TiO2 nanoparticles covered by a 4 μm thick film of larger (200–400 nm) particles which scatter photons back into the transparent film. Following light absorption, the excited dye injects electrons into the TiO2. The injected electrons diffuse through the titanium dioxide to be collected at the front-side transparent FTO electrode, whereas the oxidized dye is quickly reduced to its ground state by a redox shuttle, usually I3−/I−, dissolved in an electrolyte solution. Diffusion of the oxidized form of the redox mediator to the counter-electrode closes the circuit. This procedure is now currently used in the vast majority of DSC studies.
In a benchmark DSC configuration, light is absorbed by a ruthenium based dye, bis(tetrabutylammonium) cis-dithiocyanato-bis(2,2′-bipyridine-4-COOH-4′-COO−)Ru(II) (N719), grafted to the TiO2 nanoparticle surface via its carboxylate moieties, affording a validated power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 11.2% under standard AM 1.5G full sunlight (1000 W m−2).
Unfortunately, the use of a TiO2 photoanode prepared from a colloidal paste likely hampers the improvement of DSC efficiencies because of the presence of numerous grain boundaries, which significantly reduces electron mobility. In addition, the presence of a basically disordered network impedes an optimal loading of the photosensitizer, which is important in order to enhance sunlight absorption. To address these issues different kinds of one-dimensional ordered nanostructures (nanorods, nanowires, and nanotubes) have been recently proposed. Indeed, one-dimensional TiO2 nanostructures improve the electron mobility, thanks to the higher order of the oxide network, and the surface area for enhancing dye adsorbtion, but in some cases insufficient sites for dye attachment may be present. An ordered architecture offers a more direct charge transport pathway and can reduce charge recombination, giving rise to surface electrical fields which confine the injected electrons in the central zone of the wires. Furthermore, light harvesting is enhanced by a superior light harvesting ability of the nanostructured films. Recently, DSCs based on hierarchically structured TiO2 nanotubes have yielded a remarkable PCE of more than 7% and those based on hierarchical TiO2 microspheres yielded more than 8–10%.
A strategic aspect for the industrial development of the DSC technology is represented by the replacement of the commonly used liquid and corrosive electrolyte based on the iodine–iodide couple by solid hole-transport materials (HTM) for building solid state DSCs (ssDSCs). However, the use of solid HTMs, associated with short charge carrier diffusion lengths and poor pore filling of the mesoporous film, is limited to much thinner TiO2 layers (2–3 μm). This in turn restricts the dye loading and thus the amount of light absorbed, effectively limiting the device PCE (5–7%). We therefore believe that it is of paramount importance to develop new ultrathin (less than 5 μm) nanostructured TiO2 films endowed with large dye loading and higher PCEs.
An efficient technique to produce thin nanostructured films with high surface area is Chemical Vapour Deposition (CVD). Shinde and Bhosale reported the fabrication of TiO2 thin films at 400 °C by CVD from titanium(IV) isopropoxide precursors on FTO substrates. Recently, a new method (flat-flame chemical vapour condensation) for the preparation of low-agglomerated TiO2 nanoparticles, with particle size in the 10–30 nm range, has been reported by Chen et al. In another study Chena explores the possibility of using flat-flame CVD to prepare TiO2 photoanodes, reaching a maximum efficiency of 4.2%.
These and other studies have outlined the importance of controlling the nano-morphology of the TiO2 layer in order to improve the DSC performances. Indeed, recent studies have demonstrated that a hierarchical assembly of nanocrystalline particles of TiO2 may represent the most efficient morphology for optimized DSC photoanodes. Sauvage et al. have described a forest-like architecture, which afforded a PCE of 4.9% using the high extinction coefficient dye C101. Kim et al. have reached a remarkable 8.4% efficiency using a mixture of nanoparticles of different sizes and shapes, with an average size of 12 nm, in order to improve the surface area and, consequently, the amount of the adsorbed dye. However, in this case the film thickness was 10 μm, which is not optimal for ssDSCs.
Herein, we present the fabrication and characterization of DSCs employing a transparent ultrathin (less than 5 μm) photoanode obtained via Plasma Assisted Supersonic Jet Deposition (PA-SJD) in combination with the benchmark dye N719 and the commonly used iodine–iodide liquid electrolyte A6141. We have focussed our present interest on ultrathin (0.8 to 4.7 μm) films for the relevant implications on the fabrication of market-ready solid-state cells (ssDSCs). The results are compared with those of a DSC using a thicker (9.0 μm) conventional TiO2 photoanode prepared via screen-printing from a commercial paste while keeping all of the other fabrication conditions unvaried. The results have shown that DSCs using the new PA-SJD TiO2 photoanodes yield significantly high PCEs even in the presence of very thin semiconductor films.

Nanostructured thin film synthesis by PA-SJD was obtained by coupling the plasma enhanced CVD technique and the inseminated supersonic jet technique in a single reactor design. Vaporizable and stable monomers could be employed as the source of oxides, semiconductors or even metals. The extraction of a supersonic plasma jet allows the precursor flow on the substrate to be focussed and the growth and the sizes of clusters to be controlled. Over conventional gas phase processes the proposed technique allows control of the kinetic energy of clusters, hence control on their assembly pattern on the substrate. In particular when molecular cluster deposition is performed under conditions of supersonic jet several advantages could be envisaged including the better collimation and stability and the control of crystallinity. By changing the conditions during processing it is also possible to obtain graded films. This novel process is based on the segmentation of the gas phase material synthesis into two separate steps: (i) precursor dissociation chemistry control in a reactive plasma environment; (ii) nanoparticle nucleation and aggregation control by means of a sonic jet. The PA-SJD process was carried out at low pressures (<10 Pa) in a custom built radiofrequency (RF) plasma source, where the vacuum chamber comprises two distinct sections connected through a nozzle (Fig. 1).

In the first, upstream, chamber a non-thermal inductively coupled plasma is generated by means of a three-loop copper antenna in a planar configuration powered by a RF generator (13.56 MHz, power = 0–400 W) through a L-type matching box. The plasma discharge is ignited using an oxygen–argon feedstock gas mixture with controlled partial pressures. Tetra-isopropoxide is mixed in the gas mixture and then injected into the plasma chamber as a precursor.
A turbomolecular pump (S = 210 l s−1 for Ar) keeps a constant pressure difference between the two chambers and allows the control of the gas-jet sonic expansion. The pressure ratio R between the upper and the lower chamber determines whether supersonic speed could be reached at the nozzle exit and is controlled by the conductance of the nozzle. Since the supersonic plasma plume is limited by a shock wave front (the Mach disk, beyond which the speed decreases abruptly), it is possible to intercept species with different sizes and energies by changing the nozzle to substrate distance.
Clusters of a few atoms with high kinetic energy are collected at small distances, while more massive nanoparticles with low kinetic energy appear on increasing the distance. Consequently, compact smooth films are obtained at low nozzle–substrate distances whereas porous and nanostructured films are formed at larger distances.
Similarly, at a fixed distance from the nozzle, the parameter R controls the morphology of the tree-like nanostructured assembly.
The plasma jet from the nozzle hits a FTO substrate located at a fixed distance from the nozzle of about 10 mm. In the experiment we fixed the RF power, the R ratio, and the substrate distance from the nozzle while varying the time exposure between 10 and 40 min. The thickness of the TiO2 films, measured by means of a profilometer, was controlled by varying the exposure time to the plasma jet. With PA-SJD it is possible to cover a substrate area of a few cm2. In the present paper we covered the FTO substrate with an open circle mask of about 5 mm in diameter. After annealing at 500 °C the films were used for DSC cell assembly. A set of TiO2 films, with varying thicknesses from 0.8 to 4.7 μm, were prepared by PA-SJD.

A typical Raman spectrum of the synthesized TiO2 before and after annealing is shown in Fig. 2. While the as deposited film spectrum is clearly amorphous, Raman spectra show the complete transformation in anatase upon annealing, as indicated by the peaks at 143 cm−1 and by the three mid-intensity peaks at 399, 519, and 639 cm−1. Considering that the 519 cm−1 peak is a superimposition of two fundamental peaks at room temperature, this set of peaks corresponds to the fundamental vibrational modes of anatase TiO2. This result holds independently from the used PA-SJD conditions.

Fig. 3 shows FE-SEM (Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy) images of a PA-SJD titanium oxide thin film after annealing, in which the tree-like structures are clearly visible; stable hierarchical nanostructures appear upon annealing at 500 °C. To fabricate efficient DSCs we chose a ratio R of ca. 0.1, having hierarchically nanostructured films assembled by nanoparticles with size of the order of 10 nm and tree shape nanostructures like those shown in Fig. 3.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) shows that the ramified structures composing the films clearly consist of zig-zagged nanowires with a diameter of about 10 nm. Electron diffraction patterns obtained selecting the tree-like structures confirm the anatase crystal structure (see the inset in Fig. 4a). High-resolution TEM (HRTEM) analyses show that the nanowires are not single-crystalline along their whole length, but rather composed of single-crystalline anatase domains with size in the 10 nm range (Fig. 4b–d).
Our film nanostructures are different from those reported by Shao et al. Shao's structures are more elongated with short isolated branches whereas the structures described here are generated by more anisotropic nanoparticles assembling in a complex tree shape, with branches and sub-branches diverging during the PA-SJD process forming a multi-scale structured deposit. The tree structure resembles a coniferous forest.

The FTO–TiO2 layers prepared via PA-SJD were immersed for 20 h at room temperature in the dark in an alcoholic solution of the benchmark dye N719. The best measured photovoltaic performances using the standard electrolyte A6141 (0.6 M N-butyl-N-methyl imidazolium iodide, 0.03 M I2, 0.10 M guanidinium thiocyanate, and 0.5 M 4-t-butylpyridine in acetonitrile:valeronitrile = 85:15) are shown in Table 1.

TiO2 film
TiO2 thickness [μm]
Dye adsorbed [10−8 mol cm−2]
Normalized dye adsorbed on TiO2 thickness [10−8 mol cm−2 μm−1]
Jsc [mA cm−2]
Voc [mV]
FF
PCE [%]
a In parentheses are efficiencies recorded without a black mask on top of the photoanode.
0.8 μm PA-SJD
0.8
2.9
3.7
3.2
793
0.67
1.7 (1.8)
1.2 μm PA-SJD
1.2
1.5
1.3
5.6
739
0.68
2.8 (3.4)
1.6 μm PA-SJD
1.6
2.8
1.8
6.6
737
0.65
3.2 (3.9)
2.2 μm PA-SJD
2.2
5.9
2.7
10.1
742
0.68
5.1 (5.7)
3.6 μm PA-SJD
3.6
6.0
1.7
11.4
738
0.61
5.1 (5.4)
4.7 μm PA-SJD
4.7
6.7
1.4
11.8
755
0.66
5.9 (6.2)
Conventional monolayer
9.0
9.2
1.0
13.0
749
0.69
6.7 (7.4)
The table includes, as a reference system, the photovoltaic performances of a conventional device prepared under the same experimental conditions, starting from a screen-printed transparent 9 μm TiO2 film. After measuring the cell short circuit current density Jsc, the open circuit voltage Voc, and the fill factor FF (FF = (Jmp × Vmp)/(Jsc × Voc), where Jmp and Vmp are the current density and the voltage, respectively, at the maximum power point), the overall PCE was derived from the equation PCE = Jsc × Voc × FF. The corresponding current–voltage plots under full AM 1.5G sun irradiation are shown in Fig. 5, which illustrates how the characteristic curves change with the thickness of the PA-SJD layer. The photocurrent densities and conversion efficiencies were measured by using a black mask (0.40 cm2) on the top of the photoanode, in order to avoid current overestimation arising from light piping by multiple reflections in the glass electrodes, and were calculated using the total area of the TiO2 films.
For each PA-SJD and screen printed TiO2 film the amount of adsorbed dye was measured by desorbing the dye, after the photovoltaic characterization, using a 0.1 M solution of NaOH in ethanol–H2O (1:1) and by measuring its UV-Vis spectrum in a known volume of solution. Comparison with the spectra of freshly prepared solutions of the dye in the same solvent, at known concentrations, was used to determine the amounts of desorbed dye.
The data are included in Table 1 along with the normalized amounts of dye on the thickness of the TiO2 layer. It is evident that, although the absolute amount of adsorbed N719 is higher in the thicker conventional DSCs than in the PA-SJD cells, the normalized loading is higher in the latter devices, with a value ranging from 1.3 to 3.7 × 10−8 mol cm−2 μm−1. In particular excellent absolute and normalized dye loadings were recorded for the 2.2 μm PA-SJD sample, the thickness of which is optimal for ssDSCs. These values are compared with that of 1.0 × 10−8 mol cm−2 μm−1 measured for the screen-printed film. Therefore it can be concluded that the PA-SJD technique allows a much larger amount of dye (up to a factor of almost 4) to be adsorbed in comparison with the conventional film fabrication.
These results explained the relatively higher photocurrents obtained for the PA-SJD cells, with an absolute value of ≈12 mA cm−2 for the 4.7 μm film, which is almost identical to that measured for the nanocrystalline film that is two times thicker (9 μm). The measured fill factors did not significantly vary with the film preparation method and the film thickness, with values in the 0.61 ÷ 0.68 range, which are typically for high quality devices. In contrast, the measured photovoltage significantly increased on going from the thicker to the thinner film, with a remarkable value of almost 0.8 V obtained for the 0.8 μm PA-SJD film. Accordingly with the data on the single photovoltaic parameters, the overall power conversion efficiency of the PA-SJD devices increased from 1.7 to 5.9% while increasing the semiconductor thickness (1.8 ÷ 6.2% without mask).
The cell photovoltaic parameters and efficiencies are plotted versus the film thickness in Fig. 6. The figure clearly evidences the effect of the film thickness on the photovoltaic parameters. In particular, the increase of PCE upon increasing the film thickness clearly originates by the higher photocurrent density which, in turn, derives from the larger amount of adsorbed dye. On the other hand the best photovoltage has been recorded for the thinnest film (less than 1 μm thickness).
Fig. 7 shows the incident monochromatic photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) of DSCs from selected PA-SJD and conventional photoanodes. The calculated integrated current under the IPCE curves nicely matched the measured photocurrents with the solar simulator under standard global AM 1.5 solar conditions. The shape of the spectra suggests that the light is more scattered in the layers made by colloidal pastes than in the thinner films produced by PA-SJD; the higher PCE of the 4.7 μm sample can be attributed to scattering effects in the deposited layer. The IPCE plots of the thinner PA-SJD films resemble more the absorption spectrum of the sensitizer, with intensity roughly proportional to the film thickness and, thus, the amount of adsorbed dye.

The properties of the thin films were investigated by means of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). In this experiment, a small sinusoidal voltage stimulus of fixed frequency is applied to an electrochemical cell and its current response is measured. The ac behaviour of an electrochemical system can be investigated by sweeping the frequency over several orders of magnitude (generally from a few mHz to several MHz). The analysis of the impedance spectra is usually performed in terms of Nyquist plots where the imaginary part of the impedance is plotted as a function of the real part over the range of frequencies.

Equivalent circuits built in series or parallel combinations of simple elements like resistance, capacitance, and inductance are often used to qualitatively describe the electrode material, while the determination of their numeric values by fitting procedures yields quantitative data. As a consequence, the impedance of a DSC can be described using an equivalent circuit model, in which the different cell components and their interfaces are treated as discrete electrical elements. Complete impedance models taking in account all the interfaces present in a DSC have been developed and discussed in great detail. The relative contribution of each single element to the overall cell impedance closely depends on the experimental parameters selected for recording the spectra.
Under illumination at open circuit voltage conditions the DSC Nyquist plot shows three arcs corresponding to the I−/I3− redox process at the counter-electrode at the high-frequency region (104 ÷ 102 Hz), the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface at intermediate frequencies (1 ÷ 10 Hz), and the Nernst diffusion within the electrolyte of ionic species (I−) in the low-frequency region (0.01 ÷ 1 Hz). Under these conditions the properties of the TiO2/electrolyte interface can be derived from the central arc in terms of recombination resistance (Rrec) and chemical capacitance for charge accumulation (Cμ), both linked to the charge transfer (recombination) phenomenon which represents detrimental back-processes between the injected electrons in the oxide and the oxidized form of the electrolyte.
Fig. 8 shows the Nyquist plots for the DSC devices obtained by EIS at the open circuit voltage under 250 W m−2 (0.25 sun) illumination. The data can be fitted using the equivalent circuit shown in the figure's inset where, in addition to the TiO2/electrolyte interface parameters, RS is the serial resistance (mainly due to the FTO layers), ZD is the Warburg diffusion of the ionic species (I−) in the electrolyte, and RCE and CCE are the charge transfer resistance and double layer capacity at the counter-electrode, respectively. The results of the EIS investigation are summarized in Table 2. The width of the central arc corresponds to Rrec, while the capacitance Cμ can be deduced by fitting the data with the equivalent circuit (Fig. 8).
TiO2 film
Rrec [Ω cm2]
Cμ [F cm−2]
τn [ms]
1.2 μm PA-SJD
38
4.3 × 10−4
16
1.6 μm PA-SJD
33
7.0 × 10−4
23
2.2 μm PA-SJD
27
8.5 × 10−4
23
Conventional monolayer
15
1.1 × 10−3
16
The apparent electron lifetime τn can thus be calculated from τn = RrecCμ and corresponds to the angular frequency at the top of the middle arc.
The effects of Rrec are strategic in the performance of the cell. The EIS data clearly show that the PA-SJD thinner films have higher recombination resistances compared to the conventional nanocrystalline film. Thus the detrimental charge recombination in the DSC of the electrons from the TiO2 surface to the electrolyte is less efficient in the PA-SJD than in the conventional films. However, the corresponding capacitance, which probes the charge carrier accumulation in the TiO2 film and the density of states in the band gap, follows an opposite trend, that is, electrons tend more to leak at the TiO2/electrolyte interface as the thickness decreases. The net result is that the highest electron lifetimes in the metal oxide are obtained at intermediate thicknesses.

A series of ultrathin (less than 5 μm) hierarchically nanostructured FTO–TiO2 films have been prepared by PA-SJD and fully characterized. The Raman analysis of the films showed pure TiO2 anatase crystalline phase demonstrating the high purity level of the deposition process and the complete dissociation of the titanium isopropoxide precursor during the plasma synthetic step. The obtained film thicknesses linearly increased with exposure time from hundreds of nm up to a few μm. Microstructural and HRTEM analyses showed that these films own tree-like features in turn consisting of polycrystalline anatase nanowires.

DSCs were prepared with PA-SJD photoanodes and compared with a device containing thicker (9 μm) conventional nanocrystalline TiO2 screen-printed layers. Although the overall power conversion efficiency of the conventional DSC was higher than those of the thinner PA-SJD film devices, the latter showed comparable or higher photovoltages and relatively higher photocurrent density, when related to the different thicknesses.
The large photocurrent densities of the PA-SJD devices, despite their very thin thicknesses, were associated with the larger normalized amount of adsorbed dye, with the 0.8 μm PA-SJD film adsorbing almost four times the normalized quantity of the conventional device (3.7 vs. 1.0 × 10−8 mol cm−2 μm−1). The DSC prepared with the 2.2 μm PA-SJD TiO2 film exhibited a remarkable power conversion efficiency of 5.7%.
Taking into account previous studies, which have shown that hierarchical structures also allow efficient electrolyte diffusion, thanks to their larger external pores, we can conclude that PA-SJD DSCs are particularly suitable for solid-state, and thus market-ready, applications. EIS studies have confirmed the superior properties of the PA-SJD devices compared to the conventional cells. In particular, the thinner film PA-SJD cells showed higher recombination resistances and electron lifetimes than conventional devices. The results are very encouraging for the development of thicker PA-SJD TiO2 films with larger photocurrents and, thus, improved power conversion efficiencies or for investigating very thin (TiO2 films of 2 μm or less) ssDSC devices. This work is under active progress and will be reported in due course.

DSCs have been prepared adapting a procedure reported in the literature. In order to exclude metal contamination all of the containers were in glass or Teflon and were treated with EtOH and 10% HCl prior to use. Plastic spatulas and tweezers have been used throughout the procedure. FTO glass plates (Solaronix TCO 22-7, 2.2 mm thickness, 7 Ω per square) were cleaned in a detergent solution for 15 min using an ultrasonic bath, and rinsed with pure water and EtOH. After treatment in a UV-O3 system (Novascan PSD Pro Series – Digital UV Ozone System) for 18 min, the FTO plates were treated with a freshly prepared 40 mM aqueous solution of TiCl4 for 30 min at 70 °C and then rinsed with water and EtOH. The conventional transparent monolayer of 0.20 cm2 was screen-printed using a 20 nm transparent TiO2 paste (Dyesol 18NR-T). The coated films were kept in a cabinet for 5 min and then thermally treated under an air flow at 125 °C for 6 min, 325 °C for 10 min, 450 °C for 15 min, and 500 °C for 15 min. The heating ramp rate was 5–10 °C min−1. The thickness of the layers was measured by means of a VEECO Dektak 8 Stylus Profiler and their area was measured using an USB Digital PCE-MM200 Microscope. The sintered layer was treated again with 40 mM aqueous TiCl4 (70 °C for 30 min), rinsed with EtOH and heated at 500 °C for 30 min. The samples prepared with PA-SJD were subjected only to the second thermal treatment and the resultant samples were kept in the second bath of TiCl4 only for 10 min. After cooling down to 80 °C the TiO2 coated plate was immersed into a 0.5 mM solution of the dye in EtOH containing equimolar chenodeoxycholic acid for 20 h at room temperature in the dark.

Counter electrodes were prepared according to the following procedure: (a) 1 mm hole was made in a FTO plate using diamond drill bits. The electrodes were then cleaned with a detergent solution for 15 min using an ultrasonic bath, 10% HCl, and finally acetone for 15 min using an ultrasonic bath. After treatment in the UV-O3 system for 18 min, a drop of 5 × 10−3 M solution of H2PtCl6 in EtOH was added and the thermal treatment at 400 °C for 15 min was repeated.
The dye adsorbed TiO2 electrode and Pt-counter electrode were assembled into a sealed sandwich-type cell by heating with a hot-melt ionomer-class resin (Surlyn 25 μm thickness) as a spacer between the electrodes. A drop of the electrolyte solution was added to the hole and introduced inside the cell by vacuum backfilling. Finally, the hole was sealed with a sheet of Surlyn and a cover glass. A reflective foil at the back side of the counter electrode was taped to reflect unabsorbed light back to the photoanode.

Photovoltaic measurements of DSCs were carried out with an antireflective layer and a black mask with an aperture area of 0.40 cm2, under a 500 W Xenon light source (ABET Technologies Sun 2000 class ABA Solar Simulator). The power of the simulated light was calibrated to AM 1.5 (100 mW cm−2) using a reference Si cell photodiode equipped with an IR-cutoff filter (KG-5, Schott) to reduce the mismatch in the region of 350–750 nm between the simulated light and the AM 1.5 spectrum. Values were recorded after 3 and 24 h, 3 and 7 days of ageing in the dark. I–V curves were obtained by applying an external bias to the cell and measuring the generated photocurrent with a Keithley model 2400 digital source meter.

Incident photon-to-current conversion efficiencies (IPCEs) were recorded as a function of excitation wavelength by using a monochromator (Omni 300 LOT ORIEL) with single grating in Czerny–Turner optical design, in AC mode with a chopping frequency of 1 Hz and a bias of white light (0.3 sun).
The surface morphological analysis was based on Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy (FE-SEM) observations, performed using a Zeiss Supra 40 field-effect microscope, at a 10 kV acceleration voltage. Raman spectroscopy was performed with a Renishaw InVia instrument, with excitation wavelength at 516 nm. The samples were prepared for TEM analyses by scratching the film surface with a diamond tip and letting the film fragments deposit onto a holey carbon net. TEM analyses were carried out using a Jeol JEM 2200FS microscope equipped with a FEG source, operated at 200 kV, and a CEOS image aberration corrector.
EIS spectra were obtained using an Eg&G PARSTAT 2263 galvanostat potentiostat. The measurements have been performed in the frequency range from 100 kHz to 0.1 Hz under ac stimulus with 10 mV of amplitude and no applied voltage bias. The obtained Nyquist plots have been fitted via a non-linear least square procedure using the equivalent circuit model in Fig. 8. In order to optimize the best fit procedure the capacitive terms have been fitted using the constant phase elements (CPEs) which contain also a frequency depend element (CPE = Y0(jω)n). Table S1 shows all the fitted parameters. The capacitance values listed in Table 2 are obtained from the corresponding CPE values (Yrec, nrec) and the parallel resistance (Rrec) using the formula
The χ2 value is the index of the goodness of the fitting procedure.

We thank the University of Milano-Bicocca Grant “Grandi Attrezzature 2010” and FONDAZIONE CARIPLO for funding under project 2010/0623, M. Longo and M. Fanciulli of CNR-IMM, MDM Laboratory of Agrate Brianza for FE-SEM analysis, M. Ghidelli for Raman measurements, and M. Piselli for his technical support.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta11485f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013