 DOI: 10.1039/C8EE02284D
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3349-3357


Xuejie
Zhu
,

Zhuo
Xu
,

Shengnan
Zuo
,

Jiangshan
Feng
,

Ziyu
Wang
,

Xiaorong
Zhang
,

Kui
Zhao
,

Jian
Zhang
,

Hairui
Liu
,

Shashank
Priya
*,

Shengzhong Frank
Liu
* and 

Dong
Yang
*

Key Laboratory of Applied Surface and Colloid Chemistry, National Ministry of Education, Shaanxi Engineering Lab for Advanced Energy Technology, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi’an 710119, China. E-mail: dongyang@snnu.edu.cn

State Key Laboratory of Catalysis, Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian, 116023, China. E-mail: szliu@dicp.ac.cn

Guangxi Key Laboratory of Information Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Guilin University of Electronic Technology, Guilin, 541004, China

Materials Science and Engineering, Penn State, University Park, PA 16802, USA. E-mail: spriya@vt.edu

Received
3rd August 2018
, Accepted 8th October 2018
First published on 19th October 2018
Two-dimensional (2D) perovskites have emerged as prospective candidates for high performance perovskite solar cells (PSCs) due to their remarkable environmental stability. However, their power conversion efficiency (PCE) is much lower than that of their 3D counterparts owing to large exciton binding energy, poor carrier transport, and low conductivity. Herein, we developed a methylammonium (MA) based 2D perovskite thin film using vapor-fumigation technology. Compared to the traditional 2D perovskite based on bulky butylammonium (BA) cations, its exciton binding energy significantly decreased to 172 meV from 510 meV, as calculated by first-order perturbation theory and an infinite barrier approximation, due to the high dielectric constant of MA. According to the WKb approximation, the tunneling probability of a carrier through a quantum well increased by four orders of magnitude because of the smaller layer thickness, which was confirmed by XRD (the layer spacing decreased to 9.08 Å of MA2PbI4 from 13.39 Å of BA2PbI4). In addition, theoretical calculations and experimental analysis reveal that the MA2PbI4 perovskite possesses a narrow band gap, good conductivity, and a low trap density. As a result, the PCE of the 2D PSCs reached 16.92%, and the certified efficiency was 16.6% according to the National Institute of Metrology (NIM), the highest efficiency value so far for 2D PSCs. Furthermore, the MA2PbI4 devices exhibited superior long-term stability under illumination and exposure to environmental conditions. The PCEs of the 2D perovskite devices without encapsulation degraded by only 2.2% from their initial values when exposed to ambient conditions at ∼55% relative humidity for 1512 hours. Meanwhile, the efficiency remained 97.2% of its initial value when the device was continuously illuminated for 500 hours at 60 °C in argon. Even after following the illumination test with light-soaking for over 500 h in ambient air, the PCE of the unsealed device suffered only a minor degradation of 3.8%.

Even though the efficiency of perovskite solar cells has rapidly increased to 23.3% due to the outstanding properties of perovskites, their environmental instability has become a major issue, which limits their commercialization potential. Recently, Ruddlesden–Popper two-dimensional (2D) perovskite materials have been shown to exhibit superior stability owing to their beneficial geometric effect and dielectric contrast effect; unfortunately, the efficiency of 2D perovskite solar cells is much lower because of severe charge recombination affected by large exciton binding energy, poor carrier transport caused by quantum wells, and low conductivity produced by insulating bulky organic spacer cations. In the present work, we developed a vapor-fumigation technique to fabricate methylammonium based 2D perovskites. The high dielectric constant and the short-chain of methylammonium lead to smaller exciton binding energy, better conductivity and good carrier transport compared to traditional 2D perovskites based on bulky butylammonium. In addition, theoretical calculations and experimental analysis reveal that methylammonium based 2D perovskites possess strong tunneling probability of a carrier through a quantum well and an ideal band gap. As a result, the efficiency of 2D methylammonium based perovskite solar cells is up to as high as 16.92%, and the certified efficiency is 16.6%, the highest reported so far for 2D perovskite solar cells. Moreover, our 2D perovskite devices exhibited superior stability under illumination and exposure to environmental conditions. The efficiency of an unsealed 2D perovskite device remains 97.8% of its initial value when exposed to ambient conditions at about 55% relative humidity for 1512 hours. Even after following the illumination test with light-soaking for over 500 h in ambient air, the PCE of the unsealed device suffered only a minor degradation of 3.8%. The high efficiency, vastly superior stability, and ease of fabrication demonstrate that the present technique provides a promising pathway toward fabricating 2D perovskite photovoltaics with high performance.


Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) based on three-dimensional (3D) absorbers have been attracting considerable attention owing to their extremely high power conversion efficiency (PCE) and simple fabrication process. However, their environmental instability has been a major challenge for commercialization. Ruddlesden–Popper two-dimensional (2D) perovskite materials, with strong photo- and chemical-stability, large exciton binding energies and continuous tunability of their optoelectronic properties due to the beneficial geometric effect and the dielectric contrast effect, have successfully been applied in photovoltaics and optoelectronics. To date, the 2D PSCs have shown a lower PCE of 15.3%, which is caused by the large exciton binding energy and quantum well (QW) effect in the out-of-plane direction. Further efficiency improvement with excellent stability requires reduction of the exciton binding energy and the QW effect in the 2D perovskites.

The 2D perovskite materials, with the general chemical formula (RNH3)2PbX4, where R is an organic chain and X is a halogen, consist of lead halide layers inserted between organic barrier planes of RNH3. In the 2D perovskite semiconductors, the van der Waals interaction between organic cations and inorganic anions is so large that it takes more energy to destroy the 2D crystal structure, leading to excellent stability compared to the 3D perovskites. Furthermore, 2D perovskite materials often employ more hydrophobic bulkier organic cations instead of the short alkyl chain organic cations typically used in the 3D perovskites, which can significantly improve their stability to moisture. Unfortunately, the thickness of the 2D network decreases to the scale of the de Broglie wavelength of the carriers, giving a quantum confinement effect on the charge behavior and creating a typical QW structure, which halves the Bohr radius and quadruples the exciton binding energy. Furthermore, the great difference between the dielectric constants of the inorganic and organic layers greatly increases the exciton binding energy. During photovoltaic operation, the geminate recombination loss would increase due to the large binding energy, which leads to reduced charge dissociation into free carriers. For example, the 2D perovskites based on (C6H5C2H4NH3)2PbI4 in early efforts suffered from exciton binding energies as high as several hundred millielectron volts, too large for photovoltaic applications; even though they were assembled into solar cells, the efficiency was only 0.3%. Almost immediately, the 2D CH3NH3+ (MA)-based perovskite was synthesized via a combined solution process and a vapor-phase conversion method. In fact, it has been studied for its application in photodetectors owing to its high photoluminescence quantum yield and unique band structure. More recently, thiocyanide was used to substitute iodide to prepare 2D MA-based perovskites. It is found that with the pseudo-halogen substitution, the solar cell efficiency is increased to 3.32% with good stability. Even though there has been significant improvement in the efficiency of the 2D PSCs, it is still lower compared to their 3D counterparts. Therefore, quasi-2D perovskite compounds, (C6H5C2H4NH3)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1, where bulky alkyl chain ammonium and short alkyl chain methylammonium cations are employed simultaneously, have been developed to reduce the exciton binding energy by increasing the proportion of the inorganic components (n), and the PCE of the 2D PSC was enhanced remarkably to 4.73%. Soon afterwards, Cao et al. adopted the shorter chain CH3(CH2)3NH3+ (BA) cations instead of C6H5C2H4NH3+, yielding a PCE of 4.02% with a higher short-circuit current density (Jsc). The charge transport in the 2D perovskite is expected to be highly confined within the QW plane as the electrons are freely movable in the in-plane direction but tightly confined in the out-of-plane direction. However, the charge transport in 2D perovskite devices is usually in the out-of-plane direction, leading to unsatisfactory PCEs. Later, a hot-coating deposition method was established to solve this problem by inducing preferential out-of-plane alignment of the inorganic perovskite component, which is beneficial to charge transport, and the PCE of 2D planar PSCs significantly increased to 12.52%. Moreover, there is a fatal disadvantage in that it is very difficult to precisely control the substrate temperature during the hot-coating procedure, resulting in inferior device reproducibility. Therefore, an alternative 2D perovskite material using a reliable fabrication method is urgently needed to decrease both the exciton binding energy and the QW effect and to increase the conductivity.
Herein, we have developed a new strategy to fabricate highly crystalline 2D perovskite thin films with the preferred orientation using vapor-fumigation technology, where the shorter chains of MA+ were introduced as the organic spacing layers between the inorganic layers. The results from X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) tests, as well as theoretical calculations demonstrate the successful formation of high-quality 2D MA-based perovskite films. Because of the material's excellent advantages, including the small exciton binding energy, reduced QW effect, higher conductivity, narrow band gap, low trap density, and strong resistance to moisture, the champion device based on the newly developed 2D perovskites yielded a PCE up to 16.92% (the certified PCE of 16.6%) with reduced hysteresis, which is the highest value among the 2D devices reported. More importantly, the devices show good stability whether preserved in the dark or under continuous illumination. The unencapsulated 2D MA-based PSCs retained over 97.8% of their initial efficiencies after storage under ambient conditions with ∼55% relative humidity for 1512 hours. After 500 hours of continuous illumination at 60 °C in an argon atmosphere, the device's efficiency was 97.2% of its initial value. Even after following the illumination with light-soaking for over 500 h in ambient air, the PCE suffered only minor degradation of 3.8%. Thus, the new strategy provides a feasible method for fabricating high-efficiency, highly-stable 2D PSCs.
The corresponding XRD pattern shown in Fig. 1b reveals that BA2PbI4 exclusively displays the overtones for (001), indicating that it preferentially grows along the (110) direction, which leads to BA2PbI4 being orientated parallel to the substrate. Fig. 1c shows the top-view SEM image of the BA2PbI4 film. It is clear that the BA2PbI4 film is composed of nanosheets, and almost all the nanosheets are parallel to the substrate, in agreement with the XRD results. When the BA2PbI4 film was annealed at 300 °C, the BA cations were removed (the high temperature led to BA2PbI4 decomposition, seen in Fig. S2, ESI), and a layered PbI2 film formed (Fig. 1d). TXRD results in Fig. 1b show that PbI2 maintains the same orientation as that of BA2PbI4. The (001), (002) and (003) diffraction peaks are located at 12.86°, 25.66° and 38.80°, respectively. It is clear that the (002) peak shifts toward larger angle compared to BA2PbI4 (6.60°), apparently caused by the sharply reduced layer spacing from 13.39 Å to 6.88 Å, which can be calculated by the Bragg's law (d = 2sinθ/nλ, where d is the layer spacing, n is an integer, λ is the X-ray wavelength, and θ is half of the diffraction angle).
It is found that PbI2 served as a template (Fig. 1d) when it was placed in contact with the MAI powder at 150 °C. The MAI molecule entered between bilayers of the corner-sharing [PbI6]4− octahedra to form the MA-based perovskite.Fig. 1b shows the XRD pattern of the MA-based perovskite with the dominant peaks of (200) (400) and (101) located at 9.76°, 19.57° and 29.07°, respectively, all in excellent agreement with previously reported MA2PbI4. The layer spacing is significantly decreased to 9.08 Å compared to BA2PbI4 (13.39 Å) because shorter chain MA cations are introduced between the inorganic bilayers. The successful growth of the 2D MA2PbI4 crystalline film is also confirmed by the SEM analysis. Fig. 1e shows that MA2PbI4 is composed of nanoslices, and these nanoslices are almost vertical with respect to the substrate, so the carriers can be transported along the nanoslices to arrive at the electrodes. Meanwhile, we fabricated the PbI2 film using the traditional spin-coating method, and then converted it into perovskites via vapor-fumigation of MAI. It is clear that the as prepared PbI2 film is composed of scattered nanorods (Fig. S3a, ESI). When it is exposed to the MAI vapor, it is converted into perovskite (Fig. 3c). The XRD results (Fig. S3e, ESI) confirm the formation of traditional 3D perovskites.
We also performed GIWAXS using synchrotron radiation to gain insight into the orientation of the BA2PbI4 and MA2PbI4 perovskites, because GIXRD is an appropriate technique to study the crystal structure in different directions. Fig. S4a (ESI) shows the GIWAXS image of the BA2PbI4 film fabricated at room temperature. It is clear that its diffraction pattern is isotropic with the sample scattering equally in different directions, indicating that the crystal structure is not only in the in-plane (qxy) but also in the out-of-plane (qz) direction, in agreement with the previous report. However, the MA2PbI4 perovskite fabricated using the present vapor-fumigation method exhibits sharp and discrete Bragg spots without noticeable arcs. Furthermore, the scattering pattern displays higher scattering intensity along qz (Fig. S4b, ESI), demonstrating that the crystal structure is stacked in the out-of-plane direction, in agreement with the SEM results (Fig. 1e).

Fig. 1f shows the absorbance spectra of the PbI2 template film and different perovskite films deposited on quartz glass. It is apparent that the absorption peaks located at 496 nm, 512 nm and 575 nm belong to the PbI2 template film, BA2PbI4 and MA2PbI4, respectively. The optical band gaps of different perovskite films are given in Fig. S5 (ESI). It is clear that BA2PbI4 has a wide band gap of 2.35 eV, and its absorption edge reaches only to 528 nm, whereas the band gap of MA2PbI4 is 1.56 eV, and its absorption edge extends to 795 nm. Interestingly, the peak (located at 575 nm) above the absorption edge region appears in MA2PbI4. The peak above the absorption edge region is attributed to the quantum confinement and a long-lived trapped-exciton state generated by the MA ions around the negatively charged [PbI6]2− layers. Another peak (751 nm) in MA2PbI4 close to the absorption edge region is originated from the multilayer stacked 2D perovskites. The PL emission shows a weak emission at the high energy absorption peak (578 nm), in good accordance with the absorption. Efficient external luminescence is a highly desirable property for solar cells, because it is an indirect indication of efficient carrier generation, which enables a high open-circuit voltage (Voc).
The structural parameters and electronic structures of BA2PbI4 and MA2PbI4 are calculated here to confirm our experimental results. The optimized lattice parameters of BA2PbI4 and MA2PbI4 including the space group, lattice lengths and angles, and the layer spacing are calculated and displayed in Table S1 (ESI), and the structure configurations are displayed in Fig. 2a and d. As can be seen, BA2PbI4 and MA2PbI4 all have triclinic structures, and the layer spacings of BA2PbI4 and MA2PbI4 are 14.2 and 9.2 Å, respectively, consistent with our experimental results, which further confirms the 2D structure of the MA2PbI4 samples.
In order to study the interlayer coupling between layers in BA2PbI4 and MA2PbI4, the band structures and density of states (DOSs) of monolayered and bulky BA2PbI4 (Fig. 2b and c) and MA2PbI4 (Fig. 2e and f) with and without considering the spin–orbit coupling (SOC) effect are calculated. Direct band gaps of 2.16 and 2.04 eV are obtained for bulky BA2PbI4 (Fig. 2c) and MA2PbI4 (Fig. 2f), respectively, while band gaps of 2.19 and 2.06 eV are obtained for monolayer BA2PbI4 and MA2PbI4, respectively, which indicates a weak interlayer coupling effect between layers in BA2PbI4 and MA2PbI4. Once SOC effects were included in the band calculations, the band gaps of bulky BA2PbI4 and MA2PbI4 were considerably reduced to 1.44 and 1.41 eV due to band splitting, and similarly to 1.43 and 1.40 eV for monolayer BA2PbI4 and MA2PbI4. The measured band gaps of BA2PbI4 are consistent with our calculated results without the SOC effect, while the band gaps of MA2PbI4 tend to match the values with the SOC effect, which indicates a stronger SOC effect in MA2PbI4, likely due to the smaller layer spacing.
We also calculated the exciton binding energy of BA2PbI4 and MA2PbI4. For the bulk 2D perovskite, the inorganic layer is considered as the well layer, and the organic layer is regarded as the barrier layer. According to the first-order perturbation theory and an infinite barrier approximation, the exciton binding energy is determined by eqn (1),
(1)
where
dw is the inorganic well thickness, a0* is the exciton effective Bohr radius, and εw and εb are the dielectric constants of the inorganic well layer and the organic barrier layer, respectively. Thus, the exciton binding energy decreases with increasing dielectric constant as well as with a narrower well-width. The inorganic well layer exhibits the dielectric constant of ca. 6, and the dielectric constants of MA and BA are ∼11 and ∼4, respectively. For the BA2PbI4 perovskite, the exciton binding energy is calculated to be ∼510 meV, while the exciton binding energy of the MA2PbI4 perovskite decreases to ∼172 meV, consistent with the experimental results extracted from the absorption spectra (Fig. S6, ESI). Such a drastically reduced exciton binding energy leads to more free carriers in the MA2PbI4 film since there is less geminate recombination compared to the BA2PbI4 film, leading to higher photocurrent in PSCs based on MA2PbI4.

In particular, the large energy barrier of the organic layer precludes carrier transport in the out-of-plane direction. Alternatively, out-of-plane charge transfer can occur through tunneling, which is restricted by the QW if the barrier height and barrier layer thickness are large. The tunneling probability through a QW structure can be calculated utilizing the WKb approximation and can be written as eqn (2):
(2)
where
db is the organic barrier thickness, ΔE is the barrier height, ħ is Planck's constant, and m is the free electron mass. We assumed that a reasonable bandgap of the barrier layer is approximately 6 eV, and the probability of the free carriers tunneling through a single organic barrier in BA2PbI4 is calculated to be 2.3 × 10−7, indicating negligible out-of-plane carrier transfer through multiple barrier layers. From the XRD spectra, we can see that the layer spacings of BA2PbI4 and MA2PbI4 are 13.39 and 9.08 Å (Fig. 1b), respectively; thus the MA barrier thickness is reduced by 4.31 Å. The tunneling probability in MAPbI4 is thereby increased to 8.2 × 10−3, which means that carrier transfer in the out-of-plane direction becomes possible, corresponding to its good conductivity.

The conductivity and trap density play important roles in PSCs. We therefore deposited BA2PI4 and MA2PbI4 films on FTO substrates to probe their conductivities. Fig. 3a presents the current–voltage (I–V) curves with the device structure schematically illustrated in the inset and the key characteristics listed in Table S2 (ESI).
Compared to the BA2PbI4 film, the electrical conductivity of MA2PI4 increases to 2.96 × 10−3 from 1.53 × 10−3 mS cm−1. The high conductivity is likely attributed to the small layer spacing and large tunneling probability.

Fig. 3b shows the dark I–V measurement of MA2PbI4 films in devices with an FTO/perovskite/Au structure. The linear relation indicates an ohmic contact at low bias voltages in these devices. When the bias voltage exceeds the kink point, the current quickly increases nonlinearly because the trap states are completely filled. The trap density is determined from the trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL) according to eqn (3):
(3)
where
e is the elementary charge of the electron, L is the thickness of the film, ε is the relative dielectric constant of the perovskite, and ε0 is the vacuum permittivity. The calculated trap density for the MA2PbI4 film is 4.36 × 1015 cm−3, lower than the value for the 3D perovskite of ∼1016 cm−3 (Fig. S7, ESI). The low trap density is attributed to the excellent film quality, which is beneficial to improving the device performance.

The stability of bare MA2PbI4 in humidity was monitored by XRD, as shown in Fig. 3c. We exposed the sample films to 70% humidity without any protection for different time intervals. The MA2PbI4 film displayed good crystallinity without any other impurity peaks after 48 h. However, the 3D MAPbI3 perovskite exhibited the PbI2 phase due to degradation by moisture after 10 h (Fig. S8, ESI). After exposure for 72 h, the tiny signature peaks of PbI2 were detected in both MA2PbI4 films. The significantly improved stability in the moist environment is ascribed to the well-ordered crystallization in the MA2PbI4 perovskite films. In brief, the superior resistance of MA2PbI4 to humidity makes it a promising candidate for the active material of perovskite solar cells for potential commercial applications.
Given its unique advantages, we introduced the 2D MA2PbI4 perovskite film into devices to further investigate its photoelectric properties. The device architecture and cross-sectional SEM of the complete device are shown in Fig. 4a and b. In addition, PSCs based on BA2PbI4 absorbers were fabricated for comparison. Fig. 4c gives the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the champion MA2PbI4 device tested in both the reverse and forward scan directions under AM 1.5G (air mass 1.5 global 1 Sun) illumination with a scan rate of 0.1 V s−1. Table 1 summarizes the key parameters including Jsc, Voc, fill factor (FF), PCE and hysteresis index (HI). The PCE of the device employing MA2PbI4 is as high as 16.92% with Jsc of 21.00 mA cm−2, Voc of 1.06 V, and FF of 0.76. To the best of our knowledge, this is the highest PCE reported to date for 2D PSCs. The certified PCE is 16.6%, and the certificate is shown in Fig. S9 (ESI). Compared to 3D PSCs, the relatively low Voc of the MA2PbI4 solar cell is mainly caused by the large exciton binding energy of 2D perovskites, leading to increased energy loss in the device. The PCE of the BA2PbI4 device is only 0.40% (Fig. S10, ESI) owing to inferior orientation for carrier transport. Surprisingly, the efficiency of the MA2PbI4 device enormously increased by over 40 times compared to that of the BA2PbI4 cell. The small exciton binding energy, high carrier tunneling probability between the planes, good conductivity and low trap density of MA2PbI4 lead to high performance of the solar cells.
Solar cell
Scan direction

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)
HI
MA2PbI4
Reverse
21.00
1.06
0.76
16.92
0.07
Forward
20.73
1.02
0.68
14.38
BA2PbI4
Reverse
1.14
0.90
0.39
0.40
0.28
Forward
1.01
0.89
0.30
0.27
Meanwhile, we also studied the hysteresis effect in PSCs, and the hysteresis index was defined as eqn (4):
(4)
where
JRS (0.5Voc) and JFS (0.5Voc) are the current densities at a voltage equal to half of Voc in the reverse and forward scans, respectively. The MA2PbI4 device has the smallest hysteresis index (0.07) compared to the BA2PbI4 devices (0.28). Generally, the hysteresis in PSCs is caused by ion migration, trap density, and imbalanced charge transport between hole transport layers and electron transport layers. The reduced hysteresis in MA2PbI4 solar cells originates from suppressed ion migration and inhibited carrier recombination due to the good orientation and low trap density. Furthermore, the smaller hysteresis presented in the MA2PbI4 devices is likely caused by imbalanced charge transport between 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) (the hole mobility is about 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1) and TiO2 (the electron mobility is about 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1).


Fig. 4d shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) and the integrated Jsc of the MA2PbI4 device. The EQE spectrum cuts off at ca. 800 nm, in good agreement with its absorbance spectrum (Fig. S11, ESI), and the fast decline beyond 650 nm results from the weak absorption of the thin MA2PbI4 absorber layer (179 nm, see Fig. 4b). The integrated Jsc from the EQE curves using the AM 1.5G photon flux is up to 20.98 mA cm−2, in excellent agreement with the direct J–V measurements. The photocurrent density vs. time and PCE vs. time curves of the MA2PbI4 device were measured at Vmp (voltage at the maximum power point) to confirm the realized PCE, as shown in Fig. 4e. The photocurrent density and the PCE rapidly stabilize at 20.15 mA cm−2 and 16.12%, respectively, demonstrating that the J–V measurement is reliable. We further investigated the reproducibility of MA2PbI4 solar cells, and 30 devices were fabricated to gather performance statistics. Fig. 4f displays the PCE distribution histogram, and their key parameters are listed in Table S3 (ESI). The average PCE reaches 14.18 ± 1.40% with average Jsc = 20.88 ± 1.36 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.98 ± 0.04 V and FF = 0.73 ± 0.06. It seems that the average values have fairly small error distributions, implying that MA2PbI4 PSCs exhibit good reproducibility. The new vapor-fumigation method not only significantly enhanced the efficiency but also efficiently solved the reproducibility problems faced by other methods.
Furthermore, we studied the long-term stability of PSCs based on MA2PbI4. The bare devices without any encapsulation were stored in the lab ambient environment with a relative humidity of ∼55%. Eight representative devices were selected from different batches of the respective MA2PbI4 devices, with J–V measurements taken at various time intervals. Fig. 5a gives a representative set of normalized PCEs as a function of test time. Surprisingly, the MA2PbI4 devices retained 97.8% of their initial efficiency after 1512 h. The continuous illumination stability was also investigated. Fig. 5b shows the PCE of a MA2PbI4 device under continuous illumination measured in different atmospheres. The device maintains 97.2% of its initial efficiency under continuous illumination after 500 h at 60 °C in Ar. Even after following the illumination with light-soaking for over 500 h in ambient air, the unsealed device suffered only minor degradation of 3.8%. Compared to the device stored in Ar, an increased performance of solar cells stored in ambient air at the primary stage is attributed to the oxidation of spiro-OMeTAD. It is known that spiro-OMeTAD often needs some oxidation (by oxygen or air) to attain increased conductivity. When the measurement is extended to over 400 hours, the performance of the perovskite solar cell degrades more in air than that in Ar. The prolonged environmental stability of MA2PbI4 devices is consistent with the large van der Waals interaction, as confirmed in previous reports.

In conclusion, 2D MA2PbI4 perovskite has been successfully fabricated using a vapor-fumigation method. The PCE of the PSCs utilizing the MA2PbI4 perovskite is as high as 16.92% (certified PCE at 16.6%), the highest efficiency reported to date for 2D PSCs. More importantly, the 2D MA2PbI4 PSCs display surprisingly better long-term stability regardless of whether they were stored in the dark or under illumination. Theoretical and experimental results reveal that the excellent performance is ascribed to the outstanding optoelectronic properties of the 2D MA2PbI4, such as a small exciton binding energy, high carrier tunneling probability in the out-of-plane direction, narrow band gap, good conductivity, and strong resistance to environmental stimuli. The high efficiency and superior stability demonstrate that the present method provides a promising pathway towards high quality 2D perovskites for potential commercial applications.


D. Yang and X. Zhu designed and performed all experiments. Z. Xu helped with the calculated results. S. Zuo and J. Feng helped with TGA and SEM results. Z. Wang tested the PL spectra. K. Zhao helped with GIWAXS measurements. X. Zhang, J. Zhang and H. Liu contributed with helpful suggestions for this communication. D. Yang wrote the first draft of the communication. D. Yang, S. (Frank) Liu and S. Priya supervised the overall project, discussed the results, and contributed to the final manuscript.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors acknowledge the support from the National Key Research Development Program of China (2016YFA0202403), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61604090/91733301), and the Shaanxi Technical In-novation Guidance Project (2018HJCG-17). D. Yang acknowledges the financial support from the NSFI/UCRC: Center for Energy Harvesting Materials and Systems (CEHMS). S. Priya acknowledges the financial support from the Air Force office of Scientific Research under award number: FA9550-17-1-0341. S. Liu would like to acknowledge the support from the National University Research Fund (GK261001009), the Innovative Research Team (IRT_14R33), the 111 Project (B14041) and the Chinese National 1000-Talent-Plan program. J. Zhang acknowledges the financial support from the Bagui Scholars Program of Guangxi.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ee02284d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018