 DOI: 10.1039/C1NR10410A
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3447-3461

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Lei
Dong
,

Wen
Li
* and 

Wei-Shi
Li
*

Faculty of Material and Photoelectronic Physics, Xiangtan University, Xiangtan, Hunan 411105, P. R. China. E-mail: liwen@xtu.edu.cn

Shanghai Institute of Organic chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Lingling road 345, Shanghai, 200032, P. R. China. E-mail: liws@mail.sioc.ac.cn; Fax: +86-21-5492-5381; Tel: +86-21-5492-5381

Received
21st April 2011
, Accepted 21st May 2011
First published on 25th July 2011
A p/n heterojunction is the basic setup for light-electric conversion. It has been widely accepted that the ideal configuration for organic photovoltaics is formed by the joint of a pair of long-range continuous but nanometre-wide phases consisting of electron-donating (D) and -accepting (A) components, respectively. Such a p/n heterojunction can provide not only a large D/A interface essential to efficient photoinduced charge separation, but also the transportation pathways for both electrons and holes. This review article summarizes the present approaches including D–A double cables, diblock copolymers, and small molecular D–A dyads and multiads, to construct such an ideal p/n heterojunction. Each approach is introduced by a few selected representative works, with highlights on their molecular design strategies and the relationship of chemical structure–packing order–property. Such information would be useful for the next research in the field.
Lei Dong
Lei Dong was born in December 1985. He received his BS degree from the College of Resource and Environment, Shanxi University of Science and Technology in 2008. He is currently a Master’s course student in Xiangtan University. His research work is focused on development of new electron-accepting materials for organic solar cells
Wen Li
Wen Li was born in June 1965. He received his PhD degree from Jilin University in 1995. After working at University of Alberta and Washington State University, he has been engaged as a Lotus Scholar by the government of Hunan province since 2007. He is presently a full professor of the Faculty of Material and Photoelectronic Physics, Xiangtan University. His research interests cover a wide range of materials science, including superhydrophobic nanomaterials, crystallography of polymeric materials, polymer composites, surface corrosion and protection, interface adhesion, and computing and simulation.
Wei-Shi Li
Wei-Shi Li was born in 1971. He received his PhD in Polymer Chemistry and Physics in 1999 from Zhejiang University. He then conducted a postdoctoral research at the University of Tokyo. In 2002, he joined ERATO Nanospace Project and later ERATO-SORST Nanospace Project of Japan Science and Technology Agency as a principal researcher. In October 2008, he started his academic career at Shanghai Institute of Organic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences as a full professor. His research interests include functional dendrimers, optoelectronic organic materials, and organic-inorganic molecule-level hybrids.

As energy crises, environmental pollution, and climate-warming become worse-and-worse, clean and renewable energy sources like sun power have become more-and-more significant for human beings. To date, various technologies have been developed to convert solar energy to electric power. Among them, organic solar cells (OSCs) are low cost, flexible, lightweight, and solution-processable, and have attracted increasing attention. Recently, with the progress in organic optoelectronic materials and the techniques of device fabrication, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of OSCs has achieved over 7%, which is close to that predicted for practical applications. However, when compared with the commercial Si-based solar cells, this value is still very low and needs to be improved.

The efficiency of OSCs is determined by both charge generation and transportation processes, in addition to light acquirement. The charge generation in OSCs is realized by p/n heterojunction since the discovery of bilayer (Fig. 1a) and bulk heterojunction (Fig. 1b) devices. Such a p/n heterojunction is jointed by electron-donating and -accepting components, which have different electron affinities. When excitons (tightly bound electron–hole pairs) generated after photo acquirement diffuse across their domains (D or A) and reach the D/A interface, electrons are transferred into the acceptor component, while holes reside in the donor part, resulting in the production of free charge carriers. Since the diffusion length of excitons is limited to be ∼10 nm, high efficient charge generation requires that a p/n heterojunction has a wide range of D/A interfaces, which should be formed by D and A domains with a size, at least in one dimension, of less than 20 nm. On the other hand, the efficient charge transportation requires two continuous pathways for holes and electrons, respectively. In the active layer of OSCs, these pathways are provided by a pair of continuous phases of D and A, since holes transport in the D phase, while electrons go through the A phase. Therefore, to achieve efficient charge generation and transportation, an ideal active layer for OSCs is composed of a p/n heterojunction having a wide-range of D/A interfaces, which should be jointed by a pair of continuous D/A phases with a width less than 20 nm (for some typical cases, see Fig. 1c–e).
For efficient light acquirement, the thickness of the active layer should be larger than 0.2 μm. Because of the effective exciton diffusion length, it is imaginable that most excitons produced in the region more than ∼10 nm away from the D/A interface are not able to dissociate into free charge carriers and contribute nothing to the photocurrent. For bulk heterojunction devices based on physical blends of at least two kinds of materials, how to finely tune their components to form an ideal configuration has become one of the central research topics in the field. It has been demonstrated that the microstructure of the active layer is not only determined by the nature of the materials, but is also sensitive to the processing factors, such as solvent, concentration, temperature, additives and preorganization, as well as post-treatments like thermal and solvent-vapor annealing. Through elaborate treatment, a number of bulk heterojunctions improve their microstructure and finally enhance power conversion efficiency. However, most cases encountered the issues of local enrichment or discontinuity, which strongly affect charge generation and transportation. As an alternative to D/A physical blends, the utilization of tightly-bound D–A materials, such as double-cable polymers, block copolymers, and small molecules, has been proposed recently. These approaches firstly ensure D/A phase separation on the nanometre scale and enable the largest D/A interface, which could promote photoinduced charge separation. The remaining issue is to establish a structure with D/A bicontinuous phases for carrier transportation. This review article summarizes the progress of these approaches by highlighting a number of representative works.

The double-cable approach adopts two closely linked parallel “cables”: one cable is composed of p-type semiconductors, while the other is made of n-type semiconductors (Fig. 2). In such a configuration, holes and electrons could be conducted separately along their corresponding cables. Since D and A units always stay next to each other, excitons soon after their generation have the chance to dissociate into free charge carriers (holes and electrons). More importantly, the produced holes and electrons could move away immediately by following the p- and n-cables respectively, which suppress the charge recombination process. Based on the above expectations, the double-cable approach would improve the PCE of the devices.

In 2000, the concept of double-cable polymers have been firstly proposed by Neugebauer and coworkers, who synthesized a polythiophene P1 with C60 pendant substituents (Fig. 3) via electrochemical polymerization. They defined this kind of polymer as a D–A double-cable polymer. However, prior to this work, two similar conjugated polymers with C60-appended side chains (P2 and P3, Fig. 3) had been reported by Sannicolò et al. and Ferraris et al., respectively. After these pioneering works, a variety of double-cable polymers were designed and investigated.Fig. 3 displays some examples, including poly(p-phenylenevinylene) (P4) with C60-appended side chains, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)s with pendant anthraquinone, perylenediimide (PDI), or 11,11,12,12-tetracyano-9,10-anthraquinodimethane substituents (P5–P7), and poly(fluorene-alt-phenylene) with pendant PDI substituents (P8). In addition to covalent linkage, non-covalent linkage has been utilized to attach A moieties to conjugated polymers. As examplified by polymer P9, three-point complementary hydrogen bonding was used to link C60 units to the conjugated backbone. Since D and A moieties are linked together, the occurrence of photoinduced electron transfer have been demonstrated in most of these double-cable polymers. The forward electron transfer rates are larger than those in the corresponding blend samples. In some cases, photocurrent responses were also reported. However, few OSC performance was reported except for P4 in Fig. 3. The cell (glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P4/Al) under white-light illumination (100 mW cm−2, AM 1.5G) showed a short circuit current density (JSC), open circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF), and PCE of 0.42 mA cm−2, 0.83 V, 0.29, and 0.1%, respectively. The incident monochromatic photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) exhibited a maximum of 6% at 480 nm, starting at 550 nm.
In fact, the photovoltaic properties of double-cable polymers reported to date are not satisfied. In this kind of polymer, the p-cable is formed by the conjugated backbones, while the n-cable can be only established by π–π interaction among the acceptor units in the side chains (Fig. 4). If the acceptor units are dense enough, the π–π interaction can occur within one polymer chain (Fig. 4a). Otherwise, such π–π interaction should rely on the interdigitation of several polymer chains (Fig. 4b). As for the reported examples, few works have clearly confirmed the existence of π–π interaction among the A units in the side chains. This fact indicates that the structure of double cables has not been truly established in most reported polymers. Furthermore, since one single polymer chain cannot cross the whole active layer, it is also important to establish the interchain conducting pathway. It is clear that the present design strategy of double cable polymers could not address these issues. A new strategy is needed.
Different from the situation in double-cable polymers, the construction of the D/A double-cable configuration has been demonstrated to promote light energy conversion in electrochemical cells. One of the convincing examples comes from the works of Matile and coworkers, who reported a series of fascinating zipper assembly structures. They synthesized a series of oligophenylenes and oligophenyleneethynylenes with naphthalenediimide (NDI) units in the side chains (Fig. 5a, O1–O5). These NDIs were linked to the rigid rod oligomers through their one N-end, while bearing negative or positive charge and hydogen-bonding moieties at the other N-end. Therefore, the oligomers having different charge, e.g. a O2/O3 or O4/O5 pair, could form a zipper assembly by π–π, electrostatic, and hydrogen-bonding interactions among their side chains. A variety of assemblies could be achieved by the different combination of the building blocks of O1–O5. For example, as shown in Fig. 5, a O1 monolayer (Au-O1) was formed firstly on an Au substrate by using the interaction between disulfide tails and gold. Since O1 has a negative charge in the side chains, the treatment with a solution of O3 with a positive charge resulted in a monolayer of O3 deposited on the top of O1via a interdigitated binding manner. Because O3 has a length one-fold longer than O1, the upper chain of O3, referred to as the “stick end”, is still open for the next. Thus, by further treatment with O1, O3, and finally O5 and O4 in sequence, the structure of Au-O1-(O3-O2)2-O5-O4 resulted. In such zipper assemblies, the existence of significant face-to-face π–π interaction among the NDIs, which could provide an electron-conducting pathway, was confirmed by electron absorption spectroscopy. Since holes could transport along the rigid rod-like conjugated backbones of the oligomers, the authors believed that a long-range p/n heterojunction with a molecule-level width and perpendicular to the electrode surface, has been constructed. Photochemical cells composed of an Au electrode deposited with such a zipper assembly as the cathode, a Pt wire as the anode and triethanolamine as sacrificer showed an excellent photo response. The current density and fill factor are greater than those without this kind of assembly, indicating the zipper assemblies indeed improve the efficiency for light energy conversion. Furthermore, they found HOMO and LUMO of the NDIs can be finely tuned by modifying R1 and R2 substituents. This finding allowed them to achieve a much broader absorption spectrum with the assembly, and to construct a structure with a gradually increased LUMO sequence of the acceptors by layer-by-layer deposition. As a consequence, the charge transport occurs much more smoothly, reflected in an increased value of FF.
Another solid demonstration has been performed by Imahori, Isoda, and coworkers, who reported another approach to build a vertical structure with bicontinuous D–A cascade arrays on electrode surface. They firstly deposited a layer of SnO2 on an FTO electrode, followed by anchoring a layer of mixed Py-ZnP-acid and C6060-acidvia carboxylic acid functionality (Fig. 6). After that, the ligand–metal coordination between pyridyl and Pd(II) was utilized to absorb a layer of Pd(II) on the top of Py-ZnP-acid, and subsequently a layer of ZnP-Py22 on the top of Pd(II) layer. Repetition of such a process resulted in the assembly of FTO/SnO2/C6060-acid+(ZnP)n with a controllable ZnP layer-number. Finally, the assembly was immersed into a Py-C6060 solution to fill with Py-C6060, giving FTO/SnO2/C6060-acid+(ZnP)n+(Py-C6060)m (Fig. 6). Composition analysis indicated that the amount of Py-C6060 is 3–4-fold that of ZnP, indicating not only the coordination between pyridyl and ZnP but also π–π interaction among C60 units contribute to the absorption of Py-C6060. This also implies that the C60 units in the assembly may stack together to form an electron conducting pathway. Photoelectrochemical measurements performed in acetonitrile with an electrolyte solution containing 0.5 M LiI and 0.01 M I2 showed that the IPCE at 440 nm reaches a maximum value of 21% when the layer number of ZnP is 5.

It is well known that block copolymers consisted of at least two different nature chains can form a variety of phase separation microstructures (Fig. 7), some of which are consistent with the ideal configuration for the active layer of OSCs. Inspired by this, many research groups have paid attention to D–A diblock copolymers composed of an electron donating block and an electron-accepting block. They expect these D–A diblock copolymers could behave like general block copolymers and produce ideal phase separation.

In 2000, Hadziioannou and coworkers firstly reported a D–A block copolymer P10 (Fig. 8). They prepared poly(p-phenylenevinylene) (PPV) having 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl (TEMPO) unit at one end, and used it as macroinitiator to initiate the random copolymerization of styrene and p-chloromethyl styrene. Subsequently, by chemically reaction with benzyl chloride units, C60 was attached to the side chains of the poly(styrene) block chain, affording P10. Of interest, under other identical conditions, the performance of solar cells fabricated with P10 as single component for the active layer was better than that of the devices made from the physical mixture of a PPV and a C60-appended polystyrene, structures of which are the same as the block chains of P10, respectively. After this work, two similar block copolymers consisting of PPV and C60-appended polystyrene were reported.
In 2004, Thelakkat et al. reported a block copolymer P11 (Fig. 9a), which is composed of PvTPA with triphenylamine electron donating side chains and PAcrPDI with perylenediimide (PDI) electron accepting side chains. When this copolymer was melted onto a glass substrate and annealed at 200 °C for 1 h, phase separation at the nanometre scale was observed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM, Fig. 9b). Further studies showed that P11 exhibits a superior photovoltaic performance to the blend sample of PvTPA and PAcrPDI. The solar cell based on a single component of P11 showed a PCE of 0.07%, while that based on the blend of PvTPA and PAcrPDI exhibited a PCE of 0.007%. Later, by modifying R1 and R2 substituents of triphenylamine, they prepared copolymers P12 and P13, which have better photovoltaic properties than P11.
As a kind of excellent electron donating material, polythiophenes are often used for the construction of block copolymers. In 2008, Thelakkat and coworkers attached a radical initiator to one end of regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), and used as macroinitiator to initiate the polymerization of PDI-appended acrylate monomers to form block copolymer P14 (Fig. 10). Almost at the same time, Emrich, Russull, et al. independently reported copolymer P15, which has a similar chemical structure as P14. These two copolymers can form an obvious phase separation structure after solvent vapor annealing. For the film of copolymer P14 after annealing in CHCl3 vapor for four days, micrometre-elongated and dotlike bright domains dispersed in dark regions were observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Fig. 11a). The authors assigned the bright and dark regions to the domains of PDI-appended polyacrylate and P3HT, respectively. Likewise, annealing the film of block copolymer P15 in toluene/CHCl3 vapor led to a fibrillar morphology, as revealed by atomic force microscopy (AFM, Fig. 11b). The fibrils were about 25 nm in diameter and microns in length, and assigned by the authors as a P3HT block. The solar cell fabricated with P15 as a single component material for the active layer, showed a PCE of 0.49%, higher than that of the device made from the corresponding P3HT and PDI-appended polyacrylate blend samples. In addition to acting as a single component material for the active layer of OSCs, these kinds of block copolymers can be also used as compatibility agents, like surfactants, for bulk heterojunctions. For example, Fréchet and coworkers added 25% block copolymer P16 to the mixture of P3HT and a PDI derivative, resulting in a slight increase in the PCE value, from 0.37 ± 0.04% to 0.55 ± 0.04%.
As compared with PDIs, spherical fullerenes are more attractive electron acceptors due to their small reorganization energy and capability to accept up to six electrons. In 2008, Hadziioannou, Brochon et al. reported block copolymer P17 (Fig. 12), which is composed of a regioregular P3HT block and a polyolefin block chain with pendant C60 units. Soon afterwards, Jo and coworkers reported a similar copolymer. In these two copolymers, the fluorescence due to the P3HT segment was almost quenched in reference to P3HT only. The quenching extent was much larger than that for the blend of two homopolymers corresponding to each block of the copolymers. The results indicate that the photoinduced electron transfer is much more efficient in the copolymers than that in the blend samples. However, no photovoltaic properties have been investigated. Later, Wudl et al. developed copolymer P18 (Fig. 12), but showed a poor photovoltaic performance. Nguyen et al. synthesized block copolymer P19 (Fig. 12), which is also composed of P3HT block and a polystyrene with C60-appended side chains. Conducting AFM confirmed that the P3HT segments self-assembled into nanofibers, while C60-appended polystyrene blocks were attached to the sidewall of the nanofibers. The charge mobilities measured by the space–charge limited current (SCLC) method are quite small, 2.7 × 10−5 cm2 V−1s−1 for hole and 1.7 × 10−6 cm2 V−1s−1 for electron. Although these copolymers showed poor photovoltaic performances by themselves, they have been proved useful as regulator to tune the morphology of P3HT and PCBM blend film. For example, Wudl et al. found that the addition of 5% of P18 to the mixture of P3HT and PCBM blend film improved the morphology of the active layer, and finally enhanced the device performance. However, when a large amount of P18 was added, the device performance turned poor.
Apart from the above P3HT-b-C60-appended poly(olefin) copolymers, Hashimoto, Tajima, et al. reported block copolymer P20 (Fig. 13a), the backbone of which contains a thiophene unit only but with diblock segments: one is rrP3HT, while the other is a random copolymer of 3-hexyl thiophene and C60-appended thiophene. The copolymer P20 was synthesized by Ni-catalyzed quasi-living polymerization of 3-alkylthiophenes, and then attached to the C60 side chains of one segment. Since its backbone is conjugated through the whole chain and C60 units are all in the side chain of one block, P20 has both features of D–A diblock and double-cable polymers. UV-vis spectroscopy of P20 in the film state showed a red shift absorption band together with a shoulder around 610 nm as referred to that in solution. Such spectral features are often observed for the films prepared from P3HT and PCBM blends due to the crystal state of P3HT. Since the film of the polymer structural identical to the C60-appended block of P20 did not show such spectral feature, the author deduced that P3HT block in P20 exists in a crystalline state in the film. The AFM phase image also showed clear nanoscale phase separation (Fig. 13b). The single component solar cell fabricated with P20 showed a PCE of 1.70% (Jsc = 6.15 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.54 V, FF = 0.51), which is the highest record so far for the devices with a single-component active layer. Furthermore, the devices showed an outstanding thermal stability. No obvious change had been observed for the device treated under 130 °C over 80 h (Fig. 3c). As a sharp contrast, a device based on traditional P3HT/PCBM bulk heterojunction degraded quickly from an initial PCE of 3% under the same conditions.
In 2006, Fréchet and coworkers synthesized a special copolymer, which is composed of two different polynorbornene chains with pendant oligothiophene and C60, respectively, by the means of ring-opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP). Although it showed a poor performance as the active material for the single-component solar cells, it can be used as a stabilizer to increase the stability of the P3HT/PCBM bulk-heterojunction devices. More recently, Charvet, Ariga, et al. reported P21 (Fig. 14a), diblock polynorbornenes bearing zinc porphyrin and C60 units respectively. Furthermore, the linker between zinc porphyrin units and the polynorbornene backbone are long alkyl chains, while that between C60 units and the backbone are long ethylene glycol chains. These structural features endow the polymer with an amphiphilic nature. As a consequence, the copolymer P21 can self-assemble into nanofibers with uniform diameter (Fig. 14b). TEM images revealed that the nanofibers consist of regularly alternating domains perpendicular to their long axes. Moreover, the nanofibers exhibited excellent photoconducting properties (Fig. 14d) and ambipolar charge transduction capability with an electron mobility of ∼3 × 10−3 cm2 V−1s−1 and a hole mobility of 3.7 × 10−2 cm2 V−1s−1, as evaluated by the current-mode time-of-flight (TOF) technique. The author believed that the porphyrin and C60 units form a segregated stacking structure in the fibers, with a packing direction not along but perpendicular to the long axis of the fibers. Therefore, the authors deduced the photocurrent propagate along the vertical direction rather than along the 1D nanofibers.

Molecular approach utilizes small molecular compounds which contain the covalently bound electron-donating and accepting moieties for the construction of p/n heterojunctions. As compared with polymers, small molecular compounds have a definite chemical structure and can be easily prepared, purified and characterized by a variety of technologies. Their packing structures and functions can be also analyzed much more easily and clearly than the polymer systems. Due to the above merits, considerable attention has been paid on these kinds of compounds. To date, a variety of D–A multiads, including dyads and triads, have been synthesized and studied. However, most of the works are focused on the properties of photoinduced electron transfer and charge separation in solution. Few have been utilized in photovoltaic applications. This is attributed to their strong tendency to form an alternative D/A packing structure in the solid state due to the existence of certain attraction interactions between electron-rich D and electron-poor A units (Fig. 15). Obviously, such a packing structure is unfavorable for the conduction of both charge-carriers, electrons and holes. Even if free charge-carriers can be produced, they can not transport away. Therefore, how to tailor these kinds of compounds to form a D/A segregated packing structure has become the main concern for their optoelectronic application (Fig. 15).


The formation of packing structure of such D–A dyads and multiads is determined by a couple of factors, such as π–π interactions of D–D and A–A, charge transfer (CT) interaction of D–A, shape matching, side-chain interaction etc. Thus, design of a special molecular shape, which is favourable for π–π interactions of D–D and A–A, but unfavourable for D–A CT interaction, may achieve a D/A segregated packing structure.

As a type of special electron acceptors, PDIs tend to form self-packing structures. In 2002, Janssen's group reported a triad M1 (Fig. 16a), in which two oligo(p-phenylene vinylene) (OPV) units are covalently linked to a PDI core. Upon heating, M1 became a liquid crystal from 215 to 310 °C. UV-vis absorption spectroscopy revealed a small blue shift of the absorption maximum of OPV segments and an accompanying red shift of the first vibronic band of the PDI unit, suggesting π-stacking preferentially occurs between like units. Later, they compared the UV-vis spectral change in methylcyclohexane from 20 to 90 °C between M1 and two similar compounds M2 and M3 (Fig. 16a). All spectral changes suggested that these compounds aggregated at low temperature, but dissociate at the increased temperature. As compared with those at high temperature, the absorption spectra of M2 and M3 at low temperature showed a remarkable red shift in the absorption bands of the PDI unit together with a small red shift in the absorption bands of the OPV units, suggesting M2 and M3 form J-aggregates at low temperature. In such J-aggregates, PDI and OPV units stack in a stagger rather than face-to-face fashion (Fig. 16b). Apart from M2 and M3, M1 showed a different spectral change. When the temperature decreased, the absorption spectrum of M1 showed blue-shifted absorption bands of the PDI unit along with appearance of a new but weak absorption band at a longer wavelength. Based on these observations, the authors deduced that M1 forms face-to-face H-aggregates (Fig. 16b) at low temperature. Since in J-aggregates, partial stacking of OPV with the neighboring PDI occurs, photoinduced electron transfer and subsequent intermolecular charge separation can take place, which speeds up the electron-transfer reaction because of the short intermolecular distance between the OPV and PDI moieties. On the other hand, the short intermolecular distance also promotes charge recombination. In contrast, the formation of H-aggregates apparently does not enhance the recombination rate. In addition, compound M2 can form a well-ordered two-dimensional monolayer on highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG). In such monolayer, the molecule is not standing upright but lying with its molecular axes parallel to the graphite plane. Different from the above works, Schenning, Würthner, Meijer, et al. constructed similar triads by means of supramolecular chemistry. They assembled two OPV segments to the both ends of PDI to form a supramolecular D–A–D triad (S1) by utilizing complementary hydrogen-bonding interactions (Fig. 16a). S1 self-assembled in methylcyclohexane into right-handed helical supercoils (Fig.16c) in which both PDI and OPV units form J-type self-packing structures. But it is disappointing that the solar cell fabricated with S1 as the single-component active layer material exhibited a poor photovoltaic behavior. Later, they developed another version of hydrogen-bonded supramolecular D–A compound, dyad S2 (Fig. 17). In heptane, S2 can self-assemble into uniform rodlike objects, in which PDI and OPV form J-aggregates. Furthermore, such rodlike assembly exhibited a capability for ambipolar charge transport, suggesting the coexistence of hole- and electron-transportation pathways in the aggregates.
Recently, Samorì, Müllen, and coworkers synthesized dyad M4, in which hexa-peri-hexabenzocoronene (HBC) and perylene monoimide (PMI) are connected by an triple bond (Fig. 18a). The bulk of M4 is liquid crystal having a hexagonal columnar phase over 217 °C and a square columnar phase below 217 °C (Fig. 18b). More intriguing, M4 tends to form an ordered self-assembled structure on substrate surfaces. Significant results were obtained by spin-coating of a chloroform solution of M4 onto mica, which afforded uniform nanofibers with a height of 1.6 ± 0.2 nm. Such height is comparable to its molecular length (1.7 nm) along its short axis (Fig. 18c). After annealing under a chloroform atmosphere at room temperature, M4 self-assembled on Au to form mesoscopic ribbons having a mean width of 830 nm, a mean height of 250 nm, and a length from tens of microns up to 150 microns (Fig. 18d). Moreover, high resolution AFM showed that the top of the ribbons were atomically flat, indicating crystalline facets and crystalline order within the mesoscopic structures (Fig. 18d, inset). Further study revealed that the ribbons can conduct both electrons and holes, with the corresponding mobilities of 7 × 10−5 and 1 × 10−4 cm2 V−1s−1 respectively, measured by a thin film transistor configuration with a bottom-contact, bottom-gate geometry.
Aso's group prepared a dendritic D–A compound M5 possessing a four-branched oligothiophene (OT) and four PDI units at its peripherical ends (Fig. 19). For a comparison purpose, they also synthesized compound M6, a linear reference to M5. As compared with a PDI reference compound, fluorescence of M5 and M6 are almost quenched, suggesting the existence of an efficient photoinduced electron transfer from the OT to the PDI unit in both compounds. However, when these two compounds were utilized as a single-component active material for the fabrication of solar cells, the devices exhibited different behaviors. The device ITO/M5/Al showed apparently far superior performance to the device ITO/M6/Al (Fig. 19b–c). This improvement convincingly demonstrates that dendritic structure can produce more appropriate pathways in films for the carrier transportation.
A remarkable work was reported by Geng and coworkers recently. They synthesized three compounds M7–M9, composed of oligo(fluorene-alt-bithiophene)s and a PDI end group (Fig. 20a). Of interest, all these three compounds exhibit liquid crystal properties having a smectic phase at a wide temperature range. Small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) at room temperature identified lamellar structures with d-spacings close to their molecular lengths, which were further confirmed by TEM (Fig. 20b–d). These results indicate all these compounds possess an ideal film structure, in which D and A form respectively bicontinuous lamellar structure with a width range from 5 to 10 nm (Fig. 20e). Further studies confirmed the solar cells fabricated with either of these three compounds as a single-component showed a good performance. The best device, ITO/PEDOT:PSS/M9/epPDI (N,N′-bis(1-ethylpropyl)-3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxyl diimide)/LiF/Al, exhibited a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 1.5% (JSC = 4.49 mA cm−2, VOC = 0.87 V, FF = 0.38), one of the highest records for single-component organic solar cells to date, under solar simulation of 100 mW cm−2, AM 1.5G.

In nature, there are a lot of incompatible phenomena, for example, water and fire cannot stay together. Similarly, in chemistry science, some functional groups also exhibit an incompatible nature. For example, hydrophilic chains do not like to mix with hydrophobic chains. They always tend to phase separation. The strategies using incompatible side chains for tailoring the self-assembly of functionalities have been often seen in literature.

Aida, Fukushima et al. reported an amphiphilic HBC derivative M10 (Fig. 21a), which bears two hydrophilic triethylene glycol (TEG) chains on one side and two hydrophobic dodecyl chains on another side. Under the suitable conditions, M10 self-assembled into nanotubular objects, which wall is consist of a double layer of π-stacked HBC with inner and outer surfaces covered by TEG chains. Based on this result, they further attached an electron accepting unit, trinitrofluorenone (TNF), to the end of one triethylene glycol chain, to form a D–A dyad M11 (Fig. 21a). Of interest, M11 can self-assemble into different objects depending on the discrete conditions. Nanotubular objects (Fig. 21b–c, h) with coaxial laminated HBC and TNF layers were produced with a dilute THF solution (0.12 mM) exposed to methanol vapor at 25 °C. While, microfibers (Fig. 21e–f) were obtained when a concentrated solution (1.2 mM) was used. Further studies confirmed that nanotubes of M11 have good photoconducting properties with a prompt and repeated photocurrent switching (Fig. 21d). In sharp contrast, no photoresponse was observed with microfibers of M11 (Fig. 21g). Electronic absorption spectroscopy revealed that a strong CT absorption for the microfibers, with no CT band for the nanotubes. These results indicate HBC and TNF form a spatial segregated packing structure in nanotubes, and form an alternative packing structure in microfibers. More recently, they changed TNF to the bulky C60 unit, and prepared M12 (Fig. 21a). As a matter of interest, M12 can also self-assemble into a coaxial nanotube with two molecular layers, clustering C60 on both the inner and outer surfaces of the wall, in addition to two HBC π-stacking layers inside the wall. The nanotubes of M12 exhibited ambipolar carrier transportation character in field-effect transistor output although the mobilities for both hole and electron were small (μh = 9.7 × 10−7 cm2 V−1s−1, μe = 1.1 × 10−5 cm2 V−1s−1). Furthermore, the balance of ambipolar carrier transportation can be regulated by the coassembly of M12 and M10. As evaluated by flash photolysis time-resolved microwave conductivity technique (FP-TRMC), intratubular hole mobility of a coassembled nanotube containing 10 mol% of M12 is 1.4–2.0 cm2 V−1s−1, close to the intersheet mobility in graphite (∼3 cm2 V−1s−1). The coassembled nanotubes were also checked as single component active materials for solar cells. A largest IPCE of ∼2% was achieved with the coassembled nanotubes having a 25 mol% of M12.
The clear demonstration that the amphiphilic molecular nature can drive D–A dyads to form a long range of p/n heterojunction with segregated D and A packing arrays, has been performed by Li, Fukushima, Aida and their coworkers. They designed and synthesized dyads M13 and M14 (Fig. 22a) possessing a oligothiophene segment and a C60 unit. M13 is amphiphilic, bearing a hydrophilic wedge with TEG chains and, on the other side, a hydrophobic wedge with paraffinic chains, while, M14 is non-amphiphilic, with paraffinic chains at both ends. Both compounds showed liquid crystal (LC) properties with a smectic A phase at a wide range of temperatures, including room temperature. However, due to the different molecular nature, the molecular packing in layered structure of the LC phase is different. The amphiphilic nature drives M13 to arrange in a head-to-head or tail-to-tail manner, resulting in the formation of a bilayer structure in the LC phase (Fig. 22b I). In contrast, the non-amphiphilic molecule M14 in the LC phase shows all three possible molecular orientations: head-to-head, tail-to-tail, and head-to-tail (Fig. 22b II), giving a single-molecule layered structure with the coexistence of staggering packing between oligothiophene and the C60 unit. The charge-transfer interaction was confirmed by UV-vis absorption spectroscopy in film states. Of further interest, the LC film of M13 showed remarkable photoconducting properties. Although the LC film of M14 was also photoconductive, its photocurrent was only 1/10 that of the LC film of M13 under identical conditions. FP-TRMC measurements revealed that the charge carriers photochemically generated in the LC film of M14 is shorter-lived than that in the LC film of M13, suggesting the presence of a larger number of trapping sites in the LC film of M14. Following this work, they designed and synthesized an amphiphilic dyad M15 and non-amphiphilic M16, both containing a oligothiophene and a perylenediimide (PDI) unit (Fig. 23a).M15 self-assembled into highly photoconductive nanofibers (Fig. 23b) with a bilayer structure (Fig. 23d), while the non-amphiphilic version, M16, formed microfibers under identical conditions (Fig. 23c,e), which, however, hardly showed any photoconducting properties. UV-vis spectroscopy confirmed the presence of CT interaction between the oligothiophene and the PDI units in the microfibers of M16. Hence, the above two works clearly demonstrated that the site-specific modification of donor–acceptor dyads with a pair of incompatible side wedges, such as hydrophilic and paraffinic ones, not only prohibits donor–acceptor interactions leading to the trapping of charge carriers but also ensures a long-range conducting pathway in the materials.
Tajima, Hashimoto, et al. reported dyad M17 (Fig. 24), in which a C60 unit is linked to oligothiophene via a long and flexible oligo(ethyleneoxide) chain. High resolution AFM confirmed the formation of long, partially aligned fibril structures. However, when M17 was used as a single-component active material to fabricate solar cells, the devices showed a poor photovoltaic performance with a PCE of 0.15%. Later, they developed another version of the molecule, M18, in which an oligo(p-phenylenevinylene) (OPV) was used in place of OT. The reference compound of the OPV segment showed a crystalline property with a strong π–π interaction among OPVs. Under simulated solar light (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2), the device with M18 as single-component active material showed a PCE of 1.28%, one of the highest values for the tightly bound D–A systems. The authors believed that the strong π–π interaction among OPV units is responsible to for such an enhancement, as compared with the case of M17.
In addition to hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity, fluorophilicity and fluorophobicity are another pair of amphiphilic properties. Researches have already shown that fluorocarbon chains tend to self-aggregate due to the fluorophilic effect, while phase separation can be produced due to the fluorophobic effect between fluorocarbon and hydrocarbon chains or fluorocarbon chains and the aromatic nucleus. Utilization of such interaction to regulate D/A stacking in solids have been conducted by Venkataraman and coworkers. They prepared dyads M19–M22 (Fig. 25a), in which a naphthalimide is linked to a naphthyl unit. M19 and M21 have a fluorocarbon at one end, with an alkyl chain at the other end. All these compounds are crystallized but have different molecular packing order due to the different side wedges. In the crystalline structure of M19 (Fig. 25b), the rigid linker produces a nearly coplanar arrangement between the naphthalimide and naphthyl ends of the molecule. The molecule forms a face-to-face naphthalimide and naphthyl segregated packing order with plane-to-plane stacking distance of 3.509 Å and an offset angle of 41°. Remarkably, there is no face-to-face interaction between the acceptor naphthalimide and the donor naphthyl ether. However, in the crystal structure of M21, which has a flexible linker, the naphthalimide units stack in face-to-face geometry while the naphthyl ethers pack in a herringbone-type arrangement (Fig. 25c). Moreover, the perfluorohexyl chains and the hexyl chains segregate into separate domains in M19 or M21. In contrast, the face-to-edge interaction between the naphthalimide and the naphthyl units was confirmed in M20 and M22 (Fig. 25d–e). These observations clearly indicate that the D/A segregated assemblies obtained in M20 and M22 is due to the innate phobicity of the fluorocarbon–hydrocarbon side chains.

Tashiro, Charvet, Aida, and their coworkers recently reported an amphiphilic dyad M23 (Fig. 26a), in which a porphyrin unit with triethylene glycol side chains is linked to a C60 unit possessing a stereogenic center. The racemic (±)-M23 self-assembled into spherical objects with an average diameter of 300 nm (Fig. 26b) in CH2Cl2–MeOH solution. Surprisingly, enantiopure (+)-M23 self-assembled into long nanofibers under identical conditions (Fig. 26c). Furthermore, the nanofibers were demonstrated to be highly photoconductive, with an ambipolar charge transportation character. The charge mobolities determined by TOF method were remarkably high: mobilities μe and μh under zero electric field to be 0.14 and 0.10 cm2 V−1s−1, respectively. In sharp contrast, the cast film of the spherical assembly from (±)-M23 showed no photoconducting behavior or detectable electron mobilities, but a very small hole mobility (1.5 × 10−4 cm2 V−1s−1 under zero electric field). The results demonstrated that not only the amphiphilic nature but also chirality play an important role in tailoring molecular packing to generate a long range of p/n heterojunctions capable of efficient charge separation and transportation.


This article reviews the present strategies to construct a long range p/n heterojunction with nanometre-wide, bicontinuous, but segregated D and A phases, based on the tightly bound D–A systems. In light–electricity conversion for OSCs, such a heterojunction could provide efficient charge separation together with smoothing transportation pathways for both electrons and holes. However, as exemplified in this article, the solar cells so fabricated exhibited a low fill factor and a low current density, giving an unsatisfactory power conversion efficiency. The best record is only 1.5%, far below polymer bulk heterojunction devices. The tight binding between D and A moieties not only promotes photoinduced charge separation, but also increases the possibility for charge recombination. This might be one of the main reasons for the poor performance of the solar cells. Therefore, suppression of the charge recombination in these approaches has become a challenge in the field. From a photochemical viewpoint, the real formation of an individual chain-like π-stacking structure for both D and A moieties, might provide the chance for the charges once separated to move away immediately, thus reducing the recombination possibility. Therefore, to increase the π–π interaction among D and A moieties and to regulate their stacking order has become one of the main research directions in the field. As to establish a long range π-stacking structure, self-assembly has been proved to be a powerful means, as illustrated in several examples in this article. However, the resulted assembled objects were generally heterogeneous, which hampers their further application in real devices. Therefore, how to overcome this obstacle is another challenge in the field.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (20974119, 90922019, and 21074147), Chinese Academy of Sciences, the Scientific Research Foundation for the Returned Overseas Chinese Scholars, State Education Ministry, and the Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (09PJ1411700)


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011