 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA02490D
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8548-8553


Maoshu
Yin
,

Fengxian
Xie
,

Han
Chen
*,

Xudong
Yang
,

Fei
Ye
,

Enbing
Bi
,

Yongzhen
Wu
,

Molang
Cai
 and 

Liyuan
Han
*

State Key Laboratory of Metal Matrix Composites, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dong Chuan Road, Minhang Direct, Shanghai 200240, China. E-mail: Chen.han@sjtu.edu.cn

Photovoltaic Materials Unit, National Institute for Materials Science, Sengen 1-2-1, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0047, Japan. E-mail: HAN.Liyuan@nims.go.jp

Received
24th March 2016
, Accepted 3rd May 2016
First published on 4th May 2016
Organic–inorganic perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted considerable attention around the world because they can be fabricated easily and inexpensively by solution-based processes. The key to the fabrication of high-performance PSCs is the crystallinity and morphology of the perovskite film, and thermal annealing is usually required to achieve a film with the necessary properties. Herein, we introduce a technique for instant crystallization of perovskite films without the need for thermal annealing. Specifically, a solution of methylammonium iodide and lead iodide was spin-coated onto a substrate, and ethyl acetate was dripped onto the film during spinning to induce instant crystallization of a CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite film. The resulting crystalline film exhibited large crystal grains and a high carrier lifetime. PSCs fabricated with annealing-free films prepared by means of this technique exhibited performance comparable to that of PSCs fabricated with annealed films and showed much higher efficiency than did reference cells fabricated with annealing-free films. This new instant-crystallization technique offers a way to shorten the device fabrication time, which will reduce the cost of manufacturing efficient PSCs.

Organometal halide perovskites have recently been attracting attention for use in perovskite solar cells (PSCs) owing to their long diffusion length, high carrier mobility, suitable optical bandgaps, and strong absorption of light. The main difficulty in fabricating high-performance PSCs is achieving uniform perovskite film morphology and crystallinity, which require careful control of the process and experienced operating personnel. Various techniques for fabricating the perovskite films have been proposed. Although the one-step spin-coating method is the simplest to control, the resulting films tend to have poor surface uniformity and low surface coverage. A sequential, or two-step, deposition technique, in which the perovskite layer is formed by separate deposition of lead iodide (PbI2) and methylammonium iodide (CH3NH3I, MAI), produces highly efficient perovskite devices with superior reproducibility. Vapor-assisted deposition, solvent engineering, and compositional engineering methodologies have all been reported to improve the cell efficiency, and these methodologies allow for control of the perovskite surface coverage and crystallization. These achievements have boosted the PSC efficiency to over 20%, which is comparable to that of commercial bulk silicon solar cells.

Now that these improvements in PSC efficiency have been achieved, researchers are turning their attention to device stability. In addition, the development of low-cost manufacturing techniques is vitally important for the commercialization of PSCs. Unfortunately, almost all the perovskite deposition techniques developed to date are time consuming, making them inappropriate for industrial use. The above-mentioned techniques for fabricating perovskite films require post-deposition thermal annealing (lasting tens of minutes), which decreases throughput and increases the manufacturing cost. Recently, there are some trials on the investigation of forming annealing free and rapid crystallization perovskite films. Uniform as well as film-thickness controllable perovskite films based on room-temperature crystallization have been reported. Watson et al. successively reported a rapid annealing technique and photonic flash annealing of perovskite films in 1 ms. In our work, we develop a method which could combine the instant crystallization and annealing-free processes to shorten the fabrication time and ultimately facilitate the commercialization of PSCs.
In this study, we developed a new instant-crystallization technique for perovskite deposition without the need for thermal annealing. Specifically, a solution of MAI and PbI2 was spin-coated onto a substrate, and then ethyl acetate (EA) was dripped onto the resulting film to induce instant crystallization of a CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3) perovskite thin film. The fabricated film exhibited large crystal grains and long photoluminescence lifetime. The performance of PSCs fabricated with films prepared using this technique was comparable to that of devices fabricated with annealed perovskite films. Moreover, the power conversion efficiency, 15.58%, was far superior to that of reference PSCs fabricated with annealing-free films prepared with toluene.
The instant-crystallization protocol is shown schematically in Fig. S1. First, 1.45 M MAI and equimolar PbI2 were dissolved in a 7:3 (v/v) mixture of γ-butyrolactone (GBL) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). The resulting solution was then spin-coated at low speed onto a NiO/FTO substrate. Then EA was dripped onto the resulting film during high-speed spin-coating to assist the formation of a highly dense MAPbI3 film. A dark brown color appeared immediately after the EA was dripped onto the film (Fig. S2), indicating the perovskite crystal formation.
To investigate how EA induced instant perovskite crystallization, we characterized the film (hereafter referred to as the EA–perovskite film) by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis and UV-vis absorption spectroscopy (Fig. 1). The film showed strong XRD peaks at 14.17°, 28.5°, and 31.9°, which were assigned to the (110), (220), and (310) planes, respectively (Fig. 1a). These peaks were also observed in the XRD spectrum of an EA–perovskite film that had been annealed at 100 °C. This result indicates that the unannealed film had the same crystal structure as the annealed film.
For comparison, perovskite films were also prepared by using toluene rather than EA (hereafter referred to as toluene–perovskite films). Unlike the freshly prepared EA–perovskite film, the freshly prepared non-annealing toluene–perovskite film showed strong XRD peaks at small angles (6.62°, 7.27°, and 9.25°), which were attributed to a MAI–PbI2–DMSO intermediate phase, determined to be MA2Pb3I8·2DMSO. That is, the solvent residue was present, and the formation of crystalline perovskite was incomplete. Ahn and co-workers have reported that this intermediate phase was unstable because of the gradual vaporization of DMSO from the surface of the adduct film, which will result in an inhomogeneous MAPbI3 film. After the toluene–perovskite film was annealed at 100 °C for 10 min, the small-angle peaks disappeared (Fig. 1b), demonstrating that heating was needed for crystalline conversion of the freshly prepared toluene–perovskite film. Upon annealing, the toluene–perovskite film changed from light yellowish-brown to dark brown (Fig. S2a and b). The absorption spectrum showed that the toluene–perovskite film without annealing had very low light absorption in the wavelength region between 500 and 780 nm (Fig. 1c), and reliable high-performing PSCs cannot be fabricated from such films.
In contrast to the films prepared with toluene, the EA–perovskite films were initially dark brown and remained so after annealing (Fig. S2c and d). The UV-vis absorption spectrum of a freshly prepared EA–perovskite film was almost identical to that of an annealed film (Fig. 1d), indicating that the use of EA resulted in complete MAPbI3 crystallization at room temperature. Taken together, these results indicate that EA effectively accelerated crystallization of the perovskite film at room temperature.
To further illustrate the function of EA in the formation of the perovskite films, we analyzed them by attenuated total reflectance Fourier transform IR spectroscopy (Fig. 2). The freshly prepared and annealed EA–perovskite films showed the same transmittance peak positions (Fig. 2a). Specifically, both films showed strong N–H stretching and N–H bending vibrations at 3300–3500 and 1550–1650 cm−1, respectively; a peak for C–H bending at 1350–1490 cm−1 and a peak for C–H stretching at 2843–3000 cm−1; these peaks are consistent with the spectral features of MAPbI3 (Fig. S3). In contrast, in the spectrum of the freshly prepared toluene–perovskite film (Fig. 2b), the N–H vibration peaks for MAPbI3 at 1466 cm−1 and at approximately 3200 cm−1 were relatively weak. The peaks at 1644, 1310, and 1020 cm−1 indicated the presence of residual DMSO, which is consistent with the XRD results (Fig. 1). In contrast, there was only a very weak peak at 1018 cm−1 for the unannealed EA–perovskite film. We concluded that a large amount of residual DMSO was present in the annealing-free toluene–perovskite layers, which may be bad for the performance of PSCs prepared from these films. In contrast, the amount of DMSO in the unannealed EA–perovskite films was negligible.
On the basis of the above-described properties of the EA–perovskite film, we propose that instant perovskite crystallization occurred via the process shown schematically in Fig. 2c(i). When the precursor solution was spin-coated onto the substrate at low speed, DMSO, MAI, and PbI2 were left on the substrate because of the strong coordination between the DMSO molecules and Pb2+ cations. When EA was dripped onto the substrate during high-speed spinning, MAPbI3 crystallized instantly. When toluene was used instead of EA, a PbI2–MAI–DMSO intermediate phase formed after the coating procedure, and annealing at 100 °C was required for the release of the residual solvent and complete MAPbI3 crystallization, as shown in Fig. 2c(ii). We speculate that EA disrupts the formation of the PbI2–MAI–DMSO intermediate phase by washing away the DMSO during high-speed spin-coating, whereas toluene could not completely remove the DMSO. According to crystallization kinetics, crystal nucleus formation speeds up when the solution concentration is increased. Because the DMSO molecules that had been coordinated to the PbI2 were washed away by the EA, the concentrations of MAI and PbI2 increased when the EA was dripped onto the substrate. This concentration increase accelerated the formation of PbI2–MAI on the substrate, and thus complete perovskite crystallization was observed immediately after the high-speed spin-coating step and no residual DMSO was present, as confirmed by XRD analysis.
Examination of the surface morphology of annealed perovskite films by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) showed that the surfaces of the EA– and toluene–perovskite films were extremely dense and homogeneous (Fig. 3). The crystal grains of the EA–perovskite film were larger than those of the toluene–perovskite film (compare Fig. 3a and c). Examination of the grain-size distribution showed that, on average, the EA–perovskite film crystal grains were approximately twice as large as the toluene–perovskite crystal grains (compare Fig. 3b and d). For the toluene–perovskite films, the average grain size was approximately 150 nm. The largest crystal grains were approximately 300 nm and accounted for 3.5% of the grains, whereas more than 8.6% of the crystal grains in the EA–perovskite film were larger than 400 nm. The EA–perovskite crystallization can be attributed to typical crystal nucleation and growth, while the toluene–perovskite first formed nuclei and then grew to form a PbI2–MAI–DMSO complex, whose solid-state transformed to crystallized perovskite. This nature of the crystallization process could be the original reason for the grain size difference of the EA– or toluene–perovskite films. Full surface coverage and large crystal grains can also be observed in the SEM image of the annealing-free EA–perovskite film (Fig. 3e), with a relatively wider grain-size distribution (Fig. 3f) compared to that of the annealed EA–perovskite film. The average grain size (230 nm) was about 93% of the annealed one. Studies have reported reduced bulk defects and improved charge carrier mobility in large perovskite grains. We speculate that the larger crystal grain EA–perovskite film will show lower trap-assisted charge recombination.
To investigate charge-carrier recombination dynamics in the toluene– and EA–perovskite films, we measured the time-resolved photoluminescence spectra of the films on glass substrates and evaluated the lifetime (Fig. S4). The photoluminescence decay of each spectrum could be fit to a bi-exponential curve. Compared to the toluene–perovskite film, the EA–perovskite film exhibited slower photoluminescence decay, which indicates slower charge recombination. The EA–perovskite film had time constants of 28 and 161 ns and an average carrier lifetime of 151 ns, whereas the corresponding values for the toluene–perovskite film were shorter: 22, 146, and 133 ns. Studies have suggested that local photoluminescence lifetimes are shorter at grain boundaries. SEM analysis indicated that the EA–perovskite film had more large crystal grains, and thus fewer grain boundaries, than the toluene–perovskite film. Large crystal grains result in fewer grain boundary defects and lower charge-trap density. Our photoluminescence investigations further suggested that the EA–perovskite film had a longer fluorescence lifetime and slower charge recombination.
Using the film-preparation methods described above, we prepared various PSCs with a FTO/NiO/MAPbI3/PCBM/BCP/Ag device architecture; an energy diagram for the cells is shown in Fig. 4a. A cross-sectional field-emission SEM image of a PSC prepared with an EA–perovskite film showed a well-defined inverted structure with clear, flat interfaces (Fig. 4b). The thickness of the perovskite layer was measured to be 340 nm. Large crystal grains were observed on the film surface, and the layers were connected closely without pinholes between the interfaces. These results are consistent with the above-described results of SEM investigation of the film surface.
We evaluated the performance of the PSCs by means of current density versus voltage (J–V) measurements under simulated air mass (AM) 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) irradiation in ambient air. The performances of PSC devices based on EA– and toluene–perovskite films annealed at 100 °C were compared in Fig. 4c and Table S1. The device based on the EA–perovskite film had an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.058 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 20.27 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 73.81%, and an overall power conversion efficiency of 15.83% in the forward sweep direction. In the reverse sweep direction, the FF and VOC values were higher, resulting in a higher efficiency (16.64%) with low hysteresis (Fig. S5a). PSCs based on the toluene–perovskite films also showed good performance, with comparable VOC, JSC, and FF values and a high efficiency (15.39%, Fig. S5b). The XRD patterns and SEM images had already showed that the use of EA resulted in faster crystallization and larger crystal grains than the use of toluene. These results were consistent with the fact that VOC of the toluene–perovskite-film-based PSC (1.039 V) was lower than that of the EA–perovskite-film-based PSC (1.058 V). The better performance of the latter was attributed to the large perovskite crystal grains with fewer grain boundaries (and thus fewer defects), which in turn reduced charge-carrier recombination along the crystal boundaries. The higher VOC of the PSC fabricated from the EA–perovskite film resulted in better device efficiency.
The efficiency performance distribution histograms of annealed PSC devices are presented in Fig. S6. Both EA– and toluene–perovskite-film-based PSCs exhibited an average power conversion efficiency of approximately 15%, but the EA–perovskite-film-based devices showed a concentrated efficiency distribution; we attributed this to the instant MAPbI3 crystallization without the formation of the unstable PbI2–MAI–DMSO intermediate phase.
We further fabricated inverted perovskite devices with unannealed perovskite films, and measured their J–V curves (Fig. 4d; detailed performance data are shown in Table S1). The device based on the unannealed EA–perovskite films had a VOC of 1.024 V, a JSC of 19.96 mA cm−2, a FF of 71.30%, and an efficiency of 14.57%, as measured by sweeping in the forward direction. The VOC, FF, and overall efficiency (15.58%) were slightly better when the cells were swept in the reverse direction, and low hysteresis was observed (Fig. S5c). A PSC based on an unannealed toluene–perovskite thin film performed poorly (Fig. S5d), which was attributed mainly to the presence of the unstable PbI2–MAI–DMSO intermediate phase and the incompletely crystallized perovskite films; for the toluene–perovskite film, annealing at 100 °C was necessary to release the high-boiling-point solvent and to get complete crystallization. The incident photo-to-current conversion efficiency spectra of PSCs based on the annealing-free EA– and toluene–perovskite films are shown in Fig. S7. The PSC based on the annealing-free EA–perovskite film exhibited high cell performance comparable to that of a PSC based on an annealed film; the power conversion efficiency of the former was 92% of that of the latter. We attributed this efficiency difference to the wider grain-size distribution of the annealing-free EA–perovskite film discussed in Fig. 3. The performance of PSCs based on annealing-free films prepared with toluene was low; which had an average power efficiency of 6% and a broad efficiency distribution. In contrast, the performance of the annealing-free EA–perovskite-film-based cells was superior and was similar to that of perovskite devices based on annealed films (Fig. S8). We conclude that instant crystallization of EA–perovskite layers will allow for annealing-free fabrication of efficient perovskite photovoltaics. This technique will simplify and shorten the fabrication process, which will increase the manufacturing throughput and reduce the manufacture cost of perovskite devices.

In conclusion, we demonstrated a new instant-crystallization technique for the deposition of perovskite films without the need for thermal annealing. The use of ethyl acetate induced instant and complete perovskite film crystallization at room temperature, and this technique can be used to reproducibly generate high-quality perovskite films. Compared to toluene–perovskite films, EA–perovskite films showed a larger crystal grain size and a longer photoluminescence lifetime, and cells fabricated from the latter films showed superior efficiency, with an improved open-circuit voltage. Moreover, PSCs fabricated with annealing-free EA–perovskite films showed a high power conversion efficiency of 15.58%, which is much higher than that of reference devices based on films without annealing. From the perspective of global photovoltaic commercialization, this instant-crystallization approach to deposition of annealing-free perovskite films can facilitate the fabrication of efficient and low-cost photovoltaics.


For financial support, we acknowledge the Pudong New Area Science and Technology Development Innovation Fund (no. PKJ2014-Z02), National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 11574199), the third 211 Project (WS3116205009) of Shanghai Jiao Tong University, and the New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization (NEDO). We also thank Professor Xiangyang Kong for assistance with time-resolved photoluminescence experiments.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, Fig. S1–S8 and Table S1. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta02490d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016