 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA10981K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3888-3899


Zhigang
Yin
,

Jiajun
Wei
,

Shan-Ci
Chen
,

Dongdong
Cai
,

Yunlong
Ma
,

Meng
Wang
 and 

Qingdong
Zheng
*

State Key Laboratory of Structural Chemistry, Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 155 Yangqiao Road West, Fuzhou, Fujian 350002, P. R. China. E-mail: qingdongzheng@fjirsm.ac.cn

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 19 Yuquan Road, Beijing 100049, P. R. China

Received
21st December 2016
, Accepted 6th January 2017
First published on 9th January 2017
Semitransparent organic solar cells (STOSCs) have shown great promise as advanced window integrated photovoltaics for architectural and automotive utilization. In the applications, STOSCs should possess both long-term stability and high power conversion efficiency (PCE). Here, long lifetime stable and efficient STOSCs with good transparency color perception are demonstrated by combining a transparent ZnMgO-modified cathode with thin MoO3/Ag anodes. The resulting devices exhibit high PCEs (6.83–8.15%) with tunable average visible transmittances (21.6–3.8%) and good color perception close to white light. The combination of the ZnMgO-modified cathode with the MoO3/Ag anode in the STOSCs leads to long-term device shelf lifetime due to their barrier effects for oxygen and water. The STOSCs can maintain over 90% of their original PCEs over two-month storage under ambient conditions. More importantly, record high PCEs of 7.08% and 7.02% were retained for the STOSCs after storage for 1 year and 2 years, respectively, demonstrating the long lifetime stability for high-efficiency STOSCs. These findings offer a promising path to develop STOSCs with high efficiencies, long lifetime and good color perception towards practical applications.

With the rising energy consumption and environmental deterioration around the world, great efforts have been devoted to photovoltaic technologies that convert sunlight to electricity in a sustainable way. As one of the promising photovoltaic devices, organic solar cells (OSCs) have good potential in achieving a low module cost per peak watt to solve the energy problem and meet our future demands of clean/renewable resources. Owing to their salient advantages of lightness, flexibility, easy scalability, solution processability and large-area manufacturing, OSCs have attracted extensive attention in recent years. Numerous strategies on synthesizing photoactive donor/acceptor materials, engineering electrodes/interface-layers, and optimizing device structures have been used to improve the performance of OSCs, leading to power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) exceeding 10% for both single-junction and tandem devices. Besides these encouraging results, developing the versatility of OSCs such as semitransparent devices can pave the way for them to evolve into commercialized products.

As an important extension of OSCs, semitransparent OSCs (STOSCs) based on versatile organic photovoltaic (OPV) materials could potentially be integrated with usual see-through elements such as colorful building and automobile glass to generate electric power. The capability of light transmission for STOSCs using transparent conductors as electrodes offers extensive spectra of uses in power-generating windows, foldable solar curtains, and other aesthetic applications. Moreover, STOSCs are basic building blocks for tandem devices, where semitransparent bottom subcells are stacked with top subcells to achieve a complementary spectral response to enhance sunlight harvesting and improve device performance. Thus, the feasibility of realizing STOSCs shows their ability to act as good candidates for broad applications not only in efficient energy conversion but also in integrated transparent electronics.
Recently, a large number of studies on STOSCs have focused on developing OPV materials as a significant step towards the achievement of efficient semitransparent devices with proper color perception/rendering properties. On the other hand, electrode structures of STOSCs play a critical role in determining device performance such as open-circuit voltage (VOC), short-circuit current density (JSC), fill factor (FF), and the final PCE as well as device transmittance. The rapid growth of transparent electrodes over the past few years can be leveraged in the realization of STOSCs with high efficiencies and desirable transparencies. For instance, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) with decent transmittance is usually adopted as a top/bottom electrode in STOSCs to achieve ohmic contacts with many bulk-heterojunctions (BHJs) for charge collection. However, STOSCs based on the PEDOT:PSS electrodes show relatively inferior performance and poor stability induced by the corrosive and hygroscopic nature of PEDOT:PSS. Its spectral absorption also results in a serious color bias of the transmitted light in STOSCs that limits real utilization. A solution to these problems is to construct PEDOT:PSS-free STOSCs by using transparent conductive oxide electrodes. The most common transparent conductor, indium tin oxide (ITO) can be used as a bottom or top electrode for STOSCs owing to its high transparency and good conductivity. Surface modification of ITO using Cs2CO3, ZnO, TiOx, polymers or MoOxetc. has been adopted to tune the work function (WF) and charge-collecting abilities of the electrodes, allowing them to serve as either cathodes or anodes in STOSCs. Additionally, some alternative electrodes with unique or multifunctional properties, such as other transparent conductive oxides, thin metal films, metal nanowires, metal meshes, and graphene electrodes, were also designed for the fabrication of various STOSCs.
Although several electrode materials have been used for STOSCs to improve device performance, the efficiencies of STOSCs are still much lower than those of their opaque counterparts. More significantly, research on long-term stable STOSCs is lagging behind. Transparent/semitransparent electrodes for high-efficiency STOSCs with long device lifetime are highly in demand for their realistic applications. It is however more difficult to find an appropriate combination of a transparent cathode and anode to realize long lifetime stability while maintaining high PCEs and good color perception properties for STOSCs. To overcome this critical limitation, introducing proper electrode architectures with desired optical/electrical and chemical properties can provide a cooperative effect of the interfacial interaction for charge collection, balanced absorption for light transmission and good stability against environmental disturbance. Recently, we found that wide bandgap metal oxides such as ZnMgO and MoO3 can be utilized to modify ITO or metal electrodes due to their good transparency and stability. Therefore, incorporation of these highly stable and transparent oxide-modified electrodes into STOSCs may lead to both excellent device performance and stability by offering an improved interface compatibility/energy-level alignment with organic active layers for charge collection, and by serving as a good water/oxygen shield against device degradation in air.
In this report, ultralong-term stable and efficient STOSCs are demonstrated by using a transparent ZnMgO-modified cathode combined with thin MoO3/Ag anodes, and incorporating a polymer/fullerene BHJ layer of poly[4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-co-3-fluorothieno[3,4-b]thiophene-2-carboxylate] (PTB7-Th) and [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM). The resulting STOSCs exhibited high PCEs, tunable average visible transmittances and good transparency color perception. Long lifetime stability was also demonstrated for the STOSCs, and even after storage of up to 2 years in air under ambient conditions, the PCE maintained as high as 7.02%, representing a record efficiency for long-term STOSCs. The achieved high performance and long shelf lifetime make the combination of the transparent ZnMgO-modified cathode with the MoO3/Ag anode and the polymer/fullerene STOSCs suitable for practical applications.

The STOSCs have an inverted structure of glass substrate/ZnMgO-modified ITO/PTB7-Th:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag. As schematically illustrated in Fig. 1, the device comprises stacking layers of cathode, active layer, and anode. For the active layer, the conjugated polymer PTB7-Th as an electron donor was blended with PC71BM as the electron acceptor to form a BHJ film, where molecular structures of the active materials are shown in Fig. 1a. The transparent ZnMgO-modified ITO and the semitransparent MoO3/Ag were used as the cathode and anode, respectively, while the active BHJ layer was sandwiched between them. Fig. 1b depicts an energy-level diagram of each component used in the STOSCs. As has been reported, the sol–gel-processed ZnMgO (30 mol% Mg) film has a low WF of approximately −4.24 eV, which matches well with the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level of PC71BM (∼−4.20 eV) and is much lower than that of ITO (∼−4.70 eV). Thus, the ZnMgO-modified cathode intensely diminishes the WF of the bare ITO cathode. Therefore, electron carriers can be extracted effectively from the active layer and transported/injected into the cathode by reducing energy barriers between the BHJ and cathode induced by the ZnMgO-modification. Meanwhile, the evaporated MoO3 can increase the WF of Ag from ∼−4.60 eV to −5.30 eV. This high WF is close to the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of PTB7-Th (about −5.22 eV), ensuring efficient transport of holes from the polymer donor to the MoO3/Ag anode without a large energy loss. Consequently, the combination of the transparent ZnMgO-modified ITO cathode with the MoO3/Ag anode in semitransparent devices can be applied to facilitate efficient charge extraction/collection and will finally afford good photovoltaic performance in the STOSCs.



Fig. 2a presents current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the STOSCs using the ZnMgO-modified cathode or bare ITO cathode under AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2). The corresponding device parameters including VOC, JSC, FF, PCE, series resistance (RS) and shunt resistance (RSh) are summarized in Table 1. As can be seen, the overall photovoltaic performances of STOSCs are considerably improved by using transparent ZnMgO-modified ITO as the cathode and MoO3/Ag as the anode. The fabricated STOSCs exhibit a PCE of 6.83% with VOC = 0.77 V, JSC = 14.84 mA cm−2, and FF = 59.51%. By contrast, using the bare ITO cathode as a reference, the STOSCs with the same transparent MoO3/Ag (10 nm) anode show a much lower VOC of 0.42 V, a JSC of 12.02 mA cm−2, and an FF of 41.10%, resulting in a low PCE of 2.08%. Compared to the STOSC using the ITO cathode without ZnMgO modification, the RS reduces from 16.1 to 11.2 Ω cm2 and the RSh increases from 0.19 to 0.66 kΩ cm2 for the STOSC based on the ZnMgO-modified cathode. The noticeably reduced RS and increased RSh are correlated well with the improved JSC, VOC, and FF as well as the finally increased PCE of the STOSCs using the ZnMgO-modified cathode. Thereby, the modification of the electron-transporting ZnMgO layer on the ITO cathode plays a vital role in reducing RS and increasing RSh, both of which give rise to the performance improvement in the STOSCs. Fig. 2b further compares the J–V responses of the STOSCs in the dark. Based on the leakage dominated region (<0.5 V), the much lower dark current is observed for the STOSC using the ZnMgO-modified cathode compared to that with the bare ITO cathode. The reduced dark-current, improved built-in potential and decreased contact resistance for the device suggest that integration of the ZnMgO-modified cathode into STOSCs helps to suppress leakage currents and to diminish carrier recombination at the cathode/BHJ interfaces. These results indicate more efficient electron-extraction and hole-blocking of the ZnMgO-modified cathode than the bare ITO cathode in the STOSCs.

Device configuration

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%) best (avg.)

R
S (Ω cm2)

R
Sh
 (kΩ cm2)
AVT (%)

a Average PCEs were based on eight devices.
b 
R
Sh and RS were calculated by the inverse of the slope of the corresponding J–V curves under illumination at V = 0 and J = 0, respectively.

ITO/BHJ/MoO3/Ag-10 nm
0.42
12.02
41.10
2.08 (1.89)
16.1
0.19
14.6
ZnMgO–ITO/BHJ/MoO3/Ag-10 nm
0.77
14.84
59.51
6.83 (6.34)
11.2
0.66
21.6
ZnMgO–ITO/BHJ/MoO3/Ag-15 nm
0.77
15.53
63.79
7.67 (7.45)
8.71
0.88
13.0
ZnMgO–ITO/BHJ/MoO3/Ag-20 nm
0.78
15.91
62.25
7.76 (7.49)
10.2
0.90
8.2
ZnMgO–ITO/BHJ/MoO3/Ag-30 nm
0.79
16.15
64.00
8.15 (7.78)
7.92
0.84
3.8
ZnMgO–ITO/BHJ/MoO3/Ag-50 nm
0.79
17.26
62.86
8.58 (8.20)
8.00
0.69
0.6
It is noteworthy that the greatly enhanced performance of STOSCs using the ZnMgO-modified cathode can be ascribed to multifunctional benefits induced by ZnMgO-modification. Firstly, the adoption of electron-extracting ZnMgO on ITO affords a good-matching energy level within the STOSC (as shown in Fig. 1b), thereby promoting electron-transportation and enhancing the final photovoltaic performance. Then, the used ZnMgO layer circumvents direct contacts between the active layer and ITO and forms good ohmic contacts, which can generate a large built-in potential, weaken unfavorable carrier traps/carrier recombination, and lessen interfacial energy barriers in the STOSCs. Moreover, the improved performance of STOSCs using the ZnMgO-modified cathode can be attributed to the modified surface/interface characteristics. To verify this point, surface morphologies of the ZnMgO-modified cathode were investigated by atomic force microscopy (AFM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Height and topography AFM images of the ZnMgO-modified cathode and the bare ITO cathode are shown in Fig. 3a and b. A difference in the surface morphology before and after modifying the ITO surface with ZnMgO is clearly observed as evidenced by a larger size of nanograins on the ITO surface compared to a nanocolloid surface of the ZnMgO-modified cathode. The successful ZnMgO modification on the ITO cathode is also supported by SEM and energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) elemental mapping. Fig. 3c–e reveal the compact nanocolloid surface of the ZnMgO-modified cathode and the uniform distribution of Zn and Mg elements on the surface, further demonstrating the change in the surface features of ITO after ZnMgO modification. The resulting small nanocolloids and large surface area of the ZnMgO-modified cathode can help to improve the contact between the BHJ layer and cathode and subsequently to decrease resistances and promote charge extraction/collection in the STOSCs. This is also one of the possible reasons for the enhanced JSC and FF of the STOSCs using the ZnMgO-modified cathode. Overall, the ZnMgO-modified ITO cathode can provide a good energy-matching level and form good interfacial contacts with the active layer, which are beneficial for improved charge collection and decreased carrier-trapping, finally giving rise to the enhanced performance of STOSCs.
On the other hand, the anode configuration also plays a significant role in the STOSCs similar to the transparent cathode. It is found that the thickness of the Ag film in the MoO3/Ag anode plays a critical role in determining the performance of the STOSCs. As shown in Fig. 4a and Table 1, all STOSCs with the fixed ZnMgO-modified ITO cathode display prominent changes in JSC and FF based on different Ag thicknesses in the semitransparent MoO3/Ag anode, whereas there is a slight deviation in VOC. As the thickness of the Ag film increases from 10 to 50 nm, the JSC and FF increase from 14.84 to 17.26 mA cm−2 and 59.5% to 64.0%, respectively. The devices using the Ag films with thicknesses from 15 to 50 nm have similar high FFs with a normal fluctuation, which are much higher than that of the device using the 10 nm Ag film. The decreased FF for the device with the 10 nm Ag electrode may be related to its increased resistivity taking account of the fact that a noncontinuous Ag film may be formed at a greatly reduced film thickness. By contrast, the VOC is relatively insensitive to the variation of Ag thickness. All the devices with different Ag thicknesses in the MoO3/Ag anodes are able to preserve VOC values close to 0.79 V. Even using a thin Ag layer of 10 nm, the STOSC exhibits a normal VOC of 0.77 V, demonstrating that the ultrathin Ag film is still suitable for the formation of a good ohmic contact. As a result, a trend of increased PCE from 6.83% to 8.58% for the devices is observed with the increase of Ag layer thickness in the anode. These results are also reflected by an obvious change in RS associated with a similar level of large RSh for the devices. Generally, the thicker Ag layers in MoO3/Ag anodes render both larger JSC and FF due to their lower contact resistances and better capabilities for hole collection and reduced recombination than those of relatively thin Ag layers in the STOSCs.
External quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the STOSCs are further depicted in Fig. 4b. All the devices using the ZnMgO-modified cathode combined with the MoO3/Ag anode exhibit high EQEs across the visible region, implying efficient photon-to-electron conversion processes in the STOSCs. It can also be seen that the EQE increases with the increase of Ag thickness, indicating its definite influence on the efficiency of photon-to-electron conversion. The EQE results are consistent with the JSC trend measured in the corresponding STOSCs. The JSC trend for these STOSCs is confirmed by measuring their EQE spectra in Fig. 4b. Integrating the EQE data with the AM 1.5G solar spectrum, the calculated JSC increases from approximately 14.79 to 17.39 mA cm−2 for the devices based on the ZnMgO-modified cathode and MoO3/Ag anodes with controllable Ag thickness from 10 to 50 nm, which are in good agreement with the measured JSC values in the J–V characteristics (Fig. 4a).


Fig. 5 shows transmission spectra of the STOSCs based on the ZnMgO-modified cathode and the MoO3/Ag anode. The average visible transmittance (AVT) of these devices in the visible region (380–780 nm) is presented in Table 1. Comparing to the STOSC using the ITO cathode and the fixed MoO3/Ag anode, the AVT of the STOSC based on the ZnMgO-modified cathode increases from 14.6% to 21.6% (Fig. 5a). This result reveals that the transparency of the ZnMgO-modified cathode compensates for the lower absorption in the BHJ layer, leading to overall enhanced device performance. The increased AVT might be caused by the higher transparency of the ZnMgO-modified ITO–glass than that of ITO–glass, and the reduced reflection at the ITO–ZnMgO/BHJ interface compared to that at the ITO/BHJ interface. At the same time, as the thickness of Ag in the anode varies from 10 to 15, 20, 30, and 50 nm, the AVT of the STOSCs with the fixed ZnMgO-modified cathode can be tuned from 21.6% to 13.0%, 8.2%, 3.8%, and 0.6%, respectively (Fig. 5b). These results show flexibility of transparency management through facile thickness control of semitransparent Ag films in the anode. Compared to a high AVT of 36.4% for the reference sample with 0 nm Ag (as shown in Fig. S1, ESI), there is a large space for further enhancing the transmission of the STOSCs by precisely controlling Ag thickness in the anode. Note that there is a trade-off between the thickness and the transmittance for these ultra-thin Ag films as the semitransparent electrode. At the same time, the transparent properties of these ultra-thin metal films could be further improved by structure designing and film processing. We also noticed that the control device with 100 nm Ag in the anode was totally opaque (AVT < 0.01) as expected (see Fig. S1, ESI), indicating that the thick Ag is not suitable for STOSCs.

Furthermore, the device performance of the STOSCs is plotted against AVT values and described in Fig. 5c. It is found that the AVT and PCE oppose each other linearly, showing an apparent tradeoff between the transmittance and device performance of STOSCs. This result makes it possible to fabricate STOSCs with both high performance (from 6.83% to 8.15% in PCE) and tunable transparency (from 21.6% to 3.8% in AVT) that are beneficial to widespread utilization. For comparison, device performances of the prepared opaque device and several representative STOSCs in previous reports are also shown in Fig. 5c. The PCEs of semitransparent devices in this work are only slightly lower than that of the opaque counterpart (where its J–V characteristic is shown in Fig. S2, ESI), and are comparable to those of the reported opaque PTB7-Th:PC71BM OSCs using other electrode combinations. These results indicate their promising potential in achieving both good photovoltaic performance and high transmittance, although their performance can be enhanced by further device optimizations. The good performance of our STOSCs with the PTB7-Th:PC71BM system using the transparent ZnMgO-modified ITO combined with thin MoO3/Ag anodes is comparable to those of other representative STOSCs under similar transparencies. Particularly, the ZnMgO-cathode-based STOSCs with 10–20 nm Ag in the MoO3/Ag anode are attractive since they have practical AVTs between 21.6% and 8.2% with high PCEs ranging from 6.83% to 7.76%. Note that the active layer thickness in the STOSCs is relatively large (>100 nm), thus the AVT of semitransparent devices can be further improved by comprehensively tuning the thickness/morphology of the active layer that plays an essential role in determining the device transmittance. We also note that the AVTs of these STOSCs are not very high due to the low bandgap of PTB7-Th. Hence, to further increase the AVTs of STOSCs, large-bandgap polymers or small-molecules can be adopted as alternatives to PTB7-Th to enhance the transparency of active layers while maintaining high PCEs. According to these considerations, there should be a good prospect for further optimization and balance of the performance of STOSCs (especially for increasing AVTs).
To be used in power-generating windows, the transparency color perception of STOSCs is important because human recognition is strongly reliant on spectral responses of the objectives. Thus the tristimulus value (X, Y, Z) and color coordinates (x, y) were calculated from the transmission spectra to evaluate the transparency perception of the STOSCs, which is specifically intended to represent the human visual color perception. The corresponding color coordinates of the STOSCs with different Ag thicknesses on the CIE 1931 chromaticity diagram are depicted in Fig. 6. The color coordinates of the devices using 10, 15, 20, 30, and 50 nm thick Ag layer in the anode are (0.337, 0.338), (0.320, 0.332), (0.313, 0.318), (0.285, 0.285), and (0.262, 0.253), respectively. Except for the device with 50 nm Ag, all semitransparent devices display good transparency color perception, which is close to white light with the color coordinate of (0.33, 0.33). As the Ag gets thicker in the MoO3/Ag anode, the color coordinates shift towards the blue corner in the CIE 1931 chromaticity diagram. However, the color coordinates of the STOSCs with thin Ag (10–30 nm) are located in the low colorfulness area in the CIE 1931 diagram, suggesting the good transparency color perception of neutral colors from the transmitted light with little color bias caused by these STOSCs using the ZnMgO-modified cathode and thin MoO3/Ag anodes. By transforming the CIE 1931 color space into the CIE 1960 uniform color space (UCS), the resulting color coordinates (u, v) on the CIE 1960 UCS are provided in Fig. S3 (ESI). As the thickness of Ag increases from 10 to 15, 20, and 30 nm, the color coordinate of the devices slightly varies from (0.212, 0.318) to (0.202, 0.314), (0.203, 0.308), and (0.195, 0.293), respectively. These color coordinates are near the color coordinate of white light, further signifying the good transparency color perception properties of the STOSCs. The small variations in these color coordinates also imply that the incident light will not change much after transmitting through the STOSCs.
Additionally, four digital photographs (see the inset of Fig. 6) were taken through the STOSCs on a sunny day. These photos show high resolution and good color-purity behind the STOSCs based on the highly transparent ZnMgO-modified ITO cathode, the semitransparent MoO3/Ag anode (thin Ag of 10–30 nm), and the transparent PTB7-Th:PC71BM active layer. The background colors of reddish yellow flowers and green leaves in the photos are only slightly changed by the semitransparent devices, which further demonstrate good visible light transparency of the STOSCs, and indicate good achromatic or neutral color sensations when seeing through the STOSCs. These results imply that the transparent ZnMgO-modified cathode is an attractive electrode candidate for high performance STOSCs, and a path of perception for window-integrated photovoltaics by an elaborate combination of electrodes and photoactive materials is possible.

In addition to the high efficiency and good transparency color perception, long-term stability of STOSCs is an essential demand towards practical applications. Hence, the device stability and shelf lifetime of the STOSCs using the ZnMgO-modified cathode and thin MoO3/Ag anodes with controllable Ag thicknesses were examined. For the stability measurements, all devices were simply encapsulated by using an epoxy resin adhesive with a glass cover, and were stored and periodically tested in ambient air. As displayed in Fig. 7, the photovoltaic parameters of these STOSCs exhibit good stability with only slight degradation under ambient exposure. The PCEs of all STOSCs maintain greater than 90% of their original efficiencies over storage in air for 60 days. These stability characteristics of STOSCs are as good as those of the ZnMgO-based opaque devices. The VOC values of all the STOSCs remain extremely stable with slightly decreased values of JSC and FF (Fig. 7b–d), leading to PCEs with very small degradation over this long period (Fig. 7a). As a result, the STOSCs with thin-layer Ag (10–20 nm) still preserve high PCEs from 6.22% to 7.46% (after 1 month storage), and further maintain PCEs from 6.19% to 7.40% after storage for 2 months. The successful fabrication of highly stable and efficient STOSCs from the transparent ZnMgO-modified ITO cathode and thin MoO3/Ag anodes suggests their good potential for semitransparent devices.

More significantly, the STOSCs using the ZnMgO-modified cathode combined with the thin MoO3/Ag anode exhibit long-term stability over storage for a period up to 2 years. As shown in Fig. 8a, normalized PCEs of the representative STOSC with 15 nm Ag can respectively retain 92% and 91% of the initial values after 1 year and 2 year storage, which are very close to those of the device using 50 nm Ag in the anode. Even with the 10 nm-thick Ag, the STOSC is able to preserve normalized PCEs of 70% and 65% over storage for 1 year and 2 years, respectively. These STOSCs also have better long-term stability properties than the control STOSC device with the structure of ITO/PFN/PTB7-Th:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag, which only retains 69% of its initial value after storage for one month (as shown in Fig. S4, ESI). The achieved long lifetime stability of these STOSCs with inverted geometry is much better than that of the control device of conventional OSCs using PEDOT:PSS-modified ITO and Ca/Al as the electrodes, which decayed rapidly to only 34% of the original PCE after 1 month storage. These results reveal that the combination of the ZnMgO-modified cathode with thin MoO3/Ag anodes in the STOSCs affords extensively enhanced PCEs and long-term stability compared to those of OSCs with other electrodes.
The achievement of long lifetime stability of the STOSCs is due to good barrier effects induced by the metal oxide-modified electrodes. The wide bandgap ZnMgO-modified ITO cathode and MoO3-modified Ag anode have excellent chemical/photochemical stability and more hydrophobic features compared to conventional PEDOT:PSS-modified electrodes and low WF metals (Al, Ca, etc.) in OSCs. As illustrated in Fig. 8b, the integration of the ZnMgO-modified ITO cathode and MoO3-modified Ag anode as shielding and scavenging layers into the top and bottom sides of the PTB7-Th:PC71BM film prevents intrusion of moisture/oxygen into the organic BHJ layer, which can achieve dual functions of self-protection and in situ encapsulation for barrier effects in the devices, thereby realizing long device stability of the STOSCs. It is known that molecular oxygen and water from the diffusion of the atmosphere into OSCs are known to cause chemical degradation such as photo-oxidation of the organic layers and interfaces, which will disrupt delicate electrochemical processes that are vital for the photovoltaic performance. Thus, an important contributor of the ZnMgO-modified ITO cathode combined with the MoO3-modified Ag anode in inverted STOSCs is believed to be their accumulated barrier effects towards molecular oxygen and water at the organic/metal electrode interface, the organic/metal oxide electrode interface, and the bulk of the organic active layer. Therefore, the combination of the ZnMgO-modified cathode with the MoO3/Ag anode can effectively protect the STOSCs against degradation in air under ambient conditions over a long time. By contrast, the conventional OSCs typically suffer from serious degradation and poor stability due to the susceptibility of the Al electrode to moisture and oxygen, the diffusion of atmosphere and photo-oxidization with the active layer, and the reaction of the acidic and hygroscopic PEDOT:PSS with the electrode. Nevertheless, detailed mechanisms of the excellent stability of this system are still an open question. Many important issues such as diffusion dynamics and interfacial stability of the STOSCs required to be extensively studied, which will help to grasp the underlying principles and to promote the future development of STOSCs.
As shown in Fig. 9, the nearly overlapped J–V curves are observed for both the devices over 1 year storage and 2 year storage, further demonstrating the excellent stability of the STOSCs. The representative STOSC using the ZnMgO-modified cathode combined with the MoO3/Ag (15 nm) anode maintains a high PCE of 7.08% (VOC = 0.784 V, JSC = 14.5 mA cm−2, and FF = 62.3%) after 1 year storage. Moreover, a PCE of 7.02% (VOC = 0.786 V, JSC = 14.3 mA cm−2, and FF = 62.6%) after 2 year storage is further achieved, representing a record high efficiency ever reported to date for the long-term stable STOSCs. Meanwhile, the corresponding RS and RSh of the STOSC slightly change from 10.7 Ωcm2 and 0.75 kΩ cm2 (1 year storage) respectively to 10.4 Ω cm2 and 0.79 kΩ cm2 (2 year storage), which reconfirms the excellent device stability of the STOSC. The least transparent device with the MoO3/Ag (50 nm) anode also retains excellent photovoltaic performance with a PCE of 7.98% (VOC = 0.785 V, JSC = 16.4 mA cm−2, and FF = 62.1%) after 1 year storage and a PCE of 7.96% (VOC = 0.786 V, JSC = 16.1 mA cm−2, and FF = 62.7%) after 2 year storage. To the best of our knowledge, this result is the first report on OSCs that can retain a near 8% PCE after storage for 2 years. Compared to the initial PCEs, there is only ∼8.5% degradation after 2 year storage for the STOSCs with the MoO3/Ag (15 nm) anode. Meanwhile, a very small degradation of less than 1% in PCE (from 7.08% to 7.02%) is found for this device during the storage in the second year, which is far less than that in the first year (from 7.67% to 7.08%, ∼7.7% degradation in PCE). The results reveal that the original PCE of devices decreases marginally from 8.58% for 50 nm Ag to 7.67% for 15 nm Ag, and after 1 year and 2 year storage the retained PCE decreases from 7.98% (Ag-50 nm) to 7.08% (Ag-15 nm) and from 7.96% (Ag-50 nm) to 7.02% (Ag-15 nm), respectively. These results further demonstrate that the long lifetime stability of ZnMgO-based STOSCs is relatively insensitive to the MoO3/Ag anode with a wide range of Ag thickness (15 to 50 nm). This phenomenon is helpful for STOSCs since their efficiencies and stability will not vary much upon the change of thin Ag in the anode. Therefore, these combined metal oxide-modified electrodes are promising and suitable for transparent optoelectronics, and they could be further extended to other photovoltaic devices for achieving both high efficiency and good stability.
Additionally, as reflected in Fig. 8 and 9, there is a stable trend in the relationship between device performance and storage time. Thus, it is expected that the shelf lifetime of these high performance STOSCs may be extended from 2 years to 3–5 years or even a longer time. The systematic achievement in the long lifetime stability, high PCEs, and good transparency color perception of these STOSCs using the ZnMgO-modified cathode combined with the thin MoO3/Ag anode provides a promising way to satisfy the requirements of low-cost and high-performance STOSCs for future applications. It should be noted that the lifetime characteristics of the STOSCs are measured indoors under ambient conditions. Therefore, investigations are underway to further determine the effects of several important factors such as thermal cycling, lighting/shading and humidity variations for the STOSCs under natural operating conditions.

In summary, we have demonstrated long-term stable and high efficiency STOSCs by using the transparent ZnMgO-modified cathode combined with thin MoO3/Ag anodes. The resulting STOSCs exhibited high PCEs of 6.83–8.15%, tunable AVTs of 21.6–3.8% and good color perception close to white light, making them promising candidates for window integrated photovoltaics. Meanwhile, long lifetime stability was demonstrated for the STOSCs, which retained over 90% of their original PCEs after two-month storage. Even over storage for 2 years, a PCE of 7.02% was maintained for the STOSCs, demonstrating a record high efficiency for long lifetime STOSCs. The ultralong shelf lifetime of these STOSCs is due to the dual functions of self-protection and in situ encapsulation for barrier effects induced by the ZnMgO-modified cathode combined with the MoO3-modified anode. These findings provide an effective way to realize low cost STOSCs with long lifetime stability, high efficiencies, and good transparency color perception towards practical applications. Our results also indicate that the combination of these stable and transparent electrodes has good potential in developing high-performance and cost-effective semitransparent optoelectronic devices.


The conjugated polymer PTB7-Th (molecular weight, Mn = 59 kDa; polydispersity index, PDI = 2.2) was synthesized according to a previous report, and PC71BM purchased from American Dye Source Inc. was used as received. Zinc acetate dihydrate (99.9%), magnesium acetate tetrahydrate (99.5%), 2-methoxyethanol (99.8%), and ethanolamine (99.5%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Inc. to be used for fabricating the ZnMgO-modified cathode. MoO3 (99.9%) purchased from Alfa Aesar Ltd was used to prepare thin MoO3-modified Ag anodes. Poly[(9,9-bis(3′-(N,N-dimethylamino)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)] (PFN) was provided by Derthon Optoelectronic Materials Science Technology Co., Ltd and used as received. Other raw materials and reagents were commercially obtained from Sigma-Aldrich Inc. or Adamas-beta Ltd, and used without further purification.


To fabricate the STOSCs, ITO–glass (∼15 Ω sq.−1) was precleaned by ultrasonication sequentially in a detergent, deionized water, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol. After drying, the ITO–glass was treated with UV-O3 for 15 min. A solution-processed ZnMgO layer (∼10 nm) was fabricated on the ITO–glass based on the sol–gel method described in our report. In the fabrication, 0.2 M of ZnMgO precursor solution was prepared by dissolving zinc acetate dihydrate and magnesium acetate tetrahydrate (30 mol% Mg in the precursor solids) in a mixture of 2-methoxyethanol as the solvent and ethanolamine as the stabilizer. Then the film was preheated on a hot plate and further annealed in an oven (290 °C for 30 min). After cooling, the ZnMgO-modified ITO glass was rinsed with deionized water and ethanol, followed by drying for 30 min at 200 °C. Then, the BHJ layer was fabricated on the ZnMgO-modified cathode in a glovebox by spin-coating (1300 rpm) a blend of PTB7-Th:PC71BM. PTB7-Th and PC71BM (1:1.5 w/w) were dissolved together in a mixed solvent of chlorobenzene and 1,8-diiodooctane (97:3 v/v) to give a 25 mg mL−1 solution. Inverted STOSCs based on bare ITO as the control devices were also fabricated for comparison. Finally, 10 nm of MoO3 and thin Ag films with controllable thicknesses (10 to 50 nm) were deposited as the anode on top of the BHJ layer through shadow masks by thermal evaporation under high vacuum (∼1 × 10−4 Pa). Meanwhile, the control STOSC with the structure of ITO/PFN/PTB7-Th:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag was also prepared. First, a PFN thin layer (∼10 nm) was coated on the ITO–glass by spin-casting (2000 rpm) from a methanol solution (2 mg mL−1) in the presence of a small amount of acetic acid, as described in a recent report. On top of the PFN-modified ITO cathode, the same PTB7-Th:PC71BM active layer and subsequently the semitransparent MoO3 (10 nm)/Ag (15 nm) anode were fabricated under the same conditions as those for the ZnMgO–ITO based STOSCs. Additionally, opaque devices were also fabricated by depositing an anode of MoO3 (10 nm)/Ag (100 nm) on the BHJ layer under the same conditions. To make a comparison with the inverted devices, conventional OSCs were also prepared, where a ∼40 nm PEDOT:PSS (Baytron PAl 4083) layer was firstly spin-cast onto ITO–glasses. Then, the PEDOT:PSS-based electrodes were dried at 130 °C for 30 min. The same BHJ layer was spin-coated on the prepared substrates under the same conditions as those for the inverted devices. Later, LiF (1 nm) and Al (100 nm) were sequentially deposited through shadow masks by evaporation under a vacuum of ∼1 × 10−4 Pa. The active area of all inverted and conventional devices was fixed at 6 mm2.


UV-vis transmission spectra were measured at room temperature using a Lambda35 spectrophotometer. Surface characteristics were studied by AFM (Bruker Dimension ICON) and SEM equipped with EDX spectroscopy units. Digital photographs were recorded using a Canon IXUS 115 HS camera. Film thicknesses were determined with a Bruker Dektak XT surface profiler. The photovoltaic performance of OSCs was investigated under AM 1.5G irradiation (100 mW cm−2) on an Oriel Sol3A simulator (Newport), where the illumination intensity of the light source was accurately calibrated using a standard silicon reference cell certified by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). After simple encapsulation by using an epoxy resin adhesive and a cover glass in a glovebox and light soaking, the devices were illuminated through the ITO sides and measured in air. J–V characteristics were recorded using a computer-controlled Keithley 2440 source measurement unit. EQE spectra were measured on a Newport EQE measuring system. According to the ISOS-D-1 shelf protocol, the devices were stored and periodically tested in air under ambient conditions (50% R.H.) over the course of 2 years for the stability measurements.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61325026, 51561165011 and 51503209), the Program of Youth Innovation Promotion Association CAS (No. 2016275), the Chunmiao Project of Haixi Institute of Chinese Academy of Sciences (No. CMZX-2017-005), the Natural Science Foundation of Fujian Province (No. 2015H0050), the Strategic Priority Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (No. XDB20000000) and the CAS/SAFEA International Partnership Program for Creative Research Teams.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Transmission spectra, J–V curve of the opaque device, color coordinates on the CIE 1960 UCS, and performance of the control STOSC. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta10981k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017