 DOI: 10.1039/B918527E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 561-567

Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical Terms


G. D.
Sharma
*,

P.
Suresh
,

John A.
Mikroyannidis
* and 

Minas M.
Stylianakis


Physics Department, Molecular Electronic and Optoelectronic Device Laboratory, JNV University, Jodhpur 342005, India. E-mail: sharmagd_in@yahoo.com; Fax: +91-0291-2720856; Tel: +91-0291-2720857

Chemical Technology Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, University of Patras, GR-26500 Patras, Greece. E-mail: mikroyan@chemistry.upatras.gr; Fax: +30 2610 997118; Tel: +30 2610 997115

Director, Jaipur Engineering College, Kukas, Jaipur

Received
8th September 2009
, Accepted 7th October 2009
First published on
16th November 2009

We report the fabrication and characterization of photovoltaic devices using a bulk heterojunction (BHJ) photoactive layer consisting of a small molecule (T), which contains a central p-phenylenevinylene unit, intermediate thiophene moieties, and terminal cyano-vinylene 4-nitrophenyls as the donor and a perylene–pyrene bisimide (PPI) as the acceptor. The difference in the LUMO levels (0.5 eV) of these materials is sufficient for the photoinduced charge transfer in the bulk heterojunction active layer. The optimum blend ratio (by weight) between T and PPI is 1:3.5 with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of about 1.87%, beyond that the PCE starts to decrease. The incorporation of a thin ZnO layer between the organic BHJ layer and the top Al electrode increases the PCE to 2.46%, which is attributed to the enhanced light absorption due to the optical interference between incident light and reflected light from the Al electrode. It is also attributed to the improved electron transport in the device, since the conduction band of ZnO closely matches the work function of the Al electrode. The PCE is further increased to 3.17% when the device with the ZnO layer is annealed at a temperature of 100 °C for 5 min. This PCE is among the highest values reported to date for solar cells using solution processable small molecules.

Low cost, high efficiency and long term stability are the key factors for commercializing photovoltaic (PV) technology. Organic PVs are one of the most promising candidates due to low material cost and compatibility with high throughput wet processes. In particular, the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) concept has been established in thin film organic solar cells utilizing electron donating conjugated polymers blended with electron accepting species such as fullerenes, di-cyano-based polymers or n-type nano-particles. Although in the past ten years significant progress has been made in organic solar cells based on the BHJ of donor and acceptor type organic materials, photovoltaic devices with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of about 5–6% have been reported at laboratory scale, which is still low for commercialization. The active layer of BHJ solar cells is composed of an interpenetrating network of electron donor and acceptor domains, which is formed during the deposition and drying processes. Currently, the favored materials for BHJ solar cells are composites of n-type fullerene derivatives, such as [6,6]-phenyl-C61 butyric acid methyl esters (PCBMs), with p-type P3HT. These composites have the advantage of good charge-carrier mobility, but suffer from a relatively large band gap and low absorption coefficients. Hence, they lack ideal absorption of solar radiation. For further enhancement of the PCE, it is of paramount importance to develop new donor-type organic/polymer semiconductors with higher carrier mobility and low band gap. The success of PCBM as a champion acceptor in the BHJ organic solar cells is due to its ability to accept from the semiconducting polymers at ultra fast (10–12 fs) time scales and the nanoscale interpenetrating network that is formed with the conjugated polymers. However, PCBM suffers disadvantages that include high material production cost and poor absorption in the visible spectrum.

Besides PCBM and other fullerene derivatives, efficient organic PVs have been fabricated from polymer acceptors with the best reported efficiency of around 1.8% and more recently by us with an efficiency of about 2.32%. Polymer acceptors have the advantages of good absorption in the visible region of the solar spectrum and a higher LUMO level than PCBM to give rise to a higher open circuit voltage. However, the polydispersity of the polymers increases fabrication complexity, since the performance of the device has been shown to correlate with the molecular weight. Electron transport in some polymer acceptors is trapping-limited, which reduces the fill factor and lowers the PCE of the device. Therefore, there is a need for an electron acceptor material that absorbs photons in the visible region. An alternative approach is to replace the fullerene component with an electron transporting small molecule that has improved light absorption in the visible region. Derivatives of perylene tetra carboxydiimide (PDI), benzothiadiazole containing small molecules and donor–acceptor (D–A) small molecules are good candidates for replacement of the PCBM, as they are known to form crystalline domains with high electron mobilities when they are blended with conjugated polymer donors.
The concept of the internal electron D–A has been extensively exploited to prepare low band gap organic semiconductors. Using this strategy, new low band gap materials have been developed to better cover the solar spectrum, especially in the 1.4–1.9 eV region.
Recently, increasing attention has been focused on soluble small molecules as the donors in the BHJ photovoltaic devices, since they offer the facile processing associated with polymers, and they are mono-dispersed, have easier synthesis and purification, and usually exhibit higher charge-carrier mobility.
In this investigation, we have used a small molecule (T), which contains a central p-phenylenevinylene unit, intermediate thiophene moieties, and terminal cyano-vinylene 4-nitrophenyls, and possesses the D–A architecture. Specifically, their central dialkoxyphenylene and intermediate thiophene behaved as electron-donating segments, while the terminal cyano-vinylene 4-nitrophenyls acted as electron-acceptors. Thus, an intramolecular charge transfer took place in this compound, which reduced its optical band gap. We have used compound T as a donor and a perylene–pyrene bisimide (PPI) as an acceptor to design the BHJ layer. The PCE of the photovoltaic device with the donor:acceptor ratio 1:3.5 is about 1.85%. When a ZnO layer is inserted in between the BHJ layer and the top Al electrode, the PCE is enhanced to 2.46%, which is attributed to the enhanced electron transport. When this device is post-annealed at 100 °C for 5 min, the PCE is further enhanced to 3.17%, resulting from the enhanced crystallization in the blend.

The detailed synthesis and characterization of the small molecules T and PPI has been reported earlier. The chemical structures of these materials are shown in Fig. 1. The UV-vis spectra of the materials were recorded on a Beckman DU-640 spectrometer with spectrograde THF. The cyclic voltammetry measurements were performed on an Autolab Potentiostat PGSTAT-10 in acetonitrile solution (0.1 M) of 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) at a potential sweep of 0.05 V s−1 at room temperature. A glassy carbon electrode coated with a thin film of both T and PPI was used as the working electrode. Pt and Ag wires were used as the working electrode and the reference electrode, respectively. The electrochemical potential was calibrated against Fc/Fc+.

For the photovoltaic device fabrication and their characterization, indium tin oxide (ITO) coated glass substrates were cleaned with detergent, de-ionized water and acetone and then dried at room temperature. A thin layer of PEDOT:PSS, from aqueous solution, was spin coated on the ITO coated glass substrates and then dried at 70 °C. The BHJ active layers (T:PPI of different weight compositions) were spin coated on the ITO/PEDOT:PSS substrates from THF solution at a substrate temperature of 70 °C and then dried. The thickness of the films were controlled by the viscosity of the solution and measured with the help of the capacitance measurement method. The thickness of the films was between 80 and 90 nm. Finally, the Al electrode was thermally deposited on the top of the photoactive layer to make a sandwiched layer structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/photoactive layer/Al. For the thermal annealing of the photoactive layer, the photoactive layer deposited on the ITO coat was placed on a hot plate at 100 °C for 10 min and then cooled to room temperature before the final Al electrode was deposited. For the fabrication of the ITO/PEDOT:PSS/T:PPI/ZnO/Al device, a thin layer of ZnO was deposited by the doctor blade technique on top of the BHJ layer before the deposition of the Al electrode.
We have synthesized the ZnO nanoparticles as follows: zinc acetate (6.0 g) and KOH (10 g) were dissolved in methanol and then heated up to 60 °C with constant stirring. After 25 min, the mixture became clear and precipitation started. This clear solution was filtered through a micron filter paper. The resulting transparent filtrate was kept in a flask for 48 h to complete the gelation and hydrolysis processes. During this period of time, a white precipitate slowly crystallized and settled at the bottom of the flask. The white precipitate was filtered and washed with excess methanol to remove the starting materials and dried at 120 °C for 2 h. This ZnO nano-particle was used for the deposition of the ZnO layer. A viscous solution of ZnO in 1,2-chlorobenzene (CB) was prepared, which was then used for the deposition of the ZnO layer.
Current–voltage (J–V) characteristics were recorded with a Keithley electrometer with built in power supply in the dark and under a white light illumination intensity of 100 mW cm−2. All the fabrications and characterizations were performed in an ambient environment. The incident photon current conversion efficiency (IPCE) was measured using a 100 W halogen-tungsten lamp light source with a single grating monochromator and the resulting photocurrent was recorded using a Keithley electrometer in short circuit condition. The IPCE was estimated using the following expression:
IPCE = 1240 Jsc/Pinλ
where
Jsc is the short circuit photocurrent (mA cm−2), Pin is the illumination intensity (mW cm−2) and λ (nm) is the wavelength of the incident light.


The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) levels of compounds T and PPI were estimated from the onset oxidation and reduction potential, observed in cyclic voltammetry measurements using the following expressions: 
EHOMO = −(Eox + 4.71) eV and ELUMO = −(Ered + 4.71) eV
 where
Eox and Ered are the onset oxidation and reduction potential of the materials observed in cyclic voltamogram. The values of the HOMO and LUMO levels are shown in the energy band diagram of Fig. 1(c). The difference in the position between the LUMO levels of compound T and PPI is about 0.5 eV, which is greater than the binding energy of excitons in organic semiconductors. Therefore, the blend of compound T as the donor with PPI as the acceptor is suitable for efficient BHJ organic solar cells.


Fig. 2 shows the thin film UV-visible absorption spectra of compounds T, PPI and a T:PPI blend. It can be seen that compound T exhibits a broad absorption which is extended up to 750 nm with an absorption peak of about 640 nm, whereas PPI shows a broad absorption band from 300 to 500 nm and an onset around 550 nm. These two compounds show a complementary optical absorption. The optical absorption spectra of the T:PPI blend film shows a continuous broad absorption from 300 to 700 nm which is extended up to 750 nm. This indicates that by using a T:PPI blend the light harvesting can be increased to design an efficient organic photovoltaic device.

Fig. 3 shows the current–voltage characteristics of the devices ITO/PEDOT:PSS/T:PPI/Al with different weight ratios of T and A in the T:PPI BHJ active layer. The device with 1:3.5 weight ratio of T to PPI showed the best performance with a power conversion efficiency (η) of about 1.87%, which is significantly higher than its counterpart with a weight ratio of 1:1 (η = 1.12%). The electron mobility value increases from 1.2 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the T:PPI 1:1 weight ratio to 5.6 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the T:PPI 1:3.5 weight ratio. The observed increase in the PCE with an increasing T:PPI weight ratio results from the increase in the electron mobility associated with an increase in PPI contents in the BHJ layer. The decrease in the PCE beyond 1:3.5 weight ratio in a T:PPI blend is most probably due to the suppressed hole transport induced by nanoscale clusters of compound T in BHJ layer and/or increased PPI trap sites for charge recombination. The diluted absorption in the longer wavelength region associated with a relatively reduced amount of compound in the BHJ may also contribute to the reduction in the PCE. Therefore, the weight ratio of 1:3.5 for T to PPI has been chosen for further investigation.
We have compared the photovoltaic parameters of the device based on the T:PPI blend with those for the device based on the T:PCBM blend (Table 1). Specifically, the values of the short circuit current (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (η) are 3.14 mA cm−2, 0.94 V, 0.46 and 1.36%, respectively, for the T:PCBM based device. The Voc and FF are almost the same for both devices, but the value of Jsc is higher for the T:PPI based device than that for T:PCBM.
Device

J
sc/mA cm−2

V
oc/V
FF

η/%

a The photovoltaic parameters of the ITO/PEDOT:PSS/T:PCBM (1:1)/Al device have been obtained from our previous publication.

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/T:PPI/Al
4.15
0.98
0.46
1.87
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/T:PPI/ZnO/Al
5.3
0.97
0.48
2.46
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/T:PPI/ZnO/Al (annealed)
6.3
0.95
0.53
3.17
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/T:PCBM (1:1)/Al
3.14
0.94
0.46
1.36
To investigate the reason why the photovoltaic performance of the devices based on T:PPI is higher than that of the device based on T:PCBM, we have estimated the electron mobility of PPI using the space charge limited current (SCLC) method. We have fabricated the device having the structure ITO/PPI/LiF/Al and their current–voltage (J–V) characteristics in dark have been measured and shown in Fig. 4. It can be seen from this figure that in the low voltage region (0.01–0.6 V), log (J) is linearly dependent on log (V) with a slope of unity. In the relatively high voltage region (0.6–2.8 V), log (J) can also be fitted to be linearly dependent on log (V) with slope two. Therefore, the J–V characteristics of this device, in the high voltage region correspond to the SCLC behavior. The work functions of ITO and LiF/Al electrodes are about 4.8 eV and 4.0 eV, respectively, The HOMO and LUMO levels of PPI are −5.9 eV and −3.8 eV, respectively. Therefore, the LUMO level of PPI is very close to the work function of the LiF/Al electrode and forms Ohmic contact for electrons. Since the difference in the work function of ITO and the HOMO level of PPI is 1.1 eV, the ITO/PPI interface forms a Schottky barrier for holes. Therefore, the device can be regarded as an electron donating device. We have estimated the electron mobility of PPI according to the equation: 
where
J is the current density, V is applied voltage, εr and εo are the relative dielectric constants of the organic layer and permittivity of free space (8.85 × 10−12 F m−1), respectively, μe is the electron mobility and d is the thickness of the organic layer. Using εr = 3.5, d = 60 nm, and Vbi = 0. 8 eV (difference in the work functions of the electrodes), the estimated electron mobility is about 1.2 × 10−3 cm2V−1 s−1, which is quite similar to the value of PCBM. Therefore, the electron mobility is not responsible for the increase in the PCE of the device with PPI as an acceptor. Additionally, the difference in the LUMO energy levels between the acceptor and donor participants plays an important role in the dissociation efficiency of excitons. The LUMOs of PCBM and PPI are located at about −3.9 eV and −3.8 eV. This difference is almost the same for both active layers. Therefore, the dissociation efficiency of the exciton is slightly higher for the T:PPI active layer than for T:PCBM and does not significantly affect the power conversion efficiency. The PCBM presents an absorption band below 400 nm, whereas the PPI displays a broad absorption band in the range of 300–500 nm with the onset around 550 nm. This improves light harvesting by PPI in this region. Therefore, we conclude that the absorption of PPI in the visible region increases the photogenerated excitons in the BHJ layer, which are subsequently dissociated into free electrons and holes at the D–A interfaces of the BHJ layer. Hence, the presence of the PPI in the BHJ also contributes to the generation of photocurrent.

Charge-carrier mobilities in donor/acceptor BHJ thin films have a crucial effect on the performance of the organic solar cells. To gain insight into the solar cell performance, hole and electron-only devices were fabricated to extract the charge carriers' mobilities using the SCLC model. The hole and electron mobilities for the blend with 1:3.5 ratio were estimated. We found that the hole mobility is of the order of 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. Similarly, electron mobility is also of the order of 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1. Thus the difference in the electron and hole mobilities of the BHJ active layer is of the order of 10, which causes unbalanced charge transport in the device resulting in a power conversion efficiency of about 1.87%, which is quite low compared to that for polymer-based BHJ devices.
Generally, the use of PEDOT:PSS layers in the organic devices increases the hole collection efficiency of the device. In addition to enhancing the hole transport in the photovoltaic devices, it is essential to improve the electron transport in order to optimize the photovoltaic response of the device. In order to increase the electron transport in the device, the incorporation of a thin film TiOx layer between the active organic layer and the Al electrode has shown a significant improvement in the power conversion efficiency of P3HT:PCBM and PBTTT:PCBM devices. This is because TiO2 is a good electron transporting material with its conduction band edge lower than that of PCBM, and very close to the work function of the Al electrode. Zinc oxide (ZnO) has attracted attention as a fascinating alternative to TiO2 in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), because of the similar energy level positioning of its conduction band as TiO2 and similar electron injection processes from the excited dye in DSSC. Moreover, the lifetime of charge carriers in ZnO is significantly longer than in TiO2. Therefore, we have incorporated a ZnO thin film layer between the BHJ layer and the Al electrode to improve the photovoltaic response of our devices. Fig. 5 shows the absorption spectra of the T:PPI device with and without a ZnO layer. Comparing the two devices with the same active layer thickness, a substantial enhancement in the absorption is observed in the device with a ZnO layer. Consequently, as shown in Fig. 6, the device with a ZnO layer shows higher IPCE throughout the visible range of the solar spectrum, as compared to the device without a ZnO layer.

Fig. 7 shows the current–voltage characteristics of the as-cast and post-annealed ITOPEDOT:PSS/T:PPI/ZnO/Al device under an illumination intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The photovoltaic parameters of the devices are shown in Table 1. The device with a ZnO layer shows a relatively higher PCE with respect to its counterpart without a ZnO layer, associated with the enhanced electron transport due to the presence of ZnO. The subsequent post-annealing of the device further increases its PCE, which is attributed to the formation of polycrystalline domains in the active layer. Similar results have been observed for the polymer solar cells. The increase in the PCE by introducing the ZnO layer between the organic BHJ layer and the top Al electrode is mainly due to the enhancement in the short circuit photocurrent and fill factor, as the open circuit voltage is almost the same. The photocurrent in an organic photovoltaic device is determined by the product of the total number of photons absorbed by the active layer and the internal quantum efficiency (IQE) of the device. The total number of the absorbed photons can be raised by increasing the thickness of the active layer. However, because of the relatively low charge-carrier mobility of the organic materials, increasing the thickness of the active layer increases the internal resistance of the device, resulting in a decrease in the fill factor of the device, consequently decreasing the PCE. The IQE of a device is determined by the following factors: (i) migration/diffusion of photogenerated excitons towards the D–A interfaces, (ii) exciton dissociation and charge separation at the D–A interfaces, and (iii) collection of charge carriers by the anode and cathode. In a BHJ (i) can be easily achieved, since it is an interpenetrating network of donor and acceptor components and the D–A interfaces are formed throughout the bulk of the active layer. For (ii) a sufficiently large energy difference between the LUMO levels of donor and acceptor material is required for ultra fast photoinduced charge transfer. In our BHJ active layer, the difference between the LUMO levels of the compound T (donor) and PPI (acceptor) is 0.5 eV, which is quite sufficient for the ultra fast photoinduced charge transfer. For (iii) both acceptor and donor phases must form a percolated network and the HOMO level of the donor and the LUMO level of the acceptor must be closely matched to the work function of the anode and cathode, respectively. In the present device, we have used ITO/PEDOT:PSS as the anode, whose HOMO level (−5.1 eV) is very close to the HOMO level of compound T (−5.0 eV), which improves the hole collection. However, the LUMO level of the PPI (−3.8 eV) forms a barrier with the Al electrode for the electron collection and limits the PCE of the device. Since the conduction band edge of the ZnO is about −4.35 eV, which is very close to the work function of the Al electrode, it improves the charge collection in the device. The ZnO layer between the organic BHJ layer and the top electrode acts as an optical spacer. The ZnO layer redistributes the light intensity within the BHJ by improving the constructive optical interference between the incident light and reflected light from the metal electrode. This increases the light harvesting properties of the device as indicated in Fig. 5. Therefore, the ZnO layer in the device acts as an optical spacer and hole blocking layer, enhancing the light absorption and electron collection efficiency, which results in the increase in the PCE of the devices.

We have achieved high device efficiency using a small molecule T as the donor and a perylene–pyrene bisimide (PPI) as the acceptor. The overall power conversion efficiency of the ITO/PEDOT:PSS/T:PPI (1:3.5 wt ratio)/Al device is 1.87%, which is quite good. This is attributed to the improved light harvesting by the bulk heterojunction thin film layer. The incorporation of a ZnO layer between the T:PPI bulk heterojunction layer and the top Al electrode increases the power conversion efficiency to 2.47%. This is attributed to a further improved light absorption by the active layer due to the optical interference between the incident light and the reflected light and the improved electron transport in the device. The power conversion efficiency is further improved to 3.17% when the device is annealed at a temperature of 100 °C for 5 min, which is attributed to the increased crystalline nature of active layer leading to further improvement in charge transport.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010