 DOI: 10.1039/C4RA05532B
(Paper)
RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 35072-35076

Yunan Zhang,
Wenqiang Zhang,
Li Nian,
Yuyu Pan,
Zengqi Xie*,
Linlin Liu and 
Yuguang Ma*

Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, P. R. China. E-mail: ygma@scut.edu.cn; msxiez@scut.edu.cn

State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, P. R. China

Received
10th June 2014
, Accepted 1st August 2014
First published on 1st August 2014
We demonstrate the concept of controlling phase separation behavior through designing directional intermolecular interactions. The twisted molecular configuration and intermolecular hydrogen bonds result in PBI-1 self-assembly into nanofiber aggregates of the order of tens of nanometers. In the blend of Zn-mTNP and PBI-1, the charge transfer interaction was suppressed effectively due to the unfavored π–π stacking for their twisted and planar molecular configurations. The spin-coated films of Zn-mTNP, PBI-1 and their blend have been characterized by UV-vis absorption spectra, and atomic force microscopy, revealing that the preferred phase separation structures in the nano scale were obtained.

Solution-processed small molecules for organic photovoltaics (OPVs) combine the advantages of high purity, defined molecular structure and a more easily reproducible synthesis over conjugated polymer systems. The morphology of bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solution-processed small molecule OPVs is crucial for efficient charge separation and transport. Bicontinuous phases with domain size on order of several nanometers to tens of nanometers, matching the effective exciton diffusion length, could be described as the favorable morphology. The morphology in terms of degree of phase separation and crystallinity (or aggregation) is intrinsically related to the thermodynamic miscibility between donor or acceptor materials, solvent–solute interactions, intrinsic crystallinity (or aggregation) of the active materials. Generally in the polymer/fullerene based BHJ solar cells, the morphology is usually tuned by adjusting the aggregates of donor polymer through comprehensive optimization of regioregularity, molecular weight, donor/acceptor ratio, choice of solvent, annealing conditions and additives, since it is hard for fullerene to form ordered aggregates. However, there are too many uncertainties to design a proper polymer structure easily, considering the high molecular weight distribution and complicated molecular configuration.

Perylene bisimides (PBIs) are promising candidates as non-fullerene acceptor materials because, firstly, PBIs are n-type organic semiconductors with high chemical, thermal, and light stabilities; and secondly, PBIs generally show a strong absorption band in the visible region, good electron affinity as well as excellent electron mobility. Furthermore their solubility, optoelectronic and self-assembling properties could be fine-tuned by tailoring the substituted groups. However the traditional unsubstituted PBI derivatives possess a large π planar structure and strong electron affinity, which will lead to either big crystalline aggregates induced by the intermolecular π-stacking interactions, or uniformly dispersed sandwich structures at the molecular level induced by the charge transfer (CT) interactions of donors and acceptors. Recently Zhan et al. successfully tuned the aggregates of PBI in the polymer/PBI system by introducing a dimer of PBIs linked by the bridge thienyl, giving a promising power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 4.03% under illumination with AM 1.5G simulated solar light at 100 mW cm−2.
Herein we demonstrate the concept of controlling phase separation behavior through designing directional intermolecular interactions. The chosen acceptor material PBI-1 (Scheme 1) possesses a twist molecular configuration bearing two N–H groups at the tip of the molecular structure, which induces the formation of J-aggregate stacking arrangement into one-dimensional nanofiber as reported previously. The donor material Zn-mTNP (Scheme 1) shows a planar core structure incorporated four flexible triphenylamine peripheral substituents and Zn(II) ion in the centre. We observed that the blend of PBI-1 and Zn-mTNP tend to form nano-structured phase separation, which is attributed to the proper design of the intermolecular interactions, i.e. preferred PBI–PBI H-bonding interactions and porphyrin–porphyrin π–π interactions, but prohibited PBI–porphyrin CT interaction for the unfavored π-stacking due to twisted and planar molecular structures of them.

UV-vis was recorded on a Shimadzu UV-3100 spectrophotometer using 1 cm path length quartz cells. Electrochemical measurements were performed with a BAS 100 W Bioanalytical System: a glass-carbon disk electrode was used as the working electrode, a Pt wire as the counter electrode, Ag/Ag+ as the reference electrode with ferrocene as the internal standard and Bu4NPF6 (0.1 M) as the electrolyte in acetonitrile. The reductive and oxidative onset potentials were used to estimate the orbital energies and band gaps. The HR-TEM experiment was performed by using a JEOL model JEM-3010 with an acceleration voltage of 300 kV. The atomic force microscopy (AFM) images are recorded on a Seiko SPA 400 with an SPI 3800 probe station for tapping mode and on NanoScope NS3A system (Digital Instrument) for contact mode.


The synthesis of PBI-1 and Zn-mTNP were synthesized according to the literatures. Solvents and reagents were purchased from commercial sources, unless otherwise stated, and purified and dried according to standard procedures. ITO substrates with a sheet resistance of 15 Ω sq−1 were purchased from CSG HOLDING Co., LTD (Shenzhen, P. R. China), while PEDOT:PSS (Clevios P AI4083) was purchased from H.C. Starck Clevios.


The OPV device structure was ITO/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxy-thiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS)/porphyrin: perylene bisimide (by weight)/poly[(9,9-bis(3-(N,N-dimethyl-amino)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)] (PFN)/Al. ITO-coated glass substrates were pre-cleaned by sonication in acetone, detergent, distilled water, and isopropyl alcohol. After oxygen plasma cleaning for 4 min, a 40 nm-thick PEDOT:PSS (Bayer Baytron 4083) anode buffer layer was spin-coated onto the ITO substrate, and then dried by baking in a vacuum oven at 120 °C for 20 min. The porphyrin: perylene bisimide active blend layer, with thickness of ∼80 nm, was prepared by spin-coating the tetrahydrofuran solutions. Subsequently, an ultra-thin PFN layer was deposited by spin-coating (2000 rpm for 30 s) from 0.02% (w/v) solution in methanol. The thicknesses of these organic films were determined by the surface profiler (Tencor Alfa-Step 500). A 90 nm aluminum (Al) layer was evaporated through a shadow mask to define the active area of the devices (∼2 × 8 mm2) and form a top anode, at a base pressure of 1 × 10−4 Pa. The PCE was determined from J–V curve measurements (using a Keithley 2400 sourcemeter) under 1 sun, AM 1.5G (air mass 1.5 global) spectrum from a solar simulator (Oriel model 91192) (100 mW cm−2).


PBI-1 bears two N–H groups at the imide positions and four bay-area phenoxy substituents. The molecule possess a twisted structure with perylene core twisting angle of ∼30° as optimized by density functional theory (DFT) at the B3LYP/6-31G level by using the Gaussian 09 Package, which is due to the four bulky bay-area substituents. The twisted molecular structure prohibits the sandwich-type face-to-face π-stacking, but the intermolecular hydrogen bonds drive self-assembly into slipped J-aggregate stacking arrangement (Scheme 2a). The molecular configuration of Zn-mTNP was also calculated that shows a planar porphyrin core structure, which will allow formation of sandwich-type molecular stacking through the intermolecular π–π interactions (Scheme 2b).

To further understand the electronic properties, the three-dimensional geometries and the frontier molecular orbital energy levels was also calculated at the B3LYP/6-31G level by using the Gaussian 09 Package (Fig. 1). In case of PBI-1, both highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) were mainly localized on the perylene bisimide moieties. In the self-assembled nanofiber aggregates, the exciton/electron transfer along the slipped J-aggregate (long axis of the fiber) would be totally allowed. As for Zn-mTNP, the HOMO localize on the whole molecule, while the LUMO mainly localize on the porphyrin core structure. In the sandwich-type molecular stacking, the exciton and charge transfer along the π–π stacking direction could be facilitated.

In the UV/vis absorption spectra of films measured on quartz substrates (Fig. 2), Zn-mTNP showed a strong absorption at around 450 nm and two weak ones at 583 and 635 nm, which were the typical Soret and Q bands absorption of porphyrin core, respectively. The absorption at 305 nm was attributed to the typical absorption of triphenylamine. PBI-1 exhibited a sharp absorption band at 650 nm that was ascribed to the formation of J-aggregate. The strong absorption in red-light region made PBI-1 a promising light absorber for OPVs.

For the blended film of PBI-1 and Zn-mTNP, there were typical absorption bands of PBI-1 J-aggregates and Zn-mTNP film in the absorption spectra. Note that the typical absorption of J-aggregate of PBI-1 lying at 650 nm appeared in the absorption spectra of blended films, suggesting that Zn-mTNP molecule would not impair the J-aggregate of PBI-1 by imbedding into between PBI-1 molecules. Meanwhile the long-range absorbance from 350 to 700 nm, covering the whole range of visible light, ensured the further applications of PBI-1 and Zn-mTNP in OPVs.

Atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements were carried out to investigate the surface morphology of PBI-1, Zn-mTNP and their blend films. As shown in Fig. 3a and b, there were typical nanofiber aggregates with domain size of around 20–40 nm in PBI-1 film from 2 mg mL−1 THF solutions, while the film of Zn-mTNP from 8 mg mL−1 THF solution showed very smooth surface (RMS < 1 nm). In blended film (Fig. 3c and d), typical nanofiber aggregates remained almost the same with that in PBI-1 film, indicating that addition of Zn-mTNP would not impair aggregates of PBI-1. Moreover nanofibers of PBI-1 overlapped each other to form the continuous interpenetrating networks filled with porphyrins, beneficial for achieving preferable bicontinuous phase separation structure in OPVs.

To further confirm aggregates of PBI-1 after blended with Zn-mTNP, more blended films with different ratio (PBI-1:Zn-mTNP = 1:9 and 3:7) were fabricated and characterized (Fig. S2). As the content of PBI-1 was increased, the typical nanofiber aggregates of PBI-1 enlarged both in width and length, which clearly indicated that nanofiber-like aggregates in blended films could be attributed to PBI-1.

Electrochemical properties of Zn-mTNP and PBI-1 were investigated by cyclic voltammetry (CV) as shown in Fig. 4. The HOMO and LUMO of Zn-mTNP were calculated to be −5.2 eV and −3.0 eV, and that of PBI-1 were −5.6 eV and −3.7 eV. From the energy level diagram, it is clear that the difference between HOMO of Zn-mTNP and LUMO of PBI-1 (1.5 eV) is smaller than the excitation energies of Zn-mTNP (1.83 eV) and PBI-1 (1.80 eV), which indicates the highly favoured intermolecular charge-transfer process.

BHJ OPVs were fabricated with a general device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/Zn-mTNP:PBI-1/PFN/Al and were measured under AM 1.5 illumination, 100 mW cm−2 (Fig. S4). The incorporation of an ultrathin polymeric PFN layer as a cathode interlayer in bulk heterojunction solar cells has been reported to improve the electron injection/extraction contact. The device performance was firstly explored by blending Zn-mTNP with PBI-1 at different ratios ranging from 5:5 to 9:1 in THF (Table S1). The optimized weight ratio of Zn-mTNP with PBI-1 is found to be 4:1, yielding a PCE of 0.22% with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.03 V, a short-circuit current (Jsc) of 0.93 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 23%, and the typical current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics are shown in Fig S5.

In conclusion, we have demonstrated that the morphology of the BHJ layer can be effectives controlled by the rational molecular design for donor and acceptor materials. By adjusting the supramolecular interactions including hydrogen bond and π-stacking of PBI-1, nanoscale fiber-like J-aggregates had been fabricated. When blended with Zn-mTNP in the as-prepared BHJ OPVs, ordered nanoscale phase separation had been obtained by the self-assembly of PBI-1. Though the OPV performance is still not satisfying, the result reported here clearly provide new perspectives to achieve preferred phase separation in BHJ OPVs.


We thank the supports from the Natural Science Foundation of China (51373054), National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program) (2014CB643504), Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2013ZZ0001), Guangdong Natural Science Foundation (S2012030006232), and Introduced Innovative R&D Team of Guangdong (201101C0105067115).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: TEM and AFM image of PBI-1 aggregates, AFM height images of blend films, cyclic voltammograms of PBI-1 and Zn-mTNP, schematic illustration of the device structure, J–V curves of OPVs, photovoltaic properties of OPVs. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ra05532b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014