 DOI: 10.1039/C8CC10316J
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 5351-5354


Ming-Yen
Lu
*,

Meng-Hsiang
Hong
,

Yen-Min
Ruan
 and 

Ming-Pei
Lu


Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan. E-mail: mylu@mx.nthu.edu.tw

High Entropy Materials Center, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan

Graduate Institute of Opto-Mechatronics, National Chung Cheng University, Chia-Yi 62102, Taiwan

National Nano Device Laboratories, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan

Received
31st December 2018
, Accepted 8th April 2019
First published on 8th April 2019
In this study Ga-doped cadmium sulfide (CdS) nanowires (NWs) were grown through chemical vapor deposition. The carrier conductivities of the CdS NWs improved after the incorporation of Ga; moreover, the conductivities of the CdS NWs increased upon increasing the amount of the Ga source. Using a cation exchange method, these CdS NWs served as the source material for the preparation of Cu2S–CdS p–n heterostructured NWs. The short-circuit current, open-circuit voltage, fill factor, and power conversion efficiency of the best-performing Cu2S–CdS NW photovoltaic device were 0.152 nA, 0.245 V, 44.5%, and 0.405%, respectively, when illuminated under AM 1.5 solar light. This study demonstrates the possibility of modulating not only the properties of CdS NWs through the incorporation of dopant Ga atoms but also the photovoltaic properties of Cu2S–CdS p–n heterostructured NW devices, paving the way for the exploitation of nanostructures within optoelectronics.

Semiconductor nanostructures have been fascinating materials for several decades because they possess unique properties arising from high surface-to-volume ratios and quantum confinement effects on the nanoscale. Indeed, these nanostructures have already been applied within field-effect transistors (FETs), light-emitting diodes (LEDs), photodetectors, solar cells, and thermoelectric devices. Among these systems, solar cells based on p–n nanostructures are particularly interesting, because the incorporation of such nanostructures has led to remarkable enhancements in device performance.

Cadmium sulfide (CdS) is an important II–IV semiconductor having a direct band gap of 2.4 eV. Because of its superior optoelectronic properties, the applications of CdS nanostructures in a diverse range of fields have been studied thoroughly in recent years. Oulton et al. prepared plasmonic lasers based on CdS nanowires (NWs), with the CdS NWs serving as the emitting media on top of a silver substrate, separated by a MgF2 dielectric layer. More recently, the cation exchange method has been used to fabricate Cu2S–CdS p–n devices for photovoltaic cells; these devices exhibited fill factors (FFs) of up to 80%. The photovoltaic performances of Cu2S–CdS p–n devices under strained conditions and of Cu2S–CdS p–n junction arrays in photovoltaic devices have also been resported. Nevertheless, poor carrier conductivity has limited the exploitation of CdS within electronics and optoelectronics. Herein, we report that the incorporation of Ga into CdS NWs improves the carrier conductivity, which is highly correlated with the level of the Ga dopant, and discuss the photovoltaic performance of corresponding Cu2S–CdS p–n heterostructured devices.
Although the electron conductivity of undoped CdS NWs is poor, dopants can improve it significantly. In this study, we used Ga (0.1, 0.2, and 0.3 g) as an n-type dopant for the growth of Ga-doped CdS NWs; Fig. S1(a)–(c) (ESI) present corresponding SEM images, revealing the presence of high-density, uniform, and ultralong NWs. All of the diffraction peaks in the XRD patterns of the samples (Fig. S2, ESI) could be indexed to wurtzite-structured CdS (JCPDS 89-2944); no second phase was evident. Fig. 1(a) displays a low-magnification TEM image, revealing a CdS NW having a uniform diameter and smooth surface; the region of dark contrast at the top of the NW is the Au particle, which served as the catalyst for the VLS NW growth.Fig. 1(b) presents an annular dark-field (ADF) STEM image of the Ga-doped CdS; the particle appearing with remarkable contrast at the top of the NW is the Au catalyst. The elemental distribution within the NW was confirmed using EDS; Fig. 1(c)–(e) display the S, Cd, and Ga elemental maps, respectively, of the highlighted area in Fig. 1(b). All of the signals were evenly distributed throughout the NW, with the relatively few Ga signals suggesting that Ga was indeed incorporated as the dopant within the NW. We used high-resolution (HR) STEM imaging to examine the atomic arrangements within these materials.Fig. 1(f) presents annular bright-field (ABF) HR-STEM images of a CdS NW along the growth axis; the ABAB stacking order of the wurtzite structure is observed along the c-axis. The magnified false-colored image in Fig. 1(g) reveals Cd–S dumbbell pairs; the S atoms are located on top of the Cd atoms, indicating the S-polarity of the CVD-grown CdS NW. XPS measurements revealed the chemical states and compositions of the Ga-doped CdS NW. The survey scan of the sample, performed with binding energies from 0 to 1200 eV (Fig. S3, ESI), featured signals for Cd, S, and Ga atoms in the sample, as well as signals for C and O atoms that presumably appeared as a result of contamination of the samples or in the chamber. Moreover, detailed XPS spectra of the Ga signals of the doped samples [Fig. 1(h)] revealed two distinct peaks at 1118 and 1145 eV, corresponding to the binding energies of the Ga 2p3/2 and Ga 2p1/2 core; the position of the peak for Ga 2p3/2 is typically used to confirm the incorporation of Ga in materials. Furthermore, the intensities of the signals in the XPS spectra were consistent with the levels of doping of Ga in the samples: for the samples grown using 0.1, 0.2, and 0.3 g of Ga as the doping source, the Ga contents in the CdS NW were 1.59, 2.45, and 3.59%, respectively. Fig. 1(i) displays the PL spectra of the samples; we attribute the emission peak to the band-edge emission. Notably, red-shifting of the emission peak occurred for the Ga-doped CdS NWs, with the emissions shifting from 507.8 nm for the undoped sample to 509.6, 510.1, and 511.6 nm for the samples grown using 0.1, 0.2, and 0.3 g of Ga, respectively. Thus, a greater amount of incorporated Ga dopant led to a greater red-shift of the signal. The red-shift of the emission presumably arose from the incorporated Ga dopant narrowing the band gap of CdS. The XPS and PL data confirmed the incorporation of the Ga dopant into the CdS NWs.
Next, were fabricated devices from the samples to examine the effects on conductivity after incorporation of the Ga dopant. The schematic representation in Fig. 2(a) reveals the structure of such a single-NW device: 120 nm Ti/30 nm Au were the electrodes, with the Ti contact metal ensuring ohmic contacts for the devices (the inset provides an SEM image of a single-CdS-NW device). Fig. 2(b) presents the carrier transport behavior of the samples. The currents passing through the samples increased significantly when the NWs were grown using greater amounts of the Ga doping source, implying the successful incorporation of the Ga dopants and different levels of doping in the various samples. Fig. 2(c) displays the I–V curves measured at various gate voltages (Vg); the currents increased upon the increasing value of Vg from −30 to +30 V, confirming the gating effect of an n-type semiconductor. Moreover, the sweeping transfer characteristics (Id–Vg curve) in Fig. 2(d), plotted on a logarithmic scale with an applied voltage of 5 V, reveals that the Ga-doped CdS NW device had an on/off ratio of 10−5 and a threshold voltage of −10 V. The negative threshold voltage of this n-type semiconductor infers that the device was a depletion-mode FET. Furthermore, we performed a statistical study of the mobilities and carrier concentrations of CdS NW devices prepared with different levels of Ga doping. Fig. 2(e) and (f) display the average mobilities and average carrier concentrations, respectively, of the devices plotted with respect to the amount of the Ga source used for the growth. For the CdS NWs grown using 0.1, 0.2, and 0.3 g of Ga as the source, the average mobilities were 5.09, 40.5, and 81.9 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively; the average carrier concentrations were 1.66 × 1017, 1.83 × 1017, and 2.41 × 1017 cm−3, respectively. Thus, these values both increased after increasing the amount of the Ga source.
The incorporation of the Ga dopant atoms in the CdS NWs not only overcame the low conductivity of the undoped CdS NWs but also allowed tuning of the properties of the CdS NWs. Accordingly, we examined the optoelectronic characteristics of our Ga-doped CdS NWs. We used a cation exchange method to transform the CdS NWs into CdS–Cu2S core–shell heterostructures. Fig. 3(a) and (b) displays a low-magnification TEM image and the corresponding selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of a CdS–Cu2S core–shell heterostructure, respectively; although the image contrast of the shell is barely distinguishable from that of the core, the SAED pattern exhibits two sets of diffraction spots, indicating the existence of two materials in the NW. These two sets of diffraction spots correspond to CdS and Cu2S, respectively. Fig. 3(c) displays a high-resolution (HR) TEM image of a CdS–Cu2S core–shell heterostructure. The interface between the CdS core and the Cu2S shell is clear; the thickness of the Cu2S shell was approximately 7 nm. Moreover, the lattice fringes appearing at 0.210, 0.335, and 0.325 nm in Fig. 3(c) correspond to the (110) and (002) planes of CdS and the (111) plane of Cu2S, respectively. The epitaxial relationship of CdS and Cu2S is given by [1−10]CdS//[1−10]Cu2S and (110)CdS//(220)Cu2S. Fig. 3(d) presents the ADF STEM image of a CdS–Cu2S core–shell heterostructured NW; Fig. 3(e) displays the EDS elemental line scan across the NW [indicated by the dashed red arrow in Fig. 3(d)]. The elemental profiles reveal that the signals from the S and Cd atoms were distributed along the NW, while the signal from the Cu atoms emanated from the shell only. The EDS elemental mappings of the signals of the Cu, Cd, and S atoms from the yellow rectangle in Fig. 3(d) are depicted in Fig. 3(f)–(h), respectively. These results confirmed the formation of CdS–Cu2S core–shell heterostructured NWs.
Our Ga-doped CdS NWs exhibited n-type semiconductor characteristics; because Cu2S is a p-type semiconductor, the CdS–Cu2S core–shell heterostructured NWs formed p–n junctions. To fabricate p–n heterojunction devices, we employed a sequential fabrication process (see the ESI). Fig. 4(a) displays a schematic representation of the Ga-doped CdS–Cu2S core–shell heterostructured device; the inset provides a corresponding SEM image. The black curve in Fig. 4(b) is the I–V plot of the heterostructured device recorded in the dark; this curve exhibits typical rectifying characteristics, presumably arising from the CdS–Cu2S n–p junction. Electrical measurements of the device [red curve in Fig. 4(b)] revealed its photovoltaic properties under illumination with AM 1.5 sunlight. We also measured the photovoltaic properties of an undoped CdS–Cu2S heterostructured device; because of the poor conductivity of CdS, the device exhibited negligible photovoltaic behavior under AM 1.5 sunlight. Fig. 4(c) displays the power-dependent photovoltaic properties of the CdS–Cu2S heterostructured device. The I–V data of the device yielded a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 0.735 mA cm−2 and an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.215 V under illumination with 60% AM 1.5 sunlight; these values increased dramatically to 1.09 and 1.62 mA cm−2, respectively, for Jsc, and 0.226 and 0.245 V, respectively, for Voc, after increasing the light power to 80 and 100% AM 1.5 sunlight, respectively. The value of Jsc was proportional to the number of photons that illuminated the device; thus, the value of Isc was also proportional to the power density of the incident light. In contrast, the value of Voc increased logarithmically with respect to the power density, as described in the following equation:
(1)
where
P and P′ are the power densities measured under illumination with 1 sun and various other solar light intensities, respectively.

The heterostructure formed through a sequential process: the generation of photoexcited electron/hole pairs in the CdS–Cu2S core–shell heterostructured NW after absorbing solar light, the separation of the carriers under the influence of the internal electric field in the depletion region of the p–n junction, and the collection of the separated carriers through the external circuit. Higher-power solar light generated more photoexcited carriers and, consequently, more carriers were collected by the external circuit. We extracted the FFs and values of η of the CdS–Cu2S heterostructured devices under solar light illumination at various power densities, and plotted them as black- and blue-dotted curves, respectively, in Fig. 4(d). The definitions of FF and η are provided in the ESI. The value of η increased significantly upon increasing the power density of the incident light, while the FF remained independent of the power density.
We have used CVD to grow Ga-doped CdS NWs; XPS and PL spectra confirmed the incorporation of dopant Ga atoms within the CdS NWs. CdS NWs featuring different levels of Ga doping were obtained when using 0.1, 0.2, and 0.3 g of Ga as the source during the growth process; they exhibited average carrier mobilities of 5.09, 40.5, and 81.9 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, and carrier concentrations of 1.66 × 1017, 1.83 × 1017, and 2.41 × 1017 cm−3, respectively. Moreover, we used a cation exchange method to obtain Cu2S–CdS heterostructured NWs; the surfaces of the CdS NWs were coated with Cu2S, forming a core–shell heterostructure, after immersing the NWs in a CuCl solution. The photovoltaic properties of the Cu2S–CdS p–n heterostructured NW device were characterized by values of Jsc, Voc, FF, and η of 1.62 mA cm−2, 0.245 V, 44.5%, and 0.405%, respectively. From measurements of several CdS–Cu2S core–shell devices, the photovoltaic properties differed by less that 15%. Moreover, the devices exhibited stable operation within two weeks of device fabrication. The ability to modulate the properties of nanostructures through the incorporation of a dopant, and to vary the properties of corresponding photovoltaic devices incorporating such heterostructures, should pave the way for their use in future electronic and optoelectronic devices.
We thank the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) of Taiwan for financial support under the Young Scholar Fellowship Program (Columbus Program, MOST 108-2636-E-007-011).

There are no conflicts to declare.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8cc10316j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019