 DOI: 10.1039/D2NJ00505K
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2022, 46, 8500-8506


Nailiang
Qiu
*,

Chunyan
Liu
,

Haijiao
Lang
,

Jingyang
Xu
,

Rui
Su
,

Jie
Jiang
,

Jiaqi
Tian
 and 

Jisen
Li
*

School of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials, Jining University, Qufu, China. E-mail: nlqiu@jnxy.edu.cn; senjili@sina.com

School of Materials Science & Engineering, Tianjin Key Laboratory for Photoelectric Materials and Devices, Key Laboratory of Display Materials & Photoelectric Devices, Ministry of Education, Tianjin University of Technology, Tianjin, China

Received
29th January 2022
, Accepted 27th March 2022
First published on 30th March 2022
In this paper, a new small-molecule donor with a fluorinated benzodithiophene core and rhodanine analogue end groups, named BTEHR-FT, has been designed and synthesized, which has excellent solubility and thermal stability for solution-processed device fabrication. Moreover, BTEHR-FT shows a low-lying highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy level of −5.45 eV due to the introduction of fluorine atoms. When blended with a nonfullerene acceptor F-2Cl, the BTEHR-FT based all-small-molecule organic solar cell (ASM-OSC) exhibits a high open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.948 V as expected, but a low short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 12.10 mA cm−2 and fill factor (FF) of 0.658 due to the bad morphology of the active layer, giving a moderate power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 7.55%. After thermal annealing treatment, a promising PCE of 10.71% was obtained benefiting from the great enhancement of Jsc (16.59 mA cm−2) and FF (0.693), which is among the highest values for non-Y series acceptor-based ASM-OSCs reported to date. This work provides a guideline for the design of small-molecule donors for efficient organic solar cells.

In the past few decades, solution-processed bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells (OSCs) have attracted much attention owing to their intrinsic advantages, such as light weight, good flexibility, low cost and large-area fabrication. Recently, high power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) exceeding 18% have been obtained for both single-junction and tandem polymer-based OSCs (PSCs), which are mainly attributed to the extensive research efforts on photoactive material design and device preparation techniques. Compared with PSCs, all-small-molecule OSCs (ASM-OSCs) show relatively lower efficiencies due to the unfavorable BHJ morphology in the blend film, which is unfavorable to obtaining high short-circuit current densities (Jsc) and fill factor (FF). Nevertheless, the small molecules possess prominent advantages of easy purification, well-defined chemical structures and less batch-to-batch variation, which endows ASM-OSCs with great potential to achieve excellent performance and thus finally realize commercialization.

Presently, the rapid development of small-molecule nonfullerene acceptors (NFAs) has been witnessed; however, less attention has been paid to small-molecule donors, despite their vital role in ASM-OSCs. Amongst the various components of donor materials, benzodithiophene (BDT) is a promising building block due to its outstanding charge transfer properties and easy modification, showing considerable photovoltaic performance in OSC devices. To date, extensive efforts have been devoted to modifying the chemical structures of BDT-based small-molecule donors to make them work well with the efficient NFAs. Among a series of strategies, introducing fluorine atoms onto the BDT unit has been proven to be an effective way to not only improve the molecular packing and crystallinity through the non-covalent interactions between fluorine and hydrogen, or sulfur atoms, but also downshift the frontier molecular orbital energy level because of the strong electronegativity. Enhanced molecular planarity and crystallinity contributes to forming a suitable phase separation morphology in the active layer, and thus improving Jsc and FF. Moreover, the low-lying frontier molecular orbital energy level is favorable for increasing the gap between the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of the donor and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level of the acceptor, which could lead to a high open-circuit voltage (Voc) of OSC devices. Accordingly, fluorinated BDT-based small-molecule donors, such as BTEC-1F and SM1-F, have been reported for their better performances than the non-fluorinated counterparts.
However, as a promising strategy, fluorination of the BDT unit has been rarely used to design novel small-molecule donors in spite of the numerous merits. Therefore, the development of new fluorinated BDT-based small-molecule donors with high performance is urgently required. Based on the above consideration, here we designed and synthesized a new acceptor–donor–acceptor (A–D–A)-type small-molecule donor, namely BTEHR-FT (Fig. 1), taking the fluorinated BDT backbone as the central unit, a trithiophene chain as the π bridge and 3-(2-ethylhexyl)rhodanine as the end group. The introduction of fluorine atoms on the thienyl group of BDT enables BTEHR-FT to obtain a deep HOMO energy level of −5.45 eV. Additionally, the molecular solubility increases effectively owing to the presence of 2-ethylhexyl groups. F-2Cl was chosen as an acceptor on account of the matched energy level and complementary absorption with BTEHR-FT. ASM-OSC devices based on BTEHR-FT:F-2Cl exhibit a high Voc of 0.948 V as expected, but a moderate PCE of 7.55% due to the inferior Jsc of 12.10 mA cm−2 and FF of 0.658. It is encouraging that a promising PCE of 10.71%, with a high Jsc of 16.59 mA cm−2 and FF of 0.692, was obtained after thermal annealing (TA) treatment despite a slight decrease of Voc (0.932 V). To the best of our knowledge, the PCE of 10.71% is among the highest values for non-Y series acceptor-based ASM-OSCs reported to date.

The preparation of BTEHR-FT was carried out according to a simple synthetic route illustrated in Fig. 1, and the detailed procedures are shown in the ESI. The Stille coupling reaction between compounds 1 and 2, two commercially available materials, provided the dialdehyde compound 3 in 83% yield. Subsequently, compound 3 reacted with 3-(2-ethylhexyl)rhodanine by Knoevenagel condensation reaction affording the target molecule in a high yield of 86%. The chemical structures of the intermediate and the final product were characterized by 1H-NMR and 13C-NMR spectroscopy and MALDI-TOF MS, as shown in the ESI (Fig. S1–S3). BTEHR-FT shows excellent solubility in common organic solvents such as chloroform, chlorobenzene, toluene, o-xylene and 2-methyltetrahydrofuran at room temperature, due to the sufficient alkyl chains on the molecular backbone. Moreover, BTEHR-FT exhibits good thermal stability with a decomposition temperature of 5% weight loss at 405 °C as shown in the thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) plot (Fig. S4, ESI). Based on the properties mentioned above, BTEHR-FT could meet the requirements of solution-processed device fabrication sufficiently. In addition, differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurement was performed as shown in Fig. S5 (ESI). It exhibits an obvious endothermic peak at 189 °C and two exothermic peaks at 136 °C and 186 °C, indicating the high crystallinity of BTEHR-FT. The structural ordering of the neat BTEHR-FT film was investigated by an X-ray diffraction (XRD) experiment. As shown in Fig. S6 (ESI), an obvious 100 diffraction peak at 4.45° and a weak second-order diffraction peak at 10.49° were observed for the cast BTEHR-FT film. Notably, the film shows a stronger 100 peak at 4.59° and a new third-order diffraction peak at 13.09° after TA treatment. The d-spacing values of 1.99 and 1.92 nm were obtained for the as cast and TA BTEHR-FT films, respectively, which indicates closer and better ordered packing after TA treatment. Moreover, the crystallite size in the as cast and TA films could be calculated on the basis of the Scherrer equation as 6.6 and 21.7 nm, respectively, demonstrating a stronger intermolecular interaction and crystallinity in the optimized solid state.


The normalized UV-vis absorption spectra of BTEHR-FT in chloroform solution and solid film are shown in Fig. 2a. It can be seen that BTEHR-FT in solution shows a broad absorption band across 300–600 nm with a maximum absorption peak (λmax) at 498 nm. As for the as cast film, there is a clear red-shift and a wide absorption band ranging from 300 to 700 nm with a pronounced shoulder peak at 607 nm. After TA treatment at 90 °C for 5 min, it shows a more red-shifted absorption and stronger shoulder peak, indicating the strong inter-chain π–π stacking in BTEHR-FT solid film as proved by XRD. The absorption edge of the BTEHR-FT film is estimated as 681 nm (optical band-gap of 1.82 eV), shifted to the blue compared to that of the non-fluorinated counterpart DR3TBDTT (720 nm).

The electrochemical properties of BTEHR-FT were investigated by cyclic voltammetry (CV) experiments to determine the LUMO and HOMO energy levels. From the CV curves shown in Fig. 2b, the reduction and oxidation potential can be calculated as −1.37 V and 0.65 V (vs. Fc/Fc+), respectively. Accordingly, the LUMO and HOMO levels were gained as −3.43 and −5.45 eV, respectively, on the basis of the equation ELUMO = −(4.80 + Eonsetre) and EHOMO = −(4.80 + Eonsetox) with reference to the energy level of Fc/Fc+ (−4.8 eV below vacuum). The optical and electrochemical data of BTEHR-FT are summarized in Table 1 with those of non-halogenated analogue DR3TBDTT for comparison. As expected, the HOMO level of BTEHR-FT shifted down largely due to the introduction of fluorine atoms, which is beneficial to obtaining a high Voc for the photovoltaic devices.
Molecules
UV-Vis
CV

λ
solmax (nm)

λ
filmmax (nm)

E
optg (eV)
HOMO (eV)
LUMO (eV)

E
cvg (eV)

a Optical bandgap was obtained from the onset wavelength of the film.
b Data from ref. 50.

DR3TBDTT
513
591, 640
1.72
−5.02
−3.27
1.75
BTEHR-FT
498
560, 607
1.82
−5.45
−3.43
2.02

To characterize the photovoltaic properties of BTEHR-FT, ASM-OSC devices with a conventional structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/PDINO/Al were fabricated, as shown in Fig. 2c. In the active layer, F-2Cl was chosen as an acceptor considering the good complementary absorptions and matched energy levels with BTEHR-FT. Processing conditions, such as donor/acceptor (D/A) weight ratio, rotation speed, TA and solvent vapor annealing (SVA) treatment were systematically investigated. The detailed fabrication procedures and device parameters are provided in the ESI (Table S1). It is found that the optimal D/A weight ratio is 1:0.9 for both as-cast and optimized devices. From the photovoltaic parameters listed in Table 2 and the current density–voltage (J–V) curves in Fig. 3a, the as-cast device exhibits a high Voc of 0.948 V benefited from the deep HOMO level of BTEHR-FT, but a moderate PCE value of 7.55% caused by the low Jsc of 12.10 mA cm−2 and FF of 0.658. SVA treatment endows the device with a higher FF of 0.691; unfortunately, both the Jsc and Voc decrease slightly compared to the as-cast device. For the nonfullerene-based binary ASM-OSCs, TA treatment is proved to be a more effective strategy. When the active layer was treated at 90 °C for 5 min, the optimal PCE could be up to 10.71%, benefiting from the great enhancement of FF (0.693) and Jsc (16.59 mA cm−2). In contrast, SVA treatment is significantly suitable for the fullerene derivative-based devices. BXR series materials with similar chemical structures to BTEHR-FT, reported by Jones et al., show a high PCE of 9.3% for BTR:PC71BM-based devices treated by SVA in THF vapor, but a low PCE of 5.7% for TA treatment counterparts. Subsequently, the blend film morphology evolution caused by SVA and TA treatments was systematically studied, revealing that different solvent selections and annealing temperatures have a great influence on the performance of the devices.

Treatment

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCEmax (%)

a Average PCE values obtained from 20 devices are shown in parentheses.

As cast
0.948 (0.941 ± 0.012)
12.10 (11.89 ± 0.25)
0.658 (0.649 ± 0.015)
7.55 (7.26 ± 0.29)
TA
0.932 (0.933 ± 0.011)
16.59 (16.28 ± 0.34)
0.693 (0.688 ± 0.012)
10.71 (10.45 ± 0.26)
The external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements were performed to investigate the photo-to-current response process. As shown in Fig. 3b, the EQE curve of the as-cast device exhibits low EQE values despite the broad wavelength region. As for the optimal device, it exhibits a stronger and broader photo-to-current response in the wavelength range from 350 to 750 nm with the maximal efficiency of 70.7% at 728 nm, which indicates the efficient photoelectron conversion process. This result could be attributed to the complementary absorption of the active layer materials and the favorable morphology after TA treatment. The integrated current densities obtained from the EQE curves for the as-cast and optimized devices are 11.93 and 16.14 mA cm−2, respectively, which agree well with the corresponding Jscs measured from the J–V curves.

To investigate the exciton generation and dissociation process in the active layer of BTEHR-FT:F-2Cl-based devices, the relation of photocurrent density (Jph) versus effective voltage (Veff) was studied, where Jph = JL − JD (JL and JD are the current density in light and dark, respectively) and Veff = V0 − Va (V0 is the voltage at Jph = 0, and Va is the applied voltage). As shown in Fig. 3c, the photocurrent of the optimized device gets close to saturation (Jsat) earlier than that of the as-cast device, demonstrating the more efficient dissociation of photogenerated excitons after optimization. In addition, the higher Jsat suggests that the optimized device could absorb more incident photons and generate more excitons efficiently. Notably, the Jph/Jsat values of 93.0% and 90.6% were obtained under the short-circuit condition for the optimal and as-cast devices, respectively, which indicates that TA treatment is favorable for exciton dissociation and charge collection in blend films. Therefore, such efficient exciton generation and dissociation lead to the high Jscs of the devices treated by TA. For further study, the charge recombination property was investigated based on the formula of Jsc ∝ Pαlight, where α is the exponential factor and Plight represents light intensity (Fig. 3d). The fitted slope (α) values for both the as-cast and optimized devices are all over 0.98, revealing that all blend films have a low degree of bimolecular recombination, which is beneficial to obtaining the high FFs.

To investigate the charge transfer behavior in the active layer, photoluminescence (PL) spectra of donor and acceptor pure films and the related blend films at different excitation wavelengths were obtained, as shown in Fig. S7 (ESI). Compared to BTEHR-FT and F-2Cl pure films, 87.4% and 88.9% PL quenching efficiency can be obtained for the as cast blend films, respectively, and higher PL quenching of 95.3% and 96.1% for the blend films with TA treatment, respectively. This indicates more effective exciton dissociation in the TA-treated blend film and efficient charge transfer between BTEHR-FT and F-2Cl, enabling higher Jsc than that of the as cast devices.

The charge-transport properties in the active layer were investigated by the space-charge limited current (SCLC) method, with the diode configurations of ITO/ZnO/BTEHR-FT:F-2Cl/Al and ITO/PEDOT:PSS/BTEHR-FT:F-2Cl/Au for electron and hole transport measurements, respectively. According to the slopes shown in Fig. S8 (ESI), the electron and hole mobilities were determined as μe = 3.34 × 10−4 and μh = 0.97 × 10−4 cm−2 V−1 s−1 for the as-cast device with a μe/μh ratio of 3.44. With regard to the TA-treated device, μe = 3.85 × 10−4 and μh = 1.50 × 10−4 cm−2 V−1 s−1 with a μe/μh ratio of 2.56 was obtained. The enhanced and more balanced charge-transport ability endows the optimized device with a higher Jsc and FF, which is in good agreement with the fact mentioned above.

To gain more insights into the reasons for the excellent charge-transport properties and photovoltaic parameters of the optimized devices, atomic force microscopy (AFM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) characterization were carried out. As shown in Fig. 4a, the topographical image for the as-cast blend film exhibits a smooth morphology with the root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of 0.90 nm. Fig. 4b shows a rough surface morphology (RMS = 1.71 nm) for the optimized blend film, indicating more favorable domain size and molecular aggregation after TA treatment. The morphology features described above are evidenced by the TEM images. It can be seen that there are no clear phase separation and crystalline domains in the as-cast film (Fig. 4c); in particular, the large number of traps distributed in the blend film promote the exciton recombination and prevent the charge-transport. Nevertheless, the optimized film shown in Fig. 4d exhibits more clear fiber structures and interpenetrating networks, which are beneficial to efficient exciton dissociation and charge-transport, and thus the improvement of Jsc and FF.

In summary, we have designed and synthesized a new small-molecule donor named BTEHR-FT with a fluorinated BDT core and 3-(2-ethylhexyl)rhodanine end groups, which has excellent solubility and thermal stability for solution-processed device fabrication. The introduction of fluorine atoms downshifts the frontier molecular orbital energy levels as evidenced by CV measurements, and endows BTEHR-FT with a low-lying HOMO level of −5.45 eV. When blended with the nonfullerene acceptor F-2Cl, the BTEHR-FT-based ASM-OSC device shows a high Voc of 0.948 V for the as-cast blend film. However, the PCE value of 7.55% is inferior due to the low Jsc of 12.10 mA cm−2 and FF of 0.658, which is mainly caused by the bad morphology in the active layer. After optimization by TA treatment, the blend film exhibits more clear fiber structures and favorable phase separation, contributing to the charge separation and transport. Thus, a promising PCE of 10.71% with a high Jsc (16.59 mA cm−2) and FF (0.693) is obtained, which is among the highest values for non-Y series acceptor-based ASM-OSCs reported to date. The findings provide a guideline for the design of small-molecule donors and demonstrate that fluorination is an effective strategy to achieve superior device performance.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors acknowledge the financial support of Jining University (2019BSZX01) and the Young Innovative Talents Introduction & Cultivation Program for Colleges and Universities of Shandong Province: Innovative Research Team on Optoelectronic Functional Materials.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2nj00505k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2022