 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA01846H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 10712-10722


Yi
Hu
,

Whitney A.
Webre
,

Michael B.
Thomas
,

Austen
Moss
,

Sarah N.
Hancock
,

Jacob
Schaffner
,

Francis
D'Souza
* and 

Hong
Wang
*

Department of Chemistry, University of North Texas, 1155 Union Circle, #305070, Denton, TX 76203-5017, USA. E-mail: hong.wang@unt.edu; francis.dsouza@unt.edu

Received
18th February 2019
, Accepted 28th March 2019
First published on 28th March 2019
A novel class of β-functionalized push–pull zinc opp-dibenzoporphyrins was designed and synthesized as sensitizers for dye-sensitized solar cells. Dibenzoporphyrin YH7 displayed strong push–pull characteristics, which included clearly segregated HOMO/LUMO and fast charge injection from the singlet excited state of zinc porphyrin to the conduction band of TiO2. The incorporation of both the phenylethynyl bridge and amino group was critical to achieve the enhanced push–pull effect. The highest PCE value in this series obtained with the YH6 cell was 6.7%, which is comparable to that of the best ruthenium dye, N719 (η = 7.4%), under similar conditions. The high PCE of the YH6 cell is ascribed to its high light harvesting ability and favorable cell kinetics, which is supported by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy studies and femtosecond transient absorption studies. An unusual illumination-induced photodegradation was observed for YH7, which was attributed as the major reason for the unexpected lower PCE of the YH7 cell (η = 5.7%). This work demonstrates the applicability of π-extended porphyrins as a new generation of sensitizers for high performance dye-sensitized solar cells.

Research on Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells (DSSCs) has attracted intense attention in the past decade due to the raising awareness of the global energy crisis. Porphyrins possess favorable properties as sensitizers for DSSCs, including multiple absorption bands in the visible region and appropriate cell kinetics for electron injection and charge recombination. However, solar cells based on porphyrin dyes had suffered from low efficiencies (η < 7.2%) for more than a decade. The introduction of meso-functionalized push–pull porphyrins in 2009 by the Diau and Yeh group completely changed the profile of porphyrins in DSSCs. Porphyrins have recently stood out as the most promising dyes among all other organic compounds. Significant efforts have been devoted to developing push–pull porphyrin dyes as well as other organic dyes in the past few years, and record-breaking power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) have been achieved with porphyrin-based DSSCs in recent years. However, problems still exist with porphyrin dyes. Solar cell instability caused by labile anchoring groups, lengthy synthetic routes, and lower photostability constitute major barriers preventing the utilization of porphyrin dyes in practical applications.

In order to address these problems, new classes of porphyrin dyes should be developed. Porphyrin dyes can be mainly classified into two types: meso-functionalized and β-functionalized. Significant efforts have been devoted to developing meso-functionalized porphyrin dyes, which led to the best organic dyes for DSSCs. In contrast, β-functionalized porphyrin dyes have only been sporadically investigated due to synthetic difficulties. Even less studied are β-functionalized π-extended porphyrins. π-Extended porphyrins possess broadened and red-shifted absorption bands, which enable better overlap with the solar spectrum. As such, the development of π-extended porphyrins may provide new opportunities for the fabrication of dye-sensitized solar cells.
Our group has been engaged in developing β-functionalized push–pull benzoporphyrins as sensitizers for DSSCs in recent years. To design these porphyrin sensitizers, we utilize the existing push–pull design strategy, which has played a pivotal role in improving the PCEs of porphyrin dyes. Additionally, we take advantage of concise and versatile synthetic methodologies developed for benzoporphyrins in our laboratory and install two vicinal linker groups on the porphyrin to enhance the binding between the dye and the TiO2 surface.
In a previous work, we prepared a class of push–pull dibenzoporphyrins (Fig. 1, top). While this type of porphyrins showed enhanced PCEs as compared with their monobenzoporphyrin analogues, significant push–pull effects were not observed. This is mainly due to the steric congestion at the porphyrin β,β′-positions, causing the phenyl rings to be perpendicular to the plane of the porphyrin core and thus limiting the electronic communication of the push group (methoxy group) with the porphyrin core. In order to further enhance the PCE and, very importantly, investigate the impact of the push–pull effect of dibenzoporphyrins on power conversion efficiency, we have designed a new class of push–pull dibenzoporphyrins in which a phenylethynyl bridge is inserted between the push group (tertiary amine) and the porphyrin core, to alleviate the steric crowding around the porphyrin periphery (Fig. 1, bottom). Herein, we present the synthesis and structure–property studies of these β-functionalized push–pull opp-dibenzoporphyrins and their evaluation as sensitizers in DSSCs.

In this work, we have designed two new opp-dibenzoporphyrins (YH6–YH7) (Fig. 2). The incorporation of the phenylethynyl bridge is expected to alleviate the steric congestion at the porphyrin periphery to allow strong electronic communication between the push group and the porphyrin core. In addition, the incorporation of an ethynyl spacer will also further extend the π-conjugation, resulting in broadened and red-shifted absorption bands. In both porphyrins, acrylic acid serves a dual purpose as both the pull and the anchoring group. Our previous work has shown that acrylic acid is the best anchoring group for benzoporphyrin dyes as compared to carboxylic acid, benzoic acid, and ethynylbenzoic acid. In porphyrin YH7, tertiary amine groups serve as the push group. Porphyrin YH6 does not contain tertiary amine groups in order to more clearly illustrate the push–pull effect of YH7. Opp-dibenzoporphyrins YH4 and YH5 were prepared for comparison purposes. Porphyrins with a similar structure have been evaluated as sensitizers for DSSCs in our previous work. The novelty of this work is the utilization of a much bulkier porphyrin. Dye aggregation has long proven to be a severe problem, which leads to lower effective conversion of solar energy to electricity in DSSCs. The utilization of a bulky porphyrin is expected to lessen dye aggregation on the TiO2 surface, which would minimize the need for co-adsorbents used to reduce dye aggregation.

The synthesis of benzoporphyrin YH4 started from free-base dibromoporphyrin 1 (Scheme 1). The Heck reaction of 1 with methyl 2,4-pentadienoate followed by 6π-electrocyclization and aromatization led to the formation of free-base monobenzoporphyrin 2 bearing acrylic esters in good yield. Zinc insertion and subsequent hydrolysis of the ester groups yielded YH4. Further bromination of 2 with NBS in refluxing 1,2-dichloroethane generated dibromobenzoporphyrin 3. Dibromobenzoporphyrin 3 reacted with p-methoxystyrene through the Heck, 6π-electrocyclization, and aromatization sequence, which produced opp-dibenzoporphyrin 4. Zinc insertion and subsequent hydrolysis of the ester groups yielded YH5.
Reaction of dibromobenzoporphyrin 3 with the corresponding enynes in the presence of a Pd(0) catalyst through the Heck-based sequence reaction produced opp-dibenzoporphyrins 5 and 6. It is worth mentioning that different conditions are required with different alkenes for the Heck-based sequence reaction. For example, the reactions of methyl 2,4-pentadienoate and p-methoxystyrene with dibromoporphyrins 1 and 3, respectively, were divided into two steps: in the first step, a bicatalytic system, i.e., Pd[P(t-Bu)3]2/Pd2(dba)3, was used in the Heck reaction at a lower temperature (45 °C) in THF, generating direct Heck products; in the second step, p-chloranil was used as the oxidant to facilitate 6π-electrocyclization and subsequent aromatization to yield 2 and 4, respectively. In contrast, the reactions of 3 with enynes were carried out in one-pot in the presence of Pd[P(t-Bu)3]2. In addition, no oxidant was added to these reactions. As demonstrated by the much lower yields, the reactions of bromoporphyrin 3 with enynes have turned out to be more difficult than with regular alkenes. This is likely due to the more severe polymerization reaction of enynes and the side reaction of enynes in the presence of Pd(0). Zinc insertion then took place with 5 and 6, followed by hydrolysis to furnish the final push–pull opp-dibenzoporphyrins YH6 and YH7, respectively.

Normalized UV-vis absorption spectra of dibenzoporphyrins YH5–YH7 and monobenzoporphyrin YH4 are compiled in Fig. 3. While all the dibenzoporphyrins (YH5–YH7) display one intense Soret band and four Q bands, monobenzoporphyrin (YH4) displays one intense Soret band and only two Q bands, likely due to the symmetry change of the porphyrin core. The Soret band of monobenzoporphyrin YH4 occurs at 455 nm. Upon fusion of one more benzene ring to the porphyrin periphery, the Soret band is red-shifted by 15 nm to 470 nm in YH5. Introduction of the conjugated phenylethynyl bridge in YH6 further red-shifted the Soret band by 5 nm to 475 nm. The Soret bands on these dibenzoporphyrins also contain a shoulder band. It is notable that the inclusion of the push (tertiary amine) groups in YH7 further shifts the Soret band by 5 nm to 480 nm, and the shoulder of the Soret band is more discernible than that of YH5 and YH6. These data suggest a better push–pull effect in YH7 than in YH5 and YH6. Although all dibenzoporphyrins (YH5–YH7) show four Q bands, the absorption patterns of YH6 and YH7 are clearly different from that of YH5. The Q bands of YH7 are also slightly red-shifted relative to those of YH6.

Steady state fluorescence spectra of the three dibenzoporphyrins (YH5–YH7) exhibit a more intense emission band around 641–644 nm and a less intense emission band at 705–709 nm (Fig. 3, inset). On the other hand, the intensity of the two emission bands in monobenzoporphyrin YH4 is inversed, with the much more intense emission at 675 nm and much less intense emission at 615 nm. The onset of fluorescence spectra of YH4–YH7 roughly reflects a similar trend in their UV-vis absorption spectra. The optical data of these porphyrins are organized in Table 1.
Dye

λ
max
abs
 [nm] (ε, 105 M−1 cm−1)

λ
max
em
 [nm]

E
0–0
 [eV]

E
ox
 [V]

 [V]
ΔGinj [eV]
ΔGreg [eV]

a Wavelength of the absorption and emission maxima in THF; the extinction coefficients (ε, 105 M−1 cm−1) are shown in parentheses.
b 
E
0–0 was determined from the intersection of normalized absorption and emission spectra.
c The oxidation potentials of dyes were measured in o-DCB with 0.1 M (TBA)ClO4 with a scan rate of 100 mVs−1; potentials measured vs. the Ag/AgCl (Ag/Ag+) couple were converted to potentials vs. SHE.
d Excited-state oxidation potentials  were approximated from Eox and E0–0.
e Driving force for electron injection (ΔGinj) calculated from the energy difference between the dye excited singlet state  and conduction band of TiO2 (−0.5 V vs. SHE).
f Driving force for regeneration (ΔGreg) calculated from the energy difference between the porphyrin radical cation (Eox) and the iodine (I−/I3−) couple (+0.42 V vs. SHE).


YH4

455 (3.40)
615, 675
2.10
1.04
−1.07
−0.57
−0.62

YH5

470 (3.27)
641, 705
1.94
0.94
−1.00
−0.50
−0.52

YH6

475 (4.58)
640, 705
1.94
0.99
−0.95
−0.45
−0.57

YH7

480 (2.11)
644, 709
1.93
0.99
−0.94
−0.44
−0.57
The fluorescence lifetime of YH4, measured using the time correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) technique, is found to be 2.14 ns. Similarly, the fluorescence lifetimes for YH5, YH6, and YH7 are 1.01, 1.12, and 1.06 ns, respectively. The lifetimes of YH5–YH7 are much shorter than that of YH4, indicating that a push–pull effect may be at play in these porphyrins. It is interesting to note that the lifetime of YH7, which bears strong electron-donating amine groups, is only slightly shorter than that of YH6, which does not have electron-donating groups.

The electrochemical properties of these porphyrins were measured by cyclic and differential pulse voltammetry techniques in o-dichlorobenzene containing 0.1 M (TBA)ClO4 as the supporting electrolyte. The electrochemical data are summarized in Tables 1 and S2. Both monobenzoporphyrin YH4 and dibenzoporphyrin YH5 revealed two one-electron oxidations and two one-electron reductions (see Fig. 4 for DPVs and Fig. S2 for CV curves), which are typical of zinc porphyrin derivatives. On the other hand, both the dibenzoporphyrins YH6 and YH7 bearing the phenylethynyl bridge showed three one-electron reductions and two one-electron oxidations. Both the oxidation and the reduction processes were found to be reversible for YH4 and YH5. The oxidation occurred at 0.25 and 0.49 V vs. Fc/Fc+ for YH4. Upon fusion of one more benzene ring to the porphyrin periphery, both the first and the second oxidation potentials of YH5 shifted more negative by 0.10 V and 0.11 V, respectively. On the other hand, inclusion of the phenylethynyl bridge in YH6 shifts the first and second oxidation potentials to 0.21 V and 0.41 V, respectively, more positive relative to those of YH5. The installation of strong electron-donating amine groups in YH7 did not affect the oxidations significantly; only a slight negative shift by < 0.02 V was observed. The two reduction processes were found at −1.91 V and −2.23 V vs. Fc/Fc+ for YH4. The first two reductions of all the dibenzoporphyrins (YH5–YH7) shifted to more positive as compared with those of monobenzoporphyrin YH4. While the two reductions of YH6 shifted to more positive relative to those of YH5, those of YH7 shifted to more negative as compared to those of YH6. In addition, the push groups have a greater impact on the third reduction potential of YH7 than on the first and second. The electrochemical HOMO–LUMO energy gap followed the order of YH4 > YH7 ∼ YH6 > YH5.

As part of complete characterization of the newly synthesized compounds, spectroelectrochemical studies were performed to characterize the one-electron oxidized and one-electron reduced products. Fig. S3 in the ESI shows the spectra of the radical cation and radical anion of each zinc porphyrin. YH4 with only one fused benzene ring revealed radical cation peaks at 455, 573, and 694 nm while the radical anion showed peaks at 435, 461, and 585 nm. For YH5–YH7, because of the presence of two fused benzene rings which extended the π-conjugation even further, the radical cation displayed broad near-IR peaks (overlap of two peaks centred around 730 and 790 nm) spanning the 650–800 nm range, in addition to new peaks in the visible range. Similarly, the radical anion also displayed new peaks in the visible region (see Fig. S3). However, no peaks for the radical anion beyond 700 nm were observed.
The driving force for dye regeneration (ΔGreg) of oxidized dyes from the electron mediator (I−/I3−) was estimated based on the experimental first oxidation potentials of YH4–YH7. All of these dyes possess first oxidation potentials >0.5 V, more positive than the potential of the redox mediator I−/I3− (0.42 V vs. SHE), indicating thermodynamically feasible regeneration of the oxidized dye from the electron mediator.
The driving force for electron injection (ΔGinj) from the excited dye to the conduction band of the semiconductor was also estimated. The optical and electrochemical data are compiled in Table 1. The calculated excited state oxidation potentials  for YH4–YH7 are −1.07 V, −1.00 V, −0.95 V, and −0.94 V, respectively. The LUMO energy levels of YH4 and YH5 are sufficiently higher than that of the conduction band for TiO2 (−0.50 V vs. SHE) to ensure efficient electron injection from the photo-excited porphyrin dyes to the conduction band of the TiO2 (Fig. 5). In contrast, the LUMO energy levels of YH6 and YH7 lie slightly lower than the energy level expected for thermodynamically feasible electron injection. The HOMO–LUMO energy gap calculated from UV-vis and emission spectra is in the order of YH4 > YH5 = YH6 > YH7, which differs from their electrochemical HOMO–LUMO energy gap. However, it is important to note that the overall HOMO–LUMO gap for the mono-benzo fused porphyrin (YH4) is higher than that of the bis-benzo fused porphyrins (YH5–YH7), from both spectral and electrochemical studies.

In order to better understand the orbital coefficients of the frontier molecular orbitals, DFT calculations (Gaussian 09 DFT B3LYP/6-31G(d,p)) were conducted for YH4–YH7. The calculated geometries of these molecules are included in the ESI (Fig. S4). The optimized structure reveals a roughly planar geometry for YH4. Upon fusion of one more benzene ring to the porphyrin periphery at the opposite side, all the dibenzoporphyrins (YH5–YH7) become distorted from planarity. The distortion is more severe in YH5 compared with that in YH6 and YH7. Similar to YH3 (ref. 13) the aryl groups at the 122 and 123 positions of YH5 did not lie in the same plane with the porphyrin core, which hinders the electronic communication between them. In contrast, the arylethynyl groups of YH6 and YH7 stayed in the same plane with the porphyrin core, which is expected to facilitate intramolecular electronic communication.

The LUMO of these porphyrin dyes was mainly located at the porphyrin core and extended into the fused benzene ring bearing the acrylic acid anchoring groups (Fig. 6). Slightly increased participation of the opposite fused benzene ring is visible for YH6 and YH7. The heavy involvement of the anchoring group in the LUMO is expected to facilitate electron injection from the photoexcited dye to the conduction band of TiO2 due to increased electronic coupling between the excited state of the dye and the 3d orbitals of TiO2.
The HOMO of the monobenzoporphyrin YH4 predominately occupied the porphyrin core without the participation of the fused benzene ring. On the other hand, the HOMO of dibenzoporphyrins YH5 and YH6 involved both the porphyrin core and the two fused benzene rings, with slight participation of the ethynyl bridge in YH6. In sharp contrast, the HOMO of YH7 displays a completely different feature. The HOMO of YH7 is mainly located at the donor (tertiary amine) groups, the phenylethynyl bridges and the fused benzene ring to which the phenylethynyl bridges are attached. The porphyrin core is not involved. It should be mentioned that the energy levels of HOMO and HOMO-1 for YH7 are very close with only 0.02 eV difference. The HOMO-1 of YH7, on the other hand, engages the phenylethynyl bridges and the donor groups with inclusion of the porphyrin core (see Fig. S4). The characteristics of the HOMOs and LUMOs demonstrate significant orbital segregation, which is a much-favoured feature for DSSCs. Considering that the only structural difference between YH6 and YH7 is that YH7 bears electron-donating 3° amine groups and YH6 does not, the impact on the HOMO brought by the 3° amine groups is immense. The order of the calculated HOMO–LUMO energy gap is YH4 (2.61 eV) > YH6 (2.50 eV) ∼ YH5 (2.47 eV) > YH7 (2.38 eV). This order roughly agrees with that of the optical energy gap, but not with that of the electrochemical energy gap. The discrepancy could be attributed to solvent effects as optical and electrochemical experiments were conducted in different solvents.

Femtosecond transient absorption spectral studies were performed to characterize the push–pull porphyrins in solution and immobilized on a transparent TiO2 surface. The presence of electron rich and poor substituents on the opposite end of the porphyrin π-ring could promote intramolecular type charge transfer within the molecules. Under such circumstances, the transient spectral features would reveal new peaks corresponding to the charge transfer state. This is in addition to the transient spectral features which could be expected for simple zinc porphyrins without any push–pull effects. Such charge transfer could also result in faster deactivation of the singlet excited state. Fig. 7 shows the transient spectra at the indicated delay times of YH4–YH7 in MeOH/CHCl3 (v/v = 4/1) at an excitation wavelength corresponding to either the porphyrin Q-band or Soret band. This solvent mixture was selected for better solubility of the investigated compounds. In the case of YH4, the instantly formed 1YH4* (see the spectrum at 2 ps) revealed transient peaks at 494 and 648 nm and negative peaks at 580 nm, due to ground state bleaching, and at 684 nm corresponding to stimulated emission. The decay of positive peaks and recovery of negative peaks were slow, consistent with the earlier discussed average lifetime of 2.14 ns. Interestingly, for YH5–YH7 distinct spectral features supporting intramolecular type charge transfer due to the push–pull effect were observed. In all of these compounds, the instantly formed singlet excited state revealed broad peaks in the 525–575 nm range and peaks in the 635 and 665 nm ranges. Negative peaks in the 570, 595, 640, and 710 nm ranges were also observed. By comparison with the earlier discussed UV-vis and fluorescence studies, the first two negative peaks were assigned to ground state bleaching while the latter two negative peaks to stimulated emission. Importantly, new peaks in the 735 and 790 nm range were also observed while the positive spectral features in the 600–700 nm range were much more intense than those observed for YH4. Note that the 790 nm peaks were noisy due to the detection limit of our detector. The spectroelectrochemical data discussed earlier revealed peaks in the 600–700 nm range for the radical anion and in the near-IR (650–800 nm) range corresponding to the radical cation for YH5–YH7. Data shown here indeed revealed the existence of transient signals which correspond to both the radical anion and radical cation in the case of YH5–YH7, which supports intramolecular charge transfer within the push–pull system. In addition, as supported by the lifetime studies, the decay/recovery of the peaks was rather rapid, which populated the triplet excited state of each system. In the case of YH7, some photodecomposition of the porphyrin was also observed.

The transient data were analysed by constructing decay associated spectra (DAS) for each system, as shown in the lower panels of Fig. 7. Such analysis yielded three components for each system. By analogy with the lifetime data and spectral features, in the case of YH4, the first component with a lifetime of 17.9 ps was assigned to formation of 1YH4*, the second one with a time constant of 892.1 ps to the decay of 1YH4* and the third one with a time constant beyond 3 ns to 3YH4*, an intersystem crossing product. In the case of YH5–YH7, the first DAS revealing negative amplitude (rise component) at positions where both cation and anion radical signals are expected are within few picoseconds, suggesting formation of a charge transfer state on this time scale. The second component with positive amplitude (decay component) at wavelengths corresponding to the charge transfer state is attributed to the lifetime of the charge transfer state. The third component, whose lifetime was beyond 3 ns and which has triplet excited state features of the push–pull porphyrins, was assigned as population of the triplet excited state. The observed time constants for the first two processes were found to be 15.2, 11.4, and 8.99 ps, and 944.2, 934.3, and 582.5 ps, respectively, for YH5, YH6, and YH7.

Fig. 8 shows the transient and DAS for YH4–YH7 anchored on the transparent semiconducting TiO2 surface. Here, films of transparent TiO2 of 6 μM thickness developed using the doctor-blade technique were employed. The selected porphyrin in a MeOH/CHCl3 solvent mixture was allowed to surface-adsorb (1–2 h) onto TiO2, and then the films were rinsed thoroughly using CHCl3 to remove unbound porphyrins. For data collection, using a solid film mount, the sample was moved slowly to avoid photodecomposition. Thermodynamic feasibility of charge injection from the excited porphyrin to the conduction band of TiO2 is discussed earlier with the help of Fig. 5. In all of the systems, viz., YH4/TiO2 to YH7/TiO2, charge injection was predicted. The spectral data shown in Fig. 8 indicate this indeed to be true. In all of the YH4/TiO2 to YH7/TiO2 systems, transient features corresponding to the radical cation of porphyrins at the expected wavelengths were possible to observe. In addition, the photochemical events were rather rapid compared to what was observed in solution for a given porphyrin. For YH4–YH6, signal relaxation was completed within 40–50 ps while that for YH7 was close to 20 ps. For data analysis, DAS were generated as shown in the bottom panels of each figure. Such analysis yielded two main components. The first one with time constants of 1–2 ps while the second component with time constants of 6–20 ps, both revealing the decay of the singlet excited state as a result of charge injection from the excited states to TiO2. Multiple components suggest the existence of multiple environments for porphyrins adsorbed on TiO2. The second component was utilized to evaluate the average charge injection time constants which yielded 19.5 ps for YH4, 16.3 ps for YH5, 20.0 ps for YH6 and 6.3 ps for YH7, respectively. Although faster charge injection was observed in the case of YH7, the sample revealed significant decomposition; hence, the time constants could be viewed as a lower limit. A much weaker third component with time constants of few ns was also observed (data not shown) which could be attributed to the charge recombination process. Earlier, time scales of this order for charge recombination were reported by the Imahori and Sundstrom groups for meso-functionalized zinc porphyrin immobilized on TiO2 systems. In general, faster charge injection was witnessed with an increased push–pull effect of the current porphyrin series, i.e., YH7 > YH5 > YH6 > YH4.

Photocurrent–voltage (J–V) curves and IPCE action spectra were used to evaluate the photovoltaic performance of the DSSCs sensitized with YH4–YH7. Both J–V curves and IPCE spectra were measured under simulated AM 1.5 one sun (100 mW cm−2) illumination on cells with a 0.16 cm2 active area. The light to power conversion efficiency (η) was determined based on eqn (1), where JSC is the short-circuit current density, VOC is the open circuit voltage, and FF is the fill factor.

η = JSC × VOC × FF
(1)
The calculated values for the best of the three cells are listed in Table 2 while η values are averages of these three cells.
Dye

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF

η
 (%)

a The photovoltaic measurements were conducted under AM 1.5G illumination (power 100 mW cm−2) in the presence of a mask and with a cell active area of 0.16 cm2 and a TiO2 thickness of 25 μm. As a reference, the efficiency of N719-sensitized solar cells was determined: JSC = 16.5 mA cm−2, VOC = 0.67 V, FF = 0.63, and η = 7.4%.
b The TiO2 film was soaked in 0.3 mM dye solution in MeOH/CHCl3 (v/v = 3/1) containing 0.6 mM CDCA for 3 h.
c The TiO2 film was soaked in 0.2 mM dye solution in MeOH/CHCl3 (v/v = 2/1) without CDCA for 3 h.
d The TiO2 film was soaked in 0.2 mM dye solution in MeOH/CHCl3 (v/v = 1/1) without CDCA for 3 h.
e The averages for PCEs of each dye obtained from the 3 devices are given in parentheses and ± refers to the standard deviation.
f Best device PCE.


YH4


13.12
0.55
0.68
4.91 (4.86 ± 0.08)

YH5


14.81
0.58
0.65
5.56 (5.52 ± 0.04)

YH6


16.12
0.58
0.72
6.70 (6.57 ± 0.09)

YH7


15.12
0.57
0.66
5.72 (5.04 ± 0.50)

First, we investigated the optimum dye soaking time for dye adsorption onto the TiO2 surface in order to maximize the performance and used YH4 as the reference dye. As shown in Table S3, variable values were obtained for the overall power conversion efficiency (PCE) and photocurrent density of the dye with variable dye soaking time. The PCE value of YH4 increased with increased soaking time, reached the highest in 3 h, and then decreased with further increased soaking time. It is noticeable that the increase in the JSC value mainly accounted for the initial increase in efficiency. With longer soaking time (>3 h) the efficiency decreased with decreased values of both VOC and JSC.

It appears that the initial increase in the JSC values with elongated dye soaking time is likely the outcome of increased dye loading onto the photoanode. However, when the dye adsorption time was too long, dye molecules start to aggregate on the photoanode, leading to lower JSC and VOC values.

Dye aggregation is generally believed to have an adverse effect on carrier photogeneration through self-quenching of the excited state. Chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA) is known to minimize dye aggregation via co-adsorption with the dye onto the TiO2 surface. It is expected that the addition of CDCA would help to improve both VOC and JSC values through reduction of the dye aggregation on TiO2. We then investigated the effect of CDCA through sensitizing YH4 with different concentrations of CDCA (0 mM–1.0 mM CDCA) (see ESI Table S4). The best PCE value was achieved when 0.6 mM CDCA was used as a co-absorbent with YH4. This CDCA concentration also worked well with YH5. However, it turns out that the best PCEs were obtained for YH6 and YH7 cells in the absence of CDCA.


The photovoltaic performance of YH4–YH7 is shown in Fig. 9 and the data are summarized in Table 2. The power conversion efficiency (PCE, η) of the YH4-sensitized solar cell is 4.9%. Upon fusion of one more benzene ring, the PCE of YH5-sensitized solar cells increased to 5.6%. The increased PCE value of YH5 can be attributed to its greater JSC value. As shown in the UV-vis spectra (Fig. 3), YH5 displayed largely red-shifted Soret and Q bands as compared with YH4. The Q bands are also broadened compared to those of YH4, which suggests that YH5 is likely to have a better light harvesting efficiency (LHE). The increased JSC is also reflected in the IPCE spectra (Fig. 9b, vide infra). YH5-sensitized solar cells exhibited higher IPCE values in the various Q-band regions as compared to the cell sensitized with YH4. These data are consistent with the PCEs reported previously for benzoporphyrins with similar structures.


YH6-sensitized solar cells achieved an even higher PCE (η = 6.7%) than the solar cells based on YH5. The JSC value of YH6 sensitized solar cells reached 16.12 mA cm−2, which is higher than those of YH4 and YH5-sensitized solar cells, suggesting that inclusion of a phenylethynyl bridge largely enhanced the light harvesting efficiency (LHE). On the other hand, the VOC values of the YH4-, YH5-, and YH6-sensitized solar cells are almost similar, indicating that these three solar cells have similar kinetic processes for electron injection and charge collection (TiO2), a trend that agrees well with the earlier discussed femtosecond transient spectral data where ultrafast charge injection was witnessed. YH4, YH5, and YH6 carry exactly the same anchoring groups (acrylic acids), and as such, the charge collection efficiencies (ηcol) of these solar cells, which are a result of competition between charge recombination and collection, are likely to be similar. Based on the electron injection data, the electron injection rates for YH4, YH5, and YH6 are also similar, indicating that the push–pull effect is almost the same in YH5 and YH6.
Significant decomposition was observed for YH7 on the TiO2 surface. The dark green-coloured surface of the YH7-sensitized device became pale coloured after irradiation. Despite the decomposition, we were able to evaluate the photovoltaic performance of YH7-sensitized solar cells. A PCE up to 5.7% was obtained under optimized conditions. Although the PCE is lower than that of the YH6-sensitized solar cell, given the observed substantial degradation of YH7 upon irradiation within 20 min, this PCE value is still high.
The current and potential switching plots shown in Fig. 9c and d reveal quite reproducible results for YH4–YH6, which is indicative of their robustness. However, a noticeable lowering of current during successive switching of YH7 was observed due to photobleaching.

The dyes were adsorbed on the TiO2 surface using the optimal dye absorbing time (3 h) at the optimal dye concentration in the presence of the co-absorbent CDCA. The incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE%) spectra measured for selected dye-sensitized devices (note – not the best performing cells shown in Fig. 9a) are shown in Fig. 9b. The IPCE% (λ) values were derived from eqn (2), where LHE is the light harvesting efficiency, Φinj is the quantum yield of electron injection from the excited sensitizer into TiO2, and ηcol is the electron collection efficiency.

IPCE (λ) = LHE × Φinj × ηcol
(2)
In general, the IPCE% spectra of YH4, YH5, and YH6 display similar patterns with higher IPCE values (up to 60%) in the Soret band region and lower IPCE values (up to 40%) in the Q band region. These IPCE values are close to those of our previously reported benzoporphyrins. Not surprisingly, the IPCE values of YH7 are much lower than those of YH4–YH6 due to degradation of YH7 over long exposure to light.

We noticed that YH7 does not decompose in the dark, regardless of being in solution or in the solid state under ambient conditions, based on 1H NMR, UV-vis absorption data, and TLC analysis. Our UV-vis spectroscopic data also indicate that YH6 and YH7 have similar stability on the TiO2 surface under ambient conditions (Fig. S5). It is possible that YH7 degrades only under irradiation. To prove this point, YH6 and YH7 were irradiated under AM 1.5G illumination in MeOH/CHCl3 solution, and the degradation was tracked with UV-vis spectroscopy. Surprisingly, YH6 and YH7 displayed a similar level of stability (Fig. S6). Solar cell stability studies reveal that the PCE of the YH6 cell increased in 3 h and only slightly decreased after 20 h. In contrast, the PCE of the YH7 cell continually decreased within the 20 h window. It appears that YH7 degrades on the TiO2 surface upon illumination. It has been reported that the presence of triethanolamine (TEA) facilitates the photobleaching of porphyrins. It is likely that the tertiary amino groups on YH7 are the key factors causing this severe photodegradation. On the other hand, such photodegradation has not been reported for other porphyrin dyes carrying amino groups. The photodecomposition mechanism of YH7 remains unclear and is worthy of further investigation.


EIS experiments were carried out to estimate the interfacial charge transfer resistance in solar cells derived from YH4–YH7.Fig. 10 shows the Nyquist plots under dark and light conditions as two semicircles. The smaller semicircles in the high frequency range (left side of the plot) reflect the charge transfer at the counter electrode/electrolyte interface while the larger semicircles in the low frequency range (right side of the plot) correspond to the TiO2/porphyrin/(I−/I3−) electrolyte interface. The charge transfer resistance, obtained by building an equivalent circuit, of the counter electrode/electrolyte interface was found to be small under both light illumination and dark conditions (smaller radius for the semicircles). Interestingly, as revealed by the larger radius of the semi-circles, substantially lower Rct values were obtained for the TiO2/ZnP/redox interface under light illumination conditions compared to the value obtained under dark conditions (Table 3). Generally, a smaller Rct value for the TiO2/dye/redox interface can be attributed to the superior photo-regeneration ability which resulted in an increased light energy conversion efficiency. From the data shown in Table 3, a comparatively lower value for TiO2/YH4–YH6/redox interfaces was witnessed which agrees with the higher performance of the DSSCs derived from these compounds. For the TiO2/YH7/redox interface, the Rct value was comparatively higher. It should be pointed out that the magnitude and trends of Rct values obtained are comparable to those reported by us for other zinc porphyrin derived DSSCs, recorded under similar experimental conditions.

Dye
Conditions

R
ct (Ω cm−2)

YH4

Dark
106.9
Light
14.4

YH5

Dark
99.9
Light
11.7

YH6

Dark
119.8
Light
14.4

YH7

Dark
82.6
Light
22.5

A series of β-functionalized push–pull opp-dibenzoporphyrins (YH4–YH7) were designed, synthesized, and characterized by various physico-chemical techniques and were then evaluated for their performance in dye-sensitized solar cells. This series of compounds were designed to systematically investigate the key structural factors in designing β-functionalized π-extended porphyrins as new generations of sensitizers for dye-sensitized solar cells. A remarkable push–pull effect was observed for YH7. In this case, incorporation of the phenylethynyl bridge has proved to be an effective strategy to allow enhanced interaction of the electron-donating group and the electron-accepting group within the molecule. The installation of the strongly electron-donating tertiary amine group is also critical to cause the pronounced push–pull effect in YH7. DFT orbital calculations revealed significant orbital segregation, a much sought-after feature for dyes used in DSSCs. Femtosecond transient absorption studies provided evidence of efficient charge injection from the singlet excited state of zinc porphyrin to the conduction band of TiO2 for all studied porphyrin dyes (YH4–YH7). In particular, porphyrin YH7, bearing both the phenylethynyl bridge and the tertiary amine group, displayed much faster charge injection (6.3 ps) than YH4–YH6 (16.3–20.0 ps) due to the push–pull effect.

The photovoltaic performances of these benzoporphyrins were quite remarkable. A monobenzoporphyrin YH4 based solar cell gave a PCE of 4.9%. Upon fusion of one more benzene ring, the PCE of the opp-dibenzoporphyrin YH5 cell increased to 5.6%. Inclusion of the phenylethynyl bridge in YH6 further enhanced the PCE to 6.7%. Despite the much favourable properties brought by the push–pull effect, YH7 cells only achieved a PCE of 5.7%. The lower than expected PCE is attributed to the photoinduced degradation of YH7 on the TiO2 surface. Nevertheless, the high PCE of the YH6 cell (6.7%), which is comparable to that of the N719 cell (7.4%) under similar conditions, suggests the great potential of this type of π-extended porphyrins. Investigation into structural factors causing and reducing the illumination-induced photodegradation of these types of push–pull porphyrins is currently underway.

There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences under Award (DE-SC0016766). Our gratitude goes out to Dr Guido Verbeck and the Laboratory for Imaging Mass Spectrometry at the University of North Texas for MALDI-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometry data. We thank Dr Yiming Cao and Dr Michael Grätzel for obtaining some preliminary DSSC data.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta01846h
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019