 DOI: 10.1039/D0NJ04619A
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2021, 45, 788-795


N.
Heshmati
,

M. R.
Mohammadi
*,

P.
Abachi
 and 

S. O.
Martinez-Chapa


Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Sharif University of Technology, Azadi St., Tehran, Iran. E-mail: mohammadi@sharif.edu

Tecnologico de Monterrey, Escuela de Ingeniería y Ciencias, Campus Puebla, Vía Atlixcáyotl 2301, Reserva Territorial Atlixcáyotl, CP 72453 Puebla, Pue, Mexico

School of Engineering and Sciences, Tecnologico de Monterrey, Ave. Eugenio Garza Sada 2501, Monterrey 64849, NL, Mexico

Received
16th September 2020
, Accepted 9th December 2020
First published on 9th December 2020
Herein, we demonstrate a new fabrication strategy for low-cost and stable-operation perovskite solar cells (PSCs) suitable for commercialization. This is performed by fabrication of the device under ambient conditions using a Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(Br0.17I0.83)3 formulation as the mixed cation and halide (MCH) perovskite and CuInS2 (CIS) as the inorganic hole transporting layer. The deposited MCH perovskite with uniform, compact and smooth microstructure containing equiaxed large grains showed excellent thermal and structural stability under intense conditions at 85 °C for 2 h in humid air (i.e., 45% relative humidity). Moreover, it had higher phosphorescence emission, absorption and bandgap energy than the conventional MAPbI3 due to efficient conversion of PbI2 to the perovskite compound, as further confirmed by XRD analysis. Photovoltaic measurements under operational conditions revealed that the MCH-based PSC showed a 27% higher photoconversion efficiency compared with the control device composed of MAPbI3 caused by less charge recombination. The CIS-based MCH device aged for 30 days at 25 °C and 40% humidity retained 91% of the maximum efficiency with a low standard deviation of all photovoltaic parameters, indicating excellent potential for industrialization.

During the last decade, organometal halide perovskites have attracted significant attention due to their prominent optoelectronic properties such as direct bandgap, large absorption coefficients and long diffusion length. Solar cell devices based on these perovskites are a pioneering technology in the solar energy conversion field, exhibiting an outstanding power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 22 and 25% in the form of tandem devices. In their most common version, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are composed of a layer structure formed on a transparent electrode made of a thin layer of nanoparticulate titania as an electron transport layer (ETL), an organometal halide perovskite layer (i.e., MAPbI3 and FAPbI3 as the conventional perovskites), an organic hole transporting layer (HTL) (i.e., Spiro-OMeTAD as the standard one) and a top gold electrode. However, there are concerns related to the degradation of the components upon association with moisture, heat, oxygen, UV light and other potential factors, limiting their application in operation. Diverse strategies have been proposed to improve the stability of the components. Amending the chemical composition of the perovskite by modifying or combining its anions and cations is an effective mechanism for improving its electronic properties and stability simultaneously. Due to the instability and volatility of the organic components of MAPbI3 and FAPbI3, their partial or complete replacement with more stable inorganic ones such as Cs has been reported. The latter has an ionic radius of 1.81 Å, which is considerably smaller than that of MA (2.70 Å) or FA (2.79 Å). Not only does the inorganic stable CsPbI3 perovskite crystallize at a high temperature of 310 °C, but also its corresponding cell shows lower efficiency than conventional PSCs. In addition, by decreasing the temperature and exposing to ambient air, after several minutes CsPbI3 transforms to the non-perovskite yellow phase. Therefore, mixed cation perovskites such as Csx(MA0.17FA0.83)100−xPbI3 have been presented through composition engineering for enhancing the stability of the device by further tuning the bandgap and achieving an effective tolerance factor to decrease the t value and drive the crystal structure towards a cubic stable phase.9,10 Moreover, mixed cations provide a suitable path to tune the bandgap to near the infrared range, which enhances the absorption of light. The cation size and content control the network symmetry and lead to the change of the optoelectronic properties. For example, higher contents of cesium result in phase segregation and a rapid decrease in thermal stability. Therefore, the quantity of cesium is controlled in the range 0.1–0.2 to block cesium iodide phase development and decrease the trap density, resulting in an increase in the PCE. In addition, the partial replacement of FA by Cs gained better moisture stability compared to the FAPbI3 perovskite. It is also known that adopting different halides into the perovskite structure gives rise to a shift in the bandgap; the smaller the ionic radius of the halogen, the higher the bandgap of the perovskite. Moreover, the morphology and microstructure of the perovskite are dependent upon the halide. In the molecular formula MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 the atomic radius of bromide (1.96 Å) is slightly smaller than that of iodide (2.20 Å), leading to higher diffusion of Br− in the solvent and controlling the growth kinetics of perovskite grains. Indeed, PSCs with the highest reported PCEs, using the antisolvent method, have mixed cation and halide compositions. In the present work, we follow the same approach using the mixed cation and halide (MCH) Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95 Pb(Br0.17I0.83)3 formulation for fabrication of mesoscopic PSCs.

Generally, PSCs with high efficiency are constructed utilizing organic materials, such as Spiro-OMeTAD, as HTLs. This material is expensive to synthesize or to acquire, it has limited conductivity and necessitates the utilization of additives and its stability is questioned. For this reason, other possible inorganic HTLs have been recently intensively studied due to their low-cost and higher hole mobility and stability. CuInS2 (CIS) has recently been employed as a promising inorganic HTL due to its suitable bandgap for the solar spectrum, low toxicity and high extinction coefficient, although the PCEs of its cells are lower than those of Spiro-OMeTAD based devices. Such favorable characteristics of CIS enabled us to construct low-cost and stable PSCs in this work. All cells were fabricated and characterized under ambient conditions of 40% relative humidity to further reduce the device cost and to evaluate their long-term stability.

Fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) was purchased from Solaronix (resistance 7 Ω per square). Titanium(IV) tetraisopropoxide (TTIP, 97%), hydrochloric acid (HCl, 37%), N,N-dimethyl formamide (DMF, 99%), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, 99.9%), isopropyl alcohol (IPA), chlorobenzene (CB, 99.9%), methylammonium (MAI, 99%), formamidinium iodide (FAI, 99%), lead iodide (PbI2, 99.99%), methylammonium bromide (MABr, 99%), lead(II) bromide (PbBr2, 99.99%) and cesium iodide (CsI, 99.9%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and all of the reagents were used without further purification except CB, which was purified.


FTO substrates were etched with Zn powder and hydrochloric acid, sequentially cleaned with detergent, deionized water, acetone and ethanol in an ultrasonic bath and finally treated under UV-ozone. A compact sol–gel derived TiO2 layer as a blocking layer was spin coated on FTO substrates at 2000 rpm for 30 s, followed by annealing at 500 °C for 30 min. A TiO2 sol was prepared by adding a solution of 2.53 mL ethanol containing 35 μL HCl (37% in water) into a mixture of 369 μL TTIP and 2.53 mL ethanol. Subsequently, mesoscopic TiO2 with a thickness of ∼400 nm was spin coated at 4000 rpm for 20 s using commercial TiO2 paste diluted in ethanol. The deposited film was dried at 100 °C for 15 min and calcined at 500 °C for 30 min to eliminate the additives from the mesoscopic film.

A MAPbI3 perovskite film, as a control cell, was deposited by a sequential two-step method. First, 70 μL of 1.5 M PbI2 solution in a mixed solvent of DMF and DMSO (4:1) was spun onto the TiO2 mesoporous film, which was spin coated at 6500 rpm for 5 s, followed by annealing at 70 °C for 30 min. In the second step, the perovskite material was formed on substrates including PbI2 by spin-coating 200 μL MAI solution (8 mg mL−1 in IPA) at 4000 rpm for 20 s after 120 s loading time. The MAPbI3 perovskite film was finally annealed at 70 °C for 30 min.
The mixed cation and halide (MCH) perovskite was prepared according to a procedure reported by Saliba et al. Briefly, FAI, PbI2, MABr and PbBr2 were dissolved in a mixed solvent of DMF and DMSO (4:1). Then CsI, predissolved as a 1.5 M stock solution in DMSO, was added to the mixed perovskite precursor to achieve the desired triple cation composition containing PbI2 (1.1 M), FAI (1 M), MABr (0.2 M), PbBr2 (0.2 M) and CsI (0.05 M). The perovskite layer was deposited by spin coating in a two step program at 1000 and 5000 rpm for 10 s and 20 s, respectively. 250 μL of CB as an anti-solvent was injected on the spinning substrate 5 s prior to the end of the program. The Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)Pb(Br0.17I0.83)3 perovskite film was finally annealed at 100 °C for 1 h. CuInS2 (CIS) ink (25 mg mL−1 in chloroform) was deposited on the perovskite film by spin coating at 3000 rpm for 10 s, followed by drying at 100 °C for 10 min. The coating and drying cycles were repeated sevaral times to achieve a CIS film as an inorganic HTL with desired thickness. It should be reiterated that all the above procedures for device fabrication were carried out under ambient air conditions of 40% relative humidity. Finally, a gold top electrode was thermally evaporated onto the HTL. The detailed process for fabrication of PSCs based on conventional MAPbI3 and mixed cation and halide Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(Br0.17I0.83)3 perovskites is schematically illustrated in Fig. 1. The MAPbI3 perovskite was prepared by a two-step deposition process, whereas the MCH perovskite was formed by a one-step method.

The films were characterized in terms of morphology and microstructure using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) TESCAN-Mira III, in terms of crystal structure and phase composition using an X-ray diffraction (XRD) diffractometer PANalytical X’Pert Pro MPD, with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å), and in terms of optical absorption using an ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectrum PerkinElmer Lambda 25 spectrophotometer. Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the perovskite films were recorded using an AvaSpec 2048 TEC spectrophotometer. The photovoltaic performance of the devices was measured using a solar simulator (SIM-1000 and calibrated by a Thorlabs photodiode) under AM 1.5 (100 mW cm−2) simulated light radiation, and the active area of the cells was defined to be 0.09 cm2 using a mask. The current–voltage characteristics were recorded using a Keithley 2400 source meter in reverse scan mode from 1.1 to −0.1 V with a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. It should be noted that each batch included five devices and the average values were reported.


We studied the optical characteristics and radiative recombination of charge-carriers of the perovskite films through their absorption and photoluminescence (PL) spectra in the visible and ultraviolet regions, as shown in Fig. 2. The absorption edge of the MAPbI3 perovskite was detected around 783 nm, while it was about 777 nm for the MCH perovskite (Fig. 2a), indicating an approximately 6 nm blue shift by introduction of the Cs and FA cations and Br halide. Furthermore, a significant increase in the absorption of the MCH perovskite was attributed to efficient conversion of PbI2 to the perovskite compound, which is consistent with the results of XRD analysis. Organometal halide perovskites emit substantial photoluminescence, which depends on the cation and halide composition. As illustrated in Fig. 2b, the MCH perovskite had higher phosphorescence emission across the 700–800 nm wavelength range than the conventional MAPbI3 perovskite, indicating a uniform and compact morphology containing large grain sizes of the MCH perovskite and enhanced light absorption and charge transfer to the ETL and HTL films. This is in accordance with high efficiency of PSCs based on mixed cation and halide perovskites.

We detected the emission peak of the MAPbI3 perovskite with a direct band gap at 770 nm which can be attributed to the recombination of the near band-to-band. A blue shift by ∼5 nm was also observed in the PL spectrum of the MCH perovskite, which is consistent with that reported previously. The bandgap of the perovskites was calculated by linear fits of the absorption edge (Tauc plots), as shown in Fig. 2c. The MCH perovskite showed a higher bandgap energy than the conventional MAPbI3 perovskite (1.61 vs. 1.58 eV) caused by a reduction in the effective radius of the A-site cation, resulting in a shrinkage of the network and an increase in the bandgap energy. Although such a blue shift may reduce the maximum theoretical photocurrent density of the cell, it is probable to gain higher voltages and suppress charge recombination using materials with larger bandgap absorption.
We further evaluated the thermal stability of the perovskite films under intense conditions at 85 °C for 2 h in humid air (i.e., 45% relative humidity), as shown in Fig. 3. The MAPbI3 perovskite presented thermal and structural instability caused by decomposing to PbI2 as identified by the decreased absorption spectrum, shifted absorption edge from 785 to 520 nm and change to a visible yellow color. Interestingly, superior thermal and structural stability were achieved for the MCH perovskite with a comparatively stable absorption edge and spectrum, retaining the dark black color.

Fig. 4 shows X-ray diffraction (XRD) data of the deposited MAPbI3 and MCH perovskites on the FTO/TiO2 substrate. Both compounds exhibited a typical tetragonal perovskite crystal structure with the strongest peak at 2θ = 14.1° corresponding to the (110) plane. The peaks detected at 2θ = 26.5° and 37.8° are assigned to mesoporous TiO2 and the FTO substrate, respectively. For MAPbI3 (Fig. 4a), we observed an incomplete conversion of the yellow phase perovskite to the photoactive black cubic phase due to the presence of a PbI2 peak detected at 2θ = 12.7°, resulting in a reduction in the photovoltaic performance of the cell. Upon addition of the CS and FA cations and Br halide (Fig. 4b), not only did the yellow phase and the PbI2 peak disappear completely, but also the crystallinity and orientation of the perovskite were enhanced.
In Fig. 5, we show top view FESEM images of the subsequent layers making PSC devices, including compact TiO2, mesoporous TiO2, and MAPbI3 and MCH perovskites. Both compact- and meso-TiO2 films (Fig. 5a and b) have a highly homogeneous morphology containing nanometric spherical particles, being in the range 20–25 nm for meso-TiO2. It is clear that the size of the perovskite particles is remarkably affected by the incorporation of the CS and FA cations and Br halide in the perovskite precursors. The average grain size of the MAPbI3 perovskite is in the range of 500–700 nm, whereas it is in the range of 1000–1200 nm for the MCH perovskite (Fig. 5c and d). The inset of Fig. 5d shows EDS mapping of Cs, indicating a uniform distribution of cesium within the MCH perovskite.
The larger grain size is expected to increase the charge output efficiency and suppress the recombination at the grain boundaries. Moreover, we can observe that the introduction of the CS and FA cations and Br halide leads to the improvement of the perovskite morphology with more uniform, compact and smooth microstructure, compared to the conventional MAPbI3 perovskite. Such a continuous, flat and full coverage MCH perovskite with larger crystals can guarantee the functioning of the PSC device by preventing direct contact between the ETL and HTL. Therefore, the mixed cation and halide formulation has a positive impact not only on tailoring the perovskite film morphology, but also on converting the residual PbI2 into perovskite material.
The current density–voltage (J–V) curves and photovoltaic characteristics (i.e., open circuit voltage, short circuit current, fill factor and PCE) of fresh PSCs composed of the MAPbI3 perovskite (as the control cell) and MCH perovskite are illustrated in Fig. 6. It should be reiterated that all devices were constructed under ambient conditions of 40% relative humidity. The MAPbI3-based PSC, as the control device, exhibits a JSC of 21.30 mA cm−2, VOC of 0.89 V and FF of 0.447, resulting in an overall PCE of 8.47%. The incorporation of the Cs and FA cations and Br halide improved the photovoltaic characteristics of the PSC device. This result is in agreement with those reported in the literature, where mixed cations and halides in the perovskite composition improved the cell efficiency, thanks to greater diffusion coefficients, diffusion lengths and lifetimes of electron–hole pairs in the MCH perovskite absorbers. In addition, the FESEM graphs depict that the grain size of the perovskite film was remarkably increased by the incorporation of the mixed cations and halide within the perovskite precursors. The lower the grain boundary content, the higher the diffusion length. In addition, all fabricated devices showed good reproducibility due to low experimental error of the photovoltaic parameters (inset of Fig. 6b).
Therefore, the MCH-based cell with a JSC of 23.17 mA cm−2 and VOC of 0.99 V showed a 27% higher photoconversion efficiency (i.e., PCE of 10.78%) compared with the MAPbI3-based device. Such an enhancement in VOC and JSC can be assigned to the higher light absorption (see Fig. 2a), formation of a uniform and smooth polycrystalline film with equiaxed large grains with reduced traps (see Fig. 5d) and converting the residual PbI2 into a perovskite material (see Fig. 4). Since the devices were constructed under ambient air conditions using an inorganic HTL (i.e., CIS), the highest achieved PCE in the present work is lower than those of cells fabricated in a glove box using standard HTLs (i.e., Spiro-OMeTAD) with a PCE beyond 22%. The main impact of CIS can be seen in the FF drop of the cells.
We studied the long-term stability of high performance MAPbI3- and MCH-based devices in an air atmosphere held at room temperature and 40% humidity, as shown in Fig. 7. A J–V scan was recorded periodically up to 30 days to extract the observed photovoltaic parameters of the champion devices. It is evident that all photovoltaic characteristics of the control device made of the MAPbI3 perovskite undergo a rapid deterioration after 15 days of cell operation, while the MCH-based device is much more stable up to 30 days. The intense drop of JSC for the control cell can be related to low light absorption caused by the α to δ phase transformation of the perovskite absorber. The greater the δ phase content, the greater the recombination and the reduction in the FF and PCE. Therefore, the fresh MAPbI3-based device presented a highest performance of 8.74% with a rapid drop in efficiency in 7 days and 96% loss in 30 days. For the MCH-based device, its efficiency demonstrated an increase of about 1% in the first 3 days, reaching 11.55% (Fig. 7e), and then followed by some loss of efficiency, finally stabilizing at about 10.52%.
Such remarkable stability of the MCH-based PSC can be attributed to the stability of the α phase and the uniform, compact and smooth microstructure with large grains of the perovskite layer. This implies that introduction of the Cs and FA cations and Br halide can significantly enhance the cubic phase stability and delay the degradation of the perovskite, retaining about 91% of the maximum device efficiency. The addition of Br− promotes the charge transfer performance by bandgap tuning. Furthermore, the coexistence of Cs+ and Br− not only leads to an increase in the grain size of the perovskite, but also induces a contraction of the perovskite crystal structure, enhancing its moisture resistance.

Fig. 8 shows the statistics of MCH-based PSCs by aging for 30 days under ambient temperature (∼25 °C) and humidity (40%). We observe small deviation of the photovoltaic parameters, verifying good reproducibility of CIS-based HTL device. Therefore, the presented method will open a new concept for up-scaling low-cost efficient and stable PSC devices.

In summary, we report a facile method for construction of stable PSC devices under ambient conditions using the mixed Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(Br0.17I0.83)3 formulation and an inorganic HTL made of CuInS2. The impact of Cs and FA cation and Br halide incorporation into the conventional MAPbI3 perovskite on its physical, optical and photovoltaic characteristics is studied. The thermal and operational stability of a CIS-based MCH device are also investigated under intense (i.e., at 85 °C and 45% humidity) and ambient (i.e., 25 °C and 40% humidity) conditions, respectively. Adding the mixed cations and halide suppresses yellow phase impurities and induces a highly crystalline uniform and compact perovskite film with large grains which reduce charge recombination. Furthermore, an increase in the absorption and bandgap energy of the MCH perovskite with a blue shift in the PL and absorption spectra is observed caused by a reduction in the effective radius of the A-site cation and a shrinkage of the crystal structure. The MCH device based on the inorganic CIS HTL shows superior thermal and operational stability up to 30 days, retaining about 91% of the maximum device efficiency with low standard deviation of the photovoltaic parameters. This indicates that there still is enormous potential in development of the presented method using CuInS2 as an encouraging HTL for up-scaling and industrialisation of PSC devices.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2021