 DOI: 10.1039/D1CE00914A
(Paper)
CrystEngComm, 2021, 23, 8553-8562


Fang
Wen
,

Liuwen
Tian
,

Wenfeng
Zhang
*,

Xiangqing
Zhou
,

Puan
Lin
,

Shenghou
Zhou
,

Lin
Du
,

Tian
Hou
,

Wenjing
Yu
,

Lang
Yu
,

Gongtao
Duan
,

Changtao
Peng
,

Zhu
Ma
,

Meng
Zhang
,

Haijin
Li
 and 

Yuelong
Huang


Institute of Photovoltaic, Southwest Petroleum University, Chengdu 610500, China

Received
13th July 2021
, Accepted 1st November 2021
First published on 2nd November 2021
To date, mixed-cation lead mixed-halide perovskite materials are the mainstream choice to serve as light-absorption layers when fabricating single-junction perovskite solar cells (PSCs) and PSC-based tandem solar cells with high efficiency and good stability. However, the universally adopted thermal annealing protocol (∼100 °C for 30, 60, or even 90 min) has issues when used for multi-cation mixed-halide perovskites, such as being time-consuming and involving the potentially severe loss of organic components from the perovskite surface. Herein, we develop a high-temperature inverted annealing strategy for post-treating CsFAMA triple-cation mixed-halide perovskite films. The inverted annealing method, with a heating time of only 5 min at 150 °C with the film side placed face-down, is demonstrated to exhibit superiority when compared with the generally adopted annealing approach with the film side placed face-up. Upon inverted annealing, the perovskite film shows significantly enlarged grains together with markedly reduced defect states, especially at its surface, arising from slowed solvent evaporation and the suppressed volatilization of organic halide components. Corresponding photovoltaic devices achieved a highest efficiency of 20.4% with a stabilized power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 19.8%. Furthermore, we demonstrate that this annealing strategy is also applicable to other perovskite materials, providing an alternative method for efficiently preparing high-quality perovskite films.

Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have drawn great attention as an overwhelming and promising form of photovoltaic technology due to their solution-processable fabrication methods, tunable absorption edges, flexibility, and high power-conversion efficiencies (PCEs). State-of-the-art single-junction PSCs have reached certified PCEs of over 25%, rivaling the most efficient single-crystal silicon solar cells (26.1%). This is primarily thanks to the excellent optoelectronic properties of organic–inorganic metal halide perovskites, which feature a characteristic ABX3 3D crystal structure, where A denotes a methylammonium, formamidinium, or cesium cation (MA+ = CH3NH3+, FA+ = HC(NH2)2+, or Cs+), B is a lead or tin cation (Pb2+ or Sn2+), and X is a halide anion (I−, Br−, or Cl−).

To date, mixed-cation lead mixed-halide perovskite materials represent the mainstream choice to serve as a light absorber layer when fabricating high-performance single-junction PSCs and perovskite-photovoltaic-based tandem solar cells. This is because these hybrid perovskite compounds generally exhibit better characteristics, e.g., higher stabilities, longer carrier diffusion lengths, lower trap state densities, better crystallization properties, and tunable bandgaps, in comparison to pure ABX3 materials such as MAPbI3, FAPbI3, and CsPbI3. Furthermore, there is a general consensus that obtaining high-quality perovskite film with a low defect density, large grain size, and high crystallinity is substantially crucial when fabricating high-performance photovoltaic devices. To this end, considerable endeavors have been made relating to the perovskite-layer deposition process, during which a thermal annealing process is generally indispensable. Currently, heating at 100 °C for about 30 min, 60 min, or even 90 min on a hotplate with the film placed face-up is the most widely used thermal annealing protocol for multi-cation mixed-halide precursor perovskite films. However, such an annealing approach, hereafter referred to as normal annealing, exhibits some deficiencies. For example, it is time-consuming, therefore being incompatible with roll-to-roll and other high-throughput manufacturing techniques when aiming at practical fabrication. In addition, organic halide components can readily escape from the perovskite crystals under thermal stress, resulting in the formation of some point defects at the film surface and grain boundaries, such as undercoordinated Pb2+ ions, and I and MA vacancies. Most of these defects act as nonradiative recombination centers, thus restricting the performance of solar cells.
Increasing the annealing temperature is a straightforward approach for shortening the annealing time. For example, Kim et al. reported a high-temperature annealing process on a short timescale, in which the FAMA hybrid precursor film was directly heated at 400 °C for only 4 s with the film side facing up. The obtained perovskite film could enable corresponding photovoltaic devices to achieve high PCEs, even exceeding 20%. However, such a high-temperature annealing process with temperatures of over 200 °C is not applicable when fabricating flexible PSCs because commonly used flexible substrates are mostly polymer-based materials, which are typically unable to withstand high-temperature fabrication processes (higher than 150 °C). In addition, these temperatures can lead to the rapid volatilization of organic halide components and induce a mass of defects and lattice stress in the perovskite film. As an alternative option, putting the precursor film upside-down on the hotplate is an effective and facile annealing strategy, hereafter referred to as inverted annealing, that can observably enlarge the grain size within a short period of time and simultaneously suppress the evaporation of organic halide; it was first reported by the Zou group for post-treating perovskite layers. Soon afterwards, Ma and co-workers independently reported this annealing approach and gave insight into the growth mechanism of perovskite films during the annealing process. However, it is noted that the two works both focused on MAPbI3 instead of multi-cation mixed-halide perovskites. Additionally, the treatment time was still relatively long (10 min), and the optimized photovoltaics exhibited stabilized power outputs of less than 18%. As such, there is much room for improvement.
Herein, we develop a relatively high-temperature (150 °C) inverted annealing strategy for the post-treatment of hybrid perovskite films. The annealing conditions are systematically optimized. This method not only significantly shortens the annealing time to only 5 min or less compared with durations of 30 or 60 min during conventional normal annealing (100 °C), but it also observably improves the film quality, with much larger grain sizes and a lower trap state density in contrast with control film obtained via corresponding normal annealing at 150 °C. The photovoltaic performance of solar cells fabricated based on the inverted annealed perovskite film is distinctly improved. The target CsFAMA perovskite cells achieve a maximum PCE of 20.4% with a 19.8% stabilized efficiency, in comparison with a maximum PCE of 19.2% for the control devices under reverse scan conditions. In addition, we demonstrate that this high-temperature inverted annealing approach is a universal and effective post-treatment strategy, offering an alternative method for efficiently preparing high-quality perovskite films.

SnO2 colloidal aqueous solution was received from Alfa Aesar (tin(IV) oxide). Lead iodide (PbI2), lead bromine (PbBr2), formamidinium iodide (FAI), methylammonium iodide (MAI), methylammonium bromine (MABr), cesium iodide (CsI), spiro-OMeTAD, bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide lithium salt (Li-TFSI), and 4-tert-butylpyridine (tBP) were all purchased from Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp. Organic solvents, including N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), chlorobenzene (CB), and acetonitrile (ACN), were brought from Sigma Aldrich. All chemicals and reagents were used as received.

The Cs0.05(FA0.83MA0.17)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 (denoted as CsFAMA) perovskite precursor solution was prepared via mixing FAI (1.0 M), PbI2 (1.1 M), PbBr2 (0.2 M), and MABr (0.2 M) in mixed DMF/DMSO solvent (4/1, v/v). Then, a certain volume of CsI/DMSO solution (1.5 M) was added to achieve the nominal composition. The obtained solution was stirred at 60 °C for two h before use.
The MAPbI3 precursor solution was prepared via dissolving MAI (1.2 M) and PbI2 (1.2 M) in DMF solvent, followed by stirring at 60 °C for several hours before use.
The hole transport material (HTM) solution was obtained via mixing 72.3 mg of spiro-OMeTAD, 17.5 μL of LiTFSI solution (520 mg mL−1 in ACN), and 28.8 μL of tBP in 1 mL of CB, followed by stirring at room temperature for one hour before use.

Patterned indium tin oxide (ITO) glass was cleaned via sequential sonication in ultrapure water, ethanol, acetone, isopropanol, and ethanol. As-cleaned ITO glass was dried under N2 gas flow and then treated via ultraviolet-ozone for 15 min. The tin oxide (SnO2) electron transport layer (ETL) was deposited via spin-coating deionized-water-diluted SnO2 colloid solution (7:1 in volume) at a speed of 3000 rpm for 30 s and heating at 150 °C for 30 min under ambient conditions.

To prepare the CsFAMA triple-cation hybrid perovskite film, the as-prepared CsFAMA precursor solution was dropped onto the ozone-ultraviolet-treated SnO2/ITO glass substrate and spin-coated via a two-consecutive-step program at 800 rpm for 10 s (200 rpm s−1) and 4000 rpm for 32 s (2000 rpm s−1). In the last 10 s of the procedure, 180 μL of CB was poured onto the spinning film. To carry out inverted annealing, the as-cast film was firstly heated at 60 °C for dozens of seconds with the film side facing up. Subsequently, the sample was transferred to a 150 °C hotplate with the film side facing down and it was maintained here for a certain period of time. It is worth noting that a piece of weighing paper was used to cover the hotplate beforehand at the place where the perovskite film was placed to avoid pollution from the hotplate. Normal annealing treatment was conducted in parallel with inverted treatment under the same conditions.
To prepare MAPbI3 perovskite film, we spin-coated the MAPbI3 precursor solution at 1200 rpm for 10 s (600 rpm s−1) and 4000 rpm for 40 s (2000 rpm s−1). During the last 5 s of the second step, 100 μL of CB was quickly dropped onto the spinning substrate. After this, the obtained film was directly annealed on a hotplate at 150 °C for 5 min with the film side facing up (normal annealing) or facing down (inverted annealing). Likewise, a piece of weighing paper was used as an interlayer between the hotplate and the sample.
After cooling down to room temperature, the HTL solution was spin-coated onto the perovskite film surface at 4000 rpm for 30 s. We note that the entire perovskite layer and HTL fabrication processes were conducted in a N2-filled glovebox. Afterwards, samples were transferred into a dry box under air and kept there for around ten hours. Finally, 100 nm silver electrodes were added via thermal evaporation. The active area of each cell was defined as 0.16 cm2.

Top-view and cross-sectional SEM images of perovskite layers were obtained using a scanning electron microscope (FEI INSPECT F50, USA). AFM measurements were performed using an atomic force microscope (AFM, KEYSIGHT Technologies 7500). The surface potentials of perovskite films were simultaneously detected in the dark using a Kelvin probe in AC mode. XRD patterns were acquired using an X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (PANalytical B.V., X'Pert Pro MPD). UV–vis absorption spectra were recorded using a Shimadzu UV 2600 spectrophotometer. Steady-state PL and TRPL characterization was carried out using an Edinburgh FLS 980 spectrophotometer. A xenon lamp (468 nm) and a 405 nm pulsed laser were used as excitation sources for PL and TRPL measurements, respectively. The following biexponential decay function was used to fit the TRPL decay spectra: R(t) = B1exp(−t/τ1) + B2exp(−t/τ2). The average decay lifetime (τave) was calculated using the equation τave = (B1τ12 + B2τ22)/(B1τ1 + B2τ2). We measured the I–V curves of photovoltaic devices under ambient conditions using an electrochemical workstation (Shanghai Chenhua) under AM1.5G illumination achieved using an LED solar simulator (WAVELABS, SUNS-220, Germany). A monocrystalline silicon reference cell (Oriel Sol 3A, USA) was employed to calibrate the simulated irradiation. The working area of a cell was defined with a square mask of 0.09 cm2. The voltage scanning rate was 100 mV s−1 with a scanning range of −0.2–1.2 V. The steady-state PCE was measured via recording the current output over time under the bias voltage acquired from the maximum power point of the J–V curve. EQE measurements were performed using an EQE system (PVE 300, Bentham, Inc.).


We used a one-step spin-coating method to prepare CsFAMA triple-cation lead mixed-halide perovskite layers, in which chlorobenzene was employed as the antisolvent. Subsequently, the as-cast precursor films were immediately heated at 60 °C for dozens of seconds followed by two different annealing approaches, i.e., normal annealing and inverted annealing at 150 °C (see Fig. 1). The annealing durations of the perovskite films on the two different hot plates were carefully optimized based on inverted annealing. We demonstrated that annealing for 50 s at 60 °C and 5 min at 150 °C is desirable.

The pre-annealing process at a relatively low temperature is essential prior to high-temperature inverted annealing. In this step, unwanted excess solvent components, i.e., N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), are gently volatilized within a certain period of time. The residual amount of solvent in pristine film has a significant impact on the morphology and optoelectronic properties of the final perovskite layers. The top-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images displayed in Fig. S1 exhibit the morphology variations of the inverted annealed films with respect to the pre-annealing time. We note that the inverted annealing time of these samples was fixed at 10 min. The grain size dramatically decreases from approximately 2 μm to around 0.3 μm upon prolonging the pre-heating duration from 10 s to over 70 s. However, when the pre-heating time is as short as 10 s, superabundant levels of solvent components, especially DMSO, existed in the film, significantly facilitating secondary grain growth and inducing the formation of pinholes during the inverted annealing process. This is similar to a previous result reported by Zhu et al. Pinholes still occur in the perovskite layers obtained after 30 s of pre-annealing, but they are completely avoided when the pre-annealing time is 50 s or more.
To examine which film has the best photoelectric performance, we fabricated corresponding photovoltaic cells. Representative current density–voltage (J–V) curves and relevant photovoltaic metrics from each cell are shown in Fig. S2 and Table S1, respectively. It is obvious that the device correlated with 50 s of pre-annealing exhibits higher PCE and VOC values than the other cells, suggesting that a pre-annealing duration of 50 s at 60 °C is advisable. Furthermore, we investigated the influence of the inverted annealing time (annealing temperature: 150 °C) on the perovskite film morphology and device performance. Based on the SEM images presented in Fig. S3, we observe mild and severe thermally induced degradation in the CsFAMA films annealed for 30 min and 60 min, respectively. By contrast, the film annealed for 5 min exhibited good morphology. The photovoltaic performances of corresponding cells confirm that the film heated for 5 min film is superior to its counterparts (Fig. S4 and Table S2). Therefore, a process involving pre-annealing for 50 s at 60 °C and inverted annealing for 5 min at 150 °C was adopted.
The top-view and cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images shown in Fig. 2 give a comparison of the microstructures of the CsFAMA films obtained via the two above-mentioned annealing routes. The grain sizes of the normal annealing film are around 300 nm, while the inverted annealing film exhibits significantly enlarged grains with a majority being over 500 nm. The large grains significantly reduce the grain boundaries in the perpendicular direction of the perovskite layer, as demonstrated in the cross-sectional SEM image in Fig. 2d, compared with Fig. 2c, which enables the more efficient transport of photoactivated charge carriers and the lower occurrence of trap-mediated non-radiative charge recombination.
Further characterization was carried out to further examine the changes occurring in the CsFAMA thin film upon inverted thermal annealing in contrast with corresponding normal annealing. Fig. 3a and b displays atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of the two kinds of perovskite layers. It is clear that the inverted annealed film exhibits a distinctly augmented grain size with a marginally increased roughness value for the layer surface, which is consistent with the above SEM results.
Furthermore, we performed ultraviolet–visible (UV–vis) spectroscopy measurements to investigate the absorbance variations between the two films. Interestingly, the absorption spectrum of the target film shows little difference compared with its counterpart, with only slightly increased absorbance over the wavelength range of 500 to 750 nm (Fig. 3c). The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns (Fig. 3d) of the two perovskite layers are similar and exhibit typical diffraction peaks of CsFAMA triple-cation mixed-halide perovskite film. The full-width-at-half-maximum (FWHM) and diffraction intensity values of the main XRD peaks for the CsFAMA perovskite films are presented in Table S3, suggesting that the crystallinity and crystal sizes of the two perovskite films are comparable. Here, we would like to note that the crystal size of a perovskite film is different from the apparent grain size. In addition, we observe that the diffraction peak of the PbI2 phase at 12.6° of the target film shows a lower intensity in comparison to the control film (Table S3). This indicates that the inverted annealing approach can retard the thermal induced degradation rate of the perovskite layer in contrast to the commonly adopted normal annealing method, owing to the volatilization of organic halide components in the perovskite film surface being markedly suppressed during the inverted annealing process (as the loss of organic halide components leads to the formation of a PbI2 phase in the perovskite film). We note that this is a significant advantage of the inverted annealing strategy compared with the normal annealing method because it is beneficial for the reduction of surface defects in the perovskite film.
In addition, we employed steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved PL measurements to investigate the photoinitiated free carrier recombination behavior and photoelectric properties of the as-prepared CsFAMA films. The characterized perovskite films were deposited on non-conducting glass substrates and the PL signals were recorded from the perovskite layer sides in reflection geometry. The PL emission intensity of the inverted annealing film exhibits significant enhancement compared with the normal one, implying much better film quality with the reduction of sub-bandgap trap states (Fig. 3e). The TRPL spectra, presenting information about the charge recombination dynamics in the films, are shown in Fig. 3f. In general, TRPL decay can be well fitted using a biexponential decay function (see the Experimental section), giving a fast decay lifetime (τ1) and a slow decay lifetime (τ2). The detailed fitting results are summarized in Table S4. It is widely believed that τ1 can be assigned to a nonradiative recombination process, while τ2 is dominated by the recombination of free carriers in the radiative channel. Furthermore, the average decay lifetime (τave) can be readily calculated based on the given weight fractions (see the experimental section). Here, the τ1 values of the normal film and inverted film are 4.9 and 4.2 ns, with relative amplitude fractions of 4.1% and 2.6%, respectively. Additionally, the corresponding films exhibit slow decay lifetimes of 173.1 and 235.1 ns and correlated weight fractions of 95.9% and 97.4%, respectively. Therefore, the obtained τave value of the inverted film is 235.0 ns, which is apparently longer than that of the control film (172.9 ns). The increased decay lifetime demonstrates higher photoelectric quality and a lower trap state density in the perovskite film upon inverted annealing in comparison to normal annealing, confirming the above steady-state PL results.
In addition, we performed Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) measurements to probe the surface potentials of the two types of perovskite films (Fig. 3g and h). As a whole, the contact potential difference (CPD), i.e., the surface potential, of the inverted annealing film dramatically increased compared to the normal annealing one. The average CPD values of the control and target perovskite films are calculated to be 438 and 751 mV, respectively. This means that the work function was reduced to 4.29 eV for the inverted annealing film in comparison to a work function value of 4.60 eV for the normal annealing film based on the equation Φsample = ΦAu + e(CPDAu–CPDsample), where Φsample refers to the work function of the sample, ΦAu is the work function of gold (5.10 eV), e is elemental charge, and CPDAu and CPDsample denote the CPD values of gold (−60 mV) and the sample, respectively. In this regard, the reduced work function of the optimized film indicates that the Fermi level was lifted, suggesting the formation of a heavier n-type perovskite film. This might be due to a higher electron concentration in the inverted film owing to the improved film quality and reduced trap states at the film surface. This indicates that the nonradiative recombination of charge is suppressed, as demonstrated above, which is beneficial for improving the open-circuit voltage (VOC) of a photovoltaic cell. In addition, we observe that the CPD distribution of the target film is more homogenous than the reference film, as manifested in Fig. 3i, which shows CPD variations over 2000 sampling points. The uniformly distributed surface potential among grains and grain boundaries further demonstrates that the perovskite film has desirable quality and that the trap states at the grain boundaries are reduced.
To illustrate the differences arising from the two annealing methods more visually, we created the diagrams shown in Fig. 4. Fig. 4a and c exhibit the two different heating processes used on the perovskite films, as revealed in Fig. 1 and explained above. Moreover, Fig. 4a1 and c1 shows reasonably magnified images of the marked square areas in Fig. 4a and c, respectively, illustrating the flux of residual solvent components under thermal stress and the growth of crystal grains. During normal annealing, the solvent molecules can evaporate quickly from the perovskite layer along the grain boundaries, resulting in fast crystallization and the slow crystal growth of the polycrystalline perovskite, thus forming small grains. In contrast, it is relatively hard for solvent components to escape in the case of inverted annealing. They mainly enrich grain boundaries, as demonstrated previously, thus leading to the formation of a solvent-mediated intermediate phase, also called a solvated crystalline phase, via interacting with external perovskite from the grains. In this case, adjacent grains can gradually merge due to a conglutination effect involving the solvated crystalline phase. After the solvent molecules are evaporated from the intermediate phase, these conglutinated original small grains eventually become a monolithic perovskite grain. Fig. 4b and d depicts the cross-sectional morphologies of the final perovskite layers obtained via normal and inverted annealing, respectively. The grain sizes of the inverted annealing film are significantly increased owing to the fusion of small grains, thus enabling a single crystal grain to stretch across the perovskite thin film, contributing to the reduction of defect density and a more efficient carriers transport compared with the control film. Similarly, Fig. 4b1 and d1 shows reasonably magnified images of the marked square areas in Fig. 4b and d, respectively. The volatilization of organic halide components during normal annealing is much faster than during inverted annealing. As a result, the concentrations of defects at the film surface and grain boundaries, such as undercoordinated Pb2+ ions and I and MA vacancies, of the normal annealing perovskite layer are much higher in contrast with the inverted annealing perovskite film. The presence of such defects induces gap states that result in the nonradiative recombination of photogenerated carriers, thus affecting the VOC value of solar cells and other photovoltaic metrics. In addition, they are also detrimental to the stability of the perovskite film, further affecting the corresponding device.
To further demonstrate that the optoelectronic properties of perovskite films have been improved upon inverted annealing in contrast with normal annealing, we fabricated photovoltaic devices based on the two types of CsFAMA perovskite films and compared their performances. Fig. 5a illustrates the simplified configuration of the fabricated perovskite photovoltaic cell, with a regular structure of ITO-coated glass/SnO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag. The statistical distributions of photovoltaic metrics, including VOC, short-circuit current density (JSC), fill factor (FF), and PCE, from ∼20 individual cells of the two types of devices are shown in Fig. 5b and c and summarized in Table 1. Distinct improvements in the VOC, JSC, and FF values of the PSCs corresponding to inverted annealing are observed compared to normal annealing, thus contributing to an obvious increase in the PCE.
Device

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Normal
1.109 ± 0.012
22.00 ± 0.36
74.6 ± 1.7
18.63 ± 0.47
Inverted
1.122 ± 0.006
23.05 ± 0.26
75.8 ± 1.4
19.59 ± 0.42
The J–V curves of the best-performing control and target cells recorded from backward scans are compared in Fig. 5d. The best efficiency of a photovoltaic device based on inverted annealing is 20.42%, with VOC = 1.132 V, JSC = 23.17 mA cm−2, and FF = 0.778, while the cell correlating with normal annealing shows a highest PCE of 19.21%, with VOC = 1.119 V, JSC =22.59 mA cm−2, and FF = 0.760. The enhanced VOC value is mainly attributed to the improved perovskite film quality and suppressed trap-assisted nonradiative recombination. In addition, the increases in the JSC and FF values primarily arise from the more favorable carrier transport because of the enlarged grain size and reduced grain boundaries along the perpendicular direction of the perovskite layer. Furthermore, we carried out maximum power point tracking (MPPT) measurements on the best solar cells to assess their practical efficiencies under simulated one-sun illumination (Fig. 5e). The inverted-annealing-related device reached its stabilized power output within 15 s, exhibiting a stabilized conversion efficiency of ∼19.8%, which is slightly lower than the J–V-based efficiency from a reverse sweep (20.4%). In contrast, the control photovoltaic device took more than 50 s to reach a stable operational state, with a stabilized PCE of ∼18.6%. The significantly improved photoelectric response suggests that J–V hysteresis of the photovoltaic device based on an inverted annealing perovskite is suppressed.

Fig. 5f displays reverse- and forward-scanned J–V curves from the best PSC based on inverted annealing. The detailed photovoltaic parameters are shown in the inset. The larger than one percent discrepancy between the efficiencies measured from forward and backward J–V scans indicates that mild hysteresis effects exist in the device, mainly owing to interfacial defects and ion migration. However, the control cell exhibits more pronounced J–V hysteresis than the target device, as shown in Fig. S5. The reduced J–V hysteresis in the target photovoltaic device is due to improved perovskite film quality upon inverted annealing. It is noted that we have not adopted any additive or interfacial-passivation strategies when building the characterized photovoltaic devices in the present study. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra from the best examples of the two types of cells are compared in Fig. 5g. The integrated current densities for the cells correlated with normal annealing and inverted annealing cells are 21.03 and 21.84 mA cm−2, respectively, showing a large mismatch in comparison with the JSC values obtained from the J–V curves. This implies that the transport and extraction of photogenerated charge carriers are not efficient inside the photovoltaic devices, leaving large room for improvement. Nevertheless, the obvious enhancement in the incident-photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) over the wavelength range of the photoelectric response demonstrates that the photoelectric properties of the inverted annealing film are indeed improved.
To gain further insight into the reduction of trap states in the perovskite film upon inverted annealing, we prepared electron-only devices to perform space-charge-limited current (SCLC) testing. The dark I–V characteristics of the normal and inverted devices in the form of double-logarithmic plots are displayed in Fig. 5h. A linear region corresponding to the ohmic response at low bias voltages and an intermediate region assigned to the trap-filling process can be seen in the I–V curves. The trap density (Nt) can be estimated using the following equation:Nt = 2ε0εrVTFL/eL2, where ε0, εr, VTFL, e, and L represent the vacuum permittivity, the relative dielectric constant of the perovskite, the trap-filling limit voltage, the elemental charge, and the thickness of perovskite layer, respectively. The calculated Nt values of the devices based on normal and inverted annealing are 8.45 × 1015 cm−3 and 6.15 × 1015 cm−3, respectively. We are convinced that the significantly reduced trap-state density of the target perovskite film arises from the enlarged grain size and the suppressed volatilization of organic halides, especially MAI components inside the CsFAMA film, during the inverted thermal annealing process compared with normal annealing. As is well known, organic halide deficiencies can induce undercoordinated Pb ions and halide vacancies at the film surface, which can act as significant nonradiative recombination centers.
Moreover, the dark J–V curves of cells based on normal annealing and inverted annealing perovskite films are compared in Fig. 5i. In contrast to the control device, the target device exhibits a much lower leakage current density, indicating the reduction of charge shunt channels and trap states. In addition, the reverse saturation current density (J0) of the target photovoltaic device (∼3.8 × 10−8 mA cm−2) is about four orders of magnitude lower than that of the reference cell (∼4.1 × 10−4 mA cm−2), and J0 can be estimated based on the intercept at zero voltage of the linear regression of the exponentially behaving region of the semi-logarithmic dark J–V curve. The dramatically reduced J0 value demonstrates that charge-carrier recombination in the optimized cell is suppressed, which is beneficial for the enhancement of the VOC and JSC values of the photovoltaic device.
To verify that the proposed high-temperature inverted annealing strategy can be extended to other types of perovskite materials, we prepared MAPbI3 perovskite films and corresponding cells using this annealing method. Fig. S6 displays surface-view SEM images of the normal annealing and inverted annealing MAPbI3 films. It is noted that the bright crystals on the film surface belong to lead-halide-dominated complexes. Thus, the high PbI2 phase content in the normal annealing MAPbI3 film indicates the evident decomposition of the perovskite layer under thermal stress. However, the target film shows a much lower PbI2 phase content, confirming that the inverted annealing strategy can retard the thermal degradation of perovskite films, as the escape of organic halide components is prevented. The corresponding XRD patterns shown in Fig. S7 are consistent with the SEM results. In addition, the inverted annealing layer exhibits significantly enlarged grain sizes in comparison with the reference film.
We also conducted PL and TRPL measurements using perovskite films that were prepared on glass substrates (Fig. S8). As expected, the PL emission intensity of MAPbI3 film shows a conspicuous increase upon inverted annealing compared with normal annealing. Meanwhile, compared to the control film, the PL decay lifetimes of the target film, both the slow decay lifetime (τ1) and fast decay lifetime (τ2), are prolonged (Table S5). Furthermore, we fabricated solar cells based on the two types of MAPbI3 films and compared their photovoltaic performances. The J–V curves of the best-performing control and target MAPbI3 PSCs recorded from reverse scans are plotted in Fig. S9. Furthermore, the statistical distributions of photovoltaic parameters (VOC, JSC, FF, and PCE) collected from around 20 individual cells of the two types of devices are displayed in Fig. S10 and summarized in Table S6. The photovoltaic performance of the target cell is far superior to that of the control device. Therefore, these results demonstrate that a high-temperature inverted annealing strategy is a universal and effective approach for facilitating grain growth and reducing surface defects in perovskite film, and this method has the potential to replace conventional normal thermal annealing.

In summary, we propose a high-temperature inverted annealing approach for post-treating CsFAMA triple-cation hybrid perovskite films, which not only significantly shortens the annealing time and remarkably increases the grain size, but also effectively prevents the potential loss of organic halides, thus slowing the decomposition of the perovskite films under thermal stress. We have demonstrated these findings using SEM and XRD characterization and KPFM and PL measurements, directly and indirectly. The advantages contribute to a reduced trap state density and improved film quality, leading to distinctly enhanced device performance. PSCs fabricated based on the inverted annealing hybrid perovskite film can yield efficiencies of over 20% in comparison to PCEs of around 19% for control cells. The overall photovoltaic metrics, i.e., VOC, JSC, and FF, are clearly increased. In addition, we have extended this annealing method to treating MAPbI3 perovskite film. As expected, similar results are obtained. The maximum J–V-scan-based efficiency of MAPbI3 PSCs is increased from 16.7% to 19.1% based on reverse sweeps. As such, this inverted annealing strategy provides an alternative way to efficiently prepare high-quality perovskite films.


L. T. and W. Z. conceived the idea and designed the experiments. F. W. and L. T. carried out the experiments and wrote the manuscript. X. Z. performed the UV–vis measurements. P. L. and S. Z. prepared the electron-only devices and conducted the I–V testing of the devices. L. D. assisted with the measurements of PL and TRPL. T. H. and W. Y. assisted with the deposition of silver electrodes and the measurement of J–V curves. L. Y. and G. D. assisted with the cleaning of ITO substrates. C. P., Z. M., M. Z., and H. L. provided valuable discussion and suggestions. W. Z. supervised the project. W. Z. and Y. H. contributed to the financial support of this research.


The authors declare no competing financial interests.


The authors acknowledge financial support from Sichuan Science and Technology Program (2018JY0015).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ce00914a
‡ Fang Wen and Liuwen Tian contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021