 DOI: 10.1039/D0DT00015A
(Paper)
Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 5815-5822


Yi
Zhang
,

Farzaneh
Fadaei Tirani
,

Philip
Pattison
,

Kurt
Schenk-Joß
,

Zewen
Xiao
*,

Mohammad Khaja
Nazeeruddin
 and 

Peng
Gao
*

Laboratory of Advanced Functional Materials, Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xiamen 361021, China. E-mail: peng.gao@fjirsm.ac.cn

Group for Molecular Engineering of Functional Materials, EPFL Valais Wallis, CH-1951 Sion, Switzerland

Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland

Institute of Physics, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland

Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China

Received
2nd January 2020
, Accepted 15th April 2020
First published on 15th April 2020
The quest for lead-free light-absorbing perovskite materials has long been the target of researchers to make the ‘star’ material friendly to the commercial market. After a summary of different lead-free solar absorbers, we demonstrate a zero-dimensional iodobismuthate (MA)3[BiI6]·3MACl (MA: CH3NH3) featuring isolated hexaiodobismuthate(III) anions in the crystal analysis. The unexpectedly formed material was made via an orthogonal solvent permeation method and the decomposition of the guest solvent. We compare the BiI63− containing compound with a series of more common iodobismuthates, especially the dinuclear Bi2I93− in terms of dimensionalities via single-crystal diffraction and DFT calculations, respectively. An undocumented second-order phase transition was found between 190 K and 160 K for the dimeric MA3Bi2I9. The photovoltaic device from a thermally reorganized polycrystalline film of (MA)3[BiI6]·3MACl, which resembled the structure of (MA)3[Bi2I9] gave a power conversion efficiency of 1.09%.

Recently, hybrid lead-halide perovskite solar-cells have emerged as potential contenders to silicon-based solar cells with an unprecedented high efficiency beyond 25% in 2019, over-taking all other third-generation photovoltaic (PV) technologies. But the intrinsic long-term instability of the hybrid halide perovskite structure and the use of Pb are persistent problems thwarting the final application of perovskite solar cells. The toxicity of lead is known to disturb the functioning of the blood, kidneys, liver, testes, brain and nervous system, especially in children and is well-documented. The urge for finding high-efficiency lead-free metal halide absorbers led to copious efforts to bypass the use of Pb ions by exploring alternative compounds within and beyond the cubic perovskite motif. Besides other group 14 elements (Sn2+, Ge2+), group 15 post-transition metal cations like bismuth3+ (Bi3+) and antimony3+ (Sb3+), which have atomic numbers increased by unity compared with Pb2+ and Sn2+. However, similar 6s26p0 and 5s25p0 electronic configurations, respectively, have been used to replace the Pb in halide perovskites in order to reproduce the favoured electronic properties of lead halide perovskites, such as p–p transition for high optical absorption coefficient and s–p coupling for defect tolerance and lighter hole masses. More importantly, they are much less toxic than Pb, and have been used in organic synthesis and medicines.

Because of the deeper energy-levels of ns2 states, Bi and Sb generally lose only p electrons when incorporated in halides, yielding stable 6-coordinated ns2 Sb3+ and Bi3+ ions, respectively. As a result, (MI6)3− (M = Sb, Bi) octahedra are the commonest building units in iodometallates. These octahedra have a high tendency to form structures with distortions, vacancies, and aggregations, through which various novel iodometallate structures can be built. The structural variations of these inorganic moieties can be demonstrated by the structural modification of either or both of the cationic counterions or anionic halide ligands. The growth from the discrete mononuclear complex [MI6]3− to polymeric 1D, 2D or 3D species with either perovskite or non-perovskite phases can be seen from Fig. 1, which summarizes the experimental bandgaps and record PCEs of some bismuth (antimony) iodides and their hybrid derivatives with different structural/electronic dimensionalities.
2D binary BiI3 and SbI3 crystallise into layered non-perovskite structures consisting of edge-sharing [BiI6] and [SbI6] octahedra, respectively. BiI3 has a bandgap of 1.8 eV, and recently solar cells based on it have achieved an improved PCE of 1.2%. Despite the similarly layered nature of BiI3 and SbI3, they do not form an ABX3 type spatial 3D network like PbI2 when reacting with a monovalent salt such as CsX owing to the difference in the charge state and in order to avoid charge imbalance. Alternatively, lower-dimensional vacancy-ordered A3B2X9 compounds form with two common polymorphs: one presents a layered perovskite structure, and the other is a non-perovskite consisting of isolated face-sharing [B2X9]3− bi-octahedra. In contrast to the commonly used nomenclature, we would like to coin the concept of ‘2.5D’ and ‘0.5D’ structure types for the ‘layered’ and ‘dinuclear’ non-perovskites, respectively, rather than 2D and 0D ‘mononuclear’ iodometalates, because of the “double octahedra layers” and “bi-octahedra”. The preferential formation of either competing target structure depends on the combination of the A, B, and X ions. Generally, A3B2X9 with smaller A cations such as K+ and NH4+ adopt the layered perovskite structure, while those with larger A cations such as CH3NH3+ result in the dinuclear structure. Bi- and Sb-based A3B2X9 layered perovskites have bandgaps of around 2.1 eV, which are much larger than that of 3D CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3) partially owing to the reduced electronic dimensionalities. Solar cells based on mixed-halide (MA)3[Sb2ClxI9−x] layered perovskite showed an unsatisfactory efficiency of 2.19%. The Bi- and Sb-based dinuclear iso-phases have larger fundamental bandgaps (e.g., 2.86 eV for Cs3[Bi2I9] and 2.9 eV for (MA)3[Bi2I9]), than their layered perovskite counterparts, owing to the further reduced electronic dimensionality associated with the isolated [Bi2I9]3− anions. It is worth noting that the most studied Bi or Sb-based light absorbers are dinuclear iso-phases, possibly because they are kinetically favourable to be formed during the device fabrication. Interestingly, some groups reported much smaller bandgaps for these non-perovskites, which were determined from the excitonic bands, rather than the higher-energy intrinsic electronic band edges. In this context, the dinuclear phase is less favoured compared to the layered perovskite phase. Ironically, so far, the reported record PCE for the binuclear phases has reached 3.2%, even higher than that for layered perovskites. HDABiI5 (HAD = [H3NC6H12NH3]2+), which consists of 1D corner-sharing [BiI6] octahedral chains, exhibited an excitonic bandgap of around 2.1 eV (the fundamental bandgap should be even larger) and its solar cells showed PCE < 0.1%. On the other hand, the Bi3+ and Sb3+ can be incorporated into the 3D expanded double-perovskite lattice A2B(I)B(III)X6 (A = Cs+; B(I) = Li+, K+, Rb+, Tl+, or Ag+; B(III) = Bi3+, Sb3+, In3+; X = Br, I), where the [B(III)X6] octahedra are alternatively isolated by the [B(I)X6] octahedra. Considering the isolation of [B(III)X6] octahedra, the reported Bi- and Sb-based double perovskite can be regarded as 0D iodobismuthates, which exhibit low-dimensional electronic properties, such as a large bandgap and localized band edges. As a representative shown in Fig. 1, Cs2AgBiBr6 has a relatively low, but indirect bandgap of 1.95 eV and its solar cells have achieved a record PCE of 2.5%.
In this work, we obtained a zero-dimensional iodo-bismuthate (MA)3[BiI6]·3MACl (MA: CH3NH3) from an orthogonal solvent permeation method. The isolated-BiI63− containing compound is cross discussed with a series of more common iodobismuthates, especially the binuclear Bi2I93− in terms of dimensionalities via single-crystal diffraction and DFT calculations, respectively. The photovoltaic devices based on (MA)3[BiI6]·3MACl gave a power conversion efficiency of 1.09%.

In an attempt at growing high-quality single crystals of hybrid iodobismuthate, we made starting solutions of methylammonium iodide and bismuth(III) iodide in dimethylformamide (DMF) in a ratio of 2:1 (i.e., an MAI-excess ratio, as compared with the 3:2 ratio for the stoichiometric “329” phase). We then exposed it to the vapor of dichloromethane (DCM) for 12 hours to drive the recrystallization via a vapor permeation process (Fig. S1).


As shown in Fig. S2, orange single crystals large enough for single-crystal X-ray diffraction (XRD) were obtained. Unexpectedly, the solved crystal structure does not show the typical “dinuclear” structure of (MA)3[Bi2I9] (Fig. 2a), but exhibits isolated mononuclear [BiI6] octahedra separated by highly-ionic MA+ and Cl− ions, as shown in Fig. 2b, and Fig. S2. We speculate that the unexpected Cl− may come from decomposed DCM. The orange-red compound crystallises in the orthorhombic space-group Cmme, with lattice constants a = 18.828(1) Å, b = 18.9288(10) Å, and c = 9.1445(5) Å. It has been believed that halogen-bismuthates prefer to form oligomers or even polymers other than monomeric structures. Therefore, (MA)3[BiI6]·3MACl (1) with completely isolated mononuclear [BiI6] octahedra unites is a very interesting hybrid iodobismuthate, owing to the ‘real’ zero dimensionality. During the preparation of this work, Trimmel and his colleagues reported a very similar compound via a different method. Both of our works make interesting additions to the family of real 0D iodobismuthate. A visualization of the isolated octahedron is presented in Fig. 2b, where the trivalent Bi3+ is sitting in the middle of six coordinating iodide ions. The [BiI6]3− octahedron showed a slightly deformed structure with roughly three kinds of Bi–I bond lengths (3.0550(4) Å, 3.0557(4) Å, and 3.1177(4) Å) and two kinds of I–Bi–I bond angles (92.757(7)° and 87.724(11)°). These are in agreement with the previous reports and indicate an inert-pair effect of the central bismuth ion, around which the non-bonding electron pair can be assumed to be spherically distributed. Random picking of the crystals in the mother-liquor disclosed that crystal with the common (MA)3[Bi2I9] structure coexisted.

To make a clear comparison between the new crystal phase with the known dinuclear (MA)3[Bi2I9], we made a systematic study of the crystal structures of the two cases (Table S1). It is worth noting that the unique structure of 1 was recorded at 100 K, where the two independent methylammonium (MA) groups are perfectly ordered: one in general position (MA1) and one of site group m (MA2). Alternating layers of [BiI6]3− octahedra and [Cl ⋯ H4] tetrahedra can be seen in the crystal structures (Fig. 2b and S5a). In the 〈a, b〉-plane, four MA1 cations surround a [BiI6]3− octahedra by directing their NH3 groups to the octahedral faces. While in the 〈a, c〉-plane, two of the four MA2 cations face the octahedron with their ammonium group, and the other two with their methyl groups. The isolated [BiI6]3− octahedra in (MA)3[BiI6]·3MACl at 100K have point symmetry mm2, which are stabilized by a plethora of hydrogen bonds assigned by distance and intuition, rather than by topological analysis of bond critical points (Table S1 and Fig. S5a). We find that the N+H⋯Cl and N+H⋯I distances (Table S2) comply rather well with Steiner's average normalized values for N+H3⋯Hal interactions, where an average value of 2.99(2) Å was given for an (NC)Csp2⋯I interaction. We also show some rather long hydrogen bonds in Fig. S5b. The [BiI6]3− octahedra slightly deform to achieve a compact packing and lower their point symmetry from Oh to C2v (Table S3).
Following the method reported in the literature, we also obtained orange crystals corresponding to the classical dinuclear (MA)3[Bi2I9] (2). Data collections were carried out at 293 K (2), 230 K (2H), and 100 K (2L). Since the first two represent the same hexagonal structure, we discuss only the structure at 230 K. The different space groups of 2H and 2L indicate that a phase transition exists between r.t. and 100 K. It indeed has been reported that there is a reversible first-order phase transition at 143 K. However, we found that there must be another transition between 190 K and 160 K judging by the fact that the symmetry at 160 K is already monoclinic while that at 190 K is still hexagonal (the transitions are indicated by coarse lines in Table S4). It could be attributed to a second-order phase transition or a small enthalpy destabilization (only relatively small displacements are involved) so that the transition between 190 K and 160 K has not been reported to date.
The structures of the dinuclear (MA)3[Bi2I9] (2) have already been reported by several groups. In our study, we provide further insight into these structures. The crystal structure of 2H is shown in Fig. 3a, where the centers of gravity of the face-sharing [Bi2I9]3− octahedra of point symmetry 3m can be thought of as occupying the positions of a hexagonal close (hc) packing. They are interconnected by a multitude of weak N–H⋯I and C–H⋯I hydrogen bonds. Both nitrogen atoms of the MAs have a stabilizer 3m, but that of the associated carbons are l for C1 and m for C2. N1 lies across an octahedral face and N2 between three [Bi2I9]3− anions in the hexagonal planes. This means that both MAs are dynamically disordered, most likely due to their weak interactions with the anions. The assignment of N and C as lying on the 6-axis is not completely certain, since both orientations lead to very comparable R1 values and since the MAs could not be refined without any restraints (the residuals near the nitrogen atoms lay too close together and also strove to further merge into the axis).
On the other hand, the anisotropic displacement parameters (ADPs) of the Bi and I atoms do not reveal any disorder. The centers of gravity of the octahedral anions lie on the positions of a hexagonal close packing, but there are now two independent Bi atoms in general positions, and the Bi–Bi distance is slightly shorter than in the case of the hexagonal phase (Table S2). The anions lost all point symmetry (C1) with the upper and lower parts of the face-sharing octahedra slightly (∼5°) rotated with respect to one another. Along the c-axis, there is one anion alternating with two anti-phase MAs. There are only two classical N–H⋯I H-bonds (Table S3 and Fig. 3b), but a significant number of weaker interactions helping to stabilize the structure. Contrary to the work by Kamminga et al., we did not find a non-centrosymmetric space group in phase III (2L) (Table S4). Also, our β-angle was consistently larger than what they reported. The moderate R1-values from both works (0.092 vs. 0.068) could be attributed to the complicated domain structure of phase III. The actual structure seems to be a 2 × 2 × 3 superstructure of the structure presented here. It may be even more complicated since there were signs of diffuse scattering in the (0kl)-planes. The triggering mechanism of the phase transitions is most likely the locking-in of the n-site hop of the MA-groups (n = 3 for N1 and n = 6 for N2).

To study the electronic properties of (MA)3[BiI6]·3MACl, we performed DFT calculations with the Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof (HSE) hybrid functional, including spin–orbit coupling (SOC) effects, in comparison with the popular layered perovskite and dinuclear iso-phases of Cs3Bi2I9. Fig. 4 shows the calculated band structures, total and projected densities of states (DOSs). As shown in Fig. 4a, the hypothetical Cs3Bi2I9 layered perovskite exhibits an indirect bandgap of 1.90 eV, with the valence band maximum (VBM) slightly off the Γ point and the conduction band minimum (CBM) at the A point. The VBM consists of antibonding states of I 5p and Bi 6s orbitals, while the CBM is derived from the antibonding states of Bi 6p and I 5p orbitals. It is noted that both the VBM and CBM of Cs3Bi2I9 layered perovskite are less dispersive as compared to those for 3D Pb iodide perovskites, indicating less efficient carrier transport properties. For the experimental non-perovskite phase of Cs3Bi2I9, as shown in Fig. 4b, the calculated bandgap is also indirect, with the VBM slightly off the K point and the CBM at the Γ point. Compared to the layered perovskite phase, the non-perovskite phase exhibits more localized valence and conduction bands, owing to the reduced structural/electronic dimensionality, leading to a larger bandgap of 2.39 eV as well as larger carrier effective masses, which is inconsistent with the PCE trend shown in Fig. 1 (vide supra). For the new (MA)3[BiI6]·3MACl, as shown in Fig. 4c, the calculated bandgap is 2.74 eV, with the VBM located at the Z point and the CBM located at the Γ point. The VBM consists of the antibonding states of I 5p and Bi 6s orbitals, while the CBM is derived from the antibonding states of Bi 6p and I 3p orbitals. The valence and conduction bands of (MA)3[BiI6]·3MACl are even more localized than those for Cs3Bi2I9 non-perovskite, which is attributed to the more significant electronic confinement within the isolated [BiI6] octahedra.


A solution of (MA)3[BiI6]·3MACl crystals in DMF was spin-coated on FTO glass and used for optical studies (Fig. S6). The measured UV-vis spectra and the corresponding Tauc plots are shown in Fig. 5a and b. The intrinsic exciton absorption clearly appears around the band-edge region with the peak energy of the exciton band located at 2.47 eV. The distinct appearance of the exciton band suggests that the exciton–phonon interaction and exciton binding energy in such an annealed iodobismuthate system are relatively strong, which agrees with previous studies on the normal (MA)3[Bi2I9] system. Owing to the existence of the strong exciton absorption band, it is not possible to deduce the bandgap correctly from the absorption spectra and the Tauc plots.

Park et al. have synthesized the mixed-halide hybrid bismuthate ((MA)3[Bi2I9Clx]), of which the XRD pattern is visually close to the neat (MA)3[Bi2I9]. In our case, to further check the structure of the novel (MA)3[BiI6]·3MACl film, we re-dissolved the crystals of iodobismuthate in dimethylformamide (DMF) by vigorous stirring at 60 °C and deposit the stock solution on meso-TiO2 coated FTO glasses before annealing at 100 °C for 20 min. The XRD pattern of this film and theoretical diffraction patterns calculated from refined single crystal data of (MA)3[BiI6]·3MACl (vide supra) and (MA)3[Bi2I9] are shown in Fig. 5c. The positions of the reflections surprisingly do not match the simulated powder pattern of (MA)3[BiI6]·3MACl, but rather that of (MA)3[Bi2I9] indicating that the thermal treatment induced elimination of MACl salts (eqn (1)). Moreover, it is noticeable that for the pattern of iodobismuthate thin-films grown from the dissolved crystals of (MA)3[BiI6]·3MACl the intensity of (006) reflection overwhelms all the others, which is very close to the diffraction of synthesized powders of (MA)3[Bi2I9] reported by Abulikemu et al.. We studied the morphology of the annealed films by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Fig. 5d). Comparing with the previously reported solution-processed films of (MA)3[Bi2I9], the film resulting from this study showed much-improved surface coverage. It was reported that the inclusion of excess MACl in the precursor solution could improve the quality of the perovskite film owing to the retarded crystallization rate during the escaping of MACl.
(1)

From these results, we can conclude that (MA)3[BiI6]·3MACl may not be suitable for solar cell applications, but would be interesting as a host for light-emitting diodes (LEDs) because of the natural electronic confinement/passivation effect that is associated with the 0D structural feature. However, after thermal annealing, it is possible to convert (MA)3[BiI6]·3MACl to (MA)3[Bi2I9], which can be tested as an absorber in a solar cell. This is the first report that a film of (MA)3[Bi2I9] has been made via a solid reorganization process. The film was illuminated with UV light at a wavelength of 254 nm, and greenish emission can be observed.

As is shown in Fig. 6, the PCE reported for solution-processed 329-polymorph absorbers has improved from 0.12% to around 3% in the past three years. Given the fact that the film achieved from the re-dissolved novel iodobismuthate crystals can give a pinhole-free morphology, we applied these films to assemble photovoltaic devices. Fig. 6a displays the schematic structure and the cross-sectional SEM image of the preliminary device. The device is composed of FTO/c-TiO2/meso-TiO2/iodobismuthate/P3HT/Au. Fig. 6b shows the J–V curves of our best-performing device with a PCE of 1.09% (open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 669 mV, short-circuit current density (JSC) of 2.55 mA cm−2 and fill factor of 0.634).

We present an absolute zero-dimensional iodobismuthate 1 containing mononuclear [BiI6]3− anions and compare it comprehensively with other iodobismuthate polymophs, especially the popular ‘Pseudo-zero-dimensional’ dinuclear (MA)3[Bi2I9] via single-crystal diffraction. A temperature-dependent study revealed that the dinuclear Bi2I93− has an undocumented second-order phase transition between 190 K and 160 K. We used DFT calculations to compare the band structures and densities of states between the new (MA)3[BiI6]·3MACl and known (MA)3[Bi2I9]. The high exciton binding energy and electronic confinement/passivation effect associated with the 0D structure indicate possible applications in LEDs. We found that, upon annealing, compound 1 can transform into a phase similar to (MA)3[Bi2I9] after the emission of methylammonium halides. A tentative mesoscopic solar cell based on the transformed polycrystalline film delivered a PCE of 1.09%. The unexpected formation of the zero-dimensional iodobismuthate enriched the family of mononuclear iodobismuthate and will provide opportunities for further design and exploration of materials with high exciton binding energy and quantum confinement effect.


The manuscript was written through the contributions of all authors. All authors have approved the final version of the manuscript.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors are grateful to the Swiss-Norwegian Consortium for providing access to synchrotron radiation for X-ray diffraction measurements on beamline SNBL/BM01 at the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility. P. Gao. acknowledges the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21975260) and the Recruitment Program of Global Experts of China (No. 201613, Y8d3071caa). Z. Xiao acknowledges the financial support from the Thousand Young Talents Program of China, the Startup Fund of Huazhong University of Science and Technology, and the Director Fund of Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics. Our sincere thanks go to an unknown Referee whose help resulted in a substantial improvement of the model for the compound 2H.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details and crystallographic data. CCDC 1915351 (1), 1915352 (2H), 1915353 (2) and 1915340 (2L). For ESI and crystallographic data in CIF or other electronic format see DOI: 10.1039/d0dt00015a
‡ These authors contribute equally to the manuscript.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020