 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA07105H
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16824-16829


Ping
Fu
,

Xin
Guo
,

Bin
Zhang
,

Tao
Chen
,

Wei
Qin
,

Yun
Ye
,

Jianhui
Hou
,

Jian
Zhang
 and 

Can
Li
*

State Key Laboratory of Catalysis, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy, Dalian 116023, China. E-mail: canli@dicp.ac.cn; Tel: +86-411-84379070

State Key Laboratory of Polymer Physics and Chemistry, Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, P. R. China

Guilin University of Electronic Technology, Material Science and Engineering, 1 Jinji Road, Guilin 541004, China

Received
18th August 2016
, Accepted 29th September 2016
First published on 29th September 2016
Interfacial engineering is crucial to improve photovoltaic performance. In this work, a single-junction inverted polymer solar cell (IPSC) is fabricated where the ZnO cathode interlayer (CIL) is modified with phenols (both on the ZnO surface and in blend). By using this strategy, power conversion efficiency (PCE) can be remarkably enhanced to 10.5% with PTB7-Th:PC71BM as the active layer, which is an ∼22% increase compared to that of a control device (8.59%) without modification. Meanwhile, the long-term stability of the modified device is also improved relevant to the control one. The improvement of device performance and stability was attributed to the better contact with the active layer, decreased work function, increased electron transport and reduced series resistance, induced by the dehydration between phenols and hydroxyl groups on the ZnO surface certified by in situ Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy.

Inverted polymer solar cells (IPSCs) show better device performances compared to conventional PSCs. Power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) exceeding 10% for single-junction IPSCs have been reported in the last few years. Fast advancement of PCEs benefits mainly from new materials synthesized, morphology optimization of the active layer and interfacial engineering. In particular, interfacial engineering has drawn great attention in recent years. In comparison to the case between the active layer and anode where vacuum evaporated MoO3 is used as a hole-extracting layer providing an ohmic contact, the cathode interlayer (CIL) between the active layer and ITO electrode in IPSCs plays a crucial role in the electron extraction/transport process.

Among effective CIL materials developed for IPSCs, including transition metal oxides, metallic salts, and organic compounds, ZnO is widely used due to its appealing properties, such as excellent transparency in the visible region, thickness independence in a range of 30–50 nm, and low cost for large-area deposition. However, ZnO as a CIL is still not efficient enough as energy level mismatch and weak physical contact at the ZnO/active layer interface lead to charge trapping/recombination. Furthermore, the easily formed surface defects of ZnO films during the fabrication process are sensitive to oxygen and moisture under ambient conditions, which are harmful to the PCE and stability of IPSCs. Consequently, it is imperative to improve the interface between ZnO and the active layer to conquer these issues.
To this end, several classes of materials have been reported as the surface modifiers to improve the ZnO/active layer interface and thus the device performance, such as self-assembled monolayers, amine-based polymers, or polar organic solvents. Among them, it has been proposed that methanol can improve the surface properties of ZnO films due to possible hydrogen bonding interactions. What's more, alcohol solvents like methanol and ethanol are of particular significance for easy and green fabrication of IPSCs. Inspired by this, we have the motivation to apply the easily accessible phenols and even diethyl ether to modify ZnO CILs for enhanced PCE and stability of IPSCs.
Herein we investigated the interactions between alcohols (methanol and 2-naphthol) and ZnO films at the molecular level by in situ Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy and found that the phenols are more efficient surface modifiers for ZnO films than methanol to increase the PCE. Moreover, mixing the phenols with ZnO films can also take the same effect and simultaneously using ether as the surface modifier of the blending CILs can further boost the PCE to 10.5% from 8.59% for the control device with ZnO films as CILs. Meanwhile, lifetime study indicates that the IPSCs fabricated by this strategy could retain 92.3% of their initial PCE value after 30 days of the stability test.

2-Naphthol, a representative of phenols, was chosen as a surface modifier of ZnO films. In order to explain the interaction between ZnO and 2-naphthol, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) of the ZnO and ZnO/2-naphthol is carried out and the results are shown in Fig. S1. The Zn 2p and O 1s peaks in ZnO films are shifted by the presence of the 2-naphthol layer, which indicates that the electronic structure of the ZnO film is affected by the 2-naphthol layer. FT-IR spectroscopy was further performed to detect the interactions between alcohols (methanol and 2-naphthol) and ZnO films at the molecular level as shown in Fig. 1(a). Untreated ZnO films were used as the background. The ZnO films treated with methanol and 2-naphthol exhibit characteristic peaks of C–O bonds at ∼1023 cm−1 and the broad peak corresponding to hydroxy stretching vibrations at 3340 cm−1. After heating the films at 373 K for 10 min, which will be adopted to process the CILs for the device fabrication (see below), the peaks of C–O bonds still remain, implying the formation of Zn–O–R (R = methyl or 2-naphthyl) species thanks to the dehydration between alcohols and hydroxyl groups on the ZnO surface, as illustrated in Fig. 1(b).

The influence of the 2-naphthol modifier on the properties of ZnO films is then investigated. Firstly, the insertion of the 2-naphthol layer brings spontaneous polarization at the interface and makes a vacuum level shift, leading to a change in the work function of ZnO. The work function of ITO/ZnO is 4.4 eV that decreases to 4.2 eV after being modified with 2-naphthol. This value is very close to the LUMO level of PC71BM used as the acceptor, as seen in Fig. 2(a); secondly, the electron mobility of the ZnO/2-naphthol film is higher than that of the ZnO film, as detected by the space charge limited current (SCLC) method using electron-only devices (Fig. 2(b)), and better electron transporting capability of the modified ZnO film can be further confirmed by the diode test (Fig. S2). Thirdly, the surface modification improves the hydrophobicity of the ZnO film (Fig. S3) owing to the naphthyls out of the ZnO surface, leading to a better contact with the active layer, which is consistent with electrical impedance spectrum (EIS) results (Fig. 2(c) and Table S1). The fitted equivalent circuit model is composed of series resistance (Rs) and component R1 forming a parallel circuit with capacitor C1 (Fig. S4). The extracted contact resistance of the 2-naphthol modified ZnO (ZnO/2-naphthol) film is found to be notably reduced, facilitating electron transport to the ITO electrode. This result together with the aforementioned increased electron mobility will be remarkably significant for the increase of photocurrent in devices (see details below). Fourthly, steady-state photoluminescence spectra exhibit that band-edge emission (366 nm) and defect-related emission (545 nm) of the ZnO film are almost completely quenched after 2-naphthol modification, confirming the passivation of surface defects and the reduction of recombination centers, which are both beneficial for efficient photo-generated charge carrier separation (Fig. S5). Finally, the ZnO/2-naphthol film still possesses high transparency, which can allow the maximum photo-flux to reach the active layer for generating photocurrents (Fig. S6). In addition, it is found that the properties of the ZnO film can also be improved when mixing 2-naphthol with the ZnO film (ZnO & 2-naphthol). Very similar properties as discussed above are achieved for the ZnO & 2-naphthol film (see detailed characterization data in Fig. S7). These improved properties of ZnO films, in particular, the better contact with the active layer, decreased work function, and increased electron transport, may imply that the 2-naphthol-modified (both on the surface and in blend) ZnO film as the CIL could present better performances than that without modification in IPSCs.
In order to demonstrate this, four classes of IPSCs with a configuration of ITO/CILs/active layer (PTB7-Th:PC71BM)/MoO3/Ag were fabricated as shown in Fig. 3. Their J–V curves under AM 1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2 are plotted in Fig. 4(a) and the key parameters including short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), and PCE are summarised in Table 1. The control device (device A) with the ZnO CIL exhibits a PCE of 8.58% in accordance with the reported value. It is worth noting that during the fabrication of 2-naphthol/ZnO-based devices, methanol or diethyl ether was used as the solvent to process 2-naphthol. Since methanol can also change the surface properties of ZnO as discussed above, devices with methanol modified ZnO as the CIL were also made for comparison. Indeed, such devices show higher PCE (8.94%) than the aforementioned control devices. Interestingly, it is also observed that using diethyl ether to treat the ZnO surface can also afford a higher PCE (9.51%) than the control devices. Potential hydrogen bonding interactions as the case for methanol might contribute to the efficiency enhancement. But both methanol and diethyl ether modified devices still present lower PCEs than those based on the ZnO/2-naphthol CIL (device B, 9.72%), evidencing the effectiveness of 2-naphthol for the modification of the ZnO film. Actually, we have also tried the phenol (Ph-OH). When using it to modify ZnO as the CIL, the device showed similar (slightly lower, see below Fig. S8 and Table S2) performance compared to the 2-naphthol case. We just chose the 2-naphthol as an example. Furthermore, blending different concentrations of 2-naphthol into the ZnO film as the CIL (device C) can also enhance the PCE, reaching 9.89% (Fig. S9 and Table S3). Inspired by our finding that diethyl ether can be used as the surface modifier of the ZnO film for improved PCEs, diethyl ether is further employed to modify the ZnO & 2-naphthol blending film. The resulting device (device D) offers a PCE as high as 10.36% (Jsc of 18.44 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.78 V and FF of 0.72), ranking among the best performances of single-junction IPSCs reported to date. The increased PCEs of devices with modified ZnO compared to those based on the untreated ones could be contributed from the enhancement of Jsc and FF, owing to the reduction of series resistance and the improvement of electron mobility after modification, as discussed above.
CIL

J
sc (mA m−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)
ZnO
16.63 ± 0.3
0.77 ± 0.01
0.67 ± 0.02
8.58 ± 0.33
ZnO/MeOH
16.85 ± 0.1
0.76
0.70 ± 0.02
8.94 ± 0.22
ZnO/ether
17.08 ± 0.3
0.76
0.73 ± 0.01
9.51 ± 0.1
ZnO/2-naphthol
18.01 ± 0.5
0.76
0.71 ± 0.01
9.72 ± 0.4
ZnO & 2-naphthol
17.54 ± 0.1
0.78
0.72 ± 0.02
9.89 ± 0.1
ZnO & 2-naphthol/ether
18.44 ± 0.1
0.78
0.72 ± 0.01
10.36 ± 0.1
The dark J–V curves show a higher rectification ratio and lower leakage current, which could also explain the increase of Jsc and FF of the IPSCs with modified ZnO as the CIL (Fig. S10).Fig. 4(b) depicts the incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the IPSCs with ZnO & 2-naphthol/ether as the CIL. The Jsc value calculated by integrating the IPCE spectrum is 17.96 mA cm−2, which is very close to the measured value (18.54 mA cm−2, maximum error <3%).

Fig. 4(c) displays that the device with ZnO & naphthol/ether as the CIL retains 92.3% of the original PCE after 30 days of the stability test, while for the device based on ZnO as the CIL only 87% of its initial PCE is observed. This clearly reveals that IPSCs with modified ZnO as the CIL provide better stability than those with ZnO as the CIL, which is attributed to passivating surface defects and improving surface hydrophobic properties of ZnO films. All these results provide strong evidence of the general utility of aromatic alcohol-modified ZnO as the CIL for more efficient and stable IPSCs.

We have presented that a single-junction IPSC where the ZnO CIL is modified with phenols exhibits a PCE of 10.36% with PTB7-Th:PC71BM as the active layer and retains 92.3% of its initial PCE value after 30 days of the stability test, which are both remarkably improved in comparison to those of the non-modified devices. The enhancement of device performance and stability is attributed to the better contact of the ZnO film with the active layer and the reduction of interfacial energy barriers between ZnO and the active layer, induced by the modification of ZnO with phenols. Our results demonstrate that modifying ZnO films with easily accessible and cost effective phenols is a simple and green interfacial engineering strategy to improve the efficiency and stability of IPSCs.


ZnO thin films coated on top of ITO glass were obtained from solution by the sol–gel method. Before coating the ZnO thin films, the ITO glass substrates (AimCore Technology Co., Ltd) were cleaned by ultrasonic treatment in acetone, detergent, deionized water, and isopropyl alcohol sequentially. The ZnO precursor was prepared by dissolving zinc acetate and ethanolamine in a solution of 2-methoxyethanol with a concentration of 0.3 mol L−1. Approximately ZnO thin films (40 nm) were obtained by spin-casting the above solution, followed by annealing at 200 °C for 10 min. The thin films were then continuously annealed in air at 200 °C for 1 h. Note that the ZnO precursor was not heated gradually from room temperature to the temperature being treated. MeOH, diethyl ether and naphthol solution were spin coated onto the ITO/ZnO substrates at a speed of 4000 rpm for 1 min with an acceleration of 1000 rpm s−1. The films were annealed at 100 °C for 10 min. Preparation of ZnO & naphthol films: different amounts of naphthol were directly mixed with the ZnO precursor solvent, and then the film was prepared following the preparation of the ZnO film.


All the thin films were fabricated on top of glass/ITO substrates with a sheet resistance of 10 Ω sq−1 by spin-coating. All the substrates were dried by nitrogen flow and treated with a UV-ozone chamber (Ultraviolet Ozone Cleaned, Jelight Company USA) for 15 min. The PTB7-Th:PC71BM active layers (ca. 100 nm) were spin-cast on top of ITO/CIL in a N2 filled glovebox from the solution of PTB7-Th:PC71BM (1:1.5 weight ratio in chlorobenzene with 3 v/v% DIO) with an overall concentration of 12 mg mL−1. Finally, 5 nm MoO3 and 100 nm Ag were deposited sequentially under 4.5 × 10−4 Torr by thermal evaporation through a shadow mask to form an active area of ∼0.064 cm2. For electron only devices, Ca (10 nm) and Al (100 nm) were deposited as the top electrodes with an active layer. The electron-only devices are fitted by the Mott–Gurney law, J = (9/8)εrε0μe (V2 L−3), where ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, εr is the dielectric permittivity of the active layer, L is the thickness of the active layer, and μe is the electron mobility. The electron mobility is estimated from the currents in the square law region. A computer-controlled Keithley 2400 source measure unit was used to characterize the J–V performance of devices with an AM 1.5G oriel solar simulator at an illumination intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The corresponding incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) was recorded on a QTest Station 2000ADI system (Crowntech. Inc., USA).


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 21374120 and No. 61377029. X. G. acknowledges the support of the “Thousand Talents Program for Young Scholars” of China and Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemistry for Energy Materials (iChEM).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta07105h
‡ Ping Fu and Xin Guo contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016