 DOI: 10.1039/C4EE00762J
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2614-2618


Seungchan
Ryu
,

Jun Hong
Noh
,

Nam Joong
Jeon
,

Young
Chan Kim
,

Woon Seok
Yang
,

Jangwon
Seo
 and 

Sang Il
Seok
*

Division of Advanced Materials, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology, 141 Gajeong-Ro, Yuseong-Gu, Daejeon 305-600, Republic of Korea. E-mail: seoksi@krict.re.kr; seoksi@skku.edu

Department of Energy Science, Sungkyunkwan University, 2066 Seoburo, Jangan-gu, Suwon 440-746, Republic of Korea

Received
8th March 2014
, Accepted 16th May 2014
First published on 16th May 2014
Besides the generated photocurrent as a key factor that impacts the efficiency of solar cells, the produced photovoltage and fill factor are also of critical importance. Therefore, understanding and optimization of the open-circuit voltage (Voc) of perovskite solar cells, especially with an architecture consisting of mesoporous (mp)-TiO2/perovskite/hole transporting materials (HTMs), are required to further improve the conversion efficiency. In this work, we study the effects of the energy level between CH3NH3(= MA)PbI3 and MAPbBr3 and a series of triarylamine polymer derivatives containing fluorene and indenofluorene, which have different highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) levels, in terms of the photovoltaic behaviour. The voltage output of the device is found to be dependent on the higher energy level of perovskite solar absorbers as well as the HOMO level of the HTMs. The combination of MAPbBr3 and a deep-HOMO HTM leads to a high photovoltage of 1.40 V, with a fill factor of 79% and an energy conversion efficiency of up to 6.7%, which is the highest value reported to date for MAPbBr3 perovskite solar cells.

Increasing the efficiency and lowering the cost of photovoltaic devices are important targets of the current research. Recently, organolead trihalide perovskites as light harvesters have provided a breakthrough for achieving potentially low-cost and high efficiency solar cells. For further improvement of the performance, an understanding and optimization of the open-circuit voltage (Voc) of the perovskite solar cells, especially with an architecture consisting of perovskite-infiltrated TiO2 electrode/upper perovskite/hole transporting materials (HTMs), are very important. Although high Voc in the perovskite solar cell can be achieved by matching and judiciously selecting the perovskite lead halide-based absorber and the HTMs, the origin of Voc in the cell architecture is poorly understood. In this work, we have investigated the effect of lowering the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the HTM using a series of triarylamine polymer derivatives. The results revealed that the voltage output of the device is found to be dependent on the higher energy level of perovskite solar absorbers as well as the HOMO level of the HTMs. We found that a deeper HOMO resulted in a significantly larger Voc, which enabled us to fabricate high-efficiency solar cells with a Voc of up to 1.40 V and a fill factor (FF) of 79% as well as a PCE of 6.7%.


Efficient and inexpensive energy harvesting by solar cells is a great challenge for the 21st century in the field of renewable energy. Most recently, inorganic–organic hybrid solar cells have been demonstrated to be amongst the most promising emerging photovoltaic devices with respect to the power conversion efficiency (PCE), use of liquid-free hole-conductors as charge carriers, abundant availability, and inexpensive fabrication. Mesoscopic inorganic–organic hybrid hetero-junction solar cells consisting of Sb2S3 or a combination of Sb2S3 and Sb2Se3 as light harvesters have shown a PCE of 3–7.5%. Inorganic light harvesters in these cells have high potential to further improve the performance as compared to the conventional dyes, owing to benefits such as high extinction coefficients, large intrinsic dipole moments, and easily tuneable band-gaps. A breakthrough in PCE for inorganic–organic hybrid solar cells has been achieved by the introduction of organolead trihalide perovskites as light harvesters. Previously, these perovskites were used for light absorption in dye-sensitized solar cells with liquid electrolytes, which exhibit a low PCE. However, the photovoltaic (PV) efficiency of the perovskite-based solar cells could be greatly improved by the use of a spiro-OMeTAD-based or polymeric solid hole-conductor. The PCE was further improved by the sequential process of PbI2 and CH3NH3I (methylammonium iodide: MAI) to deposit CH3NH3PbI3 (=MAPbI3) perovskites on a mesoporous (mp)-TiO2 electrode, and a planar thin layer of MAPbI3−xClx was deposited by the vacuum thermal evaporation method without the mp-TiO2 electrode.

In addition, the perovskite was justifiably utilized as a donor in organic photovoltaic architectures because of its large diffusion length. Thus, the unusual properties of the perovskites could be exploited for thin-film planar, meso-superstructured, or mesoporous architectures in perovskite-sensitized solar cells. However, we recently proposed that a bi-layer architecture consisting of the perovskite-infiltrated mp-TiO2 and pure perovskite is crucial in fabricating efficient perovskite cells with coincident reverse and forward scans.
Generally, high open-circuit voltage (Voc) solar cells are important tools for driving electrochemical reactions or adopting new device architectures, such as the top-cell in tandem solar cell structures. Hodes and co-workers demonstrated a high Voc of 1.5 V from a solar cell based on the organic–inorganic lead bromide and 4,4′-bis(N-carbazolyl)-1,1′-biphenyl (CBP) hybrid structure, but the efficiency was low. J. Qiu et al. described organolead halide perovskite cells, with CH3NH3PbBr3 as the light harvester and poly[N-90-heptadecanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-3,6-bis-(thiophen-5-yl)-2,5-dioctyl-2,5-dihydropyrrolo[3,4]pyrrole-1,4-dione] (PCBTDPP) as the hole transporting material (HTM), which showed a Voc of 1.16 V and an efficiency of 3.04%, which is the highest observed for solid state MAPbBr3 devices to date. Nevertheless, to the best of our knowledge, MAPbBr3 perovskite solar cells that have PCEs exceeding 6% with Voc approaching 1.4 V have not yet been reported. It is necessary to determine how and where the Voc is established for understanding the PV performance and its optimization. In particular, the origin of Voc in the bilayer cell architecture consisting of mp-TiO2–perovskite/perovskite/HTM, which is significantly different from conventional dye-sensitized solar cells, is poorly understood. A high Voc in the perovskite solar cell can be achieved by matching and judiciously selecting the perovskite lead halide-based absorber and the HTMs.
Here, we have investigated the effect of lowering the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the HTM to enhance the Voc of mesoscopic perovskite solar cells. We found that a deeper HOMO results in a significantly larger Voc, which enabled us to fabricate high-efficiency solar cells with a Voc of up to 1.40 V and a fill factor (FF) of 79% as well as a PCE of 6.7%, the highest values ever reported for MAPbBr3perovskite solar cells.
Inorganic–organic hybrid solar cells were fabricated in the configuration mesoporous (mp)-TiO2/perovskite/HTM/Au. Both the light absorber (MAPbBr3 or MAPbI3 perovskites) and the HTM were deposited onto mp-TiO2 by spin coating. The homogeneous perovskite layer was deposited with full coverage on mp-TiO2 (see Fig. S1) The HTMs used in this work are triarylamine (TAA) polymer derivatives containing fluorene and indenofluorene, named P-TAA, PF8-TAA, and PIF8-TAA; the molecular structures of these are shown in Fig. 1a. First, we measured the valence bands of MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 perovskites, and the HOMO levels of HTMs, which are P-TAA, PF8-TAA, and PIF8-TAA, because the Voc in solar cell devices can be derived from the quasi-Fermi levels of each material in the structure. Fig. 1b shows the photoelectron emission spectra of MAPbI3, MAPbBr3, PTAA, PF8-TAA, and PIF8-TAA obtained using a Riken Keiki AC-2 photoelectron spectrometer. Photoelectron spectroscopy (PES) measurements were successfully performed to measure the occupied electronic states of an organic semiconductor and the valence band edges (VBEs) in solids. The measured VBEs of MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 were −5.46 eV, which is in accord with the reported values, and −5.68 eV, respectively. The HOMO levels of P-TAA, PF8-TAA, and PIF8-TAA were measured to be −5.14 eV, −5.44 eV, and −5.51 eV which are in accord with a previous report. The band alignment is represented in Fig. 1c, where the conduction band edge is calculated from the optical band gap of the perovskite materials. The excited state of the perovskite is higher than the TiO2 conduction band, and the HOMO levels of PF8-TAA and PIF8-TAA are located near the valence band edges of MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3, respectively.

Fig. 2a shows the diffuse reflectance of MAPbBr3 deposited on the mp-TiO2/blocking layer (bl)-TiO2/FTO substrate, which was measured using a UV-Vis spectrometer with an integrated sphere. The optical band gap of MAPbBr3 is calculated to be 2.3 eV from the diffuse reflectance spectra. Fig. 2b shows the J–V characteristics of the FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2:MAPbBr3/HTM-devices with different HTMs of PTAA, PF8-TAA, and PIF8-TAA measured under AM 1.5 illumination conditions. Table 1 summarizes the extracted short-circuit current density (Jsc), Voc, and fill factor (FF). Voc increased with the deeper HOMO of the HTMs, from 1.29 V of P-TAA to 1.36 V of PF8-TAA and 1.40 V of PIF8-TAA. This reveals that the HOMO level of the HTM influences Voc. The origin of Voc in perovskite solar cells is typically described by the difference between the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level of the perovskite and the HOMO of the HTM, or by the potential difference between the quasi-Fermi level of the electron (Efn) at the electron extracting layer/anode interface and the quasi-Fermi level of the hole (Efp) at the hole extracting layer/cathode interface under illumination, assuming that recombination within the device can be ignored. Therefore, the high Voc of 1.40 V in the MAPbBr3-PIF8(TAA)-device is ascribed to the deeper HOMO level near the VBE of MAPbBr3. The determination of Voc in the perovskite cell will be further discussed later. In Fig. 2b and Table 1, we also see that the increased Voc accompanies a decrease in the photocurrent (Jsc), while the FF increases, in the sequence P-TAA, PF8-TAA, and PIF8-TAA. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) shown in Fig. 2c for devices using PIF-TAA and PIF8-TAA as HTMs is lower than that of P-TAA over the whole range of absorption wavelengths. The relatively low EQE and decreased Jsc with deeper HOMO levels of the HTMs might be attributed to the lowering of the driving force for charge injection, due to the small disruption in energy levels between the VBE of MAPbBr3 and the HOMO of the HTM, as shown in Fig. 1b. In contrast, the remarkable FF of PIF8-TAA can be related to the charge carrier mobility (4 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1) which is higher than that of PF8-TAA (2 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1) and P-TAA (4 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1). The much larger driving force of P-TAA may counterbalance the low charge carrier mobility, resulting in the same FF as that of PF8-TAA. However, the FF might also be determined by other factors such as the charge injection rate and the recombination rate at the interface contact between perovskite and HTM. Regardless of the reduced Jsc, the increase in Voc and FF leads to an improved PCE of 6.7%. Consequently, the Voc, FF, and PCE of 1.40 V, 79%, and 6.7%, respectively, are the highest among those reported for existing single-junction MAPbBr3 perovskite solar cells. To ensure the reproducibility of the results, a histogram for the efficiencies of each cell is shown in Fig. S2.
Perovskite
HTMs

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)
MAPbBr3
PTAA
6.6
1.29
0.70
5.9
PF8-TAA
6.3
1.36
0.70
6.0
PIF8-TAA
6.1
1.40
0.79
6.7
MAPbI3
PTAA
21.3
1.04
0.73
16.2
PF8-TAA
8.9
0.92
0.56
4.6
PIF8-TAA
19.0
1.04
0.46
9.1
For the perovskite solar cell, especially for the architecture consisting of the mp-TiO2–perovskite composite and pure perovskite layers, our previous results suggested that the Voc is not simply determined by the difference between the electron Fermi level at mp-TiO2 and the hole Fermi level at the HTM. Under the current operation mechanism, the perovskite acts as an absorber as well as a charge (either electron or hole) carrier; hence, the voltage output is expected to be high since sensitization or donor–acceptor type devices significantly reduce the expected Voc because of some charge transfer energy loss. Furthermore, perovskite has high capacitance and can accumulate charges on itself, because of which the quasi Fermi level is controlled upon illumination.
To gain more insight into the Voc of the perovskite cells with HTMs having a deeper HOMO, we additionally fabricated devices using MAPbI3 with the same HTMs used in MAPbBr3. Fig. 2d shows the J–V characteristics of MAPbI3 perovskite solar cells using PTAA, PIF8-TAA, and PIF8-TAA as HTMs; the photovoltaic parameters are also summarized in Table 1. One can assume that Efn is constant in FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2:perovskite/HTM-devices, although different HOMO levels of HTMs are used. It is noted that the HOMO levels of PTAA and PF8-TAA are −5.14 eV and −5.44 eV, respectively, which are higher than the VBE (−5.46 eV) of MAPbI3 and therefore, hole transport from MAPbI3 to the HTMs is favoured. However, PIF8-TAA has a lower HOMO level of −5.51 eV as compared to the VBE of MAPbI3, which may result in a hole-injection barrier between MAPbI3 and PIF8-TAA. The J–V curve of the FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2:MAPbI3/PIF8-TAA-device shows the roll-over effect, in which the current is saturated at high forward bias, while the PTAA and PF8-devices show a typical J–V response. The roll-over effect has been explained by a back contact hole-injection barrier in CdTe, PbS, and organic solar cells. Moreover, the driving force might be not enough for hole injection from MAPbI3 to PF8-TAA because PF8-TAA has a similar HOMO level to the VBE in MAPbI3, as shown in Fig. 1b. Therefore, it is difficult to discuss the effect of the HOMO level in HTMs on Voc for MAPbI3-devices, because of the insufficient driving force for charge injection and the abnormality in the J–V response. Nevertheless, the significantly high Jsc value of 19.0 mA cm−2 for the FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2: MAPbI3/PIF8-TAA-device in spite of the unfavourable energetic alignment between MAPbI3 and PIF8-TAA is an interesting result. Other effects except the energy level between perovskite and the HTM may affect charge transfer, because the perovskite material is known for its very low exciton binding energy or its ability to act as a free electron–hole carrier.

J–V characteristics and photovoltaic parameters of MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 fabricated with spiro-OMeTAD [(2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene)] as low-molecular HTMs are given in Fig. S3 and Table S1. We see that the use of spiro-MeOTAD, which has a higher HOMO level than that of PTAA, resulted in a decrease of the Voc for both MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3. Therefore, our results further suggest that the energy level of the contact materials could have a strong impact on the deliverable energy of photoinduced charges. However, it is important to select energetically favourable contact materials with the HOMO well-aligned to the VBE of the perovskite to maximize the energy output.

Fig. 3a compares the J–V characteristics of MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 perovskite solar cells using PTAA as the HTM. The cross-sectional image of a representative device is shown in the inset of Fig. 3a. Comparison of the Voc value of FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2:MAPbBr3/PTAA with that of FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2:MAPbI3/PTAA shows that Voc can be increased from 1.04 V to 1.29 V simply by changing the perovskite material from MAPbI3 to MAPbBr3 in the same sandwich structure between mp-TiO2 and PTAA. This result reveals that the perovskite materials obviously contribute to Efn and Efp within the device. As shown in Fig. 1b, MAPbBr3, with a wider band gap (2.3 eV) than MAPbI3 (1.55 eV), has a lower VBE (5.68 eV) and a higher conduction band edge (CBE, 3.38 eV) as compared to MAPbI3. Therefore, when Efn and Efp are built-up within the device under light illumination, MAPbBr3 might lead to a larger difference between Efn and Efp as compared to MAPbI3, in spite of using the same electron (TiO2) and hole extracting layers (PTAA), thus resulting in a higher Voc. This is not expected in sensitized solar cells, because the FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2:MAPbBr3/PTAA/Au device shows a higher Voc of 1.29 V than the potential difference (1.16 eV) between the CBM (−4.0 eV) of TiO2 and the HOMO level (−5.16 eV) of PTAA. Consequently, as depicted in Fig. 3b, the CBE level of the MAPbBr3 can manipulate the voltage output of the mp-TiO2–perovskite/perovskite/HTM bilayer junction cell. Based on this reasoning, a remarkably high voltage (1.40 V) device has been realized by judicious selection of the perovskite and HTM. This also means that the energy gap with charge separation significantly dominates the voltage output.

In summary, we have fabricated mp-TiO2/MAPbI3 and MAPbI3 perovskite as the light harvester, and P-TAA, PF8-TAA, PIF-TAA as HTMs. The Voc of MAPbBr3 perovskite cells increased from 1.29 V of P-TAA to 1.36 V of PF8-TAA and 1.40 V of PIF8-TAA with a deeper HOMO level. In addition, the Voc decreased from 1.29 V to 1.04 V by using MAPbI3 in place of MAPbBr3 with the same configuration and HTM (PTAA). This result reveals that both the perovskite materials and the HOMO level of the HTM determine the high voltage output in our devices. The MAPbBr3-based perovskite device displayed a remarkably higher Voc of 1.40 V, with an FF of 79%, due to the deep HOMO level and superior hole mobility, as well as a high PCE of 6.7%, when PIF8-TAA was used as the HTM. The present study demonstrates the main roles of the HTMs and perovskite light harvester in determining the Voc and provides a suitable strategy for the design and development of perovskite-based solar cells showing a high Voc, FF, and significantly improved PCE.


This work was supported by the Global Research Laboratory (GRL) Program, the Global Frontier R&D Program on Center for Multiscale Energy System funded by the National Research Foundation in Korea, and by a grant from the KRICT 2020 Program for Future Technology of the Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT), Republic of Korea.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: A description on the detailed experimental process and characterization. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ee00762j
‡ These two authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014