 DOI: 10.1039/D1TA10608B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 4683-4694


Michael S. A.
Kamel
,

Michael
Oelgemöller
 and 

Mohan V.
Jacob
*

Electronic Materials Research Lab, College of Science and Engineering, James Cook University, Townsville, 4811, Australia. E-mail: mohan.jacob@jcu.edu.au

Physics Department, Faculty of Science, Minia University, P.O. Box 61519, Minia, Egypt

Applied and Green Photochemistry Group, College of Science and Engineering, James Cook University, Townsville, 4811, Australia

Received
13th December 2021
, Accepted 19th January 2022
First published on 20th January 2022
The rapid degradation of organic photovoltaics (OPVs) under ambient conditions represents a major limitation to this promising technology. Device encapsulation is an effective approach to increase the lifetime of OPVs. Herein, we report the time and cost-effective synthesis of ultrathin encapsulation materials for OPVs by radio frequency (RF) plasma polymerization from plant extract. The encapsulated device retained 66% and 87% of its initial power conversion efficiency (PCE) and fill factor, respectively, after 90 days under ambient conditions while the reference device degraded within the first month. More interestingly, the open circuit voltage of the encapsulated device was found unchanged after >4.5 months with 70% of its original short circuit current density. The investigated thin films have shown strong absorption in the ultraviolet (UV) range with high transmission exceeding 98% to visible light and can be employed to prevent harmful UV photons from reaching the photoactive layer of the device. Additionally, the synthesized films have revealed a high chemical stability under artificial UV irradiation. Thus, this work presents a solvent-free and room temperature encapsulation method based on sustainable materials to increase the lifetime of OPVs without altering the device performance.

Organic solar cells (OSCs) have received intensive research attention over the past decade as a promising alternative to their high cost inorganic based counterparts. Mechanical flexibility, low processing cost, light-weight, abundance of materials and rapidly increasing power conversion efficiency (PCE) are the major advantages of OSCs. The PCE of organic photovoltaics (OPVs) has increased from approximately 7% to >18% for monolayer and exceeded 17% for multi-layer tandem devices since 2010. However, the short lifetime of OPVs under real world operating conditions hinders their large-scale commercialization. Typical lifetimes of OPVs range from a few to thousands of hours in air. However, these lifetimes increase significantly when devices are stored in an inert atmosphere. The prolonged exposure of OPVs to oxygen, water vapour, temperature, and ultraviolet (UV) radiation stimulates oxidation reactions at the interface between, and within, the different layers of the device. These reactions result in compositional changes which eventually lead to the degradation of the photovoltaic parameters and overall device performance.

Different approaches were proposed to reduce the degradation of OPVs such as the development of inverted geometry which allowed the utilization of metal electrodes with high work functions such as silver (Ag) and gold (Au). The high work function electrodes show higher resistance to photo-oxidation reactions under real world conditions compared to aluminium cathodes in the case of regular geometry OPVs. Additionally, inverted geometry stopped the degradation of the ITO transparent electrode caused by the acidic nature of the most commonly used hole transport layer (HTL) poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS). Despite the performance improvement achieved with inverted OPVs, the long-term operation under ambient conditions eventually results in device degradation. Therefore, physical encapsulation of OPVs is an essential procedure to increase their lifetimes through reducing the amount of oxygen and water vapour reaching the different layers of the device. The utilization of glass-based encapsulation prevents the application of flexible OPVs. Several attempts were reported to synthesize efficient encapsulation materials for flexible electronic devices including plastic and graphene-based barriers. However, these methods are based on multi-step processes and/or require additional adhesive (sealing) materials and further UV treatment to adhere to the encapsulated device.
An effective encapsulation material should possess low water and oxygen permeability, high resistance to thermal and UV degradation, and high electric permittivity. Moreover, good adhesion to the device to be encapsulated and low cost processability are of great importance. Plant extract-based radio frequency (RF) plasma polymers (PPs) offer outstanding features such as their sustainable generation, stability, chemical inertness, mechanical flexibility, defect-free structure, high optical transparency, time and cost effectiveness and solvent-free processing. Plant extract-derived RF PPs are promising candidates as encapsulation materials for OPVs and other optoelectronic devices especially for flexible applications. Many reports have referred to the potential of PPs from essential oils as encapsulation layers for electronic devices. However, only one attempt has been made to encapsulate OPVs with such thin film polymers where the γ-terpinene PP based on continuous RF plasma was employed. The properties of the synthesized PP-thin films can vary widely with the preparation conditions such as the power and the mode of RF plasma, deposition time, monomer type, flow rate, etc. More research is needed to develop new encapsulation materials and to investigate any potential applications of these sustainable and low cost PPs for OPVs and other optoelectronic devices.
In this work, Pelargonium graveolens (geranium oil) was used to produce plasma polymerized thin films, by both continuous and pulsed RF plasma. Thin film coatings were synthesized directly on the top of the metal electrode of inverted geometry P3HT:PCBM based OPV devices. The effect of RF power and duty cycle (DC) in the case of continuous and pulsed plasma, respectively, on the film properties as well as device stability was studied. The stability of the encapsulated and non-encapsulated OPVs under ambient conditions was investigated via measuring the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics over three months. The variation of the photovoltaic parameters, short circuit current density (JSC), open circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (PCE), of the devices with time was investigated. Different techniques such as FTIR, AFM, water contact angle, UV-VIS and ellipsometer were used to characterize the synthesized PP thin films. Moreover, the photo-stability of the prepared PP-thin films was studied under ultraviolet (UV) irradiation.

Inverted geometry bulk heterojunction (BHJ) OPV devices with structure ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag were employed in the present study (Fig. 1a). Pre-patterned (20 mm × 15 mm) ITO-coated glass substrates (S211) purchased from Ossila were cleaned in an ultrasonic bath of DI water with decon-90, DI water, acetone and subsequently isopropyl alcohol (IPA) for 10 minutes each. The cleaned substrates were then dried by using an air gun and left overnight in an oven at 100 °C to remove any residual water or solvents. Finally, the dried substrates were exposed to 50 W O2 plasma for 20 minutes for surface modification just before the deposition of the ZnO electron transport layer (ETL). To produce ZnO sol–gel, 0.109 g of Zn-acetate dihydrate was dissolved in 1 ml of 2-methoxyethanol (purity >99%) with 32 μl of ethanolamine (purity >99.5%) as a stabilizer. All the components of ZnO sol–gel were obtained from Sigma Aldrich. The ZnO solution was stirred at 60 °C for two hours followed by overnight vigorous stirring at room temperature. The clear ZnO sol–gel was then filtered using 0.45 μm PTFE hydrophobic filters before spin coating to exclude any agglomerations. To obtain a thin (∼30 nm) ETL of ZnO, an amount of 40 μl of the solution was spin coated at 4000 rpm for 60 seconds on the top of ITO and then annealed using a hotplate at 170 °C for 30 minutes in open air. After that, the coated substrates were moved to a nitrogen-filled glovebox for the deposition of the photoactive layer through the spin coating of 20 μl of P3HT:PCBM (1:0.8 weight ratio) dissolved in chlorobenzene with a total concentration of 25 mg ml−1 on the top of the ZnO layer at 2000 rpm for 35 seconds followed by 10 minutes annealing on the hotplate at 120 °C. For the deposition of the top electrode (anode), the substrates were then transferred to a thermal evaporation unit (model: HINDI HIVACUUM 12A4D). A thin layer (∼2.3 nm) of MoO3 HTL and then 100 nm of Ag (anode) were evaporated under a high vacuum of 5 × 10−6 mbar. The active area of each single device was determined by using a deposition mask (S211 from Ossila) to be 4 mm2. Eight devices were fabricated for each type under investigation. After the deposition of the anode, devices were moved directly to the RF plasma reactor for encapsulation.


A thin layer of plasma-polymerized Pelargonium graveolens was deposited on the top of the metal electrode using a custom-made plasma polymerization system, as shown in Fig. 1b. Pelargonium graveolens was obtained from Australian botanical products and was used without further treatments. The major constituents of the precursor are citronellol (34.12%), geraniol (13.69%), citronellyl formate (7.39%), isomenthone (5.74%), and linalool (5.19%). The RF plasma polymerization reactor consists of a 70 cm long quartz tube (with an inner diameter = 5 cm) connected to a vacuum pump at one end and to the precursor inlet at the other side. Two copper rings were mounted around the tube and fixed 10 cm apart. The output terminals of the RF generator (CESAR 1312 RF power generator) with a frequency of 13.56 MHz were connected to the copper rings through a matching network (Navio RF matching network – Advanced Energy-M/N 3155401-002C). The OPV devices to be encapsulated were inserted into the tube between the Cu electrodes. The tube was evacuated at a pressure of (0.1–0.2) mbar before the monomer vapour was released to enter the reactor. For continuous plasma, different RF power levels (10, 15, 20, 25, and 30 W) were applied for 10 minutes to produce the plasma polymerized encapsulation layers. On the other hand, 30 W of pulsed power was applied at three different duty cycles (30%, 50%, and 70%) while all other conditions were kept the same as those of continuous plasma. Tiny pieces of sticky tape were used to cover the end sides of the ITO stripes to avoid blocking the device terminals with the encapsulation film. Both encapsulated and non-encapsulated devices were then stored under ambient conditions, outside the glovebox, to investigate their stability by studying the variation of their J–V curves with time.


The stability of the as-fabricated (reference) and encapsulated OPVs in ambient air was investigated over three months. However, the top device based on pulsed plasma encapsulation was tested once again after extra 1.5 months i.e. a total of 4.5 months. The variation of the photovoltaic parameters e.g. JSC, VOC, FF, and PCE of the devices stored in an ambient atmosphere was studied as a function of time. The performance of the investigated devices was obtained by studying their J–V characteristics under one sun illumination of an AM1.5G solar simulator (ABET Sunlite) with 100 mW cm−2 incident illumination. The solar simulator was calibrated before the J–V measurements using a standard Si solar cell as a reference. J–V curves were recorded with the help of a Keithley 2636A source meter and E370 test board (from Ossila).


The chemical structure of the prepared plasma polymers at different deposition power levels was studied using an ATR FTIR (PerkinElmer Spectrum 100 FTIR spectrometer). Moreover, the photostability of the investigated encapsulation PP-thin films was also studied by studying the change in their FTIR spectra as a result of exposure to UV irradiation. A variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometer (J.A. Woollam Co. Inc. M-2000D) was used to study the thickness of the as fabricated films via the analysis of the reflection and transmission spectra with the help of CompleteEASE 6.56 software. Optical constants such as refractive index and attenuation coefficient were also studied. Moreover, the UV absorption and optical bandgaps of different plasma polymerized thin films were investigated using a UV-VIS spectrometer (Shimatzu UV-VIS 2600) with a wavelength range of 200 to 800 nm. A goniometer instrument (KSV CAM 101, Helsinki, Finland) was used to investigate the wetting properties of the PP-films through studying the water contact angle. Morphology of the prepared films was studied using an atomic force microscope (AFM) (NT-MDT NTEGRA, Moscow, Russian). The stability of the synthesized PP-films under UV irradiation was studied using a photoreactor chamber (Luzchem LZC-1). The reactor consists of a top illuminated chamber with eight 8 W UVB lamps (Ushio G8T5E; wavelength range 300 ± 25 nm). The chamber had dimensions of 33 × 33 cm (L × W) and 22 cm (H). The film temperature during irradiation was kept at almost ±3 °C from room temperature with the help of an exhaust fan at the back of the chamber. The stability of the films under UV irradiation was investigated by studying the variation of their FTIR spectra with UV doses.



Fig. 2 shows the performance variation of OPV devices both encapsulated with the PP-thin films deposited at 20 W RF continuous plasma (CP) and non-encapsulated as a function of time. In Fig. 2a the variation of the J–V curves of the device encapsulated at 20 W RF CP after fabrication and after 2160 hours is shown. The performance of the reference device completely deteriorated in comparison with the encapsulated counterparts, which retained almost 50% of their initial performance after 2160 hours as shown in Fig. 2b and c. The value of the open circuit voltage of the devices encapsulated at 20 power also remained unchanged even after three months under ambient conditions. The decay of the photovoltaic performance of the encapsulated devices is mainly attributed to the reduced JSC unlike the reference device, which showed high loss in both JSC and VOC. The simultaneous decrease in VOC and JSC for the non-encapsulated device may be an evidence for dramatically reduced Rsh and increased Rs of the device. On the other hand, the highly stable VOC of the encapsulated devices confirms that their shunt resistance has not or only slightly changed over >2100 hours, while the drop in their JSC is attributed to the Rs increase. The increased Rs is attributed to the increased resistance of the metal electrode upon oxidation in an ambient atmosphere. It is worth mentioning that water and oxygen molecules not only diffuse through the device during its lifetime, but can also be captured during device fabrication. Thus, part of the performance degradation of the investigated devices can be attributed to the presence of O2 and H2O molecules within the fabrication steps particulary during the metal electrode deposition and encapsulation which were conducted outside the glovebox. Therefore, the integration of these steps with the glovebox is expected to significantly increase the device lifetime.

For pulsed plasma-based encapsulation layers, the variation of device performance with time showed higher stability compared to that based on continuous plasma. As shown in Fig. 3, OPVs encapsulated with pulsed PP-thin films have retained almost 90% of their initial PCE and ∼95% of FF during the first 25 days (600 h). In the following 20 days (after 1080 hours), the encapsulated devices have revealed high performance with retaining more than 83% and >92% of their PCEs and FFs, respectively, compared to their reference counterpart that lost almost 60% of its initial PCE after almost 900 hours. The devices encapsulated at DCs of 30% and 50% have higher stability than those encapsulated at a DC of 70%. After 2160 hours (90 days), OPVs encapsulated at DCs of 30% and 50% retained 66% and 67% and 82% and 83% of their initial PCEs and fill factors, respectively. At a higher DC (70%), the device retained 61% and 75% of its original PCE and FF, respectively, after three months. Additionally, the values of VOC for all the encapsulated devices have shown no change over the investigated time (90 days). More interestingly, the device encapsulated at a DC of 50% was found to retain >57% and 78% of its original PCE and FF, respectively, without any loss in its VOC value even after 3264 hours (136 days), as shown in Fig. 3a. These values recorded after 4.5 months are still higher than those obtained with the reference device after less than three weeks. The obtained results confirm that OPVs encapsulated with geranium oil-based pulsed plasma polymers have higher stability than their continuous plasma based counterparts either synthesized from geranium oil, in the present work, or from γ-terpinene in ref. 33. The addition of PP coating on the top electrode of the OPV device plays a significant role in improving device stability. The presence of encapsulation films on the top of the metal electrode limits the passage of O2 and water vapour, which leads to fast degradation through the different layers of the device. Therefore, the photo-induced oxidation reactions at the interfaces as well as the metal electrode are slowed down and hence higher stability is achieved.

Fig. 2a and 3a compare the performance of the best encapsulated devices based on continuous and pulsed plasma, respectively, over three months in an ambient atmosphere. The stability of the device with pulsed plasma encapsulation is superior to that based on continuous plasma coating. The higher stability of the device may prove that the pulsed plasma based encapsulation layer is more impervious (less permeable) to ambient oxygen than the CP-based counterpart. In addition to the low cost, sustainable preparation and fast synthesis of essential oil-based PP encapsulation layers, they are excellent candidates for OPVs and other optoelectronic devices. It should also be observed that the present encapsulation method does not have any negative impact on the photovoltaic performance of the device as confirmed by Fig. S1. This can be attributed to the low RF power and short deposition time needed to produce these PP-thin film encapsulation layers.
To understand the properties of the synthesized PP-thin films and to investigate their potential for further applications, particulary in organic optoelectronics, a set of measurements was carried out which are discussed in the following sections.

The morphology features of the investigated thin films were studied using an atomic force microscope (AFM). Fig. 4 shows the 2D and 3D images of PP-films deposited at 20 W continuous plasma and pulsed plasma of 30 W at a DC of 50%. Both samples show uniform and smooth surfaces with a root mean square roughness of 0.38 nm and 0.42 nm for the pulsed and continuous plasma based polymers, respectively, which are in good agreement with the data in the literature. Structural imperfections such as pinholes or dislocations within the encapsulation layer increase the permeation of oxygen and water molecules which negatively affects the device stability. Therefore, the defect-free morphology of PP-thin films is a promising feature that makes them excellent candidates as barrier layers for organic optoelectronic devices.

The thickness of the investigated films was obtained by analyzing both reflection and transmission ellipsometer data. The variation of film thickness over the substrate surface has shown a high degree of homogeneity, as shown in Fig. 5. The values of film thickness ranged from 80 nm to 100 nm and from 200 nm to 300 nm for the pulsed and continuous plasma films, respectively. The average film thickness was found to increase from 78 nm to ∼98 nm with increasing DC from 30% to 50% and remained almost the same (∼96 nm) at a DC of 70%. The thickness increase with the duty cycle may be attributed to the increased probability of the polymerization reaction to the monomer vapour to occur with a higher fraction of the deposition signal. In addition, all the films under investigation have shown high optical transmission exceeding 98% at a wavelength of 550 nm, as displayed in Fig. S2.

The high optical transmission of the investigated films is also confirmed by UV-VIS data, as illustrated in Fig. 6, while the absorption spectrum of the monomer (geranium oil) can be found in Fig. S3. All wavelengths >approx. 380 nm are totally transmitted through the film, while absorption is observed for shorter wavelengths. Fig. 6 shows the UV-VIS absorption spectra of the continuous and pulsed plasma polymer thin films prepared at different RF power and different duty cycles. These datasets were recorded for the as synthesized samples without any further treatment. Similar absorption spectra were observed for all samples with an absorption peak between 270 and 280 nm which may be assigned to the π–π* transition. The optical bandgap (Eg) of the investigated films was determined using Tauc plots as shown in Fig. 6(c and d) according to the following equation:

αhυ = A(hυ − Eg)n
(1)
where
h is the Planck constant, A is an energy-independent constant, and ν is the frequency of the incident light (Hz). The value of n depends on the distribution of the density of states and the transition mode; n can be 0.5 or 3/2 for direct allowed and forbidden transition, respectively, or 2 and 3 for indirect allowed and forbidden transitions, respectively. In this work, an n value of 3/2 was used for all the investigated PP-thin films as it gave the best linear fitting. α is the absorption coefficient (cm−1) which can be related to the absorbance and the optical path within the material (film thickness, d) as:

(2)
The values of the optical bandgap for all the investigated films are listed in Table 1.
Continuous plasma
RF power (W)
10
15
20
25
30
Optical bandgap (eV)
3.45
3.42
3.38
3.44
3.33

Pulsed plasma

Duty cycle (%)
30
50
70
Optical bandgap (eV)
3.33
3.4
3.42
The ability of these plasma polymerized thin films to absorb light in the UV-range represents an added value to such materials in terms of their applicability as encapsulation layers for organic electronics. The absorption of these plasma polymers starts at almost 370 nm with an optical bandgap of (3.33–3.48 eV) which is in good agreement with previously reported data. It has been reported that the exposure of the different layers of OPVs, especially the photoactive layer, to high energy UV photons present in the solar spectrum is a determining factor to the overall device stability. Therefore, the prevention of such high energy photons from reaching the active layer of OPVs is crucial to reduce device degradation. Although glass substrates can absorb UV light with short wavelengths (<290 nm), these wavelengths are normally blocked by the Earth's atmosphere (stratosphere layer). On the other hand, UV photons with longer wavelengths (UV-A and UV-B) which are present in natural sunlight reaching the Earth's surface are transmitted through glass substrates and can cause photo degradation of OPVs (Fig. 6e). Therefore, the deposition of these PP films on the glass substrate represents a promising strategy to cut off destructive UV-light from the solar cell device, besides their application as physical encapsulation layers to the metal electrodes of OPVs and other organic electronics. As shown in Fig. 6(a and b), the UV-absorbance of CP-based thin films is stronger than that of the pulsed plasma based counterparts which may be attributed to their larger absorption coefficient and thickness as confirmed by ellipsometer data. Thus, the film thickness can be adjusted to achieve optimum UV absorption and hence higher protection of the encapsulated device can be guaranteed without significant drop in the visible light reaching the photoactive layer due to the high transmission of these materials at visible wavelengths.

The chemical structure of the material is a key factor to understand its properties. The chemical composition of the precursor as well as the synthesized films was investigated by studying their FTIR spectra. Fig. 7a shows the FTIR spectrum of the Pelargonium graveolens monomer. The band around 3370 cm−1 represents the OH stretching of alcohol. The strong peak at 2940 cm−1 with two shoulders at 2870 and 2960 cm−1 accounts for the different –C–H stretching vibrations. The two peaks at 1712 cm−1 and 1730 cm−1 are assigned to the CO stretching of carbonyl compounds, while the peaks at 1453 and 1377 cm−1 are attributed to CH2 and CH3 bending vibrations, respectively. The weak peak at 1670 cm−1 represents the CC of alkenes. The peaks at 1057 and 1173 cm−1 appear as a result of the C–O–C and C–OH stretching, respectively. Similar FTIR spectra were obtained for both continuous and pulsed plasma in terms of peak positions, while the absorbance intensity of some peaks varied with varying deposition parameters. Fig. 7(b and c) show the FTIR spectra for the synthesized films. The broad band around ∼3400 cm−1 is attributed to the O–H stretching vibration of the alcohol groups. The peak at ∼1707 cm−1 refers to the CO stretching of the carbonyl groups. In case of continuous plasma polymers, two emerging peaks at wavenumbers of 1380 cm−1 and 1457 cm−1 are assigned to the C–H bending of the CH3-and CH2-groups, respectively. Moreover, the emerging peak around 2960 cm−1, with the highest intensity at RF = 10 W, is assigned to the C–H asymmetric stretching. In contrast, for pulsed PP-films, the presence of a peak at approx. 2960 cm−1 can be observed, and with low intensity, at DCs of 50% and 70%, while the CH2 and CH3 related peaks completely disappeared. The disappearance of these bonds may be attributed to the high deposition power that can lead to the breakage of weak bonds within the monomer molecules during polymerisation reactions. The higher the deposition RF power, the higher the energy of the ions, electrons, and free radicals within the plasma reactor.

Due to the exposure of the encapsulation layers to incident solar light during device operation, it is important that the encapsulation material possesses a high degree of photostability. In this work, the stability of both continuous and pulsed plasma polymerized films was investigated under UV-B (λ = 300 ± 25 nm) irradiation. The films were exposed directly to UV radiation for 24, 48 and 120 hours and their stability was evaluated through variations of their FTIR spectra. UV-irradiation can result in structural changes within the plasma polymerized thin films depending on the energy of radiation and exposure time. To exclude the effect of unnatural wavelengths (<300 nm), the irradiated films were covered with a glass Petri dish which is transparent to wavelengths >300 nm (see Fig. S4–S6). Upon exposure to UV-B, both continuous and pulsed plasma based films started to show slight changes in their FTIR spectra compared to their non-irradiated counterparts. The response of the investigated PP-films varied with their preparation conditions. The resulting changes in the corresponding FTIR spectra of the irradiated samples are represented by an increase or decrease in the intensity of the different peaks. In order to exclude the influence of film thickness on the peak intensity, absorption data were normalized over the total area under the curve for the range of interest in the FTIR spectrum.
For both continuous and pulsed plasma based films, it can be observed from Fig. 8 that the change in the intensity of the absorbance peaks is minor especially when using the glass cover. For the films deposited at continuous RF power, the C–H stretching vibration around 2900 cm−1 was mainly affected, particularly when unnatural high energy photons were included (without the glass cover). The change is higher in the case of low deposition RF power which may be attributed to the presence of the residual monomer on the film surface due to incomplete polymerisation. The decrease of the C–H vibration band (around 2900 cm−1) is accompanied by an increase in the intensity of CO and OH peaks which can be ascribed to the photooxidation reaction upon UV exposure. Pulsed plasma-based thin films have shown higher stability as almost no changes in their FTIR spectra have been observed, even after 120 hours of UV-B exposure when a glass cover was used. In addition, minor changes were found even when high energetic UV photons were present. These were visible as a decrease in the intensity of the CO vibration band with a simultaneous broadening in the OH vibration peak, which increased with exposure time. This behaviour may be attributed to the conversion of carbonyl (CO) into carboxyl (COOH) groups in the presence of molecular oxygen.

The water contact angle (WCA) is an important parameter for encapsulation materials. The hydrophobicity of an organic material is significantly improved by the presence of non-polar CH groups. Fig. 9 shows the water contact angles of all the investigated plasma polymer thin films. Films based on continuous plasma have a much higher WCA than those based on pulsed plasma, as summarized in Table 2. In the case of continuous PP-films, the relatively high WCA (compared to pulsed PP-films) can be attributed to the presence of more non-polar groups such as CH2 and CH3, as confirmed by their FTIR spectra (Fig. 7). The value of the WCA of the sample prepared at 30 W is somewhat lower than those of other samples deposited in continuous power mode. This variation can be linked to the weaker presence of non-polar groups with respect to polar groups (CO and OH). It is noteworthy to mention that an efficient encapsulation material should possess large water contact angles so that it can provide higher protection to the photovoltaic device, especially in high humidity or even rainy conditions, for large scale applications. As shown in Fig. 2 and 3, OPVs encapsulated with pulsed plasma –based thin films have higher stability under ambient conditions than those based on continuous plasma. On the other hand, WCA measurements revealed that CP-based thin films are more hydrophobic than the pulsed plasma-based counterparts. Therefore, the deposition of a CP-based thin layer on the top of the encapsulation layer synthesized with pulsed plasma can be a more protective approach to OPVs in humid or rainy weather. This bilayer encapsulation can be carried out in the same procedure as the single layer deposition without any considerable excess cost.

Continuous plasma
RF power (W)
10
15
20
25
30
Water contact angle (°)
64.01
60.48
58.05
60.56
29.31

Pulsed plasma

Duty cycle (%)
30
50
70
Water contact angle (°)
22.38
4.47
8.55

Efficient encapsulation layers for organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices were prepared by time- and cost-effective RF plasma polymerization of Pelargonium graveolens. The low RF deposition power coupled with room temperature fabrication of these polymer thin films does not cause any damage to the layers of the device during encapsulation. The dry (solvent-free) deposition of these plasma polymers in addition to their dielectric nature and high adhesion results in an effective contact with the metal electrode without influencing the photovoltaic parameters of the device. Both continuous and pulsed plasma-based polymers have enhanced the device stability with an optimum performance for films deposited at a pulsed plasma of 30 W and duty cycle of 50%. The best encapsulated device retained two thirds (66%) of its initial power conversion efficiency and 87% of its fill factor without any change in the open circuit voltage after three months in an ambient atmosphere, while the reference device degraded within the first month. More interestingly, the encapsulated device was found to retain >57% of the PCE after more than 4.5 months. In addition, the synthesized films have shown high stability under UV-B irradiation. The sustainability and time- and cost-effectiveness of this method make it a promising candidate for large scale encapsulation of OPVs and other organic optoelectronic devices, especially for flexible ones.


There are no conflicts to declare.


Michael S. A. Kamel would like to acknowledge the financial support by the College of Science and Engineering, James Cook University (JCU), Townsville, Australia through the JCUPRS scholarship.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta10608b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022