 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA03240G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14592-14597


Minoh
Lee
,

Yimhyun
Jo
,

Dong Suk
Kim
,

Hu Young
Jeong
 and 

Yongseok
Jun
*

Department of Chemical Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan 689-798, Republic of Korea

KIER-UNIST Advanced Center for Energy, Korea Institute of Energy Research, Ulsan 689-798, Republic of Korea

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan 689-798, Republic of Korea

Department of Materials Chemistry and Engineering, Konkuk University, Seoul 143-701, Republic of Korea. E-mail: yjun@konkuk.ac.kr; Tel: +82 2 450 0440

Received
3rd May 2015
, Accepted 8th June 2015
First published on 26th June 2015
Efficient flexible perovskite solar cells based on a Ti substrate have been fabricated using indium tin oxide (ITO) as the top electrode. Furthermore, an ultra-thin Ag layer embedded between spiro-MeOTAD and ITO led to lower sheet resistance and a highly durable electrode compared with bare ITO. Inclusion of the Ag thin film has also provided enhanced electromagnetic fields on the surface of Ag for devices, which caused an increase of short circuit current.

Inorganic–organic hybrid perovskite materials with the formula CH3NH3PbI3 are considered to be highly promising candidates for light harvesting in solid-state photovoltaic devices. Their superior intrinsic properties include a direct optical band gap of 1.55 eV, a high extinction coefficient, and a broad absorption range from the visible to the near-infrared region (800 nm). These advantages can help to meet the demand to increase the power conversion efficiency (PCE) in photovoltaic devices on a rigid substrate, from initial reports of 3.9% (ref. 5) to the highest value of 20.1%, within only a few years. One of the generalized structures in inorganic–organic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) consists of TiO2 as the electron transport layer. This structure hinders feasible fabrication with polymer-based flexible substrates at temperatures above 450 °C, which are used for various applications, such as portable electronic devices and wearable electronic textiles. To facilitate the fabrication of flexible PSCs (FPSCs), a Ti substrate was considered. Ti substrates have excellent endurance at high temperatures compared with that of polymer-based substrates, which allow them to be easily formed with the well-crystallized TiO2 layer. However, a Ti substrate needs a transparent conducting cathode for top illumination in PSCs, because of its opaque properties.

In this regard, we have recently fabricated FPSCs based on a Ti substrate, using a Ag thin film as a semitransparent top electrode. Although structures with Ag films successfully achieved good cell performance, they were inferior to polymer-based FPSCs because of their poor transmittance. In order to achieve a better cell performance, it is necessary to replace the thin Ag film as the top electrode with the one that is more transparent. Several materials are considered, such as metal grids, metal nanowires, carbon nanotubes, graphene films, as well as indium–tin-oxide (ITO). ITO has been used as a transparent electrode for photovoltaic devices because of its advantages such as low electrical resistivity, structural uniformity, environmental stability, and high transparency, compared with those of other promising transparent conducting materials.
Even though ITO has superior characteristics, its inherent brittleness has restricted its use in flexible electrode applications. Here, we suggest that the insertion of an ultra-thin Ag layer (1–3 nm) by thermal evaporation between spiro-MeOTAD and ITO may be a solution to the brittleness issue. The embedded Ag layer in ITO (Ag-ITO) enables the fabrication of high efficiency FPSCs with excellent mechanical flexibility during the bending test, which are ascribed to the following reasons: (i) the Ag thin film acted as crystalline seed layers for the (222) ITO growth orientation. This enhanced crystallinity leads to highly durable electrodes in FPSCs. (ii) Ag-ITO has a lower value of resistivity compared with bare ITO, which is because of the increase in the carrier concentration. An increase in the degree of resistivity of the top electrode reduces the series resistance in photovoltaic devices. (iii) The inclusion of the discontinuous ultra-thin Ag film also provides higher diffusive transmittance, which enhances the short circuit current (Jsc). This study demonstrates that by inserting an ultra-thin Ag layer as the top electrode into ITO films, highly efficient FPSCs with superior mechanical flexibility, based on a Ti substrate, can be realized.

An approximately 100 nm layer of metal (Ag, Au) as the top electrode is applied for conventional PSCs on glass and polymer-based flexible substrates by thermal evaporation. In contrast, the Ti substrate, whose opaqueness blocks the penetration of light, needs a transparent cathode deposited on it to allow illumination from the top. For this study, a TiO2 film on a Ti substrate (as an electron transport layer) was prepared by calcination at 500 °C. This layer was deposited with CH3NH3PbI3 as a light absorber, followed by spiro-MeOTAD, as a hole-transporting layer. Finally, the ITO film was coated by direct current (DC) sputtering at room temperature. Details of the device fabrication procedure and characterization are provided in the ESI.

The schematic diagram of the device is represented in Fig. 1a. To obtain a cross-sectional view of the structure, a focused ion beam microscope with Ga ions was used (30 kV), as shown in Fig. 1b. From the image, a uniform ITO layer (∼200 nm) on top of spiro-MeOTAD could be observed.
In order to investigate how the photons reach the active layer through the top transparent electrode, the transmittance spectra of the ITO film (200 nm) on spiro-MeOTAD/glass were measured in the range of 350–1000 nm. The optical photograph is shown in the inset of Fig. 2a (far right sample). There were many curves in the full range, and nearly the entire spectrum indicated over 80% transmittance. The maximum optical transmittance of ITO/spiro-MeOTAD/glass exceeded 91% (at 530 and 700 nm) in the visible region. The absorbance spectra are shown in Fig. 2b, along with its scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image (inset image). The highly uniform CH3NH3PbI3 film was grown using a fast crystallization–deposition method and its effective absorption occurs in the wavelength range of 400–750 nm. Fig. 2c and d represent the current density–voltage (J–V) curve of the FPSCs fabricated on the Ti substrate, with ITO as the top electrode, and the corresponding incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra, respectively. The photovoltaic characteristics of the FPSCs were investigated under 100 mW cm−2 illumination and AM1.5 G conditions. The performance data of the FPSCs based on the Ti substrate with the ITO electrode are summarized in Fig. 2c (inset). (Jsc = 16.5 mA cm−2, open circuit voltage (Voc) = 0.996 V, fill factor (FF) = 55%, and PCE = 9.1%.)
While FPSCs were fabricated on metal substrate devices, PSCs based on fluorine-doped-tin oxide (FTO) glass with the same ITO cathode were characterized for reference. As shown in Fig. S3a, the J–V curves of PSCs on the glass substrate from the FTO and the ITO side illumination are presented. Their photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table S1. The device irradiated from the FTO side has a higher PCE (9.50%) than that from the ITO side (9.10%). This result is due to the ∼7.8% increase in Jsc, which may be ascribed to the increase in the photon flux of the FTO electrode from 550–700 nm (Fig. S4). We further observed J–V characteristics for the effect of reflection by adding the Ti substrate at the back of the FTO-glass side (Fig. S3b). All photovoltaic parameters are similar. However, as seen in Table S1, there is a ∼2.3% improvement in Jsc with the addition of the Ti substrate at the back of the FTO, compared with no Ti substrate. Therefore, we can assume the effect of reflection for the Ti substrate. Although a superior performance was achieved in the metal substrate with the ITO cathode, there remains the issue of insufficient performance compared with using a polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate, as well as poor mechanical properties when used in flexible applications. In order to address this issue, an ultra-thin Ag film was inserted by thermal evaporation between the spiro-MeOTAD layer and the ITO cathode. The microstructures of the Ag-ITO electrodes with different Ag layer thicknesses were examined by X-ray diffractometry (XRD), as shown in Fig. 3a. The thickness of the Ag layer was varied from 1 to 3 nm and the effect of the Ag layer was investigated. It is well known that amorphous ITO (α-ITO) is usually grown without thermal annealing. Therefore, various peaks of α-ITO were found, which can be attributed to the fact that the ITO film was deposited onto spiro-MeOTAD by sputtering at room temperature. Otherwise, two major crystalline orientations are generally observed for crystalline ITO (c-ITO), as discussed previously by Triambulo et al. One of the ITO peaks, at 2θ = 30.66°, corresponds to the (222) diffraction plane of the cubic bixbyite structure of indium oxide. The other peak, at 2θ = 35.13°, corresponds to the (400) direction of ITO. A higher intensity peak in the (222) direction of ITO was observed with increasing Ag thickness. This is because the Ag thin film acts as a seed layer for crystalline growth along one direction of (222), which could form a domain-like structure inserted in the matrix ITO with the other crystalline orientation of (400). Improved crystallinity with the incorporation of the thin Ag film helps to improve the mechanical flexibility. The experimental information regarding flexibility in photovoltaic devices will be discussed later in this paper. Fig. S5 shows the effect of the Ag layer on the resistivity of the ITO film with increasing Ag thickness. The calculated resistivity variation in Ag-ITO electrodes can be expressed using eqn (1).
(1)
where
ρ is the resistivity, n is the number of charge carriers, e is the charge of the carrier, and μ is the mobility of the charge carriers. According to Schottky's theory, the change in resistivity can be attributed to the increase in the carrier concentration with the increasing thickness of the Ag layer. In this study, similar results for sheet resistance were observed (Fig. 3b). When a bare ITO film was deposited onto spiro-MeOTAD, the sheet resistance was found to be 35.48 Ω ㅁ−1. As the Ag thickness increased to 3 nm, the sheet resistance decreased to approximately 7 Ω ㅁ−1. To check if the modified cathode enhances the performance of photovoltaic devices, cell characteristic testing was conducted. The results are shown in Fig. 4. The schematic image of an FPSC on a Ti substrate with Ag-ITO as the top electrode is represented in Fig. 4a. The same method, as was described earlier in this paper, was used for fabricating photovoltaic devices with the exception of inserting a Ag thin film layer by thermal evaporation before ITO sputtering. The photovoltaic characteristics of the FPSCs with different Ag thicknesses were evaluated under identical conditions. The J–V curves of the best devices for each thickness are shown in Fig. 4b. Furthermore, the mean photovoltaic parameters were obtained from the corresponding J–V curves for 16 devices, as shown in Fig. S6, and these values are summarized in Table 1. By increasing the Ag thickness, no significant differences in Voc values were observed. However, the Jsc values increased to 17.37 and 16.01 mA cm−2 in the Ag-ITO photovoltaic samples (1 nm and 2 nm Ag layer, respectively) as compared to the Jsc value of the bare ITO cathode, which is 15.54 mA cm−2. For the Ag-ITO photovoltaic samples with 1 nm and 2 nm Ag layers, a higher Jsc values may be ascribed to the higher diffusive transmittance. IPCE results could be supported by this phenomenon, as shown in Fig. 4c. Ag-ITO samples exhibited a decrease in quantum efficiency near 400 nm. On the other hand, a strong increase of quantum efficiency was found near 600 nm. The higher diffusive transmittance led to enhanced light harvesting between 500 and 630 nm, which corresponds to the increased photocurrent.

Sample

V
oc/V

J
sc/mA cm−2
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Rs
ITO
0.958 ± 0.036 (0.996)
15.54 ± 0.68 (16.5)
0.54 ± 0.01 (0.55)
8.02 ± 0.70 (9.10)
269.31
Ag 1 nm_ITO
0.960 ± 0.039 (0.998)
17.37 ± 0.68 (18.5)
0.59 ± 0.02 (0.61)
9.78 ± 0.91 (11.01)
107.14
Ag 2 nm_ITO
0.964 ± 0.032 (0.998)
16.01 ± 0.57 (16.8)
0.62 ± 0.01 (0.64)
9.65 ± 0.57 (10.67)
76.54
Ag 3 nm_ITO
0.962 ± 0.032 (0.999)
13.95 ± 0.49 (14.6)
0.65 ± 0.01 (0.66)
8.67 ± 0.60 (9.51)
54.14
As shown in Table 1, Jsc decreased to 13.95 mA cm−2 for the 3 nm Ag-ITO sample. The downward trend in Jsc values for the Ag-ITO samples from 1 nm to 3 nm Ag may be due to the decreased transparency, there is a trade-off between conductivity and transparency, and rough surface morphology (Fig. S8). In particular, enhanced FF values were observed in all devices with increasing Ag thickness. This behavior could be explained by a decrease in the series resistance of devices. Series resistance is defined as the sum of the contact resistance and the bulk resistance of the materials. Lower sheet resistance of the cathodes by the insertion of the ultra-thin Ag film could offer reduced series resistance in FPSCs. Consequently, improved series resistance results in excellent cell performance in terms of both FF and PCE.
Bending tests were performed to compare the mechanical flexibility of the FPSCs using the conventional α-ITO and Ag-ITO as the top electrode (Fig. 4d). The efficiency ratio of the FPSC with α-ITO gradually decreased with increasing bending cycles. After 50 bending cycles, its performance exhibited 82% of initial efficiency. According to previous research, this poor behavior during bending may be attributed to crack formation and propagation. However, FPSCs with Ag-ITO showed highly durable flexibility during bending cycles compared to that of the FPSCs with α-ITO. The improved stability of the FPSCs was observed with increasing thickness of the Ag layer. For 3 nm of Ag, more than 99% of its initial efficiency ratio value was maintained after 50 bending cycles. The insertion of the ultra-thin Ag film to ITO resulted in superior flexibility during the bending test. Consequently, Ag-ITO cathodes in FPSCs can be a desirable alternative to existing PET-based flexible perovskite solar cells.

In conclusion, this study demonstrates that a discontinuous ultra-thin Ag layer inserted into ITO as the top electrode can be used in FPSCs on a Ti substrate. The insertion of an ultra-thin Ag film to ITO electrodes leads to lower resistance and higher diffusive transmittance compared with those using a bare ITO film. As a result, the decreased series resistance was observed in photovoltaic samples, which could provide improved FF and PCE values for FPSCs. Moreover, bending test results indicated enhanced mechanical flexibility with increasing Ag thin film thickness. FPSCs using 3 nm of Ag inserted into ITO as the top electrode were shown to have the highest durability, retaining 99% of their initial PCE. The results of this study clearly demonstrate that FPSCs based on a Ti substrate, using a Ag-ITO top electrode, can be an alternative to FPSCs based on a PET substrate. Furthermore, using metal substrates in solid-state photovoltaic devices yielded superior performance and durability, which demonstrates their practical application.


This research was supported by the NRF, KETEP, and KEIT (2014060255, 20133030000140, 10050509) in Korea.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Details of experimental methods, Fig. S1–S12, and Tables S1 and S2. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta03240g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015