 DOI: 10.1039/C6EE00612D
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1258-1263


Hyungcheol
Back
,

Geunjin
Kim
,

Junghwan
Kim
,

Jaemin
Kong
,

Tae Kyun
Kim
,

Hongkyu
Kang
,

Heejoo
Kim
,

Jinho
Lee
,

Seongyu
Lee
 and 

Kwanghee
Lee
*

Heeger Center for Advanced Materials and Research Institute for Solar and Sustainable Energies, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju 61005, Republic of Korea. E-mail: klee@gist.ac.kr

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju 61005, Republic of Korea

Received
26th February 2016
, Accepted 18th March 2016
First published on 18th March 2016
Despite recent reports of high power conversion efficiency (PCE) values of over 20%, the instability of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has been considered the most serious obstacle toward their commercialization. By rigorously exploring the self-degradation process of planar-type PSCs using typical metal electrodes (Ag or Al), we found that the corrosion of the metal electrodes by inherent ionic defects in the perovskite layers is a major origin of intrinsic device degradation even under inert conditions. In this work, we have developed a new concept of a chemical inhibition in PSCs using amine-mediated metal oxide systems and succeeded in chemically neutralizing mobile ionic defects through mutual ionic interaction. As a consequence, we realized planar-type PSCs with long-term stability that maintain nearly 80% of their initial PCEs even after 1 year (9000 h) of storage under nitrogen and 80% of their initial PCEs after 200 h in ambient conditions without any encapsulation.

Despite the remarkable efficiencies and printability of PSCs, their instability has been the most serious bottleneck in the PSC research toward their commercialization. In particular, for PSC devices using typical metal electrodes (Al and Ag) without using noble metal electrodes (such as Au or Pt), the PSCs are easily ‘self-degraded’ even under inert conditions, which is a well-known issue in the field. However, the origin of the problem has not yet been clearly understood. We found that inherent ionic defects in perovskite layers can degrade the perovskite solar cells (PSCs) even under inert conditions. Furthermore, we have developed a new concept of a chemical inhibition layer in PSCs using amine-mediated metal oxide systems and realized long-term stable PSCs.


Methylammonium lead trihalide (MAPbX3, X = Cl, Br, and I) perovskite semiconductors have recently drawn considerable attention as a class of materials for efficient solar energy harvesting due to their unprecedented optoelectronic properties. These desirable properties include a direct band gap, small effective mass, low exciton binding energy, and extremely long exciton diffusion length. Based on these advantageous properties, the field of organometallic perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has been accelerated by the development of sophisticated device architectures and various perovskite deposition methods, leading to the achievement of a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of over 20%. Moreover, the advent of PSCs is expected to be an ultimate solution for a future renewable energy source because the solution processability of PSCs ultimately allows for high-throughput manufacturing techniques of printing processes.

Despite their PCE values, the instability of PSCs has been continuously raised as the most serious obstacle toward their commercialization. Some even consider that PSC researchers will never solve this dilemma because of the intrinsic origin of the poor stability. The perovskite materials can be easily decomposed by even small amounts of external contaminants, such as moisture in the air or reactive dopants in charge transport layers. However, recent studies have shown that those cases could potentially be overcome by introducing hydrophobic or nonreactive charge transport layers to protect the perovskite layer from external contaminants as a physical blocking layer.
A more serious problem with PSC lifetime arises from the inherent ionic defects in the perovskite layers. Solution-processed perovskite crystal films inevitably contain numerous ionic defects (e.g., halide or MA ions) in their polycrystalline structure, particularly at the crystal boundaries. These defects localize charge carriers by acting as deep traps. Moreover, due to their extremely small migration activation energy (∼0.1 eV), the halide ionic defects easily migrate to other layers (upper or lower layers) through the crystal boundaries in the devices even without decomposition of perovskite layer. Consequently, the released corrosive halide ions contaminate the conductive metal electrodes and form a thin insulating layer that causes performance degradation in PSCs, particularly when using aluminium or silver (Al or Ag) electrodes (see the proposed mechanism in Fig. 1a and b). Such metal corrosion by halide ions is already well known in the field of electrochemical devices (e.g., dye-sensitized solar cells and PSCs). Thus, although degradation by external contaminants can be prevented by the physical encapsulation of PSCs, their self-degradation by the intrinsic ionic defects appears to be unavoidable, particularly in PSCs using typical metal electrodes, such as Al and Ag.
In this work, by rigorously exploring the self-degradation process of the planar-type PSCs using typical metal electrodes (Ag or Al), we found that the corrosion of the metal electrodes by inherent ionic defects in the perovskite layers is a main contributor of PSC device degradation. Then, by integrating a new amine-mediated titanium suboxide (AM-TiOx) system as an efficient chemical inhibition layer (CIL), we can successfully protect the metal electrodes by extracting and stabilizing the ionic defects migrating from the perovskite layer. Thus, we realized planar-type PSCs with long-term stability that maintain nearly 90% of their initial PCEs even after 4000 h of storage under nitrogen condition (N2) and 80% of their initial PCEs after 200 h in ambient conditions without any encapsulation.
The planar heterojunction (PHJ) type in a p–i–n structure is a promising ‘printable’ device architecture for PSCs utilizing a conducting polymer, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)-poly(styrenesulfonate) acid (PEDOT:PSS), as a hole transport layer and a fullerene derivative, [6,6]-phenyl-C 61 butyric acid methyl ester (PC60BM), as an efficient electron transport layer (ETL) (Fig. 1a). This type of device is also known to minimize the notorious hysteretic problem due to defect passivation. The detailed device structure used in our approach is indium-tin oxide (ITO)/PEDOT:PSS/vanadium suboxide (VOx)/MAPbI3−xBrx/PC60BM/metal electrode (Ag or Al). Here, we used the VOx layer to increase the open-circuit voltage (Voc) of our p–i–n PSCs, as explicitly shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). Our p–i–n devices with Al electrodes exhibit reasonable device performance for this type of structure, with a Voc of 1.06 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 18.26 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 77%, with a corresponding PCE of 15.02% for both the reverse and forward sweep directions with a scan rate of 500 mV s−1 (Fig. S2 and S3, ESI).
Although defect passivation is expected to be minimized in our p–i–n type PSCs, the current density–voltage (J–V) curve of the reference PSCs even with the relatively stable Ag electrode exhibits a significantly increased series resistance (Rs) from 25 to 500 Ω cm2 and thus a decreased FF as the storage time increases, even inside of a glove box containing high-purity N2 (Fig. 1c). This observation is well known in the PSC community, but has not yet been rigorously explored. However, because the perovskite layers in the devices exhibit nearly identical absorption spectra with increasing storage time (see the inset of Fig. 1c), we can easily rule out the possibility that it might originate from the degradation of the perovskite material itself. Instead, the degradation originates from the interfacial instability, as indicated by the increased Rs with increasing storage time. The degradation of our PSC devices is likely caused by corrosive and mobile interstitial halide ions (Fig. 1a and b). The corrosive iodide ions in the perovskite layer easily migrate to the metal electrode (Ag or Al) through the PC60BM layer and then contaminate the inner surface of the metal electrodes by forming an insulating metal halide compound (e.g., Ag–I).
To prevent metal electrode contamination by halide ions, we have invented the concept of a CIL in PSCs. By placing an amine-mediated metal oxide (AM-MO) system (Fig. 1d and Fig. S4, ESI) as a CIL between the PC60BM layer and metal electrode, we found that the corrosion of the metal electrodes (Al and Ag) can be nearly completely suppressed, thereby unprecedentedly securing long-term stability in PSCs. In such a case, the prerequisite conditions as an ideal CIL are that it should also act as an excellent ETL so that it does not create any electrical drawbacks in device operation and that it should not damage the lower perovskite layer. In this work, we developed a new sol–gel derived, AM-TiOx system as a material for an efficient CIL (see ESI, and Methods). The networked medium of AM-TiOx acts as an excellent doped semiconducting ETL (Fig. S4–S9 and Supplementary Notes S1–S4, ESI). At the same time, the amine functional groups in AM-TiOx can capture and stabilize the halide ions as a corrosion inhibitor. Consequently, the Ag electrodes were protected from corrosion by halide ions (Fig. 1e and f). Even after aging for over 900 h under N2, the Rs value was maintained below 10 Ω cm2 (Fig. 1f) without any significant degradation in the device performance.
We also notice that the introduction of the CIL in PSCs improves the device performance by reducing the initial Rs value from 25 to 2.5 Ω cm2. This reduction in the initial Rs value is due to the improved electrical contact and the reduced energy barrier between the PC60BM and the metal electrode compared to the pristine devices without a CIL (Fig. S6–S9, ESI). Fig. 2a and b shows the J–V characteristics and incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) plot of the optimized device with a CIL measured as a reverse scan with an air mass 1.5 global (AM 1.5G) irradiation of 100 mW cm−2. After optimizing the PSCs containing a uniform CIL (δCIL ∼ 10 nm) and an Ag electrode by fabricating the devices more than 50 times, we obtained optimized values of a Voc of 1.07 V, a Jsc of 18.34 mA cm−2, and a FF of 82% with a corresponding PCE of 16.09%, which is higher than that of the pristine device without a CIL (15.02%) (Fig. S10–S13 and Supplementary Notes S5, S6, ESI). The average PCE over the 50 devices is a 14.75%, with a standard deviation of 0.65% (Fig. S14, ESI). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the optimized device exhibits a broad feature of over 80% between 450 and 600 nm.
To assess the CIL as an ‘internal protective layer’ in PSCs, we fabricated PSCs using common metals, such as Ag and Al, as the top cathodes and conducted aging tests under N2 to exclude the influence of moisture and oxygen. The devices were stored inside of a glove box with a dry N2 atmosphere at room temperature (∼25 °C) for up to 1 year (9000 h). The devices mainly remained in the dark and were only irradiated by the AM 1.5G standard lights during their performance measurements. The pristine reference PSCs (without a CIL) for both Al and Ag electrodes exhibit a significant decrease to 70–80% of the initial PCEs after only 200 h (Fig. 2c), and continue to decrease below 40% after 1 year of storage for the Al electrode device without a CIL. Such a rapid degradation originates from the low fill factor and can be attributed to the excessive diffusion of iodide ion defects at the initial stage (Fig. S15, ESI). Furthermore, the device with the low-work function (WF) Al cathode exhibited lower stability than the device containing the relatively high-WF Ag electrode. This observation implies that the internal degradation of PSCs is associated with the chemical interaction between the corrosive iodide ion defects and the metal electrode. In contrast, the PSCs with a CIL exhibit dramatically improved stability without any significant initial performance loss. The CIL devices (both with Al and Ag electrodes) maintain over 90% of their initial PCEs even after the 1000 h aging process and continue to maintain a PCE value above 80%. In particular, the Al devices with a CIL maintain a PCE value approaching 80% even after 1 year of aging. This result is in strong contrast with the pristine Al-devices (without a CIL) exhibiting severe degradation to less than 40% of their initial PCE values after the same aging period. Despite the different degradation features of the PSCs, their hysteretic behaviors were negligible (Fig. S16, ESI).
As we expected, even under continuous illumination condition (AM 1.5G standard light in the glove box), the metal oxide-based CIL extends the device lifetime. During both J–V sweep test and max power point (MPP) tracking test, the CIL device showed a PCE value of over 80% of the initial PCE after 12 h (40000 s) of irradiation time, whereas the devices without a CIL rapidly degraded (below 50%) only after 12 h (Fig. 2d and Fig. S17–S20 and Supplementary Note S7, ESI). Moreover, surprisingly, the excellent device lifetime-extending capability of our metal oxide-based CIL can be confirmed even under ambient conditions. When we performed the aging test outside of the glove box, that is, in a normal ambient atmosphere (25 °C, 35% relative humidity in air), using the same devices without any additional encapsulation, the CIL device exhibited a PCE value of over 80% of the initial PCE after 200 h of storage, whereas the pristine devices without a CIL degraded to approximately 40% of the initial PCE value during the first 25 h and nearly completely degraded (below 10%) after 200 h. This ‘bare’ aging test (i.e., in the normal atmosphere without any encapsulation) clearly demonstrates the excellent protective function of our CIL material for both internal and external contaminants in PHJ-type PSC devices using typical metal electrodes (Fig. 2e).
Direct evidence of the CIL function of the AM-TiOx comes from the X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) measurement on the top cathode (Ag) using samples with a structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/VOx/perovskite/PC60BM/with or without a CIL/Ag (5 nm). To directly observe the interaction between the Ag and iodide ions, we specially fabricated the XPS samples with a thinner Ag layer (δAg ∼ 5 nm) than that of our normal devices (δAg ∼ 150 nm) to explore the interface between the electrode and CIL (or perovskite layer). Whereas the pristine reference sample (without a CIL) exhibits a signature of the Ag–I bond at 619.4 eV when measured just after device fabrication, the CIL-XPS sample exhibits a negatively ionized iodide (I−) peak at 618.2 eV (Fig. 3a). The monotonic curve fitting for the I− peak implies that the CIL completely suppresses the formation of insulating Ag–I components by stabilizing the iodide ions, clearly demonstrating the excellent inhibiting function of the CIL.
We presume that the inhibiting function of the CIL mainly arises from the amine groups in the sol–gel-processed AM-TiOx (Fig. 1e). Nitrogen-containing compounds are well known to serve as a corrosion inhibitor by interacting with the surface of typical metals. Moreover, the amine groups easily interact with negative ions, such as the iodide ions in the CIL (Fig. 3a). Therefore, just after the fabrication of the CIL devices with the Ag electrode, the amine groups in the CIL exist in three possible forms; pristine amines without interaction, Ag–amine bonds at the metal interface, and amine–iodide ion bonds neutralizing the iodide ions. During the aging process of the CIL devices, the remaining pristine amine groups would neutralize the migrating iodide ions and inhibit the formation of the insulating Ag–I bonds on the surface of the Ag electrode.
To prove our suggested electrode protection process as explained above, we carried out XPS measurements as a function of storage time for the reference sample (without a CIL) and the CIL-XPS sample (δAg of approximately 5 nm). For the reference sample, nitrogen (N) was not detected in the top Ag-part, and the Ag peak at 369.1 eV remained unchanged even after aging for 100 h. However, for the CIL-XPS sample immediately after the fabrication, a new peak corresponding to the Ag–N bond is observed in the Ag part of the XPS spectrum due to the interaction between Ag and the amine functional groups in the CIL (Fig. S21, ESI). This Ag–N peak is also observed in the N-part of the XPS spectrum at 398.5 eV together with other two peaks (399.0 eV for the pristine amine groups and 401.5 eV for the positive ion form of nitrogen, N+), as shown in Fig. 3b. After aging for 100 h, the N+ ion peak (401.5 eV) increases, whereas the Ag–N bond peak at 398.5 eV disappears (Fig. 3b and Fig. S21, ESI).
Considering that the I− and N+ ions simultaneously increase as the aging time increases in the CIL-XPS sample (Fig. 3b and Fig. S22, ESI), together with the fact that the original CIL does not contain N+ ions (Fig. S23, ESI), the generation of the N+ ions can be interpreted as a result of the expected amine–iodide ion bond pair; this pairing is more clearly supported by the analogous depth profiles of a time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectroscopy of the CIL device (Fig. S24, ESI). By pairing with the amine groups, the corrosive iodide ions can be chemically neutralized, and thus, metal contamination is prohibited. The concept of the CIL can also be applicable to other solution-processed and AM-MO systems, such as niobium oxide (AM-NbOx) (Fig. S25, ESI). Therefore, our suggested CIL function appears to be universal throughout AM-MO systems.
In addition to acting as a protection layer for the corrosive I−, the CIL also functions as an I− extraction layer. Our interpretation is supported by the observation of an extremely large amount of I− in the CIL samples compared with the reference pristine sample (without a CIL), as observed in the XPS measurements (Fig. 3a and Fig. S26, ESI). Because ionic defects typically act as deep trap sites inhibiting charge transport, we confirmed this extraction ability of the CIL by comparing the deep trap distributions of the perovskite layers (with or without a CIL), which were deduced from the J–V characteristics of electron-only devices, ITO/C60/perovskite/PC60BM/with or without a CIL/Al (Fig. S27 and Supplementary Note S8, ESI). For the reference electron-only device without a CIL, the slope of the J–V curves increases from 5.2 to 7.0 during the aging process (∼200 h). Therefore, the corresponding characteristic energy (Ech) that represents the width of the deep trap distribution is broadened from 100 to 150 meV (Fig. 3c). In contrast, the slope of the CIL electron-only device decreases from 5.2 to 3.3, and the Ech is reduced from 100 to 50 meV (Fig. 3d), implying a significant reduction in the deep trap width for the CIL PSCs. Due to the reduced deep trap width in the CIL PSCs (Fig. S28 and Supplementary Note S9, ESI), the devices exhibit an increased shunt resistance (Rsh) during the aging process (from 2500 to 4000 Ω cm2, as shown in Fig. S17, ESI), implying the extraction ability of the CIL as an “active” inner passivation layer.
The most significant aspect of our approach is that the electrical properties of the CIL are not changed despite the large amount of iodide ions in the CIL as the aging time increases. This fact can be verified by impedance spectroscopy (IS) and transient photocurrent (TPC) measurements of the real PSCs with the Ag electrode. Fig. 4a and b shows the IS results of the PSCs without and with a CIL, respectively, as measured under the open-circuit condition with illumination (i.e., with storage times of 0 and 200 h in a dry N2 atmosphere). In the pristine initial stage, the Nyquist plots of both devices exhibit low resistances (Rsc < 500 Ω cm−2), corresponding to selective charge transport in the high-frequency region (>104 Hz); at this stage, the devices have good charge transport properties. However, after 200 h of aging, the reference device without a CIL exhibits high Rsc (∼2500 Ω cm−2) and an additional inductive loop in the low-frequency region (<10 Hz) as a result of metal corrosion by the adsorbed halide ions on the Ag surface (Fig. 4a). However, the CIL devices maintain the small Rsc value of ∼100 Ω cm−2 without any inductive loop (Fig. 4b and Supplementary Note S10, ESI). This observation is also consistent with the observations in the Al devices (Fig. S30 and S31, ESI).
The TPC measurement of the devices also confirms the electrode protection function of the CIL (Fig. 4c, d and Fig. S32, ESI). For the reference devices (Fig. 4c), an increase in the settling time (as a time of 95% intensity decay) from 0.54 to 1.45 μs with aging time indicates a delayed charge extraction, whereas the CIL devices exhibit similar decay profiles for both the pristine and aged condition with nearly identical τ values of 0.49 and 0.47 μs (Fig. 4d), respectively. This result implies preserved PSC operation in the CIL devices without any loss of the electrical properties of the CIL as an ETL. We further fitted the TPC spectra with double exponential decay model and deduced the charge transport time (τ) from an interval time of 1/e decay of the initial photocurrent. For both pristine devices with and without CIL, the values of τ were the same, 0.19 μs. Interestingly, after the aging process, the τ changed in the opposite manner; although the reference device without CIL exhibited longer τ (0.31 μs), the CIL devices represented shorter τ (0.14 μs) than the initial τ, which can be attributed to the resulting defect extraction behavior of the CIL, as shown in Fig. 3d.
Finally, to evaluate the CIL on large-area devices, we fabricated large-area PSCs with various size of 25, 36 and 64 mm2, and conducted aging tests under N2 atmosphere at room temperature (∼25 °C) for up to 300 h (Fig. S33, S34 and Table S1, ESI). In addition to the aging tests, we also used steady-state photocurrent measurements (MPP tracking method). Even under the large-size devices with CIL, the large-area PSCs with a CIL exhibit significantly improved stability without any dependence on device area due to the uniform coverage of the CIL (Fig. S12, ESI).

In conclusion, we have revealed that the degradation process of the planar-type PSCs arises from the migration of the ionic defects in the perovskite layer, yielding insulating Ag–I bonds at the surface of the metal electrode. Then, we can suppress the formation of the insulating Ag–I bonds by adapting a solution-processed metal oxide system as an efficient ion extraction and chemical stabilization layer for the ionic defects between the metallic electrode and PC60BM ETL, thereby realizing planar PSCs with long-term stability using an Al (or Ag) electrode. In addition to the active inner protection of the devices, our CIL demonstrates an improved external passivation effect under the ambient air conditions without any encapsulation. Our results provide an important step toward air-stable and fully printable PSCs as a next-generation renewable energy source.


The authors would like to thank the Research Institute for Solar and Sustainable Energies (RISE) at the Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST) of Korea for help with device fabrication and measurements. This work was supported by a grant from the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Korean government (MSIP) (NRF-2014R1A2A1A09006137 and NRF-2015M1A2A2057510), the R&D program of MSIP/COMPA (2015K000199). K. Lee also acknowledges support provided by the GRI (GIST Research Institute) Project through a grant provided by GIST in 2016.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fig. S1–S34. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ee00612d
‡ H. Back and G. Kim contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016