 DOI: 10.1039/C5CP00963D
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 9835-9840


Jian
Wang
,

Fujun
Zhang
*,

Miao
Zhang
,

Wenbin
Wang
,

Qiaoshi
An
,

Lingliang
Li
,

Qianqian
Sun
,

Weihua
Tang
 and 

Jian
Zhang


Key Laboratory of Luminescence and Optical Information, Ministry of Education, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, People's Republic of China. E-mail: fjzhang@bjtu.edu.cn

Key Laboratory of Soft Chemistry and Functional Materials (Ministry of Education of China), Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing 210094, People's Republic of China

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Guilin University of Electronic Technology, Guilin 541004, People's Republic of China. E-mail: jianzhang@guet.edu.cn

Received
15th February 2015
, Accepted 4th March 2015
First published on 10th March 2015
Polymer solar cells (PSCs), with poly(diketopyrrolopyrrole-terthiophene) (PDPP3T):[6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) as the active layers, were fabricated using solutions of different temperatures. The best power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the PSCs prepared using a hot solution was about 6.22%, which is better than 5.54% for PSCs prepared using cool (room temperature) solutions and 5.85% for PSCs prepared using cool solutions with a 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) solvent additive. The underlying reasons for the improved PCE of the PSCs prepared using a hot solution could be attributed to the more dispersive donor and acceptor distribution in the active layer, resulting in a better bi-continuous interpenetrating network for exciton dissociation and charge carrier transport. An enhanced and more balanced charge carrier transport in the active layer is obtained for the PSCs prepared using a hot solution, which can be determined from the J–V curves of the related hole-only and electron-only devices.

Polymer solar cells (PSCs) have attracted more and more interest due to their low-cost, roll-to-roll manufacturing, environmentally friendly process, lightweight properties and mechanical flexibility. Recently, low bandgap conjugated polymer donors have been preferred for achieving high efficiency PSCs due to the expanded light absorption range, which can increase the photogenerated carrier densities in the active layer of the PSCs. The key essential condition for high performance PSCs is that the photogenerated carriers in the active layer must be swept-out by the internal field prior to their recombination. Therefore, some effective strategies have been carried out to promote the sweep-out of charge carriers, such as: (i) increasing the charge carrier transport by optimizing the molecular structure or weight of the polymer donors, (ii) increasing the charge carrier collection on the electrodes by employing appropriate interfacial engineering, (iii) increasing the excitons dissociation and charge carrier transport by tuning the donor–acceptor (D–A) phase separation in the active layer. Amongst these approaches, optimizing the D–A phase separation has been one pillar to improve the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of solution-processed PSCs. For example, Kim et al. reported that the PCE of PSCs improved from 3.94% to 7.08% by optimizing the D–A phase separation in the active layer with 5% (v/v) solvent additive 1-chloronaphthalene (CN). However, the doping ratio and processing time of the solvent additive should be accurately controlled during the preparation of blend solutions. In addition, the residual of the solvent additives in the active layer may lead to instability of the device performance.

The performance of PSCs can be seriously limited by the charge carrier recombination or formation of space charges in the active layer due to the various D–A domain sizes, especially to the unbalanced charge carrier transport in the active layer. Hence, a simple solution processing approach of the active layer is required which can form homogeneous dispersive D–A domains with moderate domain size for efficient and balanced charge carrier transport. Adhikary et al. reported that the solubility of polymer poly(diketopyrrolopyrrole-terthiophene) (PDPP3T) in chlorobenzene (CB) was increased at 70 °C compared to at room temperature, and the PDPP3T:[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) blend films prepared by spin-coating the 70 °C solution had an improved D–A phase separation due to a decreased domain size. It can be inferred that the D–A blend materials have a more dispersive distribution in hot solutions and that the D–A distribution can be well inherited in the active layer spin-coated using the hot solution. Therefore, the active layer prepared using a hot solution is an attractive approach to the preparation of high performance PSCs, especially PSCs based on a polymer donor that insoluble at room temperature. However, no further investigation of hot solutions for performance improvement of PSCs has been reported using a physical mechanism.
In this work, the PDPP3T:[6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) (1:2, wt/wt) hybrid was dissolved in 1,2-dichlorobenzene (o-DCB) solvent and then the mixed solution was heated to 70 °C in a sealed bottle under continuous stirring for better dissolution. The prepared hot solution was used to prepare the active layers of the PSCs. The short circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF), and the balance of charge carrier transport of the PSCs prepared using the hot solution were simultaneously improved compared to those of PSCs prepared using the cool solution or a cool solution with a DIO additive. The optimized PCE of PSCs prepared using the hot solution is about 6.22%, which is larger than 5.54% for the PSCs prepared using the cool solution and 5.85% for PSCs prepared using the cool solution with a DIO additive.

Patterned indium tin oxide (ITO) coated glass substrates (15 Ω □−1) were consecutively cleaned in ultrasonic baths containing glass lotion, de-ionized water and ethanol, before being blow-dried by high pure N2. All pre-cleaned ITO substrates were treated with UV-O3 for 6 minutes to improve the work function of ITO and clean the surface of the ITO coated substrates. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS, Clevios AI 4083) was filtered through a 0.22 μm syringe filter and spin-coated onto the ITO coated substrates at 5000 rounds per minute (rpm) for 40 s. The PEDOT:PSS coated ITO substrates were then annealed at 120 °C for 10 minutes in atmospheric air and transferred into a N2 glove box. Electron donor PDPP3T (purchased from Organtec Materials Inc., Mn > 240k) and the electron acceptor PC71BM (purchased from Luminescence Technology Corp.) hybrid was dissolved in o-DCB at a concentration of 15 mg mL−1 with a D/A weight ratio of 1:2 at 70 °C. Part of the blend solution was kept at 70 °C for fabrication of the PSCs using the hot solution, and the rest of the blend solution was cooled to room temperature. Then solvent additive DIO was added into part of the room temperature solution with 5% volume. The PDPP3T:PC71BM solutions were spin-coated on top of the PEDOT:PSS layer to prepare the active layers. All the prepared PDPP3T:PC71BM blends films were treated under o-DCB vapor annealing for 2 hours. The lithium fluoride (LiF), molybdenum trioxide (MoO3), aluminium or silver thin films were deposited by thermal evaporation under 3 × 10−4 Pa vacuum conditions, and the thickness of the film was monitored using a quartz crystal microbalance. The active area of the PSCs was defined about 3.8 mm2 by the vertical overlap area of the ITO and Al electrodes. All the measurements were carried out at the room conditions.


The absorption spectra of the films were measured using a Shimadzu UV-3101 PC spectrometer. The morphology of the films was characterized using an atomic force microscopy (AFM) with a multimode Nanoscope IIIa operated in tapping mode. The current–voltage (I–V) characteristic curves were measured using a Keithley 4200 semiconductor characterization system. The AM 1.5 light at one Sun intensity 100 mW cm−2 was provided by an ABET Sun 2000 solar simulator. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra were measured using a Zolix Solar Cell Scan 100. The chemical structure of used materials and the PSCs energy level diagram are shown in Fig. 1.


Three series of PDPP3T:PC71BM-based PSCs were prepared to investigate the evolution of the charge carrier transport dynamics in the active layers prepared from different solutions. The competition between charge carrier transport and their recombination can be reflected by the FF values of the PSCs. The PDPP3T:PC71BM active layers were prepared using the cool solution (cool), a cool solution with a DIO additive (DIO) and a hot solution (70 °C, hot). The thickness of the PDPP3T:PC71BM blend films was adjusted by changing the spin-coating speed to obtain the optimized PCE for each kind of PSC. The J–V characteristic curves and EQE spectra for all the PSCs are shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). According to the J–V curves, the key photovoltaic parameters of the PSCs are shown in Table S1 (ESI). The evolution of the key photovoltaic parameters of the PSCs along with the variation in active layer thickness are shown in Fig. 2, where the active layer thicknesses are represented by the spin-coating speeds of the related solutions. The optimized thicknesses are 137 nm (cool, 1000 rpm), 123 nm (DIO, 1500 rpm) and 140 nm (hot, 800 rpm), which correspond to the optimized performance of the PSCs prepared using each solution. It is apparent that the open-circuit voltage (Voc) is kept between 0.64 V and 0.68 V for all PSCs prepared using different solutions and spin-coating speeds. The Jsc for all the PSCs shows a strong dependence on the thickness of the active layers. The optimized active layer thickness is a result of the trade-off between light absorption and charge carrier collection due to the limited charge carrier transport ability in the blend films. The optimized FF and PCE of the PSCs prepared using the hot solution are larger than those of other PSCs, meaning that the charge carrier transport ability and their balance have been improved in the active layers prepared using the hot solution.

The J–V characteristic curves of each kind of optimized PSCs are shown in Fig. 3a. The key photovoltaic parameters of the PSCs according to the J–V curves are summarized and listed in Table 1. The Voc of all the PSCs is kept almost constant about 0.67 V with 0.01 V indeterminacy. The optimized PSCs prepared using the cool solution show a PCE of 5.54% along with a Jsc of 13.32 mA cm−2 and a FF of 62.0%. The optimized PSCs prepared using the cool solution with a DIO additive show a relatively high PCE of 5.85% along with a Jsc of 14.27 mA cm−2 and a FF of 61.2%. The positive effect of the DIO additive on the performance of the PSCs has been widely demonstrated and can be attributed to the improved D–A phase separation for better exciton dissociation and charge carrier transport, with less charge carrier recombination loss in the active layer. Here, it is worthwhile highlighting that the optimized PSCs prepared using the hot solution show the best PCE of 6.22% along with a relatively high Jsc of 13.65 mA cm−2 and a FF of 69.0%. In order to confirm the effect of the active layer prepared using the hot solution on the performance of the PSCs, the EQE spectra of the optimized PSCs were measured and are shown in Fig. 3b.
Solution

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
PCE (%)

a The PCE of the PSCs based on PDPP3T:PCBM as the active layer reported by another group.
b The acceptor is PC61BM.

Cool
0.67
13.32
62.0
5.54
4.74
DIO
0.67
14.27
61.2
5.85
5.75
Hot
0.66
13.65
69.0
6.22
4.02
According to the EQE spectra of the optimized PSCs in the range from 350 nm to 600 nm, it is apparent that the EQE values are increased for the cells prepared using the cool solution with a DIO additive and the maximum values were obtained for the PSCs prepared using the hot solution, which should be attributed to the more dispersive PC71BM distribution for effective exciton dissociation and charge carrier transport. In the longer wavelength from 650 nm to 900 nm, the PSCs prepared using the cool solution with a DIO additive show a negligible change. However, the PSCs prepared using the hot solution show slightly decreased EQE values in the same wavelength region, which plays a negative effect on the Jsc. As we might envisage, the molecular arrangement of the polymer PDPP3T in the active layer can be influenced by the solution processing methods. The molecular arrangement in the blend films may affect the charge carrier transport and photon harvesting abilities. It means that the prominent FF values of the PSCs prepared using the hot solution may originate from the enhanced charge carrier transport ability in the active layer.
The absorption spectra were measured to further clarify the underlying reason for the effects of the active layer fabrication conditions on the performance of the PSCs, and are shown in Fig. 4. The light absorption in the range from 300 nm to 650 nm is mainly absorbed by the PC71BM domains, and the absorption in the range from 650 nm to 900 nm is mainly attributed to the PDPP3T domains. It is apparent that the absorption intensity of the blend films prepared using the cool solution with a DIO additive and the hot solution is decreased in the whole spectral range compared with the blend films prepared using the cool solution. It is worth noting that the thickest blend films (140 nm) prepared using the hot solution show a lower absorption intensity compared with the blend films prepared using the cool solution (137 nm). The decreased absorption intensity in the range from 300 nm to 650 nm should be attributed to the more dispersive PC71BM domains in the blend films. In the range from 650 to 900 nm, the decreased absorption intensity may result from the change in the PDPP3T molecular arrangement. The photon harvesting ability of the polymer can be decreased due to the separated chains and decreased conjugation length, induced by solvent treatment or adding the solvent additive. The more dispersive PC71BM domains indicate that the charge carrier transport ability can be improved in the blend films prepared using the cool solution with a DIO additive and the hot solution. In addition, the PDPP3T molecular arrangement inherited from the homogenous distribution in the hot solution can lead to an improved charge carrier transport balance in the active layer prepared using the hot solution.
In order to clarify the charge carrier transport ability and their balance on the performance improvement of the PSCs, the hole-only ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layers/MoO3 (10 nm)/Ag (50 nm) and electron-only ITO/Al (10 nm)/LiF (1 nm)/active layers/LiF (1 nm)/Al (100 nm) devices were fabricated according to the related PSCs. The J–V curves of the hole-only and electron-only devices were measured in dark conditions and are shown in Fig. 5a. To provide more valuable information on the charge carrier transport ability of the active layers prepared under the different conditions, the J–V characteristics of the hole-only and electron-only devices were measured under low bias (less than 1 V). It is apparent that the hole transport ability is larger than the electron transport ability for all active layers prepared using the different solutions. This means that the performance of the PSCs was restricted by the relative weak electron transport ability. Compared with the device prepared using the cool solution, the hole current density of the hole-only devices prepared using the hot solution was only moderately increased under the same applied voltage. According to the J–V curves of the electron-only devices, these devices prepared using the hot solution show the largest current density under the same applied voltage, which means that the electron transport channels can be well formed in the active layers prepared using the hot solution. For the PSCs prepared using the hot solution, the increased hole and electron transport ability is an important reason for the performance improvement of the PSCs. The current density ratios of the electron to hole were calculated and are shown in the Fig. 5b. It is apparent that the hole and electron transport balance in the active layer prepared using the hot solution is improved significantly compared with the other active layers. The simultaneously improved charge carrier transport and their balance led to the largest PCE of 6.22% in the PSCs prepared using the hot solution. For the PSCs prepared using the cool solution with a DIO additive, the performance improvement is limited due to the unbalanced charge transport, although both the hole and electron transport abilities are increased.
In order to further demonstrate that the simultaneously improved charge carrier transport ability and their balance in the active layer, prepared using the hot solution, resulted from the more homogenous D–A distribution, the surface morphology of the PDPP3T:PC71BM blend films prepared using the different solutions were measured with a tapping mode AFM, as shown in Fig. 6. The root mean square surface roughness (RMS) of the blend films prepared using the cool solution and the cool solution with a DIO additive are 10.4 nm and 10.3 nm, respectively. The decreased RMS could be attributed to the more dispersive PC71BM domains induced by the DIO additive. The RMS in the film prepared using the hot solution was decreased to 9.0 nm, meaning that the aggregation levels of the PDPP3T domains was decreased. The more homogenous D–A distribution in the active layer is beneficial to exciton dissociation and the charge carrier transport as well as their balance in the active layers when prepared using the hot solution.

In summary, the best PCE value for PSCs based on PDPP3T:PC71BM as the active layer prepared using a 70 °C solution was 6.22%, which is better than that of 5.54% for PSCs prepared using a cool solution (room temperature) and 5.85% for PSCs prepared using a cool solution with a DIO additive. The performance improvement of the PSCs prepared using the hot solution can be attributed to the better bi-continuous interpenetrating network for excitons dissociation and charge carrier transport. The balance between hole and electron transport in the active layer prepared using the hot solution is optimized, resulting in the largest FF among the PSCs. This strategy may provide a simple and effective method to adjust the phase separation of donor and acceptor materials for improving the performance of PSCs.


We thank the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2013JBZ004), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61377029), and the Beijing Natural Science Foundation (2122050).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: J–V characteristic curves, EQE spectra and key performance of PSCs with different active layer thickness. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cp00963d
This journal is © the Owner Societies 2015