 DOI: 10.1039/C0CC01229G
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6273-6275

Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical Terms


Silvia
Colella
*,

Marco
Mazzeo
*,

Roberto
Grisorio
,

Eduardo
Fabiano
,

Giovanna
Melcarne
,

Sonia
Carallo
,

M. Daniela
Angione
,

Luisa
Torsi
,

Gian Paolo
Suranna
,

Fabio
della Sala
,

Piero
Mastrorilli
 and 

Giuseppe
Gigli


Istituto di Nanoscienze, via Arnesano, 73100 Lecce, Italy. E-mail: marco.mazzeo@unisalento.it; silvia.colella@unisalento.it

Università del Salento, scuola superiore ISUFI, via Monteroni, 73100 Lecce, Italy

Department of Water Engineering and of Chemistry, Polytechnic of Bari, Campus Universitario, via Orabona 4, 70125 Bari, Italy

Dipartimento di Chimica, Università degli Studi di Bari “Aldo Moro”, 70125 Bari, Italy

Centro di Eccellenza TIRES, Università degli Studi di Bari “Aldo Moro”, 70125 Bari, Italy

Department of Innovation Engineering, University of Salento, Campus Universitario, via Monteroni, 73100 Lecce, Italy

Received
3rd May 2010
, Accepted 18th June 2010
First published on
30th July 2010

The relations between the chemical–physical properties of novel designed monodispersed donors and their photovoltaic performances are discussed. The importance of intermolecular interactions is emphasized to figure out the achievement of high performing bulk hetero-junction solar cells which are solution processed.

Organic photovoltaics, and in particular bulk hetero-junction (BHJ) devices, have attracted a broad interest during the past decade due to their potential for the development of large-area, low-cost, flexible and lightweight solar cells. A BHJ is a mixture of the donor and the acceptor material in the active layer. To date, while 1-(3-methoxycarbonylpropyl)-1-phenyl-[6,6]-methano-fullerene (PCBM) is commonly employed as acceptor, two strategies are generally followed in the choice of the donor material. On the one hand, soluble polymers are largely employed because they allow the use of simple and low-cost device fabrication techniques. However, the limited control of their primary structure, molecular weights, polydispersity and purification poses several drawbacks in terms of structure–property relationship. On the other hand, well-defined conjugated molecular structures take advantages from their easier purification and higher structural control. Nevertheless, they have been deposited so far by means of expensive thermal evaporation techniques. Only recently, soluble linear, star-shaped and polycyclic aromatic low-energy-gap molecules have been proposed with promising results. The success of this strategy can be traced back mainly to its ability to combine in a single approach the low-cost processability of soluble materials with the high control that can be exerted on the properties of monodispersed molecules.

The work presented in this communication aims at rationalizing the photovoltaic behaviour of a series of new molecular donor materials, bearing a 2-trimethylsilyl-bithienyl moiety linked to a series of different cores through acetylenic spacers. The chemical design was conceived in order to favour (i) the solubility in organic solvents by means of suitable end groups, (ii) the extension of π-conjugation along the whole chain through the employment of acetylenic spacers, and (iii) a planar conformation. The planarity favors π–π stacking in the solid state and results in a high carrier mobility and low absorption band-gap. These features, in combination with a rigid and electron-rich central core such as anthracene (compound 3), which has already shown promising photovoltaic attitudes, allow the achievement of an efficiency (η) up to 1% and an unusually high open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1 V. The chemical structures of the investigated compounds (see the ESI for synthetic details) are reported in Fig. 1, together with the optical absorption spectra of spin-coated layers of donors blended with PCBM. All the spectra are quite broad and characterized by one main peak corresponding to a π–π* (HOMO–LUMO) transition. The substitution of the bi-thienylene central core in the basic structure 1 with an electron withdrawing benzothiadiazole in compound 2 and with the electron-rich anthracene in compound 3 leads to a reduction of the HOMO–LUMO gap, causing a red shift of the absorption maximum from ∼450 nm to ∼500 nm. This behaviour is confirmed by cyclic voltammetry (CV) experimental results as well as by density-functional theory (DFT) calculations (see Table 1 and ESI for details). Both the methods provided information on the energies of frontier orbitals (Table 1 and Fig. S2) and can describe trends among systems with good accuracy. The lowering of the energy gap in 3, with respect to 1, originates mainly from the anthracene group, which leads to a more extensive conjugation, eventually increasing the HOMO energy. The lowering of the LUMO energy in 2 is mainly due to the presence of the electron withdrawing character of the benzothiadiazole central group, leading to a partial localization of the LUMO.
Energy gap/eV
HOMO/eV
LUMO/eV

Opt



CV


DFT


CV


DFT


CV


DFT


a Estimated by the onset of the absorption curves in CH2Cl2 (Fig. S3).


1

2.5
2.6
2.6
−5.4
−5.1
−2.8
−2.5

2

2.3
2.2
2.3
−5.5
−5.2
−3.3
−2.9

3

2.3
2.1
2.3
−5.2
−4.9
−3.1
−2.6
The three compounds were blended with PCBM and employed as active media in BHJ solar cells, schematically shown in Fig. 2 together with the current density–voltage (J–V) curves and the relative Incident Photon to Current Efficiency (IPCE).
Despite compound 2 showing a much broader absorption than compound 1, the IPCE curves (inset of Fig. 2) are reversed, resulting in a much lower power conversion efficiency for device 2 with respect to device 1 (0.05% vs. 0.2%, as reported in Table 2). On the other hand, although device 3 and device 2 show similar optical spectra, the IPCE of device 3 is twenty times higher than device 2 (32.5% vs. 1.7% at 487 nm) resulting in an efficiency of 1.00%. This satisfactory performance, clearly not imputable to the number of photogenerated carriers, has to be ascribed to a better charge separation and/or collection efficiency occurring in device 3. Both these effects can be caused by the generation of a good phase separation between donor and acceptor, which could then be able to form suitable percolation paths within the active layer. Indeed phases having a size in the order of the exciton diffusion length usually increase the exciton separation efficiency, while the generation of percolation paths enhances the charge transport, according to the intrinsic mobility of the pure donor and acceptor materials. The measurements on thin-film field effect transistors on our donors revealed for compound 3 mobilities in the range of 10−4 cm2 s−1 V−1 (Fig. S6) while compound 2 does not exhibit field effect behavior at all, meaning that the mobility can be several orders of magnitude lower. However, without the generation of percolation pathways, the carriers cannot exploit the potentiality of these better transport properties.

η (%)

FF



V
OC/V

J
SC/mA cm−2
ΔEDA/eV
Energy binding (Kcal/mol)
π–π
T-type

a Fill factor.
b Calculated as difference HOMODONOR − LUMOACCEPTOR.
c Calculated by DFT simulations.


1

0.20
0.32
0.64
1.00
1.1
—
—

2

0.05
0.25
0.78
0.26
1.2
−7.28
0.56

3

1.00
0.31
0.98
3.41
1.0
−3.45
4.14
The presence of a suitable morphology has been investigated observing the active layers through tapping-mode atomic force microscopy (AFM) (Fig. 3A). While 1:PCBM film presents alternating very large and regular hills and valleys with size ranging from 0.5 to 1.0 μm, the surfaces of 2:PCBM and 3:PCBM present smaller and more numerous nanostructures. The achievement of a domain size below 100 nm in devices 2 and 3, in agreement with the typical exciton diffusion length, may be a prelude to an efficient charge collection. Nevertheless, if the domain sizes are too small, as shown by 2:PCBM morphology, percolation channels cannot be formed, leading to a low carrier collection efficiency. In order to clarify this issue, the presence of phase separation has been studied by confocal microscopy, in the light of the observed photoluminescence (PL) from 2 and 3 as neat films. The first important information provided by these experiments was the quenching of PL exhibited by 2 in blend with PCBM, which contrasts with the fluorescence observed for the 3:PCBM blend. This finding can be ascribed to an extremely fine dispersion of 2 into the PCBM matrix which allows for a complete exciton dissociation before the radiative decay takes place. Nevertheless, it makes the generated carriers unable to reach the electrodes for the absence of an interpenetrating network, and rationalizes the extremely low photocurrent observed for device 2. Thus we focused on the mapping of compound 3 as a function of 3:PCBM ratio (Fig. 3B) in order to determine its tendency to form aggregates due to the intermolecular π–π stacking between the anthracenic units. The tendency of compound 3 to self-assemble into ordered domains is reflected in the appearance of the luminescent map recorded for a 50:50%w blend, as well as in the corresponding topography (Fig. S7), where few and big aggregates in the order of 200–300 μm were detected. Increasing the PCBM concentration, the domain size strongly decreases to less than 100 nm (65%w, in Fig. 3B), as well as the PL intensity from each grain. In the extreme situation of the film containing a large excess (80%w) of PCBM the domains are indistinguishable from the background. The best electrical performances, tested in photovoltaic devices, as reported in Table S1, are obtained using the 35:65 ratio (Fig. 3B), in which a good compromise between phase separation and donor concentration is achieved, resulting in 3.41 mA cm−2 short-circuit current (JSC).
A consistent contribution to obtaining highly efficient solar cells is made by the open circuit voltage, especially in our molecular BHJs which display VOC values up to 1 V (compound 3), among the highest reported in the literature. The VOC has classically been correlated with the difference between the HOMO of the donor and the LUMO of the acceptor (ΔEDA). However it has recently been proposed that VOC can follow a logarithmical dependence on the inverse of the barrier-free saturation current (JSO), according to the relationship
(1)
where
n is the diode ideality factor, k is the Boltzmann constant, T the temperature and q the fundamental charge. The magnitude of JSO depends on the D/A interface electronic coupling, and it is independent of the energy barrier ΔEDA.

As reported in Table 2, in our devices the values of ΔEDA for compounds 2 and 3 respectively (1.2 eV vs. 1.0 eV) cannot explain the increase of VOC from 0.78 (device 2) to 0.98 V (device 3). This behavior indicates large differences in the values of JSO for different active materials. Considering that the diode ideality factor n ranges over a rather small interval around 1.8–2.4, we can infer from eqn (1) that the value of JSO for compound 2 must be about two orders of magnitude larger than for compound 3. Considering the definition of JSO, these results can be interpreted in terms of a stronger donor–acceptor coupling of compound 2 compared to compound 3. In order to confirm this idea, we investigated the nature of the intermolecular interaction and the degree of intermolecular coupling by performing DFT simulations of complexes 2-C60 and 3-C60 (Fig. S8 in ESI) in their outermost orientations: the π–π bonded and the T-type nonbonded configuration. In both orientations, the binding energy computed for complex 2-C60 was lower than for 3-C60, as reported in Table 2, indicating therefore a significantly lower interaction of compound 3 with the fullerene, in agreement with the JSO expectations. The trend found in binding energies and in JSO allows a rationalization of the high VOC observed for 3 in terms of a very low coupling with the acceptor PCBM.
In conclusion, this study on a new series of thiophene-based monodispersed molecular materials shows how the photovoltaic properties of a BHJ device can be controlled by suitably tailoring the properties of the donor molecule. We found that an ideal molecular donor should have the following chemical–physical characteristics: (i) tendency to give π–π stacking interactions in order to induce a proper phase separation that makes it possible to have a high JSC; (ii) low intermolecular overlap with the acceptor, corresponding to a high molecular steric volume and a low binding energy of the charge transfer exciton, in order to increase the VOC.
The authors thank Dr. Giovanni Morello for the confocal microscopy images and TURBOMOLE GmbH for providing the TURBOMOLE program package. This work was partially funded by the ERC Starting Grant FP7 Project DEDOM, Grant Agreement No. 207441 and by the Regione Puglia (APQ-Reti di Laboratorio, Progetto PHOEBUS, cod. 31).
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Material synthesis, experimental and computational details, CV, absorption and UV-Vis images, solar cells responses at different concentrations and binding energies simulations. See DOI: 10.1039/c0cc01229g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010