 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA02843D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16860-16866


Jun
Yin
,

Jing
Cao
,

Xu
He
,

Shangfu
Yuan
,

Shibo
Sun
,

Jing
Li
*,

Nanfeng
Zheng
* and 

Liwei
Lin


Pen-Tung Sah Institute of Micro-Nano Science and Technology, Xiamen University, Xiamen, 361005, China. E-mail: lijing@xmu.edu.cn; Tel: +86-592-2181340

State Key Laboratory for Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces, Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemistry for Energy Materials, Department of Chemistry, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China. E-mail: nfzheng@xmu.edu.cn; Fax: +86-592-2183047

Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA

Received
19th April 2015
, Accepted 7th July 2015
First published on 8th July 2015
Recently, organometal trihalide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have undergone intense development and show huge potential as the next generation of high efficiency photovoltaic (PV) cells. However, the stability of these devices still needs to be improved to enable commercialization, especially the photovoltaic stability under ambient conditions. In this work, the demonstrated greatly improved stability of CH3NH3PbI3 based PSCs in ambient air has been achieved by controlling the mesoporous TiO2 (m-TiO2) layer in the devices. With the optimized thickness of the m-TiO2 layer, rather stable devices which maintain over 85% of the initial power conversion efficiency (PCE) even after ∼2400 hours (100 days) storage in air were accomplished. It is evidenced that the suppressed decomposition of perovskite and the well-kept charge transportation are majorly responsible for the improved air-stability of the device.

Photovoltaic (PV) technology has been developed intensively in the last few decades with the goals being high efficiency and low fabrication cost. Since organometal trihalide perovskite was initially demonstrated as a light sensitizer for photovoltaic cells by Miyasaka et al. in 2009, a variety of studies have been done to improve the performance of perovskite based solar cells, such as morphology control, interface engineering, crystal growth, and so on. Recently, a new power conversion efficiency (PCE) record exceeding 20% has been achieved for perovskite solar cells (PSCs). These attractive results mean that PSCs exhibit huge potential as next generation highly efficient solar cells with low cost fabrication processes.

Besides the pursuit of high efficiency, the stability of the PSCs is another crucial factor that determines their practicability. However, the most currently studied CH3NH3PbIxCl3−x perovskite tends to degrade when exposed to ambient air, and the correspondingly produced PbI2 grains that adhere to the surface of the perovskite will block the efficient transportation of carriers and thus dramatically reduce the device's performance. Recently, a few publications have focused on improving the stability of PSCs by introducing a hydrophobic structure to prevent moisture damage, such as with carbon nanotubes (CNTs) combined with PMMA decoration, aluminum oxide post-modification, or using a hydrophobic hole transporting layer and so on. Coincidentally, the widely used mesostructured scaffold materials in PSCs, such as TiO2 and Al2O3, are also ideal protective architectures, which can be potentially utilized to protect the perovskite from moisture damage in air to some degree. Moreover, recently, mesoporous TiO2 has also demonstrated the unique ability to increase the innate tolerance to environmental conditions due to its rapid electron transporting properties. Therefore, a well-designed mesoporous TiO2 structure is expected to help improve the photovoltaic stability of PSCs in ambient air, and the corresponding mechanisms are worth investigating.
In this work, through carefully controlling the thickness of the mesoporous TiO2 (m-TiO2) layer in PSCs, the impact on the device's performance, especially the stability in ambient air as well as the decay properties, have been systematically investigated. With an optimized m-TiO2 thickness of 240 nm in the CH3NH3PbI3 based PSCs, a quite stable performance which maintained over 85% of the initial PCE was accomplished in the device even after ∼2400 hours (100 days) of storage in ambient air. It was proposed and experimentally verified that the mesoporous TiO2 layer not only can effectively prevent the damage of perovskite by moisture in air, but also provides a stable charge transportation channel, so that the photovoltaic performance of PSCs can be well maintained when exposed to ambient air for a long time. This work demonstrates well the effect of the controllable mesoporous layer on improving the stability of CH3NH3PbI3-based solar cells in ambient air, providing specific guidelines for realization of air-stable PSCs.

Here, the solar cells were fabricated using the widely used two-step method and the detailed fabrication processes can be seen in the ESI. All of the devices were fabricated under ambient air with a humidity of about 50% and then stored in a dry air environment without being sealed while maintaining a humidity of ∼15% before measurements. The thickness of the m-TiO2 layer was controlled through employing different numbers of spin-coating cycles ranging from 1 to 4. As shown graphically in Fig. 1a, the thickness of m-TiO2 linearly increases with the cycle number, and so does the m-TiO2 ratio (defined as the ratio of the m-TiO2 thickness to the total thickness of the active layer). From the cross-section images of the samples shown in Fig. S1, it can be found that the thickness of the perovskite capping layer decreased as the m-TiO2 thickness increased, and the total thickness of the active layer was maintained at ∼500 nm without any obvious variation. It is noteworthy that the perovskite crystal domains decreased due to the presence of a thicker m-TiO2 layer, consistent with Rietveld analysis reported previously. The reduced size of the perovskite grains would greatly influence the charge transportation process, which will be discussed later. The slightly increased absorption, as shown in Fig. 1b, also indicates the change in the formation of the perovskite sensitizer grains and the corresponding absorption kinetics by increasing the thickness of the mesoporous structure.

The most efficient cells were realized with the devices configured with a m-TiO2 thickness of ∼160 nm and achieved a PCE of 11.09% (10.43% on average). With an optimized perovskite layer, a 13.76% PCE (12.41% on average) can be obtained, as seen in the J–V curves of Fig. 1c and the histogram of efficiency in Fig. S2 (ESI). A well resolved perovskite capping layer with large crystal domains can be seen in this device (Fig. 1d). It is believed that these large perovskite crystal domains ensure effective charge transportation processes and thus better photovoltaic performance. A comparison of the reverse- and forward-scanning in the J–V measurements also indicates that little hysteresis existed in the prepared devices (Fig. S2c, ESI). As the m-TiO2 thickness increased, an obvious decreasing trend in open-circuit voltage (Voc) can be observed, as well as the fill factor (FF) and PCE, while the short-circuit current density (Jsc) and the incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) response (Fig. S3, ESI) undergo a slight increase and then decrease, as shown in Fig. 2.
In order to understand the above phenomena, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed to evaluate the charge recombination properties of the PSCs. As shown in Fig. S4a (ESI), under full illumination and 1.0 V bias, the Nyquist plot shows typical arcs in the measured frequency range from 1 Hz to 1 MHz, which is attributed to the combination of the recombination resistance (Rrec) and the chemical capacitance (Cμ) of the considered film. As shown in Fig. S4b (ESI), a distinguishable Rrec decreasing trend can be observed as the thickness of the m-TiO2 layer increased over the whole range of the applied voltages. This indicates that the detrimental electron back reaction at the interfaces, especially between the mesoporous TiO2 and the perovskite active layer, was enhanced with thickening of the m-TiO2 layer due to the increased electron diffusion length. This recombination reaction is known to be the major loss factor for the Voc decrease in devices, originating from the reduced steady state electron density in the TiO2 film. Also, the excess interfaces between TiO2 and the perovskite layer when the m-TiO2 layer is thicker may result in extra trapping defects, which would quench the photo-generated carriers and lead to an increased series resistance (Rs), presented as a lowered FF. Additionally, the poorer charge transportation properties with a thickened m-TiO2 layer resulted in an inefficient charge collection, leading to a slightly increasing and then decreasing trend in Jsc and IPCE, although the absorption increased.
More importantly, the PCE decay measurements revealed that the mesoporous TiO2 layer also plays an important role in the stability of the devices in ambient air, as displayed in Fig. 3a and b. All of the devices exhibit a PCE decay feature but with different trends. For the devices with a thicker m-TiO2 layer (240, 330 and 415 nm), the obvious decay happened in the first 7 days, and then a stable performance was maintained. In contrast, a continuous decay feature is presented in the devices with a thinner m-TiO2 layer (160 nm). Among all of the tested cells, the most efficient cells with a 160 nm m-TiO2 layer present the fastest decay rate. The cells with a 240 nm m-TiO2 layer exhibit the best long-term stability. A ∼30% PCE loss occurred for the devices with a 160 nm thick m-TiO2 layer while a loss of lower than 15% occurred for the ones with a 240 nm m-TiO2 layer even after about one month. To our surprise, the PCE for the devices with a 240 nm m-TiO2 layer exhibited almost no more decay after the first 7 days and the PCE maintained at a value of about 9%. Even after 100 days, an average of ∼8.61% (over 85% of the initial average PCE value) and a maximum of 9.15% PCE could still be obtained with these stable cells, as shown in Fig. 3a and S5 (ESI). The device stability is evaluated using the ratio of the remaining PCE to its original value (decay ratio) after 100 days ageing, as illustrated in Fig. 3c. Obviously, the stability of the PSCs shows a strong dependence on the proportion of the m-TiO2 layer within the active layer. The typical J–V curves of the corresponding cells measured immediately after fabrication and 15 days later also show similar decay features to the above (Fig. 3d). The specific photovoltaic parameters summarized in Table 1 reveal that the decay of the Voc and FF is the main reason for the apparent decrease in PCE values for both kinds of cells. Noticeably, the cells with a 240 nm-thick m-TiO2 layer are more stable because of the smaller decrease in the Voc and FF.
Samples

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
160 nm_0 days
1.04
17.82
60.02
11.06
160 nm_15 days
0.88
18.09
48.36
7.72
240 nm_0 days
1.01
18.62
53.59
10.18
240 nm_15 days
0.97
18.95
47.28
8.72
When fully considering the unique PV performances, EIS characteristics and long-term stability in air for the PSCs with different thicknesses of TiO2, the relevant PV mechanisms in Fig. 4 are proposed: for the perovskite solar cells employing a thin m-TiO2 layer, a uniform film and large perovskite crystal domains can be produced, producing solar cells which have good charge transportation and better photovoltaic performance, as illustrated in Fig. 4a. While for the cells configured with a thicker mesoporous layer (as seen in Fig. 4b), the reduced perovskite crystal domains and additionally introduced surface defects in the thick m-TiO2 layer would result in a lower charge transportation rate, and thus a relatively poorer PCE performance, exhibiting reduced Voc and FF.
When experiencing a long exposure time to air, the cell structure with a thin m-TiO2 layer tends to be damaged by moisture in the air, and the PbI2 grains from perovskite decomposition would significantly limit the charge transportation processes (as illustrated in Fig. 4c), leading to a dramatically decayed PCE performance. Meanwhile for samples with a thicker m-TiO2 layer (Fig. 4d), the mesoporous structure intertwined with the perovskite can not only suppress the decomposition reaction of CH3NH3PbI3 by preventing moisture attack to a certain degree, but also ensures that the charge transportation process is well maintained. So a relatively high PCE performance with a maximum of 9.15% and an average of 8.61% in this work can be accomplished after storage in air for 100 days, retaining more than 85% of its initial PCE, as shown in Fig. S5 (ESI).
To verify this decay mechanism, morphology characterization was first carried out to examine the evolution of perovskite film exposed to ambient air. As shown in Fig. 5a, the as-prepared CH3NH3PbI3 shows a typical cuboid crystal morphology with smooth surfaces and sharp edges. With increasing exposure time, the surface changed to be rough and the cuboid shape disappeared gradually, especially for the sample stored in air for over 30 days. Undoubtedly, the decomposition of perovskite and the correspondingly produced PbI2 grains on the surface should be the main reasons for the morphology evolution. The cross-sectional SEM images in Fig. 5b and c show a clear m-TiO2 layer dependent morphology evolution trend: in the newly prepared perovskite films for the samples with a 160 and 240 nm-thick-m-TiO2 layer, dense and large perovskite crystal domains can be seen presenting good consistency with the planar SEM image shown in Fig. 5a-i. After exposure to air for 15 days, the crystal size of the perovskite in both samples underwent an obvious decrease and the surface also became rough. Undoubtedly, the decomposition of the perovskite film and the generated PbI2 nanograins adhering on the surface are the main reasons for this morphology evolution. Contrastingly, a much denser morphology for the perovskite bilayer was presented in the sample with a thicker m-TiO2 (240 nm) layer as seen in Fig. 5c-ii. Then, as the exposure time further increased to over 30 days, the crystal domains continuously decreased in size and obvious voids can be seen in the perovskite layer of the sample with the thin m-TiO2 layer of 160 nm. Certainly, these voids were formed from the seriously decomposed perovskite films, which would cause detachment of the perovskite structure and dramatically decrease the PV performance of PSCs. While for the sample with a thicker m-TiO2 layer (240 nm), a better situation can be visualised in the cross-sectional image where a relatively denser and better connection between the charge collection layer still can be maintained after a long aging time in air, as shown in Fig. 5c-iii.
The crystallinity evolution shown in Fig. 6 further evidences the production of PbI2 grains. The main diffraction peaks centred at 14.2° and 28.5° can be assigned to the CH3NH3PbI3 phase, and the peak centred at 12.7° is attributed to PbI2. For the as-prepared samples, both strong diffraction from perovskite and an accompanied weak PbI2 diffraction are present. The perovskite diffraction peak intensity also seems stronger for the sample with a thinner mesoporous layer, which should originate from the relatively thicker perovskite capping layer consisting of larger crystal domains compared with the samples with a thick m-TiO2 layer. For the samples stored in air for 15 days, the corresponding diffraction peak intensity of the perovskite understandably decreased accompanied by the PbI2 peak increasing in intensity, as shown in Fig. 6b, which results from the decomposition reaction caused by moisture in the air. Interestingly, the XRD diffraction peaks undergo a quite unique decline trend for these samples, where a greater reduction in the intensity of perovskite related diffraction peaks occurred for the cells with a thinner m-TiO2 layer and the PbI2 diffraction peaks experienced an opposite trend. Furthermore, almost no changes occurred for the cell with a 415 nm thick m-TiO2 layer, presenting the most stable structure.
These characterization results indicate that the formed PbI2 grains, mainly located at the surface and grain boundaries of the perovskite, are the major defects in perovskite films when exposed to air for some time and these defects would dramatically damage the interfaces between the perovskite and charge conducting layer. Although the well-controlled PbI2 boundary grains have been demonstrated to passivate the perovskite layer to achieve high PSC performance, the excess PbI2 would still significantly block the charge transportation resulting in a lowered photovoltaic performance. So, there must be a compromise in the thickness of the m-TiO2 layer in order to: on the one hand, suppress the electron recombination reaction, and on the other hand reduce the production of PbI2 grains due to the attack of moisture, so that an efficient charge transportation process can be ensured in the well protected crystal structure and interfaces of PSCs. Therefore, the optimized m-TiO2 thickness of 240 nm was demonstrated in the PSCs to achieve the satisfied performance for both conversion efficiency and stability.
In order to further demonstrate the influence of the formed PbI2 grains on the charge transportation properties, the current dynamics were investigated for the as-prepared cells and after being stored in air for 15 days through switching the light ON and OFF, as shown in Fig. 7a and b. For the as-prepared cell with a 160 nm-thick m-TiO2 layer, a fast current response can be obtained with a short response time Δt1 (2.9 s) when exposed to light, while a dramatically enlarged continuous current rise time Δt2 (6.5 s) can be seen for the cell that was stored in air for 15 days. This indicates that the excessive charge accumulation at the electronic defect states occurred in the interfaces between the TiO2/perovskite/HTM layers, which would block the efficient transportation of the charges and lead to a poorer photovoltaic performance, as demonstrated in Fig. 3d. However, for cells with the relatively thicker m-TiO2 layer of 240 nm, few differences can be seen when comparing the current responses of the cell measured immediately and 15 days later, evidencing that the charge transportation mechanism has not been influenced too much. Therefore, no prominent performance fading can be found for this device configuration. This conclusion is also further supported by the time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements shown in Fig. S5.

In this work, the mesoporous layer of perovskite solar cells has been investigated with specific focus on enhancing the device's stability in ambient air while still maintaining a relatively satisfactory photovoltaic performance. With an optimized thickness of the m-TiO2 layer, stable and efficient perovskite solar cells were produced which can be fabricated and stored in ambient air, which still maintain over 85% of their initial PCE value even after over 100 days of exposure to air. The obviously enhanced stability in air of the perovskite solar cells is proposed to originate from the protected crystallinity and charge transportation channels induced by the relatively thick mesoporous layer, which not only acts as a protective architecture, but also as a stable electron transportation medium. The attractive results in this work not only reveal the specific influence of the mesoporous structure on the charge transportation and photovoltaic stability within perovskite solar cells in air ambient, but also provide a constructive way to fabricate efficient and stable perovskite solar cells by introducing or designing new mesoporous structures and configurations.


This work is financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61106118), the Science and Technology Program of Public Wellbeing of Xiamen City of China (3502Z20144079) and the China Scholarship Council (CSC) scholarship under the State Scholarship Fund.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta02843d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015