 DOI: 10.1039/D1NJ04068E
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2021, 45, 21382-21388


Zhen
He
,

Fanning
Meng
,

Lianjie
Li
,

Liguo
Gao
* and 

Tingli
Ma
*

State Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116023, China. E-mail: liguo.gao@dlut.edu.cn

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, China Jiliang University, Hangzhou, 310018, P. R. China. E-mail: tinglima@life.kyutech.ac.jp

Graduate School of Life Science and Systems Engineering, Kyushu Institute of Technology, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka 808-0196, Japan

Received
25th August 2021
, Accepted 21st October 2021
First published on 27th October 2021
Due to the low cost and strong hydrophobicity of carbon electrodes, carbon-based perovskite solar cells (C-PSCs) have drawn much attention. Copper(I) thiocyanate (CuSCN) is a favorable hole transport layer in perovskite solar cells (PSCs) because of its high chemical stability, high conductivity, and high hole mobility, but pinholes often appear during CuSCN film fabrication. In this work, organic ammonium salt, phenethylammonium iodide (PEAI), has been applied to modify the CuSCN film. The results indicated that PEAI not only eliminated the pinholes, but also passivated the perovskite film and enhanced the interfacial connection. Therefore, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of C-PSCs increased by about 11%. The stability test showed that the C-PSCs, without any encapsulation, could maintain 70% of the initial efficiency after storage for 800 h in ambient air with 60%–70% relative humidity at room temperature.

To date, the certified power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has reached 25.5%. However, PSCs suffer from high cost and instability issues. Due to the low cost, strong hydrophobicity, and well-aligned energy level with perovskites, carbon electrodes (CEs) could replace noble-metal electrodes and hole transport layers (HTLs) at the same time. Therefore, carbon-based perovskite solar cells (C-PSCs) could not only reduce the device cost, but also enhance the stability. However, there is a larger energy-level difference between the work function of CEs and the valence band maximum (VBM) of the perovskite. Therefore, the heterogeneous interface between the perovskite and the CEs lacks sufficient depletion width and built-in potential, resulting in insufficient force to facilitate charge carrier separation and extraction. This reduces the hole collection efficiency and causes excess carrier recombination, giving rise to a serious loss in the open-circuit voltage (Voc) of C-PSCs. Chu et al. introduced NiO nanoparticles into carbon electrodes, and the results illustrated that the doping of NiO could significantly enhance the hole transfer.

Hence, intercalation of HTLs can effectively alleviate this problem. As an inorganic hole transport material in the field of PSCs, copper(I)thiocyanate (CuSCN) has advantages of high chemical stability, high conductivity (10−2–10−3 S cm−1), high hole mobility (10−2–10−1 cm2 V−1 s−1), and well-aligned energy level with the perovskite VBM. Inserting CuSCN into the interface of the perovskite and CEs is an effective strategy to solve the issue of energy level mismatch in C-PSCs. Yang et al. inserted the CuSCN layer between the perovskite layer and the carbon electrode. The results demonstrated that the introduction of the CuSCN layer could eliminate the hysteresis of C-PSCs. Then, they found that CuSCN could achieve better energy level alignment with the perovskite than Spiro-OMeTAD, resulting in an improved PCE with lower hysteresis. However, the poor solubility of CuSCN and rapid crystallization in alkyl sulfide lead to inferior film quality and insufficient coverage, which decrease the hole-collection efficiency and lead to low PCE of the device.
In this regard, multiple groups have made a lot of effort to improve the quality of the CuSCN film. Liu et al. demonstrated that low-pressure treatment could vaporize the diethyl sulfide (DES) solution in CuSCN HTLs and improve the quality of the perovskite films. Mali et al. developed a deposition method assisted by a smart bottle humidifier, and successfully prepared a uniform and dense large-area CuSCN film by regulating the concentration of the CuSCN solution. Arora et al. obtained CuSCN HTLs with high coverage, and the corresponding C-PSCs efficiency was as high as 18.1%. Wu et al. optimized the crystallization rate by adjusting the concentration of the CuSCN solution and obtained a dense and defect-free film. Xu et al. controlled the crystallization process of CuSCN by constructing intermediate complexes, forming a dense and uniform layer, which improved the photovoltaic performance of devices. Yang et al. introduced functional molecules between the perovskite and CuSCN, enhancing the Voc by 40 mV. Therefore, high-quality CuSCN films are crucial for the improvement of the hole collection and photovoltaic performance of devices. In addition, Yang et al. reported that a hot-pressing process could dramatically strengthen the interfacial contact between CuSCN and the carbon electrode, which could increase the charge transfer, resulting in an improved PCE.
Phenylethylammonium iodide (PEAI), a simple derivative of aromatic ammonium iodide, is one of the most widely used passivation materials for PSCs. Jiang et al. investigated the role of PEAI in surface passivation of perovskite films. The results demonstrated that the PEAI reduced surface defects of three-dimensional (3D) perovskites, inhibited non-radiative recombination, and realized efficient PSCs. Lee et al. post-treated CEs with PEAI and induced in situ growth of two-dimensional (2D) perovskites at the perovskite/CE interface, improving the PCE of C-PSCs from 12.2% to 15.6%.
Our previous work has proved that CuSCN HTLs significantly modified the energy level alignment (ELA) between the perovskite and CEs. However, pinholes of CuSCN films would lead to serious charge accumulation, resulting in electron–hole recombination, which reduces the effective hole collection. Herein, an organic ammonium salt, PEAI, is introduced to repair the pinholes of the CuSCN film and passivate the defects of the perovskite by in situ growth of 2D perovskites. After investigation of the carrier dynamics and photoelectric performance of C-PSCs, the results show that the extraction of holes has been improved due to ammonium salt modification. It gave rise to enhanced PCE, and the stability of relevant devices was also improved.

FTO (15 Ω sq−1) was purchased from Yingkou OPV Tech New Energy Co., Ltd Technology. The SnO2 colloid (tin(IV) oxide) precursor was purchased from Alfa Aesar. SnCl2·2H2O (98%) was purchased from J&K Chemical Technology. Chlorobenzene (CB, 99.8%), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, 99.9%, superdry), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, ≥99.7%), and isopropyl alcohol (IPA, ≥99.9%) were purchased from Aladdin Biochemical Technology Co., Ltd. Ethanol (C2H6O, 99%) was purchased from Tianjin Damao Chemical Reagent Company. Diethyl sulfide (DES, 98%) and cuprous thiocyanate (CuSCN, 99%) were bought from Sigma-Aldrich. Formamidine ammonium iodide (FAI), ammonium bromide (MABr), lead bromide (PbBr2), cesium chloride (CsI), and PEAI were purchased from Xi’an Polymer Light Technology Corp. Lead iodide (PbI2) was bought from Advanced Election Technology CO., Ltd. Carbon paste (CH-8 (MOD2)) was bought from JUJO Printing Supplies & Technology (Pinghu) Co., Ltd.


SnO2 layers, the perovskite (Cs0.05(MA0.15FA0.85)0.95Pb(I0.86Br0.14)3) precursor, and CuSCN films were prepared in accordance with our previous report. For carbon electrode fabrication, 10 g carbon paste was dissolved in 7 mL CB and milled for 12 h. Then the milled carbon paste was applied on the top of the HTL and dried at 85 °C for 1 h. For the PEAI modified CuSCN precursor, PEAI was dissolved in IPA with a concentration of 5 mg mL−1, and CuSCN was dissolved in DES with a concentration of 35 mg mL−1. By controlling the volume of PEAI solution, the modified CuSCN precursor with PEAI concentrations of 0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, and 0.8 mM was obtained. As shown in Fig. S1 (ESI), with an increase in the concentration of PEAI from 0 mM to 0.4 mM, the PCE of C-PSCs gradually increased. However, when the concentration of PEAI further increased to 0.6 mM and 0.8 mM, the PCE of C-PSCs gradually decreased. Therefore, in this study, unless specified, the modified CuSCN samples were prepared when the PEAI concentration was 0.4 mM.


The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were obtained on a high-resolution field emission Nano SEM 450 (FEI, USA). The crystal structures of the perovskite film were tested by X-ray diffraction (XRD) (XRD-7000S Shimadzu, Japan). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was conducted on a Thermo Scientific, ESCALAB 250Xi, USA. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was conducted with He(I) radiation at 21.22 eV. The transmittance and absorption spectra were measured using a LAMBDA 950 (PerkinElmer, USA). The J–V characteristics of the cells were measured using a Peccell-L15 solar simulator (Peccell, Japan) under AM 1.5G 100 mW cm−2 (Keithley 2460, America). For both reverse and forward scans, the sweep rate was 0.1 V s−1. Photoluminescence (PL) spectra were measured using C5410 (Hamamatsu) with an optically triggered fringe camera with a laser of 517 nm. Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra were recorded with an Edinburgh FLS1000 fluorescence spectrometer. The excitation was at 375 nm. Nyquist plot measurements were conducted with an electrochemical workstation (Zennium Zahner, Germany) under AM 1.5G 100 mW cm−2 (Peccell-L15 solar simulator, Peccell, Japan) as well as a 0.6 V forward bias voltage of AC perturbation ranging from 100 mHz to 4 MHz. The obtained impedance spectra were fitted with the Z-man software in terms of the appropriate equivalent circuit model. The incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) and transient photocurrent/photovoltage measurements were conducted on a controlled intensity modulated photoelectric-chemical spectrometer of Zennium Zahner. The water contact angles of the perovskite were measured using OCAH200 Dataphysics Instruments.


SEM was employed to characterize the morphologies of the perovskite film and the modified CuSCN films deposited on the perovskite film at different concentrations of PEAI. As shown in Fig. 1a, before CuSCN deposition, perovskite grains are clearly visible, and there are many grain boundaries. The surface morphologies of the perovskite film are relatively rough. After CuSCN deposition (Fig. 1b), there are obvious pinholes on the surface of the CuSCN film due to its poor crystallization. These pinholes would reduce the hole extraction and transport of CuSCN, inducing charge accumulation and electron–hole recombination, and ultimately decreasing the photovoltaic performance of the device. As the additive PEAI was added into CuSCN, pinholes of the CuSCN film gradually decrease and disappear, as shown in Fig. 1b–d. When the PEAI concentration is 0.4 mM, a continuous, dense, and pinhole-free CuSCN film is obtained.

To investigate the possible mechanism of PEAI repairing pinholes in the CuSCN film, X-ray diffraction (XRD), photoluminescence spectroscopy (PL), and ultraviolet-visible absorption spectroscopy (UV-Vis) were used to characterize the properties of FTO/SnO2/3D perovskite/(pristine or modified) CuSCN samples. XRD patterns in Fig. 2a show that the clear diffraction peaks at 2θ = 12.72°, 14.16° and 16.14° in both pristine and modified CuSCN simples can be indexed to excess PbI2, 3D perovskite and CuSCN, respectively. The modified CuSCN sample shows a new diffraction peak at 2θ = 5.44°, which can be indexed to the (020) crystal reflection of 2D perovskite PEA2PbI4, indicating the formation of 2D perovskite PEA2PbI4. Meanwhile, the intensity of the diffraction peak of PbI2 in the modified CuSCN sample is significantly decreased owing to the reaction between PbI2 and PEAI. The characteristic peak at 514 nm in the PL spectrum could be attributed to PEA2PbI4 (Fig. 2b), which further confirms the formation of the 2D perovskite in the modified CuSCN sample. In addition, the redshift of PL spectra and the fitting results of the Tauc plot (Fig. S2, ESI) suggest the bandgap changes of the 3D perovskite film. In comparison with the pristine CuSCN sample, the stronger PL quenching of the modified CuSCN sample also demonstrates its more efficient hole extraction. Accordingly, the quality improvement of the CuSCN film in Fig. 1d can be attributed to the in situ growth of the 2D perovskite, which repairs the defects of the CuSCN film and enhances the film continuity.
To determine whether the modified CuSCN has a passivation effect on the underlying 3D perovskite film, the dark current–voltage characteristics of the hole-only devices based on the pristine and modified CuSCN were characterized. And the defect state density of the 3D perovskite is quantitatively calculated through the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) model (Fig. 2c). According to , the Nt of the 3D perovskite can be estimated by the trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL). The VTFL of the CuSCN film decreases from 0.269 V (the pristine film) to 0.145 V (the modified film), implying that the Nt reduces from 2.38 × 1015 cm−3 to 1.28 × 1015 cm−3. The results suggest that the modified CuSCN film passivates the surface defects and reduces the defect state density of the underlying 3D perovskite. This is beneficial to improve the charge transport performance of the perovskite/CuSCN interface.
To investigate the effect of modified CuSCN on the photovoltaic performance of the device, a carbon layer with a thickness of about 50 μm (Fig. S3, ESI) was deposited on top of the CuSCN layer for fabricating C-PSCs. The cross-sectional SEM image in Fig. 3a demonstrates that there are gaps at the perovskite/CuSCN interface due to the poor quality of the pristine CuSCN. After modification (Fig. 3b), the gap at the perovskite/CuSCN interface is significantly reduced, and the contact is enhanced. The photovoltaic performance of C-PSCs was characterized by the current dense–voltage (J–V) curves, and the results are shown in Fig. 3c, Table 1 and Table S1 (ESI). The Voc of C-PSCs increases from 1.04 V to 1.09 V, the short-circuit current density (Jsc) increases from 20.87 mA cm−2 to 21.62 mA cm−2, and the fill factor (FF) increases from 0.61 to 0.62, resulting in a PCE enhancement from 13.20% to 14.62%. In comparison with the CuSCN-based C-PSCs, the modified CuSCN-based C-PSCs show a smaller hysteresis, suggesting reduced charge accumulation at the perovskite/modified CuSCN interface. To verify the accuracy of the J–V results, the incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra of the resultant C-PSCs are recorded. As shown in Fig. S4 (ESI), C-PSCs based on modified CuSCN show a stronger absorption of visible light and generate higher integrated current density (increases from 20.01 mA cm−2 to 20.94 mA cm−2), which is consistent with the J–V curves. Fig. S5 (ESI) illustrates the time evolution of the maximum output power of the device under the AM 1.5G light source. The results demonstrated that the device based on modified CuSCN could maintain a stable maximum output power within 600 s, whereas the device based on CuSCN showed slightly decreased PCE after 300 s continuous output. Fig. 3d displays the statistical PCE distribution from 60 devices. The two types of C-PSCs demonstrate good reproducibility. Moreover, the average PCE of C-PSCs based on modified CuSCN is 12.64%, which is 10% higher than the average PCE of the C-PSCs based on pristine CuSCN (11.49%).
Devices
Scan direction

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
HI
CuSCN
RS
1.04
20.87
0.61
13.20
0.158
CuSCN
FS
1.02
20.60
0.56
11.73
Modified-CuSCN
RS
1.09
21.62
0.62
14.62
0.102
Modified-CuSCN
FS
1.07
21.48
0.58
13.29
To analyze the interfacial carrier dynamics of devices, linear sweep voltammogram (LSV), time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL), the transient photovoltage (TPV), the transient photocurrent (TPC) decays, and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) spectra were measured. LSV results in Fig. S6 (ESI) reveal that the modified CuSCN contributes to higher conductivity at the perovskite/CuSCN interface, which is beneficial to boost charge transport and suppress charge recombination at the interface, resulting in an improvement in Jsc. TRPL spectra (Fig. 4a and Table S2, ESI) demonstrate stronger PL quenching and shorter carrier lifetime at the perovskite/modified CuSCN interface, implying faster hole extraction and suppressed recombination of electrons and holes.
Furthermore, the carrier transport and recombination time (τt and τr) of C-PSCs are extracted from the TPV and TPC decays (Fig. 4b and c). The τt in TPV curves increases from 12.02 μs (for the pristine CuSCN) to 16.41 μs (for the modified CuSCN), suggesting accelerated charge extraction and transport of the modified CuSCN-based C-PSCs. Meanwhile, the τr in TPC curves decreases from 11.39 μs (for the pristine CuSCN) to 8.89 μs (for the modified CuSCN), which implies slower interfacial carrier recombination due to rapid carrier extraction and reduced accumulation at the perovskite/CuSCN interface. The Nyquist plot in Fig. 4d displays a small arc at high frequency and a large arc at low frequency, which could be fitted with the equivalent circuit (the inset of Fig. 4d). The value of the starting point at the real part represents a similar series resistance (Rs). The small arc is associated with the transfer resistance (Rtr) and capacitance C1, revealing the charge transporting properties at the interface of the perovskite film and charge transport layer. The large arc is associated with the recombination resistance (Rrec) and capacitance C2, which reflect the recombination resistance at the perovskite/CuSCN (pristine or modified CuSCN) interface. The results demonstrate that the smaller Rtr and C1 indicate that the improved carrier transport is achieved between the perovskite and the modified CuSCN. This means that the reduced charge accumulation will occur at the interface of perovskite/modified CuSCN. The larger Rrec and C2 indicate that the suppressed recombination will occur at the interface of perovskite/modified CuSCN. This means that a lower PL will be obtained, which is consistent with the results in Fig. 2b.
To evaluate the effect of modified CuSCN on device stability, the PCE of the C-PSCs without any encapsulation was monitored in a high-humidity air environment, 60%–70% relative humidity (RH) and room temperature. As shown in Fig. 5a, after storage for 800 h, C-PSCs based on modified CuSCN retain 70% of the initial PCE, whereas C-PSCs based on pristine CuSCN maintain only 63% of the initial PCE. The thermal stability test (Fig. S7, ESI) showed that the device based on modified CuSCN could retain 82% of the initial PCE after 288 h of storage at 85 °C in the environment, whereas the device based on CuSCN lost 30% of the initial PCE. The enhanced stability of devices based on modified CuSCN can be attributed to the following aspects. Compared with C-PSCs based on pristine CuSCN, devices based on modified CuSCN showed a better hydrophobicity property, as shown in Fig. 5a, which could avoid the degradation from water. And the 2D perovskite could act as a barrier layer to suppress the ion migration caused by thermal stress. In addition, the PEAI in the modified CuSCN film could reduce the pinholes of CuSCN, and passivate defects at the perovskite/modified CuSCN interface, as shown in Fig. 1 and 2c, which could slow down the degradation of the perovskite. As shown in the schematic images Fig. 5b, the pinholes in the pristine CuSCN film provide channels for moisture penetration, which can accelerate perovskite decomposition induced by moisture. The improved quality of the modified CuSCN film and the intimate contact of the perovskite/modified CuSCN interface could eliminate the pinhole and protect the perovskite from degradation, inducing an enhancement in the stability of C-PSCs.

Organic ammonium salt, PEAI, has been utilized for CuSCN modification. The PEAI will participate in the crystallization of the perovskite film and form a 2D perovskite on a 3D perovskite. The results show that the formation of the 2D perovskite can block the pinholes of HTLs, reduce the defects of devices, and enhance the charge transport. The PCE of C-PSCs based on the modified CuSCN is improved by 11% compared with their pristine counterparts. The stability of C-PSCs based on the modified CuSCN is improved due to the properties of the 2D perovskite including better hydrophobic properties, defect passivation, and suppressed ion migration. After storage for 800 h in ambient air with 60%–70% RH, the C-PSCs based on the modified CuSCN can maintain 70% of the initial efficiency without any encapsulation. It retains 82% of the initial PCE after 288 h of storage at 85 °C in the environment.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51772039 and 51972293).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1nj04068e
‡ These authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2021