 DOI: 10.1039/C5CP04872A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 5412-5418


Bo
Liu
,

Feng
Xu
,

Xinghua
Zhang
,

Dadong
Yan
* and 

Dan
Lu
*

State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials, College of Chemistry, Jilin University, 2699 Qianjin Street, Changchun, China. E-mail: lud@jlu.edu.cn

Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

School of Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, No. 3 Shangyuancun, Haidian District, Beijing, China

Department of Physics, Beijing Normal University, No. 19 Xinjiekouwai Street, Beijing, China. E-mail: yandd@bnu.edu.cn

Received
16th August 2015
, Accepted 7th January 2016
First published on 7th January 2016
A Pauli master equation method is adopted for the simulation of polymer bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells with vinylidene fluoride–trifluoroethylene copolymer (P(VDF–TrFE)) films as interfacial layers. According to previous reports, using highly crystalline P(VDF–TrFE) films as interfacial layers can highly enhance the efficiency of polymer BHJ solar cells, and possible mechanisms for the enhancement by two different groups were given as the dipole induced permanent internal electric field or simply the electrode improvement which implied that the origin is the barrier lowering effect. The correlation between the appearance of S-shaped current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics and the energy barrier is studied first, and then further results indicate that the previous electrode improvement model provides a consistent explanation for the origin of performance enhancement due to the insertion of polarized P(VDF–TrFE) interfacial layers. Moreover, the phenomenon of an increase of the internal electric field observed before can be attributed to better contact conditions which help reduce the bimolecular recombination rate. Comparatively speaking, the electrode improvement model can give a more rational explanation for the origin of performance enhancement experimentally found. In contrast, the dipole induced permanent internal electric field model was not complete enough.

Exploiting solar energy at a low cost has been an inspiring issue for humankind. For decades, the field of organic photovoltaics (OPVs) is emerging as a hot spot and much progress has been made in commercialization. In the polymer BHJ solar cells, one of the critical points for device optimization is how to improve the active layer–electrode contact interface where the photogenerated charge carriers are extracted and charge carriers from the external circuit are injected. A great challenge for OPV device engineering lies in the fact that it is difficult to establish Ohmic contacts at both electrodes. The idea of electrode improvement can be achieved by means of inserting a buffer layer between the electrode and the active layer. Generally speaking, these interfacial layers can significantly reduce boundary recombination near the electrodes by both serving as “transporting” layers for reducing energy barrier heights and “blocking” layers acting as electron or hole filters. Hence, for the purpose of energy alignment and reducing boundary recombination, choosing appropriate interfacial layers can bring about a significant performance improvement.

The vinylidene fluoride–trifluoroethylene copolymer (P(VDF–TrFE)) [(C2H2F2)1−m(C2HF3)m]n, characterized by large spontaneous polarization, good polarization stability and a short switching time, has been widely studied as a promising material for nonvolatile memory elements. Each structure unit in a polymer chain of PVDF has a net dipole moment. All the chains can be crystallized in parallel lines by using the Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) technology. When in the switching state, a large electric field can be applied to polarize the dipoles of all chains, then macroscopic polarization (aligned along a twofold crystalline axis) can be obtained.
Recently, with an increasing need for the strategy of incorporating appropriate materials at the contact between electrodes and the active layer in polymer solar cells, P(VDF–TrFE) films have received much attention and successfully applied in some cases. Yuan et al. have carried out a series of studies on interfacial layers prepared by P(VDF–TrFE) films, and found that the insertion of such thin films could help increase both the short circuit current density (JSC) and open circuit voltage (VOC) of solar cells, and then yield an enhanced power conversion efficiency (PCE). Meanwhile, a mechanism that ferroelectric dipole may induce a permanent internal electric field has also been established to explain this performance enhancement. According to their model, the extra internal electrical field provided by permanent electrical polarization could be calculated via a formula deduced. However, Asadi et al. argued that the improved efficiency was only due to the improvement of electrodes. Based on their analysis, solar cells at the operation state will continue yielding free charge carriers which are favored by electrodes. As a result, there must exist a depolarization effect acting against the induced polarization within the P(VDF–TrFE) film. Thus, the big value of permanent polarization charge density can not be a reasonable guess. Since lithium fluoride (LiF) and P(VDF–TrFE) have chemical similarity, i.e., electronegative fluorine pointing to the electropositive hydrogen or lithium, the role of P(VDF–TrFE) was supposed to be the same as that of LiF. For polymer solar cells with optimized energy level tuning, LiF interlayers are usually used to lower the work function of aluminium and help to achieve an energy alignment, thus P(VDF–TrFE) likewise may also play a similar role in energy level matching. Possible mechanisms of LiF as an interfacial layer have been reported by some, and in this paper the dipole layer leading vacuum level offset (or the work function lowering and energy alignment) mechanism is interpreted and generalized to the study of P(VDF–TrFE). In the following, we will render the above assumptions into the previous model and show how the contact energy barrier affects the shape of J–V curves, then discuss the possible role of P(VDF–TrFE) as an interfacial layer.

To date, several detailed OPV models have been developed and successfully applied for full device numerical simulation research studies. As a mesoscopic model, the master equation method is very powerful for organic solar cell modeling and simulations, which can help to establish links between the microscopic photoelectric process and macroscopic device performance. According to some comparative studies, the master equation method also has the advantages of simplicity and efficiency. In this paper, the device model is generally analogous to that described in the previous studies, except that the step of dealing with current injection and extraction is more sophisticated.

The device is represented as a three-dimensional cartesian lattice with 50 sites in each direction. The first step is to use the cellular automata program based on an annealing algorithm to generate the morphology of the blend with a 1:1 ratio of the donor (D) and the acceptor (A) with an average domain size of 7.5 nm. All sites with a device thickness direction z ∈ [2,49] are active layer sites. Periodic boundary conditions are applied along the x and y directions, while z = 1 and 50 represent the anode and cathode sites, respectively, where charge carrier occupancy possibilities are held constant and equal to unity. Ensure the collection of charge carriers at electrodes without considering the exclusion principle at electrode sites and assume that every exciton ends in instant annihilation at electrode sites. By solving the steady state Pauli master equations at all sites the occupancy possibilities of corresponding particles (exciton, hole or electron) can be obtained,
(1)
where n denotes the tag of exciton (x), electron (e) or hole (h) and
fni = 1 − Pni, which only exists for charge carriers (e, h) at active layer sites. Terms Gni and Rni are associated with the generation and annihilation of corresponding quasi-particles.

Excitons are generated evenly throughout all active layer sites with the rate Gx which depends on the intensity of the incident light. The hopping rate of exciton Wxij is calculated according to Förster energy transfer in the first-order approximation, Wxij = Wx0(R0/Rij)6, where Wx0, R0 and Rij are hopping frequency, localization radius and the hopping distance, respectively. The diffusion length of an exciton is controlled by the parameter of decay rate Rx to be about 12 nm, and RxPxi denotes the exciton decay term. Excitons are supposed to dissociate instantaneously into free charge carriers at D–A interfaces, and thus, the dissociation rate of excitons Ked at an interfacial donor (acceptor) site should be high enough. Meanwhile, the exciton dissociation rate will amount to an equal net charge carrier generation rate at the same site. The term of exciton dissociated has the form:
(2)
Here, at donor site
i, the number of all neighboring acceptor sites is mk. The prefactor K0 must be set high enough to ensure a sufficient overall rate of exciton dissociation. ΔLUMO is the difference of the LUMO between the donor and acceptor material. ψ is the electric potential. EB is the initial binding energy. More description of eqn (2) can be found in the previous studies.

The hopping rate for the charge carriers (e.g., hole) is calculated using the Miller–Abrahams (M–A) model.
(3)
where
Wh0, α and ΔEij being the hopping frequency, the inverse localization length of localized wave functions and the overall carrier transition energy. ΔEij between donor site i and site j,

ΔEij = q(ψi − ψj) + (Eci − Ecj).
(4)
 Accounting for space-charge limited behavior and the effect of an externally applied electric field perpendicular to the surface of electrodes, the electric potential set
ψ(z) along the z direction can be obtained by solving the one-dimensional Poisson equation via the shooting method. For an organic system the distribution of localized electronic states is assumed to be of Gaussian style. For donor site i, define the site energy as Eci = HOMO + Er(σ), where Er(σ) is a random number generated by the Gaussian randomizer with width σ which can also be measured experimentally, and ΔEcij is the energy difference between site i and site j.

In this paper, between electrode sites and active layer sites adjacent to electrode sites, the energy barrier (Φ) that hinders the charge carrier hopping process from the active layer to the electrode and vice versa is evaluated based on the energy difference between the Fermi level of electrodes and the LUMO(HOMO) of the acceptor(donor). The barrier lowering effect due to image charge force is also taken into account. When a hole hops from donor site i to electrode site j, the transition energy difference:
(5)
Conversely, if a hole hops from electrode site i backwards to donor site j, the transition energy difference similarly,
(6)
where
γ is a tunable phenomenological prefactor used for fitting experimental data. As emphasized in a dynamic Monte Carlo model, the charge injection process is very important and should be treated carefully. In that model the hopping rate for charge injection was calculated by using M–A theory, while the charge extraction process was described by the Marcus formula. By using this approach, both illuminated photocurrent and injected dark current can be calculated and fit experimental results. In order to simulate the J–V characteristic curves with S-shaped kinks, we adopt similar strategies; specifically, both charge carrier injection and extraction are considered to be hopping processes. Different transition energies are assigned for injection and extraction processes, respectively, according to eqn (5) and (6), therefore, the rates of injection and extraction are different.

In a recent publication we have shown the influence of a metal–semiconductor contact barrier on the performance of P3HT:PCBM BHJ solar cells by performing simulation using a similar full device model. The correlation between contact barrier height and J–V characteristics which was described in the form of charge collection efficiency was revealed. In this paper, the model is further improved by introducing prefactor γ with the purpose of making the injection rate to be a more adjustable correlation with the extraction rate. Comparing with the case of mixed use of M–A and Marcus theories, such a treatment is much simpler. In Fig. 2 of the following section, together with the energy barrier, image force potential and electric potential difference at contact, prefactor γ is proved to be very helpful for the simulation results to fit the non-Shockley shaped output curves which could be caused by contact condition complexity. If the contact condition is far away from the ideal Ohmic contact, the J–V characteristics may present some non-Shockley shapes, especially a reduction in the dark injected current region. Appropriate value assignments for injection and extraction rates can lead to appropriate overall charge carrier distribution in the device.
It should be noted that the possible event of electrode invert is neglected, which means no electrons can be injected from the anode to the acceptor or holes can be injected from the cathode to the donor. In this work, for simplification reasons, the energy barrier for hole injection and extraction at the anode and extraction at the cathode is identical to avoid the possible failure condition of electrical neutrality. See Fig. 1(a) for a schematic illustration of the above settings.
Before reaching the electrodes, fully separated free charge carriers may encounter opposite charge carriers and then recombine at D–A interfacial sites to the ground state; to describe the rate of such a thermally assisted bimolecular recombination process, we have
(7)
Here, we define the overall bimolecular recombination efficiency
ηbr as 〈Ribr/Gxi〉.

After an acceptable convergence criterion (10−8) for charge carriers is reached, current density and mobility can be calculated. At each active layer site, the local site hole and electron current in the direction of electrodes is calculated, then a summation is made to obtain the overall current density which is a summation of both hole and electron current densities.
(8)
where
V is the total volume and Rijz is the distance between sites i and j along the z direction.


At first, we utilize the above model of new injection and extraction treatment to figure out the relationship between the discrepancy of extraction and injection rates and J–V characteristics, a group of J–V curves of the BHJ solar cells with different energy barriers Φ and prefactor γ have been simulated and are presented in Fig. 2, where the parameters used are listed in Table 1. In Fig. 2, the value of γ varies from 0.63 to 1.50, and for Φ the range is from 0.1 to 0.4 eV. It can be observed that with increasing injection rate, the dark current increases. Besides, the higher the injection rate the lower the JSC and VOC. Moreover, increasing the extraction rate will also result in a higher JSC and VOC, together with a gradually formed S-shaped kink when Φ is higher than 0.1 eV. In Table 2, for every curve shown in Fig. 2, the values of Φ, γ, JSC, VOC and FF are listed.

Parameter
Symbol
Value
Lattice constant

a

3.0 nm
Dielectric constant

ε

3.5
Device thickness

L

150 nm
Temperature

T

300 K
Gaussian width

σ

60 meV
Work function difference

ϕ
a − ϕc
0.7 eV
Exciton generation rate

G
S

10.0 × 1027 m−3 s−1
Exciton hopping rate

W
D = WA
1.0 ps−1
Exciton decay rate

R
x

1.0 × 1010 s−1
Mobilities at short circuit

μ
e = μh
∼3.0 × 10−8 m2 V−1 s−1
Charge recombination prefactor

R
0

8.0 × 104 m−3 s−1
Device set

Φ


γ


J
SC (A m−2)

V
OC (V)
FF
I1
0.20
1.50
−76.5
0.51
0.36
I2
0.20
1.25
−75.4
0.48
0.39
I3
0.20
1.00
−71.5
0.41
0.38
E1
0.10
2.50
−77.0
0.57
0.37
E2
0.30
0.83
−59.2
0.31
0.33
E3
0.40
0.63
−36.8
0.18
0.29
Since the current direction will reverse at VOC, the whole procedure of charge transport along with bias variation can be divided into two regimes, namely extraction and injection regimes. Take hole for instance, under illumination with reverse bias or forward bias less than the built-in potential, fully dissociated holes will move towards the anode and a hole photocurrent can be generated. Meanwhile, an energy barrier at an anode-active layer will disturb such a hetero-phase hopping process. As a result, the saturated photocurrent was significantly affected by this barrier. After the forward bias has surpassed the built-in potential, the holes begin to move from the anode to the cathode. There also exist an injection barrier at the anode and an extraction barrier at the cathode. Only when these thresholds are overcome can the dark injection hole current begin flowing. Consequently, the S-shaped J–V characteristics can be seen as a joint result of the hindered process of extraction and injection. Many have studied the boundary degradation caused S-shaped J–V characteristics of solar cells by means of electrode ageing in experiments. Meanwhile, some by using one-dimensional drift-diffusion models have also got comparable findings.
As discussed in the beginning, the mechanism of electrode improvement by introducing P(VDF–TrFE) film can be assumed as the polarized dipoles driving the vacuum level offset between the active layer and the electrodes. In our model, the concept of the Schottky energy barrier is adopted to represent the obstructed charge carrier hetero-hopping between the active layer site and the electrode site. The data of experimental J–V characteristics (see Fig. 3) of switchable diode structure polymer BHJ solar cells (see Fig. 1(b)) fit well with our simulation results of the same device structure. This fit can be seen as a hint for the evidence of contact barrier regulation. Further, the appearance of S-shaped kinks in J–V characteristics also produce evidence about space charge accumulation with the subsequent soaring recombination, which was originally caused by the blocking effect due to high energy barriers at contacts (see Fig. 1(c) and (d)).
It should be noticed that the cell structure shown in Fig. 1(b) was obtained due to the insertion of the same thin interfacial layer at both electrodes (Al and ITO). Although this structure looks a little uncommon, the variation pattern of J–V characteristics is clear evidence of varying contact conditions. The cell with P(VDF–TrFE) film after poling behaves as one with non-Ohmic contacts, specifically the VOC is more than 0.3 V lower than those of the optimized sort. Besides, the JSC and fill factor (FF) also decrease which together lead to a significant efficiency loss. Based on a previous finding, we guess that the origin of this uncommon loss could be more carefully ascribed to both unbalanced and high energy barriers at both electrodes. In fact, a ferroelectric polymer, whose energy level is poorly aligned with the work function of ITO, is mostly used as an interfacial layer for the cathode. However for the purpose of focusing on testing the validity of mechanisms previously guessed by some, an approximate treatment of balanced energy barriers at both sides is adopted. The cell with P(VDF–TrFE) film under pristine conditions (w/o poling) characterized by the appearance of a typical S-shaped kink in the J–V characteristics and extremely small VOC (0.97 V) and JSC (−21.1 A m−2). In addition, one can find that at forward bias near-saturated injection current density arises. Based on the simulation results, this is also the consequence of bad contacts in the form of very low rates of injection and extraction. Therefore, the main loss mechanism of this uncommon structure can be concluded as a joint result of accumulated space charge near electrodes due to poor charge extraction ability and decreased dark current due to weak charge injection. Parameters used in fitting are given in Table 1 and Fig. 3.
Compared with the one-dimensional drift-diffusion model, it is relatively inconvenient to simulate solar cells under unbalanced conditions (e.g., mobilities, energy barriers or component proportions) by using a three-dimensional disorder model, but the advantage of our master equation model is also clear: very convenient to acquire local charge carrier density. The photocurrent loss process due to poor charge extraction efficiency can be clarified by the concept of series resistance in the macroscopic equivalent circuit model of solar cells. However, in our model, such a process can be illustrated from a microscopic perspective. As presented in Fig. 4, the simulated local current densities (hole) and potentials ψ of cells with poling and pristine P(VDF–TrFE) film at short circuit are compared. When the bias is at 0 V, nearly all free charge carriers are photogenerated charge carriers. If the boundary charge carrier accumulation did not exist at all, one could expect that the potentials exhibit a linear dependence on the position through the device thickness direction. However, because of low charge carrier collection efficiency at contacts, the piled up space charge drives the potential to redistribute. Furthermore, via solving the Poisson equation the electric field distribution can also be calculated (data not shown). Obviously, the electric field also varies along the axis of the device and with distance from electrodes. In the center sites of cells, a change of 7.7 V μm−1 of the internal electric fields of the compared cells can be measured, while at boundary sites this change reads about 10.1 V μm−1. In Fig. 5, the effect of space charge accumulation is shown. After poling, the charge carrier (e.g., hole) densities near electrodes decrease as many as several times. Apparently, fully separated free charge carriers should be extracted as fast as possible to the external circuit before the possible thermal recombination or trapped annihilation (not included in the model). As pointed out in eqn (7), the rate of thermally assisted bimolecular recombination is strongly influenced by the factor of charge carrier density, in fact, the mean percentage of the fully separated charge carriers lost decreases from 82.2% to 53.8% after the P(VDF–TrFE) films were polarized. In a word, the unusual S-shaped J–V curves and efficiency enhancement by polarizing the pristine P(VDF–TrFE) film layers would make sense if the mechanism is a dipole induced contact barrier lowering effect.
A formula was deduced for estimating the extra permanent electric field due to the polarized P(VDF–TrFE) film. It was assumed that P(VDF–TrFE) film after poling would introduce both a permanent extra electric field and series resistance. When the benefit of an extra field counteracts the disadvantage of series resistance, the performance of a cell would enhance. This mechanism is reasonable in a way, but one of the shortcoming of their model is that it cannot figure out the cause of quick climb in injection current observed. Since the performances of polymer BHJ solar cells with P(VDF–TrFE) films as interfacial layers rely on a little more complex group of dependencies, only focus on the factor of the internal electric field is not enough to clarify the experimental results, it seems a more appropriate description of the relationship between the dark current injection process and series resistance should be added into the original model. But, the formula for estimating the extra permanent electric field could be still helpful for determining the value of an internal electric field increase similar to what we measured according to Fig. 4. For the purpose of verification, the contribution of such an extra permanent electric field was added into our model as a replacement for the assumption of the energy barrier lowering effect. Extra electric fields (EFE) are assumed to be constant along the device thickness direction. Together with the contribution of extra electric potential the overall potential is obtained by solving the Poisson equation. Meanwhile, the injection and extraction rates at electrode-active layer contacts remain unchanged as those for the w/o poling cell listed in Table 1 and Fig. 3. Within the possible range, extra EFE values of 7.5 and 15.0 V μm−1 were added respectively to the built-in electric field of the same direction, whereas the calculated extra field is several times higher which can be tolerant for an experimental formula. In Fig. 6, the w/o poling J–V curve is the same one shown in Fig. 3. Normally, a higher built-in electric field helps improve both VOC and JSC, and the increase of the electric field around 10 V μm−1 is also about the value measured according to Fig. 4. As the energy barrier that restricts the injection does not change, together with an increased built-in electric field opposite to the direction of injection current, the injected current highly suppressed but not exponentially increased. Obviously, for our model, a solely increasing built-in electric field but not along with tuning injection currents cannot fit the simulation results to the experimental data. In conclusion, the formula Yuan et al. deduced seems to be helpful for estimating the variation in the internal electric field; however a sophisticated description of series resistance is still needed to help in calculating dark current.

In summary, by using a device model of the Pauli master equation method, we study the cause of S-shaped J–V characteristics first, then explain the origin of P(VDF–TrFE) film interfacial layers on the performance of polymer BHJ solar cells. By adjusting the injection and extraction rate of the charge carrier, the previous experimental results can be well fitted. We calculated the increase of the internal electric field through electrode improvement (poling method) and found that the value is experimentally-comparable. The origin of electrode improvement lies in the fact that the lowering energy barrier helps in decreasing bimolecular recombination. In this work, we extend the idea of a Schottky energy barrier to describe the electrode improvement by introducing P(VDF–TrFE) films, according to the simulation results, such an assumption is reasonable. As mentioned by Yuan et al., the role of P(VDF–TrFE) films can be divided into two contrary sides. Their model seems to be feasible, if the series resistance part can be more sophistically dealt with.


This work was supported by National Science Foundation of China (NSFC) 21174049, 91333103, 21404067 and Open Project of State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials 201329. Part of this work was performed using computing resources of Computing Center of Jilin Province. We are grateful to associate professor Bing Miao (UCAS) and professor Zhonghan Hu (JLU) for resultful discussions.


This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016