 DOI: 10.1039/D0NJ06180H
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2021, 45, 5958-5970


Muhammad
Reza
,

Annisa Nurul
Utami
,

Auliya Nur
Amalina
,

Didi Prasetyo
Benu
,

Alvian Ikhsanul
Fatya
,

Mohammad Kemal
Agusta
,

Brian
Yuliarto
,

Yusuf Valentino
Kaneti
*,

Yusuke
Ide
,

Yusuke
Yamauchi
 and 

Veinardi
Suendo
*

Division of Inorganic and Physical Chemistry, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, Institut Teknologi Bandung, Jl. Ganesha No. 10, Indonesia, Bandung 40132, Indonesia. E-mail: vsuendo@chem.itb.ac.id

Department of Chemistry, Universitas Timor, Jl. Eltari, Kefamenanu, 85613, Indonesia

Department of Engineering Physics, Faculty of Industrial Engineering, Institut Teknologi Bandung, Bandung, Indonesia

Research Center for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, Institut Teknologi Bandung, Jl. Ganesha No. 10, Bandung 40132, Indonesia

School of Chemical Engineering and Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (AIBN), The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia. E-mail: v.kaneti@uq.edu.au

JST-ERATO Yamauchi Materials Space-Tectonics Project and International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (WPI-MANA), National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), 1-1 Namiki, Ibaraki 305-0044, Japan

Received
21st December 2020
, Accepted 4th March 2021
First published on 5th March 2021
This paper investigates the adsorption behavior of polyaniline (PANI) towards triiodide ion (I3−) solution in acetonitrile. Two different types of PANI, namely PANI emeraldine salt (PANI ES) and nanostructured PANI ES (NPES) were prepared by the rapid mixing and interfacial polymerization methods, respectively. FTIR and Raman spectroscopy results show that both PANI ES and NPES have similar vibrational features, indicating a similar molecular structure. NPES particles are interconnected granules with thorny durian-like surface morphology and better shape uniformity than PANI ES. The maximum adsorption capacity of NPES towards triiodide (I3−) ions is higher than that of PANI ES; however, both of them obey the dual-site Langmuir–Freundlich isotherm. The calculated thermodynamic parameters reveal the spontaneous and endothermic adsorption processes for both types of PANI. The positively charged group in PANI (C–N+) provides more favorable adsorption sites for I3− ions through electrostatic interactions, as confirmed by Raman spectroscopy. The photovoltaic and electrochemical performance data confirm the higher power conversion efficiency (∼30%) of the NPES counter electrode compared to that of PANI ES. The thorny durian-like surface morphology of NPES enhances the number of adsorption sites for I3− ions, thereby facilitating better electrolyte regeneration in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC).

Solar energy has attracted significant interest as an abundant, clean, and renewable energy source. The dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) is a promising alternative to first-generation silicon solar cell due to its low production cost, moderate light-to-electricity conversion efficiency, and excellent performance under weak light intensity. A typical DSSC consists of three components: dye-impregnated semiconductor film, redox pair electrolyte, and counter electrode (CE). CE is one of the essential components for maintaining charge regeneration. The reduction reaction of electrolyte redox species occurs at the CE/electrolyte interfaces to regenerate dyes after the electron injection. Transparent conducting oxide (TCO) substrate coated by platinum (Pt) is commonly used as CE in DSSC due to their high conductivity and good electrocatalytic activity towards the redox pair electrolyte, e.g., I−/I3−. However, Pt-TCO substrates are not suitable for large-scale manufacturing because of their rarity in the earth's crust, energy-consuming deposition processes, and corrosion by the redox couples. Addressing these drawbacks requires finding another alternative CE material with similarly high efficiency and reduced fabrication cost.

Carbonaceous materials have been proposed to replace Pt due to their high electronic conductivity, corrosion resistance towards I2, high reactivity for triiodide reduction, and low production cost. Several works have proven that carbonaceous materials, such as doped graphene and carbon nanowires have shown high efficiencies for triiodide reduction. Conducting polymers (CPs), such as polythiophene, polypyrrole, PEDOT, are examples of carbonaceous materials that have attracted considerable attention as promising candidates for CE. They have numerous advantages, such as low production cost, simple synthesis routes, versatile processability, high electrical conductivity, and good environmental stability. As one of the most popular CPs, polyaniline (PANI) has received great attention in photovoltaic fields due to its good environmental stability, tunable electrical conductivity, and ease of synthesis.Scheme 1 shows several methods to synthesize PANI from its monomer, i.e., aniline. Many research papers have reported the use of PANI emeraldine salt (PANI ES) as a CE material in DSSC. The obtained power conversion efficiency (PCE) varied, depending on the synthetic method, morphology, and molecular modification of PANI. PANI is usually combined with other materials, such as graphite or graphene to improve the PCE.
The problem occurs during the electrochemical reaction between PANI ES and I3− ion. At the CE surfaces, the redox reaction between PANI ES and I3− ion leads to a negative standard potential cell (E°cell) as given by eqn (1)–(3)
Red: I3−(solv) + 2e− → 3I−(solv) E° = 0.35 V
(1)
Ox: ES(s) → PEB(s) + 2H+(solv) + 2e− E° = −0.75 V
(2)
Net: I3−(solv) + ES(s) → 3I−(solv) + PEB(s) + 2H+(solv) E°cell = −0.40 V
(3)
where PEB is pernigraniline base,
i.e., the oxidation product of PANI ES. The redox reaction between PANI ES and I3− ion cannot occur spontaneously under ambient conditions (electrolyte concentration of 1 M, the temperature of 298 K, and pressure of 1 atm). However, the potential cell value (Ecell) under non-standard condition follows the Nernst equation to facilitate the reaction:

(4)
Therefore, a positive
Ecell can still be obtained by increasing the adsorbed I3− ions on the PANI surface. Increasing the PANI surface area at the CE/electrolyte interface is another approach that can be carried out besides increasing the I3− ion concentration in the electrolyte solution. However, PANI ES is synthesized using a rapid mixing method that produces irregularly-shaped particles with smooth surface morphology and low surface area. Previously, we reported a novel synthesis method to obtain PANI ES (NPES) with uniform durian-like thorny/rough surface morphology.

The nitrogen physisorption method and Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) calculation are usually carried out to obtain the specific surface area (SSA) of the adsorbent. However, the direct adsorption isotherm towards adsorbate understudy is another useful method to determine the actual adsorption capacity of the adsorbent and adsorption behavior/mechanism. By applying various adsorption isotherm models to the obtained adsorption data, the adsorption behavior or mechanism can be identified. However, to date, there is no detailed report on the PANI adsorption capability towards the actual redox couple in the electrolyte, i.e., I−/I3− redox couple in acetonitrile. Meanwhile, the adsorption process is a crucial step in determining the sustainability of I3− reduction and charge circulation in DSSC. Herein, we compare the adsorption behavior of I3− on PANI ES and NPES adsorbents at various temperatures. The adsorption capacities of PANI ES and NPES were analyzed using several adsorption isotherm models. Experimental data were fitted to the different isotherm equations to determine the best isotherm representing the data and correlate them with the adsorption mechanism. The interaction between PANI and I3− ion was investigated using Raman spectroscopy. Furthermore, we have compared the photovoltaic performance of cells with CE made of PANI ES and NPES in the DSSC system. We expect the regular shape and rough morphology of NPES to increase I3− ion adsorption, thus enhancing the photovoltaic performance of the fabricated DSSC.

Ammonium persulfate (APS), hydrochloric acid (HCl), iodine (I2), potassium iodide (KI), toluene, potassium bromide (KBr) for IR spectroscopy were purchased from Merck, while acetone, acetonitrile, aniline, graphite, and methylcellulose were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Polyglyceryl-2-Dipolyhydroxystearate (PGPH) surfactant was received from BASF. TiO2 was purchased from Qingdao Roadsun Titanos Ind Co., Ltd. FTO glass (Rsh < 15 Ω square−1) was purchased from Zhuhai Kaivo Optoelectronic Technology, China. Ruthenium complex N719 dye was purchased from Synthex Technologies, Poland. All reagents were of analytical grade and used without any further purification. However, aniline was distilled before polymerization to remove the presence of oligomers.


PANI ES was synthesized using a rapid mixing method. The monomer solution was prepared by dissolving 3.64 mL of aniline in 100 mL of 1 M HCl. The oxidizing solution was prepared separately by dissolving 11.42 g of APS in 100 mL of demineralized water. These two solutions were kept in a cooling bath (T = 0 °C) for 1 h. The polymerization process was started by introducing the monomer solution to the oxidizing solution, followed by vigorous shaking for 10 s. The reaction mixture was placed in the same cooling bath for 24 h. The reaction mixture was then filtered, rinsed with HCl and acetone, respectively, and dried under dynamic vacuum for 3 h.

NPES was synthesized using emulsion polymerization in reverse micelle media. Two different solutions were prepared to obtain the emulsion system. The oil solution contained 6% (v/v) of non-ionic surfactant polyglyceryl-2-dipolyhydroxystearate (PGPH) in 100 mL of toluene. In contrast, the aqueous solution contained 1 mL of aniline in 15 mL of 1 M HCl. The aqueous solution was added dropwise into the oil solution under vigorous stirring for 30 min to form a milky solution. The stable emulsion was placed in the cooling bath (T = 0 °C). Next, 2.17 g of APS was dissolved in 15 mL of 1 M HCl, and then introduced dropwise into the previously prepared stable emulsion to initiate the polymerization. The reaction mixture was kept for 1 h under constant stirring. The reaction mixture was then filtered and washed with ethanol, water, and acetone consecutively. The obtained NPES particles were dried under a dynamic vacuum for 3 h at ambient temperature.

The stock solution of I3− (450 mg L−1) was prepared by adding 30 mg of I2 and 40 mg of KI into 100 mL of acetonitrile. The stock solution was diluted with acetonitrile to obtain the desired concentration of I3−. Specifically, 10 mg of PANI ES was added to 50 mL flask containing 25 mL of I3− solution with an initial concentration from 5 to 40 mg L−1 at different temperatures (303, 313, and 323 K) in a thermostatic rotary shaker. After 1 h of contact time, the adsorbent was separated using centrifugation, and the residual concentrations of I3− in each flask were determined by a UV-vis spectrophotometer. The concentration of I3− was obtained using the Lambert–Beer–Bouguer equation as the sum of the absorption band area centered at 289 and 366 nm, as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI). The UV-vis spectra of the samples were fitted using the Gaussian functions to obtain the corresponding absorption band area (Fig. S2, ESI). The adsorption capacities were determined from the mass balance equation given by:

(5)
where
qe is the equilibrium adsorption capacity (mg g−1); C0 and Ce are the initial and equilibrium concentration of I3−, respectively (mg L−1); V is the volume of treated I3− solution (L), and M is the mass of the adsorbent (g). The experimental data were fitted using an open-source software IAST++v1.0.1 to obtain the adsorption isotherm parameters.


DSSC consists of three components, including a photoanode, an electrolyte, and a counter electrode. The photoanode, with an active area of 0.81 cm2, was prepared by screen printing TiO2 paste on FTO glass substrate, followed by sintering at 500 °C for 1 h. The obtained TiO2 photoanode was immersed in the N719 dye solution (5 × 10−4 M) for 20 h. I−/I3− redox couple solution in acetonitrile was used as the electrolyte in this study. The counter electrode was firstly prepared by coating the glass substrate with the synthetic graphite film. Both polyaniline types were then mixed with graphite and methylcellulose to obtain the counter electrode paste with a PANI:graphite composition ratio of 1:3 (w/w). The obtained paste was screen-printed on the synthetic graphite-coated glass substrate. The resulting counter electrode was then dried on a hot plate at 120 °C for 15 min. All components were assembled like a sandwich and held together using two binder clips.


UV-vis spectra were recorded using Thermo Scientific Evolution 220 UV-vis spectrophotometer. The molecular structures of PANI ES and NPES were characterized using FTIR and Raman spectrometers. FTIR spectra were acquired using a Bruker Alpha FTIR spectrometer with 32 acquisition scans in transmission mode. PANI samples were prepared in the form of KBr pellets prior to FTIR measurements. Bruker Senterra Raman spectrometer equipped with an Olympus long-working-distance MPlan semi-apochromatic objective lens (50×) was used to obtain the Raman spectra. The samples in the form of pellets were excited at 785 nm with a diode laser at 1 mW with an acquisition time of 30 s and three times of co-addition. The morphology of PANI ES and NPES was observed using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) (Hitachi S-4800) with an accelerating voltage of 5 kV in the secondary electron (SE) image mode. Current density–voltage (J–V) measurements of DSSC were performed using a Keithley 2400 source meter under the illumination of a Newport ORIEL S013A solar simulator (AM 1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements of DSSCs were recorded with a Hioki IM3533-01 LCR meter. A direct-current bias at 650 mV within the frequency range from 100 mHz to 200 kHz was applied under the same light irradiation as the photovoltaic measurement to measure the impedance. The obtained EIS spectra were fitted with the open-source software EIS Spectrum Analyzer from ABC chemistry.


FTIR spectra of the as-synthesized PANI ES and NPES adsorbents are shown in Fig. 1a. Both spectra display the characteristic absorption bands of PANI. The band at 1554 cm−1 is assigned to the CC stretching vibration in the quinonoid ring (Q) mixed with the benzenoid (B) modes. The band at 1482 cm−1 corresponds to the CC stretching vibration in B mixed with the N–H bending. This band is slightly shifted to a higher wavenumber in NPES spectra. A stronger hydrogen bond between the PANI chains in NPES than in PANI ES causes the CC stretching in B and N–H bending mode to be strengthened. The band at 1295 cm−1 is associated with the C–N stretching of the secondary aromatic amines in QBQ, QBB, and BBQ. The band at 1241 cm−1 is assigned to the C–N stretching of the secondary aromatic amines in BBB. Other main characteristic bands of PANI are the C–H bending and stretching (18b) at 1111 cm−1, C–H out-of-plane bending in 1,2,4 trisubstituted ring (2H) at 874 cm−1, C–H out-of-plane bending in 1,4 disubstituted ring at 819 and 796 cm−1. A wide polaron band from 1600 to 2000 cm−1 is observed in the FTIR spectra of both PANI samples. In the PANI ES case, this wideband is narrower at around 1700 cm−1. The wideband is affected by the number of polarons (C–N˙+) and impurity species in PANI, which will be explained below.


Fig. 1b presents the Raman spectra of as-synthesized PANI ES and NPES adsorbents. The main band at 1596 cm−1 corresponds to the CC stretching vibrations in Q. The band with a maximum at 1509 cm−1 represents the N–H deformation associated with the semiquinonoid structures. The band at 1388 cm−1 corresponds to the C–N+ ring-stretching vibration of substituted N-phenylphenazines. The band at 1330 cm−1 represents the C–N˙+ vibration. The weak band at 1245 cm−1 is associated with the C–N stretching vibration in B. Other observed bands are the stretching vibration of C–H in semiquinonoid ring (1164 cm−1), B and substituted B ring deformation (813 cm−1), amine deformation in the bipolaronic form of emeraldine salt (736 cm−1), phenoxazine-type units (575 cm−1), and out-of-plane ring deformation (519 and 415 cm−1). In the PANI ES case, the Raman band at 575 cm−1 is more intense, indicating that the number of phenoxazine-type units in PANI ES is higher than that in NPES. Rapid polymerization during the synthesis of PANI ES favors the formation of phenoxazine-type species. This species is an impurity in PANI and directly affects the number of polarons (C–N˙+) species. Phenoxazine is one of the most effective Radical Trapping Antioxidants (RTAs), which can inhibit the radical chain reaction through the hydrogen atom transfer followed by a radical combination. The C–N˙+ vibrational band at 1330 cm−1 is also less pronounced in PANI ES than in NPES relative to the band at 1338 cm−1 (C–N+ ring-stretching vibrational band of substituted N-phenylphenazines). This result supports the previous finding that the presence of phenoxazine species reduces the number of polaron species. We can also conclude that the observed deformation of the wide polaron band in the FTIR spectra of PANI ES from 1600 to 2000 cm−1 (Fig. 1a) is mainly affected by the presence of phenoxazine-type species. Phenoxazine rings will consume polarons in PANI ES by trapping their radical species through the hydrogen atom transfer to form the benzenoid rings, thus inhibiting the electron delocalization along the PANI chain.
The morphology of the as-synthesized PANI ES is presented in Fig. 1c. This sample consists of a mixture of irregular granule and fiber-like structures. This shape is the typical or conventional shape of PANI ES particles obtained using a rapid mixing polymerization method at low temperatures. On the other hand, NPES consists of more regular interconnected granules covered by nanothorns or nanospines of PANI, resembling a durian fruit (Fig. 1d and Fig. S3a, ESI). The obtained diameter of the NPES granules is around 500 nm, and these granules exhibit a relatively uniform size distribution. The high-magnification SEM image of NPES clearly shows that the length of the thorn/spine of NPES is in the nanometer scale (Fig. S3b, ESI). The formation mechanism of this morphology has been described elsewhere.


Fig. 2 presents the adsorption isotherms of I3− on PANI ES and NPES at various temperatures (303, 313, and 323 K) fitted using several models. The amount of adsorbed I3− ion increases as a function of adsorption temperature indicating that the adsorption equilibrium is an endothermic process.

In general, the adsorption isotherm describes how the sorbates interact with adsorbents, and thus it is critical in optimizing the usage of adsorbents. The obtained data were fitted using several isotherm models, such as Langmuir, Freundlich, Temkin, Dubinin–Radushkevich (D–R), single- and dual-site Langmuir–Freundlich to describe the adsorption isotherms. The best-fit model was assessed based on the squared correlation coefficient (R2) value, which is close to unity.
Langmuir isotherm assumed that adsorption occurred at specific homogeneous adsorbent sites with identical energy. The Langmuir equation can be represented as:
(6)
where
KL (1 mg−1) is the Langmuir constant related to the energy of adsorption, and qmax is the maximum adsorption capacity (mg g−1).

The Freundlich model assumes that adsorption occurred at heterogeneous surfaces characterized by sorption sites with different energies. The Freundlich isotherm expression is given by:
(7)
where
KF and nF are Freundlich isotherm constants related to adsorption capacity and adsorption intensity, respectively.

The Temkin isotherm model assumes that the adsorption energy decreases linearly with the surface coverage due to adsorbent-adsorbate interactions. It also considers the chemisorption of an adsorbate on the adsorbent. The Temkin model can be expressed by the following equation:
(8)
where
b is the Temkin constant related to the heat of adsorption (J mol−1), and KT is the Temkin isotherm constant (L g−1).

The D–R isotherm model is a semi-empirical equation where the adsorption follows a pore-filling mechanism. It assumes that the adsorption has a multilayer character, involves van der Waals forces, and is applicable for physical adsorption processes. The D–R isotherm model is expressed as:
qe = qdexp(−βε2)
(9)
where
qd is the D–R constant (mg g−1), β is the constant related to free energy, and ε is the Polanyi potential defined as:

(10)
The Langmuir–Freundlich isotherm (LF) includes the knowledge of heterogeneous adsorption surfaces. It describes the distribution of adsorption energy onto the heterogeneous surface of the adsorbent. This model becomes the Freundlich isotherm model at low adsorbate concentration, while at high adsorbate concentration, it becomes the Langmuir isotherm.
 LF isotherm can be expressed as follows:

(11)
where
qLF is LF maximum adsorption capacity (mg g−1), KLF is the equilibrium constant for heterogeneous solid, and nLF is the heterogeneity factor. When the value of nLF is close to unity (1), the equation reduces to the Langmuir-type equation, which implies an ideal homogeneous surface.

The dual-site Langmuir–Freundlich isotherm (DSLF) model overcomes some limitations of the single-site models, i.e., LF, such as heterogeneity of the solid phase sites in the adsorption process. Thus, this model assumes that the adsorption occurs on the surface of the adsorbent, which possibly has different types of adsorption sites with different affinities. The DSLF model is represented by:
(12)
where
q1 and q2 is maximum adsorption capacity of type 1 and type 2 adsorption sites (mg g−1), KDSLF1 and KDSLF2 are the affinity coefficients of type 1 and type 2 adsorption sites, nDSLF1 and nDSLF2 represent the deviations from the ideal homogeneous surface (i.e., heterogeneity factor) for each type of sites. When the value of nDSLF is close to unity, the equation reduces to the dual-site Langmuir-type equation, which implies two types of ideal homogeneous surface. The value of nDSLF significantly deviates from unity as the adsorbent's surface becomes heterogeneous (see details in the ESI, Fig. S4–S6, ESI). The calculated parameters for all adsorption isotherm models at various temperatures are listed in Table 1.

Adsorption isotherm
Parameter
PANI ES
NPES
303 K
313 K
323 K
303 K
313 K
323 K
Langmuir

q
max

26.84
49.07
80.56
53.57
65.70
84.71

K
L

0.12
0.07
0.05
0.27
0.20
0.14

R
2

0.989
0.976
0.981
0.973
0.960
0.960
Freundlich

n
F

2.34
2.27
1.91
3.61
3.34
2.85

K
F

5.31
7.82
8.44
19.65
21.40
21.46

R
2

0.880
0.753
0.869
0.751
0.710
0.695
Temkin

b

406.76
247.31
187.88
265.16
218.26
163.10

K
T

1.14
0.85
0.81
5.75
4.13
2.18

R
2

0.898
0.851
0.928
0.804
0.783
0.814
D–R

q
d

19.91
31.19
39.74
42.37
48.90
55.88

β (× 10−6)
2.64
3.53
2.81
0.48
0.55
0.80

R
2

0.751
0.899
0.921
0.890
0.925
0.964
LF

q
LF

34.83
33.00
46.80
40.72
45.92
55.22

K
LF

0.06
0.02
0.15
0.60
0.58
0.40

n
LF

0.79
1.67
1.53
3.20
4.20
2.30

R
2

0.989
0.989
0.990
0.988
0.993
0.996
DSLF

q
1

29.44
17.77
27.94
77.54
31.21
55.22

n
DSLF1

0.95
5.16
17.12
0.35
1.88
2.30

K
DSLF1

0.08
0.13
0.20
3 × 10−3
0.51
0.40

q
2

2.94
11.45
6.73
21.13
16.39
1.14 × 10−10

n
DSLF2

2.22 × 10−4
3.85
16.51
120.89
272.02
74.91

K
DSLF2

3.38 × 10−27
0.45
5.15
0.55
0.59
25.63

R
2

0.990
0.994
0.990
0.998
0.995
0.996
Langmuir isotherm parameter fits quite well with the I3− adsorption on both PANI samples, thereby yielding isotherms that are in good agreement with the observed behaviors. As seen in Table 1, the obtained maximum adsorption capacity (qmax) increases with increasing temperature, typical of an endothermic process. The Langmuir constant (KL), which can be correlated with the variation of the adsorbent's surface area and porosity, decreases with temperature. The temperature dependence of KL implies that more active areas are available for the adsorption process at higher temperatures. The Freundlich constant (KF), which is related to the adsorption capacity, increases with temperature, indicating that the adsorption process is endothermic. The values of n are generally in the range of 1 to 10, representing good adsorption. In the present work, the exponent is 1 < n < 10, indicating favorable adsorption. The Temkin adsorption isotherm plot (Fig. 2c) provides low squared correlation coefficients for both adsorbents (Table 1). The Temkin constant (b), which is related to sorption heat, decreases with temperature, indicating that the adsorption process is more favorable at higher temperatures (endothermic behavior). The R2 value for the D–R isotherm is also relatively low for both adsorbents (Table 1). The obtained adsorption capacities (qd) increase with increasing temperature, which is in good agreement with the experimental data. The energy-correlated D–R constant (β) at the working temperature varies from 10−6 to 10−7, implying that the I3− adsorption on PANI ES and NPES particles is a physical process.
We obtain a better R2 value using the LF model than the other models. Based on this model, monolayer and multilayer adsorptions can occur simultaneously on the adsorbent due to the heterogeneity of the adsorption sites. Regarding Table 1, the Langmuir model has a higher R2 value than the Freundlich model, suggesting that most of the adsorbed I3− ions tend to form a monolayer on the PANI surface with some multilayer part. This is due to the surface of both PANI ES and NPES having heterogeneous features. It is also supported by the fact that PANI is usually considered as a semi-crystalline material because PANI consists of fiber- and granule-like structures. Each structure has different properties; the fiber is more crystalline than the granule, hence leading to the semi-crystalline nature of PANI. The heterogeneous features of PANI originate from the combination of both crystalline and amorphous moieties of PANI (Fig. 1c and d), making the LF model appropriate to describe the adsorption process of I3− on the PANI surface.
Moreover, the obtained LF maximum adsorption capacity (qLF) is in good agreement with the observed data, which increases as a function of temperature. The maximum adsorption capacity obtained from the Langmuir model (qmax) is significantly higher than the value of qLF, as shown in Table 1. It overestimates because the Langmuir model does not consider the surface heterogeneity of the adsorbent, or in other words, it assumes uniform coverage of the adsorbent surface by adsorbates. The Langmuir model probably also considers the non-adsorption site of PANI as an adsorption site, leading to a significant increase in the adsorption capacity. Meanwhile, the PANI surface has a different adsorbate affinity due to its heterogeneous features (Fig. 1c and d), making the LF model more valid than the Langmuir model.
The improved LF model, i.e., the DSLF model, presents the best fit to the experimental data (R2 ∼ 0.99) for PANI ES and NPES. This model can separately describe the sites' affinities with different energy and estimate their contribution to the adsorption process. Based on these parameters, adsorption isotherms are divided into two contribution regions, type 1 and type 2 adsorption sites. The sum of maximum adsorption capacity of type 1 (q1) and type 2 (q2) sites derived from the DLSF model is almost the same as the maximum adsorption capacity obtained from the LF model (qLF), indicating the validity of the DLSF model to represent the heterogeneous system with respect to the LF model. The values of q1 are significantly higher than q2 for both PANI ES and NPES, indicating that the type 1 site is the main adsorption site of PANI. The affinity coefficient of the type 1 site (KDSLF1) is lower than that of the type 2 site (KDSLF2), indicating that the adsorption process on type 1 site has a lower binding energy than that on type 2 site. Thus, physical interaction probably occurs on type 1 site, while chemical interaction may occur on type 2 site. By correlating these facts with the heterogeneity of adsorption sites obtained from the LF model, we can conclude that type 1 site is composed of a crystalline moiety of PANI, i.e., fibers. In contrast, type 2 site consists of the amorphous moiety of PANI, i.e., granules. The surface type 1 site comprising crystalline moiety tends to have a homogeneous low binding energy interaction with adsorbates, leading to monolayer adsorption (Langmuir-like behavior) through physical interaction. On the other hand, the surface of type 2 site comprising amorphous moiety tends to have a heterogeneous high binding energy interaction with adsorbates, leading to multilayer adsorption (Freundlich-like behavior) via chemical interaction.
In the type 1 site, considering the primary adsorption site of PANI, both the capacity (q1) and affinity coefficient (KDSLF1) increase with increasing temperature. The increased value of KDSLF1 implies that the interaction between the PANI surface and I3− ions is gradually strengthened with the increase of temperature. I3− ions will be physically adsorbed on the PANI surface through electrostatic interaction, which will be explained in the next section. The parameter, nDSLF1, is gradually increased and stepped away from one unit in this system (nDSLF1 > 1). Thus, the first site's adsorption behavior follows Langmuir's behavior at low temperatures and gradually deviates from Freundlich's behavior as the temperature increases. From their fitting parameters in the type 2 site, considered as the secondary adsorption site of PANI, it shows a significant deviation of nDSLF2 (nDSLF2 ≫ 1) for all temperatures, thus indicating Freundlich's behavior. At the type 2 site, the formation of a multilayer with chemical interaction probably occurs between adsorbed I3− ions on the surface of PANI and I3− ions in bulk solution producing polyiodide. It is common in reactions involving iodine/iodide species, which significantly reduces the number of sorbates, i.e., I3− ions. Moreover, polyiodide has several structural conformations (linear, v-, and z-shaped), which can inhibit another I3− ion from the bulk phase to reach the PANI surface. We can conclude that the adsorption of I3− on PANI ES and NPES is best described by the DSLF model.

Fig. 3a and b display the simulated adsorption isotherms of PANI ES and NPES for each site as a function of temperature derived from DSLF parameters. Type 1 site has a higher adsorption capacity than type 2 site for all adsorbents. As stated earlier, type 1 site is the PANI surface with a positive charge that accommodates I3− ions through the electrostatic interaction described in the next section. Type 2 site is the adsorbed I3− ions on type 1 site, which can undergo another adsorption process with I3− ions in bulk phase (noted by a red circle in Fig. 3c). Polyiodide is produced at this site through chemical bonding, which will disrupt the continuous equilibrium between adsorbed I3− ions on the PANI surface with the I3− ions in the bulk phase and reduce the number of type 1 site directly. Hence, the growth mechanism is likely the Volmer–Weber type, where the nucleation of islands favors overextended growth at layer edges. It can occur if the sorbate tends to cluster, i.e., polyioidide, or if diffusive processes slow the layer growth until a new surface nucleation far exceeds it. In the PANI ES case, the adsorption capacity of type 2 site generally increases as I3− ion concentration and temperature increase due to the irregular morphology of PANI ES. The PANI ES is directly exposed to the bulk phase, facilitating polyiodide formation in the type 2 site at high I3− ion concentration and high temperature.
On the other hand, NPES with the durian-like granule morphology behaves differently. The adsorption capacity of type 2 site significantly decreases as the I3− ion concentration and temperature increase. This is due to I3− ion has enough energy to fill not only the NPES surface directly exposed to the bulk phase but also the NPES nanofiber surface, which is comprised of granules. During the adsorption process, I3− ions will diffuse to the NPES nanothorn/spine. The influence of temperature on the diffusion process obeys the well-established Stokes–Einstein relation. The diffusion rate (specifically the diffusion coefficient, D) of I3− ions increases as the adsorption temperature increases. In other words, I3− ions are more energetic at higher temperatures and can reach the deeper part of the PANI nanofiber. The durian-like granule morphology of NPES facilitates the continuous equilibrium between adsorbed I3− ions on the PANI surface with the I3− ions in the solution bulk phase due to its open channel structure. Thus, the equilibrium condition can be reached easily on NPES without the surfaces being filled with I3− ions. This condition also prevents the formation of polyiodide in NPES. This behavior has previously been observed in the adsorption behavior of iodine on silica, having similar morphology called bicontinuous concentric lamellar (bcl). Moreover, the space between NPES nanofibers as the active adsorption site was quite dense and not directly exposed to the bulk solution, preventing polyiodide formation. Lyu et al. have reported a similar structure called 3D hierarchical coral-like PANI, which had a good crystallinity due to the high packing density of PANI nanofibers. It increases the adsorption capacity of the type 1 site, which is the main adsorption site of PANI, and reduces the probability of polyiodide formation. Besides, we also obtain a higher adsorption capacity from this kind of morphology.

Adsorption thermodynamic parameters, such as adsorption Gibbs free energy (ΔG°), enthalpy (ΔH°), and entropy (ΔS°) of I3− adsorption on PANI ES and NPES were evaluated based on the Langmuir constant that can be determined using van't Hoff equation given by:

ΔG° = −RTlnK
(13)
(14)
(15)
where
M is the molecular weight of I3− (g mol−1), T is the temperature (K), and R is the ideal gas constant (J mol−1 K−1). The values of ΔG°, ΔH°, and ΔS° for the adsorption of I3− on PANI ES and NPES at various temperatures are tabulated in Table 2. The sign of ΔG° for both PANI at all temperatures is negative, indicating that the adsorption occurs spontaneously. The more negative the ΔG° value with increasing temperature, the larger the amount of adsorbed I3− ions at equilibrium. The sign of ΔH° shows that the adsorption is endothermic, and its value indicates that the physical adsorption (in the range of −20 to 40 kJ mol−1) of I3− on PANI ES and NPES occurs. A temperature increase is favorable to the adsorption process, consistent with adsorption isotherm data (Fig. 2a). The sign of ΔS° is all positive, indicating that the I3− ions are arranged in a more disorderly manner at the adsorbent's surface after adsorption. The ΔS° value of PANI ES is more positive than NPES, suggesting that the surface of PANI ES has more type 2 site and amorphous moieties than NPES.

Adsorbents
ΔH° (kJ mol−1)
ΔS° (J mol−1 K−1)
ΔG° (kJ mol−1)

R
2

303 K
313 K
323 K
PANI ES
35.98
182.78
−20.25
−22.24
−23.90
0.993
NPES
26.24
146.76
−18.28
−19.61
−21.54
0.991

The Raman spectra of CE made of PANI ES or NPES before and after electrolyte solution (I3−/I−) addition were compared to investigate their interactions (Fig. 4a). A specific change in the Raman spectra of both PANI is observed. The Raman bands at 109 and 154 cm−1, which correspond to linear I3− chains vibration and polyiodide in the form of pentaiodide (I5−) chains vibration, respectively, become more pronounced after the addition of electrolyte solution to CE surfaces. These iodine species are commonly found in iodine-doped PANI and have been observed previously by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The Raman band at 1388 cm−1 (attributed to the C–N+ ring-stretching vibration) decreases with the addition of the electrolyte solution. This Raman band weakening is probably due to the electrostatic interaction between the positive species on the PANI surface (C–N+) and I3− ions to form the charge transfer complexes (I), as illustrated in Fig. 4b. After that, an intramolecular redox reaction occurs in the quinonoid unit, resulting in the semiquinone dicationic radical (II) formation, i.e., localized polaronic states. Finally, the charge delocalization occurs, forming the polysemiquinoid structure (III), i.e., delocalized polaronic states. This leads to the changes in molecules' arrangement, altering the PANI lattice chain package and the crystal structure symmetry to be Raman inactive. Gospodinova et al. reported that the Raman bands in the range of 1300–1400 cm−1 are usually associated with the polaron lattice states. They also presented a schematic representation of the electron and spin-density distributions of localized and delocalized polaronic states in a fully protonated emeraldine tetramer, which differ from each other. The presence of polaron lattice states is confirmed in our previous findings, indicating that the adsorption of I3− ions on PANI ES and NPES is a physical process and occurs through electrostatic interaction before the oxidative doping reaction.



Fig. 5a and b show the schematic illustration and J–V curves of DSSCs fabricated using CEs made of PANI ES and NPES. Photovoltaic parameters were derived from the curve, and the values are listed in Table 3. An increase in some photovoltaic parameters is observed by using NPES CE relative to PANI ES CE. The fill factor (FF) value represents the electrocatalytic efficiency, notably in the regeneration process of DSSC. The obtained FF for NPES CE is higher than that of PANI ES CE, indicating that NPES has a better electrocatalytic activity towards the electrolyte. In general, both PANI CEs have moderate electrical conductivity (around 10−2–10−1 S cm−1) and good electrocatalytic activity towards the electrolyte, which due to their excellent interactions. However, PANI ES has fewer polarons, which is indicated by the narrowing of the polaron band in FTIR spectra and the decreased intensity of C–N˙+ vibration band in Raman spectra (Fig. 1a and b). Another significant difference between them is the morphology (Fig. 1c), which directly affects the adsorption capacity of the type 1 site based on the DSLF model (Fig. 3). The regular and uniform durian-like morphology of NPES can provide more adsorption sites for I3− ions (type 1 site), i.e., increase I3− concentration [I3], and facilitate the regeneration process of the electrolyte on PANI surfaces, as described in Eqn (4). In turn, these factors lead to the increase of short circuit current density (Jsc) in DSSC, suggesting that the morphology of NPES also promotes the charge regeneration process in a whole DSSC system. NPES CE exhibits a PCE of 2.71%, which is 30% higher than that of PANI ES CE, with Jsc of 7.60 mA cm−2 and open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 612.5 mV. The Voc value is not directly affected by the CE properties, but it depends solely on the energy level between the dye and electrolyte.

CE

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (mV)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Synthetic graphite (SG)
0.24
600.0
5.90
9.66 × 10−3 ± 6.51 × 10−4
SG + graphite (G)
4.74
600.0
12.80
0.40 ± 0.061
SG + PANI ES/G blend
6.51
612.5
46.79
2.07 ± 0.070
SG + NPES/G blend
7.60
612.5
52.42
2.71 ± 0.210
To further investigate the electrocatalytic activity of the fabricated CE, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were carried out. In the Nyquist plot (Fig. 6), two well-defined semicircles are observed in the high-frequency (>1 kHz) and medium-frequency (1–100 Hz) regions. The high-frequency semicircle reflects the redox reaction of I−/I3− at the CE, while the medium-frequency semicircle represents the electron transfer at the FTO/TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface. The corresponding equivalent circuit model used to fit EIS spectra is shown in the inset of Fig. 6, where Rs is the series resistance in the transparent conducting glass (FTO) and the transport loss in the electrolyte layer, Rct is the resistance to the charge transfer between electrons at CE surface and I3− ions of the electrolyte, CPE 1 is the chemical capacitance at the CE/electrolyte interface, Rw is the impedance to recombination at the TiO2/electrolyte interface and CPE 2 is the chemical capacitance of the TiO2 film permeated with electrolyte. The detailed parameter values derived from EIS spectra are provided in Table S1 (ESI). The Nyquist plot reveals that the Rs value is nearly the same for both CEs (inset in Fig. 6) which due to the same photoanode and electrolyte used in this study. The Rct value of NPES (27.05 Ω) is smaller than that of PANI ES (44.50 Ω), which can be attributed to the better charge transfer process at the CE/electrolyte interface. This will facilitate the redox reaction of I−/I3− at the CE. The Rw value of NPES is also higher than that of PANI ES, implying a longer electron lifetime and lesser probability of recombination at the electrode–electrolyte interface. These results clearly support the photovoltaic data presented in the previous paragraph.

In summary, we have revealed the adsorption behavior of triiodide ions (I3−) on polyaniline emeraldine salt (PANI ES) and nanostructured PANI ES (NPES). The adsorption process of I3− ions on PANI ES and NPES can be well-described using the Langmuir–Freundlich isotherm (LF) model, indicating that the presence of heterogeneous sites in PANI is due to the semi-crystalline properties of PANI. An improved model called the dual-site Langmuir–Freundlich isotherm (DSLF) is used to understand better the adsorption mechanism of I3− ions on PANI ES and NPES due to the different types of adsorption sites with different affinities. There are two possible types of sites filled during the adsorption process: type 1 and type 2 adsorption sites. Specifically, type 1 site is composed of the crystalline moiety of PANI, i.e., fibers, while type 2 site is formed by the PANI amorphous moiety, i.e., granules. Type 1 site is the positively charged PANI surface, while type 2 site is the adsorbed I3− ions on type 1 site. During the adsorption process, type 1 site adsorbs I3− ion through physical interaction forming monolayer adsorption, whereas type 2 site chemically interacted with I3− ion from bulk solution to produce a multilayer of polyiodide. The adsorption behavior in type 1 site can be described as Langmuir isotherm at low temperature, which gradually deviates to Freundlich isotherm as the temperature is increased. Meanwhile, type 2 site obeys the Freundlich isotherm for all temperatures. The open channel structure of durian-like NPES morphology plays an essential role in facilitating the I3− ion equilibrium and reduces the polyiodide formation on type 2 site. This kind of morphology also provides more type 1 site in capacity than the irregular agglomerates morphology of PANI ES. Thermodynamic parameters show that the adsorption of I3− ion on both PANI is classified as a spontaneous and endothermic process. The high temperature will facilitate the adsorption process due to I3− ion dynamics, which obeys the Stokes–Einstein relation. The adsorption process of I3− on both PANI is a physical process through electrostatic interaction between positive species of PANI (C–N+) and I3− ion, which forms charge transfer complexes confirmed by Raman spectroscopy. NPES demonstrates a better electrocatalytic activity than PANI ES, indicated by smaller charge transfer resistance (Rct), higher FF, and larger Rw values. NPES exhibits promising potential as a counter electrode (CE) material in dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) due to its high adsorption capacity (qmax) at the working temperature of DSSC (around 313 K). This high adsorption capacity will facilitate the regeneration of electrolytes and maintain the charge circulation in the DSSC system.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This research was financially supported by Penelitian Dasar Unggulan Perguruan Tinggi (PDUPT) Research Grant 2020 (Grant Number: 2/AMD/EI/KP.PTNBH/2020), Ministry of Research, Technology and Higher Education of the Republic of Indonesia and Program Penelitian, Pengabdian kepada Masyarakat dan Inovasi ITB (P3MI-ITB) Grant 2017, Institute for Research and Community Service of Institut Teknologi Bandung. V. Suendo acknowledges Mrs Kurniawati Kusnadi from P.T. BASF Distribution Indonesia for providing the polyglyceryl-2-Dipolyhydroxystearate (PGPH) surfactant. This work was also performed in part at the Queensland node of the Australian National Fabrication Facility (ANFF-Q), a company established under the National Collaborative Research Infrastructure Strategy to provide nano- and microfabrication facilities for Australian researchers.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0nj06180h
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2021