 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA02772F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 13777-13786


Jianhua
Liu
,

Qisen
Zhou
,

Nan Kyi
Thein
,

Lei
Tian
,

Donglin
Jia
,

Erik M. J.
Johansson
 and 

Xiaoliang
Zhang
*

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Beihang University, 100191 Beijing, China. E-mail: xiaoliang.zhang@buaa.edu.cn

Department of Chemistry-Ångström, Physical Chemistry, Uppsala University, 75120 Uppsala, Sweden

Department of Physics-Materials Science Research Laboratory, Mandalay University, Mandalay, Myanmar

Received
14th March 2019
, Accepted 14th May 2019
First published on 16th May 2019
The interfacial properties between a perovskite layer and carbon electrode are critical for the photovoltaic performance of carbon electrode-based perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Herein, a methylammonium lead mixed halide (MAPbIxBr3−x) perovskite layer is in situ grown on the top of a methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) perovskite layer forming a MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite stacking structure (PSS) to improve the interfacial properties at the perovskite/carbon electrode interface. The charge carrier dynamics in both the perovskite and the PSC device induced by the MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite stacking layer are studied using extensive characterization. The charge interfacial recombination at the perovskite/carbon electrode interface is significantly diminished using the PSS within the PSC, resulting in largely improved charge extraction and therefore high photovoltaic performance. The PSS-based PSC shows a power conversion efficiency of up to 16.2% (increased by 43% compared with that of a conventional MAPbI3-based PSC), which is among the highest efficiencies of carbon electrode-based hole conductor free PSCs. Meanwhile, the PSS-based PSC also exhibits good stability under both continuous illumination and storage under dark conditions. This work may provide a new avenue to fine tune the interfacial properties of carbon electrode-based PSCs for further improving their photovoltaic performance.

Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite materials have attracted tremendous attention in the applications of solar cells, photodetectors, light emitting devices and lasers due to their remarkable optoelectronic properties including a high light absorption coefficient, a long charge carrier diffusion length, and ambipolar charge transporting properties. A significant achievement in terms of improving the photovoltaic performance and stability of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) was obtained in the past few years through fine tuning the perovskite composition, charge (hole and electron) transport materials, interfacial properties, and device architectures and with better understanding of the device physics. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs was rapidly improved from an initial value of 3.8% to a recent value of over 23%.

Noble metals, such as Au and Ag, are generally used as the counter electrode in PSCs. Metal-based electrodes are deposited by means of a thermal evaporation approach under high temperature and high vacuum conditions, which may remain challenges toward scalable fabrication of PSCs and therefore hinder their commercialization. Meanwhile, the hole transport material (HTM) is necessary for the metal electrode-based PSCs because the metal nanoparticles resulted from such metal electrode could penetrate into the HTM layer or even perovskite layer, significantly affecting the device stability. Commercialized carbon-based electrodes are believed as one of the most promising alternative candidates for metal electrodes owning to their earth abundance, low cost, easy preparation, low-temperature processability and similar work function to metal electrodes. Meanwhile, HTM may be not necessary for the carbon electrode-based PSCs, further lowering the PSC cost. However, the photovoltaic performance of carbon electrode-based PSCs is determined by the interfacial properties at the perovskite/carbon electrode interface due to undesirable charge interfacial recombination.
To suppress such interfacial recombination, Aitola et al. used a hybrid HTM-counter electrode based on a thin single-walled carbon nanotube film and drop-cast 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD) as a HTM to improve charge collection and therefore obtained 15.5% PCE. Yang et al. used copper phthalocyanine (CuPc) as an HTM to improve energy alignment at the perovskite/carbon interface, benefiting the charge extraction and a high PCE of 16.1% was obtained. However, the PCE of carbon electrode-based HTM-free PSCs is far behind the PCE of carbon electrode-based PSCs with an organic or inorganic HTM due to the charge interfacial recombination.
Herein, an additional methylammonium lead mixed halide (MAPbIxBr3−x) perovskite stacking layer was in situ grown on the top surface of a methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) perovskite layer forming a MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite stacking structure (PSS) to improve the interfacial properties at the perovskite/carbon electrode interface. The MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite layer was prepared using the composition engineering approach where a methylammonium bromide (MABr) precursor is spin-coated on the top of a pristine MAPbI3 perovskite layer with excess PbI2, followed by sintering treatment. A PSC with a device architecture of fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)/compact TiO2 (c-TiO2)/mesoporous TiO2 (m-TiO2)/MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-PSS/carbon electrode was fabricated, and the device shows a PCE of up to 16.2%, improved by 43% compared to that of conventional PSCs with a device architecture of FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3 perovskite/carbon electrode. As is known the PSS-based PSC shows the highest efficiency among the hole conductor free carbon-based PSCs. Due to the favorable energy level alignment within the PSS-based PSC, the charge interfacial recombination at the perovskite/carbon electrode interface was significantly decreased, resulting in improved charge extraction and therefore photovoltaic performance.


Fig. 1a schematically presents the fabrication process of the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-PSS, and the detailed information is demonstrated in the Experimental section. A pristine MAPbI3 perovskite layer with excess PbI2 (molar ratio of PbI2:MAI = 1.05:1) was firstly prepared on the top of an FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2 substrate using a one-step deposition method with anti-solvent treatment, and thereafter the sample was annealed on a hot-plate (100 °C) for 15 min. During the MAPbI3 perovskite formation, excess PbI2 mostly presented on the top surface of the perovskite layer and between the grain boundaries within the perovskite layer. MABr isopropanol (IPA) solution was spin coated on the top surface of the pristine MAPbI3 perovskite layer with excess PbI2 and then annealed at 100 °C for 15 min. The MABr reacted with the excess PbI2 distributed on the top surface of the MAPbI3 perovskite layer or even left in the grain boundaries forming a thin MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite stacking layer, resulting in the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-PSS.

The inset in Fig. 1a displays the assumed PSS. The morphology of the top surface of theMAPbI3 perovskite and PSS was characterized using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The MAPbI3 perovskite layer exhibits dense properties covering a large area and the grain size is ∼200 nm (Fig. 1b). But a few pinholes were observed on the sample surface, which affect the charge collection and therefore the photovoltaic performance of the PSCs. However, after the in situ growth of the MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite stacking layer on the top surface of the MAPbI3 perovskite layer forming the PSS, the perovskite layer is pinhole free and a more homogeneous and smoother morphology was obtained (Fig. 1c). The grain boundaries within the MAPbI3 perovskite layer are fully covered by the perovskite stacking layer. These results suggest that the excess PbI2 in the pristine MAPbI3 perovskite layer could be diminished using MABr and therefore converts to MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite forming a PSS, which was further characterized in the following part.

The MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite stacking layer deposited on the top surface of the MAPbI3 perovskite layer may affect the physical properties of the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-PSS, such as energy levels and optoelectronic properties, which has an important effect on the photovoltaic performance of the PSCs. To confirm such a hypothesis, detailed characterization was carried out.


Fig. 2a shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the MAPbI3 perovskite layer with excess PbI2 and MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-PSS. For comparison, a conventional MAPbI3 perovskite layer was also prepared with a precursor molar ratio of PbI2:MAI = 1:1. The PbI2 peak at ∼12.7° in the XRD pattern clearly reveals that PbI2 did not fully convert to the perovskite, which is in agreement with the literature. As expected, compared with the conventional MAPbI3 perovskite (PbI2:MAI = 1:1), the intensity of the PbI2 peak at ∼12.7° becomes stronger after using excess PbI2 in the perovskite precursor (PbI2:MAI = 1.05:1), marked as MAPbI3 + PbI2 in Fig. 2a, which indicates that more PbI2 is left in the perovskite layer. However, the PbI2 peaks thoroughly disappear in the XRD pattern after treating the perovskite film (MAPbI3 + PbI2) with MABr, and meanwhile a negligible change in the intensity and position of the diffraction peaks of the MAPbI3 perovskite phase is found in the XRD pattern. Due to the fact that the MAPbIxBr3−x stacking layer is also a perovskite structure we did not observe any significant changes in the XRD patterns after depositing the MAPbIxBr3−x stacking layer on the MAPbI3 perovskite layer. IPA may affect the amount of PbI2 left in the perovskite layer. Therefore, IPA alone was applied to treat the perovskite film (MAPbI3 + PbI2) for comparison, and the result shows that the perovskite layer has no obvious difference in the XRD pattern before and after the IPA treatment (Fig. S1, ESI). This important evidence suggests that the excess PbI2 in the perovskite layer reacts with MABr forming a thin MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite stacking layer covering the former MAPbI3 perovskite layer, forming a PSS.

Fig. 2b presents the light absorption spectra of the pristine MAPbI3 perovskite (PbI2:MAI = 1:1) and the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-PSS, and a partial enlargement of the spectra at the wavelength of 725–800 nm is shown in Fig. 2c. Both perovskite samples exhibit strong light absorption in the visible wavelength region. However, a slight blue shift in the light absorption spectra is observed for the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-PSS sample (Fig. 2c), which reveals that the MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite stacking layer may affect the overall optoelectronic properties of the PSS sample. Generally, the bandgap energy of the perovskite material is determined by the material composition. The bandgap energy of the MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 perovskite is ∼1.6 and ∼2.3 eV, respectively, and the bandgap energy of the intermediate composition MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite gradually becomes higher with an increase in the amount of Br element in the MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite material. The Tauc plot figure of the MAPbI3 perovskite and MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-PSS is presented in Fig. S2 (ESI). The bandgap energy with an increased value of ∼0.02 eV was calculated for the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-PSS compared with that of the pristine MAPbI3 perovskite sample. The detailed mechanism of such a band edge shift is not exactly known currently.
To gain more information concerning the effect of the MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite stacking layer on the composition and energy levels of the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-PSS, X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) measurement was performed. Fig. 2d, e, and f display the core-level XPS spectra of Pb 4f, I 3d and Br 4d in the MAPbI3 perovskite and MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-PSS, respectively. The overview of the XPS spectra is shown in Fig. S3 (ESI). The binding energy of Pb 4f7/2 and I 3d5/2 peaks shifts from 138.38 and 619.30 eV to 138.07 and 618.99 eV for the MAPbI3 perovskite and MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-PSS, respectively. Therefore, the core level of the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-PSS shows an upward shift of ∼0.31 eV compared to that of the conventional MAPbI3 perovskite, which reveals the occurrence of interfacial charge redistribution at the interface of the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-PSS. Compared with the MAPbI3 perovskite sample, the peak of Br 3d was obviously observed in the PSS, confirming the existence of Br element in the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-PSS (Fig. 2f). Due to the fact that XPS measurement is surface sensitive, the thickness of the MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite stacking layer in the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-PSS was determined using time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS), as shown in Fig. S4 (ESI). The results show that the Br element is mainly distributing at the top part of the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-PSS with a depth of ∼75 nm. It is worth noting that the Br element is not uniformly distributing in the MAPbIxBr3−x stacking layer, which may result from the halide exchange or ion migration.
As described above, the energy levels of the perovskite material are dominated by the material composition and thus the MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite stacking layer may also affect the energy levels of the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-PSS. Therefore, the valence band (VB) edge of the MAPbI3 perovskite and MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-PSS was tested (Fig. 2g). The valence band maximum (VBM) of the MAPbI3 perovskite is below the Fermi level of ∼1.40 eV, and thus the conduction band minimum (CBM) is placed above the Fermi level of ∼0.21 eV considering the band gap energy value of ∼1.61 eV for the MAPbI3 perovskite. For the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-PSS, the VBM and CBM up shift to 1.17 and 0.46 eV, below and above the Fermi level, respectively, considering a band gap value of ∼1.63 eV for the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-PSS (Fig. S2, ESI). Therefore, the VBM and CBM of the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-PSS have an upshift of ∼0.23 and ∼0.25 eV, respectively, compared to that of the MAPbI3 perovskite.

The above results reveal that the MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite stacking layer is in situ developed on the top surface of the MAPbI3 perovskite layer forming a PSS. To study the application of such a PSS in photovoltaic devices, a PSC device with a device architecture of FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-PSS/carbon electrode was constructed, as shown in Fig. 3a. The corresponding energy levels of each material in the device are summarized in Fig. 3b. The TiO2 (c-TiO2 and m-TiO2) works as an efficient electron transport material and the MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite stacking layer acts as an electron blocking layer in the device. Commercial carbon paste was applied for the counter electrode preparation, which was deposited on the top of the MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite stacking layer using the doctor blade technique under ambient conditions, followed by annealing at 100 °C for 20 min. Due to the favorable energy level alignment of each layer within the device and the ambipolar nature of the perovskite, the photoinduced electrons and holes in the perovskite layer might be efficiently extracted by the corresponding electrodes, which will be discussed in detail in the following part. Fig. 3c displays the cross-sectional SEM image of the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-based PSC device.

The device photovoltaic performance was measured under AM1.5G 100 mW cm−2 illumination provided by a solar simulator and different voltage scanning directions were applied to record the photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curve. Fig. 3d shows the J–V curves of the conventional MAPbI3-based PSC and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters, such as the open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF) and PCE, are summarized in the figure. Both backward (from Voc to Jsc) and forward (from Jsc to Voc) voltage scanning directions were used for the J–V measurement to study the hysteresis effect. A small hysteresis is observed in the J–V curves of the MAPbI3-based PSC. An impressive PCE of 11.3% was obtained in the backward voltage scanning direction, whereas a slightly lower PCE of 10.7% was achieved in the forward voltage scanning direction.
In contrast, the photovoltaic performance of the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-based PSC was significantly improved and neglectable hysteresis is observed. A PCE as high as 16.2% and 16.1% was achieved for the backward and forward voltage scanning directions, respectively, as shown in Fig. 3e. The improved PCE of the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-based PSC is mainly attributed to the higher Jsc and FF, which is largely affected by the interfacial properties in the device and that will be discussed in the following part. The statistical PCE of the MAPbI3-based and MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-based PSCs was calculated from 16 devices (Fig. 3f). The statistics of photovoltaic parameters are summarized according to the literature. The result shows that both PSCs have high reproducibility and the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-based PSC gives a relatively higher PCE value. The statistical results of the Jsc, FF, and Voc of the MAPbI3-based PSC and MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-based PSC are shown in Fig. S5 (ESI). MAPbI3-based PSCs with different organic HTMs, such as Spiro-OMeTAD and poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT), were also fabricated for comparison (Fig. S6 ESI). When using an organic HTM in the PSC, the device photovoltaic performance is largely improved, but the device efficiency is still lower than that of the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-based PSC.

Fig. 3g presents the incident photo-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra of the MAPbI3-based and MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-based PSCs and the corresponding integrated photocurrent is shown in Fig. S7 (ESI). The MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-based PSC has a slightly higher IPCE value than the MAPbI3-based PSC in the wavelength region of 350–750 nm, which may result in a higher Jsc value in the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-based PSC compared to that of the MAPbI3-based PSC. In addition, a small blue-shift in the IPCE spectra was observed for the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-based PSC, which is in agreement with the light absorption spectrum of the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-PSS (Fig. 2c).
Device stability is one of the crucial factors to evaluate the overall performance of a solar cell device. Therefore, the stability of the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-based PSC was measured under both continuous illumination and storage under dark conditions. The steady-state efficiency of the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-based PSC at the maximum power point (MPP) was tracked under continuous AM1.5G 100 mW cm−2 illumination provided by a solar simulator (Fig. 3h). The photovoltage and photocurrent under the MPP tracking are presented in Fig. S8 (ESI). No significant degradation in the efficiency is observed during the photostability test, whereas the device efficiency is slightly increased with the illumination. During the photostability test, the illumination was blocked with a mechanical shutter putting the device under dark conditions for several minutes, and after that time the shutter was removed again putting the device under illumination. The device exhibits a fast light response and quickly shows the original efficiency value of before blocking the illumination. The unencapsulated PCSs were stored under dark conditions and the device efficiency was measured again after a few days. Fig. 3i shows the normalized PCE of both MAPbI3-based and MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x based PSCs as a function of the storage time. The unencapsulated PCSs were stored under dark conditions (23 °C and ∼30% humidity) and the device efficiency was measured again after a few days. It is encouraging that the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-based PSC maintains ∼85% of its initial PCE value, whereas the MAPbI3-based PSC only maintains ∼50% of its original PCE value after storage for 55 days. These important results indicate that the MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite stacking layer in the PSC could significantly improve the stability of the carbon electrode-based PSC. Therefore, we conclude here that the PSC with the PSS in the device exhibits superior photovoltaic performance to conventional MAPbI3-based PSCs. Meanwhile, the perovskite stacking structured PSC also shows good stability under both continuous illumination and storage under dark conditions.

As described, the MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite stacking layer may affect the charge carrier dynamics in the perovskite, which will provide more insights to comprehensively understand the transportation and recombination of the photoinduced charge carriers. Therefore, the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra and time-resolved PL decay were measured to obtain more information in terms of the charge transport mechanism at the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite interface. The perovskite layer was prepared on a microscope slide for the PL spectra measurement, and an incident excitation light with a wavelength of 550 nm was applied to excite the perovskite sample. The PL intensity of the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-PSS sample is significantly decreased compared to that of the MAPbI3 perovskite sample (Fig. 4a), which may be because the photoinduced charge was efficiently quenched by the MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite stacking layer in the PSS. The PL peak with a blue shift of ∼19 nm is observed for the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-PSS sample compared with that of the MAPbI3 perovskite sample (Fig. S9, ESI), ascribed to the higher bandgap energy of the PSS (Fig. S2). The results of the PL spectra are in good accordance with the results of the light absorption of the perovskite layer and the IPCE spectra of the PSC device.

Even though the detailed mechanism of such a band edge shift is not exactly known currently, there may be two causes leading to the band edge shift: (1) after preparing MAPbBrxI3−x on the top of the MAPbI3 layer forming a double-layered structure, the Br element may diffuse into the MAPbI3 perovskite layer forming an uniform MAPbBrxI3−x perovskite instead of the double-layered structure, which results in the band edge shift compared with that of the MAPbI3 perovskite. However such a hypothesis is in contradiction with the elemental analysis by TOF-SIMS which shows that the Br element is mainly distributed on the top of the perovskite layer with a thickness of ∼75 nm (Fig. S4). (2) The coupling of such two layers may be too strong, and the band-edge state may be mixed leading to a single PL emission. The PL mainly comes from the MAPbI3 perovskite layer in the double-layered perovskite. Otherwise, two PL peaks or a broad PL peak should be observed. We think that the photoinduced electrons in the MAPbBrxI3−x layer may efficiently inject into the MAPbI3 perovskite layer and the photoinduced holes in the MAPbI3 perovskite layer inject into the MAPbBrxI3−x perovskite layer. Therefore the MAPbBrxI3−x layer somehow works as an electron blocking layer (or hole transfer layer) in the solar cell.
The time-resolved PL decay could directly probe the charge carrier dynamics in the perovskite layer, such as extraction and recombination. Therefore, time-resolved PL decay measurement was carried out using the time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) technique.Fig. 4b shows the PL decay of the MAPbI3 perovskite and MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-PSS, and the fitted parameters of the PL decay are summarized in Table S1. Compared with the MAPbI3 perovskite layer, a faster PL decay was obtained for the PSS sample in the fast decay region in the spectra, indicating that the photoinduced holes may efficiently inject from the MAPbI3 perovskite to the MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite stacking layer in the PSS which may be the cause of lower PL intensity observed in the PSS sample (Fig. 4a).
The MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite stacking layer may also affect the charge carrier dynamics in the full PSC device. The transient photocurrent (TPC) and transient photovoltage (TPV) can be used to directly probe the recombination rate and transport rate of the photoinduced charge carriers in a solar cell device. Therefore, the TPC and TPV of the MAPbI3-based and MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-based PSCs were measured. Fig. 4c shows the normalized TPC of the MAPbI3-based and MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-based PSCs. The MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-based PSC shows a slightly faster TPC decay which suggests that a faster charge transport may occur in such a PSC.
When the solar cell device is under illumination and open-circuit conditions, a photovoltage is formed across the full device. However, as the illumination is removed, the photoinduced charge carriers will be recombined, resulting in a Voc decay (or TPV). Therefore, the Voc decay could offer more information regarding the charge extraction: a slower Voc decay generally results from a slow charge recombination rate in the solar cell device.Fig. 4d shows the normalized TPV curves of the MAPbI3-based and MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-based PSCs and the charge recombination time (also called the electron lifetime) can be extracted from the TPV. The electron lifetime as a function of Voc is shown in Fig. S10 (ESI). The result reveals that a longer electron lifetime was calculated for the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-based PSC, suggesting that more charge carriers could be extracted from the perovskite layer. Therefore, these results confirm that the MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite stacking layer covered on the MAPbI3 perovskite layer forming the PSS could largely improve the charge extraction in the solar cell device, leading to diminished charge interfacial recombination at the perovskite/carbon electrode interface.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were also conducted to investigate the internal charge transfer behavior in the MAPbI3-based and MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-based PSCs (Fig. S11, ESI). The Nyquist plots of the PSCs show a semicircle at high frequency, which is related to the perovskite/carbon interface. Compared with the MAPbI3-based PSC, the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-based PSC shows a lower charge transfer resistance (Rct), implying a faster carrier transport and a better contact at the perovskite/carbon interface, which is consistent with the results obtained from TPC and TPV.

For a solar cell device, the photovoltaic performance is directly determined by the charge extraction, which is dominated by the materials' optoelectronic properties, energy band structure and device architecture. Based on the above results we further propose the mechanism of the improved photovoltaic performance in the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-based PSC induced by the additional MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite stacking layer in the PSC. Considering the results from the light absorption and XPS analysis, the energy levels of each material are schematically presented in Fig. 5a. As discussed in the XPS section, the core levels of Pb 4f7/2 and I 3d5/2 show an upward shift of ∼0.31 eV after depositing the MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite stacking layer on the top of the MAPbI3 perovskite layer forming the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-PSS. Meanwhile, by combining the VB spectra (Fig. 2g) and Tauc plot (Fig. S2, ESI), the VBM of the MAPbI3 perovskite and MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite is found to be ∼1.40 and ∼1.17 eV below the Fermi level, and the CBM is ∼0.21 and ∼0.46 eV above the Fermi level, respectively. The upshift of the core level (∼0.31 eV) and VBM (∼0.23 eV) shows the same band bending trend at the interface of MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite.

Therefore, introducing an additional MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite interlayer between the MAPbI3 perovskite and carbon electrode results in a favorable energy level alignment within the PSC device, benefiting hole extraction from the perovskite layer. Additionally, the small difference of VBM at the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite interface may help to reduce the constraint of built-in field and thermionic losses during hole extraction, as demonstrated by Kahn. Due to the absence of an energy barrier at the MAPbI3 perovskite/carbon electrode interface, the photoelectrons generated in the perovskite layer will back-transport to the carbon electrode and recombine with the holes (Fig. 5b and c) at such an interface, reducing the charge extraction. Therefore, the MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite interlayer with higher bandgap energy may act as an energy barrier preventing the electron back-transport toward the carbon electrode, lowering the charge interfacial recombination at the perovskite/carbon electrode interface. However, due to the ion migration and the small size of Br ions in the MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite stacking layer, some Br ions may migrate to the interior of the MAPbI3 perovskite layer, which may also affect the device performance.

In situ growth of an additional perovskite layer forming a bilayer perovskite structure was proven as an efficient way to improve the photovoltaic performance of gold electrode-based PSCs. Compared with reported carbon electrode-based PSCs, no conductor was used in this work and the MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite stacking layer somehow works as an electron blocking layer (or a HTM) in the PSC. We also compared the demonstrated MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-based PSC with a carbon electrode-PSC with or without any HTMs in the device. We find that the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-based PSC shows the highest efficiency among the carbon electrode-based hole conductor free PSCs (Table S2). Meanwhile, the MAPbI3/MAPbIxBr3−x-based PSC also shows comparable photovoltaic performance with the carbon electrode-PSC with an organic or inorganic HTM in the device (Table S3). These encouraging results indicate that the interfacial properties within carbon electrode-based PSCs are significantly desired to be optimized for fine tuning the device operation. However, it is worth noting that although improved interfacial properties were obtained in the carbon electrode-based PSC through in situ growth of an additional perovskite stacking layer, the charge interfacial recombination at the perovskite/carbon-electrode interface may also somewhat remain. Therefore, further studies may be needed to further understand the effect of Br ion migration and further control the interface properties in PSCs toward further improving the device photovoltaic performance and stability.

In conclusion, a perovskite stacking structure was successfully developed to improve the performance of carbon electrode-based hole conductor free PSCs. By incorporating an additional MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite stacking layer at the MAPbI3 perovskite/carbon electrode interface, a favorable energy level alignment was formed within the PSC device. The perovskite stacking structured PSC shows the highest efficiency among carbon electrode-based hole conductor free PSCs resulting from significantly diminished charge interfacial recombination at the perovskite/carbon electrode interface. Meanwhile, the perovskite stacking structured PSC also shows good stability under both continuous illumination and storage under dark conditions. This work may provide a new avenue to fine tune the interfacial properties in PSCs for obtaining higher photovoltaic performance and stability.


Titanium(IV) isopropoxide (97%), isopropanol (anhydrous, 99.5%), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, anhydrous, 99.8%), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, anhydrous, 99.8%), and chlorobenzene (anhydrous, 99.8%) were provided by Sigma-Aldrich. Methylammonium iodide (MAI) and methylammonium bromide (MABr) were purchased from Dyesol. Lead iodide (PbI2) was obtained from TCI. Other solvents were obtained from Aladdin. The commercial carbon paste was bought from Shanghai Materwin New Materials Co., Ltd. All chemicals were used without any further purification.


A patterned FTO glass substrate was cleaned sequentially with water, acetone, and ethanol using an ultrasonic water bath. Subsequently, a compact TiO2 layer was deposited on the FTO substrate by spray pyrolysis of a precursor solution containing 0.2 M titanium isopropoxide and 2 M acetylacetone in anhydrous isopropanol at 500 °C. Diluted commercial TiO2 paste (Dyesol paste, 30NRD) with ethanol was spin-coated on the compact TiO2 layer at 4000 rpm and then sintered at 500 °C for 30 min. After cooling down to room temperature, the substrate coated with the mesoporous TiO2 layer was immersed in a TiCl4 aqueous solution (40 mM) at 70 °C for 30 min, followed by sintered again at 500 °C.

The preparation of the perovskite precursor and perovskite layer was carried out in a glovebox. Briefly, the perovskite precursor solution with excess PbI2 was prepared by mixing PbI2 (1.05 M), MAI (1 M) in a solvent of DMF:DMSO = 4:1 (volume ratio). The precursor solution was then spin-coated onto the top of the TiO2-coated FTO substrate by a continuous two-step procedure at 1000 and 4000 rpm for 10 and 30 s, respectively. During the second spin-coating step, 150 μl anhydrous chlorobenzene was quickly injected onto the rotating substrate 15 s before the end of the process. Then the sample was annealed on a hot plate at 100 °C for 15 min. For the preparation of the additional MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite stacking layer, 100 μl of MABr isopropanol solution (5 mg ml−1) were spin-coated onto the prepared MAPbI3 perovskite film with excess PbI2 at 4000 rpm for 30 s and annealed on a hot plate at 100 °C for 15 min. For the preparation of the perovskite solar cell with HTM, 70 mM Spiro-OMeTAD in chlorobenzene solution and 15 mg ml−1 P3HT in chlorobenzene solution were deposited on the MAPbI3 perovskite film by spin coating at 3000 rpm for 30 s, respectively. The Spiro-OMeTAD solution was doped at a molar ratio of 0.5, 0.03 and 3.3 with bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)-imide lithium salt (Li-TFSI), tris(2-(1H-pyrazole-1yl)-4-tert-butylpyridine) cobalt(III) tris-(bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)-imide) (FK209) and 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP), respectively. Finally, the carbon paste was doctor-bladed on the top of the MAPbIxBr3−x perovskite layer, followed by drying at 100 °C for 20 min to remove the solvent in the carbon paste to complete the PSC device.

SEM images were recorded using scanning electron microscopy (JEOL-7500). EDS was performed using an energy dispersive spectrometer (OXFORD X-Max 50). The X-ray diffraction pattern was recorded using a Rigaku D/max2500 in an angle range of 10–45° with Cu Kα radiation. The light absorption spectrum was recorded using a UV-VIS-NIR spectrophotometer (UV-3600). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (Thermo Scientific Escalab 250Xi US) was performed to test the chemical states and the valence band of the perovskite layer, which was prepared on the FTO glass substrate. Time of Flight Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (Germany ION TOF 5) was used to detect the distribution of Br element with depth. The steady-state PL spectrum was recorded using a Fluorolog 3 Spectrophotometer (HORIBA JOBIN YVON) with an excitation wavelength of 550 nm and a cut-off filter (575 nm) was applied to block the scattered excitation light. TCSPC measurement was performed by means of a picosecond diode laser (EPL 470) of 470.4 nm as excitation light. A cut-off filter (OG 570 nm) was applied to block the scattered excitation light during the measurement. TAC (Ortec 566, 50 ns) was read by using a DAQ-1 MCA computer card using 4096 channels and collected with Horiba Jobin Yvon DataStation 2.3.


The photovoltaic performance of the PSC was measured under AM1.5G 100 mW cm−2 illumination provided by a Newport solar simulator (model 91160). A Keithley 2400 digital source meter was used to record the photocurrent–photovoltage (J–V) curve with a voltage scanning rate of 10 mV s−1 and a delay of 10 ms in both forward and backward voltage scanning directions. During the J–V curve measurement, a black metallic mask with an area of 0.068 cm2 was used to define the working area of the PSC device.

The MPP tracking was carried out in a home-made chamber that provided a nitrogen atmosphere and a solar simulator was used to provide continuous AM1.5G 100 mW cm−2 illumination. A certified reference Si solar cell (Fraunhofer ISE) was used to calibrate the light intensity before the J–V measurement and photostability test. IPCE spectra were obtained using a computer-controlled setup that consists of a xenon lamp (Spectral Products ASBXE 175), a monochromator (Spectral Products CM110), a LabJack U6, and a potentiostat (PINE, AFRDE 5). The certified reference solar cell (Fraunhofer ISE) was used to calibrate the setup before measurement. The Voc decay and Jsc decay were measured according to a previously reported method.
EIS was performed on an electrochemical workstation (CORRTEST CS350). Z-view software (3.0a, Scribner Associates Inc.) was used to analyze the impedance data.

There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Science Foundation of China (51872014), Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities and Recruitment Program of Global Experts. E. M. J. J acknowledges the funding from the Göran Gustafsson Foundation, Swedish Energy Agency, Swedish Research Council FORMAS, ÅForsk, and Swedish Research Council (VR). Dr N. K. K. Thein acknowledges the LOTUS+ program from Erasmus Mundus for a scholarship. We thank Dr Yang Nan for help with the SEM measurement.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta02772f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019