 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM34429G
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21841-21844

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Yuying
Huang
,

Lisheng
Li
,

Xiaobin
Peng
*,

Junbiao
Peng
 and 

Yong
Cao


Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, 381 Wushan Road, Guangzhou 510640, China. E-mail: chxbpeng@scut.edu.cn

Received
7th July 2012
, Accepted 6th September 2012
First published on 7th September 2012
Due to the π-conjugation of the whole molecule along with the push–pull property of a newly designed conjugated donor–acceptor porphyrin, the solution processed solar cells using the blend of the porphyrin small molecule with PC71BM exhibit a promising performance with a power conversion efficiency of up to 4.02%.

Most natural photosynthetic systems utilize chlorophylls to absorb light and carry out photochemical charge separation to store energy, and this remarkable process provides all of our food and most of our energy resources. Porphyrins were studied earlier as photoactive materials for organic photovoltaics (OPVs) partly because the porphyrin structure is a synthetically tractable analogue of chlorophylls. Furthermore, porphyrins have extensively π-conjugated systems, are amenable to fast electron transfer to acceptors, and absorb light with high molar absorption coefficients, and their properties can be tuned easily via synthetic modifications of the periphery or by metal insertion into the cavity. These physical and chemical properties make porphyrins suitable for OPV studies, and significant efforts have been devoted to porphyrin-based organic solar cells (OSCs) since porphyrins may have a significant potential to provide major efficiency breakthroughs. Indeed porphyrins have been successfully employed as organic dyes in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). However, the studies on porphyrin bulk heterojunction (BHJ) OPVs, which show many advantages over DSSCs, have been less successful, especially the reports on the BHJ OPVs based on solution-processed porphyrin small molecules as the donors are very limited.

Solution processed small molecules for BHJ OSCs are attractive due to several advantages superior to their polymer counterparts, such as a defined molecular structure, a definite molecular weight, and high purity without batch to batch variations, showing great prospect in low-cost and large-scale OSC commercialization applications. The power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of solution processable small molecule based OSCs have steadily improved over the past decade from about 0.03% to over 6.7%, and the approach of using the conjugated donor–acceptor (D–A) molecular structure plays a very important role in the significant progress. The D–A molecules were considered as efficient donor materials for OSCs because of several key advantages: (1) the internal charge transfer (ICT) is facilitated by the push–pull property of a D–A structure; (2) the more efficient ICT leads to more desirable double-bond characteristics of the π-electrons and therefore a smaller band gap; and (3) the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy levels and the band gap of a D–A molecule can be easily tuned by introducing various electron-donors or acceptors into the molecule.
It was reported that the short exciton diffusion length or the low charge carrier mobilities of porphyrins are likely the root of the low efficiencies of porphyrin-based BHJ OSCs. After a close investigation of the reports on porphyrin BHJ OSCs, we found that a conjugated molecule and a D–A structure were not considered simultaneously for the design of porphyrin-related BHJ OPV materials, and the strategy of conjugated D–A molecules, which is being applied in OSCs very successfully, is almost unemployed in porphyrin OSCs though this approach has been applied to porphyrin two-photon absorption studies. Perhaps unsurprisingly, enhanced performance can be anticipated in OSCs of the conjugated D–A porphyrin derivatives.
In this context, the very typical acceptor 2,1,3-benzothiadiazole (BT) end-capped with 3-hexylthienyl (TBT) was linked by ethynylenes to a porphyrin core to form 5,15-bis(7-(4-hexyl-thiophen-2-yl)-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole-4-yl-ethynyl)-10,20-bis(3,5-di(dodecyloxy)-phenyl)-porphyrin zinc (DHTBTEZP, Scheme 1). The ethynylenes can make the whole molecule planar so that the whole molecule is π-conjugated. The π-conjugation of the whole molecule along with the push–pull property of the porphyrin core and BT moieties can facilitate the ICT. The solution processed OSC using the blend of DHTBTEZP with phenyl C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) exhibited a promising performance with a PCE of up to 4.02%. For comparison, two TBTs were linked to a porphyrin core directly (without ethynylene linkages) to form 5,15-bis(7-(4-hexyl-thiophen-2-yl)-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole-4-yl)-10,20-bis(3,5-di(dodecyloxy)-phenyl)-porphyrin zinc (DHTBTZP, Scheme 1), and the performance of the OSC of DHTBTZP with PC71BM was also investigated.
DHTBTEZP and DHTBTZP, which were synthesized by Sonogashira coupling reaction and Suzuki coupling reaction, respectively (see ESI), show good solubility in common organic solvents such as chloroform, THF, and toluene, and can be readily processed to form smooth and pinhole-free films upon spin-coating. The 3,5-bis(dodecyloxy)phenyl groups at meso-positions 10 and 20 of the zinc porphyrin ring of DHTBTEZP and DHTBTZP play an important role in solubilizing. The thermal properties of DHTBTEZP were determined by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), which exhibited an onset decomposition temperature at 416 °C (see ESI), indicating that this porphyrin has good thermal stability.
The UV-vis absorption spectra of DHTBTEZP and DHTBTZP in CH2Cl2 and thin-films are shown in Fig. 1. In solution, DHTBTZP exhibited a Soret band at 423 nm and very weak Q bands at 550 and 590 nm, which are quite similar to those of non-functionalized porphyrins, indicating that the ICT in DHTBTZP is very weak. In contrast to the absorption spectrum of DHTBTZP, DHTBTEZP exhibits two broad peaks centered at 511 and 801 nm in CH2Cl2 and the intensity of absorbance of the peak at 801 nm dramatically increased. The peaks at 511 and 801 nm were assigned to the porphyrin characterized Soret band and Q band, respectively. The dramatical red-shifts of ca. 90 nm at the Soret band and ca. 250 nm at Q bands along with the significant increase of the absorbance at the Q bands were contributed by the efficient ICT within DHTBTEZP. The difference was attributed to the co-planarity and therefore the π-conjugation between the BT and porphyrin units in DHTBTEZP to enable the π-electrons to be delocalized within the whole molecule, which was demonstrated by the ab initio calculations reported below.
The absorption spectrum of a DHTBTEZP thin film versus that in solution showed a red-shift of 35 nm at the Q band region, which was attributed to the strong intermolecular interaction in the condensed solid state. From the onset of the absorption spectrum of the film (957 nm), the optical energy band gap of DHTBTEZP was estimated to be 1.3 eV, which belongs to typically low band gaps. Electrochemical properties of DHTBTEZP were investigated by cyclic voltammetry (CV) in solutions of Bu4NPF6 (0.1 M) in acetonitrile at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 at room temperature under the protection of argon. The onset oxidation potential (Eox) was 0.8 eV vs. Fe/Fe2+ (ESI). The HOMO energy level of DHTBTEZP was estimated to be −5.2 eV according to the empirical formula EHOMO = −e(Eox + 4.4) (eV), and the LUMO energy level was calculated to be −3.9 eV from the corresponding HOMO energy level and the optical energy gap.
The BHJ OSCs were fabricated by spin-coating a DHTBTEZP or DHTBTZP/PC71BM (1:3 w/w) solution in 1,2-dichlorobenzene/chlorobenzene (DCB/CB) with 1 vol% pyridine as an additive  onto a PEDOT/PSS layer in a conventional device configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS (40 nm)/DHTBTEZP or DHTBTZP:PC71BM (1:3, w/w, 60 ± 2 nm)/PFN/Al (80 nm) (ITO: indium tin oxide; PEDOT:PSS: poly(styrene sulfonate)-doped poly(ethylene-dioxythiophene); PFN: poly[(9,9-bis(3′-(N,N-dimethylamino)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)). A detailed device fabrication process is described in the Experimental section (see ESI). The devices based on DHTBTEZP exhibited promising photovoltaic properties with an average PCE (from eight devices) of 3.86% under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2). Fig. 2a shows the current density–voltage (J–V) curve of a device with a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 9.46 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.85 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 50%, resulting in a PCE of 4.02%. Although a PCE of up to 5.2% was reported for an OSC based on tetrabenzoporphyrin as the donor and bis(dimethylphenylsilylmethyl)[60]fullerene (SIMEF) as the acceptor, the PCE was only 2.0% when PCBM was used in place of the SIMEF acceptor through thermally managing the precursor. The PCE reported here is the highest PCE for BHJ OSCs based on the solution-processed porphyrin small molecules as the donors and PCBM as the acceptors reported so far. Compared with the parameters of non-functionalized or non-conjugated porphyrin OSCs, all these values of Voc, Jsc and FF are improved for the DHTBTEZP-based OSCs.
In contrast, the device based on DHTBTZP only exhibited a PCE of 0.71% with a Jsc of 2.81 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.88 V, and a FF of 28.7%. Although the Voc is similar to those of the DHTBTEZP-based OSCs, the Jsc and FF are much lower probably due to the lack of efficient ICT in DHTBTZP as shown by the absorption spectra.
The external quantum efficiency (EQE) of a device based on DHTBTEZP is also shown in Fig. 2b. Similar to the absorption curve (see ESI, Fig. S4), the DHTBTEZP/PC71BM device exhibited a broad and high response ranging from 380 nm to 950 nm, suggesting that most of the light energy absorbed by the DHTBTEZP/PC71BM blend film is to some extent converted into electricity. Therefore, much more photons can be converted into electrons leading to a high photovoltaic efficiency. The highest EQE value is 59% at 500 nm, and the EQE value at 870 nm is 12%. The Jsc calculated from the EQE curve is 9.3 mA cm−2, which matches the measured value of 9.46 mA cm−2. We also tried to measure the EQE of the device based on DHTBTZP, but could not obtain due to the very low Jsc.
As shown in Fig. 3 and 4, the optimum geometries and electron-state-density distributions of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of DHTBTEZP and DHTBTZP were investigated by performing density functional theory (DFT) calculations at the B3LYP/(6-31G(D)+LANL2DZ) level using the Gaussian 09 program suite.Ab initio calculations indicated that DHTBTEZP is planar and the π-electrons are delocalized in the whole molecule both at LUMO and HOMO. However, the BT units are almost perpendicular to the porphyrin moiety and the π-electrons are almost confined to the porphyrin moiety at HOMO and to BT units at LUMO in DHTBTZP. It is also worthy to note that the thiophene units are coplanar with the BTs and there are some π-electron distributions at LUMOs in both DHTBTEZP and DHTBTZP. All these results suggested that the co-planarity of the units in DHTBTEZP enable the whole molecule to be conjugated and the π-electrons to be delocalized within the whole molecule. The highly delocalized π-electrons along with the push–pull property of the D–A structure are beneficial for the efficient ICT as revealed by its absorption spectrum. In contrast, due to the perpendicular conformation, the π-electrons could not be delocalized efficiently in DHTBTZP and thus led to poor ICT even if DHTBTZP was a D–A molecule. A more efficient ICT should lead to a higher charge mobility, which is very important in OPVs.
Literature values for hole mobilities in porphyrins vary tremendously from 10−16 to 10−1 cm2 V−1 s−1, and most of the reported values are below 10−8 cm2 V−1 s−1. The discrepancy in the values derives from many factors, including the measurement methods, the porphyrin structures, as well as the material purities and the aggregation properties. Hence, a detailed hole mobility study of the DHTBTEZP or DHTBTZP/PC71BM blend film was conducted by using the electric-field dependent space-charge-limited-current (SCLC) method, which has been widely used to estimate the charge transporting ability of the OSC active layers. As shown in Fig. 5, the blend film based on DHTBTEZP exhibited a moderate hole mobility of 7.4 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is much higher than that based on DHTBTZP with the hole mobility of 2.5 × 10−9 cm2 V−1 s−1, probably due to the more efficient π-electron conjugation and therefore the delocalized π-electrons in DHTBTEZP as revealed by ab initio calculations and the more efficient ICT shown by the absorption spectra. Owing to the high charge-carrier mobility, an efficient charge transport in the OSCs is anticipated that contributes to the high PCEs of the DHTBTEZP-based OSCs.
Several factors contribute to the excellent photovoltaic properties of DHTBTEZP. Firstly, the whole molecule became planar after the introduction of ethynylene linkages and the planarity of the whole molecule is the premise for the efficient π-conjugation and highly delocalized π-electrons. Secondly, ICT was facilitated by the push–pull property of the D–A structure and the π-conjugation of the whole molecule, which contributed to not only the high hole mobility and high FF but also to a small band gap to absorb more light energy to generate the high Jsc. Finally, both DHTBTZP and DHTBTEZP-based OSC devices exhibited a relatively higher Voc (0.85 V) compared to most of the previously reported porphyrin-based OSCs, which was also attributed to the D–A structures.
In conclusion, a new conjugated D–A porphyrin small molecule has been designed and synthesized. The typical acceptor BT end-capped with 3-hexylthienyl was linked by an ethynylene bridge to a porphyrin core. Due to the π-conjugation of the whole molecule and the push–pull property of the porphyrin core and BTs after the introduction of ethynylene and the BT acceptor, the porphyrin showed significant red-shifts both at the Soret band and Q bands and enhanced absorbance at the Q bands of the absorption spectrum. The BHJ OSCs fabricated by solution spin-coating with DHTBTEZP as the donor and PC71BM as the acceptor showed a Jsc of 9.46 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.85 V, and a FF of 50%, resulting in a PCE of 4.02%. This is the highest PCE for BHJ OSCs based on the solution-processable porphyrin small molecules as the donors and PCBM as the acceptor reported so far. This study shows that the performance of porphyrin-based OSCs can be significantly improved upon suitable molecular design, indicating that porphyrins are promising for the application in BHJ OSCs.

This work was financially supported by the grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51073060, 50990065, and 51010003) and International Science and Technology Cooperation Program of China (2010DFA52150).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental section and detailed results. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm34429g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012