 DOI: 10.1039/C7CC03363J
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 6953-6956


R.
Srinivasa Rao
,

Anirban
Bagui
,

G.
Hanumantha Rao
,

Vinay
Gupta
 and 

Surya Prakash
Singh
*

Inorganic and Physical Chemistry Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Uppal Road, Tarnaka, Hyderabad-500007, India. E-mail: spsingh@iict.res.in

Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), New Delhi, India

CSIR-National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi-110012, India

Received
2nd May 2017
, Accepted 5th June 2017
First published on 6th June 2017
A novel boron dipyrromethene based dye, coded as BODIPY-DTF, decorated with dithiafulvalene wings has been developed for solar cell application. A very high efficiency of 7.2% has been achieved, which is the highest reported value so far for BODIPY based donors. A remarkable value of about 88.1% of external quantum efficiency has also been observed at 371 nm.

The organic photovoltaic (OPV) technology is known to be the cheapest and cleanest technique to harness solar energy. It offers several technological opportunities such as low cost of fabrication, light weight of the final product and possibility of making flexible devices via simple solution deposition techniques. The design and development of photoactive polymers and small molecules for OPV applications is the most attractive field of research. Organic solar cells (OSCs) fabricated from conjugated polymer based electron donors already surpassed the PCEs of the 10% benchmark. However, molecularly engineered small molecular donors (SMDs) provide certain advantages over their polymeric counterparts such as high degree of purity and absence of batch-to-batch variation during synthesis. The purification process is also easier for small molecules compared to that of polymers. Moreover, small molecules have defined molecular structures and definite molecular weights. Considering the aforementioned advantages of small molecules, substantial progress in research has been made towards the development of solution processable SMDs targeting high performance OSCs. Recently, a series of solar cells made from oligothiophene based SMDs have shown high PCEs in the range of 8–10%. Some other popular structural templates for SMDs employ diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP), squaraine, and boron dipyrromethene (BODIPY). Small molecular BODIPY dyes have been used as both the donor and the acceptor for BHJ solar cell application. Some of those molecules are demonstrated in Fig. 1. The molecules exhibited impressive PCEs up to 4.7% in OPV devices as reported in Table S1 of the ESI. The BODIPY derivatives have emerged as promising donor dyes because of their strong absorption at higher wavelengths extending up to the near infrared region, high molar extinction coefficients, high thermal and photo stability, efficient luminescence properties and tunable redox properties, which are desirable key parameters for a molecule to be used as a photoactive component in OPV devices. The BODIPY dyes are well known for a wide range of applications such as chemical sensors, biological labeling agents, laser dyes and sensitizers for both DSSCs and OPVs. However, very limited research has been done on BODIPY dyes using them as donors in bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells. Roncali's group reported PCEs of 1.34 and 1.70% for OPV devices fabricated using BODIPY derivatives as the donor and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) as the acceptor. BODIPY-based polymers have achieved a PCE of nearly 2% as reported by the group of Fréchet. Later a BODIPY based small molecular dye, developed by Lin et al., crossed the PCE of 3% in an inverted structure solar cell. Recently the PCE value has reached up to 4.5% as reported by Thompson's group.

With this background of BODIPY dyes, recently we have undertaken the task of developing novel BODIPY dyes with an extended conjugation by associating it with a DTF molecule as an electron donating moiety in the direction of a new promising SMD for high performance OPV devices. Herein, we report the design, synthesis and characterization of a novel BODIPY dye, coded as BODIPY-DTF (Fig. 2) following the strategy of core and wings. The synthetic route of the molecule is illustrated in Scheme S1 (ESI). All intermediate and final molecules were characterized by NMR and mass spectrometry (Fig. S1–S5, ESI). Here an electron deficient BODIPY acts as a core moiety (orange), which is terminated with electron donating group DTF wings (pink) and bridged by a π-conjugated furan unit (green). Sulfur-containing conjugated structures, such as DTF, play a vital role in controlling the optoelectronic behavior of the resultant molecules developed by incorporating them due to their electron-rich character. DTF acts as an excellent electron-donating moiety and has unique redox characteristics. Indeed, DTF is used in the design and synthesis of organic semiconductors in various ways. It has been used as a part of push–pull donor–acceptor dyads, to form the backbone for polymers and hybrid extended tetrathiafulvalene (TTF) oligomers, which have applications in organic electronics. The DTF unit has applications in photonic devices and optical information processing as well because of their non-linear optical (NLO) properties. The DTF unit forms a stable and good conducting charge transfer (CT) complex with well-known electron acceptors in solar cells.
In this work, a newly synthesized BODIPY-DTF dye is utilized as an electron donor to fabricate OPV devices blending with the popular electron acceptor phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM). The observations from structural, electrochemical and optoelectronic characterizations are systematically presented herein. To the best of our knowledge, there has been no such report on BODIPY decorated with DTF as a small molecular electron donor for OPV application to date. Here, DTF wings act as strong electron donors and the furan ring provides π-conjugation and connects to the central BODIPY unit.
The UV-visible absorption spectra of the BODIPY-DTF dye in a chloroform (CHCl3) solution recorded at room temperature (22 °C) are presented in Fig. 3. A broad absorption profile ranging from 300 to 800 nm with three major peaks at 376, 458 and 627 nm was observed. The strongest peak seen at 376 nm with a molar extinction coefficient (ε) of 3.3 × 104 M−1 cm−1 is attributed to the π–π* charge transition in the peripheral DTF donor moiety. The second absorption band ranging from 425 to 514 nm is because of the π–π* charge transition in the p-methoxy phenyl unit. The peak located at 459 nm has a ε value of 2.4 × 104 M−1 cm−1 as reported in Fig. S6 (ESI). The peak at 627 nm in the longer wavelength region of 510–820 nm originates from the strong intra-molecular charge transfer (ICT) interaction between the central BODIPY core and the peripheral donating moiety. The absorption spectra of pristine BODIPY-DTF based thin films are also demonstrated in Fig. 3. Due to strong π–π interactions of delocalized electrons in the solid state, a comparatively broader (tailing up to 900 nm) and red-shifted absorption profile was observed in the case of the thin film with peaks situated at 385, 468 and 665 nm. Annealing is found to improve the absorption properties of BODIPY-DTF (Fig. S6, ESI).

Fig. 4 and Fig. S7 (ESI) demonstrate that the HOMO energy level of BODIPY-DTF is delocalized over the entire molecule; more specifically 20% on BODIPY, 34% on furan and 47% on the DTF unit as estimated by density functional theory calculations at the B1LYP/6-311g(d,p) level. On the other hand, the LUMO is predominantly concentrated onto the electron deficient BODIPY moiety (94%) at the centre. This result clearly indicates that the charge transfer transition originates from the DTF donor to the BODIPY acceptor. The absorption wavelengths as computed from TD-DFT calculations closely match with those of the experimental findings. The major allowed transitions in the wavelength range between 450 and 800 nm are reported in Table S2 (ESI).
The values of the HOMO and LUMO energy levels of BODIPY-DTF are estimated to be −4.93 and −3.28 eV, respectively, by cyclic voltammetry (Fig. S8, ESI) and a band gap of 1.65 eV is obtained, which is well in agreement with the value calculated from the tangent drawn to the absorption band at 790 nm. The values of FMO energy levels indicate that BODIPY-DTF can be conveniently used as an electron donor blending with popular fullerene and non-fullerene based acceptors for the fabrication of OSC devices.
For optimization of photovoltaic performance of OSCs (Fig. S9, ESI), initially the donor-to-acceptor (D/A) weight ratio was varied from 1:1 to 1:4 and then films were treated at elevated temperatures to investigate the effect of thermal annealing on the device performance. Fig. 5a shows the current density vs. voltage (J–V) characteristics of the best performing BODIPY-DTF:PC71BM based BHJ solar cells for different categories measured under AM 1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2 light intensity. The optimum weight ratio of the donor and the acceptor was found to be 1:3 and the solar cells made from the unannealed photoactive layer with a D/A ratio of 1:3 showed the highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 5.3% with a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 12.83 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.789 V and a fill factor (FF) of 0.52. The PCEs for other sets of ‘as cast’ devices with D/A ratios of 1:1, 1:2, and 1:4 were found to be 4.2, 4.8, and 5.0%, respectively. The thermal annealing treatment of BODIPY-DTF:PC71BM blend films at 80 °C for 15 min was found to improve the device performance drastically. Under optimized conditions, the champion solar cell made from the ‘annealed’ blend film with a D/A ratio of 1:3 (w/w) exhibited a PCE of 7.2% with a Voc of 0.768 V, a Jsc of 13.79 mA cm−2, and a FF of 0.665. A well balanced hole and electron mobility (μe/μh → 1) is also observed in the ‘annealed’ blend films (Fig. S10, ESI), which subsequently helped in charge transport and improved the values of Jsc and FF.
In order to check the reproducibility of the experimental results, device fabrication was carried out in several independent runs. Fig. 5b shows the efficiency histogram based on at least fifty cells from the ‘as cast’ and ‘annealed’ categories of samples with an optimum D/A ratio. Out of fifty devices in the ‘annealed’ category, seven cells showed the highest PCE of 7.2% and eleven cells showed the PCE of 7.1%. The average PCEs for all categories are reported in parentheses in Table S3 (ESI).
The external quantum efficiency measurements were carried out on the devices to get an intuition about the photo-response behavior of the cells as a function of wavelength (λ). Fig. 6 illustrates the incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) spectra for ‘as cast’ and ‘annealed’ BODIPY-DTF:PC71BM (1:3) based solar cells. The best performing ‘annealed’ BHJ solar cell with a PCE of 7.2% exhibited a maximum IPCE of 88.1% at 371 nm. Two additional peaks are observed at 471 and 687 nm with an IPCE value of 80.0 and 69.7%, respectively. The spectral response behavior of the devices is consistent with the absorption profile of the thin film as demonstrated in Fig. 3. The value of Jsc, calculated by integrating the IPCE curve in the wavelength (λ) range of 300–900 nm, is found to match closely with the experimentally obtained Jsc value (Table S3, ESI). As can be seen from the graph, the IPCE value of the device drastically improved in the higher wavelength region (560–860 nm) upon thermal annealing of the photoactive layer at 80 °C.
The surface morphology of the photoactive layer plays a crucial role in determining the photovoltaic performance of solar cells made with those blend films. A smooth surface is known to promote charge transport and collection in the devices. Fig. 7 shows the topological images of the ‘as cast’ and ‘annealed’ blend films where the D/A ratio was 1:3. A very uniform surface with an RMS roughness of only 1.8 nm was observed for the ‘annealed’ blend film, whereas the ‘as cast’ film shows an RMS roughness of 3.1 nm.
In summary, a novel small molecule electron donor, namely BODIPY-DTF having boron dipyrromethene as the central core and dithiafulvalene as the end caps, has been synthesized. The molecule shows a broad absorption profile covering a wide range of the solar spectrum from 350 to 780 nm and extending up to the near IR region. The molar extinction coefficient (ε) is calculated to be 3.3 × 104 M−1 cm−1 at 376 nm. The values of the HOMO and LUMO energy levels are estimated to be −4.93 and −3.28 eV, respectively, from cyclic voltammetric measurements. The frontier molecular energy levels of the new donor are compatible with those of popular electron acceptors for using it as a photoactive component in organic solar cells. Under optimized device fabrication conditions, the highest PCE of 7.2% is recorded from a solution processed BHJ solar cell constructed from thermally annealed (80 °C) BODIPY-DTF:PC71BM blends. This is the highest efficiency reported so far for BODIPY based donors. The values of Voc, Jsc and FF are found to be 0.768 V, 13.79 mA cm−2, and 0.665, respectively. A high EQE value of 88.1% at 371 nm is also attained from the best performing cell. A very smooth surface morphology with an RMS roughness of only 1.8 nm is measured for the ‘annealed’ photoactive layer by AFM scanning. Thus the BODIPY-DTF molecule can be conveniently used as an electron donor material for low cost solution processed OSCs.
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from Indo-UK APEX project (Phase-II). RSR thanks UGC for providing SRF. AB thanks DST for a NPDF fellowship (PDF/2016/001853). We thank T. Swetha for DFT calculation.
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cc03363j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017