 DOI: 10.1039/C2EE23294D
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9827-9832

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Yinhua
Zhou
,

Canek
Fuentes-Hernandez
,

Jae Won
Shim
,

Talha M.
Khan
 and 

Bernard
Kippelen
*

Center for Organic Photonics and Electronics (COPE), School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia 30332, USA. E-mail: kippelen@ece.gatech.edu

Received
27th August 2012
, Accepted 9th October 2012
First published on 9th October 2012
We report on inverted polymer tandem solar cells wherein the conducting polymer poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS), modified at one interface with ethoxylated polyethylenimine (PEIE), acts as an efficient charge recombination layer. This recombination layer shows very low optical absorption, high electrical conductivity, and a large work function contrast of 1.3 eV between its top and bottom interfaces. Its use yields tandem cells in which the open-circuit voltage is the sum of that of individual cells. The fill factor of tandem cells connected in series is found to be larger than that of single-junction cells. Its simple polymeric composition and its unprecedented performance make it a promising component for emerging organic photovoltaic technologies.

Solar energy is one of the most abundant renewable energy sources at our disposal. Polymer solar cells are a particularly attractive technology to convert solar energy into electricity because they can potentially be fabricated on large areas at low cost using high yield roll-to-roll manufacturing processes. Tandem solar cells, wherein two single junction solar cells are connected in series by a conducting layer known as a recombination layer, have the potential of reaching higher performance than their single junction counterparts. This is because tandem solar cells can overcome many of the shortcomings of single junction solar cells, such as limited optical absorption and open-circuit voltage. A grand challenge for the realization of high performance polymer tandem solar cells is to find a recombination layer that does not prevent light from being efficiently absorbed in each of the two active layers, which provides good energy match for electrons and holes to be collected and recombine, which is conductive enough so it does not add parasitic series resistances, and that is compatible with prior and subsequent processing steps. Here, we demonstrate that an all-polymeric recombination layer meets must of these requirements and leads to high performance polymer tandem solar cells.


Organic solar cells have been attracting tremendous attention because of their potential to become a future energy source with light weight, superior mechanical flexibility, and low-cost. Great progress has been made towards increasing the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of such cells recently by developing novel materials, optimizing fabrication processing techniques, and implementing novel device structures. So far, the PCE of single-junction organic solar cells has reached 7–8% based on new donor materials mixed with fullerene derivatives. Very recently, a new record-high efficiency of 10.6% for organic solar cells was reported in a tandem architecture.

For a tandem solar cell, choosing an interlayer that connects the two subcells is critical to the device performance. Charge recombination at this so-called charge recombination layer must be efficient to maximize the open-circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF). In terms of the energy level alignment, this means that the work function of one interface of the recombination layer needs to be high enough to provide adequate energy level alignment with the ionization potential of the donor material in the adjacent subcell for a hole to be collected efficiently at that interface. Conversely, the work function of the other interface needs to be low enough to provide adequate energy level alignment with the electron affinity of the acceptor material in the adjacent subcell for an electron to be collected efficiently at that interface. In addition, a recombination layer is required to be comprised of materials with low optical attenuation coefficients, such that it presents a very low optical absorption in the spectral region of interest. From a practical perspective, in tandem solar cells wherein the top active layer is solution-processed, the recombination layer is also required to be robust enough to avoid damage to the bottom cell and to the recombination layer itself during the processing of the top cell.
Up to date, recombination layers comprising high work-function and low work-function components, such as LiF/Al/Au/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS), LiF/Al/MoO3, MoO3/Al/ZnO, MoO3/Ag/Al/Ca, or Al/TiO2/PEDOT:PSS, have been applied in organic tandem cells. In these recombination layers, some of the layers are required to be prepared in high vacuum. More recently, all-solution processed recombination layers comprising PEDOT:PSS/ZnO for inverted tandem cells, and ZnO/PEDOT:PSS and TiOX/PEDOT:PSS for tandem cells in conventional structure have been used successfully. Although all-solution processed recombination layers are highly desirable for large-area roll-to-roll manufacturing of solar cells, the use of crystalline inorganic materials may pose additional challenges in terms of the mechanical flexibility of the solar cell devices. In addition, the use of PEDOT:PSS in combination with metal-oxides having typical work function values around 4.3 eV, limits the work function contrast between the two surfaces of the recombination layer to less than about 0.6 eV, consequently limiting the range of photoactive materials that can be used to assemble tandem solar cells.
Here, we demonstrate a new recombination layer that is comprised of the conducting polymer PEDOT:PSS modified at one interface with ethoxylated polyethylenimine (PEIE, Fig. 1). This surface modification leads to a high work function contrast between the two opposite interfaces of the charge recombination layer in contact with the bottom and top cells in a tandem cell configuration where the cells are connected in series. The bottom surface of the PEDOT:PSS displays a high work function of 4.9 eV, whereas the top surface modified by PEIE displays a low work function of 3.6 eV. With this recombination layer, tandem cells display excellent performance: VOC = 1.48 ± 0.02 V, short-circuit current density (JSC) = 7.4 ± 0.4 mA cm−2, FF = 0.68 ± 0.04, and PCE = 7.5 ± 0.7%, averaged over 25 devices, among which, the champion cell shows a FF = 0.72 and a PCE = 8.2% under 100 mW cm−2 air mass (AM) 1.5 illumination. In contrast to tandem cells reported to date, the ones incorporating this new simple polymeric charge recombination layer exhibit FF values that are larger than those measured in individual single junction cells, demonstrating that the interlayer does not add detrimental series resistance. While we had previously reported that PEDOT:PSS modified by PEIE could be used as an efficient electron-collecting electrode in single-junction inverted solar cells, it was difficult to predict that it would also perform well as a charge recombination layer. As mentioned earlier, recombination layers typically consist of a combination of at least two different layers and generally involve the use of metal-oxides and/or metals. Furthermore, the robustness of this recombination layer and its compatibility with solution-based processing of the top subcell were difficult to anticipate. The single layer geometry and the completely polymeric composition of these interlayers have the potential to further simplify the fabrication and lower the cost of organic tandem solar cells. Its unprecedented performance could lead to future tandem cells with even higher performance if combined with next generation active layers that yield record efficiency single-junction cells.

As shown in Fig. 1, the organic tandem solar cells fabricated for this study have an inverted architecture with a high-conductivity formulation of PEDOT:PSS PH1000, hereafter referred to as PH1000, coated with PEIE as the charge recombination layer. A poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT, Fig. 1):indene-C60 bis-adduct (ICBA, Fig. 1) blend and poly[(4,8-bis-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene)-2,6-diyl-alt-(4-(2-ethylhexanoyl)-thieno[3,4-b]thiophene)-2,6-diyl] (PBDTTT-C, Fig. 1):phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC60BM, Fig. 1) blend were employed as the bottom and the top photoactive layers, respectively. Indium tin oxide (ITO) coated with PEIE was used as the electron-collecting electrode of the bottom cell. Starting with the deposition of the first PEIE layer, the bottom photoactive layer, the recombination bilayer, and the top photoactive layer are all spin-coated sequentially from solution. Hence, this structure paves the road to all-additive solution-based coating and/or printing of all-polymeric tandem solar cells.


Fig. 2a shows a comparison of the measured and simulated normalized absorptance of the two photoactive layers deposited on glass [the model and procedure used to conduct simulations of the optical properties are discussed in the ESI]. The combination of PBDTTT-C:PC60BM and P3HT:ICBA in a tandem cell configuration provides spectral coverage up to around 800 nm. The effective refractive index and thickness of both films [see Fig. S1 in the ESI] were obtained by spectroscopic ellipsometry and used to implement optical simulations of the absorptance using the transfer matrix method.

Fig. 2b displays the measured complex refractive index values (N = n0 + ik) of PH1000 and PEIE. PH1000 displays complex refractive index dispersion characteristics that are metallic in nature. That is, within the visible spectral region, the attenuation coefficient (k) follows a spectral dispersion that is typical of a “free”-electron contribution, monotonically increasing with wavelength. Correspondingly, the refractive index (n0) values within this region are below 1. In contrast, PEIE shows the typical spectral dispersion for a lossless material (Cauchy dispersion characteristics) within the visible spectra. Kelvin probe measurements conducted on PEIE (10 nm)-coated PH1000 (40 nm) films show that the work function of PH1000 decreases from 4.9 eV to 3.6 eV after being coated by PEIE. The thickness of PEIE represents an average value, measured by spectroscopic ellipsometry, since in the past, we have found that PEIE does not produce coatings with a uniform thickness. The thermally annealed PEDOT:PSS layer is robust enough to avoid being dissolved by the aqueous PEIE solution. This chemical robustness is critical for the fabrication of the top cell.
Simulations of the JSC of the tandem solar cells were carried out to aid the selection of the active layer thicknesses. Fig. 2c displays a simulation of the dependence of JSC on the thicknesses of the active layers. Details for these simulations are given in the ESI. From these simulations, the JSC reaches an optimum value, around 8.0 mA cm−2, when the thicknesses of the P3HT:ICBA and PBDTTT-C:PC60BM layers are around 220 nm and 80 nm, respectively. In a tandem solar cell with these active layer thicknesses, a breakdown of the individual layer contributions to the total absorptance of the tandem cell (see Fig. S2b in ESI) shows that the PH1000 layer contributes less than 4.5% to the total absorptance of the tandem cell for wavelengths smaller than 800 nm. Hence, its contribution to the total absorptance in the tandem cell is negligible.

Fig. 3a displays a comparison of the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the tandem solar cells and corresponding reference single active layer solar cells. Their structures are A: glass/ITO/PEIE (10 nm)/P3HT:ICBA (200 nm)/PH1000 (40 nm)/Ag (150 nm), B: glass/ITO/PEIE (10 nm)/PBDTTT-C:PC60BM (80 nm)/MoO3 (10 nm)/Ag (150 nm) and C: glass/ITO/PEIE (10 nm)/P3HT:ICBA (200 nm)/PH1000 (40 nm)/PEIE (10 nm)/PBDTTT-C:PC60BM (80 nm)/MoO3 (10 nm)/Ag (150 nm). Device performance is summarized in Table 1. The single-junction devices of type A yield a VOC = 0.82 ± 0.01 V, a JSC = 8.8 ± 0.4 mA cm−2 and a FF = 0.63 ± 0.01, resulting in a PCE = 4.5 ± 0.2% averaged over 9 devices. Devices of type B yield a VOC = 0.67 ± 0.02 V, a JSC = 15.2 ± 0.8 mA cm−2 and a FF = 0.57 ± 0.03, resulting in a PCE = 5.9 ± 0.3% averaged over 20 devices.
Device

V
OC [V]

J
SC [mA cm−2]
FF
PCE [%]

R
S [Ω cm2]

r
S


R
P [Ω cm2]

r
P


n

A
0.82 ± 0.01
8.8 ± 0.4
0.63 ± 0.01
4.5 ± 0.2
2.9
0.037
2500
30.64
3.7
B
0.67 ± 0.02
15.2 ± 0.8
0.57 ± 0.03
5.9 ± 0.3
1.8
0.041
500
11.34
3.6
C
1.48 ± 0.02
7.4 ± 0.4
0.68 ± 0.04
7.5 ± 0.7
3.3
0.017
3790
18.95
4.5
(1.50)
(7.7)
(0.72)
(8.2)
The tandem solar cell devices of type C exhibit a VOC = 1.48 ± 0.02 V, a JSC = 7.4 ± 0.4 mA cm−2, a FF = 0.68 ± 0.04, and a PCE = 7.5 ± 0.7%, averaged over 25 devices fabricated in three different rounds. Fig. 3b shows the statistical analysis of the performance parameters of tandem solar cells (J–V characteristics of all devices under illumination are shown in Fig. S3 in ESI). The champion tandem cell achieved a VOC of 1.50 V, a JSC of 7.7 mA cm−2, and a high FF of 0.72, yielding a PCE of 8.2%. Measured values of JSC are in good agreement with values estimated through optical simulations, as shown in Fig. 2c. The statistical data demonstrates that the VOC of tandem solar cells is the sum of the VOC of the two subcells. This suggests that the energy level alignment between the work function of PH1000 and the ionization energy of P3HT and of PH1000/PEIE and the electron affinity of PCBM allows, under illumination, for the alignment of the quasi-Fermi levels of bottom and top cells without loss in the photovoltage generated by the cell. Tandem solar cells exhibit higher FF values (0.68 ± 0.04) than either of the individual cells: FF = 0.63 ± 0.01 for the P3HT:ICBA cells and FF = 0.57 ± 0.03 for the PBDTTT-C:PC60BM cells. This performance can be analyzed using an equivalent circuit model with the following equation
(1)
where
RS is the series resistance, RP is the shunt resistance, JS is the reverse saturation current density, A is the solar cell area, q is the elementary charge, k is Boltzmann's constant, T is the temperature, n is the ideality factor of the diode, and Jph is the photogenerated current density. Fig. 3a also shows the fits to the J–V characteristics of devices A, B, and C using this model. Table 1 summarizes the values of RS, RP, and n used to fit the data. First, it is worth noting that in the absence of series resistance and for an infinite shunt resistance, an upper-limit for the fill factor, FF0 is defined as

(2)
where
vOC = qVOC/nkT. FF0 yields values of 0.67, 0.62, and 0.74 for devices A, B, and C, respectively (Table S1). In device C (tandem cell), the ideality factor n has a higher value which could reduce FF0, however, this effect is not as strong as the increase arising from the higher value of VOC. In devices, the fill factor is reduced by the values of RS and RP normalized to the characteristic resistance defined as RCH = VOC/(JSCA). Details of these calculations and analysis are shown in the ESI. After incorporating the normalized series resistance, rS = RS/RCH, the fill factor (FFS) yields values of 0.64, 0.60, and 0.72 for devices A, B, and C, respectively (Table S1). Furthermore, with the additional incorporation of the normalized shunt resistance, rP = RP/RCH, the fill factor (FFSP) yields values of 0.63, 0.56, and 0.69 for devices A, B, and C respectively (Table S1), consistent with the measured values, validating the effectiveness of the model in this case and the parameters derived from it.

It is also worth mentioning that no S-shaped kinks were observed in the J–V characteristics of pristine devices under illumination, which further confirms the high performance of the PH1000/PEIE recombination layer. This is different from previous reports of tandem solar cells with MoO3/Al/ZnO, or Al/TiO2/PEDOT:PSS, or ZnO/PEDOT:PSS recombination layers, where S-shaped kinks were initially observed in the J–V characteristics of pristine devices, although they could be removed after UV illumination. We have recently found that single-junction solar cell devices wherein the work function of the electron-collecting electrode is well-matched with, or smaller than, the electron affinity of the acceptor in the active layer, leads to devices that do not require any prior UV illumination to exhibit high FF. We and others have also found that the effects induced by the UV illumination in devices containing metal-oxide layers, are related to a reduction of the work function of such metal-oxides. When these metal-oxides are used as electron-collecting electrodes, the work function reduction leads to a better matching with the electron affinity of the acceptor and consequently improves the device performance. With the use of PEIE or branched polyethylenimine (PEI), the proposed recombination layers exhibit a work function of 3.6 eV, which is low enough to produce efficient electron-collecting interfaces. The good electron selectivity of the PEIE-coated electrodes (ITO and PH1000) in our tandem solar cells is also exemplified by the high rectification displayed in the J–V characteristics acquired in the dark on pristine devices, without the need of UV illumination.
It should be noted that while PH1000/PEIE is shown to be an efficient recombination layer for tandem cells, we have also tested PH1000/PEI as the recombination layer in tandem solar cells. The cells with PH1000/PEI yield J–V characteristics that are similar to those measured with PH1000/PEIE (see Fig. S4). This is consistent with the fact that the reductions in the work function of PH1000 with PEIE and PEI are similar.
Finally, it is worth stating that although the equivalent circuit model provides a plausible path to explain the increased fill-factor in these tandem solar cells, it does not provide a complete physical picture of the mechanisms that give rise to the efficient recombination of carriers in the proposed recombination layer. Further studies will be necessary to gain more insight in the detailed physical processes behind some of our observations.
In summary, we demonstrated inverted polymer tandem solar cells using a polymer recombination layer. PEIE-modified PEDOT:PSS PH1000 layers have been shown to display a large work function contrast between its two interfaces with the bottom and top active layers, to lead to low absorption losses and to be robust enough for the fabrication of tandem solar cell devices using all-additive solution processing. Despite its simple architecture, the recombination layer was found to be robust enough to withstand the solution-based processing conditions of the top subcell. The high efficiencies, up to 8.2%, and large fill factors, up to 0.72, measured in these tandem cells show that a single layer of a conducting polymer such as PEDOT:PSS PH1000 modified with air-stable branched amine containing polymers such as PEIE or PEI, is an excellent candidate as a recombination layer for highly efficient tandem solar cells. With this interlayer, higher efficiency could be achieved if donor polymers with a broader and more complementary spectral absorption were employed.

ITO glass substrates (Colorado Concept Coatings LLC) with a sheet resistivity of ∼15 Ω sq.−1 were patterned using acid etching and cleaned in sequential ultrasonic baths of detergent in deionized water, deionized water, acetone, and isopropanol. Nitrogen was used to dry the substrates after each of the last three baths.

Polyethylenimine, ethoxylated (PEIE, Sigma-Aldrich) (Mw = 75000 g mol−1) was diluted into 2-methoxyethanol to a weight concentration of 0.4 wt%. 5 wt% dimethyl sulfoxide was added into PEDOT:PSS PH1000 (Heraeus) to enhance its conductivity. Poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT, 4002-E, Rieke Metals):indene-C60 bis-adduct (ICBA, Lumtec) (1:1, weight ratio) was dissolved in 1,2-dichlorobenzene with a total concentration of 40 mg ml−1 for the first active layer. Poly[(4,8-bis-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene)-2,6-diyl-alt-(4-(2-ethylhexanoyl)-thieno[3,4-b]thiophene)-2,6-diyl] (PBDTTT-C, Solarmer Materials):phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC60BM, Nano-C) (1:1.5, weight ratio) was dissolved in a chlorobenzene:1,8-diiodooctane (97:3, v/v) solvent with a total concentration of 25 mg ml−1 for the second active layer.

The PEIE solution was spin coated onto ITO substrates, at a speed of 5000 rpm for 1 min and with an acceleration of 1000 rpm s−1, and annealed at 120 °C for 10 min on a hot plate in ambient air. The thickness of PEIE was estimated to be 10 nm. Then, the substrates were transferred into a N2-filled glove box. The first active layer of P3HT:ICBA was prepared by spin coating at a speed of 800 rpm for 30 s. The active layer was solvent-annealed for 1 hour and thermally annealed at 150 °C for 10 min on a hot plate in the glove box. Its thickness was around 200 nm. After samples cooled down, they were transferred in ambient air and treated with an O2 plasma for about 1 s, to make the surface hydrophilic. PH1000 was spin coated on top of the active layer at a speed of 4000 rpm for 1 min. During spin coating, a piece of polydimethylsiloxane was put onto the P3HT:ICBA layer to cover the glass area without ITO in order to prevent possible direct contact between the top electrode and PH1000 during measurements, and to provide a more accurate characterization of the device area. After spin-coating the PH1000 layer, samples were annealed at 100 °C for 10 min on a hot plate in a N2-filled glove box. The thickness of the PEDOT:PSS layer was estimated to be around 40 nm. After this, PH1000 was coated with PEIE following the same conditions as previously described. The second active layer of PBDTTT-C:PC60BM was deposited by spin-coating at 1000 rpm for 20 s. The thickness of PBDTTT-C:PC60BM was estimated to be around 80 nm. Samples were then loaded into a vacuum thermal evaporation system (SPECTROS, Kurt J. Lesker), and 10 nm of MoO3 and 150 nm of Ag were deposited through a shadow mask. The overlap area between the patterned ITO and patterned Ag is 10–13 mm2, varying from substrate to substrate. All thicknesses were measured by spectroscopic ellipsometry (J.A. Woollam M-2000UI) on independent films deposited on glass or Si substrates. Variations in thickness of around 10% to 20% can be expected from batch to batch variability and thickness inhomogeneities created by spin coating.

As a reference, single-junction cells with the following structures were also fabricated: device A: ITO/PEIE/P3HT:ICBA/PH1000/Ag; device B: ITO/PEIE/PBDTTT-C:PC60BM/MoO3/Ag. The preparation for each layer was carried out as previously described for the tandem cells.
For tandem solar cells, the layers comprising P3HT:ICBA/PH1000/PEIE/PBDTTT-C:PC60BM were electrically isolated using a sharp tweezer, along the perimeter defined by the area of the top electrode to reduce the fringing effects and prevent over estimation of the current density generated by the tandem cell. To unequivocally define its photoactive area, a shadow mask with a single aperture with an area of 9.2 mm2 was placed onto the glass substrate of the tandem solar cells during measurements.
Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics were measured inside a N2-filled glove box by using a source meter (2400, Keithley Instruments) controlled by a LabVIEW program. To test the solar cell properties under illumination, a 300 W xenon lamp (6258, Newport) with an air mass (AM) 1.5 filter and an irradiance of 100 mW cm−2 was used as the light source. Before the measurement of the polymer solar cells, a Si photodiode (Hamamatsu S1133) calibrated by NREL was used to calibrate the intensity of the solar simulator.

The refractive index values of all materials were obtained by modeling spectroscopic ellipsometric data, taken on individual films deposited on glass or Si substrates, as perfectly flat continuous layers and by neglecting optical anisotropy. The elliposmetric data for the modeling of the refractive index values was obtained using CompleteEASE® (J.A. Woollam). Simulations of the optical properties of the cells were carried out using the transfer matrix method. Further details of the simulations are presented in the ESI.


This material was funded in part through the Center for Interface Science: Solar Electric Materials, an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences under Award number DE-SC0001084 (Y.Z., J.S.), by the STC Program of the National Science Foundation under Agreement no. DMR-0120967 (C.F.H.), by the Office of Naval Research (Grant no. N00014-04-1-0313) (T.K, B.K.).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2ee23294d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012