 DOI: 10.1039/D3EE01320K
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2023, Advance Article 

Xin Song*,
Hao Xu,
Xinyu Jiang,
Shengzheng Gao,
Xinjie Zhou,
Shanlei Xu,
Junjun Li,
Jian Yu,
Wenzhu Liu,
Weiguo Zhu* and 
Peter Müller-Buschbaum

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Jiangsu Engineering Laboratory of Light-Electricity-Heat Energy-Converting Materials and Applications, Changzhou University, Changzhou 213164, P. R. China. E-mail: xin.song@cczu.edu.cn; zhuwg18@126.com

Chair for Functional Materials, Department of Physics, TUM School of Natural Sciences, Technical University of Munich, James-Franck-Str. 1, 85748 Garching, Germany

School of New Energy and Materials, Southwest Petroleum University, Chengdu 610500, P. R. China

Research Center for New Energy Technology, Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201800, P. R. China

Heinz Maier-Leibnitz-Zentrum, Technical University of Munich, 85748 Garching, Germany

Key Laboratory of Advanced Energy Materials Chemistry (Ministry of Education), Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, P. R. China

Received
26th April 2023
, Accepted 16th June 2023
First published on 20th June 2023
The severe carrier recombination and enormous trap density induced by the anisotropic aggregation state and ungovernable scale of phase separation not only constrain the photovoltaic performance, but also the operational reliability and thickness-tolerance, of organic solar cells (OSCs). Herein, by the delicate coordination of film-formation kinetics, we propose an intermediate state engineering (ISE) strategy to yield efficient, thickness-insensitive and robust OSCs. Using Y6 as a demonstration, inspired by its superior intermolecular interaction with the dithienothiophen[3.2-b]pyrrolobenzothiadiazole (BTP) core in the Y6 molecule, a 1,3,5-tribromobenzene (TBr) solid additive would trigger a distinct TBr:Y6 intermediate phase, which would facilitate self-aggregation behavior and prolong the aggregation kinetics during the drying process. Remarkably, this subtle modulation of BHJ morphology catalyzes inhibited energetic disorder, suppressed trap-assisted recombination and elevated carrier transport and collection capabilities, resulting in a considerable boost in power conversion efficiency (PCE) from 15.9% to 19.1% with an impressive improvement of 20.1% based on the PM6:L8-BO system. Benefitting from this superior manipulation facility, a champion PCE of 17.8% is harvested in a thickness of 300 nm after ISE treatment, representing one of the highest efficiencies in thick-film OSCs. Additionally, doctor-blade coated thick-film devices are fabricated to assess the commercialization potential of the ISE methodology, where a best PCE of 17.1% is yielded on an ISE device with a substantial improvement of 31.5% compared to that of a control device (13.0%). More critically, the ISE-treated device displayed a significantly enhanced T80 (80% degradation of initial value) lifetime from 106 h to 492 h under a continuous 1-sun illumination test.

To achieve the goal of commercialization, organic solar cells (OSCs) should be fabricated in an industrial roll-to-roll manner. In reality, the great fluctuation in thickness during the high-speed coating or printing period means the thickness of the active layer should be greater than 300 nm. However, due to the unfavorable blend morphology and moderate carrier transport capability, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of a thick-film device lags far behind that of a thin-film device. Herein, an intermediate state engineering (ISE) approach is explored to cope with this hurdle and successfully construct efficient, thickness-insensitive, and robust OSCs. Indeed, 1,3,5-tribromobenzene (TBr) would present a tight non-covalent intermolecular interaction with dithienothiophen[3.2-b]pyrrolobenzothiadiazole (BTP) in BTP derivatives, which would form a metastable intermediate state in the film-formation process. This modulated drying dynamic could manipulate the crystallinity and molecular packing orientation, which is beneficial for the configuration of a favorable hierarchical morphology in the ISE-treated active layer. As a result, champion PCEs of 19.1% (thin-film) and 17.8% (thick-film) were harvested based on the PM6:L8-BO system. To move forward, the doctor-blade coating technique was employed to construct thick-film devices with a corresponding PCE of 17.1%, whereas a control device without ISE treatment demonstrates a decent PCE of only 13.0%.


Organic solar cells (OSCs) have emerged as a promising technology for next-generation photovoltaic applications due to their desirable features, such as flexibility, light weight, and solution-processability. However, high-efficiency OSCs are currently developed using laboratory-level thin film preparation methods (such as spin coating), which are incompatible with industrial production due to their high material loss and discordance with large-area substrates. To overcome these challenges, recent research endeavors have focused on the evolution of industrial fabrication methods that are suitable for commercial production, including inkjet printing and doctor-blade coating methods.

Despite the promising potential of the industrial preparation of OSCs using real high-speed continuous coating techniques, the active layer thickness is constrained within the range between 80 nm to 120 nm due to the low mobility of organic semiconductor materials (approximately 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) and the short exciton diffusion length (about 10–40 nm). Unfortunately, attributed to the huge variation in thickness under continuous high-speed fabrication conditions, it would be essential for a film constructed by the large-area solution process to maintain a thickness greater than 300 nm (thick-film device) to eliminate these defects. However, compared to thin-film devices that are easily regulated by a simple optimization approach, thick films manufactured by large-scale coating procedures usually result in a fast and uncontrollable crystal growth process, impelling the formation of immense grains together with an inferior internal morphology. More critically, these pinholes would hinder efficient charge collection and normally trigger severe device degradation. Therefore, despite their broad application prospects, thick-film devices constructed using a coating or printing process are rarely explored, and their performance lags substantially behind that of thin-film devices.
Based on the points discussed above, an ideal thick-film modification strategy should meet at least three requirements: (i) superb crystallinity to realize efficient charge transport; (ii) a well-regulated film growth process to harvest favorable phase separation; (iii) an excellent hierarchical morphology to ensure charge collection. Currently, a thick-film device is typically based on the rational design of conjugated fused-ring molecules with strong electron push–pull intramolecular interactions. Meanwhile, the incorporation of a third component with cohesive crystallinity is another reliable approach to harvest the appropriate nanomorphology. Although an upgraded performance was successfully achieved, high cost and complex synthesis of conjugated molecular blocks are prerequisites for the construction of highly crystalline molecules, which invisibly maximizes the preparation expense of an OSC device. Moreover, attributed to the tough self-assembly ability and further complexity of solution-casting procedures, the stress of thick-film factors for the corresponding active layer is still not easily governable, which critically constrains the improvement in photovoltaic performance and long-term operability of thick-film OSCs. Consequently, a comprehensive and economical strategy is urgently and vitally required to regulate the aggregation kinetics as well as to confine the carrier dynamics to achieve efficient and robust thick-film OSCs by a large-scale coating technique.
In this work, we report an intermediate state engineering (ISE) strategy to construct thickness-insensitive OSC devices with high-performance and long-term operability by a doctor-blade coating method. Using Y6 as a representative of BTP-series derivates, by adding a low-cost and volatile 1,3,5-tribromobenzene (TBr) solid as a process-aid additive, the tight intermolecular interaction between TBr and Y6 would form a TBr:Y6 intermediate state to manipulate the film-formation kinetics, which would result in elevated crystallinity and distinct scale of hierarchical phase separation. Thanks to this exceptional modulation of BHJ nanomorphology, an ISE-treated device presents ameliorated carrier transport and collection dynamics, accompanied by inhibited trap density and trap-assisted recombination. Ultimately, a power conversion efficiency (PCE) as high as 19.1% together with a remarkable fill factor (FF) of 80.7% are achieved based on the state-of-the-art PM6:L8-BO system, representing a 20.1% improvement over a control device. More intriguingly, the ISE-based device demonstrates a superior tolerance to thickness fluctuation, where a champion PCE of 17.8% is obtained with an active layer of 300 nm, which represents one of the highest values for a thick-film device. Additionally, we utilize the doctor-blade coating technique to fabricate the thick-film devices to test the compatibility of the ISE strategy with industrial fabrication. Strikingly, the control device only achieved a moderate PCE of 13.0%, whereas an appropriate PCE 17.1% with an increment of 31.5% is yielded by the ISE device. More remarkably, the ISE-based thick-film device demonstrates enhanced operational reliability under simulated AM 1.5G illumination for 1000 hours (estimated T80 lifetimes of ISE device: 492 hours, control: 142 hours). Conclusively, the revealed mechanism of ISE strategy in this work is expected to provide a rational guide towards boosting the performance of OSCs and other organic optoelectronic devices.

The molecular structures of TBr and Y6 are displayed in Fig. 1a and b. Our previous report discovered that 1,3-dibromo-5-chlorobenzene (DBCl, molecular structure in Fig. S1, ESI) can be applied as a solid additive to adsorb on the BTP core in BTP derivatives by forming an appreciable intermolecular interaction (such as a hydrogen-bond, a halogen-bond, or π–π coupling interaction). This interaction would facilitate the formation of compact molecular packing and further promote the carrier transport capability of BTP molecules. However, the interaction capability of DBCl is not sufficient to harvest a high-efficiency thick-film device since the PCE is constrained to 17.0% at a thickness of ∼300 nm. For the purpose of the industrial fabrication of OSCs, a pronounced intermolecular interaction and further tighter molecular packing are essential to accomplish the thickness-tolerance property of the active layer. Therefore, we rationally chose TBr solid with the exchange of Cl by Br since the presence of a higher number of empty 3d orbitals in Br than in Cl atoms can participate with more frontier orbital coupling with the BTP core unit. It is worth to mention that TBr is a byproduct of the petrochemical industry, and, which can be obtained easily with a extremely low price (<$1/g). To confirm the effect of this halogen substitution (TBr and DBCl) on intermolecular interaction, B3LYP-D3BJ/6-31G** theoretical calculation (Gaussian 09.D01 software package) was applied to calculate the molecular distance. As featured in Fig. S2 (ESI), we can clearly witness the fundamental interaction between TBr and the BTP core unit from the reduced density gradient (RDG) analysis, where the blue and green region in the Y6:TBr dimer is the critical signal of the considerable non-covalent intermolecular interaction. In addition, as displayed in Fig. S3 (ESI) of optimal molecular conformation, the Br–S distance in the TBr:Y6 dimer is 3.67 Å, whereas the Cl–S distance increases to 3.73 Å in the DBCl:Y6 dimer. Moreover, extracted from the optimized structure, the adsorption energy of the TBr:Y6 dimer (−27.9 kcal mol−1) is higher than that of the DBCl:Y6 dimer (−24.6 kcal mol−1). These two results (molecular distance and adsorption energy) definitively demonstrate that TBr shows a harsher interaction with the BTP core block, which can contribute to closer molecular packing (as discussed in the GIWAXS section).

Two-dimensional (2D) 1H–1H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurement was further employed to validate this molecular interaction between TBr and Y6, where Nuclear Overhauser Effect Spectroscopy (NOESY) spectra can provide satisfying information about protons in the range of less than 5 Å in space. As highlighted in Fig. 1d, there are multiple crossover signals at the C11H23 proton signal at the 7.59 ppm location in the Y6:TBr blend, whereas no signal appears at the same location in the neat Y6 case (Fig. 1c). Obviously, these distinct signals of C11H23 can be attributed to the strong intermolecular interaction between TBr and the BTP core unit, which is consistent with the conclusion reported by Li et al. Meanwhile, as shown in Fig. 1e of the Fourier-transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy, the infrared peak at 2930.1 cm−1 arising from the –CH2– stretching vibration in the BTP block is shifted to 2929.3 cm−1 after incorporation of TBr, again indicating the significant intermolecular interaction between TBr and Y6.
Apart from the interaction, incorporation of TBr indeed facilitates molecular aggregation by tuning the molecular dipole moment and direction. As shown in Fig. S4 (ESI), in comparison with the neat Y6 molecule (1.01 Debye) and Y6:DBCl (1.91 Debye) reported in our previous results, the dipole moment for the TBr:Y6 dimer is boosted to 2.09 Debye with the dipole direction tuned from x = 0, y = 1, z = 0 (parallel to plane direction) to x = 0, y = 0, z = −1 (perpendicular to plane direction). As reported by Hou et al., the varied dipole direction and intensified dipole moment would facilitate molecular aggregation and increase crystallinity. To endorse this assumption, the aggregation property of the Y6 molecule is deduced through the UV-vis absorption spectrum. As depicted in Fig. 1f, the distinctive absorption peak for the Y6 molecule shifts from 818 nm to 840 nm after the addition of TBr. This bathochromic shift clearly elucidates the boosted aggregation of the Y6:TBr matrix, which agrees well with the DFT theoretical simulations mentioned above. We further employed grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) characterization to investigate the crystallinity of Y6 and Y6:TBr films. The diffraction patterns and corresponding line-cut profiles are plotted in Fig. S5 and S6 (ESI). Despite the similar (010) out-of-plane (OOP) peak location, the crystalline coherence length (CCL) value, as calculated by the Scherrer equation, demonstrated a slightly amplified trend from 1.86 nm (Y6) to 2.00 nm (Y6:TBr). Besides, the elevated peak intensity in the OOP and IP directions, as summarized in Tables S1 and S2 (ESI), verifies the higher crystallinity of the Y6 molecule after the addition of TBr. Moreover, atomic force microscopy (AFM) was implemented to confirm the aggregation state after the addition of TBr. As illustrated in Fig. S7 (ESI), the root-mean square (RMS) value is markedly boosted from 1.34 nm to 4.75 nm with larger domains after the incorporation of TBr, suggesting that the intermolecular interaction would accelerate the more ordered aggregation behavior. Conclusively, all of these optical and morphological features reveal the great potential to fabricate a thick-film device to rival its thin-film counterpart by using a TBr solid additive. The ameliorated crystallinity is also compatible with the upgraded exciton lifetime in time-resolved photoluminescence (TR-PL) measurement, where the exciton lifetime (τ) of Y6 probed at 800 nm is prolonged from 0.49 to 0.66 ns (Fig. S8, ESI) after the incorporation of TBr.
Volatility is another vital parameter for a solid additive to construct efficient and stable organic solar cells, which can be evaluated via thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). As displayed in Fig. S9 (ESI), solid TBr displays a Td (5% weight loss) value of 82 °C and total sublimation at 125 °C, suggesting excellent volatility. X-ray photoelectronic spectroscopy (XPS) was further applied to accurately detect the remaining content after thermal annealing. In comparison with the Y6 and TBr molecules, we found that bromine is the defining element in the Y6 and TBr structure. Indeed, as illustrated in Fig. S10 (ESI), the signal peak of bromine 3d is not detected in either neat Y6 or in the Y6:TBr blend after 5 minutes of treatment at 85 °C, which indicates the excellent volatility at this temperature. Therefore, all samples used for further characterization were annealed at 85 °C for 5 minutes.

This intermolecular interaction certainly has a critical impact on the film formation process. Therefore, in order to investigate the effect of the ISE strategy on the film-forming kinetics and definite nanomorphology, in situ techniques such as UV-vis absorption, photoluminescence (PL), and light scattering (LS) spectroscopy were synergistically explored to monitor and analyze the aggregation and domain size during the film formation period. The molecular structure of the PM6 donor is shown in Fig. S11 (ESI). For ease of discussion, the PM6:Y6 blend system without TBr is referred to as the “control” case, and the PM6:Y6:TBr system is referred to as the “ISE” case in the following sections.

Firstly, the in situ absorption contour plots of the control and TBr-added solutions during the spin-coating process are presented in Fig. 2a and b, respectively. The detailed UV-vis absorption spectra are provided in Fig. S12 (ESI). It is noteworthy that the rapid evaporation of the chloroform solvent can lead to rotational speed-induced vibrations that result in periodic “background noise” over the measurement period. Based on the time-dependent absorption spectrum, the film-forming process can be divided into three stages: the liquid state, the solvent drying stage, and the thin-film period. Normally, D:A phase separation is quickly constructed due to the fast evaporation rate of CF solvent after the liquid–solid transition. Strikingly, the intermediate state explored in this work provides a novel approach to modulating the film-formation kinetics and finely constrains the scale of phase separation. Indeed, for the PM6:Y6 control blend, the transition time occurred at 105 ms, whereas the solidification process evolved earlier after the addition of TBr (58 ms) due to the robust intermolecular interaction between TBr and Y6 and further forms pre-aggregations in the blend solution. Furthermore, as highlighted in Fig. 2b, this tight interaction brings about the formation of a metastable Y6:TBr intermediate phase during the film-formation period, which is verified by an evident red-shift trend of the Y6 absorption peak position after the incorporation of TBr. In addition, as featured in Fig. 2d, for the control sample, a quick aggregation rate is calculated at 0.0895 s−1, which resulted from the quick evaporation of the solvent. After adding the sufficient TBr solid into the active layer to create the unique intermediate state, the aggregation rate of the blend film shows a declining trend from 0.0895 s−1 to 0.0649 s−1. As reported in the literature, the retarded aggregation allows re-organization of the active layer, which can induce regulation of crystallinity orientation and elimination of defects. Therefore, the explored ISE strategy would promote the organized growth of Y6 aggregates with greater crystallinity, consistent with the microstructural insights obtained from ex situ morphological characterization (discussed below).
Moreover, the subsequent domain growth and phase separation after ISE treatment can be observed by in situ PL and LS measurements. As the film-forming process is dominated by the acceptor's aggregation, a 750 nm laser is used to exclusively excite the acceptor to detect the formation of nanoscale morphology. As depicted in Fig. 2e and f, the integral PL intensity of the ISE-based blend displays an accelerated decline in speed in comparison with that of the control blend, indicating faster liquid–solid phase separation upon the formation of the intermediate state. To further investigate the effect of the ISE strategy on domain size in the case of the drying process, the time-dependent LS spectra are characterized, where an elevated LS intensity corresponds to an enlarged domain size during the film-forming stage, ultimately leading to substantial phase separation in the ISE-treated film, which is thought to be beneficial for carrier generation and collection.

The manipulation of film-forming kinetics with the support of intermediate state engineering would critically reinforce the revolution in film nanomorphology. Therefore, the surficial nanomorphology of the control and ISE-treated blend were first investigated by atomic force microscopy (AFM) characterization. As displayed in Fig. S13 (ESI), the RMS values of the control and ISE film are 0.46 and 0.79 nm, respectively. Meanwhile, the fibrillar topography becomes more distinct after the ISE treatment. These results indicate that the modulated film-drying kinetics after ISE treatment would lead to raised phase separation with organized packing. Confocal Raman mapping technology was further employed to directly investigate the phase separation scale. As reported in our previous study, PM6 demonstrates a characteristic Raman peak at 2955 cm−1, and Y6 shows a characteristic position at 2212 cm−1. By monitoring these two characteristic signals, we can accurately identify the donor and acceptor domains in the blend film. As demonstrated in Fig. S14a (ESI), the control blend demonstrates a tiny phase separation between PM6 and Y6 due to the high miscibility between them. However, as clearly estimated in Fig. S14b (ESI), the domain size of Y6 show an increased trend together with the formation of clear interpenetrating charge transport pathways, which is attributed to the control over the nucleation and crystalline kinetics of Y6 with the assistance of the ISE strategy.

Apart from the surficial information, the inner molecular packing is another essential aspect affecting the carrier dynamics and improving the photovoltaic performance, which can be evaluated via GIWAXS measurements. The 2D patterns, relative line-cuts, and calculated peak parameters along the IP and out-of-plane (OOP) directions in the GIWAXS patterns are displayed in Fig. S15 and Tables S3, S4 (ESI). Indeed, as displayed in Fig. 3a and b, both the control and ISE-treated blend films display a face-on dominant crystalline orientation along the substrate. Likewise, as shown in Fig. 3c, there are pronounced (010) and (100) diffraction peak intensities in the OOP and IP directions, respectively. In addition, as listed in Tables S3 and S4 (ESI), the lamellar CCL values in the OOP and IP directions of the ISE blend film are also elevated compared to that of the control film. These consequences (intensity and CCL value) evidently present a harsher molecular crystallinity after ISE treatment. Furthermore, to gain deeper insights into the molecular orientation, a polar figure of the (100) lamellar crystalline peak is amplified by extracting the integrated intensity as a function of azimuth angles χ along the arcs, where 0°–45° and 45°–90° are defined as edge-on and face-on orientations, respectively. It is worth emphasizing that the background signal is identical in the control and TBr blends. As shown in Fig. 3d, there is a significant increase in the integral area ratio at 45°–90° in the ISE blend film, indicating a preferred face-on orientation after ISE treatment, which would contribute to charge transport and collection.
In addition to the lateral morphological features, time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS) is applied to investigate the vertical phase separation after ISE treatment. Based on a real device structure with an ITO/PEDOT:PSS/Active layer, TOF-SIMS can monitor donor and acceptor components throughout the whole active layer by tracking the element distribution as a function of sputtering time. In particular, the CN− signal is tracked to represent the Y6 acceptor phase and the F− signal is tracked to represent the Y6 and PM6 mixed phase. As illustrated in Fig. 3e and f, as the active layer is etched, the lower CN− intensity compared to the F− intensity observed over the time scale of 0 s to 200 s is indicative of a lower distribution of acceptors across the upper surface for the control film. In contrast, after the ISE treatment, the CN− curve is noticed to shift towards higher allocation over the same sputtering time, indicating a higher concentration of the acceptor phase at the upper surface of the active layer. On top of that, as highlighted in Fig. 3f, with the etching time exceeding 500 s, the CN− signal in the ISE blend film exhibits a more rapid declining trend, indicating a lower distribution of Y6 phase at the bottom anode region. From the TOF-SIMS result, we can conclude that the volatile TBr solid and corresponding TBr:Y6 intermediate state would be distributed on top of the active layer during the thermal force treatment. Therefore, a favorably hierarchical morphology can be subtly constructed after the ISE treatment, which is beneficial for efficient charge collection, which is especially essential for a thick-film device.
Overall, the in situ and ex situ characterizations provide a clear comprehension of the effect of ISE on the evolution on the BHJ morphology by optimization of the ISE treatment. To make a straightforward picture of the film-formation kinetics and corresponding nanomorphology, a schematic cartoon is depicted in Fig. 3g. As shown in the scheme, the tight intermolecular interaction between TBr and Y6 molecules allows for subtle shortening of the liquid–solid transition time by forming a metastable intermediate Y6:TBr phase. Distinct from the disorganized orientation by quick aggregation of the control film, this intermediate state would ameliorate the aggregation rate, which continues to induce the adjacent Y6 molecules to form dense, organized and pure aggregates. Ultimately, thermal annealing treatment activates the volatile TBr to vacate the space, facilitating self-assembly and interdiffusion of the D/A components, which impels the preferential vertical distribution with increasing crystallinity.

The microstructural revolution of BHJ blends after ISE treatment are expected to have an exceptional impact on the carrier dynamics. Firstly, a combination of the film-depth-dependent light absorption spectroscopy (FLAS) method and the modified transfer-matrix optical model is applied to numerically simulate the vertical distribution of charge generation intensity (exciton generation rate) within the photovoltaic devices. By etching the control and ISE film, depth-dependent UV-vis absorption spectra can be monitored, which are plotted in Fig. S16 (ESI). According to the depth-dependent absorption curves, we can delineate the exciton generation rate as a function of film depth. As depicted in Fig. S17 (ESI), the density of excitons in the ISE blend is found to be significantly higher than that of the control in the wavelength range of 600–900 nm, exhibiting a greater photon-to-electron conversion efficiency in the acceptor part, which can be attributed to the increased Jsc value.

After considering carrier generation, we shine further light on carrier transport dynamics using the space charge limited current (SCLC) method (more details in the experimental section). As shown in Fig. S18 (ESI), the control blend presents a hole mobility (μh) of 1.46 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and an electron mobility (μe) of 3.68 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, leading to an unbalanced charge transport ratio of μh/μe = 3.97, which would induce a considerable potential of carrier combination and further lower the FF. However, the raised crystallinity and optimized bulk microstructure after the ISE treatment induce an increment in the μh and μe values to 1.52 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 1.34 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, with a more balanced μh/μe ratio of 1.03, which is beneficial for carrier transport and suppression of carrier recombination.
An improvement in carrier transport is normally correlated with the degree of energetic disorder in the active layer, which can be quantitatively evaluated by the Urbach energy (Eu). As depicted in Fig. 4a, due to the manipulated blend morphology after the ISE treatment, a decrease in the Eu value from 26.6 meV to 24.2 meV is extracted from the sensitive EQE spectrum. This reduction in energetic disorder is consistent with the better crystallinity observed through GIWAXS characterization, which promotes the charge transport capability in the ISE-treated device.
Another important point worth discussing is the carrier recombination process, which can be monitored by photoinduced charge extraction by linearly increasing voltage (photo-CELIV) measurement. As shown in Fig. 4b, by applying eqn (1), the time dependence of charge carrier density can be plotted to investigate the recombination mechanism:
(1)
where
n0 is the initial density of photogenerated carriers at t = 0, which is a time-independent parameter, and β is known as the bimolecular recombination coefficient.

On the one hand, from the photo-CELIV curves (shown in Fig. S19, ESI), the initial density of photogenerated carriers in the ISE device is higher than that in the control device as a result of the improved carrier generation and transport process after TBr incorporation. On the other hand, by fitting n versus t using eqn (1), β values of 1.13 × 10−10 cm3 s−1 and 2.61 × 10−11 cm3 s−1 are extracted for the control and ISE devices, respectively. This allows us to distinguish the recombination type of electrons and holes using the Langevin model, as expressed in eqn (2):
(2)
where
μh and μe are the effective charge carrier mobility of holes and electrons, respectively, and ε0 and ε are the vacuum and relative permittivity, respectively.

Specifically, a β/βL ratio less than 1 indicates a reduction in Langevin recombination, indicating that bimolecular recombination is not immediate. As the mobility value has been extracted by the SCLC method, βL values are estimated of 1.85 × 10−10 cm3 s−1 and 4.62 × 10−10 cm3 s−1 for the control and ISE blend devices, respectively. To move forward, the corresponding β/βL ratios for the control and ISE blends are 0.41 and 0.12, respectively, indicating the decreased recombination loss in ISE-based devices, which coincides with the higher FF and ameliorated PCE value.
To further assess the impact of ISE strategy on charge recombination, the light intensity (I) dependent J–V characteristics are particularly evaluated. As depicted in Fig. S20 (ESI) of Jsc as a function of light intensity, the slope value (α) extracted from the linear fit for ISE devices (α = 0.99) is closer to 1, indicating a slight reduction in bimolecular recombination compared to the control device (α = 0.98). Additionally, the correlation between Voc and I can assess the presence of trap-assisted recombination, which is depicted in Fig. S21 (ESI). The decrease in slope from 1.31 kT/q to 1.24 kT/q suggests that the optimized morphology after ISE treatment can effectively suppress trap-assisted recombination. In addition to the light intensity test, we also conducted transient photovoltage (TPV) measurements to evaluate the charge recombination after ISE treatment. As presented in Fig. 4c, by using the exponential decay fitting method, the charge carrier lifetimes are extracted to be approximately 5.12 μs and 7.94 μs for the control and ISE devices, respectively. The upgraded charge carrier lifetime observed in the ISE device is indicative of suppressed trap-assisted recombination, and is consistent with the higher FF values observed in these devices.
Trap-assisted recombination is always related to trap state density, which can be clearly measured by current-based deep level transient spectroscopy (DLTS). As shown in Fig. 4d, the trap state density (Nt) is fitted to 6.56 × 1015 cm−3 for the control blend, whereas a lower Nt value (5.19 × 1015 cm−3) is obtained in the ISE device. This result markedly evaluated that the favorable blend morphology after ISE treatment can significantly inhibit trap density and trap-assisted recombination.
After identifying the carrier transport and recombination processes, the charge extraction efficiency is evaluated through transient photocurrent (TPC) measurements under short-circuit conditions. As depicted in Fig. S22 (ESI), the carrier extraction lifetime decreased from 0.38 μs to 0.30 μs after IPE treatment, implying that increased crystallinity and hierarchical morphology can initiate elevated carrier extraction kinetics.

The above results established that the ISE strategy can finely tune the blend aggregation nanostructure and optoelectronic properties. Therefore, to elucidate the effect of these factors on photovoltaic performance, as displayed in Fig. 5a, a conventional organic solar cell (OSC) device with an ITO/PEDOT:PSS/Active layer/PNDI-F3N-Br/Ag configuration was manufactured. Initially, Table S5 (ESI) summarizes the optimization details of amount of TBr added. After careful optimization, a thermal annealing process is identically conducted at 85 °C for 5 minutes and the optimal concentration of TBr is determined to be 15 mg mL−1. The J–V curves of the optimized devices under AM 1.5 G solar illumination (100 mW cm−2) are presented in Fig. 5b, and the photovoltaic characteristic parameters are summarized in Table 1. As shown, the device based on the as-cast PM6:Y6 active layer yields a moderate power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 15.6% with a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 25.1 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.85 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 73.0%, which is consistent with the result reported by Yuan et al. By employing the ISE strategy, the corresponding device exhibits a remarkably enhanced Jsc (26.5 mA cm−2) and FF (78.5%), giving rise to an elevated PCE of 17.7%. Furthermore, the external quantum efficiency (EQE) is applied to confirm the accuracy of the Jsc value. As illustrated in Fig. S23 (ESI), significantly higher EQE values exceeding 80% in the range from 650 nm to 830 nm are detected in the ISE device, indicating more efficient photon-to-carrier conversion following ISE treatment. Additionally, due to the improved aggregation of Y6 molecules, an obvious red-shift trend is observed in the EQE spectra, which is in good accord with the absorption spectrum (Fig. S24, ESI). Additionally, the Jsc values integrated from the EQE spectra are 24.8 and 26.1 mA cm−2 for the control and ISE devices, respectively, which are consistent with the Jsc values obtained from the J–V measurements with less than 5% discrepancy.

Active layer
Voc (V)
Jsc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
PM6:Y6 (control)
0.85 (0.85 ± 0.01)
25.1 (24.2 ± 0.8)
73.0 (70.3 ± 2.8)
15.6 (15.2 ± 0.4)
PM6:Y6 (ISE)
0.85 (0.85 ± 0.01)
26.5 (26.0 ± 0.5)
78.5 (77.1 ± 1.4)
17.7 (17.4 ± 0.3)
PM6:L8-BO (control)
0.90 (0.90 ± 0.01)
24.1 (23.5 ± 0.6)
73.2 (70.3 ± 3.0)
15.9 (15.5 ± 0.4)
PM6:L8-BO (ISE)
0.90 (0.90 ± 0.01)
26.3 (25.7 ± 0.5)
80.7 (78.5 ± 2.6)
19.1 (18.7 ± 0.3)
To further evaluate the generality of the ISE strategy, the start-of-the-art PM6:L8-BO combination was selected using identical device configurations, where the chemical structure of L8-BO is shown in Fig. S25 (ESI). The J–V curves of the control and ISE devices are depicted in Fig. 5c, and the corresponding photovoltaic characteristic parameters are summarized in Table 1. As expected, the devices based on the ISE-based BHJ systems demonstrate a raised Jsc and FF value compared to their control devices. Notably, the champion device of the PM6:L8-BO BHJ system harvested a superior FF of 80.7% and amplified Jsc of 26.3 mA cm−2, resulting in a promising PCE of 19.1%, which provides an excellent basis for the subsequent industrial fabrication of OSC devices. In addition, the Y6-BO molecule is also applied to confirm the generality of this ISE strategy in other BTP-derivatives. As shown in Fig. S26 and Table S6 (ESI), the PCE of the PM6:Y6-BO devices is found to exhibit simultaneously enhanced Jsc and FF after ISE treatment, also demonstrating the excellent generality of the ISE strategy.
Since large-scale R2R fabrication requires that the device performance should exhibit great tolerance to active layer thickness, ISE-treated devices with various thicknesses were fabricated to monitor their corresponding PCE parameter. The related photovoltaic parameters of the studied results are shown in Fig. 5d and Table S7 (ESI). Intermediate state engineering can enhance the crystallinity and modulate the hierarchical morphology, which would improve the thickness-tolerance of PM6:L8-BO system. In detail, the maximum PCE of ISE-based devices drops slightly from 19.1% to 17.8% (∼6% decline) with the thickness increasing from 100 nm to 300 nm, suggesting that this ISE strategy can efficiently bridge the gap between thin-film and thick-film devices. More strikingly, as summarized in Table S8 (ESI), it should be emphasized that the PCE of 17.8% is a record efficiency for thick-film OSCs.
Encouraged by the superior thickness-insensitivity after the ISE treatment, we further fabricated a thick-film device by the doctor-blade coating method to test the potential of the ISE strategy for large-scale fabrication. As shown in Fig. 5e and Table S9 (ESI), the ISE-based device produced a remarkable PCE of 17.1% with a promising Jsc of 26.2 mA cm−2 and FF of 72.5%. In contrast, the control device yielded a moderate PCE of 13.0% with an extremely low FF of 58.5%. The light response of the devices was also investigated with EQE spectra. As shown in Fig. 5f, the control device exhibited a maximum EQE response as high as 81.1%, which yielded a moderate Jsc of 24.0 mA cm−2. By using the ISE strategy, the corresponding device exhibited an improved EQE response of 83.6% with a broader photo-response in the wavelength range of 300 nm to 920 nm, which resulted in a higher Jsc value (25.5 mA cm−2). These observed higher Jsc and FF values indicate that for the doctor-blade coating technique, the optimized morphology after ISE treatment can contribute to improved exciton dissociation and charge transport and collection processes.
Finally, in addition to efficiency, this ISE strategy can also help to enhance operational stability, which is another essential factor for the practical application of OSCs. Therefore, the cast PM6:L8-BO thick-film devices were used to carry out a continuous light-soaking test. The degradation curves of Jsc, Voc and FF are plotted in Fig. S27 (ESI). As shown in Fig. 5g, the control device suffers from a severe drop of 50% of its initial PCE value after aging for 1000 hours under a 100 mW cm−2 white LED light source, where the T80 lifetime (80% degradation of the initial value) evaluated from the corresponding curves is only 106 hours. In contrast, the ISE-treated device shows notably enhanced stability under the same operational conditions, with the latter maintaining 70% of its initial PCE after 1000 h of continuous operation. More essentially, the T80 lifetime is built up to 492 hours, suggesting that the strong intermolecular interaction between TBr and Y6, as discussed in the previous sections, would promote the stabilization of the Y6 phase by this ISE strategy, which would facilitate morphological stability and further device operation stability. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. S28 (ESI), ISE-based devices show excellent shelf-lifetime stability and remain at more than 80% of the initial efficiency after 10 days of storage (240 hours), whereas the photovoltaic performance of the control device is degraded to its 60% of the initial value. And the thermal stabilities of the ISE devices were revealed under constant heating for nearly 240 hours at 65 °C in a glove box (Fig. S29, ESI). Indeed, the ISE device maintained 60% of its initial performance, whereas the control device exhibited a faster decay trend (less than 50%) after 240 hours of thermal stress treatment. These results demonstrate that the favorable blend morphology with the assistance of ISE treatment would be beneficial for the suppression of trap densities and further the improvement of device stabilities.

In summary, we realized efficient, stable, thickness-insensitive OSCs through an intermediate phase engineering strategy by adding a TBr solid additive to modulate the film-forming kinetics of the active layer. Through the critical intermolecular interaction between TBr and the BTP core unit, a metastable intermediate phase was constructed during the film-drying period, which would elongate the nucleation process and facilitate the incredibly hierarchical scale of phase separation. This favorable blend morphology triggers the exceptional charge carrier transport capability and eliminates charge carrier trap-assisted recombination, which induce the upgraded performance in diverse types of OSCs. Specifically, the champion PCE of 19.1% together with an impressive FF of 80.7% is harvested for a device using the ISE-treated PM6:L8-BO system. More strikingly, the high-quality film with increased crystallinity would trigger a high-efficiency thick-film OSC by a doctor-blade coating process, where a champion PCE of over 17% is achieved when the thickness of active layer is increased to 300 nm. Furthermore, the ISE-device exhibited an upgraded light stability with a boosted T80 lifetime from 106 h to 492 h. This contribution provides an outline for the delicate regulation of proper nanomorphology that not only raises the photovoltaic performance but also upgrades the thickness-tolerance character in organic solar cells.


X. S. conceived and developed the idea, and directed this project. X. S., H. X, S. G, X., X. X performed the experiment design, device fabrication, and characterization. X. J. and M. P. analyzed the GIWAXS morphology part. J. L. and J. Y. contributed to the AFM characterizations. W. L., W. Z. contributed to device characterization and data analysis. All authors discussed the results and contributed to the writing of the manuscript.


The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 62105129) and Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK20200591). P.M.-B. was supported by funding from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under Germany's Excellence Strategy – EXC 2089/1 – 390776260 (e conversion) and TUM. solar in the context of the Bavarian Collaborative Research Project Solar Technologies Go Hybrid (SolTech). X. J. acknowledges the China Scholarship Council (CSC).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3ee01320k
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023