 DOI: 10.1039/C9NR05719F
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 19586-19594


Hannah
Kwon
,

Ju Won
Lim
,

Jinyoung
Han
,

Li Na
Quan
,

Dawoon
Kim
,

Eun-Sol
Shin
,

Eunah
Kim
,

Dong-Wook
Kim
,

Yong-Young
Noh
,

In
Chung
 and 

Dong Ha
Kim
*

Department of Chemistry and Nano Science, Ewha Womans University, 52, Ewhayeodae-gil, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 03760, Republic of Korea. E-mail: dhkim@ewha.ac.kr

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 48109, USA

Department of Chemistry, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720, USA

School of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea

Department of Chemical Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Pohang, Gyeongbuk, 37673, Republic of Korea

Department of Physics, Ewha Womans University, 52, Ewhayeodae-gil, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 03760, Republic of Korea

Division of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Ewha Womans University, 52, Ewhayeodae-gil, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 03760, Republic of Korea

Received
7th July 2019
, Accepted 7th October 2019
First published on 7th October 2019
Designing an efficient and stable hole transport layer (HTL) material is one of the essential ways to improve the performance of organic–inorganic perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Herein, for the first time, an efficient model of a hole transport material (HTM) is demonstrated by optimized doping of a conjugated polymer TFB (poly[(9,9-dioctylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl)-co-(4,4′-(N-(4-sec-butylphenyl)diphenylamine)]) with a non-hygroscopic p-type dopant F4-TCNQ (2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane) for high-efficiency PSCs. The PSC with the F4-TCNQ doped TFB exhibits the best power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 17.46%, which surpasses that of the reference devices, i.e., 16.64 (LiTFSI + TBP-doped Spiro-OMeTAD as the HTM) and 11.01% (LiTFSI + TBP-doped TFB as the HTM). F4-TCNQ doped TFB was believed to favor efficient charge and energy transfer between the perovskite and the hole transport layer and to reduce charge recombination as evidenced by steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) analysis. Moreover, the hydrophobic nature of F4-TCNQ contributed to enhancing the stability of the device under ambient conditions with a RH of 45%. The device reported herein retained ca. 80% of its initial efficiency after 10 days, significantly superior to both LiTFSI + TBP-doped Spiro-OMeTAD (ca. 30%) and LiTFSI + TBP-doped TFB (ca. 10%) based counterparts. This simple yet novel strategy paves the way for demonstrating a promising route for a wide range of highly efficient solar cells and other photovoltaic applications.

Organic–inorganic halide perovskites with the ABX3 composition have attracted significant attention from the scientific community due to their excellent optoelectronic properties, such as (1) low energy bandgaps (Eg < 1.6 eV), (2) low exciton binding energy (<10 meV), (3) long diffusion length (up to 1 μm) and (4) high absorption coefficient (1.5 × 104 cm−1 at λ = 550 nm). Therefore, perovskite materials have been utilized in a wider range of optoelectronic devices such as light emitting diodes (LEDs), photodetectors, memory devices, and lasers. Along with the desired optoelectronic characteristics, many conventional perovskites are solution processable at low temperature which could facilitate the mass production of these materials for energy harvesting devices. Accordingly, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) reached a rapid development of PCE with a certified 23.7% efficiency to date. In PSC devices, the hole transporting layer (HTL) plays a critical role by facilitating the extraction of holes from the photoactive perovskite layer and transport to the electrode to generate photocurrent. In recent years, the development of hole conducting polymers has emerged as a crucial factor due to their good processability, accessibility, and low cost. A wide number of approaches have showcased the application of polymers in perovskite solar cells as HTMs, such as poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS), polytriarylamine (PTAA), poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT), TFB, Spiro-OMeTAD,etc. Currently, the most widely employed organic HTL is 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N′-di-4-methoxyphenylamino)-9,9′ spirobifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD), which was reported by Graetzel and co-workers about a decade ago. Although Spiro-OMeTAD is one of the most efficient HTLs in the market, some drawbacks such as high cost, insufficient hole mobility (∼10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) and low electrical conductivity (∼10−5 S cm−2) should be resolved for commercialization.

Polyfluorenes are conjugated polymer materials containing multiple fluorine groups in their chemical structure and can be considered an ideal alternative to Spiro-OMeTAD. Yang and co-workers fabricated PSCs with three different polyfluorene-based copolymers, i.e., PFO (9,9 dioctyl fluorene 2,7 diyl), PFB (poly(9,9′-dioctylfluorene-co-bis-N,N-(4-butylphenyl)-bis-N,N-phenyl-1,4-phenylene-diamine) and TFB (poly[(9,9-dioctylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl)-co-(4,4′-(N-(4-sec-butylphenyl)diphenylamine)]). Among them, TFB showed a remarkable performance as the hole conducting material for PSCs with an efficiency that can rival or even surpass that of the conventional Spiro-OMeTAD. Furthermore, the price of TFB is significantly lower than that of Spiro-OMeTAD, which facilitates the actual commercialization of perovskite PSC devices. In this context, TFB has emerged as a representative HTM material owing to its fluorene-N-triphenyl based polymer. To further enhance the device performance, many scientists employed various types of additives and dopants to increase the efficiency of polymer-based HTLs. For example, the introduction of lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)-imide (LiTFSI) as the molecular dopant into Spiro-OMeTAD could increase the HTL efficiency. The mechanism behind such enhancement was attributed to the increase in conductivity due to the oxidation of Spiro-OMeTAD; the hygroscopic nature of LiTFSI catalyzes the oxidation of Spiro-OMeTAD by capturing nearby oxygen and water molecules. Although the oxidation of Spiro-OMeTAD results in an increased conductivity of the HTL, the photoactive layer suffers from the oxidation due to the innate instability of CH3NH3PbI3 to ambient conditions. Similarly, incorporation of 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) into Spiro-OMeTAD exhibited a similar effect, that is, increased hole mobility and conductivity, where TBP functioned as a recombination blocking agent of the photogenerated carriers and contributed to the enhancement in the open-circuit voltage. Although these materials are effective dopants for efficient HTLs, they also suffer from significant drawbacks to be solved for further use in solar cells. For instance, the hygroscopic nature of LiTFSI can easily absorb the moisture from the ambient air, so the stability and reproducibility are inherently low. Also, the LiTFSI doped Spiro-OMeTAD film caused the formation of a significant amount of pinhole channels across the film; these pinholes facilitated moisture infiltration, causing degradation of the perovskite layer. For TBP, the introduction of this dopant disturbs the equilibrium between CH3NH3PbI3 and its degraded components as shown in eqn (1-1). The strong polar nature of TBP not only corrodes the perovskite layer but also leads to the formation of a complex between PbI2 and PbI2-TBPx (eqn (1-2) and (1-3)), further causing the degradation of the CH3NH3PbI3 ((1-1) to the right).
CH3NH3PbI3(s) ↔ CH3NH3I(s) + PbI2(s)
(1-1)
PbI2(s) + xTBP(s) → PbI2–TBPx(aq)
(1-2)
PbI2(s) + xTBP(s) → [PbI2·xTBP](s)
(1-3)
Many alternative additives were investigated to replace LiTFSI and/or TBP, such as Co(PzPy)3(TFSI)3, Ag-TFSI, and FK209. However, these materials are still hydrophilic, which inherently decreases the device performance as time progresses. Moreover, harsh purification processes make these materials difficult to synthesize. Hence, it is essential to find a suitable and simple dopant for enhancing device performance without sacrificing device stability.
2,3,5,6-Tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8 tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4-TCNQ) is a well-known effective p-type dopant for perovskite and organic solar cells owing to its ease of preparation as well as low-temperature solution processability. More importantly, F4-TCNQ has a relatively low lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy level (−5.24 eV) which facilitates hole extraction from the active layer. Using a non-hygroscopic F4-TCNQ doped HTL, we propose to demonstrate substantially improved air stability by replacing hygroscopic LiTFSI and TBP with F4-TCNQ-doped TFB.
In brief, we employed non-hygroscopic F4-TCNQ as the efficient p-type non-ionic dopant to replace conventional LiTFSI and TBP with TFB to increase the conductivity and hole transport properties. Also, the LUMO of F4-TCNQ is well aligned to the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of TFB as an efficient HTL, forming appropriate band alignment, thus facilitating efficient charge extraction from the perovskite to the electrode. These synergistic aspects contributed to resolving the stability issue in perovskite solar cells.

Lead iodide (PbI2), methylammonium (MAI) and F4-TCNQ were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. TFB is purchased from American Dye Source, Inc. Spiro-OMeTAD was purchased from Borun New Material Technology Limited.


All the devices were constructed based on a conventional solar cell structure. The solar cell device was fabricated on a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)/glass substrate. Patterned fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass substrates were firstly cleaned via sequential ultrasonic treatment in deionized water, acetone and isopropyl alcohol and then further treated with oxygen-plasma. A dense compact TiO2 electron transport layer (ETL) was deposited via spin coating at 2000 rpm for 30 s and then annealed at 500 °C for 30 min. The TiO2 film was then further dipped into an aqueous solution of TiCl4 (40 mM) at 85 °C for 30 min, followed by annealing at 500 °C for 30 min after being taken out. Perovskite solutions were prepared by dissolving stoichiometric quantities of lead iodide and methylammonium iodide in a mixture of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)/γ-butyrolactone (GBL) under vigorous stirring for 2 h at 70 °C. The resulting solution was filtered through a 0.2 μm polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) filter before coating. The perovskite precursor solution was spin-coated onto the substrate via a two-step speed process at 1000 rpm for 10 s and 5000 rpm for 60 s, respectively. During the second spin-coating step, 1000 μL of chlorobenzene was dropped onto the substrate. The resulting film was then annealed at 100 °C for 1 h for improved crystallization. A perovskite layer could be obtained from 2 M CH3NH3PbI3 solution. Next, each HTL was then deposited on top of the perovskite followed by the top electrode deposition. Lastly, a 90 nm gold film was thermally deposited on the top of the HTM using a thermal evaporator under vacuum (<10−6 Torr).


63 mg of Spiro-OMeTAD, 20 μL of tert-butylpyridine, and 70 μL of bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide lithium salt (170 mg mL−1 in acetonitrile) were mixed together and dissolved in 1 mL of chlorobenzene. The prepared solution was spin-coated onto the perovskite film at 4000 rpm for 30 s. The thickness of the Spiro-MeOTAD layer was 80 nm.


The TFB doped LiTFSI solution was prepared by mixing 20 mg TFB in 26 μL of tert-butylpyridine with 35 μL of bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide lithium salt (170 mg mL−1 in acetonitrile) dissolved in 1 ml chlorobenzene. The prepared solution was spin-coated onto the perovskite film at 4000 rpm for 30 s.


The TFB doped F4-TCNQ solution was prepared by dissolving 20 mg of TFB and F4-TCNQ (1.5 mol%) into 1 mL chlorobenzene. The prepared solution was spin-coated onto the perovskite film at 4000 rpm for 30 s.


The surface morphologies of hybrid films were investigated with a scanning electron microscope (SEM; JEOL JSM6700-F) and an atomic force microscope in tapping mode (AFM; Digital Instruments Dimension 3100 scanning force microscope). The crystalline structures of the perovskite were investigated by X-ray diffraction (XRD) with Cu Kα radiation (D/max RA, Rigaku Co). UV-vis absorbance was measured using a Varian Cary 5000 UV-vis-NIR spectrophotometer to measure the optical properties of the HTL films. Current density–voltage (J–V) curves with a scanning rate of 1 point per 0.05 V under reverse scan were measured using a Keithley 2400 instrument. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was conducted using a PHI-5000 ultrahigh vacuum surface analysis system employing Al Kα and He I (hv = 21.2 eV) excitation sources at a pressure of 1 × 10−6 Pa. Steady-state photoluminescence was measured using a Photon Technologies International, QuantaMaster 400 scanning spectrofluorometer at 298 K. Time-resolved photoluminescence data were obtained using a Hamamatsu Quantaurus-Tau fluorescence lifetime spectrometer (C11367-32) using a 372 nm laser diode. The photoluminescence decay was scanned at 720 nm. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed under a simulated AM 1.5G illumination intensity of 1 mA cm−2 (McScience Inc.) using an electrochemical measurement system (InviumStat.XR, Invium Technologies). EIS measurement was performed using a frequency range from 63 Hz to 1 MHz.



Fig. 1a illustrates a device schematic of the perovskite solar cell. The solar cell device was fabricated on a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)/glass substrate. TiO2 was coated on the substrate as an electron transport layer, followed by the deposition of a perovskite photoactive layer. The HTL was coated on top of the perovskite followed by the top electrode deposition. Fig. 1b shows the corresponding energy levels of each component of the PSC device. The measured LUMO level of F4-TCNQ is −5.24 eV, suggested to be an effective p-type dopant for the polymer TFB. The small energy difference between the LUMO level of F4-TCNQ (−5.24 eV) and HOMO level of TFB (−5.3 eV) is expected to allow for an efficient-ground state charge transfer. The corresponding chemical structures of TFB and F4-TCNQ are shown in Fig. S1a and b, respectively. The optical properties of Sprio-OMeTAD doped with LiTFSI and TBP, TFB doped with LiTFSI and TBP and TFB doped with F4-TCNQ in chlorobenzene solution were measured by UV-vis absorption spectroscopy as shown in Fig. 1c and the corresponding photographs of the solutions are presented in Fig. 1d. In the following paragraphs, we will mark the dopant in parentheses for better understanding. The three samples exhibited similar absorbance at ∼385 nm, which is ascribed to the light absorption induced by the π–π* transition. Also, TFB doped with F4-TCNQ showed an additional peak at ∼770 nm, ascribed to the charge transfer from the HOMO level of the TFB to the LUMO level of the F4-TCNQ. This phenomenon suggests that ground state charge transfer from TFB to F4-TCNQ could occur and the F4-TCNQ is able to oxidize the TFB by the doping process. For these reasons, when LiTFSI and TBP are used as a dopant for both Spiro-OMeTAD and TFB, the solution exhibited nearly the same color of light yellow (Fig. 1d, 1–2). However, when F4-TCNQ was introduced into TFB, a dark yellow color was observed, suggesting that charge transfer occurred from the HOMO of TFB to the LUMO of F4-TCNQ.

Before examining the effects of the different types of the HTLs on the device performance, we characterized the optical, crystalline and morphological properties of perovskite films as shown in Fig. S2. The perovskite film coated on the electron transporting layer (TiO2/MAPbI3) showed good light harvesting capability from the visible to the near-infrared spectrum with ∼90% light absorption with an absorption onset at 800 nm and the strongest absorption at 400–500 nm (Fig. S2a). X-ray diffraction (XRD) was utilized to investigate the crystallinity of the synthesized MAPbI3 films (Fig. S2b). The strong peaks at 14, 28 and 31° correspond to the (110), (220) and (310) crystallographic planes, respectively, which confirms the formation of perovskite tetragonal crystal orientation. The characteristic peaks of the MAPbI3 film remain unchanged before the addition of TiO2. Fig. S2c shows the top-view SEM image of the morphology of the perovskite film deposited on the TiO2/FTO substrate, which exhibits dense grains and uniform grain size in the 100–300 nm range. Using the three types of HTLs, we fabricated PSC devices to investigate the effect of HTLs on solar cell performance.

Fig. 2a presents the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristic curves of the three different HTL-based perovskite solar cell devices measured under AM 1.5G simulated illumination. As a control device, the PSC with Spiro-OMeTAD (LiTFSI + TBP) exhibited an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.04 V, a short circuit current (JSC) of 22.07 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 72.38%, and an overall power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 16.64%. In contrast, the device with the TFB (LiTFSI + TBP) showed the lowest performance (VOC = 0.99 V, JSC = 19.72 mA cm−2 and FF = 56.04%), resulting in a PCE of 11.01%. The best performance was obtained from TFB (F4-TCNQ) based PSCs, VOC = 1.05 V, JSC = 22.36 mA cm−2, and FF = 70.03%, leading to an efficiency of 17.46%. The corresponding parameters are summarized in Table 1. To examine the reproducibility of the PSCs, the statistical distribution of the performance was examined by measuring 20 devices under AM 1.5G illumination and the statistical histogram is provided in Fig. 2b. Most of the TFB (LiTFSI + TBP) based PSC devices yielded a PCE of only 7–11% and showed a relatively broad PCE distribution. In comparison, most of the Spiro-OMeTAD (LiTFSI + TBP) based PSC devices showed a PCE above 14%. More importantly, TFB (F4-TCNQ) based PSC devices showed a narrow PCE distribution of around 15–17%, which clearly demonstrates the advantage of doping F4-TCNQ with TFB as a HTM in PSCs. The detailed performances of the 20 devices are summarized in Tables S4–6.
Type of HTLs

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Spiro-OMeTAD (LiTFSI + TBP)
1.02 ± 0.02(1.04)
22.18 ± 0.41(22.07)
68.74 ± 1.44(72.38)
15.62 ± 0.45(16.64)
TFB (LiTFSI + TBP)
0.96 ± 0.05(0.99)
18.72 ± 1.09(19.72)
51.91 ± 3.64(56.04)
9.40 ± 0.90(11.01)
TFB (F4-TCNQ)
1.06 ± 0.02(1.05)
22.05 ± 0.47(22.36)
71.05 ± 1.61(74.03)
16.58 ± 0.41(17.46)
We discussed the effect of the concentration gradient on the photovoltaic performance of PCSs based on TFB with different concentrations of the dopant F4-TCNQ. The data were collected for an average of 10 devices. We doped F4-TCNQ in TFB with increasing concentrations within a 0 mol% to 2.0 mol% range and noted that the device performance was highly dependent on the doping concentration. When the F4-TCNQ concentration increased from 0% to 1.5%, the power conversion efficiency gradually increased from 5.20 to 17.46% with an enhancement of the VOC value.
Interestingly, with a continuous increase of the doping ratio up to 2.0%, the efficiency and the VOC remarkably decreased. These findings confirm that the most significant improvement is attained with an F4-TCNQ doping ratio of 1.5 mol% with the highest Voc. The information is summarized in Fig. S3, Tables S1, and S2.
The hysteresis index (HI) represents the integrated area under J–V curves under forward and reverse scans. A lower HI implies that the integrated areas under forward and reverse scans are comparable. Herein, the HI was 0.295 when Spiro-OMeTAD (LiTFSI + TBP) was used as a HTL, while 0.588 was obtained from the TFB (LiTFSI + TBP)-based HTL device. These findings confirm that the TFB doped with LiTFSI + TBP negatively affects both PCE and hysteresis index. In contrast, a HI value of 0.257 obtained for the TFB (F4-TCNQ) HTL-based devices infers an improvement of the average hysteresis. This change in hysteresis might be ascribed to an efficient charge transfer between the perovskite and the hole transport layer, leading to reduced charge recombination in the device (Fig. S4 and Table S3).

Fig. 2c shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra within the 350–800 nm wavelength range. The JSC calculated by integrating the EQE is 22.10 mA cm−2 for the Spiro-OMeTAD (LiTFSI + TFB)-based device, 19.37 mA cm−2 for the TFB (LiTFSI + TFB)-based device and 22.29 mA cm−2 for TFB (F4-TCNQ)-based device, respectively, which are in good agreement with experimental data obtained from JSC values (22.07, 19.72 and 22.36 mA cm−2, respectively) extracted from the J–V curves. The PSC based on F4-TCNQ doped TFB gives a similar improvement as compared to the Spiro-OMeTAD (LiTFSI + TFB)-based device, implying that the F4-TCNQ doping facilitates charge extraction and charge-carrier transport. To figure out the enhanced JSC of the TFB (F4-TCNQ) HTL based devices, an energy level diagram was constructed using ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy (UPS) analysis. JSC directly correlates with the charge carrier barrier which is ascribed to the energy gap between the HOMO level of the HTL and that of the active layer. A reduced barrier leads to efficient charge extraction from the active layer to charge transport layers and thereby reduces the charge recombination. UPS was utilized to measure the HOMO level of the three different HTL films as shown in Fig. 3a and b, and the resultant energy level alignment diagrams of HTLs are illustrated in Fig. 3b. The HOMO level of the perovskite, Spiro-OMeTAD (LiTFSI + TBP), TFB (LiTFSI + TBP) and TFB (F4-TCNQ) was determined to be −5.43, −5.12, −5.68 and −5.45 eV, respectively. Among all candidates, TFB (F4-TCNQ) shows the lowest hole transfer barrier, which facilitates hole extraction from the perovskite layer. However, Spiro-OMeTAD (LiTFSI + TBP) and TFB (LiTFSI + TBP) show significant charge extraction barriers and charge losses are expected to occur at the interfaces. To date, bandgap alignment is known to be one of the critical factors determining JSC and good band alignment of constituting components (active layer, HTL, and ETL) leads to high JSC. Among the three different HTLs, TFB (F4-TCNQ) employed cells showed the highest JSC (22.36 mA cm−2) and the best PCE (17.46%). The superior performance of the above HTL is due to a minimized barrier between the perovskite and the TFB (F4-TCNQ) layer which prevents the loss of charge carriers at the interface and facilitates charge extraction. For the TFB (LiTFSI + TBP) and Spiro-OMeTAD (LiTFSI + TBP) based devices, a higher energy barrier caused enhanced charge recombination, leading to a lower JSC of 19.72 and 22.07, respectively, and a lower PCE.
We further investigated the mechanism of the PCE enhancement of the devices by studying the optical characteristics of each film. Fig. 4a shows the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD (LiTFSI + TBP), MAPbI3/TFB (LiTFSI + TBP) and MAPbI3/TFB (F4-TCNQ) samples on bare glass substrates, respectively. PL quenching is attributed to the extraction of charge carriers and dissociation of the holes between the perovskite and the HTM interface. The fast PL quenching refers to fast charge extraction with reduced charge recombination, which can lead to enhanced device performance. The PL peak observed at 760 nm for all samples originates from the MAPbI3. The PL intensity of the MAPbI3/TFB (F4-TCNQ) film is the lowest compared to the other two samples, indicating that an efficient hole extraction was achieved when F4-TCNQ was doped into TFB. To prove the dynamics of the charge transfer mechanism between the HTL and the perovskite interface, a time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) decay curve was obtained. As shown in Fig. 4b, the TRPL traces were collected at 720 nm with the excitation wavelength of a 372 nm laser diode and the corresponding TRPL curves were fitted to a bi-exponential equation as shown below:
y = y0 + A1exp(−t/τ1) + A2exp(−t/τ2)
(2)
where
A1 and A2 are time-independent coefficients for each decay component while τ1 and τ2 are decay lifetimes, respectively. The fast decay lifetime of τ1 is attributed to the quenching of free charge carriers transporting from the perovskite layer to the HTL, while the slow decay lifetime of τ2 arises from the radiative recombination before charge extraction. The MAPbI3/TFB (F4-TCNQ) sample showed a fast-decay lifetime of τ1 = 3.75 ns and a slow decay lifetime of τ2 = 43.08 ns (detailed parameters are summarized in Table S7). Under the same experimental conditions, the MAPbI3/TFB (F4-TCNQ) shows the strongest PL quenching effect compared to MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD (LiTFSI and TBP) and MAPbI3/TFB (LiTFSI and TBP). This result indicates that photogenerated holes are more efficiently extracted and transferred from the perovskite to TFB (F4-TCNQ) without recombination by suppressing charge recombination, further giving rise to a high PCE of the device. This result is in good agreement with the steady-state PL result. The above analyses show that the F4-TCNQ doped TFB can enhance hole transport most efficiently among the three HTMs.

EIS measurement was performed to analyze the carrier transport and recombination dynamics of the PSCs (Fig. 5 and Fig. S5). Nyquist plots of the PSCs were measured at VOC under standard AM 1.5G irradiation and a frequency ranging from 63 Hz to 1 MHz. The equivalent circuit proposed in this work took into account the parallel charge transfer resistance (RHTL) and parasitic chemical capacitance (CHTL), while the recombination resistance (Rrec) and chemical capacitance (Crec) represent charge recombination resistance and capacitance, respectively. The acquired Nyquist plot is typically divided into two main arcs at low and high frequencies. Herein, the absence of the electron recombination in the TiO2 film is attributed to the very thin TiO2 layer and a resulting low electron transport resistance. In agreement, only one arc was observed under illumination, the latter originating from the charge-transfer resistance at the interface between the perovskite and HTL. For the three different HTL based PCSs, the RHTL values of 5250 Ω (Spiro-OMeTAD (LiTFSI and TBP)), 6600 Ω (TFB (LiTFSI and TBP)) and 4750 Ω (TFB (F4-TCNQ)) were obtained respectively. The result indicates that the presence of F4-TCNQ doped TFB in the PSC reduces the resistance between the hole transport layer and photoactive layer. Electrical and optical analyses confirm that the lower resistance of the F4-TCNQ doped TFB contributes to the high device performance.
To compare the conductivity between the hole transport layers, we have acquired current–voltage (I–V) curves in the bias voltage range from −1 to 1 V. The three different hole transport layer only devices Spiro-OMeTAD (LiTFSI + TBP), TFB (LiTFSI + TBP) and TFB (F4-TCNQ) were compared. A higher conductivity was obtained for the F4-TCNQ doped TFB hole transport material device. The increased slope of the I–V curve suggests an enhancement of the conductivity with lower resistance, which is correlated with the results obtained in impedance spectroscopy characterization (Fig. S6). In addition, hole-only devices of Spiro-OMeTAD (LiTFSI + TBP) and TFB (F4-TCNQ) were fabricated to reveal the hole mobility under dark conditions. Compared to the control device, the F4-TCNQ-based device exhibits a ca. 19% increase in mobility (Fig. S11).

Fig. 6a shows the normalized photovoltaic performance monitored for 10 days of storage without encapsulation in the dark under ambient conditions in a relative humidity (RH) of 45% in ambient air. The detailed variations of parameters are shown in Fig. S7. After 10 days of exposure to the ambient air, the PCE of the devices containing LiTFSI and TBP dropped rapidly and retained about 30% of its initial value. In contrast, the F4-TCNQ doped TFB HTM-based device retained about 80% of its initial efficiency, which clearly suggests remarkably improved stability compared to the others.
To investigate the influence of the hydrophobic characteristics of the HTMs on the stability of the device, the water contact angle was measured (Fig. 6b). The water contact angle of F4-TCNQ doped TFB was measured to be 94.08°, which is larger than that of the other two HTMs containing LiTFSI and TBP. In comparison, the contact angles of Spiro-OMeTAD (LiTFSI + TBP) and TFB (LiTFSI + TBP) were 66.97° and 12.99°, respectively. Thus, it is conjectured that F4-TCNQ can effectively suppress the moisture penetration into the perovskite layer, while the hygroscopic character of LiTFSI along with TBP may cause faster degradation of perovskite films. Therefore, it is concluded that the replacement of LiTFSI and TBP with F4-TCNQ could enhance the stability of the PSC device.
The steady-state power output at the maximum power point of the representative PSC devices based on Spiro-OMeTAD (LiTFSI + TBP) and TFB (F4-TCNQ) was measured at a constant bias of 0.75 and 0.8 V, respectively. While under 1 sun irradiation for 25 min, the TFB (F4-TCNQ) PSC device showed a stabilized output, the output of the Spiro-OMeTAD (LiTFSI + TBP) PSC device decreased gradually (Fig. S9). The enhanced stability of the device is consistent with the stable steady-state output.
To investigate the surface morphology and charge transport processes, we carried out atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurement to analyze the surface morphology of the HTM (Fig. S10). From the AFM image, root mean square (RMS) roughness was measured to correlate with the overall surface coverage. The values for Spiro-OMeTAD (LiTFSI + TBP) and TFB (LiTFSI + TBP) were estimated to be 13.4 and 18.6 nm, respectively. These rough surfaces reflect the presence of defects and trap states that cause not only charge carrier loss but also higher trap-assisted recombination in the device. However, the RMS roughness value of TFB with F4-TCNQ additive was smaller (8.9 nm), implying that the perovskite surface was covered with TFB/F4-TCNQ more uniformly compared to the other two HTMs. This result suggests that the combination of TFB and F4-TCNQ doping passivates the defects formed by the imperfect interface.

A novel strategy for developing efficient HTL materials is proposed for high-performance perovskite photovoltaic devices. By incorporating the p-type dopant of F4-TCNQ into TFB, we developed an efficient and stable HTM for PSCs. As a result, the PSC with the F4-TCNQ doped TFB exhibits the highest PCE of 17.46%, which was mainly ascribed to the highly increased JSC. The F4-TCNQ doped TFB based solar cell shows the fast hole extraction from the perovskite to the HTM, evidenced by the PL dynamics studies. The reduced charge extraction barrier between the perovskite photoactive layer and the F4-TCNQ doped TFB HTL was proposed as a primary factor inducing efficient charge extraction and consequentially increasing JSC and PCE. Furthermore, the hydrophobic property of TFB (F4-TCNQ) contributed to the improved long-term stability of the device, retaining ca. 80% of its initial efficiency under ambient conditions with a RH of 45% after 10 days. Based on our result, we are convinced that our simple yet robust strategy can shed light on the way for designing a wide range of highly efficient and long-term stable perovskite optoelectronic devices.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea Grant funded by the Korean Government (2017R1A2A1A05022387 and 2015M1A2A2058365) and by the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) grant funded by the Korea government (MOTIE) (No 20173010013340).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fig. S1–S11 and Tables S1–S7 provide additional characterization including UV-vis absorbance spectra, XRD spectrum, SEM image, and device performance. See DOI: 10.1039/c9nr05719f
‡ This authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019