 DOI: 10.1039/C2NR12089E
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3154-3161


Z. H.
Chen
*,

S. Y.
Yeung
,

H.
Li
,

J. C.
Qian
,

W. J.
Zhang
,

Y. Y.
Li
 and 

I.
Bello
*

Center of Super-Diamond and Advanced Films (COSDAF), City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, P. R. China. E-mail: apibello@cityu.edu.hk; chen.zhenhua@nims.go.jp

Department of Physics and Materials Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, P. R. China

Department of Physics, University of Science and Technology of China, Anhui, P. R. China

Received
24th December 2011
, Accepted 4th March 2012
First published on 9th March 2012
ZnO/Zn1−xPbxSe core–shell nanowires (NWs) have been synthesized by a solution based surface ion transfer method at various temperatures. The energy dispersive spectroscopic (EDS) mapping of single NWs suggests that the Zn, Pb and Se atoms are uniformly distributed in their shell layers. The ternary Zn1−xPbxSe layers with tunable bandgaps extend the band-edge of optical absorption from 450 nm to 700 nm contrasting with the binary ZnSe layers. The ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopic (UPS) analysis reveals a transition from the type I to type II band alignment when the x fraction decreases from 0.66 to the value of 0.36 in the nanoshell layers. This quantitative investigation of electronic energy levels at ZnO and Zn1−xPbxSe interfaces indicates that the proper type II band alignment is well suited for photovoltaic energy conversion. The photovoltaic cells comprising a ZnO/Zn1−xPbxSe nano-heterojunction with the optimized Pb content are expected to be more efficient than the devices sensitized by binary ZnSe or PbSe.

In the photosensitizing architecture, suitable alignment of energy levels is necessary for efficient electron injection from a photo-excited sensitizer to a wide bandgap semiconductor. The so-called “type II” band alignment is that in which an excited electron in a sensitizer must lie above the conduction band edge of the acceptor. Accordingly the distribution of energy levels at the interface between the wide bandgap semiconductor and sensitizers is critical for development of new sensitizers. On one hand, the rate of electron transfer is a function of the density of states (DOS) in the acceptor levels. Thus, the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) levels have to lie sufficiently above the conduction band minimum (CBM) where the DOS are high enough to inject electrons into the semiconductor and to compete with other relaxation processes. On the other hand, the excess energy of the photoinjected electrons being over the CBM is rapidly thermalized by electron–phonon scattering and cannot be recovered as electric energy. The ability to tune electronic energy alignment at the semiconductor and sensitizer interface contributes to maximize the photocurrent of solar cells.

Ruthenium based dyes employed as type II sensitizers for n-type semiconductor electrodes (e.g., TiO2) have been well studied for photochemical solar cells. The high interfacial surface area of the mesoporous TiO2 nanocrystals allows efficient light absorption and exciton dissociation. Nevertheless, the formation of aggregates on the TiO2 and dye interface may induce the charge recombination and limit their power conversion efficiency. In the search for device structures with the highest power conversion efficiency of light to electricity and the lower production cost, semiconductor quantum dots (QDs), such as CdS, CdSe and PbS, have been introduced as new types of sensitizers into the latest device structures. The rationale behind is that the photon absorption can be controlled via moderation of the morphologies and sizes of these composite structures, and at the interface, the type II heterojunction between QDs and wide bandgap semiconductors assists the electron transfer. Despite these advantages associated with QD sensitized solar cells, effective loading of QDs on the nanostructured oxide electrode remains a critical problem. The layer of QDs may not uniformly cover the surface area of a wide bandgap semiconductor, and inadequate contact of this layer with electrolyte may cause the charge recombinations and lower the power conversion efficiency.
Recently many films made of narrow bandgap semiconductors were investigated as uniform sensitizer shells to improve the coverage of wide bandgap semiconducting nanomaterials. For example, ZnO/CdTe core–shell nanowires were prepared by a electrodeposition process, while ZnO/CdS core–shell nanowires were grown by a chemical bath deposition method. Since binary semiconductors have fixed band levels, it is a tedious work to find the best semiconductors to form suitable band alignment at the interface with wide bandgap semiconductors. These problems can be surpassed by using ternary or quaternary semiconductors. However, syntheses of ternary or quaternary semiconducting shells to manipulate the interfacial band alignment have been scarce so far.
In this work, the Pb chalcogenide family is studied as nanoshell sensitizers because of their large exciton Bohr radii (PbS 18 nm, PbSe 47 nm, and PbTe 150 nm). Herein, the uniform ternary Zn1−xPbxSe shells with tunable compositions have been synthesized on ZnO NWs by a solution based surface ion transfer method. An intact interface is formed between the single-crystal ZnO NWs and the Zn1−xPbxSe nanoshells. Therefore, the one-dimensional core–shell NWs would provide an efficient and direct pathway for electrons toward the fluorine-tin-oxide electrode deposited on glass (FTO/glass) substrate. Quantitative analysis of the band alignment between the ternary Zn1−xPbxSe shells and the ZnO NW cores is necessary to understand the charge transfer process at their interfaces, which determines the short current density (Jsc) of the devices. This is especially critical for electrons injection from sensitizers to wide bandgap semiconductors in photosensitizing solar cells.

Arrays of ZnO NWs on FTO coated glass substrates were prepared by a hydrothermal method. The substrates were ultrasonically cleaned in acetone and ethanol baths in sequence and then dried in a nitrogen flow. This process was followed by deposition of zinc acetate (0.5 M) dissolved in ethanol on the FTO glass substrates by spin casting at 2000 rpm for 30 seconds. The dry coating was then baked at 350 °C in air for 20 minutes to form a seed layer of ZnO nanoparticles. ZnO NWs were then grown by immersing the seeded substrates in an aqueous solution containing zinc nitrate hydrate (25.0 mM) and hexamethylenetetramine (25.0 mM) at 90 °C for 8 hours. Finally the samples were washed with deionized water and dried in air.


A Se2− source solution was first prepared by dissolving 5 mM of NaBH4 and 2.5 mM of Se in distilled water. Arrays of ZnO/ZnSe core–shell nanocables were prepared by immersing the ZnO NW arrays in the Se2− source solution and kept at 50 °C for 3 hours. The samples were then washed with deionized water and dried in a nitrogen flow.


1.0 mM of Pb(AC)2·3H2O was first dissolved in ethylene glycol (EG). Arrays of ZnO/ZnSe core–shell NWs were then immersed in the solution for 3 hours. In three different runs, the solution was maintained at room temperature (RT), 50 °C and 90 °C to prepare three sample sets of ZnO/Zn1−xPbxSe core–shell NW arrays. Finally the samples were rinsed in deionized water and dried in air.


Pristine samples were characterized with X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a Siemens D-500 diffractometer operating with Cu Kα radiation. Morphological and phase structural studies were performed using a Philips XL30 FEG scanning electron microscope (SEM) and a Philips CM20 transmission electron microscope (TEM). Alternatively a Philips CM200 FEG TEM operating at 200 kV was used for high resolution phase contrast microscopic studies. Elemental mapping on nanoscales was carried out by EDS integrated in the CM200 TEM. Raman measurements were carried out to further confirm the compositions with a 514 nm argon ion laser of 2 mm spot size for excitation. Absorption spectra were recorded with a lambda-750 UV/Vis spectrophotometer. Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the solar cells were measured under AM 1.5G illumination with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The UPS was used to study electronic structures of the interfacing deposits. The UPS spectra were induced by He I line (21.22 eV) in a VGESCALAB220i-XL ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) surface analytical facility with a base vacuum of 10−8 Pa.


Arrays of ZnO/Zn1−xPbxSe core–shell NWs grown on FTO glass substrates were sandwiched and bonded with a platinum coated ITO counter electrode. The two electrodes were separated by a 30 μm thick polypropylene spacer, and the internal space of the cells was filled with a liquid electrolyte (1 M Na2S, 1 M S, and 0.1 M NaOH in distilled water) by capillary effect. The performance of fabricated solar cells was evaluated using AM 1.5G simulated sunlight. The active area of the solar cells was 0.25 cm2.


The SEM image of pristine ZnO NWs in Fig. 1a shows bare ZnO NWs with facetted surfaces and hexagonal cross-sections with diameters from 50 to 200 nm in transverse directions and lengths ranging from 1 to 2 μm. The TEM image in Fig. 1b demonstrates the smooth surfaces of an abstracted ZnO NW, while the high resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) image, shown in the inset of Fig. 1b, taken near the edge of the ZnO NW in the denoted region A, illustrates the single crystalline wurtzite structure of the NW. The interplanar spacing parallel to the axial direction of the NW is 0.52 nm which is consistent with single crystal growth in the [0001] direction and the work reported by Wei et al. previously. The EDS compositional analysis taken from the ZnO NWs in an area of 6 μm2 (3 μm by 2 μm) indicates a slightly oxygen deficient ZnO structure (Zn:O = 59:41) as revealed by EDS spectral analysis in Fig. 1c.

The growth of shell films on ZnO NWs was carried out by a solution based surface ion transfer method. The solubility constant of ZnO product, Ksp = 6.8 × 10−17, was much greater than the reported solubility constants of ZnSe (3.6 × 10−26) and PbSe (7.94 × 10−43). This implies that the arrays of ZnO NWs can be used as sacrificial templates to synthesize more stable ZnSe by anions exchange at ZnO NW surfaces, and it can be further converted into PbSe structure by cations exchange to obtain ZnO/PbSe core–shell NWs. Herein the intermediate reaction product in the shell from the structure of ZnO/ZnSe NWs towards the structure of ZnO/PbSe NWs is regarded as ZnO/Zn1−xPbxSe core–shell NWs (0 < x < 1).
Compared to bare ZnO NWs, the outer layer of the ZnO/ZnSe core–shell NWs turned to a structure with less faceted surfaces as depicted by the SEM image in Fig. 1d. However, the bright field TEM image in Fig. 1e shows that the shell layer of an individual NW is fairly uniform on the presented scale. The thickness of the shell layer is about 10 nm. To investigate structure at the core–shell interface of NWs in detail, the HRTEM image was taken from the region B where the shell is peeled off from the NW, as illustrated in the inset of Fig. 1e. Obviously the NW shell is composed of a number of crystallites, while its core has a single crystal structure. The regions signified by red ellipsis in the shell layer indicate the formation of crystallites. The EDS analysis taken from an area of 6 μm2 of ZnO/ZnSe core–shell NWs, as illustrated in Fig. 1f, confirms the presence of Zn, O and Se elements in atomic ratio of 57:30:13, respectively. With regard to EDS spectra in Fig. 1c, the atomic ratio of Zn to O is about 1.5:1 for bare ZnO NWs. This unstoichiometric ratio of ZnO is mainly caused by the oxygen vacancies and Zn ions incorporated in interstitial positions being intrinsic defects in ZnO NWs.
The difference between the two spectra is caused by introduction of selenium substituting O atoms in the pristine ZnO NWs at their surfaces via an anion transfer process from the Se solution. Interestingly after this process, the atomic ratio of Zn to the sum of O and Se is maintained at about 1.5:1.
ZnO/Zn1−xPbxSe core–shell NWs with different shell compositions were obtained by immersion of the ZnO/ZnSe NW template into Pb2+ source solution at different temperatures (RT, 50 °C and 90 °C) for 3 hours. In this process, the cation of Pb2+ substitutes Zn2+ in ZnSe nanoshells to form Zn1−xPbxSe shell layers with different atomic ratios of Pb and Zn. Investigations of elemental distributions of the ZnO/Zn1−xPbxSe core–shell NWs synthesized at 50 °C are demonstrated herein.
As illustrated in the bright field TEM image in Fig. 2a, the shell layer of Zn1−xPbxSe is uniform. The HRTEM image of the area C taken from an interfacial region of the ZnO/Zn1−xPbxSe core–shell NW is shown in Fig. 2b. Obviously, the ZnO NW near surface region is fully covered by a polycrystalline shell layer. The interplanar spacing parallel to the axial direction of the NW is 0.52 nm, which is maintained as observed in the bare ZnO NWs.
The EDS mapping of a single NW, shown in Fig. 2c–f, indicates even distribution of Zn, O, Se and Pb elemental constituents along the NW. In comparison with the middle region, a part of Zn in the shell layer is substituted by Pb, resulting in a relatively bright region in the centre of the NW. In addition, Fig. 2e–f demonstrate fairly even distribution of Se and Pb. These elemental constituents are uniformly dispersed in the shell layer of the NW.
The compositional EDS analysis of Zn1−xPbxSe shell layers was carried out over a sample area of 6 μm2. In the ZnO/ZnSe core–shell nanowires, Se atoms substitute O constituents. It can be assumed that the Zn/Se in the ZnSe shell has the same atomic ratio as Zn/O in the pristine ZnO nanowires. Accordingly in the shells of ZnO/ZnSe core–shell nanowires the compositional ratio of Zn to Se should be 1.5:1. After the introduction of Pb into the shell layers at different temperatures (RT, 50 °C and 90 °C), the Pb/Se atomic ratios are found to be 0.15, 0.54 and 0.99, contrasting the calculated Zn/Se atomic ratios of 1.35, 0.96 and 0.51, respectively. Since the Pb content of cations in Zn1−xPbxSe shells can be preset to 10%, 36% and 66%, the values of “x” are 0.9, 0.64 and 0.34. The composition of ZnxPb1−xSe shell layer synthesized at different temperatures can be obtained, as shown in Table 1.
Conditions of synthesis
Pb/Se (AR)
Zn/Se (AR)
Pb/(Zn + Pb) (%)
Composition of shell layers
RT, 3 h
0.15
1.35
10
Zn0.9Pb0.1Se
50 °C, 3 h
0.54
0.96
36
Zn0.64Pb0.36Se
90 °C, 3 h
0.99
0.51
66
Zn0.34Pb0.66Se
In further study of the NW structures, XRD patterns were acquired from the FTO/glass substrate, pristine ZnO NWs, ZnO/ZnSe core–shell NWs, and ZnO/Zn1−xPbxSe core–shell NWs grown at RT, 50 °C and 90 °C, as shown in Fig. 3a. The XRD study of the FTO coated glass reveals several diffraction peaks, as indicated by triangles in the diffraction pattern (1) in Fig. 3a. The peaks indexed to the (110), (200), (211), (310) and (301) crystallographic planes are consistent with those previously reported.
Analysis of the pristine ZnO NW arrays grown on FTO reveals additional diffraction peaks that are indexed to the (100), (002), (101), (102) and (103) planes of the wurtzite structure (JCPDS file no. 74-534), respectively. The peaks are marked by rhombuses in the pattern (2) of Fig. 3a, The predominant (002) peak suggests that the ZnO NWs mostly grow along their c-axes.
After substitutional reactions transforming ZnO to ZnO/ZnSe core–shell NWs, diffraction peaks at 23.4° and 29.6° appear in addition to those originated in the hexagonal structure of ZnO NWs. The weak peaks at 23.4° and 29.6° are correlated with (100) and (101) planes of selenium. This is the evidence that the anions of Se2− diffuse into the NWs to substitute O2− constituents, while no obvious peak is found to correlate it with crystallographic planes of ZnSe as demonstrated by the diffraction pattern (3) in Fig. 3a. This can be elucidated by the fact that ZnO NWs grow with hexagonal wurtzite structures, while ZnSe usually occurs with a cubic zinc blende structure. The crystals with high perfection may not be formed easily because of the difference in the crystal structures after the transfer of anions. Instead, ZnSe crystals might also appear in a wurtzite hexagonal structure with lattice constant of 0.436 nm, which differ by 25% when compared with that of the ZnO wurtzite structure.
Structural XRD study of ZnO/Zn1−xPbxSe NWs grown at RT (pattern 4 in Fig. 3a) discloses that despite the presence of new element Pb in the core–shell no additional peak is observed. More likely the amorphous ZnSe and PbSe constituents do not form crystalline structures under these conditions. However, the ZnO/Zn1−xPbxSe NWs grown at a higher temperature (50 °C) yield diffraction peaks owing to the presence of both ZnSe and PbSe binary constituents. Instead of featureless characteristics, crystals are formed via cation exchange processes. The emerged diffraction peaks (111), (200) and (311) planes are indexed for ZnSe wurtzite structure, while the peaks denoted by (200) and (220) planes in the diffraction pattern (5) of Fig. 3a are correlated with the cubic PbSe crystal structure.
When the temperature of synthesis is increased to 90 °C, more cations of Zn are substituted by Pb to form stable PbSe crystals. This process is demonstrated by vanishing ZnSe peaks and emerging diffraction peaks corresponding to PbSe crystals of higher quality. As a result, two additional peaks, referring to (111) and (311) crystallographic PbSe cubic crystal planes, emerge in the shell layer due to the generation of PbSe polycrystal in abundant quantities, as illustrated in the diffraction pattern (6) of Fig. 3a.
The surface chemical bondings of ZnO/ZnSe and ZnO/Zn1−xPbxSe core–shell NWs were also studied with reference to pristine ZnO NWs by Raman spectroscopy using a red laser excitation line (633 nm). The laser beam, focused by a confocal microscope, to about 2 μm in diameter can excite many NWs.
The reference Raman spectrum taken from the FTO/glass substrate is presented by the spectrum (1) in Fig. 3b. In this spectrum the broad peak at 560 cm−1 originates in the FTO film. As indicated by the pattern (2) in Fig. 3b, the intense and fairly narrow peak at 437 cm−1 arises from the first-order Raman scattering by the high frequency E2 phonons of the ZnO wurtzite structure, corroborating good crystalline qualities of ZnO NWs. The rest of the Raman features correspond to the second-order scattering at 332 cm−1 (E2high − E2low) that is consistent with that of bulk ZnO as reported previously.
The Raman spectrum 3 in Fig. 3b accumulated from the ZnSe layer reveals a peak at 247 cm−1 which is assigned to the transverse optical phonon mode (TO) of the ZnSe crystal. After introduction of Pb cations into ZnSe nanoshells, resonance peaks corresponding to PbSe appeared at 135 cm−1, 368 cm−1 and 790 cm−1 (spectrum 4 in Fig. 3b). The peak at 135 cm−1 is attributed to the longitudinal optical (LO) phonons of cubic PbSe crystals. The energy of the measured LO phonon is 16.7 MeV, which is consistent with Hall and Raceffe's calculations of the phonon energy for PbSe LO phonon at the Γ point (16.5 MeV). The high-frequency resonance peak at around 790 cm−1 could be attributed to the ground state energy of the polaron in PbSe crystals. The weak peak located at 368 cm−1 may arise from traces of the PbSeO4 oxide structures. The Raman spectrum 5 in Fig. 3b is collected from the Zn1−xPbxSe shell grown at 90 °C. The spectrum reveals an additional peak at around 275 cm−1 which can be assigned to the 2LO (Γ) phonon mode of the PbSe cubic crystals.
XRD and Raman spectral analysis in Fig. 3a and b, respectively, indicate that the surface transfer processes facilitate the formation of Zn1−xPbxSe nanoshells. It is observed that Pb content in Zn1−xPbxSe nanoshells increases with the increase in growth temperature.
The enhanced absorbance of the synthesized nanoshells is indicated by the UV-Vis absorption spectra in Fig. 4a. It can be observed that light absorption over the spectral region ranging from 400 to 415 nm by pristine ZnO NWs is fairly low (spectrum 1). This part of absorbance is rather due to the additional light scattering by the ZnO NWs than by the onset of additional absorption bands. The collected absorption spectrum (2), in Fig. 4a, from ZnO/ZnSe core–shell NWs shows characteristic absorption region between 400 and 450 nm which is attributed to the bandgap of the ZnSe layers. Obviously further broadening absorption spectral range is obtained by formation of the ZnO/Zn1−xPbxSe core–shell NW structures as illustrated by spectra (3), (4) and (5) in Fig. 4a. The absorbance enhancement is achieved in the spectral range of 400–700 nm by modification of the core–shell bandgap which can be realized through incorporation of Pb into ZnSe structure. It means that the controlled Pb content in Zn1−xPbxSe shell affects the absorbance of the light.
The optical bandgaps of the structures were evaluated by Tauc's diagrams plotting the (αhν)2 absorption functions against the photon energy which is possible in these direct band gap semiconductors. The plots are presented in Fig. 4b for pristine ZnO NWs, ZnO/ZnSe core–shell NWs and ZnO/Zn1−xPbxSe NWs grown at RT, 50 °C, and 90 °C to illustrate estimation of the bandgaps with values of 2.97, 2.10, 1.86, 1.65 and 1.72 eV, respectively.
Electronic structures of interfacing ZnO and nanoshell semiconducting materials were quantitatively studied by UPS. The analysis samples were prepared by uniform dispersion of single types of NWs over highly conductive Si wafers (n-type, 0.001–0.008 Ω cm). The bottom spectrum was obtained from the pristine ZnO NWs. The formation of ZnSe and PbSe nanoshells on the ZnO core yields UPS spectra (2) and (3–5) in Fig. 5a with the secondary electron cutoffs which are shifted towards the lower binding energies, as illustrated. The position “0 eV” denotes the Fermi energy, as seen in the inset of Fig. 5a. This way, the position of the valence band maximum with respect to the Fermi level can be determined from the secondary electron cutoffs of pristine ZnO NWs, ZnO/ZnSe core–shell NWs and ZnO/Zn1−xPbxSe grown at RT, 50 °C, and 90 °C which are 2.25, 1.2, 1.0, 0.8 and 1.1 eV, respectively.
The bandgaps of 2.97, 2.10, 1.86, 1.65 and 1.72 eV for ZnO NWs, ZnO/ZnSe core–shell NWs and ZnO/Zn1−xPbxSe grown at RT, 50 °C, and 90 °C, respectively are determined from the corresponding Tauc's plots, shown in Fig. 4b, using an extrapolation method. So, the positions of the conduction bands with respect to the Fermi levels are 0.72, 0.9, 0.86, 0.85 and 0.62 eV for pristine ZnO NWs, ZnO/ZnSe core–shell NWs and ZnO/Zn1−xPbxSe grown at RT, 50 °C, and 90 °C, correspondingly. The band diagram at ZnO and shell layer interfaces is illustrated in the right part of Fig. 5b.
It can be observed that the interfaces between ZnO NWs and nanoshells comprising ZnSe and Zn1−xPbxSe grown at RT and 50 °C are the type II heterojunctions, while the ZnO/Zn1−xPbxSe NWs grown at 90 °C are the type I band alignment, as indicated by the schematic in the left part of Fig. 5b. Thus the methodology of adjusting the elemental ratio in nanoshells as illustrated enables us to produce the type I or type II band alignments. The optimized band alignment can be prepared by controlling the value x in the Zn1−xPbxSe composite nanoshells.
The tunable bandgaps of nanoshells with type II heterojunctions at ZnO/Zn1−xPbxSe interface represent a new approach to construct photovoltaic cells. Herein, the sandwiched cell device bonded with platinum coated ITO as counter electrode was constructed (Fig. S1a). Under light illuminations, e−–h+ pairs are induced in the Zn1−xPbxSe shells (formula 1), while the excited electrons appearing at the ZnO/Zn1−xPbxSe interfaces are transported to the conduction band of ZnO NWs, and drifted to the FTO electrode. The electrons donated by the redox species of the electrolyte compensate the lost electrons (formula 2). The generated sulfur atom S and S2− lead to the formation of polysulfide S22−via a chemical pathway given by formula 3. The S22− then obtains electrons at the counter electrode and regenerates oxidized sulfide (S2−, formula 4). The electron transfer process of the redox couple should be fast and their redox potential should be sufficiently negative to provide electrons to the Zn1−xPbxSe film continuously. The whole process of generating photocurrent within the photochemical solar cell is illustrated by the following cascade reactions:
Anode: Zn1−xPbxSe + hν → h+(Zn1−xPbxSe) + e−(Zn1−xPbxSe)
(1)
2h+(Zn1−xPbxSe) + S2− → 2Zn1−xPbxSe + S
(2)
S + S2− → S2−
(3)
Cathode: S22− + 2e−(counter electrode) → 2S2−
(4)

J–V characteristics of pristine ZnO NWs, ZnO/ZnSe NWs and ZnO/Zn1−xPbxSe core–shell NWs structures were examined under AM 1.5G simulated sunlight with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (Fig. S1b). The device with pristine ZnO NWs generates a voltage of 0.12 V, while that with ZnO/ZnSe core–shell NWs induces 0.83 V. The open circuit voltage (Voc) is reduced to 0.61, 0.50 and 0.22 V for the Zn1−xPbxSe core–shell NWs synthesized at RT, 50 °C and 90 °C. The second photovoltaic parameter, short circuit current density of the pristine ZnO NWs, is 0.06 mA cm−2, while that with ZnO/ZnSe core–shell NWs induces 1.82 mA cm−2. After introducing Pb into the shell layer with atomic ratios of 0.1, 0.36 and 0.66, the short current densities of the devices made of the ZnO/Zn1−xPbxSe core–shell NWs prepared at RT, 50 and 90 °C are 2.17, 4.22 and 0.52 mA cm−2, as shown in Fig. 6a. During the measurement process, Jsc gradually increases with the elapsed time until reaching stable values. Fig. S2 demonstrates the Jsc changes with illumination time of ZnO/Zn0.64Pb0.36Se core–shell NWs.

The Voc reduces linearly with an increase in the atomic ratio of Pb, while Jsc increases to the highest value with the ternary Zn0.64Pb0.36Se sensitizer shells. These current densities depend on both the bandgap of Zn1−xPbxSe and the energy difference of CBM between the sensitizer layers. The short current densities Jsc can be obtained by:
(5)
where
q is the elementary electric charge, F(λ) is the incident photon flux density under AM 1.5 spectral irradiance, and IPCE is the incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency. So, increasing the amount of light absorbed by the sensitizers leads to a higher IPCE value and yields higher conversion efficiency. The sensitizer of Zn1−xPbxSe shells with a smaller bandgap results in broader light absorption and more effective generation of e−–h+ pairs and thus higher induced short current density Jsc. Therefore, the Jsc increases as the Pb ratio was raised from 0 to 0.36, as indicated in Fig. 6a. The Jsc is also affected by the charge injection from Zn1−xPbxSe shells to ZnO NWs. If the CBM of Zn1−xPbxSe is only little above that of ZnO NWs, or it is lower, which is band I alignment at the interface, the generated electrons cannot effectively be injected into ZnO NWs. Consequently Jsc in such core–shell structures of ZnO/Zn0.34Pb0.66Se NWs is dramatically reduced, as indicated in Table S1.

The fill factor (FF) and power-conversion efficiency (η) can be determined from the following formulae:
(6)
(7)
where
VM and JM are the voltage and current density at the maximum power output, respectively. The calculation of the power conversion efficiencies reaches 0.59, 0.50, 0.82 and 0.033% for the devices with sensitizer of ZnSe, Zn0.9Pb0.1Se, Zn0.64Pb0.36Se and Zn0.34Pb0.66Se, respectively. The J–V characteristic of photovoltaic cells with the highest efficiency (η = 0.82%) is obtained by employing ZnO/Zn0.64Pb0.36Se core–shell nanowires as photoanode, as shown in Fig. 6b. The broad monochromatic incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) plotted in the inset of Fig. 6b demonstrates its suitable adjustment for bandgaps of ternary sensitizers.


In summary, ZnO/Zn1−xPbxSe core–shell NWs have been synthesized by a solution based surface ion transfer method and incorporated into the architecture of solar cells. The ternary Zn1−xPbxSe layers with tunable bandgap properties extend the band-edge of optical light absorption from 450 to 700 nm, compared to binary ZnSe layers. The charge separation is obtained by electron transfer from the excited sites of the Zn1−xPbxSe nanoshells to ZnO NWs and compensation of the holes left on the sensitizer layer by an electrolyte donor. The detailed electronic structure at the interface of ZnO and Zn1−xPbxSe is quantitatively investigated with the aid of UPS. The alignment of electronic energy between ZnO and ternary Zn0.64Pb0.36Se shells indicates the optimized band II alignment at their interfaces, inducing the highest short current density and power conversion efficiency. The ternary semiconducting sensitizers are alternatives of functional structures in photovoltaic devices since the devices based on such tunable bandgaps and CBM values at interfaces would surpass those based on pure binary materials.


This work was fully supported by the Research Grant Council of Hong Kong under grant no. CityU 110 209. The authors thank Mr. T. F. Hung for HRTEM analysis, and Ms. C. Y. Luan for Raman characterization.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2nr12089e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012