 DOI: 10.1039/D0TC00435A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 5273-5279


Peng
Luo
,

Kang
An
,

Lei
Ying
*,

Guanze
Li
,

Chunguang
Zhu
,

Baobing
Fan
,

Fei
Huang
* and 

Yong
Cao


Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, China. E-mail: msleiying@scut.edu.cn; msfhuang@scut.edu.cn

Received
24th January 2020
, Accepted 27th February 2020
First published on 28th February 2020
A novel n-type organic small-molecule semiconductor, denoted N-IDTBR, was designed and synthesized by introducing an amine group into the extensively used non-fullerene acceptor O-IDTBR. This new material can be readily dissolved in alcohol, which allowed it to be spin-cast on top of a photoactive layer by processing with an orthogonal solvent for the construction of multilayer polymer solar cells. A poly(3-hexylthiophene):O-IDTBR blend was selected as a model system, which contains N-IDTBR as the cathode interlayer. We adopted non-halogenated anisole/2-methylanisole as the processing solvent to fabricate the active layer and achieve an impressive power conversion efficiency of 6.1%. Of particular interest is the fact that the N-IDTBR functioned not only as a single cathode interfacial layer to facilitate charge collection, but it also presented slight contribution to the light-harvesting capability of the device, thus leading to enhanced current density of the resulting devices. More importantly, the PCEs of the devices remained at 5.85 ± 0.25% as the thickness of the N-IDTBR layer varied from 5 to 30 nm, which demonstrated their great potential for future practical applications.

Organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices have attracted extensive research interests owing to their prominent application potential as light-weight and large-area solar panels, which can be fabricated through cost-effective printing techniques on a flexible substrate. Great efforts have been focused on the development of new non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs) as light-harvesting materials of OPVs, as NFAs possess a range of advantages, such as enhanced light absorption, enhanced variability in energy level alignment, well-defined molecular structures for large-scale fabrication, improved solubility in various non-halogenated solvents, and high stability relative to fullerene derivatives. Although 3,9-bis-(2-methylene-(3-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)indanone))-5,5,11,11-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-dithieno[2,3-d:2′,3′-d′]-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b']-dithiophene (ITIC) derivatives have to date been extensively used as NFAs, a prominent alternative candidate for practical applications is (5Z,5′Z)-5,5′-((7,7′-(4,4,9,9-tetraoctyl-4,9-dihydro-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene-2,7-diyl)bis(benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole-7,4-diyl))bis(methanylylidene))bis(3-ethyl-2-thioxothiazolidin-4-one) (O-IDTBR) (Fig. 1a), which comprises an indacenodithiophene core flanked with benzothiadiazole and rhodanine groups. In particular, IDTBR and its derivatives are very compatible with the extensively used electron-donating polymer poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), forming highly stable and readily scalable OPV devices that are accessible via straightforward syntheses and are compatible with high-throughput production techniques.

To make efficient OPVs, a critical prerequisite is to optimize the interface between the organic bulk-heterojunction light-harvesting layer and the metallic electrodes, because large differences in the work functions of the electrodes and organic semiconducting materials form a barrier against charge collection. A range of alcohol-soluble organic semiconducting materials have been developed in an attempt to solve this problem, as these materials can be deposited atop pre-fabricated organic semiconducting layers from alcohols to attain multi-layer devices. One strategy to ensure ohmic contact involves delicately manipulating molecular orbital energy levels by modifying the backbone structure of these interfacial materials. However, ohmic contact can be more easily achieved by incorporating functional groups, such as alkylamino groups, into the side chains to change the work function of the electrodes. This interfacial engineering strategy is supposed to be very effective in improving the performance of solar cells, as it enables the modulation of the alignments of energy levels, facilitating charge collection and thereby improving power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of the resulting devices.
Here, we designed and synthesized a new alcohol-soluble molecule, denoted N-IDTBR, which has exactly the same backbone as its IDTBR counterpart while containing alkylamino groups as the side chain. The amino side chains endowed the material with remarkable alcohol processability, representing an effective strategy to enhance electron collection by interface modification. The resulting N-IDTBR was utilized as the cathode interlayer (CIL) for devices containing P3HT:IDTBR as the photoactive layer, in which N-IDTBR not only functioned as the charge collection interlayer, but also slightly contributed to the light-harvesting capability of the solar cell device and thus enhanced electron collection while contributing to photocurrent production in the resulting devices. The optimal device with N-IDTBR as the CIL had a substantially enhanced PCE of 6.1%, which was much higher than that of the control device. Notably, the PCEs of the devices remained at 5.85 ± 0.25% as the thickness of the N-IDTBR layer varied in the range of 5–33 nm, which demonstrated their great potential for future practical applications.

The synthetic route of N-IDTBR is shown in Scheme 1, and the detailed synthetic process is summarized in the ESI. The core unit of indacenodithiophene (2) was synthesized according to the reported procedures. Compound 2 was alkylated using 1,6-dibromohexane to give 4,4,9,9-tetrakis(6-bromohexyl)-4,9-dihydro-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene (3), containing bromoalkyl side chains. Then, compound 3 was treated with dimethylamine solution in tetrahydrofuran to give the intermediate compound 6,6′,6′′,6′′′-(4,9-dihydro-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene-4,4,9,9-tetra-yl)tetraki-s-(N,N-dimethylhexan-1-amine) (4), which was stannylated by reacting with n-butyllithium followed by addition of trimethyltin to give compound 5 in a high yield of 90%. A Stille coupling reaction of compound 5 with 7-bromo-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole-4-carboxaldehyde produced compound 6, which reacted with 3-ethylrhodanine in Knoevenagel condensation to give the target molecule N-IDTBR with a two-step reaction yield of approximately 30%. For comparison, we also synthesized the quaternized compound N-IDTBR-Br that was ionized by treating N-IDTBR with excessive amounts of 1-bromoethane (ESI). The molecular structures of all intermediate compounds 2–6 and the target materials were confirmed by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (Fig. S1–S10, see the ESI).

The target compound N-IDTBR was readily dissolved in tetrahydrofuran and chloroform (solubility >10 mg mL−1), but was barely soluble in dimethylsulfoxide. N-IDTBR was also readily dissolved in methanol and ethanol (both with solubility >10 mg mL−1) by adding a trace amount of acetic acid (approximately 0.1% in volume), which can be attributed to the interaction between the added acetic acid and the nitrogen atoms in the alkylamino side chains. In this regard, the alcohol solubility of the target compound N-IDTBR will facilitate its use in an orthogonal solvent processing strategy to fabricate multi-layer devices, as solvent erosion during stepwise-processing can be avoided.

The thermal properties of N-IDTBR were evaluated by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). N-IDTBR exhibited a decomposition temperature (5% weight loss) of 260 °C as estimated by TGA, and the DSC study revealed no distinct thermal transition in the range of 25–230 °C during the second heating or cooling cycle (Fig. S11, ESI). As can be seen in Fig. 1b, the N-IDTBR solution exhibits broad absorption at 300–720 nm, with an absorption maximum at 644 nm. In contrast, a red-shifted peak at 691 nm for the N-IDTBR film was observed, attributable to the intermolecular aggregation. Moreover, compared with the thin film of O-IDTBR, the absorption edge of the N-IDTBR thin film was slightly red-shifted. The optical bandgap was estimated to be 1.57 eV from the edge of absorption as a thin film.

The electrochemical behavior was investigated via cyclic voltammetry (CV, with characteristics shown in Fig. 1c). Here, we used the ferrocene/ferrocenium (Fc/Fc+) reference as the internal standard, which showed a potential onset of 0.39 V with regard to the Hg/HgCl electrode. The oxidation and reduction potential onsets of N-IDTBR were 0.38 V and −0.82 V; and thus, the HOMO and LUMO levels were calculated to be −5.18 eV and −3.98 eV, respectively. The LUMO level of N-IDTBR was slightly lower than that (−3.89 eV) of O-IDTBR. Detailed absorption and electrochemical parameters are summarized in Table 1.
Materials
Solution
Film
HOMO (eV)
LUMO (eV)

E
optg (eV)

λ
max (nm)

λ
onset (nm)

λ
max (nm)

λ
onset (nm)

O-IDTBR

—
—
690
775
−5.48
−3.89
1.60

N-IDTBR

644
730
691
791
−5.18
−3.98
1.57

To evaluate the function of N-IDTBR as the CIL in polymer solar cells, we fabricated devices with the conventional configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:O-IDTBR/N-IDTBR/Ag. The test was performed under simulated AM 1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2. Fig. 2a illustrates the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the resulting devices. The reference device without the CIL presented a moderate PCE of 4.07%, with an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.77 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 11.72 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 45.39%. Incorporating N-IDTBR as the CIL led to an enhanced PCE of 5.62% (VOC = 0.76 V, JSC = 12.59 mA cm−2, and FF = 59.06%), mainly attributable to the increased JSC and FF (Table 2). However, the device using the quaternized N-IDTBR-Br as the CIL led to a slightly lower PCE of 5.35% (Table S1, ESI).

CIL

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE [avg.] (%)

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
sh (Ω cm2)

a 
The donor:acceptor weight ratio was 1:1; the blend film was deposited from o-xylene solvent and then thermally annealed at 100 °C for 10 min.
b The PCE values were obtained from at least five separate devices.

W/O
0.77
11.72
45.39
4.07 [3.95]
1.78
8.8 × 104

N-IDTBR

0.76
12.59
59.03
5.62 [5.51]
1.47
1.8 × 105
To examine the reasons for the improved performance, we used the Kelvin probe to study the effect of the N-IDTBR CIL on the work function (WF) of the silver electrode. It was noted that the WF increased to −4.12 eV after deposition of N-IDTBR, a substantial enhancement compared with −4.65 eV for the bare Ag electrode. The change in the WF of the electrodes after introducing N-IDTBR as the CIL suggests that the amine groups enhanced the interfacial dipoles at the electrode, favoring the charge collection ability of the N-IDTBR CIL-modified, P3HT:O-IDTBR-based devices.

Fig. 2b shows the dark J–V characteristics, which were measured to elucidate the enhancement of JSC and FF for the devices. It was noted that, in the low voltage regime, the N-IDTBR modified devices exhibited a slightly reduced leakage current, which indicated an enhanced shunt resistance (Rsh) of 1.8 × 105 Ω cm2 compared with that (8.8 × 104 Ω cm2) for the reference devices (Table 1). Moreover, from the quadratic regime around 2 V, we estimated the series resistance (Rs) to be 1.47 Ω cm2 for the devices modified with N-IDTBR, which was also lower than that of the reference (Rs = 1.78 Ω cm2). The low Rs and high Rsh values were consistent with the increased JSC and FF values for the N-IDTBR CIL-modified devices.

Fig. 2c illustrates the external quantum efficiency (EQE) response for devices without and with N-IDTBR modification. It can be seen that the N-IDTBR-modified device presents a slightly higher EQE in the spectral range from approximately 460 to 700 nm than the control device without N-IDTBR. The integrated current density obtained from the EQE spectra agrees with that from J–V scanning to within 5%, which confirms the accuracy of the JSC measurement of these devices.
We further calculated the difference in EQE (ΔEQE) spectra of the devices with and without the N-IDTBR CIL (Fig. 2d), and it can be seen that the ΔEQE spectra exhibited two peaks, at 530 nm and 750 nm. Considering that the devices with N-IDTBR exhibited slightly red-shifted absorption relative to those containing O-IDTBR, it is highly probable that the EQE emerging at a longer wavelength of 750 nm was contributed by the marginally bilayer-like properties of the solar cell at the P3HT:O-IDTBR/N-IDTBR interface. Specifically, with P3HT:O-IDTBR acting as the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) and N-IDTBR as the CIL, the N-IDTBR came into contact with both the P3HT and O-IDTBR domains at the BHJ/CIL interface.
Given the fact that N-IDTBR has a lower LUMO level than P3HT, it can act as an electron acceptor. Bilayer devices of P3HT coated with N-IDTBR were fabricated to further clarify the effect of the incorporation of the CIL on the efficiency of exciton dissociation (Fig. S12 and Table S2, ESI). Interestingly, even though the thickness of N-IDTBR remained at approximately 5 nm, the bilayer device still showed a slight photovoltage response. This observation indicated that the N-IDTBR CIL can act as an electron acceptor due to photo-induced electron transfer from the P3HT to IDTBR backbone. In summary, the extra photon-harvesting capacity, the capability of tuning the WF of the electrodes, and the improved electron extraction properties together led to the improved performance of the N-IDTBR-modified devices.

The dependence of the photovoltaic performance of devices on the film thickness of the CIL plays a significant role in large-scale printing. Therefore, the practical potential of N-IDTBR as a CIL was further evaluated using a conventional architecture containing P3HT:O-IDTBR as the photoactive layer. Here, the P3HT:O-IDTBR layer was processed with the co-solvent system of 2-methylanisole:1-methylnaphthalene (o-MA:1-MN), and the N-IDTBR thickness was varied in the range of 5–33 nm. From the J–V characteristics of the devices shown in Fig. 3a, we noted that the optimized devices with an N-IDTBR thickness of 5 nm exhibited an enhanced PCE of 6.1% (VOC = 0.70 V, JSC = 13.98 mA cm−2, and FF = 61.58%). Interestingly, it can be seen that the PCEs remain at 5.88%, 5.83%, and 5.60% even when the thickness of the N-IDTBR was increased to 13, 24, and 33 nm, respectively (Table 3).

CIL thickness (nm)

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE [avg.] (%)

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
sh (Ω cm2)

a The donor:acceptor weight ratio was 1:1; the blend film was deposited from o-MA/1-MN solvents and then thermally annealed at 100 °C for 10 min.
b The PCE values were obtained from at least five separate devices.

5
0.70
13.98
61.58
6.10 [6.02]
1.35
2.7 × 105
13
0.68
13.84
62.18
5.88 [5.85]
1.53
5.4 × 105
24
0.68
13.45
63.56
5.83 [5.79]
1.70
4.1 × 105
33
0.68
13.17
62.44
5.60 [5.54]
1.51
1.1 × 105
Even though the photovoltaic performance slightly decreased with the increase in the film thickness of the CIL, we did not observe distinct S-shaped J–V characteristics, which indicated that the series resistance Rs for the devices did not notably increase as a function of thickness. This observation was consistent with the nearly unchanged dark J–V characteristics (Fig. 3b). It is also worth noting that even though the N-IDTBR may potentially have contributed to the light-harvesting ability of the device, the increased film thickness did not significantly enhance the EQE response. In contrast, the device with 33 nm N-IDTBR presented a slightly lower EQE response in the entire spectral range relative to that of the 5 nm device, indicating that the N-IDTBR predominantly acted as the CIL instead of the light-harvesting layer in these devices.
To study the competition between carrier recombination and sweep-out by the internal field, we measured the transient photocurrent measurements of these devices, with the corresponding characteristics shown in Fig. 3d. The measurement of the transient photocurrent of devices with various thicknesses of the N-IDTBR CIL was performed at a bias of 0 V. As can be seen, the decay curves of all devices with different thicknesses are very similar, which indicated that they all have similar charge extraction times.

In order to understand the underlying mechanism of the electron transfer effect of the N-IDTBR CIL, we conducted the electrical measurements to verify whether photo-induced doping occurred in the N-IDTBR CIL. The device structure is shown in the inset of Fig. 4a. The measurements were performed under both illuminated and dark conditions. For the N-IDTBR-based devices, we noted an obvious change in current as a function of voltage (I–V) characteristics under illumination. From Fig. 4a it is noted that, at a bias of 1 V, the current under illumination was increased to almost three times the magnitude with regard to the dark current. Such photoconductivity of N-IDTBR might be understood as the photo-induced electron transfer, which occurred from the amino groups in the side chain to the conjugated molecular framework of the N-IDTBR. Mechanistically, the excited electron can jump from the highest occupied molecular orbital to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital upon illumination of N-IDTBR, which will generate a hole in the former. Note that the oxidation potential of amines is about −5.10 eV, and the HOMO of N-IDTBR is −5.18 eV, thus the occurrence of electron transfer from the electron lone pair of the amine group to the HOMO of N-IDTBR is highly possible, which backfilled the generated hole. As a result, this procedure led to a free electron in the LUMO of N-IDTBR, and the charged ammonium in the side chain, which can be stabilized with each other. To further confirm this assumption, we measured the current as a function of bias of the resulting device upon removal of light. From Fig. 4b, we can clearly observe that the current increases and then slowly saturates at ∼3.2 μA after illumination for approximately five minutes. When the light is turned off, the current drops slowly and eventually stabilizes over time. After two hours in the dark, the current becomes approximately 2.3 μA, equating to more than 70% of the original value (∼3.2 μA). This finding indicated that the photo-induced doping effect that occurred in the N-IDTBR is stable. We further recorded the current upon illumination and in the dark and realized that the doping cycle in N-IDTBR is quite reversible (Fig. 4c).


We have developed a new amino-functionalized small-molecule cathode interfacial material denoted N-IDTBR. This new compound possesses good solubility in environment-friendly solvents such as alcohol, providing the possibility of processing non-fullerene polymer solar cells using orthogonal solvents. The amino groups in N-IDTBR can modify the work function of the cathode, resulting in a further photo-induced conductivity enhancement. Finally, based on P3HT:O-IDTBR as the light-harvesting layer, a prominent power conversion efficiency of 6.1% at the N-IDTBR was attained, and the PCE remained at 5.6% even at an N-IDTBR thickness of 33 nm. These results indicated that the newly developed N-IDTBR may be a promising candidate as a cathode interfacial material for developing multi-layer high-performance polymer solar cells.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2019YFA0705900) funded by MOST, the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21634004, 51673069 and 51521002), and the Basic and Applied Basic Research Major Program of Guangdong Province (No. 2019B030302007).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0tc00435a
‡ P. Luo and K. An contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020