 DOI: 10.1039/D3TC00275F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2023, 11, 4393-4403


Yuxin
Wu
,

Chenrui
Lu
,

Fei
Gao
*,

Yuanrui
Li
,

Bonan
Shi
,

Xuediao
Cai
*,

Fei
Yang
,

Junqi
Zhang
 and 

Shengzhong (Frank)
Liu
*

Key Laboratory of Applied Surface and Colloid Chemistry, National Ministry of Education, Shaanxi Key Laboratory for Advanced Energy Devices, Shaanxi Engineering Lab for Advanced Energy Technology, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi’an 710119, China. E-mail: feigao@snnu.edu.cn; liusz@snnu.edu.cn

School of Chemistry & Chemical Engineering, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi’an 710119, China. E-mail: xdcai@snnu.edu.cn

Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy, iChEM, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian 116023, China

Received
22nd January 2023
, Accepted 23rd February 2023
First published on 28th February 2023
Surface defects of perovskite films are considered to be a source of carrier nonradiative recombination in perovskite solar cells (PSCs) that causes not only the degradation of power conversion efficiency (PCE) but also instability. In this study, an organic small molecule, 2-amino-5-chlorobenzophenone (ACB), is employed to passivate the surface defects of (FAPbI3)0.95(MAPbBr3)0.05 perovskite films. The O of the carbonyl group (–CO) and the N of the amino group (–NH2) in ACB form a coordinate bond with the uncoordinated Pb2+ of the perovskite to passivate this defect. The –NH2 and –Cl groups in ACB can also form a hydrogen bond with the perovskite, which inhibits the degradation of the perovskite films. PSCs with ACB passivation possess lower defect state density and better photoelectric properties. Therefore, PCE of the PSCs is increased from 22.11% to 24.32% by ACB passivation. Furthermore, the ambient stability of the PSCs is also enhanced. The unencapsulated PSCs with ACB passivation maintain 90% of their initial PCE after being stored for 1440 h under ambient conditions.

Organic–inorganic hybrid metal-halide perovskites are promising photoelectric materials because of their tunable bandgap, large visible light absorption coefficient, superior ambipolar carrier transportability, long charge carrier diffusion, and low temperature solution processability, and they have attracted considerable attention in the photovoltaic field. After development for more than ten years, the solar-to-electrical power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has been tremendously improved from 3.8% up to 25.7%. However, even if PSCs have reached unprecedentedly high efficiency in a short time, there are large amounts of defects in perovskite thin films, especially on their surface (including at the grain boundary). These defects not only cause photogenerated carrier nonradiative recombination but also induce the degradation of the perovskite and are therefore detrimental to the performance of PSCs, which is widely considered to be the main problem to be solved to further improve their performance.

As it is the core device component, the quality of the perovskite absorber plays a key role in device performance. Because of the intrinsic low formation energy and ionic characteristics of perovskites, various defects, including (1) intrinsic point defects (atomic vacancies, interstitials, and anti-site substitutions), (2) impurities (Li+ and Na+ releasing from the hole transport layer, electrodes, and other raw materials of PSCs), and (3) surface defects and grain boundary defects (dangling bonds, uncoordinated ions, dislocations, voids and cracks, etc.), are easily formed in solution-processes and thermal annealing for preparing perovskite polycrystalline films. In order to eliminate or weaken the deleterious influences of defects on the performance of PSCs, various approaches have been adopted, such as crystallization engineering, additive engineering, and surface/interface passivation/treatment engineering. Surface defect passivation is an effective method to enhance the performance of PSCs through inhibiting the photogenerated carrier recombination induced by the defects on the surface of perovskite films. It can be performed in two ways by intermolecular reactions. One is to produce a thin two-dimensional (2D) perovskite film through the reaction of ammonium halides and the three-dimensional (3D) perovskite underneath. Li et al. introduced 1,8-naphthyridine (1,8-ND) to construct a 2D perovskite layer on 3D perovskite films and obtained excellent hydrophobic properties and better stability of an α-FAPbI3 phase, and high efficiency (23.8%) PSCs were fabricated. The challenge for this approach is that 2D perovskites have a larger longitudinal resistance and higher intrinsic exciton binding energies. The other passivation approach is to deposit a monolayer of small molecules on the surface of perovskite films, which can neutralize the charged defects on the perovskite surface by coordination or ionic bonds. Multifunctional molecules with different functional groups were used for the complexity and diversity of surface defects. For example, Choi et al. developed a small molecule indacenodithieno [3,2-b] thiophene (IDTT-ThCz) to perform surface passivation of perovskite films. The small molecule possesses Lewis-base atoms O and S, which can interact with the perovskite to passivate the defects and improve the charge extraction due to its p-type conducting properties. As a result, the PSCs exhibit a PCE of 22.5%. Xiong et al. used a molecule N-benzyloxycarbonyl-d-valine (NBDV) to treat the surface of perovskite films. NBDV surface post-treatment resulted in a bulk restructure of the entire perovskite film, which eliminated the trap states, improved the cathode interface, and formed an additional strong electric field at the interface of MAPbI3/PCBM, resulting in a 21.80% efficiency for MAPbI3 PSCs.
Herein, we report a small molecule 2-amino-5-chlorobenzophenone (ACB),which contains a carbonyl group (–CO), an amino group (–NH2), and –Cl to passivate the surface defects on (FAPbI3)0.95(MAPbBr3)0.05 perovskite films. The interaction between ACB and the perovskite was demonstrated in detail. The O atom in the –CO group and the N atom in –NH2 group formed coordinate bonds with under-coordinated Pb2+ (the Pb2+ defect was considered to be the major carrier trap) and passivated this defect. The –NH2 and –Cl groups could also form hydrogen bonds with the perovskite, suppressing the ion shift and degradation of the perovskite. As a result, the PCE of the ACB passivated PSCs is enhanced from 22.11% to 24.32% with an increased open circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF) as well as reduced hysteresis. Furthermore, ACB surface passivation also enhances the ambient stability of PSCs, which maintain 90.5% of their initial PCE after being stored for 1440 h in air without encapsulation.

(FAPbI3)0.95(MAPbBr3)0.05 perovskite films were deposited through a one-step spin-coating method. Different concentrations of ACB in chlorobenzene (CB) were spin-coated on the surface of the perovskite films to perform passivation. Fig. 1a shows the process of ACB passivation on the perovskite film surface, and the detailed process is provided in the Experimental Section. X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were conducted to study the phase and crystallinity of the perovskite films, as shown in Fig. 1b. All samples show two strong XRD peaks at 2θ = 14.18° and 28.35°, which correspond to the (110) and (220) planes of the perovskite, respectively. There is no additional peak and no obvious peak shift, indicating that the ACB did not affect the phase of the perovskite. The intensity of the main (110) diffraction peak increases lightly with ACB treatment, indicating that the crystallinity of the perovskite is lightly boosted (as shown in the Fig. S1, ESI).

The effect of ACB treatment on the surface morphology of the perovskite films was investigated through scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM). In Fig. 2a, it can be seen that there are cracks and holes in the untreated perovskite film, while after ACB treatment, the grain boundary becomes blurred and the perovskite film become more compact (Fig. 2b). In addition, excess PbI2 (white particles or streaks on the image) can be observed on the untreated perovskite film, while the amount of PbI2 is greatly reduced after ACB treatment, which indicates that ACB can inhibit the formation of PbI2 on the perovskite film. The excess PbI2 will result in the degradation of the perovskite under ambient conditions and illumination, it will also cause serious hysteresis. From the AFM results (Fig. 2c and d), the root-mean-square roughness of the perovskite films is reduced from 23.0 to 16.4 nm through ACB treatment, indicating a smoother surface of the perovskite films, which is beneficial for carrier transport.
Some DMSO solvent is still left in the as-prepared perovskite films. The ACB/CB solution infiltrated into the perovskite films via voids and grain boundaries, and CB dissolved the residual DMSO. In the annealing process, CB evaporated out of the perovskite film to help the residual DMSO solvent evaporate, and ACB postponed crystal growth due to its interaction with the perovskite. This further promoted the crystallization and improved the morphology of the perovskite films. Xue et al. reported surface-induced secondary grain growth, where surface modification induced post crystallization grain growth in the entire perovskite thin film.

Fig. 3a gives the UV-vis absorption spectra of the perovskite films passivated using different concentrations of ACB, and the corresponding Tauc plots are presented in Fig. 3b. The unpassivated and the ACB passivated perovskite films have nearly the same absorption spectrum with an absorption edge at ∼ 790 nm (bandgap Eg = 1.56 eV), meaning that ACB treatment does not change the optical properties of the perovskite films. Steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence (PL and TRPL) spectroscopies were used to investigate the influence of ACB on carrier recombination of the perovskite films. As given in Fig. 3c, the PL peaks of all the samples exhibit almost the same shape and position at ∼790 nm, but their intensity increases through ACB passivation and 6 mg mL−1 of ACB passivation produced the strongest PL, indicating the suppression of photogenerated carrier non-radiative recombination through defect passivation by ACB. Fig. 3d shows the TRPL spectra of the unpassivated and ACB passivated perovskite films, and the luminescence intensity decreases gradually with time. The luminescence intensity of the perovskite film passivated by 6 mg mL−1 of ACB decreases the slowest, indicating that the lifetime of the photogenerated carrier is the longest. The PL decay curves were fitted using a double exponential equation:
I = A1 exp(−t/τ1) + A2 exp(−t/τ2)
(1)
where
A1 and A2 are the decay amplitudes, τ1 is the fast decay lifetime (associated with nonradiative recombination) and τ2 is the slow decay lifetime (associated with band-to-band recombination). The average carrier lifetime τave is determined by:

(2)
The fitting parameters are presented in Table S1 (ESI). The ACB passivation prolonged the carrier lifetime from 290.57 to 419.49 ns, meaning that carrier non-radiative recombination was depressed by ACB passivation.
In order to further explore the passivation effect of ACB on the perovskite films, the defect state density of the perovskite films was evaluated in a hole-only device with the structure of FTO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au, using a space charge limited current method. Fig. 4a and b show the dark current–voltage (I–V) curves of the devices without and with ACB passivation, respectively. The trap density Ntrap can be determined via the trap-filled limited voltage (VTFL), which is the onset voltage of the trap-filled limited regime (TFL, the inflection point on the I-V curve), based on the equation:
(3)
where
ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, ε is the relative dielectric constant of the perovskite, q is the elementary charge, and L is the thickness of the perovskite film. The unpassivated and ACB passivated perovskite films have Ntrap values of 1.46 × 1016 and 1.05 × 1016 cm−3, respectively. The reduction of Ntrap demonstrated that ACB can effectively passivate the defects in the perovskite films.

Mott–Schottky analysis was used to investigate the effects of ACB treatment on the built-in potential (Vbi) of the PSCs, as shown in Fig. 4c. Vbi can be determined by the Mott–Schottky equation:
(4)
where
C is the space-charge capacitance, q is the electron charge, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, ε is the relative dielectric constant, A is the device area and N is the charge density. The pristine PSC presents a Vbi of 1.178 V, and the PSC treated by ACB has a higher Vbi of 1.310 V. The high Vbi will produce a large open circuit voltage (Voc). Dark J–V curves of the PSCs without and with ACB treatment were also measured to evaluate the charge transport properties (Fig. 4d). Compared with the control device, the device with ACB treatment has a lower dark current density (Jdark). There are two causes for the lower dark current of the ACB passivated device: one is that the surface defects of the perovskite film were passivated by ACB, which decreased the carrier recombination. The other is that ACB filled the holes and grain boundaries of the perovskite film, which reduced current leakage.

Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) was applied to measure the contact potential difference Vcpd between the perovskite film surface and the probe to study the influence of ACB treatment on the perovskite surface potential, which is an important means for studying the electrical properties of a semiconductor:
Vcpd = (Φtip − Φpvk)/(−e)
(5)
where
Φtip and Φpvk are the work functions of the probe tip and the perovskite films, respectively. Fig. 5a and b present the KPFM plane Vcpd images of the perovskite films without and with ACB treatment, and the corresponding line scans are displayed in Fig. 5c and d, respectively. In general, a trap-rich semiconductor shows a relatively lower Vcpd. The average Vcpd of the pristine perovskite films is 0.294 V, and after ACB treatment, it increases to 0.771 V. The increase of Vcpd should be from the defect passivation by ACB. Moreover, the inhomogeneous distribution of the potential was reduced after ACB treatment, which inhibits the adverse local charge accumulation. In the meantime, the reduction of the work functions of the ACB treated perovskite films produces band upward bending, which will boost the built-in potential and the separation of positive and negative carriers.

In order to investigate the interaction between ACB and the perovskite, FTIR, XPS, and NMR measurements were carried out. Fig. 6a and b show the FITR spectra of the N-H bond and the CO bond of the ACB, perovskite, and the ACB treated perovskite film, respectively. In Fig. 6a, it can be seen that there are obvious differences in the peak positions of the N–H bond vibration. After ACB treatment, the stretching vibrations of the N–H bonds (of –NH2) and the CO bond of ACB shift from 3312/3418 to 3267/3399 cm−1 and from 1616 to 1619 cm−1, respectively, which demonstrates the interaction between ACB and the perovskite. Fig. 6c and Fig. S2 (ESI) show the XPS of the Pb 4f and I 3d core level for the ACB passivated perovskite films and the pristine one, respectively. The Pb 4f spectrum for the pristine perovskite film shows two main peaks located at 138.30 and 143.16 eV, corresponding to the Pb 4f7/2 and Pb 4f5/2 binding energy peaks, respectively, whereas the ACB treated perovskite film shows two main Pb 4f peaks at 138.13 and 142.99 eV. The Pb 4f peak of the perovskite film with ACB passivation shifts by 0.17 eV to a lower binding energy, which can be attributed to the interaction between the O in the –CO and the N in the –NH2 of ACB and the Pb2+ of the perovskite. The I 3d spectrum of the perovskite without ACB treatment exhibits two characteristic peaks of I 3d5/2 and I 3d3/2, which are located at 619.10 and 630.59 eV. For the ACB treated film, these two peaks shift to lower binding energies of 618.95 and 630.44 eV respectively, which can be attributed to the formation of hydrogen bonds between N–H⋯I.
To further verify the chemical interaction between ACB and the perovskite, the 1H and 13C NMR spectra of ACB and the perovskite were measured in deuterated dimethylsulfoxide-d6 (DMSO-d6). In Fig. 6d, the resonance peak corresponding to the protons of the –NH2 group in ACB appears at 7.20 ppm, which moved to a higher field of 7.11 ppm when mixed with the perovskite (and to a higher field of 7.17 ppm when mixed with PbI2, as shown in Fig. S3a, ESI), confirming the existence of a coordination interaction between the N in the –NH2 of ACB and Pb2+. In Fig. 6e, the 13C NMR spectrum displays that the –CO peak of ACB shifts from 196.89 to 196.69 ppm when mixed with the perovskite (and to a higher field of 196.83 ppm when mixed with PbI2, as shown in Fig. S3b, ESI), which indicates that the electron-donating ability of –CO brings about a Lewis acid-base coordination interaction between the O in the –CO of ACB and Pb2+. Furthermore, the proton chemical shift peak from the –NH2 group in FA (at 8.82 ppm) is split into two peaks at 8.94 and 8.66 ppm with ACB addition, as given in Fig. S3c (ESI); this is due to the formation of Cl⋯H–N hydrogen bonds between ACB and FA.

Fig. 6f gives the passivation mechanism schematic of ACB on the perovskite. The –CO group and the –NH2 group of ACB interact with the Pb2+ on the perovskite. The O in the –CO and the N in the –NH2 group form coordination bonds with the uncoordinated Pb2+, which passivate the Pb2+ defects on the perovskite. In the meantime, the –NH2 and –Cl groups of ACB can also form hydrogen bonds with the perovskite. Accordingly, ACB can passivate the defects and suppress the ion shift and degradation of the perovskite. Furthermore, the ACB passivation layer can also prevent moisture invasion owing to its hydrophobic benzene ring, which will improve the stability of the PSCs.
The passivation effect of ACB on the photovoltaic properties of PSCs was investigated. Fig. 7a gives the cross-sectional SEM image of a complete PSC with ACB passivation at the optimized concentration of 6 mg mL−1, which clearly displays the FTO/TiO2/perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au structure, and the thickness of the perovskite film is about 450 nm. The grains of the perovskite layer are large, and these grains are closely connected with the fused grain boundaries and vertically penetrate the entire perovskite layer, which is beneficial for carrier transport in the PSCs. Fig. 7b presents the current–voltage (J–V) curves of the pristine and different concentrations of ACB passivated devices under standard AM1.5 illumination (100 mW cm−2) and the detailed photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table S2 (ESI). The devices with ACB passivation attain higher performance values than the pristine device. 6 mg mL−1 of ACB passivation produced the highest device PCE of 24.32% with a Voc of 1.18 V, short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 25.32 mA cm−2, and fill factor (FF) of 81.42%, while the highest values for the pristine device are a PCE of 22.11%, Voc of 1.14 V, Jsc of 25.14 mA cm−2, and FF of 76.86%. The enhancement of PCE is mainly from the improvement of the Voc and FF. In Fig. 7c, the hysteresis effect of the PSCs was studied by measuring their forward and backward J–V curves, which is characterized by the hysteresis index HI = (PCEReverse − PCEForward)/PCEReverse. The detailed photovoltaic parameters of the forward and reverse J–V scans for the pristine and ACB passivated devices are presented in Table S3 and S4 (ESI). The ACB treated device has a lower HI of 2.5% in contrast with that of the pristine device (6.4%). The movement of charged defects in the electric field of PSCs is a cause for the hysteresis in PSCs. The small HI can be ascribed to the effective defect passivation by ACB.
The statistical distribution of the photovoltaic parameters from 40 PSCs without and with ACB treatment is given in Fig. 7d and Fig. S4 (ESI). The average PCE of the untreated and ACB treated devices is 21.57% and 24.04%, respectively. Moreover, the distribution of PCE is narrower for the ACB treated devices, reflecting good reproducibility. Fig. 7e presents the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra in the visible to near infrared region of 300–900 nm for the control and ACB treated devices; they exhibit a similar profile and have a high EQE around 95% in the range of 350–750 nm. The integrated Jsc values for the devices without and with ACB treatment are 25.02 and 25.20 mA cm−2, respectively, in line with those acquired from the J–V curves.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed to investigate the charge transfer in the PSCs. Fig. 7f shows the Nyquist plots of the PSCs without and with ACB treatment. The electrical parameters of the PSCs were obtained (Table S5, ESI) through fitting using the equivalent circuit. The series resistance (Rs) of the PSCs decreases from 19.92 to 15.33 Ω, and the recombination resistance (Rrec) increases dramatically from 2281 to 3617 Ω by ACB treatment. The lower Rs reflects the improvement of the crystallinity of the perovskite film and the higher Rrec indicates suppressed charge carrier recombination in the ACB treated PSC, which shows that ACB can effectively passivate defects.
The output stability assessment of the PSCs at the maximum power point was conducted under continuous AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2) for 900 s. As shown in Fig. 8a. the fabricated PSCs have good stable output properties. The ACB treated PSC achieves a stabilized PCE of 24.21% with a stabilized Jsc of 25.22 mA cm−2 at a bias of 0.96 V, while those of the control one are 22.04% and 25.05 mA cm−2 at a bias of 0.88 V, in good accordance with the results of the J–V measurements. The ambient stability of the PSCs was investigated under air and environmental conditions (RH 30%, 25 °C) without encapsulation, as shown in Fig. 8b. The PSC with ACB treatment exhibits superior stability compared with the untreated one. After 1440 h of storage, the PSC passivated by ACB maintained 90.5% of its initial efficiency, in contrast to 80.9% for the unpassivated PSC. The defects on the surface and at the grain boundaries of perovskite films can also lead to the permeation of moisture or oxygen into the perovskite films, which accelerates the decomposition of the perovskite and the decline of the PCE. The hydrophobicity of the perovskite films was studied by water contact angle measurements. As show in the inset of Fig. 8b, the water contact angle of the perovskite films increases from 63.0° to 80.1° by ACB passivation, which indicate that ACB treatment improved the moisture resistance of the perovskite film. This comes from the contribution of the benzene ring and the –Cl of ACB. The defect passivation and improved hydrophobicity bring about the enhanced ambient stability of the PSCs.

In summary, an organic small molecule ACB was used to improve the PCE and stability of PSCs effectively by passivation of the surface defects. The influence of ACB passivation on the surface morphology, defect state, and photoelectric performance of perovskite films was investigated systematically. The O of the –CO group and the N of the –NH2 group in ACB can interact with the Pb2+ in the perovskite, which effectively passivated the defects on the surface of the perovskite films. The –NH2 and –Cl groups of ACB can also yield hydrogen bonds with the perovskite, which inhibit the degradation of the perovskite films. ACB passivation improved the surface morphology, decreased the defect state density, and boosted the built-in electric field and hydrophobicity of the perovskite films. Consequently, the PCE of the ACB passivated PSC is enhanced from 22.11% to 24.32%. Furthermore, the PSC with ACB passivation shows higher environmental stability. This work demonstrates that ACB is a promising passivator which can passivate the surface defects of perovskite films for achieving high performance in PSCs and other perovskite photoelectric devices.


F. G., Y. W. and X. C. designed the experiments. F. G. and Y. W. wrote the manuscript. Y. W. prepared the perovskite films and fabricated the perovskite solar cells and performed most measurements. Y. L. measured the SEM images. C. L., B. S., F. Y., and J. Z. offered help to prepare the perovskite films. S. L. revised the manuscript.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was funded by the Natural Science Basic Research Program of Shaanxi Province [grant number 2021JZ-24].


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3tc00275f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023