 DOI: 10.1039/D1TA06410J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 24064-24070


Fa-Zheng
Qiu
,

Ming-Hua
Li
,

Shuo
Wang
,

Jia-Yi
Sun
,

Yan
Jiang
*,

Jun-Jie
Qi
* and 

Jin-Song
Hu
*

State Key Laboratory for Advanced Metals and Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China. E-mail: junjieqi@ustb.edu.cn

Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences (BNLMS), CAS Key Laboratory of Molecular Nanostructure and Nanotechnology, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: hujs@iccas.ac.cn

Energy Materials and Optoelectronics Unit, Songshan Lake Materials Laboratory, Dongguan, Guangdong 523808, China. E-mail: jiangyan@sslab.org.cn

School of Chemical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China

Received
29th July 2021
, Accepted 7th October 2021
First published on 8th October 2021
The sequential deposition method has achieved great success in the preparation of high-performance perovskite solar cells. Nevertheless, the crystalline phase of intermediate films which determines the quality of perovskite films and the corresponding device performance is yet to be fully understood. In this work, we show that FA1−xMAxPbI3 perovskite intermediate films prepared in ambient air are δ phase, which after annealing, present preferable orientation, higher crystallinity, longer photoluminescence carrier lifetime, and lower trap density than those obtained from α phase intermediate films. By integrating fully ambient-prepared perovskite films into planar heterojunction solar cells, a champion power conversion efficiency of 22.09% (steady-state efficiency of 21.03%) is achieved. Moreover, the unencapsulated device maintains 92.4% of its original efficiency after aging for 1200 h in ambient air (30 ± 5% relative humidity, 25 ± 5 °C, dark). This study provides new insight into preparation of high-quality perovskite films and solar cells.

Metal-halide perovskites have attracted enormous research interest for energy conversion applications in the last few years due to their extraordinary optoelectronic properties, such as tunable bandgap, low exciton binding energy, high light absorption coefficient, and long carrier lifetime. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has enhanced rapidly from 3.8% to 25.5%, which is comparable to that of commercial photovoltaic technologies such as crystalline silicon. In recent years, more research efforts are devoted to the development of scalable manufacturing technology for production of PSCs on an industrial scale.

A variety of low cost and highly reproducible solution-processed methods, such as one-step antisolvent dripping deposition, two-step sequential deposition, solvent annealing etc., have been successfully developed and widely employed to fabricate high-quality perovskite films. When comparison is made between these methods, the two-step sequential deposition method is more suitable for production of PSCs on a large scale because (i) it has a longer processing window, and (ii) film uniformity and functionality can be controlled in different steps. Using this method, PSCs employing mixed cation-halide perovskite films (e.g., with formamidinium lead iodide (FAPbI3) as a major component) showing superior performance are reported from a series of independent groups.
Recently, various strategies such as seed-assisted growth, additive engineering, and conjugated polymer tailoring have been developed to assist the two-step sequential deposition method. For example, Huang et al., introduced NH4H2PO2 into CH3NH3I precursors to form intermediates, thus obtaining large-grain films. Zhao et al., incorporated CsCl seeds into PbI2 precursors to retard perovskite formation and reduce nucleation density, resulting in the formation of high-quality films and the enhancement of device performance. These efforts are mainly devoted to engineering crystal growth kinetics. However, little attention is paid to the influence of the crystalline phase of the intermediate film on the film quality.
In this work, we fabricated FA1−xMAxPbI3 perovskite films via the two-step sequential deposition method. By regulating the deposition environment, we obtained the intermediate films of both δ phase and α phase. A series of film and device physics characterization studies reveal that FA1−xMAxPbI3 prepared from δ phase intermediate films exhibit preferable orientation, higher crystallinity, longer photoluminescence carrier lifetime, and lower trap density. As a result, the planar PSCs (ITO/SnO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au) realize a champion PCE of 22.09% (steady-state efficiency of 21.03%) and retain 92.4% of the initial PCE after aging in ambient air for 1200 h.

The schematics showing formation of the perovskite films are depicted in Fig. 1. PbI2 solution was spin-coated onto the SnO2 films either in a N2 glovebox or in ambient air (relative humidity (RH) around 40%) and annealed at 75 °C for 1 min to obtain PbI2 films with weak crystallinity. Then the mixed organic amine salt solution was dropped on the PbI2 films and held for 5 s before spin-coating to form the intermediate films. After a post-annealing process in air, the perovskite films were formed. We referred to the FA1−xMAxPbI3 perovskite film prepared in the N2 glovebox as the control film, and that prepared in ambient air as the air film.

X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were performed to understand the perovskite formation process. The PbI2 film prepared in air exhibits stronger peak intensity and lower full width at half-maximum (FWHM). A peak at around 10° assigned to the PbI2-DMSO adduct is shown in both cases (Fig. 2a). After deposition of the organic amine salts, the intermediate control film is tan in color and presents the [111] oriented α-black phase (Fig. 2b). In contrast, the intermediate air film is pale-yellow in color and shows the δ non-perovskite phase. After annealing at 150 °C for 10 min, the control film shows enhanced (001) and (002) peak intensities together with the suppressed (111) peak intensity, suggesting the change in the crystallographic orientation (Fig. 2c). The air film, on the other hand, experiences a δ to α phase transition, accompanied by a change to black color. In addition, the air film exhibits much strong intensities in the [001] crystallographic orientation than the control film, which are beneficial to reduce light scattering at grain boundaries and intragranular defects. Furthermore, the FWHM of the (001) peak of the air film (0.075°) is smaller than that of the control film (0.091°) (Fig. S1). The reduced FWHM values and increased peak intensity demonstrate that perovskite films prepared in ambient air have higher crystallinity. Moreover, the PbI2 peak at 12.82° appears in both cases because of partial decomposition of the perovskite films during the annealing processes. The air film shows lower PbI2 peak intensity, implying its better thermal stability. Next, the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) technique was performed to investigate the morphology evolution. The PbI2-air film exhibits a higher density of nanoscopic pinholes than that of the PbI2-control film (Fig. 2d and e). These nanoscopic pinholes are expected to facilitate the diffusion of organic amine salts in PbI2 films and accelerate the solid–solid reaction. Volume expansion (∼200% time) during perovskite formation causes these nanoscopic pinholes to be filled, avoiding the detrimental shunting pathways. When the organic salts are spin-coated on PbI2 films, the intermediate air film presents a larger grain size compared to the intermediate control film (Fig. 2f and g). In the spin-casting process, the H2O molecule in ambient air liquefies and ionizes the organic amine salts, accelerating the reaction rate with PbI2, thereby inducing a larger grain size and better interconnectivity between perovskite crystals. The white powders on top of the film are residual organic salts. After annealing at 150 °C for 15 min, these organic salts disappear. The final control film is composed of small crystals with an average grain size of 0.45 ± 0.14 μm (Fig. 2h and S2a). The grain of the final air film grows to an average size of 0.96 ± 0.31 μm (Fig. 2i and S2b). The increased grain size could lead to reduced grain boundaries and defect densities.
To understand the influence of the crystalline phase of intermediate films on the chemical states, optical properties and charge transport dynamics of the final perovskite films, we carried out a series of characterization studies on the above two perovskite films. Fig. 3a presents X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra of Pb 4f. Pb0 peaks located at 136.7 and 141.6 eV are observed in both samples, similar to previous results. The possible reason for the existence of Pb signals is that too many iodine vacancies in the perovskite film lead to the appearance of highly unsaturated Pb, which may show metallic characteristics. These metallic Pb clusters serve as nonradiative recombination centers and cause electrical loss. Pb0 intensity is 3.6 times higher for the control film, suggesting that the air film suffers less non-recombination losses. The I 3d peaks of the two films have almost no shift (Fig. S3). Absorption and steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the two films are depicted in Fig. 3b. The air film shows a higher absorbance than the control film, which contributes to a higher density of photo-generated carriers. In addition, the air film exhibits a lower Urbach energy than the control film (Fig. S4), suggesting a reduced energetic disorder that is associated with sub-bandgap states. Moreover, the steady-state PL intensity of the air film is enhanced, and the peak position is blue-shifted from 803 to 796 nm, indicating that the trap-assisted non-radiative recombination is reduced.Fig. 3c shows the time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) decay spectra fitted by using the biexponential decay model:
f(t) = A1exp(−t1/τ1) + A2exp(−t2/τ2)
(1)
where
τ1 and τ2 are the fast and slow decay time constants, respectively, and A1 and A2 are their corresponding decay amplitudes. Generally, the fast decay component (τ1) is attributed to non-radiative recombination induced by charge-trapping defect states, while the slow decay component (τ2) reflects the bi-molecular recombination in the bulk film. We find that both time constants are significantly longer in the air film. Specifically, τ1 increased from 150.50 to 231.58 ns and τ2 from 1408.53 to 1670.09 ns. The average lifetime (τave), determined from τave = (A1τ12 + A2τ22)/(A1τ1 + A2τ2), increases from 1376.39 to 1643.43 ns (Table S1). These results confirm that regulating the crystalline phase of intermediate films in the two-step sequential deposition method is a powerful method towards lowering trap density and obtaining better optoelectronic properties.

Subsequently, to examine the effect of the crystalline phase of intermediate films on the photovoltaic performance, we used the control film and the air film to fabricate photovoltaic devices with the structure of ITO/SnO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au (Fig. 4a). The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of champion devices, measured under simulated solar illumination (AM1.5G, 1 sun), are displayed in Fig. 4b. The control device shows a PCE of 20.38% with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.11 V, short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 22.92 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 80.10%. By comparison, the air device displays a champion PCE of 22.09% with a Jsc of 24.35 mA cm−2, Voc of 1.13 V and FF of 80.30%. Their external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra are shown in Fig. 4c. Integrated photocurrents are close to the Jsc values obtained from J–V measurements (average mismatch is below 5%). The enhancement of quantum efficiency in the long wavelength region is in agreement with the UV-vis absorption spectra. According to the previous reports, the preferred crystal orientation of tetragonal perovskite grains could increase the charge carrier lifetime, leading to the enhanced photocurrent in PSCs. The enhanced Voc and FF values of the air device could be ascribed to the suppressed non-radiative recombination and the improved charge transport.
The notorious J–V hysteresis between the reverse and forward scans is studied. The hysteresis index decreases from 0.146 for the air device to 0.090 for the control device (Fig. S5 and Table S2). Fig. 4d displays the stabilized photocurrent density and PCE measured near their maximum power point, when constant biases were applied for the control device (0.93 V) and the air device (0.95 V), respectively. The PCE of the control and the air device rapidly stabilizes at 18.71% and 21.03% with a stable photocurrent density of 20.12 and 22.14 mA cm−2, respectively. Next, statistical PCE distributions of 30 devices of each type verify the reproducibility and reliability of the photovoltaic performance improvement of prepared perovskite films in ambient air (Fig. 4e). Finally, we monitored the long-term stability of two devices without encapsulation over 1200 h under ambient-air and dark conditions. As shown in Fig. 4f, the control device exhibits a rapid PCE decay, decreasing to 62.4% of its initial value after 1200 h. In comparison, the air device could retain 92.4% of its initial PCE.
We employed a range of device physics characterization techniques to reveal how the crystalline phase of intermediate films affects the final device performance. First, the space-charge limited current (SCLC) method was utilized to quantitatively calculate the trap density of perovskite films.Fig. 5a and b present the dark current density–voltage (J–V) analysis of the electron-only and hole-only device, respectively. The corresponding structures are shown in the inset. The trap density (Ntrap) can be estimated by using the following equation:
VTFL = (eNtrapL2)/2εε0
(2)
where
VTFL is the defect-filled limited voltage, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, ε is the relative dielectric constant, and L and e represent the thickness of the perovskite film and elementary charge, respectively. The extracted electron trap densities of the control film and the air film are determined to be 6.2 × 1015 and 5.6 × 1015 cm−3, respectively. The hole trap densities of the control film and the air film are determined to be 1.3 × 1015 cm−3 and 4.8 × 1014 cm−3, respectively. The reduced electron and hole trap density would contribute to decreased non-radiative recombination and enlarged carrier lifetime, consistent with PL and TRPL spectra.

We performed the Nyquist plot measurements on the two devices (Fig. 5c). The corresponding equivalent circuit is displayed in the inset. The Rs values are similar in the two cases. The Rrec for the air device is about 1.6 times that for the control device (Table S3). The higher Rrec comes from higher degree of crystal orientation and lower trap density, manifesting the effective restriction of the charge recombination. Fig. S6 shows the light intensity-dependent Voc plot. The slope decreases from 1.85 kBT/q for the control device to 1.53 kBT/q for the air device, suggesting a reduction of trap-assisted nonradiative recombination in the air device. Finally, the Mott–Schottky measurement was performed to investigate the influence of defect density on charge transport. The air device exhibits an enhanced built-in potential (Vbi) of 1.00 V (Fig. 5d and Table S4), which is higher than that of the control device (0.96 V). The larger Vbi means a stronger driving force for charge separation and collection, which is beneficial for improving the Voc output of PSCs. These results consistently indicate that FA1−xMAxPbI3 prepared from δ phase intermediate films is beneficial to charge transfer and the non-radiative recombination suppression.

In summary, we conclude that the crystalline phase of intermediate films in the two-step sequential deposition method affects the perovskite film morphology, crystallinity and electronic quality, thereby determining the photovoltaic performance of the device. FA1−xMAxPbI3 prepared from δ phase intermediate films exhibits preferable orientation, high crystallinity, low trap density and strong light absorption, resulting in PSCs with remarkably restrained charge recombination loss and enlarged built-in potential. The corresponding planar PSCs achieve a champion PCE of 22.09%. Moreover, the unencapsulated device maintains 92.4% of its original efficiency after aging for 1200 h in ambient air. This finding paves a new avenue to further enhance perovskite solar cell efficiency.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by funding from Beijing Natural Science Foundation (2202030), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22109166), the Chinese Academy of Sciences and the Energy Materials and Optoelectronics Unit of Songshan Lake Materials Laboratory.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta06410j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021