 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA01628J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11055-11062


Yaxiong
Guo
,

Hongwei
Lei
,

Liangbin
Xiong
,

Borui
Li
,

Zhao
Chen
,

Jian
Wen
,

Guang
Yang
,

Gang
Li
* and 

Guojia
Fang
*

Key Laboratory of Artificial Micro- and Nano-structures of Ministry of Education of China, School of Physics and Technology, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, PR China. E-mail: gjfang@whu.edu.cn; Fax: +86 27 68752569; Tel: +86 27 87642784

Department of Electronic and Information Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China. E-mail: gang.w.li@polyu.edu.hk; Fax: +852 2362 8439; Tel: +852 2766 7723

School of Physics and Electronic-information Engineering, Hubei Engineering University, Xiaogan, 432000, China

Received
22nd February 2017
, Accepted 28th April 2017
First published on 28th April 2017
Inorganic hole transport materials (HTMs) are being extensively studied as they are promising for efficient and stable organic solar cells (OSCs) and organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells. High mobility, earth-abundant, environmentally stable and nontoxic HTMs are the focus of research. This work demonstrates that highly transparent, high mobility and phase pure Cu2O nano-crystal films are promising HTMs for efficient OSC applications. The Cu2O films are synthesized by reactive magnetron sputtering at room temperature. The highest power conversion efficiency of OSCs based on the classical PTB7:PC71BM active layer reaches 8.61% with the Cu2O HTM, which is 15% higher than that of the OSCs with the standard PEDOT:PSS HTM layer. Our study shows that the device based on the Cu2O HTM exhibited better energy level alignment, reduced series resistance and therefore improved charge extraction compared with those based on CuO and PEDOT:PSS HTM layers. The improved photovoltaic performance suggests that Cu2O is a promising HTM for future low temperature roll to roll organic solar cell and even perovskite solar cell fabrication.

Organic solar cells (OSCs) have been studied intensively in the last few decades due to their remarkable properties such as mechanical flexibility, low cost, light weight and the low energy consuming roll-to-roll compatible manufacturing process. Recently, OSCs showed an impressive power conversion efficiency (PCE) close to or over 12% for both tandem devices and single-junction OSC devices from several groups. Commercialization of OSCs is always the focus of extensive research. The physical and chemical properties of the carrier transport layers were found to be the most critical factors in determining the device characteristics and stability.

For the conventional OSCs, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly-styrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) is the most used HTM due to properties such as easy processing, high work-function, etc. However, the devices often suffer from instability due to the organic nature, and the acidic nature of PEDOT:PSS by indium diffusion into the active layer. Various methods were carried out to manipulate the organic semiconductor/anode interface: (1) organic material modification such as using conducting polymers and conjugated polyelectrolytes (CPEs). (2) Surface modification with cross-linkable materials and graphene-based materials. (3) Inorganic transition metal oxide semiconductors, such as molybdenum oxide, vanadium oxide and nickel oxide, both thermally evaporated and solution processed, were used to achieve both efficient hole collection and better device stability. Although many published good-performing OSC results use solution-processed non-crystalline oxide transport materials, there are still many problems need to be explored and researched in crystalline oxide materials. Thus, the development of p-type transparent semiconductors with good transport characteristics compatible with a low temperature processing technique is much appreciated for organic solar cells.
Recently, copper suboxides (CuOx) have drawn lots of attention as anode/hole buffer layers for OSCs due to their advantages of p-type conductivity and relatively high optical transparency. For instance, Chen et al. have demonstrated the use of CuOx by thermal evaporation as an effective hole transporting layer and a PCE of 4.06% was obtained for a poly(3-hexyl thiophene) P3HT:PC61BM OSC with a device degradation of 25% after 40 days. Lin et al. have fabricated the solution-processed CuOx interlayer on the P3HT:PC61BM active layer by sol–gel processing in the inverted device structure and the PCE was improved from 3.11% to 4.02%. CuO nanoparticles synthesized via sonochemistry were also utilized as an anode buffer layer in a PCDTBT:PC71BM bulk heterojunction solar cell, leading to an improved PCE from 6.00% to 6.44% in comparison to the PEDOT:PSS-based solar cells. Li et al. reported the application of solution processed CuOx as an anode buffer layer with a conventional OSC structure. The CuOx buffer layer is prepared simply via spin-coating copper acetylacetonate in 1,2-dichlorobenzene solution on the ITO substrate followed by thermal transformation (at 80 °C) in air. A much higher PCE of 7.14% has been achieved by adopting PBDTTT-C, a low band gap conjugated polymer, as the donor material. Recently, a successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) method with an annealing temperature of 170 °C has been reported to produce Cu2O films for perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Also, a solution reaction method from CuI with an annealing temperature of 100 °C has been reported to produce Cu2O films for PSCs.
In single phase copper oxides, Cu ions have several different forms. However, single phase cuprous oxide (Cu2O) has rarely been reported for HTM application in polymer solar cells, although Cu2O has earth-abundant sources, is low cost and can be processed cost-effectively using an industrially compatible method at low temperature.
In this study, we report single phase Cu2O and CuO nano-crystalline films as HTMs in OSC devices, which are prepared by reactive magnetron sputtering at room temperature. The intrinsic doping of the material is influenced by the concentration of copper vacancies, which is tunable by controlling the amount of oxygen in the process gas during deposition. The structural, morphological, chemical, and electrical properties of the films are analyzed using in situ X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), X-ray diffraction (XRD), atomic force microscopy (AFM), and Hall measurements. Highly efficient OSCs have been constructed with these HTMs, and enhancements in JSC, VOC and FF for the device using the Cu2O HTM were realized, resulting in an improvement in OSC PCE. The interface design is essential in controlling active layer/electrode interface barriers for charge extraction, balanced carrier transport, reduced surface recombination, and the OSC series resistance.

Patterned ITO glass (sheet resistance = 10 Ω □−1, CSG Holding) was used as the anode. The copper target (99.999%) was bought from Beijing InnoChem. PEDOT:PSS (Clevios PVP AI4083), purchased from H. C. Starck, was used as the hole transport material for reference devices. Polymer donor materials were PTB7 and P3HT, which were purchased from Solarmer Material Inc. PC71BM and PCBM (Nano C) were utilized as acceptor materials. Chlorobenzene was purchased from Sigma Aldrich. The commercially available materials were used directly without any further purification.


The preparation of copper oxides by reactive radio-frequency (RF) magnetron sputtering was carried out in a custom made sputter chamber at a sputtering power of 60 W with a 2-inch metallic copper target. The vacuum chamber was pumped down to below 10−4 Pa. To achieve the desired sputtering argon atmosphere environment, the gas flow rate was controlled at a constant pressure of 1 Pa. As a reactive gas component, oxygen was introduced into the argon atmosphere during deposition. The oxygen content was varied between 4 and 30%. Without intentional substrate heating, the substrate temperature is assumed to remain at room temperature (RT) during deposition. The target to substrate distance was set to 7 cm.


The indium tin oxide (ITO) glass substrates were cleaned sequentially under sonication for 10 min with acetone, detergent, deionized water, and isopropyl alcohol, respectively. And then the substrates were dried at 60 °C in a baking oven overnight, followed by a plasma treatment for 10 min. The copper oxides will be deposited by reactive RF magnetron sputtering deposition. PEDOT:PSS (filtered through a 0.45 μm filter) film (∼40 nm) was spun on ITO substrates and dried at 120 °C for 20 min in air. For the preparation of the active layer, PTB7:PC70BM (10:15 mg ml−1) was dissolved in chlorobenzene/1,8-diiodooctane (1.00/0.03 ml, Aldrich). The solution was stirred under an Ar environment at 60 °C overnight. For referencing the P3HT device, P3HT and PC61BM were combined in a 1:1 mass ratio (20 mg ml−1:20 mg ml−1) in chlorobenzene. The blend was heated to 40 °C with vigorous magnetic stirring for 24 h before use. Subsequently, the active layer was spun-cast onto the HTL layer at 1200 rpm for 30 s. The photoactive layer was then annealed at 100 °C for 10 min. Finally, Ca (20 nm)/Al (100 nm) layers were deposited as cathodes by thermal evaporation finally through a shadow mask under a base pressure of 10−4 Pa, which defines the cell active area of 0.04 cm2.


Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were obtained on a field emission scanning electron microscope (SEM FEI XL-30). AFM measurements (AFM SPM-9500J3, Shimadzu, Japan) were carried out on a scanning probe microscope in a tapping mode under an ambient atmosphere. XRD measurements were carried out using a Bruker D8 X-ray diffractometer. The transmittance and absorbance of the films were measured using an UV-VIS-NIR spectrophotometer (CARY5000, Varian) in the 200–800 nm wavelength range. Van der Pauw measurements of the Hall effect were used to determine the carrier concentration and carrier type of individual layers. The carrier mobility was then determined from ρ = 1/pqμ, where ρ is the resistivity, p is the carrier concentration, e is the electron charge, and μ is the carrier mobility. The current density–voltage (J–V) characterization of OSCs was carried out by using a Keithley 2400 source measurement unit under simulated AM 1.5G irradiation 100 mW cm−2 with a standard xenon-lamp-based solar simulator (ABET, USA). The solar simulator illumination intensity was calibrated using a monocrystalline silicon reference cell. The corresponding incident photo-current efficiency (IPCE) spectrum was measured with a QE/IPCE Measurement system (Enli Technology Co. Ltd). C–V measurements were carried out with a CHI660E electrochemical workstation at a frequency of 50 Hz. Photoluminescence (PL) measurements were carried out under a 488 nm laser at RT and the emission was collected via a HORIBA Jobin-Yvon monochromator. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed using monochromatic Al Kα radiation with an energy of 1486.6 eV and an overall energy resolution of less than 0.4 eV. The surface carbon signal at 284.6 eV was used as an internal standard. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectra (UPS) for the determination of the work function ϕ = EVAC − EF and ionization potentials IP = EVAC − EVB were acquired under normal emission and a sample bias of 1.5 V using He I radiation (hν = 21.2 eV) from a gas discharge lamp with an overall energy resolution of less than 0.2 eV. The work functions of the films are determined from the binding energies of the secondary electron cut off Ecut off according to ϕ = hν − Ecut off. With core level binding energies and valence band maximum from XPS and work function determined by UPS. All spectra were calibrated by referencing to the Fermi edge of sputtered Au.



Fig. 1 shows the typical X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the formed Cu2O and CuO films. Samples sputtered at 15% oxygen concentration have shown XRD peaks corresponding to CuO with orientation along (11) and (111), and the samples sputtered at 5% oxygen concentration have shown a single phase of Cu2O with preferential orientation along (111) and (200) directions. The observed XRD full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) values of Cu2O are comparatively smaller than those of CuO indicating that the Cu2O thin films have enhanced crystalline nature or larger grains than xx. Using the Debye–Scherrer empirical formula, d = 0.9λ/BcosθB, (where d is the particle size, λ is the wavelength of X-ray radiation, B is the FWHM value of the diffraction peak, and θB is the diffraction angle), the grain sizes of CuO and Cu2O are calculated as 21.8 and 59.3 nm, respectively. The SEM micrographs (Fig. S1, ESI) also clearly indicate that the Cu2O film has phase enhanced crystallinity and a bigger grain size than CuO, which are consistent with the results calculated from the Scherrer equation. We also performed AFM analysis on hole transport layers (HTLs) on ITO (Fig. S2). The root-mean-square roughness (RMS) value of as-cleaned ITO was 4.195 nm and the RMS values of HTLs – PEDOT:PSS, Cu2O and CuO on ITO – are 1.6, 9.3 and 8.2 nm, respectively.

XPS and LMM Auger spectrum measurements were performed to study the chemical component of the buffer layer. Fig. 2a shows XPS spectra of the Cu 2p3/2 core levels for an as-grown Cu2O film surface and a Cu2O surface sputtered with argon ions at 1 keV in situ. The samples sputtered at 15% oxygen concentration exhibit a satellite and a main peak, which reflect the characteristics of CuO. The samples sputtered at 5% oxygen concentration have no satellite and main peaks, which is consistent with either metallic Cu or Cu2O. The Auger LMM peak position (Fig. 2b), however, confirms the presence of Cu2O only.
The dependence of oxygen concentration on the electrical properties of copper oxides was investigated using Hall effect measurements. Fig. 3 records the variations of electrical properties for copper oxide films with oxygen concentration increasing from 4% to 30%. Hall effect measurements show that all the copper oxide thin films are p-type semiconductors. The resistivity of the films tends to decrease with increasing oxygen concentration, and hole carrier concentrations ranged from 1015 to 1018 cm−3. Conversely, the films achieved a substantial increase from 0.04 to 4.38 cm2 V−1 s−1 in hole mobility with decreasing oxygen concentration, indicating that low oxygen concentration contributes to improved hole mobility. Electrical conductivity improvement may be due to oxygen excess exhibited as copper vacancies, VCu, or oxygen interstitials, Oi. These defects introduce hole states above the valence-band maximum (VBM), due to the oxidation of Cu(I) and Cu(II). The enhanced mobility may be attributed to the improvement of crystallinity, as much larger grain growth under lower oxygen concentration was observed in the SEM images and XRD for the Cu2O thin film.

We examined the optical transmittance of ITO with PEDOT:PSS (40 nm), Cu2O (40 nm) and CuO (26 nm) HTLs. In comparison with PEDOT:PSS spin-coated on an ITO substrate, optimized Cu2O (40 nm, see ESI) modified ITO exhibited good transparency and higher transmittance in the ultraviolet-violet region (Fig. 5a). The transmittance spectra of ITO and PEDOT:PSS were consistent with reported results in the literature. The better transmittance of optimized Cu2O on ITO will let the PTB7:PC71BM BHJ system has higher absorption (Fig. 5a inset). To obtain information about the optical bandgap, optical absorptions have been acquired using the film of copper oxides deposited on soda-lime glass (shown in Fig. 5b). The direct optical bandgap Eg can be calculated by Tauc's plots: αhν = A(hν − Eg)1/2 where Eg is the optical band gap of the samples, A is a constant, h is Planck's constant and ν is the photon frequency. The value of the bandgap of the Cu2O film and CuO film is estimated to be 2.1 eV and 1.5 eV, respectively. Although the copper oxide films do absorb in the visible range, the optimized very thin film thickness does not lead to optical loss.

We fabricated bulk heterojunction solar cells based on these copper oxides with an architecture of ITO/HTL/PTB7:PC71BM/Ca/Al, as shown in Fig. 4a. The energy level diagram is shown in Fig. 4b. The energy levels of Cu2O and CuO were determined by UPS measurements combined with optical band-gap studies.
To verify the merits of Cu2O and CuO in real devices, the effect of Cu2O HTM thickness on the device performance was investigated. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of inverted solar cells with different thickness HTL films (15, 28, 40, and 51 nm) under AM 1.5G irradiation with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 are shown in Fig. S3 and Table S1 (ESI). The device with an ∼28 nm thick Cu2O HTL presented a PCE of 7.34%. Impressively, the device with an ∼40 nm Cu2O HTL achieved a champion PCE of 8.61% with VOC = 0.78 V, JSC = 16.65 mA cm−2, and FF = 66.2%. With the increase of the Cu2O HTL thickness in the OSCs, the FF decreased gradually and the VOC reached its maximum. A PCE of 7% was obtained with 51 nm Cu2O HTL, showing a JSC of 14.9 mA cm−2, VOC of 0.78 V, and FF of 54.5%. Similar investigation was conducted for the CuO HTL and the corresponding data are given in Fig. S4 and Table S2. For direct comparison, Fig. 5c shows current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the optimized devices with CuO (≈26 nm) and Cu2O (≈40 nm) and PEDOT:PSS HTLs. More than 32 devices were fabricated under each condition for device optimization. The control device with the CuO HTL showed poor device performance with PCE = 6.29%, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 14.48 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.73 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 59.5%. The device with PEDOT:PSS had PCE = 7.36% with a JSC of 15.32 mA cm−2, a VOC of 0.76 V, and a FF of 63.2%, which are comparable with those of PTB7:PC71BM OSCs reported in the literature. The device with the Cu2O HTL demonstrated a higher PCE of 8.61% compared with those of the devices with PEDOT:PSS and CuO HTLs. In particular, a significant improvement in JSC (16.65 mA cm−2) and fill factor (66.2%) was achieved for Cu2O. The detailed device parameters are summarized in Table 1. Typical polymers poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) were also chosen as the active layer materials for device fabrication. The thickness optimization results of devices with Cu2O and CuO HTLs are shown in Fig. S5 and S6 and Tables S3 and S4, respectively. The optimized thickness of the copper oxide HTLs is the same for the cases of two active layer systems.
HTL

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)

R
series (Ω cm2)

R
shunt (Ω cm2)
PCE (%)
CuO
0.72 ± 0.01
14.4 ± 0.5
59.1 ± 0.5
9.85 ± 0.11
781.9 ± 9.1
6.38 ± 0.21
PEDOT:PSS
0.75 ± 0.01
15.2 ± 0.4
64.1 ± 0.3
4.07 ± 0.09
828.3 ± 7.6
7.46 ± 0.16
Cu2O
0.77 ± 0.01
16.4 ± 0.2
66.3 ± 0.2
3.62 ± 0.04
851.1 ± 5.2
8.51 ± 0.11
The long term stability of unencapsulated OSCs with our Cu2O, CuO and PEDOT:PSS HTLs is investigated by testing the degradation of the characteristic parameters (PCE, VOC, JSC and FF) with time under an ambient atmosphere as shown in Fig. S9. Overall, the Cu2O HTL performance was superior to that of the corresponding CuO HTL and PEDOT:PSS HTL.
To further understand the performance of solar cells, the incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra of the corresponding solar cells are measured and compared. Fig. 5d exhibits the IPCE spectra of the Cu2O, CuO and PEDOT:PSS devices. Devices with the Cu2O HTL show a slightly higher photo-response between 350 and 550 nm than PEDOT:PSS devices, which is consistent with the transmittance and absorption data, and the higher short wavelength transmission does result in a higher JSC under AM 1.5G illumination. The cells with the CuO HTL showed a slightly lower JSC, which may be due to lower carrier mobility. IPCE results indicated the enhancement of the photocurrent of the devices using the Cu2O HTL, which is consistent with the J–V measurements. To confirm the reproducibility of solar cell devices, the PCE histogram of 32 samples each for the Cu2O HTL and CuO HTL is presented in the inset of Fig. 5d. The PCE histogram indicates that OSCs based on the Cu2O HTL show a higher PCE compared with OSCs based on the CuO HTL. Meanwhile, the IPCE spectra and PCE histogram of P3HT:PC61BM OSCs based on Cu2O and CuO HTLs are shown in Fig. S7 and S8, respectively.
To further clarify the photovoltaic characteristics, a model based on the single heterojunction solar cell is put forward to analyze the I–V properties of the devices.
(1)
(2)
where
J is the light induced constant current density, J0 is the reverse saturated current density of a PN heterojunction, RS is the series resistance, J is the current density flowing through the external load, A is the ideality factor of a heterojunction, KB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, e is the elementary charge, and V is the DC bias voltage applied to the cell. Fig. 6a gives the plots of −dV/dJ vs. (JSC − J)−1 and the linear fitting curves according to eqn (1). It can be found that there is a good linear relationship between −dV/dJ and (JSC − J)−1 under illumination, and the ideality factor and series resistance of the cell are derived from the slope and intercept of the linear fitting results, as shown in Fig. 3b. For the Cu2O device, the series resistance is 3.72 Ω cm2, while for the PEDOT:PSS and CuO device the series resistance is 3.97 and 9.75 Ω cm2, respectively. Meanwhile, a low series resistance is necessary for a high-performance solar cell with a high fill factor according to eqn (1). The inset in Fig. 6a gives the plots of ln(JSC − J) vs. V + RS × J and there is also a linear relationship. The ideality factor and reverse saturated current density are also derived from the linear fitting results. The reverse saturated current density of the Cu2O, PEDOT:PSS and CuO device is 7.24 × 10−7 mA cm−2, 1.13 × 10−6 and 3.06 × 10−5 mA cm−2, respectively. The lower J0 value of the device with the Cu2O HTL indicates a significantly reduced junction leakage current density and higher fill factor.

It is well known that the contact of different semiconductors frequently results in build-in voltage (Vbi) in the interface for solar cells. To probe these parameters, we performed capacitance (C)–voltage (V) measurements of PTB7:PC71BM solar cells containing Cu2O, PEDOT:PSS and CuO HTLs. The Vbi is estimated by the voltage corresponding to the maximal capacitance in the flat-band condition. Because of the lack of a well-defined depletion regime and Schottky contact, the flat-band voltage can serve as a sound approximation of the Vbi. The C–V characteristics shown in Fig. 6b were attained by applying a low AC perturbation signal by sweeping the DC bias under a fixed frequency. Vbi = 0.79 V for the device with the CuO HTL and Vbi = 0.84 V for the device with the Cu2O HTL were obtained. These values are consistent with the results estimated from dark J–V characteristics in Fig. 6a. Compared with Vbi = 0.82 V for the device based on PEDOT:PSS, the increase of Vbi is attributed to the eliminated energy barrier and better ohmic contact, leading to a higher VOC in PTB7:PC71BM devices with the Cu2O HTL.
We further investigate the influences of HTLs on the hole extraction by hole-only diode measurements based on PTB7:PC71BM blends using a structure of ITO/HTL/PTB7:PC71BM/Au in Fig. 6c. The J–V characteristics were fit by the Mott–Gurney law (the space-charge limited current model, SCLC)
J = 9εrε0μVeff2/8L3
(3)
where
εrε0 is the dielectric constant of the active layer, μ is the mobility, and L is the thickness of the active layer; Veff equals applied voltage (Vappl) minus Vo. Here, Vo is the built-in potential which results from the difference in the work function of the anode and the cathode between Au and ITO. Vo ∼ 0.3 eV was estimated according to the literature (hole-only device). As shown in Fig. 6d, the feature of the device with PEDOT:PSS is consistent with the formation of injection limited current, yielding an effective mobility of 1.2 × 10−7 cm2 V−1 s−1. In the CuO HTL device, we estimate the effective hole mobility by applying the SCLC model, yielding an effective mobility of 1.0 × 10−7 cm2 V−1 s−1. With the hole injection barrier confirmed by UPS, the determined hole mobility should be contact-limited and thus cannot directly reflect the bulk transport properties in PTB7:PC71BM. In the Cu2O HTL device, the hole current is much higher than that of the CuO HTL device based on the same thickness of active layers. Importantly, the current voltage characteristic exhibits a large range of quadratic dependence. By using the SCLC model, we attain a hole mobility of 1.5 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, an enhancement of nearly 2 orders of magnitude due to achieving an ohmic interfacial contact between the Cu2O and PTB7:PC71BM active layer. With the improved hole extraction, more balanced charge transport is realized in the solar cell.

UPS measurements (Fig. 7a–c) were performed to determine the work function (WF) and ionization potential (IP) of the Cu2O and CuO HTLs. Fig. 7d shows the band energy diagrams of PTB7/Cu2O and PTB7/CuO interfaces analyzed based on the UPS spectra in Fig. 7a. In Fig. 7a, the spectrum (black line) is obtained on a clean Cu2O surface with a WF of 4.94 eV and an IP of 5.22 eV, as determined by the incident photon energy (hν = 21.2 eV) for HeI, Ecut off at the higher binding energy side (left panel), and ECB at the lower binding energy side (right panel) by using the equation IP = hν − (Ecut off + EVB − EF). This result suggests that there is no energy barrier at the PTB7/Cu2O interface for hole transport. Meanwhile, the relatively higher ECB level (φb0 > 0.3 eV) is beneficial for its highly efficient electron blocking, which reduces interface recombination. Meanwhile, Cu2O presents a valence band maximum position at −5.22 eV. This level is close to the LUMO level of PTB7 (5.15 eV), and this value is comparable to that of PEDOT:PSS (4.9 eV). This will be beneficial for the formation of an ohmic contact between ITO on the HTM, and improved hole transport from the active layer to anode. Consequently, dissociated charges can be better balance transported and more efficiently extracted in solar cells with the Cu2O HTM. In contrast, the UPS measurements in the red panel show that the IP of a clean CuO surface is 5.41 eV, which may indicate an interfacial energy barrier formed at the PTB7/CuO interface. In addition, the negative φb0 makes it difficult to block electrons and prohibit surface recombination effectively.

We show that high mobility p-type near-stoichiometric cuprous films (Cu2O) can be prepared by reactive magnetron sputtering at room temperature with controllable intrinsic doping of the material. A correlation between an elevated copper vacancy concentration depending on the oxygen partial pressure during RT deposition of Cu2O and the intrinsic p-type doping of the material is observed. Meanwhile, efficient organic solar cells have been achieved by using single phase Cu2O as the HTL, and the highest power conversion efficiency of the OSCs based on the model PTB7:PC71BM system reaches 8.61%, which is 15% higher than that of the standard PEDOT:PSS HTL based OSCs. Our results indicate that the high mobility, lower series resistance and better band energy alignment are related to the enhancement of hole extraction capability in the devices, which lead to the improvement of the short-circuit current density and fill factor in Cu2O solar cells. The improvement in device efficiency suggests that the room temperature formed single phase Cu2O film is a promising HTM for future large area and flexible OSCs and potential perovskite solar cells.


This work was financially supported by the National High Technology Research and Development Program (2015AA050601) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61376013, 91433203 and 11674252). This work is also supported by the funding for Project of Strategic Importance provided by the Hong Kong Polytechnic University (1-ZE29) and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2015M572187 and 2016T90724), and the Hubei Provincial Department of Education (D20152702). We thank the nano center of Wuhan University for AFM, SEM, XRD and UPS measurements.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta01628j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017