 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM34706G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24424-24429

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Philippe
Wyss
,

Thomas
Moehl
,

Shaik M.
Zakeeruddin
* and 

Michael
Grätzel
*

Laboratory for Photonics and Interfaces, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, CH 1015, Lausanne, Switzerland. E-mail: shaik.zakeer@epfl.ch; michael.graetzel@epfl.ch; Fax: +41 21 693 61 00; Tel: +41 21 693 31 12

Received
17th July 2012
, Accepted 21st August 2012
First published on 22nd August 2012
The electrolyte is one of the key components for DSC and its properties have great influence on the photo-conversion efficiency and stability of the devices. Five new low volatile electrolytes containing 3-methoxypropionitrile (MPN) as solvent were prepared with different cationic structures of the iodide source to evaluate their photovoltaic performance in dye-sensitized solar cells. We are interested in studying the role of cations in the device performance and selected the cations of iodide salts such as 1,3-dimethylimidazolium, 1,2-dimethyl-3-propylimidazolium, 1-ethyl-1-methylpyrrolidinium, tetrabutylammonium and 1-propylpyridinium for comparison. These electrolytes are characterized by measuring the triiodide diffusion coefficients using both electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and cyclic voltammetry. In combination with the Ruthenium C106 dye these newly developed electrolytes show an initial power conversion efficiency between 8 and 9% under full sunlight at AM1.5G conditions. The DSC devices prepared with these electrolytes subjected to prolonged aging under full sunlight at 60 °C showed excellent stability. EIS has been employed to characterize the photovoltaic parameter variations observed during the durability tests.

With the dawn of the 21st century, the world energy demand and rising environmental pollution have made it important to search for renewable and carbon-emission-free energy sources. Various solar cells have been developed and investigated as a solution to this problem. In this regard, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) have attracted significant attention as an alternative to conventional solar cells due to their low cost and high efficiency. In DSCs normally the most successful charge transfer sensitizers employed are ruthenium polypyridyl complexes, yielding greater than 11% solar-to-electric power conversion efficiencies (PCE) under full sunlight (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2) with an iodine based electrolyte although recently a donor-π-bridge-acceptor zinc porphyrin sensitized DSC in conjunction with a cobalt based redox system yielded more than 12% PCE. In traditional photovoltaic cells, silicon acts as both the source of electrons as well as conductor of the charge carriers. DSCs separate light harvesting from charge carrier transport, mimicking the principles of solar energy conversion that follows natural photosynthesis. After injecting an electron into the conduction band of titania the oxidized dye is reduced by the electron donation from the redox electrolyte, typically by the iodide. The oxidized redox species (triiodide) then diffuses into the counter electrode where it is reconverted to iodide. Hence the diffusion of triiodide is one of the limiting steps for the high performance of the device.

In an attempt to enhance the solar cell performance various studies have been conducted on the dye structure optimization, nanostructured materials and on different types of electrolytes. The electrolyte is one of the key components for DSCs and its properties have great influence on the PCE and stability of the devices. The influence of additives present in the electrolyte on the device PCE and durability has already been studied. It is also known that several cations present in the electrolyte solution affect the photovoltaic parameters. For example, lithium ions interact with the TiO2 surface and reduce the conduction band energy level increasing the driving force for the electron injection from the excited state of the dye into the TiO2 semiconductor. Consequently the short circuit current density (Jsc) increases. At the same time the energy gap between the Fermi level of TiO2 and the electrolyte decreases thus lowering the Voc. Earlier studies show that the electron diffusion in the mesoporous TiO2 film depends on the nature of the cation and its concentration. The aim of this study was to understand the influence of the cation structure of the iodide salt on the initial photovoltaic performances of DSC devices and their durability.
The diffusion coefficients of triiodide of these new electrolytes have been determined using cyclic voltammetry and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). A standard electrolyte (coded as Z946) was used in conjunction with the heteroleptic polypyridyl ruthenium sensitizer (coded C106 (ref. 5); the structure is presented in Fig. 1) and compared to the devices with the newly formulated electrolytes. The durability of all the devices was evaluated under light soaking at 60 °C and AM 1.5G. The variations in the photovoltaic parameters during the aging process were analysed using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy measurements.

All chemicals and solvents used in the present study were of puriss quality and used as received. 3-Methoxypropionitrile (MPN) from Sigma-Aldrich was distilled before use. The sample of C106 was obtained from Prof. Peng Wang as a gift. The different iodide salts used for the preparation of electrolytes were synthesized in our laboratory according to the literature procedures and the purity was confirmed by 1H NMR spectroscopy.


Low volatile electrolytes containing 3-methoxypropionitrile (MPN) as solvent with different cationic structures of iodide salts were formulated. The choice of structure of this cation, selected from 1,3-dimethylimidazolium, 1,2-dimethyl-3-propylimidazolium, 1-ethyl-1-methylpyrrolidinium, tetrabutylammonium and 1-propylpyridinium iodides, was systematically varied. In general the compositions of the electrolytes contained: 1.0 M iodide salt, 0.15 M I2, 0.5 M N-butylbenzimidazole (NBB), and 0.1 M guanidinium thiocyanate (GNCS) in 3-methoxypropionitrile (MPN). The electrolytes containing 1,3-dimethylimidazolium, 1,2-dimethyl-3-propylimidazolium, 1-ethyl-1-methylpyrrolidinium, tetrabutylammonium, 1-propylpyridinium cations were coded as Z946, Z1149, Z1151, Z1152 and Z1153, respectively. The DSC devices containing electrolytes Z946, Z1149, Z1151, Z1152 and Z1153 were labeled as devices A, B, C, D and E, respectively.


The DSCs consisted of a double layer mesoscopic TiO2 film composed of a 8 μm thick transparent layer of 20 nm sized TiO2 anatase nanoparticles, deposited on a fluorine doped SnO2 (FTO, NSG-10 Ω cm−2, 4 mm thick) conducting glass electrode and afterwards coated with a second 5 μm thick scattering layer of 400 nm sized TiO2 nanoparticles (CCIC, Japan). The area of the printed TiO2 spot is 0.28 cm2. The porosity was determined from BET measurements to be 68% for the 20 nm TiO2 transparent layer and 42% for the 400 nm TiO2 scatting layer. Further details about the preparation procedure of TiO2 nanocrystals, pastes for screen-printing and nanostructured TiO2 film have been reported. The double layer TiO2 films were heated to 520 °C and sintered for 30 min, then cooled to 80 °C and immersed into the dye solution (300 μM) containing 10% DMSO in acetonitrile and tert-butyl alcohol (volume ratio: 1:1) mixture with 75 μM bis-(3, 3-dimethyl-butyl)-phosphinic acid (DINHOP) as a co-adsorbent for 16 h. The sensitized TiO2 films were removed from the dye solution and washed with pure acetonitrile to remove any excess of dye from the TiO2 surface. The above-prepared photoanode was sealed with a 25 μm thick transparent Surlyn ring (from DuPont) at 130 °C for 15 s to the counter electrode (FTO glass, TEC15, coated with a platinum solution chemically deposited at 410 °C for 15 min). The devices were filled with the electrolyte through a pre-drilled hole in the counter electrode. The hole was then closed with a Bynel disk and a thin glass to avoid leakage of the electrolyte. A self-adhesive antireflective foil that acted as well as a UV-cut-off filter was attached on all the cells. Finally a double sealing was applied with epoxy glue in order to confine the electrolyte inside the device. The devices were assembled inside a dry box, which had a constant dry airflow.


The electrochemical cell for the determination of the diffusion coefficient of triiodide consisted of two identically sized TCO-coated glasses, both platinized twice by thermal deposition of a 3 mM H2PtCl6 in an isopropanol solution and heated at 410 °C for 15 min. The two electrodes were sealed with a square shaped Surlyn film (70 μm thick) with an inner area of 36 mm2. Electrolytes were introduced into these sealed devices by vacuum filling through the back hole made by a sandblast machine. The hole was then closed with a Bynel disk and a thin glass to avoid leakage of the electrolyte.

EIS and cyclic voltammetry (CV) have been employed to determine the diffusion coefficient of triiodide () in the electrolytes (due to a large excess of iodide present in the electrolytes the current limiting species is the triiodide ion). The EIS measurements were performed from 1 MHz down to 0.01 Hz with a sinusoidal 10 mV perturbation overlayed on top of the bias potential (in this case 0 V). The measurements were conducted with an Autolab PGStat30 and the EIS data were analyzed with the Zview 2.8 software according to Randles circuit (see also Hauch and Georg).
The diffusion coefficient  is calculated by using the relation  where δ is half of the distance between the two Pt electrodes and W is the Warburg coefficient extracted from the analysis of the Nyquist plot. CV was measured between a potential range of −0.9 V to +0.9 V. The limiting current density (Jlim) is obtained by dividing the limiting current (Ilim) by the surface exposed to the electrolyte. The diffusion coefficient is calculated:
where
l is the distance between the two electrodes, n is the number of exchanged electrons, e is the elementary charge, c is the triiodide concentration and Nav is the Avogadro number.


The impedance measurements on DSC devices were performed as described above with bias potentials from 0 V up to the open circuit voltage (Voc). The analysis of the EIS response by means of the transmission line model yields the resistive and capacitive elements of the solar cell like the series resistance, Rs, the counter electrode resistance and associated capacitance, RCE and CCE, the recombination resistance for electrons from the TiO2 to the electrolyte, Rct, the chemical capacitance of the TiO2, Cu, and the transport resistance for the electrons in the TiO2, Rt. The determined parameters can be used to calculate e.g. the electron lifetime (τn = Rct × Cμ), the transport time (τtrans = Rt × Cμ) and the charge collection efficiency (ηCC = 1/(1 + Rt/Rct)).

The EIS results are corrected for IR-Drop over the sum of all series resistances with the real potential (Vreal) determined by the subtraction of the voltage drop (VDrop) from the applied potential (Vapplied). The voltage drop is calculated by the integration of the sum of all series resistances (RAseries) over the current passed. (Vreal = Vapplied − VDrop; with VDrop = ∫RAseriesdI whereby RAseries = Rs + Rce + RElectrolyte). The impedance spectra in the dark with low volatile and viscous solvents are normally less clearly resolved compared to measurements under illuminations with volatile solvents based electrolytes.

The test was performed under illumination or with visible light (1 sun; 100 mW cm−2) at 60 °C. The photovoltaic measurements were conducted at regular time intervals at room temperature after the DSC was equilibrated and cooled down to room temperature.


Five electrolytes with different cationic structures of the iodide salts were formulated for use in DSC devices (see electrolyte preparation). The triiodide diffusion coefficient of each electrolyte was determined and compared to the initial power conversion efficiency (PCE) value of the devices. As triiodide (I−3) is the current limiting species in the electrolyte, if it does not diffuse fast enough then it will have an influence on the dye regeneration kinetics and consequently the device performance will be lower. Hence it is important to know the influence of each iodide salt cation structure on . The diffusion coefficients determined by EIS and CV techniques are summarized in Table 1.

Electrolyte
 [cm
2 s−1] by EIS × 10−6
 [cm
2 s−1] by CV × 10−6
Z946
2.8
1.8
Z1149
4.1
2.3
Z1151
5.3
2.4
Z1152
2.8
1.3
Z1153
2.9
2.3
Though both techniques do not give exactly the same values for the diffusion coefficient they are in the same order of magnitude and show the same tendencies. The highest triiodide diffusion coefficient is obtained for 1-ethyl-1-methylpyrrolidinium iodide containing electrolyte (Z1151), whereas the lowest value is obtained with the tetrabutylammonium iodide-containing electrolyte (Z1152). The trend is in good agreement with our expectations, as we believe that tetrabutylammonium iodide has a stronger ion pair effect compared to other iodide salts.
To further investigate the new electrolytes they have been incorporated into DSC devices in combination with the heteroleptic C106 dye and photovoltaic measurements were performed. The Incident Photon to Current conversion Efficiency (IPCE) of the device C is shown as an example in Fig. 2, which exhibits a high plateau of over 65% conversion efficiency from 420 nm to 680 nm. A maximum of 90% at 570 nm is reached for all the electrolytes.
The Jsc value obtained from integrating the product of the IPCE spectrum with the AM 1.5 G spectral solar photon flux was within 5% of the measured Jsc value of the DSCs. The PCE are in the range of 8 to 9% for all the devices except for the device D (Table 2).
Electrolyte
Device

V
oc/mV

J
sc/mA cm−2
FF

η/%
Z946
A
685
18.4
0.70
8.8
Z1149
B
695
17.6
0.67
8.2
Z1151
C
715
19.1
0.67
9.1
Z1152
D
695
16.5
0.40
4.6
Z1153
E
680
18.4
0.68
8.5
Device D shows a significantly lower initial PCE mainly due to the low fill factor (FF) and lower short circuit current density compared to the devices containing other electrolytes. One of the reasons for such a low FF is due to the lower diffusion coefficient of the triiodide in this electrolyte (see Table 1). Another reason could be the low catalytic activity of the Pt counter electrode as identified by EIS analysis of this device (see below). It is interesting to note that the highest Jsc has been obtained with device C using 1-ethyl-1-methylpyrrolidinium iodide containing electrolyte and the PCE reached as high as 9.1% at full sunlight intensity.
After successfully testing the new electrolytes for DSCs, these DSC devices were subjected to accelerated aging to test their durability. The evolution of the photovoltaic parameters for each of these electrolytes during a 1000 h light soaking test period at 60 °C is presented in Fig. 3. In the case of devices A, B and E there is a drop of approximately 20 mV in the value of Voc after a 1000 h aging period compared to the initial values. The drop in Voc is compensated by an increase in Jsc for the devices A and E and an increase of FF for the device B. The devices C and D show a drop of approximately 40 mV of their initial Voc during the aging period. For device C the drop in Voc is compensated by an increase in Jsc and for device D an increase in FF was observed. However, in terms of stability, all the five device types retained more than 92% of their initial efficiencies after the accelerated aging test.
EIS measurements have been undertaken to unravel the differences in the photovoltaic parameters of DSC devices A to E. We tried to understand the lower fill factor obtained with device D to explain the lower PCEs of this device. The fill factor of a DSC is related to its total series resistance, which includes the Warburg diffusion and the charge transfer resistance at the counter electrode. The diffusion coefficient of the triiodide in the electrolyte Z1152 is lower leading to about two times higher Warburg diffusion resistance in device D compared to the other DSC devices at similar potentials (results not shown here). The charge transfer resistance at the counter electrode is strongly increased (see in Fig. S1 a comparison of RCE of device A and D in the dark and under illumination conditions). RCE of device D is 10 times larger than that of the reference device A. The increase in RCE could be due to the bulkier molecule with its longer aliphatic chains compared to the other cations. This can increase the viscosity of the electrolyte and/or deactivate the Pt on the FTO leading to a decrease in the catalytic activity for the reduction of triiodide. Consequently the higher RCE and diffusion resistance of the triiodide lead to a higher overall series resistance in the device and therefore to a lower FF value.
EIS analysis was likewise utilized to monitor the photovoltaic parameter changes during the light-soaking test. For devices A, B, C and E the Rct, Cμ, and Rt values obtained from the EIS measurements in the dark, before and after aging, are plotted in the ESI (Fig. S2). The capacitance and the transport resistance remain nearly unchanged for all the devices (indicating no change or only a slight change in the conduction band position of the TiO2) while the recombination resistance reduced with aging. These results are in good agreement with the observed increase in dark current of the aged devices compared to the initial state (Fig. 4). The increase in dark current following the aging process implies a higher electron recombination (when assuming no change in the conduction band of TiO2).

Fig. 5 presents the EIS results obtained under illumination for the fresh and aged devices A and C. This corroborates the results obtained with the stability measurements (see Fig. 3). Similar to the EIS analysis results obtained under dark conditions (as discussed above and shown in Fig. S2) devices subjected to EIS under illumination do not show or only show minor changes of Cu and Rt and therefore in the conduction band position for the fresh and the aged sample. This is especially true for device A, although a small shift of the conduction band (∼15 mV) for device C was observed. In both cases the dominating reason for the lower Voc is due to the decrease of Rct during the light-soaking test. The faster recombination behavior was observed when the electron lifetime (τe) is plotted against the density of states (DOS, implying comparable electron density inside the TiO2 film and therefore the same position of the EF, see Fig. 6).
For both of the devices, A and C, the electron lifetime was reduced in the aged samples, confirming an increase in the recombination rate. The faster recombination of electrons in the aged DSCs is in agreement with the observed decrease in Voc during the durability test. The EIS measurements also give access to the charge collection efficiency (ηcc). In freshly prepared DSCs the ηcc is nearly 94% and is reduced to 88% after the accelerated light soaking test (see ESI, Fig. S3).

Five electrolytes have investigated in DSCs for long-term stability tests in conjunction with the heteroleptic polypyridyl ruthenium sensitizer C106. These DSC devices yielded PCEs of 8 to 9% under full sunlight intensity. The DSCs retained more than 92% of their initial performance during the 1000 h accelerated aging test at 60 °C under a solar simulator with a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The EIS measurements in the dark and under illumination show that the main decrease in PCE is due to a higher electron recombination rate rather than a decrease in Ecb of the TiO2. Electrolytes containing tetrabutylammonium ions showed lower electrolyte diffusion coefficients and higher counter electrode resistivity, which explains the lower fill factor for this device. Overall the newly formulated electrolytes show excellent stability in the accelerated aging test paving the way for practical applications.


The authors thank Mr P. Comte for the TiO2 paste preparation, Dr Péter Péchy for providing sample of DINHOP, Dr Carole Grätzel for fruitful discussions and Prof. P. Wang for providing sample of C106 as a gift. This work was supported by the ECR advanced grant agreement (no. 247404) under the CE-Mesolight project funded by the European community's 7th FWP.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm34706g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012