 DOI: 10.1039/C6RA10007D
(Communication)
RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 56807-56811

Qingbo Wei,
Dong Yang*,
Zhou Yang,
Xiaodong Ren,
Yucheng Liu,
Jiangshan Feng,
Xuejie Zhu and 
Shengzhong (Frank) Liu*

Key Laboratory of Applied Surface and Colloid Chemistry, National Ministry of Education, Institute for Advanced Energy Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi’an 710119, China. E-mail: dongyang@snnu.edu.cn

College of Chemistry & Chemical Engineering, Yan’an University, Yan’an 716000, P. R. China

Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian, 116023, China. E-mail: szliu@dicp.ac.cn

Received
18th April 2016
, Accepted 3rd June 2016
First published on 14th June 2016
For a high efficiency of planar-type perovskite solar cells, a good crystallization and high surface coverage of the absorber films are required. However, these two key factors are still the main challenges in perovskite film formation to date. Here, 1-chloronaphthalene (CN) is used as a solvent-additive in the precursor HC(NH2)2PbI3 (FAPbI3) solution to control the crystallization and surface coverage of the FAPbI3 films by adjusting its concentration. The CN chlorinated monodentate ligand is likely to temporarily chelate with Pb2+ during the crystal growth, facilitating homogenous nucleation to form relatively high quality FAPbI3 films. Meanwhile, the CN additive with a high boiling point delays the growth rate of the FAPbI3 film, which helps to form homogenous continuous FAPbI3 films with fewer pin-holes. As a result, with the addition of the CN solvent-additive, the efficiency of the FAPbI3 planar-type solar cells is enhanced to 16.53%.

Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite materials have emerged as very effective light absorber materials for high efficiency solar cells and the power conversion efficiency (PCE) has rapidly risen from 3.8% to 21.0% in just a few years. Even for flexible lightweight cells, the efficiency has been improved to 15.4%. The excellent performance originates from their splendid properties such as a high charge carrier mobility, extremely low trap state density, long electron–hole diffusion length, and small exciton-binding energy. As the morphology of the perovskite films plays a key role in the cell performance, there have been extensive studies on developing high quality films. For example, solvent additives have been frequently used to improve the crystallinity, surface coverage and surface roughness. Im et al. used hydrobromic acid (HBr) to grow a perovskite film with remarkably improved density. Grätzel et al. obtained smoother, highly crystalline and continuous perovskite films by simply adding H2O into the precursor solution. Snaith et al. utilized hydroiodic acid (HI) as an additive to grow a compact and uniform perovskite film. Jen et al. employed 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) as an additive to obtain high quality films. Ma et al. used a 1-chloronaphthalene (CN) additive in MAPbI3−xClx perovskite solar cells to fabricate more homogenous perovskite films.

So far most studies have been focused on CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3) absorber materials. Another active area of research is optimizing the active layer to expand its absorption spectrum to longer wavelengths, since the absorption onset of the most popular perovskite MAPbI3 only occurs at ∼800 nm with most of the near infrared wasted. In this regard, formamidinium (HC(NH2)2PbI3, FAPbI3) has been developed as a more effective absorber, with a narrower band gap of ∼1.47 eV compared to 1.55 eV for MAPbI3. More importantly, materials and processes have been developed to solve the stability problem.
In this work, we report an effective process that improves both the crystalline quality and surface coverage of the FAPbI3 film using a simple one-step solution technique. We have found that CN as a chlorinated ligand chelates with Pb2+ in the precursor. The chelation encourages homogenous nucleation, to form a better quality FAPbI3 film with fewer pin-holes. Meanwhile, the higher boiling point of the CN compound moderates the growth rate of FAPbI3, to form a continuous film with better uniformity. The PCE is increased by 15% compared to cells without the CN additive, with the average PCE improved to 15.54% over a large area and the champion device PCE reached 16.53%. We attribute the improved performance to better crystallization and higher surface coverage.
Planar-type solar cells based on a FAPbI3 active layer were fabricated with the device structure illustrated in Fig. 1a. A FTO transparent electrode was used as the bottom cathode; the TiO2 prepared on top of it was used as the electron transport layer; the spiro-OMeTAD film was applied as the hole transport material (HTL). The FAPbI3 films were deposited using a one-step solution-process. Fig. 1b shows the cross-sectional SEM image of a completed device. It is clear that the FAPbI3 absorber film was prepared with well-defined crystal grains across the film thickness (∼560 nm).
A series of solar cell devices were fabricated using a FAPbI3 precursor solution prepared with CN using different additive concentrations. Fig. 2a displays the J–V curves of the FAPbI3 cells, with the key J–V parameters, including the short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF) and PCE, summarized in Table 1. It appears that the PCE firstly improves and then decreases with an increasing CN content. A control device fabricated using a pristine FAPbI3 solution without the additive exhibits a relatively lower PCE of 14.33%, with Jsc = 20.39 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.98 V and FF = 0.72. Interestingly, when 1% CN was added into the FAPbI3 solution, the Jsc increased to 23.84 mA cm−2, the Voc to 1.04 V, the FF to 0.67, and the PCE to 16.53%. The IPCE curve of the champion device based on 1% CN is shown in Fig. S1. The calculated Jsc values from the IPCE are up to 22.32 mA cm−2, in excellent agreement with the direct J–V measurements. When the CN concentration is further increased to 2–3%, the PCE of the solar cells drops to 12.81% and 9.01%, respectively. It is apparent that the optimal CN additive amount is 1%. Compared to the reference solar cell prepared without the additive, the cell efficiency is increased by 15%. For reliable measurements, we have studied the J–V characteristics of the champion device using both the reverse and forward scan directions, as shown in Fig. S2. It is believed that the hysteresis originates from defects and ion migration within the FAPbI3 film. The defects could act as traps for electrons and holes under forward bias working conditions, and the charges directly fill the traps when forward scanning, which leads to poor operation until the traps are fully filled. Meanwhile, ion migration in perovskite produces an internal capacitance. These processes generate the J–V hysteresis of FAPbI3 solar cells. To further confirm that the cell fabrication is reproducible, we prepared 10 individual devices from five different batch runs using the same 1% CN solvent-additive and coating processes. Fig. 2b shows a PCE distribution histogram, with the statistics of the J–V measurements listed in Table S1. It is clear that all of the key J–V parameters show a very small deviation, demonstrating that the high efficiency solar cell fabrication process is reproducible. Meanwhile, the stability of the devices without and with the 1% CN additive was measured under AM 1.5G illumination at room temperature for 210 minutes, and the results are shown in Fig. 2c. It is clear that the device based on the CN additive exhibits greater stability than the cell without CN. This good stability likely results in the improved crystallization and less pin-holes, as will be discussed later.
Sample
Voc (V)
Jsc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
0% CN
0.98
20.39
0.72
14.33%
1% CN
1.04
23.84
0.67
16.53%
2% CN
0.98
20.83
0.63
12.81%
3% CN
0.90
20.76
0.48
9.01%
It is well known that the surface coverage of the absorber layer has a great influence on the device performance because a low surface coverage would lead to direct electrical contact between the HTL and the ETL, resulting in carrier recombination. The FAPbI3 film prepared from the pristine precursor solution without the CN additive shows inferior surface coverage, as shown in Fig. 3a, leading to a poor cell performance. Fig. 3b–d show top-view SEM images of the FAPbI3 films prepared using different concentrations of CN. It is clear that when the CN solvent-additive is added into the precursor solution, the FAPbI3 films show better surface coverage.
Fig. S3 shows AFM height images of the FAPbI3 film coatings with different CN amounts. It is clear that the higher the CN content, the better the surface coverage. The root-mean-square (RMS) surface roughness of the FAPbI3 film without CN is 12.9 nm. When the amount of CN solvent-additive was increased to 1%, 2% and 3%, the RMS roughness increased to 14.0, 15.0 and 16.4 nm respectively. Fig. 3e exhibits the absorbance spectra of the FAPbI3 films prepared using different CN amounts. The samples with the CN additive show significantly higher absorbance in the short-wavelength spectrum from 400 to 810 nm, indicating fewer pinholes in the FAPbI3 films, in agreement with the SEM results.
The improvement in the surface coverage is likely due to chelation between the CN and PbI2. Fig. 3f shows a schematic diagram for the PbI2–CN chelation. We speculate that the chlorine groups in the CN chelate to Pb2+ ions. During the crystal growth step, CN moderates the FAPbI3 crystallization before it is evaporated during high temperature annealing. As a result, the FAPbI3 films are formed with better crystallization and better surface coverage, as shown in Fig. 3b–d.
However, Fig. 2a and Table 1 show that the solar cell performance is reduced when the CN content is increased beyond 1%, even though a better surface coverage is achieved using a higher CN concentration. In order to gain better insight into the fundamental mechanism, XRD was carried out for the FAPbI3 films deposited using different CN concentrations. Fig. 4a shows the XRD patterns of the FAPbI3 films prepared using different CN concentrations while the other deposition parameters were fixed. All the samples display diffraction peaks centered at 14.2°, 19.9°, 24.3°, 28.4°, 31.7°, 34.7°, 40.5°, and 42.7°, corresponding to the (111), (120), (021), (222), (231), (030), (240) and (333) lattice planes, respectively, and in good agreement with the previous reports on FAPbI3. Detailed analyses revealed that the film prepared using 1% CN provided the highest peak intensity, demonstrating the most improved crystallization. However, when the CN content is increased beyond 1%, the samples show lower peak intensities. As better crystallinity improves the charge diffusion length and transport kinetics, the cells prepared using 1% CN show the highest PCE (16.45%) with a Jsc of 23.84 mA cm−2 and a large Voc of 1.04 V. The high Jsc originates from the high crystallinity of the FAPbI3 films. It is worthwhile to note that the high Voc (1.04 V) achieved is likely due to a smaller potential loss for the photoexciton dissociation as the band gap for the FAPbI3 is only about 1.5 eV, as estimated from Fig. 3e.
We measured the steady state photoluminescence (PL) to investigate charge transfer and recombination loss. Fig. 4b shows the steady-state PL spectra of the FAPbI3 films prepared using different CN concentrations. It is clear that the FAPbI3 film prepared using the pristine precursor solution without the CN additive shows the highest PL intensity, indicating that there is significant recombination in the film. Meanwhile, the PL intensity decreases as the CN content increases, demonstrating that charge transfer effectively occurred before carrier recombination. We prepared the FAPbI3 films with and without CN, and tested their PL decay time using time resolved-PL. Fig. 4c displays the TRPL spectra of the FAPbI3 films with different CN concentrations. The key TRPL parameters are listed in Table S2. For the pristine FAPbI3 film, the average PL decay time is 77.29 ns. Interestingly, the average PL decay time increases with enhanced CN content. A long decay time is essential for a long exciton diffusion length, which is beneficial for improving the device. However, the FAPbI3 solar cells show a poorer performance when the CN concentration is increased to above 1%. We attribute this phenomenon to inferior crystallization (Fig. 4a). Compared to the control devices prepared using the pristine FAPb3I precursor, the 1% CN content significantly improved the surface coverage and crystallization, and reduced the charge recombination, resulting in increased Jsc and Voc values for the FAPbI3 solar cells.
In summary, we have demonstrated that CN is an efficient solvent-additive for improving the performance of FAPbI3 solar cells. The chlorine groups in CN likely chelate to Pb2+ during the crystal growth, moderating the thin film formation, and leading to higher crystallinity and a greater surface coverage of the absorber layer. Compared to the control device fabricated using a pristine FAPbI3 precursor solution, the efficiency is enhanced by 15%, from 14.33% to 16.53%. The good crystallization and higher surface coverage effectively improve the charge transport and suppress charge recombination, resulting in improved Jsc and Voc values for the solar cells.

The authors acknowledge support from the National University Research Fund (GK261001009), the Changjiang Scholar and Innovative Research Team (IRT_14R33), the Overseas Talent Recruitment Project (B14041) and the Chinese National 1000-talent-plan program.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ra10007d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016