 DOI: 10.1039/C6TC03624D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 10839-10846


A. B.
Huang
,

J. T.
Zhu
,

J. Y.
Zheng
,

Y.
Yu
,

Y.
Liu
,

S. W.
Yang
,

S. H.
Bao
,

L.
Lei
* and 

P.
Jin
*

State Key Laboratory of High Performance Ceramics and Superfine Microstructure, Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dingxi 1295, Changning, Shanghai 200050, China. E-mail: leilei@mail.sic.ac.cn; p-jin@mail.sic.ac.cn

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Yuquan 19, Shijingshan, Beijing 100049, China

State Key Laboratory of Solid Lubrication, Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Lanzhou 730000, China

CAS Key Laboratory of Materials for Energy Conversion, Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Heshuo 588, Jiading, Shanghai 201899, China

National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Moriyama, Nagoya 463-8560, Japan

Received
22nd August 2016
, Accepted 22nd October 2016
First published on 22nd October 2016
Perovskite solar cells are some of the most promising photovoltaic devices and they have experienced extraordinary progress in efficiency and fabricating technologies. Herein, we explore the effect of Co-doped NiOx hole transport layers on the electronic structure and photovoltaic properties of PSCs, which were deposited onto FTO substrates via DC magnetron sputtering at room temperature. Appropriate Co-doping can slightly regulate the optical band gap and the Fermi level position, leading to an increased potential cell performance. By virtue of continuously adjusting the power loaded onto the Co target, we can obtain the optimal atomic ratio of the Co:NiOx hole transport layer, and the PSC based on Co:NiOx exhibited a 25% higher efficiency than its undoped counterparts (from 9.46% to 12.61%). Therefore, these results demonstrate that Co is an appropriate dopant and the PSCs based on Co:NiOx layers have a good performance.

Photovoltaic devices based on organic–inorganic alkyl ammonium lead halide perovskites have attracted considerable attention within the energy-conversion community. Over the past seven years, these compounds have showed remarkable improvements in power conversion efficiency (PCE) that were as high as 22.1%; a value that is comparable to that of silicon-based solar cells. This great breakthrough has been attributed to the following attractive physical and chemical properties: the appropriate bandgap range between 1.2 and 2.3 eV, a superior light absorption coefficient (∼104 cm−1 at 550 nm), long charge-carrier lifetimes, a low non-radiative recombination rate and a high charge carrier mobility. With the additional advantages of low-cost and facile fabrication processes and a good tolerance to defects, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have a bright future as viable alternatives in the solar energy conversion field.

Until now, the conventional (n–i–p) architecture has been widely adopted in PSCs and excellent performance of the planar heterojunction structure has been demonstrated: TiO2 (electron transport layer, ETL)/perovskites/2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-MeOTAD; hole transport layer, HTL). In view of some shortcomings, such as the appearance of hysteresis in the photo-current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics under different scan directions and the instability of organic HTL under ambient conditions, the reliability of this configuration is limited. Some researchers have proposed that a TiO2 mesoporous layer can contribute to the suppression of hysteresis owing to the improved electron extraction/transport efficiency, which is restricted due to the inevitable post high temperature (around 500 °C) annealing process. Moreover, replacing the organic HTLs (spiro-MeOTAD) for inorganic hole transport layers has also been argued. However, it is quite difficult to prepare an inorganic HTL conformally covering the perovskite absorber layer without degrading its quality. Thus, the designation of an inverted configuration like HTL/absorber material/ETL (p–i–n) naturally emerged, and has displayed a competitive PCE and promising stability. More importantly, the PSCs with an inverted structure showed decreased or no hysteresis between the reverse and forward scan directions. There is no definite interpretation of the cause of hysteresis yet and the main origins considered to date are ion migration, ferroelectricity and intersurface defects. Since the p–i–n structure is more beneficial in balancing the large amount of photo-generated electrons and holes, the hysteresis behaviour is correspondingly suppressed compared to the n–i–p structure.
Various hole transport materials (HTMs) have been investigated and utilized by researchers, such as poly-TPD, perylene, PTAA and p-type doped spiro-OMeTAD. High PCEs were achieved with these chlorobenzene soluble HTMs, especially with PTAA and spiro-OMeTAD. These materials, however, were usually deposited on perovskites with n–i–p structures rather than under the perovskite as they are easily dissolved in the solvents used to deposit the perovskites.
Owing to its high work function, optical transparency, excellent conductivity and solution processability, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(4-styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) has been widely used in inverted PSCs. However, the acidic and hygroscopic nature of PEDOT:PSS impairs the electrode lifetime and device stability, and thus it is not competitive for the mass production of PSCs. Therefore, several inorganic p-type semiconductors with excellent stability, good optical properties, wide bandgaps and favourable energy levels have been developed (e.g. CuSCN, NiOx, CuI and CuAlO2), and serve as promising alternatives to organic HTLs in planar heterojunction PSCs. To obtain acceptable efficiencies a large thickness (>1 μm) is required for CuI and CuSCN HTLs, which are usually deposited on mesoporous substrates using solution-processed methods. The fabrication of CuAlO2 films is complicated and less controllable compared to NiOx films, as it is difficult to prepare compact CuAlO2 films with solution processes while only radio frequency mode is capable of depositing CuAlO2 by magnetron sputtering. NiOx has already been analysed in detail as a potential HTL candidate for PSCs in many research reports. Compared to PCSs based on PEDOT:PSS, the devices based on NiOx HTLs exhibited a slightly lower performance with a smaller fill factor (FF). This situation results from the incompact morphology of the solution-processed film and the high resistance of the NiOx.
Several approaches have been proposed to enhance the FF and photocurrent of the NiOx based devices, such as introducing a meso-superstructured Al2O3 layer or doping the solution processed NiOx with divalent Cu. In addition, various methods such as pulsed laser deposition (PLD), spin coating, electron-deposition and radio frequency (RF) sputtering have been employed to prepare NiOx films. Nevertheless, the increased PCE was still not satisfactory or the complex fabricating methods demanded post thermal treatment at around 500 °C.
In this work, we introduce p-type Co2+ doped high performance NiOx films as HTLs deposited onto FTO substrates using the direct current (DC) magnetron sputtering method for highly efficient PSCs at room temperature. Compared to common solution processes, the magnetron sputtered films appeared to be more compact and homogeneous on unlimited substrates (for instance: size and flexibility). The thickness of the film could be precisely controlled at the sub-nanometer scale, making mass production with considerable reproducibility possible. The sputtered films produced in this work did not require post annealing, which was needed for the solution-processed films to evaporate the solvent. Moreover, the DC operating mode we first put forward here was nonradiative and only depended on simple power, which, according to previous reports, contrasted to the radio frequency (RF) operating mode. We observed an apparent change of the effective work function in the NiOx films related to the doping content of Co2+. The p-type Co2+ was first doped into films by co-sputtering Ni and Co targets. According to our experiment, the Co:NiOx films demonstrated a greatly increased hole transport capacity and distinct structural effects. Therefore, the devices based on Co:NiOx HTLs achieved higher PCEs and better stability. This study not only revealed the importance of p-type doping in designing more effective inorganic HTLs, but also demonstrated its general applicability for various substrates and electrodes corresponding to the room-temperature preparation process.


Fig. 1A depicts the diagram of the reactive DC magnetron sputtering chamber employed in this work to prepare the NiOx films at room temperature. In order to realize the optimal sputtering efficiency, the crystallites grown on the substrate were projected on the surface normal to the incidence direction of the ions (37° to the substrate, as shown in Fig. 1A). The device configuration utilized in this work is shown in Fig. 1B, and comprised five layers: the transparent electrode (FTO, F-doped SnO2), the hole transport layer (HTL), the perovskite absorber material (CH3NH3PbI3), the electron transport layer (ETL, [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM)) and the counter electrode (Ag). Using the magnetron sputtering method, optimized NiOx films with balanced transmittance and thickness could be obtained by adjusting the operating conditions (such as time, gas pressure, etc.). To further improve the hole mobility of the films, the p-type Co element was doped using co-sputtering, which was considered to be an efficient and facile method. The opposing locations of the Co and Ni targets are shown in Fig. 1A, the positions of which were beneficial in optimizing the dispersity of the elements in the film. Thereafter, the well-crystallized perovskite absorber material was prepared on the as-deposited films. The XRD patterns and top view SEM images of CH3NH3PbI3 grown on the NiOx and Co:NiOx layers are shown in Fig. S1 and S2 (ESI), where the well crystallized distinct perovskite grains are indicated. Five typical diffraction peaks in the two XRD patterns centred at 14.15°, 28.48°, 31.92°, 43.24° and 60.90° were assigned to the (110), (220), (310), (330) and (440) lattice planes of CH3NH3PbI3, respectively. There was no significant difference in the crystalline degree or the surface morphologies of the perovskite films grown on the NiOx and Co:NiOx layers. The valence band position of PCBM is relatively close to that of CH3NH3PbI3 leading to inefficient blocking of the holes that induce leakage currents at their interfaces. Several approaches have been explored to improve the hole blocking efficiency and consequently to improve the cell performance. In this study, however, we did not adopt such approaches so as to focus our attention on the effect of Co2+ doping on the photovoltaic performance of the NiOx HTL based cells. Finally, the Ag electrode was prepared using vacuum evaporation, which is in agreement with previous reports.

We studied the influences of the thickness and doping ratio of the NiOx films on the final performance of the correspondingly cells. The NiOx films deposited onto FTO substrates with different thicknesses were obtained by controlling the sputtering duration at 1 min, 2 min, 3 min and 4 min, respectively. The photovoltaic parameters of the PSCs based on these HTLs are summarized in Table S1 (ESI). To achieve the best photovoltaic performance, the sputtering time was fixed at 2 minutes corresponding to a film thickness of about 20 nm. Different doping powers were used to load the Co target (5 W, 15 W, 20 W, 25 W and 50 W) and the Ni target was kept at 300 W during the co-sputtering process to tune the doping ratio. Under the optimized doping ratio, the film would show the fastest hole mobility leading to the best performance among the cells. Table S2 (ESI) summarizes the photovoltaic parameters of the PSCs based on the Co2+ doped HTLs, and the optimum doping power applied to the Co target was found to be 15 W. The best performing Co-doped NiOx layer, denoted as Co:NiOx, and its counterpart without doping, denoted as NiOx, were carefully studied and are compared in the following parts.
In terms of PSC efficiency, it was obvious that the interface between the HTL and FTO substrate was vital in determining the cell performance. The cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the NiOx and Co:NiOx films on top of the FTO substrates are presented in Fig. 2A and B. As indicated in the picture, the doping process did not influence the thickness (around 20 nm) of the as-deposited layers on the same FTO substrates. The HTLs and FTO were in close contact due to the continuous bombardment of high-energy particles that generally resulted in efficient hole transport and suppressed hysteresis. Meanwhile, the grains deposited onto the substrate were fairly small and closely packed on top of the FTO substrate as shown in the superficial SEM image in Fig. S3 (ESI). A solution process method was also applied to prepare the NiOx layers as a contrast and Fig. S4 (ESI) depicts its surface morphology. Numerous voids existed in the solution processed film, revealing that this technique could rarely produce a uniform and compact NiOx film. In terms of better coverage and homogeneity, the magnetron sputtering utilized in this work was superior to the conventional solution process method. The EDS pattern (Fig. 2C) recorded from the position shown in Fig. 2B indicated that the sample was a Nu–Co–O compound and the cobalt ions had been effectively incorporated into the film. Therefore, the optimum doping ratio of Co incorporated into the Co:NiOx film was identified as 1.6 at% despite the fact that the ionic radius of the Co was slightly larger than that of the Ni according to data summarized in Table S3 (ESI).
To characterize the surface morphology of blank FTO, pristine NiOx and the Co:NiOx films, atomic force microscopy (AFM) was employed and the results are presented in Fig. 3. The surface root-mean-square (RMS) roughness value decreased from 12.691 nm for blank FTO glass to 6.212 nm when covered with a compact layer of NiOx. Unexpectedly, the RMS of the Co:NiOx film based on the FTO substrate (5.545 nm) was slightly further reduced due to the co-sputtering effect, which indicated that it had a smoother surface than the pristine NiOx film. The three dimensional (3D) images shown in Fig. 3 also revealed the morphology evolution. It was believed that the smoother surface of the charge carrier transport layer would lead to better electric contact with the perovskite absorber material. Conductive AFM (c-AFM) measurements were performed to examine and compare the conductivity of the pristine NiOx and Co:NiOx films, and the influence of the Co-doping on the conductivity of the films was analysed. The I–V curves presented in Fig. 3D clearly demonstrate the conspicuous enhancement of the current that verified the increase of the electrical conductivity when compared with the film without Co doping.
The electrical properties of the NiOx and Co:NiOx films were further checked using Hall measurements. The Hall carrier density and mobility of the different HTLs on Si substrates were calculated. It needs to be emphasized that the films were sputtered onto the Si and FTO substrates at the same time as they were put onto the same sample holder in the chamber. The Hall mobility and carrier density for the Co:NiOx film were μHall = 3.232 × 103 cm2 V−1 s−1 and nHall = 1.977 × 1016 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, and for the NiOx film were μHall = 3.718 × 102 cm2 V−1 s−1 and nHall = 2.914 × 1017 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. This clearly certified that Co doping enhanced the carrier mobility in the Co:NiOx HTL, which was in accordance with the c-AFM analysis.
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was used to analyse the element composition of the NiOx and Co:NiOx layers. Deconvolution with a Lorentzian–Gaussian distribution function was performed. Fig. 4A and B show the XPS spectra of the Ni 2p and O 1s core levels of NiOx, and Fig. 4C and D show those of Co:NiOx, respectively, on top of a Shirley background. Comparing the O 1s spectra from NiOx and Co:NiOx in Fig. 4A and C, respectively, an extra weak peak appeared in Fig. 4C which was caused by the Co doping. Again, this proves that the Co ions were successfully doped into the compound films. The eight peaks displayed in Fig. 4B and D were assigned to the Ni 2p1/2 and 2p3/2 levels of Ni2O3, NiO and NiOOH and the shake-up process of the NiOx. Therefore, the as-prepared films were nonstoichiometric and thus they were denoted as NiOx. It should be mentioned that the Co doping process did not change the composition of the NiOx layer. Fig. 4E illustrates the XPS spectrum of the Co 2p level that comprises two peaks at 796.7 eV and 779.8 eV, which were ascribed to 2p1/2 and 2p3/2 of CoO, respectively. Along with the Co2+ developed in the NiOx film, the localized oxygen vacancy states would be created simultaneously. As a result, we could ensure that pure p-type Co2+ was created and first doped into the hole transport layer successfully, which was beneficial to improving the hole mobility and the corresponding cell performance. This discovery was also in accordance with the Hall measurements. Moreover, the pure p-type Co2+ doping could be easily realized using co-sputtering, which was considered an advantage in contrast with using the solution process.

Fig. 5A showed the optical transmittance spectra of the NiOx and Co:NiOx films on the FTO substrates with the same thickness of around 20 nm, which corresponded to the same sputtering time. The two as-deposited films that were prepared at room temperature were found to be highly transparent (with a transmittance of up to 84% at 550 nm) across the visible range, which is rather desirable for photovoltaic devices. From the enlarged inset picture in Fig. 5A we found that the transmittance of the NiOx film was only slightly affected after Co2+ doping. Hence, nearly the same mass of photon flux would reach the perovskite material leading to an enhanced light-harvesting ability.
Ultraviolet photo-electron spectroscopy was carried out to explore the electronic structure variation of the NiOx films with and without Co doping, and Fig. 5B and C showed the analysis results. The work function (WF) of NiOx was slightly decreased from 4.27 eV to 4.18 eV that resulted from the Co2+ doping, while the distance between the valence band and Fermi level remained unchanged. The position of the valence band could be confirmed using the equation EVB = 21.22 − (EB − EC) and the values for NiOx and Co:NiOx were estimated to be 5.36 eV and 5.26 eV, respectively. It is important to emphasize that WF was associated with a dipole layer, which would facilitate the hole extraction from the perovskite absorber material to the hole transport layer.
A device with three layers consisting of FTO/Co:NiOx/CH3NH3PbI3 was fabricated to analyse the interface between the HTL and perovskite material. It could be distinctly observed that the perovskite material was closely packed onto the HTL and their interfaces were touching, which was beneficial to the enhancement of the extraction rate of photo-generated holes.Fig. 6B shows the energy level diagram of each layer belonging to an assembled PSC. The HOMO (highest occupied molecular orbital) and LUMO (lowest unoccupied molecular orbital) of the perovskite material matched well with the contacted HTL and ETL as well as the top and bottom electrodes, respectively. The good match of the energy levels between the neighbouring layers was a precondition to a high performance PSC. The above mentioned good properties of the HTLs promoted us to fabricate the PSCs. The cross-sectional SEM image of a typical FTO/HTL/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Ag device is given in Fig. 6C. It was clear that each layer in the device was sharply demarcated.

Fig. 7A and B show the J–V curves of device 1 (FTO/NiOx/perovskite layer/PCBM/Ag) and device 2 (FTO/Co:NiOx/perovskite layer/PCBM/Ag), which were measured in both the reverse direction (open-circuit voltage (Voc) to the short-circuit current density (Jsc)) and the forward direction (the short-circuit current density (Jsc) to open-circuit voltage (Voc)), and were scanned with 10 mV voltage steps and 40 ms delay times under AM 1.5G illumination. The photovoltaic parameters (Jsc, Voc, FF and PCE) of the PSCs based on NiOx and Co:NiOx HTLs are summarized in Table 1. It can be clearly seen that device 2 showed not only better photovoltaic performance, which mainly resulted from the higher short-circuit current density (Jsc) and the fill factor (FF), but also a narrower hysteresis than device 1. As listed in Table 1, the open-circuit voltages (Voc) were all around 1 V regardless of the scan direction, while the Jsc and FF were quite different. In particular, the Co-doped NiOx achieved a significantly increased Jsc from 18.41 mA cm−2 to 19.92 mA cm−2, and the FF value increased from 0.55 to 0.63. Since the transmittance of Co:NiOx was slightly lower and hence the incident light loss was higher, the enhancement of the short current density was attributed to the following reasons: (i) a smoother surface which ensured better wettability between the precursor solution and the HTL and thus better touch and contact; (ii) improved conductivity which reduced the carrier transport loss in the HTL and (iii) a lower valance band position which reduced the basic energy loss. The advantages of the close contact between Co:NiOx and the perovskite and better conductivity that enabled fast carrier extraction were believed to be responsible for the enhancement of the FF. With dramatically improved Jsc and FF, the PCE value was enhanced from 9.46% to 12.61% due to the Co2+ doping. To further examine the reproducibility of the photovoltaic performance, 20 PSCs based on NiOx and Co:NiOx HTLs were fabricated and tested at their correspondingly optimal conditions. The histogram of the average PCEs shown in Fig. 7C demonstrates the feasibility of the co-sputtered Co:NiOx HTL, which exhibited an obviously higher PCE than the NiOx HTL. In addition, this evaluation allowed us to confirm that the magnetron sputtering method was a highly reproducible and facile route for realizing low-cost and high-performance PSCs.
Devices
Scan direction

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
NiOx
Reverse
1.008
18.80
54.76
9.60
NiOx
Forward
0.993
18.01
54.95
9.33
Co:NiOx
Reverse
1.010
20.02
63.35
12.63
Co:NiOx
Forward
1.009
19.82
63.40
12.58
To examine the photocurrents of the devices, the photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra were recorded and the results are shown in Fig. 8. The IPCE presented had a broad plateau with a maximum value of 85% in the visible region. The integral current densities as a function of wavelength were also calculated. The IPCE (Fig. 8) of the device based on Co:NiOx was higher that of the NiOx based device in the whole visible region, indicating that the photon-to-electron conversion process in the Co:NiOx based PSC was more efficient. The integral Jsc values (20.2 mA cm−2 and 19.2 mA cm−2) derived from the IPCE spectra were in good accordance with the experimental value of Jsc. In addition, Fig. S4 (ESI) illustrates the IPCE spectra and their integral current densities of the devices based on various NiOx HTLs where the power of loading onto the Co target was 5 W, 15 W, 20 W, 25 W and 50 W, respectively. The integral Jsc values agreed with the photovoltaic parameters summarized in Table S2 (ESI) and reaffirmed that 15 W was the optimal doping power for the Co target.
Steady state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements were employed to reveal the photo-generated carrier transfer and recombination loss. As indicated in Fig. 9A, the PL quenching for the FTO/Co:NiOx/perovskite films was more intense than for the FTO/NiOx/perovskite films, suggesting an enhanced hole extraction ability after p-type Co2+ doping. Using the time-correlated single photo counting method at a fixed acquisition time, the time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra in Fig. 9B demonstrate that the doping effect successfully accelerated the carrier transfer process from the perovskite absorber layer to the NiOx layer, which was in accordance with the steady-state PL spectra. By incorporating the steady state PL spectra (Fig. 9A) into the analysis, it was apparent that the Co:NiOx based device exhibited a higher hole transfer/extraction efficiency due to the aforementioned smoother surface, faster hole mobility and higher WF.
Undoubtedly, the stability of the perovskite solar cells was a major concern even though they have already achieved excellent performance. PEDOT:PSS is a widely used HTL for high performance pervoskite solar cells. However, it could not effectively block the electrons due to it having a relatively low LUMO position. Furthermore, the hydrophilic and acidic properties were detrimental to device stability. Therefore, the inorganic metal oxide HTLs with good stability are certainly beneficial to the practical application of PSCs. In light of this important point, the stability of the devices based on NiOx and Co:NiOx HTLs were also examined as well as the conventional organic HTL (PEDOT:PSS) without encapsulation. They were put in a constant temperature humidity chamber at 30 °C and 60% humidity. After 10 days storage, the PCE of the NiOx and Co:NiOx based devices remained above 90% of the initial value illustrating that the doped Co2+ did not influence the PSC long-term stability, while the PEDOT:PSS based device dramatically degraded to below 50% (Fig. 10). This was mainly caused by the degradation of two key photovoltaic parameters: the FF and Jscversus time. Possible mechanisms for this might be attributed to the acidic and hydrophilic characteristics of PEDOT:PSS, which would degrade the FTO electrode and the perovskite absorber layer.

In conclusion, the p-type Co2+ was first doped into a NiOx HTL using room-temperature magnetron sputtering. The film was shown to have an enhanced hole mobility, a smoother surface and a decreased WF using AFM, Hall effect measurements, PL, TRPL and UPS measurements. Consequently, the average power conversion efficiency of the devices based on NiOx and Co:NiOx notably increased from 9.46% to 12.61%, which was mainly attributed to the increased FF and Jsc. The co-sputtering technique was proven to be a facile and efficient way to prepare Co2+ doped NiOx making it a competitive method for the production of a hole transport layer when compared to the conventional solution-processed method. More importantly, the Co2+ doping did not show damage to the solar cell stability, with an over 90% PCE retention even after 10 days storage without encapsulation as the same with undoped samples. Therefore, our work proposed an efficient and simple strategy for promoting the mass production of planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells with high reproducibility and outstanding stability.


The authors are grateful to the high-tech project of MOST (2014AA032802), the national sci-tech support plan the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC, No. 51372264), and the Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (STCSM, No. 14DZ2261200).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental section, XRD patterns and top view SEM image of the perovskite material. Top view SEM image of the co-sputtered Co:NiOx layer. Top view SEM image of NiOx on the FTO substrate prepared by a solution processed method. IPCE spectra and the corresponding integration photocurrent of the device based on Co:NiOx HTLs when the doping power was 5 W, 10 W, 15 W, 20 W, and 50 W, respectively. The photovoltaic parameters of the PCSs based on NiOx HTLs with different sputtering times, Co:NiOx HTLs with different doping powers are summarized. The elemental content in Co:NiOx compounds. See DOI: 10.1039/c6tc03624d
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016