 DOI: 10.1039/D2NR04917A
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 17625-17632


Diksha
Thakur
,

Qi Bin
Ke
,

Shou-En
Chiang
,

Tzu-Han
Tseng
,

Kun-Bin
Cai
,

Chi-Tsu
Yuan
,

Jyh-Shyang
Wang
 and 

Sheng Hsiung
Chang
*

Department of Physics, Chung Yuan Christian University, Taoyuan 320314, Taiwan, Republic of China. E-mail: shchang@cycu.edu.tw

Research Center for Semiconductor Materials and Advanced Optics, Taoyuan 320314, Taiwan, Republic of China

Center for Nano Technology and R&D Center for Membrane Technology, Chung Yuan Christian University, Taoyuan 320314, Taiwan, Republic of China

Received
7th September 2022
, Accepted 31st October 2022
First published on 31st October 2022
The quasi Fermi level for electrons in a soft perovskite crystalline thin film and the contact qualities at the PCBM/perovskite and perovskite/P3CT-Na interfaces can be increased using a facile encapsulation method, which improves the device performance and stability of the resultant perovskite solar cells. In the encapsulated perovskite solar cells, the averaged open-circuit voltage (VOC) largely increases from 0.981 V to 1.090 V after 9 days mainly due to the increased quasi Fermi levels. Besides, the reflectance and photoluminescence (PL) spectra show improved contact qualities at the PCBM/perovskite and perovskite/P3CT-Na interfaces, which can be used to explain the increase in the short-circuit current density (JSC) from 21.68 mA cm−2 to 23.48 mA cm−2 after the encapsulation process. Besides, nanosecond time-resolved PL and temperature-dependent PL spectra can be used to explain the increased VOC, which is mainly due to the increased shallow defect density and thereby increasing the exciton binding energy of the encapsulated perovskite sample. It is noted that the averaged power conversion efficiency (PCE) slowly decreases from 18.24% to 16.52% within 45 days.

In recent decades, organic–inorganic lead tri-halide perovskite crystalline thin films have been widely used as the active layers of various devices, such as solar cells, light-emitting diodes, photo-detectors, X-ray detectors and field-effect transistors, due to their tunable optoelectronic properties and low-cost fabrication methods. In the application of solar cells, CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3) and CH3NH3PbBr3 (MAPbBr3) perovskite crystals were first deposited on the top of a mesoporous TiO2/FTO/glass substrate as a light absorber, which resulted in a moderate power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.8%. In other words, the void space of mesoporous TiO2 films can be filled with perovskites, which means that organic–inorganic perovskites are soft materials. Solution-processed perovskite crystalline thin films can be deposited on hydrophilic or hydrophobic substrates, which resulted in high-efficiency perovskite solar cells using a regular or inverted device structure. In the best regular and inverted perovskite solar cells, the CH(NH2)2PbI3 (FAPbI3) crystalline thin film and Cs0.1FA0.9Pb(I0.9Br0.1)3 crystalline thin film are used as light absorbing layers. When the surface defects of perovskite crystalline thin films are passivated using organic small molecules, the PCE values of regular and inverted perovskite solar cells can be higher than 25% and 23%, respectively. Encapsulation techniques have been used to extend the lifespan of the high-efficiency perovskite solar cells. Hydrophobic UV-curable adhesives are wieldy used to encapsulate perovskite solar cells. However, the photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells can be degraded due to UV-light illumination during the encapsulation process. In our previous report, additional defects in perovskite crystalline thin films can be formed under blue light illumination, which degrades the photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells. A Surlyn or EVA sheet has been inserted between the cover glass and the perovskite solar cell as an encapsulant. However, the PCE of the perovskite solar cell decreased from 12.5% to 8.2% after encapsulation with a Surlyn sheet due to the required melting temperature at 100 °C and pressing pressure at 0.4 bar, which means that the heating and pressing process might change the properties of soft perovskites and/or the contact qualities at the electron transport layer (ETL)/perovskite and perovskite/hole transport layer (HTL) interfaces. In other words, it is possible to increase the PCE of perovskite solar cells by optimizing the encapsulation process.

In this study, an Ag/BCP:PCBM/MAPbI3/P3CT-Na/ITO/glass sample was encapsulated with a Parafilm sheet and a cover glass. To melt the Parafilm sheet, the encapsulation process was performed on a hotplate at 50 °C with a fixed weight at 500 g for 1 minute. Our experimental results show that both the quasi Fermi level for electrons in the soft perovskite crystalline thin film and the contact qualities at the PCB:PCBM/MAPbI3 and MAPbI3/P3CT-Na interfaces are increased after the facile encapsulation process, which increases the open-circuit voltage (VOC) and short-circuit current density (JSC) of the resultant perovskite solar cells.

ITO/glass substrates (7 Ω sq−1) were purchased from Uni-Onward. P3CT brown powder was purchased from Matrix Scientific. PbI2 brown powder, PCBM brown powder and BCP white powder were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. MAI white powder was purchased from Lumtec. MAI was purified before the preparation of MAPbI3 precursor solution. 0.2 mL chlorobenzene (CB) was used as the antisolvent during the washing-enhanced nucleation process. The material preparation and device fabrication processes are illustrated in our previous report. The thickness values of Ag, PCBM, MAPbI3 and ITO thin films are 100 nm, 60 nm, 600 nm and 210 nm, respectively. Besides, a BCP/IPA solution was used to modify the PCBM thin film and the contact quality at the PCBM/MAPbI3 interface. Finally, high-efficiency inverted MAPbI3 solar cells were prepared using the spin-coating technique and thermal evaporation method. The active area of a single MAPbI3 solar device is defined to be 2 × 5 mm2 using a shadow mask during the thermal evaporation process of Ag thin films. Each sample contains four individual solar cells. One cover glass and a Parafilm sheet were used to encapsulate the four solar cells, as shown in Fig. 1. The J–V curves of the perovskite solar cells were measured using a source measurement unit (NI-USB 6356 DAQ) under one sun illumination (AM1.5G, 100 mW cm−2). The light intensity of the light-emitting diode based solar simulator (VeraSol-2, Newport) on the surface of solar cells was calibrated using a reference cell (91150 V, Newport) before evaluating the photovoltaic performance of the perovskite solar cells.

To explore the trends of the VOC, JSC and fill factor (FF) of the inverted perovskite solar cells without and with the facile Parafilm encapsulation technique, MAPbI3/P3CT-Na/ITO/glass, PCBM/MAPbI3/P3CT-Na/ITO/glass, cover glass/Parafilm/MAPbI3/P3CT-Na/ITO/glass and cover glass/Parafilm/PCBM/MAPbI3/P3CT-Na/ITO/glass samples were prepared. The surface morphologies were observed using an atomic force microscope (UTEK, Nanoview 1000). The crystal structures were analyzed using an X-ray diffractometer (Bruker, D8 Advance). Photoluminescence spectra were recorded using a home-made optical-microscope based spectrometer. The excitonic features were observed using a home-made reflectance spectrometer (see Fig. S1). Time-resolved PL curves were recorded using a time-correlated single-photon counting spectroscopic system (Picoquant, FluoTime 300). Temperature-dependent PL spectra were recorded using a home-made system.


Fig. 2 presents the day-dependent photovoltaic performance of the inverted perovskite solar cells. The averaged PCE of 8 cells was 16.82% when the BCP-modified PCBM thin film, MAPbI3 crystalline thin film and P3CT-Na thin film were used as the ELT, light absorbing layer and HTL, respectively. The solar cells were encapsulated on the second day, which largely increased (decreased) the averaged JSC (series resistance) from 21.68 mA cm−2 (47 Ω) to 23.48 mA cm−2 (36 Ω). The day-dependent Rs is shown in Fig. S2. The increased JSC and decreased series resistance (Rs) imply that the atomic contact distance between the P3CT-Na polymer and MAPbI3 crystals was decreased after the encapsulation process, as shown in Fig. S3. In the encapsulated solar cells, the averaged VOC significantly increased from 0.981 V to 1.090 V after 9 days. It seems that the increased JSC and VOC result in a slow decay in the FF, which might be due to the improved contact qualities at the BCP:PCBM/MAPbI3 and MAPbI3/P3CT-Na interfaces. To confirm that the improved photovoltaic stability is related to the encapsulation, the day-dependent PCE of the un-encapsulated cells was monitored, as shown in Fig. S4. The averaged PCE of the un-encapsulated cells decreased from 15.66% to 13.03% after 46 days, which indicates that the use of a facile encapsulation method extends the device lifespan. Fig. 3(a)–(c) present the J–V curves of the inverted perovskite solar cells. On the first day, the forward and backward J–V curves show a weak JSC hysteresis (see Fig. 3(a)), which indicates that some iodine vacancies were formed in the inner region of the perovskite crystalline thin film, as shown in Fig. 3(d). On the second day, the JSC hysteresis (VOC hysteresis) was reduced (formed) after the encapsulation process, which indicates that the iodine ions migrate from the surface to the inner region of the perovskite crystals, as shown in Fig. 3(d). The migration of iodine ions is possible due to the thermal-driven effect and/or pressure-driven effect during the encapsulation process. In the encapsulated perovskite solar cell, the VOC hysteresis (ΔVOC) increases from 18 mV to 34 mV after 9 days (see Fig. 3(c)), which indicates that the density of iodine vacancies slowly increases with an increase in the time from the second day to the tenth day. It is noted that the trend of the VOC hysteresis is proportional to the trend of the VOC of the encapsulated perovskite solar cells. In other words, the higher density of iodine vacancies (electron density) results in a higher position of the Fermi level for electrons in the top region of the perovskite crystalline thin film, which can be used to explain the trend of the VOC values from the second day to the tenth day. From the tenth day to the 46th day, the encapsulated perovskite solar cells exhibited stable VOC and JSC. Besides, the averaged FF of the encapsulated perovskite solar cells slowly decreases from 80.7% to 69.9% after 45 days, which can be explained as due to the formation of blue light-induced defects in the perovskite crystalline thin film. On the other hand, the averaged FF of the un-encapsulated solar cells largely decreases from 74.3% to 69.8% after 10 days, which shows the formation of moisture-induced defects and thereby degrading the photovoltaic performance. It can be predicted that the formation of blue light-induced defects in the perovskite thin film will be significantly increased when the solar cell is encapsulated on the 10th day. In other words, the photovoltaic performance of the resultant solar cells will degrade faster.

Fig. S5 presents the atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of the MAPbI3/P3CT-Na/ITO/glass and BCP:PCBM/MAPbI3/P3CT-Na/ITO/glass samples. The surface roughness (Rq) of the samples largely decreases from 10.31 nm to 1.93 nm, which can be used to explain the high contact quality at the BCP:PCBM/MAPbI3 interface and thereby resulting in a VOC hysteresis-free characteristic in the J–V curves (see Fig. 3(a)). The high contact quality means that the hydrophilic ester functional group of PCBM small molecules passivates the interfacial MA cation of the (110) preferred MAPbI3 crystalline thin film. Fig. S6 presents the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the MAPbI3/P3CT-Na/ITO/glass and BCP:PCBM/MAPbI3/P3CT-Na/ITO/glass samples. In the MAPbI3/P3CT-Na/ITO/glass sample, the strong XRD intensity indicates that the several hundred nanometer-sized particles are highly crystalline MAPbI3 grains (see Fig. S5(a)), which can be used to explain the weak JSC hysteresis in the J–V curves of the inverted perovskite solar cell on the first day (see Fig. 3(a)). When the MAPbI3/P3CT-Na/ITO/glass sample was covered by a 60 nm thick PCBM thin film, the additional XRD peak at (002) was observed, which indicates that the main crystal plane of the MAPbI3 thin film changes from the (110) phase to the (110)/(002) complex phase. In other words, the PCBM small molecules effectively passivate the surface defects of the MAPbI3 crystalline thin film.Fig. 4 presents the reflectance spectra and PL spectra of the MAPbI3/P3CT-Na/ITO/glass and BCP:PCBM/MAPbI3/P3CT-Na/ITO/glass samples. In the reflectance spectra, the prominent peak is due to the higher dielectric constant near the exciton absorption peak, which can be explained by using the Kramers–Kronig relations. In other words, the shorter peak wavelength in the reflectance spectra corresponds to the larger absorption bandgap of the MAPbI3 crystalline thin film. It is noted that the changed shape of the peak in the reflectance spectrum is related to the thin-film interference of the sample. In the PL spectra, the emission peak can be assigned to the emission energy of excitons. According to the definition, the exciton binding energy is the energy difference between the exciton absorption peak and the emission peak of excitons. Therefore, the exciton binding energy of the MAPbI3 crystalline thin film is recued and thereby increasing the exciton self-dissociation rate when the PCBM thin film is used as the capping layer, which can be used to explain the high JSC.
To investigate the encapsulation effect on the interfacial contact between the MAPbI3 crystalline thin film and the P3CT-Na polymer modified ITO thin film, the reflectance spectra and PL spectra of the MAPbI3/P3CT-Na/ITO/glass samples without and with the Parafilm encapsulation were measured, as shown in Fig. 5(a) and (b). After the encapsulation process, the prominent peak has a blue shift in the reflectance spectra of the MAPbI3/P3CT-Na/ITO/glass samples (see Fig. 5(a)), which means that the absorption bandgap (lattice constant) of the MAPbI3 crystalline thin film is increased (decreased). Besides, the reduced PL intensity (see Fig. 5(b)) means that the atomic contact distance between the MAPbI3 crystalline thin film and the P3CT-Na polymers becomes shorter after the encapsulation process (see Fig. S3). Fig. 5(c) and (d) present the reflectance spectra and PL spectra of the BCP:CBM/MAPbI3/P3CT-Na/ITO/glass samples without and with the Parafilm encapsulation, respectively. After the encapsulation process, the prominent peak also has a blue shift in the reflectance spectra of the PCBM/MAPbI3/P3CT-Na/ITO/glass samples (see Fig. 5(c)), which means that the absorption bandgap (lattice constant) of the MAPbI3 crystalline thin film is increased (decreased). Besides, the PL peak is red-shifted from 767 nm to 773 nm (see Fig. 5(d)), which can be used to explain the formation of iodine vacancies at the MAPbI3 grain boundaries after the encapsulation process. In other words, a slightly increase in the PL peak intensity is due to the formation of iodine vacancies (electrical barrier) at the PCBM/MAPbI3 interface and thereby resulting in the VOC hysteresis (see Fig. 2).

Fig. 6(a) and (b) present the reflectance spectra and PL spectra of the encapsulated BCP:PCBM/MAPbI3/P3CT-Na/ITO/glass sample on the first day and ninth day, respectively. The decreased reflectance indicates a reduced exciton absorption strength due to the increased shallow defect density (n-type doping concentration). It is noted that the trend of the shallow defect density (exciton binding energy) of the MAPbI3 crystalline thin film is proportional to the trend of the VOC of the encapsulated perovskite solar cells (see Fig. 2(b)). The increased VOC of the encapsulated perovskite solar cells can be explained as due to the increased energy position of the Fermi level for electrons in the MAPbI3 crystalline thin film via the formation of iodine vacancies (shallow defects) at the grain boundaries. In other words, the increased exciton binding energy is probably due to the attractive force from the shallow defects as shown in Fig. 6(c). The main concept is that the effective exciton radius can be decreased via the electric force from the shallow defect. On the other hand, the PL peak intensity of the encapsulated BCP:PCBM/MAPbI3/P3CT-Na/ITO/glass sample increased from 1650 counts to 2458 counts due to the increased exciton binding energy and/or the formation of an effective electrical barrier at the BCP:PCBM/MAPbI3 interface, which can be used to explain the decrease in JSC from 23.48 mA cm−2 to 21.13 mA cm−2 after 9 days. To confirm the increased exciton binding energy, the time-resolved PL decay curves and temperature-dependent PL spectra of the encapsulated BCP:PCBM/MAPbI3/P3CT-Na/ITO/glass sample were measured on the first day and ninth day, as shown in Fig. 6(d) and 7. After the pulsed laser excitation, the PL intensity decays with time. To obtain the exciton (photo-excited carrier) dynamics, the curve was fitted with a double exponential decay function. The relaxation time constants are listed in Table 1. The shorter time constant (τ1) is assigned to the time for exciton dissociation at the MAPbI3/P3CT-Na interface. The longer time constant (τ2) is assigned to the lifetime of residual excitons in the MAPbI3 crystalline thin film. Conceptually, the larger exciton binding energy can result in a longer time for exciton dissociation and a shorter lifetime of residual excitons. After 8 days, the increased time for exciton dissociation and the decreased lifetime of residual exactions can be used to confirm the increased exciton binding energy. In Fig. 7(a) and (d), the background signal was removed before fitting the PL spectrum with a two-peak Gaussian function. The higher photon-energy peak and lower photon-energy peak are assigned to the band-to-band emission and defect-assisted emission, respectively. The integrated PL intensity and emission peak energy are plotted in Fig. 7(b), (c), (e) and (f). In Fig. 7(b), the integrated intensity decreases with an increase in the temperature from 220 K to 300 K due the thermal quenching effect, which can be used to calculate the exciton binding energy of the encapsulated perovskite sample on the first day. The exciton binding energy values are listed in Table 1. In Fig. 7(e), the integrated intensity increases with an increase in the temperature from 270 K to 300 K, which can be used to explain the increased exciton binding energy of the encapsulated perovskite sample on the ninth day. In Fig. 7(c) and (f), the emission peak energy of the band-to-band emission (defect-assisted emission) increases (decreases) with an increase in the temperature from 220 K to 300 K, which indicates that the shorter lattice constant of the tetragonal perovskite crystals results in a deeper defect energy level. In other words, the integrated PL intensity increases with an increase in the temperature from 270 K to 300 K (see Fig. 7(e)), which is due to the stronger defect-induced exciton localization effect.
Measurement time

τ
1 (ns)

τ
2 (ns)

E
B (meV)
1st day
2.9
146.3
24.9
9th day
7.8
82.9
29.1

In summary, both the open-circuit voltage (VOC) and short-circuit current density (JSC) of the inverted perovskite solar cells are significantly increased after the Parafilm encapsulation which extends the device lifespan. The increased VOC is mainly due to the formation of iodide vacancies (n-type doping) at the perovskite grain boundaries. The increased JSC can be explained as due to the improved contact qualities at the perovskite/P3CT-Na and PCBM/perovskite interfaces after the Parafilm encapsulation. The encapsulated perovskite solar cells exhibited stable and high photovoltaic performance after 45 days.


There are no conflicts to declare.


Financial support was provided by the Ministry of Science and Technology (Taiwan) under Grants MOST 110-2112-M-033-008-MY3 and MOST 111-2112-M-033-008.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2nr04917a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022