 DOI: 10.1039/D0TA02437F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10283-10290


Yanping
Lv
,

Hongru
Ma
,

Yanfeng
Yin
,

Qingshun
Dong
,

Weidong
Zhao
,

Shengye
Jin
 and 

Yantao
Shi
*

State Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals, Department of Chemistry, School of Chemical Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, 116024, China. E-mail: shiyantao@dlut.edu.cn

Key Laboratory of Magnetic Molecules and Magnetic Information Material (Ministry of Education), School of Chemistry and Material Science, Shanxi Normal University, Linfen, 041004, China

State Key Laboratory of Molecular Reaction Dynamics, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian, 116023, China

Received
2nd March 2020
, Accepted 4th May 2020
First published on 4th May 2020
Currently, three-dimensional (3D) organic–inorganic hybrid metallic halide perovskites are emerging as optoelectronic materials, but they demonstrate poor stability against heat and moisture and are vulnerable to oxidation and photodegradation upon exposure to ultraviolet (UV) light. Herein, for the first time, 1,6-diaminohexane ammonium (HDAD+) is demonstrated to be a unique cation spacer to prepare a two-dimensional Dion–Jacobson phase (DJP) perovskite that is ultimately used to construct a 2D/3D stacking structure. Compared to 3D perovskites and Ruddlesden–Popper phase (RPP)-2D perovskites, the DJP-2D perovskite demonstrates superior UV stability and can efficiently protect the 3D layer underneath from being damaged by the UV light. Moreover, the DJP-2D perovskite can also act as an interfacial layer to passivate the defects located on top of the 3D perovskite, resulting in a notably increased photoluminescence lifetime and suppression of interfacial charge recombination. As a result, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) is enhanced from 19.22% (3D) to 20.31% (2D/3D) and is accompanied by improved moisture and thermal stabilities.

In recent years, organic–inorganic metal halide perovskites have been increasingly studied as emerging photoelectric materials due to their low cost, facile solution processibility and exceptional optoelectronic properties, including excellent light absorption, low exciton binding energy, a tunable bandgap, and an ultralong carrier diffusion length, which enables use in various types of highly efficient photoelectric devices. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has jumped from approximately 10% (in 2012) to over 25% (in 2019), which is comparable to that for mature commercially available PV technologies. The practical application and commercialization of PSCs, however, are being substantially inhibited by the intrinsic instability of three-dimensional (3D) perovskites whose structures are prone to be destroyed upon exposure to heat, moisture, ultraviolet (UV) light and oxygen. Consisting of inorganic sheets sandwiched by organic spacer layers, two-dimensional (2D) perovskites feature a layered structure generally represented by the formula (A′)mAn−1BnX3n+1, where the spacer cation can be monovalent (m = 2 for the Ruddlesden–Popper phase (RPP)) or divalent (m = 1 for the Dion–Jacobson phase (DJP)). Relative to their 3D counterparts, 2D perovskites, in particular those with n ≤ 2, demonstrate excellent moisture resistance due to the hydrophobic nature of the organic spacer cations. When serving as photoactive layers in PSCs, however, pure 2D perovskites are greatly limited because of their larger exciton binding energy and indirect and wider bandgap (>2.3 eV) compared to those of 3D perovskites. The combination of 2D and 3D perovskites into a well-defined stacking structure has been validated as a promising strategy to simultaneously resolve the instability issue and improve the photovoltaic performance of PSCs.

The 2D perovskites in 2D/3D stacking structures reported so far are mostly RPPs with monovalent organic ammonium as the spacer cations, such as phenethylammonium (PEA+), butylammonium (BA+), and hexylammonium (HA+). PSCs with 2D/3D stacking structures containing RPPs demonstrated excellent moisture and thermal stabilities compared to those of their 3D counterparts, and the PCE was also notably improved due to suppressed interfacial charge recombination. For example, in 2017, Snaith and co-workers reported high PCEs exceeding 20% and a stability of over 1000 h in air for the BA+ cation-derived 2D/3D device. Moreover, in addition to the observed good moisture and thermal stabilities, Shihe Yang et al. demonstrated a (MAPbI3–PEA2Pb2I4) graded 2D/3D structure enabling a continuous upshift in the energy level, which finally resulted in a high open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.17 V as well as an efficiency enhancement. Very recently, HA+ was also used to establish a 2D/3D stacking structure, endowing the device with improved long-term durability and a high PCE of up to 20.62%. As we know, most organic materials are vulnerable to oxidation and photodegradation under exposure to UV light. Therefore, in addition to humidity and heat stabilities, UV stability is also an important concern when evaluating the practical long-term durability of PSCs. To improve the UV stability, Sb2S3, CsBr or a silane coupling agent were previously used as interfacial layers (usually between the electron transport layer and perovskite) to prevent UV light from damaging the perovskite layer, thus improving the UV stability. However, to the best of our knowledge, 2D perovskites with good UV stability have never been reported until now.
In this work, 1,6-diaminohexane ammonium iodide (HDADI) was introduced to prepare the DJP-2D perovskite capping layer in a 2D/3D stacking structure. The HDADI-based DJP-2D perovskite with n = 1 demonstrated UV stability that was superior to that for a 3D perovskite and an RPP 2D perovskite in a 2D/3D perovskite, both of which decomposed readily upon exposure to UV radiation. The structures as well as the optoelectronic properties of the 2D/3D stacking architecture were well characterized and are discussed. Apart from the excellent UV stability, the HDADI-based DJP-2D perovskite can also act as an interfacial layer to passivate the defects located on top of the 3D perovskite, resulting in a notably enhanced photoluminescence lifetime and a suppressed interfacial charge recombination. As a result, the PCE was enhanced from 19.22% (3D) to 20.31% (2D/3D), and the moisture and thermal stabilities also improved.

The 3D perovskite in our 2D/3D stacking structure had a mixed composition for both cations and halides, namely, Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3, which was fabricated by one-step spin-coating with an anti-solvent method. When preparing the 2D/3D perovskite stacking structure, the HDADI isopropanol solution with a concentration of 2 mg mL−1 was spin coated on the as-prepared 3D perovskite surface, and the obtained film is referred to as 3D + HDADI. Fig. 1a illustrates the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the 3D and 3D + HDADI perovskite film samples, which were deposited on the SnO2/FTO substrates. For the 3D sample, typical diffraction peaks from the 3D perovskite at 14.3°, 20.2°, 24.7°, 28.6° and 32.1° appeared. In addition, the (001) PbI2 peak was observed at 12.9°. For the 3D + HDADI sample, diffraction peaks that characterize 3D perovskites were almost unchanged, indicating that the HDADI isopropanol solution treatment process did not destroy the 3D perovskite film underneath. It is worth noting that the characteristic peak of PbI2 disappeared, and a new peak at 8.2° appeared. To identify this new peak, we prepared a [NH3(CH2)6NH3]PbI4 film for reference, marked as 2D. According to the inset in Fig. 1a, the peak at 8.2° was indexed to the 2D perovskite based on HDADI, demonstrating that a 2D perovskite layer formed on the 3D perovskite surface through the reaction between the HDADI and the residual PbI2 located in the 3D perovskite. To further confirm the presence of the 2D perovskite layer, we performed photoluminescence (PL) analysis of the 3D and 3D + HDADI perovskite film samples, which were deposited on glass substrates. The spectra were recorded from the top of the film side, and the corresponding result is shown in Fig. 1b. For the 3D film, only one emission peak at 774 nm appeared. Strikingly, the 3D + HDADI perovskite film had a different behaviour. Except for the characteristic emission peak of the 3D perovskite at 771 nm, a new emission peak at a wavelength of approximately 490 nm appeared. According to the PL spectra of the 2D perovskite (see the inset in Fig. 1b), the new peak originated from the 2D perovskite. This finding and the XRD data are consistent and provide compelling evidence for the presence of a 2D perovskite layer on the 3D perovskite surface.

The highly sensitive grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) measurement offers 2D detection capability and is often applied to investigate the preferred orientation of 2D perovskites. Therefore, we conducted GIWAXS analysis of both the 3D and 3D + HDADI perovskite film samples, as shown in Fig. S1 in the ESI. For the 3D perovskite, a Debye–Scherrer ring at Qz = 10 nm−1 was observed along the out-of-plane direction, which was assigned to the (110) crystalline planes of the 3D perovskite. For the 3D + HDADI film, an additional Debye–Scherrer ring corresponding to a large lattice spacing at approximately Qz = 5 nm−1 was observed in addition to the characteristic rings of a 3D perovskite. This new ring must be originated from the 2D perovskite, once again demonstrating the formation of a 2D perovskite layer on the 3D perovskite surface, which is in good agreement with previous XRD and PL results. Fig. 1c displays the crystal structure of HDADI-based 2D perovskite (n = 1), where the layer of inorganic [PbI6]4− layer was sandwiched between the diammonium organic spacer cations.
In general, the 2D/3D perovskite stacking structure showed an improved moisture stability compared to that of its conventional 3D counterpart due to the hydrophobic bulky organic cations in 2D perovskite. To observe the moisture stability of the 2D/3D perovskite based on HDADI, water contact angle measurements of the three perovskite films were performed, as shown in Fig. S2 in the ESI. For the 3D perovskite, the water contact angle was 55.26°. However, the 2D/3D perovskite stacking structure exhibited a larger water contact angle of 63.38°. Moreover, as the concentration of the HDADI precursor solution increased to 6 mg mL−1, the surface hydrophobicity was significantly enhanced, with a water contact angle of 84.09°. This is because a thick 2D perovskite layer was formed in the 2D/3D stacking structure, indicating that the 2D perovskite based on HDADI had a high hydrophobicity, thus preventing moisture from penetrating into the 3D perovskite underneath. To further evaluate the moisture stability of the 2D/3D stacking structure based on HDADI, XRD analysis was performed to observe the degradation process of the two perovskite films, as illustrated in Fig. S3 in the ESI. Two perovskite films were directly exposed to ambient conditions. After being placed for 6 months, the aged 3D perovskite film exhibited an increased diffraction peak intensity for PbI2 at 12.9°, which was caused by the degradation of the perovskite film. In contrast, no obvious changes were observed for the 2D/3D stacking structure, indicating that the HDADI-based 2D/3D perovskite film exhibited excellent environmental stability in comparison with that of the 3D film, which could be ascribed to the improved hydrophobicity of the 2D perovskite, as discussed above.
In addition to moisture, UV light has also been found to be detrimental to 3D perovskites because organic materials are vulnerable to oxidation and photodegradation upon exposure to UV light. Therefore, UV stability tests on 3D and 2D/3D perovskite films were also performed with field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM), XRD and UV-vis absorption. Herein, to highlight the UV stability of the HDADI-derived 2D/3D perovskite, monoamine with the same carbon number, that is, an HAI-derived 2D/3D perovskite, was also introduced as a reference and is referred to as RPP-2D/3D, while the 2D/3D perovskite based on HDADI is referred to as DJP-2D/3D. The three film samples were exposed to UV light with an intensity of 6.9 mW cm−2. The UV intensity within the AM1.5 solar spectrum upon irradiation of 100 mW cm−2 was 4.6 mW cm−2. First, we performed XRD and UV-vis absorption measurements to explore the UV irradiation stability of the perovskite films, and the results are shown in Fig. 2a and b. For the 3D perovskite film, as the UV irradiation duration increased, the intensity of the PbI2 peak at 12.9° was significantly enhanced, and the absorption of the perovskite film was significantly decreased, suggesting severe degradation of the 3D perovskite under UV light exposure; the degradation was also characterized by a lightened colour of the 3D perovskite film. For the RPP-2D/3D perovskite film, decomposition also occurred after UV irradiation, but the degradation degree was significantly reduced, which can be verified by the weak increase in the peak intensity of the PbI2 and the slight colour change of the perovskite film. This occurred because the 2D perovskite capping layer was located on the surface of the 3D perovskite and reduced the UV light damage to the bottom 3D perovskite. However, according to the UV-vis absorption results, when the ageing duration was further extended to 7 h, the film absorption intensity decreased obviously and was accompanied by a redshift of the band edge, which indicated that the RPP-2D perovskite cannot suppress the decomposition completely. Compared with the performance of the former two perovskites, the DJP-2D/3D perovskite film performed much better, where no obvious XRD and UV-vis absorption changes in the film were observed during 7 h UV light exposure, indicating that the existence of a DJP-2D perovskite capping layer can enhance the UV stability of the 3D perovskite light absorbing layer effectively. To further verify the function of the DJP-2D perovskite capping layer under UV irradiation, the UV light-induced morphological changes in the films were studied and are depicted in Fig. 3a. Before UV exposure, the 3D perovskite film exhibited a compact and uniform surface with a clear crystal boundary. However, after UV ageing for 3 h, the 3D perovskite surface became porous, and the grain boundaries also became indistinguishable, indicating that severe degradation occurred within the 3D perovskite. In contrast, the morphology of the RPP-2D/3D perovskite film surface was almost invariable after 3 h of UV irradiation. However, when the irradiation time increased to 5 h, the surface became porous, indicating that the existence of an RPP-2D perovskite layer can only delay the decomposition of 3D perovskites. Compared with that for the former two perovskites, the decomposition of the DJP-2D/3D perovskite film decreased. After UV irradiation for 5 h, some voids appeared on the surface of the DJP-2D/3D perovskite film, while the DJP-2D perovskite with a nanoplate structure remained. Even when the UV irradiation time increased to 7 h, these nanoplate structures still existed. This demonstrated that the DJP-2D perovskite can resist the corrosion of UV light. If the 2D perovskite completely covered the 3D surface as we increased the concentration of the 2D perovskite precursor solution, the UV stability of the whole perovskite layer would be greatly improved. This result is consistent with the former XRD and UV-vis results.
In order to understand the mechanism of UV degradation inhibition, we further prepared an HDADI-based DJP-2D perovskite film (n = 1) and investigated its UV-vis absorption spectra after UV light irradiation. As illustrated in Fig. S4 in the ESI, the absorption spectra of the 2D perovskite film were overlapped completely before and after UV exposure for 16 h, demonstrating the increased UV-light tolerance of the DJP-2D/3D stacking structure was induced by the property of the DJP-2D perovskite capping layer. In the structure of the DJP-2D perovskite, as shown in Fig. 1c, diamine compounds with two amino groups at both ends can act as bridges to electrostatically connect the slabs in the stacking direction. Therefore, they may provide stronger links between the layers and increase the overall rigidity of the structure compared to the links in the RPP-2D perovskite, thus exhibiting enhanced stability under UV exposure. This property holds great potential for application in tandem or semitransparent electrode-based PSCs.
After demonstrating excellent stabilities, the optical and electronic properties were also investigated to evaluate the potential of the HDADI-based 2D/3D perovskite in PSCs. Generally, defect-assisted non-radiative recombination is detrimental to device performance. Therefore, space-charge-limited current (SCLC) measurements were conducted to quantify the trap density in the 3D and DJP-2D/3D films. We estimated the electronic trap density in the perovskite layer by measuring the dark current–voltage curves of the electron-only devices with a configuration of FTOglass/SnO2/perovskite/PCBM/Ag, as illustrated in Fig. 4a. The trap density (Nt) was determined by the following equation (eqn (1)):
Nt = (2εε0VTFL)/(eL2)
(1)
where
e is elementary charge, L is the thickness of the perovskite film, ε is the dielectric constant of perovskite, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, and VTFL is the trap-filled limit voltage. As the 2D perovskite layer in the DJP-2D/3D stacking structure was relatively thin, the Nt seemed to be directly proportional to the VTFL. The VTFL of the 3D film was 0.19, which is larger than that of the DJP-2D/3D film (VTFL of 0.13), indicating that the trap densities were somewhat reduced by incorporating the HDADI-based DJP-2D perovskite layer on the 3D perovskite surface. To further demonstrate that the DJP-2D/3D perovskite film had few defects and traps compared with those in the 3D film, photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved PL (TRPL) spectra were obtained. As shown in Fig. 1b, the DJP-2D/3D perovskite film sample exhibited a higher peak intensity than that of the 3D perovskite, suggesting that the DJP-2D perovskite in the DJP-2D/3D stacking structure can passivate surface defects in the 3D perovskite underneath, corresponding to reduced non-radiative recombination. Fig. 4b depicts the TRPL spectra from the 3D and DJP-2D/3D perovskite films deposited onto a bare glass substrate. Both of the two curves were fitted with a double exponential equation, as illustrated below (eqn (2)):

(2)
According to the fitting results listed in Table S1 in the ESI, the average lifetime of the DJP-2D/3D perovskite film was 46 ns, which is much higher than that of the 3D perovskite (40 ns). The enhanced PL lifetime indicates a decreased non-radiative recombination and trap density, suggesting that the DJP-2D perovskite capping layer was efficient in reducing the trap states of the 3D perovskite, which is in accordance with the previous results.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was conducted to investigate charge transport and recombination processes occurring at the interface of the PSCs. Fig. 4c displays the Nyquist plots of the PSCs with the 3D- and DJP-2D/3D-based devices. The inset of Fig. 4c is the corresponding equivalent circuit model. Compared to the 3D-based PSC, a much larger value of carrier recombination resistance (Rrec) located at the low frequency region was observed for the DJP-2D/3D-based PSCs, demonstrating that the charge recombination could be remarkably suppressed due to the reduced defect density within the DJP-2D/3D perovskite, which is in agreement with the PL and TRPL results described above. Moreover, we have examined the time-resolved PL spectra of 3D and DJP-2D/3D perovskites covered with HTM, as illustrated in Fig. S7 in the ESI. As the HTM will quench the emission of perovskite films and exhibited decreased PL lifetime, the much shorter lifetime of the DJP-2D/3D + HTM indicates that a much faster hole extraction occurred at the interface between DJP-2D/3D perovskite and HTM, which is corresponding to the EIS results. Fig. 4d shows the magnified Nyquist spectra for the high-frequency region in Fig. 4c. Compared with the 3D-based PSC, the series resistance (Rs) of the DJP-2D/3D-based device was remarkably decreased. This was probably because the DJP-2D perovskite layer assisted the interaction between the 3D perovskite and the hole transport layer (HTL), thus improving the charge transfer.
After the perovskite film was characterized, the photovoltaic performance was examined for the PSCs based on 3D and DJP-2D/3D perovskite films. We fabricated a device with a planar structure comprising a stack of FTO/SnO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag, as illustrated in Fig. 5a. Fig. 5b shows the current density–voltage (J–V) curves for the best-performing devices measured in reverse and forward scan directions with a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 under AM 1.5G illumination. The corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. The 3D perovskite-based device had an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.09 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 22.88 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.77, leading to a PCE of 19.22%. Compared with those for the 3D perovskite, the DJP-2D/3D-based device had a VOC of 1.10 V, a JSC of 22.80 mA cm−2, and an FF of 0.81, leading to an improved PCE of 20.31%. To evaluate the reproducibility of the PSCs, more than 50 devices with intrinsic 3D and DJP-2D/3D perovskites were fabricated. The statistical distributions of the PCE and VOC were determined and are displayed in Fig. S5 in the ESI. As revealed, the improved performance of the DJP-2D/3D-based device was mainly reflected in the VOC value, which can be related to the reduced number of defects after introducing the DJP-2D perovskite layer. Moreover, the device photocurrent hysteresis was also observed. The hysteresis factor was calculated as follows (eqn (3)):
(3)
Perovskite

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
3D
Reverse
1.09
22.88
0.77
19.22
Forward
1.03
23.06
0.69
16.56
DJP-2D/3D
Reverse
1.10
22.80
0.81
20.31
Forward
1.06
22.82
0.74
18.09
The hysteresis factor of the DJP-2D/3D-based PSCs was 0.109, which is much smaller than that of 3D PSCs (0.138). The dramatically reduced photocurrent hysteresis can be attributed to the defect passivation from the newly formed DJP-2D perovskite capping layer on the 3D perovskite surface. Fig. 5c shows the internal photo-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra of the two devices. The integrated photocurrent of the two devices was almost identical, which is consistent with the JSC values determined by the J–V curves. A steady-state output measurement at the maximum output power point was also performed to demonstrate the reproducibility of the performance. As depicted in Fig. 5d, for the DJP-2D/3D derived device, the output power remained steady over 120 s with a stabilized JSC of 21.27 mA cm2 and PCE of 19.31%, which is higher than that of the 3D-based device. This result demonstrates that the DJP-2D/3D-based device performed better than the 3D device, which is believed to be a result of reduced trap states and non-radiative recombination at the interfaces between the perovskite and spiro-OMeTAD layers.
Finally, we assessed the long-term stability of the non-encapsulated devices based on 3D and DJP-2D/3D perovskite films. The stability in the ambient environment was determined and is illustrated in Fig. 6a, where the related PSCs were stored in an environment with a relative humidity of approximately 55–75% and a temperature of approximately 25–40 °C. As a result, the DJP-2D/3D perovskite-based device maintained 80% of the initial PCE after 60 days, while the PCE of the control device decreased gradually to 40%. The excellent stability in the ambient environment was ascribed to the DJP-2D perovskite capping layer on the 3D perovskite surface, which was demonstrated to be more hydrophobic in the water contact angle tests. Furthermore, the thermal stability of the two devices was determined and is illustrated in Fig. 6b. After continuous heating for 350 h, the PCE of the 3D device gradually decreased to 40% of the initial PCE, while the device based on the DJP-2D/3D film still maintained 60% of its initial value. In general, the thermal stability was attributed to ion migration, which always occurs in perovskites with defects. As the foregoing state, the DJP-2D perovskite played a role in passivating surface defects on the 3D perovskite. Therefore, compared to the characteristics of the 3D perovskite, the DJP-2D/3D counterpart contained fewer trap states; thus, the probability of ion migration was greatly decreased, leading to an improved thermal stability.

In this work, 1,6-diaminohexane ammonium iodide (HDADI) was introduced to prepare a DJP-2D perovskite capping layer in a 2D/3D stacking structure for the first time. The HDADI-based DJP-2D perovskite with n = 1 demonstrated superior UV stability to a 3D perovskite and an RPP 2D perovskite involved in a 2D/3D perovskite, both of which decomposed readily under UV irradiance. Moreover, the HDADI-derived 2D perovskite effectively reduced the surface defects and suppressed the charge recombination at the interfaces between the 3D perovskite and the HTL in planar PSCs. As a result, the PCE increased from 19.22% (3D) to 20.31% (2D/3D) and was accompanied by improved moisture and thermal stabilities. In conclusion, it was demonstrated that the DJP-2D perovskite has potential in establishing a 2D/3D stacking structure with improved optoelectronic properties and stabilities.


FTO was cleaned with hellmanex, and then washed with deionized water, isopropanol and ethanol successively. After dried, FTO was treated with UVO for 30 min. The SnO2 electron-accepting layer was fabricated by spin coating the 0.1 M precursor solution (22.565 mg SnCl2·2H2O dissolved in 1 mL isopropanol) at 2000 rpm for 30 s on the FTO substrate. The ultimate film is obtained after annealing at 180 °C for 1 h. For preparing the 3D perovskite precursor solution, 18.2 mg CsI, 606.7 mg PbI2, 77.1 mg PbBr2, 204.6 mg FAI and 23.5 mg CH3NH3Br were dissolved in 1 mL solvent containing DMF and DMSO (4:1, volume ratio). After stirring for 12 h at room temperature, it was spin-coated following two-steps: 1000 rpm for 10 s (a speed of 100 rpm s−1) and then 6000 rpm for 30 s (a speed of 6000 rpm s−1). Chlorobenzene was poured at 15 s before the finish. The ultimate film was obtained after annealing at 100 °C for 60 min. For fabricating 2D perovskite layer, 2 mg HDADI is dissolved in 1 mL isopropanol. The obtained solution was spin-coated at 4000 rpm for 30 s. For the preparation of the hole transport layer (HTL), the corresponding precursor solution was obtained as follows: 72.3 mg spiro-OMeTAD was dissolved in 1 mL chlorobenzene, and then 17.5 μL lithium bis-(trifluoromethylsulphonyl) imide (520 mg mL−1) in acetonitrile solution, 29 μL 4-tert-butylpyridine and 20 μL FK 209 Co(III) TFSI salt (300 mg mL−1) in acetonitrile solution were added into it. After stirring for 4 h, it was spin-coated at 3000 rpm for 30 s. At last, Ag was evaporated onto the HTL layer thermally forming the total device.


The X-ray diffraction patterns were recorded by (XRD, D/MAX-2400, Japan) with Cu Kα radiation (γ = 0.1541 nm). The GIWAXS measurements of perovskite films were performed at the BL16B1 beamline of the Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility using a Pilatus 2M detector and X-ray with a wavelength of 1.24 Å. Absorbance spectra measurement was performed via a UV-vis spectrophotometer (PerkinElmer Lambda 950). Micromorphology was characterized via scanning electron microscopy (SEM, FEI QUANTA 450). Fluorescence spectra (PL) were excited by a pulse laser (PIXEA-CU-1, AUREA, France) with the wavelength of 406 nm. The IPCE spectra were measured by a monochromatic Xenon lamp (Bunkouki CEP-2000SRR). The contact angle was obtained using an optical CA meter (OCA20, Dataphysics). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was collected via an electrochemical workstation (Zennium Zahner, Germany). The current density–voltage (J–V) curves were measured under simulated AM 1.5G (Solar3A, Newport, 100 mW cm−2) with a Keithley 2450 source meter.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51773025, 51605079, 21606040 and 51872036), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities of China (Grant No. DUT18ZD208 and DUT18LK48), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant No. 2019TQ0046), Natural Science Foundation of Liaoning Province, China (Grant No. 20180510027) and the 1331 Engineering of Shanxi Province.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, water contact-angle test, GIWAXS, XRD, UV-vis, SEM, TRPL and histogram. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta02437f
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020