 DOI: 10.1039/D0TC05877G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 4367-4377


Mozhgan
Yavari
*,

Xueping
Liu
,

Thomas
Webb
,

K. D. G. Imalka
Jayawardena
,

Yuren
Xiang
,

Stefanie
Kern
,

Steven
Hinder
,

Thomas J.
Macdonald
,

S. Ravi P.
Silva
,

Stephen J.
Sweeney
 and 

Wei
Zhang
*

Advanced Technology Institute, Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey GU2 7XH, UK. E-mail: m.yavari@surrey.ac.uk; wz0003@surrey.ac.uk

State Center for International Cooperation on Designer Low-carbon & Environmental Materials (CDLCEM), School of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, Henan, China

Interface and Surface Analysis Centre (ISAC), University of Nottingham, School of Pharmacy, University Park, Nottingham, NG7 2RD, UK

The Surface Analysis Laboratory, Department of Mechanical Engineering Sciences, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey GU2 7XH, UK

Department of Chemistry and Centre for Processable Electronics, Imperial College London, London, W12 0BZ, UK

Advanced Technology Institute and Department of Physics, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey GU2 7XH, UK

Received
15th December 2020
, Accepted 1st March 2021
First published on 16th March 2021
Triple cation CsFAMA perovskite films fabricated via a one-step method have recently gained attention as an outstanding light-harvesting layer for photovoltaic devices. However, questions remain over the suitability of one-step processes for the production of large-area films, owing to difficulties in controlling the crystallinity, in particular, scaling of the frequently used anti-solvent washing step. This can be mitigated through the use of the two-step method which has recently been used to produce large-area films via techniques such as slot dye coating, spray coating or printing techniques. Nevertheless, the poor solubility of Cs containing salts in IPA solutions has posed a challenge for forming triple cation perovskite films using the two-step method. In this study, we tackle this challenge through fabricating perovskite films on a caesium carbonate (Cs2CO3) precursor layer, enabling Cs incorporation within the film. Synergistically, we find that Cs2CO3 passivates the SnO2 electron transport layer (ETL) through interactions with Sn 3d orbitals, thereby promoting a reduction in trap states. Devices prepared with Cs2CO3 treatment also exhibited an improvement in the power conversion efficiency (PCE) from 19.73% in a control device to 20.96% (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) in the champion device. The Cs2CO3 treated devices (CsFAMA) showed improved stability, with un-encapsulated devices retaining nearly 80% efficiency after 20 days in ambient air.

Metal halide perovskites with an ABX3 structure were first identified as a potential light-harvesting material for photovoltaics (PV) by Kojima et al. in 2009. When used in semiconductor applications, the A site of the perovskite is a small monovalent organic or inorganic cation (e.g., CH3NH3+ (MA); CH (HN2)2+ (FA); Cs+; Rb+), the B-site by a metal cation (e.g., Pb2+, Sn2+), and the X-site is occupied by a halide anion (e.g., Br−, I−). The remarkable photovoltaic properties of perovskites such as tunable bandgaps, high photovoltages and high absorption coefficients have led to significant research interest in their use for high-efficiency photovoltaic devices. Typically, the preparation of perovskite thin films is carried out using either a one-step anti-solvent or a sequential deposition method. A wealth of research into compositional, passivation and fabrication engineering of the perovskite absorber has played a key role in driving the rapid improvements in the power conversion efficiency (PCE) and stability of perovskite photovoltaics witnessed in recent years. As a result, the PCE of organic–inorganic perovskite-based photovoltaics has soared, with current record efficiencies exceeding 25%.

Triple cation perovskites (CsFAMA) are amongst the most promising of perovskite compositions, combining excellent performance with high stability. Using a one-step antisolvent method, Cs+ can easily be incorporated directly into the perovskite crystal structure via the addition of a caesium halide salt, such as CsI, directly into the precursor solution. Following deposition of the precursor solution, an antisolvent washing step must be carried out to encourage controlled nucleation and crystallization. Upon increasing the size of the substrate, achieving control and uniformity via antisolvent washing becomes increasingly difficult. This makes the one-step antisolvent washing process unsuitable for large-area processing.
Recently, two-step methods have emerged as a promising approach for large area perovskite PV fabrication using techniques such as spray coating, slot dye coating and inkjet printing. However, incorporating Cs cations into the perovskite using a two-step method has so far remained a challenge owing to the low solubility of Cs halide salts in isopropanol (IPA). In the limited research addressing this issue, methods have focused on directly incorporating the Cs salt into the PbI2/dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) precursor solution. Using this method, the Cs+ cations form an intermediate, non-perovskite, δ-phase CsPbI3. More recently, the addition of Cs-based perovskite nanocrystals has been used either with or without additional Cs halide salts leading to the production of triple cation perovskites with increased grain sizes and enhanced crystallinity, although the surface morphology of the resultant Cs incorporated films remains rough. In addition, these strategies have overlooked the opportunities afforded by advances in interfacial engineering for ETL passivation in combination with Cs incorporation.
Tin(IV) oxide (SnO2) is a promising inorganic ETL that has frequently been reported for use in two-step, low-temperature processing of perovskite photovoltaics. So far, the highest PCE achieved utilising a SnO2 planar structure is a remarkable 23.32%. Furthermore the processing temperature of SnO2 is significantly lower compared with alternative ETLs such as mesoporous titanium dioxide (mp-TiO2), which require temperatures of above 450 °C. As a consequence, SnO2 is a desirable ETL for commercial large-area applications. However, PSC efficiencies using SnO2 remain lower than the state of the art mp-TiO2 structure (25.2%), a consequence of the film quality of both the perovskite and SnO2 films. Unlike TiO2, SnO2 suffers from increased crystal aggregation after the annealing process which can lead to poor coverage, the presence of pinholes and a high density of traps at the film surface. It is therefore vital that, for SnO2 to fulfil its commercial potential, these surface defects are passivated. Passivation through interface modification has been established as an effective method for addressing surface defects. Cs2CO3 has been widely used in organic light-emitting diodes (OLED), organic field-effect transistors (OFET), organic solar cells (OSCs) and perovskite solar cells (PSCs) as an interface modifier owing to its excellent effects on electron injection between layers. Cs2CO3 and CsI (caesium iodide) have also been applied as interfacial modifiers in mesostructured perovskite solar cells to suppress the formation of energetic barriers at the interface and enhance the extraction of both electrons and holes. Modified PSCs with dual-caesium doping have been reported to exhibit reproducible efficiencies with little hysteresis, and with a champion PCE of 20.6%. Cs2CO3 has been further employed as a novel surface modification material for mp-TiO2 ETLs which serves to reduce recombination without affecting the crystal quality of the perovskite. Cs2CO3 has thus become a popular method for modifying the properties of mp-TiO2 layers because of its excellent ability to promote electron extraction. In addition to the enhancements in PCE, improvements in the stability of perovskite films have been reported using Cs2CO3 treatment, in which devices can retain 78% initial efficiency after 250 h. Despite this progress, the effects of the high solubility of the Cs2CO3 film in typical perovskite processing solvents has yet to be explored and the distribution of the Cs salt following perovskite formation is yet to be discussed.
In this work, we develop a novel and simple synergistic approach to tackling the difficulty of uniformly incorporating Cs into perovskite films via a two-step method while also passivating the perovskite ETL interface. To do this, we spin coat a thin layer film of Cs2CO3 (CC) prior to the deposition of a PbI2 film. Caesium carbonate was chosen for this work for its previously discussed prevalence as a passivating interlayer combined with its intrinsic solubility in solvents that are typically used for the processing of PbI2 films. As a consequence, we find that the Cs+ diffuses into the perovskite films enabling the simple fabrication of a triple cation perovskite. In doing so, we demonstrate a synergistic treatment approach for producing passivated, triple cation perovskites with large and smooth grains through a two-step fabrication method that is also suitable for a range of large-area perovskite fabrication techniques. We also note the suppression of the δ-FAPbI3 phase following Cs2CO3 treatment. To characterise Cs incorporation within the perovskite layer we use time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) depth profiles combined with etching depth X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) techniques. To investigate the synergistic passivation of the interface we conduct light intensity-dependent measurements on devices, combined with time correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) and space charge limited current (SCLC) measurements. Finally, we produce PSCs to demonstrate the increased performance upon application of the multifunctional Cs2CO3 interfacial treatment and improvements in the stability.

Incorporation of Cs+ cations into perovskites using a two-step processing procedure presents a challenge in producing highly efficient and stable triple cation perovskite devices. To address this we explore a novel soluble interlayer strategy. In brief, following fabrication of a thin SnO2 ETL layer, we deposited the Cs2CO3 cation solution to produce a thin Cs2CO3 film as shown in (Fig. 1). Following the Cs2CO3 deposition a conventional perovskite two-step fabrication is employed. In terms of photovoltaic device performance, we observed the optimum performance to be achieved at a Cs2CO3 cation solution concentration of 1 mg mL−1 (as discussed later on). Therefore unless otherwise stated, all characterisation discussed has been carried out on samples based on this concentration of Cs2CO3.

As a first approach to investigating the tendency of Cs cations to diffuse into the perovskite film, films were prepared with and without a Cs2CO3 ETL treatment before being characterized using ToF-SIMS depth profiling using a Bi source (Fig. 2). From the ToF-SIMS analysis we observe that for perovskite films prepared on a Cs2CO3 treated ETL, Cs+ cations are incorporated within the perovskite photoactive layer (Fig. 2a). To gain further insight into the distribution of Cs+ cations within the film, 3D topographical plots were collected which show a uniform distribution of Cs+ through the thickness of the perovskite absorber (Fig. 2b). The tendency of Cs+ to diffuse and be incorporated within the perovskite film is attributed to the high affinity of the Cs2CO3 interlayer with the polar processing solvents used in the subsequent materials deposited, forming a distribution of Cs moieties within the PbI2 precursor film. Following the addition of organic cations in the perovskite forming step, a well-distributed concentration of Cs is readily incorporated into the perovskite affording the triple cation composition. The topographical plots further highlight a high lateral uniformity of the Cs+ distribution which can be attributed to the excellent dispersion and uniformity of the initial Cs2CO3 layer on SnO2, which can be identified from energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) maps of the surface (Fig. S1, ESI).
To gain greater insight into the Cs distribution profile through the entirety of the device, etched depth X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was also conducted (Fig. 3a). The etched profiles confirm that the concentration of Cs remains uniform and consistent throughout the perovskite bulk film with a minor increase towards the SnO2 interface. The slight increase at the interface is attributed to a residual Cs2CO3 interlayer which coordinates to the SnO2 and is discussed in more detail later.
To confirm beyond doubt that Cs+ is distributed across the entirety of the perovskite absorber layer, surface X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) was conducted on the top surface of a Cs2CO3 treated perovskite film. We note that XPS is highly surface sensitive and gives a good indicator of the composition at the uppermost interface. Consistent with the previous data, films prepared with Cs2CO3 exhibited Cs+ peaks around 725 and 739 eV thus confirming that Cs+ is distributed across the entirety of the perovskite structure (Fig. S2a, ESI). This method is therefore comparable to one-step methods in terms of its uniform and effective distribution of Cs+. Using surface XPS, we estimate a Cs:Pb ratio of 0.024:1 or 2.4% Cs (Fig. S3, ESI). However, it is pertinent to note the high presence of residual Pb2+ cations from PbI2, as evidenced by the X-ray diffraction characterization, which is discussed later. The presence of residual PbI2 is frequently reported in two-step processed films and makes the quantitative analysis of the stoichiometry an underestimate. Interestingly the surface XPS measurements of perovskites prepared both with and without Cs2CO3 do not show a significant change in the intensity of the binding energy of the O 1s orbital, which indicates the absence of CO32− at the surface. It is, therefore, reasonable to suggest that the carbonate ions are accumulated between grains and at the SnO2/perovskite interface (Fig. S2b, ESI). We suggest that this could be a result of charged interactions between under coordinated Sn4+ cations at the interface.
To identify passivating interactions between the Cs2CO3 treatment and the SnO2, surface XPS was conducted on both Cs2CO3 treated and pristine SnO2 films. After the Cs2CO3 treatment, the SnO2/Cs2CO3 film showed additional peaks located at binding energies of 725 and 739 eV, characteristic of the Cs 3d orbitals (Fig. 3b inset). Upon addition of a Cs2CO3 layer, a reduction in the binding energies of the Sn 3d5/2 and Sn 3d3/2 peaks of around ca. 0.4 eV was observed (Fig. 3b and c). This is attributed to the transfer of electron density between the electronegative anion of CO32− and Sn4+ passivating electron-poor oxygen vacancy surface defects which may help to suppress trapping and enhances conductivity. The interaction between CO32− species and the Sn 3d orbital at the interface is consistent with the small increase in Cs+ distribution in etched depth XPS and suggests that a residual interlayer remains present at the interface acting as a passivation layer. We also observe a slight increase in the binding energy of the Pb 4f orbital in perovskite films prepared with Cs2CO3 (Fig. 3d). This is attributed to both a reduction in the PbI2 content and a change in the electron density on the Pb atoms from a change in perovskite composition.
Crystallographic data of the perovskite films were collected using X-ray diffraction (XRD) techniques and the recorded patterns are presented in (Fig. 4a). Comparison of the diffraction patterns reveals some changes between the films prepared with and without Cs2CO3 treatment. One of the notable changes between the films is the reduction in the intensity of the peak at 12.7° characteristic of residual PbI2 which is often observed in two-step processed perovskite films. From the XRD data, it is clear that the residual PbI2 is reduced in films prepared with Cs2CO3 which is also consistent with the modified crystallisation stage and can be observed by the reduction of bright PbI2 grains in the SEM (as discussed later on), suggesting that the Cs2CO3 encourages the formation of the perovskite phase. The more complete reaction and reduction in PbI2 is consistent with previous studies, in which the addition of Cs into a one-step method improves the formation of the photoactive black perovskite phases. Moderate residual PbI2 is frequently reported as being beneficial to the photovoltaic performance.
In addition to the change in the PbI2 peak, the relative intensity of the peaks at 13.9° and 28.3°, corresponding to the (100) and (200) planes of the cubic lattice respectively, is significantly increased (Fig. 4a). This observation can be attributed to improved crystallinity, and orientated growth of the film following the addition of a small inorganic cation such as Cs+ (or Rb+), which acts to promote a more cubic crystal system via a reduction in the average ionic radius of the A-site cation. This slight decrease in effective ionic radius upon addition of small Cs cations can also be identified in the films via a minor shift in the (100) peak from 13.90° to 13.96° in the sample containing Cs+ (Fig. 4b), which corresponds to the slight reduction in the size of the crystal lattice unit cell, further confirming that the added Cs is sufficient within the structure to influence the crystal lattice properties. X-ray diffraction also reveals the elimination of the yellow hexagonal non-perovskite δ-FAPbI3 phase upon addition of the Cs+ cations into the perovskite, as evident from the peak at 11.7° (Fig. 4b inset). This result is a consequence of decreasing the tolerance factor and stabilizing the photoactive black phase. The removal of the δ-FAPbI3 phase is essential for improving the stability of the devices as a consequence of its key role in the degradation of perovskite films.
Following the identification of Cs+ diffusion into the perovskite device, as well as a residual Cs2CO3 interlayer we next sought to investigate the resultant change in the morphology of the perovskite film. To do this we first conducted 2D and 3D atomic force microscopy (AFM) scans on the perovskite surface (Fig. 5a and b) and (Fig. S4, ESI). The root mean square (RMS) roughness of the perovskite layer deposited onto the untreated SnO2 was ∼53 nm (Fig. 5a). In comparison, films prepared with additional Cs2CO3 treatment on the SnO2 surface showed a decrease in the RMS roughness of the perovskite film to ∼39 nm (Fig. 5b). The observed decrease in surface roughness in films prepared after Cs2CO3 treatment highlights that the quality of the perovskite film is improved, a consequence of higher crystallinity, and more compact grains leading to reduced defects associated with the grain boundaries and consequently fewer non-radiative recombination sites, as discussed later. To further characterise the effects of Cs2CO3 on the growth of the perovskite films, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were taken of the perovskite surfaces (Fig. 5c and d). The SEM images show that the perovskite grown on a treated SnO2 ETL layer produces larger, smoother, and more compact grains which is anticipated to improve charge transport and reduce defect density. To compare the distribution of grain sizes between perovskites grown on SnO2 and Cs2CO3 treated SnO2, histograms were prepared from analysing the SEM images which shows an increase in the average grain size from 680 nm in the control sample to 950 nm in the Cs2CO3 containing sample (Fig. 5g). Furthermore, we note a large percentage of grains over 1 μm in size for the Cs2CO3 treated samples. The increased grain size is desirable for improved photocurrents and device performance. Cross sectional-SEM images of devices prepared with and without Cs2CO3 treatment are shown in (Fig. 5e and f). Consistent with the top view in (Fig. 5c and d), the grains in the perovskite layer are larger in the SnO2 treated Cs2CO3 film compared with the control. However, the thickness of the layer remains unchanged at around 680 nm.
To maximise the light absorption of the perovskite film, the ETL thin film must have high transmittance over visible wavelengths, the region which can be absorbed by the photoactive layer. Ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) transmission spectra of ITO/SnO2 substrates reveal excellent transmission across the region with no significant changes upon the addition of a Cs2CO3 layer (Fig. 6a). From the transmission data, the average visible transmittance (AVT) (340–700 nm) calculated for the SnO2 film and Cs2CO3 incorporated films was over 80% (SnO2: 87.30%, with Cs2CO3: 87.50%). For optimal light collection in the absorber layer, the transparency of an ideal ETL should be in excess of 85%. To investigate the optical properties of the perovskite films grown on Cs2CO3, steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra were collected for ITO/SnO2/perovskite and ITO/SnO2/Cs2CO3/perovskite samples (Fig. 6b). The collected data show the blue shifting of the PL emission peak in the films prepared on a Cs2CO3 treated SnO2 substrate, which is consistent with the formation of a wider bandgap triple cation perovskite. A slight asymmetry in the PL emission of the triple cation perovskite films can be observed. To further characterise the effect of Cs2CO3 treatment on the optical properties of the perovskite absorber, UV-vis spectroscopy was conducted. As expected, the UV-vis absorbance spectra revealed that the perovskite films grown with Cs2CO3 treatment exhibited increased light absorption compared with the control films (Fig. 6c). The enhanced absorption in the perovskite film is consistent with both the improved crystallinity, larger grains and improved stability and the presence of the black photoactive phase. UV-vis absorption plots also confirm the blue shift observed from the PL measurements in films prepared with Cs2CO3. To quantify the change in the bandgap of perovskite films after Cs incorporation, Tauc plots (αhν)2, where h is the Planck constant, ν is the photon's frequency and α is the absorption coefficient, were constructed (Fig. 6d). The constructed Tauc plots show that the perovskite exhibits a slightly higher bandgap when grown with Cs2CO3, from 1.51 eV in the control to 1.53 eV, closely matching the PL spectra and being consistent with triple cation formation. Similar to the PL emission, plotting the derivative of the absorption onset (dA/dE) also shows asymmetry towards higher energy and suggests a slight change in the density of states around the bandgap in the triple cation films (Fig. S5, ESI).

Devices were fabricated using a regular n–i–p architecture, where n and p are n and p type layers respectively. The device structure consisted of ITO/SnO2/Cs2CO3(CC)/FA1−xMAxPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Ag (Fig. 7a). The Cs2CO3 treatment was prepared by spin coating a Cs2CO3 solution onto a SnO2 ETL substrate. The perovskite layers were then fabricated using a two-step deposition method (see details in the Experimental section). Optimization data for the devices prepared with various Cs2CO3 concentrations, including (PCE), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF) and short-circuit current density (Jsc) are summarized in (Fig. S6, ESI), At lower concentrations, the loss in performance is attributed to the presence of the delta phase within the perovskite absorber, which is eliminated when the appropriate amount of Cs+ is incorporated into the perovskite, and the reduced defect passivation in SnO2. Upon addition of high concentrations of Cs2CO3, we observe that the efficiency is reduced. This is attributed to the formation of a Cs2CO3 insulating layer at high concentrations (above 1 mg mL−1). We find that, when optimized, devices prepared with a Cs2CO3 layer showed significant improvements in the photovoltaic characteristics. Current density–voltage (J–V) curves (measured at 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5) are shown for both the champion control device and with a 1 mg mL−1 Cs2CO3 treatment (Fig. 7b). The efficiency of the champion devices increased from 19.73% in the control device to 20.96% in the Cs2CO3 treated device. All photovoltaic parameters showed performance enhancements in FF from 76.67% to 77.20%, Voc from 1.07 to 1.11 V, and the Jsc from 24.12 to 24.50 mA cm−1. We attribute the improvement of voltage and FF to the reduction in surface trap states at the perovskite/ETL interface as a result of passivation of the SnO2 surface states enabling higher carrier densities near the open-circuit voltage and increased quasi-Fermi level splitting.

The maximum power point (MPP) tracking (Fig. 7c) indicates that the stabilized efficiency is close to the value obtained from the J–V scan, validating the device performance data. Consistent with the collected J–V data, the integrated current densities from the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra (Fig. 7d) are 23.2 and 23.7 mA cm−2 for the control and passivated ETL devices respectively, which are well-matched with the Jsc values obtained from the J–V measurements. This result also confirms that the perovskite containing Cs shows a slight improvement in Jsc which is attributed to the increased crystallinity, reduced trap states and larger grain size of the films. To demonstrate the statistical significance, data from 15 devices (Fig. S7, ESI) were collected that highlight the improvement in photovoltaic parameters in devices prepared with the optimized concentration of Cs2CO3 relative to the control structure.
To understand the origin of the improved photovoltage in devices prepared with Cs2CO3, the light intensity dependency of the open-circuit voltage of the perovskite devices at light intensities from 0.1 to 1 sun was measured (Fig. 8a). The data revealed a reduction in the slope nkBT/q (where kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, and q is the electric charge) in the Cs2CO3 prepared film from 1.39 to 1.24. The reduction in the slope (and therefore n) confirms that the defect-assisted (Shockley–Read–Hall, SRH) recombination at the interfaces has been suppressed. Conducting the same measurements on the short circuit current showed little change between the Cs2CO3 passivated and non-passivated films with a slope of approximately 1, suggesting low rates of non-radiative recombination within the bulk of the device and that passivation occurs predominantly at the interfaces (Fig. S8, ESI).
To further understand the passivating role of the thin Cs2CO3 interlayer on the SnO2 and perovskite interface, space charge limited current measurements (SCLC) were performed using ITO/Perovskite/Ag and ITO/Cs2CO3 (CC)/Perovskite/Ag devices. The perovskite devices with a Cs2CO3 layer recorded a significantly lower trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL) of 0.16 V compared with the control of 0.32 V (Fig. S9, ESI) indicating a reduction in trap states and improved mobility within the perovskite following Cs2CO3 treatment. To further elucidate the passivating effects of Cs2CO3 treatment resulting in reduced charge trapping, further SCLC measurements were conducted, using electron only devices with the structure ITO/SnO2 (without and with Cs2CO3)/perovskite/PCBM/Ag. The log(J–V) plots of the electron only devices are shown in (Fig. 8b). Consistent with the previous findings the measured trap-filled limit voltage VTFL of the SnO2 and SnO2/Cs2CO3 electron-only devices were 0.21 V and 0.18 V respectively. This corresponds to a reduction in the electron trap state density (Nt) as highlighted by eqn (1):
VTFL = qNtL2/2εε0
(1)
where
L is the thickness of the active layer (which was 680 ± 2.05 nm), ε is the relative dielectric constant and ε0 is the vacuum permittivity.

To further characterize the passivation of surface traps on electron transfer across the interface, time correlated single photon counting was conducted. To decouple electron transfer and recombination of the bulk from the PL decay a low-intensity excitation was used (Fig. S10, ESI). Fitting the decay of the excited states using a biexponential function enabled the separation of fast non-radiative pathways with the radiative decay of the bulk material. Using the biexponential analysis, the fast decay lifetime component (τ1) is governed by the ability of the ETL to extract electrons from the perovskite layer, while the slow decay lifetime (τ2) reflects the slower radiative lifetime of the perovskite bulk. Its reduced recombination is consistent with our previous findings, and we observe a decrease in τ1 from 1.2 to 1.0 ns for the SnO2 treated Cs2CO3 perovskite, indicating an improvement in charge transfer from trap passivation and an improvement in mobility.
Following the initial fast decay on the order of (<2 ns), the Cs2CO3 treated films have a longer τ2 component increasing from 121 to 167 ns. This result is likely a bulk passivation effect of the Cs+ cations within the perovskite, as reported in previous studies, which can act to increase the radiative lifetime of the perovskite bulk. Ultimately, the data suggest that the Cs2CO3 synergistically improves the interface between SnO2 and perovskite, reducing surface traps and encouraging electron transfer while modifying the bulk perovskite composition as discussed. As a result, we observed an improved photovoltage in the Cs2CO3 modified devices.
Further to the passivation of interfacial traps we also find that the Cs2CO3 plays a role in improving the stability of the device. Improving device stability is a key requirement for perovskite devices. For a more in-depth study of the device stability, devices were placed in a 20% relative humidity (RH) environment without any encapsulation. Measuring the PCE at regular intervals revealed a notably slower decay in the efficiency in devices prepared using Cs2CO3 treatment (Fig. 9). Devices prepared in this manner retained an impressive 80% efficiency of the original PCE after 20 days. The improved ambient air stability of the Cs containing films is attributed to a combination of the larger and more compact grains in the perovskite coupled with the increased phase stability associated with triple cation perovskites, preventing the formation of the non-perovskite δ-FAPbI3 degradation species.

In summary, here we have demonstrated a simple new approach to incorporating Cs cations into perovskite a two-step process, thereby tackling a key issue in two-step fabrication of large-area PSCs. Through various characterisation techniques to probe the composition of the bulk material, we demonstrate that the incorporated Cs+ is well distributed throughout the perovskite bulk. We also find that in incorporating Cs+ into the perovskite, the morphological properties are significantly improved resulting in increased crystallinity, grain size and smoothness. Through employing the Cs2CO3 ETL treatment we observe the complete conversion of the yellow photo-inactive of δ-FAPbI3 in triple cation perovskites addressing a key stability issue of typical two-step double cation perovskite films. Through the construction of devices we find an improvement in efficiency from 19.72 to 20.96%. To rationalise the improvement in device performance we characterize the Cs2CO3 interface, identifying key passivating orbital interactions between Cs2CO3 and Sn4+ orbitals. Using a combination of SCLC measurements combined with light illumination-dependent photovoltage and photocurrent we report a reduction of trap states at the perovskite interface, leading to improved electron extraction as evidenced by low-intensity TCSPC. We thus conclude that the use of Cs2CO3 interlayers is a promising strategy for further optimisation and integration for emerging two-step processed large area cells.


All chemicals were purchased from commercial suppliers and used as received. Formamidinium iodide (FAI) and methylammonium iodide (MAI) was purchased from Greatcell Solar Materials Pty Ltd. Methylammonium chloride (MACl), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, 99.8%), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, 99.7%), chlorobenzene (CB, 99.8%), acetonitrile (ACN, 99.8%), 4-tert-butyl pyridine (TBP, 98%), caesium carbonate Cs2CO3 (CC 99%) and bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide lithium salt (Li-TFSI, 98%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Lead diiodide (PbI2, 99.99%) was from Tokyo Chemical Industry Co. Ltd (TCI, Japan). Isopropanol (IPA, 99.5%) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. SnO2 colloidal solution (15 wt% in water) was purchased from Alfa Aesar. Spiro-OMeTAD (99.8%) was purchased from Xi’an Polymer Light Technology in China.


We fabricated devices with the structure ITO/SnO2/FA1−xMAxPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Ag using SnO2 nanoparticles as ETLs by a two-step spin coating method. ITO glass substrates were ultrasonically cleaned by being sequentially submerged in 2% Hellmanex water solution, deionized water, acetone, and ethanol for 15 min respectively. Substrates were treated with UV–ozone for 15 min to remove remaining organic residues. To prepare the SnO2 films, 1 mL of SnO2 colloidal solution (15 wt%) was dispersed in 5 mL of deionized water. The SnO2 precursor solution was then spun-cast onto the clean ITO glass at 3000 rpm for 30 s, followed by annealing at 150 °C for 30 min in the ambient environment under a RH of 30–40%. The substrates were then treated with UV-ozone for 15 min before being transferred into the nitrogen glove box. An optimized concentration of 1 mg mL−1 Cs2CO3 in deionized water solution was spin-cast on the SnO2 substrates at 3000 rpm for 30 s, followed by annealing at 120 °C for 15 min. Perovskite films were fabricated through a two-step sequential deposition method. First, 80 μL of PbI2 precursor solution (625 mg PbI2 dissolved in 0.9 mL of DMF and 0.1 mL of DMSO) was spin-coated on SnO2 films at 1500 rpm for 30 s and annealed at 70 °C for 1 min. A solution of mixed organic salts FAI/MAI/MACl (60 mg of FAI, 6 mg of MAI, and 6 mg of MACl dissolved in 1 mL IPA) was spin-coated onto the PbI2 film at 1300 rpm for 30 s. After spin-coating, the films of 680 nm thickness were annealed at 150 °C for 15 min in ambient air (30–40% RH). The Spiro-OMeTAD solution was prepared by dissolving into 1 mL chlorobenzene the following: 72.3 mg Spiro-OMeTAD, 35 μL bis(trifluoromethane) sulfonimide lithium salt (LiTFSI) stock solution (260 mg LiTFSI in 1 mL acetonitrile), and 30 μL 4-tert-butyl pyridine. The resulting doped Spiro-OMeTAD solution was spin-coated at 3000 rpm for 30 s. Finally, an Ag back electrode was deposited by thermal evaporation at a pressure of 3 × 10−6 torr. The active area of the device was 0.09 cm2.


The surface morphologies of the perovskite films were studied by SEM (Jeol 7100F) and AFM (Bruker ICON2 SYS). Each SEM image was analyzed using Image J software to obtain the grain size distribution. Time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) dual-beam depth profiling experiments was performed using a Hybrid-SIMS instrument (Hybrid-SIMS; IONTOF GmbH, Münster, Germany). A 30 keV pulsed Bi3+ ion beam was used as the analysis beam, and the analysis area was 150 × 150 μm2 at the centre of the sputter crater which was 500 × 500 μm2. The cycle time was 200 μs and the non-interlaced mode was applied to measurements. After each analysis scan, the sample surface was sputtered for 1 s with 10 keV Ar1460+ ions for depth profiling. Charge compensation was used for all depth profiling measurements by using a 20 eV electron flood gun. Data were acquired in positive polarity. The obtained mass resolution m/Δm was for all measurements better than 5000 for the C4H7+ mass signal. Data analysis was performed using SurfaceLab 7 software (IONTOF GmbH, Münster, Germany).

Steady-state PL was carried out using a 405 nm 5 mW excitation source and an Ocean Optics STS-NIR fibre-coupled spectrometer. The excitation source was filtered via a 450 nm long-pass filter. The absorption spectra were performed using a Varian Cary 5000 UV-vis-NIR spectrophotometer. The film thickness was measured using a surface profilometer (Dektak XT). The J–V characteristics were performed outside the glovebox using a Keysight 2400 Source Meter under simulated one-sun AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2) with a solar simulator (Enlitech, SS-F5-3A) calibrated using a standard monocrystalline silicon solar cell with a KG-5 filter. All devices were measured both in the reverse scan (1.2 → −0.2 V, step 0.02 V) and forward scan (−0.2 → 1.2 V, step 0.02 V). To ensure accuracy, a mask with an aperture area of 0.09 cm2 was employed during the measuring process. The stabilized power output was measured under the largest power output bias voltage. EQE was measured in air on a commercial system (Bentham PV300). X-ray diffraction was carried out by Bragg–Brentano powder XRD patterns which were performed using 45 kV, 40 mA Cu Kα (λ = 0.154187 nm) radiation using a PANalytical X'Pert Pro, equipped with an X-ray mirror (parallel beam) and proportional Xe detector (GM-tube). The perovskite and SnO2 films were prepared as stated above. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis was performed using a ThermoFisher Scientific Instruments (East Grinstead, UK) K-Alpha+ spectrometer. XPS spectra were acquired using a monochromated Al Kα X-ray source (hν = 1486.6 eV). An X-ray spot of ∼400 μm radius was employed. Survey spectra were acquired employing a pass energy of 200 eV. High resolution, core-level spectra for all elements were acquired with a pass energy of 50 eV. All spectra were charge referenced against the C 1s peak at 285 eV to correct for charging effects during acquisition. Quantitative surface chemical analyses were calculated from the high resolution, core level spectra following the removal of a non-linear (Shirley) background. Time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) was carried out using a Horiba Delta Flex system. The excitation was at 635 nm with a probe of 770 nm. The pulse duration was 200 ps with a 1 MHz repetition rate.

M. Y. and X. L. prepared devices and films, performed absorption, SEM, EQE, and J–V measurements. M. Y. plotted the figures and performed SCLC. M. Y. and T. W. wrote the paper. T. W. performed the SCLC, XRD, AFM, EDX, PL, and plotted figures. S. H. conducted XPS and depth profile XPS measurements. S. K. conducted ToF-SIMS. T. J. M. performed TCSPC. W. Z. directed and supervised the project. K. I. J. and all authors contributed to discussions for finalizing the manuscript.


There are no conflicts to declare.


T. W. thanks the University of Surrey Doctoral College for financial support, M. Y. thanks Dr Jones from the Department of Mechanical Engineering Sciences, and University of Surrey (UK) for SEM training. K. D. G. I. J. and S. R. P. S. thank the European Commission H2020 CORNET program (Grant ID: 760949) and Support EPSRC via research grant EP/R025304/1. T. J. M. would like to thank the Royal Commission for the Exhibition of 1851 for their financial support through an 1851 Research Fellowship. S. J. S. gratefully acknowledge the support of EPSRC (UK) under grant EP/N021037/1. W. Z. thanks EPSRC New Investigator Award (2018; EP/R043272/1) for financial support.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: EDX data, XPS data, quantification of Cs+ in perovskites, 3D AFM, absorption onset dA/dE data, statistical data of different concentrations of CC, statistical data of SnO2 and CC treated SnO2 perovskite devices, light intensity-dependent Jsc, SCLC data, and time correlated single photon counting of perovskite films. See DOI: 10.1039/d0tc05877g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021