 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA07535A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 22170-22179


Taesu
Kim
,

Robert
Younts
,

Wonho
Lee
,

Seungjin
Lee
,

Kenan
Gundogdu
* and 

Bumjoon J.
Kim
*

Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon 34141, Korea. E-mail: bumjoonkim@kaist.ac.kr

Department of Physics, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695, USA. E-mail: kgundog@ncsu.edu

Received
26th August 2017
, Accepted 25th September 2017
First published on 26th September 2017
The photodegeneration of polymer solar cells (PSCs) based on polymer donors and fullerene acceptors limits their lifetime and reliability. Here, we demonstrate that replacing fullerene acceptors with naphthalenediimide (NDI)-based n-type polymers can significantly enhance the photo-stability of PSCs. As a model system, we compared the photo-stabilities of all-polymer solar cells (all-PSCs) and fullerene-based PSCs (fullerene-PSCs) using the same polymer donor (PBDTTTPD) exposed to one sunlight illumination. We observed a remarkable contrast in their photo-stabilities. After 4 days of irradiation, the performance of the fullerene-PSCs dropped by 50%, whereas the performance of the all-PSCs remained stable. The detailed analysis of charge dynamics measured by femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy and space charge limited current measurements shows significant reduction in interfacial charge transfer and charge carrier mobility, which correlates with the loss in JSC and FF of the fullerene-PSCs under solar illumination. By contrast, for the all-PSCs, the ultrafast dynamics and charge mobility remained consistent after illumination. The NDI-based copolymer had high stability under light exposure, whereas the photo-induced dimerization of phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) acceptors was responsible for the photo-degradation of fullerene-PSCs.

Over the past decade, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of bulk heterojunction (BHJ) polymer solar cells (PSCs) has significantly improved reaching values beyond 10–11%. The main driving factor in this improvement is the development of a library for appropriate combinations of low bandgap polymers and fullerene derivatives (i.e., phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM)). Although the PCE values are significantly improved, the utilization of these structures in applications is still limited due to long-term stability and reliability issues. Particularly, BHJ PSCs experience degradation emerging from illumination in the absence of any accelerating agents. The chemical stability of fullerene derivatives in the active layers is often the limiting factor because of the photo-induced fullerene dimerization. It has been reported that fullerene dimers cause reduced charge generation and carrier mobility due to the formation of energetic traps, leading to severe short circuit current (JSC) and fill factor (FF) losses in fullerene-based PSCs (fullerene-PSCs). The development of bis-adduct type fullerene derivatives can suppress the photo-induced dimerization due to steric hindrance by the substituents, but regioisomers of bis-adduct fullerenes reduce the performance of PSCs and limit their utilization. Consequently, replacement of fullerenes with non-fullerene acceptors, either polymers or small molecules, has attracted significant attention for solving the poor lifetime of BHJ PSCs.

All-PSCs, which are composed of electron donating polymers and electron accepting polymers, have been extensively studied as alternative PSC systems. In the absence of oxygen (encapsulation conditions), polymers can provide much higher photo-stabilities than fullerenes due to their chemical stability under illumination. Also, compared to fullerenes, polymer acceptors have other advantages such as higher light harvesting efficiency, and tunable chemical structures and energy levels, which enable simultaneous enhancement of both JSC and open-circuit voltage (VOC). However, to the best of our knowledge, there has been no report on the direct comparison of the photo-stabilities of all-PSCs and fullerene-PSCs based on the same polymer donor.
Herein, we report a comparative study of the photo-stabilities of all-PSCs and fullerene-PSCs based on the same polymer donor, demonstrating that all-PSCs exhibit superior photo-stability compared to fullerene-PSCs under light soaking conditions in a N2 atmosphere. The model system of a poly[4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-alt-5-octyl-4H-thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6(5H)-dione] (PBDTTTPD)-based device was chosen for the following reasons: (1) PBDTTTPD systems exhibit similarly high PCE performances (6–7%) for both fullerene- and all-PSCs with the poly[[N,N′-bis(2-hexyldecyl)-naphthalene-1,4,5,8-bis(dicarboximide)-2,6-diyl]-alt-5,5′-thiophene] (P(NDI2HD-T)) polymer acceptor, allowing a fair comparison of their photovoltaic performances against photo-stresses, and (2) the PBDTTTPD-based PSC system is well characterized in earlier studies. We found out that the photo-induced dimerization of PCBM caused a reduction in the formation of polarons and charge carrier mobilities in PBDTTTPD:PCBM PSCs (PCBM-PSCs). This degradation in devices caused a 50% decrease in the photovoltaic performance of PCBM-PSCs after illumination for 4 days. In stark contrast, PBDTTTPD:P(NDI2HD-T) all-PSCs exhibited much superior photo-stability. In all-PSCs, the charge generation and transport dynamics were unchanged under photo-stress, which was attributed to the superior photo-stability of n-type polymers (P(NDI2HD-T)) under N2 conditions.

(4,8-Bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl)bis(trimethylstannane) and 1,3-dibromo-5-octyl-4H-thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6(5H)-dione for PBDTTTPD, and 4,9-dibromo-2,7-bis(2-hexyldecyl)benzo[lmn][3,8]phenanthroline-1,3,6,8(2H,7H)-tetraone for P(NDI2HD-T) and PCBM were purchased from Solarmer Energy Incorporation. 2,5-Bis(trimethylstannyl)thiophene for P(NDI2HD-T) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Commercial PEDOT:PSS in water (AI 4083, Clevios) was used. Unless stated otherwise, all other chemicals were acquired commercially and utilized without further purification.


Both PBDTTTPD (number average molecular weight (Mn) = 22 kg mol−1, polydispersity index (Đ) = 2.02) and P(NDI2HD-T) (Mn = 46 kg mol−1, Đ = 2.04) were synthesized by Stille coupling reaction and characterized as previously reported in the literature.


Both PCBM-PSCs and all-PSCs were fabricated with an inverted device architecture of indium tin oxide (ITO)/ZnO/active layer/PEDOT:PSS/Ag. ITO glass substrates were sequentially washed by using an ultrasonicator with acetone, deionized water, and isopropyl alcohol for 20 min each and dried in an oven at 80 °C. After O2 plasma treatment on the cleaned ITO substrates, ZnO films were obtained by spin-coating at 4000 rpm for 40 s and then annealed at 200 °C for 10 min under ambient conditions. The ZnO was prepared using a sol–gel method as reported in the previous report. Then, donor:acceptor blend solutions were spun onto the ITO/ZnO substrates under each of the optimized spin-coating conditions in a N2 glovebox. For the PBDTTTPD:PCBM system, the blend solution was prepared in chloroform with a PBDTTTPD:PCBM weight ratio of 1:1.5 (w/w) and a total concentration of 25 mg mL−1. The PBDTTTPD:P(NDI2HD-T) blend solution was prepared by dissolving PBDTTTPD:P(NDI2HD-T) in chloroform at a ratio of 1.3:1 (w/w) and a total concentration of 12.5 mg mL−1. The thicknesses of the blend films were about 200 nm for the PCBM-PSCs and 120 nm for the all-PSCs. The PEDOT:PSS layers were spin-coated onto the BHJ active layers at 4000 rpm for 40 s by using the PEDOT:PSS solution including X-triton 100 (0.3 wt%) with a thickness of ∼40 nm. The Ag electrode was deposited in an evaporation chamber under high vacuum (<10−6 Torr), with thicknesses of approximately 120 nm. Finally, the fabricated devices were post-annealed at 130 °C for 20 min in a N2 glove box. The active area of the fabricated device was 0.093 cm2, which was measured by optical microscopy. The photovoltaic characteristics were measured using a solar simulator (K201 LAB55, McScience) under an irradiance of 100 mW cm−2 from a 150 W Xe short-arc lamp filtered by an air mass 1.5G filter under ambient conditions using a Keithley 2400 Source Measure Unit (SMU). This solar simulator system satisfies the Class AAA, ASTM Standards. Light intensity was calibrated with a Si reference cell (McScience, K801S-K302).


Optical microscopy measurements (Nikon, Eclipse 80i) were performed to confirm the surface morphology of the PCBM-PSC and all-PSC blends. The blends were spin-coated on glass/ZnO substrates. The PCBM-PSC and all-PSC BHJ blends were also measured by GIXS measurements at beamline 3C in the Pohang Accelerator Laboratory (South Korea). The active layers were prepared on Si substrates. Incidence angles (0.12–0.14°) were used to allow complete penetration of X-rays (wavelength = 1.1179 Å) into the film.


Unless stated otherwise, all active layers were prepared on glass substrates. We performed TAS in a standard pump-probe spectrometer setup (Ultrafast Helios system) using an 800 nm Ti:sapphire laser (Coherent LIBRA HE, 4 mJ, repetition rate = 1 kHz, pulse response = 100 fs). The laser output was split into two paths creating (i) a tunable monochromatic pump pulse at 2.0 eV (620 nm) through an optical parametric amplifier (OPA, Coherent Opera Solo) and (ii) a broadband visible probe pulse covering a spectral range from 1.5 eV to 2.8 eV obtained by white-light continuum generation through a sapphire plate. Pump and probe pulses were then focused onto the thin film blends and the transmitted probe light was spectrally resolved with a charge-coupled device (CCD) camera.


We first compared the initial performances of PBDTTTPD:PCBM and PBDTTTPD:P(NDI2HD-T) devices. The same inverted structure of ITO/ZnO/BHJ active layer/PEDOT:PSS/Ag was produced for both all-PSC and PCBM-PSC, because the inverted structure is well known to be more stable than the conventional structure. The synthesis and characterization of PBDTTTPD and P(NDI2HD-T) were reported in our previous studies. The BHJ active layers consisting of PBDTTTPD:PCBM and PBDTTTPD:P(NDI2HD-T) were stored in high vacuum (<10−7) for more than 12 h to achieve the maximum removal of residual solvents and solvent additives in the films and to minimize their adverse effect on the stability. The optimized PBDTTTPD:PCBM device exhibited a PCE of 3.81% (VOC = 0.90 V; JSC = 8.40 mA cm−2; fill factor, FF = 0.50) and the PBDTTTPD:P(NDI2HD-T) device exhibited an enhanced PCE of 4.75% (VOC = 1.00 V; JSC = 9.30 mA cm−2; FF = 0.51) (Fig. 1). We used the PEDOT:PSS layer as an anode buffer layer in the inverted PSCs because of the photo-degradation of the MoO3 interlayer during solar illumination, which generates a hole extraction barrier and reduces the JSC and FF of the PSCs. The use of the PEDOT:PSS layer may result in a decrease of the initial PCE values of both PBDTTTPD:PCBM and PBDTTTPD:P(NDI2HD-T) compared to the reported values of devices using the MoO3 layer (Table S1), but by avoiding MoO3 interlayers, we can precisely evaluate the photo-stability of the active layer of the devices.

Next, the changes of the device performances were evaluated as a function of illumination time under one sunlight (Fig. 2). Before irradiation, the devices were encapsulated with glass to prevent oxygen and water diffusion into the devices. Then, the PSCs were exposed to one sunlight illumination for various time periods. During the exposure, the surrounding temperature of the devices was maintained at 25 °C. Despite the use of the thermostatic chamber, the surface of the devices was heated to 45–55 °C during 1 sun illumination. However, this increase in the temperature should not cause any morphological change because the glass transition temperatures (Tg) of the active layers of both the PBDTTTPD:PCBM and PBDTTTPD:P(NDI2HD-T) were significantly higher than 55 °C. Also, we confirmed that the BHJ morphologies and the polymer packing structure of both the PCBM- and all-PSCs were unchanged during photo-illumination as shown in the results from optical microscopy and grazing-incidence X-ray scattering (GIXS) (Fig. S1–S3).
As shown in Fig. 2b, the PCE values of the PCBM-PSCs rapidly decrease to 50% of the initial value within the first 12 h of sun-light exposure. Afterwards, the PCE decay slows down. The efficiency decay of the PCBM-PSCs was mainly governed by JSC and FF, and there was little reduction in VOC due to irradiation, as shown in Fig. S4. In stark contrast, superior photo-stability was observed for the all-PSCs, which show higher than 85% of the initial performance even after 100 h illumination. In addition, to elucidate the effect of irradiation on the device performance, we compared the lifetime of the PCBM- and all-PSCs (Fig. S5). In this measurement, we first shelved the encapsulated devices under dark for certain periods and measured the device performance of the aged devices under the same experimental conditions as in Fig. 2b. The PCE values of both the encapsulated PCBM- and all-PSCs with 100 h aging were the same as the initial PCE values before illumination, indicating that the dramatic contrast in lifetime during illumination between the PCBM- and all-PSCs is attributed to the different stabilities of acceptor materials under illumination.

We conducted femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy (TAS) to understand the effect of photo-irradiation on the photophysics of PBDTTTPD:PCBM and PBDTTTPD:P(NDI2HD-T) devices. We measured the differential transmission of a broadband probe pulse after excitation of the sample with a 100 fs pump pulse tuned to 620 nm (2.0 eV), predominantly exciting the PBDTTTPD polymer domains. Pump pulse absorption was similar among all thin films measured in the TAS studies ensuring constant excitation density. The TA spectra at 1 ps delay between pump and probe pulses are shown in Fig. 3 for the blend films treated for different exposure times under one sunlight illumination. The transient spectra exhibit ground state bleaching (GSB) features corresponding to the 0–0 vibronic transition at 2.00 eV and the 0–1 vibronic transition at 2.22 eV. The photo-induced absorption (PIA) band extending below 2.00 eV results from two effects: (i) the excited-state absorption of charge transfer (CT) states, centered at 1.80 eV, and (ii) the dynamic Stark effect, yielding an additional negative signal at 1.90 eV. This assignment of polaron PIA spectral features coincides with the previous results of TAS for all-PSCs. The critical result in this experiment is that the PBDTTTPD:PCBM blend film shows a sharp decrease in the dynamic Stark effect at 1.9 eV as the film was exposed to solar illumination. By contrast, the PBDTTTPD all-PSC had almost no change in the intensity at 1.9 eV during 24 h photo-illumination.

We monitored the evolution of the Stark effect signal and the PIA features as a function of time (Fig. 3c and d). It was observed that the Stark effect signal is reduced in the PCBM-PSC blend films due to solar illumination. This suggests a decrease in the electric field caused by reduced charge separation. The decrease in the charge separation was saturated after 6 h irradiation. This result is consistent with the PCE loss trend of PCBM-PSCs under one sunlight illumination for 6 h. In contrast to the PCBM-PSC blend film, the PBDTTTPD:P(NDI2HD-T) blend film did not show significant degradation or changes in excited-state dynamics during 24 h of solar irradiation (Fig. 3d).
We further studied polaron dynamics by measuring the transient absorption of probe pulses in the near-IR (0.85–15 eV) region of the spectrum. Fig. 4 shows the NIR TAS spectra at 1 ps delay between pump and probe pulses for fresh PBDTTTPD, PBDTTTPD:P(NDI2HD-T), and PBDTTTPD:PCBM films. In the NIR TA spectra, similar to other reports of polymer:fullerene and all-PSC films, singlet exciton (SE) and polaron (CS) excited-state absorptions occur at 1.05 eV and 1.38 eV, respectively. Due to the broad linewidth and close proximity of these spectral features, global fitting using multivariate curve resolution with alternating least squares (MCR-ALS) was performed to determine component spectra and dynamics of the SE and CS excited state absorption (see ESI). The NIR TA spectrum of the neat PBDTTTPD film at 1 ps was used as the SE spectrum and the calculated component spectrum for polarons is shown in Fig. S6.
The SE dynamics resulting from MCR-ALS are shown in Fig. S7. For both polymer:fullerene and all-PSC films, singlet exciton dynamics do not exhibit a significant dependence on solar illumination time. However, there are differences in the polaron dynamics for both all-PSC and PCBM-PSC blends after illumination, as shown in Fig. 5. The most striking difference between the dynamics occurs in the PBDTTTPD:PCBM blend after 6 h of solar illumination, where the initial polaron population dropped 20–40% compared to the PBDTTTPD:PCBM blend that is not exposed to solar illumination. By contrast, in the PBDTTTPD:P(NDI2HD-T) blend, the maximum polaron population fluctuated within 10%, regardless of the solar illumination time. In the PBDTTTPD:PCBM blend film, polaron generation predominately occurs within the instrument response of the measurement, <100 fs, as given by the prompt increase in the TA signal, and therefore the decrease in the CS amplitude with increasing solar illumination is related to photo-induced degradation in the PBDTTTPD:PCBM blend. By contrast, polaron generation in PBDTTTPD:P(NDI2HD-T) takes place over 100 ps and does not appear to be correlated with solar illumination time.
To further analyze the polaron generation process, we analyzed the rise and the decay kinetics of the polaron features in both samples. In the all-PSC blend, the rise component of the CS dynamics takes place within the first 100 ps. This rise component was fit to multi-exponential functions, as shown in Fig. 5b. The results highlighted in Table S2 show no significant change in the charge generation process with increasing solar illumination in all-PSCs. For the PBDTTTPD:PCBM system, since charge generation takes place within the instrument response, a similar analysis cannot be made.
The decay of the polaron features in the TAS can provide additional information. In the PBDTTTPD:PCBM blend, although the polaron decay of the unexposed sample starts at a higher polaron population than the other samples, after 5 ns, the polaron population is similar or even lower than that of the exposed samples. In contrast to the PBDTTTPD:PCBM blend, the PBDTTTPD:P(NDI2HD-T) blend appears to have similar decay dynamics with increasing solar illumination. Quantitatively, these trends in the polaron recombination with solar illumination can be described by fitting the CS dynamics in Fig. 5 to the equation:
where
A is the proportion of charges, which recombine with a time constant τ, and B represents the proportion of long-lived charges, which undergo recombination in timescales much greater than 5 ns. The resulting fits are shown in Fig. 5 with the corresponding parameters in Table S3. In the polymer:PCBM blend, the most distinct change occurs in the fit parameter A, which is related to the population of charges, which recombine within the first few ns. This parameter decreases from 64% to 52% upon 24 h of illumination. In contrast, in all-PSC films, approximately 34% of the polarons recombine within the first few ns regardless of the amount of solar illumination.

Differences in polaron recombination could result from changes in either geminate or non-geminate recombination. To determine the recombination processes in the blend films, TAS measurements were performed by varying the excitation intensity. As shown in Fig. S8, the SE dynamics for the PBDTTTPD:PCBM blend are excitation intensity independent while the PBDTTTPD:P(NDI2HD-T) blend shows exciton–exciton annihilation with increasing excitation intensity. Exciton–exciton annihilation in the all-PSC blend film manifests the fluence dependency of polaron formation shown in the CS dynamics of Fig. S9. However, the polaron recombination in the all-PSC blend is weakly fluence-dependent, suggesting geminate recombination to be the dominant recombination mechanism. In contrast, PBDTTTPD:PCBM shows strong fluence-dependency indicative of bimolecular recombination. Based on the TA measurements, it is likely that the decrease in polaron formation of the PCBM-PSC blend film is related to an increase in bimolecular recombination, which was monitored by the decreased Stark effect of the TAS results measured in the visible range (Fig. 3).
The reduction of polaron yield and the concomitant bimolecular recombination increment in the PBDTTTPD:PCBM blend after at least 6 h of exposure is suggestive of photo-induced degradation. Since SE dynamics were relatively unchanged by solar illumination, it is probable that the degradation in PCBM domains affected charge separation. Interestingly, SE and CS dynamics in the PBDTTTPD:P(NDI2HD-T) blend were not influenced by solar illumination, suggesting that the all-PSC blend was more resilient to photo-stress. These results indicated that the photo-degradation of the electron acceptor affected bimolecular recombination, charge yield, and charge mobility. Hence, these properties were further investigated using space charge limited current measurements.

Next, to gain deeper insight into the effect of photo-irradiation on charge transport, we have evaluated the hole mobility (μh) and electron mobility (μe) of the PBDTTTPD:PCBM and PBDTTTPD:P(NDI2HD-T) blend films under illumination for different times by using the space charge limited current (SCLC) measurements (Table 1). To prepare and measure the SCLC devices, the blend films were illuminated for various time periods under one sunlight prior to deposition of the relevant top electrodes. The μh and μe values of the optimized PCBM-PSC and all-PSC blend films were 6.53 × 10−5 and 2.85 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, and 1.06 × 10−4 and 4.72 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, showing that the charge mobilities of the blend films were consistent with that reported previously. After 24 h illumination, for the all-PSC blend films, the change in both μh and μe values was less significant. In contrast, the μh and μe of the PCBM-PSC blend films rapidly decreased by an order of magnitude during 24 h illumination. This contrast can be assessed by the charge mobilities of the pristine films of photo-active materials upon irradiation (Table S4). During the first 6 h illumination, the μe of the PCBM neat film rapidly decreased by an order of magnitude and then became saturated. In contrast, the μe of the P(NDI2HD-T) neat film and the μh of the PBDTTTPD film remained the same during 24 h illumination. Therefore, it is suggested that the charge carriers were trapped due to the photo-degradation of PCBM in PCBM-PSCs after irradiation. It seems that the μh values of PCBM-PSC blend films decreased because hole transport was also hindered at the trapping sites. Furthermore, the reduction in charge mobilities resulted in the poorer hole/electron mobility balance of the irradiated PCBM blend film compared with that of the PCBM blend film before irradiation, mainly consisting in the loss of FF values. In the case of all-PSCs, a constant feature in the charge mobility balance was observed, which was attributed to the fact that the μe values of P(NDI2HD-T) were well preserved regardless of illumination.

Mobility
System
0 h
12 h
24 h

μ
h (cm2 V−1 s−1)
PCBM-PSC
6.53 × 10−5
1.10 × 10−5
2.72 × 10−6
All-PSC
2.85 × 10−5
1.70 × 10−5
1.94 × 10−5

μ
e (cm2 V−1 s−1)
PCBM-PSC
1.06 × 10−4
4.38 × 10−5
3.50 × 10−5
All-PSC
4.72 × 10−5
3.48 × 10−5
2.24 × 10−5

μ
h/μe
PCBM-PSC
0.62
0.25
0.08
All-PSC
0.61
0.49
0.87

Previous studies have suggested that light exposure of PCBM films can result in fullerene dimerization. Such fullerene dimerization is therefore the most probable origin of the reduced polaron formation and electron mobility in PCBM-PSCs. Direct evidence for the difference in the chemical stability of PCBM and P(NDI2HD-T) polymers under light exposure was provided via size exclusion chromatography (SEC) and Raman measurements. First, SEC experiments were performed to detect the change in the molecular weights of the components in the PBDTTTPD:PCBM and PBDTTTPD:P(NDI2HD-T) films at 0 and 24 h light exposure under N2. To prepare the samples for SEC measurements, the blend films on glass substrates were irradiated for 0 and 24 h, and then re-dissolved in 1,2-dichlorobenzene. As shown in Fig. 6a, an extra peak (peak 3) at a molecular mass two times that of PCBM (peak 2) appeared upon the light exposure, indicating the formation of PCBM dimers in the irradiated PBDTTTPD:PCBM blend. By contrast, the constant peak positions of the SEC trace in Fig. 6b indicated that both the PBDTTTPD polymer donor and P(NDI2HD-T) polymer acceptor of all-PSCs were photo-stable during solar illumination. In addition, the chemical changes of the pristine PCBM and P(NDI2HD-T) films under illumination were investigated by Raman measurements.Fig. 6c and d compare Raman spectra at 514 nm excitation wavelength for (c) neat PCBM and (d) P(NDI2HD-T) films before and after 24 h illumination. The major peak position of pristine PCBM films was shifted from 1465 cm−1 to 1460 cm−1 after irradiation, indicating that PCBM dimers were formed under light exposure. In the case of P(NDI2HD-T) films, all the spectral features of the original molecular vibrations were preserved during illumination.

Next, we monitored the photo-induced degradation of the all-PSC and PCBM-PSC blends by UV-vis absorption. During irradiation in a N2 condition, the absorption spectrum of a PBDTTTPD:PCBM film shows the increase of the optical density at 318 nm (Fig. S10a). The same behavior (the increase at 318 nm) was observed in the absorption spectrum of the PCBM pristine film (inset of Fig. S10a), indicating that the PCBM dimers were formed in the PCBM-PSC film by one sunlight illumination. On the contrary, the absorption spectra of all-PSCs were nearly identical even after 24 h illumination (Fig. S10b).
Based on our observations using TAS study and SCLC measurements, scenarios of the changes in charge generation and transport of PCBM-PSC and all-PSC blend films during solar irradiation are described schematically in Fig. 7. When the PBDTTTPD:PCBM blend film was irradiated, PCBM dimerization occurred from [2 + 2] cycloaddition between two parallel 6–6 double bonds on adjacent fullerene balls. In the aged PCBM-PSCs, the excitons are generated upon light absorption and dissociated in a similar degree to the fresh device because the major portion of the excitons are formed in the polymer donor domain, which are relatively stable. However, the polaron yield was significantly decreased due to the PCBM dimers that create the localized (trapped) state near the donor/acceptor interface (Fig. 7a). The progress of the photo-induced fullerene dimerization via the triplet state may restrain the formation of polarons and then charge transfer. These PCBM dimers also act as trap sites that suppress the efficient transport of the generated free charge carriers to the relevant electrodes and reduce the electron mobilities, resulting in the loss in the JSC and FF of PCBM-PSC devices. These results were well supported by the SCLC mobility results, showing a drastic decrease of μe by solar illumination in both PCBM pristine and PCBM-PSC blend films. In contrast, the all-PSCs exhibited high photo-stability performance, benefitting from the superior endurance of the polymer acceptor against photo-illumination.

We report a comparative study of the photo-stabilities of two different inverted type PSCs based on PBDTTTPD:PCBM and PBDTTTPD:P(NDI2HD-T) blend films with similar initial PCE values. All-PSCs exhibited much superior photo-stability, retaining 85% of the initial performance after 100 h illumination in a N2 atmosphere. On the contrary, the performance of the PCBM-PSCs dropped by 50% under the same illumination conditions. The contrast in the photo-stability was attributed to the difference in the chemical stability of fullerenes and n-type polymers against sunlight illumination. We observed a significant reduction of both polaron yield and charge transport characteristics in the BHJ layer of the PCBM-PSCs due to the photo-induced dimerization of PCBM molecules. In contrast, the constant device physics of all-PSCs was driven by the stable chemical structure of P(NDI2HD-T) against photo-stress under N2 conditions. Thus, the key finding from this model study is that the use of polymer acceptors instead of fullerene derivatives may increase the photo-stabilities of PSCs, which is a crucial requirement for their commercialization.


There are no conflicts to declare.


T. K. and R. Y. contributed equally to this work. This research was supported by the National Research Foundation Grant (2015M1A2A2057509), funded by the Korean Government. This work was supported by the KETEP Grant, funded by the Korean Government (20163030013620 and 20163010012470). We thank Dr Hongseok Yun for helpful discussions.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The experimental details of SCLC measurements and MCR-ALS, the detailed data about photovoltaic characteristics, TAS analysis, and UV-vis spectra. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta07535a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017