 DOI: 10.1039/C9TA07974B
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26797-26803

Zhi Yong Bao
,
Shenghua Liu,
Yidong Hou,
Aixue Shang,
Feng Yan*,
Yucheng Wu,
Dangyuan Lei* and 
Jiyan Dai*

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, China

Department of Applied Physics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong. E-mail: feng.yan@polyu.edu.hk; jiyan.dai@polyu.edu.hk

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. E-mail: dangylei@cityu.edu.hk

School of Physical Science and Technology, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China

Received
23rd July 2019
, Accepted 13th November 2019
First published on 15th November 2019
Plasmonic effects are an effective approach to improve the efficiency of organic photovoltaics (OPVs) by enhancing the light absorption of the devices. In this work, we design hollow and spectrally tunable Au nanorattles as nanophotonic inclusions to achieve plasmon-enhanced OPVs for the first time. Compared to conventional bulk structures, these hollow Au nanorattles exhibit stronger and broader plasmon resonances. Consequently, they can significantly enhance the performance of the nanorattle-embedded solar cells due to matchable absorption, plasmon resonance energy transfer and plasmonic near-field enhancement in the devices. More importantly, this technique is applicable to various types of OPVs by tuning the structure of the nanorattles. This work paves the way for using hollow plasmonic nanostructures with controllable optical properties in OPVs as an alternative approach to effectively enhance device performance.

Organic photovoltaics (OPVs) as one of the promising energy harvesting devices have attracted intensive attention due to their light weight, easy fabrication and mechanical flexibility. However, owing to the relatively low carrier mobilities of organic semiconductors, the organic active layers in OPVs generally have thin thicknesses to ensure efficient carrier transportation, which results in relatively poor light absorption of OPVs in comparison with inorganic solar cells. To achieve a higher power conversion efficiency (PCE), common additives such as plasmonic nanoparticles, high-mobility nanotubes and other conjugated polymers are introduced in OPVs to improve light absorption and carrier transportation. Recently, significant improvements have been made in the performance of OPVs by introducing plasmonic metal nanoparticles (MNPs). Upon resonant excitation, the incident light energy can be confined into a nanoscale volume around the plasmonic nanostructure, thereby greatly enhancing the local field strength and consequently the light–matter interaction for OPV devices. More importantly, the tunability of the optical properties of MNPs by controlling the size, morphology, and composition of metal nanostructures makes the plasmonic inclusions to be flexible “optical antenna” in OPVs. Notably, some reports of plasmon-enhanced OPVs have adopted physical methods, such as lithography fabrication or thermal evaporation, to form many kinds of Au nanostructures. These physical attempts mainly focused on regular patterns or gratings with rigorous geometrical precision requirements. Although considerable efficiency enhancements have been achieved, the physical strategies are generally sophisticated, expensive and time-consuming. In comparison, the use of solution-processed MNPs is a more attractive approach since they are easily processed from a variety of aqueous solutions and can be synthesized in all kinds of dimensions and sizes for achieving desirable optical properties.

The matchable absorption and resonant energies are beneficial for the electronic transition of nearby polymers, thereby modifying the charge collection of OPVs. Recently, lots of research studies have ignited the interest in the spectral overlap between the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) band of MNPs and the absorption range of photoactive polymers. The spectral overlap between the LSPR band of MNPs and the absorption range of photoactive polymers could induce an improvement in the photocurrent density and charge collection, thereby enhancing the power conversion efficiency (PCE). By appropriately designing metallic nanomaterial geometries, the enhanced local electric field and optical scattering of incident light will increase the optical path length and solar light absorption within the photoactive layer. Simultaneously, hollow metal nanostructures are a relatively novel class of plasmonic nanostructures that exhibit excellent optical properties compared to their solid counterparts due to the increased surface area and facile tunability of LSPR wavelength. Internal nanoscale gap within these structures exhibits extraordinary electromagnetic field enhancement. These hollow structures correlated with a large local density of optical states have been employed as exogenous contrast agents in bioimaging and photothermal therapy, drug carriers, nanotransducers in chemical and biological sensing, and catalysts and therefore eliminated the need for MNP assemblies or aggregates. However, hollow nanostructure-incorporated OPVs have been rarely studied to date.
In this work, we systematically investigated the incorporation of different Au nanorattles with tunable optical absorption into the hole transport layer (HTL) of two types of OPVs. It was demonstrated that poly[4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)-benzo[1,2-b;4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl-alt-(4-(2-ethylhexyl)-3-fluorothieno[3,4-b]thiophene-)-2-carboxylate-2-6-diyl]:PC71BM (PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM) based OPVs with optimized addition of small-gap nanorattle (S-NR) solution result in the highest average PCE of 10.43%, which is relatively increased by 15% in comparison with control devices, while large-gap nanorattle (L-NR) incorporated polythieno[3,4-b]-thiophene/benzodithiophene:[6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PTB7:PC71BM) based OPVs display the highest average PCE of 8.73%, corresponding to an average PCE enhancement of 10.4%. The plasmon resonance energy transfer and plasmonic near-field enhancement play pivotal roles in the PCE improvement. The mechanisms for the distinct PCE improvement in various nanorattle-incorporated OPVs are also discussed.
Au nanorattles were prepared by the galvanic replacement method reported before. Three different sizes of Au nanorattles with the same concentration in the solution were synthesized by controlling the molar ratio of precursors. Fig. 1a–c show the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of a class of Au nanorattles with rather uniform sizes, corroborating that the inside Au nanorod core is ∼60 nm in length and ∼15 nm in diameter. Fig. 1d–f show the magnified TEM images of Au nanorattles with relatively uniform gap sizes, while the enwrapped Au shell is estimated to be ∼2–4 nm. The schematic diagram illustrating the structure and gap size of hollow Au nanorattles is shown in Fig. S1. The structural features of the Au nanorattles are illustrated in high-resolution TEM images in the inset of Fig. 1d. The lattice fringe of 0.204 nm can be assigned to the (200) plane of the Au crystal. The STEM images (Fig. 1h) and elemental mapping Au (Fig. 1i) further demonstrate the gap nature of the synthesized nanorattles.
 Fig. 1g displays the extinction spectra of the Au nanorattles in aqueous solutions with the same MNP concentration but different gap sizes, and the nanorattle concentration is ∼2 nM. Due to the decreasing aspect ratio of MNPs, the longitudinal LSPR peak presents blue-shifts with the increase of interior gap size (the details are shown in Fig. S2 and S3, ESI). As shown in Fig. 1j, over 60 samples were measured to get the gap size distribution of Au nanorattles in each group and the corresponding average gap sizes of small-gap nanorattles (S-NRs, shown in Fig. 1a and d), middle-gap nanorattles (M-NRs, shown in Fig. 1b and e) and large-gap nanorattles (L-NRs, shown in Fig. 1c and f) are 2.1 ± 0.2 nm, 6.6 ± 0.5 nm and 12.4 ± 1.5 nm, respectively.
OPVs with the device structures shown in Fig. 2a were fabricated based on two photoactive polymers PTB7:PC71BM and PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM with the incorporation of nanorattles. Fig. 2b illustrates that the introduction of the Au nanorattles greatly promotes the light absorption of the HTL/PTB7 or pure HTL film due to the LSPR effect of the nanorattles. It is noted that Au nanorattles can absorb solar light in the wavelength region from 450 to 800 nm, covering the full photoactive region of the OPVs. The effects of the MNPs on the light absorption of the polymer active layers were simulated using the finite-element method (FEM) under the platform of COMSOL Multiphysics. The simulated light absorption of the PTB7:PC71BM layers of OPVs with/without MNPs under both longitudinal and transversal polarizations are shown in Fig. 2c. Both the experimental measurement and theoretical calculations clearly indicate that by incorporating MNPs into the OPVs, the total absorption of OPVs is tremendously enhanced over the visible regions.
OPV devices (Fig. 2a) were fabricated by the solution process on indium tin oxide (ITO) glass substrates. It is noted that Au nanorattles are embedded in the PEDOT:PSS layer and have less chance to come into contact with the organic active layer (Fig. S4). Thus, the bare Au nanorattles used in this work may have little effect on the recombination of photo-generated charges. We first fabricated PTB7:PC71BM based OPVs by incorporation of S-NRs with different concentrations. Control devices without S-NRs were also prepared under the same preparation conditions. The representative J–V characteristics of the devices of each group are shown in Fig. 3a. It was found that the incorporation of nanorattles into each group can increase the short-circuit current densities (Jsc) and PCEs of the devices. The detailed photovoltaic parameters including the open circuit voltage (Voc), Jsc, fill factor (FF), PCE and relative PCE enhancement are summarized in Table S1 in the ESI. In general, the average efficiencies of each group of OPVs show the same trend with the concentration increase of S-NRs. The PCE initially grows with the increase of nanorattle additives and then decreases gradually with the addition level of up to 10 vol%. The OPV with 6.0 vol% addition of S-NR solution shows the highest average PCE of 8.36%. The PCE increase is mainly due to the improved Jsc by the Au nanorattle while the Voc and FFs of the devices show little improvement. External quantum efficiencies (EQEs) of the OPVs were subsequently measured to better illuminate the performance enhancement of the devices. As shown in Fig. 3b, the maximum EQE arise when the added Au nanorattle concentration is 6 vol%. For the 10 vol% addition level, the decreased EQE is presumably due to the influence of light transmission and the aggregation of nanorattles that can induce carrier recombination in the HTL film. As shown in the right of Fig. 3b, the integrated short-circuit current densities extracted from the EQE curves match well with the measured Jsc and the relative errors of these values are less than 5%, elaborating the good stable performance of our solar devices.
To optimize the volume of added S-NRs in OPVs, another OPV device based on PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM was fabricated. Fig. 3c and d show the J–V and EQE curves of the OPVs incorporated with S-NRs of different volumes in the HTL. With the addition of 6 vol% plasmonic inclusions, the average and best PCEs of the devices incorporated with S-NRs are 10.43% and 10.55%, respectively. Detailed photovoltaic parameters of the devices including average Voc, Jsc, FF, PCE and PCE enhancement are summarized in Table S2. The PCE enhancement is mainly attributed to the increase of Jsc, which is similar to the case of PTB7:PC71BM-based OPVs. Remarkably, plasmonic nanorattles could modify EQEs in the whole absorption region of the devices due to the enhanced light harvesting. Moreover, the S-NR incorporated PBDTTT-based OPV exhibits higher PCE improvement than the PTB7-based device. Similarly, the short-circuit current densities (in the right of Fig. 3d) integrated from the EQE spectra are consistent with the measured Jsc. The detailed SEM images of Au nanorattles (1, 3, 6 and 10 vol%) on ITO/glass substrates are shown in Fig. S5.
We further optimized the device performance by using different Au nanorattles. Fig. 4a shows the J–V curves of the PTB7:PC71BM-based OPVs incorporated with various gap sizes of Au nanorattles. Voc and FFs of all the devices are similar, while Jsc and PCE of the devices are greatly improved in comparison with the control device. The devices blended in L-NRs exhibit the highest average improvement of PCE. All photovoltaic parameters of the devices are summarized in Table S3. In Fig. 4b, the EQEs of the devices, consistent with enhanced Jsc of the devices, are dramatically improved by L-NRs in the increased optical absorption region. To explore the utterly different PCE enhancement of Au nanorattles in different OPVs, as shown in Fig. 4c and d, the PCE efficiency and EQE improvement for PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM based devices were studied. So the devices incorporated with S-NRs exhibit the highest average improvement of PCE (10.43%) (all of the photovoltaic parameters of the devices are summarized in Table S4).
In order to understand why different Au nanorattles show distinct performance boost for two types of OPVs, the following factors should be considered. First, S- and L-NRs provide near-perfect spectral overlap to the ultrathin PBDTT-FTT:PC71BM and PTB7:PC71BM photoactive layer, respectively (Fig. S6). It is known that plasmon resonance energy transfer (PRET) occurs as long as the semiconductor is within the nanostructure near-field and a matchable spectrum exists between the LSPR and the semiconductor absorption. Considering the spectral overlap between the SPR band of MNPs and the absorption range of photoactive polymers, PRET plays a key role in non-radiative plasmonic enhancements in OPVs. The LSPR dipole originates from the oscillations of conduction electrons and dephases on plasmon decoherence via absorption or scattering. Following light absorption by the metal nanostructures, PRET occurs when the resonant energy is transferred from the metal to the adjacent semiconductor via dipole–dipole coupling, generating electron–hole pairs below and near the semiconductor band edge. Metal nanostructures function as a secondary light source to augment the total light trapped within the mesoporous layer, enabling enhanced carrier generation. This consequently decreases the amount of active material required to achieve high efficiency solar conversion. As shown in Fig. 5a, the spectral overlap between the LSPR band of MNPs and the absorption range of active polymers will trigger an improvement in the photocurrent density and therefore enhance the PCE of OPVs.
Second, the interaction of plasmonic nanostructures with incident light results in strong local enhancement of electromagnetic fields in the immediate vicinity of the nanostructure. Metal nanostructures integrated in OPVs function as nanosized light concentrators focusing incident light on the metal surface within a small mode volume and the intensities of these fields are typically orders of magnitude higher than the incident light. Therefore, one can envision nanostructures as a secondary light source increasing the photon flux and the overall light absorption by the solar cell. Photoactive polymers in the proximity of the nanostructures directly couple with the strong near-fields and the resulting plasmon–molecule coupling increases the electron–hole pair generation in the OPVs. This results in transfer of higher density carriers from the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the photoactive molecule to the conduction band of the HTL and subsequently improves the overall current density of OPVs. Fig. 5b shows the energy diagram of a plasmon-enhanced OPV system illustrating how coupling between the plasmonic nanorattle and PTB7:PC71BM polymer results in enhanced absorption, thereby increasing the electron transfer from the PTB7 to the PC71BM and then to Ca.
To elaborate the electromagnetic field effect of Au nanorattles on OPVs, we take the S-NR incorporated PTB7:PC71BM based OPV as an example. Fig. 6 shows the distributions of the electric field intensity on the cross sections of S-NRs at the longitudinal (a) and transverse (b) resonant wavelengths, respectively. These Au nanorattle nanostructures with gap features generate a high concentration of charges localized at the gaps, edges and corners. The simulated field patterns reveal that the plasmonic electric field can extend to tens of nanometers from the surface of MNPs to the photoactive layer. We extract the scattering enhancement defined as the ratio E/E0, where E (E0) is the electric distribution with (without) MNPs. Considering the near-field nature of the plasmonic enhancement, a broader space distribution of the enhanced electric intensity and field distribution size of plasmon modes begin to decline when the gap size increases, as shown in Fig. S7 and S8. It's known that the electric field becomes stronger where the smaller radius of curvature of MNPs appears as the electric field is proportional to the density of electrons. This may be responsible for S-NR incorporated OPVs exhibiting higher PCE improvement than the L-NR incorporated device. To further elaborate the plasmonic near-field effect, we also coated a ∼5 nm SiO2 shell outside the Au nanorattles and investigated the OPV efficiencies by incorporating these Au@SiO2 nanorattles in the active layer (details are shown in Fig. S9, S10 and Table S5).
Moreover, the S-NRs have a narrow gap size and full width at half maximum (FWHM) with the LSPR peaks, indicating a higher localized electric field enhancement and improved absorption. More importantly, this greatly enhanced absorption (680–740 nm) arising from S-NRs is located at the region where the PBDTTT has a relatively low absorption efficiency, while for the L-NRs, a wide FWHM with the LSPR peaks is observed, which indicates that the synthesized L-NRs have a broader size distribution. In this case, the L-NRs have a larger extinction cross-section in the shorter waveband (520–680 nm) when compared with the S-NRs. It can result in larger near field enhancement and scattering field enhancement in this waveband, which match the relatively low absorption efficiency region of PTB7. These are the reasons why different Au nanorattles show distinct performance boost for two types of OPVs.

In summary, hollow Au nanorattles with intense and tunable localized surface plasmon resonances were successfully synthesized and incorporated in two types of OPVs. By integrating plasmonic nanorattles into the devices, the light harvesting efficiency of the OPVs displays remarkable improvement as manifested by significant increase in the device short-circuit current and PCE. A rational design of spectrally overlapped Au nanorattles can further promote the light harvesting efficiency and hence the performance of OPVs. Interestingly, different nanorattles show distinct performance boost for two types of OPVs. The matchable absorption spectra, PRET route and strong electromagnetic field dominate the distinguishing PCE improvements of different OPVs. Our approach towards light harvesting is also applicable to other types of solar cells and light-driven devices due to the fact that LSPR bands can be readily manipulated to match the absorption band of various photoactive materials.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51802066), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities of China (Grant No. JZ2019YYPY0023) and the Research Grants Council (RGC) of Hong Kong, China (project number: C4030-14G). Prof. Y. Wu acknowledges the financial support from the 111 Project “New Materials and Technology for Clean Energy” (B18018). We thank Dr Y. Zhu for performing parts of TEM measurement.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details and additional figures and tables. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta07974b
‡ Z. Y. Bao, S. Liu and Y. Hou contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019