 DOI: 10.1039/C7TC04721E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 3668-3674


Masahiko
Saito
 and 

Itaru
Osaka
*

Department of Applied Chemistry, Graduate School of Engineering, Hiroshima University, 1-4-1 Kagamiyama, Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima 739-8527, Japan. E-mail: iosaka@hiroshima-u.ac.jp

Received
17th October 2017
, Accepted 22nd November 2017
First published on 22nd November 2017
Stability of polymer-based bulk-heterojunction solar cells (PSCs) is an even more crucial factor than power conversion efficiency for commercialization. Here, the thermal stability of PSCs is studied using a thiophene–thiazolothiazole semiconducting polymer system. Interestingly, it was found that the cells that used polymers with a less regular side chain placement (iPTzBT) showed higher thermal stability than the cells that used polymers with a more regular placement (PTzBT). The difference can be correlated with the change in the polymer structural order upon thermally annealing the polymer/fullerene blend films. Whereas the structural order of iPTzBT is unchanged after annealing, that of PTzBT is decreased, although the crystallinity is lower in iPTzBT than in PTzBT. These results clearly demonstrate that careful design of the side chain placement in the semiconducting polymers is an important factor for improving the thermal stability of PSCs.

A number of studies on polymer-based bulk-heterojunction solar cells (PSCs) have been carried out in the last two decades because of the great interest for flexible, light-weight, and large-area renewable energy sources that can be produced by low-cost and low-energy consumption solution-processes. In PSCs, typically a semiconducting polymer and a fullerene derivative, such as [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) or [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM), are used as a p-type (electron-donor) and a n-type (electron acceptor), respectively, in the bulk-heterojunction photoactive layer. Much attention has been focused on developing new semiconducting polymers, optimizing the processing methods and structures of PSCs toward the improvement of the power conversion efficiency (PCE). These intensive studies have led to the PCE in excess of 10%. In addition, more recently, the development of non-fullerene n-type materials and/or the use of ternary blend bulk-heterojunction have raised the PCE over 12%. On the other hand, the stability (life time) of PSCs is equally or even more important than PCE for the practical applications. However, the studies on the stability improvement are very limited as compared to the studies on the PCE improvement.

Important environmental factors that are believed to cause degradation of PSCs are oxygen, water (moisture), sunlight (UV light), and heat, as is the case for other organic devices. Hence, the use of materials with high durability to those factors is necessary. It has been reported that the optimization of buffer layers (hole or electron transporting layers), including the use of inverted architectures, has successfully improved the stability under ambient conditions. Moreover, it should be noted that encapsulation can prevent penetration of oxygen and moisture into the cell and the use of UV-protection films can cut off the UV light, both of which are effective for increasing the stability. However, heat that is induced to the cell by continuous exposure to sunlight is directly conducted to the active and buffer layers, and thus cannot be avoided even with those protections of the cell. Therefore, the thermal stability of the materials is a necessary condition and one of the most important issues for the PSC stability. Recently, the group of Chambon and Osaka independently reported that the use of WOx as the hole transporting layer (HTL) instead of familiar MoOx in the inverted cell increased the thermal stability. Maes and co-workers demonstrated that modification of the side chain of P3HT (regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene)) and PCPDTBT (poly{4,4-dialkyl-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b;3,4-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl-alt-2,1,3,-benzothiadiazole-4,7-diyl}) systems, such as introducing the hydroxyl and ester groups at the end of the alkyl group, can increase the thermal stability of their cells.
Recently, we have reported that PSCs with an inverted architecture, based on a semiconducting polymer system consisting of thiophene, thiazolothiazole (TzTz), and naphthobisthiadiazole (NTz), PTzNTzs (Fig. 1), showed surprisingly high thermal stability in addition to relatively high PCEs of ∼9%. PTzNTz cells that used MoOx as the HTL showed only ca. 15% drop from their initial PCE after 500 hour-storage at 85 °C under a N2 atmosphere (in glove box), regardless of the alkyl side chain length and the use of the solvent additive (1,8-diiodoctane: DIO) at the time of fabrication. Furthermore, when WOx was used as the HTL, PTzNTz cells showed almost negligible thermal degradation under the same conditions. In contrast, the cells using a thiophene–thiazolothiazole polymer, PTzBT (Fig. 1), even with WOx as the HTL, showed a significant drop at the initial “burn-in” stage and resulted in the 30% drop of the PCE after 500 hours. This large difference between PTzNTz and PTzBT prompts us to further investigate the thermal stability of PSCs. In the viewpoint of the molecular structure, there are two major differences between these two polymers, that are the backbone building unit and the side chain placement (Fig. 1). As for the backbone, while PTzNTz incorporates TzTz and NTz along with alkylthiophenes, PTzBT incorporates only TzTz along with alkylthiophenes. With respect to the side chain, in PTzNTz, R1s heads “toward” the TzTz moiety, whereas R2s heads “outward” the NTz moiety. In PTzBT, on the other hand, all the alkyl groups head “toward” the neighboring TzTz moieties. We hypothesized that these structural differences may impact the thermal stability of their PSCs.
In this work, we focus on the effect of the side chain placement on the PSC thermal stability. We therefore synthesized new polymers, iPTzBTs (Fig. 1), which possess the same backbone as PTzBT, but different side chain placement. In iPTzBTs, one pair of alkyl groups (R1s) heads toward the TzTz moiety, whereas the other pair (R2s) heads outward the TzTz moiety, and thus the placement is less regular than in PTzBTs (Fig. 1). We found that there was a clear difference in the thermal stability between the PSCs of PTzBTs and iPTzBTs; iPTzBTs showed higher thermal stability. The difference will be discussed by correlating the structural change in the bulk-heterojunction films upon thermal annealing.

Synthesis of the polymers is shown in Scheme 1. Here, two iPTzBTs were synthesized, where one has the 2-butyloctyl (BO) group as both R1 and R2, and the other has BO and 2-hexyldecyl (HD) as R1 and R2, respectively. First, the mixture of 2-formyl-4-alkylthiophene (1a and 1b) and dithiooxamide was heated at 200 °C for 12 hours, which gave the TzTz derivatives (2a and 2b) both with ca. 30% yield. 2a and 2b were then brominated by NBS at the 5-position to afford 3a and 3b both with ca. 80% yield. 3a and 3b were copolymerized with 4via the Stille coupling reaction to give iPTzBT-BOBO and -BOHD, which were collected as the chloroform (CF) fraction. Number average molecular weights (Mn) of iPTzBTs evaluated by GPC at 140 °C were 34 kDa with a polydispersity index (PDI) of 1.9 for iPTzBT-BOBO, and 30 kDa with a PDI of 1.8 for iPTzBT-BOHD (Fig. S1 (ESI) and Table 1). Interestingly, the solubility of iPTzBTs was higher than that of PTzBTs with the same alkyl groups. For example, whereas 1 mg of iPTzBT-BOHD can be dissolved in 1 mL of chlorobenzene (CB) at room temperature, 1 mg of PTzBT-BOHD can be dissolved at 60 °C.

Polymer

M
n
 (kDa)
PDI

λ
max
 (nm)

λ
edge (nm)/Eg (eV)

E
HOMO
 (eV)

a Determined by GPC using polystyrene standard and o-dichlorobenzene as the eluent at 140 °C.
b Polydispersity index.
c Absorption maximum in the film.
d Absorption edge (λedge) in the film and optical bandgap (Eg) calculated with λedge.
e HOMO energy level evaluated by PYS in air.

iPTzBT-BOBO
34
1.9
570, 617
672/1.85
–5.20
iPTzBT-BOHD
30
1.8
575, 621
662/1.87
–5.21
PTzBT-BOBO
16
2.3
576, 626
675/1.85
–5.21
PTzBT-BOHD
35
3.1
572, 623
674/1.84
–5.23


Fig. 2a shows the UV-vis absorption spectra of iPTzBTs and PTzBTs in CB solution. iPTzBTs exhibited absorption maxima (λmax) mainly at around 570 nm and 620 nm (Table S1, ESI). These values are similar to those observed in PTzBTs. However, the relative intensity of the high-energy band (absorption peak at ca. 580 nm) and the low-energy band (absorption peak at 620 nm) was clearly distinct between iPTzBTs and PTzBTs. In iPTzBTs, the intensity of the high-energy band was similar to or higher than that of the low-energy band. In contrast, in PTzBTs, the intensity of the high-energy band was lower than that of the low-energy band. Temperature-dependent UV-vis absorption spectra of iPTzBTs and PTzBT were also measured in CB solution (Fig. S2, ESI). The spectra of iPTzBTs significantly changed upon heating the solution from rt to 60 °C and 100 °C, where the absorption band blue-shifted about 100 nm. On the other hand, the blue-shift of the absorption spectra in PTzBTs upon heating was limited (ca. 20 nm). These results indicate that iPTzBTs have weaker aggregation properties than PTzBTs.


Fig. 2b displays the absorption spectra of the polymers in the thin film. λmax of iPTzBTs is almost the same as those observed in the solution spectra (Table 1). The relative intensity of the low-energy band became slightly higher than that of the high-energy band, implying that the intermolecular interaction was enhanced in the film. The absorption edge (λedge) was determined to be ca. 662–672 nm, which corresponds to the optical bandgaps (Eg) of 1.85–1.87 eV (Table 1) and are similar to those of PTzBTs.

Fig. 2c depicts the photoemission yield spectra of iPTzBTs and PTzBTs measured in air. The HOMO energy levels (EHOMOs) of iPTzBT-BOBO and -BOHD were determined to be –5.20 and –5.21 eV, respectively. These values were similar to those of PTzBT-BOBO and -BOHD. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) was performed to investigate the thermal properties of the polymers. (Fig. S3a–d, ESI). It was found that all the polymers showed a transition peak at around 300 °C that is assignable to the melting point. Note that only iPTzBT-BOBO gave a mesophase transition peak at around 220 °C.

Solar cells with an inverted structure, ITO/ZnO/(polymer/PC71BM)/WOx/Ag, were used to investigate the photovoltaic properties of the polymers. Since WOx can give higher thermal stability as mentioned above it was chosen for the HTL rather than MoOx that is typically used for the inverted cell. The optimal polymer to PC71BM weight ratio was 1:2 for all polymers. The current density (J)–voltage (V) curves and the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the cells under 1 Sun of simulated AM 1.5G solar irradiation (100 mW cm−2) are displayed in Fig. 3a and b, respectively. The photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 2. The cell using iPTzBT-BOBO gave a PCE of 5.7% with a short circuit current density (JSC) of 10. 6 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.80 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.67. The iPTzBT-BOHD cell showed a PCE of 5.0% with a JSC of 9.6 mA cm−2, a VOC of 0.87 V, and a FF of 0.59. PCEs of the cells using iPTzBT-BOBO and -BOHD were slightly improved to 6.1% and 5.3% when the active layer was fabricated from CB solution including 1% of DIO as the solvent additive (Fig. S4a, b and Table S2, ESI). The PTzBT-BOBO cell gave a PCE of 5.7% (JSC = 10.4 mA cm−2, VOC = 0.86 V, FF = 0.64), which was similar to the iPTzBT-BOBO cell. In contrast, the PTzBT-BOHD cell showed a PCE of 6.8% (JSC = 12.7 mA cm−2, VOC = 0.84 V, FF = 0.64), which was higher than the iPTzBT-BOHD cell.

Polymer

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF
PCEmax [PCEave] (%)

a PCEmax: maximum power conversion efficiencies, PCEave: average power conversion efficiencies.

iPTzBT-BOBO
10.6
0.80
0.67
5.7 [5.4]
iPTzBT-BOHD
9.63
0.87
0.59
5.0 [4.7]
PTzBT-BOBO
10.4
0.86
0.64
5.7 [5.4]
PTzBT-BOHD
12.7
0.84
0.64
6.8 [6.6]

Thermal stability of the solar cells that used iPTzBTs and PTzBTs was tested according to a procedure defined by the consortia of the international summit on solar cell stability (ISOS). The cells were heated at 85 °C in the dark under a N2 atmosphere (glovebox), which refers to category ISOS-D-3, for 1000 hours. The J–V characteristics were measured at room temperature (Fig. S5, ESI). Fig. 4a shows the relative change of PCE as a function of storage time (annealing time). Interestingly, thermal stability of the cells was greatly improved in iPTzBTs than in PTzBTs. The PCE of the iPTzBT-BOBO and -BOHD cells gradually decreased by ca. 10% in 200 hours, and then plateaued thereafter. As a result, losses of the PCE after 1000 hours were 11% and 8% for iPTzBT-BOBO and -BOHD, respectively. In sharp contrast, as reported previously, the PCE of the PTzBT-BOBO and -BOHD cells decreased immediately by more than 20% within the initial 24 hours. Then the PCEs almost plateaued after 200 hours, resulting in losses of 24% and 30% after 1000 hours for PTzBT-BOBO and -BOHD, respectively. In addition, it is interesting to note that iPTzBT-BOBO and -BOHD cells fabricated with DIO as a solvent additive were also thermally stable, as losses of the PCE in the DIO-aided cells that used iPTzBT-BOBO and -BOHD after 1000 hours were 14% and 8%, respectively (Fig. S4c–f, ESI).


Fig. 4b–d show the relative change of JSC, VOC, and FF, respectively, as a function of storage time. In all parameters, the iPTzBT cells showed higher stability than the PTzBT cells. In particular, the loss of FF was clearly different. Whereas losses were 6–7% for the iPTzBTs cells, those were 14–23% for PTzBTs cells.

As the degradation of the FF was the main difference for the thermal stability between the iPTzBT and PTzBT cells, we investigated the change in the charge carrier mobility of the blend films after annealing at 85 °C. Hole-only devices (ITO/PEDOT:PSS)/(polymer/PC71BM/WOx/Ag) were fabricated, and the mobility (μSCLC) was calculated using the space-charge-limited-current (SCLC) model. As the ‘‘burn-in’’ stage dominated the degradation of the solar cells, we evaluated the change in μSCLC for the initial 24 hours (Fig. 5 and Fig. S6, ESI). The initial μSCLCs of the devices that used iPTzBT-BOBO and -BOHD were 2.4 × 10−4 and 2.2 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, which were lower than that of PTzBT-BOBO (7.1 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) and -BOHD (6.5 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) cells. After thermal annealing, the μSCLC values of the iPTzBT devices were almost unchanged. In contrast, the μSCLC values of the PTzBT-BOBO and -BOHD devices decreased to 3.0 × 10−4 and 3.2 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, after 24 hours. These results are consistent with the degradation of the FF in the solar cells.


In order to correlate the morphology and structural order of the polymer/PC71BM blends in the thin film with charge carrier transport and the photovoltaic properties, we first performed the atomic force micrography (AFM) of the blend films before and after annealing. The AFM images of all the polymer/PC71BM films became slightly rougher after annealing at 85 °C (Fig. S7 and S8, ESI). However, there is no specific difference among these polymers.

We then carried out the grazing incident X-ray diffraction (GIXD) measurements. Fig. 6a–d depict the two-dimensional (2D) GIXD patterns of the as-spun polymer/PC71BM blend films. The polymers were found to form a predominant face-on orientation, as the diffraction corresponding to the π–π stacking appeared in the qz axis. It is noted that, in all cases, the structural order of the polymers observed in the blend film was almost the same as in the polymer neat film (Fig. S9, ESI). The lamellar distance (dl) of iPTzBTs was about 1 Å larger than that of PTzBTs (Fig. 6e, annealing time = 0), probably due to the weakened side chain interdigitation originating in the different side chain placement. Accordingly, the π–π stacking distance (dπ) of iPTzBTs was also larger than that of PTzBTs by about 0.1 Å (Fig. 6f, annealing time = 0); 3.75 Å for iPTzBTs and 3.60 Å for PTzBTs. We also investigated the crystallinity of the polymers in the blend film by calculating the coherence length (LC) of the lamella (Fig. 6g) and π–π stacking (Fig. 6h) structures in the face-on crystallite using a modified Scherrer's equation (LC = 2π/FWHM, where FWHM is the full width at half-maximum of the diffraction peak). The LC values of both the lamellar and π–π stacking structures in the as-spun films were higher for PTzBTs than for iPTzBTs, indicating that the crystallinity was higher for PTzBTs. We note that, however, the enlarged intermolecular distances and decreased crystallinity in iPTzBT did not critically affect the initial performance of the cells, as described above.
By annealing the blend films at 85 °C, we observed a clear difference in the change of the structural order between iPTzBTs and PTzBTs. Fig. 6e and 6f show changes in dl and dπ of the polymers, respectively. In iPTzBTs, both dl and dπ did not change by annealing the blend films. In contrast, those increased in PTzBTs though the changes were moderate; dl increased to that of iPTzBT with the same side chains, and dπ increased to 3.65 Å. Similarly, while LC values of the lamellar and π–π stacking structure of iPTzBTs almost unchanged after annealing at 85 °C for 24 hours, those of PTzBTs decreased (Fig. 6g and h). We note that the structural order of PC71BM, in its aggregation that is detectable in 2D GIXD, did not change upon annealing (Fig. S13, ESI). Therefore, the difference in the structural changes of the polymers upon annealing the blend films correlates well with the difference in the changes in μSCLC and thus the difference in the solar cell degradation between iPTzBTs and PTzBTs. It is also interesting to note that, in the case of the neat films, only a marginal change was observed for dl, dπ, and LC in all the polymers after thermal annealing (Fig. S16, ESI). Thus, the structural change by thermal annealing only occurred in the blend films of PTzBTs. We speculate that in iPTzBTs there should be larger regions where the polymer and PC71BM are well mixed than in PTzBTs, due to the lower crystallinity. This state is probably thermodynamically stable. In the meantime, in PTzBTs the polymer and PC71BM domains are well phase-separated due to the higher crystallinity of the polymers. However, some diffusion of PC71BM molecules into the polymer domains likely to occur by thermal annealing, as often seen in P3HT/PCBM bilayer films. This may cause the structural change in the polymers, such as the increase in intermolecular distances or the decrease in crystallinity, giving rise to the degradation of the charge carrier mobility and thus the photovoltaic performances.

New thiophene–thiazolothiazole semiconducting polymers, iPTzBTs, which possess the same backbone as PTzBT, but different side chain placement were synthesized in order to study the effect of side chain placement on the thermal stability of the polymer-based solar cell. iPTzBTs had a similar electronic structure to PTzBTs, but showed slightly lower crystallinity than PTzBTs. Although the solar cell performance of the cells that used iPTzBTs and PTzBTs were similar, interestingly, the thermal stability was higher in the cells with iPTzBT than in those with PTzBTs. The thermal degradation of the solar cell was consistent with the change in the charge carrier mobility of the polymers in the blend films upon thermal annealing. 2D GIXD measurements revealed that the structural order of iPTzBTs almost unchanged after annealing their blend film at 85 °C, whereas that of PTzBTs decreased. The structural change agreed well with the degradation of the solar cell as well as the mobility. These results clearly demonstrated that the side chain placement of the semiconducting polymers is an important factor that impacts the thermal stability of PSCs. We believe that this work provides an important guideline for developing new semiconducting polymers that afford highly efficient and highly thermally stable PSCs.


ITO substrates were first pre-cleaned sequentially by sonicating in a detergent bath with de-ionized water, acetone, and isopropanol at rt, and in a boiled isopropanol bath each for 10 min, and then baked at 120 °C for 10 min in air. The substrates were then subjected to an UV/ozone treatment at rt for 20 min. ZnO layers were prepared by spin-coating (at 5000 rpm) the precursor solution prepared from 0.4 M zinc acetate dihydrate in 0.3 M monoethanolamine and 2-methoxyethanol. ZnO substrates were immediately baked in air at 200 °C for 30 min, and then rinsed with acetone, isopropanol, and finally were washed in a boiled isopropanol bath for 10 min. A solution of the polymer/PC71BM blend was prepared by mixing them (weight ratio of 1:2) in a CB with a concentration of 5 g L−1 based on the polymer. The photoactive layer was deposited, in a glove box, by spin coating the solution at 600 rpm for 20 s, in which the solution was kept heated at 100 °C. The thin films were transferred into a vacuum evaporator connected to the glove box, and the WOx layer (15 nm) and the Ag layer (100 nm) were deposited sequentially through a shadow mask. The active area of the cells was 0.16 cm2 (4 mm × 4 mm).


J–V characteristics were measured using a Keithley 2400 source-measure unit under 1 Sun (AM1.5G) conditions using a solar simulator (SAN-EI Electric, XES-40S1) in a glovebox. The light intensity for the J–V measurements was calibrated with a reference PV cell (KONICA MINOLTA AK-100 certified at National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Japan). EQE spectra were measured with a Spectral Response Measuring System (SOMA OPTICS, LTD., S-9241). Thermal stability test of the cells was carried out in the glovebox, where the cells were heated at 85 °C on a hot plate for 1000 hours. During the annealing, the cells were subjected to the J–V measurements as described above at rt in the glovebox.

The pre-cleaned ITO substrates were coated with PEDOT:PSS by spin-coating (5000 rpm for 30 s, thickness of ∼30 nm). The polymer/PC71BM (1:2 wt/wt) blend film was then fabricated by spin-coating as described above. The thin films were transferred into a vacuum evaporator connected to the glove box, and WOx (15 nm) and Ag (100 nm) layers were deposited sequentially through a shadow mask. The J–V characteristics were measured in the range of 0–7 V using a Keithley 2400 source-measure unit in the dark in the glovebox. The devices were annealed at 85 °C on the hot plate, and the J–V characteristics were measured at rt after annealing for 1, 6, and 24 hours. The mobility (μSCLC) was calculated by fitting the J–V curves to a space charge limited current model described by
J = (8/9)εrε0μSCLC(V2/L3)
where
εr is the dielectric constant of the polymer, ε0 is the permittivity of free space, μSCLC is the mobility, V = Vappl − Vbi, where Vappl is the applied voltage to the device and Vbi is the built-in voltage due to the difference in the work function of the two electrodes (determined to be 1.0 V), and L is the polymer thickness. The dielectric constant εr is assumed to be 3, which is a typical value for semiconducting polymers.


GIXD experiments were conducted at the SPring-8 on the beamline BL46XU. The sample was irradiated with the X-ray energy of 12.39 keV (λ = 1 Å) at a fixed incident angle on the order of 0.12° through a Huber diffractometer. The 2D GIXD patterns were recorded with a 2D image detector (Pilatus 300 K). Samples for the X-ray measurements were prepared in the same manner as that for solar cell fabrication. The films were thermally annealed at 85 °C on a hot plate in air and then were measured at rt in air. The same films were continuously annealed to collect the data.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the Advanced Low Carbon Technology Research and Development Program (ALCA) from JST. 2D GIXD experiments were performed at the BL46XU of SPring-8 with the approval of the Japan Synchrotron Radiation Research Institute (JASRI) (Proposal No. 2016B1875). The authors thank Dr T. Koganezawa (JASRI) for the support on 2D GIXD measurements.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7tc04721e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018