 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA04600B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11372-11380


Faming
Li
,

Chunxiong
Bao
,

Weidong
Zhu
,

Bihu
Lv
,

Wenguang
Tu
,

Tao
Yu
*,

Jie
Yang
,

Xiaoxin
Zhou
,

Yangrunqian
Wang
,

Xiaoyong
Wang
,

Yong
Zhou
 and 

Zhigang
Zou


National Laboratory of Solid State Microstructures & Eco-Materials and Renewable Energy Research Center (ERERC) at Department of Physics, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, P. R. China. E-mail: yutao@nju.edu.cn

Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Microstructures, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, P. R. China

Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Nano Technology, Nanjing 210093, P. R. China

Received
2nd June 2016
, Accepted 22nd June 2016
First published on 22nd June 2016
As the light absorption layer, a CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite film with a fully and homogeneously covered flat surface is crucially important for perovskite photovoltaic devices. Herein, the sequential method is improved by introducing a spray-assisted solution process (SSP) instead of the commonly used dipping process in CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite film deposition. The morphology analysis for PbI2 films found that the airflow of the spray pre-wetting process provides a driving force for accelerating the dissolution and deep infiltration, which is helpful to form a mesoporous PbI2 scaffold. So the 2-propanol (IPA) pre-wetting has advantages to complete the reaction of PbI2 and CH3NH3I through the diffusion channel in the grain boundary and on the surface of the PbI2 film. Furthermore, the grain size and surface coverage of the film can be controlled effectively by a facile IPA pre-wetting process in the SSP. Meanwhile, the influence of the annealing process on the crystallization, chemical composition, microstructures and carrier transport properties of the perovskite films were investigated. Our results showed that an optimum annealing temperature and time can reduce crystal defects in the film and weaken the hysteresis phenomenon of the perovskite solar cell. Efficient mesoporous structured perovskite solar cells were fabricated with an optimal PCE of 14.2%, because of the improved perovskite film preparation method.

Metal–organic halide perovskites such as CH3NH3PbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) have attracted much research attention in the photovoltaic field due to their unique optical and electronic properties. Recently, significant progress has been realized in perovskite solar cells (PSCs), with a highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 22.1%. The PCE of PSCs has increased very quickly, considering that such a situation for conventional thin film solar cells based on Si, CdTe, CuInSe2, Cu2ZnSnSe4 and polymer solar cells has not been seen. In previous studies, researchers have employed a step spin-coating method to fabricate the light absorption layer of mesostructured PSCs. However, the inhomogeneous thickness and poor surface coverage over a large area enhances the charge recombination on the interface of the TiO2 and hole-transport material (HTM) layer, leading to poor photovoltaic performance not exceeding a 12% PCE. In 2013, Gratzel and coworkers introduced a sequential deposition method to fabricate mesostructured PSCs, through which the morphology of the perovskite film can be controlled easily, and achieved a PCE exceeding 15%. However, this method would inevitably induce perovskite films with a relatively rough and pinhole-rich surface, which is unacceptable in PSCs. Recently, the sequential deposition method has been extended by many research groups, such as by a vapor-assisted solution process, two-step spin-coating, interdiffusion of precursor layers, hybrid chemical vapor deposition, hot-pressing method post-process and so on, implying that sequential deposition is a promising method for further technological improvements.

Spray deposition is one of the commonly used techniques that has been used to deposit many kinds of thin film in the past decades. This technique has been widely used to fabricate noble metals, metal oxides, chalcogenides, superconducting materials and so on. It has also been used to prepare various functional thin film materials, such as CdTe, Bi2S3, CuInS2 (ref. 13) and so on. In addition, this method has also been widely used in organic photovoltaics, for example spray deposition of the active layer, hole-transport layer, top electrode layer and solvent spray annealing process. Recently, some literatures have reported the deposition of perovskite films using ultrasonic spray-coating or a simple spray gun, but the average PCE of the solar cells is at a relatively lower value, only about 10% due to the smaller grains, more grain boundaries and the greater surface roughness etc. In our previous work, we reported that an efficient spray-assisted process instead of the commonly used dipping process in a two-step sequential deposition can effectively reduce the roughness and eliminate the pinholes of the perovskite film. A similar study using a simple airbrush gun spray-coating CH3NH3I in 2-propanol (IPA) solution on PbI2 film to prepare a continuous perovskite film has also been reported by Boopathi et al., and they reported a PCE of 11.66% and high reproducibility. Yet, even though the method could attain a uniform, stoichiometric and continuous perovskite film, it also has certain limitations in the actual preparation, for instance it was only suitable for preparation of thin films of about 100 nm thickness, and the solar light cannot be completely absorbed by the thin film. When the thickness of the PbI2 film increases, the photocurrent significantly reduces to 10–17 mA cm−2, the PbI2 and CH3NH3I cannot react completely, and the PbI2 at the interface between TiO2 and the perovskite layer will block the carrier transport. In addition, the grain size is relatively small and distributed unevenly, resulting in the grain boundary of the films increasing clearly, so the non-radiative recombination significantly increases, and the fill factor (FF) and open-circuit voltage (Voc) of the PSCs are relatively small. The pre-wetting process is very important for forming perovskite films in the two-step deposition, and some studies have reported that the dipping, spin-coating pre-wetting process and solvent extraction can improve the crystal quality of CH3NH3PbI3 films in sequential deposition and two-step spin-coating methods, respectively. Yet, even the perovskite films with pre-wetting of IPA possess high surface coverage, and the pine holes still inevitably exist. For the spray pre-wetting process, we speculate that the air flow of spray-coating could provide a driving force for deep infiltration, which is helpful to complete the reaction of the PbI2 film and optimize the microstructure. As far as we know, the spray-coating pre-wetting process to prepare perovskite films is rarely reported.
In this work, the sequential method is improved by introducing a spray-assisted solution process (SSP) in CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite film deposition. We propose a strategy of IPA pre-wetting via spray-coating to modulate the microstructure of the CH3NH3PbI3 layer. This strategy could provide a driving force for accelerating the dissolution and deep infiltration, and it is beneficial to form mesoporous PbI2 thin film scaffolds. The IPA pre-wetting has an advantage in completing the reaction of PbI2 and CH3NH3I through the diffusion channels in the grain boundaries. Meanwhile, it can effectively control the grain size and surface coverage via spraying different amounts of IPA. In addition, the influence of the annealing process on the crystallization, chemical composition, microstructure and carrier transporting properties of the perovskite films was systematically investigated. Efficient mesoporous structured PSCs were obtained with an optimal PCE of 14.2%.

Unless stated otherwise, all materials were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used as received. Specific details of all materials are reported in our previous work. Spiro-OMeTAD (99.68%) was purchased from Shenzhen Feiming Science and Technology Co., Ltd. (China). The methyl ammonium iodide (CH3NH3I) was synthesized according to a previous report. All chemicals used were analytical grade reagents without further purification.


PbI2 was dissolved in DMF with a concentration of 462 mg mL−1 under stirring at 70 °C. The mesoporous TiO2 films were then infiltrated with PbI2 by spin coating at 3000 rpm for 30 s and dried at 90 °C for 5 min. After cooling to room temperature, the pure IPA and CH3NH3I in IPA solution (10 mg mL−1, 500 μL) were successively sprayed on the PbI2 films using an airbrush pen with a 2 mm nozzle, as shown in Fig. 1. In this process, the substrates are kept at room temperature. Meanwhile, the other two pre-wetting methods (the dipping and spin-coating) were utilised as contrasting experiments, with the same volume of CH3NH3I in IPA solution sprayed on PbI2 films under the same conditions. In order to obtain the optimal volume of spray pre-wetting, the PbI2 films were wetted by different amounts (2.0, 1.5, 1.0, 0.5 and 0.1 mL cm−2) of IPA. In order to maintain homogeneous dispersion of the droplet on PbI2 films, the substrates were spun at 500 rpm under air ambient conditions (humidity < 50%, temperature 20–25 °C), the films were sprayed at a nozzle height of 10 cm and an air carrier pressure of 15 psi, followed by annealing on a hot-plate in air. Unless stated otherwise, all perovskite films were annealed at 90 °C for 30 min.


The device fabrication process is described as follows. TiO2 sol (ethanol solution containing a 10% volume fraction of tetrabutyl titanate) was dropped onto the pre-cleaned fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass substrates to form compact TiO2 layers of about 50 nm thickness by spin-coating at 4500 rpm for 30 s, followed by annealing at 480 °C for 30 min in air. TiO2 paste (Dyesol 18NR-T) diluted with ethanol 1:4 by weight was then dropped onto the TiO2 compact film to form a mesoporous TiO2 layer of about 300 nm thickness by spin-coating at 4000 rpm for 30 s, followed by annealing at 500 °C for 30 min in air. Afterwards, the substrate was coated by the CH3NH3PbI3 light absorption layer. Then, the HTM layer, consisting of 90 mg Spiro-OMeTAD, 17.5 μL lithium Li-TFSI in acetonitrile (500 mg mL−1) and 28.8 μL 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) mixed in 1 mL chlorobenzene, was spin-coated on the CH3NH3PbI3 layer. Finally, a thermally evaporated silver layer (∼100 nm) was coated to form the back contact of the device.


X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were collected on a Rigaku Ultima III X-ray diffractometer (Cu Kα). An FEI NOVA NanoSEM230 scanning electron microscope was employed to characterize the morphological properties of the samples. The atomic force microscopy (AFM) analysis was performed on an MFP3D 50 microscope (Asylum Research, MFP-3D-SA, USA) with a cantilever operating in the tapping mode. A Shimadzu UV-2550UV-vis (UV-vis) spectrometer fitted with an integrating sphere was used to investigate the absorption properties of the samples. The time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) decay properties were obtained using the time-correlated single-photon counting technique (Picoharp 300). The samples were photoexcited using a laser beam pulsed at 5 MHz. The performance measurements of the as-fabricated solar cells were carried out on a Keithley 2400 source measurement unit under AM1.5 illumination (standard 100 mW cm−2) cast by an Oriel 92251A-1000 sunlight simulator calibrated by the standard reference of a Newport silicon solar cell. A black mask with a circular aperture (0.09 cm2) was applied on top of the solar cells to define the active area. The current density–voltage (J–V) curve of solar cells was measured by the scans with a voltage step of 10 mV and a delay time of 50 ms under an AM 1.5 G sun light simulator. The incident photon conversion efficiency (IPCE) was measured using a 150 W xenon lamp (Oriel) fitted with a monochromator (Cornerstone74004) as a monochromatic light source.


It is crucial for perovskite photovoltaic devices to feature a flat CH3NH3PbI3 film whose surface is fully and homogeneously covered and where PbI2 residues are as little as possible for the light absorption layer. Herein, we design the pre-wetting technology as an effective method of concentration gradient diffusion for preparing such a layer. Fig. 1 presents a schematic diagram of the deposition of the perovskite films without and with the IPA pre-wetting process. In this paper, the spray-assisted solution process (SSP) was performed in four steps. First, the PbI2 film was deposited via spin-coating. Second, IPA or other solvent was sprayed on the PbI2 film in pre-wetting processing. The pristine IPA and PbI2 have good affinity, so the IPA can rapidly infiltrate into the PbI2 film via grain boundaries and voids. Third, the solution of CH3NH3I in IPA was sprayed onto the wetting film. Because of the concentration gradient, there was an IPA indiffusion channel in the grain boundaries and voids of the PbI2 film, which can result in CH3NH3I rapid diffusion to the bottom of the PbI2 film and the TiO2 mesoporous structure. So we deduce that the pre-wetting process could be of benefit to completing the reaction between PbI2 and CH3NH3I, and forming a high quality perovskite film. On the surface, droplets of the CH3NH3I solution sufficiently diffuse instead of reacting quickly, which induces the perovskite films to be more uniform and flat. Finally, the homogeneous flat film is converted into a pure crystalline CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite layer after annealing.


Fig. 2 shows the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the perovskite films. It is clearly observed that the top morphology of the perovskite layer is markedly changed by the spray pre-wetting process. For CH3NH3PbI3 films fabricated by SSP without a pre-wetting process, the surface morphology appears as inhomogeneous islands that contain a large number of raised grains embedded on the surface of the perovskite film, as shown in Fig. 2(a). This phenomenon is mainly ascribed to the following reasons. The CH3NH3I droplet will quickly react with adjacent PbI2 grains before the CH3NH3I solution sufficiently diffuses on the surface of the PbI2 film. The size of the droplets is not uniform, which is influenced significantly by the spray speed, the nozzle size, space distance between nozzle and substrate and so on. Hence some large droplets of CH3NH3I solution could induce big raised particles on the surface of the perovskite film. In contrast, a homogeneous flat film appears after the spray pre-wetting process, as shown in Fig. 2(b). The results confirm the previous assumptions: the droplets of CH3NH3I solution sufficiently diffused instead of reacting quickly after the spray pre-wetting process, which means the perovskite films tend to be more uniform and flat.
In the previous work, some researchers have reported that the pre-wetting process through the dipping and spin-coating methods could regulate the grain size and surface structure of the perovskite films. Here, to gain further insight into the unique advantages of the spray pre-wetting process, the morphology features of the PbI2 wetting film formed by dipping, spin-coating and spray-coating pre-wetting processes were investigated. The plane-view and cross-sectional SEM images of the PbI2 films via the different pre-wetting methods are shown in Fig. 3. It can be observed that all the surfaces of the films exhibit islands of non-uniform coverage. It is clearly observed that the surface structure of the PbI2 films after the dipping and spin-coating pre-wetting processes have no significant changes compared with the pristine film, whereas there is a clear difference that the PbI2 film for spray pre-wetting features many mesopores compared with the other PbI2 films. We deduce that these mesopores can result from a driving force (the airflow of the spray process) accelerating the dissolution process of the PbI2 film in the grain boundaries and giving thin surface coverage. In order to confirm the inference, we use ethanol (stronger dissolving ability of the PbI2 film) instead of IPA as the spray pre-wetting solution, and it can be observed that larger mesopores appear in the PbI2 film (Fig. S1). Fig. 3(e) and (f) shows the cross-sectional SEM images of the pristine and spray pre-wetting PbI2 film, respectively. Lamellar PbI2 crystals are formed on the surface and fully cover the mesoporous TiO2 layer. It is also found that PbI2 is well infiltrated into the mesopores of the TiO2 film without pre-wetting the film. However, the structure of the mesoporous TiO2 layer becomes loose and some pores appear in the spray pre-wetting PbI2 film, which demonstrates that the airflow of the spray pre-wetting process provides a driving force for accelerating the dissolution and deep infiltration, which is helpful to form the porous PbI2 scaffold. Recently, Liu et al. reported that the mesoporous PbI2 thin film scaffolds can enhance the conversion efficiency of perovskite active layers in PSCs. So the spray pre-wetting process may have obvious advantages in keeping PbI2 residues as little as possible.
To observe the advantageous effect of spray pre-wetting on the perovskite film forming, the normalized UV-vis absorption spectra of pristine PbI2 and the perovskite films prepared under different methods of IPA pre-wetting were investigated. Compared with the perovskite film with no pre-wetting, the intensity of the optical absorption between 520 nm and 800 nm clearly increases in the films with pre-wetting. There was a similar intensity of absorption in the films for dipping and spin pre-wetting, and the intensity increases to a maximum in the film with spray pre-wetting. The results demonstrated that the spray pre-wetting is beneficial to completing the reaction of PbI2 and CH3NH3I because of the formation of the mesoporous PbI2 scaffold. Some studies have reported that the crystallization and surface structure of CH3NH3PbI3 is related to the PL intensity.Fig. 4(b) shows the PL intensity of the corresponding CH3NH3PbI3 film; the samples for the PL measurements are composed of the CH3NH3PbI3 film deposited on the mesoporous TiO2-coated FTO substrate. The emission peaks appearing in the 750–800 nm range resulted from the PL of CH3NH3PbI3. The PL intensity of the CH3NH3PbI3 film decreases obviously after the IPA pre-wetting processing. For dipping and spin-coating, the PL intensity of the films is almost equal, but it significantly decreases to a minimum after spray pre-wetting. The results suggest that the electrons in the CH3NH3PbI3 film with spray pre-wetting inject easily into the mesoporous TiO2, because PbI2 on the interface between the TiO2 and CH3NH3PbI3 layers can block electron transport. So the absorption increase and PL intensity decrease of the CH3NH3PbI3 film with spray pre-wetting can illustrate the reaction being completed more thoroughly.
SEM images of the perovskite films fabricated by the pre-wetting process with different volumes of IPA are shown in Fig. 5. When the volume of IPA was more than 1.5 mL cm−2, the SEM image shows that the perovskite films were similar to those fabricated by sequential deposition or two-step spin-coating processes. These films consisted of grains with different sizes from tens to hundreds of nanometers distributed on the mesoporous TiO2 film. The crystalline grains distributed continuously and were closely arranged to each other, but some pinholes or cavities existed in the grain boundaries, which induced the bareness of the TiO2 mesoporous layer. As the pre-wetting amount of IPA gradually decreased, the grain size decreased and the films gradually tended to be flatter. However, when the pre-wetting amount of IPA decreased to 0.1 mL cm−2, a large number of raised particles appeared. Analogously, the influence of the ethanol pre-wetting amount on the microstructure for perovskite films is shown in Fig. S2.
The photovoltaic devices adopted the mesoporous configuration of FTO/bi-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/HTM/Ag. In order to explore the optimal volume of IPA, the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of corresponding perovskite solar cells were tested. Fig. 6 depicts the average PCE and Voc of the corresponding devices. The results show that the average PCE and Voc first increased and then decreased, reaching a maximum value when the amount of IPA pre-wetting is about 0.5 mL cm−2. When the amount of IPA is less than 0.5 mL cm−2, the devices show a relatively low Voc again. This may be attributed to some aforementioned micron-sized particles which were not fully covered by the HTM and consequently were in contact with the Ag electrode directly. Moreover, the PbI2 on the film surface prefers to react with CH3NH3I first due to the IPA evaporating quickly before the loaded CH3NH3I immerses into the grain boundaries of PbI2, so a part of PbI2 on the bottom does not fully react even after annealing, and PbI2 residues on the interface may hinder electron transportation and reduce the current density. Therefore, it is difficult to obtain high performance solar cells by directly spraying CH3NH3I solution on the PbI2 film. However, the higher PCE could be achieved via ethanol pre-wetting due to forming more favourable porous PbI2 scaffolds (Fig. S3).
Complying with the above results, we chose the amount of IPA pre-wetting as 0.5 mL cm−2. The composition/morphology evolution of the perovskite films along the thermal annealing process is further investigated by a series of XRD, SEM and AFM measurements. In order to get optimal crystalline quality, we chose a representative sample and divided it into three parts, followed by thermal annealing at different temperatures. The diffraction peaks in the XRD pattern (Fig. S4) clearly show that, when annealed at 90 °C, the prepared film is composed of a CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite phase. As the annealing temperature (AT) increased to 120 °C, the crystallinity of the perovskite film increased obviously without the observation of any other peaks. A clear diffraction peak of the PbI2 phase is observed after annealing at 150 °C, suggesting that the CH3NH3PbI3 decomposed partly due to the weak bonding nature between the organic and inorganic species. This means the optimal AT is 120 °C.
The surface topography was further investigated by SEM and AFM characterization, as shown in Fig. 7. In the figure, the left and right columns show the SEM images and AFM images, respectively. The perovskite film annealed at 90 °C consisted of crystallites with sizes of less than 300 nm, and the AFM image exhibits the relative roughness of the surface morphology. As for the perovskite film annealed at 120 °C, the sizes of the crystallites increased to around 500 nm and the roughness of the surface decreased notably. The root mean square (RMS) roughness of the films fabricated by SSP is relatively smaller compared to the other solution processed films, and is close to the vapor-assisted solution process (RMS ∼ 23.2 nm). On further increasing the AT to 150 °C, the sizes of the crystalline grains did not further increase but partly decreased, and the roughness of the films increased again. The results should stem from the deviation of the stoichiometric composition judging from the XRD in Fig. S4. Part of the CH3NH3I sublimates from the surface and grain boundaries, which leads to the change of the microstructure and surface morphology of the films. The RMS of the films was measured by AFM (Fig. 7(d)–(f)) and calculated to be 23, 16 and 34 nm in the range of 10 μm × 10 μm.
We measured the J–V curves of the devices fabricated under different ATs in both scanning directions of from forward bias to short circuit (FB-SC) and from short circuit to forward bias (SC-FB). As shown in Fig. 8, an obvious difference between the J–V curves obtained through the SC–FB and FB–SC scan directions was observed for the devices fabricated with a 90 °C AT. When the AT increased to 120 °C, the difference between the scan directions reached a minimum value. The hysteresis was then again aggravated when the AT increased to 150 °C. According to the early report about the definition of the J–V hysteresis index, we calculated the hysteresis index to be about 0.156, 0.015 and 0.193 for ATs of 90, 120 and 150 °C respectively (Table S1). Recently, studies have indicated that the phenomenon of anomalous hysteresis stems from ion migration. The phenomenon of ion migration in perovskite films was observed by Kelvin probe force microscopy and snapshots of the in situ recorded video, which confirmed the possibility that interstitial ions would be able to migrate to either side of the film. Herein, we deduce that the ion migration mainly originates from the defects in the perovskite film. The literature indicates that the J–V hysteresis is alleviated as the crystal size increases. The smaller crystal size may result in more defects, so optimal crystallization can reduce the hysteresis degree due to the ion migration decreasing.
In order to investigate the effect of the AT on the charge transportation properties of the CH3NH3PbI3 films, time-resolved PL decay was introduced to estimate the charge transfer and carrier lifetimes in the perovskite films. Fig. 9 displays the PL decay curves of the perovskite films fabricated under different ATs, and their decay parameters are summarized in Table S2. For the perovskite films fabricated under 90 °C AT, the lifetime τ1 is 13.1 ns and τ2 is 48 ns, while their weight fractions are 57% and 43%, respectively. The weight fractions of fast and slow decay represent the amount of free charge in the perovskite films transferring to the TiO2 layer and recombining in the perovskite films, respectively. Therefore, the above results indicate that much recombination occurs, which leads to the relatively low photocurrent and FF in the corresponding photovoltaic devices. As for the perovskite films undergoing a 120 °C AT, the lifetime τ1 sharply reduced to 1.3 ns and the weight fraction increased to 91%, which suggests that there is a very fast and efficient charge separation. Obviously, the corresponding devices showed high Jsc (19.1 mA cm−2) and FF (0.67–0.69), as shown in Table S3. When the AT increased to 150 °C, τ1 remained similar, but the weight fraction decreased to 71%, implying that the charge transferring reduced and recombination increased due to the perovskite film partially decomposing. According to the literature,τ1 and τ2 can be correlated to the rate for interfacial electron transfer by eqn (1):
(1)
where
ket is the specific rate constant of the charge injection process. The results show that the electron injection rate from the CH3NH3PbI3 film annealed at 120 °C to the TiO2 layer is 7.3 × 108 s−1 (Table S2), which is faster than that of the films annealed at 90 °C (0.5 × 108 s−1) and 150 °C (1.2 × 108 s−1).


Fig. 10 shows the SEM images of the perovskite films under different annealing times at 120 °C. The results show that the surface and grain boundaries of the films changed significantly as the annealing time increased. For 10 min, part of CH3NH3I still did not completely react. The residual CH3NH3I was distributed on the surface and the grain boundaries of the perovskite film. As the annealing time increased to 30 min, the grains and their boundaries can be clearly seen, which demonstrated that the residual CH3NH3I thoroughly reacted or sublimated. On further prolonging the annealing time to 60 min, many grains with light contrast were observed in the grain boundaries. The phenomenon is consistent with the results of Chen et al., which indicates that a part of the CH3NH3I species in the grain boundaries escaped from the perovskite film and formed a PbI2 phase. When the annealing time increased to 150 min, the CH3NH3PbI3 decomposed further and damaged the surface structure.

Fig. 11(a) depicts the J–V characteristics of the corresponding devices under different annealing times at 120 °C. The results indicate that the PCE first increases and then decreases as the annealing time increases, and reaches a maximum of about 14.2% with a 60 min annealing time. For the 10 min annealing time, the device showed a low PCE of about 8.9% with a Voc, short-circuit current density (Jsc), and FF of 0.890 V, 18.2 mA cm−2, and 0.55, respectively. The low Jsc and FF demonstrated that the residual CH3NH3I distributed on the surface and in the grain boundaries of the perovskite film may form the charge traps, which would block the charge transportation and aggravate the photogenerated carrier recombination. The PCE jumped up to 12.5% in the device with a 30 min annealing time, and all the Jsc, Voc, and FF values were significantly enhanced. The optimal annealing time is 60 min; under these conditions the device achieved a PCE of 14.2%, with a Voc, Jsc, and FF of 0.982 V, 20.1 mA cm−2, and 0.72, respectively. The research results of Chen et al. pointed out that the PbI2 in the grain boundaries can passivate the perovskite grains, which reduces carrier recombination in the interface between the perovskite and the TiO2 or HTM layer. Therefore, moderate amounts of PbI2 in the grain boundaries can enhance the performance of perovskite solar cells. Further increasing the annealing time to 90 min, however, did not favor device performance, with the Voc, Jsc, and FF decreasing. The photoelectric conversion characteristics of the fabricated devices were further investigated by measuring their IPCE values. As is vividly revealed in Fig. 11(b), the photocurrent generation of all the devices started at around 780 nm, which coincides with the optical bandgap values of the samples (Fig. 4(a)). With the increase of the annealing time, the IPCE was obviously enhanced in the long wavelength part (450–780 nm). At an annealing time at 60 min, the highest IPCE of the PSCs reached 80% on average. The integrating current is about 19.6 mA cm−2 (see the inset of Fig. 11(b)), which is close to the Jsc of 20.1 mA cm−2.
In order to prove the advantages of this method in fabricated flat surface and pinhole free perovskite films, we also prepared planar structure PSCs in the same way. Fig. S5 shows the SEM image of the perovskite film fabricated on a TiO2 hole-blocking layer. The pinholes or hollows were not observed on the surface of the film. The planar structure device showed an optimal PCE of 14.5%, with Voc, Jsc, and FF values of 0.968 V, 22.1 mA cm−2 and 0.68, respectively (Table S2, Fig. S5(b)). Fig. S6 shows the SEM cross-section images of the whole cell taken from mesoporous and planar structure PSCs. Clearly, the thickness of the perovskite layer is similar in mesoporous and planar structure devices. Moreover, it can be observed that the average grain size was approximately equal to the thickness of the films, and the grain boundaries and substrate are almost vertical, so the charges could transport and be collected through a single layer grain without encountering grain boundaries.

In summary, an efficient spray-assisted technology has been successfully introduced to fabricate high quality CH3NH3PbI3 films in PSCs. By introducing a pre-wetting process, we can effectively control the grain size, surface coverage and flatness of the films. Meanwhile, we proposed a reasonable mechanism of the spray pre-wetting process, where the airflow provides a driving force for accelerating the dissolution of the PbI2 film and deep infiltration for IPA on the boundaries and thin coverage areas, which is helpful to form porous PbI2 scaffolds. So the spray pre-wetting process has obvious advantages by keeping PbI2 residues as little as possible. The influence of the annealing process on the crystallization, chemical composition, microstructure and carrier transportation properties of the perovskite films was systemically investigated. Our results showed that the CH3NH3PbI3 has high crystal quality and almost vertical grain boundaries. Finally, efficient mesoporous structured perovskite solar cells were fabricated with an optimal PCE of 14.2%, because of the improved perovskite film preparation method.


Faming Li, Chunxiong Bao and Weidong Zhu prepared the samples and performed the structural analysis, device fabrication and characterizations. Bihu Lv and Xiaoyong Wang performed photoluminescence measurements. Wenguang Tu and Yong Zhou performed AFM measurements. Jie Yang, Xiaoxin Zhou and Yangrunqian Wang performed the solar cell characterizations. Faming Li, Zhigang Zou and Tao Yu conceived the project. All authors participated in writing, revising the manuscript and discussion of the results.


This work was supported primarily by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61377051), the National Basic Research Program of China (2013CB632404), and the Science and Technology Research Program of Jiangsu Province (BK20130053). We thank M.S. student Lei Kang for his contribution on some experimental data collection.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta04600b
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016