 DOI: 10.1039/C9NR10691J
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 3646-3656


Jiabin
Qi
,

Hao
Xiong
,

Chengyi
Hou
,

Qinghong
Zhang
*,

Yaogang
Li
 and 

Hongzhi
Wang
*

State Key Laboratory for Modification of Chemical Fibers and Polymer Materials, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Donghua University, Shanghai 201620, People's Republic of China. E-mail: wanghz@dhu.edu.cn; Fax: +86-21-67792855; Tel: +86-21-67792943

Engineering Research Center of Advanced Glasses Manufacturing Technology, MOE, Donghua University, Shanghai 201620, People's Republic of China. E-mail: zhangqh@dhu.edu.cn

Received
19th December 2019
, Accepted 16th January 2020
First published on 17th January 2020
A range of power generating approaches, such as integration with clothing, fashion accessories, or textiles, allow electronic devices to be charged in environmentally friendly ways. Stretchable, efficient, stable, and even washable solar cells are considered the next necessary component to supply continuous wearable energy. However, ultra-thin photo-active materials are often fragile, which inevitably raises challenges for electron conduction during stretching and washing processes, thus resulting in unsatisfactory output performance. Herein, we have removed the stumbling block by designing a kirigami-inspired unique island-chain structure with serpentine interconnects, which prevented the photo-active layer of subcells from being subjected to excessive strain. Notably, this is the first time perovskite solar cell arrays met the above wearable requirements simultaneously. The obtained devices exhibited a high yet stable power output (efficiency of 17.68%) accompanied by a robust cycling performance (87% of the initial PCE) even after 300 times of continuous stretching with a large ratio of 80%. The efficiency of the optimized PSCs maintains promising stability after being exposed in a harsh environment (80% humidity) for 10 days. As textile-compatible power sources, the successfully designed stretchable and moisture-resistant photovoltaics add power-generation functionality to clothing, opening a new avenue for applications as long-term power sources for wearable electronics.

Broad applications of personal consumer electronics have generated demand for portable power supplies. Solar cells satisfy the energy consumption needs owing to their sufficient energy efficiency. When integrating personal electronics into clothing for meeting the requirements of smart wearable electronics, important features such as stretchability, being moistureproof, and maintaining a stable working performance should be exhibited for both comfortable wearing and to power supplies. Owing to limitations in material selection and structural design, it is difficult for solar cells to exhibit high stretchablility. Some stretchable solar cells capable of holding a reversible strain (≤50%) were fabricated on pre-strained elastomer substrates. However, because of limitations in bulk structural design, it is difficult for such solar cells to achieve a high stretchable deformation and robust mechanical durability. Furthermore, the response of the photo-active layer microstructure under an external force can markedly inhibit the photoelectric performance.

To address these issues, fiber- or mesh-based structures have been developed, representing effective ways to produce photovoltaics capable of withstanding stretching. After several times stretching, textiles made from fibrous solar cells maintained the initial power conversion efficiency (PCE). Unfortunately, the solar cell arrays in such structures can be stretched only through external conductive wires, which adds an additional contact resistance. As the number of solar cells in the array increases, the contact resistance will rise linearly, which can seriously affect the transmission of electrons in such a stretchable network. Inspired by traditional Chinese paper-cut art, also called kirigami, holistic and continuous patterns can be formed after stretching accompanied by a high level of stretchability, which has not yet been discovered and utilized in the stretchable solar cells. Therefore, the selection of conductive substrates and kirigami patterns are essential for realizing efficient conversion and transfer of photonic-electrons. Furthermore, the original photovoltaic performance of these fibrous devices was poor (PCE ≤ 8%), which is a major obstacle to their practical applications.
In recent years, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have emerged with a photoelectric conversion efficiency greater than 20%. The photoelectronic properties of perovskite active materials include a wide band gap, long electron hole diffusion length, and high charge carrier mobility. PSCs have the advantages of being solution-processible, low cost, thin, and mechanically flexible, which makes them ideal candidates for being fabricated on whole conductive polymer substrates. Metal oxides are considered to be the best electron transfer layer (ETL) for PSCs with low hysteresis owing to their high crystallinity. Such ETLs must be sintered at a high temperature, which limits their potential use on conductive polymer substrates. Thus, there is a clear motivation to develop low-temperature annealing technologies for ETLs with high crystallinity. Furthermore, the water permeability and moistureproof performance has rarely been reported. One of the major obstacles in simultaneously achieving these three important features is the trade-off between high stretchability, moistureproof ability, and long-term stability in a single system.
Herein, we designed a novel island-chain structure by laser engraving stretchable serpentine interconnects on a whole conductive polymer substrate. Since low-temperature fabricated SnO2-based PSCs are considered rigid devices, such a unique design can avoid the electron conduction drawbacks caused by contact resistance and achieve high output performance (PCE of 17.68%), as well as a large stretch amplitude (stretching ratio of 80%). Furthermore, the PCE of the designed PSCs remains at 87% from the initial value even after stretching for 300 cycles at the largest ratio (80%). The degradation of the PCE was 37% even after being exposed to a harsh environment (80% humidity) for 10 days, exhibiting promising stability. The fabricated devices exhibit excellent stretchability, robust moistureproof abilities and high efficiency stability, ushering them into the potential application as an efficient power source in wearables, electronic textiles and other Internet of Things.

To fabricate the stretchable PSCs, the array structure of the device is particularly important. Inspired by kirigami, we developed a simple island-chain structure to increase the stretchability without changing the applied materials or influencing their properties. Fig. 1a and b show a schematic diagram and photograph of the stretchable PSCs, respectively. The yellow area of Fig. 1b is the gold electrode (top view of the device) from which we can obviously observe that the subcells are arranged in arrays. An additional packaging layer (Eco-flex) is required at both the top and bottom sides of the device to protect the PSCs from damage in practical use. In this structure, PSCs are considered to be rigid devices on an ITO–PET substrate, laser-patterned with serpentine interconnects (Fig. 1c). The island-chain stretchable structure patterned over the whole conductive ITO–PET substrate can eliminate contact points and limitations to stretching, while realizing a fast electron transfer and efficient photoelectric conversion in the island-chain stretchable structure. The specific structural parameters of our design are shown in Fig. S1. The whole serpentine interconnect structure has good electrical conductivity and the slope of the resistance fitting line is 13.52 ohm per unit, which is far lower than that of the welding structure, by avoiding electron conduction problems caused by contact resistance (Fig. 1d). We also designed a variety of stretchable structures, as shown in Fig. S2a–d. All these structures were based on traditional Chinese paper-cuts and they enable stretching. To ensure the stress–strain distribution of the designed PSCs under stretching conditions, the finite element analysis was utilized (Fig. S2e–h). Furthermore, we analyzed the mechanical properties of the stretchable structure (Fig. S3). Fig. S4 shows an optical photograph of the device state during testing. These four structures were distorted during stretching and the photoactive perovskite layer was damaged due to the brittleness of the organic–inorganic crystals. Hence, we experimentally studied the effect of the bending radius on the perovskite layer (Fig. S5) associated with the finite element analysis (Fig. S6), which indicated that as the bending radius decreased, the number of cracks inside the circle increased rapidly. This simulation can accurately reflect the real-world behavior of the PSCs.

Although the above four structures achieved a high tensile strength, it was impossible to prevent the PSCs from being damaged on a stretched unit, which resulted in poor device performance. Therefore, our novel island-chain structure design shows great superiority, which can ensure that the subcells are not affected at the time of stretching. Inspired by the free-jointed bodies of snakes, we developed a serpentine structure composed of multiple rods in series with freely rotatable joints at the end of each rod (Fig. 1e–i). The resulting snake-like line could be extended or compressed, mimicking the crawling motion mode of a snake. The curvature equation is:
(1)
where
l is the length of the curve, α is the initial tangent angle of the curve, and s is the distance of the curve along the x-axis. The articulation components of the serpentine interconnects were connected in serial, as shown in Fig. 1e. The world coordinate system was fixed externally with origin O. The absolute position and altitude are denoted by the start or end point coordinate (x, y, z) and the inner interconnected shape, respectively. To describe the shape, a series of moving coordinates x0y0z0, x1y1z1, …, xnynzn is designated at every module. Variables On+1 and O0 represent the start and endpoints, respectively. The construction of the i-th moving coordinate xiyizi in the i-th module is shown in the lower right corner of Fig. 1e-ii. The variable yi is the pitch joint axis, and zi is the roll joint axis. The origin is designated as the crossing point of yi and zi. The positive direction of zi is determined based on the contraction of the linear joint. Variable xi is determined by the left-hand law of the Cartesian coordinate system. Variables li, γi, and θi denote the i-th translational displacement, roll angle, and pitch angle, respectively. The transformation of two adjacent module coordinates can be calculated as follows:

(2)

Eqn (2) can be used to compute the coordinates of every joint point. Variables li, γi, and θi are parameters for the serpentine interconnects, which are related to gait. From this formula, we find that the i − 1 joint has a rotating torque (Ti−1i) relative to the first joint, which produces a tangential force that affects the conductive layer, which will be discussed later.
The island-chain structure design gives the device matrix stretchable interconnectors, and the PSCs can be regarded as rigid individual units. The ITO–PET substrate has the advantages of being thin and light with good conduction, transparency, and mechanical properties. The island-chain stretchable structure was patterned over the whole conductive ITO–PET substrate to eliminate contact points and hindrance to stretching, while realizing fast electron transfer and efficient photo-electric conversion in the two-dimensional stretchable structure. The application of ITO–PET gives the solar cells excellent photoelectric properties and good stretchability.
For conventional PSCs, the most frequently used ETLs are metal oxides, such as TiO2 and ZnO. Compared with TiO2, SnO2 has a deeper conduction band and higher electron mobility, which can promote charge transfer from the perovskite to the ETLs and reduce charge accumulation at the interface. To meet the temperature tolerance requirements of PET substrates, a low temperature preparation method must be used. In this study, SnO2 nanocrystals with good crystallinity fabricated by hydrothermal methods were utilized as an effective ETL for PSCs. Fig. S7 shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of synthesized SnO2 powders and spin-coated thin films. All peaks were consistent with a tetragonal SnO2 structure (space group P42/mnm, a = 0.4738 nm and c = 0.3187 nm). No peaks of the starting substance or any residual species were found in the XRD pattern, indicating that the synthesis of pure SnO2 crystals was achieved. The surface morphology of the SnO2 thin film, as measured by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and top-view atomic force microscopy (AFM) are shown in Fig. S8(a, b). These results confirmed a uniform, flat, and pinhole-free structure (Fig. S8c). The AFM image (Fig. S8d) distinctly shows the existence of grains with sizes in the range of 20–100 nm, which can also be evidenced by the TEM image, as shown in Fig. S9. Fig. S10 shows an AFM height map of the SnO2 film. The root-mean-square roughness was 12.1 nm. To date, SnO2 nanocrystals synthesized by the hydrothermal method are quite different from ITO (with a particle size of ∼20 nm and a roughness of 3.6 nm), as shown in Fig. S11, which turned out to be synthesized SnO2 crystals rather than ITO. A smooth surface such as this is favorable for the formation of high-quality perovskite films.
A cross-sectional SEM image of the PSC is also shown in Fig. 1f. The SnO2 was bonded well to the ITO film because SnO2 and ITO share the same crystal lattice. The as-formed (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 perovskite film had smooth surfaces, uniform crystalline size, good coverage, and was free of pinholes (Fig. S12); the size of the crystals was approximately 140 nm, and the surface was densely covered (Fig. S12c). A smooth surface with an average roughness of 23 nm was achieved, as shown in the AFM images (Fig. S13). The XRD patterns, absorbance spectra, steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra, Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) survey scans (Fig. S14) showed that the perovskite film was similar to those previously reported. The best photoelectric properties of devices based on SnO2 nanocrystals as the ETL are shown in Fig. 1g. To date, the effective area for the test of our perovskite solar cells is 0.1 cm2. Under a reverse scan (VOC to JSC), it showed the following: open-circuit voltage (VOC), 1.096 V; short-circuit current (JSC), 22.41 mA cm−2; fill factor (FF), 71.97%; and a PCE, 17.68%. The different scan directions exhibited nearly the same properties other than a small difference in the fill factor. We attribute the good performance to the defect-free crystals and matching of the band gap. The representative external quantum efficiency of the device is shown in Fig. S15. As shown in Fig. S16, a stable PCE of 17.5% was obtained near the maximum power point (voltage of 1.09 V). The good stable performance of SnO2-based PSCs mainly contributes to the deeper conduction band and high mobility of SnO2, which promotes charge transfer from the perovskite to the electron transport layer, indicating a reduced energy barrier, as shown in the energy diagram of the device structure in Fig. S17.
When exposed to air, perovskite films are eroded by oxygen and moisture, reducing the performance of the PSCs. To improve the moisture resistance of PSCs under moist conditions, we used a thin coating of Eco-flex (0.5 mm). The film was cured and island-chain arrays were embedded within it to provide protection from external damage to the PSCs and limit degradation of the perovskite film. The transmittance of Eco-flex is greater than 99% (Fig. 2a); it is almost impossible to distinguish the presence of the film with the naked eye (as shown in the inserted graph in Fig. 2a, a film covers the right side of the colored printing paper). The Eco-flex film matches the absorption curve of the PSC well and has almost no effect on the visible light absorption of PSCs. Hence, the efficiency of the PSCs changed little when coated by the Eco-flex film (Fig. S18). After covering with Eco-flex film, we observed a slightly decreased VOC and JSC but an increased FF of the device. The slightly increased FF can be attributed to the improved perovskite layer after encapsulation (i.e. isolating moisture and air). The Eco-flex encapsulation layer can block some visible light, resulting in less light absorbed by the perovskite layer and lower electrical performance. In fact, the change between the two (before and after covering with the Eco-flex film) is small, so the encapsulation process has little effect on the electrical output performance. This protective film allowed the PSCs to be cleaned under running tap water, as shown in the background image of Fig. 2b and ESI Movie 1. We tested the output performance of the PSCs covered with Eco-flex film after soaking in water for different periods of time. As shown in Fig. 2b and Table S1, the solar cells remained effective following 60 s of immersion and there was little effect on the output performance for the first 30 s. Thus, we confirmed the effectiveness of a silane-based waterproof coating on the PSC surface. Eco-flex is a type of silicone rubber with good moistureproofing owing to its silicon-oxygen base (Fig. 2c). We measured the corresponding contact angle of the Eco-flex layer to be 117.5°. This angle reflects the material's high hydrophobicity, which allows Eco-flex to effectively moistureproof surfaces. However, Eco-flex is composed of polymer chains, and there are some gaps between the segments. Hence, although it can prevent the approach of liquid water, it cannot prevent water vapor from passing through the polymer film over a long time. In this point, the permanence in water is still a challenge for the devices encapsulated with polysilicone. A more efficient and stretchable barrier material should be developed in future research. Fig. 2d shows the stability results of the devices in an extreme atmosphere (80% humidity). The PCEs of PSCs without the Eco-flex layer decreased markedly under air over 4 days. Nevertheless, the PSC coated with Eco-flex was more stable than the uncoated one (Fig. 2d), indicating that it gained an improved moistureproof ability. In terms of long-term performance, some defects, such as oxygen vacancies in the surface of nanocrystal SnO2 film resulting from the solution processing, might accelerate decomposition of the perovskite film and attenuate the stability of the solar cells. The encapsulated PSCs can operate effectively in a high moisture environment; hence, we expect that they might be applied to the moving human body. People sweat, which contributes to a highly moist environment; encapsulated solar cells could still potentially provide electricity for portable appliances, such as Bluetooth headphones. To verify the practicality of this device, we fixed it to the surface of the shoulder part of some clothing (Fig. 2e). Sweat glands are dense in this area and resulted in higher humidity. Fig. 2e(i) shows the solar cells on dry clothes before exercise, and Fig. 2e(ii) shows the PSCs on clothes wetted by large amounts of sweat after exercise. We selected eight devices each for the test of photoelectric characteristics on cloth before/after exercise (Fig. 2f). The average PCE of PSCs on dry cloth before exercise was 17.37%, whereas the average PCE of PSCs on wet cloth after exercise was similar at 16.98%. We also found that the maximum PCE values before and after were almost unchanged; however, the distribution of PCE became more disperse after exercise. The JSC and FF showed the same trend as the PCE, whereas the VOC was almost unchanged, as shown in Fig. S19. This wider distribution of the photoelectronic performance can be attributed to the uneven distribution of sweat. As shown in Fig. 2e(ii), some areas remained dry because of less sweating, and the humidity in those areas was also lower, which has less effect on the solar cells. In other areas, there was more sweat, and the sweat was in direct contact with the Eco-flex film. Owing to the siphoning effect of polymer pores (as discussed in Fig. 2c), some damage occurred to the PSCs; however, because of the extremely small amount of sweat, the damage was limited.
As shown in Fig. 3a, the structure of the designed PSC without encapsulation could be stretched up to 1.5 times its original size. Moreover, the Eco-flex is capable of stretching at least 6.5 times its initial size. Hence, this material matches well with the PSCs to ensure good stretchability. In the stretching process, the electrical conductivity of the serpentine interconnects affects the output performance of the whole device. The surface tangential force produced by stretching has an important effect on the adhesion of the conductive ITO. Therefore, we analyzed the surface tangential force of the serpentine interconnects during the stretching process. We regarded the serpentine connections as a series rod system, composed of countless elements. As shown in Fig. 3b, when external forces were applied at both ends of the serpentine connection, an interaction force occurred between the two adjacent joints, which produced torque Ti on the joint, which can be defined as:
(3)
where
δs is considered to be an infinitesimal connecting rod element. The tangential direction of joint Ji along the main line is defined as the direction of the continuous curve, and the angle at which the extension line intersects is θi. The tangential force generated by joint Ji can be represented by the following expression through the analysis of Fig. 3b.

(4)
When the length of the connecting rod is infinitely small, the connecting rod system can be considered to be a continuous curve, and the relationship is as follows:
(5)
(6)
where
ρ is proportional to the curvature of the connecting rod (i), and the average tangential force on the joint Ji(7) can be obtained by putting (3), (5) and (6) into formula (4).

(7)
When δs approximates 0 infinitely, we obtain the tangential force density function:
(8)
Formula (8) indicates that the tangential force is proportional to the increase of the curvature of the spindle. When the interconnect is stretched, the bent part becomes distorted and the radius of curvature will change, such that the tangential force is also large. The finite element model shows that even when the stretching strain reaches 80%, the maximum red stress at the corner of the structure is minimal; however, when the tension exceeds 140%, the red region becomes longer. The maximum stretch value of this structure is 150%, and the snake-like line becomes a straight line as illustrated in Fig. 3c, which might seriously damage the conductive layer.
Because the PSCs are rigid devices in the current island-chain structure design, there is little effect on the performance during stretching. Thus, the electrical conductivity of the chain (interconnects) is significant in the stretching process. Over more than 100 cycles of 0%–80% strain, the interconnects can stretch reversibly with no effective change of Rs. The conductivity of the electrode decreases as the strain ratio increases: 54.2 ohm per sq at 110% strain and 208.1 ohm per sq at 140% (Fig. 3d). Visible cracks appear at 110% strain, and above this strain, the film becomes irreversibly stretched (Fig. S20). The Eco-flex silicone rubber prevents broken ITO from falling off the PET. When the stretched unit returns to its initial position, the ITO fragments remain in contact with each other, with a specific conductivity. We also tested the electrical conductivity of the interconnects during repeated stretching processes. The sheet resistance remained remarkably stable under a strain of 80% even after 500 stretch-recovery cycles (Fig. 3e).
To further study the effects of the strain ratio on the properties of PSCs during stretching processes, we fabricated solar cell devices, which adapted to multiple stretching cycles. Optical photos acquired after assembly into integrated devices are shown in Fig. 4a. When external stress was applied along the orthogonal directions, the serpentine bridges can release the applied strain reliably to facilitate stretching (Fig. 4b) and twisting (Fig. 4c) of the designed PSCs, as demonstrated in ESI Movie 2. The PCE showed almost no decrease even at an 80%-stretching ratio, retaining 94% of its initial PCE value (Fig. 4d). The key J–V parameters are summarized in the ESI (Table S2). These results indicate that the interconnected electrodes were highly stretchable and conductive. When the stretching ratio exceeded 80%, the efficiency of the PSCs drops rapidly. The deterioration in the performance of the device can be explained by the sharp increase of the sheet resistance of the serpentine interconnect electrode owing to the fracture of the ITO polycrystalline structure, as mentioned above. We also investigated the effects of mechanical stretching on the performance of the PSCs through multiple cycles of stretching tests. A total of 300 stretching cycles at a ratio of 80% were conducted. As shown in Fig. 4e, the designed stretching devices exhibited excellent mechanical stretching stability. The PCE remained stable even after 300 cycles of stretching, retaining 87% of the original PCE value. In the field of flexible solar cells, such high stretching durability is competitive with state-of-the-art devices and our device also maintained a high efficiency. In a practical application, three parallel PSCs with a maximum output voltage of up to 1 V and a current of up to 5 mA were used to drive a light-emitting diode (LED) (Fig. 4f and ESI Video S3). The LED maintained excellent functionality even when the solar cells were stretched, which suggested that the proposed design meets the requirements of commercial stretchable electronics.
As textile-compatible power sources, the successfully designed stretchable and moisture-resistant photovoltaics add power-generation functionality to clothing, opening a new avenue for applications as long-term power sources for wearable electronics. In practical applications, we still need to consider more challenges, such as research on lead-free solar cells with more awareness for the environment, fabricating large scale perovskite solar cell arrays, stretchable waterproof coatings with long-time stability and so on. We have only taken a small step in the field of stretchable perovskite solar cells. We look forward to more insightful researchers dedicated to breaking more key technical bottlenecks that have held back the development of perovskite solar cells in wearable electronics.

In summary, highly stretchable and moistureproof PSCs with stabilized output performance were demonstrated herein with a designed island-chain structure combined with serpentine interconnects. The structure showed superior electrical conductivity and mechanical stability during stretching. Additionally, low-temperature hydrothermally synthesized SnO2 provides an excellent ETL for high-performance PSCs (PCE of 17.68%). The overall performances showed almost no reduction even after 300 cycles of stretching, retaining 87% of the initial PCE value at a large stretching ratio of 80%. The double-side-coated PSCs also showed superior moisture stability, which enabled the PSC moistureproofing with a maintained high efficiency in harsh environments (80% humidity) for 10 days. The simultaneous stretchability and moistureproof ability enabled the PSCs to maintain stability with a high efficiency. With these excellent performances, the designed highly stretchable and moistureproof PSCs can be a practical alternative power supply for modern popular wearable electronics.


All materials were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich and used without any purification, except in the following cases: CH3NH3Br (MABr), CH(NH2)2I (FAI), and Spiro-OMETAD (purity ≥99.5%) were received from Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp. Indium tin oxide (ITO) coated PET (14 Ω sq−1) was obtained from Nippon Sheet Glass Co., Ltd. All solutions were filtered with a 0.45 μm PTFE filter prior to use.


The solution was prepared by dissolving SnCl4·5H2O (0.05 M, 17.78 g) in deionized water (200 mL). The sol–gel hydrolysis was performed by addition of aqueous ammonium hydroxide (35 g in 200 mL) to the above-obtained solution followed by slow heating to 70 °C and an strong ultrasonic treatment for 30 min. After completion of the reaction, the solution was cooled down and washed centrifugally until the pH became neutral. The obtained white transparent precipitate was then added to a hydrogen peroxide solution (1.00 M, 200 mL) and allowed to stand for 12 h. After the last step, the solution was transferred to a Teflon-lined stainless-steel autoclave and stored at 150 °C for 5 h. The products were collected by centrifugation at 10000 rpm followed by washing with deionized water several times. Hydrothermal SnO2 nanocrystals were obtained after vacuum drying at room temperature. By dispersing the SnO2 nanocrystals in isopropyl alcohol at 15 mg mL−1 and stirring overnight, a solution of SnO2 nanocrystals was obtained.


To prepare SnO2 nanocrystal films, the diluted SnO2 nanocrystal solution was spin-coated on ITO–PET substrate at 3000 rpm in the presence of air, followed by annealing at 120 °C for 30 min. When the sample was cooled to room temperature, it was treated with an oxygen plasma for 15 min before depositing the perovskite. The (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 perovskite precursor solution was prepared by dissolving PbI2 (1.1 M, 507 mg), PbBr2 (0.2 M, 73.4 mg), FAI (1.0 M, 172 mg), and MABr (0.2 M, 22.4 mg) in 1 mL anhydrous DMF/DMSO = 4:1 (v/v). The solution was stirred at room temperature for 12 h. Then, the ITO/ETL substrate was spin-coated with a precursor solution by a continuous two-step process at 1000 and 3000 rpm for 10 and 30 s, respectively. During the second step, 200 μL of chlorobenzene was added rapidly onto the substrate before completion of spinning. The substrate was then annealed at 120 °C for 20 min in a glovebox filled with nitrogen. The color of the film changed from orange to dark brown during this process. The spiro-OMeTAD (90 mg mL−1 in 1 mL chlorobenzene) was added with t-BP (36 μL), and Li-TFSI solution (520 mg in 1 mL acetonitrile, 22 μL) and then spin-coated at 2500 rpm on the perovskite layer for 30 s. The samples were maintained in a desiccator for 12 h. Finally an Au back contact was deposited by thermal evaporation at a pressure of 4 × 10−5 Pa.


After fabrication of the PSCs, the devices were transferred to the laser engraving machine. A JQ1290 laser machine ensured stability and accurate cutting at high speed. Moreover, the laser engraving machine was equipped with a liquid cooling system, which rapidly lowered the temperature of the engraved material (≤45 °C) and reduced deformation and internal stress of the engraved object. In this study, the laser energy was set to be 30% and the cutting speeding was 800 mm min−1. After engraving, the obtained stretchable solar cell was sandwiched in the middle of a silicone substrate (Eco-flex, Smooth On) for protection. The thin silicone substrate was prepared by adding two reagents in a 1:1 weight ratio and then spin-casting (300 rpm for 30 s) the above material in a Petri dish twice. The silicone substrate was partially cured at room temperature for 30 min.


Component analysis was conducted by using an X-ray diffractometer (Bruker D2 Phaser). The morphology of the obtained perovskite film was observed with a field-emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, Model S-8010, Hitachi, Japan). Surface topography, height profiles and average surface roughness (Ra) were measured with the use of an AFM (Park System, NX10) operating in noncontact mode. The photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves of the PSCs were measured by a Keithley model 2400 source measure unit. A solar simulator (Model 96160 Newport Co., USA) fitted with a 300 W Xenon lamp was used as the light source. An NREL calibrated Si solar cell with KG-1 filter was used to adjust the light intensity to be one sun light intensity or approximately AM 1.5G. The stability test in water was tested by measuring J–V curves immediately after removing the subcell from a beaker filled with water of 100 mL and quickly blow-dried with a purge air gun. The devices used for the stability test in a moist atmosphere were stored in self-made sealed glass cubes, the humidity of the environment was controlled by a humidifier, and the test was taken out regularly. The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectrum was measured over wavelengths from 350 to 800 nm with an IPCE system (Newport Co., USA). The sheet resistance was measured using a portal four-point probe system (MCP-T360, Mitsubishi Chemical, Japan). The transmittance spectra of the as-prepared stretchable films (Eco-flex) was measured with a UV-vis spectrophotometer (Lambda 950, PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA, USA). The mechanical properties were measured with an Instron universal material testing system (INSTRON 5969, Instron Corporation, USA).


The authors declare no conflict of interest.


We gratefully acknowledge the financial support by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2232019A3-02), Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51572046, 51590902), Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (16JC1400700), and Innovation Program of Shanghai Municipal Education Commission (2017-01-07-00-03-E00055). Dr C. Hou gives thanks for support from the Shanghai Natural Science Foundation (16ZR1401500), the Shanghai Sailing Program (16YF1400400), and Young Elite Scientists Sponsorship Program by CAST (2017QNRC001). Mr J. Qi gives thanks for supports from the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities and Graduate Student Innovation Fund of Donghua University (CUSF-DH-D-2018002 and BCZD2019001).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9nr10691j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020