 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA09740A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4365-4373


Liguo
Gao
*,

Likun
Wang
,

Xiaogang
Ding
,

Erling
Zhao
,

Shuzhang
Yang
,

Yingyuan
Zhao
,

Yanqiang
Li
,

Shufeng
Wang
 and 

Tingli
Ma
*

State Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals, School of Petroleum and Chemical Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, Panjin, 124221, China. E-mail: liguo.gao@dlut.edu.cn; Tel: +86-427-2631810

Department of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China

Graduate School of Life Science and Systems Engineering, Kyushu Institute of Technology, 2–4 Hibikino, Wakamatsu, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka 808–0196, Japan

Received
6th November 2017
, Accepted 31st January 2018
First published on 2nd February 2018
The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) can be improved by introducing appropriate additives into perovskite precursor solutions. However, the exact role and mechanism of additives are still unclear. In this study, self-designed cognition experiments were conducted to improve the hole extraction efficiency, as well as to deeply understand the working principle of additives. A common hole transport material, 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl) amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD), was used as an additive for bulk heterojunction PSCs (BHJ-PSCs). The results showed that the PCE of mesoporous BHJ-PSCs (M-BHJ-PSCs) was enhanced by more than 15% when an extremely low concentration of spiro-OMeTAD additive was added. However, the crystallization of the perovskite was hampered and the recombination risk increased when grain boundaries increased in the perovskite layer. Planar BHJ-PSCs were fabricated to further investigate the role of additives. In comparison with those in planar BHJ-PSCs, the hole extraction efficiency and diffusion length significantly improved in M-BHJ-PSCs due to the transport paths and relay effects caused by the spiro-OMeTAD additive. Subsequently, exact functions and a new working principle of additives in BHJ-PSCs were proposed. This study may extend the possibilities of designing highly efficient PSCs through the promotion of additive research and application.

Organic and inorganic lead halide PSCs have shown remarkable development and prospective application due to their unique advantages, such as high absorption coefficients, excellent carrier transport, low cost, tunable compositions, and excellent structures, thereby allowing easy fabrication by various processes. Recent studies showed that the PCE of PSCs could reach 22.1%. Several techniques, such as spin coating, blade coating, slot-die coating, spray deposition, inkjet printing, electrodeposition, and anti-solvent extraction, could be used to fabricate PSC devices. These techniques could provide PSCs with mesoporous, planar heterojunction, and hole-free device architectures.

In fabricating high-performance PSC devices, excellent perovskite layers are indispensable; otherwise, poor layer quality can cause electric short circuits or deter charge separation and transportation. The quality of perovskite layers mainly depends on growth kinetics and interfacial energy, which can be optimized by changing solvents, annealing temperatures, precursor compositions, and fabrication procedures. Incorporating additives into perovskite precursors can efficiently achieve optimal perovskite layers. Several compounds such as 1,8-diiodooctane, NH4Cl, alkali metal halides, and lead thiocyanate (Pb(SCN)2) have been selected as additives to temporarily chelate with Pb2+ and enhance the solubility of inorganic components in perovskite precursor solutions. These additives can slow down crystal growth and induce homogeneous nucleation, thereby improving the quality of perovskite layers.
A few compounds were adopted as additives in BHJ-PSCs to facilitate electron and hole extraction efficiency, which increase the short-circuit current (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), and fill factor (FF). BHJ-PSC devices could efficiently work in conventional and inverted architectures, and they could solve problems of unbalanced diffusion lengths of electrons and holes within perovskite films. Wu et al. demonstrated for the first time the bulk heterojunction concept, which was applied successfully in PSCs to improve FF. The additive, [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM), improved the perovskite layer quality, including the mobility and diffusion length of carriers. Gong et al. fabricated BHJ-PSCs by mixing perovskite materials with water/alcohol soluble fullerene derivatives. As a result of the balance in carrier extraction, a 22% increase in PCE and a high FF at 86.7% were observed. Han et al. used a fullerene as an additive of the perovskite to fabricate perovskite-fullerene-graded BHJ-PSCs, and to enhance photoelectron collection and reduce recombination loss. PSCs with 18.21% PCE and an area of 1.022 cm2 were proposed for the said structure. Liu et al. introduced CuSCN (a hole-transporting additive) into a perovskite precursor solution. The perovskite/CuSCN bulk heterojunction passivated hole trap states, balanced electron and hole transfer, eliminated charge accumulation, and reduced charge carrier recombination. PSCs with 18.1% PCE and nearly zero J–V hysteresis were obtained. Peng et al. introduced the CuPc(tBu)4 additive into the perovskite precursor solution of planar PSCs to improve the quality of the perovskite layer with relatively high crystallization and surface coverage. An increase of 2% PCE was achieved when extremely low concentrations of CuPc(tBu)4 were added. However, although past studies showed that additives could improve the PCE of PSCs, the working principles behind device structures are still unclear. Thus, further studies are necessitated to fully understand the mechanism of additives.
Previous publications showed that additives could slow down crystal growth and induce homogeneous nucleation, which in turn could improve the quality of perovskite layers and PCE enhancement. In this study, a self-designed experiment was conducted to investigate the functions of additives and deeply understand the mechanism of BHJ-PSCs, where the crystallization of the perovskite layer was hampered and the recombination risk increased. Studies showed that the spiro-OMeTAD additive could play different roles in improving hole extraction in mesoporous and planar BHJ-PSCs, resulting in variations in PCE enhancements. Positive roles, transport paths and relay effects allowed for the transport of holes over long distances, and these led to highly efficient hole extraction. Negative roles and poor quality of the perovskite layer caused by additives resulted in a comparatively high accumulation and recombination risk of charge carriers in hole trap states. Additives could facilitate hole extraction and reduce charge recombination in M-BHJ-PSCs; an inverse process was considered when highly similar spiro-OMeTAD additive concentrations were induced in planar BHJ-PSCs. We deeply explore the working principle of additives in BHJ-PSCs by comparing their functions in both M-BHJ-PSCs and planar BHJ-PSCs. Consequently, balancing the hole extraction efficiency and recombination risk capabilities resulted in a 15% PCE enhancement in M-BHJ-PSCs.

All of the chemicals and materials were purchased and used as received unless otherwise noted. The fluorine doped tin oxide glass (FTO) was purchased from OPV Tech Co., Ltd. Lead iodide (PbI2) and methylamine iodine (MAI) were purchased from Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp. (PLT), and spiro-OMeTAD was purchased from Alfa. Ag (99.9%) was obtained from Aladdin. All liquid reagents such as dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) and chlorobenzene (CB) were purchased from J & K Chemical Technology. The remaining reagents and materials related to perovskite solar cells were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.


In the fabrication of the devices, fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) was initially removed from regions under the anode contact by etching the surface with 2 M HCl and zinc powder. Then the substrate was cleaned with detergent/deionized water, acetone, and isopropanol. For the fabrication of electron selective layers (ESLs), a dense TiO2 (Den-TiO2) layer was spin-coated onto the pre-patterned FTO glass substrates at 3000 rpm for 30 s, with annealing at 450 °C for 30 min. Subsequently, the mesoporous TiO2 (Mp-TiO2) was deposited by spin-coating at 5000 rpm for 30 s, and annealed at 500 °C for 15 min. Then the perovskite layer was deposited, which would be induced later. Spiro-OMeTAD was introduced as a hole transport material (HTM) by spin-coating at 3500 rpm for 30 s. The solution of the HTM was prepared by adding 72.3 mg spiro-OMeTAD, 28.8 μL 4-tert-butylpyridine (tBP), 17.5 μL of a stock solution of 520 mg mL−1 lithium bis-(trifluoromethyl sulphonyl) imide (Li-TFSI), and 20.0 μL of a stock solution of 300 mg mL−1 tris(1-(pyridin-2-yl)-1H-pyrazol) cobalt(III) tris(hexafluorophosphate) (FK102) in acetonitrile to 1 mL chlorobenzene. Finally, a 100 nm Ag electrode was deposited by thermal evaporation at 5 × 10−4 Pa on top of the device to form the back contact. The active area of these solar cells was 0.06 cm2 which was defined by a mask during the measurement. The perovskite film was sensitive to humidity, and thus, all procedures were performed under a N2 atmosphere.

For MAPbI3 layer fabrication in M-PSCs, 462 mg mL−1 PbI2N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) was spin-coated onto the FTO/Den-TiO2/Mp-TiO2 substrate at 3000 rpm for 30 s. Furthermore, MAI dissolved in isopropanol was spin-coated onto the dried PbI2 layer at 5000 rpm for 30 s, and annealed at 125 °C for 20 min.
For MAPbI3 with spiro-OMeTAD additive fabrication in M-BHJ-PSCs: 462 mg PbI2 was added into different spiro-OMeTAD/DMF solutions to form PbI2/spiro-OMeTAD with different mass ratios. Then, 80 μL of the above solution was spin-coated onto the FTO/Den-TiO2/Mp-TiO2 substrate at 3000 rpm for 30 s. Furthermore, MAI dissolved in isopropanol was spin-coated onto the dried PbI2 layer at 5000 rpm for 30 s, and annealed at 125 °C for 20 min.
For perovskite (MAPbI3−xClx) layer fabrication in planar PSCs: MAI and PbCl2 were diluted in anhydrous DMF at a 3:1 molar ratio of MAI to PbCl2 with a final concentration of ∼40 wt%. Then, the mixture was spin-coated on the FTO/Den-TiO2 substrate at 2000 rpm for 30 s, with annealing at 85 °C for 1 h and 100 °C for 25 min.
For MAPbI3−xClx with spiro-OMeTAD additive fabrication in planar BHJ-PSCs: MAI and PbCl2 were diluted in anhydrous DMF at a 3:1 molar ratio for a final concentration of ∼40 wt%. Then, different mass ratios of spiro-OMeTAD/DMF additive were added into the precursor solution. The mixture was spin-coated on the FTO/Den-TiO2 substrate at 2000 rpm for 30 s, with annealing at 85 °C for 1 h and 100 °C for 25 min.

A digital source meter Keithley 2460 (Keithley, USA) was used to measure the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of PSCs under simulated AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2, PEC-L15, Peccell, Japan). All the devices were measured with a 100 ms delay after a 10 mV voltage step, which is approximately equal to a scan rate of 0.1 V s−1. A black mask (0.06 cm2) was used on top of the device to control the active light irradiation area of light irradiation. The incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) was characterized from 365 nm to 1020 nm using a computer-controlled electrochemical workstation (Zen-nium Zahner, Germany). The top view and cross-section of the layers were investigated through field-emission scanning electron microscopy (Nova Nano SEM 450, FEI, USA). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were conducted on a computer-controlled electrochemical workstation (Zen-nium Zahner, Germany) under dark conditions. The measured frequencies ranged from 10 mHz to 4 MHz with 0.6 V bias voltage. The amplitude was 20 mV. TRPL spectra were taken with a Hitachi F-4500 fluorescence spectrometer. PL measurements were performed using an optically triggered streak camera system (C5410, Hamamatsu). All the samples were photoexcited using a 517 nm laser with a repetition rate of 76 MHz (Mira900, Coherent). Each of the samples was tested 3–5 times, and the average data were obtained.


Various amounts of spiro-OMeTAD additive (0.01–0.1% by weight of spiro-OMeTAD additive to PbI2) were added into perovskite precursor solutions during fabrication. Table 1 summarizes the photovoltaic performances of M-BHJ-PSCs with different ratios of spiro-OMeTAD additive. Introducing an extremely low (0.01 wt%) spiro-OMeTAD additive concentration into the precursor solution improved the conversion efficiencies of M-BHJ-PSCs. However, the PCE of M-BHJ-PSCs decreased when the additive ratio increased by more than 0.01 wt%.

Spiro-OMeTAD additive

V
oc [V]

J
sc [mA cm−2]
FF
PCE [%]

a Data summarized in table are the average values of the fabricated 50 PSCs.

0 wt%
Average
1.00 ± 0.03
19.57 ± 1.36
0.72 ± 0.03
14.12 ± 0.74
Champion
1.02
21.00
0.73
15.52
0.01 wt%
Average
1.04 ± 0.020
20.98 ± 1.07
0.74 ± 0.03
16.18 ± 0.75
Champion
1.06
22.71
0.74
17.77
0.03 wt%
Average
1.00 ± 0.03
19.97 ± 1.20
0.72 ± 0.03
14.43 ± 0.94
Champion
1.03
20.50
0.75
15.75
0.05 wt%
Average
0.99 ± 0.03
19.33 ± 1.18
0.71 ± 0.03
13.64 ± 0.86
Champion
1.02
19.93
0.74
15.12
0.1 wt%
Average
0.98 ± 0.04
17.78 ± 1.33
0.71 ± 0.02
12.38 ± 0.61
Champion
1.02
18.34
0.71
13.34
Mesoporous PSCs (M-PSCs) without the spiro-OMeTAD additive exhibited a PCE of 15.5% with a Voc of 1.02 V, a Jsc of 21.00 mA cm−2, and a FF of 0.73. The M-BHJ-PSCs with low ratio additive (0.01 wt% spiro-OMeTAD) enhanced PCE by 2.3% with a Voc of 1.06 V, a Jsc of 22.7 mA cm−2, and a FF of 0.74, after which the optimal PCE of 17.8% was obtained (Fig. 1a). The J–V curves of M-BHJ-PSCs and M-PSCs were measured and simulated under AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) illumination and dark in reverse voltage scanning mode. The M-BHJ-PSCs exhibited a less-darker current image than the M-PSCs, which implies that current leakage was suppressed by the spiro-OMeTAD additive (see ESI Fig. S1). The increase in the PCE value can be validated by IPCE curves of the fabricated M-PSCs and M-BHJ-PSCs, as shown in Fig. 1b. Both IPCE curves showed a strong spectral response in the range of 450–750 nm, which was consistent with PSCs with overall IPCE values of ∼80%. Compared with those of M-PSCs without the spiro-OMeTAD additive, the IPCE results of M-BHJ-PSCs achieved efficient photo-to-electricity conversion because of the enhanced light absorption caused by fast-charging carrier separation. The corresponding steady-state efficiencies of M-PSCs and M-BHJ-PSCs with 0.01 wt% spiro-OMeTAD additive are shown in Fig. S2, which demonstrates that M-BHJ-PSCs are as stable as M-PSCs.
The spiro-OMeTAD additive concentration in the MAPbI3 composite was studied to investigate the contribution of the additive in M-BHJ-PSCs. Fig. 2 shows the Jsc, Voc, FF, and PCE values plotted against the ratios of spiro-OMeTAD to MAPbI3. When the ratio of spiro-OMeTAD additive to MAPbI3 increased by more than 0.01 wt%, the values of Voc, Jsc, FF, and PCE of M-BHJ-PSCs decreased. When the ratio of spiro-OMeTAD additive to MAPbI3 increased from 0.01 wt% to 0.1 wt%, Voc decreased from 1.04 V to 0.98 V, Jsc decreased from 20.98 to 17.78, and FF decreased from 0.74 to 0.71. Consequently, the PCE initially decreased from 16.18 to 12.38.
Morphology, carrier transport, device characterization, and photoelectric properties were also investigated in detail to explore the exact roles of the spiro-OMeTAD additive in the perovskite layer. Schematic and field-emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images (Fig. 3) were obtained to illustrate the carrier transport and surface morphology of the perovskite layer after the spiro-OMeTAD additive was introduced. As shown in Fig. 3a–d, the difference in the morphology of the perovskite layer in M-PSCs and M-BHJ-PSCs cannot be easily observed due to the low additive ratio (0.01 wt%). However, when the ratio of spiro-OMeTAD additive to MAPbI3 increased by more than 0.01 wt%, the surface morphology and coverage of the perovskite layer changed, which could be seen from X-ray diffraction (XRD) results shown in Fig. S3 and Table 2 in the ESI. To further illustrate the phenomenon, the ratio of the spiro-OMeTAD additive was increased by 10 wt% (Fig. 3e and f). The aggregated extra spiro-OMeTAD additive was on the surface of the perovskite layer as shown in Fig. 3e, and these aggregates are encircled by red lines in the SEM profile in Fig. 3f. The extra additive decreased the grain sizes of the perovskite layer, which implies that the spiro-OMeTAD additive could deter perovskite layer formation during M-BHJ-PSC fabrication even with the use of extremely low concentrations.
Without the spiro-OMeTAD additive, the electrons in M-PSCs could quickly transfer from the perovskite layer to the Mp-TiO2 because of the excellent electron collection capability of Mp-TiO2. However, the generation of holes by the perovskite near or within the Mp-TiO2 layer was relatively slow given that the electron–hole diffusion length was approximately 100 nm in the MAPbI3-processed solution whereas the capping perovskite layer in the M-PSCs was approximately 300 nm. The charge–carrier mobility of the Mp-TiO2-deposited perovskite could be attributed predominantly to holes. Holes could accumulate as a result of the transport distance and grain boundaries of the perovskite layer in the Mp-TiO2; thereafter, charge carrier recombination could increase in hole trap states between the interfaces of perovskite particles and Mp-TiO2. In addition, decreasing the grain sizes of the perovskite layer could further decrease charge recombination and photovoltaic performance. However, the PCE of the M-BHJ-PSCs was enhanced by more than 15% when extremely low spiro-OMeTAD additive concentration was introduced, although the crystallization of the perovskite was hampered and the recombination risk was enhanced due to the increase in grain boundaries in the perovskite layer. In other words, the hole extraction efficiency increased. The additive plays three roles, as shown by the schematic in Fig. 3g. First, the aggregates of the spiro-OMeTAD additive in the gaps of the perovskite layer acted as cables to accelerate hole extraction in Mp-TiO2. These transport paths allowed for the transport of holes over long distances via path 1. Second, the spiro-OMeTAD additive played a relay role for the holes generated near Mp-TiO2, that is, the additive was extracted for the HTM via path 2. Finally, owing to the decreased grain sizes of the perovskite layer caused by the additive, the accumulation and recombination risk capabilities of the charge carriers in hole trap states increased via path 3. Balancing the hole extraction efficiency and recombination risk of the additive enhanced PCE by 15% in M-BHJ-PSCs. As the ratio of the additive increased by more than 0.01 wt%, the PCE of M-BHJ-PSCs decreased from 17.8 to 13.3. This is attributed to the poor quality of the perovskite layer caused by the spiro-OMeTAD additive.
To prove the probable working mechanism and gain insight into the photophysics of perovskite layers with and without the spiro-OMeTAD additive, photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved PL (TRPL) spectra were obtained (Fig. 4). Samples were prepared in half-PSC devices with electron-transporting materials. As shown in Fig. 4a, the PL intensity of the perovskite layer with 0.01 wt% spiro-OMeTAD additive is lower than that of the pure perovskite layer, thus demonstrating the suppression of non-radioactive carrier recombination in the perovskite with 0.01 wt% spiro-OMeTAD additive. The phenomenon could be explained by the positive roles of the spiro-OMeTAD additive via paths 1 and 2, which resulted in an accelerated hole extraction and decreased recombination rate of carriers in hole trap states. In addition, TRPL spectroscopy (Fig. 4b) was conducted to investigate the effects of the spiro-OMeTAD additive on photo-conversion. The pristine perovskite layer without the spiro-OMeTAD additive achieved relatively low PL decay because of photo-excited charge trapping in hole trap states between the interfaces of perovskite particles and Mp-TiO2. However, lower PL lifetime was obtained in M-BHJ-PSCs with 0.01 wt% Spiro-OMeTAD additive, which proved that the carriers were fast-transported when an extremely low concentration of Spiro-OMeTAD additive was introduced. This phenomenon is beneficial in reducing the recombination of charge carriers in hole traps. The spiro-OMeTAD additive in the perovskite layer effectively facilitated hole transfer from the perovskite layer to a location in-between or near Mp-TiO2. Consequently, electron and hole transfer reached a balanced state, charge accumulation was eliminated, and the recombination of charge carriers was reduced, which in turn improved the device performance.
The Nyquist plot was deployed to further explore the electrical characteristics of PSCs with and without the spiro-OMeTAD additive. The plot was measured under dark conditions at 0.46 V bias voltage and in the frequency range of 100 mHz to 1 MHz. The Nyquist plot of PSCs is composed of two irregular arcs, namely, a small arc in the high frequency range and a large arc in the low frequency range, as shown in Fig. 5. The value of the starting point at the real part of the Nyquist plot is denoted by series resistance. Series resistance is related to the resistance of external wires and substrates, among others. In this study, M-PSCs and M-BHJ-PSCs were given the same series resistance, the value of which was consistent with experimental results (Fig. 5a). The first arc was related to the charge transport in the cell, such as contributions of the electrode/perovskite interface, perovskite layer, and perovskite/counter electrode interface (Fig. 5b). The arc for the Nyquist plots of M-BHJ-PSCs with 0.01 wt% spiro-OMeTAD additive was smaller than that of M-PSCs without the spiro-OMeTAD additive. The charge transfer resistance of BHJ-PSCs with 0.01 wt% spiro-OMeTAD additive was the lowest. The decrease in charge transfer resistance contributed to the high Jsc value of BHJ-PSCs (Fig. 2b). The 0.01 wt% spiro-OMeTAD additive contributed to the decrease in resistance values. Therefore, charge extraction and transfer were efficient at the Mp-TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-MeOTAD interfaces, and these were consistent with the above PL and TRPL analyses. Charge transfer resistance increased when the ratio of spiro-OMeTAD additive to MAPbI3 increased from 0.01 wt% to 0.1 wt%, which implies that the extra additive could decrease charge transfer mobility. This occurrence was related to the extra spiro-OMeTAD additive that caused perovskite grain sizes to decrease, which in turn increased the grain boundaries and hole traps in between Mp-TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-MeOTAD interfaces. Subsequently, charge transfer resistance increased and charge recombination resistance decreased (Fig. 5c). Recombination resistance was inversely proportional to the charge recombination rate. As shown in Fig. 2, the comparatively high FF value of M-BHJ-PSCs with 0.01 wt% spiro-OMeTAD additive can be mainly attributed to the suppressed charge recombination in between interfaces with concomitantly low charge transfer resistance. The equivalent circuit model to fit the experimental data is shown in Fig. 5d.
We obtained the same results by introducing the spiro-OMeTAD additive into MAPbI3 (light absorber) in planar PSCs as shown in ESI Fig. S4–S6 and Table 3. An extremely low (0.01 wt%) spiro-OMeTAD additive concentration added into the precursor solution improved the conversion efficiencies of planar BHJ-PSCs. The PCE of planar BHJ-PSCs decreased when the additive ratio increased by more than 0.01 wt%.
To fully depict our working mechanism, planar PSCs were adopted to investigate the effects of spiro-OMeTAD additive on the photovoltaic performance of the device by choosing a mixed halide perovskite (MAPbI3−xClx) as the light absorber, where the transport distance of carriers was different with MAPbI3. The introduction of an extremely low concentration (0.01 wt%) of spiro-OMeTAD additive into the precursor solution decreased the PCE of planar BHJ-PSCs (Fig. 6a). As shown in Fig. 6b, IPCE measurements validate the PCE curves of fabricated planar PSCs and planar BHJ-PSCs. Unlike the IPCE results of planar PSCs without the spiro-OMeTAD additive, the results of planar BHJ-PSCs with the spiro-OMeTAD additive showed a decrease in PCE. As the ratio of spiro-OMeTAD additive to MAPbI3−xClx increased, the PCE of planar BHJ-PSCs decreased by 2% for every 0.01 wt% additive (see ESI Table 4). Fig. S7 in the ESI provides a summary of photovoltaic performance parameters with different ratios of spiro-OMeTAD additive. The corresponding steady-state efficiencies of planar PSCs and planar BHJ-PSCs with MAPbI3−xClx as the light absorber are shown in Fig. S8, which demonstrates that planar BHJ-PSCs are as stable as planar PSCs.
The schematic and SEM images in Fig. 7 can explain why planar BHJ-PSCs with the spiro-OMeTAD additive showed a decrease in PCE. At the outset, the surface morphology and coverage of the perovskite layers with and without the extra spiro-OMeTAD additive (0.01 wt%) seem similar, as shown in Fig. 7a–d, that is, the effects of introducing an extremely low concentration of spiro-OMeTAD additive into MAPbI3−xClx cannot be easily observed in the perovskite layer. However, when the ratio of the spiro-OMeTAD additive increased (Fig. 7e and f), the extra spiro-OMeTAD additive aggregated onto the surface of the perovskite layer and influenced the quality of the perovskite layer (i.e., see the aggregate encircled by the red dashed line in the SEM profile image).
A single perovskite crystal could directly connect to the HTL and ESL in planar PSCs with MAPbI3−xClx as the light absorber. Investigation showed that charge carrier diffusion lengths were >1 μm in PSCs based on the mixed halide perovskite layer. The generated holes in planar PSCs could transport from the perovskite layer to the HTL with less resistance as shown in Fig. 7g. But the spiro-OMeTAD additive influenced crystallinity and induced more recombination risk during perovskite formation. Thus, PCE decreased when the spiro-OMeTAD additive was introduced. As the ratio of the spiro-OMeTAD additive increased, PCE decreased more with small perovskite grain size.
PL and TRPL spectra were obtained to investigate the role of the spiro-OMeTAD additive in planar PSCs and planar BHJ-PSCs. As shown in Fig. 8a, the PL intensity of the perovskite layer with 0.01 wt% spiro-OMeTAD additive is higher than that of the pure perovskite layer, which indicates that the radioactive carriers recombined more frequently in the perovskite with 0.01 wt% additive. In addition, the TRPL spectra in Fig. 8b reveal that the perovskite layer with 0.01 wt% additive has undergone a relatively low PL decay process. These phenomena could be explained by the crystallinity of the perovskite layer that was influenced by the spiro-OMeTAD additive; thereafter, additional hole trap states formed due to small grain sizes in the perovskite layer. Therefore, photo-excited charge trapping prolonged the carrier transportation time.
The Nyquist plot showed similar series resistances in planar PSCs and planar BHJ-PSCs (i.e., see ESI Fig. S9a). When the ratio of spiro-OMeTAD additive to MAPbI3−xClx increased from 0 wt% to 0.1 wt%, the charge transfer resistance in planar BHJ-PSCs also increased. The arc in the Nyquist plots of planar PSCs without the spiro-OMeTAD additive was smaller than the others. In addition, the planar PSCs without the spiro-OMeTAD additive exhibited the lowest charge transfer resistance (i.e., see ESI Fig. S9b). The high PCE of planar PSCs could be mainly attributed to the suppressed charge recombination in between interfaces with concomitantly lower charge transfer resistance.
By comparing the results of M-BHJ-PSCs with MAPbI3 and planar BHJ-PSCs with MAPbI3−xClx as the light absorber, we found that the concentration of the spiro-OMeTAD additive in the precursor solution was not a crucial parameter for preparing perovskite films. The spiro-OMeTAD additive could damage the perovskite layer in both M-BHJ-PSCs and planar BHJ-PSCs even if the concentrations were extremely low. However, an optimal amount of spiro-OMeTAD additive could promote the PCE of M-BHJ-PSCs, where the electron–hole diffusion length was approximately 100 nm in the MAPbI3-processed solution. Three different roles were played by the aggregates of the spiro-OMeTAD additive in the gaps of perovskite layers in M-BHJ-PSCs. The transport paths and relay effect allowed for the transport of holes over long distances, and these led to highly efficient hole extraction. However, the decrease in the grain size of the perovskite layer caused by the additive resulted in a comparatively high accumulation and recombination risk of charge carriers in hole trap states. An increase of 15% PCE in M-BHJ-PSCs could be obtained by balancing the roles of the additive. When the ratio of the spiro-OMeTAD additive increased, the changes in the surface morphology and coverage of the perovskite layer in M-BHJ-PSCs played a dominant role in decreasing PCE. The perovskite layer with the spiro-OMeTAD additive appeared incomplete with the decreased grain sizes, and this phenomenon further induced hole trap states and caused additional electron–hole recombination in M-BHJ-PSCs.
In planar BHJ-PSCs, the conductivities of the spiro-OMeTAD additive and perovskite layer were similar. A single perovskite crystal could directly connect to the HTL and ESL in planar PSCs with a mixed halide perovskite (MAPbI3−xClx). Past studies showed that electron and hole diffusion lengths were >1 μm in mixed halide perovskites, a value that was approximately 5–10 times greater than absorption depths. The generated holes in planar BHJ-PSCs could transport from the perovskite layer to the HTL with less resistance. Therefore, the PCE of planar BHJ-PSCs decreased when the spiro-OMeTAD additive was introduced, because the additive hampered the crystallization of the mixed halide perovskite layer and induced more recombination risk during perovskite formation. The mechanism presented in this study was evidently not similar to previous reports wherein additives played an important role in high-quality formation.

Self-designed extraordinary experiments were conducted in both M-BHJ-PSCs and planar BHJ-PSCs to improve the hole extraction efficiency, as well as to deeply understand the working principle of additives. Additives played different roles in improving hole extraction, as proven by the comparison in M-BHJ-PSCs and planar BHJ-PSCs. Transport paths and relay effects allowed for the transport of holes over long distances, and these led to highly efficient hole extraction. The poor quality of the perovskite layer caused by the additives resulted in a comparatively high accumulation and recombination risk of charge carriers. Subsequently, a new working principle of additives in BHJ-PSCs was proposed. By deeply understanding the mechanism and balancing the roles of additives, the PCE of M-BHJ-PSCs was increased by 15%. This study may extend the possibilities of designing highly efficient PSCs through the promotion of additive research and application.


There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51772039, 21703027, 51273032 and 91333104), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Grant No. DUT17ZD206 and DUT16QY04).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta09740a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018