 DOI: 10.1039/C7TA02496G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10978-10985


Hasan
Raboui
,

Emmanuel S.
Thibau
,

David S.
Josey
,

Zheng-Hong
Lu
 and 

Timothy P.
Bender
*

Department of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry, University of Toronto, 200 College St., Toronto, Ontario M5S 3E5, Canada. E-mail: tim.bender@utoronto.ca

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Toronto, 184 College St., Toronto, Ontario M5S 3E4, Canada

Department of Chemistry, University of Toronto, 80 St. George St., Toronto, Ontario M5S 3H6, Canada

Received
21st March 2017
, Accepted 7th May 2017
First published on 8th May 2017
The structure of oxy phosphorus tetrabenzotriazacorrole (POTbc) was firmed up using time-of-flight electron ionization mass spectrometry (TOF-EI MS), elemental analysis (EA), and core level X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), addressing the contradictions in the literature around the nature of the bond between the phosphorus atom center and the axial oxygen atom(s). Pre-device fabrication physical characterization of POTbc was conducted in the solid-state using ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS), optical measurements, and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) to enable appropriate device integration. POTbc, tetrabenzotriazacorroles in general, was then applied for the first time in an organic electronic device, a planar heterojunction organic photovoltaic (PHJ OPV). The functionality of POTbc was confirmed in PHJ OPV devices by pairing with conventional organic semiconductors, with fullerenes, C60 and C70, as an electron donor and with α-sexithiophene as an electron acceptor. POTbc showed highest promise as an electron donor within a POTbc:C70 based OPV owing to external quantum efficiencies broadly across the entire visible spectrum (300 nm–750 nm). The thicknesses of the POTbc and C70 active layers was then probed and a PHJ OPV with 1.96% power conversion efficiency (PCE) was achieved. The high short-circuit current densities (JSC) obtained with the POTbc:fullerene based OPVs is attributable to the unusual dual absorbance of POTbc in the visible spectrum, yielding a conclusion that POTbc and other Tbc derivatives are promising functional organic electronic materials for visible light harvesting applications.

Phthalocyanines (Pcs) are a family of molecules that have been known for almost a century as dyes and pigments produced at an industrial scale and low cost. Pcs also continue to emerge as functional materials in the field of organic electronics due to their interesting optical, physical and electronic properties. Notably, the first functional organic photovoltaic (OPV) cell, an organic electronic device, used copper Pc as an electron donating and light absorbing material. The power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of Pc-based OPVs have since been reported to range up to 5–6% through a focus on extensive device engineering of known Pcs. Relatively smaller efforts have been directed to the molecular design and synthesis of alternative Pcs, their analogs and establishing their functionality in OPVs. Molecular design of Pcs in the OPV context have been generally achieved by either the replacement of the central atom of the Pc molecule or by peripheral and axial substitutions. Although nearly all elements in the periodic table have been incorporated into the center of a Pc molecule, only a few derivatives have been utilized in OPV devices. Peripheral substitution, especially halogenation, of Pcs has been proven a robust tool for tuning their frontier energy orbitals and the solid-state packing. Functionalization of the axial position have been shown recently to allow for control of the solid-state arrangement as well as increasing the solubility to enable solution processing.

Tetrabenzotriazacorroles (Tbcs, Fig. 1), alternatively triazatetrabenzocorroles, are a relatively new family of aromatic macrocycles that have become of interest to the chemistry community in recent years. Tbcs are structurally similar to and are synthetically derived from Pcs. Tbcs differ only by the exclusion of one of the bridging imine nitrogen atoms. Tbcs were first synthesized in 1981, in particular oxy phosphorus Tbc (POTbc, Fig. 2), from the reaction of metal-free Pc (H2Pc) with a phosphorus source but was thought at the time to be the phosphorus Pc complex. It was not until 1986 when Fujiki et al. acknowledged the formation of the Tbc macrocycle. In that publication Fujiki et al. synthesized Tbc derivatives with aluminum, gallium, germanium, and silicon as the central atoms. The synthesis was conducted by simple chemical reduction of the respective metallated Pc derivatives using sodium borohydride in a mixture of benzyl alcohol and anisole. From that point until today, the chemistry and characterization of Tbcs remained fairly limited and inconsistent. The first report to synthesize the phosphorus derivative and recognize the formation of a Tbc was not until 1995. The synthesis was achieved by inserting phosphorus (using PBr3 in pyridine) into metal-free Pc molecule and reducing the Pc in situ yielding POTbc. Other reports of Tbc synthesis used silicon Pc and silyl chloride agents.
Like Pcs, Tbcs have the capacity for hosting a variety of elements in their central cavity. When Tbcs adopt high-valent central atoms (higher than 3+) such as silicon or phosphorus, Tbcs allow for axial functionalization. Tbcs can also be functionalized through the periphery to enhance their solubility, in organic and aqueous systems, and also to probe their optoelectronic properties. Hence, Tbcs have the same molecular design handles available to Pcs. However, all the synthetic reports were at relatively small scale and required chromatography as a mean to purify the final products, which is not an inherently scalable process.
The omission of the nitrogen atom leads to a decrease in symmetry from D4h symmetry in the case of Pcs to C2v symmetry in the case of Tbcs, if the axial substituents are neglected. This decrease in the symmetry results in significant changes in the optical properties while maintaining the high molar extinction coefficient and the number of conjugated π-electrons typical of a Pc (18 π-electrons, Fig. 1). Unlike Pcs, Tbcs exhibit an unusual dual absorbance in the visible spectrum with strong intensities from both bands. Their absorbance spectra are similar to that of Pcs in the red-light region (Q-band) with a slight blue-shift, which is indicative of retaining the number of conjugated π-electrons. However, the band in the UV region for Pcs (Soret-band) is significantly red-shifted into the visible region for Tbcs. Other reported properties such as the electrochemical oxidation potential of a silicon Tbc derivative and the fact that the macrocycle possesses a 3− formal charge suggested to us that Tbcs have potential as electron-donating and light absorbing materials in OPVs. Regardless of the simple reported synthesis of Tbcs and the attractive optical and electrochemical properties, Tbcs have never been incorporated into organic electronic devices.
Although POTbc is the most reported Tbc in the literature, there is no consensus on the exact structure of POTbc. Some researchers argue that the structure of POTbc has a single oxygen atom forming a double bond with the phosphorus atom (POTbc I) while others have proposed a structure with two hydroxyl groups on the axial direction (POTbc II) (Fig. 2). This dispute over the molecular structure has never been addressed nor acknowledged. Additionally, the reported synthetic approaches have been limited in size and constrained the application of the material into organic electronic devices.
In this paper, we established a fair sized synthetic process to produce ultrapure POTbc and outlined how it is suited for OPV application. We were successful in scaling up the process to the gram scale along with using gradient-temperature train sublimation to produce an ultrapure product that was suitable for OPV device fabrication. Time-of-flight electron ionization mass spectrometry (TOF-EI MS), elemental analysis (EA), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) were used to absolutely confirm the structure of POTbc. We then explored the properties of POTbc in the context of OPV devices. Solid-state characterization including ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS), thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA), and solid film absorbance was conducted. Then, OPV cells incorporating POTbc with conventional organic semiconductors such as α-sexithiophene (α-6T), C60, and C70 were fabricated in order to assess the potential of POTbc as an electron-donating and as an electron-accepting material. A preliminary thickness optimization of the POTbc:C70 based OPV device was also conducted.

All ACS grade solvents were purchased from Caledon Labs (Caledon, Ontario, Canada) and used without further purification unless otherwise stated. Metal free phthalocyanine was purchased from TCI America (Portland, Oregon, USA) and used as received. Phosphorus tribromide was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Chemical Company (Mississauga, Ontario, Canada) and was used as received. Bathocuproine (BCP 99.99%) was purchased from Lumtec Technology Corp. (Hsinchu, Taiwan) and was used as received. Ag (99.99%) from R. D. Mathis Company and was used as received. Fullerene (C60) and α-sexithiophene (α-6T) were purchased from SES Research and from Sigma-Aldrich Company, respectively, and were both purified through gradient-temperature apparatus before they were used.


Low-resolution mass spectra (LR-MS) and high-resolution mass spectra (HR-MS) were determined using Waters GC Premier using time-of-flight spectrometer with electron ionization source (TOF-EI MS). 31P Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra were recorded on a Agilent DD2 600 spectrometer at 23 °C in 10% CDCl3 solution in pyridine, operating at 600 MHz. Chemical shifts (δ) are reported in parts per million (ppm) referenced to triethyl phosphite (137.29 ppm). High-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) analysis was conducted using a Waters 2695 separation module with a Waters 2998 photodiode array and a Waters 4.6 mm × 100 mm SunFire C18 3.5 µm column. HPLC grade acetonitrile was eluted with an isocratic flow of 80/10 acetonitrile/dimethylformamide at 0.6 mL min−1 during operation. Optical experiments were acquired on a PerkinElmer Lambda 1050 UV/VIS/NIR spectrometer using a PerkinElmer quartz cuvette with a 10 mm path length for solution samples and an attached 150 mm integrating sphere for solid samples to capture the scattered and reflected light. Thermogravimetric analysis was run using TA Instruments Q50 under an atmosphere of nitrogen and a heating rate of 5 °C min−1. Photoemission measurements were conducted on a PHI 5500 Multi-technique system using a monochromated Al Kα photon source (hν = 1486.7 eV) for X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) and a non-monochromated He Iα photon source (hν = 21.22 eV) for UV photoemission spectroscopy (UPS). Work function and HOMO offset measurements were carried out using UPS with the sample tilted to a take-off angle of 89 and under an applied bias of 15 V. The deposition of the films along with the XPS and UPS measurements were carried out in a chamber with a base pressure ≈10−10 torr.


All OPVs were fabricated on commercially available patterned ITO substrates (Thin Film Device Inc. (TFD)) with 145 nm ITO thickness and a sheet resistance of 15 Ω □−1. Four ITO substrates were ultrasonically cleaned in detergent, distilled water, acetone, methanol, and finally dried in flowing nitrogen. Subsequently, ITO was treated by plasma for 5 min to remove carbon residues. After plasma treatment, a CHEMAT Technology KW-A4 spin coater was used to spin a layer of PEDOT:PSS (Clevios™ P VP AI 4083) at 500 rpm for 10 s and 4000 rpm for 30 s on the ITO electrode anode. The ITO with the PEDOT:PSS coating was annealed at 115 °C for 10 min. The device structure grown by thermal evaporation with a base pressure of 1 × 10−7 torr consists of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/Active layer/BCP(5.5 nm)/Ag(80 nm). Between deposition of the BCP layer and the Ag cathode, devices were transferred from the vacuum chamber to a glovebox with nitrogen atmosphere through a gate, without exposure to ambient conditions, to attach a shadow mask consisting of four active pixels with areas of 0.4 cm2. The α-6T/POTbc was prepared using a Ag mask with five active pixels with areas of 0.2 cm2. Then, the substrates were transferred back to the vacuum chamber. Layer thickness and deposition rate were monitored using a quartz crystal microbalance (QCM). After the Ag layer was deposited, the OPVs were transferred directly from the vacuum chamber back to the nitrogen atmosphere glove box. Silver paste (PELCO® Conductive Silver 187) was applied to the end Ag of electrode and ITO contact point to enhance electrical contact and left to cure for 30 minutes before testing. A 300 W ozone free xenon arc lamp with an air Mass 1.5 Global filter, fed through a Cornerstone™ 260 1/4 m monochromator and then into the glove box by way of a single branch liquid light guide was utilized as a solar simulator. The illumination levels for the test cell were kept at 100 mW cm−2. A UV-silicon photo-detector was used to calibrate the measurements. The current densities versus voltage (J–V) characteristics and external quantum efficiency (EQE) were recorded using a Keithley 2401 Low Voltage sourcemeter controlled by a custom LabView program and a Newport Optical Power Meter 2936-R controlled by TracQ Basic software, respectively, in the nitrogen atmosphere glove box.


POTbc was synthesized by an adapted procedure form Li et al. In a three-neck round-bottom flask, 2 g (3.9 mmol) of metal-free phthalocyanine was mixed with 30 molar excess of PBr3 (10.8 mL) in 50 mL of pyridine. The solution mixture was brought to reflux at 115 °C under an argon atmosphere and left under reflux for 23 hours. Then, the mixture was allowed to cool down to 40 °C before starting to quench the unreacted PBr3 with isopropyl alcohol, methanol, and water sequentially. After all the PBr3 was quenched, the solution was precipitated in 500 mL of 10% aqueous H3PO4 solution and stirred for 24 hours. The solution was then sonicated for one hour before filtering the solid precipitants under vacuum. The filter cake was then washed with excess water until the filtrate was neutralized before washing with methanol. The cake was left to dry in air overnight before transferring it to the vacuum-oven and drying it overnight. 2.9 g of product was collected after drying the sample, which is indicative of residual PBr3 quenched products. The powder was further purified twice using train sublimation apparatus using N2 as a carrier gas. 31P NMR (600 MHz, pyridine) δ −202.04. High-resolution mass spectroscopy (HR-MS) calc'd for C32H16N7PO 545.1154, found 545.1142. EA calc'd for C32H16N7PO: C, 70.5; H, 3.0; N, 18.0. Found: C, 70.8; H, 3.0; N, 17.7. UV-Vis (DMSO) λmax = 442 nm. UPS, XPS and other characterization presented within the main body of this text.


For this study, POTbc was chosen as a starting point with the Tbc family because it was the first reported Tbc molecule and is the most accessible from the industrially-produced H2Pc. The synthetic process is adopted from Li et al. However, Li's process requires the purification of the crude using column chromatography with pyridine as the mobile phase, which is an unpopular solvent in the industry due to its toxicological impact on human health. We also question the purity of the product due to the low nitrogen content of the sample as observed in their EA. The modifications we introduced to the process include an increased reaction time for higher conversion and the replacement of the column chromatography workup with a multistep workup. The residual PBr3 was quenched with isopropyl alcohol, methanol and water, sequentially. The reaction mixture was then precipitated in a 10 wt% H3PO4 aqueous solution in order to remove the PBr3 quenched products. The suspension was then filtered and washed with water until the filtrate was pH neutral followed by a methanol wash. The mass after drying under vacuum overnight was indicative of residual PBr3 quenched products. A simple UV-Vis absorption measurement verified the conversion of H2Pc into POTbc. However, TOF-EI MS showed a small peak corresponding to H2Pc. The residual H2Pc and PBr3 quenched products were then eliminated by purifying the product using gradient-temperature train sublimation (twice). Other techniques that were conducted as means to assess the purity and beginning to confirm the structure of the product included 31P nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and elemental analysis (see Experimental section).


As outlined in the introduction, the structure of POTbc is highly controversial; whether the phosphorus atom is axialy bonded to one oxygen atom with a double bond (POTbc I) or two hydroxyl groups (POTbc II) is the main point of controversy (Fig. 2). Mass spectrometry is often utilized to identify the nature of the axial group of the POTbc molecule. The most common mass spectrometry technique used in previous reports is matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) which has produced apparent evidence of both structures. Zhou et al. observed a structure with one axial oxygen atom for a peripherally-substituted POTbc derivative using electron-spray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI MS) and a structure with two axial hydroxyl groups with another derivative.

Herein, we utilized TOF-EI MS, EA, and XPS to conduct a structural analysis of POTbc (Table 1). The 545.1 m/z resulting from the TOF-EI MS experiment is evident of POTbc I with only one axial oxygen (Fig. 2). This TOF-EI MS result is further supported by EA and XPS analysis. The EA of the ultrapure sublimed sample showed a composition of carbon (70.76%), hydrogen (3.00%), and N (17.71%), again suggesting that POTbc I is the correct structure.
Technique
Structural metric
POTbc I
POTbc II
Our POTbc sample
TOF-EI MS
Exact mass
545.12
563.13
545.1
Elemental analysis (wt%)
% C
70.46
68.21
70.76
% H
2.96
3.22
3.00
% N
17.97
17.40
17.71
XPS (atomic ratio)
P to O
1
0.5
1.2
N to O
7
3.5
7.5
XPS was then conducted on a thin solid film deposited under vacuum. The elemental composition showed that the POTbc sample consists of carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and phosphorus exclusively (Fig. 3); this confirms that the POTbc sample does not contained traces of bromine atoms (neither in peripheral positions nor bound to phosphorus), a potential concern given the synthetic procedure uses PBr3. Since POTbc I contains half the amount of oxygen relative to POTbc II, the atomic ratio of oxygen to other elements in the compound are yet another confirmation of the POTbc structure. The phosphorus-to-oxygen and nitrogen-to-oxygen atomic ratios are 1.2 and 7.5, respectively. The oxidation state of the phosphorus atom was also determined using XPS. The binding energy of the phosphorus 2p orbital (134–135 eV, Fig. 3) suggests that the oxidation state of phosphorus in POTbc is 5+. The phosphorus oxidation state and the two axial oxygen bonds confirms that the Tbc ring holds a formal charge of 3− rather than 2− as in Pcs. The presence of two peaks in the nitrogen core level spectrum is evident of the presence of two types of nitrogen atoms, confirming the C2v symmetry in contrast to the single peak in the case of the D4h symmetric Pcs. The sum of these XPS results, along with the results from TOF-EI MS and EA, confirm without doubt that the structure is POTbc I.

For the application of any new organic electronic material, characterization in the solid-state is required. Therefore, we conducted UPS measurement, thin film optical measurements, and thermal stability testing using TGA. UPS of POTbc (Fig. S1) showed a secondary electron cutoff corresponding to a work-function of 4.4 eV. The HOMO offset from the work-function is 0.7 eV resulting in a HOMO level of 5.1 eV with respect to vacuum level. POTbc has a slightly higher HOMO than its Pc counterparts (e.g. chloro aluminum Pc). The modestly higher HOMO level could be attributed to the higher formal charge of Tbc ring (3−) by comparison to Pc (2−).

Solid-state absorbance of POTbc was measured from a vacuum-deposited thin film and compared to the solution-state absorption spectrum (Fig. 4). As expected, both POTbc absorbance peaks broadened in the solid-state relative to solution. The absorbance in solid-state is extremely wide covering a considerable amount of the visible spectrum (300 nm to 750 nm) with a narrow window between 500 nm and 550 nm. This broad absorbance is ideal for OPV application. The solid-state absorption coefficient of the Soret-band (450 nm) and the Q-band (695 nm) are approximately 91000 cm−1 and 85000 cm−1, respectively. The absorbance intensity of the Soret- and Q-bands in the solid-state, unlike in solution, are almost identical in intensity another property ideal for OPV applications. The onset of the absorbance of POTbc (756 nm) corresponds to an energy gap (Eg) of 1.65 eV. The addition of the HOMO level, Eg and an exciton binding energy of 0.3 eV that is common for Pcs systems lead to a LUMO level of 3.15 eV. The measured HOMO/LUMO energy levels of POTbc rendere it an excellent candidate material for pairing with multiple conventional organic semiconductors, both with C60/C70 as an electron donor and α-sexithiophene (α-6T) as an electron acceptor (Fig. 5).
Thermal stability is of importance to enable thermal vacuum deposition processing for the fabrication of planar heterojunction (PHJ) OPVs. Due to the reduced symmetry of POTbc in comparison to that of Pcs, one may be concerned that the Tbc macrocycle would be more structurally strained and, hence, less thermally stable. However, the thermal stability of POTbc measured using TGA showed very similar thermal stability to that of chloro aluminum phthalocyanine (Cl-AlPc) (Fig. S2). POTbc exhibited 50% mass loss at 575 °C while the first Cl-AlPc degradation peak is at a slightly lower temperature (568 °C) and a higher mass loss (∼60%). Those temperatures are higher than the expected thermal vacuum processing temperatures, which eliminates any concerns about stability.

Because POTbc has never been applied as an organic semiconducting material before, nor has any other Tbc, we first paired POTbc with the well-established PHJ OPV materials to investigate and confirm its functionality; POTbc was paired with fullerenes, C60 and C70, as an electron-donating material and paired with α-6T as an electron-accepting material. A Cl-AlPc:C60 device was used as a point of comparison/as a control in this study. All of the devices in this paper were fabricated having the following general structure: ITO/PEDOT:PSS/donor/acceptor/BCP(5.5 nm)/Ag(80 nm).

The first PHJ OPV device fabricated was POTbc:C60 and it was modestly outperformed by the Cl-AlPc:C60 control. The modestly lower performance is attributable to a lower open-circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF) (Table 2). The POTbc based device did, however, produce a higher short-circuit current density (JSC), attributable to the pronounced Q-band absorbance contribution compared to Cl-AlPc as notable from the external quantum efficiency (EQE) plot (Fig. 6).
Donor
Acceptor

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
Cl-AlPc (20 nm)
C60 (40 nm)
0.75 ± 0.01
2.90 ± 0.04
0.54 ± 0.03
1.17 ± 0.06
POTbc (20 nm)
C60 (40 nm)
0.62 ± 0.00
3.72 ± 0.07
0.46 ± 0.02
1.06 ± 0.06
POTbc (20 nm)
C70 (40 nm)
0.63 ± 0.00
5.24 ± 0.19
0.44 ± 0.02
1.45 ± 0.09
α-6T (60 nm)
POTbc (20 nm)
0.93 ± 0.00
2.11 ± 0.04
0.42 ± 0.00
0.82 ± 0.02
Next, C60 was replaced with C70 due to the higher absorption coefficient of C70 in the middle of the visible spectrum (∼500 nm), complementary to the absorbance of POTbc. As a result, significant broadening of the EQE spectrum was observed (Fig. 6). The EQE of the POTbc:C70 device covering the entire visible spectrum (300 nm to 750 nm) is attributable to the strong dual absorbance of POTbc in the visible spectrum. The broadening of the EQE resulted in 80% and 41% boost in the JSC from the Cl-AlPc:C60 and POTbc:C60 devices, respectively. It is noteworthy that the increase in the JSC occurred while maintaining the same VOC as in the POTbc:C60 device, due to the similar electron affinity of both fullerene materials; the retaining of the VOC is in-line with our previous experience with these fullerenes. Because of the broad EQE and relatively high PCE (1.45%), the POTbc:C70 structure was selected for further device active-layer optimization (see below).
For a complete scoping of POTbc, it was also paired as an electron-accepting material with α-6T. α-6T was recently established as an excellent electron-donating material for scoping Pcs as electron acceptors. While the VOC of the device was extremely high, the PCE was limited by the low JSC. The substantial VOC is at first phase attributable to the large difference between the HOMO of α-6T and the LUMO of POTbc (Fig. 5). The low JSC is likely caused by either the high formal charge of the POTbc ring (3−) inhibiting any further reduction and, hence, weakening charge transfer from α-6T or perhaps the small difference between the HOMO levels of the two materials (∼0.3 eV). Since the HOMO level calculations have generally uncertainty in the range of 0.1 eV, a small deviation in the HOMO level of each material can close the gap between them and, hence, constrain exciton extraction from the electron-accepting material (POTbc in this case). The high HOMO level of POTbc might inhibit its use as an electron-accepting material in any setting due to the scarcity of electron-donating materials with higher HOMO levels.

Due to the broad EQE of the POTbc:C70 device, we decided to proceed with some active-layer thickness probing of this device. The first step was adjusting the thickness of the electron acceptor layer. As the thickness of C70 was reduced from 40 nm to 30 nm, not only did the JSC increase (Table 3) but the photocurrent contribution of the thinner C70 layer (∼550 nm) also increased (Fig. 7). This can be a result of a higher optical field intensity near the rectifying interface or due to a lower electrical resistance in the thinned C70 layer. However, when the thickness was further decreased the JSC dropped along with the photocurrent contribution of C70. The drop in the JSC can be attributed to a limitation on the absorbance of the thinner C70 layer. While VOC was not altered as the thickness of C70 decreased, the FF dropped slightly when the thickness decreased from 30 nm to 20 nm.

Donor
Acceptor

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
POTbc (20 nm)
C70 (40 nm)
0.63 ± 0.00
5.24 ± 0.19
0.44 ± 0.01
1.45 ± 0.09
POTbc (20 nm)
C70 (30 nm)
0.63 ± 0.00
5.68 ± 0.10
0.43 ± 0.01
1.52 ± 0.05
POTbc (20 nm)
C70 (20 nm)
0.63 ± 0.00
5.00 ± 0.09
0.40 ± 0.01
1.25 ± 0.05
POTbc (10 nm)
C70 (30 nm)
0.64 ± 0.01
6.39 ± 0.08
0.48 ± 0.02
1.96 ± 0.09
POTbc (5 nm)
C70 (30 nm)
0.52 ± 0.01
6.00 ± 0.16
0.55 ± 0.02
1.73 ± 0.08
Lastly, the POTbc thickness was probed while the C70 thickness was fixed at the optimal thickness, 30 nm. By locking the electron acceptor layer thickness, the distance between the exciton rectifying interface and the reflective electrode (Ag) is fixed, which is known to play a substantial role in the optics of the device. A 10 nm thick POTbc layer produced the most optimal device with the highest PCE (1.96%) due to a high JSC and FF. Similar to the C70 optimization process, the photocurrent contribution of the POTbc increased while the layer thickness was decreased from 20 nm to 10 nm. As the rectifying interface was fixed in this step, the most probable cause to this increase is a lower resistance in the POTbc layer. When the POTbc layer was further reduced to 5 nm, not only did the JSC decrease but also a 0.11 V decrease in the VOC occurred. The decrease in the VOC is perhaps caused by band bending of the HOMO level of the POTbc due to the very small layer thickness. This hypothesis is supported by the increase of the FF which is indicative of enhancement in charge transport within the device; band bending can lead to better level alignment which can improved hole extraction from the POTbc layer.

In this paper, we assessed the potential of Tbcs in OPV applications for the first time. A modified synthetic process to produce ultrapure POTbc was established. The controversy over the molecular structure of POTbc was addressed as the structure of POTbc was firmed up using TOF-EI MS, EA, and XPS. All three techniques support the structure of POTbc with a single oxygen atom in the axial position (POTbc I). Pre-device fabrication characterization of the thin-film of POTbc was conducted including UPS, solid-state absorbance measurement, and TGA. We, then, showed the first example of a Tbc applied as a functional material in an organic electronic device, a PHJ OPV. The functionality of POTbc was scoped and established through the pairing with well-known organic semiconductors as both an electron-donating and an electron-accepting material. POTbc showed exceptional promise as an electron-donating material, especially when paired with C70. The POTbc:C70 devices exhibited a broad EQE over the entire visible spectrum due to the dual absorbance of POTbc. Lastly, preliminary active-layer thickness optimization of the POTbc:C70 device was conducted. Although the PCEs of the devices in this paper are not record-breaking, this proves firmly the functionality of the Tbc family of compounds as organic electronic materials. The ease of synthesis of Tbcs from the easily accessible Pcs, the potential for molecular tunability, the strong dual absorbance, and the asymmetrical nature of their chromophores render Tbcs interesting materials for further molecular and device engineering in the context of organic electronics and specifically organic photovoltaics.


The authors would like to acknowledge financial support from Saudi Basic Industries (SABIC). We would like to acknowledge the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada for their support through the Discovery Grant program.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Figures of UPS, TGA, 31P NMR, and high resolution mass spectrometry of POTbc. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta02496g
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017