 DOI: 10.1039/D1TA01061A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 9266-9271


Mengjiong
Chen
,

Hong Wei
Qiao
,

Ziren
Zhou
,

Bing
Ge
,

Jingjing
He
,

Shuang
Yang
*,

Yu
Hou
* and 

Hua Gui
Yang


Key Laboratory for Ultrafine Materials of Ministry of Education, Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Hierarchical Nanomaterials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai 200237, China. E-mail: syang@ecust.edu.cn; yhou@ecust.edu.cn

Received
4th February 2021
, Accepted 14th March 2021
First published on 15th March 2021
Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite materials have attracted enormous attention owing to their extraordinary progress in both power conversion efficiency and stability. However, nonradiative carrier recombination occurring in the perovskite films and interface hinders its commercial viability as the next-generation photovoltaics. Doping with metal cations has been demonstrated to be efficacious for controlling charge transport and reducing charge recombination for perovskite solar cells. Herein, we report the homogeneous doping of entire perovskite solar cells by alkali cations via a dopant diffusion strategy from the hole transport layer. It was found that Rb+ ions enhanced the conductivity and optimized the energy level alignment. The diffused Rb+ ions within the perovskite layer could further reach the bulk films with modulated electronic states. The power conversion efficiency of the perovskite solar cell based on 1.0% Rb+-doped NiOx boosts to 21.80% with a high fill factor of 0.824. Unencapsulated Rb+-doped NiOx photovoltaic devices maintained 93.3% of their initial efficiency after storage in air for 1200 h.

Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites have made momentous progress as light harvesters for photovoltaics owing to their long carrier diffusion length, high optical absorption coefficient, and low exciton binding energy. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) swiftly increased from 3.8% to 25.5%, which is comparable to that of crystalline silicon solar cells. Currently, the trap-state induced nonradiative recombination in perovskite films and interface has been proved to be the major obstacle to enhance the device efficiency towards the theoretical Shockley–Queisser limit efficiency (33.5%). In addition, the defective interfaces and bulk point defects make perovskites to be active under different environmental stressors, which have a critical influence on the stability of metal halide perovskite devices.

The ionic nature of hybrid perovskites has enabled the ease of ion migration with low activation energies for intrinsic elements such as CH3NH3+, I− ions or vacancies that readily appear under operational conditions. In numerous recent studies, alloying perovskites with alkali metal cations has been demonstrated to be an effective pathway to improve the device stability and efficiency. For example, Rb+ ions could alter the solidification process of perovskite films and manage halides to reduce recombination in perovskite films. Nevertheless, Rb+ favors the formation of phase-segregated micron-sized rubidium halide crystals, which decrease the short-circuit current density (JSC) and thus hamper the PCE. Therefore, it is critical to dope perovskites by alkali cations without aggregation or impurity phases.
Herein, we develop a simple strategy to simultaneously dope the perovskite film and modulate the perovskite interface using alkali cation-doped NiOx thin films. We found that Rb+-doped NiOx exhibits enhanced conductivity and better energy level matching with perovskite films. In addition, the quality of perovskite films undergoes apparent improvement by uniformly accommodating diffused Rb+ ions from the NiOx layer. PSCs based on Rb+-doped NiOx present a significant increase in PCE from 18.04% to 21.80% with the considerable enhancement of the fill factor (FF) up to 0.824 from 0.731. Moreover, unencapsulated Rb+-doped NiOx photovoltaic devices maintain more than 93% of their initial efficiency after storage in air with 15 ± 5% relative humidity for 1200 h and continuous one-sun illumination in a nitrogen atmosphere for 500 h.

The concept of spontaneous Rb+ diffusion from the hole transport layer into a typical planar p–i–n device is shown in Fig. 1a. The device configuration adopted in this study is fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)/NiOx/CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3)/[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM)/bathocuproine (BCP)/Ag, and the cross-sectional SEM image of a typical device is illustrated in Fig. 1b. Rubidium ions were incorporated in the NiOx hole transport layer (HTL) by adding rubidium chloride into the nickel oxide precursor solution, followed by a spin-coating and thermal annealing procedure. Then, a portion of rubidium cations is spontaneously diffused into the MAPbI3 perovskite layer and even the PCBM electron transport layer (ETL) upon the driven force of concentration gradient during the device preparation, enabling the doping of the entire solar cell device. We referred the samples before and after Rb+ diffusion as Rb–NiOx fresh and Rb–NiOx, respectively, in the study.

We first characterized the mesoscopic structure of NiOx films via scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM). Both NiOx and Rb–NiOx fresh films manifest uniform and smooth surface morphologies with root-mean-square roughness (RMS) values of 7.126 nm and 8.212 nm, respectively (Fig. S1 and S2). All of the NiOx films show more than 80% transmittance over a broad spectral range (Fig. S3). X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns in Fig. S4 present characteristic peaks at 37.2°, 43.3°, and 62.9°, which can be indexed to the (111), (200), and (220) planes of the rock salt NiO, respectively. The surface electronic structure of NiOx layers was further probed via X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Ni 2p spectra in Fig. S5a and b reveal two oxidation states for both samples at binding energies of ∼853.2 eV and ∼855.1 eV for Ni2+ and Ni3+, respectively. There is no appreciable change in the Ni2+/Ni3+ ratio after Rb+ doping. High-resolution O 1s spectra show two distinct components of O1, O2 at ∼528.9 eV and ∼530.1 eV, which can be ascribed to the metal–oxygen bonds and –OH groups, respectively (Fig. S5c and d). As displayed in Fig. S6, considering the identical peak position of Rb 3d peaks for Rb–NiOx fresh and Rb–NiOx films, the chemical state of Rb+ should hardly be changed after Rb+ diffusion. In comparison, no Rb signal can be detected in the NiOx films.
The spatial distribution of the Rb+ cation in a perovskite photovoltaic device was probed via time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) measurements. As shown in Fig. 1c, we ascribe the existence of Ag+, C+, Pb+, Ni+, and Sn+ to the top electrode, ETL, perovskite layer, HTL, and FTO, respectively. Doping information can be observed more clearly in the corresponding 3D distribution images (Fig. 1d). The signal of Rb+ ions is evenly distributed with the same order of magnitude across the whole profile of perovskite, PCBM, and NiOx layers, which implies the absence of impurity or segregated Rb+-containing phases. The quantitative analysis of Rb+ ratios in each layer inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) and UV-Vis spectroscopy, and the results are listed in Fig. 1e, Table S1 and Fig. S7. The molar ratio of Rb+ in NiOx is decreased from 0.98% to 0.55% after the Rb+ ion diffusion process, where 44.2% of Rb+ ions are migrated out. The doping concentrations of Rb+ in perovskite and PCBM layers are measured to be 0.19% and 8.99%, respectively. The diffusion of Cs+ and K+ ions can also be observed in the corresponding ToF-SIMS spectra images, which demonstrate that our strategy is universal to other alkali metal cations (Fig. S8).
Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of devices were measured under standard AM 1.5 G illumination at a reverse scan rate of 0.15 V s−1. We first investigated the effect of Rb+ concentration on the photovoltaic performance of solar cell devices. As displayed in Fig. 2a and Table S2, the NiOx devices exhibit a PCE of 18.04% with a JSC of 22.45 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.100 V, and a FF of 0.731. By contrast, the performance of perovskite devices based on numerous Rb+ concentrations exhibit a remarkably enhanced PCE with an obvious FF improvement, confirming the positive effects of Rb+ doping. Notably, the champion device with 1.0% Rb-NiOx delivers a PCE of 21.80% with a JSC of 23.35 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.133 V, and a FF of 0.824, among the best of MAPbI3 solar cells. The photovoltaic parameters from 20 devices (Fig. S9) demonstrate the good reproducibility of our strategy. According to the ICP-OES results, we also investigated the photovoltaic performance of 0.19% Rb+ doped MAPbI3 (Rb–MAPbI3) and 0.55% Rb+ doped NiOx with 0.19% Rb+ doped MAPbI3 (Rb–NiOx–MAPbI3), respectively, to deconvolve the contribution of the Rb+ cation and doping method on MAPbI3 and NiOx films. Comparing Rb–MAPbI3 with Rb–NiOx–MAPbI3, the addition of Rb+ into the NiOx film increased the PCE of solar cells from 19.19% to 20.69%, with the improvement of FF from 0.752 to 0.799. Moreover, the direct addition of Rb+ in NiOx and MAPbI3 precursors show a PCF of 20.69% with a JSC of 23.15 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.118 V, and an FF of 0.799, which are lower than those of based on Rb–NiOx (Fig. 2b, c and Table S3). This may be due to the uniform distribution of dopants. Therefore, the modification of MAPbI3 and NiOx films is required for the high-performance solar cells. To study the effects of Rb+ in the PCBM layer, PSCs based on Rb+-doped PCBM were fabricated. PCEs based on Rb–PCBM were almost unchanged, indicating that the improvement of Rb–NiOx devices is mainly due to the optimization of hole transport and modulation of perovskite defects (Fig. S10 and Table S4). The integrated current densities from EQE spectra are 21.65 and 23.08 mA cm−2 for the NiOx and Rb–NiOx devices, respectively, matching well with the JSC values obtained from the J–V measurements (Fig. 2d), caused by stronger light harvesting capacity (Fig. S11). Besides, devices based on NiOx and Rb–NiOx HTLs showed negligible hysteresis (Fig. 2e and Table S5). In addition, the photocurrent tested at the maximum power point of NiOx and Rb–NiOx devices were stabilized at ∼19.8 mA cm−2 and 21.7 mA cm−2 (Fig. 2f), corresponding to stabilized PCEs of 17.4% and 21.1%.
To investigate the long-term stability of the devices, devices with different HTLs were stored in a dry container at 25 ± 5 °C with a relative humidity of 15 ± 5%, and their photovoltaic performance was monitored over the course of 1200 h. The photovoltaic device with Rb–NiOx HTL retains a PCE of 93.3% after 1200 h, whereas the PCE values of NiOx decreased to 58.2% owing to the decrease of JSC and FF (Fig. S12). Moreover, the operational stability of the devices presented in Fig. S13 indicated that the Rb–NiOx devices maintained 93.5% of their initial efficiency after 500 h of continuous one-sun illumination in a nitrogen atmosphere.
The effect of different alkali cations on the photovoltaic performance of devices was investigated, which is displayed in Fig. S14 and Table S6. Cells based on alkali cations (Na+, K+, Rb+, and Cs+) doping NiOx demonstrated better performances compared to the control device. Besides, the Rb+ doping of NiOx improved the PCEs of CsPbI2Br PSCs from 14.03% to 16.22%, with the enhanced FF to 0.781 (Fig. S15). The results here demonstrate the universality of dopants and the perovskite composition of our strategy.
We have demonstrated the beneficial effects of the alkali cation diffusion strategy in improving the performance and stability of PSCs. We then carried out electrical and optical studies to reveal the working mechanism of these dopants in the entire device. The energy level diagram of PSCs is summarized in Fig. 3a. The valence band positions vs. the vacuum level of NiOx and Rb–NiOx films on FTO substrates were determined by the secondary electron emission cutoff and valence band edge of ultraviolet photoelectron spectra (UPS, Fig. 3b and c). The valence band maximum (VBM) of NiOx shifts from −5.20 eV to −5.29 eV after Rb+ doping and further increases to −5.30 eV after the migration of Rb+ ions. The increase in VBM in the Rb–NiOx film could reduce nonradiative recombination during charge extraction due to the better interfacial band alignment, leading to the higher VOC.
The optimized charge extraction of HTL is also evidenced by the photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved PL (TRPL) results. As depicted in Fig. 3d, the PL peaks of MAPbI3 films at 775 nm quenched significantly to ∼29% of that on the NiOx layer, suggestive of fast hole transfer to the Rb–NiOx layer. TRPL spectra in Fig. 3e indicate that holes are more effectively extracted from the perovskite layer to the Rb–NiOx film. Besides, we performed J–V measurements of the FTO/HTL/Au device structures (Fig. S16) and found that Rb–NiOx films exhibited 1.8 times higher conductivity compared with the NiOx sample, which could minimize the charge transport loss in bulk carrier transport layers.
The top view SEM images manifest the full surface coverage of perovskites coated on NiOx and Rb–NiOx thin films (Fig. S17). Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) of the perovskite films was employed to characterize the surface potentials. Fig. S18 shows the KPFM potential images and AFM topographic images of the NiOx and Rb–NiOx samples. It can be seen that the mean surface potential of the Rb–NiOx film is over 400 millivolts higher than that of the NiOx film. We then compared line scans in the KPFM images to quantitatively assess the potential change of perovskite films. As shown in Fig. S18e and f, the Rb–NiOx film exhibits minor potential variations of about 25 mV, and in striking contrast, the grain boundary potential drops to as high as ∼35 mV for the NiOx film. Rb+ doping increases the overall surface potential of perovskite layers towards a lower work function, suggesting less p-type doping or towards n-doping after Rb diffusion.

V
OC at various light intensities was measured to further understand the recombination kinetics of PSCs. Fig. 4a represents the dependence of VOC on the logarithm of the incident light intensity (log(I)), which can be fitted with the ideal factor based on the equation: VOC = nkTln(I)/e + constant, where n is the ideal factor to judge the dominant recombination mechanism, k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, e is the elementary charge, and I is the fractional light intensity normalized to one sun. The n value of the NiOx sample is calculated as 2.14. By contrast, n value of the Rb–NiOx-based photovoltaic device is 1.45, indicating suppressed trap-assisted non-radiative recombination. Space-charge-limited-current (SCLC) of the hole-only device was conducted to estimate the bulk trap density in the perovskite films quantitatively (Fig. 4b). The trap density Nt is calculated from the equation VTFL = eNtL2/2εε0, where e is the elementary charge, L is the thickness of the perovskite film, ε is the relative dielectric constant, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, and VTFL is the trap-filling limit voltage. The hole trap density of the perovskite film grown on the Rb–NiOx thin film (3.1 × 1016 cm−3) is substantially lower than the NiOx sample (5.0 × 1016 cm−3), which is consistent with the higher VOC and FF in solar cells. The electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was employed to detect the extract transfer resistance in PSCs. The Nyquist plots of devices based on different HTLs are depicted in Fig. 4c and d, measured in the frequency range 1.0 MHz to 0.1 Hz at 0–1.0 V under dark conditions. Commonly, the high-frequency component is the signature of transfer resistance (Rtr). The low-frequency is ascribed to recombination resistance (Rrec) associated with carrier recombination in the whole device. Compared with the Nyquist plots of PSCs with different HTLs, Rb–NiOx manifests larger Rrec than the NiOx sample, implying an improved interfacial charge transport in the Rb–NiOx/perovskite interface, which contributes directly to the increase in FF. The dark current density of photovoltaic devices based on Rb–NiOx is around one order of magnitude lower than the NiOx sample (Fig. S19), indicative of lower leakage pathways after entire device doping.

In summary, we have demonstrated a simple, generic strategy to dope alkali metal ion in the entire planar inverted perovskite solar cells via a diffusion route from NiOx hole transport layers. The Rb+ doped NiOx thin film exhibited superior conductivity and better energy level matching with the perovskite layer, which help to improve the hole carrier transport and extraction. Furthermore, Rb+ ion existing in HTLs could self-migrate to the perovskite film, which is beneficial to improve the quality of perovskite films. As a result, high performance inverted PSC was obtained with a high PCE of 21.80% and considerably improved moisture and operational stability. Our finding provides a new avenue for the development of high-performance and stable thin film photovoltaics.


M. C. and H. W. Q. designed the study. H. G. Y. and Y. H. directed the study. M. C. performed the main experimental work. M. C., Q. H. W. and Z. Z. contributed to the characterizations. M. C., B. G. and J. H. analysed the data. M. C. and S. Y. wrote the manuscript. All authors revised the paper.


There are no conflicts of interest to declare.


This work was financially supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (51972111, 51902185), National Ten Thousand Talent Program for Young Top-notch Talent, National Natural Science Fund for Excellent Young Scholars (52022030), National Natural Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars (51725201), International (Regional) Cooperation and Exchange Projects of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51920105003), Innovation Program of Shanghai Municipal Education Commission (E00014), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (JKD012016025, JKD012016022), and Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Hierarchical Nanomaterials (18DZ2252400). The authors also thank the Frontiers Science Center for Materiobiology and Dynamic Chemistry.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta01061a
‡ These authors contributed equally to this study.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021