 DOI: 10.1039/C2JM33679K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21057-21064

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Chia-Jui
Liu
,

Sheng-Yen
Tai
,

Shu-Wei
Chou
,

Ya-Chu
Yu
,

Kai-Di
Chang
,

Shuei
Wang
,

Forest Shih-Sen
Chien
,

Jeng-Yu
Lin
* and 

Tsung-Wu
Lin
*

Dept. of Chemistry, Tunghai University, No. 181, Sec. 3, Taichung Port Rd., Taichung City 40704, Taiwan. E-mail: twlin@thu.edu.tw

Dept. of Chemical Engineering, Tatung University, No. 40, Sec. 3, Chungshan North Rd., Taipei City 104, Taiwan. E-mail: jylin@ttu.edu.tw; Fax: +886-225861939

Dept. of Physics, Tunghai University, No. 181, Sec. 3, Taichung Port Rd., Taichung City 40704, Taiwan. E-mail: fsschien@thu.edu.tw

Received
7th June 2012
, Accepted 15th August 2012
First published on 4th September 2012
In the current study, a nanocomposite of molybdenum disulfide and graphene (MoS2/RGO) was proposed for the first time as the counter electrode (CE) catalyst in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) to speed up the reduction of triiodide (I3−) to iodide (I−). This novel catalyst was synthesized by simply mixing graphene oxide nanosheets with a solution of ammonium tetrathiomolybdate and then converting the solid intermediate into MoS2/RGO nanocomposite in a H2 flow at 650 °C. Atomic force microscopy, X-ray powder diffraction and X-ray photoemission spectroscopy confirmed that MoS2 nanoparticles were deposited onto the graphene surface. The extensive cyclic voltammograms (CV) showed that the cathodic current density of the MoS2/RGO CE was higher than those of MoS2, RGO and sputtered Pt CEs, due to the increased active surface area of the former. Moreover, the peak current densities of the MoS2/RGO CE showed no sign of degradation after 100 consecutive CV tests, suggesting the great electrochemical stability of the MoS2/RGO CE. Furthermore, the MoS2/RGO CE demonstrated an impressively low charge-transfer resistance (0.57 Ω cm2) for I3− reduction. Finally, the DSSC assembled with the MoS2/RGO CE showed a high power conversion efficiency of 6.04%, which is comparable to the DSSC with a Pt CE (6.38%).

In the development of clean energy, solar energy is a plentiful and environmentally safe energy source. In recent years, much attention has been paid to the study of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) due to their easy fabrication, good plasticity and environmental friendliness. A DSSC typically consists of a photoanode (a nanocrystalline semiconductor film on an FTO substrate sensitized by a dye), an electrolyte containing the triiodide (I3−)/iodide (I−) redox couple, and a counter electrode (CE, usually platinum (Pt)). Although the Pt CE in DSSCs shows excellent electrocatalytic activity toward the reduction of I3−, the use of noble Pt metal greatly restricts the commercial production of DSSCs. Therefore, much effort has been devoted to exploring low cost alternatives to the Pt CE. To date, a variety of materials including carbon materials, conducting polymers, and inorganic materials (transition metal carbide, nitride, oxide or sulfide) have been tested to serve as the CE catalysts.

Stimulated by the discovery of the two-dimensional graphene monolayer and its rich physical properties, inorganic graphene analogues such as transition metal dichalcogenides, MX2 (M = Mo, W; X = S, Se, Te), have attracted considerable attention in the past few years. As a typical layered transition metal sulfide, molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) possesses a hexagonal structure, in which a sheet of Mo atoms is sandwiched between two hexagonally packed sulfur layers. The bonding within the three stacked atom layers (S–Mo–S) is covalent, whereas the interaction between sandwiches is van der Waals force. MoS2 exhibits versatile applications including as a lubricant, as the catalyst for hydrodesulfuration and hydrogen evolution reactions, and as anode materials for lithium ion batteries. However, only a few studies have been performed to investigate the use of MoS2 as the CE in a DSSC system.
To the best of our knowledge, using a MoS2/graphene nanocomposite as the CE in DSSCs has not yet been reported. In this study, we show that a MoS2/graphene nanocomposite can be synthesized by simply mixing graphene oxide (GO) nanosheets with a solution of ammonium tetrathiomolybdate, and then converting the solid intermediate into the MoS2/reduced graphene oxide (MoS2/RGO) composite in a H2 flow at 650 °C. It is found that the functional groups in GO are critical to the immobilization of MoS2 nanoparticles onto the graphene surface, and the density of MoS2 nanoparticles on graphene can be modulated by the concentration of ammonium tetrathiomolybdate. Finally, when the MoS2/RGO nanocomposite serves as the CE in DSSCs, it shows excellent electrocatalytic activity for I3− reduction and great electrochemical stability. Our results suggest that the photovoltaic performance of a DSSC based on the MoS2/RGO nanocomposite CE is comparable to that of the sputtered Pt CE.

Ultra large and single-layer GO nanosheets were prepared by a modified Hummers' method as reported. For the synthesis of the MoS2/RGO nanocomposite, 1 mg of GO nanosheets was added to a solution of ammonium tetrathiomolybdate at various concentrations (0.019 M–0.076 M). The mixed solution was sonicated for 20 min to make a homogeneous dispersion with a brown-red color. After a 12 h reaction time, the dispersion was subject to ultracentrifugation (10000 rpm) for 20 min. After the supernatant was removed, the precipitate at the bottom of the tube was carefully washed with deionized water to remove residual ammonium tetrathiomolybdate, and then dried at 70 °C overnight. Finally, the powder was annealed in a H2 (10%) flow at 650 °C for 1 h.


TiO2 based photoanodes (0.283 cm2) were fabricated by screen-printing a 14 μm thick double-layer onto FTO glass substrates (Nippon Sheet Glass Co. Ltd., 13 Ω sq−1), as described in our previous study. The first layer (∼12 μm) served as the interlayer on which a layer of light-scattering anatase TiO2 particles (∼2 μm) was coated. After sintering at 450 °C for 20 min and the subsequent cooling to 80 °C, the TiO2 photoanodes were immersed into an ethanol solution containing 0.3 mM N719 dye (RuL2(SCN)2·2H2O, L = 2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid, Everlight Chemical Industry Co.) and kept at 40 °C for 4 h. The dye-sensitized TiO2 photoanode was further assembled with a CE into a sandwich-type cell, and then sealed with a thermoplastic hot-melt Surlyn resin (30 μm thick, Dupont). As for the preparation of CEs, the active materials such as MoS2, RGO and MoS2/RGO powders were mixed with acetylene black and polyvinyldifluoride in a weight ratio of 8:1:1. The paste of the aforementioned mixtures was prepared using N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone as the solvent and subsequently drop-cast onto a drilled FTO glass substrate to form a film with a thickness of 4 μm. The coated FTO glass was dried at 120 °C for 12 h under vacuum. Then, the redox electrolyte was injected into the space between the two electrodes through the pre-drilled holes on the CE. The redox electrolyte was composed of 1 M 1,3-dimethylimidazoliumiodine (Merck), 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine (96%, Aldrich), 0.15 M iodine (J.T. Baker), and 0.1 M guanidine thiocyanate (Aldrich) in 3-methoxypropionitrile (Acros). Finally, the holes on the CE were sealed before the electrochemical measurements.


The surface morphology of the samples was examined with a commercial atomic force microscope (Agilent 5500 AFM). Raman spectra were obtained using a confocal Raman microscopic system (NT-MDT). The wavelength and spot size of the laser are 473 nm and 0.4 μm, respectively. The Si peak at 520 cm−1 was used for calibration in the experiments. Chemical configurations were determined by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Phi V5000). XPS measurements were performed on the samples with an Al Kα X-ray source. The energy calibrations were made against the C 1s peak to eliminate the charging of the sample during analysis. X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) patterns of the nanocomposites were obtained using a Philips X'Pert Pro MPD. A field-emission transmission electron microscope (TEM, JEOL JEM-2100F, operated at 200 kV with a point-to-point resolution of 0.19 nm) equipped with an energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) was used to obtain information on the microstructures and the chemical compositions. The reflection spectra of the CEs were recorded using a UV/vis/NIR spectrometer (V-560, Jasco). For the electrochemical characterization, the MoS2/RGO nanocomposite with 33 wt% MoS2 loading was chosen. Cyclic voltammograms (CVs) and Tafel polarization curves were carried out using a computer-controlled electrochemical analyzer (CHI 6081D, CH Instrument). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) analysis was performed using an IM-6 impedance analyzer (Zahner). The symmetric dummy cells were used for both EIS and Tafel measurements. EIS analysis was conducted at zero bias potential and the impedance data covered a frequency range of 0.1 Hz–1 MHz. The amplitude of the sinusoidal AC voltage signal was 5 mV. The complex nonlinear least square (CNLS) analyses of the resulting impedance spectra were conducted using the software ZSimpWin version 3.1. All photocurrent density–voltage tests of the DSSCs were conducted with a Keithley Model 2400 digital source meter under a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (AM 1.5) through a solar simulator (Yamashita Denso YSS-100A).



Fig. 1a shows the typical AFM image of the synthesized GO. The GO sheets are up to 200 μm in lateral size, and show a clean surface without any deposit. In this study, GO sheets serve as the template where ammonium tetrathiomolybdate is anchored. Fig. 1b shows some nanoparticles formed on the GO surface and edges after the mixing of GO nanosheets and (NH4)2MoS4 and post-annealing treatment. It is found that the density of the nanoparticles on GO surface can be modulated by the concentration of (NH4)2MoS4. When the concentration of (NH4)2MoS4 is higher, the distribution of the nanoparticles over the GO surface becomes denser. As shown in Fig. 1c, the GO surface is fully covered with nanoparticles when a high concentration of (NH4)2MoS4 (0.076 M) is used. Fig. 1d is a typical TEM image of the nanocomposite, showing that most of the nanoparticles lie flat on the graphene surface. EDS analysis of the nanocomposite (see Fig. S1) reveals the presence of C, O, Mo and S elements, and the average atomic ratio of Mo to S is estimated to be 1.0:2.0.

To further characterize the identity and structure of the composite sample, XRD measurements were carried out. The bottom of Fig. 2a shows the typical XRD pattern of GO subject to H2 annealing at 650 °C (RGO). It is known that GO has a broad peak near 2θ = 11.9° (d002 = 7.63 Å). In this study, RGO shows a broad (002) peak at 2θ = 26.0° (d002 = 3.41 Å). This significant shift to a higher 2θ angle suggests that the interlayer distance is reduced due to the removal of most of the oxygen-containing functional groups of GO. For the composite sample, except for the broad peak originating from RGO, several new diffraction peaks are observed in the XRD spectrum. These broad diffraction peaks (the upper spectrum in Fig. 2a) are derived from the MoS2 nanocrystal with a hexagonal structure [powder diffraction file (PDF) no. 771716].

Fig. 2b shows the typical Raman spectrum of the as-synthesized MoS2/RGO composite. The MoS2 nanoparticles exhibit two Raman characteristic bands at 406 and 383 cm−1, corresponding to the A1g and E2g modes respectively. In the higher wavenumber region (the inset in Fig. 2b), the peaks at around 1370 and 1600 cm−1 correspond to the D and G bands of graphene sheets, respectively. The G band is attributed to in-plane bond stretching of pairs of sp2 C atoms, and the D mode is associated with defects or lattice distortion. It is noteworthy that the oxygen-containing functional groups of GO play a crucial role in the immobilization of ammonium tetrathiomolybdate. A separate experiment, in which hydrazine reduced GO replaced pristine GO in the composite synthesis, showed that no MoS2 Raman characteristic peaks can be observed in the sample. This result suggests the presence of the functional groups of GO is essential to the deposition of MoS2 nanoparticles on the graphene surface.
The composite sample was characterized by X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) to verify its chemical composition. As shown in Fig. 3a, the Mo3d spectrum shows two peaks at 229.4 and 232.4 eV, attributed to the doublet Mo3d5/2 and Mo3d3/2. Furthermore, the peaks at binding energies of 162.2 and 163.3 eV in Fig. 3b can be assigned to the spin–orbit couple S2p3/2 and S2p1/2, respectively. These binding energies are all consistent with the reported values for the MoS2 crystal. In Fig. 3c, the MoS2/RGO composite shows relatively unpronounced C1s signals at higher binding energy (from 286.0 to 288.0 eV) compared with the as-prepared GO nanosheets (Fig. 3d), indicating that thermal annealing in H2 removes oxygen-containing functionalities and sp3 carbons. Based on the XPS data, it is concluded that the treatment of H2 leads to the reduction of Mo(VI) to Mo(IV) and the restoration of graphitic structures in GO.
To investigate the reaction kinetics and electrocatalytic activities of the as-prepared RGO, MoS2, and MoS2/RGO CEs toward the reduction of I3−, CVs were conducted in 3-methoxypropionitrile solution consisting of 50 mM LiI, 10 mM I2, and 500 mM LiClO4 at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. Fig. 4a shows the typical redox peaks corresponding to the reduction of I3− (cathodic peak: I3− + 2e− → 3I−) and the oxidation of I− (anodic peak: 3I− → I3− + 2e−) in the CV measurements. It is found that the broad cathodic peak of the RGO CE appears at a relatively negative potential, and its cathodic current density is the lowest among all the CE materials, suggesting that the RGO CE has a poor electrocatalytic activity. As shown in Fig. 4a, MoS2 and MoS2/RGO CEs display similar anodic and cathodic peaks to the sputtered Pt CE, suggesting that they are effective in catalyzing the reduction of I3− to I−. Compared with the MoS2 and sputtered Pt CEs, the cathodic current density of MoS2/RGO is the highest. The enhanced electrocatalytic activity of the MoS2/RGO CE can be attributed not only to the superior electrical conductivity of RGO, but also to the considerable active surface area of the MoS2 nanoparticles dispersed on the RGO surface. To gain a better insight into the difference in the diffusivity of I3−/I− redox species between MoS2 and MoS2/RGO CEs, the CVs of the I3−/I− system were carried out at various scan rates (Fig. S2). As shown in Fig. 4b, for both MoS2 and MoS2/RGO CEs, the resultant peak current densities show a linear dependence on the square root of the scan rate. This linear relationship reveals that the reaction of the I3−/I− redox couple at both CEs is dominated by diffusion-controlled transport, and there is no specific interaction between the I3−/I− redox couple and the MoS2 or MoS2/RGO CEs. The diffusion coefficient (D) of I3− can be estimated using the Randles–Sevcik equation:
Ip = Kn3/2AC(D)1/2ν1/2
(1)
where
Ip represents the peak current, K is the constant of 2.69 × 105; n is the number of electrons transferred in the redox event; A is the electrode area, C represents the bulk concentration of I3− species and v means the scan rate. The diffusion coefficient of I3− for the MoS2/RGO CE (3.84 × 10−6 cm−2 s−1) is larger than that for the MoS2 CE (1.73 × 10−6 cm−2 s−1), presumably arising from the high active surface area of MoS2/RGO. Furthermore, in the consecutive CV cycle experiment (Fig. S3 and 4c), the peak current densities of the MoS2/RGO CE show no sign of degradation after the test, suggesting that the MoS2/RGO CE possesses advantages including reversible redox activity, excellent electrochemical stability and strong adhesiveness on the FTO glass substrate.

EIS analysis was performed with a sealed symmetric cell consisting of two identical CEs to interpret the electrocatalytic activity of the various CEs. The obtained Nyquist plots are shown in Fig. 5a. The intercept of the semicircle on the real axis is assigned to the ohmic series resistance (Rs). The semicircle in the high-frequency range of the Nyquist plot is attributed to the resistance capacitance (RC) network, consisting of the charge-transfer resistance (Rct) of I3− reduction and the corresponding capacitance (Cμ) at the electrode–electrolyte interface. The right semicircle represents the diffusion resistance (ZN) of the I3−/I− redox couple in the electrolyte. Table 1 summarizes the values of Rs, Rct and Cμ estimated by fitting the arc observed at high frequency with Zsimpwin software in terms of the equivalent circuit model (Fig. S4). Due to the superior electrical conductivity of RGO, the Rs value of the MoS2/RGO CE (6.46 Ω cm2) is very close to that of the sputtered Pt electrode (6.06 Ω cm2) and much lower than that of the MoS2 CE (8.29 Ω cm2). Furthermore, the estimated Rct values of the MoS2 and RGO CEs are 2.11 and 6.09 Ω cm2, respectively. As for the MoS2/RGO CE, its Rct value is decreased to 0.57 Ω cm2, and is considerably lower than that of the sputtered Pt CE (1.93 Ω cm2). This remarkably low Rct value indicates that the MoS2/RGO CE shows superior electrocatalytic activity for I3− reduction compared to other CEs, including the sputtered Pt electrode. As shown in Table 1, the large Cμ value of the MoS2/RGO CE corresponds to its large surface area, which can promote the electrocatalytic activity of the MoS2/RGO CE. This is in accordance with the CV results. To further elucidate the electrocatalytic activity of these CEs, Tafel-polarization analysis was conducted for the symmetric cells used in the EIS experiments. Fig. 5b shows the Tafel polarization curves for the symmetric cells based on sputtered Pt, MoS2, RGO, and MoS2/RGO CEs. The tangent slope of the Tafel curves provides information about the exchange current density (J0), which is closely associated with the Rct value, as shown in eqn (2).
(2)
where
R is the gas constant, T is the temperature, F is the Faraday constant, and n represents the number of electrons involved in the reaction at the electrolyte–CE interface. The J0 values for the individual CEs are summarized in Table 1. Compared to the MoS2 and RGO CEs, the MoS2/RGO CE displays an enhanced J0 (5.89 mA cm−2), which is in good agreement with the EIS values in terms of eqn (2).


R
s (Ω cm2)

R
ct (Ω cm2)

C
μ (μF cm−2)

J
0 (mA cm−2)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF

η (%)
Sputtered Pt
6.06
1.93
1.15
3.88
13.42
0.72
0.66
6.38
MoS2
8.29
2.11
20.85
2.94
11.21
0.73
0.62
5.09
RGO
6.07
6.09
22.47
0.25
9.47
0.67
0.54
3.43
MoS2/RGO
6.46
0.57
45.42
5.89
12.51
0.73
0.66
6.04
In order to raise the conversion efficiency (η) of solar cells, three parameters, fill factor (FF), short circuit current and open circuit voltage (Voc), must be improved. To investigate the effect of the CEs on the aforementioned parameters and the conversion efficiency of the DSSCs, DSSCs were assembled with various CEs including sputtered Pt, RGO, MoS2, and MoS2/RGO. Fig. 6 shows the photovoltaic performances of the DSSCs assembled with various CEs, and the detailed photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. Except for the RGO CE, all the other CE materials in the current study display similar Voc values without any change to the TiO2 photoanodes or the electrolytes of the devices. However, the short circuit current density (Jsc) and FF of the cells varies with different CEs. For example, the RGO CE based DSSC shows the lowest Jsc (9.47 mA cm−2) and FF (0.54) values, and thus the resulting η value (3.43%) is the worst among the four different cells, as expected. It is noted that the variation in FF and Jsc can be as large as 6% and 11%, respectively, when the CE material in the cell is changed from MoS2 to MoS2/RGO. Compared with MoS2, the MoS2/RGO based DSSC shows a higher η value (6.04%) due to the great contribution from the improved FF and Jsc values. For the MoS2/RGO based DSSC, the increase in Jsc value may be attributed to the fact that the large active surface area of CE increases the total current of the I−/I3− redox reaction. Furthermore, the enhancement in the FF value for the MoS2/RGO based DSSC can be explained by the decrease in the internal resistance elements (Rs and Rct). Due to the superior electrical conductivity of RGO, the MoS2/RGO CE shows a low Rs value, which promotes the collection of electrons from the external circuit. On the other hand, the small Rct at the CE–electrolyte interface enhances the electron transfer from the CE to the I3− ions. The improved FF and Jsc values lead to a photovoltaic performance of the MoS2/RGO based DSSC which is comparable to that of sputtered Pt based cells (6.38%). It should be noted that the MoS2/RGO based DSSC demonstrates a lower Jsc value than the DSSC using a sputtered Pt CE. The high reflectivity of the mirror-like sputtered Pt (Fig. S5) is expected to reflect the unabsorbed portion of the incident solar light back to the TiO2 photoanode, thus enhancing the light-harvesting efficiency of the DSSC. However, this effect is obstructed for the opaque MoS2/RGO CE, which leads to a relatively low Jsc value. In addition, Fig. S6 shows long-term stability data of a MoS2/RGO based DSSC under continuous AM 1.5 G irradiation. It is found that the value of η gradually decreases from its initial value to 86% after irradiation for 8 days, which can be ascribed to the adsorption of water molecules on carbon based CEs. In subsequent tests, the cell efficiency becomes stable. This result indicates that the MoS2/RGO based DSSC shows reasonable stability in long-term operation, which is in accord with the results from the consecutive CV scans.
Finally, Fig. 7 shows the possible catalytic mechanisms of MoS2/RGO and MoS2 CEs toward I3− reduction during the operation of the DSSC. For the MoS2/RGO CE, the high surface area of graphene promotes high numbers of MoS2 nanoparticles spread across the surface of the RGO sheets, as evidenced by our AFM observation (Fig. 1c). By taking advantage of the high conductivity of RGO, the electrons are easily shuttled across the 2D mat to the catalytic MoS2 sites where the electrons are used to reduce I3− species. It is known that the low conductivity between two adjacent van der Waals bonded S–Mo–S sheets inhibits the delivery of the electrons to the surface of the MoS2 particles. Due to the size effect, it is expected that the time of electron hopping between the sandwich sheets in the MoS2 nanoparticles is less than that in micrometer-sized MoS2 particles. Therefore, more electrons can be transferred to the surface of the MoS2 nanoparticles where I3− reduction occurs. In addition, the Rct value of MoS2 nanoparticles is comparable to that of sputtered Pt, indicating that MoS2 is as effective as Pt for catalyzing I3− reduction. Based on the capacitance measurement, it is suggested that MoS2 nanoparticles should have a larger active surface area than MoS2 particles, which leads to the former having a lower Rct value. Furthermore, the large active surface of the nanoparticles allows the I3− species to have a high probability of diffusing onto the MoS2 surface. This is also supported by the fact that the MoS2/RGO CE shows a larger diffusion coefficient of I3− than the MoS2 CE. Based on the aforementioned statements, the MoS2/RGO CE displays a higher catalytic activity toward the reduction of I3− than the MoS2 CE.

In this work, a nanocomposite of MoS2 and graphene has been successfully synthesized by simply mixing GO nanosheets with a solution of ammonium tetrathiomolybdate, and then converting the solid intermediate into the MoS2/RGO nanocomposite in a H2 flow at 650 °C. The presence of the functional groups of GO is essential to the deposition of MoS2 nanoparticles on the graphene surface, as evidenced by AFM and Raman measurements. Furthermore, both XRD and XPS experiments have verified that MoS2 nanoparticles with a hexagonal structure are deposited onto the reduced GO after thermal annealing in H2. Extensive CV measurements show that the MoS2/RGO CE, with a high active surface area, possesses a higher cathodic current density than RGO, MoS2 and sputtered Pt CEs. The Rct (0.57 Ω cm2) of the MoS2/RGO CE, estimated from the Nyquist plot, also demonstrates its superior electrocatalytic activity. Furthermore, the peak current densities of the MoS2/RGO CE show no sign of degradation after 100 CV cycles, suggesting the great electrochemical stability of the MoS2/RGO CE. Finally, the DSSC assembled with a MoS2/RGO CE shows a comparable power conversion efficiency of 6.04% to the DSSC with a Pt CE (6.38%). The present work suggests that the MoS2/RGO CE shows great potential as a low cost alternative to Pt in DSSCs.


This research was supported by the National Science Council Taiwan (NSC 100-2113-M-029-001-MY2 and NSC 101-2221-E-036-035). This research was also supported by the Tunghai Green Energy Development and Management Institute (TGEI). We also thank Dr. Yu-Sheng Hsiao and Mr. Hung-Yu Wei for their assistance with the TEM and XPS measurements.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm33679k
‡ These authors contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012