 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA06879K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15383-15389


Huiyin
Zhang
,

Jiangjian
Shi
,

Xin
Xu
,

Lifeng
Zhu
,

Yanhong
Luo
,

Dongmei
Li
 and 

Qingbo
Meng
*

Key Laboratory for Renewable Energy, Beijing Key Laboratory for New Energy Materials and Devices, Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: qbmeng@iphy.ac.cn

Received
11th August 2016
, Accepted 31st August 2016
First published on 21st September 2016
Mg as an effective ion dopant has been introduced into compact TiO2 ETL for planar perovskite solar cells. It is found that Mg doping can shift the Fermi energy level of the ETL upward and decrease the resistivity of the TiO2 film. Carrier transport velocity is thus enhanced and high charge collection efficiency has been achieved at high bias voltages, leading to a higher fill factor (FF) and better cell efficiency. More than 19% power conversion efficiency has been obtained.

Perovskite solar cells (PSCs), consisting of a perovskite absorber and inorganic or organic selective contacts, have attracted considerable interest as a promising candidate for photovoltaic application. Typically, PSCs can be fabricated by solution-processing methods, which have distinctive advantages of low manufacturing cost and simple procedures, compared to the conventional high temperature based inorganic semiconductor junction cells. In the past few years, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of this cell has been enhanced from 3.8% to 22.1%, which is even higher than that of multicrystalline silicon solar cell (21.3%) and comparable to those of CdTe (22.1%) and Cu(In, Ga)Se2 (22.3%) solar cells. To date, most of the certified high-efficiency cells are based on mesoscopic structures, which can provide larger interface contact area to support film deposition and afford faster charge extraction. In fact, the planar heterojunction PSCs have also been developing rapidly, with a series of solution or vapor deposition methods applied to obtain high-quality perovskite film. This planar PSC has a simpler device structure and can be completely fabricated at much lower temperature, which help to lower the fabrication cost. Due to these advantages, many works have also been focused on the planar cell.

In addition to a high quality perovskite absorber film, engineering selective contact layers and interfaces has also been demonstrated as an effective approach to improve cell performance. In planar PSCs, the n-type electron transport layer (ETL) plays an important role in extracting photo-induced free electrons and suppressing front-surface hole recombination. Therefore, the compact ETLs have to fully cover the conductive substrate. Usually, a TiO2 ETL with a thickness of tens of nanometers is demanded to satisfy this coverage; however, it simultaneously suffers from low conductivity and carrier accumulation due to the numerous trap states. Thus, it is crucial to enhance the ETL's carrier transport ability while keeping its covering advantage. Therefore, some works have been carried out. For example, TiO2 nanoparticles were directly applied to deposit the ETL to increase the electron density and conductivity. Remarkably, the conductivity was increased by 50-fold compared with conventional TiO2 film. Graphene and graphene quantum dots were also introduced as additives to increase the conductivity and carriers extraction of ETL. Moreover, ion doping is another effective method to control the trap states and carrier transport, for example, niobium and lithium dopants have been successfully applied. These results show that ion doping can effectively tailor the energy band structure, increase the conductivity and decrease trap density of ETL. However, ion doped TiO2 ETLs were achieved by adding corresponding metal salt into the TiO2 precursor solution. This method may need a complex sol–gel process, which increases the difficulty to control experiment process.
In this study, magnesium as an effective dopant is introduced into the compact TiO2 ETL and applied for the planar PSCs. It is found that the Mg doping can shift the Fermi energy level of the ETL upward, increase the free electron density and decrease the density of deep trap states. The resistivity of the TiO2 film is thus decreased, leading to a decrease in the series resistance of the cell. A PCE exceeding 19% has been achieved. Furthermore, the microscopic carrier transport and recombination mechanisms behind the macroscopic efficiency are further investigated by DC current–voltage, AC frequency impedance and modulated transient photocurrent/photovoltage analysis. It is revealed that Mg doping can significantly reduce the transport time of photo-induced carriers to be collected and enhance the charge collection efficiency at high bias voltages, thus contributing to high performance.

PbI2 and PbBr2 were purchased from Aldrich-Sigma (99.9985%); methylammonium bromide (MABr) and formamidinium iodide (FAI) were from Shanghai Materwin New Materials Co., Ltd. N,N-Dimethylformamide (DMF), dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) and chlorobenzene were from Alfar Aesar. Spiro-OMeTAD was from Luminescence Technology Corp. Magnesium chloride was purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. All the chemicals were directly used without further purification. Laser-patterned FTO glass (Pilkington, thickness of 2.2 mm and sheet resistance of 15 Ω sq−1) was sequentially cleaned with a mild detergent, distilled water and ethanol in an ultrasonic bath. The substrate was treated with UV-ozone for 15 min prior to use.


The perovskite solar cells are fabricated on the transparent FTO substrate. The compact TiO2 layer of about 30 nm was deposited onto the FTO by spin coating a sol–gel precursor solution containing 0.125 M titanium isopropoxide and 0.125 M HCl in n-butylalcohol and sintered at 500 °C for 30 min. After cooling to room temperature, the TiO2 compact film was immersed into a 0.025 M TiCl4 aqueous solution with different MgCl2 concentration (0, 0.005, 0.01, 0.025 M) and heated at 70 °C for 30 min. Furthermore, the film was sintered at 500 °C for another 30 min. The perovskite layer was deposited on top of the TiO2 compact layer by a spin coating method, as reported previously. In detail, the perovskite precursor solution was obtained by dissolving 1.15 mM-PbI2, 1.095 mM-FAI, 0.202 mM-PbBr2 and 0.202 mM-MABr in a mixture of 0.8 mL-DMF and 0.2 mL-DMSO, then stirring overnight. The perovskite film was successively deposited by two-step spin-coating; first, at 1000 rpm for 10 s and then at 5000 rpm for 30 s. During the second step, 120 μL chlorobenzene was poured on the spinning substrate in 15 s. The as prepared perovskite film was treated at 150 °C for 10 min in the glove box and then 100 °C for 40 min in the vacuum condition. The Spiro-MeOTAD layer with a thickness of about 200 nm was spin-coated onto the perovskite film at 3000 rpm for 30 s. An 80 nm-thick Au electrode was finally deposited via thermal evaporation under the vacuum of 10−7 Torr.


The thickness of the TiO2 film was measured by a surface profiler (KLA-Tencor). The morphology of the films was obtained by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi S4800). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed on the Thermo Scientific ESCALab 250Xi using 200 W monochromated Al Kα radiation, and 500 μm X-ray spot was used for XPS analysis with the energy resolution of 50 meV. The ICP-AES results were obtained by using a full spectrum direct reading plasma spectrometer (IRIS Intrepid II XDL, Thermo Elemental). For the current–voltage (I–V) measurements, the cells were illuminated under AM 1.5 simulated sunlight (100 mW cm−2) from Zolix SS150A. I–V curves were recorded by a digital source meter (Keithley model 2602). The solar cells were masked with a black aperture to define the active area of 0.1 cm2. External quantum efficiency (EQE) of the cells was measured with a lab-made setup under 0.3–0.9 mW cm−2 monochromic light illumination without bias illumination. Transient photovoltage and photocurrent of the cell were obtained by a pulsed double-frequency Nd:YAG laser (Brio, 20 Hz, 4 ns) at 532 nm with an ultralow light intensity of about 10 nJ cm−2 and recorded by a sub-nanosecond resolved digital oscilloscope (Tektronix DPO 7104) with input impedances of 1 MΩ and 50 Ω. A signal generator (Tektronix AFG 3052C) together with a low-pass filter was applied to give steady-state bias voltages over the cell. Impedance spectra measurements were performed with an IM6ex electrochemical workstation (Zahner) in dark in the frequency range of 1 MHz–1 Hz and perturbation amplitude of 10 mV.


In this study, the planar-heterojunction perovskite solar cell was fabricated and Fig. 1(a) shows the device structure of FTO/Mg-doped TiO2/perovskite film/Spiro-MeOTAD/Au. According to the cross sectional SEM image of the complete cell in Fig. 1(b), different layers are deposited closely to each other; however, the ETL is too thin to be observed. To realize trace-Mg doping and to avoid the formation of insulating MgO secondary phase, Mg doping is accomplished in the TiCl4 treatment process. Herein, the strong acidity of TiCl4 aqueous solution prevents the direct precipitation of MgO. The Mg ions may be embed into the TiO2 lattice by absorbing into the hydrated TiO2 and ion diffusion occurs in the later high-temperature sintering process. To confirm the existence of Mg in the ETL layer, ICP-AES measurement is performed, as shown in Fig. 1(c). It clearly shows an emission peak corresponding to Mg atom at about 279 nm and further indicates that the atom ratio between Mg and Ti is about 0.8%. XPS spectra of the ETL films are also measured and shown in Fig. 1(d). The Mg 1s peak is observed and magnified in the inset. To investigate the influence of the existence of Mg atoms in the film, the high-resolution Ti 2p peaks are shown in Fig. 1(e). With Mg, the Ti 2p3/2 peak is shifted toward the high energy by about 70 meV, which implies that trace Mg has been located into the TiO2 lattice, influencing the electronic structure of the Ti atoms. Thus, Mg can be considered as a dopant in TiO2. For clarity, the Mg-doped ETL film will be labeled as ‘Mg doped TiO2 (x)’ in the following discussion, where ‘x’ is the concentration of MgCl2 added in the TiCl4 solution. The XPS valence band spectra are given to further reveal the influence of Mg doping on the electronic structure, as in Fig. 1(f). It is found that the Fermi energy level of the ETL is upward-shifted by about 100 meV, which is obviously larger than the energy resolution of the XPS measurement. However, no change is found in the absorption spectra, suggesting that the band gap of the film has not been changed. Thus, it is deduced that the upward shift of Fermi energy level implies that the free electron density in the film is significantly increased or that the density of deep trap states below the conduction band is decreased. Obviously, these two effects can enhance the charge transport ability of the ETL film.

Furthermore, the conductivity of the ETL films is directly measured with a DC I–V method. The sample structure for this measurement is depicted as in the inset of Fig. 2(a). It is obvious that the resistivity of the film is reduced after Mg doping. Among these samples, the ETL doped with 0.01 M Mg shows the highest conductivity, which is about 1.7 times higher than that of the pristine TiO2 ETL. The series resistance (RS) of the cells fabricated with and without the Mg-doped ETL is also derived from the illuminated I–V curves, as shown in Fig. 2(b). Agreeing with the resistivity measurement, RS of the cell is decreased from 3.2 to 1.6 Ω cm2. In a solar cell, a lower RS is necessary to eliminate charge loss at high bias voltages and to achieve high fill factor (FF). With these ETLs, the cells are fabricated. The statistic results of their performance are summarized in Table 1. As can be observed, Mg doping mainly improves the FF by about 4.3% and slightly increases the open-circuit voltage (VOC) by about 2.8%. Finally, the averaged PCE is enhanced from 16.37% to 17.65% and the highest PCE is improved from 17.29% to 19.08% when 0.01 M MgCl2 is applied as the doping source. For clarity, the I–V curves of the best performed cells with and without the Mg doped ETL and the statistic histograms of the PCE are shown in Fig. 3. As has been discussed, the I–V curves indicate the decrease in RS. Moreover, these I–V results also indicate that the heterojunction nature of the cell does not change after ion doping since the ideality factors of the cells are almost the same. This implies that no insulating layer is formed at the ETL/perovskite interface to accumulate free carriers, which also confirms the abovementioned discussion based on the XPS results.
ETL
Averaged JSC (mA cm−2)
Averaged VOC (V)
Averaged FF (%)
PCE (%)
Average
Max
TiO2
21.36 ± 0.64
1.060 ± 0.014
72.3 ± 2.4
16.37 ± 0.72
17.29
Mg doped TiO2 (0.005)
21.46 ± 0.81
1.073 ± 0.017
73.4 ± 1.7
16.89 ± 0.71
17.75
Mg doped TiO2 (0.01)
21.48 ± 0.60
1.090 ± 0.012
75.4 ± 1.8
17.65 ± 0.75
19.08
Mg doped TiO2 (0.025)
21.22 ± 0.58
1.080 ± 0.013
74.6 ± 1.8
17.10 ± 0.79
18.24
The recombination properties are further investigated to understand the influence of Mg doping on the photoelectric characteristics of the cells. The saturated recombination current density (J0) of the cell is derived from the I–V curves, as shown in Fig. 4(a). It can be seen that J0 is decreased from 3.15 × 10−7 to 1.97 × 10−7 mA cm−2 after Mg doping. In a heterojunction solar cell, J0 is related to the built-in potential (Vbi) of the cell as J0 ∼ exp(−qVbi/KBT), where q is the electron charge, KB is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature. As the Fermi energy level of the ETL is shifted upward, it can be inferred that Vbi is also increased, thus decreasing J0. According to the calculated J0 and the ideality factor of the cell, VOC can be estimated as AKBT/q × ln(JSC/J0). With the value of J0, it is found that VOC is improved by about 30 mV, which agrees well with the experimental results. The AC impedance spectra are also applied to evaluate the charge recombination resistance (RCT) and the accuracy of the abovementioned calculation based on the DC I–V results. Fig. 4(b) gives the Nyquist plots of the cells. After Mg doping, RCT of the cell increases from 8 to about 13.5 kΩ cm2, in good agreement with the theoretical relationship between RCT and J0. Transient photovoltage in dark is also measured, as shown in Fig. 4(c). For the cell with the pristine TiO2 ETL, it has a recombination lifetime of about 0.8 ms, which obviously increases to 1.7 ms after Mg doping. All these self-consistent results support that Mg doping can decrease the charge recombination in the cell, which agrees with the previous reports. This can be reasonably explained by the change in the Fermi energy level.
In addition to the charge recombination, the increase in film conductivity may also influence the carrier transport ability of the cell and the final charge collection. Thus, the transient photocurrent of the cell at different bias voltages is measured for deep understanding.Fig. 5(a) gives the transient photocurrent results of the cells with ETLs of the pristine TiO2 and the Mg-doped TiO2 (0.01), respectively, at bias voltages of 0 and 880 mV. For the cell without ETL doping, the carrier transport time (τj) is 5.5 μs at 0 mV. When the bias voltage is increased to 880 mV, wherein the solar cell may work in practice, the peak photocurrent decreases by about 50%. Moreover, the τj changes to 4.0 μs. The left shift of the photocurrent peak confirms this decrease. By integrating the photocurrents, the total charge collected by the cell can be derived. As the energy of incident pulse laser does not change during the measurement, the results of transient photocurrent mean that the charge collection efficiency decreases by more than 50% when the bias voltage is increased. Another interesting result is the decrease in τj. In the general physics model of a heterojunction solar cell, the photo-induced free electrons in the perovskite absorber can be fast extracted into the ETL within several nanoseconds. In this case, the non-equilibrium free electrons will stay close to the ETL/perovskite interface in a form of delta distribution. Furthermore, these carriers will spontaneously diffuse to the FTO/ETL interface to be collected. In this process, some carriers can also be recombined through the ETL/perovskite interface. These recombined carriers will not contribute to the photocurrent. The decrease in τj is usually thought to be attributed to the enhancement in charge conductivity. However, in the planar perovskite solar cell, we find that the bias voltage would not change the electronic properties of the ETL by theoretical calculation and experimental measurements. Thus, it is supposed that the conductivity of the ETL does not enlarge by increasing the bias voltage. Moreover, the charge collection efficiency would not be significantly decreased if the conductivity is increased. Therefore, the only possibility is that more free carriers are recombined at the interface. One may debate that the interface recombination during the carrier collection can be ignored since τj is much smaller than the generally measured and reported charge recombination lifetime. However, it can be noted that the recombination lifetime of the cell is found to be ultra-short under illumination and high bias voltages, which is only several microseconds, similar to τj. Thus, a high conductivity and short τj are necessary for high charge collection efficiency.
When it comes to the doped ETL, τj is only about 1.3 μs at bias voltage of 0 mV, whereas at 880 mV, τj is not changed. Moreover, the peak photocurrent only decreases by about 20%. All these results indicate that much fewer free carriers are lost during the transport and collection processes. The shorter τj and higher conductivity of the Mg doped ETL contributes to this positive effect. With the transient photocurrents, the total collected charge of different cells at different bias voltages is finally derived and summarized in Fig. 5(b). At low bias voltages below 500 mV, all the cells show almost the same charge collection efficiency. At higher voltages, the charge collection of the pristine TiO2 ETL based cell decreases due to the increase in charge recombination. Although the charge recombination lifetime of the Mg doped ETL based cell can also significantly decrease at high voltages, the faster charge transport still prevents the obvious carrier loss and maintains higher charge collection efficiency. More efficient charge collection at high voltages could be the microscopic origin for the higher FF of the cell.
In particular, for the best performed device, the detailed I–V curve is shown in Fig. 6(a), giving a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 22.56 mA cm−2, VOC of 1101.4 mV, FF of 0.768, and PCE of 19.08%. The external quantum efficiency in the short-circuit condition is also measured, yielding an integrated JSC of about 21.8 mA cm−2, agreeing well with the I–V result and confirming the accuracy of our measurement. The steady-state current output and efficiency of the cell is also measured, as shown in Fig. 6(c). A steady-state PCE of 18% is obtained, which is only a little lower than the I–V result due to the anomalous hysteresis in this cell.

Mg has been introduced as an effective ion dopant to enhance the carrier transport ability of the compact TiO2 ETL for planar perovskite solar cells. XPS valence band spectra reveal that this doping can shift the Fermi energy level of the ETL upward, increasing the free electron density or decreasing the density of deep trap states. With this doping, the resistivity of the TiO2 film is decreased, leading to a decrease in the series resistance of the cell. Moreover, the cell performance is evidently boosted, yielding a PCE exceeding 19%. The microscopic carrier transport and recombination mechanisms behind the macroscopic efficiency are further investigated with DC current–voltage, AC frequency impedance and modulated transient photocurrent/photovoltage analysis. This doping can significantly reduce the transport time of photo-induced carriers to be collected, which obviously enhances the charge collection efficiency of the cell at high bias voltages. This improvement in charge collection efficiency contributes to higher FF and cell efficiency. In addition to improving the cell performance, the modulated electrical transient investigations applied in this work also give an effective approach to clarify the microscopic properties of a solar cell.


This study was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51421002, 11474333, 91433205 and 51627803).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016