 DOI: 10.1039/C5TC00213C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 4099-4103


Yue
Cui
,

Di
Huang
,

Yang
Li
,

Wenxiao
Huang
,

Zhiqin
Liang
,

Zheng
Xu
 and 

Suling
Zhao
*

Key Laboratory of Luminescence and Optical Information, Beijing Jiaotong University, Ministry of Education, Beijing 100044, P. R. China. E-mail: slzhao@bjtu.edu.cn

Institute of Optoelectronic Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, P. R. China

Center for Nanotechnology and Molecular Materials, Department of Physics, Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, NC, USA

Received
21st January 2015
, Accepted 8th March 2015
First published on 9th March 2015
To enhance the light harvesting of polymer solar cells (PSCs), amphipathic Al core and PPh3 protective shell (Al@PPh3) nanoparticles (NPs) synthesized by a simple and facile wet chemical process are incorporated into the anode buffer layer of the PTB7:PC71BM blend PSCs. The optimized power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 6.29% is achieved, which is enhanced about 20% compared with the pristine device. It is attributed to the localised surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effects of Al@PPh3 NPs incorporated in the buffer layer and the light absorption of devices is enhanced.

Polymer solar cells (PSCs) have many advantages over their inorganic counterparts, including low fabrication costs and application versatility. However, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) at present is significantly low, which is mostly limited by the poor carrier mobility of organic materials. A thinner PSC active layer can lower the probability of charge recombination and increase the carrier drift velocity, while a minimum film thickness is always required to ensure sufficient photon absorption. Therefore, it is quite important to increase the absorption of the active layer without increasing the thickness.

An effective method for achieving light trapping inside PSCs to increase absorbance is the use of metallic NPs that produce localised surface plasmon resonance (LSPR), which is elicited through the resonant interaction between the local electromagnetic fields of incident light and the surface electron density surrounding metallic NPs causing local enhancement in the electromagnetic field. It has been well-established that noble metal (Au and Ag) NPs have a significant impact on the enhancement of the PCE of PSCs with different structures by the LSPR effect.
Compared with the noble metals, Al, which is also capable of supporting LSPR and significantly more abundant and cheaper, has attracted surging interest in fundamental studies and applications. Recent studies suggested that Al NPs have the potential to lead to significantly greater enhancement than the typical plasmonic materials, due to the much higher plasma frequency, which ensures a better overlap between plasmon resonance and absorption bands of organic semiconductors. Al NPs can also enhance the stability of PSCs. Despite all these potential advantages, the exploitation of Al NPs for LSPR is in a fledging period and still facing many challenges. LSPR is sensitive to the size, shape, interparticle spacing, dielectric environment and dielectric properties of the nanoparticles used. However it is challenging to prepare Al NPs with air stability, narrow size distribution and a low degree of aggregation. Simultaneously, Al NPs are vulnerable when exposed to ambient conditions: an oxidized layer on the particles’ surface is formed as a barrier suppressing further oxidation, which decreases the effect of LSPR on the performance of PSCs due to undesirable exciton quenching processes.
Although both positive and negative effects of introducing metallic NPs into PSCs have been reported, the incorporation of cheaper metallic NPs into the photoactive layer or the interconnecting layer is still a potential method to improve the performance of PSCs with different structures. So in this paper, a novel architecture of Al core and PPh3 protective shell (Al@PPh3) nanoparticles (NPs) has been synthesized by a simple and facile wet chemical process for realizing LSPR to enhance PSC efficiencies. The influence of various shapes and configurations of Al@PPh3 NPs was investigated. In particular, poly[[4,8-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl][3-fluoro-2-[(2-ethylhexyl)carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl]] (PTB7) was chosen as the electron donor material and the prepared Al@PPh3 NPs were incorporated into the anode buffer layer for the first time.

Aluminium chloride (AlCl3, anhydrous, powder, 99.99%, trace metal basis), lithium aluminium hydride (LiAlH4, powder, reagent grade), and triphenylphosphine (PPh3, powder, ReagentPlus grade) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Chemicals and used as received without any purification. AlCl3 and LiAlH4 acted as precursors for preparing the Al particles, while PPh3 acted as both stabilizing ligand and reducing agent. 1,3,5-trimethylbenzene solution (analytical standard) which was processed with the ultrasonic cleaning and dehydration was used as the solvent for the reaction of the chemicals.

In a glovebox, AlCl3 (2 mmol) and PPh3 (40 mmol) were mixed with 50 ml of 1,3,5-trimethylbenzene in a round bottom flask, and stirred for 0.5 h. Then 10 ml of 1,3,5-trimethylbenzene containing LiAlH4 (6 mmol) was slowly added to the flask. Subsequently, the precursor solution was removed from the glovebox, heated to 164 °C and maintained for 1 h. All reactions were performed under argon protection. The prepared Al@PPh3 NPs were extracted by a centrifugation process at 12000 rpm for 10 min, and washed with 0 °C methyl alcohol and tetrahydrofuran (THF) several times.
In order to identify the crystallization phase, X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was carried out using a D8 FOCUS X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα irradiation (λ = 1.5406 Å). The scanning angle range (2θ) was 20° to 90° at a speed of 0.05° s−1. The surface structures of the Al@PPh3 NPs were observed using a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Hitachi, S-4300). The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images were recorded using a JEM-2100F microscope operated at 200 kV. Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Nicolet-6700) spectroscopy with the KBr pellet was performed to investigate whether the PPh3 layer was well covered on the surface of Al@PPh3 NPs.

The indium tin oxide (ITO) glass substrates (sheet resistance 15 Ω □−1) were cleaned consecutively in ultrasonic baths containing acetone, ethanol and de-ionized water and dried by high pure nitrogen gas. The pre-cleaned ITO substrates were then treated with UV-ozone for 5 min. Electron donor material PTB7 and electron acceptor PC71BM were purchased from 1-material Chemscitech and Nano-C, respectively, and used as received. The Al@PPh3 NPs were dissolved in ethyl alcohol at a concentration of 0.1 mmol ml−1. Poly-(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)–poly-(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) was purchased from H. C. Starck co. Ltd. The device structures were ITO/Al@PPh3 NP/PEDOT:PSS/PTB7:PC71BM (1:1.5 by weight)/LiF/Al, ITO/Al@PPh3 NP:PEDOT:PSS/PTB7:PC71BM/LiF/Al and the regular device structure was ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTB7:PC71BM/LiF/Al. All anode buffer layers were spin-coated on the ITO substrates at 3000 rpm for 40 s. Then these ITO substrates were dried in air at 120 °C for 10 min and then transferred to an N2 glove box and dried again at 120 °C for 10 min on a hot plate. The polymer materials PTB7 and PC71BM were dissolved in chlorobenzene at a concentration of 20 mg ml−1, respectively. The PTB7:PC71BM active blend layer was prepared by spin-coating a mixed solvent of chlorobenzene/1,8-diiodoctane (97:3 by volume) solution (concentration, 20 mg ml−1) at 1000 rpm for 2 min. A 0.7 nm interfacial LiF layer and an about 100 nm aluminium cathode layer were successively deposited by thermal evaporation under 2 × 10−4 Pa vacuum conditions. The active area is about 9 mm2, which is defined by the vertical overlap of the ITO anode and the Al cathode.

The current–voltage characteristics of PSCs were measured using a Keithley 4200 semiconductor characterization system and an ABET Sun 2000 solar simulator. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra were recorded on a Zolix Solar Cell Scan 100. The absorption spectra of films were recorded using a Shimadzu UV-3101 PC spectrometer. The thickness of PTB7:PC71BM was about 80 nm which was determined using the KLA Tencor P6 stylus profiler.

Amphipathic Al@PPh3 NPs were synthesized by a novel wet chemical process, and the morphological control with surfactant PPh3 has been discussed. The reaction is explained as follows (eqn (1)):

(1)
 X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis (
Fig. 1a) confirmed the face-centered-cubic (fcc) Al@PPh3 NPs, which agreed with the JCPDS (No: 04-0787), and showed no appearance of Al2O3.

The investigation of the morphology is demonstrated in Fig. 1b. The HRTEM image revealed the core–shell structure with an Al core and a 5 nm thick amorphous PPh3 protective shell, which was also confirmed by the Fourier transform infrared spectrometry (FT-IR) spectra (see ESI, Fig. S1).
PPh3 played multiple roles: firstly, it is expected to prevent the aggregation of nanoparticles and lead to a small particle size (see ESI, Fig. S2 and S3). Secondly, PPh3 provided the solubility of Al@PPh3 NPs in both aqueous and oleic phases, which is a key to fabricate the PSCs with different structure.
Then the prepared Al@PPh3 NPs were introduced into PTB7:PC71BM based PSCs to act as anode buffer layers. The volume ratio of the Al@PPh3 NP aqueous solution and the PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution is 1:3. Fig. 2a and Fig. S4 (ESI) show the photovoltaic device structure and the molecular structure of used materials PTB7 and PC71BM, respectively. Fig. 2b displays the photocurrent–voltage (J–V) characteristics, recorded under 100 mW cm−2 illumination (AM 1.5G), of the PSCs prepared with different anode buffer layers. The respective averaged photovoltaic characteristics are summarized in Table 1.
Anode buffer layers

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

R
sh (ohm cm−2)

R
s (ohm cm−2)
Pristine PEDOT:PSS
0.73 ± 0.01
12.53 ± 0.16
57.5 ± 0.01
5.26 ± 0.03
665.37
13.94
Al@PPh3 NP/PEDOT:PSS
0.74 ± 0.01
13.27 ± 0.15
63.9 ± 0.12
6.28 ± 0.02
943.61
10.49
Al@PPh3 NP + PEDOT:PSS
0.74 ± 0.01
13.02 ± 0.09
65.3 ± 0.05
6.29 ± 0.02
1063.01
8.31
Interestingly, it is observed that the incorporation of Al@PPh3 NPs into the buffer layer induces an enhancement of nearly 5.9% to the short-circuit current (Jsc), and a noticeably upward trend in the values of fill factor (FF), while the open-circuit voltage (Voc) remains almost constant. The devices with Al@PPh3 NPs exhibit a PCE of 6.29%, which is nearly 19.6% higher than that of the pristine device.
In order to find an optimal concentration, we also studied the volume ratios of 0:1, 1:2, 1:3, 1:4 and 1:9 of the Al@PPh3 NP aqueous solution and the PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution according to the photovoltaic performance. The data are provided in Fig. S5 and Table S1 (ESI). We found that the optimized volume ratio is 1:3. A further increase of Al@PPhs3 NPs leads to a detrimental effect on the PCE.
In order to get an insight into the mechanism responsible for the enhanced performance of the short-circuit current, the incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) curve and absorption spectra of the Al@PPh3 NPs were recorded and compared with those of the pristine one (Fig. 3). The improvement in the IPCE, which is broad and uniform ranging from 350 to 700 nm, results from the effect of Al@PPh3 NPs, especially from the efficient light scattering and improved charge transport. The photocurrent increased notably after incorporating the Al@PPh3 NPs, which implies that more light was harvested because of multiple light scattering by the Al@PPh3 NPs. To confirm this hypothesis we recorded optical absorption spectra of Al@PPh3 NPs, as well as the devices fabricated with and without Al@PPh3 NPs in PEDOT:PSS (shown in Fig. 3b). In addition, the increased and extended operability of Al@PPh3 NP-PEDOT:PSS composite PSCs at visible wavelengths well below the UV region is closely related to the injection of plasmonically excited hot carriers (electrons) from metal NPs into PEDOT:PSS. The wavelength range of spectral response enhancement coincides with the improvement in the IPCE, indicating that excitation of the LSPR indeed improved the photocurrent.
To further investigate the underlying mechanism responsible for the enhanced performance of the devices, we compared the maximum exciton generation rates (Gmax) and exciton dissociation probabilities for devices prepared using pristine PEDOT:PSS solution and the devices with Al@PPh3 NP/PEDOT:PSS two anode buffer layers, following the analytical approach reported by Mihailetchi and Chen.Fig. 4 reveals the effect of the LSPR on the photocurrent density (Jph). The value of Jph is determined using the equation Jph = JL − JD, where JL and JD are the current densities under illumination and in the dark, respectively. The plot of Jph with respect to the effective voltage Veff = Vo − V, where Vo is the compensation voltage at which Jph equals zero and V is the applied voltage. Jph reaches saturation for both devices, suggesting that all photogenerated excitons are dissociated into free carriers and all carriers are collected at the electrodes without any bimolecular recombination. The saturation photocurrent density (Jsat) correlates with the value of Gmax, given by Jsat = qGmaxL, where q is the electronic charge and L is the thickness of the active layer. From Fig. 4, we observed that the value of Jsat for the device with Al@PPh3 NP/PEDOT:PSS two layers was higher than that of the device prepared with pristine PEDOT:PSS solution, then the calculated values of Gmax have the same trend. Because the value of Gmax is governed only by the absorption of light, the enhanced value suggests that the incorporation of the Al@PPh3 NPs increased the degree of light harvesting in the devices. From Fig. 4, the saturation photocurrent density (Jsat) is 13.2 mA cm−2 for the device prepared with pristine PEDOT:PSS solution while 13.8 mA cm−2 for the device with Al@PPh3 NP/PEDOT:PSS double layers, respectively. The increased Jsat should be attributed to the effective charge carrier transport and collection of the PSCs with Al@PPh3 NP/PEDOT:PSS double layers. Moreover, Jsat correlates with the value of Gmax, given by Jsat = qGmaxL, where q is the electronic charge and L is the thickness of the active layer. Then the calculated values of Gmax for the devices were 9.93 × 1027 m−3 s−1 and 1.04 × 1028 m−3 s−1, respectively. Gmax slightly increased, suggesting that the incorporation of the Al@PPh3 NPs increased the degree of light harvesting in the devices. Because the value of Gmax is governed only by the absorption of light, it well matched the enhanced absorption.
Since the Jph/Jsat ratio is essentially the product of exciton dissociation efficiency and charge collection efficiency, under the shortcircuit conditions (V = 0 V), Jph/Jsat is almost 90% for the devices with Al@PPh3 NP/PEDOT:PSS two anode buffer layers while it is only 87% for devices prepared using pristine PEDOT:PSS solution (Jph at Veff = 0.5 V), indicating that excitation of the LSPR facilitated the excitons to dissociate into free carriers. Generally speaking, a decreased Jph/Jsat suggests either a reduced exciton dissociation efficiency or charge collection efficiency, with the latter suggesting that bimolecular recombination begins to dominate and usually leads to a lower FF of PSCs. What is more, from Table 1, we observe that Rsh of the Al@PPh3 NP devices are higher than the undoped device, which also reveals the increasing exciton dissociation efficiency after adding Al@PPh3 NPs into the devices, and then leading to a higher FF of PSCs. Meanwhile the smaller Rs signifies a lower semiconductor bulk resistance, a better metal/semiconductor interface was induced by adding Al@PPh3 NPs. Moreover, the reduced contact resistance can facilitate the electron extraction in PSCs.

To summarize, for the first time, we synthesized amphipathic Al@PPh3 NPs with core–shell structure to improve light harvesting in PSCs using a simple and facile wet chemical process. We have improved the device PCE 20% (from 5.26% to 6.29%), as well as the Jsc, FF and IPCE. These improvements result from a combination of enhanced light absorption caused by the LSPR of Al@PPh3 NPs. From the observed increase in the FF, we deduced that excitation of the LSPR increased not only the rate of exciton generation but also the probability of exciton dissociation. Also, it is worthy of mention that those improvements exist even when Al@PPh3 NPs exhibit slight aggregation which is believed to be detrimental to the enhancement of the performance of PSCs. An even better outcome could be expected when the aggregation issue is restrained. Therefore, we have demonstrated that Al, as a cheap metallic material, is an excellent candidate to benefit the development of polymer solar cells.


The authors express the thanks to the National High Technology Research and Development Program of China (863 Program) under Grant No. 2013AA032205; the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 51272022 and 11474018; The Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education No. 20120009130005; the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities with the Grant No. 2012JBZ001 and 2014YJS137.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5tc00213c
‡ The first two authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015