 DOI: 10.1039/C1EE01286J
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2586-2590

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Liang
Li
*,

Hongqiang
Wang
,

Xiaosheng
Fang
,

Tianyou
Zhai
,

Yoshio
Bando
 and 

Dmitri
Golberg


International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA), National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Namiki 1-1, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0044, Japan. E-mail: LI.Liang@nims.go.jp; liliang@issp.ac.cn

Nanosystem Research Institute (NRI), National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Central 5, 1-1-1 Higashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8565, Japan

Received
11th March 2011
, Accepted 27th April 2011
First published on 2nd June 2011
The transition metal dichalcogenide ZrS2 is an important semiconductor and should be a promising material in the optoelectronic field, however, its optoelectronic properties and applications have seldom been reported. In this paper, we synthesized single-crystalline ZrS2 nanobelts for interesting applications in solar cells. A facile and effective approach to fabricate ZrS2 nanobelt network-embedded solar cells was represented by forming Schottky junctions between the contacts of ZrS2 nanobelts and metal Au electrodes. The solar cell devices showed a high short-circuit current Jsc of 21.8 mA cm−2 and a cell efficiency of 1.2%. The photovoltaic mechanism was discussed by constructing their energy band diagrams. Present results would be important for the field of transition-metal-dichalcogenide nanostructure optoelectronic applications.

Solar cells can directly convert solar energy into electrical power, and thus have become an important candidate for renewable energy technology. The adoption of an ideal photoactive material and the design of an optimal device structure are critical for achieving low-cost and high-efficiency solar cells. Schottky solar cells based on a “high-work-function metal/semiconductor/low-work-function metal” configuration have been developed in bulk and film forms. In this paper, layer transition metal dichalcogenide ZrS2 nanobelt network-embedded solar cells were constructed by forming Schottky junctions between the contacts of ZrS2 nanobelts and metal Au electrodes, which demonstrated a conversion efficiency of 1.2%. The present ZrS2 nanostructures can be promising candidates for solar cell applications, and the fabrication technique has the potential to be effectively utilized for the construction of large-area nanostructured solar cells.


In the coming decades, the annual global consumption of energy will rise by more than 50%, most of this rise should come from the combustion of fuels, speeding up the exhaustion of natural resources and the pollution of our environment. To solve these severe problems, renewable energy technology, for example solar cells that directly convert solar energy into electrical power, have been widely investigated. The adoption of an ideal photoactive material and the design of an optimal device structure are critical for achieving low-cost and high-efficiency solar cells. Regardless of the material or structure utilized, an essential design concept is the creation of junctions or interfaces for the promotion of charge separation with an improved efficiency. To this end, various one-dimensional (1D) semiconductor nanomaterials and innovative structures have been explored, such as core-shell Si nanowires, coaxial ZnS/carbon nanotubes, p–n junctions, inorganic–organic hybrids, three-dimensional (3D) nanopillar arrays, and so on. However, many of these methods suffered from time-consuming processes of material fabrication and post-treatments. It is thus indispensable, but still challenging, to develop the optimized structure of a solar cell device.

As an alternative structure, Schottky solar cells based on a “high-work-function metal/semiconductor/low-work-function metal” configuration have been developed using bulk and film materials. Comparatively, the fabrication of Schottky junctions is simple because any semiconductors can form a Schottky junction with a metal if the difference between their work functions is large enough. Single and multiple nanowire, nanobelt and graphene Schottky solar cells have been reported, but most of those need a high-cost and complex optical/electron-beam lithography process including spin coating of a photo resist, exposure, metal deposition, and a lift-off process, and produce a relatively low photocurrent and conversion efficiency. Although Schottky junctions have demonstrated potential in nanostructured solar cells, the practical application still needs decent and accessible approaches to make large-area devices free from lithographic processes.
Layer transition metal dichalcogenides MX2 (M = Ti, Zr, Hf, Mo, W, V, Nb, and Ta, X = S and Se) have unique electronic features resulting from their large band-edge excitation of the d–d transition centered at a metal site, leading to plentiful applications in catalysis, field emission, electrochemical intercalation, lithium-ion batteries, superconductivity, and so on. Through decreasing the dimensions to the nanoscale, many novel phenomena and unique properties have been disclosed.Zirconium disulfide (ZrS2), a typical transition metal dichalcogenide, has demonstrated many interesting structure-related applications including catalysis, field-emitters, and metallic behaviors of lithium-intercalation. As a wide bandgap (∼1.7 eV) semiconductor, ZrS2 should be a promising material in the optoelectronics field. However, its optoelectronic applications have received little attention. Recently, the present authors have fabricated single ZrS2 nanobelt photodetectors by a photolithography process and found them to have excellent sensitivity to visible light. Herein, firstly we explore a new application of this material in solar cells. A facile approach is presented to fabricate ZrS2 nanobelt-network Schottky solar cells with a conversion efficiency as high as ∼1.2%. Our results also demonstrate a promising way to develop large-scale solar cells from nanowire/nanobelt networks.

The ZrS2 nanobelts were synthesized viachemical vapor transport followed by vacuum pyrolysis. Firstly, a zirconium (Zr) foil (99.8%) and sulfur (S) powder (99.8%) were sealed in a quartz tube under a vacuum of ∼10−2 Pa. The quartz tube was placed in a conventional horizontal furnace with a temperature gradient of ∼10 K cm−1 and the Zr foil was positioned in the center zone. The furnace was heated to 650 °C over 1 h and kept there for 5 h, and then the foil was extracted for cooling under vacuum at room temperature. After heating again at 820 °C for 1.5 h in a flowing argon atmosphere, the final sample was extracted for thorough characterization.


The as-prepared ZrS2 nanobelts were analyzed by field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, Hitachi S-4800) and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, JEM-3000F).


The detailed processing sequence for the ZrS2 nanobelt network Schottky solar cells consisted of the following steps: 1) a Si substrate with a 200 nm-thick SiO2 top layer was cleaned with acetone and propanol by means of an ultrasonic process. 2) ZrS2 nanobelts were dispersed in ethanol and then dropped onto the clean Si substrate. 3) A 50 nm-thick Au electrode was deposited on the desired part of the nanobelt network using an electron beam evaporation system at an evaporation rate of ∼1 Å s−1 (ULVAC Corp), and the remaining network was protected with a mask. 4) A 10 nm/50 nm Ti/Au electrode was deposited on the remaining part after step 3, leaving a space as the conductive channel between the two electrodes.


The solar cells were characterized using a semiconductor characterization system (Keithley 2400) and a solar simulator (Peccell Technologies, Inc., PEC-L11) under AM 1.5G light illumination conditions with a calibrated power density of 100 mW cm−2. The monochromatic IPCE (incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency) of the solar cells was measured with a CEP-99W system (BUNKOH-KEIKI Co., Ltd.).


The ZrS2 nanobelts were synthesized by the chemical vapor transport and vacuum pyrolysis method described previously. As derived from field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images, and corresponding fast Fourier transform (FFT) patterns, the as-prepared nanobelts have lengths of tens of micrometres (Fig. 1a) and are crystallized as hexagonal single crystals with a [100] growth direction (Fig. 1b).

The fabrication of solar cells involves three steps, as shown schematically in Fig. 2a. Firstly, ZrS2 nanobelts were dispersed in ethanol using an ultrasonic process, and then a few drops of the solution were dripped onto a Si substrate with a 200 nm-thick SiO2 top layer (I). Secondly, a 50 nm-thick Au electrode was deposited on the desired part of the nanobelt network to form a Schottky contact, and the remaining network was protected with a mask (II). Thirdly, a 10 nm/50 nm Ti/Au Ohmic contact electrode was defined on the other end of the network (III), leaving a bare middle part as a conductive channel (IV). The space separation between the two electrodes was therefore adjustable. The effective area (S) of the solar cell, defined by the area of the nanobelt network underneath the Schottky contact, is 0.01 cm2. Fig. 2b shows a typical SEM image of a Schottky solar cell. It can be considered as a ZrS2 nanobelt network connected by asymmetrical electrodes in which the Au part forms the Schottky junction (top electrode) at one end while the Ti/Au makes the Ohmic contact at the other end (bottom electrode). Ethanol vaporization resulted in a relatively dense nanobelt network with uniform and close contacts to the electrodes (Fig. 2c and 2d).

Fig. 3a shows the typical I–V characteristic of ZrS2 nanobelt-network Schottky solar cells in dark conditions and under AM 1.5G illumination. In the dark, the I–V curve indicates clear rectification behavior. Under AM 1.5G illumination, the device exhibits photovoltaic characteristics. The fill factor and power conversion efficiency of the devices can be calculated from the following equations:
FF = ImVm/IscVoc = JmVm/JscVoc
(1)
η = ImVm/SPsun
(2)
where FF is the fill factor,
η is the solar cell efficiency, Im (Jm) and Vm are the current (current density) and voltage at the maximum power point of the I–V curve for the illuminated device, Isc (Jsc) and Voc are the short-circuit current (current density) and the open-circuit voltage under illumination, and Psun is the incident power from the solar simulator. Fig. 3b presents a monochromatic IPCE spectrum of the ZrS2 nanobelt-network Schottky solar cell. The IPCE spectrum shows the strongest peak value at about 621 nm (∼2.0 eV), which is close to the bandgap of ZrS2 materials.

The ZrS2 nanobelt-network Schottky solar cell exhibits a Jsc of 21.8 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.19 V, a FF of 30%, and a η of 1.2%; such parameters are comparable to, and even higher than, the values measured from some other single nanowires,nanowire arrays,nanowire films, and organic/inorganic hybrid nanowires. A summary of critical parameters obtained in some previous reports and in the present work is shown in Table 1. The present solar cells are composed of a ZrS2 nanobelt network that forms multiple Schottky junctions between Au and ZrS2 nanobelts, and each junction contributes to the sum current, resulting in a high Jsc. The low Voc possibly stems from the interfacial recombination, as evidenced by a large dark current (Fig. 3). The high surface to volume ratio in the nanobelts is expected to exacerbate the recombination.

ID nanostructured solar cells
Short-circuit current density (Jsc) [mA cm−2]
Open-circuit voltage (Voc) [V]
Fill factor (FF) [%]
Conversion efficiency (η) [%]
Reference
Single Si nanoware
5.0
0.19
40
0.46

13

3.5
0.29
51
0.5

14

Single CdS nanobelt
23.8 pA
0.16
42
0.42

9c

Single III Nitride nanowire
0.39
2.0
56
0.19

15


ZnO
nanowire array
3.37
0.58
26.6
0.53

16


Si
nanowire array
4.28
0.29
33
0.46

5a

1.6
0.13
28
0.1

17


Si
nanowire film
2
0.28
20
0.1

18

Single ZnO-organic hybrid
0.32
0.4
28
0.036

19


Au/graphene-Schottky nanobelt
275.0 pA
0.15
40
1.65

22

TiOx coated GaAs nanowire
7.16
0.57
41
2.36

23


ZrS2 nanobelt network
21.8
0.19
30
1.2
Present work
Recently, Dai et al. reported a novel CdS-nanobelt (nanowire) Schottky solar cell using Au/graphene combined layers as Schottky contact electrodes. The cell efficiency was as high as ∼1.65%, which was attributed to high-performance electrodes of low series resistance, high transparency and good Schottky contact to the CdS nanobelts (nanowires). To reduce the surface recombination, Gradečak et al. coated a TiOx layer onto GaAs nanowires and thus improved the efficiency from 1.98% to 2.36%. Although the efficiency value for ZrS2 nanobelts exceeds that of many reported 1D systems, it remains rather modest. It is worth emphasizing that the present result is due solely to the network structure within the active region, without any additional device optimization. In future work, three routes can be explored to further improve the efficiency. (1) Surface passivation or combination with other semiconductor materials. This will decrease the chance of interfacial recombination and increase the efficiency of charge separation, resulting in an enhanced Voc. (2) The optimization of the electrodes. Decreasing the thickness of the Au layer or replacing it with other transparent materials can largely improve the absorption of light and thus increase the photocurrent. (3) The shortening of the electrode distance. This can largely decrease the chance of recombination of carriers.
The photovoltaic effect in such devices can be understood based on their energy band diagrams. Fig. 4a shows the energy band diagrams of Au, ZrS2 and Ti prior to contacting. Based on basic physical principles, compared with the work function (φZrS2) of ZrS2, Au has a higher value (φAu = 5.35 eV) and tends to form a Schottky barrier with ZrS2 in the junction area, while Ti has a lower value (φTi) and should form an Ohmic contact with ZrS2. Fig. 4b presents the thermal equilibrium energy band diagram after contacting in the dark. Owing to the higher φAu and the lower φZrS2, electron transfer occurs across the interface from ZrS2 to Au until their Fermi levels become aligned. As a consequence, ZrS2 is charged positively and Au is charged negatively, resulting in the formation of a built-in potential Vi and thus band bending at the interface. The opposite built-in potential is formed at the interface between ZrS2 and Ti. When the junction is illuminated by light with phonon energies higher than the bandgap energy of ZrS2, as shown in Fig. 4c, electrons are excited from the valence band to conduction band, and photoexcited electrons and holes are formed. In normal cases, the recombination of photoexcited electrons and holes degrades the photoconductivity, however, the built-in potential in the present Schottky junction effectively separates the photoexcited electrons and holes, producing the photovoltaic effect. Upon connecting to the external circuit, the photoexcited carriers are transported and give current.

In summary, we have demonstrated a facile approach to fabricate ZrS2 nanobelt network-embedded solar cells by forming Schottky junctions between the contacts of ZrS2 nanobelts and metal Au electrodes. Such a device shows a high short-circuit current Jsc of 21.8 mA cm−2. The cell efficiency is 1.2% at the current stage of experiments, and there is a plenty of room to further improve the performance by passivating the surfaces of nanobelts to improve the open-circuit voltage Voc, shortening the electrode spacing (in order to decrease the recombination probability of photoexcited carriers), and optimizing the device configuration. These results show that ZrS2 nanostructures can be promising candidates for solar cell applications. Moreover, the presently developed fabrication technique has a potential to be effectively utilized for the construction of large-area nanostructured solar cells.


This work was supported by the International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA), National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Japan. X. S. Fang thanks the financial support from Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research (B), JSPS (No. 22760517). We thank Prof. Xingcai Wu in Nanjing University, China for help in the synthesis of samples.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011