 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA05167C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21537-21544


Yuan
Li
* and 

Nanlong
Hong


School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China. E-mail: celiy@scut.edu.cn

State Key Laboratory of Pulp and Paper Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China

Received
10th July 2015
, Accepted 19th August 2015
First published on 20th August 2015
Inspired by the electron transfer process during the oxidation of electron-rich phenol derivatives and the serious aggregation properties of lignin, we studied the hole transporting properties of hole-only devices using water soluble lignosulfonate (SL) and an alkyl chain cross-linked lignosulfonate polymer (ASL) as active layers for the first time. SL with a higher phenolic group content shows higher hole mobility than ASL with a lower phenolic group content, which further suggests that phenolic groups are conducive to the hole transporting property. The maximum value of the hole mobility was achieved at 3.75 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1 for SL. This unexpected hole mobility provides a novel perspective for the application of SL as a potential polymeric p-type semiconductor. A water soluble and solution-processable PEDOT:SL material was prepared from the oxidation of EDOT dispersed in SL. As a hole-transport material in OPV with a PCE of 5.79%, PEDOT:SL showed comparable performance to that of the conventional PEDOT:PSS with a device structure of ITO/HTM/PTB7:PC71BM/Al. In principle, amorphous lignosulfonate, which has a complex chemical structure, should show a worse hole transport property as a dopant for PEDOT than PSS, which has a regular molecular structure. In contrast, we found that PEDOT:SL showed comparable performance with that of PEDOT:PSS. The performance of PEDOT:SL is not very dependent on the mass ratio of PEDOT in PEDOT:SL. This also confirmed our proposal and results on the hole transport property of lignosulfonate. Our results provide a promising scaffold and concept for the design and feasible synthesis of HTMs based on the interconversion between phenol and benzoquinone for organic electronics. Moreover, our result also opens an application approach for lignin in the future.

During the past decades of development of organic electronic devices including organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs), organic solar cells (OSCs), organic field effect transistors (OFETs) and polymer solar cells (PSCs), hole transport materials (HTMs), also called p-type materials, played indispensable roles and have been studied with great interest by chemistry scientists. One of the most widely employed HTMs is poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonic acid), PEDOT:PSS, which modifies indium-tin oxide (ITO) anodes with good performance. However, it is known that PEDOT:PSS could corrode ITO at elevated temperatures due to its high acidity. New solution-processable HTMs are still in demand and chemistry scientists have made great effort to explore new materials.

Considering that traditional and classical hole transport materials (PEDOT:PSS),N,N′-di-[(1-naphthalenyl)-N,N′-diphenyl]-1,1′-biphenyl-4,4′-diamine (NPB) and poly(vinylcarbazole) (PVK) contain electron-rich thiophene-, arylamine-, and carbazole-based building blocks, respectively, many works focused on the modification of these materials. Meanwhile, most of the HTMs are wide band gap p-type materials, and several inorganic materials such as V2O5 and MoO3 have been reported. However, a solution-processable organic wide band gap material is still in urgent demand.
It is well known that the hole transport process during the operation of organic electronic devices is related to the oxidation of the electron-rich building blocks, such as the typical bis(triphenylamine) and its derivatives, in which the radical-cation is formed as shown in Fig. 1a. However, there are few reports of HTMs based on electron-rich compounds such as phenol derivatives.
In this work, inspired by the electron transfer process during the oxidation of the phenol derivatives of lignin, in which radicals are produced as shown in Fig. 1b, we proposed that SL might show a hole transport property in organic electronic devices. The hole mobility, oxidation behavior, ESR and electrochemical property were carefully studied and discussed. Furthermore, based on the above results, we designed a novel water solution-processable hole transport material, PEDOT:SL, which was prepared from the oxidation of EDOT dispersed in SL. For comparison, PEDOT:PSS 4083 was studied as a control for the hole transport performance test.
Lignin, the second most abundant plant resource, is gaining attention from academic and industrial research interests because of the increasing crisis of oil resources. Nowadays, it is used as an inexpensive and renewable starting material for developing new products in various aspects. The development of approaches for the high-value-added utilization of lignin, as the only biomass containing rich aromatic rings in nature, is still of urgent importance. It is known that native lignin shows strong absorption in the ultraviolet region of the solar spectrum due to the rich aromatic rings in the lignin molecule. The J-aggregation behaviours of lignin and lignosulfonate have been intensively studied in our previous work as shown in Fig. 1c.
Most recently, we found that SL exhibited unexpected hole mobility because of phenolic oxidation and J-aggregation behaviour. The aggregation of SL may have a potential application in semiconductors. In this context, to study the effect of phenolic groups on the hole transporting property, an alkyl chain was introduced to the phenolic group of sulfomethylated lignin (SL) to obtain an alkyl chain cross-linked lignosulfonate-based polymer via our previous method. Alkali lignin (AL), from a pulping black liquor, was sulfomethylated and coupled to prepare a supramolecular lignosulfonate-based amphiphilic polymer (ASL). It is a noteworthy finding that ASL, having an ultrahigh molecular weight, also showed relatively lower hole mobility compared to that of SL, which can be explained by a lower phenolic hydroxyl group content (see Fig. 1b).

The supramolecular lignosulfonate-based polymer (ASL) was synthesized via the sulfomethylation and alkyl chain coupling polymerization of AL. The synthetic route of ASL is shown in Fig. S1. The molecular weight (Mw) and fundamental structural properties of ASL were characterized by gel-permeation chromatography (GPC), and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) and 1H-NMR spectroscopy, respectively. As shown in Fig. S1, a noteworthy increase in Mw was made through the polymerization of sulfomethylated lignin (SL) using C6H12Br2 as a reagent.

The results of the Mw distributions of SL and ASL are listed in Table S1. The Mw of ASL (Mw = 1.53 × 105 Da, Mw/Mn = 4.00) was 30-fold that of SL (Mw = 5.5 × 103 Da, Mw/Mn = 2.12). To characterize the effect of C6H12Br2 on the structure of SL, functional groups including phenolic hydroxyl groups and sulfonic groups were investigated. As shown in Table S1,the Mw of ASL increased significantly, accompanied by a remarkable decrease in the phenolic hydroxyl group content from 1.58 mmol g−1 to 0.11 mmol g−1. It suggests that polymerization successfully occurred at the position of the phenol hydroxyl groups. The amount of sulfonic groups on ASL decreased slightly with increasing Mw. To elucidate the chemical structure of ASL, FT-IR spectra of SL and ASL were recorded and shown in Fig. S2. The intensity of the bands at 2938 cm−1 and 2860 cm−1 corresponding to the methylene stretching vibrations of alkyl chains increased significantly. The intensity of the band at 1042 cm−1 corresponding to ether bond stretching vibrations also obviously increased, which further supported the efficient substitutions of aliphatic chains on the phenolic groups of SL. The samples were also subjected to 1H-NMR analysis (Fig. S3), the signal intensity between 0.5 and 2.0 ppm exhibited a significant increase which was ascribed to the aliphatic chain –C6H12– groups and was consistent with the IR results. Therefore, we proposed a reaction mechanism from AL to ASL as shown in Fig. S1. AL was sulfomethylated to obtain SL, and then SL was polymerized with C6H12Br2 to prepare the supramolecular ASL polymer.
In order to make a quantitative evaluation of the different hole transport properties of the SL and ASL materials, their hole mobilities were measured by testing the J–V characteristics of hole-only devices with a device structure of ITO/MoO3/sample/MoO3/Al, as shown in Fig. 2a. As a wide band gap semiconductor, MoO3 is used to assist the hole transport to the ITO anode and block the electrons injected from the Al cathode at the same time. The observed dark current–voltage curves were then fitted by using the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) model, which is described by the following equation:
J = (9/8)εrε0μ(V2/d3)
In the above equation, ε0 is the dielectric permittivity of free space, εr is the relative permittivity of the sample, μ is the mobility, and d is the thickness of the sample. As shown in Fig. 2, the hole mobility value was obtained using the SCLC equation with the detailed data listed in Table 1.
Samples
Thickness (L) (nm)
Slope (ρ)
Hole-mobility (cm2 V−1 s−1)
SL
110
2.90
3.75 × 10−6
SL
100
2.95
2.91 × 10−6
SL
35
14.96
3.21 × 10−6
ASL
30
6.46
4.57 × 10−7
As can be seen from Fig. 2a and Table 1, the hole mobility of 3.21 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1, achieved from a sample of SL, is nearly one order of magnitude higher than that from ASL. The result indicates that SL and ASL are potential water soluble organic semiconductors with hole transporting properties. SL, having a higher phenolic group content, has higher hole mobility than ASL, having a lower phenolic group content, which suggests that phenolic groups are conducive to hole transporting properties. In our study, SL with different thicknesses was also investigated as shown in Fig. 2b, and the results are listed in Table 1. We can find that the hole mobilities of SL with different thicknesses are all higher than that of ASL. The maximum value of hole mobility achieved was 3.75 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1 for SL.
Based on the above hole transporting properties of SL and ASL, SL and ASL are potential organic semiconductors with hole transporting properties, especially SL. Therefore, the electron transfer properties of SL and ASL were also studied in our work, including the electrochemical property and electron spin resonance (ESR), as shown in Fig. 3.
From the above results, the hole mobility of SL is higher than that of ASL, and the oxidative activities of SL and ASL were also investigated. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electron spin resonance (ESR) were applied to study the oxidative activity of the samples. The cyclic voltammogram of the samples in 0.1 M Bu4NPF6 (in dichloromethane) solution was used to investigate the electrochemical behaviour of SL and ASL, as shown in Fig. 3a. Two irreversible oxidation peaks at 1.0 V and 1.3 V were observed at the ASL and SL modified electrode, respectively. SL has a relatively high oxidation potential at 1.3 V as reported. The oxidation process of SL and ASL was also studied by ESR and the obvious ESR signal of the oxidized state of SL was observed in Fig. 3b, which indicated that stable radicals were formed after the reaction of SL with PbO2. It is proposed that SL is oxidized during the CV test to form a resonance structure, as proposed in Fig. 1b. In contrast, ASL showed no ESR signals at different concentrations and temperatures, including 100 K.
On the basis of the above results, we can find that ASL, having few phenolic groups, which was obtained from an alkyl chain cross-linked lignosulfonate, has lower hole mobility than SL, which has more phenolic groups. Moreover, SL was also easy to aggregate and oxidize. In order to provide evidence to illustrate our proposal on the hole transport property of lignosulfonate, a series of water soluble and solution-processable PEDOT:SLs and PEDOT:ASLs was prepared from the oxidation of EDOT dispersed in lignosulfonate. SL and ASL, as the dispersant and template, were applied to be dopants in the conductive polymer PEDOT, and the schematic for the polymerization of EDOT in the presence of the SL and ASL templates was proposed, as shown in Fig. 4. PEDOT:SL and PEDOT:ASL films were prepared and applied as hole transport layers in polymer solar cell devices, and PEDOT:PSS-4083 was also tested for comparison.
The UV-vis absorption spectra of the PEDOT:SL and PEDOT:ASL aqueous dispersions were measured as shown in Fig. 5a. The absorption bands at 280 nm originate from the aromatic rings of SL and ASL. All of the UV spectra, including the PEDOT:PSS, PEDOT:SL and PEDOT:ASL aqueous dispersions, showed the presence of a bipolaron absorption band at 800 nm, which was ascribed to π–π transition in the PEDOT polymer chain. In the meantime, the broad absorption band from 600 to 900 nm was also detected in all PEDOT:SL and PEDOT:ASL aqueous dispersions. The transmittance spectra of the PEDOT:SL and PEDOT:ASL films are shown in Fig. 5b. The results indicated that the transmittance of the films was determined by both the content of dopant and film thickness. The broad peak from 600 to 900 nm decreased, compared with a blank glass substrate, in all the PEDOT:SL and PEDOT:ASL films, which is consistent with the UV results.
To further study the structure of PEDOT:SL and PEDOT:ASL, the FT-IR spectra of EDOT, PEDOT:ASL-1:2 and PEDOT:SL-1:1 are shown in Fig. 6. Compared with the spectrum of the EDOT monomer, the strong band ascribed to the C–H bending mode at 892 cm−1 and the C–H vibration bands at 2985 cm−1 and 3125 cm−1 all disappeared in the PEDOT:ASL and PEDOT:SL polymer spectra, demonstrating the formation of PEDOT chains with α,α′-coupling. Moreover, the vibrations at 1480 cm−1 and 1360 cm−1 were attributed to the stretching modes of CC and C–C in the thiophene ring, and the stretching vibration modes of the C–S bond in the thiophene ring can be observed at 935 cm−1 and 762 cm−1. The adsorption peaks at 1188 cm−1 and 620 cm−1 were attributed to the stretching modes of the SO bond of the sulfonic groups. These show that PEDOT:SL and PEDOT:ASL have been prepared successfully.
The conductivities of the PEDOT:PSS film, PEDOT:SL films and PEDOT:ASL films are shown in Table S2. The conductivities of PEDOT:SL with different proportions are close to that of PEDOT:PSS-4083, and the conductivity of the PEDOT:SL-1:1 film (0.05 S cm−1) is a litter higher than that of the PEDOT:PSS-4083 film (0.02 S cm−1). The sheet resistance of the films formed with PEDOT:ASL was too large to test.
In order to evaluate the hole transport performance of a PEDOT:SL film, PSCs with a device structure of ITO/HTM/PTB7:PC71BM/Al were fabricated, in which water spin-coated PEDOT:SL and PEDOT:ASL were applied as HTMs. Using the PEDOT:PSS-4083 film as an anode modifier, PSCs with the same device structure were also prepared as control devices for comparison. The detailed device architecture and current density (J)–voltage (V) curves of the PSCs with different HTMs are shown in Fig. 7. The power conversion efficiency (PCE), short-circuit current density (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF) of the PSCs are given in Table 2. The PCE of the PSCs in a conventional device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTB7:PC71BM/Al was 4.28 or 4.50%, as reported in the literature, as shown in Table 2. In our work, PEDOT only showed a bad PCE of 2.91% with a FF of 48.04%. The device with the PEDOT:PSS modified anode showed a JSC of 12.11, VOC of 0.73 and PCE of 5.80% with an FF of 65.57%, which is relatively higher than the results reported in the literature. When the mass ratios of PEDOT:SL were 1:1, 1:2 and 1:6, the PCEs of the devices with PEDOT:SL were 5.79%, 5.76% and 5.33%, respectively, which are all very close to that of PEDOT:PSS-4083. However, PEDOT:ASL with different mass ratios exhibited relatively bad PCEs, as shown in Table 2. When the mass ratio of PEDOT:ASL was 1:1, the PCE of the device was 2.14%, which is lower than that of the device using the PEDOT-only anode; when PEDOT:ASL-1:2 was applied, a PCE of 3.93% with a JSC of 12.47 mA cm−2, VOC of 0.59 V and FF of 53.39% were obtained. It is noteworthy that PEDOT:SL with different mass ratios has the closest performance to that of PEDOT:PSS, which suggests that the influence of SL as a dopant in the conductive PEDOT polymer is not strong. The results indicate that SL has a positive effect on the hole injection/transport properties. It encourages us to study its potential in the future. We proposed the possible mechanism based on the following two aspects.
Anode
pH

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

Ref. 47

—
0.72
12.77
46.40
4.28

Ref. 48

—
0.62
14.58
50.00
4.50
None
—
0.43
14.12
48.04
2.91
PEDOT:PSS
1.9
0.73
12.11
65.57
5.80
PEDOT:ASL-1:1
3.5
0.44
10.34
47.01
2.14
PEDOT:ASL-1:2
3.7
0.59
12.47
53.39
3.93
PEDOT:SL-1:1
3.6
0.70
13.22
62.60
5.79
PEDOT:SL-1:2
3.8
0.69
13.27
62.96
5.76
PEDOT:SL-1:6
3.9
0.68
12.64
62.03
5.33
First of all, in our work, an alkyl chain was designed and introduced in the phenolic group of SL to obtain the high molecular weight lignosulfonate ASL. We found that the hole mobility of ASL was lower than that of SL, which suggested that the phenolic group content could affect the hole transporting property. Therefore, SL could be applied as a dopant and template in the conductive polymer PEDOT on the basis of its hole mobility and electron transfer property; and SL exhibited a better power conversion efficiency than ASL.
On the other hand, the aggregation behavior also affects the hole transporting property of the conductive PEDOT. Therefore, the surface morphologies of PEDOT:PSS, and PEDOT:ASL and PEDOT:SL with different mass ratios were observed by AFM as shown in Fig. 8a–f. There is a significant difference between them. The surface of PEDOT:PSS-4083 was quite smooth (Fig. 8a). In comparison, the surfaces of PEDOT:SL and PEDOT:ASL were unique and different from that of PEDOT:PSS, and consisted of many compact nanoaggregates (Fig. 8b–f). We also found that the surface and the size of the nanoaggregates were different between them. The size of the aggregates of PEDOT:SL was relatively smaller than that of PEDOT:ASL, and the aggregates of PEDOT:SL were more compact than those of PEDOT:ASL, which both contributed to the unexpected hole transport of the PEDOT:SL film. The AFM images of the film after heating (120 °C for 20 min) are also shown in Fig. S4 and Fig. 8g–i. The crystalline characteristic of all samples decreased, however, the obvious nanoaggregates of PEDOT:SL after thermal annealing might facilitate the charge transport of the PEDOT:SL polymers in films as shown in Fig. 8g–i.
PEDOT:SL showed a promising performance as a hole-transport material in polymer solar cells (PSCs), which is comparable with that of the conventional PEDOT:PSS. As we know, lignosulfonate is totally amorphous and complex, however, poly(styrenesulfonate) (PSS) has a regular structure with crystallizability. In principle, compared with PSS, lignosulfonate will show a worse hole transport property as a dopant for PEDOT. In contrast, we found that PEDOT:SL showed a comparable performance to that of PEDOT:PSS. This also confirmed our proposal and results on the hole transport property of lignosulfonate. It is worth mentioning that the new HTMs including their properties have reproducibility with different lignosulfonates. Our results provide a promising scaffold and concept for the design and feasible synthesis of HTMs based on the interconversion between phenol and benzoquinone for organic electronics in the future.

Alkali lignin (AL) separated from the pulping black liquor was supplied by Shuntai Co. Ltd (Shuntai, Hunan, China). 1,6-Dibromohexane (C6H12Br2) was supplied by Energy Chemical Co. Ltd (Shanghai, China) with a purity of 97%. All other chemicals were of analytical grade, including NaOH, Na2SO3, KI, hexane, ethanol (EtOH), and 37% formaldehyde (CH2O).


AL (10 g) was dissolved in 50 mL of H2O at a pH of 12. The reaction was started with the slow addition of formaldehyde (2.1 g) at 70 °C for 20 min, and the subsequent addition of sodium sulfite (4.0 g) at 95 °C. After the reaction was kept for 3 hours, a certain amount of the C6H12Br2 reagent, 5.0 g of NaOH and a trace amount of KI (0.1 g) were added to the reaction mixture at 75 °C. The m(AL):m(C6H12Br2) ratio was 1.0:0.65. The polymerization was stopped after 10 hours of reflux at 75 °C. The sample was then extracted with hexane to remove the excess C6H12Br2 and the polymer in the aqueous solution was filtered. The filtrates were purified by dialysis. The purified product was then freeze-dried to obtain a yellow-brown solid powder.


The Mw measurement was conducted using aqueous gel permeation chromatography and UV absorption at 280 nm was monitored with a Waters 2487 UV detector (Waters Co, Milford, MA, USA). Polystyrene sulfonate was used as the calibration standard. A 0.10 M NaNO3 solution (pH 8.0) was used as the mobile phase (0.50 mL min−1). Samples were dissolved and diluted to 0.3 wt% in double-distilled water and filtered through a 0.22 μm filter.

The phenolic hydroxyl group (–OH) content of the samples was determined by the FC method. The sulfonic group (–SO3H) content of SL and ASL was measured by an automatic potentiometric titrator (Type 809 Titrando, Metrohm Corp., Switzerland).
An Auto system XL/I-series/Spectrum2000 (Thermo Nicolet Co., Madison, WI, USA) spectrometer was used for Fourier transform infrared spectrum analysis and the spectra were recorded between 4000 and 400 cm−1. The measurement method was the potassium bromide pressed disk technique.
The 1H-NMR spectra of SL and ASL were recorded with 30 mg of each sample dissolved in 0.5 mL of deuterated dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO-d6) using a DRX-400 spectrometer (Bruker Co., Ettlingen, Germany).
The hole mobility of the samples was measured using the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) method by testing the J–V characteristics of the hole-only device structure ITO/MoO3 (10 nm)/sample/MoO3 (10 nm)/Al (100 nm). A film of the sample was spin-coated with a concentration of 80 mg mL−1, and the solvent of the sample was deionized water.
Cyclic voltammetry measurement were conducted as follows: a glassy carbon electrode was first carefully polished with alumina powder to a mirror finish surface and rinsed repeatedly with distilled water. The sample solution was prepared by dissolving 10 mg of the sample in 1 mL of distilled water. Then the SL and ASL polymer films were deposited on the surface of the clean glassy carbon electrode. The resulting electrode was immersed in 0.1 M Bu4NPF6 DCM solution, and was stabilized in the 0.1 M Bu4NPF6 DCM solution by scanning the potential between −0.6 and +2.0 V at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1.
ESR spectra were recorded on a JEOL model JES-FA200 spectrometer (JEOL, Japan) operating at 9.058 GHz with a 100 kHz modulation frequency.
Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images were observed using a Park XE-100 instrument in tapping mode. The AFM samples were prepared by spinning the sample solution on the ITO conductive substrate.

A proposed schematic for the polymerization of EDOT in the presence of the SL and ASL dispersants is shown in Fig. 4. The procedure was as follows: SL or ASL samples with different masses were dissolved in 200 mL of distilled water, then 1 g of the EDOT monomer was added with a slow stirring speed for 10 min and the pH of the solution was adjusted to 2. To the mixed solution, 1.93 g of ammonium persulfate (APS) solution as oxidant was added slowly under high speed stirring. The reaction was kept at room temperature for 24 hours, and dialyzed to remove inorganic salts. The dialysis product was used for detection through ultrasonication for 10 min. PEDOT:PSS (Baytron PVPAI 4083) was used for comparison. The UV-vis absorption spectra of the PEDOT:PSS (Baytron PVPAI 4083), PEDOT:SL and PEDOT:ASL aqueous dispersions were measured using a Shimadzu UV-3600 spectrophotometer (Japan). The transmittance spectra of the PEDOT:PSS-4083 film, PEDOT:SL films and PEDOT:ASL films were tested using a Shimadzu UV-2600 spectrophotometer (Japan). The FT-IR spectra of the PEDOT:ASL and PEDOT:SL polymers were also measured. The sheet resistance of the PEDOT:PSS film, PEDOT:ASL films and PEDOT:SL films was tested by a KDY-1 four point probes resistivity/resistance measurement system, and the film thickness of the film samples was tested using a step profiler (Dektak 150, Veeco, USA).


The ITO-coated glass substrates were cleaned by sonication in acetone, detergent, deionized water, and isopropyl alcohol and dried in a nitrogen stream, followed by oxygen plasma treatment. In order to fabricate the photovoltaic devices, a thin hole-transportation layer (ca. 40 nm) of PEDOT:sample (filtered at 0.45 μm) was spin-cast on the pre-cleaned ITO-coated glass substrates and baked at 120 °C for 20 min under ambient conditions. The PTB7:PC71BM (10:15 mg mL−1) active layer was prepared by spin-casting a chlorobenzene solution of a small amount of DIO (CB:DIO = 100:3, v/v) at 1500 rpm for 30 s in a dry box. The thickness of the PTB7:PC71BM layer was about 100 nm. 4 h later, methanol was spin-coated on the active layer at 2000 rpm for 30 s. The Al electrode was thermally deposited for 100 nm through a mask under vacuum (<5 × 10−4 Pa). All steps except the processing of the HTMs were performed in the glove box. The effective device area was about 0.16 cm2. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics were measured using a Keithley 2400 source meter. The photovoltaic devices were characterized using a calibrated AM1.5 G solar simulator (Oriel model 91192), under a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2.


To summarize, the hole-transporting properties of water soluble lignosulfonate and alkyl chain cross-linked lignosulfonate polymers were studied using hole-only devices for the first time. The underlying mechanism was the electron transfer process during the oxidation of electron-rich phenol derivatives and the serious aggregation properties of lignosulfonate. The unexpected hole mobility provides a novel perspective for the application of lignosulfonate as a potential polymeric p-type semiconductor. Water soluble and solution-processable PEDOT:SL prepared from the oxidation of EDOT dispersed in SL showed promising performance as a hole-transport material in polymer solar cells, which is comparable with that of the conventional PEDOT:PSS. In addition, PEDOT:SL might show potential for applications in various fields including PEDOT:PSS-based hybrid solar cells. Our results provide a novel concept for the application of biradicals containing polyaromatic hydrocarbons and provide a promising scaffold for the design and feasible synthesis of HTMs based on the interconversion between phenol and benzoquinone for organic electronics in the future.


The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21402054, 21436004), National Basic Research Program of China 973 (2012CB215302), and International S&T Cooperation Program of China (2013DFA41670).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Results including the molecular weight distribution and functional group content of SL and ASL, the FT-IR and 1H-NMR spectra of the samples, conductivities of the PEDOT:sample films, and the AFM images of the PEDOT:PSS and PEDOT:ASL films after heating. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta05167c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015