 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA08417B
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24215-24220


Sungmin
Park
,

Jin Hyuck
Heo
,

Cheol Hong
Cheon
,

Heesuk
Kim
,

Sang Hyuk
Im
* and 

Hae Jung
Son
*

Photoelectronic Hybrid Research Center, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul, Korea. E-mail: hjson@kist.re.kr

Department of Chemistry, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea

Functional Crystallization Center (FCC), Department of Chemical Engineering, Kyung Hee University, Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea. E-mail: imrom@khu.ac.kr

Received
20th October 2015
, Accepted 22nd October 2015
First published on 22nd October 2015
We report the development of a novel hole transporting material (HTM), PCP-TPA, based on [2,2]paracyclophane. In comparison to the well-known HTM, spiro-OMeTAD, PCP-TPA could be prepared using a simple synthesis and showed a higher hole mobility due to effective intermolecular aggregation in the film state. When used as a HTM in perovskite solar cells, the power conversion efficiency reached 17.6%. PCP-TPA will potentially replace spiro-OMeTAD and advance the development of cost-effective and practical perovskite solar cells.

Solid-state organometallic halide perovskite (e.g., methylammonium lead halides CH3NH3PbX3, where X = halogen) solar cells have gained recognition as the most promising low-cost photovoltaic technology since the first pioneering reports of Park et al. Perovskites characterized by the chemical formula ABX3 (A¼ CH3NH3 or NHCHNH3, B¼ Pb, and X¼ Br, Cl, or I) have several advantageous properties, including high light absorption, excellent ambipolar charge mobility, and a small exciton binding energy, which importantly contribute to the excellent performance of perovskite solar cells. Recently, Jeon et al. reported the properties of highly efficient mesoscopic perovskite solar cells with >17% power conversion efficiencies (PCEs), and the efficiencies have gradually approached the efficiencies of crystalline Si solar cells. In addition to the photovoltaic performance, it is important that the power generation cost is lower than the corresponding costs of all other photovoltaic technologies to ensure competitiveness in the solar cell market. Processing costs can be reduced by developing low-temperature solution processes, such as spray-coating, spin-coating, slot-die coating, and roll-to-roll coating. Importantly, material costs should be minimized by developing new cost-effective materials or simplifying the solar cell device architecture because perovskite solar cells are typically constructed using multiple stacked materials, including transparent electrodes, electron conductors, perovskites, hole transporting materials, and metal electrodes.

Among the materials used to fabricate perovskite solar cell devices, hole-transporting materials (HTMs) play a key role in enhancing the solar cell efficiency by inducing efficient hole transport and slowing electron–hole recombination. The most widely used HTM, spiro-OMeTAD (2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine]-9,9′-spirobifluorene), reproducibly performs well, irrespective of the perovskite solar cell device architecture (i.e., mesoscopic Al2O3/TiO2 scaffolds or planar heterojunction structures) since it was developed as a HTM for use in solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells. Despite its promising properties, the high cost of spiro-OMeTAD impedes the practical applications of highly efficient perovskite solar cells in the photovoltaic market because spiro-OMeTAD requires complicated multi-step synthesis approaches. Novel polymeric HTMs have been developed, such as poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), poly[2,1,3-benzothiadiazole-4,7-diyl[4,4-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl]] (PCPDTBT), and poly-triarylamine (PTAA) and small molecular HTMs, such as N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine-substituted pyrene derivatives, 4-(4-phenyl-4-a-naphthyl-butadienyl)-N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)-phenylamine, and 2,5-bis(4,4′-bis(methoxyphenyl)aminophen-4′′-yl)-3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene, have also been synthesized. Although polymeric HTMs exhibit comparable device efficiencies in perovskite solar cells, they are far from practical use because their photovoltaic properties depend significantly on batch-to-batch variations in the molecular weights of polymeric HTMs. Small molecular HTMs are better for fabricating reproducible perovskite solar cells. Therefore, it is important to develop new small molecular HTMs that are inexpensive and perform better than spiro-OMeTAD.
We report the synthesis and photovoltaic properties of a novel small molecular HTM, PCP-TPA, a triphenyl amine-based compound that incorporates [2,2]paracyclophane as a core (see Fig. 1). PCP-TPA can be synthesized from the relatively inexpensive and commercially available [2,2]paracyclophane through several synthetic steps. Furthermore, PCP-TPA, which employs [2,2]paracyclophane, has structural features that are advantageous for efficient charge transport. (i) First, the cylindrical and rigid structure of the [2,2]paracyclophane framework promotes dense packing among the HTM molecules. (ii) At the same time, the three-dimensional structure of the molecule favors charge transport. (iii) The extended π-conjugation in N,N,N′′,N′′-tetrakis(4-methoxyphenyl)-[1,1′:4′,1′′-terphenyl]-4,4′′-diamine (Ph-diTPA) enhances effective intermolecular interactions among neighboring molecules, and thus decreases the hopping distance. Our results revealed that perovskite solar cells fabricated using PCP-TPA as an HTM displayed notably better performances with a PCE of 17.6% under AM 1.5 G illumination at 100 mW cm−2. By contrast, the spiro-OMeTAD HTM showed a 15.4% PCE.
The procedures used to synthesize PCP-TPA are shown in Fig. 1(b), and the experimental details are described in the ESI. [2,2]Paracyclophane was brominated using Br2/I2, and then PCP-TPA was obtained by a Suzuki coupling reaction of the brominated [2,2]paracyclophane and 4-(4-methoxydiphenylamino)phenylboronic ester. The resulting compound PCP-TPA was characterized by 1H/13C NMR spectroscopy and mass spectrometry (see the ESI). The 1H NMR spectrum showed two broad multiplets at δ = 3.40–3.55 and 2.72–2.85, corresponding to the protons at the ethano bridge, which were present in distinct chemical environments. The down-field peak corresponded to protons positioned closer to the triarylamine substitution, as shown in Fig. S1. A singlet at δ = 3.79 ppm corresponded to the eight methoxy group protons. The MALDI-TOF mass spectrum revealed peaks at m/z = 1420.409 and m/z = 710.253, which corresponded to molecular ions [M+] and [M2+], respectively, and further confirmed the chemical structure of PCP-TPA (Fig. S3). The thermal properties of PCP-TPA were studied by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), both of the techniques were performed under a nitrogen atmosphere at a heating rate of 25 °C min−1 and 10 °C min−1 for TGA and DSC, respectively. The TGA curves (Fig. S4(a)) showed that PCP-TPA had a similar thermal stability, with an onset decomposition temperature corresponding to a 5% weight loss (Td) at 446.0 °C, compared with spiro-OMeTAD, which had a Td at 452.1 °C.
The DSC results shown in Fig. S4(b) revealed that the glass transition temperature (Tg) in PCP-TPA (148.5 °C) exceeded 123.4 °C, the value obtained from spiro-OMeTAD, probably due to the improved molecular packing structure in PCP-TPA compared to that of spiro-OMeTAD. Tg is usually affected by the free volume, which depends on the molecular packing density of the molecules. The UV-vis absorption properties of PCP-TPA were investigated, as shown in Fig. 2(a), and the characteristic data are listed in Table 1. In solution, PCP-TPA exhibited a strong absorption at 365 nm, representing a 23 nm blue shift relative to the absorption maximum obtained from spiro-OMeTAD at 388 nm. The absorption spectrum confirmed that PCP-TPA did not significantly absorb light in the visible region, indicating that the molecule would not compete significantly with the perovskite layer in a solar cell used for light harvesting. In a film, the onset point of the absorption spectrum of PCP-TPA was clearly red-shifted compared to that of the solution, whereas spiro-OMeTAD only displayed a minor change in the absorption onset. These results indicated that intermolecular aggregation among PCP-TPA molecules in the film was more effective than that of spiro-OMeTAD, which is in good agreement with the DSC results obtained from the HTMs, as described above. The energy band gaps (Egs) of PCP-TPA estimated from the absorption and emission spectra (Fig. S5) were 2.96 eV, which was 0.08 eV lower than the 3.04 eV value obtained from spiro-OMeTAD. The electrochemical properties of the compound were studied using cyclic voltammetry (CV). Details are given in the ESI and a summary of the resulting data is given in Fig. 2(b) and Table 1. All oxidation curves were attributed to the removal of electrons from the diarylamino centers. In the cyclic voltammogram of PCP-TPA, the ∼100 meV gap between the first and second peaks in the spiro-OMeTAD voltammograms disappeared, probably due to the increased N–N distance in PCP-TPA, which resulted in a decrease in the electronic interactions between the two redox active sites. A slight difference between the first oxidation potentials between PCP-TPA and spiro-OMeTAD, 0.23 V for PCP-TPA versus ferrocene/ferrocenium (Fc/Fc+), was observed and this value was 0.20 V more positive than the value, 0.03 V, obtained from spiro-OMeTAD versus Fc/Fc+. The limited electronic interactions between the two N atoms in PCP-TPA could also affect the first oxidation potential of the molecule. The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy levels measured from the oxidation potentials in relation to Fc/Fc+ and the HOMO (−5.33 eV) of PCP-TPA were deeper than those measured from spiro-OMeTAD (−5.13 eV). The HOMO energy levels of the HTMs, determined from thin films using photoelectron spectroscopy in air (PESA), showed a consistent result with the CV experiment; it was revealed that the HOMO of PCP-TPA (−5.33 eV) was lower than −5.22 eV for spiro-OMeTAD. The lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals (LUMOs) were calculated from the HOMO and Eg values and were found to be −2.37 eV and −2.09 eV for PCP-TPA and spiro-OMeTAD, respectively.
HTM
Optical properties (solution (film))
Electrochemical properties

λ
max (nm)

λ
em
 (nm)

E
g
 (eV)

E
ox
1/2
 (V)
HOMO (eV)
LUMO (eV)

a Excitation at λmax.
b From the intersection of absorption and emission spectra.
c CV measurements and referenced internally to ferrocene.
d Calculated from the Eox1/2 of the respective redox waves; Fc/Fc+ was set to −5.1 eV vs. vacuum.
e LUMO = HOMO + Eg.

PCP-TPA
365 (366)
451 (465)
2.96
0.23
−5.33
−2.37
Spiro-OMeTAD
388 (372)
415 (427)
3.04
0.03
−5.13
−2.09
Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed to obtain the optimized geometries and electronic structures of PCP-TPA. Gaussian 09 was used to conduct the calculations based on the B3LYP hybrid functional and the 6-31G(d, p) basis set. As shown in Fig. 3(a), the Ph-diTPA units in the PCP-TPA molecule are positioned transannularly with spatial π–π interactions, which will favor intramolecular charge transport. The cylindrical conformation of the PCP-TPA molecule will facilitate intermolecular π–π stacking in the film, and the multi-directional positioning of the triphenylamino groups will be favorable for intermolecular charge transport. Fig. 3(b) shows the frontier orbitals of the PCP-TPA; both of the HOMO and HOMO−1 were delocalized over the whole PCP-TPA molecule, which is probably because the Ph-diTPAs in the molecule were connected to each other with conjugation due to the π–π interaction in the PCP core. It is expected that the oxidation processes involve the entire molecular framework of PCP-TPA. Interestingly, HOMO and HOMO−1 energy levels are very close to each other with an energy difference of 0.06 eV, which is not much higher than the thermal energy at room temperature. Thus, HOMO/HOMO−1 may represent the two redox-active orbitals of the PCP-TPA molecule. The LUMO was mostly localized across the PCP core. The calculated HOMO and LUMO values were −4.34 eV and −0.93 eV, respectively, and were lower than the corresponding energy values calculated for spiro-OMeTAD (HOMO: −4.21 eV, and LUMO: −0.61 eV). The calculated band gap of PCP-TPA (ΔE = 3.41 eV) was 0.18 eV lower than the value calculated from spiro-OMeTAD (ΔE = 3.59 eV). These results were consistent with the observations obtained from the CV and optical measurements.
The hole mobility values were measured using the space charge limited current (SCLC) method. Devices for measuring the mobility were prepared by following a published procedure, which involved preparing a spin-coated layer of the HTM on an ITO/PEDOT:PSS substrate, followed by evaporating a gold counter electrode. The closeness of the ITO and gold work functions to the HTM HOMO level and large mismatch with the HTM LUMO created a hole-only device from which the mobility could be determined. These samples contained tert-butyl pyridine (tBP) and lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide salt (Li-TFSI) additives at concentrations that yielded the best solar cells. PCP-TPA showed a hole mobility value of 6.32 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, which exceeded the literature values reported for spiro-OMeTAD, 1–3.6 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. The detailed measurement conditions and average mobility values are described in the ESI. Our measurements revealed that the mobility in spiro-OMeTAD was 5.22 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 when measured using the same method. The higher mobility in the new HTM may be due to its advantageous molecular structure. The extended π-conjugation along with the rigid cylindrical structure favored intermolecular aggregation, which could facilitate intermolecular hopping processes (Fig. 4).

Fig. 5(a) shows a schematic device architecture of a planar MAPbI3 hybrid solar cell comprising FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/HTM/Au. In a typical procedure for fabricating a planar MAPbI3 hybrid solar cell, a TiO2 electron conductor was deposited onto a cleaned FTO (F-doped tin oxide) substrate via spray-pyrolysis deposition using a 20 mM titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) solution at 450 °C. A pinhole-free MAPbI3 layer was then deposited onto the TiO2/FTO substrate by spin-coating a 40 wt% MAPbI3/DMF solution with a hydroiodic acid (HI) additive (MAPbI3/DMF:HI = 1 mL:0.1 mL) at 3000 rpm for 200 s. The assembly was subsequently dried at 100 °C (see the photographs in Fig. S6). An HTM layer was formed by spin-coating a spiro-OMeTAD or a PCP-TPA solution which included a Li-TFSI and 4-tert-butyl pyridine mixture dissolved in acetonitrile as an additive solution. Finally, an Au counter electrode was formed by thermal evaporation. Fig. 5(b) shows a representative SEM cross-sectional image of planar MAPbI3 hybrid solar cells, revealing that the thicknesses of the TiO2, MAPbI3, HTM, and Au layers were 50 nm, 300 nm, 100 nm, and 70 nm, respectively. Fig. 5(c) shows the corresponding energy band diagrams of each component, revealing that the electrons and holes generated in MAPbI3 could be effectively transported to the electron conductor and HTM. Upon illumination with light, the MAPbI3 layer absorbs the light and generates free electrons and holes or loosely bonded electron–hole pairs due to the small exciton binding energy of 30 meV, which is comparable to the thermal energy at room temperature (1kT = 25 meV, where k and T are the Boltzmann constant and absolute temperature, respectively). The generated electrons and holes are transported to a TiO2 electron conductor and HTM, respectively. Fig. 6 shows the device performances of a planar MAPbI3 hybrid solar cell prepared with different HTMs. The EQE spectra shown in Fig. 6(c) revealed that the planar MAPbI3 hybrid solar cell prepared with the PCP-TPA HTM offered a better EQE value in the range of 350–800 nm compared to the spiro-OMeTAD sample. Here, we used the same thickness of MAPbI3 films prepared using the same processing method so that the light harvesting efficiencies of both cells are almost identical to each other. It should be noted that only spiro-OMeTAD was replaced with the PCP-TPA HTM and the improved EQE was attributed to the improved properties of PCP-TPA HTM. Because the HOMO level of PCP-TPA (−5.33 eV) was 0.11 eV lower than that (−5.22 eV) of spiro-OMeTAD, the driving force for charge transfer from the perovskite to the HTM was predicted to be higher for spiro-OMeTAD than that for PCP-TPA. The enhanced photocurrent was, therefore, attributed to more efficient charge transport due to the higher hole mobility of PCP-TPA. Although the LUMO energy level of PCP-TPA was lower than the value obtained from spiro-OMeTAD, this energy level appeared to be sufficient to block electron transfer from the perovskite layer to the HTM and minimize charge recombination. The integrated EQE spectra of the spiro-OMeTAD and PCP-TPA samples were 20 mA cm−2 and 21.2 mA cm−2, respectively, in good agreement with the short circuit current density (Jsc) measured from each device, as shown in Fig. 6(a) and (b) and Table 2. The photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves obtained from the planar MAPbI3 hybrid solar cells prepared with different HTMs are shown in Fig. 6(a) and (b), and their photovoltaic properties are summarized in Table 2. The planar MAPbI3 hybrid solar cell, prepared with the spiro-OMeTAD HTM, provided a PCE (η) of 15.1% under forward scan conditions with an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.01 V, a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 20.5 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 73% and 15.7% η under a reverse scan condition with a Voc of 1.01 V, a Jsc of 20.5 mA cm−2, and a FF of 76%, thereby yielding an average PCE (ηavg) of 15.4% under 1 sun conditions.

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)

η (%)

η
avg
 (%)

a The average PCE values from the forward and reverse scans.

PCP-TPA
Forward
1.04
22.0
76
17.4
17.6
Reverse
1.04
22.0
78
17.8
Spiro-OMeTAD
Forward
1.01
20.5
73
15.1
15.4
Reverse
1.01
20.5
76
15.7
The planar MAPbI3 hybrid solar cell prepared with the PCP-TPA HTM was characterized by a Voc of 1.04 V, a Jsc of 22.0 mA cm−2, and a FF of 76%, yielding 17.4% η under forward scan conditions and a Voc of 1.04 V Voc, a Jsc of 22.0 mA cm−2, a FF of 78%, and 17.8% η under reverse scan conditions. The resulting ηavg under 1 sun conditions was 17.6%. Fig. 6(d) shows histograms of the PCEs, indicating that the reproducibility of the performances was fairly high. The average PCE values were 15.8 ± 1.33% and 13.3 ± 1.32% for PCP-TPA and spiro-OMeTAD devices, respectively. The overall efficiency improvements resulted from the increase in the Jsc from 20.5 to 22.0 mA cm−2 and the slight enhancement in the FF value. The Voc measured from PCP-TPA, which was 30 mV higher that the value measured from spiro-OMeTAD, was attributed to the lower HOMO energy level of PCP-TPA compared with that of spiro-OMeTAD. The improved photocurrent in the PCP-TPA device is most likely due to the higher hole transporting properties, which originated from more compact intermolecular aggregation among PCP-TPA molecules in the film.

In conclusion, we developed a hole transporting material that incorporated PCP as a core. This HTM was prepared using a PCP core which can be prepared using a simple synthetic process, thereby potentially reducing the manufacturing costs. The advantageous rigid and cylindrical structure of PCP-TPA enabled effective intermolecular aggregation in the film with simultaneously maintaining 3D directional transport pathways, which results in increased charge carrier mobility. As a result, the perovskite solar cell fabricated using PCP-TPA displayed higher photocurrent density compared with the value obtained from spiro-OMeTAD, and thus achieved a high solar cell efficiency of 17.6%. This cell efficiency is among the highest efficiencies yet reported for perovskite solar cells employing non-spiro-OMeTAD as a HTM. Our research results provide new guidelines for the development of HTMs, and thus the fabrication of efficient perovskite solar cells.


This work was supported by the Global Frontier R&D Program on Center for Multiscale Energy System funded by the National Research Foundation under the Ministry of Science, Korea Research Council of Fundamental Science and Technology (KRCF), Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST) for Project No. 2E25392, the New and Renewable Energy Program of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) grant funded by the Korea Government Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy (MTIE) (20113030010030), and Mid-career Research Program (No. NRF-2013R1A2A2A01067999) through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta08417b
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015