 DOI: 10.1039/C1JM11239B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10676-10684

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Christian
Müller
*,

Jonas
Bergqvist
,

Koen
Vandewal
,

Kristofer
Tvingstedt
,

Ana Sofia
Anselmo
,

Roger
Magnusson
,

M. Isabel
Alonso
,

Ellen
Moons
,

Hans
Arwin
,

Mariano
Campoy-Quiles
 and 

Olle
Inganäs


Biomolecular and Organic Electronics, Department of Physics, Chemistry and Biology, Linköpings universitet, SE-58183, Linköping, Sweden

Department of Physics and Electrical Engineering, Karlstads universitet, SE-65188, Karlstad, Sweden

Laboratory of Applied Optics, Department of Physics, Chemistry and Biology, Linköpings universitet, SE-58183, Linköping, Sweden

Institut de Ciència de Materials de Barcelona (ICMAB-CSIC), Esfera UAB, ES-08193, Bellaterra, Spain

Received
23rd March 2011
, Accepted 13th May 2011
First published on 17th June 2011
The thermal behaviour of an organic photovoltaic (OPV) binary system comprised of a liquid-crystalline fluorene-based polymer and a fullerene derivative is investigated. We employ variable-temperature ellipsometry complemented by photo- and electroluminescence spectroscopy as well as optical microscopy and scanning force nanoscopy to explore phase transitions of blend thin films. The high glass transition temperature correlates with the good thermal stability of solar cells based on these materials. Furthermore, we observe partial miscibility of the donor and acceptor together with the tendency of excess fullerene derivative to segregate into exceedingly large domains. Thus, for charge generation less adequate bulk-heterojunction nanostructures are poised to develop if this mixture is exposed to more elevated temperatures. Gratifyingly, the solubility of the fullerene derivative in the polymer phase is found to decrease if a higher molecular-weight polymer fraction is employed, which offers routes towards improving the photovoltaic performance of non-crystalline OPV blends.

Currently, organic semiconductors receive much attention as photovoltaic materials for low-cost, large area solar cell applications. Of particular promise are bulk-heterojunction binaries that comprise an electron-donating (hole-conducting) conjugated polymer intimately blended with an electron-accepting (electron-conducting) small-molecular species such as a fullerene derivative. Much progress with respect to the synthesis of new organic photovoltaic (OPV) materials as well as their employment in increasingly sophisticated device architectures has led to a steady improvement in the power conversion efficiency achievable with organic solar cells.

Furthermore, the precise bulk-heterojunction nanostructure, i.e. the distribution of donor and acceptor molecules, has been recognised to be crucial for achieving an adequate photovoltaic performance. Generally, the correlation between nanostructure and photocurrent generation is well established (although various details are still being debated in the current literature). For instance, it is desirable that an OPV blend features (i) a high fraction of the more light-absorbing species in order to maximise bound charge pair (exciton) generation, (ii) a high donor/acceptor interfacial area in order to enable efficient exciton dissociation into weakly bound electron-hole charge pairs (charge-transfer state), (iii) pure donor/acceptor domains in order to ensure efficient charge-transfer state dissociation and (iv) percolation of electron- and hole-transporting domains throughout the bulk-heterojunction in order to permit efficient transport of fully dissociated charges to the electrodes, balanced by appropriately adjusted volume fractions so that differences in charge-carrier mobilities are accounted for.
However, the physico-chemical driving forces that underlie nano- and microstructure formation in OPV blends have attracted less attention. Therefore, it has been found difficult to judiciously select combinations of organic semiconductors that can be readily solidified into bulk-heterojunctions, which simultaneously fulfil all of the above criteria. Thus, in currently attainable donor/acceptor nanostructures several charge recombination mechanisms may contribute towards losses in photocurrent, the most noticeable of which are geminate (monomolecular) recombination of charge-pairs before charge dissociation can occur and non-geminate (bimolecular) recombination of fully separated charges en route to the electrodes. The former is usually favoured if donor and acceptor molecules are too finely intermixed whereas the latter is promoted by extremely poor charge-transport properties.
A common approach to realise fine-grained but relatively pure donor and acceptor domains is to employ (semi-)crystalline materials. For instance, combining the semi-crystalline polymer poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and the crystalline small molecule [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) permits formation of single component domains of either species thus strongly reducing the amount of geminate recombination. In addition, such blends can display eutectic phase behaviour, which allows these mixtures to readily solidify into the required fine-grained nanostructures and bestows them with a high degree of thermal stability provided both components have crystallised appropriately.
However, frequently the photovoltages obtained with crystalline materials are disappointingly low. Instead, careful selection of less ordered materials can yield open-circuit voltages above one volt. Unfortunately, non-crystalline semiconductors have the tendency to be at least partially miscible and thus encourage geminate recombination. In addition, phase separation of such blends is prone to progress indefinitely. For instance, blends of poly(2-methoxy-5-(3′,7′-dimethyloctyloxy)-1,4-phenylene vinylene) (MDMO-PPV) and PC61BM have been found to display excessive segregation of the acceptor phase, especially when heated to temperatures above the glass transition temperature Tg of the macromolecule, i.e. Tg (MDMO-PPV) ≈ 45–80 °C. Hence, such blends require processing away from thermodynamic equilibrium in order to freeze in unstable nanostructures that feature adequately phase-separated donor and acceptor domains. For such blends the use of high Tg materials has been singled out as the principal requirement to achieve sufficient thermal stability, especially at elevated operating temperatures up to 85 °C.
Here we study the phase behaviour of the liquid-crystalline polymer poly[2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole)] (F8TBT, in the literature also abbreviated as APFO-3 or PFDTBT) and PC61BM (Fig. 1): two materials that feature a Tg > 100 °C and in combination yield an encouragingly high photovoltaic performance. We correlate the high Tg of these OPV blends with the good thermal stability of solar cells based on these materials. In addition, we identify the inherent miscibility of the donor and acceptor as the charge-generation limiting nanostructural feature. Gratifyingly, the solubility of PC61BM in the polymer phase is found to decrease if a higher molecular-weight polymer fraction is employed, which offers routes towards improving the photovoltaic performance of non-crystalline OPV blends.

In a first set of experiments we established the (non-equilibrium) temperature/composition diagram of the F8TBT5k:PC61BM system. We used a low molecular-weight grade of F8TBT, i.e.F8TBT5k (number- and weight-average molecular weight: Mn ≈ 5 kg mol−1 and Mw ≈ 12 kg mol−1), as most previous work concerning this type of material has focused on similarly low degrees of polymerisation due to the superior solubility in benign organic solvents. In contrast to previous studies on the phase behaviour of OPV blends, which have principally relied on calorimetric techniques that are most suitable for the study of bulk (polymer) systems, in this work we employed variable-temperature ellipsometry. By examining the evolution of the film thickness d with temperature we could most conveniently probe thermal transitions of thin polymer films. Phase changes manifest themselves as a change in volumetric expansion coefficient α, which is directly proportional to variations in the rate of change of density ρ and hence d with temperature T, i.e. α = d−1 × δd/δT. Initially we determined the refractive index n and extinction coefficient k of F8TBT5k:PC61BM thin films for wavelengths λ = 245–1690 nm at T ≈ 50 °C by fitting the ellipsometric angles tan Ψ and cos Δ obtained from variable-angle spectroscopic ellipsometry (VASE) using the standard critical point model. As shown in Fig. 2a and S1, independent of thin-film composition the material is largely optically transparent for λ > 650 nm, i.e. k ≈ 0. Thus, we employed Cauchy's dispersion relation (n(λ) = An + Bnλ−2 + Cnλ−4, where An, Bn and Cn are constants) in the region λ = 700–1690 nm to extract d from variable-temperature ellipsometry measurements of tan Ψ and cos Δ recorded during heating of spin-coated thin films (see Experimental for details). In agreement with previous reports on thin films of e.g. atactic polystyrene (PS), polyfluorene (PFO) or poly(9,9′-dioctylfluorene-alt-benzothiadiazole) (F8BT), we find that d(T) is closely related to tan Ψ(T) at wavelengths at which the material is optically transparent, e.g. 800 nm for F8TBT5k and 20:80 F8TBT5k:PC61BM (Fig. 2b and c). In order to investigate variations in transition temperature with decreasing film thickness, we examined the thermal evolution of F8TBT5k as well as 20:80 F8TBT5k:PC61BM for a series of 7 films each with d ranging from 20 to 200 nm. We find that the extracted glass transition temperatures Tg are independent of d and deduce Tg (F8TBT5k) ≈ 104 ± 2 °C and a similar Tg (20:80 F8TBT5k:PC61BM) ≈ 98 ± 2 °C (see Fig. S2). In contrast to the liquid-crystalline to isotropic transition temperature Ti of PC61BM rich blends, which displays equally invariant behaviour, Ti (F8TBT5k) appears to increase for d ≤ 50 nm. We associate this with the frequently reported onset of confinement effects in thin polymer films. The observation that the transition temperatures of thicker F8TBT5k as well as all investigated F8TBT5k:PC61BM films are unaffected by thickness variations we rationalise with the oligomeric nature of F8TBT5k (cf.ref. 30) as well as the presence of small-molecular PC61BM. This is consistent with previous studies on PS thin films, which have demonstrated that reducing the degree of polymerisation or addition of a small-molecular diluent can mitigate confinement effects. Instead, higher molecular-weight polymers can display a pronounced variation in e.g. Tg if confined in thin films.

A more extended study of different compositions revealed that Ti is not only sensitive to confinement effects but also to addition of the electron acceptor molecules and it decreases from ∼179 ± 2 °C for pure F8TBT5k films (d > 50 nm) to ∼138 ± 3 °C for PC61BM rich blends with polymer compositions cF8TBT < 75 wt% F8TBT5k (Fig. 3). When, in addition, considering the end-melting temperatures of PC61BM, which we deduced from polarised optical microscopy experiments (cf.ref. 14), we find that F8TBT5k:PC61BM blends are of eutectic nature with a eutectic composition ceutectic ≈ 75% and eutectic temperature Teutectic ≈ 138 °C. In contrast, Tg was found to be largely independent of composition, owing to the good match in Tg of the pure components.

In crystalline–crystalline eutectic binaries, formation of fine-grained pure-component crystals occurs below Teutectic. In contrast, if one of the components is of liquid-crystalline nature (LC), here F8TBT, we can expect this phase to dissolve a certain fraction, cLC < ceutectic, of the other component, akin to a lyotropic phase. In order to investigate the miscibility of PC61BM in F8TBT5k we recorded a series of photoluminescence (PL) as well as electroluminescence (EL) spectra of thin films with varying composition. Independent of the thermal history of these blends, i.e. spin-coated, thermally treated at 130 °C or 190 °C, with an increasing amount of the acceptor we find increasingly efficient quenching of the polymer emission as previously reported for spin-coated blends (Fig. S3). For instance, upon addition of ∼20 wt% PC61BM we observe a more than 100 times reduction in PL quantum yield. The efficient quenching of the polymer emission suggests that all conjugated polymer segments are in close proximity to an acceptor molecule. Thus, F8TBT5k and PC61BM form a finely intermixed phase that is thermodynamically favourable since it persists after thermal treatment at T > Tg. In addition, a strong red-shift in the peak luminescence wavelength λp is evident (Fig. 4). This trend is consistent with a transition from polymer to F8TBT5k:PC61BM charge-transfer state dominated emission. The weakly bound charge pairs that give rise to this spectroscopic signature are primarily located at the interface between the donor and acceptor molecules, the precise organisation of which strongly influences the energetics of this emission process. Our data reveal a rapid red-shift in λp upon addition of PC61BM until cF8TBT ≈ 80 ± 5 wt% F8TBT5k, whereas at more PC61BM-rich compositions λp is less strongly affected by the presence of an additional acceptor fraction. We rationalise this observation with phase separation of excess PC61BM from the liquid-crystalline F8TBT5k:PC61BM phase and hence we infer the composition of the miscible fraction at e.g. 130 °C as cLC ≈ 80 ± 5 wt% F8TBT5k, i.e. ∼20 ± 5 wt% PC61BM (cf.Fig. 3).


As a result, the here discussed OPV blend tends to phase separate into a liquid-crystalline F8TBT5k phase that dissolves up to 20 ± 5 wt% PC61BM and a (pure) PC61BM phase composed of excess PC61BM that will undergo crystallisation if given sufficient time. At temperatures just above Tg we find that PC61BM crystallisation proceeds slowly as evidenced by the conspicuous absence of crystallites after thermally treating 20:80 F8TBT5k:PC61BM blends for 4 hours at 130 °C (Fig. 5a). However, we observe that additional heat treatment at ∼190 °C results in a significantly increased number of finer crystals than found in spin-coated films that were directly exposed to these more elevated temperatures. This suggests that nucleation of PC61BM crystals proceeds at T > Tg but is paired with a low crystal growth rate. We suggest that phase separation of excess PC61BM from the liquid-crystalline F8TBT5k:PC61BM phase, which we have inferred from our luminescence measurements, is initially governed by liquid–liquid dynamics. Thus, depending on the exact solidification protocol, the size and shape of PC61BM domains are likely to vary considerably. Scanning force nanographs (that is atomic force microscopy (AFM) images) of blend films thermally treated at 130 °C (Fig. 5b) reveal structures reminiscent of classical binodal or spinodal decomposition, depending on the blend ratio. Polymer-rich blend compositions with 70–100 wt% F8TBT5k show generally flat surfaces (root-mean-square (RMS) roughness ≈ 0.4 nm) with isolated protrusions (∼10 to 20 nm diameter), decreasing in number with increasing PC61BM fraction. Similar nanostructures and roughness values are found for the surfaces of PC61BM-rich blends with 0–50 wt% F8TBT5k, whilst the surface of sample 60:40 F8TBT5k:PC61BM is noticeably different. Height and phase images show larger domains, droplet-like and irregular in shape, characteristic for binodal decomposition (RMS roughness ≈ 0.8 nm). These results indicate that the transition from the binodal to the spinodal decomposition regime in the phase diagram occurs just to the left of the fraction 60:40 F8TBT5k:PC61BM on a composition scale. Here, we would like to draw attention to recent studies on blends composed of a related fluorene derivative, which comprises didecyl instead of dioctyl side-chains (i.e. F10TBT) and again PC61BM. In agreement with our results, polymer-rich 80:20 F10TBT:PC61BM blends (spin-coated from chlorobenzene) were found to display no phase-separation beyond 10–20 nm as revealed by AFM and transmission electron microscopy (TEM), whereas PC61BM-rich 20:80 F10TBT:PC61BM thin films featured PC61BM clusters separated by F10TBT-rich domains. A further report suggested that the connectivity of such polymer-rich domains improved with increasing molecular weight of the macromolecule.


The partial miscibility of F8TBT5k:PC61BM blends together with the tendency of excess PC61BM to segregate into exceedingly large domains implies that less adequate bulk-heterojunction nanostructures are poised to develop at elevated temperatures. Fortunately, thanks to the high Tg of this system, non-equilibrium structures can be maintained at T < Tg, which is of benefit for the operational stability of solar cells based on these binaries. In order to establish the relevance of the high Tg of F8TBT5k:PC61BM blends, we fabricated a series of OPV devices that incorporated active layers isothermally treated at temperatures between 20 and 190 °C for one hour. This was done before evaporation of lithium fluoride/aluminium (LiF/Al) top electrodes, which appeared to respond poorly to elevated temperatures (cf. Fig. S4). The donor/acceptor ratio 20:80 F8TBT5k:PC61BM and active layer thickness d ≈ 80–100 nm were chosen according to previously reported optimisation studies. Blend films were deposited by spin-coating from o-dichlorobenzene (oDCB) in order to initially guarantee a high degree of homogeneity. We found that all device parameters, i.e. the open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF) and maximum power point (MPP), were unaffected by heating to at least T ≈ 70 °C (Fig. 6 and 7). This observation is in agreement with a previous report that established good thermal stability up to a similar range of temperatures during dynamic heating of 20:80 F8TBT:PC61BM OPV devices. Unfortunately, we found that the device performance rapidly deteriorated at temperatures closer to Tg (20:80 F8TBT5k:PC61BM) ≈ 98 ± 2 °C, as has been found for several other blends comprising a non-crystalline polymer. For instance, it has been reported for MDMO-PPV:PC61BM blends that prolonged exposure to elevated temperatures leads to detrimental coarsening of acceptor domains. Directly after spin-coating a fine distribution of PC61BM domains is frozen by virtue of the above ambient Tg of MDMO-PPV:PC61BM binaries, which start to coalesce upon heating. We propose that similar coarsening occurs in the here investigated 20:80 F8TBT5k:PC61BM blends, initially on a nanometre length scale as indicated by AFM and eventually more microscopically as illustrated by optical micrographs of PC61BM crystals that have grown at more elevated temperatures (cf.Fig. 5). It is important to note that we observe a deterioration in photovoltaic performance at T < Tg. We cannot rule out the presence of a very thin interfacial layer at the free surface of our films (<20 nm, cf. Fig. S2) that displays a deviation from bulk thermal behaviour and would be particularly relevant for OPV devices due to the eventual proximity to the top electrode. In addition, it is important to point out that the nominal glass transition temperatures quoted in this paper are unlikely to coincide with the actual onset of the glass transition, which would permit the blend nanostructure to develop at lower temperatures, i.e. at T < Tg.


Since the above studied blends comprised a low molecular-weight polymer moiety, the question arises to which extent a higher degree of polymerisation may influence the phase behaviour of the here discussed OPV blends. To this end, we also investigated blends based on a higher molecular-weight grade, i.e.F8TBT36k (Mn ≈ 36 kg mol−1 and Mw ≈ 65 kg mol−1). Interestingly, we found that such blends could be exposed to T ≈ 90 °C for at least 16 hours without any deterioration in photovoltaic performance (Fig. 7 and S4), i.e. closer to the Tg (20:80 F8TBT36k:PC61BM) ≈ 104 °C of these blends (determined with variable-temperature ellipsometry). We rationalise the slight increase in Tg with the higher Tg (F8TBT36k) ≈ 122 °C of the polymer fraction.

Furthermore, we noted that 20:80 F8TBT36k:PC61BM blends displayed a superior photovoltaic performance, thanks primarily to a higher Jsc as well as FF. Previous reports have argued that this is likely due to suppressed geminate charge recombination but also aided by better light absorption as well as charge-transport characteristics. In order to further elucidate this dependency, we studied the partial miscibility of these higher molecular-weight binaries by means of PL measurements (Fig. 8). Spin-coated (not shown) as well as thermally treated 20:80 F8TBT36k:PC61BM blends displayed significantly less PL quenching (∼13 times) than blends based on the lower molecular-weight F8TBT5k (more than 100 times, cf. Fig. S3). In addition, λp had only slightly red-shifted to 688 nm indicating incomplete suppression of the polymer emission. This observation clearly indicates that such binaries prefer to phase-separate into relatively pure donor and acceptor domains. We suggest that the lower entropy of mixing that is commonly associated with higher molecular-weight polymers is likely to be the cause for this behaviour. Thus, the decreased miscibility of PC61BM in the liquid-crystalline polymer phase may have given rise to improved dissociation dynamics that have been reported previously for F10TBT:PC61BM blends (cf.ref. 63).

In summary, we have demonstrated that liquid-crystalline:crystalline polymer:small molecule F8TBT:PC61BM OPV blends display eutectic phase behaviour and segregate into (eventually crystalline) PC61BM domains and a liquid-crystalline polymer phase. The extent to which the small-molecular acceptor is miscible in the polymer phase is principally governed by the molecular weight of the macromolecule. This strongly correlates with the previously proposed charge dissociation dynamics in such OPV blends, i.e. less pronounced geminate charge pair recombination facilitated by a higher degree of polymerisation. Furthermore, F8TBT:PC61BM blends display a useful level of thermal stability, thanks to the relatively high glass transition temperature of F8TBT. In particular blends comprising a higher molecular-weight polymer displayed good temperature stability and appeared resilient to isothermal treatment at 90 °C. Certainly, our observation that the eutectic phase behaviour of liquid-crystalline polymer/small molecule blends can be tuned with respect to thermal stability as well as miscibility outlines an important design strategy for the development of future OPV binaries.


Two F8TBT grades of different molecular weights were used in this study: F8TBT5k (number-average molecular weight Mn ≈ 5 kg mol−1; weight-average molecular weight Mw ≈ 12 kg mol−1) and F8TBT36k (Mn ≈ 36 kg mol−1; Mw ≈ 65 kg mol−1); for details of synthesis see ref. 18. PC61BM was obtained from Solenne BV. Blend compositions are quoted in weight percent (wt%:wt% F8TBT:PC61BM).


Thin F8TBT:PC61BM films for ellipsometry, microscopy, nanoscopy, spectroscopy and device studies were spin-coated from homogeneous oDCB solutions (∼15 to 75 g L−1 material content) at ambient conditions and, where applicable, thermally treated in nitrogen atmosphere on a Kofler bench (Wagner & Munz, Germany). Temperature calibration was performed with heating standards; the error on quoted temperatures is estimated to be ±5 °C. Before thermal treatment, films were allowed to dry for several hours at ambient conditions in order to remove residual solvent.


Devices were fabricated on poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonic acid) (PEDOT:PSS) coated (spin-coated from Baytron P, H. C. Stark GmbH, and treated at 150 °C for 30 min, thickness ≈ 40 nm) patterned ITO-coated glass substrates. Blend active layers (film thickness d ≈ 80–100 nm; i.e. close to a thickness of 85 nm, at which the power absorption of such devices displays a local maximum) were spin-coated as described above and, were applicable, thermally treated before top electrode deposition. A LiF electron-blocking layer (thickness ∼6 Å) and aluminium top electrodes were deposited viathermal evaporation under vacuum (thickness ≈ 80 nm; area ≈ 4 mm2).



VASE was carried out with a RC2 instrument from J. A. Woollam Co., Inc. (USA) and modelling was performed using the Winelli II software package from SOPRA (France).


Variable-temperature ellipsometry was carried out with a RC2 instrument from J. A. Woollam Co., Inc. (USA) at a fixed angle of incidence (70°), equipped with a nitrogen-flushed hot stage. Spin-coated thin films on silicon substrates with a 2.0 nm native silicon oxide top layer were heated by 10 °C min−1. Temperature calibration was performed with an external thin-film temperature sensor (Omega Engineering, UK) that had been glued onto a silicon wafer; error on quoted temperatures is estimated to be ±3 °C. Modelling of variable-temperature measurements was performed using the Complete Ease software package from J. A. Woollam Co., Inc. (USA). The optical model assumed a layer stack of silicon/native silicon oxide/blend layer/ambient; the in-built optical properties for silicon as a function of temperature and for native silicon oxide were used. A thin roughness layer on top of the blend layer was permitted.


Photo- and electroluminescence (PL and EL) emission spectra of thin films were recorded using an Oriel liquid light guide and a Shamrock SR 303i spectrograph coupled to a Newton EMCCDsilicon detector.



Optical microscopy was carried out with an Olympus BH2 polarising microscope. Thermal transitions were studied by heating thin films at a rate of 10 °C min−1 in a nitrogen-flushed Mettler FP82HT hot stage.



AFM was conducted with a Nanoscope IIIa Multimode instrument (Veeco, USA) in tapping mode using a silicon cantilever (OMCL-AC160TS series) with a spring constant of 42 N m−1, a resonance frequency of 300 kHz and a tip radius of less than 10 nm.


Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of photovoltaic devices were measured at ambient conditions under simulated solar illumination (Air Mass 1.5, 1000 W m−2). The light source used was a 300 watt xenon arc lamp solar simulator (Photo Emission Tech., USA); the intensity was calibrated using a silicon photo-diode from Hamamatsu Photonics (Japan).


We acknowledge funding from the Northern European Innovative Energy Research Programme (N-INNER), the Swedish Energy Agency through the projects Morphoso and Polarge as well as from the Spanish Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación through the project Nomocell. Financial support to instrumentation was obtained from the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation. Furthermore, we thank Prof. Mats Andersson (Chalmers Tekniska Högskola) for generously providing the F8TBT used in this study.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c1jm11239b
‡ Present address: Institut de Ciència de Materials de Barcelona (ICMAB-CSIC), Esfera UAB, ES-08193 Bellaterra, Spain. E-mail: christian.muller@icmab.es.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011