 DOI: 10.1039/C8DT03784A
(Frontier)
Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 799-805


Jialong
Duan
 and 

Qunwei
Tang
*

Institute of New Energy Technology, College of Information Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, PR China. E-mail: tangqunwei@jnu.edu.cn

Received
19th September 2018
, Accepted 26th November 2018
First published on 28th November 2018
Renewable energy utilization by energy conversion devices is regarded as a promising solution to resolve energy crisis and environmental pollution problems. Solar energy occupies 99% of the total energy of the Earth; therefore, the development of photovoltaic technology to convert solar energy into electricity is attracting considerable interests. The state-of-the-art research in this field mainly focuses on the improvement of power conversion efficiency under the sunlight irradiation by new materials development, device structure optimization, technique innovation, etc. In real natural environments, there is no or negligible sunlight for at least half of the time, particularly during rainy, foggy days or at night. Therefore, it is a challenging but promising strategy to develop new-type solar cells that can persistently harvest waste energies from nature without sacrificing the solar-to-electric conversion ability. In theory, these photovoltaics may break through the theoretical efficiency limitation and maximize the total power output. In this frontier article, the status quo of these physical proof-of-concept hybrid solar cells as well as the preparation methods of the solar cell architectures, and why harvesting waste energies are discussed. According to the working principles, the possible strategies of improving waste energy conversion efficiency are also envisaged.

Green energy harvest from nature has attracted enormous attentions since the emergence of fossil energy shortage and climate changes. Thus, the development of novel energy conversion devices by converting energies, such as solar energy, wind energy, wave energy, thermal energy, tidal energy, chemical energy, etc., to electricity is a promising solution. Among various green energies, the solar energy occupies 99% of the total energy of the Earth, therefore solar cells (also called photovoltaics), according to solar-to-electric conversion principles, are regarded as one of the most promising strategies because of their zero emissions, high efficiency, abundant raw materials, and scalable techniques. Low production cost and high power conversion efficiency (PCE) are the two important factors to evaluate the overall performance of photovoltaic (PV) module. To achieve this goal, the PVs have experienced a rushing development through material innovation, device structure optimization, and technique updating. To date, the highest PCE record for commercial single crystalline-silicon solar cells is approaching 26.1% under one solar illumination, therefore the low generating cost (∼0.1$ kWh−1), excellent long-term stability in the real atmosphere (>30 years) and high efficiency promote the global installation capacity up to 405 GW in 2017. Subsequently, thin-film solar cells are developed to further reduce production cost, to realize flexibility, and to improve the PCE outputs in weak-light environments. For example, GaAs and CIGS solar cells have achieved the maximized PCEs of 28.9% and 22.9%, respectively. However, the toxicity of As and rare reserves of In and Ga are still commercial burdens for these PVs. In recent few decades, some resource-efficient and environment-friendly thin-film cells, such as dye-sensitized (DSSCs), organic, quantum dot-sensitized, and perovskite solar cells (PSCs), are entering into a plateau stage, as shown in Fig. 1. It is noteworthy to mention that all of these state-of-the-art PVs concentrate on the performance improvement under sunlight illumination; however, the cell efficiencies are relatively low or zero in dark-light conditions. How to break through the current impasse and to further improve total power generation is a challenging but promising topic to meet application-specific requirements.

To the best of our knowledge, the state-of-the-art solar cells only output electricity under solar irradiation, where the electricity generation ability is highly dependent on the weather conditions, through obeying solar-to-electric conversion principles, undoubtedly dropping the overall performance of solar cells in dark-light conditions, such as rainy, cloudy, foggy days, at night, etc. According to substantial statistics data, nearly 65.8% of the total year in China is occupied by low-visibility weather conditions, not to mention the rain-enriched countries and regions near equator including the south of the United States, Central America, South America, Southeast Asia, the United Kingdom, etc. To address this issue, enormous efforts have been made to explore functional materials for harvesting waste energies, such as thermal energy and optimizing the architecture of solar cells. In this frontier article, we summarized the recent progresses in harvesting waste energies from nature by solar cells, realizing the electricity generation beyond solar irradiation, and melting the ice, on the way towards all-weather platforms.

The golden rule for these multi-energy integrated PVs is to simultaneously harvest waste energies without sacrificing the solar-to-electrical conversion ability in sunny days. Over the past decades, growing research efforts have been devoted to developing a mechanical energy-tailored generator to break through the limitation of weather conditions, particularly the triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG). Upon incorporation of these generators with PV device, a hybridized power panel that could simultaneously realize power output from sunlight, raindrop, and wind have been fabricated, demonstrating the promising application to prolong working time on cloudy days.

Prior to discussion of the PV devices, which can generate electricity beyond sunny days, two types of the TENGs were explained for better understanding. Fig. 2a describes a classic single-electrode TENG mode that collects rain energy in rainy days, composed of a conductive layer (ITO, FTO, or PEDOT:PSS) and a triboelectric layer (PA, PDMS, or PTFE). When two different materials are pressed or rubbed together, the surface of one material will generally withdraw some electrons from the surface of the other material. The material that withdraws electrons has stronger affinity for negative charge and that surface will be negatively charged after those two materials are separated. The PA, PDMS, and PTFE have negative charge affinities, which mean that they are generally negatively charged after pressed or rubbed with other materials. Therefore, an enormous number of the functional polymer composites is being developed for the application in wearable strain sensors, corrosion resistance and triboelectric layer. For example, Sun et al. have fabricated a hybridized solar panel by integrating a heterojunction Si solar cell and a PEDOT:PSS/poly(dimethylsiloxane) PDMS-type TENG to form a Si/PEDOT:PSS/PDMS configuration by sharing the same Ag electrodes (Fig. 2b), achieving a synthetic power output and enhanced energy harvesting in rainy days. Upon illumination from a stimulated solar cell, a PCE as high as 13.6% with open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.628 V, short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 29.1 mA cm−2 and fill factor (FF) of 0.745 can be achieved. When the raindrop contacts the surface of PDMS layer, the TENG layer would be negatively charged owing to the triboelectric effect. As shown in Fig. 2a, the electrons are transferred to the PEDOT:PSS electrode from the ground, due to the positive electric potential difference, until achieving charge equilibrium. Once the raindrop leaves the PDMS film surface, an inverse electric potential is formed, driving electrons to flow from the PEDOT:PSS film to the ground. Upon persistent stimulus by raindrops, the device achieved periodically electrical signals, and the maximized voltage of 2.14 V and the current of ∼33.0 nA are obtained by this physical proof-of-concept hybridized solar cell.
Apart from the harvesting rain energy, the wind energy can be simultaneously captured through establishing a dual-mode TENG based on a sequential process of contact electrification and electrostatic induction. The electricity generation processes are ascribed to the connection of two electrodes of tribo-surfaces, and the charges flow between two electrodes instead of flowing to the ground. Taking the PTFE-nylon system as an example, as shown in Fig. 2c, the impact force from wind drives PTFE film to contact with nylon film, resulting in the PTFE and nylon film charged surfaces due to the triboelectric effect. As the wind driven force stops, the contacted surfaces are separated to form a potential difference between two conductive layers; therefore, to cause the electrons flow until reaching equilibrium. On the contrary, the reverse electron flow would be established between two electrodes once another impact force from the wind makes PTFE and nylon films contact again. In this fashion, a similar AC electric signal is generated from this tailored dual-electrode mode TENG by impact forces.
Based on the above-mentioned electricity generation principles, Wang et al. have developed a multifunctional solar cell panel by integrating two types of TENGs into silicon solar cell to eliminate the dysfunction of solar cell in different weather, as shown in Fig. 2d. It not only can harvest energy from sunlight by PV unit but also from raindrops and wind simultaneously by TENG units. This hybridized solar cell can deliver a power output of 8 mW m−2 in windy days and 86 mW m−2 under the stimulus of raindrops without sacrificing the PV performances, which significantly enhances the overall electricity generation ability and brings down the generating cost. The efficient integration of solar energy and other waste energies into a single solar cell provides a new opportunity to prolong the generating time and to reduce the cost meeting application-specific demands.

Graphene is a two-dimensional carbon layer presenting large delocalized π-electron systems, making it a Lewis base in aqueous solution and absorbing positively charged cations for electrical double layer (EDL) pseudo-capacitances present at graphene/cation interfaces. This pseudo-capacitance originates from Lewis acid–base interactions between the delocalized π-electrons from the electron-enriched graphene and the cations in aqueous solutions. Guo et al. have systematically studied the electrokinetic phenomenon by driving ionized water on the surface of carbon materials, such as 2D graphene or 3D porous carbon frameworks, for voltage and current outputs. Rainwater is not a pure water, it splits into anions and cations, therefore the combination of graphene with PVs could harvest rain energy by solar cells and realize persistent power generation in rainy days.

Inspired by above-mentioned electrokinetic mechanism, a flexible DSSC that can be triggered by sun and rain was made by Tang et al. for the first time, achieving a PCE of 6.53% under standard one solar illumination along with a voltage of hundreds of microvolts and a current over microamps under the stimulus of raindrops.Fig. 3a shows the architecture of this physical concept-of-proof solar cell composed of a mesoscopic TiO2/N719 photoanode, a I−/I3− redox electrolyte, a counter electrode and a reduced graphene oxide (rGO) layer. Notably, the rGO layer is made on the rear side of a traditional DSSC to avoid the light loss and efficiency reduction. The solar energy harvest obeys solar-to-electrical principle: on sunlight illumination, the N719 dyes absorb photons to release electrons, which transfer to the conduction band of mesoscopic TiO2 and to the FTO layer. I− ions recover the oxidized dyes to their ground state and change to I3− ions, which diffuse to counter electrode/electrolyte interface to be reduced back to I− ions by counter electrode. On rainy days, the delocalized π-electrons in rGO layer absorb the positively charged cations from rainwater, such as H+, Na+, K+, Ca2+, etc. to form an electron donor–acceptor complex. By density functional theory (DFT) simulation, as shown in Fig. 3b, an adsorption energy of over 2 eV was obtained owing to the physisorption of Na+ ions on the surface of graphene along with the formation of delocalized π-electrons|Na+ EDL pseudo-capacitance. As shown in Fig. 3c, upon dragging the ionic raindrops on the surface of rGO, the pseudo-capacitances were charged/discharged in the front and at the end of the droplet, resulting in a potential difference and, therefore, voltage and current outputs in rainy days.
According to the above-mentioned EDL theory, the pseudo-capacitances determine rain energy harvest; therefore, a promising solution is to increase the electron density of electron-enriched materials. To the best of knowledge, the state-of-the-art counter electrodes for DSSC applications are divided into six categories including carbonaceous materials, conductive polymers, Pt, alloys, hybrids, and compounds ascribing it to their excellent electron mobility and enlarged electron concentration in the surface region. Inspired by this catalytic principle of I−/I3− couples, conductive polymers, such as polyaniline, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) and polypyrrole, and PtM alloys (M = Ni, Fe, Co, Cu, and Mo, etc.) are applicable for building rain-responsive solar cells, due to presence of the conjugated π-electrons for conductive polymers and an electron-enriched surface for alloys. Notably, the periodical electric signals during the repeated spreading and shrinking of the raindrops on the surface of PtM alloy are much higher than that of pure Pt electrode. The mechanism behind this enhancement can be explained by an increased electron density arising from the electron deviation from transition metals to Pt due to its higher electronegativity. Conductive polymer–graphene and polymer–graphene/PtM hybrids are also synthesized to further increase the electron density, demonstrating an enhanced power output in response of raindrops.

Recent study demonstrates that the nanoporous carbon black (CB) may be used to generate electricity under stimulation by water evaporation, which is similar to the phenomenon of dragging ionic solutions across graphene surfaces. Arising from interaction between water molecules and carbon layers, persistent water evaporation flow across centimeter-sized CB film outputs sustained voltage up to 1 V. In detail, upon evaporation-induced water flows within the porous carbon sheets, the negative zeta potential of the CB layer can create repulsion to hydroxy ions (OH−) and adsorb protons (H+) to form electron (CB)/proton (water vapor) EDL at the CB/water interface.

In recent years, PSCs have attracted enormous attention owing to their rising PCE from 3.8% for the prototype to 23.3% in 2018. However, the use of expensive hole-transporting materials (HTMs) and precious metal electrodes increases the production cost, while the performance degradation upon humidity attacks is still an aging burden for their commercialization. To address these issues, all-inorganic CsPbBr3 PSCs free of HTMs are developed by coating carbon paste (including CB, graphene, and binders) as back electrode. Using the hole-transporting behavior and the evaporation-induced potential of CB as well as good conductivity of graphene, the all-inorganic tailored carbon electrode CsPbBr3 PSC harvests solar and water-vapor energies (Fig. 4), making perovskite light-harvesters and water “friends” rather than “enemies”. Upon interfacial modification and plasma treatment, this bifunctional PSC yields a PCE up to 9.43% under solar irradiation and 0.158 μW in 80% relative humidity. Due to the hydrophobicity of carbon electrode and the stable crystalized structure of CsPbBr3 halide, the photovoltaics present improved stability under strong insolation and moisture attacks. Water circulation is a persistent process for maintaining ecosystems and life processes, during which water evaporation releases tremendous energy to nature. By increasing the vapor energy harvest, these kinds of PSCs could be regarded as “all-weather solar cells” because of the persistent water evaporation during the days and at nights.

According to the solar-to-electrical conversion principles, the light-harvesters absorb excited sunlight to release electrons; therefore, it is a great challenge to persistently generate electrons at night. Taking DSSC as an example, the state-of-the-art N719 dye is responsive to sunlight with wavelength ranging from 300 nm to 560 nm, as shown in Fig. 5a, demonstrating that the incident light beyond 560 nm penetrates across the FTO/dye-TiO2 photoanode (Fig. 5b). By coating a layer of long persistence phosphors (LPPs) material to obtain FTO/dye-TiO2/LPPs composite photoanode, the lost visible, NIR or IR spectral light across FTO/dye-TiO2 is re-absorbed by LPPs to emit fluorescence for hours or several days after ceasing illumination, as shown in Fig. 6. This design in photoanodes does not reduce the spectral absorption of N719 dyes and photo efficiency under incident light illumination, simultaneously the LPP layer persistently emits monochromatic visible light through complicated up-conversion phenomenon and electron-recombination mechanism. Subsequently, the fluorescence light is re-absorbed by N719 to pump the electrons from dye to TiO2 (Fig. 5a), playing a role of “sun” in dark conditions, as shown in Fig. 6. A series of LPPs-tailored solar cells have been fabricated by our group, and the systematical investigations demonstrated that the LPPs had positive effects towards solar-to-electric conversion efficiency, as shown in Fig. 5c and d. In details, the LPPs are compounds with elements of Ba, Y, S, Au, O for blue-emitting LPPs, Al, S, Y, C, Eu, S, O for green-emitting LPPs, Al, C, Ca, P, O for cyan-emitting LPPs, Ba, Mo, Mg, Sr, C, O for purple-emitting LPPs, Ba, Y, S, Au, O for white-emitting LPPs, and Al, Sr, O for red-emitting LPPs. A maximum PCE, as high as 10.08%, is achieved for green-LPP-tailored device under standard one solar irradiation, which is much higher than that of LPP-free device. This is mainly attributed to the associated illumination of photosensitive dyes by incident light from simulated sunlight and fluorescent light from LPP layer for the increased photocurrent density. Notably, the maximized dark efficiency (PCEdark) was determined to be 26.69% under dark conditions calculated according to PCEdark = Pmax/Pin, where Pmax and Pin present the maximal power output and fluorescent light power, respectively. This unprecedented dark efficiency comes from the high conversion ability of monochromatic fluorescence to electricity, which can be cross-checked by monochromatic incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra.

As an alternative DSSC structure to persistently work at night, the LPP layers may be set at the rear side of transparent counter electrode. The fluorescence penetrates transparent counter electrode and electrolyte (I−/I3−) layer to illuminate N719-TiO2 photoanode LPPs, leading to the electricity generation in dark conditions.
Our recent study in this field demonstrates a bifacial DSSC with a symmetrical structure of glass/FTO/dye-TiO2/LPP/electrolyte|Pt/Ti/Pt|electrolyte/LPP/dye-TiO2/FTO/glass may markedly increase the power output, as shown in Fig. 7. Different from the state-of-the-art bifacial devices, the reflected light can be directly utilized with high-efficiency without passing through the transparent counter electrode and I−/I3− electrolyte. Arising from the parallel structure, extra-high short-circuit current densities up to 28.59 mA cm−2 and 119.9 μA cm−2 under simulated sunlight irradiation (100 mW cm−2, AM1.5) and dark-light conditions are obtained for this bifacial solar cell, significantly enhancing the overall electricity generation ability of photovoltaic modules.
Featured with the light absorbing–converting–releasing behaviors of LPP materials, the performance of LPP-tailored solar cell is determined by the light-harvesting ability and fluorescence intensity as well as luminescence lifetime of LPP material at room temperature. However, the fluorescent intensity and aging time of state-of-the-art LPPs are still below the demands for high-performance DSSCs at night. To better understand the electricity generation ability of LPP-tailored device under dark conditions, the total energy of nearly 600 μW min cm−2 can be recovered when removing sunlight after enough solar irradiation for LPP. With developing novel LPP materials, it is expected that the power output can be further enhanced.

The newly developed solar cells that can persistently generate electricity beyond sunny days are undoubtedly a PV revolution, dramatically prolonging the generating time and increasing total power by harvesting waste energies from nature. Fortunately, this promising topic has attracted growing interests in recent years for climate-independent solar cells. In this frontier article, we summarized the recent advances of hybridized solar cells by combining the nanogenerators or electron-enriched materials with PVs to harvest solar energy in sunny and rainy days or vapor energy in rainy or foggy days, respectively. Moreover, the application of light-storage materials in DSSCs realized the persistent work at night.

Although substantial progresses have been obtained by developing advanced materials and/or device architectures, some urgent issues should be considered in the future. First, the generated power in the dark-light environment is still much lower than that excited by the sun; second, the device structures of hybridized solar cells need further optimization to meet the practical applications; third, advanced photovoltaic platforms that can work in every weather should receive more attention. In summary, the hybridized solar cells mentioned in this article are still in their physical proof-of-concept state, but we believe they are certainly a good choice to maximize renewable energy harvest and to minimize emissions.

There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61774139, 21503202) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (11618409).


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019