 DOI: 10.1039/C5TC00826C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 6086-6093


Mrinmoy
Misra
*,

Suman
Singh
,

A. K.
Paul
 and 

Madan Lal
Singla


Academy of Scientific & Innovative Research (AcSIR), Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), India

Central Scientific Instruments Organisation (CSIO), Material Research Division, Sector 30 C, Chandigarh, India. E-mail: mrinmoymishra@gmail.com; Fax: +91-172-2657267; Tel: +91-9803473089

Received
24th March 2015
, Accepted 6th May 2015
First published on 8th May 2015
In the present study, ZnO@PbS core–shell thin film based solar cells have been fabricated by the successive ionic layer absorption and reaction method (SILAR). The assembly consists of zinc oxide (ZnO) nanorods as the core and PbS as the shell, and the thickness of the PbS layer was controlled by varying the number of dipping cycles. The varied PbS layer thicknesses resulted in the shifting of the absorption of ZnO@PbS from the ultraviolet region to the visible region. The PbS layer suppressed the visible emission of ZnO and enhanced the charge separation at the interface. By introducing PbS layers, the charge generation and separation within the ZnO@PbS core–shell nanorod has been improved. The PbS shell on ZnO nanorods improved the short-circuit current (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF) that resulted in an enhancement of the photovoltaic device efficiency. A maximum power conversion efficiency of 6.59% was achieved with ten layers of PbS in the ZnO@PbS@dye thin film based solar cell.

Nowadays, semiconductor nanostructures are drawing the attention of researchers for the development of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSc) because of their superior optoelectronic properties at the nanoscale region The band gap and absorption range can be tuned by adjusting the size and shape of the nanostructure material due to quantum confinement. One-dimensional (1D) nanorods of metal oxide, like tin dioxide (TiO2) and zinc oxide (ZnO), have been considered as synthetically tuneable nanoscale building blocks for next-generation electronic devices. These materials have properties such as quantum confinement effects in the radial axis, large aspect ratio, high directional electron mobility, increased electron diffusion length, lower charge recombination rates and they act as good electron acceptors. These properties make them very useful materials for electrodes and energy conversion and storage devices. ZnO nanorods have higher electron mobility (∼205–1000 cm2 V−1 s−1) than TiO2 (∼0.1–4 cm2 V−1 s−1) and can perform fast diffusion transport of photo injected electrons when used as the anode in DSSc. However, ZnO nanorods have failed to draw the attention of researchers.

It is expected that the PbS nanostructure can further improve the photocatalytic activity of ZnO due to the efficient spatial separation of the photogenerated electron and can also prevent electron–hole recombination at the interface of two materials. The PbS nanostructure is very advantageous due to specific properties such as a narrow band gap (0.41 eV), as compared to bulk, excellent photosensitivity in the near-IR region, a large excitonic Bohr radius (<18 nm), high dielectric constants and a small effective mass for the electron and hole. In recent years, a lot of work on CdS, CdSe and PbS nanoparticle or quantum dot sensitized solar cells with high photoconversion efficiencies have been reported. Various studies have reported on the development of synthetic methods for size tunable PbS nanocrystals to absorb light in the near-IR region. A PbS layer can be deposited on the surface of metal oxides by chemical bath deposition (CBD) or by the successive ionic layer adsorption/reaction (SILAR) method or by the pre-synthesized nanostructure soaking method.
Core–shell nanostructures, on other hand, have their own advantages like the ability to enhance the efficiency of the interfacial charge separation process and to achieve Fermi level equilibrium. Moreover, these structures have a controllable chemical composition and chemical stability and are able to electrically insulate the core material from its surroundings.
Recently, many synthetic routes have been developed to synthesize ZnO@PbS core–shell nanostructures. Among the reported methods, Wang and co-workers spin-coated the PbS quantum dot onto ZnO nanowire (NW) arrays and studied the effect of ZnO NW dimensions and density in achieving higher efficiency in the near-IR region. Gao and co-workers prepared ZnO/PbS quantum dot (QD) based thin films and studied the effect of size on the overall performance of solar cells. They also reported that the Schottky barrier height is a function of the quantum dot band gap energy and back contact metal work function. Brown and co-workers prepared ZnO/PbS heterojunction QD based solar cells, wherein a MoO3 interlayer was used between the PbS QDs and anode electrode. The power conversion efficiency was about 3.5 ± 0.4% for a device employing a gold anode. Willis and co-workers prepared ZnO/PbS QDs based solar cells and studied the charge separation at the heterojunction interface of ZnO/PbS. Furthermore, they investigated the impedance and external quantum efficiency response to examine the effect of zinc oxide doping density. Jean and co-workers prepared ZnO/PbS ordered QDs solar cells and studied the effect of thickness of the MoO3 anode layer. The maximum energy conversion efficiency and fill factor achieved was 4.3% and 0.4, respectively. Song and co-workers prepared ZnO@PbS core–shell nanorod array based thin films and used them as a counter electrode for quantum dot sensitized solar cells. The maximum fill factor and efficiency for the fabricated solar cell was 0.52 and 3.05%, respectively. To date, many researchers worked on the preparation of TiO2 and TiO2/PbS nanostructures for solar cells and many other applications. A study has shown that the lifetime of excitons in ZnO@CdS nanorods can be enhanced by varying the thickness of the CdS coating.
To the best of our knowledge, this promising ZnO@PbS core–shell electrode, with variable PbS shell layers, has not been employed in dye-sensitized solar cells so far. We studied the effect of PbS shell layer thickness on the lifetime of excitons. Particular attention was focused on the control of the PbS layer thickness on ZnO nanorods to achieve higher efficiency in the solar cell. We demonstrated that increasing the PbS shell thickness led to an enhancement in the short-circuit current (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF) of the device. The maximum power conversion efficiency and fill factor was 6.59% and 0.75, respectively.

Prior to the deposition of ZnO seed on four indium tin oxide (ITO) glass substrates, they were ultrasonically cleaned for 40 min in a mixture of acetone, isopropyl alcohol and deionised water. Zinc acetate (0.1 M) solution was prepared in 50 mL of methanol and heated at about 45 °C in a covered glass beaker with continuous stirring for 20 minutes. Then, 50 mL of sodium hydroxide (0.4 M), prepared in methanol, was added to form a transparent solution. The temperature of the mixture was maintained at 45 °C. The ITO substrates were dipped in the reaction bath and the solution was stirred continuously for 2 h. After deposition, each of the ZnO seed coated samples was annealed at 200 °C for 1 h to remove residual organics. The seed layer coated ITO substrates were further used for the growth of ZnO nanorods.


The four ZnO seed layer coated ITO substrates were immersed in a mixture of aqueous solution containing 100 mL of zinc nitrate (50 mM) and 100 mL of hexamethylenetetramine (HMT) (50 mM). The mixture was then heated on a hot plate at 95 °C for 1 h with continuous stirring. Each thin film was thoroughly rinsed with deionized water to remove impurities and was dried in atmosphere at 200 °C for 3 h. The prepared ZnO nanorod thin film samples were named S1, S2, S3 and S4.


Previously prepared ZnO nanorods (ZNR) electrodes (sample S2, S3 and S4) were dipped in 1% mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) solution for 1 minute and were dried at 80 °C for 3 hours. The mercaptopropionic acid caped ZnO nanorods were coated with PbS by the successive ionic layer absorption and reaction (SILAR) method. The ZNR electrodes were exposed to Pb2+ and S2− ions by successive immersion in an aqueous solution of 0.01 M lead nitrate and an aqueous solution of 0.01 M sodium sulfide. The electrodes were washed with ethanol and DI water in the intermediate steps. The number of cycles of PbS layer deposition were 3, 5 and 10 for samples S2, S3 and S4, respectively. Upon completion of each cycle, a thin layer of PbS was deposited onto the ZNR surface, as shown in eqn (1).

(1)

For dye-sensitized ZnO/ZnO@PbS thin film preparation, the electrodes (sample S1 to S4) were soaked in an aqueous solution of ruthenium dye (3 mM, N719) at room temperature for 24 h. The prepared thin films were named S1*, S2*, S3* and S4*. A platinum (Pt) layer coated ITO substrate was used as the counter electrode. In fabricating the cell, the two electrodes were held together with clips and separated by a Teflon spacer having a thickness of 40 μm. An electrolyte solution consisting of 1 M Na2S and 1 M S aqueous solution was introduced into the thin film by capillary action.


UV-Vis spectra were obtained on a Hitachi U-3900H spectrophotometer coupled with a 1.00 cm quartz cell. The photoluminescence (PL) spectra and lifetime decay were performed on a Cary eclipse fluorescence spectrometer under the excitation of 350 nm. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained on a Philip-X'Pert X-ray diffractometer with a Cu Kα X-ray source. The morphology of ZnO nanorods and PbS nanostructures was recorded on a Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FE-SEM) (Hitachi 4300 SE/N) and a Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) (JEM-200 CX). For TEM studies, the thin films were scratched and sonicated in an aqueous solution. The photocurrent–voltage characteristics were measured with a Keithley 2400 source meter under illumination from a 150 W xenon lamp. The FTIR spectra of ZnO nanorods and ZnO@PbS thin films were studied on a Varian FTIR system (600 series). For sample preparation, the thin films were scratched and mixed with KBr for pellet preparation. The amperometric measurements were performed with a CHI 680 electrochemical workstation (CH Instruments Co., USA). For impedance studies, the frequency range was between 0.1 Hz and 100 kHz with an AC signal of 7 mV amplitude. The applied bias voltage and AC amplitude were set at the Voc of the DSScs.



Fig. 1 shows the UV-Vis absorption spectra of ZnO nanorods (sample S1) and ZnO@PbS core–shell thin films (S2 to S4) with different shell layer thickness. ZnO nanorods showed an absorption edge at 368 nm, similar to the reported literature value. The ZnO@PbS nanorod sample S2 showed an absorption peak at 372 and sample S3 showed a peak at 428 nm. Sample S4 showed two absorptions peaks: at 379 nm and 514 nm. The absorption at 379 nm corresponds to ZnO and absorption at 514 nm corresponds to the PbS nanostructure. Absorption by the PbS layer at 514 nm was quite similar to the absorption of a PbS quantum dot. It has been observed that as the number of PbS layers on a ZnO nanorod increased, the absorption of ZnO showed red shift, which might be due to the interaction between PbS layers and ZnO. For ZnO nanorods with 10 layers of PbS (sample S4), the absorption shifted smoothly to the visible green region. There are three possible reasons for this visible absorption broadening of excitation bands: (a) increased inhomogeneous distribution of QD sizes (b) strong QD–QD coupling and (c) strong QD–ZnO interactions. This has been further discussed below in terms of the size quantum effect on the energy band alignment of PbS with respect to that of ZnO nanorods, along with the spatial separation of the electron and hole at the interface. The change in the band gap of a nanoparticle is mostly due to the increase or decrease of its bottom potential of the conduction band (CB). For bulk PbS, since its conduction band (CB) is lower in energy than the CB of ZnO, the electron transfer is impossible. The transfer of excited electrons from the PbS layer into ZnO is due to the increase of CB of PbS caused by quantum size effects. Finally, the photo generated electron gets transported to the external circuit through ZnO core nanorods, whereas holes with high oxidability accumulate in the valence band of PbS. The lower PbS layer, the higher its conduction band edge will be, leading to a high driving force for injecting electrons into the conduction band of ZnO nanorods. The band diagram of ZnO@PbS and the electron transfer mechanism under PbS layer excitation is shown in Fig. 2. It is expected that the charge recombination will also get reduced using ZnO nanorods, as it can serve as a privileged charge-transport pathway; the same phenomenon was observed in case of PbS/TiO2 colloidal heterostructure.

The photoluminescence (PL) spectrum is very sensitive to the electronic structure of the materials and is very helpful in studying the effects of successful growth of PbS on ZnO nanorods. In the present study, the photoluminescence spectra were obtained at the excitation wavelength of 350 nm at room temperature. For comparative studies, the PL spectra of samples S1 to S4 are given in Fig. 3. Pure ZnO nanorods exhibited a narrow UV emission with peaks at 360 nm and 378 nm. The UV emission peak is due to near band-edge transitions. A blue emission band in the range of 380–530 nm, centered at 436 nm, was observed in ZnO nanorods, which is associated with the recombination of carriers trapped at Zni (electrons) and VZn (holes). Although the ZnO@PbS nanorods showed similar UV emission bands as those of ZnO, the band intensity is much weaker and the blue emission bands almost disappeared. The UV emission intensity was reduced with increasing number of PbS layers. With the deposition of PbS layers, the structural characteristics of ZnO nanorods were changed. During the PbS layer growth process, the S2− anions present in the solution are easily captured by oxygen vacancies as oxygen and sulfur atoms have similar chemical properties. The Pb2+ ions in solution occupy Zn vacancies. The Pb2+ and S2− ions are captured by the surface defects of ZnO nanorods and provide the initial nucleation site for the surface growth of PbS layer, which reduces surface defects on ZnO nanorods. Therefore, the reduced photoluminescence intensity reasonably correlates with reduced surface defects of ZnO nanorods.

In the basic solution, Zn2+ ions can react with OH− ions to form Zn(OH)2, which is then transformed into ZnO. When the concentration of free Zn2+ cations is sufficiently high, ZnO nucleation begins on the surface of the ITO substrate. In the growth process of ZnO nanorods, the ZnO seed layer coated ITO substrate was dipped into the growth solution containing HMT and zinc nitrate, wherein HMT can react with water and produce ammonia. Ammonia tends to dissociate water to produce OH− anions in the solution. These OH− anions react with Zn2+ to form Zn(OH)42− and finally, ZnO nucleation is formed by the dehydration of intermediates. This homogeneous nucleation consumes ZnO precursors rapidly and causes the early termination of growth of ZnO nanorods on the ITO substrate. In order to facilitate assembly of the PbS layer on the ZnO nanorods surface, we used a MPA linker to initiate a ligand exchange reaction. The molecular structure of MPA contains a thiol (–SH) group on one end and a carboxylic acid group (–COOH) on the other end. The carboxylic acid is attracted to the surface of the ZnO nanorods and forms an ester linkage. The thiol group of MPA is attracted to the PbS shell, which forms a disulfide bond. In DSSc, the linker molecules covalently attach the PbS to the ZnO surface without introducing a significant barrier for injection of the photo generated electron from PbS into the ZnO nanorods. The growth mechanism of ZnO@PbS core–shell nanostructure thin films is pictorially depicted in Fig. 4. The FE-SEM image of ZnO seed layers, ZnO nanorods and ZnO@PbS thin film with 10 layers of PbS are given in Fig. 5(a)–(c). The EDS for the ZnO seed layer can be found in the ESI. The uniform growth of ZnO nanorods has been confirmed from FE-SEM imaging. After PbS layer deposition on ZnO nanorods, the surface of ZnO@PbS thin films become smooth. To study the size of ZnO nanorods and the thickness of PbS layers, a TEM image was used. The length and width of ZnO nanorods (sample S1) was about 350–450 nm and 60–70 nm, as shown in Fig. 5(d). The thickness of PbS was about 3–4 nm for ZnO@PbS nanorods (sample S4), as shown in Fig. 5(e). The selected-area electron-diffraction pattern (SAED) of the PbS shell is consistent with the cubic phase of PbS ring patterns showing (200) and (220) planes, as shown in Fig. 5(f). These patterns of SAED are composed of regular clear diffraction dots, which indicate that the PbS shell is singly crystalline.


The FTIR spectra of the neutral MPA ligand and as-synthesized ZnO@PbS nanorods are shown in Fig. 6. The symmetric and asymmetric stretching vibrations of the carboxylate group of the charged MPA appear at 1418 and 1565 cm−1, respectively. The absence of the S–H bond stretching between 2633 cm−1 and 2561 cm−1 suggest the attachment of MPA to PbS through chemical bonding between thiols and free coordination sites on Zn atoms of the ZnO layer. The characteristic peaks at 2851 cm−1 and 2957 cm−1 attributed to C–H symmetric vibrations has almost disappeared after PbS is coated onto the surface of the ZnO nanorod and similar results have been found in literature.


X-ray diffraction (XRD) was carried out to study the crystal structure of ZnO and ZnO@PbS nanostructure on ITO substrates. In sample S1, ZnO peaks have been identified at angles 34.35°, 36.29° (Fig. 7(a)), corresponding to {002} and {101} diffraction planes (JCPDS 36-1451, a = 0.325 nm, c = 0.521 nm). The XRD pattern contains the diffraction peaks of the ITO substrate also at angles 31.64°, 35.19°, 50.63° and 60.01° corresponding to {222}, {400}, {440} and {622} planes (JCPDS 06-0416). This confirms the presence of a well-defined crystalline ZnO layer on the ITO substrate. The {002} diffraction peak of ZnO nanorods is much stronger than the previously reported XRD samples. From the SEM of ZnO nanorods, it is also observed that they are well aligned.

The XRD pattern of ZnO@PbS shows the characteristic diffraction peaks of PbS at angles 30.1° and 43.06° corresponding to {200} and {220} planes, along with the peaks for ZnO and ITO (Fig. 7(b)). The peaks corresponding to PbS confirms the presence of PbS. The d spacing of {200} and {220} PbS layer is 0.295 nm and 0.21 nm, respectively. From these results, it can be inferred that there exists an occurrence of a separate process within the shell during the formation of the PbS shell layer adjacent to the ZnO nanorods. It appears that the ZnO@PbS nanostructures are well crystallized, even though they were synthesized at the low temperature of 200 °C. These XRD results are consistent with the SAED pattern.

To obtain better insight into the dynamics of interfacial charge transfer processes within the DSScs, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed. In EIS, the impedance is usually presented in the form of a Nyquist plot in which the graph is plotted between the real and imaginary plane. Fig. 8 shows the electrochemical impedance spectra recorded for ZnO@dye and ZnO@PbS@dye thin films based DSScs. The equivalent circuit model of the impedance of different interfaces in DSScs is presented in Fig. 9. The symbols have their usual meanings; Rs denotes solution resistance, R1 stands for the charge transfer resistance of the ITO/ZnO or ITO/ZnO@PbS interface and R2 is the charge transfer resistance of ZnO/dye/electrolyte or ZnO@PbS/dye/electrolyte. ‘W’ is the finite Warburg impedance related element, which is associated with diffusion processes and is influenced by the nature of the electrode/electrolyte interface. The constant phase element (CPE) of the capacitance is related to a non-ideal frequency-dependent capacitance due to a non-uniform distribution of current by the material heterogeneity. The resistances R1 and R2 directly influence the photovoltaic performance of the cell.

The measured impedance spectra show two semicircles: one at very low frequency and the other at medium and high frequency. In all four samples (S1* to S4*), the semicircle at the low frequency region is overlapped with the medium-frequency region. The Nyquist plot shows the overall charge transfer resistance for all samples. The results indicated that the performance improved with the number of PbS layers on ZnO nanorods. These results reveal that the charge transfer resistance across ITO@ZnO of the S1* sample is high compared to the other three samples, which may be due to high resistance at the interface of the ITO substrate and ZnO nanorods. It may also delay the charge transfer at the ZnO@dye/electrolyte interface. The resistance R1 of sample S1* may be the dominant factor responsible for the lower cell performance. Similarly, when compared to sample S4*, the resistances R1 and R2 are higher for sample S1*, S2* and S3*. This result reveals that an electron can easily be transferred over the ZnO@PbS@dye surface, thereby enhancing the photocurrent generation and power efficiency of the solar cell.

To study the effect of the PbS layer thickness of the ZnO thin film, we investigated the responses of the transient photocurrent of samples S1* to S4* under visible light irradiation. It has been observed that the ZnO@dye (sample S1*) thin film exhibited a lower photoelectric current because ZnO has visible blindness. The photocurrent was generated only from the N719 dye. In ZnO@PbS@dye thin film, the photoelectric current depends upon the number of PbS layers on the ZnO thin film as shown in Fig. 10. The photocurrent values reached 1.67, 4.36, 7.84 and 8.42 mA in 70 s for sample S1*, S2*, S3* and S4*, respectively. These results also strongly indicate that the photocurrent enhancement is mainly due to photo generated electrons from PbS layers and prolonged effects in ZnO@PbS samples. Furthermore, it is suggested that the ZnO@PbS@dye thin film has great potential application as a visible-light photocatalyst material.


The J–V measurements were carried out for DSScs with ZnO@dye (sample S1*) and ZnO@PbS@dye (sample S2* to S4*) thin film photo electrodes under the same environmental conditions. The J–V measurements of ZnO@PbS thin film based solar cells were made in redox liquid electrolyte consisting of 1 M Na2S and 1 M S in an aqueous solution. The effect of PbS layer thickness on the performance of solar cells has been given in the ESI. The photoelectrodes were assembled with platinized ITO glass counter electrodes and liquid electrolyte. The photovoltaic performance obtained for different PbS layer thickness is summarized in Fig. 11. These solar cell parameter were calculated by the equations below.

(2)
(3)
Pmax = ISCVOC
(4)
It has been found that the open circuit voltage (
Voc) and the short circuit current (Jsc) increased gradually with an increase in the number of PbS layers. The maximum fill factor (FF) was obtained for thin films with 10 PbS layers. Thus, adjusting the thickness of PbS shell layers seems to be an effective approach to improve overall photovoltaic performance of DSScs. The maximum energy conversion efficiency and fill factor were 6.59% and 0.75, respectively, for ZnO@PbS core–shell nanorods with 10 layers of PbS. As the dye layer coating is uniform for the entire sample, the different PbS layer thickness was only responsible for the enhancement of open circuit voltage and the overall performance of the solar cell. All device performance parameters are listed in Table 1.

Sample name

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA)
FF
Efficiency (η)
S1*
0.53
1.63
0.76
0.65
S2*
0.56
3.31
0.73
1.35
S3*
0.64
8.77
0.72
4.04
S4*
0.71
12.39
0.75
6.59

The resulting solar cell consisted of a ZnO nanorod thin film electrode and layers of PbS as the sensitizer. The ZnO nanorods served as both as a stabilizer for the PbS layers and a substrate for the second absorber, i.e. a N719 dye layer. For efficient operation of the ZnO@PbS thin film based DSSc, we required a high yield of interfacial charge separation and the minimization of recombination losses between the photo injected electrons in the ZnO and the PbS layers. Fig. 12 represents the energy diagram scheme for the formation of a cascade energy band matching by introducing the PbS layer between the ZnO and dye N719. The energy levels of ZnO, PbS and N719 dye are taken from the literature. The conduction band of the PbS nanostructure is in between the excited state of N719 dye and the conduction band of ZnO. During the charge transfer process, the photo generated electron jumps from the LUMO of the dye to the conduction band (Ec) of the PbS layer, and cascades from the Ec of the PbS layer to the Ec of ZnO as the work function of ZnO (−5.2 eV) is higher than PbS (−4.5 eV).


In summary, the novel ZnO@PbS thin film has been fabricated using a simple SILAR method, providing remarkable performance. The PbS coating on ZnO nanorods show that the absorption of ZnO@PbS shifted smoothly from UV to visible region. PbS layers suppresses the surface defect of ZnO nanorods and enhance the charge separation process at the interface of the ZnO and the PbS layers. The PbS layers improve the photovoltaic and photoconductive performance of ZnO@PbS nanorod based thin films.


The authors acknowledge CSIR for research fellowships and support extended for this work.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5tc00826c
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015