 DOI: 10.1039/C6TA11181E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9097-9106


Jiang
Liu
*,

Gang
Wang
,

Zhen
Song
,

Xulin
He
,

Kun
Luo
,

Qinyan
Ye
,

Cheng
Liao
* and 

Jun
Mei


Chengdu Green Energy and Green Manufacturing Technology R&D Centre, Chengdu Development Center of Science and Technology, China Academy of Engineering Physics, Chengdu, China. E-mail: 546jiang@163.com; cliao315@hotmail.com

School of Materials, Southwest University of Science and Technology, Mianyang, China

Science and Technology on Surface Physics and Chemistry Laboratory, Mianyang 621907, China

Received
29th December 2016
, Accepted 7th April 2017
First published on 7th April 2017
Organic–inorganic halide perovskites possess excellent chemical, optical, and electronic properties that make them attractive for next-generation solar cells. An important target for the further improvement of perovskite-based solar cells is to eliminate or reduce the use of the heavy metal lead. Herein, we systematically investigated the performance of FAPb1−xSnxI3 mixed metal halide perovskites. The addition of Sn led to the stabilization of the perovskite phase and the low temperature of 100 °C was enough to result in the formation of the perovskite phase. The efficiency of the solar cell fabricated in this study is over 10% at x = 0.5, owing to the improved light harvesting in spite of the reduced open voltage. As more Sn was added, the device performance gradually deteriorated. Importantly, we performed stability tests under white light illumination and demonstrated that the FASn0.5Pb0.5I3 material might be intrinsically stable in a nitrogen environment. These results show that the device based on the FASn0.5Pb0.5I3 absorber without encapsulation retained over 85% of the initial efficiency for 100 h in nitrogen, indicating that a highly efficient perovskite solar cell with reduced Pb content and long-term stability could be realized.

Hybrid organic–inorganic halide perovskites with the formula ABX3 (where A is commonly an organic cation, B is Sn2+ or Pb2+, and X is the halide anion) have attracted a tremendous amount of interest in the photovoltaic community. Excellent combinations of optical and electrical properties for this family of materials, such as high absorption coefficients in the UV-vis range, long electron–hole diffusion lengths, and benign grain boundaries, have been reported, which makes them ideal for use in photovoltaic devices. Because of their remarkable properties, their applications in light-emitting diodes, lasers, photodetectors, and even X-ray imaging have been extensively explored. One of the particular advantages of organic–inorganic halide perovskites is that they can be readily processed into thin films using a low-temperature solution-based process. A variety of solution-based processing techniques for preparing high-quality perovskite films have been developed, such as two-step sequential deposition, solvent annealing, varying lead salt precursors, hot casting, and anti-solvent washing. With the efforts of many groups, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) for this kind of solar cell has risen from 3.8% with methylammonium (MA) lead triiodide as a sensitizer in 2009 to over 20% using structurally stable formamidinium (FA) and MA mixed-cation lead mixed-halide perovskite absorbers.

Along with high PCE, the toxicity and environmental issues of Pb are growing concerns for perovskite solar cells. An important target for the further improvement of perovskite-based solar cells is to replace Pb with less toxic elements. However, it is still highly challenging to develop Pb-free perovskite devices with high performance and good stability. The Kanatzidis and the Snaith groups are at the forefront of demonstrating Pb-free MASnI3-based perovskite solar cells, with reported PCEs of 5.2% and 6.4%, respectively. Attempts to replace the MA cation with FA and Cs in pure Sn perovskites have been made. But FASnI3-based solar cells have been limited to ∼6% PCE, while CsSnI3-based solar cells seemingly perform worse. One reason for the large PCE differences compared with the MAPbI3 counterpart is the high air sensitivity of Sn2+, which is easily oxidized into Sn4+. If only for this reason, the problem of poor performance is expected to be mitigated by a rigid processing environment and an encapsulation technique. Perhaps more significantly, pure Sn perovskites intrinsically have a poor electronic quality associated with deep charge defects, although it was reported that the addition of SnF2 could be used to reduce the density of charge defects. Besides this, adopting Pb–Sn binary perovskites to reduce the amount of Pb in solar cells is also a meaningful approach, which at least could reduce the use of heavy metal lead. Efforts in the development of mixed Sn–Pb perovskite devices, particularly, focused on MA-based perovskite materials. An anomalous bandgap behavior in a MA-based Sn–Pb perovskite system has been demonstrated, in which partial substitution of Pb with Sn could extend the light absorption into the near-infrared region. This trait could be further explored to build a tandem perovskite device.
FA-based perovskite has been demonstrated to have improved thermal stability and a slightly broadened absorption region compared to MA-based analogues, but pure Pb FA-based perovskite tends to convert to a yellow nonperovskite phase at room temperature. Partial substitution of FAI with MABr could stabilize the perovskite phase. Similarly, we expect that partial substitution of Pb with Sn in a FA-based perovskite system could modulate the tolerance factor and favor the formation of a perovskite structure, since Sn2+ has a slightly smaller ionic radius than Pb2+. In this work, we fabricated planar perovskite heterojunction solar cells by using an entire range of FAPb1−xSnxI3 materials as light harvesters. Our results confirmed that a small amount of Sn addition to FAPbI3 films resulted in the increase of lattice stability. The FAPb1−xSnxI3 films with x > 0.1 could turn black when the annealing temperature reached 100 °C, and maintain the black perovskite phase at room temperature. The optimum condition of the composition ratio was explored to achieve good photovoltaic performance. Interestingly, the cells fabricated with FAPb0.5Sn0.5I3 performed best with a maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) of over 10% and produced an absorption spectrum up to 965 nm, corresponding to a bandgap of 1.28 eV. The results of stability tests show that the device based on the FASn0.5Pb0.5I3 absorber without encapsulation retained over 85% of the initial efficiency for 100 h in nitrogen, indicating that a highly efficient perovskite solar cell with reduced Pb content and long-term stability could be realized.

We compared the crystal structures of FAPb1−xSnxI3 films with increasing Sn contents and all relevant XRD spectra are shown in Fig. 1a. Note that the FAPb1−xSnxI3 films were coated with a polymer poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA) layer and great care was taken to minimize air exposure time for the samples (details can be found in the Experimental section). As shown in Fig. 1b, the pure Pb FAPbI3 film exhibited a yellow color under the annealing condition of 100 °C, and changed to black, which is a sign of the perovskite phase formation, until the annealing temperature reached 150 °C. The XRD results demonstrated that the FAPbI3 sample annealed at 150 °C tended to contain a certain percentage of PbI2 and non-perovskite yellow phase. In contrast, upon incorporating 10 mol% of Sn, the sample annealed at 100 °C displays a black color. The FAPb1−xSnxI3 films with x ≥ 0.3 exhibit a single perovskite phase. We also observed that the unannealed FAPb1−xSnxI3 films with a median Sn/Pb ratio (e.g. x = 0.5) turned black immediately after chlorobenzene washing during the spincoating. All of this indicates that incorporation of Sn lowers the formation temperature of the perovskite phase and increases the lattice stability at room temperature. More importantly, the FAPb1−xSnxI3 films still retain the feature of high thermal stability of the FA-based perovskite system (see Fig. S1). The FAPb1−xSnxI3 films with x = 0 and x = 0.5 remained unchanged after annealing at 150 °C for 4 h on a hot plate, while MAPbI3 films were degraded. It was reported that FASnI3 displays an orthorhombic perovskite structure with an Amm2 (no. 38) space group at 340 K, while recent crystallographic analysis revealed that FASnI3 has a cubic crystal structure (Pmm, no. 221). The determination of the real crystal structure is beyond the scope of this paper. However, the Amm2 structure of FASnI3 could be approximately considered as the Pmm cubic structure due to the reported lattice constant √2a ≈ b ≈ c. Therefore, by adopting either orthorhombic or cubic structure, we determined the lattice parameters to be a ≈ 6.32 Å from the 2θ positions of main peaks, which is in good agreement with the reported values.

The morphology of the FAPb1−xSnxI3 films fabricated with different Sn contents was investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Fig. 2 shows that the obtained perovskite films exhibit excellent morphology and are free of pinholes. The low-magnification SEM images (Fig. S2) also reveal closely packed grains, which could be attributed to the fast crystallization induced by chlorobenzene. It can be seen that the pure Pb perovskite film exhibits a plate-like grain morphology, whereas the FAPb1−xSnxI3 films with x > 0.3 display a granular morphology, which may imply a crystal structure transition when x > 0.3. From the XRD results in Fig. 1a, we further found that the intensity of characteristic peaks related to the perovskite phase increases obviously when the Sn content exceeded 30 mol%. The desired FAPbI3 perovskite phase has a trigonal (P3m1, no. 156) crystal structure. Therefore, as Pb is substituted with Sn, a crystal phase transition may occur from a trigonal to a cubic or nearly cubic structure of FASnI3. Based on the above-mentioned results, we may speculate that the FAPb1−xSnxI3 films with x > 0.3 would adopt a similar crystal structure to FASnI3, while the x < 0.3 films have the same structure as FAPbI3. It must be noted that when the Sn content reaches 80 mol%, the grain boundaries of the films seem to become ambiguous. Some black spots were observed on the grain boundary for the pure Sn perovskite film. It could be explained that degradation of perovskite films was easily initiated at the grain boundaries.
To check the variation of optical properties in the mixed metal perovskite, we measured the photoluminescence (PL) spectra of FAPb1−xSnxI3 perovskite films over the full range of compositions to characterize optical bandgaps. The results in Fig. 3a show that the FAPbI3 and FASnI3 samples exhibit PL peaks at 875 nm and 820 nm, respectively. However, the mixed Sn–Pb perovskites do not fall in between the two and display PL peaks at longer wavelengths. The optical bandgaps calculated from the PL peaks versus the Sn content are plotted in Fig. 3b. It was found that unlike the mixed halide perovskites such as MAPbI3−xBrx where the relationship between the composition ratio and its bandgap is linear, the FAPb1−xSnxI3 perovskite films exhibit a parabolic variation of bandgaps with Sn content. An anomalous bandgap behavior was similarly found in MA-based Pb–Sn mixed perovskites. The results here show that the bandgap of the film decreased from 1.51 eV to 1.32 eV when a small quantity of Sn was added. When the x value reached 0.6, the bandgap dropped to the lowest value of 1.28 eV. The decreased bandgap could allow the photovoltaic device to harvest the near-infrared light and the feature could be further explored for tandem solar cells. In addition, we found that, except for x = 0.1 and 0.3, the films show Gaussian PL emission distribution, while the FAPb0.9Sn0.1I3 and FAPb0.7Sn0.3I3 films display distorted PL curves with a fluctuant and prolonged tail in the short wavelength region. Generally, the PL emission is related to the recombination channel concerning the bandgap and trap state. That indicates these two films contain a high level of electronic disorder and a band of trap states localized near the band edge. In Fig. 1a, we similarly found that the two films display relatively low intensity XRD peaks with a very wide FWHM (full width at half maximum), where it should not be a coincidence. We conclude that the introduction of a small quantity of Sn (x = 0.1–0.3) tends to result in lattice distortion or disorder, which is related to the low film crystallinity and high density of trap states.
Having determined the crystal structure and optical properties of FAPb1−xSnxI3 perovskite films, we then investigated their photovoltaic performance under AM1.5 G illumination, as shown in Fig. 4. The best-performing devices and average device parameters with their standard deviations for each precursor solution are listed in Table S1. When only PbI2 was used, the FF and Jsc were relatively low, although the Voc was the highest compared with others, thus yielding a low efficiency. Our SEM observation (Fig. S4) shows that there are always some voids positioned at the bottom of the film, which could explain why the pure Pb perovskite exhibits poor performance. Further optimization of the perovskite layer is expected to improve the device performance.
The short-circuit current density versus Sn content continuously increases from x = 0 devices to x = 0.5 devices before falling off towards pure Sn samples. In order to further investigate this issue, external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements have been performed, as shown in Fig. 5 and S3. The EQE curves exhibit some troughs and crests due to the reflection interference of the incident light in planar solar cells. For the direct bandgap materials, by plotting [hν × (1 – EQE)]2 against hν and by extrapolating the linear portion of the absorption (Fig. 5b), we could evaluate the bandgap values of the perovskite absorbers, as shown in Fig. 3b. The bandgap results from PL peaks and EQE curves exhibit the same trend on the whole. When 10 mol% of SnI2 was introduced, Jsc improved obviously due to the gain in light harvesting, but Voc and FF deteriorated. The corresponding EQE curve shows an obvious feature that there is a considerable EQE loss in the long-wavelength region (700–900 nm), which could be attributed to reduced carrier lifetime and increased interface recombination. When 50 mol% of SnI2 was used, the EQE curve shows a broad span of >72% in the wavelength range of 350–950 nm and thus yields a high Jsc value. The calculated current density by integrating the EQE curves with the AM 1.5G spectrum reaches 26.2 mA cm−2, which is close to the measured Jsc values. The FASn0.5Pb0.5I3 based devices have the highest PCE among all, exhibiting the best PCE of 10.76% (Voc = 695 mV, Jsc = 28.37 mA cm−2, FF = 54.6%), and a mean PCE of 9.35%. For the FASn0.5Pb0.5I3 film, the EDX analysis in a surface region of approximately 100 μm × 100 μm area shows the composition to be I 74.17 at%, Pb 12.23 at% and I 13.60 at% (Fig. S5). We could find that the overall composition ratio of I:Pb:Sn is close to 6:1:1, which is consistent with that of the precursor solution. This may also confirm Sn incorporation and that no elemental loss occurred. When the molar concentration of SnI2 (x > 0.5) exceeds that of PbI2, all the device parameters (Voc, Jsc, FF, and η) tend to deteriorate. The threshold value can be explained that the Pb atoms surrounding Sn atoms in the perovskite lattice are expected to protect the Sn2+ ions against air oxidation and high Sn content perovskite films are vulnerable to air damage.
A cross-sectional SEM image of an optimized perovskite solar cell is presented in Fig. 6a. From the SEM image, the interface between each layer could be defined clearly. The perovskite layer exhibits excellent coverage and low thickness variation. PCBM with a thickness of ∼50 nm was used as an electron transport layer. The current density versus voltage (J–V) curves for each type of device are shown in Fig. 6b. We could find that some devices exhibit distinctive S-shaped J–V curves, with the result that the fill factor is not high. This behavior is commonly attributed to the charge barrier for photogenerated electrons or holes. It has been reported that a contact barrier between PCBM and the Ag electrode always occurs, which prevents efficient electron injection at the PCBM/Ag interface. Since PCBM is a weak n-type organic semiconductor material, the built-in electric field under high external forward bias may not be sufficient to pull excited carriers away. The low electrical conductivity or low Fermi level of the PCBM layer causes the appearance of S-shaped curves. Therefore, further advances in overall power conversion efficiency are expected by adopting an appropriate charge transport layer and better process control.

Fig. 7 shows Voc and Jsc as a function of light intensity for the FAPbI3 and FASn0.5Pb0.5I3 devices. The Jsc is linear with light intensity, with fitting lines extrapolating to the origin of coordinates. The semi-logarithmic plots of the Voc against light intensity give slopes of 1.41kT/q and 3.10 kT/q, respectively. The Voc for the FASn0.5Pb0.5I3 device decreases faster than that for the FAPbI3 device as the light intensity is reduced. At low light intensities, the recombination loss in the FASn0.5Pb0.5I3 device may become dominated by shunting, perhaps due to a low shunt resistance (Rsh) associated with the high conductivity of the FASn0.5Pb0.5I3 perovskite layer itself. At low light intensities, the photogenerated current (Iph) is small, and in this case, the voltage drop caused by the leak current flowing through Rsh is also small. Thus, the Voc is limited by the product of IphRsh. On the other hand, the slope of Voc decline refers to the ideality factor (n), which is associated with the recombination mechanism. A value of A > 2 implies stronger SCR recombination, or that trap-assisted recombination would be the dominant limiting factor.
Impedance spectroscopy has been performed to further understand the effect of Sn incorporation in FAPb1−xSnxI3 perovskite films on the electrical characteristics. The obtained Nyquist plots are presented in Fig. 8a and b. The pure Pb device exhibits two arcs separated in frequencies; in contrast, the other devices give rise to only a semicircle in the frequency range of 10 Hz to 1 MHz. This is probably due to an extra element in the charge transport process for the FAPbI3 device. The high frequency arc is due to the charge transfer resistance and the low frequency arc is commonly attributed to the recombination resistance Rrec, in parallel with a chemical capacitance. The recombination lifetime was estimated according to the equation τr = 1/2πfmax, where fmax is the frequency at the top of the arc in impedance spectra. The extracted recombination resistance Rrec and charge-recombination lifetime τr are shown in Fig. 8c and d. Obviously, the Rrec and τr values as a whole decrease exponentially with increasing Sn contents. The decreasing slope becomes flattened when the Sn content falls between 10 mol% and 80 mol%. Note that the recombination resistance is associated with the charge losses in the cell, and determines the open circuit voltage and maximum attainable efficiency. Thus, the variation in Rrec and τr could also be reflected in Fig. 4a, where the Voc values remain at a relatively stable level of around 600 mV for the FAPb1−xSnxI3 devices with x = 0.1–0.6. When the Sn content exceeds 60 mol%, the recombination loss becomes prominent, resulting in reduced performance. This indicates that the electronic properties of FAPb1−xSnxI3 perovskite films correlate strongly with the Sn addition amount.
Finally, we characterized the device performance of one unencapsulated FAPb1−xSnxI3 solar cell as a function of storage time in a glovebox, as shown in Fig. 9. The device was placed at a fixed position under LED array illumination (see Fig. S7). Although the device was characterized using a non-standard light source, we believe that these results are still suitable for evaluating the evolution of photovoltaic performance. Remarkably, the Voc values were stable within 100 hours. The Jsc values retained over 95% of the initial value, the FF result declined slightly, and the normalized maximum output power decreased from 100% to about 85% after 100 hours. This may indicate that the FASn0.5Pb0.5I3 material is intrinsically stable in a nitrogen environment. This may also imply that under water-free and oxygen-free conditions, which could be realized by excellent encapsulation conditions, no obvious degradation would occur for the FASn0.5Pb0.5I3 device. Fig. S8 shows the J–V curves of the perovskite solar cell after being stored in a glovebox for different times. Obviously, the J–V curves under forward scan were almost overlapped with those under reverse scan. This is already a significant advantage for the inverted perovskite/PCBM planar device, possibly due to the PCBM passivation.

In conclusion, we have demonstrated FAPb1−xSnxI3 mixed metal halide perovskites as absorbers in photovoltaic devices. The incorporation of environmentally friendly element Sn could stabilize the crystal structure of FA-based perovskites. It is believed that the formation of the yellow FAPbI3 phase could be fully avoided by partially replacing Pb with Sn. More importantly, the mixed metal FAPb1−xSnxI3 perovskites exhibit narrower bandgaps, which result in improved light harvesting and higher Jsc. Despite these advantages, the recombination loss increased and the charge lifetime decreased with the increase of the proportion of added Sn, which limits the Voc of these devices. This clearly indicates that future studies should focus on how to reduce the recombination loss and trap density related to Sn addition. However, we were able to fabricate a FAPb0.5Sn0.5I3 device yielding a PCE of up to 10.76%. The stability measurement results further show that the FAPb0.5Sn0.5I3 device could retain over 85% performance within 100 hours in a nitrogen environment, which provides a promising path towards realizing efficient and stable low Pb perovskite devices.


The etched ITO (8 Ω sq−1 sheet resistivity) glass substrates were first ultrasonically cleaned with detergent, deionized water, acetone and ethanol sequentially. The substrates were then blow-dried with a nitrogen gun and were further subjected to UV light exposure for 1 min. The PEDOT:PSS films (Clevious Al 4083) on the ITO substrates were obtained by spin-coating at 6000 rpm for 45 s, followed by annealing at 120 °C for 10 min. After cooling down to room temperature, the samples were then transferred into a nitrogen glovebox for the fabrication of perovskite films. For all perovskite films and devices, 1 M FAPb1−xSnxI3 precursor solutions in a DMF:DMSO (2:8 v/v) mixture solvent were prepared using FAI (Lumtec), PbI2 (99.999%, Alfa Aesar), and SnI2 (99.99% purity, Sigma-Aldrich) in a nitrogen-filled glovebox. After stirring for at least 2 h at room temperature, the solutions became clear and were spin-coated at 4000 rpm for 55 s, in which 50 μl of anhydrous chlorobenzene (Sigma-Aldrich) was quickly dropped at the center of the substrates after twenty seconds. Films with x ≥ 0.3 were annealed at 100 °C for 10 min, in which the color of the film turns brown black, while films with x < 0.3 were annealed at 150 °C for 10 min unless otherwise noted. The PCBM layers were deposited by spincoating a 20 mg ml−1 solution of PC60BM (FEM Inc.) in chlorobenzene at 3000 rpm for 45 s. Finally, Ag contact electrodes were thermally evaporated at a constant rate of 0.2 nm s−1 using an Angstrom Engineering EvoVac deposition system with an integrated Innovative Technology glovebox. The active device area is 0.12 cm2.


For the XRD and PL measurements, 50 mg ml−1 poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA, Sigma-Aldrich) in chlorobenzene solution was spincoated on the perovskite films to minimize air- and moisture-induced deterioration. Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) was measured using an Edinburgh FLS 920 spectrophotometer with an excitation wavelength of 500 nm. X-ray diffraction patterns were measured using a DX-2700B (Dandong Haoyue Instrument Corporation) using Cu Kα radiation at a scan rate of 6° per min. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images were obtained using a Hitachi S5200 at an electron accelerating voltage of 3 kV. For SEM cross-section measurements, a glass cutter was used to cut on the backside of the sample to produce a fresh cross-section. Current density–voltage curves were obtained using a Keithley 2400 source meter under AM 1.5G illumination (1000 W m−2) from a solar simulator, which was calibrated using a standard silicon solar cell device. Devices were tested without encapsulation at room temperature in an ambient environment with 30–50% humidity. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the solar cell was recorded as a function of the wavelength using a DSP lock-in amplifier (Stanford Research Systems SR830). The excitation beam was provided by using a 150 W Xenon lamp (LSXS-150) equipped with a monochromator (Omni-λ 1509), chopped at 17 Hz using an optical chopper (Thorlabs) and focused entirely onto the active area of the solar cell. Impedance spectra (IS) were measured using an electrochemical workstation (Zahner, Zennium) with a 20 mV rms amplitude over the frequency range of 10 Hz to 1 MHz under low light intensity (0.1 sun). For the J–V measurements under different light intensities, neutral density filters were stacked on the devices to modify the light intensity. For stability measurements (see Fig. S7), the device was exposed to white light generated by a 50 W LED array. The devices and LED light source were both placed inside a N2 filled glovebox. Home-made software was developed to execute the J–V test automatically under forward and reverse scans using a Keithley 2400 source meter every two hours.


This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2016YFB0700700), the National New Energy Materials Technology R&D Center (No. NENMC-I-1701), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61674174), and the Science and Technology Development Foundation of China Academy of Engineering Physics (No. 2014B0302054).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta11181e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017