 DOI: 10.1039/C3DT51149A
(Paper)
Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 13065-13070

Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms


Supriya A.
Patil
,

Dipak V.
Shinde
,

Sambhaji S.
Bhande
,

Vijaykumar V.
Jadhav
,

Tran N.
Huan
,

Rajaram S.
Mane
* and 

Sung-Hwan
Han
*

Department of Chemistry, Hanyang University, Sungdong-Ku, Haengdang-dong 17, Seoul, 133-791, Republic of Korea. E-mail: shhan@hanyang.ac.kr; Fax: +822-2299-0762; Tel: +822-2292-5212

Center for Nanomaterials and Energy Devices, School of Physical Sciences, Swami Ramanand Teerth Marathwada University, Dnyanteerth, Vishnupuri, Nanded 4316006, India. E-mail: rsmane_2000@yahoo.com; Fax: +822-2299-0762; Tel: +822-2292-5212

Department of Chemistry and Research Institute for Convergence of Basic Sciences, Hanyang University, Seongdong-Gu, Haengdang-Dong, Seoul 133-791, South Korea

Received
2nd May 2013
, Accepted 11th June 2013
First published on 11th June 2013
Photoelectrochemical cells (PECs) of ZnO/CdSe decorated with a charge separating SnO2 nanoparticles (NPs) layer of various thicknesses are prepared and characterized by using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), UV-visible absorption, energy dispersive X-ray analysis spectroscopy (EDX) and incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) measurements. A uniform coverage of the SnO2 NPs layer over ZnO/CdSe electrode surface is evidenced. The EDX elemental mapping analysis of the ZnO/CdSe/SnO2 PECs demonstrates the presence of Sn and O over the surface. A remarkable improvement in the light harvesting efficiency confirmed from the IPCE measurement, supports an enhancement in current density in the current density–voltage measurement due to increased electron transport and smaller charge recombination. Moreover, these observations are corroborated with the EIS measurement as a cell with SnO2 reveals a reduced charge transfer resistance due to which the power conversion efficiency is increased from 2.20 to 3.41% i.e. 55% compared to the pristine ZnO/CdSe PEC.

Third generation photovoltaic devices considerably attracting much attention from various research groups in photovoltaic technology due to their low-cost, transparent, colourful, durable, efficient, and flexible characteristics. Especially, semiconductor quantum dots have been considered as a fascinating alternative to organic dye molecules and they have potential advantages over DSSCs, such as higher absorption coefficients compared with dye molecules, tailored absorptions by changing the size of quantum dots, and the possibility of exceeding the Schottky–Queisser limit by using multiple-electron generation. Due to these reasons, the utilization of inorganic semiconductors as sensitizers has shown to be a promising and low-cost alternative to conventional dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). Using such properties of inorganic semiconductors can also allow application based band alignment. Moreover, the large intrinsic dipole moment available in semiconductors leads to a rapid charge separation in PECs. Other supporting phenomena include a direct hot carrier transfer as well as the use of energy transfer based charge collection, which is also possible in the cells. This favours greater theoretical efficiency than ongoing silicon based solar cells. A photoelectrochemical cell (PEC) with an unprecedented 30 mA cm−2 current density is reported by incorporating Hg doped PbS nanoparticles (NPs).

In the literature, compact blocking layers of various metal oxide NPs have been employed to prevent the reverse electron transfer flow from fluorine-tin-oxide to the conventional iodide electrolyte. In the case of inorganic NPs-based PECs generally polysulfide electrolyte is used as metal chalcogenide NPs are not stable in iodine-based electrolytes. Promising improvement in the overall performance of liquid electrolytes has been attained by the means of new routes of sensitization such as different modes of attachment, co-sensitization, optimized counter-electrodes nano-sulfide/carbon composites, and also photoanode post-treatments including ZnS, MgO, ZnO, ZrO2, SiO2 surface treatments, dipole adsorption, fluoride ion insertion, modification induced by CdCl2 or annealing, etc. One of the most widely extended post-treatments utilizes the deposition of ZnS over the sensitized electrode, taking advantage of the straightforward preparation and the striking enhancement of the efficiency achieved. The semiconducting NPs used for photosensitizations are post treated with ZnS to block the reverse flow of electrons and to protect the photosensitizer from photocorrosion. Moreover, it is confirmed that the presence of a ZnS thin layer is advantageous in NPs due to its bi-functional role to reduce the electron leakage from oxide surfaces to electrolytes and protect the semiconductor surface from the surface passivation effect which eventually results in the increment in overall power conversion efficiency of the cell. This strategy was pioneered by Yang et al. in 2002, proving that a ZnS layer grown by SILAR (successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction) over a PbS/CdS sensitized TiO2 electrode not only prevented chalcogenides photocorrosion, but also improved the output parameters of the cell. Therefore, ZnS deposition has arisen as a current treatment in the preparation of semiconductor NPs-based PECs. In fact, it has been successfully applied to TiO2 electrodes sensitized with CdSe NPs, grown either by chemical bath deposition or adsorbed from colloidal dispersions methods. Moreover, until now, the best performance in CdSe-sensitized solar cells (conversion efficiency of 4.22%) has been documented for a TiO2 cell through co-sensitization of CdS and CdSe NPs prepared by a wet chemical method. Unfortunately, the efficiencies reported for these types of cells are modest as compare to DSSCs, due to poor understanding of the fundamentals governing the overall efficiency of semiconductor-based solar cells. Furthermore, efforts have been focused on improving the redox electrolyte suitable for semiconductor type photosensitization and photo anode treatment.
This work aims to report the use of an alternative metal oxide (SnO2) layer with a simple straightforward spin-coating method to enhance electron transport and suppress charge recombination in ZnO/CdSe PECs. In the present study, the experiment was designed in two stages, initially fabrication of ZnO/CdSe PECs was performed and in the later stage, thin SnO2 NPs layers of different thicknesses (300–75 nm) were obtained over ZnO/CdSe PECs. The prepared ZnO/CdSe/SnO2 PECs were successfully characterized for their structures, morphologies and electrochemical properties by using various spectroscopic and analytical methods. The effect of SnO2 NPs layer thicknesses on power conversion efficiency (η%), charge transfer resistance (Rct) and incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) was investigated. A schematic presentation of the energy levels of ZnO, CdSe and SnO2 is also provided.

The devices studied in this work were composed of indium-tin oxide (ITO)/ZnO/CdSe/SnO2. For the synthesis process, all reagents were purchased from Alfa Aesar and used as received. ZnO nanoshield paste of 50% in distilled water (ZnO nanoshield ZN-5060, Alfa Aesar), cadmium sulphate, sodium selenosulphate nitrilotriacetic acid and SnO2 NPs (tin oxide, 15% in H2O colloidal dispersion liquid, Alfa Aesar). Distilled water with a resistivity of 18 MΩ cm was used as solvent for CdSe synthesis. Prior to deposition, ITO substrates (with resistivity 20 Ω cm−2 and thickness 25 nm) were rinsed with ethanol and water, after that they were dried under an argon gas flow and further ozone treated for 30 minutes.


To prepare the porous ZnO NPs layer of four microns in thickness colloidal ZnO nanoshield paste of 50% in distilled water (ZnO nanoshield ZN-5060, Alfa Aesar) were used as received and spin-coated onto several cleaned ITO substrates by fixing the rotary pump at 10−3 Torr and 2000 rpm motor speed. As-prepared ZnO film electrodes were annealed at 300 °C for 1 h for improving the interfacial contacts between the NPs. Furthermore, the CdSe NPs were prepared by using a wet chemical method with the help of 80 mM cadmium sulphate, 90 mM nitrilotriacetic acid and 80 mM sodium selenosulphate. The ZnO electrodes were vertically immersed in a solution maintained at 40 °C. As sufficient time is need to be fill for ZnO pores completely with CdSe NPs; deposition was carried out for 1.5 h. These ZnO electrodes with CdSe (brown red colour) were taken off, washed with distilled water and then dried at room temperature.


Before decorating the SnO2 NPs (tin oxide, 15% in H2O colloidal dispersion liquid, Alfa Aesar) layer for further study, the liquid dispersion was kept in a sonicator to avoid the formation voids or clotting. A dispersion of sonicated SnO2 NPs (20.0 μl) was poured over the ZnO/CdSe electrode using a micro-syringe. Different thicknesses of SnO2 NPs were obtained by controlling the rotational speed of the spin coater. Both pristine and SnO2 coated ZnO/CdSe electrodes were then sintered at 300 °C for 1 h and allowed to cool at room temperature naturally. A solution of 1 M sodium sulphide and 1 M sulphur dissolved in water was used as the liquid electrolyte. The cells were assembled in sandwich fashion. Solar cell performance was evaluated under simulated AM1.5 irradiation conditions.


Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, Hitachi S-4200, Korea) images were used for surface morphology analysis. An EDX mapping (Hitachi S-4200, Korea Stereoscan 250 Mk) unit was used for investigation of the elemental composition of the prepared electrode, in particular, for SnO2. All PECs thicknesses were confirmed from the FE-SEM cross-sectional images. Crystal structures and phases of the resultant electrode composed of ZnO, CdSe and SnO2 were confirmed using an X-ray diffractometer (XRD) (Rigaku D/MAX 2500 V, Cu Kα, λ = 0.15418 nm). UV-visible diffuse reflectance spectra were recorded using a Shimadzu UV-9665 PC spectrophotometer. For IPCE measurement, a Polaronix® K3100 spectral IPCE measurement system (South Korea) was preferred. For electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) study a BAS-Zahner IM6 Impedance Analyzer was used. Keithley 617 programmable electrometer filtered light from an Oriel 450 W xenon arc lamp was used for plotting photocurrent–voltage curves (J–V). Prior to the sample measurement, a Bausch and Lomb high intensity grating monochromator was introduced into the path of the excitation beam for selecting the excitation wavelength which was also calibrated with a standard silicon photodiode.



Fig. 1a–c shows typical FE-SEM surface images of ZnO, CdSe imbedded ZnO and SnO2 NPs coated ZnO/CdSe electrodes, respectively. In Fig. 1(a) large-sized and irregular-shaped ZnO nanocrystals (NCs) of several nanometres (15–300 nm) were observed. The surface of the ZnO NCs electrode was changed when CdSe NPs were decorated onto it (Fig. 1(b)). All ZnO NCs were well-decorated with CdSe NPs of about 20–40 nm sizes. The change in ZnO surface appearance with CdSe NPs decoration time is elaborated previously. It was confirmed that with CdSe decoration time optical and electrochemical properties were also changed. Fig. 1(c) shows that ZnO NCs were well decorated with CdSe NPs as there were no voids as observed in pristine ZnO. Furthermore, SnO2 coating created a perfectly smooth surface of ZnO/CdSe due to its smaller relative dimensions. Extremely fine NPs of SnO2 has systematically covered the surface of ZnO/CdSe electrode completely. Fig. 1(d) shows the representative cross-sectional image of the ZnO/CdSe electrode obtained at 2000 rpm. The thickness of ZnO and CdSe NPs was 8 (±50) μm. A thin 225 nm (±10) SnO2 NPs layer over ZnO/CdSe was clearly noticed, indicating with increments in rpm levels from 1000 to 4000 thickness of the SnO2 NPs layer was decreased from 300 to 75 (±10) nm. In further discussion instead of thicknesses, rpm levels were taken into account. In short, porous ZnO NCs were filled with CdSe NPs and further decorated with a thin SnO2 NPs layer for application feasibility.


The chemical composition of the synthesized ZnO/CdSe/SnO2 electrode was examined by EDX measurement (Fig. 2). The characteristic peaks corresponding to Cd, Zn, Sn, and O elements were found in the EDX pattern. The presence of Sn, Cd, Zn, and O elements in different proportions was noticed from the EDX spectrum. We speculated that this variation was due to use of a particular shell/orbit used for knocking electrons out. Our intension was just to prove the presence of SnO2 over ZnO/CdSe and not to see exact proportions.



Fig. 3 shows the X-ray diffraction spectra of ZnO/CdSe and ZnO/CdSe/SnO2 electrodes. Reflection (002), (100), and (101) planes were close to standard data reported in JCPDS file (ZnO: 79-2205, CdSe: 77-2307). All peaks were indexed to the hexagonal wurtzite structure of ZnO. In addition to ZnO peaks, additional (101), (002), (200), (220) and (110) peaks, belongs to CdSe, were also detected. This proved the formation of guest ZnO/CdSe electrode without disturbing ZnO host layer. After SnO2 NPs-layer coating XRD peak intensities were slightly changed which is practically unprecedented. This might be due to similar XRD peak locations of ZnO, CdSe and SnO2. Moreover, in addition, (002) peak was broaden which might be due to the smaller sizes of SnO2 NPs (right image).


The optical properties of ZnO/CdSe/SnO2 (2000 rpm) and pristine ZnO/CdSe electrodes were investigated by percent diffuse reflectance measurement (Fig. 4). The lower reflectance within the 500–600 nm wavelength range was supporting the fact that CdSe NPs were well embedded into the ZnO NCs matrix. The sharp decrease in reflectance at about 700 nm wavelength was due to the CdSe band gap energy (1.8 eV). The slight shift in reflectance was clearly due to the presence of a SnO2 NPs layer. It was presumed that due to a compact and uniform layer of SnO2 NPs, rays of light demonstrate transmittance as well as reflectance properties and reflected rays undergo the scattering effect by decreasing diffused reflectance (i.e. increased absorbance).



Fig. 5 presents in-depth current density–voltage (J–V) spectra of ZnO/CdSe PECs with and without SnO2 thin film layers (1000–4000 rpm) under 1.5AM sun light intensity and 0.25 cm2 exposed area. The PEC results are summarized in Table 1, with several parameters including the short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (ff) and efficiency (η%).

Speed (rpm)
SnO2 thickness (±10 nm)

J
sc (mA cm−2) (±0.5)

V
oc (V) (±0.01)
ff (±0.1)

η (%) (±0.2%)
Pristine
0
11.00
0.51
0.39
2.20
1000
300
11.98
0.51
0.39
2.45
2000
225
15.97
0.51
0.39
3.41
3000
150
15.38
0.52
0.41
3.30
4000
75
13.74
0.50
0.42
2.92
The pristine ZnO/CdSe PEC exhibited moderate Jsci.e. 11 mA cm−2, however it is certainly higher than reported for other ZnO/CdSe and TiO2/CdSe systems revealing an importance of the ZnO/CdSe system. Higher current density was due to the formation of a closely packed layer of ZnO/CdSe i.e. ion-by-ion chemical deposition of CdSe NPs might have not left any pore empty; responsible for charge recombination. It must be noted that the PEC with 1000 rpm had higher thickness than 4000 rpm. Current density was increased with rpm from 1000 to 4000 due to decreased SnO2 layer thickness and was optimum i.e. 15.97 mA cm−2 at 2000 rpm. Compared to the pristine ZnO/CdSe PEC the power conversion efficiency was enhanced about 55% revealing an importance of the SnO2 layer. This enhancement in power conversion efficiency was accomplished with an increase in current density as both Voc and ff were increased slightly. Interestingly, PEC performance was decreased again at 4000 rpm. Performances of the 3000 and 4000 rpm cells were relatively inferior to pristine and 1000 rpm PECs. In absence of the SnO2 layer, excited photoelectrons follow forward, responsible for current density, and reverse, favouring charge recombination paths. Poor performance was attributed to a smaller ff value which is inversely proportional to series resistance (Rs) as both Rs and Rct are inversely proportional to ff. The 1000 rpm PEC demonstrated increased current density without much change in Voc and ff values indicating that relatively thicker SnO2 layer was favouring a photoinjected electron transport mechanism caused by a light scattering effect. Secondly, the compact SnO2 NPs layer might have not permitted electrolyte species to pass through in it for regeneration of the sensitizer i.e. CdSe. The PEC prepared at 2000 rpm confirmed optimum performance indicating that, (a) the reverse flow of the photoexcited electrons was suppressed effectively and (b) the enhanced scattering effect. Performances of PECs obtained at 3000 and 4000 rpm were once again inferior to that of cell prepared at 2000 rpm but were not less than the 1000 rpm cell indicating that for better performance a thinner surface layer is more useful than a relatively thicker one. This change is attributed to the tunnelling effect generating recombination centres of photoexcited electrons from the conduction band of ZnO to the electrolyte. In the further study we have only compared the results of pristine and SnO2 NPs decorated (2000 rpm) ZnO/CdSe PECs.


Fig. 6 represents the IPCE spectra for ZnO/CdSe and ZnO/CdSe/SnO2 PECs. The ZnO/CdSe PEC showed an IPCE value close to 50% whereas, the ZnO/CdSe/SnO2 PEC showed 62% in the same wavelength region indicating that in the presence of the SnO2 NPs layer photoelectrons emitted in the ZnO/CdSe/SnO2 PEC were higher in number and were transporting efficiently toward the charge collecting electrode. This wavelength range of photoelectrons emitted in ZnO/CdSe/SnO2 is in good correlation with the energy range of the sunlight spectrum at the Earth's surface where the flux is maximal.


Nyquist plots obtained from the EIS measurement for ZnO/CdSe and ZnO/CdSe/SnO2 PECs were compared to identify the interfacial reactions of photoexcited electrons (Fig. 7). Nyquist plots of ZnO/CdSe and ZnO/CdSe/SnO2 at an applied bias of Voc and a frequency range from 10−1–106 Hz, with an AC amplitude of 10 mV under the illumination of one Sun (AM1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) were measured. In ZnO/CdSe and ZnO–CdSe/SnO2 photoanode the presence of two semicircles (the first one in the range 18.50–22.5 due to the interface between the platinum electrode and electrolyte, the second, in the range 22.6–45.0 due to the electron transport resistance of the cell) was noticed. Due to scattering the 27.73 ohm Rct (ZnO/CdSe) was decreased to 22.51 ohm (ZnO/CdSe/SnO2) indicating that involvement of the SnO2 layer over ZnO/CdSe was advantageous. Relatively smaller charge transfer resistance for the ZnO/CdSe/SnO2 PEC than ZnO/CdSe PEC indicated that excited photoelectrons under the open circuit voltage condition might be effectively blocked by the SnO2 NPs-layer by suppressing the charge recombination and enhancing photoelectron transport.


Fig. 8 shows the schematic representation of electron transfer system we adopted. It was speculated that thin SnO2 NPs layer blocks the reverse flow of excited electrons and also covering the CdSe NPs so that their direct contact with electrolyte is hindered.

In summary, the PEC performance of the ZnO/CdSe cell was increased by about 55% by decorating an SnO2 thin NPs layer over it. The thickness of the SnO2 layer was monitored with spin-coater rpm values. Due to light scattering, enhanced electron transport and suppressed charge recombination of the ZnO/CdSe PEC with a 2000 rpm decorated SnO2 layer revealed optimum performance compared to pristine and other PECs. The prepared ZnO/CdSe/SnO2 PECs were characterized for their structure, morphology and electrochemical measurements. Increased IPCE value from 50% to 60% and decreased charge transport resistance from 27.73 Ω to 22.51 Ω signified an importance of the SnO2 NPs-layer over the ZnO/CdSe PEC due to which the current density was increased from 11.00 mA cm−2 to 15.97 mA cm−2. All these results provide a better insight into the role of SnO2 NPs-layer deposition on the ZnO/CdSe electrode, which should open a new avenue for the enhancement of PEC performance. The impact of NPs of other metal oxides including WO3, Nb2O5, MgO on PEC performance of ZnO/CdSe is an ongoing topic of research and is underway.


This work was supported by the Korea Research Foundation Grant funded by the Korean Government (MOEHRD, Basic Research Promotion Fund) (KRF-2008-314-D00107). The present work was also supported by the KIST internal projects under contract 2E20980.


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013