 DOI: 10.1039/C5EE02555A
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3550-3556


C.
Roldán-Carmona
,

P.
Gratia
,

I.
Zimmermann
,

G.
Grancini
,

P.
Gao
,

M.
Graetzel
 and 

Mohammad Khaja
Nazeeruddin
*

Group for Molecular Engineering of Functional Materials, Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH-1951 Sion, Switzerland. E-mail: mdkhaja.nazeeruddin@epfl.ch

Laboratory of Photonics and Interfaces, Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH-1051 Sion, Switzerland

Received
18th August 2015
, Accepted 15th October 2015
First published on 15th October 2015
Methylammonium lead iodide perovskite solar cells with improved performance and stability have been successfully prepared by using a non-stoichiometric PbI2:CH3NH3I ratio in the precursor solution, and yield a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of above 19% under 1 sun for the champion cell.

In the past few years, organic–inorganic metal halide perovskite compounds have become one of the best photovoltaic materials for solution-processed high efficiency thin-film solar cells. Since the first report on perovskite solar cells (PSCs) by Kojima et al., tremendous efforts have been made in understanding and controlling the growth of these hybrid materials and their optoelectronic properties. Most of the reported perovskite solar cells in the literature are based on methylammonium lead iodide perovskite CH3NH3PbI3, with spiro-OMeTAD as a hole-transporting material, exhibiting PCE values over 17%. The methylammonium lead iodide perovskite (APbX3) bandgap has also been tuned by substituting organic cations (A) and halide anions (X) in the APbX3 structure, evidencing their remarkable influence on the stability and optoelectronic properties of the resulting photoactive materials. Following this strategy several studies have been successfully reported using mixed halide perovskites, which focus mainly on the exchange of I− through Br− in the CH3NH3PbI3 structure, resulting in the solid solution (CH3NH3Pb(I1–xBrx)3 with 0 < x < 1). However, these devices exhibit power conversion efficiencies below those reported for the pristine material. Mixed halide precursor solutions containing I− and Cl− ions have also been used since the initial stages of the field, leading to the commonly studied CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite. In this material the role of Cl− ions in the final structure still remains unclear, even though it seems to enhance the charge transport and to reduce the charge recombination in the device. Nevertheless the most impressive compositional modification of the perovskite structure was pioneered by Pellet et al., and has been recently improved by Jeon et al. based on a combination of formamidinium iodide (FAI) and Br− ions with the final formula (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15. The results show tremendous sensitivity to the ionic composition in the final performance, which is strongly influenced by the molar ratio between FAI:PbI2 precursors. As a result, a certified PCE of 20.1% and a noticeably low hysteresis when scanning in forward and reverse bias have been reported.

In attempting to reach high efficiency, factors affecting the crystallization behaviour of the final film, the deposition method, and additives are under intense study. Focusing on the perovskite film composition, several strategies have been applied to enhance the nucleation and uniform growth of the crystalline layer. The solvent engineering method or the antisolvent vapor-assisted crystallization approach are some examples where high quality perovskite films were obtained thanks to controlled film deposition. Such a rapid development in different processing methods, as well as the interface manipulation to decrease carrier recombination, have recently boosted the power conversion efficiencies for CH3NH3PbI3−xClx and CH3NH3PbI3 perovskites to values above 19% being comparable to the FAI based analogue, a persistent caveat being the poor stability of these high efficiency devices.
In this communication we present high efficiency methylammonium lead iodide perovskite solar cells in which a non-stoichiometric ratio between PbI2 and MAI precursors (x:1, being x ≥ 1) has been used. Due to its higher band-gap (Eg = 2.3 eV), the presence of PbI2 in the perovskite film has been considered harmful to the device performance. This may be true when its formation is associated with the perovskite degradation, such as an excessive annealing time or temperature, leading to a deterioration of the photovoltaic device. However, in this study we demonstrate the influence of unreacted PbI2 when it is incorporated as an additive into the perovskite solution. Our results demonstrate that an excess of PbI2 improves the average fill factor (FF) and the open circuit voltage (Voc), boosting the averaged power conversion efficiency from 16.2% to values close to 18%, and an efficiency peak of above 19% for the champion cell. These results provide further evidence that tuning PbI2 in PSCs can be an easy and effective approach towards a competitive photovoltaic alternative.
The solar cells were fabricated on FTO covered glass substrates based on a previously reported architecture, where the active layer is sandwiched between a mesoporous TiO2 electron transport material and a 2,2′7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) hole transport layer. After cleaning the substrates by ultrasonication and UV-ozone treatment, a thin TiO2 compact layer of 25 nm was deposited on FTO via spray pyrolysis at 450 °C, followed by a sintering process of the layer at 450 °C during 30 minutes. Then a mesoporous TiO2 layer was deposited by spin coating a 30 nm particle paste (Dyesol 30 NR-D) diluted in ethanol for 10 s at 4000 rpm, to achieve a 150 nm thick layer. These layers were sintered again at 450 °C for 30 min under dry air flow. For further details about the substrate and TiO2 preparation see the ESI. The perovskite films were prepared from a precursor solution of 1.25 M of both components PbI2 and CH3NH3I in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) in the case of a 1:1 molar ratio. Different compositions with 5–10–15–20% molar excess of PbI2 were also tested by fixing the MAI concentration in the precursor solution and adjusting the amount of PbI2. The perovskite solution was then deposited by a previously reported method with slight modifications of the deposition process, as it is described in the ESI. This process consists of the deposition of the precursor solution followed by chlorobenzene drop-casting in a similar way to the solvent engineering method previously reported. The resulting film was uncoloured and transparent, indicating the formation of a smooth film of the CH3NH3I–PbI2–DMSO intermediate phase. This film was then annealed at 100 °C for 45 minutes in an inert atmosphere to favour good crystallization of the perovskite layer. Finally, a 200 nm layer of doped spiro-OMeTAD was deposited as the hole transport material prior to the deposition of 100 nm gold as the electrode. Fig. 1a shows the device architecture of the studied perovskite solar cells.

Fig. 1b shows the J–V curves recorded under standard AM1.5G solar spectrum illumination conditions obtained for devices containing perovskite active layers with different compositions, where excess lead iodide have been added intentionally to the solution. In order to demonstrate the influence that using a non-stoichiometric ratio generates on the device performance, five different perovskite solutions with a molar excess of lead iodide of 0–20% have been tested. The most representative devices, which are close to the averaged results obtained for each condition are shown in Fig. 1b, with the main device parameters summarized in the inset table. As it is observed in the figure, all perovskite solar cells exhibit excellent performances even when an excess of PbI2 as high as 20% is incorporated into the active layer, obtaining the maximum power conversion efficiency for concentrations with 10% excess PbI2 with respect to the stoichiometric ratio. Compared to the reference cell, where a ratio PbI2:MAI (1:1) has been used, the short circuit current density Jsc increases slightly with the presence of PbI2 in the film, leading to its maximum improvement for perovskite films containing between 5–10% PbI2 molar excess. A similar trend is observed in the open circuit voltage, Voc, which improves considerably in the presence of small amounts of unreacted PbI2, reaching an average value of Voc = 1.080 V for cells containing 10% PbI2 excess and a maximum value as high as Voc = 1.11 V for its best result. However, the device parameter which is most influenced by the presence of unreacted PbI2 is the fill factor. All PSCs containing PbI2:MAI (x:1) with x ≥ 1.1 exhibit an important improvement in the fill factor, showing averaged values of  above 76% in all cases. This influence is more pronounced when 10% of unreacted PbI2 is present in the CH3NH3PbI3 layer, leading to an impressive value of 80.7% for the best result when scanning in forward bias, which appears to be the highest value reported for n–i–p structures. An even higher value of 0.85 was achieved in our recent study of p–i–n structures, which is very close to the theoretical limit of 0.89. It is worth noting that high FF values are frequently obtained for solar cells with low current densities, J, where resistive losses could be minimized. The photovoltaic performance of the champion cell, which led to an impressive power conversion efficiency of 19.1% is shown in Fig. 2. The incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) (Fig. 2b) of the champion perovskite device as a function of wavelength obtained shows that the generation of photocurrent begins at ∼820 nm and the photocurrents obtained from the IPCE data are in close agreement with those of current–voltage measurements. Interestingly, the prepared cells present a negligible hysteresis (see Fig. S6, ESI) between the forward and reverse scan in the J–V curves, as well as a remarkable stability (see Fig. S8, ESI), showing no significant deterioration after more than 3 months under dry air and dark conditions.
In order to achieve an in-depth understanding of the origin of such high performances further investigations concerning surface characterization and spectroscopy measurements were performed for all the perovskite films. Fig. 1c shows the cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) view of the perovskite solar cells containing 10% and 20% excess PbI2, as well as the corresponding image for the reference cell. The individual layers that form the device can be easily differentiated in the images, with their composition indicated for clarity in the left legend. In all cases the perovskite layer consists of two different regions, one based on an infiltrated perovskite through a 150 nm mesoscopic TiO2-film capped with a solid perovskite layer of ∼200 nm thickness. Although the images are similar, there is a noticeable change in morphology in the perovskite capping layers as the unreacted excess PbI2 increases. As can be observed, the stoichiometric perovskite film exhibits a granulated capping layer where the grain crystals are not well defined. As the amount of PbI2 in the perovskite material increases, larger and more homogeneous defined grain-crystals are formed. This change could be attributed to a better crystallization of the perovskite layer, which leads to larger crystals in the capping layer in the presence of excess PbI2. For clarity only 3 different compositions are shown in Fig. 3b. The SEM images corresponding to the rest of the studied stoichiometries are shown in Fig. S1 (ESI), as well as the grain-size distribution obtained for each composition.
To further investigate the role of PbI2 in the crystallization process of the perovskite material, X-ray diffraction (XRD) experiments have been performed for different films, with 0–30% excess PbI2 in the photoactive layer. Fig. 3a shows the diffractograms obtained for different CH3NH3PbI3:x PbI2 compositions. The X-ray patterns confirm the presence of the tetragonal perovskite phase of CH3NH3PbI3 in all of the prepared films. As previously reported, the excess lead iodide can be monitored by looking at the characteristic PbI2 peak located at 2θ of around 12.7°. Very little unreacted lead iodide can be seen for the film prepared using a stoichiometric mixture of the starting materials. This indicates a close to complete conversion into the perovskite phase. As expected, the increasing excess lead iodide ranging from 5–30% can be clearly observed in the diffraction patterns. Interestingly, an increasing amount of PbI2 in the films also results in more intense perovskite peaks. The inset in the figure shows how the intensity of the (110) peak from the perovskite increases with excess lead iodide. This phenomenon can be explained by an increased film thickness, a more dense packing of the perovskite grains or an increased crystallinity within the thin films. From SEM cross-section images no significant change in the thickness of the perovskite film could be observed. This is a strong indication of an overall improvement of the quality of the perovskite films within the device with the presence of unreacted lead iodide. Looking at the peak shape, a decrease in the peak broadening can also be observed with excess lead iodide, which can be associated with a larger size of the perovskite grains within the capping layer of the films (the values for the full width at half maximum (FWHM) are also indicated in the inset). SEM images obtained from the surface analysis of the perovskite films are also shown in Fig. 3b, which confirm the variation on the grain-size with the film composition.
As will be confirmed by the optical analysis shown below, the formation of larger crystals can be intrinsically related to a more relaxed lattice structure formed during the crystallization process in the presence of excess PbI2. It has been demonstrated in the literature that the interplay between organic and inorganic interactions affects the lattice strain, influencing the band gap of the semiconductors. If the organic cations freeze in a preferential head-to-tail-like configuration, the lattice strain is reduced and CH3NH3PbI3 tends to crystallize into larger grains. The reduced strain leads to a lattice expansion, resulting in a reduced bandgap observed as a red shift in the photoluminescence emission. From one side, in our work we have evidence from the SEM measurements of the larger crystal domains of the capping layer obtained in the presence of excess PbI2. On the other side, the corresponding photoluminescence spectra show a red shift of the emission (see spectral shift of the normalized curves in Fig. 4b), indicative of a reduced band gap associated with improved crystallization.
In order to understand the difference between the perovskite crystals we further characterized the films by using optical steady state (UV-vis, Photoluminescence (PL)) along with time resolved PL spectroscopy. Fig. 4 shows the absorption and PL spectra of different perovskite layers prepared with 0–20% excess PbI2. Due to the high absorption coefficient of the perovskite material at high frequencies, only the absorption spectra in the visible region λ > 400 nm are shown (see Fig. 4a). A similar absorption onset centered at ∼770 nm is obtained for all the films, exhibiting small differences in their absorption intensities. The films prepared with a stoichiometric ratio of both precursors had the highest absorption, which decreases for the rest of the films proportionally to the PbI2 content. This can be related with a lower concentration of the CH3NH3PbI3 material present in the film due to the limited CH3NH3I content in the precursor solution. When high quality perovskite films are formed through improved crystallization, factors such as charge dissociation efficiency, charge transport and the diffusion length of charged species are the main affected parameters. Previous studies on perovskite devices have demonstrated that non-radiative trap-assisted recombination takes place in the perovskite films, which represents a loss in the generated free carriers and thus in the power conversion efficiency. Time resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectroscopy has been recently used to obtain important information about perovskite film quality, with longer carrier recombination lifetimes (τ) indirectly indicating longer charge diffusion length and superior performance.
Here we perform TRPL spectroscopic investigation to gain an in-depth understanding on the influence of excess PbI2 on the fundamental photo-induced dynamical processes. It is worth mentioning that, given the high absorption coefficient of the perovskite, the light penetration depth at 460 nm can be estimated to be in the 50–100 nm range. Therefore, as one can observe from the inset of Fig. 4c, due to the asymmetric nature of the perovskite device configuration, the excitation from the TiO2 substrate side (scaffold thickness ∼150 nm) will exclusively interrogate the physical properties of the perovskite nano-crystallites grown within the oxide scaffold, on the other hand, excitation from the capping layer side (∼150 nm thick) will only probe the intrinsic processes of the large perovskite grains. This will enable us to disentangle the effects due to the excess PbI2 content on the intrinsic properties of the perovskite capping layer from the ones induced at the active perovskite/TiO2 interface.

Fig. 4b shows the PL spectra as well as the normalized data for the two limiting conditions: 0% and 20% PbI2 excess. Typical sharp PL spectra with very little Stokes-shift centered at ∼770 nm are also observed for all cases, which is in agreement with the previously reported data in the literature. The PL spectra and dynamics in Fig. 4b and in the right panel of Fig. 4d, respectively, have been measured from the capping layer side. We observe a trend when increasing the content of the unreacted PbI2 in terms of: (i) higher PL intensities (that reaches a maximum value for the 15% excess sample) than the stoichiometric CH3NH3PbI3 films; (ii) a continuous red-shift of the PL peak (normalized data relative to the reference and the 20% excess samples show a displacement of 10 nm in their maximum emission wavelength) and (iii) a longer-living PL component exceeding the temporal window of 100 ns (Fig. 4d, right panel). Overall, these observations suggest that the crystallization dynamics dramatically impact the photophysical scenario. Similar trends have been previously reported by some groups who found that morphological changes (i.e. the dimension of crystal grains) affect the optical properties of the perovskite films: tuning the average crystallite dimension changes the optical band gap of the material along with its photoluminescence lifetime. In particular, larger crystallites present a smaller band gap (i.e. red-shifted PL as we do observe) and longer lifetime, which correlates with a smaller radiative bimolecular recombination coefficient. DeQuilettes et al. also reported a strong quenching in the PL spectra caused by the presence of defect states or shallow trapping levels in the grain boundaries of the perovskite, which frequently behave as non-radiative recombination centres. Similar effects are induced in our case by the presence of excess PbI2. The observed shrinkage of the optical band gap along with the enhanced PL lifetime support the formation of larger perovskite crystal grains (consistent with our results from the X-ray diffraction pattern analysis) that can be mainly due to a change in the local order of the crystalline structure.
To get a comprehensive picture on the influence of the excess amount of PbI2 on the device physics we also excited the device from the mesoporous TiO2 layer, in order to analyze the perovskite/TiO2 interface. Fig. 4c shows the PL decay of the reference sample from both excitation sides: when the light is focused from the TiO2 side we observe a slight quenching of the PL decay with respect to what is obtained upon the capping layer excitation. It is true that small crystals confined in an insulating mesoporous oxide structure generally exhibit faster PL dynamics due to their intrinsic shorter charge recombination lifetime however, this usually happens in the hundreds of nanoseconds time window. The much faster quenching that we observe is more reasonably attributed to the more efficient charge extraction happening at the conductive TiO2 interface, where electron injection occurs, thus reducing the PL lifetime. Fig. 4c (left panel) shows the PL decay obtained for the studied samples when the excitation takes place through the TiO2-meso side. A clear trend can be observed in the TRPL response of the perovskite with the presence of unreacted PbI2. When increasing the PbI2 content the PL shows a faster decay component (with a time constant down to 2 ns for the 20% sample, see Table S1 in the ESI). This observation indicates that the excess of PbI2 leads to faster PL quenching indicative of a more efficient electron transfer to TiO2. We infer that this effect might be induced both by a better energy level alignment and stronger interfacial coupling at the interface as recently theoretically predicted for the mixed-halide perovskite, enhancing the charge extraction, or by a beneficial passivation effect of the iodine atoms at the interface.

Fig. 5a–d summarizes the photovoltaic parameters obtained from more than 50 devices, where the improvement due to unreacted PbI2 is clearly observed. For clarity in the figure, the peak intensity of each histogram has been adjusted for different RPbI2/MAI ratios. The numbers on the diagram indicate the PCE values for the most populated segment, which correlate with the averaged PCE value obtained for each composition. The averaged values for the rest of the photovoltaic parameters are also reported in Fig. 4b–d, where a clear enhancement is observed for RPbI2/MAI ≈ 1.1. Our results demonstrate that the quality of CH3NH3PbI3 films can be easily enhanced without many modifications with respect to the reported device architectures by adding excess PbI2 precursor in the perovskite film. The unreacted PbI2 may enhance the crystallinity and reduce the non-radiative recombination pathways at the perovskite interface, leading to an impressive improvement in the photovoltaic performance compared with the reference material. With this approach, methylammonium lead iodide perovskite solar cells with higher reproducibility and improved stability can be obtained. As a remark, a first stability evaluation for one of our record cells is also shown in Fig. 5b (for comparison with the reference cell see also Fig. S9, ESI). The cell, which was stored in dry air without any encapsulation, did not deteriorate after more than 2.5 hours after its preparation, remaining with a PCE hysteresis lower than 0.8% during this time.

We have successfully prepared high efficiency methylammonium lead iodide perovskite solar cells by incorporating excess PbI2 as an additive in the film. Our results suggest that the unreacted PbI2 improves the crystallinity of the perovskite film and the electron transfer to the TiO2 layer, both leading to impressive improved performances even for a molar excess of 20%. This provides evidence of the unnecessary use of a stoichiometric ratio between PbI2:MAI precursors, as has been commonly thought in the field, and represents an effective approach for boosting the efficiency closer to its theoretical value.


This work was supported by the European Union Seventh Framework Programme [FP7/2007-2013] under grant agreement no. 604032 of the MESO project, (FP7/2007-2013) ENERGY.2012.10.2.1; NANOMATCELL, grant agreement no. 308997, and H2020-ICT-2014-1, grant agreement no.: 643791. We thank Drs J.-P. Correa Baena (LPMS, EPFL), Antonio Abate and Fabrizio Giordano (LPI, EPFL) for providing the initial recipe for the fabrication of the perovskite solar cells.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ee02555a
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015