 DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00067K
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4981-5037


Changli
Li
,

Qi
Cao
,

Faze
Wang
,

Yequan
Xiao
,

Yanbo
Li
,

Jean-Jacques
Delaunay
* and 

Hongwei
Zhu
*

State Key Laboratory of New Ceramics and Fine Processing, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. E-mail: hongweizhu@tsinghua.edu.cn

School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan. E-mail: jean@mech.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Institute of Fundamental and Frontier Sciences, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, 610054, China

Received
23rd January 2018

First published on 8th May 2018
Graphene and two-dimensional (2D) transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have attracted significant interest due to their unique properties that cannot be obtained in their bulk counterparts. These atomically thin 2D materials have demonstrated strong light–matter interactions, tunable optical bandgap structures and unique structural and electrical properties, rendering possible the high conversion efficiency of solar energy with a minimal amount of active absorber material. The isolated 2D monolayer can be stacked into arbitrary van der Waals (vdWs) heterostructures without the need to consider lattice matching. Several combinations of 2D/3D and 2D/2D materials have been assembled to create vdWs heterojunctions for photovoltaic (PV) and photoelectrochemical (PEC) energy conversion. However, the complex, less-constrained, and more environmentally vulnerable interface in a vdWs heterojunction is different from that of a conventional, epitaxially grown heterojunction, engendering new challenges for surface and interface engineering. In this review, the physics of band alignment, the chemistry of surface modification and the behavior of photoexcited charge transfer at the interface during PV and PEC processes will be discussed. We will present a survey of the recent progress and challenges of 2D/3D and 2D/2D vdWs heterojunctions, with emphasis on their applicability to PV and PEC devices. Finally, we will discuss emerging issues yet to be explored for 2D materials to achieve high solar energy conversion efficiency and possible strategies to improve their performance.

Changli Li

Changli Li received his PhD degree in Mechanical Engineering from The University of Tokyo, Japan, in 2015. Currently, he is a Post-Doctoral Research Fellow at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University. His research activities focus on the synthesis of semiconductor heterojunctions for photovoltaic and photoelectrochemical solar energy conversion.

Qi Cao

Qi Cao obtained his Master's degree from Fudan University in 2015 under the supervision of Prof. Renchao Che. He is currently a PhD candidate working with Prof. Jean-Jacques Delaunay at the Graduate School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo. His current research interest is focused on the synthesis of novel plasmonic photoelectrocatalysts for energy conversion and sensing applications.

Jean-Jacques Delaunay

Jean-Jacques Delaunay is an Associate Professor at the School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo. He received his PhD degree from the Strasbourg University. He has worked for research institutions in the fields of nanotechnology and solar energy in France, Germany and Japan. He conducts research on the synthesis of micro/nanomaterials with controlled structures and functionalities for sensing and energy conversion. He has co-authored more than 100 scientific publications.

Hongwei Zhu

Hongwei Zhu is a Professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University, China. He received his BS degree in Mechanical Engineering (1998) and PhD degree in Materials Processing Engineering (2003) from Tsinghua University. After Post-Doctoral studies in Japan and USA, he began his independent career as a faculty member at Tsinghua University (2008–present). His current research interests involve the structural design and engineering of nanomaterials for energy and environmental applications.

In recent years, the rapid expansion of modern industry and global population has accelerated the consumption of energy. In 2015, worldwide primary energy consumption was ∼5.7 × 1020 J, which was equivalent to an average power use of 18.1 terawatts (TW). It is estimated that more than 80% of energy is obtained from fossil fuels such as petroleum, oil, and natural gas. Renewable energy, such as solar energy, wind power, hydropower, biomass, biofuel, and geothermal energy, has been used to replace conventional fossil fuel due to its sustainability, low pollution, and inexhaustibility. Compared to other clean and renewable energy sources, solar energy is by far the most promising energy source because of its abundance. The amount of solar energy radiated on the surface of planet earth in 1 hour (4.3 × 1020 J) is comparable to all of the energy currently consumed on the planet in 1 year. Thus, solar energy bears great potential in the replacement of conventional fossil fuels to enable a more sustainable world. To harness solar energy, solar cells made of semiconductor materials have been developed to convert sunlight into electricity based on the photovoltaic (PV) effect. To overcome the challenge of the intermittent nature of solar radiation, converting solar energy into chemical fuels that are suitable for storage, transportation, and consumption is critical for maximizing the use of solar energy. To this end, photoelectrochemical (PEC) systems have been considered as promising and practical means for producing chemical fuels (e.g., H2 from water splitting and hydrocarbons from CO2 reduction), due to the low cost, low energy consumption, and environmental friendliness. The direct semiconductor/electrolyte junction provides an effective driving force for PEC reactions under irradiation, offering a more straightforward, cost-effective, and convenient way to achieve high-efficiency solar energy conversion. To increase the economic attractiveness of a PV and PEC cell, there are three main aspects to be considered: (1) enhance the cell efficiency, (2) reduce the cost of the cells and, (3) increase the operating lifetime of the cells. The conventional solar cells based on group IV, III–V, or II–VI compounds have been extensively investigated and a high efficiency can be achieved. However, the difficult requirements of the employed epitaxial technique and the limited abundance of some elements have impeded the economic viability and the widespread application of this technology. Thus, the construction of ultrathin PV and PEC devices will be a promising way to decrease the material consumption and growth time if the high efficiency of the device can be maintained for ultrathin layers. There has been growing interest focused on the design of ultrathin absorbers (<100 nm) for high-performance solar cells. The ultrathin devices present the advantages of being light-weight, flexible, and provide efficient transport and collection of photogenerated carriers. The loss of light absorption because of the ultrathin thickness can be compensated by plasmonic or nanophotonic absorption enhancement. For conventional covalently bonded and isotropic three-dimensional (3D) semiconductors, the scaling of semiconductor thickness down to an ultrathin layer, less than 100 nm, usually degrades the crystalline quality and increases the defect density, restricting the applicability of 3D absorbers in ultrathin PV and PEC devices. In view of this, two-dimensional (2D) materials such as graphene and semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) could potentially serve as excellent transparent electrodes and ultrathin absorbers for solar energy conversion due to their unique optical, electronic and structural properties.

Graphene, a stable and free-standing 2D material made of carbon atoms in a hexagonal structure that can be exfoliated from graphite, has attracted significant attention both in fundamental research and practical applications due to its unique physical and chemical properties. The high carrier mobility, good transparency, and excellent electrical transport behavior make it an extraordinary candidate for transparent electrodes and carrier transporting layers for PV solar cells. However, the absence of an electronic bandgap in graphene restricts its applicability as an absorber in solar energy conversion. Layered TMDs span a great diversity of properties that complement those of graphene, from insulators (e.g. HfS2), semiconductors (e.g. MoS2, WS2, MoSe2), to metal-like conductors (e.g. NbS2, VSe2). In particular, the semiconducting TMDs possess bandgaps in the range of 1.0–2.0 eV, which is well matched with the solar spectrum and comparable to the bandgap of Si (1.1 eV), GaAs (1.4 eV), and CdTe (1.5 eV). Monolayer TMDs such as MoS2, WS2, MoSe2, MoTe2 and WSe2 exhibit a direct bandgap and excellent light absorption, rendering the mono- or few-layered TMDs as promising candidates for PV and PEC applications. The ultrathin thickness of the absorber layer allows a short exciton diffusion distance and thus a reduced charge recombination. Interestingly, the atomic-level thickness of these 2D materials presents a thickness that is even less than the width of the space charge region in a conventional p–n junction, and can thus provide new insights into the design of efficient PV and PEC devices involving solid/solid and solid/liquid interfaces. Similar to graphene, due to the weak van der Waals (vdWs) interlayer force, the layered TMDs can be mechanically and chemically exfoliated into few and monolayers. The vdWs interactions allow researchers to restack the 2D materials into arbitrary stacking junctions without the consideration of the crystal lattice matching and atomic interdiffusion that exist in the growth of conventional covalently bonded semiconductor based heterostructures. The self-passivated, dangling bond free vdWs surfaces appear to contain no “intrinsic” surface states within the energy gap and thus high-quality Schottky junctions and p–n junctions are expected based on those 2D materials, which can not only be integrated with well-developed 3D semiconducting absorbers to form 2D/3D vdWs heterostructures but are also amenable to the construction of 2D/2D vdWs junctions with other dissimilar 2D materials, thus making ultrathin PV devices possible. For a 2D/2D p–n junction, a type-II band type can be designed to provide a large band offset for exciton dislocation and a favorable band alignment for carrier transport. The excellent catalytic activities and good stability of the graphene and TMDs materials in electrolytes also open up exciting opportunities for developing highly efficient and durable 2D/3D or 2D/2D photoelectrodes for use in PEC reactions.
In this review, we focus on the integration, surface, and interfacial engineering of 2D/3D and 2D/2D homo/hetero junctions for PV and PEC applications. First, we give a brief introduction to the basic principles of PV solar cells and PEC cells. Secondly, the unique properties of layered 2D materials that are most relevant to solar energy conversion are highlighted in terms of crystal structure, optical, electronic, and catalytic properties. Thirdly, we review the experimental realizations of various kinds of PV and PEC devices based on 2D material vdWs junctions and summarize the optimization of devices including gate modulation, chemical doping, photonic design, thickness engineering, and interfacial engineering. Particular efforts are imposed on the engineering of graphene and TMDs based vdWs heterostructures for emerging ultrathin PV and PEC devices. Finally, we give a perspective on future challenges in this field and propose possible solutions to realize highly efficient PV and PEC devices based on ultrathin 2D materials.

Through PV technology, the energy of solar photons can be directly converted into electricity. An efficient PV energy conversion process requires three basic attributes: (1) the absorption of sunlight with energy exceeding the bandgap of a semiconductor that results in the generation of charge carriers (electron–hole pairs or excitons); (2) the charge carriers diffuse through the semiconductor and reach an energy barrier that permits one kind of charge carrier to pass but blocks the opposite charge carrier; and (3) the separated charge carriers move through the semiconductor to an external circuit. The separation of charge carriers over macroscopic distances plays a key role in solar energy capture and conversion. The carrier separation requires the development of spatial variations in an electronic environment to provide the essential driving force. In a conventional inorganic PV cell, the intimate contact of two dissimilar materials presents an electrostatic field at the interface and the electrostatic force provides a large driving force for charge separation. For organic PV cells (excitonic solar cells), the absorption of sunlight leads to the production of excitons that are relatively strongly bound, and the band offset between the materials in contact provides a pathway for dissociation of excitons at the heterojunction in both phases. In a PEC cell, a barrier junction can be formed at the semiconductor and electrolyte interface when an electronic equilibrium is reached. The band bending in the semiconductor provides a driving force for charge carrier separation and subsequent electrochemical reactions. The generation, separation, and transport of charge in a PV process give rise to a photocurrent and a photovoltage in short-circuit operation and in open-circuit operation, respectively. The one-dimensional current of electrons Jn in a PV device can be obtained by the sum of a drift component and a diffusion component. The drift current results from the existence of an electric field, which can be expressed as follows:

Jn,drift = qnμnε
(1)
where
q is the elementary charge, n is the concentration of electrons, μn is the electron mobility and ε is the applied electric field. Besides the drift current, another component of the current is the diffusion current. When the carriers form a concentration gradient, a diffusion process occurs through the migration of carriers from the high concentration region to the low concentration region. The flow of electron carriers generates a diffusion current, expressed as follows:

(2)
where
Dn is the electron diffusion constant. Thus, the electron current is given by the sum of the drift and diffusion currents:

(3)
Similarly, the hole current density can be expressed as:

(4)
and the total current density is the sum of the electron and the hole components:

J = Jn + Jp
(5)
It is obvious that the built-in field at the junction, together with the non-uniform carrier density induced concentration gradient, determine the current of a PV device. The diffusion current should not be an important consideration in PV devices based on high conductivity materials such as metals, but it plays a key role in low conductivity semiconductor-based PV devices, especially in exciton solar cells.

p–n junction-based solar cells are the most widely utilized PV devices for solar energy harvesting. A p–n junction is formed when a p-type semiconductor and an n-type semiconductor are put in contact intimately. The electrons from the n-type semiconductor diffuse across the p–n junction and leave behind positively charged ions in the n-type material. Similarly, holes from the p-type semiconductor tend to diffuse into the n-type semiconductor near the junction, leaving behind negatively charged ions in the p-type material. As a result, an electrostatic field is established in adjacent regions of the semiconductors to generate a drift current that travels across the interface in a direction opposite to the diffusion current. When the drift current and the diffusion current balance each other, an equilibrium is achieved and the p–n junction region is depleted of carriers. The diagram of a p–n junction is shown in Fig. 1a. The Fermi level is flat and constant throughout the semiconductors.

The presence of a built-in potential results in band bending in the depletion region. The built-in potential φbi, is given as follows:
(6)
where
k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, ND and NA are the donor impurities and acceptor impurities, respectively, and ni is the intrinsic carrier concentration. The depletion width for a p–n junction is expressed as follows:

(7)
where
V is the applied voltage of the junction, εs is the dielectric constant of the semiconductor. The p–n junction can be considered as a parallel-plate capacitor with the capacitance per unit area of a one-sided abrupt junction given by

(8)
(9)
where
N is NA or ND, depending on whether ND ≫ NA or vice versa. Note that eqn (9) indicates a linear relationship between 1/C2 and V. Through plotting C–V data of a p–n junction, the φbi and dopant concentration (N) of a one-sided junction can be extracted from the x-intercept and the slope of the plot between 1/C2 and the applied voltage, V.


Fig. 1e plots the J–V characteristics of a p–n junction in the dark and under light illumination. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) is calculated as a ratio of the maximum generated power and the solar energy input:
(10)
where
Jsc and Voc are the short-circuit current and open-circuit voltage of the devices. The incident power Pin is 100 mA cm−2 under standard illumination conditions (AM 1.5G). FF is the fill factor, which is defined by the ratio of the maximum power (Pm = JmVm) generated by a solar cell to the product of Jsc and Voc:

(11)
The subscript “m” in
eqn (11) denotes the maximum power point of a solar cell. The solar cell has the maximum power (Pm) output at this point and Pm of the solar cell corresponds to the maximum area of the rectangle formed by the J–V curve with J and V axes in the fourth quadrant.

The external quantum efficiency (EQE) or incident photo-to-current efficiency (IPCE) of a solar cell is defined by the ratio of the number of carriers collected by the solar cell to the number of photons of a given energy illuminating on the solar cell:
(12)
where
λ is the wavelength of the incident light, Jph is the photocurrent at λ, e is the charge of an electron, h is Plank's constant, c is the speed of light, and P is the incident light intensity at λ.

It is very important to investigate the energy band alignment of a heterojunction since the band alignment often determines the electrical functionality of a PV device. The electronic band alignment of a semiconductor heterojunction can be characterized by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), as proposed by Kraut et al. When a very thin semiconductor is deposited on another semiconductor to form a heterojunction, the interface region will be exposed for XPS analysis without affecting the band lineup. The valence band offset (VBO) between the semiconductors A and B is given by the following:
ΔEv(A–B) = ΔECL(A–B) + (EBCL − EBv) − (EACL − EAv)
(13)
where
EACL and EBCL are the binding energies of the arbitrary core level in bulk semiconductors A and B, respectively. EAv and EBv are the valence band (VB) positions of A and B, respectively. They are all determined from measurements on the pure materials. ΔECL(A–B) is the difference between the core level binding energies EACL(i) and EBCL(i), which is determined from measurements on an A/B-stack sample. Combined with bandgaps of the semiconductors A and B, the conduction band offset (CBO) of a heterojunction is expressed as follows:

ΔEc(A–B) = ΔECL(A–B) + (EBCL − EBv) − (EACL − EAv) + (EBg − EAg)
(14)
where
EAg and EBg are the bandgaps of the semiconductors A and B, respectively.


The Schottky junction is another alternative structure for solar energy conversion. In this configuration, a thin and almost transparent metal/semi-metal film replaces the p or n-type region of a p–n junction device. Graphene/semiconductor (Si, GaAs) solar cells fall into this category and have been investigated extensively due to their easy fabrication and promising efficiency. The electronic contact between a metal and an n-type semiconductor results in a flow of electrons from the semiconductor to the metal, leaving behind the positively charged ions on the n-type material side near the junction and generating a built-in field at the junction. An equilibrium is established when the built-in field is sufficient to further hinder carrier flow, as shown in Fig. 1b. The junction presents a selective barrier to charge carrier transport, providing an asymmetry in resistance which is necessary for solar energy conversion. In an ideal case of a metal/n-type semiconductor structure without consideration of surface states and other defects, the limiting value of the Schottky barrier height (SBH) is determined by the difference between the electron affinity of the semiconductor and the work function of the metal, expressed as

qΦBn = q(φm − χ)
(15)
For the metal/p-type semiconductor Schottky junction, the barrier height is given as

qΦBp = Eg − q(φm − χ)
(16)
In practice, the existence of interface states and the unavoidable interface layer result in the pinning of the Fermi level, an effect that causes the observed barrier height to be different from its expected value.


The depletion layer of the metal/n-type semiconductor is similar to the case of the p+n junction (NA ≫ ND). The depletion layer width can be expressed as
(17)
and we also have

(18)
This allows the determination of
φbi and ND by using the C–V data. Under forward bias V, the current density Jn flowing through the device is given by the following:

(19)
(20)
where
A* is the effective Richardson constant of the semiconductor, ΦB0 and JS are the SBH and the saturation current density under zero-bias. η is the ideality factor that should be equal to 1 when the Schottky junction current is determined by thermionic emission. Deviation of η from 1 could be generally ascribed to generation-recombination, thermally assisted tunneling, bias dependent SBHs, and image force lowering.


Along with conventional p–n junction solar cells, excitonic solar cells constitute other types of PV devices, which include organic solar cells, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC), and quantum dot solar cells. Furthermore, atomically thin TMDs heterostructure solar cells can also fall into this category of solar cells because the Coulomb binding energy in 2D TMDs is much stronger than those in the conventional semiconductors. Compared to conventional p–n junction solar cells, excitonic solar cells present a fundamental difference in the way charges are generated. The absorption of light in a dye molecule, polymer, quantum dot, or atomically thin semiconductor film leads to the generation of relatively strongly bound excitons instead of the relatively weakly bound electron–hole pairs produced in bulk inorganic semiconductors. The relatively strongly bound excitons, which cannot be thermally dissociated in the chemical phase, are generated directly at the heterointerface or could diffuse to the heterointerface to produce charge carriers. For the conventional p–n junction solar cells, charge carriers (free electron–hole pairs) are first photogenerated in the bulk of the semiconductors and then arrive at the junction for carrier separation. For the diffusion process, the electrons and holes have the same spatial distribution in the same chemical phase and thus the currents produced by electron diffusion and hole diffusion have opposite signs. The separation of electron and hole is therefore achieved in principle by the existence of a built-in field at the junction. However, in excitonic solar cells, the charge carrier generation and separation simultaneously occur upon the dissociation of an exciton at a heterointerface into an electron at one side and a free hole at the other side of the interface. The electron and hole concentration gradient drives both electron and hole away from the heterointerface and thus generates additive currents. Fig. 1c shows the charge generation/separation process at the heterointerface of an excitonic solar cell. The difference between the bandgap energy of a free electron–hole pair (Eg) and energy of a thermalized singlet exciton (Eopt) gives the singlet exciton binding energy. The interfacial exciton dissociation requires Eopt ≥ Ebg,hj, where Ebg,hj is the effective heterojunction bandgap of the material. The CBO and VBO between the two materials in contact provide the driving force for exciton dissociation, creating holes in the semiconductor 2 and electrons in the semiconductor 1. From eqn (2) and (3), we know that the first term represents the drift component under the net electric field and the second term represents the diffusion component resulting from the carrier concentration gradient. In conventional p–n junction solar cells, the drift component is the dominant factor and thus its maximum photovoltage is limited by the built-in electrical potential energy. However, in the excitonic solar cells, the carrier generation/separation process occurs in a narrow region near the heterojunction, resulting in a large carrier concentration gradient and a powerful PV driving force. Thus, an internal electric field is not essential for charge separation and its maximum photovoltage is not limited by the built-in electrical potential energy. Excitonic solar cells offer the possibility to develop cost-effective, flexible, potentially disposable, and light-weight PV devices.


PEC cells are devices that can be used to convert solar energy into chemical fuels, such as hydrogen. This technique has shown significant promise in providing a solution for hydrogen production thus enabling the production of fuel suitable for storage, transportation, and consumption. In general, a PEC cell consists of three components: a working photoelectrode, a counter electrode, and an electrolyte. A common method is to use photoactive semiconductors as the working electrode to produce photo-excited electron–hole pairs, and the counter electrode can also be semiconductors to provide additional photovoltage to facilitate water splitting. In this system, the oxidation of water (oxygen evolution) occurs at the photoanode, while the reduction of protons (hydrogen production) occurs at the photocathode under sunlight illumination with zero or minimal external bias.Fig. 1d shows a typical semiconductor–electrolyte double-layer junction structure formed after an n-type semiconductor is immersed in an electrolyte. When the Fermi level (EF) of the semiconductor is higher than the redox potential (Eredox) of the electrolyte, electrons initially flow across the junction until an electronic equilibrium is reached, where the EF is equal to the Eredox. The transfer of electric charge produces a region on each side of the junction that is composed of a space-charge layer, a Helmholtz layer, and a Gouy layer, resulting in upward band bending and a built-in electric field. Under illumination, photogenerated electron–hole pairs are separated by a space-charge field and the holes travel to the semiconductor–electrolyte interface for oxidation reaction, while the electrons travel to the counter electrode for water reduction reaction.

By changing the voltage applied to the semiconductor electrode, the level of band bending originating from the electron depletion in the semiconductor will change accordingly. When an appropriate voltage is applied such that there is no potential drop between the surface and the bulk of a semiconductor, i.e. no space charge layer, the semiconductor is at its flat band potential (Vfb). The flat band potential is a very useful quantity in photoelectrochemistry as it facilitates the location of the energy position of the conduction band (CB) and VB edges of a given semiconducting material.Vfb can be determined by the Mott–Schottky (M–S) equation by measuring the capacitance of the space charge layer (Csc) of the semiconducting electrode as a function of the applied potential (V). The M–S relationship is given by the following:
(21)
where
εr is the relative permittivity of the semiconductor, ε0 is permittivity of vacuum; A is the surface area, e is the charge of an electron, ND is the free carrier density, k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, and V is the applied potential. A plot of the square of the reciprocal capacity against the applied voltage should give a straight line, from which the value of Vfb can be obtained from the intercept with the V axis. Along with the value of Vfb, the free charge carrier density (ND), which plays a role in describing the bulk and surface properties of a semiconductor, can be also determined.

Under open-circuit conditions or a positive applied potential, the space charge layer is a depletion layer where mobile majority carriers are depleted and an excess space charge is generated by the fixed ionized donors and acceptors. From the flat band potential Vfb, the depletion region width (WD) can be determined as follows:
(22)
where the symbols have been defined in
eqn (21).


Fig. 1f shows the photocurrent (Jp)–applied potential (Vapp) curves for a photoanode during solar water splitting in a PEC cell. The solar-to-hydrogen (STH) efficiency of the photoanode devices in a standard three-electrode configuration is given as
(23)
where
Jp is the photocurrent density, Vapp is the applied voltage (V) versus the reverse hydrogen electrode (RHE), and Pin is the power density of the incident light.

The IPCE of a photoelectrode is a crucial parameter for describing the performance of photoelectrodes. To obtain the IPCE, which is defined as the number of photogenerated charge carriers contributing to the photocurrent per incident photon, the measurement can be performed by using a standard three-electrode configuration under monochromatic illumination. The IPCE of a photoelectrode at the wavelength λ is calculated using eqn (12).
The overall water splitting reaction is a thermodynamically uphill reaction (ΔG0 = 237 kJ mol−1, which is equal to 1.23 eV) involving multiple electron transfer processes. For example, a four-electron electrochemical reaction is required for oxygen evolution. Thus, to realize high performance in PEC water splitting, the bandgap of semiconducting materials should be large enough to provide a sufficient driving force for the uphill reaction and, at the same time, small enough to absorb light in a wide solar spectral range for optimal sunlight utilization. Secondly, the CB and VB of a semiconductor should straddle water redox potentials to make the water-splitting reactions energetically favorable. Thirdly, efficient separation and migration of charge carriers to the surface catalytic sites are required for efficient hydrogen reduction or water oxidation. Finally, the photoelectrode must be stable to avoid photodegradation. During the past decades, many promising electrode materials (e.g., TiO2, Fe2O3, Cu2O, Ta3N5, and BiVO4) have been proposed for fabricating PEC cells. However, their conversion efficiencies and stability are still unsatisfactory to meet requirements for commercial applications. The emergence of ultrathin 2D materials such as graphene and TMDs provides new opportunities for the construction of high-efficiency photoelectrodes in water splitting due to their tunable optoelectronic and catalytic properties.

Graphene, a single atomic layer of carbon with all atoms covalently bonded in a honeycomb lattice, is a strictly 2D zero-bandgap semi-metal material with a small overlap between its CB and VB (Fig. 2a and b). It exhibits a unique combination of many superior physical properties including mechanical strength and electrical transport. Charge carriers in graphene move with an extraordinarily high mobility, making graphene a highly conductive layered material and an essential 2D building block for vdWs assembly into heterojunction devices. Particularly, graphene shows a strong ambipolar electric field effect with a high charge carrier mobility of ca. 104 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature, while the suspended graphene exhibits an even higher mobility of >2 × 105 cm2 V−1 s−1 for carrier densities below 5 × 109 cm−2 at low temperature. In addition, graphene displays partial optical transparency with a tunable work function, owing to its unique single-atom thickness and finite density-of-states. The white-light transmittance of suspended graphene could reach as high as 97.7% with a negligible reflectance of <0.1%. Besides, graphene also shows excellent thermal stability and conductivity (3000–5000 W m−1 K−1), and ultrahigh theoretical specific surface area of 2630 m2 g−1.

In the case of graphene with a few layers, the physical properties depend largely on the number of layers and the orientation of stacking between adjacent layers. For example, Bernal-stacked bilayer graphene, where half of the carbon atoms lie directly over the center of a hexagonal lattice in the lower graphene sheet, and the other half lie over an atom, has been predicted to have a tunable bandgap if an electric displacement field is applied to the bilayer, and has been experimentally demonstrated. Due to appreciable electrical and optical properties of graphene, graphene-based thin films hold great promise for energy conversion. With comparable sheet resistance (ca. <0.5 kΩ sq−1) and transparency (ca. <80%) to the conventionally utilized oxide electrode material indium tin oxide (ITO), graphene-based electrodes demonstrate many additional advantages such as excellent flexibility and stability, larger surface areas, high electrocatalytic activity for various redox reactions, high-density sp2/sp3 hybridized domains allowing for chemical modification and surface reactions, as well as the possibility for mass production from bulk graphite. Pristine graphene is not active in chemical reactions due to its low density of states at the Fermi level. However, the defects or edges in graphene provide active sites for catalytic reactions. Surface modification of graphene by introducing heteroatoms helps to increase the number of active sites, thus improving its catalytic activity. Graphene can also serve as an interfacial layer and/or supporting layer for semiconducting nanoparticles to enhance the charge transfer and minimize carrier recombination.
The 2D atomically thin layer can be easily transferred onto a 2D or 3D crystal substrate to form a vdWs heterojunction (Fig. 2c and f), allowing the combination of lattice-mismatched materials. In a graphene/semiconductor structure, the Fermi level of graphene can be modulated by electrostatic gating, due to the limited density of states of graphene near the Dirac point. The Fermi level and electrical properties of graphene are also sensitive to chemical doping and the number of graphene layers, making it an attractive material that can be transferred directly onto well-developed semiconductors without the utilization of expensive deposition systems. The excellent chemical stability and good catalytic activity also make graphene a promising protective and catalytic layer for semiconductors in PEC applications. Thus, graphene provides a variety of opportunities in PV and PEC device integration for achieving high SBH and high PCE through interfacial engineering.

Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) consist of many-layered materials with tunable electronic properties (Fig. 2d). With the transition metal atom M and chalcogen atom X (X = S, Se or Te) bonded in the formula MX2, there exists a large variety of stable bulk combinations of TMDs, ranging from insulators (such as group-IV TMD HfS2), semiconductors (such as group-VI TMD MoS2 and WS2, and group-VII TMD ReS2), semi-metals (such as TiSe2), to true metals (such as group-V TMD NbS2 and VSe2). In addition, the properties of the group-X TMD PtX2 are found to be dependent on the chalcogen size with the semiconducting/semi-metallic/metallic transition in PtS2/PtSe2/PtTe2. Overall, the electronic structures of TMDs materials have a strong dependence on the number of d-electrons and the coordination environment of the transition metal. Specifically, if the d-orbitals are partially filled, as in the case of NbS2, the TMDs are metallic. In contrast, if the d-orbitals are fully occupied, such as in 2H-MoS2 and 1T-PtS2, the TMDs are semiconductors.

Except for Co, Rh, Ir, and Ni-based TMDs, most TMDs naturally form layered crystals of tri-atom-thick X–M–X sheets comprising of covalently bonded chalcogen-metal species (i.e. monolayers), which are held together by vdWs forces. Typically, with the chalcogen atoms in two hexagonal planes separated by a plane of metal atoms, such monolayers stack to form bulk crystals with various polytypes (i.e. stacking sequences), which vary in the metal atom coordination (i.e. either octahedral or trigonal prismatic coordination). In general, the polymorphs of TMDs include 1T, 2H and 3R-phases, namely, the trigonal, hexagonal and rhombohedral overall symmetry with 1, 2 and 3 X–M–X units in the unit cell, respectively. It is worth noting that monolayer TMDs possess two polymorphs: trigonal prismatic and octahedral phases. The physical properties of the layered TMDs depend on the phases, for example, 1T MoS2 shows a metastable metallic property whereas 2H MoS2 exhibits a stable semiconducting property. In addition, the phase transition in TMDs could be intentionally induced by intercalation with alkali metals. For instance, lithium intercalation in 2H-MoS2 could help to realize the transition into 1T-MoS2.
To date, molybdenum and tungsten dichalcogenides (e.g. MoS2, MoSe2, WS2 and WSe2), especially MoS2, are arguably the most well-studied TMDs due to their superior properties. MoS2 is perhaps the first earth-abundant compound used for hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) catalysis. Notably, their tunable electronic structures result in versatile optical absorption and transparency, charge carrier transport and mobility, and conductivity. These unique properties, along with their earth-abundance and stability in air and acidic solutions make them better candidates for optoelectronic applications and catalysis, compared to other semiconducting TMDs such as ReS2 and PtS2. The excitonic properties of a 2D monolayer semiconductor are different from the 3D bulk counterpart. As illustrated in Fig. 3a and b, due to the reduced dielectric screening of Coulombic interactions in monolayer TMDs, the holes and electrons form tightly bound excitons (quasiparticles). The quasiparticle bandgap is expected to increase for monolayers and the enhanced electron–hole interaction is expected to increase the exciton binding energy. Their binding exciton energies, e.g. 0.5–1.0 eV for MoS2, 0.32 eV for WS2, are several times larger than those in bulk. Similar to graphene and other related materials, the electronic and optoelectronic properties of Mo- and W-based TMDs depend greatly on the number of layers. Typically, Mo- and W-based TMDs exhibit controllable bandgap structures from indirect transitions in their bulk forms to direct transitions in monolayers, generally in the range of ∼1.0–2.0 eV with moderate charge carrier mobility at room temperature. The calculated band structures of bulk, quadrilayer, bilayer and monolayer MoS2 are displayed in Fig. 2e. It is revealed that the direct transition energy at the Brillouin zone K point barely changes with the layer thickness; however, the indirect bandgap increases with the decrease in the number of layers.
When the thickness of the layers is reduced to a monolayer, the indirect transition energy becomes so high that the material changes into a 2D direct bandgap semiconductor. The variation of the bandgap of MoS2 with different thicknesses has been demonstrated by photoluminescence (PL) spectra performed on mono- and few-layer MoS2 samples. The bandgap decreases along with increasing the number of layers, from 1.88 eV for monolayer MoS2 to 1.29 eV for few-layer MoS2, as shown in Fig. 3c and d. On the other hand, regardless of the layer number, the bandgaps of Mo- and W-based TMDs increase with the increased size of the transition metal atom and the decreased size of the chalcogen. More details are given in Table 1 regarding the charge carrier mobility, layer number-dependent bandgaps, and exciton energies of Mo- and W-based TMDs. Importantly, it has been reported that the Mo- and W-based TMDs can absorb >95% of sunlight in sub-micrometer-thick material, leading to efficient solar cells. Moreover, recent studies have demonstrated that a TMDs monolayer can absorb ∼5–10% of sunlight, corresponding to the absorption of Si films with a thickness of 50 nm or GaAs films with a thickness of 15 nm, making it possible to construct ultrathin solar energy conversion devices based on mono- or few-layer TMDs. TMDs such as MoS2 and WS2 have also been considered as low-cost and promising electrocatalysts for HER. Based on density functional theory (DFT) calculations, the edges of MoS2 can act as catalytically active sites. A calculation conducted by Hinnemann et al. has demonstrated that MoS2 nanoparticles supported on graphite act as a promising catalyst, which exhibits a moderate overpotential of 0.1–0.2 V for the hydrogen evolution reaction, as shown in Fig. 3e. In addition, according to their calculations, the edges of a S–Mo–S monolayer, especially the Mo-edges have the most favorable binding energy for hydrogen, which is even similar to Pt surfaces. This prediction was then verified experimentally by Chorkendorff's group, who demonstrated that the electrocatalytic HER activity of MoS2 could be linearly correlated with the number/length of edge sites, instead of the total area of the MoS2. It has also been revealed that metallic nanosheets of 1T-MoS2 chemically exfoliated through lithium intercalation from semiconducting 2H-MoS2 exhibit excellent catalytic HER activities, indicating that both basal plane and edges contribute to the increase in the active sites and the charge transfer kinetics in metallic MoS2, which is key for improving the HER performance. Chemically exfoliated WS2 nanosheets have also been considered as interesting catalysts for HER. The enhanced catalytic activity of WS2 has been found to be associated with high concentrations of the strained metallic 1T phase. The promising HER activity together with the semiconducting properties of some TMDs make them potential photoelectrodes for water splitting. Compared to conventional photoelectrodes summarized in Fig. 3f, the narrow bandgaps of TMDs stand out as excellent absorbers for harvesting a wide range of light energy. Interestingly, although the band position of bulk TMDs does not fulfil the requirements of thermodynamically photocatalytic water splitting, the CB and VB of monolayer MoS2 are reported to straddle the redox potentials of hydrogen evolution and water oxidation (Fig. 3f). Thus, the monolayered MoS2 can serve as an efficient photocatalyst and photoelectrode for water splitting.
Mobility (cm2 V−1 s−1)
Bandgap (eV)
Exciton binding energy of the monolayer (eV)
Bulk
Monolayer
Bulk
4-Layer
3-Layer
Bilayer
Monolayer
2H-MoS2
60–200
∼200
1.29I
1.42I
1.47I
1.60I
1.88D
0.5–1.0
2H-MoSe2
15
50
1.10I
1.52I
1.52I
1.54I
1.57D
0.55
2H-MoTe2
200
0.30 (2–4 layers)
0.93I
1.00I
1.03I
1.05I
1.10D
0.64
2H-WS2
105
0.28
1.35I
1.51I
1.59I
1.77I
1.99D
0.32
2H-WSe2
100
30–180
1.20I
1.45I
1.49I
1.58I
1.65D
0.37
The cleavage planes of layered semiconducting TMDs are expected to be chemically inert and have no surface electronic states. Thus, the “Fermi level pinning” effect in the TMDs-based Schottky junction or p–n junction can be minimized and a large SBH is expected. The layer-dependent tunability of the bandgap coupled with the absence of dangling bonds allows for an arbitrary combination without constrictions from lattice symmetries, making TMDs attractive candidates for PV devices. In 1978, the rectifying and PV properties of Schottky junctions based on layer-structured semiconductors (InSe, GaTe, GeS, SnS, WSe2 and MoSe2) and metals (Al, Au, Cu etc.) were studied. It was found that the p-WSe2/Al junction achieved the best PCE of 5.3% (tungsten iodide lamp, 57 mW cm−2), indicating that a considerable PCE can be obtained based on TMDs with a moderate purity. Fortin et al. studied the PV effect and optical absorption based on a MoS2/metal junction and suggested that MoS2 should be a suitable absorber for PV solar cells. TMDs based p–n junctions such as p-WSe2/n-ZnO and p-WS2/ZnO have also demonstrated a PV effect. The aforementioned TMDs used in PV solar cells are single crystals or thick films, which are not cost-effective. It is reported that TMDs thin film-based PV devices of Au/MoS2 (∼220 nm)/ITO and Au/WSe2 (∼100 nm)/Al/ITO have achieved PCE of ∼1.8% and ∼3.4%, respectively, indicating that a substantial photonic absorption can be achieved with a MoS2 thin film. Besides PV solar cells, the appropriate band positions, good catalytic activity, and excellent acid-resistance of TMDs allow the layered structure to serve as photoelectrodes for PEC applications. TMDs such as MoS2, WS2, WSe2 and MoSe2 have been employed as photoelectrodes in a generative PEC cell for electrochemical solar energy conversion. The WSe2 and MoSe2 photoanodes realized solar to electrical power conversion efficiencies of 10.2% and 9.4% in 1 M NaI and 0.1 M I2 solution, respectively. PEC water splitting was also realized by MoS2, WS2, MoSe2 and WSe2 based photoelectrodes with noble metal co-catalysts (Pt, Ru, Pd etc.) in acidic conditions, resulting in energy-conversion efficiencies >7%. n-WS2 and p-WSe2 appeared stable in acidic conditions (e.g. H2SO4), which makes them attractive candidates for the solar-driven water splitting application. Although the layered TMDs semiconductors showed promising efficiency and stability towards PEC applications, the existence of indirect bandgaps of the bulk TMDs restricts light absorption. For layered compounds, the minority carrier mobility within the layers (perpendicular to the c axis) is higher than that perpendicular to the layers (parallel to the c axis). Thus, edges and dislocations on the surface parallel to the c axis serve as efficient recombination centers and the smooth vdWs face is suitable for the PEC reactions. The direct bandgap and large exposed vdWs surface of monolayer TMDs (e.g., MoS2, WS2) provide an ideal platform for the development of PEC photoelectrodes to simultaneously realize effective light absorption and efficient photoreactions on the vdWs surface. Fig. 3g presents the theoretical STH efficiency for the conventional absorber materials and TMDs as photoelectrodes for PEC water splitting. It is expected to achieve a high STH efficiency based on the TMDs photoelectrodes, which can be used as excellent alternatives for conventional absorber materials such as Si, InP, and GaAs. Furthermore, the absence of covalent bonding between the (001) planes of the layered TMDs enables the construction of 2D/2D TMDs vdWs junctions, which are attractive for the development of flexible devices with low cost (Fig. 2f). Integrating monolayer or ultrathin 2D TMDs with other 2D materials or conventional bulk semiconductors should be a cost-effective way to develop efficient PV and PEC devices.

The construction of metal/semiconductor heterojunctions is a straightforward approach to fabricating a PV device. The contact between a metal and a semiconductor with different work functions results in the formation of a built-in field. A larger photovoltage can be achieved by choosing two materials with a larger difference in work function. However, the formation of a metal/semiconductor junction is prone to the introduction of interface states at the junction interface, which may decrease the photovoltage. Furthermore, the effective absorption of light in the semiconductor would be reduced by the metal overlayer since it is not transparent, resulting in the poor utilization of sunlight and a low conversion efficiency. In this regard, the introduction of layer-structured 2D materials such as graphene or TMDs on 3D semiconductors opens up a new dimension for engineering the interfacial, electronic, and optical properties of devices.


Amorphous carbon films have been introduced on Si to form PV junctions due to its transparency, tunable optoelectronic properties, extreme hardness, and chemical inertness. In 1979, Bhagavat et al. deposited carbon films onto single-crystal silicon and the heterojunction exhibited a photovoltage of 280 mV under Air Mass 1 conditions. The PV effect is observed in both carbon layer/p-type silicon and carbon layer/n-type silicon heterostructures, affording SBH values of 0.7 and 0.6 eV, respectively. Yu et al. reported a carbonaceous thin film/n-type silicon solar cell with an ideality factor of 1.1, suggesting a significant contribution to the current of the diffusion current and a nearly flawless heterointerface. The C/n-Si PV cell shows a power conversion efficiency of 3.8% and an open-circuit voltage of 325 mV under illumination of light with an energy density of 15 mW cm−2 (400–800 nm). Further enhancement of performance has been achieved by the introduction of boron-doped diamond-like carbon thin films on n-type silicon, reaching a record energy conversion efficiency of 7.9% and an open-circuit voltage of 580 mV under 100 mW cm−2 illumination. Although many efforts have been involved in developing a-C/n-Si solar cells, the efficiencies of this structure are mainly limited by the relatively high electrical resistivity and low transparency. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) represent another type of attractive carbon material that exhibits unique optical and electrical properties. The bandgap of CNTs is zero in the metallic type, or is tunable with values in the range from 0.4 eV to 2.0 eV, depending on the chirality of the semiconducting CNTs. The CNTs are intrinsically p-doped in air through oxygen absorption. CNTs film/n-Si heterojunctions have stimulated tremendous interest in PV solar cells. Wei et al. reported the first demonstration of double-walled CNTs (DWNTs)/Si heterojunction solar cells with an initial PCE of only 1.3%. To improve the performance, many approaches including CNTs optimization, chemical doping, gate modulation, and antireflection coating have been proposed to improve the optical and electrical properties of devices. Wang et al. reported a method to improve the PV performance of single carbon nanotube (SCNT)/Si solar cells by using multifunctional MoOx layers, resulting in the highest PCE of 17% for SCNT/Si solar cells. Although CNTs possess many advantages, the interspace between bundles in CNTs films may reduce their conductivity, and the effective contact area may be limited by their configuration. To address these challenges, it is reasonable to expect that a graphene film with a two-dimensional configuration and fascinating physical properties could work well on n-Si for PV solar cells. The graphene layer with a one-atom thickness is continuous and provides a flat surface to cover the entire active area of a device, avoiding the contact resistance that can emerge in CNTs film-based devices.

In 2009, Tongay et al. investigated the SBH of highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) and semiconductor (Si, GaAs and 4H-SiC) heterostructures. By using eqn (19) and (20), the effective SBH of HOPG/n-Si was determined to be 0.40 eV and the ideality factors of devices based on cleaved flakes were in the range of 1.12 to 1.5. Capacitance–voltage (C–V) measurements with data plotted in the form of 1/C2versus V (reverse bias voltage) were used to characterize the devices. A slightly higher SBH was observed compared with values from I–V measurements, which may be ascribed to the presence of a very thin oxide layer at the HOPG/semiconductor heterointerface. The authors have inferred that barrier properties are determined mainly by the outermost layer of the HOPG layer and thus a graphene/semiconductor Schottky barrier with a similar behavior can be anticipated due to the outermost layer of the graphite being an atomically thin graphene layer. The first graphene/n-Si PV solar cell was demonstrated by Li et al. in 2011, with an SBH of ∼0.78 eV, an ideality factor of ∼1.5 and an open-circuit voltage of 0.42–0.48 V. The depletion width (WD) of the device was estimated to be 0.5–0.7 μm from eqn (17), which can be further enlarged to improve the IPCE. The solar energy conversion efficiency was 1.65% for the solar cell (active area of 0.1 cm2), indicating that the interface quality, uniformity, and balancing between the transparency and conductivity should be carefully considered for further performance improvement. Therefore, extensive efforts have been aimed at understanding the interface and engineering the physical and chemical properties of devices.

The SBH of a Schottky junction is determined by the respective work functions of two contact materials. Graphene provides the additional benefit of constructing PV devices with high SBH since its work function can be controlled by an electric field. By applying a gate voltage (Vg) to graphene devices, the work function can be adjusted over a wide range through the shifting of the Fermi level originating from the electric field effect-induced carrier doping. Tongay et al. found that the Fermi level of graphene is tunable during charge transfer across the graphene/semiconductor (n-type Si, GaAs, 4H-SiC and GaN) interface. This is different from the metal/semiconductor structure, in which the Fermi level of a metal with a high density of states is constant under the bias. In forward bias (<1 V), the Fermi level of positively charged graphene shifts downward and results in a small increase in SBH. When Schottky junctions are used in reverse bias (∼−10 V), the graphene is negatively charged due to electron injection and thus the Fermi level increases, leading to an obvious decrease in SBH. Sinha et al. have also found that the barrier height of graphene/p-type Si Schottky junctions is dependent on the reverse bias. The observed effects suggest that it is possible to tune the Fermi level of graphene while simultaneously conserving its exceptional properties, which is insightful for the integration of graphene into semiconducting devices. Yang et al. reported a graphene variable-barrier “barristor” based on hydrogenated Si to realize a large modulation of device current by changing the gate voltage applied to the device. The Fermi level of graphene can be modulated electrostatically by the top gate electrode and thus lead to a corresponding variation in the SBH, as shown in Fig. 4a and b. Under a negative voltage on the gate, the holes are injected into graphene and the Fermi level of graphene shifts downward and thus increases the SBH. The higher SBH effectively decreases the reverse current across the Schottky barrier. Applying positive gate voltage decreases the SBH due to the upward shift of the Fermi level, which is obtained by injecting electrons into graphene. The SBH decreases significantly from 0.45 eV to 0.25 eV by increasing the gate voltage from −1 to 5 V. “Fermi-level pinning” can be eliminated and the manipulation of SBH, as in the ideal Schottky–Mott limit, is allowed.

The application of the field effect to graphene/silicon Schottky solar cells was investigated by Regan et al. in 2012. In order to enable the penetration of electric fields through the underlying semiconductor, the thickness of the top contact should be thinner than its Debye screening length. Graphene is a promising choice due to its desirable conductivity and ultrathin thickness. Thus, the electric field is able to partially penetrate one or more layers and modulate the Fermi level of graphene. CVD grown monolayer graphene was transferred to the surface of n-type Si and a gate field was applied using ionic liquid. During the measurement, the graphene was held at ground and different gate voltages were applied for studying the field effect on the performance of solar cells. As mentioned above, a negative gate voltage could increase the SBH of a device by repelling electrons in the top layer of Si and graphene. The PCE of solar cells increases from ∼0.5% to ∼1.8% by changing the gate voltage from 0 V to −1.4 V under AM 1.5 illumination. The authors also proposed a method to eliminate the requirement of an external gate power source by connecting the cell output to the gate, realizing a self-powered gate. Another work reported by Yu et al. demonstrated that electric field effects can be realized either by applying an external field on a graphene/Si solar cell or by integrating a ferroelectric polymer layer in a solar cell. To construct an external electric field tuned graphene/Si solar cell, an ultrathin layer of graphene oxide (GO) was deposited on the surface of Si and then a monolayer graphene film was brought into contact with the Si substrate. A thin insulating layer of HfO2 (∼10 nm) was deposited on the graphene film and finally, the gate electrode was formed by transferring another graphene film onto the device. By using the high k HfO2 and controlling the gate voltage under a low value (≤3 V), the leakage current could be minimized. The operation of the device without using an ionic liquid makes it a more feasible method for practical application. When the gate voltage was varied from 0 V to −3 V, the PCE, open circuit voltage (Voc), and short circuit current density (Jsc) of solar cells increased from 1.23% to 3.19%, 0.30 to 0.40 V, and 14.0 to 23.3 mA cm−2, respectively. C–V measurements obtained a higher Vbi of 0.60 V under a gate voltage (Vg) of −3 V compared with the value of 0.42 at Vg = 0 V, verifying the effect of electric field doping on Schottky junction solar cells. Furthermore, authors inserted a layer of ferroelectric polymer P(VDF-TrFE) between GO and graphene gate to generate an internal electric field. When a positive voltage was applied to the gate, the P(VDF-TrFE) layer was polarized and induced net dipole moments that would effectively dope the graphene film. When the gate voltage varied from 0 V to 4 V, the PV performance of the device was progressively enhanced and the PCE increased from 2.01% to 4.13%. Kim et al. studied the effect of Vg on the PV performance of the gate-tunable Schottky junction solar cells based on graphene and graphene mesh electrodes on n-type Si. The graphene mesh (hole average diameter of ∼250 nm)/Si structure exhibited a more sensitive improvement of PCE values, from 5.7% to 8.1%, with the Vg changing from 0 V to −1 V. A finite element simulation suggested that holes in the graphene mesh provided a better electric-field permeability, resulting in the effective modulation of electric potentials in Si.

The work function of graphene also depends sensitively on the number of graphene layers. Filleter et al. reported that the bilayer films of graphene exhibited an increased work function compared to single layer films on 6H-SiC(0001). The difference in work function between bilayer and single layer graphene was determined to be ∼0.135 eV. Hibino et al. also found that the work function of graphene grown on 6H-SiC(0001) increased with the number of graphene layers and the increment was about ∼0.1 eV from single layer films to few-layer films. Graphene films with a larger work function are expected to form a high SBH with n-Si. The modulation of the work function of graphene by engineering the number of graphene layers should provide a path towards the improvement in the PV performance of graphene/Si solar cells. By transferring graphene films onto p-Si for measuring PV responses, Ihm et al. demonstrated a direct dependence of Voc on the number of graphene layers. Graphene films were annealed at 500 °C for 12 h in a vacuum chamber to remove adsorbed contaminants. The work functions of graphene films exhibited a continuous increase along with an increasing number of graphene layers. The Voc of PV devices showed a sequential decrease from −120 mV to −5 mV when the number of graphene layers decreased from 4 to 1. The results imply that a more efficient graphene/n-Si-based PV solar cell could be developed via modulating the electronic structures at graphene interfaces, which can be achieved by varying the number of graphene layers. From a theoretical study carried out by a generalized equivalent circuit model, a multilayer graphene film can be integrated with an n-type Si to realize high PV performance. This is attributed to the increase in the work function of graphene as the number of graphene layers increases, leading to a higher barrier height at the graphene film/n-Si interface. It was also found that as the number of graphene layers increases, the sheet resistance decreases accompanied by a reduced transmittance (Fig. 4c and d). An et al. reported a systematic work on Schottky solar cells formed with Si and monolayer graphene, multilayer graphene, as well as thin transparent graphite. The impact of optical transmittance and sheet resistance on the PV performance of solar cells was investigated. The transmittance and sheet resistance decreased as the thickness of graphene films increased, indicating that a thinner graphene film afforded excellent light transmittance but a relatively low conductivity. Thus, a trade-off between transmittance and conductivity should be carefully considered during the selection of graphene thickness. The best PV performance of solar cells without modification was achieved when a thin transparent graphite with a mean thickness of 65 nm was chosen as the electrode on n-Si, with a PCE of ∼3.16%. Calculations indicated that the junction could form extremely robust interfaces with near 100% internal quantum efficiency. After optimized doping, the PCE was increased to 7.5% with Jsc exceeding 24 mA cm−2. Other studies also confirmed that increasing the number of graphene layers could improve the PCE of graphene film/n-Si solar cells, although thicker graphene films exhibited worse transmittance.


Graphene was used as a gas sensor that allowed the detection of the adsorption of individual gas molecules. The local carrier concentration in graphene was varied during the adsorption and desorption of gas molecules on graphene, which led to a change in resistance. The results indicate that the chemical doping of graphene without deterioration of its mobility is possible. Thus, the surface adsorbed species with different reduction/oxidation potentials could be introduced on graphene, to achieve a p- or n-doping on the graphene by donating holes or electrons. Moreover, compared to the conventional substitutional doping, the chemical doping process would not induce defects in the graphene lattice. Jung et al. found that the absorption of bromine on monolayer graphene generated a high density of doped holes, which was beyond the effect from electrical gating with an ionic electrolyte. Tongay et al. reported that the sheet resistance of graphene decreased by 70% and the p-doping of graphene was achieved by the modification of polymer TFSA ((CF3SO2)2NH). The doped graphene exhibited an increased carrier density of holes and decreased mobility due to the enhanced short-range scattering. The doped graphene also showed a high transmittance in the visible and near-infrared spectrum, and its superior properties such as environmental stability and high conductivity were preserved. Thus, chemical doping could tune the electrical properties and Fermi level of graphene and provide a powerful method for integrating doped graphene films into high-performance PV solar cells.

Miao et al. demonstrated a significant enhancement of PCE based on single graphene/n-Si Schottky junction solar cells achieved by doping graphene with TFSA, as shown in Fig. 4e and f. The doped graphene layer led to an increase in the Jsc, Voc, FF, and PCE of graphene/n-Si solar cells from 14.2 to 25.3 mA cm−2, 0.43 to 0.54 V, 0.32 to 0.63, and 1.9% to 8.6%, respectively. The doped graphene film/n-Si devices exhibited a lower series resistance Rs (10.3 Ω) and ideality factors (1.3–1.5) compared to the pristine graphene/n-Si structure. The SBHs of doped graphene/n-Si and pristine graphene/n-Si junction were 0.89 and 0.79 V from J–V data, which were consistent with the values of 0.82 and 0.63 V from C–V measurements. It was found that the built-in potential increased from 0.36 to 0.56 V after doping, indicating that electron–hole pairs generated under illumination could be separated efficiently. Bae et al. used HNO3 to realize a p-doping on graphene films and an increased work function was observed for the doped graphene, which was important in tuning the PCE of PV solar cells. Feng et al. found that the introduction of HNO3 on graphene resulted in a p-doped graphene film with an enhanced conductivity and larger work function. The chemical doping of HNO3 on graphene increased the PCE of graphene/silicon-pillar-array (SPA) substrate solar cells from 1.96 to 3.55%. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonic acid (PEDOT-PSS) modification of graphene was also found to improve the PV performance of graphene/silicon-pillar-array (SPA) substrate solar cells due to its high conductivity. Cui et al. investigated the effect of HNO3, HCl, H2O2, and SOCl2 on the PV performance of graphene/n-Si solar cells. It was found that all the chemicals enhanced the PCEs of solar cells and SOCl2 doping exhibited the best performance. Furthermore, devices with SOCl2 and HCl doping exhibited much better stability compared to those with HNO3 and H2O2 doping. Graphene oxide (GO) could also act as a p-dopant for graphene and contribute to a reduced sheet resistance, thus a PCE of 10.6% could be achieved through GO spin coating.
Based on DFT calculations, weak bonding between graphene and metals (Al, Ag, Cu, Au, and Pt) could shift the Fermi level with respect to the conical point by ∼0.5 eV, while preserving the unique electronic structure of graphene. The results suggested that the p-doping of graphene could be realized through the rational deposition of appropriate metal particles on graphene for enhanced PV performance. Shi et al. demonstrated that the work function and sheet resistance of graphene could be modulated by AuCl3 doping. p-doping was realized by the charge transfer from graphene to Au3+, which induced the formation of Au nanoparticles (NPs). After AuCl3 modification, the work function of graphene films could up-shift up to 0.5 eV. A PCE of ∼0.08% was obtained on a graphene/n-Si Schottky junction solar cell after the modification. Au NPs were also formed directly on graphene/n-Si substrates to improve the PV performance of the Schottky junctions. An increased work function and enhanced electrical conductivity of graphene were realized through the electron transfer between Au NPs and graphene. Thus, with an optimized thickness of Au layers, the PCE of graphene/n-Si solar cells reached a maximum value of 7.34%. By combining Au NPs modification and HNO3 doping, the authors further improved the PCE of graphene/n-Si solar cells to 10.2%. Considering the inevitable existence of wrinkles and cracks in CVD grown graphene, which could decrease the mobility and conductivity of graphene films, Ho et al. developed an interesting method to improve the electrical properties of CVD graphene films by intentionally filling the cracks in graphene with Au NPs. The Au NPs could be formed through a simple reduction–oxidation reaction between a Cu substrate and the gold precursor solution. The Au NPs filled graphene exhibited a decreased sheet resistance and a reduced series resistance with the configuration of the graphene/n-Si junction. With TFSA doping, the Au NPs filled graphene/n-Si solar cells achieved a high PCE of 12.3%. Pt NPs were also found to increase the work function and reduce the sheet resistance of graphene woven fabrics (GWFs). With a solid electrolyte coating, the Pt-decorated graphene/n-Si solar cells realized a PCE of 10%.

Since the monolayer graphene is too thin and highly transparent, the graphene/silicon structure usually exhibits a high reflectance. In view of this, Shi et al. added a TiO2 antireflection layer onto a monolayer graphene/Si PV solar cell and achieved a high PCE and long-term stable operation. The antireflection layers were deposited on graphene/Si substrates by spin-coating TiO2 nanoparticles to form very thin films with an average thickness of ∼65 nm (Fig. 4g). The as-prepared graphene/Si films showed a large reflectance of up to 40% in the wavelength range of 400–1100 nm. After the TiO2 layer modification, a much-decreased light reflectance of ∼10% in the visible region was observed, which could be attributed to the suitable refractive index and the appropriate film thickness of the TiO2 layer. After the formation of the TiO2 thin layer, many micro-cracks were found in the TiO2 film, which resulted in large amounts of exposed active areas for subsequent effective chemical doping. Combining the TiO2 antireflection layer and HNO3 chemical doping, the resulting graphene/n-Si solar cells showed a Jsc of 32.7 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.612 V, an FF of 0.72, and a PCE of 14.5% under AM 1.5 illumination (Fig. 4h). The large difference in work functions between graphene and TiO2 could form a charge-transfer complex and result in substantial hole doping in graphene. Therefore, coating with the TiO2 layer is an effective way to achieve the p-doping of graphene and increase the Voc of the devices. Li et al. found that polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) based solid electrolyte served as a chemical modification carrier as well as an anti-reflection layer for GWFs/n-Si solar cells. The PVA + HNO3-GWFs/n-Si showed a high PCE of 11%. GO was also reported as an antireflection material for graphene/Si solar cells. Compared to bare Si, the GO coating with an optimal thickness on graphene/Si led to a decrease in reflectance by 15% at the wavelength of 600 nm.


To improve the performance of graphene/silicon Schottky junction solar cells, many efforts have been dedicated to improving the quality of the interface between graphene and silicon. Sinha et al. reported the construction of graphene/n-Si Schottky junction diodes with near ideal diode behavior (ideality factor of ∼1.08) by reducing the metallic impurities in graphene. The metallic impurities in graphene could be minimized by etching the topmost ∼700 nm of Cu using an ammonium persulfate solution for 90 s. For graphene with an initial etching of Cu, the graphene/n-Si device exhibited a lower ideality factor and a noticeable increase in the reverse saturation current with reverse bias, indicating a low interface defect state at the interface. As the reverse bias increased, a decrease in the SBH of this device was observed, implying that the pinning of the Fermi level was eliminated. The results suggest that controlling the interface of graphene/Si was of critical importance for the construction of high performance energy conversion devices. Song et al. investigated the effect of a native oxide layer between graphene and silicon on the PV performance of graphene/n-Si solar cells (Fig. 5a). An s-shaped kink in the I–V curve usually occurs in graphene/n-Si or CNTs/n-Si solar cells, but the fundamental mechanism is poorly understood. The authors demonstrated that the kink behavior was related to the native oxide layer since a pronounced kink emerged as the thickness of native oxide increased. It is well known that a thin layer of native oxide forms naturally on Si when it is exposed to air. In this study, it was found that the thickness of the native oxide layer was ∼5 Å after HF etching and increased to ∼15 Å after storage in air for 2 weeks. The graphene/n-Si devices with different thicknesses of native oxide were studied and a distinctive kink was observed for the device with oxide thickness greater than 9 Å. The kink behavior became more distinct when the native oxide thickness and the intensity of illumination were increased. Thus, the PCE and FF of the devices decreased with the increase in oxide thickness. However, the Voc increased along with the increase in the thickness of the oxide layer. Tuning the oxide layer with an optimal thickness for maximizing Voc while allowing the elimination of photocurrent suppression is effective for achieving high-performance solar cells. Chemical doping is another effective way to suppress the kink unless the thickness of the oxide layer is larger than 15 Å. The device with an oxide layer of 15 Å and chemical doping (AuCl3) reached a Voc of 0.59 V and a PCE of 12.4%, representing a significant improvement over past efforts. Furthermore, the addition of a TiO2 antireflection layer on the optimized device pushed the PCE to a record value of 15.6%, with a Jsc of 37 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.595 V, and an FF of 0.72, as shown in Fig. 5b. The authors also proposed a model to explain the shape of the I–V curve and the effect of chemical doping. Both the native oxide and the relatively low work function of graphene led to the pronounced recombination current and decreased photocurrent, resulting in an s-shaped kink during the I–V measurement. The photogenerated electron–hole pairs were separated by a built-in field at the graphene/Si junction and holes drifted freely to the graphene side without the existence of an interfacial oxide layer. In the presence of barriers originating from the oxide layer, holes accumulate near the oxide-layer/silicon interface. When the surface carrier product nsps (ns and ps are the density of electrons and holes at the interface, respectively) became larger than the intrinsic carrier density ni2 (ni is the intrinsic concentration), recombination took place as evidenced by the less abundant carriers. Fig. 5c–f shows the band diagram for devices under different conditions in order to understand the behavior of I–V curves. In reverse bias, the electron concentration near the interface is low due to the band-bending. In this case, a large number of excess holes pile up near the interface and the tunnel current accounts for the photocurrent. At zero or forward bias, the increased electron concentration leads to an increase in the recombination rate. The excess hole concentration decreases due to the enhanced recombination and thus the tunnel current is reduced. When the oxide layer is very thin, nsps ≈ ni2, recombination is negligible, the tunnel current is dominant, and the s-shaped kink is not obvious. With a thicker oxide layer, ps becomes larger and it is easy to achieve nsps > ni2. Thus, in this case, recombination becomes significant and the kink emerges.

The insertion of other interfacial layers between graphene and Si have also been investigated. Poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) has been adopted as a hole transport layer/electron blocking layer between graphene and the Si substrate. P3HT provides a large offset between the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital of the organic species and the CB of Si to reduce the recombination at the interface, leading to a PCE of ∼10%. Jiao et al. introduced a thin GO interfacial layer between graphene and Si in graphene/n-Si solar cells to improve the PV performance. In this study, the GO should be regarded as a p-doped layer instead of an insulator, which is similar to the result obtained by the Bandaru group. The I–V curve of a pristine multilayer graphene/n-Si solar cell showed an s-shaped kink with a low PCE of ∼2.3%. After inserting a GO layer between graphene and Si, the PCE decreased significantly. Moreover, annealing the GO interfacial layer at 200 °C resulted in a much-improved PCE of 5.2% and the kink disappeared, indicating that the incorporation of annealed GO films can suppress interfacial recombination, which might be attributed to the negative interface charge nature of GO. After doping the graphene with HNO3 and depositing a TiO2 antireflection layer, the PCE further increased to 12.3%. Tsuboi et al. developed a graphene/MoS2/n-Si junction for high-performance PV solar cells, in which the MoS2 interlayer served as an effective electron-blocking/hole-transporting layer. By increasing the number of graphene layers and decreasing the thickness of the MoS2 interlayer, a PCE of 11.1% could be achieved. Meng et al. reported the introduction of few-layered hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) to engineer the graphene/n-Si interface for enhanced PV performance. The h-BN is optically transparent due to its wide bandgap (5.9 eV) and has a small lattice mismatch with graphene. The band alignment between n-Si and h-BN could hinder the electron transfer from Si to graphene and thus suppress the charge recombination at the interface. The PCE of the devices increased from 2.80% to 3.61% and the sheet resistance decreased from 2.3 to 1.9 Ω cm2 after inserting the h-BN layers. The PCE of solar cells further increased to 10.93% with Au NPs decoration and HNO3 doping. A fluorographene (FG) insulating interlayer was also introduced into the graphene/n-Si structure to construct metal/insulator/semiconductor (MIS) like solar cells. FG is a kind of graphene derivative with dipoles formed by C–F bonds on the graphitic basal plane. FG can act as an electron acceptor and lead to p-doping on graphene. The employment of the FG interfacial layer suppressed the carrier recombination and increased the PCE of solar cells from 3.17% to 7.52%. The ideality factors were 1.99 and 1.32 for the graphene/FG/n-Si and graphene/n-Si solar cells, respectively, indicating the improved rectifying characteristics of devices after FG introduction. From C–V measurement, Vbi of 0.65 and 0.56 V were obtained for the graphene/FG/n-Si and graphene/n-Si solar cells, respectively, implying that the p-doping of graphene in the graphene/FG heterostructure could contribute to the enhancement of Voc. It was also found that a temporary voltage bias could improve the PV performance of graphene/FG/n-Si solar cells, which can likely be attributed to the rotation of the C–F bond and/or the enhancement of graphene/FG coupling in an electric field. With HNO3 doping and a TiO2 antireflection layer coating, the PCE of graphene/FG/n-Si solar cells was promoted to 13.38%. Another MIS like solar cell based on graphene/hafnium oxide (HfO2)/n-Si also showed a pronounced improvement in PCE compared to solar cells without insulating layers. The introduction of an ultrathin HfO2 layer (1 nm) between graphene and n-Si increased PCE from 3.5% to 6.68%. The HfO2 was suggested to contribute to reducing the recombination and increasing the Voc. A thin layer of high work function MoO3 was introduced as a hole injection layer on the Si substrate. The PCE of solar cells increased from 5.28% in the absence of MoO3 interlayer to 8.18% with the 15 nm MoO3 layer. The ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) measurement indicated an upward band bending of Si with the deposition of the MoO3 layer. The large work function of MoO3 also led to the electron transfer from Si to MoO3 and formed a p-type inversion layer near the Si surface. The enhanced surface built-in potential provided a large driving force for charge separation and transport. Furthermore, a defect band in the MoO3 layer provided a pathway for hole transfer from MoO3 to graphene. With a HNO3 doping and PMMA antireflection layer, the PCE of the solar cell was enhanced to 12.2%.

GaAs is a promising candidate for high-performance solar cells due to its high electron mobility (8000 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 300 K) and direct bandgap (1.42 eV) In 2013, Jie et al. first demonstrated that graphene and n-type GaAs could be combined to form a Schottky junction for PV applications. The bilayer graphene/GaAs junction exhibited a Voc of 0.65, a Jsc of 10.03 mA cm−2, and a PCE of 1.95%, which is superior to its monolayer counterpart. Compared to the monolayer graphene/GaAs structure, the bilayer graphene/GaAs junction exhibited a higher SBH (0.75 eV), a lower Rs (20.1 Ω), and a smaller ideality factor (2.43), resulting in a better PCE. Li et al. promoted the PCE of graphene/GaAs solar cells to 15.5%, with the introduction of TFSA doping of graphene and an Al2O3 antireflection layer (68 nm). Furthermore, the authors designed a graphene/dielectric/graphene gating structure to improve the PCE by tuning the gate voltage, which benefited from the adjustable work function of graphene (Fig. 6a–c). In this configuration, the Al2O3 layer was deposited on a graphene/GaAs junction as a gate dielectric layer and another graphene layer was transferred on Al2O3 as a top gate layer. By changing the Vg negatively, the work function of graphene shifted downward and led to a higher SBH. In this study, the highest PCE of 18.5% was achieved when the Vg was modulated to be −15 V, and the Voc, Jsc, and FF were 0.96 V, 27.1 mA cm−2, and 0.71, respectively. A simulation indicated that a higher PCE of 23.8% could be achieved when the Vg was increased to −60 V. Lin et al. used Au NPs to enhance the PV performance of graphene/GaAs Schottky junction solar cells, and the surface plasmon absorption effect from Au arrays was a key role for performance enhancement. Au NPs with different diameters (30–150 nm) were spin-coated onto graphene/GaAs and 80 nm was found to be the optimal diameter to balance the radiation damping effect and surface plasmon absorption effect. On coating with Au of 80 nm in size, the PCE of the solar cells increased from 8.33% to 11.8%. After TFSA doping and Al2O3 antireflection layer coating, the PCE of the devices further increased to 16.2%. By combining graphene with p-type InP (bandgap of 1.34 eV), the same group demonstrated that a PCE of 3.3% can be realized based on a graphene/p-InP heterojunction. With an n-type doping of graphene by a viologen, the PCE increased to 4.6% and the ideality factor decreased from 4.0 to 3.1. Based on a graphene/Al2O3/graphene/p-InP gating structure, the PCE could be increased to 5.0% when a gate voltage of 16 V was applied to the graphene top gate layer. Combined with chemical doping and gating, a PCE of 5.6% was realized. A graphene/CdTe (bandgap of 1.45 eV) heterojunction was demonstrated, reaching a PCE of 2.08%. By depositing a layer of CdSe quantum dots onto the heterojunction, the PCE was improved to 3.1%, which could be ascribed to a photo-induced doping effect. Vazquez-Mena et al. investigated the barrier height modulation of graphene/Zn3P2 (bandgap of 1.5 eV) field-effect solar cells with a top-gate electrode. A tunable PV performance could be realized (Fig. 6d and e). The Vbi of devices increased from 0.31 V to 0.44 V when the Vg increased from 0 V to 1 V, indicating that the tuning of the junction enables the enhanced performance of solar cells. With a higher Vg of 2 V, a Voc of 0.53 V, Jsc of 7.5 mA cm−2, FF of 0.53, and PCE of 1.9% were obtained, as shown in Fig. 6f. The performance of graphene/Zn3P2 might be further improved by using a thicker Zn3P2 layer, chemical doping of graphene, or introducing a transparent conductive oxide as a top gate. Graphene has also been combined with CdS and CdSe nanowires/nanobelts to construct Schottky junction solar cells, but these devices yielded a relatively low PCE (<1.65%).


The layered semiconducting TMDs usually have a bandgap in the range of 1.0 to 2.0 eV, making them excellent light absorbers compared with the semi-metal graphene. Thus, better light harvesting is expected for the TMDs based 2D/3D vdWs junction solar cells. The vdWs bonding between the layers also allows an arbitrary combination between the 2D TMDs and 3D semiconductors, allowing the development of efficient type-II junctions with reduced interfacial defects. The integration of monolayer or ultrathin film 2D TMDs with conventional 3D bulk semiconductors should offer a promising way to construct efficient PV solar cells.

Lopez-Sanchez et al. reported the construction of a heterojunction composed of p-type monolayer MoS2 and p-Si with an obvious rectifying effect, which could thus be used as a solar cell. The authors proposed a type-II p–n junction based on the heterojunction, with CBO and VBO of 0.2 eV and 0.9 eV, respectively. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurement showed a broadband response in the 450–1100 nm range. The maximum EQE of 4.4% suggested a promising value for a device based on 2D monolayer TMDs. Tsai et al. realized a pronounced PV effect in an Al/monolayer MoS2/p-Si heterojunction and a PCE of 5.23% was obtained. The combination of the ultrathin MoS2 layer and p-Si resulted in the formation of a type-II heterojunction. A built-in field at the MoS2/p-Si interface could help to facilitate the separation of photogenerated carriers. Based on a detailed wavelength-dependent photocurrent measurement, Li et al. claimed a band alignment of type-I for the monolayer n-MoS2/p-Si heterojunction. A photocurrent was observed when the heterojunction was irradiated with 514 nm (photon energy of 2.41 eV) and 633 nm (photon energy of 1.96 eV) lasers, but no photocurrent was observed when the device was illuminated with a 785 nm (photon energy of 1.58 eV) light. Considering that the photon energy of 785 nm is lower than the optical gap of MoS2 at room temperature (∼1.9 eV) and larger than the bandgap of Si (∼1.1 eV), the absence of photocurrent under 784 nm irradiation suggested that an energy barrier existed and hindered the drifting of electrons into the MoS2 layer, i.e. the CB edge of MoS2 is higher than that of Si. Furthermore, the finite photocurrent from the excitons resonantly generated at 1.9 eV in MoS2 indicated that the CBO of the heterojunction was larger than the exciton binding energy in the MoS2 layer (∼0.2–0.4 eV). The authors also proposed a 3D band diagram for the MoS2/Si junction, which might help with visualizing the transport of charge carriers within the device in a 3D configuration. Hao et al. reported the rectifying effect based on a thin film MoS2/p-Si heterojunction. The MoS2 thin layer was deposited on Si by DC magnetron sputtering and exhibited an optical bandgap of 1.45 eV. The CBO and VBO were determined to be −0.16 eV and 0.17 eV, respectively, suggesting a type-I heterojunction. The p–n junction showed a Voc of 0.14 V, a Jsc of 3.2 mA cm−2, FF of 0.42, and a PCE of 1.3% under illumination (15 mW cm−2). It was suggested that the introduction of an interfacial layer between MoS2 and Si might further improve the performance of the devices. By incorporating a SiO2 (∼3–5 nm) buffer between MoS2 (∼40 nm) and p-Si, the PV performance of the MoS2/Si solar cells was enhanced significantly. From the C–V measurements, the Vbi of the MoS2/SiO2/Si junction was ∼0.65 V, which was larger than that of the MoS2/Si junction (∼0.41 V). The enhanced Vbi facilitated the separation and transport of photocarriers in the heterojunction. Thus, the PCE of the MoS2/SiO2/Si solar cell was increased from 1.4% to 4.5%, with a Voc of 0.3 V and a Jsc of 5.5 mA cm−2. Al2O3 passivation is another effective way to improve the performance of MoS2/Si solar cells. By coating a 10 nm Al2O3 layer on multilayer MoS2/p-Si, the PCE of the devices increased from 2.21% to 5.6% under the illumination of deep ultraviolet light with an average intensity of 11 mW cm−2. The Al2O3 layer was considered to reduce the interface trap density at the MoS2 surface and offer an n-type field effect passivation through fixed positive charges presented in the Al2O3 layer, resulting in the enhancement of PCE performance. Based on MoS2/GaAs heterojunctions, Lin et al. investigated the effect of the interfacial layer, chemical doping and electrical gating on the PV performance of the heterostructure. An insulating 2D h-BN layer with a negative electron affinity was inserted between MoS2 and GaAs to suppress the static charge transfer during the formation of the heterostructure and increase the SBH. With an h-BN thin layer, the ideality factors and SBHs of devices varied from 3.18 to 2.73 and 0.71 to 0.78 eV, respectively. The lower ideality factor indicated a decreased interfacial recombination with an h-BN interfacial layer. The Voc of solar cells increased to 0.57 V from the original value of 0.51 V, leading to a PCE of 5.42%. To improve the performance, AuCl3 doping was introduced to tune the Fermi level and carrier concentration in MoS2. After doping, the SBH increased to 0.85 eV, along with a decreased series resistance. The Voc, Jsc, FF, and PCE of MoS2/h-BN/GaAs were 0.64 V, 20.8 mA cm−2, 0.54, and 7.15%, respectively. The Fermi level of atomic thin MoS2 could also be modulated through a gating effect. With an ion gate covered on the surface of doped MoS2, a negative voltage was applied to the gate to improve the PV performance of the device. For a device with an interfacial layer, the modulation of the Fermi level of MoS2 by Vg was more sensitive compared with the device without the h-BN layer. With a Vg = −1 V, a Voc of 0.76 V, a Jsc of 21.1 mA cm−2, FF of 0.56, and a high PCE of 9.03% were realized. The same group also reported the improvement of PV performance of the monolayer MoS2/InP vdWs heterostructure through the gate effect (Fig. 6g–i). The devices exhibited an initial PCE of 4.0%, which could be enhanced to 7.1% under a Vg of 6 V. Graphene quantum dots (GQDs) were also introduced on monolayer MoS2/InP to enhance the PV effect. An n-type doping of MoS2 was realized through effective charge transfer between GQDs and MoS2. The GQD-modified MoS2/InP showed an increased SBH, resulting in a PCE enhancement from 2.1% to 4.1%. Besides MoS2/semiconductor junctions, an ultrathin WS2 film/Si vertical heterostructure was also constructed and the junction could serve as a photodetector with broadband photoresponse and good detectivity. The WS2/p-Si heterojunction was also constructed by the CVD growth of thin film WS2 on p-Si for PV application. The device exhibited an EQE of >25% near the red and near-IR region, indicating a high photo-absorption regime with a high diffusion length of minority charge carriers. The solar cells showed a Voc of 16.34 mV, a Jsc of 8.4 μA cm−2, and a FF of 0.26. Further improvement might be achieved through a series of rational interfacial engineering.
2D graphene and TMDs have also been exploited as efficient electron-transport layers (ETL), hole-transport layers (HTL), and protective layers in organic solar cells or electrodes in DSSCs, which have been summarized in other reviews. In this section, we focus on the interfacial engineering of well-defined 2D materials/3D semiconductor vdWs heterostructures as PV power generators. These results have demonstrated that graphene and TMDs are promising materials with multi-functionalities, and the well-defined heterostructures and/or hybrid compounds can be used as excellent building blocks for high-efficiency solar energy conversion devices.

Due to the strong light–matter interaction, tunable bandgap and easy combination of 2D materials, the ultrathin 2D TMDs homo/heterojunctions can serve as excellent light absorbers for solar energy conversion. The 2D materials based ultrathin PV devices can be constructed by forming vertically stacked mono- and few-layer p–n junctions or lateral monolayer p–n junctions. The bandgap, band alignment, interfacial quality, surface charge transfer, doping, and thickness of the junctions can be intentionally controlled to engineer the heterostructures and thus achieve efficient PV devices.


vdWs heterostructures composed of 2D semiconductors such as graphene and atomically thin TMDs layers are of particular interest for constructing light-harvesting devices for light-electricity conversion. Lattice matching between dissimilar 2D materials, a fundamental constraint for the design of conventional semiconducting heterojunctions, is no longer a significant issue due to the vdWs interlayer interaction. The bandgap of the 2D ultrathin semiconducting TMDs can be tuned through thickness modulation, making them promising light absorbers that are comparable to those of the conventional group IV and III–V semiconductors. Therefore, stacking different TMDs monolayers one on top of another to form heterojunctions with favorable band alignment and broad-spectrum absorption is very intriguing. Several disadvantages that exist in conventional heterojunctions, including interlayer atomic diffusion and interfacial defects, may be avoided in these vdWs heterojunctions. A calculation study predicted that a high absorbance of 5–10% in the visible range could be effectively achieved in an ultrathin (thickness <1 nm) monolayer of TMDs. The absorption of photon fluxes in single-layer TMDs and thick graphene resulted in a Jsc of 2–4.5 mA cm−2, which is comparable to that of photocurrents generated in 15 nm of GaAs or 50 nm of Si. This result can be ascribed to dipole transitions with large joint density of states and oscillator strengths between localized d states with strong spatial overlap. Furthermore, the optical absorption of TMDs heterojunctions with two or more layers showed an improved absorption beyond the simple superimposition of the absorption of individual monolayers (Fig. 7a–d). The absorption properties of TMDs multilayer heterojunctions suggested promising applications in low-cost, flexible, and high-performance PV solar cells. Based on calculations, the TMDs heterojunctions could form a type-II band alignment, where the CBM and the VBM were in two separate materials and the optical properties of monolayers were largely maintained in these heterostructrues. It is also possible to create direct bandgap bilayer heterojunctions for efficient light harvesting, for example, MoS2/MoSe2 and MoS2/WS2 bilayers.

The type-II heterojunctions help to separate the photoexcited electrons and holes, resulting in a reduced interfacial electron–hole recombination. The CBO and VBO provide a driving force for the dissociation of excitons at the junction interface. Thus, it is important to determine the band alignment and band offsets of the heterojunction. The band alignment of monolayer and few-layer TMDs have been studied via theoretical calculations. The TMDs heterostructures with a type-II junction could be developed based on the band alignment information, which is essential for realizing PV devices with high performance. For example, the CBO and VBO of MoS2/WSe2, MoS2/WS2, and MoS2/MoSe2 type-II heterojunctions were estimated to be 0.73 and 0.99 eV, 0.31 and 0.36 eV, and 0.37 and 0.63 eV, respectively. By using the XPS method summarized in Section 2.1, the band alignment of the MoS2/WSe2 heterojunction could be determined and the corresponding VBO was measured to be 0.41 eV, which was smaller than the value obtained from calculations. This result might be explained by the insufficient resolution of the Γ–K splitting from XPS. To overcome this shortcoming, scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) was used to accurately determine the quasi-particle gaps and Γ–K VBM energy splitting, resulting in a CBO and VBO of ∼0.76 and ∼0.83 eV, respectively, which were consistent with the values obtained from theoretical calculations. It was also demonstrated that Anderson's model was valid in vertical 2D TMDs heterojunctions due to the weak vdWs interface, which enables no charge transfer (no Fermi-level pinning). Based on this model, the VBO of the MoS2/WS2 heterojunction was predicted to be 0.5 eV, which was close to the experimental results derived from XPS measurements (0.38 eV).
To realize efficient light-absorption characteristics of TMDs heterojunctions in PV devices, an efficient charge transfer in the device should be achieved to minimize the recombination. For a vdWs TMDs heterojunction composed of two different materials, the photogenerated exciton in a 2D material dissociates to an electron–hole pair that crosses the junction interface but does not necessarily lead to free carriers. Due to the low dielectric constants of 2D TMDs, the Coulomb potential is weekly screened and thus a tightly bound interlayer exciton is created across the interface, i.e., bound electrons and holes that reside in different layers. Based on theoretical calculations, it was predicted that the binding energies of excitons range from 0.5 to 1 eV in TMDs monolayers, which is more than one order of magnitude larger than that in conventional III–V-based quasi-2D semiconducting quantum wells. For most TMDs heterostructures, the conduction and band offsets are smaller than the binding energy of interlayer excitons, resulting in an insufficient driving force for exciton dissociation. However, many experimental studies have revealed that ultrafast charge transfer occurs very efficiently in TMDs heterojunctions. Hong et al. reported that holes from a MoS2 layer could transfer into a WS2 layer within 50 fs after photoexcitation in a MoS2/WS2 heterojunction. Other TMDs based ultrathin heterojunctions such as MoS2/WS2, MoSe2/WSe2, WSe2/WS2, MoS2/MoSe2, and MoS2/WSe2 all demonstrated a fast charge transfer and a long interlayer exciton lifetime. Zhao's group systematically investigated the charge transfer dynamics in MoS2/MoSe2 bilayer, MoS2/WS2/MoSe2 trilayer, and MoS2/WS2/MoSe2/WSe2 four-layer, which showed an efficient and ultrafast charge transfer in the multilayer structures (Fig. 7e–h). The photocarrier lifetime for the tri-layer and four-layer structures was extended to more than one nanosecond, suggesting that the TMDs multilayers could be used to fabricate efficient PV devices. Graphene/WS2 structures also showed the fast injection of photocarriers from WS2 to graphene in 1 ps with near 100% efficiency. These studies indicate that both ultrathin graphene/TMDs and TMDs vdWs heterojunctions are promising structures for PV energy conversion, in which TMDs are used as the photoactive layer and graphene may be applied as an excellent transparent electrode.

The combination of graphene and ultrathin TMDs provides a promising platform to realize the miniaturization of functional electronics and optoelectronics including PV solar cells. Semiconducting TMDs monolayers or multilayers can serve as excellent photoactive materials and graphene as a transparent electrode with tunable electrical properties. Britnell et al. reported the construction of graphene/WS2/graphene junctions to realize an enhanced light–matter interaction and improved photon absorption, and electron–hole generation (Fig. 8a). h-BN with a thickness of 20 nm was chosen as both the substrate and an encapsulating layer, and thus the final structure was h-BN/graphene/WS2/graphene/h-BN on top of an oxidized silicon wafer of flexible polyethylene terephthalate (PET) film. The structure was symmetric in the idealized case and thus the photogenerated electrons/holes had no preferred diffusion direction, resulting in the absence of photocurrent. By introducing a gating or p-doping one of the graphene sheets with a high-concentration of water vapor, a built-in field emerged across the WS2 layer, helping to separate the electron–hole pairs, and promoting the generation of a photocurrent, as shown in Fig. 8b and c. After doping, the photocurrent became finite with Vg = 0, which could be attributed to the shift of the work function of graphene. The I–V curve of the device exhibited a strong gate dependence under illumination, and a large EQE of 30% could be achieved at zero bias and Vg = −40 V (Fig. 8d). The performance of the device could be further enhanced by optimizing the light absorption in the TMDs layer. Yu et al. constructed vertically stacked graphene/MoS2 (∼50 nm)/graphene and graphene/MoS2/metal heterojunctions on SiO2/Si for efficient photocurrent generation, benefiting from the tunable band slope under an external gate voltage (Fig. 8e and f). The Si could be used as a back gate and SiO2 can serve as the gate dielectric. For the graphene/MoS2/graphene structure, the photogenerated excitons in MoS2 could be separated by the asymmetric potential in the top graphene/MoS2 and bottom graphene/MoS2 heterojunctions. Under a zero bias of the back gate, the built-in potential was dependent on the SBH difference between the bottom graphene/MoS2 and the top graphene/MoS2 junctions. The SBH of the bottom graphene/MoS2 junction was higher than that of the top graphene/MoS2 contact, which could likely be attributed to the p-type doping of graphene from the substrate oxide. Thus, the band in the MoS2 layer sloped upward toward the bottom graphene side, leading to a built-in field that drove photogenerated holes to move towards the bottom graphene. The schematic illustration of the band structure under different Vg is presented in Fig. 8h–k. In this case, an obvious PV effect could be observed and a Voc of ∼0.3 V and an Isc of ∼2 μA were obtained under 514 nm laser illumination (80 μW), as shown in Fig. 8g. When an external field was applied on the back-gate electrode (Vbg), the SBH of the bottom graphene/MoS2 junction could be effectively tuned due to the limited density of states in graphene and the weak electrostatic screening effect. A negative Vbg increased the work function of the bottom graphene and thus the SBH of bottom graphene/MoS2 increased, resulting in an enhanced electron–hole separation. In contrast, the positive Vbg decreased the SBH of the bottom graphene/MoS2 junction and the electron–hole separation was suppressed. An EQE of ∼27% could be achieved with a Vbg of −60 V and the excitation laser (514 nm) power was <5 μW. Furthermore, the photocurrent could be further modulated and the polarity of the photocurrent could be switched by an external gate field in a dual-gate configuration, in which another gate was applied on the top graphene using HfO2 as an insulator dielectric layer and another graphene layer as a top gate electrode. The authors also developed a graphene/MoS2/Ti asymmetrical heterojunction for enhanced photocurrent generation. In this configuration, the Schottky junction was formed at the bottom graphene/MoS2 junction and the MoS2/Ti contact formed an ohmic contact. Similarly, a negative Vbg could increase the work function of bottom graphene and so did the SBH of bottom graphene/MoS2 junction. With a Vbg of −1 V, a maximum EQE of 55% could be obtained at an excitation wavelength of 488 nm (∼5 μW). From calculations, Bernardi et al. demonstrated that a TMDs monolayer with a thickness <1 nm could absorb as much sunlight as 50 nm Si, suggesting an excellent absorption of the ultrathin layer. The calculation results also implied that the bilayer of the graphene/MoS2 and WS2/MoS2 junctions could serve in PV solar cells due to the formation of Schottky barriers and type-II heterojunctions, respectively. The PCE of the graphene/MoS2 and WS2/MoS2 junctions were predicted to be 0.1–1.0% and 0.4–1.5% based on the calculations, respectively. Several strategies had been suggested to improve the performance, including the introduction of a back metallic contact to achieve a double pass of light, the employment of multilayer graphene and MoS2 (e.g. three layers) for enhanced absorption and the modulation of the bandgap of TMDs by changing the number of layers. Based on a glass/Au/WS2 (∼30 nm)/graphene structure, the number of graphene layer was tuned to optimize the PV performance of the devices. It was found that the multilayer graphene contributed to the suppression of the dark current of the device and thus enhanced the SBH of the junction. With a multilayer graphene, a Voc of 0.7 V, a Jsc of 16 mA cm−2, and a PCE of 3.3% were obtained. Gao et al. reported a gate-tunable rectification inversion and polarity inversion based on graphene/WSe2 heterojunctions. An obvious PV effect was observed in this heterojunction and thus the structure can be used as a solar cell and photodetector. The PCE of the device was measured to be 0.27% and the EQE could reach up to 15% under zero bias and 532 nm illumination. Combining graphene with TMDs alloys such as WS2xSe2−2x or Mo1−xWxSe2 provided additional options for PV applications since the bandgap, CBM, and VBM of alloys could be adjusted by varying the value of x. The Pd/Mo0.5W0.5Se/graphene heterojunction was reported to show a significant PV effect, demonstrating the potential of TMDs alloys based Schottky junctions for high-performance PV devices with improved band alignment and light absorption.


The combination of various ultrathin TMDs layers in vertical and lateral configurations has recently been extensively investigated since attractive physicochemical characteristics are expected to lead to promising applications for optoelectronic devices. The vertically stacked junctions can be prepared by vdWs interactions and lateral structures were formed through the covalent bonding of different TMDs materials. The vertically stacked or lateral TMDs homo/hetero junctions enable a vast number of possibilities for designing and fabricating PV devices with tailored properties.


The lack of dangling bonds on the surfaces of the mono- and few-layer ultrathin layered 2D materials (e.g. graphene and TMDs) makes them excellent candidates for developing vdWs junctions. The availability of TMDs with tunable bandgaps and energy band positions allows for a wide range of modulation for the optoelectronic properties of the vdWs heterostructures. Thus, the heterojunctions prepared by stacking ultrathin vdWs materials provide an important building block for the construction of practical PV devices.


Engineering the carrier type is critically important for constructing p–n homojunctions with TMDs layers for high-performance PV devices. Since MoS2, WS2 and MoSe2 are inherently n-type and WSe2 and MoTe2 are p-type, the chemical treatment of TMDs is of fundamental importance to tune the intrinsic carrier type and enable a wide range of optoelectronic devices for solar energy conversion. This approach is similar to what has been previously explored for III–V nanostructures, organic molecules and polymers, carbon nanotubes and graphene. The absorbed O2 and H2O on TMDs were reported to deplete n-type MoS2 and MoSe2, leading to a decreased electrostatic screening and an enhancement of PL. In contrast, O2 and H2O accumulated the majority holes in p-type WSe2 and resulted in a reduced PL. NO2 molecules could serve as a p-type surface dopant for WSe2, thus making it possible to tune the electrical properties of TMDs through covalent functionalization. The n-doping of MoS2 could be realized by the adsorption of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH), benzyl viologen (BV), cesium carbonate (Cs2CO3), and graphene quantum dots (GQDs). In particular, it was reported that the n-doping of MoS2 enhanced the formation of negative trions and reduced the charge recombination of photoexcited electron–hole pairs, which resulted in a suppressed PL. In contrast, the PL intensity of MoS2 was enhanced by the surface modification of p-type dopants of 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4TCNQ) and 7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (TCNQ). The chloride molecular doping of few-layer WS2 and MoS2 and the potassium doping of MoS2 and WSe2 were reported to reduce the contact resistance in the few-layer TMDs. Thus, the chemical doping opened up many opportunities to modulate the optical and electrical properties of 2D TMDs, which were particularly critical for developing solar energy conversion devices. Wi et al. developed a novel approach to creating built-in potentials inside the TMDs layers that could enhance the separation and collection of photogenerated carriers. The multilayer MoS2 (∼10–140 nm) was treated with plasma (e.g., O2, SF6, CF4, and CHF3) and the outmost layer could be converted into p-type MoS2. The resulting vertically stacked Au/p-doped MoS2/n-type MoS2/ITO device exhibited a substantial PV effect and the authors demonstrated that the PV effect mainly originated from the p-doped MoS2/n-MoS2 junction. The Jsc of the PV devices was increased with the MoS2 thickness in the range of 10–120 nm, which could be ascribed to the enhanced absorption in the thicker MoS2 layer. With a MoS2 thickness greater than 210 nm the Jsc decreased, likely due to the limited diffusion lengths of photogenerated carriers. In that study, it was found that the CHF3 plasma-doped PV solar cells showed the best performance, with a PCE up to 2.8% under AM 1.5G illumination. To study the thickness-dependent electrical behavior of a vertical p–n homojunction, a two-step doping process was applied on MoS2 flakes to achieve a p-doping on the top side and an n-doping on the bottom side of MoS2. The top surface was doped to create a p-type MoS2 by AuCl3 and the bottom surface was doped to form n-type MoS2 through benzyl viologen (BV) (Fig. 9a). For the MoS2 flakes with a thickness greater than 8 nm, the potential barrier in the p–n junction could be effectively tuned and a current rectifying could be achieved. However, for the flakes with a thickness smaller than 8 nm, tunneling-dominated “reversed” rectification occurred. The resulting MoS2 (11 nm) p–n junction could function as a solar cell and a Voc of 0.6 V, a Jsc of 3 mA cm−2, FF of 0.22, and a PCE of 0.4% were realized under AM 1.5G simulator, as presented in Fig. 9b. It was found that the ultimate thickness and scaling limits for the vertical MoS2 p–n homojunction was 3 nm, in which the chemical doping depth was 1.5 nm. Jin et al. reported the fabrication of p-type semiconducting MoS2 through a conventional elemental doping (Nb-doping) process on intrinsic MoSe2 semiconductors. By vertical stacking of the p-type MoSe2 (2.9 nm) and n-type MoSe2 (3.2 nm), a homojunction with ideal diode properties (ideality factor: ∼1) was obtained. The ideal diode properties could be attributed to a low charge trap density at the heterointerface. The homojunction exhibited a Voc of ∼0.35 V and Jsc of ∼0.2 nA under light illumination (λ = 405 nm, 890 W m−2). A high EQE of 1049% was obtained with Vg = 0 V and Vds = 1 V. By the few-layer stacking of n-type MoS2:Fe (6 nm) and p-type MoS2:Nb (9 nm), a vertical homojunction was constructed and its PV performance could be tuned by a gate voltage. With a negative Vg, the n-type MoS2 tended to be depleted and the p-type region accumulated carriers, resulting in a reduced Vbi and narrowed space charge region. In contrast, the positive Vg resulted in an increased thickness of the space charge region. The homojunction showed a peak EQE of 4.7% and a maximum Voc of 0.51 V under illumination (660 nm). The structure had also been integrated into a transparent and flexible substrate to get an EQE of 1.5%.

Considering that the energy bandgaps of 2D layered materials are also dependent on the thickness, the band structure (band offset) would also be affected by the thickness. The thickness-dependent band structure of TMDs provides a new platform for designing junctions with the PV effect, due to the discontinuities in energy bands existing at the interface of thin films with different thicknesses. Therefore, it is expected that thickness engineering will be used to construct TMDs films that have different numbers of layers in different regions, resulting in functional PV devices. Howell et al. investigated the junction between monolayer (1L) and multilayer (ML) MoS2 and found that the 1L/ML junctions exhibited a rectifying effect in a consistent direction. Based on the finite element device simulations, a type-II band alignment at the 1L/ML junctions was suggested to explain the rectifying electrical properties and the photocurrent response under bias. He et al. developed an innovative PV device based on layered MoSe2. The PV behavior originated from the neighboring MoSe2 domains that varied in layer thickness. MoSe2 homojunctions with a configuration of 1L–2L (L: layer), 2L–3L, and 3L–4L could be prepared by a CVD method under different growth temperatures (Fig. 9c). The first-principle electronic structure calculations based on DFT indicated that the 1L–2L junction was a type-II junction, with CBM situated on the monolayer and the VBM located on the bilayer. A direct bandgap of 1.48 eV for the monolayer region and an indirect bandgap of 1.18 eV in the bilayer region were obtained. The band offset in the 1L–2L junction was calculated to be ∼0.4 eV, which decreased to 0.2 eV in the 2L–3L junction, as shown in the inset of Fig. 9d. The 1L–2L junction exhibited the strongest rectification behavior with a Voc of 148 mV, an Isc of 76.6 pA, and FF of 0.28 (Fig. 9c), providing a unique method for creating ultrathin junctions, without the requirement of deliberate alignment, stacking, or doping in conventional p–n or Schottky junctions. MoSe2 homojunctions fabricated with MoSe2 flakes with different thicknesses were also reported to exhibit significant PV effects through gate modulation. By introducing a negative back gate (−20 V), the built-in field at the interface of the flakes could be enhanced, resulting in a Voc of 0.24 V and a PCE of 1.9% (14.4 mW cm−2). The novel and facile TMDs homojunction solar cells achieved by thickness manipulation paved a new route for developing new types of solar energy conversion devices.

The vdWs heterojunction made of two different TMDs presents another promising way to develop PV solar cells. The investigation of vertically stacked ultrathin TMDs heterojunction PV diodes was mainly based on the WSe2/MoS2 structure. By using a dual-gate architecture, the interlayer band-to-band tunneling in vertically stacked WSe2/MoS2 heterojunctions was demonstrated and the electric potential and carrier concentration of the TMDs layers could be tuned independently by the two gates. The weak electrostatic screening in atomically thin layers also allowed the modulation of interlayer band alignments with a high gate coupling efficiency. Furchi et al. reported the realization of type-II heterojunctions based on MoS2 and WS2, and an atomically thin PV device could be obtained under appropriate gate bias. The optical bandgaps of MoS2 and WS2 were estimated to be ∼1.85 eV and ∼1.65 eV, respectively. Thus, electronic bandgaps of ∼2.35 eV and ∼2.15 eV could be obtained if a large exciton binding energy of ∼0.5 eV was considered. When the two layers were in contact with each other, an atomically sharp vdWs heterojunction was developed; the lowest energy electron states were situated in the MoS2 layer and the highest energy hole states were positioned in the WSe2 layer, leading to a type-II heterojunction. When the heterojunction was illuminated by light with a photon energy greater than the optical bandgap of the TMDs, excitons were generated in both monolayers. The excitons dissociation was driven by the CBO and VBO between the two contacted TMDs, creating holes in WS2 and electrons in MoS2. The mechanism was analogous to the case with excitonic solar cells (DSSC), which was summarized in Section 2.3. The authors also confirmed that the photocurrent indeed originated from the laterally extended heterojunction instead of the metal-semiconductor contacts. A PCE of ∼0.2% was obtained for the MoS2/WS2 heterojunction with Vg = −50 V. Lee et al. also constructed a WSe2/MoS2 type-II heterojunction to form an ultrathin p–n junction (Fig. 9e and f). The band alignments of the MoS2/WSe2 junction in the lateral and vertical directions with a forward bias of 0.6 V were presented based on simulations, as shown in Fig. 9g and h. Under forward bias, most of the voltage drop occurred in the vertical p–n junction and no obvious potential barriers could be observed in the lateral transport direction within MoS2 and WSe2 layers. With a reverse bias, the band bending led to a substantial potential barrier in the lateral direction. A tunneling-mediated interlayer recombination was considered to be the main process to govern the current under forward bias. The interlayer recombination could be described by two possible processes, Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination and Langevin recombination. The PV performance was gate tunable and the device reached its maximum at Vg = 0 and decreased as the Vg varied (increased or decreased). The pronounced photoluminescence (PL) quenching and photocurrent generation in the heterojunction suggested that there was a rapid dissociation of excitons at the junction, which was faster compared to the case within the layers. Although the photocarriers separated into different layers after the exciton dissociation, the majority carriers restrained in each layer could also recombine with each other through inelastic tunneling. To reduce the interlayer recombination, graphene transparent electrodes were applied on the top and bottom of the vertical p–n junction, resulting in a direct vertical charge transfer, avoiding the carrier diffusion in the lateral direction. In this configuration, the p–n diode characteristics could also be modulated by the number of layers in the heterojunction. Consequently, the vertical p–n junction composed of two multilayers (10/9 nm) exhibited a PV response with a Voc = ∼0.5 V. The EQE of the monolayer, bilayer, and multilayer p–n junctions at 532 nm were 2.4%, 12%, and 34%, respectively. To extend the absorption of the WSe2/MoS2 heterojunction, a graphene layer was inserted into the heterojunction to form WSe2/graphene/MoS2 PV devices. The device exhibited a broadband photoresponse in the visible to infrared range, benefiting from the absorption of graphene. Wong et al. constructed few-layer graphene (0.6 nm)/WSe2 (9 nm)/MoS2 (3 nm)/Au heterostructure and the optoelectronic characteristics were studied. The effect of optical absorption and electronic transport on the efficiency of charge collection could be analyzed separately. In that study, a high EQE of >50% could be obtained, which could be ascribed to the efficient electronic charge carrier collection and high optical absorption (absorption >90% in the range from 500 to 600 nm). A graphene top contact was used for realizing a vertical carrier collection and thus the carrier propagation distance was reduced, resulting in an improvement of photovoltage and photocurrent. The maximum single wavelength (633 nm, 740 W cm−2) PCE was 3.4% and the PCE under AM 1.5G was estimated to be ∼0.4%. The high EQE value suggested that ultrathin TMDs PV solar cells with high PCE should be possible through carefully engineering the absorption, charge generation and collection. By replacing MoS2 with a lower bandgap semiconductor MoSe2 (1.55 eV), the resulting trilayer WSe2/MoSe2 heterojunction was reported to be more efficient compared to the WSe2/MoS2 junction. The device exhibited a Voc of ∼0.46 V and a Isc up to 0.04 nA under illumination with a wavelength of 633 nm (320 W cm−2). The WSe2/MoSe2 heterojunction showed a much higher EQE in the wavelength range of 750–850 nm, compared to that of the WSe2/MoS2 structure, indicating that the low bandgap enabled a more efficient light absorption. Monolayer α-MoTe2 has a direct optical bandgap of 1.1 eV, thus it was expected to achieve excellent absorption towards PV energy conversion. Pezeshki et al. constructed few layered α-MoTe2/MoS2 heterojunctions by direct imprinting and studied the PV response. The resulting 3L-α-MoTe2/3L-MoS2 showed a type-II heterojunction and the difference between the CBM of MoS2 and the VBM of α-MoTe2 was estimated to be ∼0.35 eV. A Voc of 0.3 V and an Isc of 200 nA were achieved based on the device under the illumination of 800 nm IR light (120 mW). Furthermore, the device exhibited a high EQE of 85% under zero-bias from blue photons, demonstrating that this structure is promising for PV energy conversion. Based on the Bi2Te3(0.16 eV)/MoS2 heterojunction, it was found that the photocurrent could be generated in the near IR range of 0.75 eV, implying that the interlayer charge separation was the main factor for the PV energy conversion. A PCE of 20% and 0.2% could be achieved under the excitation of 2.33 eV and 1.17 eV, respectively, suggesting its promising application in PV devices.


Although promising PV performance was achieved on the vertically stacked ultrathin graphene and/or TMDs based devices, the quality of the vdWs junction was affected by the uncontrolled stacking orientation, contaminants, defects, and quenching centers introduced during the multiple-step transfer process. Thus, the ultrathin lateral junction with edge contacts is a promising configuration due to its easier modulation of band offset and the large active area of the surface.


In 2014, Mueller's group reported the formation of the monolayer WSe2 (1.64 eV) lateral p–n junction through electrostatic doping. Two different regions of a single WSe2 flake were tuned by corresponding gate electrodes, and thus the p–n junction was realized on the same flake by applying a positive voltage on one gate and a negative voltage on the other. Fig. 10a shows the device schematic and Ids–Vds characteristics measured in the p–n and n–p configuration under white light illumination. Palladium with a high work function was used as the anode for hole injection, and electron injection was achieved by the Ti cathode that had a low work function. By applying one gate with a voltage of −40 V and the other with a voltage of 40 V, a p–n junction with an obvious rectifying behavior was observed. When the device served as an n- or p-type resistor, the I–V curves were not affected by light. It could be confirmed that the photoresponse was from the WSe2 p–n junction instead of the metal electrode/WSe2 Schottky contacts. The p–n junction exhibited a Voc of ∼0.8 V, FF of 0.5, and a PCE of 0.5% (Fig. 10b), indicating that this system could serve as an attractive semi-transparent solar cell due to its large transparency (∼95%). Based on this structure, an electrically driven light emission also could be achieved, which was realized in other studies using a similar configuration. Furthermore, Baugher et al. also demonstrated a double gated WSe2 p–n junction that showed a pronounced PV effect with one gate biased at −10 V and the other biased at 10 V, resulting in an EQE of 0.2% at 522 nm, and a Voc in the range of 0.5–0.75 V at 700 nm with laser power of 2–10 μW. Groenendijk et al. investigated the photocurrent generation mechanisms based on a double-gated WSe2 device. A large Voc of 0.7 V could be obtained under above-bandgap illumination in the p–n configuration. The results suggested that the double-gated WSe2 p–n junction could generate a substantial PV effect and lead to a large Voc, which is promising for solar cells. Based on a double-gated lateral MoSe2 (∼10 atomic layers) p–n junction on an h-BN layer, a pronounced PV effect could be observed with a Vg1 = 5 V and Vg2 = −5 V under AM 1.5G illumination. Besides the double-gated configuration, Li et al. introduced a novel vertically stacked WSe2/h-BN/graphene structure to realize a stable non-volatile programmable p–n junction. The p–n junction was produced along the WSe2 by controlling the voltage pulse on the gate. As shown in Fig. 10c, when a positive voltage was applied on the Si gate, electrons piled up in the WSe2 layer and the electrons would tunnel from the WSe2 to graphene due to the creation of positive electrical potential between WSe2 and graphene. After the positive gate voltage was removed, the accumulated electrons in the WSe2 disappeared but the tunnelled electrons in graphene remained because of the potential barriers provided by h-BN. Thus, the tunnelled electrons in graphene created mirror-image charges (holes) in the WSe2 over the graphene, resulting in the formation of p-doped WSe2 over the graphene region. The resulting lateral WSe2 p–n junction with a 20 V voltage pulse biased on the Si gate showed a Voc of ∼0.8 V, FF of 0.53, and a PCE of 4.1% under the illumination of 638 nm (6.8 nW), as shown in Fig. 10d. This work presents the advantages of the non-volatile p–n junctions based on all 2D crystal heterostructures, which can be applied in other 2D materials such as WSe1.2Te0.8 and black phosphorus (BP).

Considering that the local gating was limited in its scalability and universality, modulating the work function of 2D materials by chemical doping and surface functionalization could improve the scalability and integration of devices. The MoS2 lateral p–n junction could be obtained by converting a portion of the MoS2 surface area into the p-type through AuCl3 doping. The resulting MoS2 p–n junction showed an EQE of 15% at 500 nm with Vds = 0.1 V, indicating that the chemical doping is a promising method for achieving high-performance TMDs PV devices. Ajayan's group reported an innovative functionalization method to tune the electronic properties of 2D materials through a Lewis acid–base reaction, which would not change the topological properties of the ultrathin layers. The atoms on the surface of many 2D materials have a fully occupied orbital and thus lead to an inert 2D surface. However, those atoms on the surface usually terminate with lone pair electrons, allowing Lewis acids to attach and form a stable coordinate covalent bond. Taking n-type InSe as an example, the Lewis acid metallic ion Ti4+ possesses an empty orbital that can be occupied by the lone pair electrons of Se, resulting in the formation of p-type [Ti4+n(InSe)] coordination complexes. By using this idea, a lateral InSe p–n junction can be developed for PV energy conversion by a one-step fabrication method on a single InSe flake, with the Ti-coordinated part serving as the p-type region and the pristine part serving as the n-type region, as shown in Fig. 10e and f. This method can also be extended to other 2D materials such as MoS2 and MoSe2. For example, after Ti4+ treatment, the lone pair electrons of sulphur in the MoS2 system entered the empty orbitals of Ti4+ and the Fermi level of MoS2 shifted downwards, leading to an effective p-doping. The method provides a great advantage to form large-scale lateral p–n junctions for high-performance PV application without the requirement of a delicate alignment and a well-controlled growth process.

The construction of lateral heterojunctions between different 2D materials makes it possible to realize band engineering within the 2D plane. In view of this, a variety of lateral heterostructures of monolayer TMDs have been synthesized, including MoS2/WS2, MoSe2/WSe2, WSe2/MoS2, MoS2/MoSe2, and WS2/WSe2. The high-quality in-plane heterostructures of TMDs monolayers with one-dimensional (1D) interfaces fabricated by the epitaxial growth process opened a new avenue for novel solar energy conversion devices with controllable interfaces and junctions. Huang et al. reported the growth of high quality lateral MoSe2/WSe2 heterojunctions by lateral heteroepitaxy through physical vapor transport using a mixture of MoSe2 and WSe2 powder as the material source. The obtained lateral heterojunction exhibited enhanced photoluminescence, which could likely be attributed to the trapping of excitons by defects or enhanced radiative recombination at the heterointerface. A type-II band alignment was expected at the junction and thus the band offsets enabled the dissociation of excitons at the interface, realizing a PV device. Duan et al. reported the growth of lateral MoS2/MoSe2 and WS2/WSe2 heterojunctions by in situ modulation of vapor-phase reactants during the growth of 2D materials. The vapor-phase reactants could be switched in situ and thus the lateral epitaxial growth of the TMDs heterojunction was achieved by avoiding the limitations that exist in simple sequential growth processes. The resulting n-type WS2 and p-type WSe2 heterostructure could serve as a photodiode with an obvious photocurrent response. The device showed a Voc of 0.47 V, Isc of 1.2 nA, and an EQE of 9.9% under illumination (514 nm, 30 nW). From photocurrent mapping, it was found that the photocurrent was localized to the WS2 and WS2/WSe2 interface region, confirming that the depletion layer was mainly localized to the WS2 in the lateral heterojunction. By using a one-step vapor phase growth process, vertically stacked bilayers and lateral WS2/MoS2 heterojunctions could be realized under different growth temperatures. In this work, a higher temperature (850 °C) led to the formation of a vertically stacked WS2/MoS2 structure with preferred 2H stacking, however, a lateral WS2/MoS2 structure with an atomically sharp heterojunction was created at a lower temperature of 650 °C. A strong localized PL enhancement was observed in the lateral structure, which could be ascribed to the enhanced excitonic recombination of the as-separated electron–hole pairs at the heterointerface. The localized interfacial excitonic enhancement could be attributed to the strong built-in field at the junction interface benefiting from the type-II band alignment. The lateral WS2/MoS2 heterojunction was demonstrated to be an intrinsic monolayer p–n junction, resulting in an obvious PV effect without the application of gate voltage. A Voc of 0.12 V and Isc of 5.7 pA were achieved under illumination, as shown in Fig. 10g. The same group also developed a two-step method to prepare a WSe2/MoSe2 bilayer with WSe2 epitaxial growth along the edges and on the top surface of MoSe2. MoSe2 was first prepared on a substrate and then transferred to another CVD setup for WSe2 growth. During the second step of growth, both first and second layer WSe2 tended to grow from the edge regions of the underlayer MoSe2, resulting in the formation of heterostructures with WSe2 bilayers at the edges and a MoSe2 monolayer at the center. A longer growth time led to the full covering of MoSe2 by WSe2. The former heterostructure could serve as a p–n junction due to the built-in field created at the p-type WSe2 and n-type MoSe2 lateral interface. A Voc of 55 mV and an IPCE of 0.12% could be realized under illumination (514 nm, 619 mW cm−2). Although several TMDs based lateral heterojunctions had been constructed, alloy structures might form in the interface regions due to the coexistence of precursors during growth in the one-step fabricating process. A two-step method allowed the growth of a lateral junction with a larger diversity. Li et al. developed a two-step epitaxial growth process to prepare lateral WSe2/MoS2 heterostructures, where WSe2 was grown on substrates first and then the epitaxial growth of MoS2 was achieved along the edge of WSe2 (Fig. 10h). The depletion width of the atomically sharp WSe2/MoS2 junction was measured to be ∼320 nm. To construct a device for electrical measurement, the heterostructure was transferred onto SiO2/Si substrates and Pd and Ti/Au were coated on WSe2 and MoS2 as electrodes, respectively. The p–n junction exhibited a Voc of 0.22 V, an Isc of 7.7 pA, FF of 0.39, and a PCE of 0.2% under white light illumination (1 mW cm−2), as shown in Fig. 10i. By using a similar two-step growth method, Tsai et al. reported the construction of alloy-free monolayer WSe2/MoS2 lateral p–n junctions for PV energy conversion. The authors demonstrated that the lateral heterojunction possessed an atomically sharp interface in the absence of the interdiffusion of atoms, which was critical for creating a high-quality interface without altering the optoelectronic/electrical characteristics. The PV device exhibited a record PCE of 2.56%, which was the highest compared to other 2D monolayer lateral heterojunctions. The high PCE might be attributed to the high quality atomically sharp interface. The parallel circuit design implied that this structure could be integrated into large-scale solar modules for high-performance solar cells. Furthermore, the lateral p–n junctions showed excellent omnidirectional light harvesting characteristics with only 5% reduction of PCE at a high angle of incidence of 75°. The promising properties could result in extensive interest in the investigation of monolayer lateral heterostructures for high-performance PV devices. The selected representative results of graphene and TMDs based 2D/3D and 2D/2D heterojunction solar cells are summarized in Table 2.

Heterojunction type
Device structure
Modification

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE or EQE
Ref.
2D/3D junctions
Graphene/n-Si
—
6.5
∼0.48
0.56
PCE: 1.7% (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2)

161

Graphene/n-Si
TFSA doping
25.3
0.54
0.63
PCE: 8.6% (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2)

89

TiO2/graphene/n-Si
TiO2 antireflective coating and HNO3 doping
32.7
0.612
0.72
PCE: 14.5% (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2)

189

Au–graphene/n-Si
Au nanoparticles decorating and TFSA doping
27.7
0.56
0.79
PCE: 12.3% (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2)

187

Graphene/SiO2/n-Si
Interfacial layer, TiO2 antireflective coating and AuCl3 doping
36.7
0.595
0.72
PCE: 15.6% (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2)

192

Graphene/p-Zn3P2
Gate modulation (Vg = 2 V)
7.5
0.53
0.53
PCE: 1.9% (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2)

209

Graphene/p-InP
Gate modulation (Vg = 20 V) and viologen doping
23.9
0.67
0.35
5.6% (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2)

207

Graphene/n-GaAs
Gate modulation (Vg = −15 V), layer engineering and TFSA doping
27.1
0.96
0.71
PCE: 18.5% (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2)

205

Graphene/n-GaAs
Surface plasmon, TFSA doping and Al2O3 antireflective coating
28.6
0.82
0.69
PCE:16.2% (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2)

206

MoS2/p-Si
—
22.36
0.41
0.57
PCE: 5.23% (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2)

213

MoS2/p-InP
Gate modulation (Vg = 6 V)
27.4
0.47
0.55
PCE: 7.1% (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2)

219

MoS2/p-InP
GQDs decorating
26.0
0.35
0.46
PCE: 4.1% (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2)

220

MoS2/h-BN/n-GaAs
Interfacial layer, AuCl3 doping and gate modulation (Vg = −1 V)
21.1
0.76
0.56
PCE: 9.03% (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2)

218

MoS2/i-SiO2/p-Si
Interfacial layer
5.5
0.3
0.42
PCE: 4.5% (15.0 mW cm−2)

216

MoS2/p-Si
Al2O3 passivation layer
4.29
0.34
0.43
PCE: 5.6% (deep ultraviolet light, 11 mW cm−2)

217

2D/2D junctions
Vertical graphene/MoS2 junction
—
—
0.1–0.5
0.3–0.6
PCE: 0.1–1.0% (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2)

112

Vertical graphene/MoS2/graphene junction
Gate modulation (Vg = −60 V)
∼5 μA
∼0.3
—
EQE: 27% (514 nm, <5 μW)

243

Vertical graphene/MoS2/Ti junction
Gate modulation (Vg = −1 V)
∼6 μA
∼0.2
—
EQE: 55% (488 nm, 5 μW)

243

Vertical WS2/MoS2 junction
—
3.5
0.5–1
0.3–0.6
PCE: 0.4–1.5% (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2)

112

Vertical graphene (multilayer)/WS2 junction
—
16
0.7
—
PCE: 3.3% (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2)

244

Vertical p-MoS2/n-MoS2 junction
—
11.3
0.13
0.23
PCE: 0.34% (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2)

260

Vertical p-MoS2/n-MoS2 junction
CHF3 doping
20.9
0.28
0.47
PCE: 2.8% (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2)

260

Vertical WSe2/MoS2 junction
Gate modulation (Vg = −50 V)
∼0.05 nA
∼0.56
∼0.5
PCE: ∼0.2% (white light, 6400 W m−2)

267

Vertical graphene/MoS2/WSe2/graphene junction
Gate modulation (Vg = 0 V)
∼0.84 μA
∼0.5
—
EQE: 34% for multilayer–multilayer (10/9 nm) junction (532 nm)

268

Vertical WSe2/MoS2 junction
Gate modulation (Vg = 0)
∼0.22 μA
∼0.27
—
EQE: 11% (514 nm, 5 μW)

269

Vertical p-MoS2/n-MoS2 junction
Dual-doping (AuCl3 and benzyl viologen dopants)
3.0
0.6
0.22
PCE: 0.4% (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2)

261

Vertical MoSe2 junction
Gate modulation (Vg = 0 V)
∼0.2 nA μm−2
0.35
—
EQE: ∼1049% (405 nm, 890 W m−2, Vds = 1 V)

262

Layered MoSe2 junction
Layer engineering (1–2 layers)
76.6 pA (543 nm, ∼100 mW cm−2)
0.148
0.28
—

265

Vertical MoS2/graphene/WSe2 junction
Gate modulation (Vg = 0 V)
∼80 nA (488 nm, 25 μW)
∼0.23
—
EQE: 1.0 × 106 (532 nm, 0.2 nW, Vds = 1 V)

272

Vertical α-MoTe2/MoS2 junction
—
∼0.2 μA (800 nm, 120 mW)
0.3
—
EQE: 85% (470 nm, 3 mW)

275

Vertical n-MoS2:Fe/p-MoS2:Nb junction
Gate modulation (Vg = 0 V)
3.3
0.51
0.46
EQE: 4.7% (660 nm, 130 mW cm2)

263

Vertical MoS2/WSe2 junction
Gate modulation (Vg = 0 V)
∼0.8 (white light, ∼4 mW cm−2)
0.34
—
—

270

Vertical WSe2/MoS2 junction
—
8.1
0.118
0.42
PCE: 0.4% (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2)

273

Lateral WSe2 p–n junction
Dual gate modulation (Vg1 = −40 V, Vg2 = 40 V)
∼20 pA
∼0.8
0.5
PCE: ∼0.5% (halogen lamp, 1400 W m−2)

277

Lateral WSe2 junction
Dual gate modulation (Vg1 = −10 V, Vg2 = 10 V)
∼1.5 nA (700 nm, 10 μW)
∼0.5 (700 nm, 10 μW)
—
EQE: 0.2% (522 nm, 2 μW)

279

Lateral WS2/MoS2 junction
—
∼5.7 pA
∼0.12
—
—

287

Lateral WS2/WSe2 junction
—
∼1.2 nA
∼0.47
—
EQE: ∼9.9% (514 nm, 30 nW)

286

Lateral WSe2/MoS2 junction
—
7.7 pA
0.22
0.39
PCE: 0.2% (white light, 1 mW cm−2)

293

Lateral WSe2/MoSe2 junction
—
∼0.05 nA
0.055
—
IPCE: 0.12% (514 nm, 619 mW cm−2)

292

Lateral WSe2/MoS2 junction
—
0.71 nA
0.39
0.37
PCE: 2.56% (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2)

294

Vertical WSe2/h-BN/graphene structure for lateral WSe2 junction
Gate modulation (+20 V voltage pulse)
∼0.6 nA
∼0.8
0.53
PCE: 4.1% (638 nm, 6.8 nW)

282

Besides the heterostructures formed between TMDs thin layers, TMDs could also be combined with other promising materials such as black phosphorus and organic molecules. The monolayers or few-layers of black phosphorus are promising in optoelectronics applications due to the high mobility, ambipolar operation, and thickness-dependent direct bandgap. It was reported that the p-type black phosphorus/n-type monolayer MoS2 p–n junction exhibited a PV effect with an EQE of 0.3% at the wavelength of 633 nm, providing a new opportunity for broadband solar energy conversion. Combining TMDs with organic molecules provided another pathway towards efficient p–n junctions, in which the absorption cross-section and charge transfer processes could be tuned by choosing appropriate organic molecules. The pentacene/MoS2 heterojunction was revealed to show a type-II band alignment, an ultrafast charge transfer, and long-lived charge-separated state in the heterojunction, suggesting that the heterojunction was a potential PV structure for solar energy application. The construction of devices based on p-type Cu–phthalocyanine/n-type MoS2 and p-type dioctylbenzothienobenzothiophene (C8-BTBT)/n-type MoS2 heterojunctions had been realized for solar energy conversions. The obtained heterojunctions were highly tunable by bias and gate voltages, resulting in a Voc of 0.5–0.6 V and a PCE of <0.7%. The integration between organic semiconductors with 2D TMDs opened up more possibilities for PV devices due to the vast library of organic molecules.

In pursuit of efficient and durable photoelectrodes for PEC water splitting, a number of semiconductors have been extensively studied as photoelectrodes to produce solar-driven hydrogen. Various semiconductors including TiO2, Fe2O3, Si, g-C3N4, BiVO4, Ta3N5 and Cu2O have been intensively investigated as efficient absorbers for PEC applications. However, there are still many challenges to be addressed, including the effective utilization of visible light, the suppression of the recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs, and the enhancement of chemical stability under light irradiation in electrolyte solutions. Most photoelectrodes are thermodynamically vulnerable to photo-corrosion. One of the most common approaches to resolving these issues is to deposit protective layers such as TiO2 on the semiconductors to form durable multilayer heterojunction structures. Conformal layers of TiO2 formed by atomic layer deposition (ALD) have been used to stabilize both photoanodes and photocathodes. Moreover, noble metals such as Pt, Ru, and Ir are used as PEC cocatalysts, in the form of nanoparticles or thin films, to catalyze the water-splitting reaction, but their effectiveness, the complex preparation process, high cost, and scarcity greatly limit their large-scale deployment. As such, novel and efficient protective and catalytic layers such as 2D materials (graphene and TMDs) for the construction of low cost, high-efficiency, and stable photoelectrodes are highly desired.


The combination of transparent graphene and semiconductors such as Si can form a Schottky barrier for effective charge carrier separation. Furthermore, graphene can serve as an excellent protective layer on semiconductors for chemical reactions in electrolyte solutions. Thus, on the basis of graphene's unique atom-thick 2D structure and remarkable physicochemical properties, integrating graphene with 3D semiconductors presents the possibility to simultaneously realize excellent stability, transparency, conductivity, and catalytic activity of PEC devices.


Mitigating the photocorrosion of the light absorber material used for PEC solar water splitting is an important subject of PEC applications. As a result of photocorrosion, the lifetime and performance of photocatalysts are significantly decreased over the long term photocatalytic operation. An alternative approach to curb the photocorrosion is the use of suitable protective layers on the electrode. Graphene is chemically inert, optically transparent, and can be easily applied to semiconductor surfaces over large areas, making it an ideal protective coating layer to improve the photocorrosion resistance of photocatalysts. Lewis's group demonstrated that graphene remarkably enhanced the stability of silicon photoelectrodes in an aqueous solution containing K3[Fe(CN)6]/K4[Fe(CN)6] under illumination, even in the challenging case of anodic operation. The graphene/n-Si electrodes showed stable short-circuit photocurrent densities of over 10 mA cm−2 for >1000 s of continuous operation in aqueous electrolytes, whereas n-Si-H electrodes yielded a nearly complete decay of the current density within ∼100 s. It was suggested that no buried junctions were formed between Si and graphene because the values of Voc and the flat-band potentials of the Si were a function of both the Fermi level of graphene and the redox potential of the electrolyte. The PEC behavior of single layer graphene-covered n-GaAs (graphene/n-GaAs) photoanodes was also evaluated in contact with a series of redox species by the same group. Monolayer graphene substantially increased the stability of GaAs toward passivation in non-aqueous solutions containing a trace amount of water, resulting in a photocurrent of 20 mA cm−2 for up to 8 h of continuous operation. It was found that the addition of a graphene layer still showed a partial Fermi level pinning similar to that of the GaAs/electrolyte, showing no effects of the graphene layer on the interfacial energetics. Fluorinated graphene (F-Gr) was found to reduce the density of states near the Fermi level, thus reducing the Fermi level pinning effects, and should passivate reactive graphene defect sites via fluorine capping. The F-Gr coated Si-based photoanodes exhibited a photocurrent of ∼10 mA cm−2 for 24 h in aqueous solution under illumination. F-Gr formed an effective physical barrier which significantly inhibited oxide formation at the Si surface in an acidic and neutral pH aqueous electrolyte.

Nam et al. demonstrated that monolayer graphene could be used as a catalyst for a solar-driven hydrogen evolution reaction on Si-photocathodes. The plasma treatment induced abundant defects and the incorporation of nitrogen atoms in the graphene structure, which could act as catalytic sites on graphene. The monolayer graphene containing nitrogen impurities exhibited a remarkable increase in the exchange current density and led to a significant anodic shift in the onset of the photocurrent from the Si-photocathode. Additionally, monolayer graphene showed the passivation effect that suppressed the surface oxidation of Si, thus enabling the operation of the Si-photocathode in neutral water. At pH 6.8, the nitrogen doped graphene/Si electrodes showed negative shifts in the onset potential of less than 0.24 V, while the onset potential of the bare Si electrode sharply decreased to approximately −1.1 V vs. RHE within only 30 cycles. Furthermore, Nam et al. also investigated N2-plasma-treated graphene quantum sheets (GQSs) deposited on Si nanowire photocathodes as an efficient HER electrocatalyst (Fig. 11a). Because of abundant defects introduced by the plasma treatment, the N-GQSs could effectively promote the faradaic reactions by reducing the charge transfer resistance across the double layers. The onset potential of the N-GQSs/Si nanowire electrode was 0.26 V vs. RHE, which was 0.09 V higher than that of the Si nanowire without a catalyst (0.17 V vs. RHE). The current density at the reversible potential (0 V vs. RHE) was approximately 35 mA cm−2 (Fig. 11b). Besides the PEC water splitting application, selective photoconversion of CO2 into CO on p-type Si nanowire with N-GQSs in acetonitrile was also demonstrated by Nam's group. The reduction of CO2 into CO on the catalyst exhibited an enhanced current density with an onset potential of −1.53 V vs. Ag/AgCl, which was much lower than that required for photo-deposited Cu on a p-type Si electrode. The DFT calculations suggested that pyridinic N acted as the active site and band alignment could be achieved for N-GQSs larger than 3 nm. Similar to the thickness engineering on graphene for tuning the work function in solar cell applications, the same strategy could be applied on the graphene/p-Si structure for dramatically enhancing the photon-to-hydrogen efficiency. In a graphene/p-Si heterojunction system, the effects of the number of graphene layers on PEC response, especially on electronic structures, were studied. The work function of plasma-treated graphene could be controlled by changing the number of graphene layers, which could also be used to change the energy band structure of the graphene/p-Si photoelectrode. On the basis of the in-depth electrochemical analysis, the strongest band bending of double-layer graphene/Si was found to give rise to STH efficiency of 0.32%, which was 64 times higher than that of the bare Si photoelectrode. Besides the graphene/p-Si photocathode, a CVD grown graphene can be integrated with an n-type Si to form a photoanode for solar-driven water oxidation. Li et al. constructed a graphene micro-net/n-Si heterojunction and a high barrier formed at the junction, resulting in a Voc of 490 mV for solid-state solar cells. In conjunction with a TiO2 protective layer and a FeNiCoOx catalytic layer, the heterojunction yields a high photocurrent density of ∼19 mA cm−2 at an applied potential of 1.5 V vs. RHE in 1.0 M NaOH solution under one sun of simulated solar illumination. This work clearly reveals the important role of graphene in the performance improvement of the Si-based photoanodes and sheds light on the introduction of novel materials onto silicon-based electrodes to achieve higher photovoltages for efficient PEC water oxidation. Cu2O is a low-cost and promising p-type semiconductor for PEC hydrogen reduction, however, self-reduction easily occurs on this material during PEC measurement. Graphene has also been introduced on the Cu2O nanowire arrays to improve the light absorption, stability, and charge carrier separation of the Cu2O-based photocathode. The graphene modified Cu2O photocathode exhibited an improved photocurrent and stability compared with the bare Cu2O photoelectrode, demonstrating that graphene could serve as a promising protective and catalytic layer on unstable metal oxide for PEC water splitting.

The fabrication of composite photoelectrodes with appropriate composition and well-designed nanostructure provides a promising route for improving the PEC performance. The charge separation can be effectively facilitated by the construction of graphene/semiconductor heterojunctions with matched band edge positions. Due to the abundance of delocalized electrons from the conjugated sp2-bonded carbon network and the high work function, graphene can act as an electron shuttle and enhance photogenerated electron transfer from the CB of the semiconductor to graphene. Cu2O/rGO and TiO2/rGO composites were demonstrated to exhibit a large enhancement in CO2 photoreduction under visible light, which could be attributed to the superior electrical mobility that facilitated the transport of photogenerated electrons to reactive sites. Ng et al. reported that rGO promoted electron migration from TiO2 and BiVO4 to conductive substrates, leading to a remarkable enhancement in PEC water splitting compared with bare semiconductor under light irradiation. The enhancement was ascribed to the longer electron lifetime of the excited semiconductor due to the instantaneous injection of the photogenerated electrons into rGO, resulting in a reduced charge recombination. Feng et al. reported the synthesis and characterization of heterojunction arrays of α-Fe2O3/graphene/BiV1−xMoxO4 core/shell nanorods, with α-Fe2O3 nanorod cores, a graphene interlayer, and BiV1−xMoxO4 shells. It was observed that the rGO sheets formed “bridges” that covered and connected the Fe2O3 arrays. This unique structural feature provided an intimate interface between the nanorod and rGO, which could be helpful for improving the charge separation and thus the PEC activity (Fig. 11c). The heterojunction yielded a pronounced photocurrent density of ∼1.97 mA cm−2 at 1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl and a high photoconversion efficiency of ∼0.53% at −0.04 V vs. Ag/AgCl under the irradiation of a Xe lamp (Fig. 11d). Pathak et al. reported that a 3D TiO2/rGO/CdS photoanode also exhibited an enhanced photo-response in PEC cells compared with the bare TiO2 and TiO2/CdS photoanodes, which could be ascribed to the more efficient charge separation due to the introduction of rGO. For a TiO2/rGO/NiFe-layered double hydroxide (LDH) structure, the RGO with a high work function and mobility could accept photogenerated electrons from semiconductors and result in fast electron transfer. NiFe-LDH served as an efficient cocatalyst to accelerate the water oxidation reaction. The synergistic effect in this composite photoanode led to an enhanced STH efficiency of 0.58% at 0.13 V vs. RHE and a photocurrent of 1.74 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V vs. RHE. Besides the semiconductor/RGO/co-catalyst structure, a BiVO4/CoAl-layered double hydroxide (LDHs)/graphene structure was also developed as an efficient photoanode for water oxidation. The IPCE BiVO4/LDH/graphene reached 52% at 400 nm, which was 2.5 times higher than that of BiVO4. The enhancement of charge separation was mainly attributed to the synergy of graphene and LDH, in which LDH helped to expedite the water oxidation kinetics, and graphene facilitated photoexcited charge transfer.

The combination of graphene and TMDs offers another promising system for high-performance PEC application. The TMDs such as MoS2 were demonstrated to possess excellent activity for HER. However, the poor electrical conductivity of MoS2 restricts its catalytic activity. Complementary to the TMDs, graphene possesses high electrical conductivity and mobility. Thus, the MoS2/graphene composite as a cocatalyst can efficiently suppress charge recombination, improve interfacial charge transfer, and enhance photocatalytic activities. It is expected that higher photocatalytic activities for noble-metal-free catalysts can be achieved when the MoS2/N-graphene cocatalyst is supported on junction-matched g-C3N4. Such 2D porous g-C3N4 nanosheets/nitrogen-doped graphene/layered MoS2 layered ternary nano/heterojunction achieved a broadening of the optical window for effective light harvesting, short diffusion distance for excellent charge transport, as well as a large contact area for fast interfacial charge separation and PEC reactions.

Due to its high electrical conductivity and excellent mechanical properties, graphene meets the requirements of an ideal support for semiconductors. It was used as a loading platform for photocatalysts to avoid undesired aggregation and as a conductive network to improve the separation and transportation of photogenerated excitons in photocatalysis. By using a hydrothermal method, α-Fe2O3 nanoparticles were supported on the rGO nanosheets and showed an enhanced photocatalytic and PEC performance towards water oxidation compared with the bare α-Fe2O3 nanoparticles. From transient absorption and time-domain terahertz spectroscopy, it was confirmed that the electrons could be transferred as mobile carriers from α-Fe2O3 into the rGO, which enhanced the charge separation and thus suppressed the charge recombination during the reaction. The enhanced photocurrent of ZnO nanoarrays was obtained by introducing a honeycomb graphene substrate. The bioinspired ZnO/graphene assembly enabled a direct stable pathway for fast electron transport and a minimized photoexcited electron–hole separation. α-Fe2O3 tetrakaidecahedron/graphene oxide (α-Fe2O3/GO) composites were facilely fabricated by Fang et al., in which α-Fe2O3 particles were supported on the graphene sheets. Owing to the superior electroconductivity of graphene, the blending of graphene facilitated the hole transfer through the interface and gave rise to a higher photocurrent and lower onset potential than that of a bare α-Fe2O3. Liu et al. developed a layer-by-layer (LbL) self-assembly process for the construction of graphene nanosheets (GNs)–CdS quantum dots (QDs) composite films. During the LbL self-assembly process, electrostatic interactions between positively charged GNs-PAH and negatively charged CdS QDs were utilized as the core driving force for the construction of multilayered films. The intimate interfacial contact between CdS QDs and GNs facilitated the effective separation of photoinduced carriers and the transport of charges to the reactants, leading to a promising PEC and photocatalytic performance under visible light irradiation. Nanocrystalline p-Cu2O was also deposited on the surface of graphene substrates, demonstrating a better PEC performance for CO2 reduction compared to bare Cu2O films. The improved performance could be attributed to the suppressed charge carrier recombination. The hole transport properties of graphene were further demonstrated by Bonaccorso et al. based on a bulk heterojunction (BHJ) photocathode. The regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl)(rr-P3HT) was exploited in the BHJ configuration with phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) for PEC water reduction with graphene as a hole selective layer. Solution-processed graphene derivatives (GO and rGO) as hole selective layers boosted the efficiency and durability of rr-P3HT:PCBM-based photocathodes. A record high performance and stability were achieved at pH 1. The photocathodes exhibited a photocurrent of 6.01 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE, an onset potential of 0.6 V vs. RHE, and an operational activity of 20 h in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. By increasing the surface area of the photocathode to ∼9 cm2, a large photocurrent of 2.8 mA cm−2 could still be maintained, demonstrating its scalability (Fig. 11e and f).


One challenge with utilizing p-type semiconductors for PEC hydrogen reduction is the intrinsic low photovoltage, which is limited by the semiconductor/liquid junction interface because of its poor hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) kinetics originating from the high hydrogen adsorption of Gibbs free energy. Due to the low permeability through the basal planes of its layered structure, the large number of catalytically active edge sites and the excellent stability in acidic electrolyte, 2D TMDs such as MoS2 and WS2 have attracted much attention as promising candidates for replacing noble metal catalysts. Furthermore, MoS2 is a semiconductor with a direct bandgap around 1.88 eV for the monolayer, indirect bandgap at around 1.29 eV for bulk, and the CBM position is higher than the level of HER. In the early studies of MoS2 by Tributsch and co-workers, the PEC activity of natural crystals of MoS2 was investigated. It was confirmed that the PEC oxidation of water on the crystal surface occurred under illumination with visible light, suggesting that TMDs could be used as both a semiconducting absorber and a HER catalyst, making MoS2 a promising candidate for use in a tandem approach to constructing a heterojunction for the PEC water reduction.


MoS2 is a potential candidate for use as a robust HER catalyst. When MoS2 is deposited on p-type semiconductors, such as p-type Si, the induced electrical fields between the n-type MoS2 and the p-type semiconductors are expected to be high because of the large difference in work functions, which may increase the efficiency of the transport of photoexcited electrons from the p-type semiconductors via the TMDs to the solid/electrolyte interfaces. MoSx was first deposited on the surface of p-type single crystalline semiconductors such as p-Si to replace Pt as a co-catalyst due to its high catalytic activity. Chorkendorff et al. showed that impressive photocurrents could be achieved by loading hydrophobic [Mo3S4]+ onto vertically aligned pillars of p-Si. The incomplete cubane-like clusters (Mo3S4) efficiently catalyzed the evolution of hydrogen when coupled to a p-Si semiconductor that harvested red photons in the solar spectrum. By drop-casting 2 nmol of those cubanes onto the freshly H-terminated Si pillared sample, an IPCE of up to 80% was obtained at a bias of 0.35 V vs. RHE and irradiated at wavelengths greater than 625 nm. Both the pillared and planar photocathodes were capable of reaching 8 mA cm2 at 0 V vs. RHE, which was one of the requirements for obtaining STH efficiency of 10%. Gao et al. coated vertically aligned p-type InP nanowire arrays with MoS3 nanoparticles by photochemical deposition as the photocathode for PEC hydrogen production, achieving STH efficiency of 6.4%. After the deposition of MoS3, the Voc increased slightly to 0.60 V and FF increased significantly to 0.44. By using a photochemical electroless deposition method, Standing et al. deposited MoSx on p-type GaP nanowire arrays as the photocathode, yielding an impressive Voc of 0.71 V vs. RHE and a Jsc of 6.4 mA cm−2. Tran et al. reported the engineering of a MoS2-decorated and vertically aligned silicon nanowire (Si-NW) array electrode by employing a photo-assisted electrodeposition procedure under mild conditions, in which MoS2 acted as an efficient and robust co-catalyst for hydrogen generation. Si-NW@MoS2 was found to be mechanically robust and was stable without MoS2 detachment even under ultrasonication conditions. Better interfacing of the MoS2 co-catalyst with the Si-NW surface improved the electron injection from Si-NW to MoS2, resulting in an onset anodic potential shift of 200 mV. Partial oxidation of the photocathode occurred during long-time operation. Thus, although the PEC performance of the p-type semiconductor could be improved by surface modification of MoSx, the long-term stability of such photocathodes was still a big challenge due to the incomplete protection and imperfect interfacial quality.


Although Si photocathodes have a CB that is high enough for H2 evolution, an oxidation layer (SiOx) is easily formed on the surface of Si under bias and illumination. Thus, Si is prone to oxidation during the deposition process of MoS2. The oxide interface will act as the recombination center, inhibiting the migration of electrons. To resolve this issue, Chorkendorff et al. reported that a thin layer of Ti deposited on Si as a conductive protection layer could drastically enhance the stability. The protection layer on a Si electrode allowed for the use of Si at highly oxidizing conditions but without oxidation. MoSx was electrodeposited on the Ti-protected n+p-silicon photoanode as a co-catalyst. The current remained stable at 12 mA cm−2 in an acidic solution (1 M HClO4) throughout 1 h of being run. Followed this method, Li et al. constructed a MoSx/Ti/InP photocathode and an enhanced stability was achieved compared to bare InP. Similarly, Yang and co-workers developed a low-temperature annealing method for the synthesis of stoichiometric MoS2 catalysts with small domain sizes and uniform coverage, even on highly corrugated surfaces. Multilayer MoS2 with a small domain size of ∼10 nm was uniformly wrapped on the surface of the Si NWs, exposing a high density of active uncoordinated edge sites. The TiO2 protection interlayer was deposited by ALD between Si and MoS2 to achieve stable current, otherwise, the underlying Si would be gradually oxidized, leading to a decreased activity. An onset of photocurrent at ∼0.30 V vs. RHE, together with a short-circuit current density of 15 mA cm−2 under simulated 1 sun illumination was achieved. The photocurrent of the coaxial MoS2/TiO2/Si NW structure remained at approximately 21 mA cm−2 for 75 min without degradation. MoS2 was also deposited on top of a ∼2 nm Al2O3 protected n+p Si photocathode, resulting in a 0.4 V vs. RHE onset potential, 35.6 mA cm−2 saturated photocurrent, and a high stability of 120-hour operation under continuous illumination.

Besides an electrocatalytic layer, MoS2 also acted as a protective layer to provide good stabilization. Chorkendorff et al. demonstrated that MoS2 could act as both a protective layer on n+p-Si photocathodes and as a HER active catalyst. A ∼10 nm Mo was first sputtered onto the n+p-Si substrate and then sulfidized in 10% H2S/H2 at 450 °C for 4h. It should be noted that the Mo film cannot be fully converted into MoS2 and thus a MoS2/Mo/n+p-Si structure could be obtained. The protected electrode demonstrated excellent stability by running for five consecutive days without degradation. In that study, it was found that the thermally synthesized MoS2 film was not active for HER due to the low abundance of active sites. Thus, the introduction of high-surface area MoSx catalyst on top of MoS2 enabled good stability and excellent catalytic activity towards PEC-HER. By using a similar method, Jaramillo et al. deposited a 3.6 nm Mo film on n+p-Si, which was then sulfurized in 90% H2/10% H2S gas to obtain a MoS2 coated n+p-Si photocathode (Fig. 12a). From cross-section TEM characterizations, it was demonstrated that a MoS2/Mo/MoxSi/n+p-Si structure could be obtained. The authors used two forms of molybdenum sulfide nanomaterials to confer both excellent durability and efficient catalysis. The thin MoS2 coating was employed as a surface protecting layer. In spite of the planar structure of the MoS2, this device showed high activity and, importantly, excellent stability since no loss in performance was observed after 100 h of operation. The key to this achievement was the appropriate engineering of the interface between the silicon photocathode and the MoS2 protecting layer. The surface tension of MoS2 caused the predominant exposure of the basal planes, which were inactive for HER, hence the photocurrent onset potential was limited by the low density of catalytic sites at the surface of the device. To improve the photocurrent onset, an additional molybdenum sulfide catalyst, [Mo3S13]2− thiomolybdate nanoclusters, was employed to increase the number of HER active sites. The PEC performances of the photoelectrodes are presented in Fig. 12b. These clusters had a high catalytic activity due to a structural motif resembling that of MoS2 edge sites. The photocurrent onset potential of the illuminated Mo3S13/MoS2/n+p Si device was also increased to 0.40 V vs. RHE. The same group also developed two similar but distinct protection schemes for silicon photocathodes. The first protection scheme (Si–2IL–MoS2) had two interlayers (IL) between the surface MoS2 and silicon, composed of molybdenum silicide and molybdenum metal. The second protection scheme had three IL (Si–3IL–MoS2), identified as molybdenum oxide, molybdenum silicide, and silicon dioxide. They extended the stability and found the photocathode to be stable for over 1500 h under continuous illumination. XPS, SEM and TEM characterizations revealed that some molybdenum remained present, though over 75% of the molybdenum was oxidized. Such morphological changes were likely the eventual cause of the catastrophic failure of the electrodes. These findings demonstrated significant photoelectrode longevity and provided insight into the degradation mechanisms that could enable the design of strategies for the future synthesis of highly durable PEC water splitting electrodes. The same strategy was also applied on p-GaInP2 to create highly active and stable MoS2/Mo/GaInP2 photocathodes. After 60 h of testing, there was no loss in activity (photocurrent onset potential, fill factor, and light-limited current density), and the MoS2 and GaInP2 materials remained largely unchanged in the system. This study, in concert with previous results on Si photocathodes, highlighted the promise of molybdenum disulfide as a catalytically active thin-film protection for many different unstable semiconducting PEC water-splitting devices. Recently, Tsang et al. reported a facile and simple magnetron sputtering method to functionalize Si photocathodes with WS2 thin films. This film not only functioned as a protective layer to isolate the Si from the harsh electrochemical environment but also formed a junction at the interface between WS2 and p-type Si for facilitating the charge separation and transport processes. Due to the presence of a barrier interface between WS2 and Si, the n-WS2/p-Si device exhibited obvious rectification characteristics, which formed as a result of the energy difference between the Fermi levels. Under illumination, the photogenerated electron–hole pairs were separated by the built-in electric field, generating a photocurrent in the external circuit. This heterojunction photocathode exhibited higher photocurrent stability and photoactivity compared with the bare Si photocathode. Moreover, by coating an extra Au film on the WS2 film, the photocurrent density and stability could be further improved. The results suggest that the Au film could act as a good acceptor and conductive layer for electrons in which the recombination of photoexcited carriers could be reduced.

Exfoliated, solution-processed and CVD directly grown TMDs have been reported to have many electrochemically active sites. However, the fabrication of uniform and dense 2D TMDs thin films on the surface of p-type semiconductors is difficult. Furthermore, the modification of morphology and thickness of TMDs nanostructures can affect the PEC performance of Si/TMDs photocathodes by changing the optical absorption, catalytic properties, and charge separation and transport of the Si/TMDs heterojunctions. Atomic layer deposition (ALD) is a modified CVD technique for growing high quality ultra-thin MoS2 films with uniform thickness and stoichiometry on high aspect ratio structures in a wafer scale. The morphology and thickness of MoS2 were tuned by varying the cycles of the ALD reaction. Post-sulfurization at high temperature was introduced to form stoichiometric MoS2 and it significantly enhanced the crystallinity of MoS2 to maximize the catalytically active sites of the basal planes. The ALD MoS2 sulfurized at 600 °C was found to contain grains with a (002) basal plane off the Si substrate, so that the edge sites were exposed and could be used as catalytic active sites for HER. The ALD MoS2 thin-films (590 cycles) on the p-Si photocathode after post-sulfurization (600 °C) exhibited an onset potential of 0.23 V vs. RHE and a photocurrent density of 21.7 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE under AM 1.5G illumination. The optimized MoS2/p-Si photocathode showed a reduction in the overpotential of ∼630 mV compared to bare Si. The MoS2/p-Si photocathode possessed a higher PEC HER performance than the Pt-decorated Si photocathode, operating for 24 hours in 0.5 M H2SO4 under AM 1.5G illumination without degradation. Jang et al. successfully demonstrated the synthesis of MoS2 thin films with high HER activities by the thermolysis of a solution precursor ([(NH4)2MoS4]), as well as the wafer-scale fabrication of n-MoS2/p-Si heterojunction photocathodes using a simple transfer method (Fig. 12c). By changing the concentration of the precursor solution, the thickness of MoS2 thin films could be tailored to be in the range of 5 to 29 nm. The obtained 2H-MoS2 layers contained a-domains with layer-by-layer stacked (001) planes and c-domains with vertically stacked (100) planes. The c-domains were electrochemically active for hydrogen evolution reactions and thus the MoS2/p-Si heterostructure should be an efficient junction for electron transport and subsequent HER. By assuming that the band bending in the p-Si of the MoS2/p-Si heterojunction was similar to that of the bare p-Si, the n-MoS2/p-Si heterojunction was found to form a type-II junction as described in Fig. 12d. The transport of the photogenerated electrons from p-Si to MoS2 was energetically favorable without an electronic potential barrier. The photocurrent, maximum ABPE, and onset potential were 24.6 mA cm−2 (0 V vs. RHE), 0.86%, and 0.17 V vs. RHE for the MoS2 (13 nm)/p-Si photocathodes, respectively (Fig. 12e). The MoS2 coated photocathode also exhibited a stable photocurrent after 50 h of operation in 0.5 M H2SO4 under AM 1.5G illumination, indicating that the transferred MoS2 thin film served not only as a catalyst but also as an excellent protective layer. The solution-based thermolysis, as well as the wafer-scale fabrication could be applied to other p-type semiconductors (p-InP, p-GaAs, and p-GaP). The wafer-scale TMD thin films could be useful in various electronic and optoelectronic devices, even in those with curved or flexible substrates. The WS2 thin film catalyst is another promising candidate for constructing WS2/p-type semiconductor PEC devices due to its high surface-to-volume ratios and a large number of catalytically active edge sites for HER. Kwon et al. prepared WS2 thin films by the sulfurization of vacuum deposited WO3 thin films for efficient PEC hydrogen production. The WS2 (23 nm)/p-Si photocathode exhibited a photocurrent of 8.3 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE, an onset potential of 0.2 V vs. RHE, and a long-term stability for over 10 h. The edge sites in the synthesized WS2 polycrystalline thin film were responsible for the enhanced catalytic activities of WS2/p-Si compared with the bare p-Si photocathode.


TMDs have three main crystal phases: 1T, 2H and 3R. Due to the high electrical conductivity and spread of catalytic active sites on the basal planes, 2D TMDs nanosheets with metallic 1T phase exhibited much enhanced HER performance compared to those with 2H and 3R phases. Chhowalla and co-workers synthesized the metallic phase MoS2 and WS2 by chemical exfoliation and found that the 1T MoS2 and WS2 exhibited superior HER catalytic activity compared to those with the 2H semiconducting phase. Taking advantage of the superior catalytic activity, Jin et al. demonstrated integrated heterostructures of chemically exfoliated 1T-MoS2 and planar p-Si as efficient and robust photocathodes for PEC hydrogen generation. The SEM images and energy diagram of 1T-MoS2 decorated p-Si are presented in Fig. 13a and b. The 1T-MoS2 suspension could significantly improve both the photocurrent onset as well as the current density compared to those of bare p-Si. A high current density of 17.6 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE and an excellent photocurrent onset were achieved together with good stability (Fig. 13c). Typically, MoS2 nanomaterials are synthesized by exfoliation or solution-based processes, but they often form an ill-controlled MoS2/Si interface, leading to poor charge transfer kinetics at the MoS2/Si interface. The direct CVD growth of 1T-MoS2 on Si can provide a controlled Si/MoS2 interface for small charge-transfer resistances across the semiconductor/catalyst and catalyst/electrolyte interfaces. Compared with drop-casted 1T-MoS2/Si, the direct CVD grown 1T-MoS2/Si photocathode had a more positive onset of 0.25 V vs. RHE, and a higher current density at 0 V vs. RHE (17.6 mA cm−2vs. 9.2 mA cm−2) (Fig. 13c).

Despite good electrocatalytic activities, most reported HER catalysts suffer from strong light absorption or high reflection, which consequently reduces the amount of light reaching the solar absorbers and decreases the generated photocurrent. Hence, the optical transparency of catalysts also plays a crucial role in the overall PEC performance. The amorphous MoSxCly HER electrocatalyst has been proved to enable highly competitive HER performance as compared to amorphous MoSx or exfoliated metallic MoS2 catalysts. Moreover, the low-temperature CVD synthesis process (275 °C) allowed the facile integration of MoSxCly with p-Si as photocathodes, resulting in a photocurrent of 20.6 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE and an onset potential of 0.27 V vs. RHE. The same group further fabricated highly efficient photocathodes by integrating amorphous MoQxCly (Q = S, Se) catalysts with n+pp+ Si micropyramid absorbers. MoQxCly was not only a highly active electrocatalyst for HER but was also transparent in the 500–1200 nm wavelength region, where Si most strongly absorbs solar light. Due to the large optical bandgap and minimum light absorption of MoSxCly, the MoSxCly/Si MP photocathode achieved a photocurrent density as high as 43 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE and a high onset potential of 0.41 V vs. RHE.
The heterobimetallic sulfide catalyst was reported to be more active in HER compared to the MoSx and could also serve as an efficient catalyst for PEC applications Chen et al. prepared CoMoSx/Si photocathodes by a photo-assisted electrodeposition process, which showed impressive PEC performance in phosphate solution under AM 1.5G illumination. The onset potential and photocurrent were 0.25 V vs. RHE and 17.5 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE, respectively. Heterometal atoms (Fe, Co, Ni) were introduced to dope the MoS2 catalyst, so that more sulfur-terminated active sites became exposed due to the doping, resulting in an enhanced PEC performance. It was found that the Co doping led to the optimal activity of the CoMoSx/Si microwire photocathode, resulting in an onset potential of 0.192 V vs. RHE and photocurrent of 17.2 mA cm−2 (0 V vs. RHE). This result could be attributed to the two-valent heteroatoms of CoMoSx which substituted the Mo4+ ions in MoS2 for charge compensation, and more defects and edges were revealed as active sites for HER. Amorphous oxygen-rich MoSx could serve as both a catalytic layer and a passivation layer, providing a promising candidate for p-type semiconducting photocathode. The MoOxSy could be deposited on the Si surface by a photo-assisted deposition method and the obtained photocathode exhibited activity comparable to that of the Pt/Si ones, but with better stability in acidic medium. By using a thermolysis method, transferrable and transparent anion-engineered MoS2 thin film catalysts could also be fabricated by using [(NH4)2MoS4] solution and powder precursors with different sulphur/phosphorus weight ratios. The as-prepared film transferred on a 4-inch p-Si wafer was presented in Fig. 13d. The obtained S-doped MoP (S:MoP) thin film changed from 2D vdWs structures to 3D hexagonal structures via the introduction of P atoms in the MoS2 thin films. (Fig. 13e) The DFT calculations revealed that the S:MoP thin films absorbed hydrogen better than the MoS2 thin films. Furthermore, the structurally engineered S:MoP thin films enhanced the transport of photoexcited electrons from p-Si into the electrolyte, resulting in a high photocurrent of 33.1 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE (Fig. 13f), long-term stability (>10000 s), and a maximum ABPE of 2.8% for the S:MoP (S/P = 0.33)/p-Si photocathode.

Metal oxides such as TiO2, BiVO4, SnO2 and Cu2O have been combined with TMDs for PEC pollutant degradation and photocatalytic water splitting. By coating amorphous 1T- or 2H-TMDs nanosheets on the surface of low-cost metal oxides, the photogenerated electrons or holes can be transferred from metal oxides to TMDs through intimate interfacial contacts, leading to the enhanced efficiency of charge separation and decreased rates of recombination of the electron–hole pairs, with a strikingly enhanced PEC performance.

Resembling the edge sites of crystalline MoS2, unsaturated S atoms in amorphous MoS2 or MoSx are well recognized active sites for catalytic reactions, which usually present in forms of S22− and S2−. Meanwhile, the unique short-range ordered atomic arrangement and sufficient structural disorder may also provide large numbers of active defect sites for enhanced catalytic performance. The scalable, fast, and mild synthetic methods opened up a way to deposit amorphous MoS2 onto metal oxide photocathodes, achieving efficient hydrogen production. Hu et al. presented a simple and scalable technique for the deposition of amorphous molybdenum sulphide films as hydrogen evolution catalyst onto TiO2 protected Cu2O films (Fig. 13g and h). The efficient extraction of excited electrons by the conformal catalyst film led to photocurrents of up to 5.7 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE (pH 1.0) under simulated AM 1.5 solar illumination (Fig. 13i). Moreover, the photocathode exhibited enhanced stability under acidic environments, whereas photocathodes with platinum nanoparticles as the catalyst were more rapidly deactivated under identical conditions. The same group demonstrated for the first time that amorphous MoSx was an active and stable hydrogen evolution catalyst in conjunction with TiO2 protected Cu2O film in alkaline solutions. The MoSx catalyst was integrated onto surface-protected Cu2O photocathodes and exhibited high PEC activity for hydrogen evolution in alkaline solutions. Photocurrents as high as 6.3 mA cm2 were obtained at 0 V vs. RHE, which would correspond to 7.7% STH efficiency in tandem cells. WS2 was also reported to be an effective hydrogen evolution catalyst on C3N4 protected Cu2O photocathodes, resulting in a photocurrent of −9.5 mA cm−2 at −0.55 V vs. RHE for PEC water splitting under visible light illumination. The growth of n-type TMDs on n-type metal oxide such as TiO2, BiVO4, SnO2 also showed an enhanced photogenerated carrier separation in photocatalytic and PEC applications. However, considering that MoS2 and WS2 were n-type semiconductors that have been extensively investigated as hydrogen evolution catalysts, applying n-type TMDs with high catalytic activity on p-type semiconductors as both protective layer and catalytic layer for PEC water should be a more promising choice due to the possible formation of favorable band alignment between p-type semiconductors and n-type TMDs. More TMDs catalysts with p-type characteristics and excellent catalytic activities should be explored and coupled with n-type semiconductors such as BiVO4, Fe2O3, Ta3N5, and Si to form durable p–n junctions for high-performance PEC water oxidation reactions.

Ultrathin photoelectrodes possess many advantages for PEC solar energy conversion, including being cost-effective, efficient carrier collection, and large exposed active sites. Metal oxides such as ultrathin TiO2, WO3, Fe2O3 and In2O3 have been employed as photoanodes for solar water oxidation with enhanced PEC performance compared with their bulk counterparts. However, their large bandgaps limit the high STH conversion efficiency. In view of this, ultrathin TMDs with tunable band structures open up new platforms for the construction of PEC devices with high activity and stability.


Since its discovery, graphene has been making a profound impact in many fields of science and technology due to its unique atom-thick 2D structure and remarkable physicochemical properties. Inspired by this, various graphene derivatives and their inorganic analogues have been synthesized via different methods. Typically, the intensive development of liquid exfoliation and the atomic layer deposition (ALD) technique have enabled the preparation of a large variety of ultrathin materials, including g-C3N4 ultrathin nanosheets, black phosphorene, metallic rhodium atomic layers, partially oxidized cobalt atomic layers, oxides such as Co3O4, SnO2, CeO2, WO3, and In2O3, chalcogenides like NiS2 and NiSe2, CoSe2, VS2 and VSe2, TiS2, Bi2Se3, ZnSe, SnS and SnS2, and other complex compounds like NiCo2O4, CuInSe2, ZnIn2S4, BiVO4, BiOCl, BiOBr and Ti3Si0.75Al0.25C2 ultrathin nanosheets. The ultimate 2D anisotropy with atom-thick layered structure offered by these ultrathin nanosheets or even atomic layers is both an ideal low-dimensional system for fundamental study and an elemental building block for designed assembly into devices. In particular, due to the difficulty and limited adjustability in opening the bandgap of graphene toward semiconducting devices and applications, these intrinsically semiconducting non-graphene 2D materials have attracted more and more attention. The intriguing surface physicochemical properties of these non-graphene 2D materials have been disclosed, and elaborate functionalities have been rationally designed and tailored, based on which their versatile application potentials have been demonstrated, especially in novel magnetic devices,in vivo photodynamic therapy and bioimaging, moisture sensing, thermoelectric conversion, organic catalytic reaction, catalytic CO oxidation, electrocatalytic CO2 reduction, electrocatalytic oxygen evolution reaction (OER), electrocatalytic HER, photocatalytic CO2 reduction, photocatalytic HER and OER, cocatalysts for photocatalytic HER, photocatalytic dye degradation, and PEC water splitting.

For PEC applications, specifically, there are several main factors responsible for the enhanced PEC performance of photoelectrodes composed of ultrathin 2D nanosheets compared to their bulk counterparts. First, the light absorption gets improved via multiple reflections and scattering within the voids between adjacent 2D nanosheets at the solution/electrolyte junction (SEJ) interface. Secondly, the CB and VB edges will shift respectively to the H2 reduction and O2 oxidation potentials with decreased thickness of nanosheets, leading to increased thermodynamic driving force and interfacial charge transfer for PEC water splitting. Thirdly, the large specific surface areas and nearly all-surface-atom structures of 2D nanosheets can also promote the charge migration at the SEJ interface. Moreover, as illustrated in Fig. 14a, the directional decoupling of light absorption and charge collection in 2D materials offer the possibility for the simultaneous facilitation of charge migration along with sufficient light absorption. Meanwhile, the normal internal electric field generated across the nanosheet can also help to improve the charge separation between photogenerated electron–hole pairs. For example, Wang et al. deposited very thin WO3, Fe2O3 and TiO2 active oxide layers on a highly conductive TiSi2 nano-network via ALD processes. In such structures, the thickness of the oxide layer is much smaller than the diffusion length of the holes from the material (i.e. in Fig. 14b), the internal TiSi2 network can serve as a charge collector, and an internal electric field can be generated across the nanosheets. The combined effects enable the efficient decoupling of light absorption and charge collection, and promotes the interfacial charge migration and separation of electron–hole pairs for superior PEC performance. For example, a high IPCE of ca. 46% at wavelength of 400 nm was achieved on α-Fe2O3 without doping, as shown in Fig. 14c.
Based on these mechanisms, Xie et al. synthesized ultrathin In2O3, WO3, SnS, ZnSe and SnS2 atomic layers for PEC water splitting, and studied the detailed reasons responsible for their much-enhanced PEC performance. For example, oxygen vacancy (VO)-rich ultrathin porous In2O3 layers were synthesized via a mesoscopic assembly and fast heating strategy, and demonstrated a new donor level and increased density of states. The unique band structure brought about a narrowed bandgap from the ultraviolet (UV) to visible regime (Fig. 14d) as well as improved charge separation efficiency, resulting in an optimized visible-light photocurrent density of 1.73 mA cm−2 for the VO-rich ultrathin porous In2O3 layers-based photoelectrode, which was 15-times higher than that of bulk In2O3-based photoanodes (Fig. 14e). Similarly, they proposed ultrathin pore-rich WO3 layer-based photoanodes with nearly fully exposed and highly active (001) crystal facets, which demonstrated good chemical bond conditions and electronic structure for improving charge carrier excitation and shortening the carrier migration path during the OER process. Besides, characterizations of SnS, ZnSe and SnS2 by synchrotron radiation X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) analysis, Xie et al. further disclosed the intralayer structural distortion of these atomic layers. Such a surface distortion would inevitably influence its electronic properties, which had been confirmed by the corresponding first-principles density of states calculations. It was found that these atomic layers possessed increased density of states at the VB edge compared to the bulk materials, contributing to a higher carrier mobility. Specifically, in the case of SnS2 single layers, as shown in Fig. 14f and g, the surface atomic elongation and structural disorder led to efficient visible-light harvesting, improved charge carrier density, a fully depleted space charge layer, fast interfacial charge transfer, as well as excellent structural stability, and finally yielded a photocurrent density of 2.75 mA cm−2 at 1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl, which was over 70-times higher than that of bulk SnS2.
However, despite the performance enhancement of ultrathin atomic layers of metal oxide and tin-based materials for PEC water splitting demonstrated by Xie and coworkers, there were still several key limitations. First, several conventional semiconductor-based photoelectrodes exhibited slow reaction kinetics at the semiconductor/liquid junctions and an unsatisfactory stability in the electrolyte. Secondly, for most of the metal oxides, their intrinsic large band-gaps resulted in the limited adjustability of the band-gaps and, hence, poor visible-light absorption. These shortcomings forced researchers to focus on other 2D materials such as TMDs. Bulk TMDs are layered materials formed by tri-atom-thick sheets of covalently bonded sulfur-metal species that are held together by vdWs forces; thus, it is easy to exfoliate TMDs into single or few atomic layers without damaging their structures or introducing defects. Researchers are therefore looking to develop 2D TMDs layer-based photoelectrodes for PEC applications.

2D atomic layers of TMDs, generally including MoS2, MoSe2, WS2 and WSe2, may be one of the hottest research topics within the 2D materials community, especially after the first demonstration of single-layer MoS2 transistors with high mobility of ≥200 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is similar to that of graphene nanoribbons, room-temperature current on/off ratio of 1 × 108, and ultra-low standby power dissipation. TMDs atomic layers could also complement graphene in applications that require transparent semiconductors such as photodiodes, light-emitting devices, photodetectors and many other energy harvesting devices involving electrocatalytic, photocatalytic and PEC processes.

For photocatalytic and PEC applications, in particular, the group VI TMDs materials have been regarded as alternatives to the conventional metal oxide materials. The conventional metal oxides generally suffer from the poor absorption of visible light due to large bandgaps, short hole-diffusion length, and low catalytic activity on the surface. In contrast, TMDs such as MoS2 exhibit excellent catalytic activity towards HER, and their small bandgaps (1.0–2.0 eV) enable the efficient absorption of light in the visible region. The ultrathin structure also leads to the efficient transport of photogenerated carriers and a reduced recombination. Moreover, similar to graphene, a single tri-atom-thick sheet of covalently bonded sulfur-metal species in layered TMDs is stable in air and solutions, including acidic media. Bulk TMDs are regarded as unsatisfactory candidates for PEC water splitting due to the high VB edge potential and low CB edge potential so that TMDs bulk phases do not meet the thermodynamic requirements for overall water splitting. For example, bulk MoS2 shows an indirect bandgap of 1.29 eV and the high VB position of the material cannot afford the spontaneous water oxidation. Benefiting from the layer-dependent bandgap, the direct bandgap of MoS2 monolayers extends to 1.88 eV and the downward shift of VB leads to thermodynamically favorable water oxidation. Recent reports confirmed that the VB edges of monolayer MoS2 and WS2 were more positive than the OER potential of water (1.23 V vs. RHE), and the CB edge potential of MoS2 and WS2 were more negative than the HER potential of water (0 V vs. RHE), indicating their potential use as photoanodes for water oxidation with decreased thermal-relaxation energy loss. The ultrathin 2D materials based photocatalysts would have remarkable advantages compared to traditional metal oxides, such as large specific surface area, short diffusion distance, solution-processability of the large-area film.

Despite the above-discussed attractive advantages, as well as great promise in lowering the amount of active materials by exploiting 2D TMDs, particularly for PEC water splitting, the fabrication of large-area, efficient, and stable photoelectrodes from 2D TMD atomic layers poses serious challenges. The first challenge is to prepare homogenous TMDs multiflake thin films on conductive substrates (e.g. FTO and ITO) for PEC applications. The chemical exfoliation of bulk TMD powder provides a promising method to synthesize mono- and few-layered TMDs, which can be further re-assembled into thin films. The PEC properties of chemically exfoliated MoS2 mono- and few-layered thin films and their composites with TiO2 nanoparticles have been studied by King et al. It was found that the MoS2 monolayer films showed similar PEC response compared to bulk MoS2, and the MoS2 monolayers absorbed on TiO2 could serve as an effective photosensitizer. In 2015, Yu et al. reported a space-confined self-assembly (SCSA) technique to prepare controlled 2D WSe2 thin films by dispersing solvent-exfoliated few-layered flakes. Flake self-assembly at a liquid/liquid interface (formed from hexane and ethylene glycol, two non-solvents, for WSe2), followed by substrate transfer onto an indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated PET plastic (Fig. 15b) or a FTO glass (Fig. 15c–e), afforded large-area thin films with superior alignment of 2D flakes compared with the traditional liquid/air-interface aggregated-compacted (AC) method. More detailed steps are shown in Fig. 15a. As a result, WSe2-layer photoelectrodes prepared by the SCSA technique (with a thickness of ca. 25 nm) exhibited a sustained photocurrent (1.0 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE) under AM 1.5G light illumination with the addition of HER catalyst (Pt), a photocurrent larger than that of the photoelectrode prepared by the AC method, as shown in Fig. 15f. Moreover, the authors further combined the SCSA method with a filtration-based separation process to systematically vary the layer dimensions and edge density of the solution processed multiflake WSe2 photocathodes, revealing the role of the edge sites and effects of the flake size on light harvesting, charge transport, and recombination. The WSe2-layer photoelectrode with optimized flake size and passivated edge sites presented an even higher photocurrent density of 2.64 mA cm−2, despite transmitting ∼80% of the accessible photons. The detrimental recombination at flake edges was reduced by a passivation process. It was especially noticeable that unlike the traditional photoetching technique used for the passivation of recombination sites on single-crystal WSe2 photoelectrodes, which led to the undesirable removal of a significant fraction of material from the electrode surface, the passivation route using ALD of Al2O3 was introduced to overcome this problem. It was found that the Al2O3 could be selectively deposited on the edges of WSe2 flakes rather than forming a conformal layer over the entire surface, leaving the active basal planes still exposed to the electrolyte. In sacrificial chloranil (tetrachloro-1,4-benzoquinone) electrolyte, such edge passivation resulted in the significantly improved photocurrent of the WSe2-layer photoelectrodes, and the photocurrent would further increase when the thickness of the Al2O3 passivation layer was increased within 1–5 nm. Recently, the authors also introduced two strategies to repair different types of defects in liquid-phase exfoliation (LPE) WSe2 nanoflakes and realized an efficient photocathode towards PEC hydrogen production. As shown in Fig. 15g, the exfoliated flakes from the as-received WSe2 powder likely contained Se vacancies both at the exposed flake edges and internally in the few-layer flakes. In this report, pre-annealing of the WSe2 powder in Se vapor at 1100 °C (i.e. the first strategy) is suggested to be able to alter the crystallinity for the removal of internal Se vacancies. Moreover, the subsequent treatment with the hexyl-trichlorosilane (HTS) surfactant is supposed to passivate the edge sites of the WSe2 nanoflakes by selectively attaching to flake edges (i.e. the second strategy). The two defect treatments resulted in a significant improvement of the PEC performance of WSe2 photocathode with Pt–Cu co-catalyst modification, affording a photocurrent of 4.0 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE and an internal quantum efficiency of over 60% under 740 nm illumination, as presented in Fig. 15h. These results indicate that the reduction of the photogenerated carrier recombination at the flake edges and internal chalcogen vacancy sites is important for achieving high-performance ultrathin TMDs-based PEC devices, and a more effective approach should be developed to minimize the negative effects from defects.


To improve the PEC performance of TMD-layer based photoelectrodes, the construction of multicomponent 2D-layer bulk heterojunction (BHJ) photoelectrodes was also investigated. Dihexanoic acid functionalized perylene-diimide (DHA-PDI) derivative was introduced to form a hybrid thin-film photoelectrode with MoS2 atomic layers, resulting in a beneficial type-II band alignment. The TEM image of the MoS2/DHA-PDI hybrid bilayer film is shown in Fig. 16a. The formation of an interfacial dipole at the MoS2-organic interface was revealed and it was suggested that the type-II band alignment between the inorganic MoS2 layer and organic DHA-PDI led to the efficient charge separation and improved light absorption, as shown in Fig. 16b. The hybrid MoS2/DHA-PDI photoelectrodes showed a six-fold improvement in photocurrent compared to that of DHA-PDI or MoS2 photoelectrodes. By replacing the MoS2 with MoSe2, the MoSe2/DHA-PDI photoelectrode only showed a slightly increased photocurrent compared to the bare MoSe2 photoelectrode. This result could be attributed to the higher-lying VB edge of MoSe2, which might present a barrier for the transfer of holes at the MoSe2/DHA-PDI interface (Fig. 16b). These results highlighted the great role of band alignment in the performance of TMDs based heterojunctions for PEC applications. Similarly, Mattevi et al. proposed TMDs/TMDs type-II BHJ transparent photoelectrodes composed of WS2 and MoS2 atomic layers (Fig. 16d and e), and achieved a ten-times increase in IPCE compared with single constituents. The photocurrent generated by the WS2/MoS2 BHJ was one order of magnitude larger than that of the MoS2 electrodes, and two times higher than that of the WS2 electrodes, as presented in Fig. 16f. This increase was attributed to the spatial charge separation, which took place when WS2 and MoS2 layers were interfaced forming a type-II junction, where excitons were likely to be dissociated and thus holes were transferred to the VB of WS2 layers while electrons were transferred to the CB of MoS2 layers (Fig. 16e). For monolayer TMDs, this would occur in a very short time of 30–50 fs, which was much shorter than the intralayer relaxation process (ca. 10 ps) of possible trapping by intrinsic defects (0.6–5 ps), thus resulting in efficient charge separation. The lifetimes of interlayer excitons in MoS2/WS2 and MoSe2/WSe2 heterojunctions were predicted and observed to be in the nanosecond scale, confirming the unique potential to construct TMDs heterostructures for application in solar energy conversion. Besides, Ho et al. reported electrostatically coordinated 2D hetero-layered hybrids composed of atomic layers of MoSe2 and ZnIn2S4, which achieved improved visible-light photoreactivity, efficient charge transfer, and intimate interfacial contact for stable cycling as both a PEC device and photocatalyst. According to the band structures of ZnIn2S4 and MoSe2, the photogenerated electrons from the excitation of ZnIn2S4 were thermodynamically available for transfer to MoSe2, indicating that the ZnIn2S4–MoSe2 hetero-layered structure would not only promote charge separation at the junction interface, but also facilitate the proton reduction on the surface of MoSe2 because of the well-recognized capability of TMD layers with exposed edge sites to effectively decrease the activation energy (i.e. overpotential of redox reaction). Regarding the charge carrier dynamics, time-resolved PL spectra and steady-state PL spectra, along with the electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS), displayed the simultaneous PL quenching, lifetime reduction, and decrease in charge-transfer resistance (RCT) of ZnIn2S4–MoSe2 layers from the bulk ZnIn2S4 counterpart, revealing the establishment of an electron transfer channel from ZnIn2S4 to MoSe2 in a non-radiative quenching pathway that would consequently lead to efficient interfacial charge transfer and suppression of charge recombination in the ZnIn2S4–MoSe2 hetero-layers. Collectively, the ZnIn2S4–MoSe2 hybrid displayed an approximately 22-fold photocurrent enhancement compared to bulk ZnIn2S4 under the same conditions, which confirmed the structural and compositional advantage of the ZnIn2S4–MoSe2 hetero-layers in promoting the charge transport and separation.


TMDs based photoelectrodes have also been explored in the application of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). For example, MoS2 and WS2 were used as photoanodes due to their good stability and excellent electrocatalytic properties. Inspired by the structure of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), organic photosensitizers such as phthalocyanine and porphyrin compounds were also exploited for the surface functionalization of TMDs toward enhanced photoinduced interfacial charge transfer, and thus inhibited recombination and improved optoelectronic and PEC properties. The attachment of photosensitizer molecules could be realized by simply drop-casting the phthalocyanine/porphyrin solutions onto TMD films, or immersing TMD films in the solution for 15–20 min. In a typical monolayer WSe2–NiPc (Ni-centered phthalocyanine) system reported by Choi et al. the PL signals of WSe2 were gradually quenched upon the consecutive steps of 10 μM NiPc functionalization. Meanwhile, normalized PL intensities decreased along with the increase in the fractional surface coverage with NiPc, suggesting that greater surface coverage would lead to the increased probability of photoinduced charge transfer and consequent PL quenching upon NiPc functionalization. Moreover, the quenched PL emission fully recovered when NiPc molecules were removed from the WSe2 surfaces, which might be re-functionalized and recycled several times. The chemically exfoliated large-area MoS2 thin films were interfaced with different porphyrin species and their PEC properties were investigated. It was found that the photocurrents were closely related to the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) levels of the porphyrins. When the surface of MoS2 was functionalized with zinc-centered protoporphyrin IX (ZnPP), a ten-fold photocurrent increase was obtained compared to that of bare MoS2. By choosing phthalocyanine/porphyrin compounds exhibiting appropriate band alignment with respect to TMDs, effective separation of reactive charge carriers (i.e. holes for OER and electrons for HER) to the SEJ interface could be realized. The results demonstrated that the magnitudes and signs of the photocurrents (anodic or cathodic) were determined by the relative band energies between TMDs and HOMO/LUMO levels of zinc protoporphyrin (ZnPP). For example, because the CB and VB edge positions of ZnPP were higher than that of MoS2 and WS2, the photogenerated holes from the excitation of MoS2 and WS2 were thermodynamically transported to ZnPP and the photoelectrons travelled through the back contact to the counter electrode, resulting in a significantly improved photoanodic response. The anodic photocurrent of ZnPP-MoS2 was two-times higher than that of ZnPP-WS2, which could be attributed to a larger driving force originating from a larger difference in energy levels between MoS2 and ZnPP. Likewise, for the ZnPP-MoSe2 and ZnPP–WSe2 structures, a cathodic photocurrent was observed because the VBs of MoSe2 and WSe2 were higher than the HOMO energy level of ZnPP. The interfacial engineering approach provided a novel method for improving the PEC performance of TMDs based photoelectrodes. The selected representative reports of graphene and TMDs based 2D/3D and 2D/2D heterostructure photoelectrodes in PEC cells are summarized in Table S1 (ESI).


Besides the above-mentioned TMD atomic layers-based BHJ photoelectrodes, the combination of TMD layers with graphene and its derivatives, such as nitrogen-doped graphene, reduced graphene oxide (rGO), and g-C3N4, for PEC applications have also been reported. Notably, Narayanan et al. disclosed the molecular origin of layered number/stacking sequence-dependent PEC performance in MoS2/graphene vdWs vertical heterostructures. They found that the presence of MoS2 would induce p-type doping in graphene, which would facilitate more H2 absorption on the graphene side than on the MoS2 side so that the activity was maximized in graphene with monolayer MoS2 and was further reduced for bilayers and multilayers of MoS2. Moreover, the graphene on top of monolayer MoS2, in terms of the stacking sequence, showed the largest photocurrent density and the lowest charge-transfer resistance toward HER. These findings established the relationship of the stacking sequence in the PEC performance of TMD/graphene hybrid vdWs layers. Meanwhile, Shin et al. investigated a more complex hybrid system composed of 1T-MoS2/2H-MoS2/2H-WS2/rGO 2D multi-layers, or 1T-MoS2 on a mixture of 2H-MoS2, 2H-WS2 and rGO hybrid films. It had been identified that the 1T-MoS2 layers contributed mainly to the catalytic activity toward HER, and the hybrid of 2H-MoS2 and 2H-WS2 with different band structures facilitated more efficient charge carrier migration through favorable band alignment compared to individual MoS2 and WS2 atomic layers. In addition, the rGO nanosheets acted as a conductive interconnected network for promoting charge separation. Finally, these components synergistically resulted in the efficient PEC performance of the optimized hybrid thin-film photocathodes. In addition to graphene and its derivatives, few-layer black phosphorus (BP, i.e. phosphorene) as a new research focus of the 2D materials community was also coupled with TMDs (e.g. WS2) and exhibited improved photocurrent responses under >780 nm near-infrared irradiation. Typically, in the BP/WS2 systems reported by Majima et al., the CB and VB edge position of BP were estimated to be ca. −0.18 and 0.52 eV vs. NHE, and thus could be excited under near-infrared light excitation due to the narrow bandgap. Such a narrow bandgap would intrinsically lead to the rapid charge recombination of pure BP. However, with the interaction with WS2, the CB electrons in BP could be efficiently injected into WS2 layers due to the low work function of WS2 (1.07 eV vs. NHE). After enough electrons had been trapped by WS2, the reduction of H+ in water (i.e. HER) occurred. This charge separation process was demonstrated by PEC measurements, electron reductive reaction analyses, and transient absorption spectroscopy. Finally, with the presence of ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid as a sacrificial agent for trapping holes, the BP/WS2 hybrids achieved 21- and 50-times enhancement in HER activity compared to bare BP and WS2, suggesting the advantages of 2D BP/WS2 hybrid layers as noble metal-free near-infrared-driven photoelectrodes or photocatalytic materials to offer new opportunities in capturing a wider solar spectrum band for energy conversion. Overall, all these reports represent new strategies in the modulation of PEC performance offered by novel 2D TMDs-layer-based photoelectrodes and suggest opportunities for further development into transparent, large-area, and low-cost solar energy conversion devices.


The rapid expansion of the 2D materials family with the prediction and demonstration of new exotic materials such as elemental 2D layers of phosphorene, borophene, silicene, and germanene, and the substantial development of robust and facile synthetic techniques for graphene, TMDs, and many other 2D materials, have together triggered tremendous research interest in developing large-area, transparent, cost-effective and highly efficient PV and PEC devices for energy conversion. The elemental abundance in nature of several main elements in TMDs and graphene and their derivatives, including Mo, W, S, C and N, has provided the prerequisite for large-scale industrial production to meet the increasing energy demand of human society. The optical properties, electronic structure, and mechanical and thermal properties of 2D materials can also be adjusted via physical or chemical modification, which offers tremendous opportunities for functionalizing 2D materials. Furthermore, the 2D materials can be combined to form 2D/3D and 2D/2D complex heterostructures, which enable new platforms for the structural engineering and functional design of devices. Considering that the currently achieved efficiencies of as-demonstrated 2D materials-based PV and PEC devices are still far from satisfactory, further efforts are necessary to realize PV and PEC devices with state-of-the-art energy conversion efficiencies. To better understand the status of vdWs junction based PV and PEC devices, we summarized the structure of the vdWs junctions in Fig. 17a and b and added a performance comparison between the 2D/2D, 2D/3D vdWs junction based devices and other high performance 3D/3D solar cells and photoelectrodes, as shown in Fig. 17c and d.


For 2D/3D heterojunction solar cells, significant efforts have been devoted to improving the performance of devices, including gate modulation, chemical doping, antireflection coating, and interfacial layer insertion. Multi-step modification is needed to achieve a high PCE. Nevertheless, the highest PCE (15.6%) achieved on a graphene/Si structure is still inferior to the performance achieved with commercial Si solar cells, as shown in Fig. 17c. Novel materials serving as interfacial layers should be investigated to optimize the band alignment and charge transfer at the interface between the 2D materials and 3D semiconductors. To improve light absorption, one strategy could be to introduce near-field localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) and/or surface plasmon polaritons (SPP) by decorating the photoactive layer with plasmonic nanoparticles. Furthermore, by introducing deterministically arranged nanostructures (e.g., periodically), collective effects including pattern-induced antireflection, light scattering, and LSPR can be obtained for efficient broadband light harvesting and plasmonic energy transfer, providing a new orientation for the optimization of 2D materials based PV devices. Almost all the reported 2D/3D solar cells are measured under standard AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2). IPCE values are also available for studying the conversion efficiency of solar cells under different wavelengths of incident light, thus, the performance of all the devices can be compared. However, there are only a few reports on the PCE of 2D/2D junctions measured under standard AM 1.5G illumination with limited IPCE data obtained under monochromatic illumination with different wavelengths, thus making it very difficult to perform a quantitative analysis and comparison of the performance of PV devices. The reported PCE of 2D/2D TMDs based solar cells is still less than 5% under AM 1.5G illumination (without gate modulation). Most of the 2D/2D solar cells exhibit a Voc of <0.6 V. A high Voc of ∼0.8 V has only been achieved on the lateral TMDs homojunction with an external gate bias, as summarized in Table 2 and Fig. 17c. Thus, the performance of the 2D/2D TMDs based solar cells is far from optimal and should be improved through different approaches.

It was shown that the defects in a non-stoichiometric MoS2 thin layer played an important role in the intensity of the PL. Moreover, alloy structures might exist at the interface region of TMDs lateral junctions prepared by a CVD method, which might hinder the formation of p–n heterojunctions with high performance. A controlled two-step epitaxial growth process was reported to develop a lateral heterojunction with an alloy-free atomically sharp interface, shedding light on the construction of other monolayer TMDs based p–n junctions for solar energy applications. Thus, improvements were imperative in not only the stoichiometry and homogeneity of the ultrathin 2D materials but also in the control over the interfacial quality of the vertical and lateral junctions. Although the excellent absorption in monolayer TMDs had been predicted (5–10% in the visible region), the absorption in the TMDs active layer was far from optimal to achieve a high PCE for 2D/2D ultrathin heterojunctions. In view of this, light trapping techniques were highly desired to enhance the optical absorption of the heterostructures. Broadband coherent light absorption in atomically thin TMDs layer was demonstrated by incorporating the thin layers within layered stacks of dielectrics. The proposed cavity was composed of a 2D active layer-on-spacer-on-reflector stack with a chirped distributed Bragg reflector above the 2D active layer, resulting in an above-bandgap light absorption of 33.3% for monolayer MoS2 and 8.5% absorption in graphene over a 360 nm bandwidth. When an ultrathin (12–15 nm) TMDs layer was coupled with reflective metals, a near-unity and broadband light absorption could be realized (Fig. 18a and b). The exciton diffusion of monolayer TMDs was typically limited to a short range (∼1 μm) due to the ultrafast exciton recombination, and thus effective exciton energy transfer should be an important topic for developing PV devices. By placing a WS2/MoS2 monolayer heterojunction on an Al2O3-capped Ag single-crystalline plate, the range of exciton energy transfer could be increased to tens of microns. The enhancement could be attributed to an exciton–surface plasmon polariton–exciton conversion mechanism. The enhanced light absorption and exciton energy transfer achieved on the ultrathin TMDs active layer suggested that novel and high-efficiency graphene and TMDs based PV devices could be envisioned based on integrated photonic and plasmonic design. Furthermore, conceiving effective techniques to decrease the dependency on the angle of incidence of light is also crucial to improving the performance of PV devices.
Tandem stacks of solar cells were considered as a powerful configuration for increasing the PCE of solar cells. In such a multigap system, materials with different bandgaps were stacked to achieve the maximum utilization of the incident photons. The proposed multi-junction tandem solar cells were made from stacked semiconductors with different bandgaps, with a schematic illustration presented in Fig. 18c. The bandgap of TMDs ranged from the visible to near-infrared region of the solar spectrum (1.0–2.0 eV), making them excellent candidates for the development of multi-bandgap solar cells. The desired bandgap of each cell could be obtained by varying the type and/or thickness of the TMDs. Based on calculations, it was found that the absorption of solar cells made by two semiconductors reached optimal conditions when the bandgaps were 0.94 eV and 1.6 eV in a constrained configuration. For a constrained three solar cell tandem, the optimum bandgaps were found to be 0.94, 1.37, and 1.90 eV, respectively. The values of the optimum bandgap for the constrained four solar cell tandems were in the range of 0.71–2.0 eV. The rich room of bandgap modulation for the mono- and few-layered TMDs provided new opportunities for the improvement of light harvesting based on multi-bandgap systems. Besides the development of multi-bandgap systems, stacking ultrathin 2D materials into a multilayer heterojunction provided another promising configuration for efficient solar cells since the lattice mismatch could be ignored for the construction of vdWs heterojunctions. It was reported that the MoS2/WS2/MoSe2 triple bandgap heterojunctions showed an efficient and ultrafast transfer of holes from MoS2 to MoSe2 and the electrons did not accumulate in the middle WS2 layer during the transfer. For a WSe2/MoSe2/WS2/MoS2 multilayer structure, an enhanced absorption and an efficient interlayer charge transfer could be achieved by arranging the monolayers in predetermined sequences to get a ladder band alignment in both CB and VBs. The initial work based on MoS2/WS2/WSe2 triple bandgap heterojunctions resulted in a PCE of ∼0.1%, implying that more efforts were needed to improve the effective electrical heterojunction bandgap. Nevertheless, the results suggested that these TMDs multilayer heterojunctions with favorable band alignments are promising candidates for cost-effective, flexible, and high-performance PV devices.
Most 2D/2D TMDs based solar cells were realized in terms of small prototype devices through layer-by-layer assembly or CVD growth. The scalable fabrication of high quality and large area 2D materials based homo/heterojunctions remained a challenge for PV applications. The fabrication of large area graphene and MoS2, along with the realization of large-scale and high-quality 2D TMDs heterostructure films, encouraged the development of ultrathin TMDs-based PV devices with large active areas. Overall, similar to the graphene/silicon solar cells, controllable modifications were needed to engineer the optical, electrical, and structural properties of 2D/2D solar cells towards high-efficiency performance, including the cumulative utilization of gate modulation, chemical doping, band alignment optimization, and light absorption enhancement.

For photoelectrodes fabricated with 2D materials and 3D semiconductors, the maximization of activity and stability have been identified as the core issues in photoelectrode materials. Based on the unique structure and promising catalytic properties of 2D materials, the coupling of 2D materials (e.g. graphene and MoS2) with semiconducting materials not only improves the stability but also enhances the catalytic activity for high-performance PEC reactions, as summarized in Table S1 (ESI) and Fig. 17d. Despite the advances, the studies in this field are at an early stage. A number of challenges still exist for the improvement of the photovoltage of the 2D/3D photoelectrodes in PEC applications. (i) As for the graphene/semiconductor, the optimization of the interface between graphene and the semiconductor has not been systematically investigated for high-performance photoelectrodes. Methods aimed at enhancing the contact between graphene and the materials, such as employing interlayers, are also of great importance. To achieve the efficient extraction of photo-excited carriers, the band alignment of junctions should be optimized through the introduction of appropriate buffer layers. Furthermore, pristine graphene is not active in catalytic reactions. Thus, the surface modification of graphene by simultaneously introducing heteroatoms and defects for increasing the number of active sites should be highlighted. (ii) As for the TMDs/semiconductor, the catalytic activity is greatly affected by the morphology, structure, and density of active edge sites. Therefore, from the synthesis point of view, one of the key challenges is related to the facile synthesis and processing of TMDs on a large scale with controlled size, defects, crystal phase, and compositions. Currently, most studies are focused on the deposition of MoS2 and WS2 sheets on p-type semiconductors for the construction of photocathodes. It is worth pointing out that TMDs represent a large group of materials, including MoS2, MoTe2, WS2, MoSe2, WSe2, TiS2, TaS2, HfS2, and WTe2, which have versatile chemical and electronic properties. One of the most promising opportunities is the combination of other kinds of TMDs nanosheets with 3D semiconductors to generate novel photoelectrodes for PEC water splitting. For example, photoanodes can be constructed by transferring p-type WSe2 and MoTe2 on n-type semiconductors (e.g., Si, GaAs) for high performance water oxidation. Overall, due to the demand for renewable hydrogen production, along with the advancement in analytical techniques and equipment, 2D layer materials based PEC still has much room for improvement.

For ultrathin 2D vdWs heterostructures based photoelectrodes for PEC water splitting, although the usage of 2D materials has advantages for lowering the amount of active materials to achieve ultrathin films and transparent devices for energy conversion, the decrease in film thickness will easily lead to the sacrifice of IPCE. Therefore, proposing new strategies with optical engineering may help to reach a balance between thinner film thickness and higher light absorption. For example, Rothschild et al. reported optical cavities comprising ultrathin α-Fe2O3 absorbing films on reflective substrates serving as both a current collector and a back reflector, which give rise to interference between the forward and backward-propagating waves to promote resonant light trapping in ultrathin-film photoelectrodes for water splitting (Fig. 18d). That method can also be introduced to construct reflective substrate/ultrathin TMDs photoelectrodes for enhanced light harvesting. Considering that most of the 2D materials based photoanodes (e.g., MoS2, WSe2, WS2/MoS2) are composed of horizontally laid 2D materials made by the self-assembly of mono- and few-layer flakes with small size, a complicated interface and many defects may exist in the films. It is important to develop vertically stacked 2D large-area TMDs heterojunctions with favorable band alignment as photoelectrodes for PEC water splitting. Another interesting choice is to tailor the electrochemically active sites on the TMDs for enhanced HER or OER activity. Vertically aligned p-type WSe2/n-type MoS2 heterojunction arrays with rectifying behaviors, rich edge sites, and large area (over 1 cm2) have been demonstrated (Fig. 18e), opening up exciting opportunities for the simultaneous facilitation of the charge separation and catalytic activity with decreased interface defects. Furthermore, engineering multiple interfaces in a device, including the construction of heterojunctions towards favorable band alignment, the introduction of optical spacing layers, light scattering layers, charge selective blocking layers, and photosensitizers, will likely provide additional opportunities to increase the efficiency of devices. In addition, deepening the investigation of the photo-induced charge carrier dynamics by methods such as transient absorption/PL spectroscopy, terahertz spectroscopy, and spatially resolved surface photovoltage spectroscopy, is of great importance for understanding the roles of defects and heterojunction interfaces. Based on this, approaches to address defects in 2D materials, such as selective passivation or etching by chemical methods, shall be explored for further improving device performance. Finally, systematic studies on tuning the electronic structures by doping and surface modification, and revealing the as-modulated detailed electronic structures by techniques such as synchrotron radiation XAFS analysis, in situ XPS, and TEM, accompanied by DFT calculations, will also likely lead to improved device efficiencies.
Overall, if the performance of large-area and transparent 2D materials-based PEC devices can be further improved, the development of ultrathin, flexible, long-time stable, and high-efficiency devices will become feasible. Due to the environmental susceptibility of the currently proposed 2D materials-based PEC devices, further optimization of the device structures will be necessary for improved contact between the 2D materials and the conductive substrate, and enhanced resistance to external mechanical and moisture factors. Finally, multicomponent integrated devices such as PV-electrolysis systems and PEC tandem cells are suggested for achieving higher overall energy conversion efficiencies.

The above-discussed strategies for improving the efficiency of graphene and TMDs based 2D/3D and 2D/2D heterostructured PV and PEC devices are mainly focused on well-investigated TMDs such as MoS2, MoTe2, WS2, MoSe2 and WSe2. However, there are still many TMDs materials with versatile chemical and electronic properties, which can play a role in complementing or improving the current status of these materials. For example, ReS2, with a distorted, low-symmetry 1T crystal structure, possesses distinct properties when compared with the more common Mo- and W-based TMDs. ReS2 exhibits a layer-independent direct bandgap, which is in contrast to other 2D TMDs for which the bandgap and band edge position are dependent on the number of layers. Its visible-light photocatalytic activity, superior electrocatalytic activity and suitable band edge alignments for water splitting makes it highly promising for PEC solar energy conversion. ReS2 can also be combined with other semiconducting 2D materials to form well-defined vdWs heterojunctions with the favorable type-II band alignment for PV and PEC devices.

Furthermore, considering that the 2D library is rapidly growing and already features more than 150 exotic 2D materials that have been split into sub-nanometer-thick layers, it is imperative to make novel combinations with graphene/TMDs and other emerging 2D materials. Within the 2D family, although a variety of 2D materials beyond graphene and TMDs, including g-C3N4, h-BN, layered double hydroxides (LDHs), layered transition metal oxides (TMOs) and black phosphorus, have been intensively and rigorously studied, there are still many other exotic 2D materials under development and investigation, so that new opportunities for creating novel 2D graphene/TMDs based lateral or vertical heterostructures with improved energy conversion efficiencies for PV and PEC devices should emerge. These emerging 2D materials mainly involve transition metal carbides, nitrides and carbonitrides (MXenes), novel single-element 2D materials like germanene and stanene, non-layered 2D metal and perovskite materials and metal phosphorous trichalcogenides (MPX3), which display attractive and different properties compared to graphene and Mo- and W-based TMDs. For example, several recent reports have verified the potential of Ni-/Fe-based MPS3 and representative MXenes (i.e. Ti3C2) for solar energy conversion. Few-layer NiPS3 have been reported to have a larger bandgap than Mo- and W-based TMDs and proper band edges for both HER and OER, and could thus supply higher EQE and responsivity in the UV band than 2D MoS2 and MoSe2, as well as significant solar water splitting activity without the addition of cocatalysts or sacrificial agents. Moreover, few-layer FePS3 and NiPS3 also show high electrocatalytic activity, implying their promising applications as cost-effective counter electrodes of DSSCs and cocatalysts for PEC water splitting. On the other hand, Ti3C2 as a conductive 2D material with the unique wide-range adjustability of the work function could form high-quality Schottky junctions with n-Si, oxides, and sulfides by vdWs forces, enabling excellent candidates for the development of highly efficient vdWs junction-based solar energy conversion devices. Overall, all these exotic 2D materials, due to their unique physicochemical properties offer diverse strategies of their own for improving the efficiencies of graphene/TMDs based vdW heterostructures, so that the demand for developing state-of-the-art transparent PV and PEC devices can be met.

There are no conflicts to declare.


This work was supported by the Basic Science Center Project of NSFC (51788104) and National Natural Science Foundation of China (51672150). This work was partly supported through Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) KAKENHI (17H03229, 17K18867). C. L. thanks the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2016M600083).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Table S1. See DOI: 10.1039/c8cs00067k
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018