 DOI: 10.1039/C5TA08668J
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 785-790


Joong Pill
Park
,

Jin Hyuck
Heo
,

Sang Hyuk
Im
* and 

Sang-Wook
Kim
*

Department of Molecular Science and Technology, Ajou University, Suwon 443-749, Korea. E-mail: swkim@ajou.ac.kr

Functional Crystallization Center (ERC), Department of Chemical Engineering, Kyung Hee University, 1732 Deogyeong-daero, Giheung-gu, Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-do 446-701, Republic of Korea. E-mail: imrom@khu.ac.kr

Received
28th October 2015
, Accepted 25th November 2015
First published on 27th November 2015
We synthesized a new type of PbS colloidal quantum dot (QDs) embedding CuS (PbS[CuS] QDs) by rapid injection of a sulfur precursor into a lead precursor solution followed by cation exchange of Pb with Cu ions. By the cation exchange reaction, the edge of PbS QDs was partially converted into CuS, which enhances the absorptivity of light and creates an additional absorption band in the near infrared (NIR) region due to the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) effect by the existence of vacancies in CuS. From the transient and static photoluminescence (PL) decay measurements, we found that the PL decay time of PbS[CuS] QDs was ∼2 fold longer than that of the PbS QDs and the PbS[CuS] QDs showed great PL quenching compared to the PbS QDs. Accordingly, the generated excitons in PbS/CuS QDs are more easily dissociated into free charge carriers than those in the PbS QDs. As a result, the mesoscopic PbS/CuS QD-sensitized solar cells constructed using FTO (F-doped SnO2)/bl-TiO2 (blocking TiO2)/mesoscopic TiO2/PbS/CuS CQDs/P3HT (poly-3-hexylthiophene)/Au showed 0.6 V open-circuit voltage (Voc), 20.7 mA cm−2 short-circuit current density (Jsc), 65% fill factor (FF), and 8.07% overall power conversion efficiency under 1 sun conditions (100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G) due to the improved absorptivity and the reduced recombination of charge carriers.

Since Grätzel et al. reported solid-state dye sensitized solar cells, intensive studies have been done to develop more cost-effective solar cells than the conventional crystalline Si solar cells because the sensitized solar cells have a unique device architecture comprising an electron conductor, a sensitizer, and a hole conductor, thereby attaining high efficiency with relatively impure materials due to prompt injection of electrons (holes) from the sensitizer into the electron (hole) conductor. However, the conventional Ru dye sensitizer has weak absorptivity and high cost so that inorganic semiconductors and quantum dots (QDs) have been considered as promising candidates to replace Ru dyes because of their excellent properties such as high absorptivity, convenient bandgap tunability by size control, easy charge separation by large dipole moment, multiple exciton generation, and good stability.

So far metal chalcogenides such as CdSe, CdTe, PbS, PbSe, HgTe, and CIX2, (X = S, Se, and Te) QDs have been intensively studied. Among them, the PbS QDs have been considered as an ideal model sensitizer because they have a strong absorption coefficient, a wide absorption range from visible to NIR (near infrared)-wavelength, a large Bohr radius, and solution processibility. The PbS QDs are deposited on the mesoscopic TiO2 electron conductor in the thick multiple-layer in depleted heterojunction, depleted bulk heterojunction, and sensitized PbS QD solar cells in order to fully absorb the external light and to convert it into electricity. In fact, the PbS QD solar cells require a 100–300 nm thick-QD multilayer to fully absorb external light from the visible to NIR region because the absorptivity of PbS QDs gradually decreases as it goes to the longer wavelength region even though the PbS QDs have strong absorption at the band edge due to the strong quantum confinement effect. Both the absorption of light and diffusion of charge carriers are important for dye sensitized type solar cells. Because the thick absorption layer results in large absorption and long diffusion length simultaneously, the layers should have appropriate thickness. To satisfy this contradictory phenomenon, absorbers should have enhanced absorption properties in spite of the thin layers state. If it does, the cell has improved efficiency and can be adapted to more wide applications.
Although the sensitized solar cells have advantages in terms of device architecture to attain high efficiency, the solid-state PbS QD-sensitized solar cells (PbS QD-SSCs) have not been intensively studied until now, as a result, the depleted heterojunction PbS QD solar cells exhibited a much higher efficiency. Lee et al. reported 1.46% for solid-state PbS QD-sensitized solar cells comprised of FTO (F-done SnO2)/m-TiO2 (mesoscopic TiO2)/PbS QDs/spiro-MeOTAD (2,2,7,7-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9-spirobifluorene)/Au. Im et al. reported 2.9% for multiple-layered PbS QD-SSCs constructed by using FTO/bl-TiO2 (blocking TiO2)/m-TiO2/PbS CQDs/P3HT (poly-3-hexylthiophene)/PEDOT:PSS (poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate)/Au. Seo et al. reported 3.2% for mesoscopic PbS QD/CH3NH3PbI3 core/shell-SSCs. Kim et al. reported 3.9% for PbS QD-SSCs with radial directional charge transport by using a TiO2 nanorod electron conductor instead of m-TiO2.
It has been generally accepted that the interfacial junctions between QDs make surface traps. Accordingly, a multiply deposited thick-PbS QD layer is not desirable to attain high device efficiency and consequently significant effort has been focused on developing interface engineering between PbS QDs to reduce surface traps and improve interfacial contact by replacing the insulating long alkyl passivation ligand on PbS QDs with a short coupling ligand such as 1,2-ethane dithiol (EDT), 3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA), and halogens.
If so, how can we reduce the thickness of the multiply deposited PbS QD layer on m-TiO2? The answer should be to increase the absorptivity of PbS QDs themselves. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report on the synthesis of PbS QDs with enhanced absorptivity by embedding CuS in themselves, of which the embedded CuS acts as the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) center, exceptionally enhancing the light absorptivity in the NIR region. Here, we synthesized the PbS QDs embedding CuS (PbS[CuS] QDs) through a simple cationic exchange reaction at room temperature by adding the copper–oleyl amine complex (Cu–OLA) into the pre-synthesized PbS QD solution and fabricated highly efficient PbS QDs with embedded CuS-SSCs.

Fig. 1 is a schematic illustration of the synthetic route for the formation of PbS QDs with embedded CuS. First, the PbS QDs, stabilized with OA, were synthesized by a hot-injection method. Typically, we mixed 1.25 mmol of lead(II) acetate trihydrate, 2.5 mmol of oleic acid in a round-bottomed flask by magnetic stirring. The mixed solution was then degassed by stirring it under vacuum at 110 °C for 2 h. After cooling down to 85 °C under a N2 atmosphere, 0.5 mmol of bis(trimethylsilyl)sulfide with 1 ml of 1-octadecene (ODE) was immediately injected into the reaction solution. We maintained the reaction temperature at 60 °C for 30 min and then cooled the solution down to room temperature. Then we prepared the Cu–OLA (Cu–oleylamine) or Cu–OA (Cu–oleic acid) complex by dissolving a CuBr precursor in equimolar OA or OLA and ODE at room temperature. The Cu–OLA or Cu–OA in ODE solution was degassed by stirring it at 110 °C for 2 h under vacuum and then was cooled down to room temperature. To form PbS QDs with embedded CuS (PbS[CuS] QDs), a specific amount (Cu:S molar ratio = 0.5:1, and 2:1) of Cu–OLA/ODE or Cu–OA/ODE solution was injected into a PbS QD/ODE solution under stirring at room temperature for 10 min. When the Cu–OLA/ODE solution is injected into PbS QD/ODE solution, the cationic exchange reaction will be favored because the Cu–OLA has weaker interaction between the Cu2+ ion and neutral amine than the Cu2+ ion and anionic oleate so that the Cu–OLA can replace the Pb–OA in PbS QDs forming CuS, whereas the Cu–OA is too stable to react with PbS QDs under current experimental conditions. Generally, the cationic exchange reaction begins from the surface of PbS QDs because the Cu2+ cations are diffused inward by the reaction while forming CuS so that the degree of the cation exchange reaction is strongly dependent on the concentration of the added Cu–OLA solution. Therefore, if excess Cu–OLA solution is added into the PbS QD/ODE solution, all of the PbS QDs will be changed into CuS nanoparticles. So the amount of CuS embedded in PbS QDs is controllable by adjusting the amount of Cu–OLA solution.

Fig. 2(a) shows UV-visible-NIR absorption spectra of a pristine PbS QD/ODE solution, PbS[CuS] QD (Cu:S = 0.5:1)/ODE solution (red line), and CuS (Cu:S = 2:1) nanoparticle solution (blue line). This shows that the light absorption of the PbS[CuS] QDs is changed remarkably compared to a pristine PbS QD solution. Extra absorption in the NIR region of PbS[CuS] QDs, which originates from the SPR of CuS, was added to the traditional absorption range of PbS QDs. The CuS (Cu:S = 2:1) solution showed two distinctive absorption peaks in the visible region and NIR region because the bulk CuS has an absorption in the visible region due to the direct bandgap and has additional strong absorption in the NIR region by SPR due to Cu vacancies. The evidence of the transformation from PbS QDs to CuS nanoparticles by the addition of excess Cu–OLA (Cu:S = 2:1) is shown in Fig. S1. To compare the extinction coefficients of pristine PbS QD and PbS/CuS QD solution, we matched their concentrations by equaling the absorptivity at 400 nm. This method is based on the following facts: (1) the extinction coefficient of the bulk material is a constant, (2) the extinction coefficient of the QDs that contain PbS changes with particle size, resulting from a quantum confinement effect, and (3) absorption in the UV region is influenced less by quantum confinement because UV energy is greater than the band-edge absorption; therefore, the QDs have a bulk material like extinction coefficient behavior in the UV region. Interestingly, the concentration matching at 400 nm results in similar absorption in the 500–700 nm region which might be attributed to the compensation of the absorption by CuS in the visible region. However, PbS[CuS] absorption in the NIR region was greatly enhanced due to the strong SPR effect by Cu vacancies even though we used the same concentration of PbS[CuS] QD and PbS QD solution. The inset is a photograph of each solution indicating apparently the color of pristine PbS QD solution and PbS[CuS] QD solution are similar but the CuS nanoparticle solution has a different olive green color. This is consistent with the result of UV-visible-NIR spectra.

Fig. 2(b) is a TEM (transmission electron microscopy) image of pristine PbS QDs indicating that the size of PbS QDs is ∼ 4 nm. The inset is a magnified TEM image showing that the crystalline PbS QDs are well synthesized. Fig. 2(c) is a TEM image of PbS[CuS] QDs indicating that the size and uniformity of PbS[CuS] QDs are not changed during cation exchange reactions. The inset and magnified TEM image confirm that the size of PbS[CuS] QDs is similar to that of the pristine PbS QDs and the marked region in the magnified TEM image indicates an obvious difference in contrast to the single-crystal PbS QDs, which is caused by the difference in electron density between Pb and Cu. To confirm the formation of CuS, we checked the EDX (electron dispersive X-ray spectroscopy) line-profile of PbS[CuS] QDs as shown in Fig. 2(d). The overlapped line-profiles of Cu, Pb, and S elements clearly indicate that the Cu element is more concentrated in the left side than the right side in a single PbS[CuS] QD. This is consistent with the result of the magnified TEM image in Fig. 2(c). Accordingly, the PbS[CuS] QDs with a strong SPR effect could be successively synthesized through our proposed method. To form general alloys or core/shell structures with epitaxial interfaces, the crystal structures and lattice constants must be similar. If this is not the case, the interfaces function as defect sites, causing tension between the materials. In extreme cases, well defined heterostructures are hard to fabricate and, even if the structure can be formed, can collapse easily. Consequently, it is difficult to form an interfacial structure between CuS and PbS, because two materials have different lattice structures. In particular, CuS has several crystalline phases such as djurleite, covellite, and digenite. These depend on the composition, vacancies, and Cu oxidation state. In contrast, PbS has only one rock-salt phase. Because of these different lattice structures, cationic exchange reactions must be adapted to solve the problems in interface formation. Recently, heterostructured PbS/CdS QDs were fabricated through cationic exchange reactions. In such QDs, the hexagonal CdS was known to be over grown on the [110] facet of cubic PbS QDs through cation exchange reactions. Accordingly, the hexagonal structure of CuS will form an interface with cubic PbS more favorably than other crystalline phases of CuS. Among the CuS phases, djurleite (Cu1.94S) is the most stable but it is not suitable to make an interface with the cubic PbS QDs because of its orthorhombic structure. Instead, covellite (CuS) or digenite (Cu1.8S), which have a hexagonal structure, can be used to produce a heterojunction structure. In our system, the addition of Cu cations using Cu–OLA results in the replacement of Pb cations from PbS. After cation exchange, the rock-salt structure is maintained, which indicates that CuS is mainly formed in the surface of PbS QDs, thereby not occupying a large volume in the PbS[CuS] QDs and consequently it does not cause significant changes in the lattice. The Pb:Cu molar ratio of PbS[CuS] QDs was ∼40% and ∼42%, respectively, by EDX spectroscopy and ICP-MS (inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry) analysis as shown in Fig. S2 and S3. If we assume that the PbS[CuS] core/shell nanoparticles are synthesized, the ratio of Pb atoms and Cu atoms should be ∼6:1 because the atomic ratio of Pb:Cu in the PbS[CuS] QDs was ∼40%. However, in the magnified TEM image in Fig. 2(c) the ratio of Pb atom:Cu atom in the marked region is 7:3–7:4. Therefore, we can conclude that the synthesized particles have PbS QDs with embedded CuS (not PbS/CuS core/shell structure).

Fig. 3(a) shows the static PL (photoluminescence) spectra of PbS QD, PbS[CuS] (Cu:S = 0.06:1) QD, and PbS[CuS] (Cu:S = 0.5:1) QD solution indicating that the PL is greatly quenched by introducing CuS in PbS QDs. This implies that the generated excitons in PbS QDs are separated to free charge carriers due to the formation of a junction between CuS and PbS. The CuS is known to be a p-type semiconductor due to abundant Cu vacancies so that the holes generated in PbS QDs will be transported to the CuS region. Accordingly, if the CuS part meets the hole transporting material, such as P3HT (poly-3-hexylthiophene), the hole will be effectively extracted out from the PbS[CuS] QDs. The PbS[CuS] (Cu:S = 0.5:1) sample did not show any PL spectrum so here we used the PbS[CuS] (Cu:S = 0.06:1) QD solution for further dynamic studies.

Fig. 3(b) shows the time-correlated single photon counting luminescence decays (TCSPC) of PbS QD and PbS[CuS] (Cu:S = 0.06:1) QD solution. The PL decay times of PbS and PbS[CuS] QDs changed considerably even though only small quantities of Cu cations were added. Pristine PbS and PbS[CuS] QDs (Cu:S = 0.06:1) had PL decay times of 2 and 4 μs, respectively, showing that the decay time of PbS[CuS] QDs is two times longer than that of PbS. Therefore, we can expect that the PbS[CuS] (Cu:S = 0.5:1) QDs will have longer exciton lifetime than the pristine PbS QDs. Therefore, the charge carriers generated in PbS[CuS] QDs will be more effectively collected and will have less recombination than the pristine PbS QDs.
To investigate the photovoltaic properties of the PbS[CuS] QD-SSCs, an all solid-state PbS[CuS] QD-SSC was fabricated as shown in Fig. 3(c) (detailed procedure is shown in the ESI Section). The thickness of the bl-TiO2, m-TiO2-PbS[CuS] QD layer, P3HT, and Au layer was ∼50 nm, ∼600 nm, ∼30 nm, and ∼60 nm, respectively. For optimized solar cell performance, the QDs were carefully controlled to be located inside the m-TiO2 layer. The structure was confirmed by SEM cross-sectional images.
Upon illumination of light, the PbS[CuS] QDs generate excitons and the excitons are quickly separated to free electrons and holes by the CuS embedded in PbS QDs as depicted in Fig. 3(d). The electrons and holes are then effectively transported to the m-TiO2 electron conductor and P3HT hole conductor, respectively. The best cell performance of PbS[CuS] QD-SSCs was 0.6 V open-circuit voltage (Voc), 20.7 mA cm−2 short-circuit current density (Jsc), 65% fill factor (FF), and 8.07% overall power conversion efficiency (η) under 1 sun conditions (100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G), as shown in Fig. 3(e), whereas the PbS QD-SSCs showed 0.49 Voc, 12.3 mA cm−2Jsc, 39% FF, and 2.36% η under 1 sun conditions. The photovoltaic properties of each cell are summarized in Table 1. The calculated Jsc from the integration of the EQE (external quantum efficiency) spectrum of each cell in Fig. 3(f) was ∼20.2 and ∼12.4 mA cm−2, respectively, which was well matched with the Jsc in the J–V curves. The contribution of Jsc, Voc, and FF to improve the device efficiency was ∼68%, ∼22%, and ∼67% improvement, respectively. The improvement of Jsc is closely related to the EQE spectrum which is the product of light harvesting efficiency (ηlhe), charge separation efficiency (ηcs), and charge collection efficiency (ηcc). Here, the PbS/CuS QDs have stronger absorptivity in the NIR region than the pristine PbS QDs so that the ηlhe of PbS/CuS QD-SSCs will be higher in the NIR region. In addition, the ηcs and ηcc of PbS/CuS QD-SSCs will be improved due to the improved excitons' lifetime and efficient charge separation by the embedded CuS in PbS QDs. The reduced recombination by the embedded structure will improve the Voc of the PbS/CuS QD-SSC and the efficient charge separation and collection will improve the shunt (Rsh) and series (Rs) resistance, thereby improving FF. We also checked the stability of QD-SSCs, however, the efficiency was decreased to 80% of pristine cells after 1 day, and 60% after 2 days.
Device

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)

η (%)
Deviation
PbS
0.49
12.3
39
2.36
1.27 ± 0.06
PbS[CuS]
0.6
20.7
65
8.07
6.09 ± 1.27

We have shown a new structured CuS-embedded PbS QD (PbS/CuS QD) and its applications in QD-sensitized solar cells. The PbS/CuS QD system was fabricated by the rapid injection of a sulfur precursor into a lead precursor solution and the subsequent cationic exchange reaction of Pb ions for Cu ions. During the reaction, new absorptions in the NIR region begin to appear and mix with the original PbS absorption. The new absorption after the cationic exchange reaction results from the SPR effect caused by vacancies of CuS. From the dynamic and static PL decay measurements, the exciton lifetime of PbS/CuS CQDs was ∼2 fold longer than that of the PbS QDs and the PbS/CuS CQDs showed greater PL quenching than the PbS QDs. For solar cell applications, CuS increased the absorption because of the surface plasmon effect, and the embedded structure helped charge collection and separation. Thus, we applied this material to produce a solid-state QD-SSC, achieving a high power conversion efficiency of 8.07% (Voc 0.6 V, Jsc 20.7 mA cm−2, FF 65%). We believe that this approach is a new paradigm for energy harvesting research.


This work was supported by the New & Renewable Energy Core Technology Program of Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) (No. 201330300001) and the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (No. 2014R1A5A1009799), Republic of Korea.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta08668j
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016