 DOI: 10.1039/D2TC05214H
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2023, 11, 2480-2483


Jiantao
Wang
,

Jinhua
Li
,

Heng
Liu
,

Zhengyu
Lu
,

Haiping
Xia
* and 

Hsing-Lin
Wang
*

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Xueyuan Avenue 1088, Shenzhen 518055, China. E-mail: wangxl3@sustech.edu.cn

Department of Chemistry, Shenzhen Grubbs Institute, Southern University of Science and Technology, Xueyuan Avenue 1088, Shenzhen 518055, China. E-mail: xiahp@sustech.edu.cn

Department of Chemistry, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China

Received
7th December 2022
, Accepted 11th January 2023
First published on 25th January 2023
Including a synthesized neutral carbolong (NC) as a cathode interlayer of p–i–n perovskite solar cells boosted the power conversion efficiency to 22.65%, higher than the 21.95% value for the bathocuproine counterpart, owing to facilitated electron transport and lower interfacial recombination losses. Moreover, NC-based devices presented greatly enhanced thermal and operational stability.

Due to their low-cost processing and high device efficiency, metal halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have been considered as one of the candidates with the most potential in the photovoltaic community. Inverted PSCs featuring a p–i–n structure are more favoured than the regular configuration due to their compatibility with low-temperature fabrication, mechanical flexibility and tandem devices. In addition, p–i–n PSCs displaying power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) exceeding 25% have recently been made as a result of composition evolution, surface passivation and charge contact layer customization. Although many efforts have been made to optimize perovskite/charge transport layer interfaces, the cathode interlayer (CIL) between the electron transport layer and the external metal electrode has received less attention. The CIL plays a vital role in energy level alignment and electron transport, which greatly impacts device performance. Moreover, the intrinsic stability of the CIL determines the upper level of the device operational lifetime.

As one of the most widely used CILs, bathocuproine (BCP) has been deployed in state-of-the-art PSCs. However, the BCP film tends to aggregate into clusters at a temperature of 85 °C, which is the protocol temperature required by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) standard, thus deteriorating the thermal and operational stability of BCP-containing PSCs. Other materials, such as metal acetylacetonates, benzotriazole (BTA), and tin oxide (SnO2), have been used as CILs to improve device stability; however, they are inferior to BCP at yielding high device PCEs. Therefore, it is necessary to develop a novel material as a CIL to produce both efficient and stable p–i–n PSCs.
Recently, we reported a series of organometallic complexes applied as CILs in p–i–n PSCs, and that can form interfacial dipoles and hence reduce the work function (WF) of the metal cathode to a large extent, even allowing the use of high-WF Au. As a corollary to this work, we found that an organometallic carbolong-derived framework can play a major role in cathode interface tuning. Herein, we synthesized a novel organometallic molecule termed neutral carbolong complex (NC) and employed it as a CIL to replace the widely used BCP in Cu-based p–i–n PSCs. Upon using NC to carry out interface engineering, the best solar cell showed a PCE of 22.65% (stabilized PCE of 22.5%), higher than the 21.95% value of the BCP counterpart. Contributions to this performance enhancement included a favourable band bending at the cathode interface, which resulted in facilitated electron transport and fewer recombination losses. Furthermore, PSCs based on NC presented greatly enhanced thermal and operational stability, making NC a potential candidate for PSCs in real-setting applications.
As shown in Fig. 1a, the target NC molecule was synthesized by performing a ligand substitution of carbolong complex a1. The molecular characterization results for NC such as those from nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and high-resolution mass spectrometry (HRMS) analyses are shown in Fig. S1–S4 (ESI). The molecular structure was identified by performing single-crystal X-ray crystallographic analysis as shown in Fig. 1b; this analysis clearly exhibited the neutral character of NC. We further performed density functional theory (DFT) calculations to characterize the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of NC, as shown in Fig. 1c and d, and found their energy levels to be at −5.35 eV and −2.48 eV, respectively. We subjected NC to a thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), and it showed a 5% weight loss temperature (T95) of 255.3 °C (Fig. S5, ESI), indicative of its good thermal properties for avoiding becoming degraded during cathode metal evaporation and device stability measurements. To monitor the thermal aging process of NC films, we studied them using atomic force microscopy (AFM). The topographic images of an NC film deposited on quartz before and after being subjected to thermal aging at 85 °C for 24 h are shown in Fig. S6 (ESI). The resulting root-mean-square (RMS) values of 1.38 nm and 1.53 nm for the film revealed no considerable change in surface morphology during the thermal treatment, in contrast to the case for BCP that has been observed to rapidly aggregate under 85 °C heating for 12 h.
To test the capacity of NC to serve as a CIL in PSCs, we fabricated photovoltaic devices with a typical p–i–n configuration, namely ITO/PTAA/perovskite/PCBM/NC/Cu. The perovskite composition was Cs0.05(FA0.9MA0.1)0.95PbI2.73Br0.27 and the characterizations of the corresponding perovskite films are described in our previous report. To improve the device PCE, we introduced an alkylammonium interlayer before depositing the perovskite. Metallic Cu was selected as the cathode due to its cost being lower than the cost of Au and due to its superb stability relative to Ag and Al. We optimized the thickness of NC by changing its concentration in its processing solution. The detailed photovoltaic parameters can be found in Table S3 (ESI). As shown in Fig. 2b, a solution of 1 mg mL−1NC led to the best device performance. Using a lower concentration resulted in discontinuous coverage, and producing too thick of a film increased the series resistance, explaining the decline in device performance upon varying the concentration from the optimal concentration. The film thickness in this optimized condition was measured, using a spectroscopic ellipsometer, to be 8–10 nm. In this optimal condition, we fabricated a series of PSCs and measured their power conversion efficiencies (PCEs). As shown in Fig. S7 (ESI), the devices had an average PCE of 21.96 with a standard deviation of ±0.56%. We plotted the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the best device with the forward scan (FS) and reverse scan (RS) in Fig. 2c. This device showed negligible hysteresis, with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.15 V, short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 24.09 mA cm−2, fill factor (FF) of 81.75%, and PCE of 22.65% determined using the RS, and with corresponding values of 1.15 V, 23.92 mA cm−2, 80.12% and 22.04%, respectively, from the FS. We measured the device external quantum efficiency (EQE) as shown in Fig. 2d. The integrated Jsc from the EQE curve was 23.24 mA cm−2, within 4% of the values from the J–V scans, indicating good reliability of our device performance. To provide an accurate description of the device performance, we measured the stabilized PCE output. As shown in Fig. S8 (ESI), the stabilized PCE of the NC-modified device was 22.5%, i.e., nearly the same as the J–V measurement results.
Next, we compared the device efficiency and stability based on NC with those based on BCP. We plotted the reverse-scanned J–V curves of the best respective devices in Fig. 3a. The device based on BCP showed a Voc of 1.14 V, Jsc of 23.69, FF of 81.28% and PCE of 21.95% (average 20.17% as shown in Fig. S9, ESI), lower than the 22.65% PCE of the NC-based device (Fig. 2c). We measured the thermal stability of PSCs by putting the unencapsulated devices on a hot plate at 85 °C in an inert condition. As shown in Fig. 3b, both devices showed rapid PCE decreases in the first 10 hours (h) due to the burn-in effect. After 500 h, the devices based on NC maintained an average PCE of 17.8%, that is 81% of its initial average value (22.01%), while the BCP-based device presented a continuously decreasing PCE with a final average of 4.4%. We further compared the maximum power point trackings (MPPTs) of the best devices based on BCP and NC, respectively. As shown in Fig. 3c, the NC-based device maintained at least 90% of the initial PCE (T90) for 700 h while the BCP-based device maintained it for only 220 h. The superior thermal and operational stability behaviours of the NC-based devices suggested the potential of using NC as CILs of PSCs in real-setting applications.
To understand how NC improved the device performance, we performed optoelectronic characterizations. We investigated the energy level alignments with and without NC by conducting ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS). As shown in Fig. S10 (ESI), the work function (WF) values of Cu, Cu/PCBM, Cu/NC and Cu/NC/PCBM were determined to be 4.7 eV, 4.6 eV, 4.4 eV and 4.6 eV, respectively. Based on the measured WFs, we produced a diagram of the energy level alignment, as shown in Fig. 4a. This analysis showed an interfacial energy barrier at the Cu/PCBM interface, with this barrier suppressing the transport of electrons from the PCBM component to the Cu component. Introducing a thin layer of NC coincided with a 0.3 eV reduction in the WF of Cu, with this reduction eliminating the interfacial energy barrier created by direct contact of Cu with PCBM. In addition, the band bending at the NC/PCBM interface improved the transport of electrons from PCBM to NC. An ultrathin layer of NC in a PSC would be expected to allow electron tunnelling to the external Cu. To compare the electron transport mobility of NC with that of BCP, we carried out a transient photocurrent (TPC) characterization. As shown in Fig. 4b, a shorter transient lifetime was found for a device based on NC (0.37 μs) than for one based on BCP (0.48 μs), indicating facilitated electron transport when incorporating NC as a CIL in a PSC, with such facilitated transport explaining the higher Jsc and FF in the NC-based PSCs than in the BCP-based ones. To compare the carrier recombination dynamics, we further carried out electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) analyses. As shown in Fig. 4c, the resulting plots showed a larger semicircle for the NC-based device, revealing its inhibited carrier recombination, which benefited from the reduced interfacial energy barrier and improved electron transport mobility, leading to a slightly enhanced device Voc.

In summary, an organometallic material termed neutral carbolong complex (NC) was used to replace BCP in p–i–n PSCs. PSCs using NC as a cathode interlayer (CIL) achieved a remarkable efficiency of up to 22.65%, higher than the maximum 21.95% value of the BCP-based ones. NC-based PSCs showed facilitated electron transport mobility and suppressed carrier recombination, which contributed to the enhanced device performance. Moreover, PSCs employing NC displayed superior thermal stability (T80 > 500 h) and operational stability (T90 > 700 h). This work demonstrated that the interface engineering by a neutral carbolong complex is conducive to fabricating efficient and stable p–i–n PSCs.


There are no conflicts to declare.


The authors acknowledge funding support from the Key-Area Research and Development Program of Guangdong Province (2019B010941001), the Shenzhen Science and Technology Innovation Committee (CYJ20170817110652558, JCYJ20210324105013035 and JCYJ20200109140812302), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21931002) and the Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Energy Materials for Electric Power (2018B030322001), as well as Financial Support for Outstanding Talents Training Fund in Shenzhen. The authors thank the technical support from the Microscope and Imaging Center of the SUSTech Core Research Facilities (SCRF) of Southern University of Science and Technology (SUSTech).


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. CCDC 2224664. For ESI and crystallographic data in CIF or other electronic format see DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2tc05214h
‡ J. Wang and J. Li contributed equally.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023