 DOI: 10.1039/D3TC00656E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2023, 11, 8942-8951


Ningxia
Gu
,

Ye
Feng
,

Lixin
Song
*,

Pengyun
Zhang
,

Pingfan
Du
,

Lei
Ning
,

Zeyuan
Sun
,

Hua
Jiang
* and 

Jie
Xiong
*

College of Materials and Textiles, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou 310018, Zhejiang, China. E-mail: lxsong12@zstu.edu.cn; jh@zstu.edu.cn

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Textile and Flexible Interconnection of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou 310018, Zhejiang, China

School of Fashion Design & Engineering, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou, 311199, Zhejiang, China. E-mail: jxiong@zstu.edu.cn

Received
21st February 2023
, Accepted 20th May 2023
First published on 22nd May 2023
Organic–inorganic perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted widespread attention in improving photovoltaic efficiency during the past decade, yet the stability and defect passivation engineering of PSCs are still challenging. Herein, a novel dye N-(4-(phenyldiazenyl)phenyl) acetamide (Ph-azo-PhAmi) was synthesized and introduced as a passivator into a perovskite to reduce the defects and enhance the efficiency. The amide group in Ph-azo-PhAmi could interact with the defects of the perovskite, resulting in the decreased trap states and suppressed non-radiative recombination. Due to the azo bond, the Ph-azo-PhAmi possessed π-conjugated properties, and could form steady-state polymer-like structures by π–π stacking to enhance the passivation effect. As a result, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs based on Ph-azo-PhAmi increased to 20.85% with matched energy levels and negligible hysteresis. The unencapsulated PSCs with Ph-azo-PhAmi retained 85.7% of the initial PCE after storage in ambient air (room temperature, 65–75% relative humidity) under dark conditions for 300 h, revealing a significantly enhanced ambient stability compared with the pristine PSCs (26.9%). This work provides a promising method for fabricating high-performance and well-stability PSCs based on a dye additive.

Solution-processed organic–inorganic halide perovskites have attracted intensive research and development due to their prominent properties, for example, long-range charge carrier diffusion lengths, adjustable band gaps and high absorption coefficients, and have been regarded as promising candidate materials for perovskite solar cells (PSCs) and other photoelectric devices. The crystalline quality of perovskites simultaneously affects the photophysical properties of perovskite films and the performance of photovoltaic devices. However, crystal defects (including uncoordinated cations and anions) easily form in the grain boundary and surface of perovskites, and have been identified as the carrier recombination centers, thus restricting the power conversion efficiency (PCE) improvement in recent years. Besides, these trap states accelerate the erosion of moisture and oxygen into perovskites, and consequently harm the stability of PSCs in an ambient environment.

Therefore, significant strategies have been devoted to passivating the defects, such as additive engineering, composite engineering, encapsulation and interface treatment and so on. In terms of additive engineering, some molecules or synthetic materials with specific functional groups (such as amino, sulfonate, cyano and carbonyl) effectively passivate the uncoordinated Pb/I defects of perovskite films, which can regulate the perovskite crystallization process. Among them, dye molecules have been seen as a novel passivator in PSCs to reduce charge defects by additive and interlayer engineering due to their low cost, high charge mobility, excellent photochemical properties, ease of chemical structure modification and high environmental stability. For example, Zhang et al. introduced N719 into a mixed-cation mixed-halide perovskite for better moisture stability. N719 molecules could form a perovskite–dye complex to tune the reaction process by a chemical interaction between bare carboxyl groups and MA+, finally achieving a champion PCE of 19.6% and better stability. Zhang et al. introduced fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) to the CsPbI1.5Br1.5 compositional perovskite for minimizing the defects by forming a strong interaction between the pseudohalide thiocyanate groups (SCN−) on FITC and methylammonium groups (MA+). The obtained device yielded a champion 14.05% PCE with negligible hysteresis and better moisture stability. Guo et al. employed two organic sensitizers (MM-3 and MM-4) with a carboxylic acid group to effectively reduce Pb2+ defects, resulting in the improvement of open-circuit voltage (VOC) from 1.02 to 1.08 V, and PCE from 18.91% to 20.31%. Liu et al. used a coumarin 343 dye molecule as an additive into perovskite. The strong coordination between the under-coordinated Pb2+ and carboxyl groups in C343 improved the efficiency (20.9%) and minimized VOC loss of nickel oxide-based inverted PSCs. As a supplement, other dye additives are summarized in Table S1 (ESI), including different dye categories, perovskite compositions, and PCE. Most of the numerous dyes as additives for PSCs interact with single cation defects and the devices are always fabricated in a glovebox under inert conditions, restricting the large-scale preparation and commercialization of PSCs. Therefore, fabricating PSCs in an air environment has attracted wide attention. Meanwhile, dye additives are difficult to extract and their high cost also limits the perovskite commercialization. Hence, designing and synthesizing a novel dye with a multifunctional effect on passivating the anion and cation defects in perovskite is a promising prospect.
In this work, a dye additive, (N-(4-(phenyldiazenyl)phenyl) acetamide, Ph-azo-PhAmi), was synthesized and introduced into perovskite for passivating the defects and improving the performance of devices. The dye molecule contained an amide bond (–CO–NH–), an azo bond (–NN–), two benzene rings and a methyl group. The N–H and CO groups in Ph-azo-PhAmi formed a bifunctional chemical interaction with the perovskite, which could reduce the defects of perovskite films and construct a compact perovskite film. Due to the azo (–NN–) bond, the Ph-azo-PhAmi possessed a π-conjugated property and π–π stacking effect, which could form steady-state polymer-like structures to enhance the passivation effect. As a result, the fabricated device achieved 20.85% PCE with an enhanced VOC and extended carrier recombination time by adding 0.1 mg mL−1 Ph-azo-PhAmi into the perovskite. Furthermore, owing to the hydrogen bonding upon Ph-azo-PhAmi passivation and increased perovskite surface hydrophobicity, both the moisture stability and light stability of the unencapsulated PSCs obviously enhanced after 300 h of storage under ambient and dark conditions (room temperature, relative humidity: 65–75%).

Fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass substrates were purchased from the Advanced Electronic Technology Co., Ltd. Acetone, anhydrous ethanol, isopropanol (IPA), titanium (diisopropoxide)bis(2,4-pentanedionate) (75 wt% in IPA), anhydrous dimethylformamide (DMF), anhydrous dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), anhydrous ethyl acetate (EA), anhydrous chlorobenzene (CB) and anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN) were purchased from Aladdin. Lead(II) iodide (PbI2), CH3NH3I (MAI), 2,2′,7,7′-Tetrakis (N,N-di-p-methoxy-phenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD), 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP), lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (Li-TFSI), poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene): poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT: PSS (4083)) and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) were purchased from Xi’an Polymer Light Technology Corporation. All chemicals were employed with no further purification.


All the synthetic routes of Ph-azo-PhAmi were as follows. The aniline (5 mmoL), concentrated water (2 mL) and hydrochloric acid (2 mL) were added into a round bottom flask (50 mL) and stirred to dissolve the solid at 20–30 °C. Then, the reaction flask was put in an ice water bath and kept at ∼0 °C. Adding 0.4 g NaNO2 into 3 mL water formed a pre-prepared sodium nitrite aqueous solution and this was added about 10 min and then the mixture was stirred for 30 min. Then starch potassium iodide test paper was used to detect whether the nitrous acid was excessive. If necessary, some urea was added to remove the excess nitrous acid. Add aniline (5 mmol) and ethanol (3 mL) into another three-necked flask (100 mL), and adjust the pH to 4–6. After adding diazonium salt solution, the mixture was stirred vigorously at 0–5 °C for 3 h. Determine whether the reaction was terminated by using thin Layer Chromatography (TLC). After the reaction was finished, add sodium carbonate aqueous solution (2 mol L−1) to adjust the solution to neutrality, leave it standing, filter, collect the precipitate, and dry it in an oven at 60 °C. The product was orange solid (0.64 g) with a yield of 65%.

CaCl2 (0.2 mmol) was introduced into the mixture of aniline (2 mmol) and acetic anhydride (2 mmol) at room temperature, which was stirred for 45 min and was monitored by TLC. The reacted mixture was washed with a saturated NaHCO3 aqueous solution, extracted, dried, and filtrated to obtain the target product (N-(4-phenylazo-phenyl)-acetamide, 0.22 g) with a yield of 47%. 1H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrum is shown in Fig. S1 (ESI), 1H NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ (ppm): 10.34 (s, 1H), 7.91–7.82 (m, 4H), 7.58 (d, J = 8.0 Hz, 2H), 7.29 (dd, J1 = J2 = 8.0 Hz, 2H), 7.03 (dd, J1 = J2 = 8.0 Hz, 1H), 2.13 (s, 3H).

The unencapsulated PSCs were prepared with an FTO/TiO2/perovskite (with or without Ph-azo-PhAmi)/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag structure under an air environment (RH: ≈50%) without a glovebox, therefore greatly reducing the manufacturing costs. The FTO glass substrates were washed through ultrasonic treatment with acetone, anhydrous ethanol and IPA for 15 min each, sequentially. Then the pre-cleaned FTO glasses were placed into the ultraviolet (UV)-ozone cleaner to clean for 15 min. Mixing 70 mg and 150 mg of titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) in 1 mL anhydrous ethanol formed a mixture with a concentration of 70 mg mL−1 and 150 mg mL−1 as the TiO2 precursor solution. The compact TiO2 precursor solution (70 mg mL−1) was spin-coated on the FTO at a rate of 2000 revolutions per minute (rpm) for 20 s, annealing at 150 °C for 30 min. After cooling down, 150 mg mL−1 TiO2 precursor solution was spin-coated at a rate of 4000 rpm for 20 s along with an annealing temperature at 450 °C (a heating rate of 2 °C min−1) for 30 min to fabricate the electron-transport layer (ETL). For MAPbI3 precursor solution, MAI (159 mg) and PbI2 (461 mg) were mixed in DMSO (0.08 mL) and DMF (0.60 mL) mixed solution and stirred at 60 °C for 0.5 h. 0.080 mL perovskite precursor solution was used to spin-coat the TiO2 layer at 2000 rpm for 10 s and 4000 rpm for 25 s, respectively. In the last 15 s, EA (0.245 mL, with 0, 0.05, 0.1 and 0.2 mg mL−1 Ph-azo-PhAmi additive) was pipetted onto the substrate as an anti-solvent. Then, the perovskite film was annealed at 100 °C for 30 min at once. Spiro-OMeTAD (72.3 mg spiro-OMeTAD powder, 17.5 μL of Li-TFSI solution (520 mg mL−1 Li-TFSI dissolved in acetonitrile) and 28.8 μL 4-TBP were dissolved in 1 mL CB), as the hole-transport layer (HTL), spin-coated on the top of the perovskite film at 4000 rpm for 30 s. 80 nm thick Ag as the top electrode was prepared by thermal evaporation to complete the devices. The active area of the device was determined to be 0.06 cm2.


Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS, ESCALAB Xi+) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Al K Alpha, USA) were employed to analyze the morphology and microstructures of perovskite films. Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy with a JASCO FT/IR-6100 spectrophotometer, field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, Ultra55, ZEISS, Germany), X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD, Thermo ARL-X’TRA, USA) with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å), and UV-visible (UV-vis) absorption with a UV-vis spectrophotometer (Lambda 900, America) were measured. A PG2000-Pro-EX spectrophotometer (Shanghai Ideaoptics Corporation) and transient fluorescence spectrometer (FLS980, Edinburgh Instruments) were used for photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurement was acquired by using an electrochemical workstation (Germany). The photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) characteristics were measured to characterize the performance of PSCs using a Keithley 2400-SCS source meter (AM 1.5 illumination, 100 mW cm−2).


It can be seen from Fig. 1a that the molecular structure of Ph-azo-PhAmi contained two benzene rings, an azo bond, an amido bond and a methyl group. The electrostatic potential distribution of Ph-azo-PhAmi was calculated using a density functional theory (DFT) method to illustrate the electronic structure of Ph-azo-PhAmi. The CO bond presented negative charge, and N–H bond located at the positive charge, as shown in Fig. 1a. Thus, the Ph-azo-PhAmi could interact with the perovskite to passivate negative- and positive-charged defects (under-coordinated Pb2+ and I− ions), which could adjust the grain growth of perovskite and stabilize the coordination effect between Ph-azo-PhAmi and perovskite.

As mentioned above, the schematic illustration of the interaction between perovskite crystal and Ph-azo-PhAmi additive was displayed in Fig. 1b. To confirm this assumption, the 1H NMR spectra of the pristine PbI2, the Ph-azo-PhAmi and the Ph-azo-PhAmi-PbI2 were shown in Fig. 1c. From the NMR spectra, the chemical shift of N–H was observed while the benzene ring remained unchanged, revealing a strong interaction between Ph-azo-PhAmi and perovskite in the solution. The FTIR spectra (Fig. 1d) indicated that the N–H bond of Ph-azo-PhAmi located at 3298 cm−1. The N–H bond of the perovskite film with Ph-azo-PhAmi shifted to a higher wavenumber compared to the Ph-azo-PhAmi, which was beneficial to passivate the I− defects. The CO bond of Ph-azo-PhAmi was located at 1797 cm−1 and showed a blue-shifted to 1792 cm−1 of the perovskite film with Ph-azo-PhAmi. This slight shift of the CO bond further verified a binding state between Pb2+ and Ph-azo-PhAmi. The strong coordination bonds (C–O⋯Pb) were formed by the Lewis base and the CO bond of Ph-azo-PhAmi donated its lone electron pair to the empty orbitals of Pb2+. To further identify the electronic state of the elements of the perovskite chemical interaction, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was employed. For the pristine perovskite film, the Pb 4f spectrum (Fig. 1e) displayed two main peaks at 137.83 and 142.68 eV, respectively, corresponding to Pb 4f7/2 and Pb 4f5/2. For the Ph-azo-PhAmi passivated perovskite film, the binding energy of the Pb 4f core level shifted to a lower energy (at 137.66 eV and 142.51 eV). This positive-shift (0.17 eV) of the element core level originated from the electron transfer from Ph-azo-PhAmi to Pb2+ and the interaction between the CO bond in Ph-azo-PhAmi and Pb2+ ions in perovskite, indicating the surrounding electron cloud density changed.
Besides, in the pristine perovskite film, the peaks of two metallic Pb were located at 141.01 and 136.06 eV and disappeared after the Ph-azo-PhAmi was incorporated, which originated from the effective defect passivation. Besides, the I 3d of the control film in Fig. 1f showed that two dominant peaks located at 630.08 and 618.59 eV, which corresponded to I 3d5/2 and I 3d3/2, respectively. For the dye-passivated perovskite film, these peaks shifted towards a lower binding energy (629.88 and 618.39 eV), which was consistent with the FTIR results, suggesting the changed chemical environment around I− after the treatment of dye in the perovskite matrix. These results verified the strong coordination interaction between Ph-azo-PhAmi additive and the perovskite.
The influence of Ph-azo-PhAmi additive on the perovskite film grain growth was studied by the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) measurement. Fig. 2a and b exhibited SEM images of the control perovskite film and the perovskite film with 0.1 mg mL−1 Ph-azo-PhAmi, and the SEM images of all perovskite films were presented in Fig. S2 (ESI). Obviously, the control perovskite film showed smaller grain size with some pinholes. And the grain sizes of the perovskite films were more compact and uniform as the concentration of Ph-azo-PhAmi increased until it reached 0.1 mg mL−1. The 0.1 mg mL−1 Ph-azo-PhAmi additive treated perovskite film became more compact and smoother with larger grain sizes. Moreover, the grain size distributions (Fig. 2c) verified the average grain size of pristine and 0.1 mg mL−1 Ph-azo-PhAmi incorporated perovskite films were 289 nm and 317 nm. However, when the doped concentration increased to 0.2 mg mL−1, the corresponding perovskite film was uneven with pinholes. The cross-sectional SEM images were measured to further investigate the passivation effect of Ph-azo-PhAmi on the morphology of perovskite films along the vertical direction, as exhibited in Fig. 2d and e. The thickness of Pho-azo-Ph treated perovskite film was thicker (≈760 nm) compared than that of pristine perovskite film (≈ 700 nm). The pristine perovskite film presented randomly stacked perovskite crystals, while the grain size of Ph-azo-PhAmi-treated perovskite had a tendency toward homeotropic alignment, which was beneficial for the carrier transport and performance of PSCs. The increased perovskite grains might be ascribed to the reduced perovskite crystallization rate by the interaction between Ph-azo-PhAmi and perovskite, as illustrated in Fig. S3 (ESI). The change in color confirmed that the incorporated Ph-azo-PhAmi in antisolvent stabilized the intermediate phase structure (MAI·PbI2·DMSO), leading to the delayed crystallization process, increased critical Gibbs free energy (ΔGc) and enlarged perovskite grain sizes of the perovskite film, which might be good for fabricating a denser and better perovskite film with less defects. Therefore, the additive Ph-azo-PhAmi acted as more efficient crystallization accelerants, and the doping concentration of Ph-azo-PhAmi additive was 0.1 mg mL−1 for the Ph-azo-PhAmi-treated perovskite film in the acquired test.
The XRD measurement (Fig. 3a) was measured to further confirm the effect of the Ph-azo-PhAmi additive on perovskite crystallization. All the perovskite films displayed similar diffraction peaks without an obvious shift, implying that the Ph-azo-PhAmi molecule had no effect on the formation of the perovskite lattice. The peaks at 14.2°, 28.44° and 31.91° corresponded to the (110), (220) and (310) crystal planes, respectively. In addition, the peaks at 26.6°, 33.8°, and 37.8° were assigned to the phases of FTO/TiO2, which were marked with *. After 0.1 mg mL−1 Ph-azo-PhAmi modification, the (110) peak intensity of the perovskite film increased to a maximum, suggesting the higher crystallinity of the perovskite film. When the concentration of Ph-azo-PhAmi further increased to 0.2 mg mL−1, the intensity decreased, which resulted from the decreased perovskite film quality. As exhibited in Fig. S4a (ESI), the full-width of half-maximum (FWHM) of the (110) peak processed without and with 0.1 mg mL−1 Ph-azo-PhAmi were 0.167 and 0.156, successively. Moreover, the intensity ratio of the (110)/(310) XRD peaks increased (Fig. S4b, ESI), which showed the same growth trend and the preferential orientation of perovskite crystals, which corresponded to the SEM images (Fig. S3, ESI). Furthermore, the peak at 12.64° corresponded to the plane of PbI2. And appropriate PbI2 resided in the grain boundaries of the perovskite absorbing layer and in particular it had a significant effect on the charge carrier lifetimes, ion migration, hysteresis and the device performance.
The better crystallization of the perovskite films was dominant on the light absorption with higher intensity on almost the entire range, which was demonstrated in the UV-vis absorption spectra of all perovskite films (Fig. 3b). All the perovskite films absorbed the light ranging from 450 to 750 nm and all the bandgap values (Eg) of perovskite were unchanged (1.57 eV). The introduction of Ph-azo-PhAmi could clearly enhance the light absorption at the wavelength ranging from 450 to 600 nm, which was linked with the enlarged grain size and increased crystallinity. Both the enhanced crystallinity and light absorption of the perovskite film treated with Ph-azo-PhAmi would contribute to increasing the current density of the device.
Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy measurements were conducted to study the carrier transport and carrier recombination of the perovskite film. The light was incident from the perovskite film (without and with 0.1 mg mL−1 Ph-azo-PhAmi), which was spin-coated on the glass substrate. Fig. 3c indicated that the peaks of the pristine perovskite film and Ph-azo-PhAmi-modified perovskite film were located at 766 nm and 764 nm. The slightly blue-shifted PL peak was ascribed to the decreased trap states on the surfaces and the GBs of perovskites, which resulted in the reduced carrier non-radiative recombination. Besides, the intensity of PL increased after the passivation of Ph-azo-PhAmi, indicating the improved crystallinity and suppressed non-radiative recombination.
The time-resolved PL (TRPL) measurement was conducted to study the charge transport and recombination process. The PL decay curves were fitted by a double exponential equation, as illustrated in Fig. 3d, and the corresponding parameters are summarized in Table S2 (ESI).
where
A1 and A2 are the corresponding decay amplitude. τ1 is the fast decay lifetime component, which is related to the charge carrier recombination. τ2 is the slow decay lifetime component, which corresponds to bulk recombination. In addition, the average lifetime defined as τave could be calculated from equation:
The
τave (s) of perovskite film prolonged from 61.85 ns to 137.22 ns after Ph-azo-PhAmi treatment. The increased lifetime demonstrated the decrease in defect intensity on the surface and the GBs of perovskite film after Ph-azo-PhAmi passivation. The stronger PL intensity and longer decay lifetime of the perovskite films with Ph-azo-PhAmi suggested the lower amount of carrier non-radiative recombination in the perovskite film, which contributed to the better photovoltaic performance. These results indicated that the Ph-azo-PhAmi was conducive to a better film quality of the perovskite films.

Moreover, ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was carried out to investigate the charge transfer between perovskite films, providing the work function (WF) and valence band maximum (VBM) in the band. As exhibited in Fig. 3e and f, the WF increased from 3.97 to 4.04 eV after Ph-azo-PhAmi passivation and the VBM was located at 1.53 and 1.42 eV for the perovskite film without and with Ph-azo-PhAmi. Combined with the unchanged Eg (Fig. 3b), the energy level alignment diagram (Fig. 3g) displayed that the energy level of the Ph-azo-PhAmi modified perovskite film was more well-matched with that of spiro-OMeTAD, which was conducive to improving the carrier transport efficiency.
To judiciously study the effect of Ph-azo-PhAmi additive on photovoltaic performance, the structures of FTO/TiO2/perovskite (with and without Ph-azo-PhAmi)/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag were employed. The measured J–V curves were plotted in Fig. 4a and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table 1. The pristine device achieved 16.71% PCE, with a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 21.51 mA cm−2 an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.06 V and a fill factor (FF) of 73.15%. After 0.1 mg mL−1 Ph-azo-PhAmi treatment, the best PCE of the modified device reached 20.85%, accompanied by a JSC of 23.79 mA cm−2, VOC of 1.11 V, and FF of 78.97%. The obviously promoted JSC value with Ph-azo-PhAmi additive could be due to the increased light harvest property and enhanced crystallinity. And the increased VOC and FF were related to the suppressed charge recombination and improved carrier transfer by defect passivation effect of the Ph-azo-PhAmi additive. To assess the reproducibility of Ph-azo-PhAmi treatment on the performance of the device, 30 statistical PCE values of the devices were collected in Fig. 4b. The higher and more intensive PCE indicated the high performance and reproducibility of different devices.
Samples
PCE (%)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
HI (%)
Pristine
Reverse
16.71
21.55
1.06
73.15
0.092
Forward
15.16
20.59
1.05
70.14
0.05 mg mL−1
Reverse
18.71
22.84
1.08
75.83
0.066
Forward
17.47
22.36
1.08
72.38
0.1 mg mL−1
Reverse
20.85
23.79
1.11
78.97
0.035
Forward
20.11
23.41
1.10
78.13
0.2 mg mL−1
Reverse
17.44
22.14
1.06
74.32
0.055
Forward
16.48
21.73
1.05
72.27
Moreover, the J–V characteristics with different directions of the devices without and with 0.1 mg mL−1 Ph-azo-PhAmi are presented in Fig. 4c and Fig. S5 (ESI). The hysteresis index (HI (%) = (PCEreverse − P CEforward)/PCEreverse) of the control device was 0.092, and it decreased to 0.035 for the 0.1 mg mL−1 Ph-azo-PhAmi-passivated PSCs. It was noticed that the hysteresis of the device with Ph-azo-PhAmi treatment was negligible and the reduced hysteresis was due to the balanced ion migration by the strong interaction between the perovskite and Ph-azo-PhAmi molecule. As displayed in Fig. S6 (ESI), the incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectrum of the device with 0.1 mg mL−1 Ph-azo-PhAmi demonstrated a higher IPCE response than the pristine device at a wavelength between 500–700 nm, caused by the improved film crystallinity and enhanced light absorption by incorporating Ph-azo-PhAmi, which was confirmed by the UV-vis results. Moreover, the steady-state efficiency (Fig. 4d) of the pristine and Ph-azo-PhAmi-modified PSCs were measured with the constant voltage of 0.91 V and 1.02 V, obtaining a stabilized PCE of 16.31% and 20.47%, which indicated the effect of surface modification, which was closed to the PCE results obtained from the J–V characteristics.
To further inspect deeply how Ph-azo-PhAmi impacted carrier transfer and charge recombination processes in the PSCs, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were carried out under dark conditions. Fig. 5a exhibited the Nyquist diagrams of PSCs with and without Ph-azo-PhAmi. The equivalent circuit model is shown in the inset diagram of Fig. 5a, which consists of the sheet resistance of the charge transfer resistance (Rct) and conductive electrode (Rs). And the fitting Rs and Rct values are displayed in Table S2 (ESI). Ph-azo-PhAmi-treated perovskite film exhibited the lower Rs, higher Rct and enhanced dependance, indicating the promoted interfacial charge transfer and effectively suppressed charge recombination ability, which was a supplement for the promoted VOC and FF. A better insight into the charge-carrier recombination process could be further illustrated by investigating the dependence of VOC on the light intensity. The relationship between light intensity and VOC (Fig. 5b) revealed that the Ph-azo-PhAmi-based device exhibited a smaller slope (1.16 KT/q) than that of the control device (1.89 KT/q). The deviation between slope and KT/q was mainly derived from the trap-assisted recombination. In general, the smaller slope meant the effectively suppressed trap-assisted recombination of perovskite with Ph-azo-PhAmi. The dark current–voltage (J–V) was helpful to understand that the introduction of additive inhibited the recombination process of PSCs, as shown in Fig. 5c. It could be seen that the device with Ph-azo-PhAmi possessed a slight leakage current compared with the pristine one, suggesting the dye molecule could effectively passivate the defects of the perovskite film and then suppress the recombination of the photo-generated charge in the PSCs. These results indicated that the recombination process of the Ph-azo-PhAmi-treated device was suppressed.
The effectively inhibited charge recombination was related to the reduced trap states and enhanced conductivity of perovskite films after the Ph-azo-PhAmi treatment, which was confirmed by the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) characterization. The devices with only ETL were fabricated by a structure: glass/FTO/TiO2/perovskite/PC61BM/Ag. The dark J–V curves included an ohmic regime, a trap-filled limited regime (TFL) and a trap-free SCLC regime, as exhibited in Fig. 5d. The defect density (Nt) was calculated using the below equation:
where
ε is vacuum permittivity, ε0 is the relative dielectric constant (∼28.8), L is the thickness of perovskite film (Fig. 2d and e) and VTFL is the trap-filled limit voltage, respectively. The VTFL results of the control device and the devices passivated by Ph-azo-PhAmi were 0.656 V and 0.551 V. And the Nt was calculated to reduce from 4.74 × 1015 cm−3 to 3.37 × 1015 cm−3 for PSC after Ph-azo-PhAmi modification. The minimized Nt indicated the trap density of the perovskite films with Ph-azo-PhAmi decreased due to the passivation effect derived from Ph-azo-PhAmi passivation and the enhanced crystallinity, resulting in the improvement of VOC. Fig. S7 (ESI) demonstrated the dark SCLC measurement of the hole-only devices (FTO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag), which confirmed the same results.

In the SCLC regime, the electron mobility (μ) was calculated via the Mott–Gurney equation:
where
J and V are the current density with high bias and the applied voltage in the SCLC regime, respectively. The device with Ph-azo-PhAmi showed a better electron mobility (1.59 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 S−1) than that of the pristine one (1.12 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 S−1). The enhancement of mobility was due to the passivated defects and the improved quality of the perovskite film with excellent crystallinity. Additionally, the reduced Nt and improved charge transfer were beneficial for the high-performance PSCs.

To evaluated the effect of Ph-azo-PhAmi on the humidity resistance, the morphology, UV-vis, water contact angle and stability measurements of PSCs were carried out with a relative humidity of 65–75% at room temperature. The stability test was conducted on the basis of the ISOS protocols (ISOS-D and ISOS-L). Fig. S8 (ESI) presents the morphology pictures of perovskite films without and with Ph-azo-PhAmi for different aging periods. The control perovskite film turned gradually from black to yellow after aging 300 h, whereas the perovskite film with Ph-azo-PhAmi was almost unchanged, confirming that the enhancement effect of Ph-azo-PhAmi on retarding the perovskite degradation obviously did enhance it. In addition, the water contact angle of the Ph-azo-PhAmi-passivated perovskite film was 80.85°, which was larger than that of the pristine perovskite film (64.72°), which was due to the enhanced perovskite film quality, as illustrated in Fig. 6a. Consequently, the moisture permeation was retarded after the Ph-azo-PhAmi treatment, which was beneficial for the stability of PSCs. In Fig. 6b, the long-term moisture stability of the unencapsulated PSCs without and with Ph-azo-PhAmi additive modulation was depicted. The modified PSCs exhibited much better stability and maintained 85.7% of the initial PCE after aging 300 h. However, the stability of pristine PSC decreased to 26.9%, which was attributed to the improvement effect of Ph-azo-PhAmi on defect passivation and moisture resistance. Fig. 6c and d showed the UV-vis spectra of perovskite films after different periods. Obviously, after 100 h of exposure, the light absorption intensity of perovskite with Ph-azo-PhAmi presented a slight change, whereas the pristine perovskite film presented a continuous decrease. The XRD measurement was also carried out in the perovskite film aging for 0, 100, 200, and 300 h, wherein the aging conditions of perovskite films in the XRD patterns were consistent with the degradation conditions of the perovskite film in the UV-vis absorption spectra. As shown in Fig. 6e and f, the pristine perovskite film began to degrade into PbI2 after 100 h, and a large amount of PbI2 formed after 200 h. After 300 h, the perovskite layer was almost completely converted into PbI2. In contrast, the Ph-azo-PhAmi incorporated perovskite presented no obvious variation, with the detected PbI2 peak sightly enhanced after storage under an ambient environment for 300 h. The improved moisture stability was ascribed to the hydrophobicity of amino bond doping. Besides, the stability test of PSCs without encapsulation exposed under dark and N2-filled conditions (at 25–35 °C) for 500 h without stress, as displayed in Fig. 6. The PSCs with Ph-azo-PhAmi modification still retained over 91% of their original PCE, while the control device exhibited a PCE drop of 64%. This result could be ascribed to superior perovskite films with the lower defect densities and larger grain size, which was induced by the synergetic effect of multiple groups in Ph-azo-PhAmi. According to the ISOS-L-1 protocol, the light stability of devices was measured under continuous light soaking 100 mW cm−2 for 500 h at room temperature (RH: 30 ± 5%) to eliminate the degradative effect, as shown in Fig. S9 (ESI). The PSCs with Ph-azo-PhAmi treatment exhibited excellent stability, preserving ∼74% of its original PCE, while the control device only maintained ∼27% of its original PCE under the same conditions. The increased device stability was due to the reduced carrier recombination regarding the passivation effect of Ph-azo-PhAmi. These results affirmed that the introduction of Ph-azo-PhAmi was responsible for enhancing both the moisture and light stability.

In conclusion, a dye, Ph-azo-PhAmi, was synthesized and added into perovskite by additive engineering to fabricate a high-quality perovskite film. The coordination effect between the amide bond of Ph-azo-PhAmi and the perovskite could passivate the under-coordinated Pb2+defects, Pb0 cluster defects and I− defects. The quality of the perovskite film improved with enhanced passivation effect, enlarged grain size, better flatness, increased crystalline quality and light harvesting. Ph-azo-PhAmi possessing π-conjugated properties could form steady-state polymer-like structures by π–π stacking to enhance the passivation effect. Moreover, the Ph-azo-PhAmi additive increased charge mobility in the perovskite layers and suppressed the carrier recombination. Finally, PSCs assembled under ambient air without a glovebox incorporated with the Ph-azo-PhAmi additive exhibited an improved PCE from 16.71% to 20.85% with negligible hysteresis. Moreover, the moisture and light stability of the device was enhanced by Ph-azo-PhAmi modification. This work predicts that incorporating a dye molecule is an effective method to fabricate high-quality perovskite film and high-performance PSCs, which is conducive to accelerating photovoltaic device commercialization.


The authors declare no conflict of interests.


This work was supported by the Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (LY21F040008) and the Fundamental Research Funds of Zhejiang Sci-Tech University (2021Q001). The authors also appreciate the Shiyanjia Lab (http://www.shiyanjia.com) for the XPS tests and UPS tests.


† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3tc00656e
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023