Poly(3-hexylthiophene): synthetic methodologies and properties in bulk heterojunction solar cells  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE22129B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE22129B
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8457-8474Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsPoly(3-hexylthiophene): synthetic methodologies and properties in bulk heterojunction solar cells

        
          
            Assunta 
            Marrocchi
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Daniela 
            Lanari
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Antonio 
            Facchetti
          
          
        
      bc and 

        
          
            Luigi 
            Vaccaro
          
          
        
      *a
aDipartimento di Chimica, Università degli Studi di Perugia, via Elce di Sotto 8, 06123 Perugia, Italy. E-mail: luigi@unipg.it; assunta@unipg.it;  Fax: +39 0755855560
bDepartment of Chemistry and the Materials Research Center, Northwestern University, 2145 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 62208, USA. E-mail: a-facchetti@northwestern.edu
cPolyera Corporation, 8045 Lamon Avenue, Skokie, IL 60077, USA
Received 
      13th March 2012
    , Accepted 25th June 2012First published on 16th July 2012AbstractPoly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) remains of significant importance as a prototypical benchmark hole conductor material in Organic Photovoltaics (OPVs). In this review we discuss synthetic strategies to P3HT, particularly focusing on those leading to the regioregular form and discussing key physical and morphological properties. Finally, a survey and a brief discussion of P3HT performance in bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) OPVs are also provided.Assunta MarrocchiAssunta Marrocchi is currently an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemistry of the University of Perugia. She earned a PhD in Chemical Sciences at the same Institution, working on a research project dealing with the design and synthesis of helically shaped polycyclic aromatics. Her main research interests include the design, sustainable synthesis, and properties of π-conjugated semiconductors for organic electronics, with a special emphasis on the preparation of semiconducting materials for organic solar cells.Daniela LanariDaniela Lanari obtained her MS degree in Chemistry at the University of Perugia in 2001. She received her PhD degree from the same Institution in 2005. In the same year she joined the research group of James Fraser Stoddart at the University of California Los Angeles (UCLA) where she worked as a postdoctoral fellow on the template synthesis of mechanically interlocked molecules. In 2010 she was appointed Lecturer at the University of Perugia and currently she is an Assistant Professor teaching “Materials for Renewable Energies”. Her current research interests include the design and synthesis of solid catalysts for the sustainable preparation of organic semiconductors.Antonio FacchettiAntonio Facchetti obtained his PhD in Chemical Sciences from the University of Milan. In 2002 he joined Northwestern University where he is currently an Adjunct Professor of Chemistry. He is a co-founder and currently the Chief Technology Officer of Polyera Corporation. Dr Facchetti has published more than 250 research articles, 7 book chapters, and holds about 40 patents. He received the 2009 Italian Chemical Society Research Prize and he is a Kavli and AAAS Fellow. He was selected among the “TOP 100 MATERIALS SCIENTISTS OF THE PAST DECADE (2000–2010)” by Thomson Reuters.Luigi VaccaroLuigi Vaccaro obtained his Laurea in Chemistry at the University of Naples – Federico II, and then earned a PhD in Chemical Sciences at the University of Perugia where he is currently an Associate Professor leading the Green S.O.C. group. He is the co-author of 75 scientific papers. He received the Europa Medal from the Society of Chemical Industry – London, the ADP Award from Merck's Chemistry Council for “Creative work in organic chemistry” and the G. Ciamician Medal of the Società Chimica Italiana. His research is currently focused on waste-minimized preparation of target molecules and materials.

Broader context
Over the past three decades organic photovoltaics (OPVs) has been identified as a fast growing technology with a large potential, as it holds the promise for cost-efficient, lightweight, (semi)-transparent, and mechanically flexible solar energy conversion platform. To date, head-to-tail (HT) regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) is one of the most studied materials for the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) structure. Many regioselective synthetic protocols to defect-free P3HT have been developed, enabling an extremely high degree of control over the molecular weight with narrow polydispersities, which remains the key to technological breakthroughs using polymeric materials in OPVs since batch-to-batch property variations are held to a minimum. Here we summarize recent progress on the chemical synthetic approaches to regioregular HT-P3HT, and attempt to merge current understandings of the influence of polymer regioregularity, molecular weight and polydispersity on its bulk properties and photovoltaic response. The well-defined structure of HT-P3HT avoided ambiguities in structure–properties correlations, thus allowing enhanced material properties and excellent BHJ OPVs performance. Importantly, all the HT-P3HT distinctive features steadily make it a relevant model to explore new controlled polymerization techniques, as well as to develop new advanced materials and to tune their performance in organic solar cells.

1. Introduction
Since the pivotal work of Tang,1 organic solar (or photovoltaic) cells (OSC or OPV cells) based on π-conjugated semiconductors have attracted considerable attention as a potential source of green, inexpensive, and renewable electrical energy.2 The technological possibilities offered by PV cells based on organic semiconductors are enormous since they can enable light and mechanically energy producing flexible devices which can be easily fabricated at low-temperatures by printing techniques. Furthermore, the versatility and access to a variety of chemical structures are possible thanks to recent advances in synthetic methodologies. Thus, organic semiconductors have several potential advantages compared to conventional inorganic materials.
Among the classes of π-conjugated polymers for OPV applications, polythiophenes3 (PTs) exhibit a unique combination of high environmental/thermal stability, electrical conductivity, processability, and the most synthetic versatility, which allows a wide range of properties to be accessed through facile ring modifications. Poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) belongs to this semiconductor family and is one of the most common hole conductors investigated for bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells.4
The development of P3HT started from the synthesis of unsubstituted 2,5-polythiophene (2,5-PT). One of the first chemical syntheses of this polymer was reported in 1980 by two research groups.5,6 Yamamoto et al.5 described the nickel-catalyzed polycondensation of 2,5-dibromothiophene. This monomer was reacted with magnesium in THF, affording 2-magnesiobromo-5-bromothiophene, which in the presence of Ni(bipy)Cl2 (bipy = 2,2′-bipyridyl) produced 2,5-PT. Lin et al.6 described another example of a metal-catalyzed route to 2,5-PT, exploiting acetylacetonates of Ni, Pd, Co and Fe as catalysts. Unfortunately, 2,5-polythiophene is an insoluble and infusible material, which cannot be processed for implementation into (opto)electronic devices. In the quest for a soluble and processable (semi)conducting polythiophene, 3-alkylthiophenes were developed. The first environmentally stable and soluble poly(3-alkylthiophenes) (P3ATs) were synthesized by Elsenbaumer7 in 1985, using a method similar to that used to prepare 2,5-polythiophene.
However, polymerization reactions of asymmetric 3-hexylthiophene (3HT) may result in three different coupling sites along the polymer chain, i.e. 2,5′-(head-to-tail, HT), 2,2′-(head-to-head, HH) and 5,5′-(tail-to-tail, TT) (Fig. 1). Therefore, synthetic methodologies have been developed to control P3HT regiochemistry, which greatly affects several structural, electronic, and optical properties of this polymer family.3,4
 Fig. 1  Coupling regiochemistry of P3HT isomers. 
Particularly, a structurally regioregular HT arrangement is greatly desirable, since several physicochemical properties are optimized for a high degree of regioregularity. For instance, regioregular HT-P3HT architecture is preorganized for three-dimensional self-assembly, resulting in efficient two-dimensional hole transport8 with high mobilities and current density.9–11 Self-organization in P3HT results in a lamellar structure with two-dimensional conjugated sheets formed by interchain stacking. Sirringhaus et al.8 suggested that the π–π stacking crystalline planes adopt two different orientations (i.e. parallel and normal to the film) depending on the P3HT regioregularity and processing conditions. Jiang et al.11 evaluated mobilities of charge carriers in films of P3HTs with HT regioregularities of 97%, 81%, 70% and 54% as a function of doping level. It was found that the difference in regioregularity of P3HT resulted in a large mobility difference, especially in the low-doping regime. At the highest doping levels of ∼20% the mobility values reached 0.4 and 0.01 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the film of P3HT 97% and P3HT 54%, respectively. These findings were ascribed to the greater order level and extent of stacking of π-conjugated thiophene rings in regioregular P3HT, as elucidated by electrochemical, ESR, UV-Vis-NIR, and X-ray diffraction measurements.
The aspect of regioregularity in P3HTs also plays an important role in their bandgap control. The random polymerization of 3-hexylthiophene leads to a large degree of HH coupling that decreases the effective conjugation in the chain and blue-shifts the absorption maxima, due to a large twist-distortion.3,12 Further, the steric hindrance induced by the randomly oriented side-chains in the regiorandom polymer may suppress the interaction of chains to such an extent that no residual features of stacking of the P3HT chains is observed anymore.3
Besides the HT regioregularity, P3HT molecular weight and polydispersity are also important parameters to control electronic, optical, electrochemical properties, and solid-state packing, modulating therefore the transport properties and getting broad UV-Vis absorption.8,13–16 For instance, Sirringhaus et al.8 first reported that the molecular weight has a considerable impact on the crystalline connectivity and ordering of pristine P3HT spin-cast films, thus influencing the charge carrier mobility of the polymer. More recently, McGehee and coworkers13 observed that varying the molecular weight of P3HT by one order of magnitude results in a four order of magnitude change in charge carrier mobility. The low mobility, low molecular-weight films revealed a highly ordered structure consisting of nanorods, whereas the high-mobility, high-molecular weight films had an isotropic nodule structure. An examination of this apparent contradiction showed that poor connectivity and insulating grain boundaries between misoriented neighboring crystals limits the charge carrier mobilities of as-spun low-molecular weight thin films. Modifying thin-film morphology by changing the casting conditions or thermally annealing the samples affected charge transport by 100× for a given molecular weight. AFM data revealed that when more time is allowed for polymer crystallization, the crystals preferentially orient with their insulating side chains normal to the substrate, thus reducing in-plane insulating boundaries and increasing the charge carrier mobilities. On the other hand, processing conditions had little influence on the high-molecular-weight films. This was ascribed to the fact that the chains are longer than the domain size and minimize the effects of the grain boundaries by bridging neighbouring grains. Generally, the best mobilities are obtained using relatively high molecular weight P3HT (Mn > 25 kDa by Gel Permeation Chromatography, GPC) under slow evaporating conditions on hydrophobic substrates.14
Further, a systematic study by Trznadel et al.15 correlating P3HT bulk properties to the molecular weight (Mn) and/or polydispersity index (PDI) underscored the electronic changes. For instance, the increased conjugation length by increasing Mn explains the red-shift of the solution as well as solid-state UV-vis/near IR λmax. Further, solid state spectra from the high-molecular weight fractions were found to develop a well-resolved vibronic structure compared to those from low-molecular weight fractions. Similarly, electrochemical behavior of regioregular P3HT was also found to strongly depend on its molecular weight. Thin-film cyclic voltammetry (CV) showed an oxidation at 0.74 V in all samples that decreased in intensity with increasing Mn. Additional oxidations at 0.58–0.60 and 0.97–1.00 V appeared when the degree of polymerization (DP) was as high as 26 and intensified with increasing Mn.
Zen et al.16 reported on the optical, structural and electrical characterization of thin-films prepared from different MW fractions of regioregular P3HT. They demonstrated that lowering the molecular weight of P3HTs dramatically decreases the field-effect mobility and this was mainly ascribed to the ability of high-molecular weight fractions to adopt a planar backbone conformation which allows a close interchain contact. Indeed, in order to support this hypothesis the authors investigated all fractions as a function of temperature. They observed a continuous mobility decrease at increasing temperatures as well as a pronounced thermochromic effect of the P3HT films occurring with the same trend. They concluded that at high temperatures the polymer chains adopted a more twisted conformation, causing a more hindered charge carrier transport. On this basis they proposed that the lower charge carrier mobility shown by short molecular weight fractions was mainly caused by a more twisted, disordered intrachain conformation. Further, their structural studies revealed that layers of the low molecular fractions exhibited an inhomogeneous morphology in which highly ordered crystallites are blended in a disordered matrix. Apparently these latter results were in contrast to the finding that layers prepared from the low molecular weight fractions exhibited low charge carrier mobilities as well as blue-shifted and unstructured UV-Vis spectra. The authors explained this discrepancy with the fact that the optical and transport properties of these layers were mainly determined by the disordered matrix.
All the above considerations clearly highlight that the regiocontrolled synthesis of P3HT having the desired molecular weight and polydispersity is crucial to enhance the material self-assembly ability and, therefore, its bulk properties. In general, the synthesis of P3HT could be achieved by either chemical or electrochemical methods. For the latter,17 a potential was applied to a solution containing the monomer and an electrolyte. Even though the electrochemical methods were promising, chemical polymerizations are the most explored strategies since they can afford highly regioregular polymer in excellent yields and large scale.
In this review article we summarize the most representative chemical synthetic approaches to regioregular head-to-tail P3HT along with its properties in BHJ OPVs. We restrict the discussion to P3HT homopolymer although several interesting studies in the area of block copolymers containing P3HT have been carried out.18 In Section 1 we present an overview of the nickel and palladium-based cross-coupling methodologies employing organometallic reagents as key intermediates, which stand as the most satisfactory regioselective synthetic routes to date. Section 2 summarizes chemical oxidative polymerization, typically yielding HT-enriched sequences. In Section 4, we focus on the influence of regioregularity, molecular weight, and polydispersities of P3HTs on the performance of organic photovoltaic devices. Next, we give a brief survey of representative papers related to efficient photovoltaic cells incorporating regioregular P3HT. We have chosen some references that cover only a small part of the countless studies carried out during the last decade. A comprehensive survey of all the papers devoted to the various photoconversion efficiencies is beyond the scope of this review.
Note that the different papers mentioned in the text are not in chronological order but are presented to provide key studies advancing the field.
2. Metal-assisted cross-coupling reactions
2.1. Nickel-catalyzed coupling polymerization
Polymerization to regioregular P3HT based on nickel-catalyzed Kumada cross-coupling was first developed by McCullough et al.19 One of the key features of this synthetic method (Scheme 1) was the regiospecific metallation of 2-bromo-3-hexylthiophene (1) with LDA (lithium diisopropylamide) in the 5-position to generate the corresponding organolithium at −78 °C (step i in 1→ 2, Scheme 1). Remarkably, quenching studies performed after treatment of 1 with LDA, and also after generation of the Grignard reagent 2 by transmetallation with MgBr2·Et2O (step ii in 1→ 2, Scheme 1) demonstrated that less than 1–2% of the undesired 2,5-exchanged intermediate 3 was produced. The polymerization was then carried out in situ by treatment of 2 with 0.5 mol% Ni(dppp)Cl2, (dppp = diphenylphosphino propane) leading to regioregular head-to-tail (HT) P3HT in a 36% yield. Indeed, 1H NMR analysis indicated that the degree of HT–HT regioregularity was approximately 98%. The average molecular weight for unfractionated P3HT prepared by this method was Mn = 12200, with a PDI ∼ 1.9. However, the polydispersity was reduced by subjecting the polymer to Soxhlet extractions using a variety of organic solvents.20
 Scheme 1  Synthesis of regioregular P3HT by McCullough's method.19Reagents and conditions: i, LDA, THF, −40 °C, 40 min; ii, MgBr2.Et2O, −60 to −40 °C per 40 min, −40 to 5 °C per 20 min; iii, Ni(dppp)Cl2, −5 to 25 °C, 18 h. 
This procedure was later modified21 by replacing magnesium bromide etherate with ZnCl2, which allowed for a greater solubility of the organometallic intermediate at −78 °C. The resulting regioregular P3HT was found22 to self-assemble into highly ordered crystalline arrays (lamellar-like structures) by X-ray studies as well as UV-Vis data, and afforded electrical conductivities of ∼150 S cm−1versus 0.1–20 S cm−1 for regioirregular poly alkylthiophenes when doped with iodine.
Shortly thereafter, Chen and Rieke23 introduced the regiocontrolled synthesis of P3HT mediated by highly reactive Rieke zinc (Zn*) (Scheme 2). Highly reactive zinc was found to undergo direct oxidative addition to 2,5-dibromo-3-hexylthiophene 4 (1.1:1, 4 h, −78 °C) in THF under argon, giving a quantitative yield of the regioisomer 2-(bromozincio)-5-bromothiophene 5 predominantly (up to 97% when cryogenic conditions are employed) and 5-bromo-2-(bromozincio)-3-hexylthiophene 6 as a very minor regioisomer. Significantly, no bis(bromozincio)thiophene was formed. The head-to-tail polymerization of the metalated intermediate 5 was achieved in quantitative yield by Negishi coupling using a catalytic amount of Ni(dppe)Cl2 ([1,2-bis(diphenylphosphino)ethane]nickel(II) chloride] (0.2 mol%) upon 4 h of refluxing at 67 °C (98.5 ± 1.5% of HT linkage). This procedure was slightly modified later23 by carrying out the polymerization at room temperature for 24 h, thus leading to 82% yield of regioregular HT-P3HT after fractionation of the crude polymer by Soxhlet extraction.
 Scheme 2  Regiocontrolled synthesis of poly(3-hexylthiophene) by the Rieke method.23 
Interestingly, it was found23 that the percentage of HT couplings is altered dramatically by the use of other nickel catalysts. Indeed, switching the ligand of the catalyst from dppe to a more labile ligand PPh3 (as Ni(PPh3)4) greatly reduced the regioregularity (65:35 HT: head-to-head, HH). Furthermore, the use of palladium catalysts (vide infra) led to a marked reduction of the regioregularity (70:30, Pd(dppe)Cl2) as well as to a completely regiorandom (Pd(PPh3)4) P3HT.
The polymerizations reported above, and described by McCullough and Rieke, utilize a metal-catalyzed cross coupling methodology (Scheme 3) which have been extensively investigated.24 The reaction is believed to usually involve three steps: (1) oxidative addition of an organic halide with a metal–ligand L catalyst (2) transmetallation (disproportionation) between the catalyst complex and a reactive organometallic reagent (i.e. organomagnesium, organozinc, organoboron, organoaluminum, organotin) to generate a diorganometallic complex, and (3) reductive elimination of the coupled product with regeneration of the metal–L catalyst. In the Rieke case,23 it has been demonstrated that the choice of the catalyst is a critical issue since the degree of P3HT regioregularity may depend on the metal as well as the ligands used in the catalysts. The authors23 speculated that the smaller ionic radius of Ni2+vs. Pd2+ along with the higher steric demands for bidentate dppe-ligand with respect to monodentate PPh3 indicate that the degree of regioregularity was controlled by the steric congestion at the reductive elimination step in the catalytic cycle of the transition-metal catalyzed coupling reactions.
 Scheme 3  Catalytic cycle of transition metal-mediated cross-coupling reactions. 
The regioregular P3HT prepared by the Rieke method had an average molecular weight Mw = 37680 and a Mn = 25500 with a polydispersity index of 1.48, after fractionation by Soxhlet extraction of the crude product.
A polydispersity as high as 3.63, corresponding to Mw = 15000 and Mn = 4130, was found for crude HT-P3HT. Interestingly, the regioregular HT-P3HT prepared using Rieke zinc showed the absorption maximum longer than regioregular HT-P3HT prepared via the McCullough method, both in solution (λmax = 456 nm vs. λmax = 442 nm, respectively) and as a thin-film (λmax = 526, 560, 610 nm vs. λmax = 504, 550, 600 nm, respectively).15 On the other hand, a similar polycrystalline, self-organized lamellar morphology with three-dimensional ordering of the polymer chains, was revealed by XRD and AFM studies. Also, conductivities of 10−6 to 10−7 S cm−1 for the neutral HT P3ATs (pressed pellet) and of ∼103 S cm−1 for I2 vapor heavily doped P3AT films25 have been found.
In 2001, a new economical synthesis of regioregular, head-to-tail P3HT was reported by McCullough and coworkers26 (Scheme 4). Treatment of 2,5-dibromo-3-hexylthiophene monomer 4 with one equivalent of an alkyl/vinyl Grignard reagent resulted in a magnesium–bromine exchange reaction, also referred to as Grignard metathesis (GRIM) method. The reaction proceeded with a moderate degree of regioselectivity leading to an ∼85:∼15 distribution of regiochemical isomers 2:3. This ratio was independent of the reaction time, temperature and Grignard reagent used. As shown in Scheme 4, treatment of the 2:3 mixture with a catalytic amount of Ni(dppp)Cl2 (0.5 mol%) in refluxing THF for 45 min afforded regioregular P3HT in high yield (71%, after fractionation of the crude polymer by Soxhlet extraction). Although the ratio of the desirable to undesirable isomers is higher for the GRIM method compared to the McCullough and Rieke methods, this method still afforded HT regioregular P3HT with high regioregularity of ∼99%. Such a high degree of regioregularity was rationalized by the authors in terms of a combination of a number of kinetic and thermodynamic effects arising from steric and electronic factors in the catalytic cycle. Note also that one strong advantage of this method is that the use of cryogenic temperatures as well as highly reactive metals is unnecessary.
 Scheme 4  Synthesis of HT-P3HT by the Grignard metathesis (GRIM) method.26,27 
Further, it is noteworthy to mention here that other 3-substituted thiophene monomers have also been quickly and easy polymerized in a regioregular fashion (HT > 99%) through GRIM metathesis,3,26,27 thus paving the way to the production of kilogram-scale high molecular weight regioregular 3-substituted polythiophenes (Mn = 20000–35000, PDI = 1.2–1.4), and promoting their use in the development of new technologies.
As already discussed, the generally accepted mechanism for cross-coupling reactions involves oxidative addition, transmetallation and reductive elimination (Scheme 3). Since the Ni-catalyzed polymerization is formally a polycondensation reaction, affording polymers with a high polydispersity and an uncontrolled molecular weight, it is generally accepted to proceed via a step-growth mechanism. However, in 2004 Yokozawa and coworkers28,29 proposed that the polymerization of Grignard-type halothiophene monomers with a nickel catalyst (i.e. McCullough and GRIM method) proceeds in a chain-growth fashion to obtain regioregular P3HT with well-controlled molecular weight and low polydispersity.
As shown in Scheme 5, the addition of 0.4 mol% of Ni(dppp)Cl2 into the THF solution of the 2-bromo-5-chloromagnesio-3-hexylthiophene 8, which is obtained by reaction of 2-bromo-3-hexyl-5-iodothiophene 7 with isopropylmagnesiumchloride (1 equivalent, 0 °C), and stirring at room temperature afforded regioregular HT P3HT (78% yield; HT > 98%, Mn = 31700, Mw/Mn = 1.36).
 Scheme 5  Yokozawa's route for the synthesis of regioregular P3HT.28,29 
It was found that the Mn values increased linearly with the monomer conversion, as well as to the feed ratio of monomer to the Ni catalyst, and that the PDIs were found to be 1.30–1.39 throughout the polymerization. All these findings indicate that the polymerization followed the chain-growth mechanism.
In accordance with Trznadel's results,15 the λmax of chain-growth synthesized HT P3HT increased as the Mn of HT P3HT increased. Note that the absorption maxima in solution UV-vis spectra (CHCl3) of HT P3HT with Mn = 21900 (Mw/Mn = 1.35) was 451 nm, which was almost identical with the value previously reported (λmax = 456 nm, when Mn = 25500 and Mw/Mn = 1.48) by Chen and Rieke.23
The chain-growth mechanism of the polymerization was also examined by a “monomer-addition” experiment. When a fresh feed of monomer 8 was added to the polymerization mixture, the gel permeation chromatography profile of the polymer clearly shifted toward the higher molecular weight region, while a narrow PDI (1.34) remained.
However, there was always a shoulder peak in the GPC chromatogram at a high molecular region, with a Mn ∼ 2× corresponding to the main peak. Later29 Yokozawa and coworkers found that this shoulder originated from the formation of a small amount of polymer with a higher molecular weight by quenching the polymerization mixture with water in the workup process, owing to a disproportionation of the active chain P3HT-Ni(II)Br (9), followed by reductive elimination of P3HT–P3HT (Scheme 6). The disproportionation of the P3HT–Ni(II)–Br complex was attributed to a change of the ligand of the P3HT–Ni(II)–Br complex when water was added into the reaction mixture. This side-reaction was avoided by quenching the polymerization mixture with 5 M HCl, which promoted protonolysis before disproportionation. P3HT with Mn = 28700 and PDI as low as 1.14 was obtained.
 Scheme 6  Yokozawa's proposed pathway for the formation of high-molecular weight P3HT promoted by water during polymerization quenching.29 
All these findings opened a new way to synthesize HT P3HT having a well-defined molecular weight, which may contribute to the development of electrical and optical devices with more controlled performance.
At the same time, McCullough and coworkers,30 through similar experiments, elucidated the mechanism of complementary systems using 2-bromo-5-chlorozinc-3-hexylthiophene 10 and 2-bromo-5-magnesiobromo-3-hexylthiophene 2. It was found that the McCullough and Grignard metathesis polymerization methods, respectively, not only proceeds via a chain-growth mechanism but they also exhibit living characteristics.
These systems allowed for the control of the molecular weight of the polymer as a function of reaction time and the amount of Ni catalyst, and conducting P3HT with predetermined molecular weights (Mn up to ∼11000 for ∼92–94% monomer conversion) and relatively narrow molecular weight distributions (PDI ∼ 1.2–1.5) were prepared. Note that for McCullough polymerization the optimal experimental conditions were [Monomer]0 = 0.075 mol L−1, [Monomer]0:[Ni(dppp)Cl2] = 57:1, and T = 25–30 °C, whereas for GRIM polymerization [Monomer]0 = 0.07 mol L−1 and [Ni(II)]0 = 1.5 × 10−3 mol L−1 were used, at T = 23–25 °C.
There are two proposed explanations for the living chain-growth nature of nickel-catalyzed cross-coupling polymerization of P3HT. Yokozawa and coworkers speculated that the oxidative addition of the polymer chain occurs selectively, since it is kinetically slower or thermodynamically less stable for the monomer than for the growing polymer chain. This was ascribed to the decreased electron density of the thiophene ring on the polymer chain.31 A different explanation from McCullough and coworkers32 involved the complexation of the nickel(0) with the thiophene growing chain, forming an associated pair which is supposed to limit polymerization to one end of the polymer chain. The McCullough's proposed mechanism is outlined in Scheme 7.
 Scheme 7  McCullogh's proposed mechanism for the nickel-catalyzed cross-coupling polymerization.32 
The first step in the mechanism is the reaction of two equivalents of 2-bromo-5-chlorozinc-3-hexylthiophene monomer 10, generated in situ from 2-bromo-3-hexylthiophene 1, with Ni(dppp)Cl2, yielding the bis-organonickel compound 11. Next, the reductive elimination of the latter resulted in the immediate formation of an associated pair [12·13] of nickel(0) (12) and the tail-to-tail aryl halide dimer 13. Dimer 13 undergoes fast oxidative addition to the nickel center, thus generating the new organonickel compound 14, in view of the already mentioned fact that the formation of the complex [12·13] eliminates the potential separation of 12 from 13. Subsequently, growth of the polymer chain occurs by insertion of one monomer at a time, and the Ni(dppp) moiety is always bound to the polymer chain as an end-group. According to the proposed mechanism, during the catalytic cycle only one defect, i.e. one tail-to-tail coupling, is generated per polymer chain. As further evidence, the addition of various Grignard reagents (R′MgX) at the end of the polymerization resulted in end-capping of HT P3HT with the R′ end group, thus supporting the fact that Ni(dppp)Cl2 acts as an initiator, rather than a catalyst.32
More recently, Hiorns et al.33 reported a simplified route to quasi-100% regioregular P3HT (37–48% yields after fractionation of the crude polymer by Soxhlet extraction) with predetermined molecular weights (Mn up to 33400) and polydispersities as low as 1.12, based on the GRIM polymerization of 2,5-dibromo-3-hexylthiophene 4 as the starting material (Scheme 8). Although the metal–halogen exchange product is a mixture of 17 and 18 with a ratio of ∼80:20, the polymerization still affords regioregular P3HT, as indicated by in-depth NMR characterization. Note that these findings correlate well with those reported by McCullough et al. (vide supra)26 as to the fact that the minority metalated isomer 18 (Scheme 8) does not participate in the polymerization mainly due to steric effects. Further, the authors33 speculated that the reaction mechanism was in accordance with the one proposed by McCullough and coworkers,32 and depicted in Scheme 7.
 Scheme 8  Metallation by GRIM metathesis of 2,5-bromo-3-hexylthiophene 4, as reported by Hiorns et al.33 
In a following contribution34 the same group reported the synthesis of a series of P3HTs with predetermined molecular weights (Mn ∼ 4500–280000) and varying polydispersities (∼1.1–2.1) by using the above method. The extremely high molecular weight P3HT (Mn ∼ 280000, PDI < 1.1) was prepared without resorting to fractionation, by carrying out the polymerization of monomer 2-bromo-5-chloromagnesio-3-hexyl-2-bromothiophene 17 in diphenylether at 40 °C ([monomer]:[Ni(dppp)Cl2] = 20000:1, 40% yield). The authors also fabricated photovoltaic devices based on P3HT–PCBM blend films, and tried to correlate the influence of molecular weights, polydispersities, and degree of conjugation of the P3HT on cell characteristics (vide infra).
A drawback of the above synthetic methodologies is that it is not possible to initiate the polymerization from an external moiety, which would be necessary for the synthesis of more complex architectures such as brushes and star/block copolymers. Different strategies towards the ex situ initiation have been reported by several groups.35–40
Within this context, Kiriy and coworkers36 developed a surface-initiated polycondensation of 2-bromo-5-chloromagnesio-3-hexyl-2-bromothiophene 17via a chain growth mechanism, allowing to achieve regioregular HT P3HT brushes from poly(4-bromostyrene)-coated silicon wafers (Scheme 9).
 Scheme 9  Preparation of HT-P3HT brushes grafted from a surface-bound nickel-coupling catalyst.36 
Poly(4-bromostyrene) layers were photo-crosslinked before polymerization. Treatment of the films with Ni(PPh3)4 solution afforded the films containing a Ph–Ni(PPh3)2Br initiator. The subsequent surface-initiated polymerization at 0 °C allowed us to prepare regioregular HT P3HT brushes, the maximal thickness of which resulted as high as ∼10 nm. The very poor polymerization performance of Ph–Ni(PPh)2Br type initiator was ascribed to the significant chain termination.
To solve the problem Kiriy and coworkers37 developed an approach using silica (nano)particles bearing surface-immobilized Ni-catalysts supported by bidentate phosphorous ligands, as shown in Scheme 10. This new approach allowed to grow hairy particles with densely grafted regioregular HT P3HT chains via surface-initiated Kumada catalyst-transfer polycondensation carried out at room temperature. The polymerization showed living characteristics, as indicated by the near linear dependence of the number average molecular weight Mn on monomer conversion. A polymerization degree up to 250 could be achieved (PDI = 1.1–1.2). The authors also fabricated bulk heterojunction polymer solar cells with this type of hairy particles as donors. The devices showed a power conversion efficiency of 1.8–2.3%.
 Scheme 10  Preparation of a hairy P3HT/organosilica particle from surface-initiated polycondensation of 5-chloromagnesio-3-hexyl-2-bromothiophene 17.37 
In a further contribution, Kiriy and coworkers38 found a way to initiate the polycondensation of 2-bromo-5-chloromagnesio-3-hexylthiophene 17 from added small molecule initiators, Ph–Ni(PPh3)4–Br, prepared by the oxidative addition of Ni(PPh3)4 to aromatic halides (Scheme 11). However, only ∼80% of P3HT was terminated by the Ph group from one side and by H or Br atoms at the opposite terminus. Moreover, ∼20% H/H terminated P3HT was also found. Additionally, the authors investigated the feasibility of the chain-growth polycondensation of HT coupled bi- and ter-thiophene monomers 18 and 19.
 Scheme 11  Ph–Ni(PPh3)4–Br-initiated Kumada polycondensation, as reported by Kiriy and coworkers.38 
The Ph–Ni(PPh3)2–Br-mediated polycondensation of 18 led to 87% Ph-terminated polymer (Mn = 5300, PDI = 1.67). An increase of the monomer length (19) decreased the content of the Ph-terminated product (∼70%, Mn = 5700, PDI = 1.74), as a result of increased probability of chain-transfer processes. All these findings indicated that a consistent degree of chain-transfer or termination generally occurs, thus making Ph–Ni(PPh3)4–Br not as good as Ni(dppp)Cl2 in controlling the polymerization.
Luscombe and coworkers39 reported a more facile method for the external initiation of regioregular P3HT from an active catalyst/aryl halide initiator complex, (PPh3)2Ni(Ar)Br, using the inexpensive, air stable Ni(II)(dppp)Cl2 to generate the active Ni(PPh3)4 catalyst in situ. Indeed, they synthesized various initiating complexes and systematically studied the effect of the structure of the aryl group on the polymerization. Unfortunately, a significant chain transfer/termination was observed, and therefore the polymerization did not show living characteristics. Finally they prepared catalyst/initiator complexes4020a e 20b (Scheme 12) with dppp as the phosphine ligand and used these in situ prepared catalysts for the polymerization of 2-bromo-5-chloromagnesio-3-hexylthiophene 17 (40–50% yield).
 Scheme 12  Synthesis of externally initiated regioregular P3HT by using nickel(II) complexes 20.40 
In the case of 20a, ∼5% of impurity, which was believed to be Ni(dppp)2, was observed.41 By contrast, clean 20b could be prepared. When the catalytic system 20a (1.43 mol%) was added to the Grignard-type monomer 17, a fully regioregular P3HT was obtained (Mn = 11.2 kDa, PDI = 1.1). 1H-NMR analysis indicated a degree of polymerization of ∼63 (i.e. monomer conversion = 90%). MALDI-TOF analysis indicated that the majority of the chains were Ph/H terminated, alongside a small amount of Ph/Br (<5%) and H/H (<1%) termination. With 20b as the initiator (1.43% mol) the authors prepared fully regioregular P3HT only with Tol/H terminus. The polymerization was quenched only after 1 h to avoid precipitation of P3HT at high conversion (degree of polymerization: ∼55). GPC analysis showed Mn = 9.8 kDa and PDI = 1.2. All these results indicated that the polymerization proceeded with living characteristics, as that catalyzed with Ni(dppp)Cl2, thus paving the way to the externally initiated synthesis of more complex structures such as brushes and star/block polymers.
In 2009 Kim and Rieke42 reported for the first time the use of thienylmanganese halides for the synthesis of regioregular HT P3HT, with 2,5-dibromo-3-hexylthiophene 4 a starting material (Scheme 13). 2,5-Dibromo-3-hexylthiophene 4 was reacted first with isopropylmagnesiumchloride at 0 °C. The Grignard metathesis was completed in 5 min at 0 °C. According to other reports, an 80:20 ratio of 2-bromo-3-hexyl-2-magnesiobromothiophene 21 and 5-bromo-3-hexyl-2-magnesiobromothiophene 22 were generated in situ. The resulting thienylmagnesium halide was treated with MnCl2 (MnBr2) affording the corresponding manganese halide, which was polymerized under a variety of conditions. The polymerization was successfully performed in the presence of Ni(dppe)Cl2 (0.1 mol%, dppe = 1,2-bis(diphenylphosphino)ethane)43 at room temperature, affording P3HT in high yields (51–94%) with regioregularity up to 96%. The highest molecular weight obtained was Mw = 44000 after Soxhlet extraction with hexane (PDI = 2.14).
 Scheme 13  Preparation of thienylmanganese bromides and polymerization.42 
More recently Kim and Kim44 investigated the possibility of using commercially available and relatively cheap zinc powder45 in the preparation of regioregular P3HT. To this end, 2-bromo-5-iodo-3-hexylthiophene (7) was chosen as the most proper candidate, since zinc dust showed excellent insertion reactivity to the carbon–iodide bond. The oxidative addition (Scheme 14, top) was easily accomplished in the presence of lithium chloride at room temperature in THF and showed excellent chemoselectivity, thus leading almost exclusively (>98%) the 2-bromo-5-iodozincio-3-hexylthiophene 23. The polymerization was easily completed in the presence of Ni(dppe)Cl2 (0.3 mol%) at room temperature in 24 h to give regioregular P3HT (HT > 96%) in ∼80% yield. A reasonable molecular weight (Mw = 28000, determined by GPC, THF eluent, relative to polystyrene standard) and PDI (1.98) have been obtained.
 Scheme 14  Synthetic routes to regioregular P3HT, as reported by Kim et al.44,46Reagents and conditions: i, Ni(dppe)Cl2, THF. 
In a later contribution, the authors46 developed a new thienylzinc reagent for the preparation of regioregular HT P3HT (Scheme 14, bottom). It was easily prepared by treatment of 2-bromo-3-hexyl-5-iodothiophene 7 with a readily available diisopropyl zinc under mild conditions (r.t., 1 h). The subsequent polymerization of the thienylzinc intermediate 24 in the presence of Ni(dppe)Cl2 (0.1–0.3 mol%) was carried out in a variety of conditions, leading to P3HT in good-to-high yields (49–80%), and with excellent head-to-tail regioregularity (HT up to >98%). Average molecular weights Mn as high as 20000 were achieved (PDIs = 1.40–1.60). Note also that the order of addition of the Ni-catalyst was found to be critical to achieve molecular weight polymers in a good yield.47
Mori and coworkers48 disclosed very recently that the employment of (2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-1-yl)magnesium chloride·LiCl49 (25) and 0.5 mol% Ni(dppe)Cl2 as catalyst is a practical dehydrobrominative polycondensation method of 2-bromo-3-hexyl-thiophene (1) towards highly regioregular P3HT (HT > 98%). The polymerization proceeded at room temperature in quantitative yield (Mn = 44900, PDI = 1.32) (Scheme 15). Dppp as a ligand of the nickel catalyst was also as effective as dppe, while dppb (1,4-bis(diphenylphosphino)butane) or tricyclohexylphosphine (PCy3) were found less effective. The use of arylnickel complex PPhNiBr(dppp) as a catalyst also resulted in smooth polymerization with excellent HT selectivity (>99%), and narrow polydispersity (PDI = 1.1). Additionally, the average molecular weight Mn increased by lowering the catalyst loading.
 Scheme 15  Nickel-catalyzed polycondensation of 2-bromo-3-hexylthiophene (1), in the presence of (2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-1-yl)magnesium chloride·LiCl (25).48 
Very recently Lohwasser and Thelakkat50 identified all the factors relevant for Grignard metathesis polymerization toward 100% end group control and low polydispersity P3HT synthesis. Indeed, they studied in detail the active Grignard monomer formation of 2,5-dibromo-3-hexylthiophene 4 using t-BuMgCl, followed by polymerization using Ni(dppp)Cl2 as catalyst (Scheme 16).
 Scheme 16  Active Grignard monomer formation and catalyst transfer polymerization for the preparation of P3HT using t-BuMgCl as such or in the presence of LiCl.50 
Lohwasser and Thelakkat50 found that polymer chains with 100% H/Br end groups are obtained in the absence of unreacted/excess t-BuMgCl, which can be realized when using a high ratio of 2,5-dibromo-3-hexylthiophene 4 to t-BuMgCl (0.96–1 equiv.) and ensuring complete consumption during active Grignard monomer formation. It was demonstrated that when these prerequisites are not fulfilled, the amount of H/Br end groups decreased with the polymerization time. On the other hand, there was no noticeable effect of unreacted/excess t-BuMgCl on the PDIs.32 The full monomer conversion requires long reaction times when t-BuMgCl and 2,5-dibromo-3-hexylthiophene 4 are used at room temperature (∼20 h). To overcome this problem, the authors used LiCl as an additive to effectively accelerate the active monomer formation (∼4 h). Further, adding LiCl led to an increase in P3HT molecular weight without changing the monomer-to-catalyst ratio (26:1). The origin of this effect was ascribed to an increase in the rate of polymerization, as well as to the incorporation of a small amount of the undesired organomagnesium isomer (18, Scheme 16), which causes a slight decrease (<5%) of the regioregularity of P3HT. By the way, this was not found to affect the polymer charge carrier mobility (μsat = 2 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1). Additionally, in contrast with precedent findings51 stating that there is no effect on the polydispersity when methanol is used as a quenching agent instead of hydrochloric acid, the authors demonstrated that methanol as a quenching agent causes chain–chain coupling via disproportionation and hence an increase in polydispersity. This result correlated well with the observation of Yokozawa and coworkers29 (vide supra) when they used water as a quenching agent instead of hydrochloric acid.
Very recently Higashihara et al.52 reported the first demonstration of the catalyst-transfer polycondensation for the synthesis of high MW regioregular P3HT using the dianion-type zincate complex, dilithium tetra(t-butyl)zincate (tBu4ZnLi2) (Scheme 17).
 Scheme 17  Halogen–metal exchange reaction and catalyst transfer polycondensation for the preparation of P3HT using t-Bu4ZnLi2.52 
They first performed the halogen–metal exchange reaction of 2-bromo-3-hexyl-5-iodothiophene 7 with an equivalent molar amount of tBu4ZnLi2 in THF at 0 °C, and found that it took place quantitatively and selectively at the 5-position to afford the zincate complex of the thiophene monomer, dilithium tris(t-butyl)-(2-bromo-3-hexyl-5-thienyl)zincate 26 (Scheme 18). Subsequent catalyst transfer polycondensation of 26 was performed using Ni(dppe)Cl2 in THF at 60 °C for 2 h. The monomer conversion was >80%. Furthermore, the polymerization proceeded in a controlled manner to afford P3HT with Mn values as high as 2.50–30.7 kDa and low PDIs (<1.2) in high yields (80–90%). Note that the molecular weights of P3HTs could be increased by increasing the feed ratio of the monomer to nickel catalyst while maintaining a low polydispersity and a high regioregularity. Importantly, it was demonstrated that such a new polymerization system is also applicable to purification-free media, such as THF undistilled or artificially contaminated with protic impurities, such as isopropanol, methanol, and even 1000 ppm water. This was ascribed to the tBu4ZnLi2 low basicity due to its bulkiness, which may make the related zincate complex 26 inert towards some electrophiles, including protic impurities.
 Scheme 18  Synthesis of regioregular HT P3HT by Stille coupling reaction.53 
2.2. Palladium-catalyzed coupling polymerizations
Other methods employed for the synthesis of regioregular P3HT include palladium-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions. Iraqi and Barker53 have investigated the synthesis of regioregular P3HT (HT > 96%) through the Stille reaction, using 3-hexyl-2-iodo-5-(tributylstannyl)thiophene 27 (Scheme 18). This intermediate is air and moisture stable, thus it can be purified from undesired residual starting materials. 3-Hexyl-2-iodo-5-(tributylstannyl)thiophene 27 was synthesized by selective iodination of 3-hexylthiophene 28 at the 2-position using iodine with mercury(II)oxide in benzene, followed by selective lithiation of the resulting 2-iodo-3-hexyl-thiophene 29 at the 5-position with lithium diisopropylamide (LDA) and reaction with tri-n-butyltin chloride at low temperatures. Polymerization reactions were carried out in different solvents at reflux temperature, and in the presence of Pd(PPh3)4 (3 mol%) as a catalyst. Molecular weights of regioregular P3HT prepared by this method were Mn = 10000–16000 with PDI = 1.2–1.4 after purification by Soxhlet extraction. Note that the rate of these polymerizations was found to be slower (∼10–50% yield) than that of polymerization reactions involving 2-bromo-3-hexyl-5-bromomagnesiothiophene (2, Scheme 1) or 2-bromo-3-hexyl-5-bromozinciothiophene (5, Scheme 2) intermediates, where reactions occur at room temperature or lower and where higher molecular mass materials were obtained. This result was ascribed to a lower rate of halogen exchange between tin and palladium, as compared to that between magnesium and nickel or zinc and nickel.
Higgins and coworkers54 investigated a range of Pd catalysts with bulky, electron-rich phosphane ligands for the synthesis of regioregular P3HT by the Suzuki reaction (Scheme 19). Such complexes were previously found55 to be highly active for a range of cross-coupling reactions, including Suzuki couplings. Indeed, although Suzuki couplings have been used to prepare oligothiophenes56 polymerizations have proven more difficult to be carried out successfully. Where thiophene boronates have been used up to then, deboronation was a problem, representing the termination of polymerization by aryl group transfer from the PPh3 ligands employed.57
 Scheme 19  Synthesis of HT regioregular P3HT by Suzuki coupling reaction.54 
The authors54 selected as monomer 2-(5-bromo-4-n-hexyl-thiophen-2-yl)-4,4,5,5-tetramethyl-[1,3,2]dioxaborolane 30 (Scheme 19). Treatment of 2-bromo-3-hexylthiophene 1 with one equivalent of (pin)B–B(pin) (pin = pinacolato) in the presence of a catalytic amount (5 mol%) of [Ir2(μ-Cl)2(η4-COD)2] (COD = 1,5-cyclooctadiene) and 4,4′-(tBu)2-2,2′-bipyridine (10 mol%) in refluxing THF for 16 h gave 30 in 97% yield. Note that the use of an Ir-catalyst avoided the use of organolithium reagents or strong bases, thus widening the range of accessible functionalized poly alkylthiophenes.
When the polymerization of 30 was carried out in the presence of [Pd(tBu3P)2], generated in situ from [Pd2(dba)3] (1.5 mol%) (dba = dibenzylidene acetone) and the ligand (t-Bu3P, 4.5 mol%), the highest P3HT average molecular weight was Mw = 11100 without Soxhlet fractionation (PDI = 3.30). Although the polymer was obtained in moderate yield (50%), the regioregularity was high (97%). Next, the authors investigated some (o-biphenyl)PR2 ligands58 and found that the parent (o-biphenyl)PtBu231 as well as phosphane 32 (Fig. 2) were unsuccessful, giving low yield (∼20 to 27%) of low molar mass material (Mw = 4500–9100). Further, they employed ligand 33 (Fig. 2) in a polymerization with 2-(5-bromo-4-n-hexyl-thiophen-2-yl)-4,4,5,5-tetramethyl-[1,3,2]dioxaborolane 30, and interestingly found that after purification, the highest molar mass fraction (extracted with THF) was obtained in 21% yield. This polymer had a Mw = 16900, a PDI = 1.10, and was 97% regioregular by 1H- and 13C-NMR. The CH2Cl2 fraction (20% yield, Mw = 11400, PDI = 1.14, HT = 95%) and the hexane fraction (35% yield, Mw = 5100, PDI = 1.20, HT = 87%) were also polymeric.
 Fig. 2  Structures of electron-rich bulky phosphane ligands employed in Pd-catalyzed Suzuki coupling polymerization to afford regioregular P3HT.57 
Subsequently Bo and coworkers59 reported a novel efficient zero valent catalyst precursor, tris[tri(2-thienyl)phosphine] palladium (Pd(PTh3)3), and demonstrated that it was superior to the classically used Pd(Ph3)4 for Suzuki–Miyaura coupling polymerization of thiophene-based substrates. Monomers 3-hexyl-5-iodothiophene-2-boronic pinacol ester 34 and 3-hexyl-5-bromothiophene-2-boronic pinacol ester 35 were used for the polymerization. (Scheme 20).
 Scheme 20  Suzuki–Miyaura coupling of 3-hexyl-5-halothiophene-2-boronic pinacol esters 34, 35 with Pd(PPh3)4 or Pd(PTh3)3 as the catalyst precursors.59 
The reactions were carried out in a refluxing biphasic mixture of aqueous NaHCO3/THF or aqueous NaHCO3/THF/toluene with approximately 1.2 mol% of Pd(PPh3)4 or Pd(PTh3)3 as a catalyst precursor (3 days). The head-to-tail regioregularity of this P3HT was over 97%, determined by 1H-NMR. The authors found that the use of Pd(PTh3)3 instead of Pd(PPh3)4 as a catalyst precursor can significantly increase the yields and the molecular weights of the polymers. In particular, the combination of iodo-monomer 34 and Pd(PTh3)3 as a catalyst precursor gave a yield of 72% and a Mw = 26000 for P3HT. Note that these results are comparable to those reported by Higgins and coworkers54 (vide supra) on the polymerization of 3-hexyl-5-bromothiophene-2-boronic pinacol ester 30 with tBu3P, (o-biphenyl)PtBu231, and Buchwald's type ligands 32, 33 (Fig. 2), whereas the synthesis of PTh3 was much simpler than the preparation of Buchwald's type ligands themselves. The high activity of tri(2-thienyl)phosphine ligand PTh3 in Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reactions of thiophene-based substrates was ascribed to the strong electron-donating ability of the thienyl rings.60 Indeed, the use of electron-rich compounds as the ligand facilitates the rate-determining oxidative addition61 in the catalytic cycle by increasing the electron density of the palladium intermediate.62 Further, the use of electron-rich compounds was supposed to suppress the main side-reactions such as deboronation of the thiophene-based monomers 34, 35 and afford high-molecular weight polymers.
Catalytic dehydrogenative coupling of heteroarenes with aryl halides63 (i.e. direct arylation) has undergone rapid development in recent years, and is becoming a viable alternative to traditional cross-coupling reactions. This class of cross-coupling processes, which does not require the preparation of organometallic reagents, is considered to be a benefit to polymer synthesis with respect to reduced waste generation and fewer reaction steps. Recently, Ozawa and co-workers64 applied this strategy to the synthesis of head-to-tail P3HT with high molecular weight (Mn up to 30600, PDI = 1.60) and high regioregularity (up to 98%) in an almost quantitative yield (99%).
Thus, polycondensation of 2-bromo-3-hexylthiophene (1) (Scheme 21) was carried out at ∼120 °C for 24–48 h in THF, in the presence of Cs2CO3 (1–2 equivalents) and a palladium catalyst (1–2 mol%) generated in situ from so-called Herrmann's catalyst 36 as a palladium source and a tertiary phosphine ligand. Complex 36, which is in turn derived from Pd(OAc)2 and P(o-tolyl)3 under heated conditions, has been proven to be a good catalyst precursor with high thermal stability.65
 Scheme 21  Pd-catalyzed dehydrogenative polycondensation of 2-bromo-3-hexylthiopene (1), using Herrmann's catalyst 36 as a palladium source.64 
Among a variety of phosphine ligands, tris(o-Me2N)phosphine was found to be optimal, and the high ligand performance was ascribed to the bidentate coordinating ability of the o-Me2N groups, rather than steric or electronic effects. Interestingly, it was found that the head-to-tail regioregularity improved with increasing the molecular weight. The authors speculated that homocoupling reactions between C–H and C–H bonds and C–Br and C–Br bonds are operative to a considerable extent at the initial polymerization stage, while the cross-coupling reaction between C–Br and C–H bonds dominates at a later stage.
Very recently Yokozawa et al.66 investigated the t-BuPPd(Ph)Br (37)-catalyzed Suzuki–Miyaura coupling of 2-(4-hexyl-5-iodo-2-thienyl)-4,4,5,5-tetramethyl-1,3,2-dioxaborolane 34 (Scheme 22). The polymerization of 34 with the Pd(II) complex initiator 37 ([monomer]/[catalyst] = 20) was carried out at 0 °C by using CsF/18-crown-6 in THF containing a small amount of water67 to achieve P3HT with a Mn = 5400 and a relatively narrow polydispersity (1.34).
 Scheme 22  Synthesis of regioregular P3HT by Suzuki–Miyaura coupling polymerization initiated with 37.67 
Further, the authors found that the Mn value was controlled by the feed ratio of monomer 34 to the Pd complex 37 up to 11400.
The HT regioregularity was found to be >99%, thus suggesting that no exchange reaction occurs between the boronic ester moiety and the iodine atom in monomer 34 in the polymerization at low temperature. The MALDI-TOF mass spectra showed that P3HT with moderate molecular weights homogeneously had Ph/H end groups, thus indicating that the polymerization involved a catalyst-transfer mechanism. However, in the synthesis of higher molecular weight polymers, polymer end-groups other than Ph/H were observed, and the PDIs became broader. Importantly, these findings demonstrated that well-defined P3HT can be synthesized not only by Kumada coupling polymerization with nickel catalysts but also by Suzuki–Miyaura coupling polymerization with Pd catalysts.
Very recently, Koeckelberghs and coworkers68 proposed a universal chain-growth polymerization protocol for the synthesis of conjugated polymers. Thus, they demonstrated that stable Pd[RuPhos] catalyst 38 (Scheme 23) does not remain complexed to the propagating polymer chains, but it is easily released from and reinserted into them. Therefore, the controlled chain-growth character does not rely on system-related interactions as is the case of polymerizations reported previously by McCullough and coworkers and Yokozawa and coworkers.28–30,66 This approach makes the protocol applicable to a wide range of monomers, and allows an easy one-pot synthesis of block copolymers by successive monomer addition. Within this broad study, the authors investigated the controlled chain-growth polymerization of regioregular P3HT using RuPhos as a catalyst ligand. The complex aryl-Pd[RuPhos]Br is readily synthesized by reacting Pd2(dba)3 (dba = dibenzylideneacetone), RuPhos and 2-bromo-3-hexylthiophene (1) (Scheme 23). Interestingly, this Pd-initiator is air-, moisture-, and solution stable molecules, and therefore easy to handle, in contrast to those used for the Ni-based protocols. The complex served as initiator (1 mol%) in the polymerization of 2-(bromozincio)-5-bromothiophene 5 in THF at room temperature, affording regioregular P3HT with controlled molecular weight and relatively narrow molecular weight distribution (Mn = 4.6 kg mol−1; PDI = 1.7).
 Scheme 23  Synthesis of HT regioregular P3HT via chain-growth Pd[RuPhos]-catalyzed polymerization of 2-bromo-3-hexylthiophene (1).68 
3. Oxidative coupling polymerization
For the preparation of poly(3-hexylthiophene), oxidative coupling polymerizations, which does not require any leaving groups or the removal of the by-product from the resulting polymer, may have great advantages for large-scale preparation. Ueda and coworkers69 investigated the synthesis of regioregular HT P3HT by utilizing the simple oxidative coupling method. The polymerization was carried out using 3-hexylthiophene (3HT) in the presence of ferric chloride (III) (4 equivalents) as an oxidant in chloroform (Scheme 24, route a). It was found that by lowering the reaction temperature as well as the monomer concentration, the HT regioregularity increased. The effect of lowering the temperature was explained by an enhancement of selectivity in the oxidation between the monomer and the oligomer, whereas the lowering in concentration was supposed to effectively suppress the reaction between the oligomers. The best HT content of 89% was obtained when the temperature was kept at −45 °C for 72 h and the initial monomer concentration was 0.02 mol L−1 (62% yield, Mn = 38 × 10,3 PDI = 2). A longer polymerization time (200 h) quantitatively afforded a high molecular weight polymer (Mn = 68000) with a PDI = 1.9 and a HT content of 88%. After Soxhlet extraction with hexane, a regioregular polymer with HT content of 91% was obtained (86% yield).
 Scheme 24  Ueda's (a)69 and Yu's (b)70 routes for the synthesis of regioregular P3HT. 
Shortly thereafter Yu et al.70 (Scheme 24, route b) reported the oxidation coupling polymerization of 3-hexylthiophene (3HT) by using O2/vanadyl acetylacetonate(IV) (VO(acac)2)/ferric chloride (FeCl3) catalytic system. The polymerization at a molar ratio of VO(acac)2/FeCl3/3HT = 1/2/5 was carried out at 0 °C for 164 h under oxygen, to give P3HT in 61% yield. P3HT prepared by this method exhibited a molecular weight of Mn = 2.1 × 104 with PDI = 3.0, and a head-to-tail content of 65%. By lowering the polymerization temperature to −20 °C an increased HT content (81%) was observed, but correspondingly the yield decreased to 18% (Mn = 1.6 × 104, PDI = 2.3).
4. BHJ photovoltaic cells incorporating regioregular P3HTs: influence of polymer regioregularity, molecular weight and polydispersity
P3HT is commonly considered a benchmark BHJ OPV hole conducting polymer.4 Power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) in excess of 5% for single-layer devices (see Fig. 3 for device structure and operation principle),71 and more than 6% in tandem cell configuration72 have been reported for regioregular P3HT when blended with 1-(3-methoxycarbonyl)propyl-1-phenyl[6,6]C61 (PCBM) as an acceptor, while the estimated theoretical potential is around 10%.73 These outstanding results were achieved despite a P3HT non-ideal bandgap (∼1.9 eV) that prevents effective spectral overlap with solar radiation. The reported operational lifetimes are in excess of 1000 hours.74 This is also the only semiconductor by which OPV panels have been fabricated in a large extent.
 Fig. 3  Structure and operation principle of a BHJ OPV cell based on P3HT. (A) OPV cell material components and (B) energetics of the light absorption and charge collection processes involving P3HT as a donor material. In an OPV device the light passes through the transparent contact (typically indium tin oxide, ITO), and is absorbed in the active layer to generate hole–electron pairs (excitons), which dissociates into free charges at the interface between the donor and the acceptor interface. Holes and electrons flow in the donor (P3HT) and acceptor regions, respectively, and are collected at the electrodes, resulting in the generation of electrical power. Principal figures-of-merit include the power conversion efficiency (PCE), short circuit current (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), and fill factor (FF), defining, respectively, the ratio between the output device electrical energy vs. the input solar energy (Pin), the device current when no reverse bias is applied, the device voltage when no current flows through the cell, and the ratio between maximum power device and Jsc × Voc, respectively. PCEs of photovoltaic cells are calculated using the following equation: PCE = FF × Voc × Jsc/Pin. 
To enhance the efficiency of OPV cells based on P3HT, several optimization strategies have been employed such as using solvent mixtures/additives, photoactive layer thermal annealing/film forming conditions, optical spacers, anode/cathode interfacial layers, and using different device architectures.4
For instance, Marks and coworkers have utilized a NiO inorganic interlayer to improve P3HT/PCBM-based cell efficiency.75 NiO is a transparent conducting p-type oxide, and considering the relevant energy levels for P3HT + PCBM cells indicates that a thin layer of NiO grown on the typically used indium tin oxide (ITO) anode could enhance hole extraction while blocking electron leakage. The highest PCEs reported at that time for optimized P3HT/PC61BM cells, using standard fabrication procedures, were 4.0% efficiency.76 Using the same fabrication procedure and optimal NiO thicknesses of 5–10 nm, the authors achieved record cell power efficiencies of 5.2%.
However, regioregularity of P3HT, molecular weight and polydispersity remain key parameters for solar cell performance. Indeed, phenomena occurring during the photovoltaic process (Fig. 3), such as the creation, the diffusion, and separation of excitons, as well as charge carrier transport, are governed by the active layer morphology and, therefore, by the phase segregation of P3HT/PCBM mixtures. The latter phenomenon, which depends on the self-organizing properties of P3HT, can be markedly influenced by its degree of regioregularity.3,8,77–81
For instance, Kim et al.77 clearly demonstrated the positive effect of the degree of regioregularity on the performance of polymer solar cells with P3HT:PCBM 1:1 weight ratio (PCEs up to 4.4%). The UV-vis absorption coefficient was observed to increase with increasing regioregularity, particularly on the longest wavelength shoulder formed by polymer interchain interactions. In the resulting solar cell, short circuit current Jsc showed positive correlation with regioregularity. The combination of increased absorption and charge transport, as the result of more organized solid-state packing, explained the performance improvement. A specific threshold for regioregularity (∼95%)77 seems to be necessary to give the highest Jsc and FF, mainly because of the better transport properties of highly regioregular P3HT.8
More recently, Urien et al.78 investigated two types of P3HTs with different degrees of regioregularity as active layers with PCBM in photovoltaic cells. The first one contained 77% HT couplings (Mn = 20400 g mol−1, PDI = 2.8), whereas the second sample had a high content of HT couplings, close to 97% (Mn = 20600 g mol−1, PDI = 1.2). They found that the best performance (Voc = 0.61 V, Isc = 4.56 mA cm−2, FF = 0.54, PCE = 1.49%) was exhibited by the devices based on high-regioregular P3HT (1:0.8 wt/wt). This was ascribed to its self-organizing properties, leading to greater absorption of sunlight and greater hole mobility.
On the other hand, it has recently been reported that a too-high regioregularity may be an issue. Sivula et al.79 have demonstrated that decreasing the regioregularity leads to polymer–PCBM blends with superior thermal stability but lowering the driving-force for the P3HT crystallization.
Further, Laquai and coworkers80 reported on charge carrier mobility measurements for blends of structural isomers of P3HT with very high regioregularity (>98%) as well as medium regioregularity (94%) with PCBM in annealed and non-annealed films to study the influence of charge carrier transport on photovoltaic efficiency. Upon blending the regioregular polymers with PCBM in chloroform, the hole mobilities were found to be typically reduced by one order of magnitude with respect to the corresponding pristine P3HTs, and they did not significantly change upon thermal annealing. Next, very high regioregularity led to a faster (μ ∼ 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1) and almost balanced charge transport of the holes and electrons, and medium regioregularity resulted in lower (μ ∼ 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) and unbalanced charge transport in the blends. Despite the differences caused by the different regioregularities, solar cells prepared from both regioregular polymers in combination with PCBM showed comparable PCEs of about 2.5%, thus indicating that increasing the order and therefore charge carrier mobility in P3HT films by using very high regioregular polymers does not significantly help to improve the device efficiency.
Ebadian et al.81 investigated P3HT:PCBM OPVs made by two samples of P3HT with higher (98%) and lower (94%) regioregularity from the viewpoint of the figures-of-merit, along with their durability. They found that the devices based on high-regioregular P3HT initially have a better performance (Voc = 0.54 V, Jsc = 9.3 mA cm−2, FF = 53%, PCE = 2.5%) vs. those based on 94% HT P3HT (Voc = 0.54 V, Jsc = 8.8 mA cm−2, FF = 48%, PCE = 2.3%), but are more prone to degradation due to a tendency for micro-phase segregation of donor and acceptor domains, as confirmed by electron and optical microscopy. The authors speculated that the tendency in high regioregular samples for π-stacking8 pushes the PCBM out to form ever larger domains, thus decreasing the total heterojunction interface, essential for charge separation in the BHJ structure. In addition, this report demonstrated the importance of thermal annealing in correlation with the regioregularity of P3HT on the film morphology and charge mobilities. For devices made with the high regioregular P3HT, the short circuit current and open circuit voltage dropped with annealing to 8.0 mA cm−2 and 0.48 V, respectively, due to accelerated phase segregation. In contrast to the high-regioregular P3HT based OPV, the performance parameters of the low regioregular device remain substantially stable before and after annealing.
Like the effect of regioregularity, the influence of the polymer's MW is critical. In a detailed study Schilinsky et al.82 observed that the efficiency of P3HT–PCBM bulk heterojunction solar cells dramatically depend on the molecular weight of the donor polymer P3HT. The low molecular-weight fractions (Mn = 2200 g mol−1, PDI = 1.43 and 5600 g mol−1, PDI = 1.18) showed a pronounced decrease in the Jsc by a factor of 5–10 as to the high molecular weight P3HT based solar cell, accompanied by a reduction of the Voc and FF by 50%. PCE values exceeding 2.5% were found only for regioregular P3HT with a Mn > 10000. The well-established correlation between molecular weight and charge carrier mobility of regioregular P3HT,13 which is in turn based on the formation of polymer aggregates (vide supra), was considered responsible for the dramatic performance decrease of devices with low-molecular weight polymers. This was corroborated by the solid-state absorption spectra of the various P3HT fractions blended into PCBM. Composites from the higher molecular fractions showed absorption spectra with well-resolved vibrational structure, which was missing in those from low molecular weight fractions.
Hiorns et al.34 found that in order to attain the highest efficiencies, the photovoltaic cells based on P3HT–PCBM blend films had to be treated at a temperature appropriate to the polymer molecular weight, with larger molecular weight P3HT requiring a higher annealing temperature and longer annealing times. This variation was ascribed to the stronger degree of aggregation for high molecular weight P3HT polymer chains,13 which hinders phase separation and slows diffusion of PCBM throughout the film. Further, a more intense variation of the P3HT–PCBM films were found to induce the formation of larger PCBM crystallites, which degraded device performance and caused film-cracking. An ideal sample of P3HT (Mn = 14800) was found to include a mixture of both high and low molecular weight P3HT (i.e. high polydisperse sample, PDI = 2.1), where the low molecular weight polymer chains forms an amorphous matrix which facilitates the aggregation of high molecular weight P3HT into conductive fibrils at low temperatures. In such a way, the high-molecular weight P3HT was considered responsible for the enhanced electrical properties, whereas the small-molecular weight P3HT was used to improve processability. Thermal annealing at 120 °C of the above mentioned P3HT sample (30 min) led to an optimal power conversion efficiency of 3.4% using the cell structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PCBM:P3HT 1:1/LiF/Al (Voc = 600 mV, Jsc = 9.1 mA cm−2 with FF = 63%).
Ma et al.83,84 investigated in detail the morphology and the associated performance of P3HT:PCBM bulk heterojunction solar cells using P3HT with different molecular weights. They found that devices made from P3HT with low molecular weight (A, Mn = 13000 g mol−1, PDI = 2.1) had a higher Isc than devices with higher MW P3HT (B, Mn = 62500 g mol−1, PDI = 2.46) despite the lower hole mobility.13 This was ascribed to a difference in blend film morphologies, all other parameters being kept constant, as also confirmed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). For film A, the PCBM was uniformly dispersed throughout the film. On the other hand, for film B, the phase separation was so strong that large PCBM aggregates were clearly visible. Next, the authors investigated the evolution of film morphology and device efficiency after annealing, and found that after optimum annealing at 150 °C for 10 min PCBM in the A (low MW) films form aggregates on the nanometer length scale, which is generally favorable for charge separation, although the absence of obvious interconnections between the grains may limit the device performance. To form the proper phase segregation morphology, the high MW polymer required a higher annealing temperature, which implies a better thermal stability of the solar cell. Indeed, annealing the high MW films at 180 °C for 10 min lead to additional de-mixing, i.e. the P3HT rich grains became larger (∼20 nm). However, the grains were more likely to be interconnected by the long chains of high MW P3HT, thus leading to a better charge transport and, therefore, a better device performance. These findings correlate well with those reported by Kline et al.13 (vide supra). Taking all the results into account, the authors concluded that the best performance can be achieved by a “molecular weight controlled” material that is made of a mixture of P3HT with different molecular weights, thus leading to highly ordered crystalline regions formed by low molecular weight P3HT embedded in and interconnected by a high MW P3HT matrix.13,16 Following this idea, a series of devices with the structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 1:0.8/Al were fabricated using different ratios of high and low molecular weight P3HT. Devices with an optimized high/low ratio = 1:4 gave the best performance. Very recently Nicolet et al.85 reported a systematic approach to the study of the influence of P3HT molecular weight on the OPV performance through the mapping of the binary P3HT:PCBM blend phase diagram. They observed the presence of an eutectic composition,86 which shifts to a higher content of P3HT going towards lower molecular weight P3HTs (Mn = 60000 g mol−1, 25000 g mol−1, and 9600 g mol−1, respectively). This result was attributed to the molecular weight dependence of the P3HT crystallization behavior. The shift inherent to P3HT molecular weight was found to also be apparent in the photovoltaic performance, as the eutectic composition corresponded to the optimal photovoltaic properties, thus demonstrating that the best composition in P3HT and PCBM is not absolute, but depends on the P3HT MW. The authors also concluded that with a low disperse polymer (e.g. Mn = 25000 g mol−1, PDI = 1.1), the P3HT:PCBM blend has a larger tendency to phase segregate, leading to a segregation of the P3HT at the top interface. This was explained by the fact that the smallest chains of a polydisperse polymer are able to migrate more easily to the interface between the two constituents, thus decreasing their interfacial tension.87
To conclude this section, we provide in Table 1 a non-exhaustive overview on the literature reports dealing with efficient single junction BHJ photovoltaic cells based on a P3HT:PCBM blend. The papers are listed by ascending year of publication.
Table 1 BHJ photovoltaic response properties of P3HT:PCBM blends




Device structure
P3HT provider

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCEa (%)
Year (ref.)





a AM 1.5 illumination, unless otherwise noted.
b 
I
sc.
c White light, 80 mW cm−2.
d Halogen lamp.
e Oleic acid.
f Polyoxyethylene tridecyl ether.
g Self propagating molecular assembly.
h Polyethylene glycol dimethyl ether.





ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 1:2/Ca/Al
—
0.58
8.7b
0.55
2.8
2002(88)


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 1:1/LiF/Al
—
0.55
8.5b
0.60
3.5c
2003(89)


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 1:1/Al
—
0.6
6.35
0.63
2.39
2004(90)


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 1:2/Al
Rieke
0.54
15.2b
0.37
3.1
2004(91)


ITO/ZnO nanorod/P3HT:PCBM/Ag
—
0.475
10.0
0.43
2.03
2005(92)


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 1:1/Al
Merck
0.61
9.4
0.53
3.0
2005(93)


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 1:1Ca/Al
—
0.607
10.631b
0.617
4.0
2005(94)


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 1:1/Ca/Al
Rieke
0.61
10.6
0.674
4.37
2005(95)


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PCBM:P3HT 0.8:1/LiF/Al
Aldrich
0.60
11.2
0.54
4.9
2005(96)


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PHT:PCBM 1:0.8/Al
Rieke
0.63
9.5b
0.68
5.0
2005(83)


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 1:1/Al
Merck
0.6
12.0
0.52
4.4
2006(84)


ITO/PEDOT:PSS//P3HT:PCBM 1:08/TiOx/Al
—
0.61
11.1
0.66
5.0
2006(97)


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PCBM:P3HT 1:1/LiF/Al
Aldrich
0.6
10.4
0.61
3.7
2006(98)


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PCBM:P3HT 1:1/LiF/Al
—
0.59
10.5
0.60
3.7d
2006(99)


ITO/P3HT:PCBM/Al
—
0.6
10
0.65
3.8
2006(100)


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 10:8/Au
—
0.70
10.1
0.53
3.7
2007(101)


ITO/P3HT:PCBM:OAe 1:0.8:2/LiF/Al
—
0.56
9.61
0.607
4.3
2007(102)


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/SWNT/P3HT:PCBM 1:0.8/Al
—
0.59
24.1
0.44
4.9
2007(103)


ITO/PEDOT:PSS (P)f/P3HT:PCBM 1:1/Ca/Al
Rieke
0.59
14.7
0.61
5.2
2007(104)


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 55:45/Al
—
0.62
11.7
0.54
3.9
2008(79)


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 1:1/Ca/Al
—
0.61
11.0
0.641
4.3
2008(105)


ITO/NiO/P3HT:PCBM 1:1/LiF/Al
Rieke
0.638
11.3
0.693
5.16
2008(75)


ITO/PEDOT:PSS//P3HT:PCBM 1:1/Ca/Al
—
0.574
12.0
0.675
4.6
2009(106)


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 1:1/Ca/Al
Rieke
0.60
10.64
0.684
4.29
2009(107)


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 1:1/LiF/Al
Rieke
0.59
8.75
0.691
3.50
2010(108)


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 1.6:1/TiO2/LiF/Al
Rieke
0.68
8.0
0.60
3.2
2010(109)


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 1:1/CrOx/Al
—
0.56
11.55
0.55
3.5
2010(110)


ITO/SPMAg /P3HT:PCBM 10:8/V2O5/Al
BASF
0.60
10.5
0.573
3.60
2010(111)


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 1:1/PEGDEh:Al(2:1)/Al
Rieke
0.58
10.95
0.63
4.0
2011(112)




5. Conclusions
To date, poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) is the most studied donor semiconductor for organic photovoltaic (OPV) cells owing to facile synthesis and unique electronic structure. Various power conversion efficiencies have been reported for P3HT-based OPV devices, up to approximately 6%. These outstanding results were achieved despite a P3HT non-ideal bandgap (∼1.9 eV) that prevents effective spectral overlap with solar radiation.
Regioregularity of P3HT is known3 to be one of the key parameters affecting the related solar cells performance, and critically depend on the regioselectivity of the synthetic approaches to conducting P3HT. The synthesis of regioregular P3HTs generates defect-free, structurally homogeneous, head-to-tail (HT) coupled polymers, which exhibit better self-assembly ability and, therefore, improved bulk properties as well as photovoltaic responses over the regiorandom counterparts. Many regioselective synthetic methods, including electrochemical and chemical polymerization, have been developed. A breakthrough for the preparation of regioregular P3HT has been reported by McCullough19 and Rieke,23 separately. From these works, high regioregular (>98%) HT P3HT has been achieved with reasonable molecular weight.
Since then, a strong chemistry effort has been required to make the regioregular P3HT evolve into an easy accessible system in which the synthesis can be carried out at room temperature and without using a highly reactive system, and is therefore suitable for scaling-up.
Intensive studies have also revealed that the regioregular polymerization of P3HT proceeds via a chain-growth mechanism and may also exhibit living characteristics. This feature allows for the precise control of the polymer molecular weight and polydispersity, which were found3 to be, in turn, critical parameters modulating polymer electronic, optical, electrochemical properties, and solid-state packing, therefore influencing the OPV device performance.
These advanced syntheses of regioregular P3HT have also been successful in producing a wide range of tailor-made functionalized polythiophenes for specific applications, and for the realization of well-defined block copolymers.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge funding from Ministero dell'Istruzione, dell'Università e della Ricerca (MIUR) and University of Perugia through the FIRB-Futuro in Ricerca (projects RBFR08J78Q and RBFR08TTWW) and PRIN 2008 initiatives.
Notes and references
C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183 CrossRef CAS .
A. Facchetti, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 733 CrossRef CAS ; M. Seri, A. Marrocchi, D. Bagnis, R. Ponce, A. Taticchi, T. J. Marks and A. Facchetti, Adv. Mater, 2011, 33, 3827 Search PubMed ; S. Loser, J. Bruns, H. Miyauchi, R. Ponce, A. Facchetti, S. I. Stupp and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8142 CrossRef ; P. Wolfer, M. L. Santarelli, L. Vaccaro, L. Liu, T. D. Anthopoulos, P. Smith, N. Stingelin and A. Marrocchi, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 1886 CrossRef ; F. Silvestri and A. Marrocchi, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2010, 11, 1471 CrossRef ; J. Nelson, J. J. Kwiatkowski, J. Kirkpatrick and J. M. Frost, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1768 CrossRef ; Y.-J. Cheng, S.-H. Yang and C. S. Hsu, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5868 CrossRef ; G. Dennler, M. C. Scharber and C. Brabec, Adv. Mater, 2009, 21, 1323 CrossRef ; P. Heremans, D. Cheyns and B. P. Rand, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1740 CrossRef ; V. Sholin, R. A. Street, S. A. Carter and A. C. Arias, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 063307 CrossRef ; B. C. Thompson and J. M. Frechét, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 58 CrossRef ; J. E. Anthony, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 5028 CrossRef .
R. D. McCullough, Adv. Mater., 1988, 10, 93 CrossRef CAS ; 
          Handbook of Oligo- and Polythiophenes, ed. D. Fichou, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  1998 CrossRef ; I. Osaka and R. D. McCullough, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1202 CrossRef ; 
          Handbook of Thiophene-Based Materials, ed. I. F. Perepichka and D. F. Perepichka, J. Wiley &Sons, Chichester,  2009 Search PubMed .
K. Vakhshouri, D. R. Kozub, C. Wang, A. Salleo and E. D. Gomez, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 026601 CrossRef CAS ; M. T. Dang, L. Hirsch and G. Wantz, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3597 CrossRef ; J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, N. E. Coates, N. E. Moses, T.-Q. Nguyen, M. Dante and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2007, 317, 222 CrossRef ; A. Salleo, R. J. Kline, D. M. DeLongchamp and M. L. Chabinyc, Adv. Mater, 2010, 22, 3812 CrossRef ; G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789 Search PubMed ; S. Gunes, H.S. Neugebauer and N.S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324 CrossRef ; K. Coakley and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4533 CrossRef ; C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 15 CrossRef ; Y. Li and Y. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2952 CrossRef ; V. D. Mihailetchi, H. Xie, B. de Boer, L. J. A. Koster and P. W. M. Blom, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 699 CrossRef ; V. Shotriya, G. Li, Y. Yao, C.-W. Chu and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 073508/1 Search PubMed .
T. Yamamoto, K. Sanechika and A. Yamamoto, J. Polym. Sci., Polym. Lett. Ed., 1980, 18, 9 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. P. Lin and L. P. Dudek, J. Polym. Sci., Polym. Chem. Ed., 1980, 18, 9 CrossRef .
K. Y. Jen, R. Obodi and R. L. Elsenbaumer, Polym. Mater. Sci. Eng., 1985, 53, 79 CAS .
H. Sirringhaus, P. J. Brown, R. H. Friend, M. M. Nielsen, K. Bechgaard, B. M. W. Langeveld-Voss, A. J. H. Spiering, R. A. J. Janssen, E. W. Meijer, P. Herwig and D. M. De Leeuw, Nature, 1999, 401, 685 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. G. Naber, M. Muldder, B. De Boer, P. W. M. Blom and D. M. De Leew, Org. Electron., 2006, 7, 132 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bao, A. Dodabalapur and A. J. Lovinger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 69, 4108 CrossRef CAS ; H. Yang, T. J. Shin, L. Yang, K. Cho, C. Y. Ryu and Z. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 671 CrossRef .
X. Jiang, R. Patil, Y. Harima, J. Ohshita and A. Kunai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 221 CrossRef CAS .
W. Luzny and A. Pron, Synth. Met., 1997, 84, 573 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Kline, M. D. McGehee, E. N. Kadnikova, J. Liu, J. M. Frechet and M. F. Toney, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 3312 CrossRef CAS ; R. J. Kline, M. D. McGehee, E. N. Kadnikova, J. Liu and J. M. Frechet, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1519 CrossRef ; R. Kline and M. McGehee, J. Macromol. Sci., Polym. Rev., 2006, 46, 27 CrossRef .
J.-F. Chang, J. Clark, N. Zhao, H. Sirringhaus, D. W. Breiby, J. W. Andreasen, M. M. Nielsen, M. Giles, M. Heeney and I. McCulloch, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 115318/1–115318/12 CAS .
M. Trznadel, A. Pron, M. Zagorska, R. Chrzaszcz and J. Pielichowski, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 5051 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zen, M. Saphiannikova, D. Neher and G. Wegner, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 2162 CrossRef CAS ; A. Zen, J. Pflaum, S. Hirschmann, W. Zhuang, F. Jaiser, U. Asawapirom, J. P. Rabe, U. Scherf and D. Neher, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 757 CrossRef .
R. L. Elsenbaumer, K.-Y. Jen and R. Obodi, Synth. Met., 1986, 15, 169 CrossRef CAS ; S. Hotta, S. D. D. D. V. Rughoopputh, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Macromolecules, 1987, 20, 212 CrossRef ; R. M. Souto Maior, K. Hinkelmann and F. Wudl, Macromolecules, 1990, 23, 1268 CrossRef ; E. L. Ratcliff, J. L. Jenkins, K. Nebesny and N. R. Armstrong, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5796 CrossRef .
M. Lee, B.-K. Cho and W.-C. Zin, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 3869 CrossRef CAS ; J. Liu, E. Sheina, T. Kowalski and R. D. McCullough, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 329 CrossRef ; Y. Liu, W. Zhang and H. Zhou, Polym. Int., 2005, 54, 1408 CrossRef .
R. D. McCullough and R. D. Lowe, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1992, 1, 70 RSC ; R. D. McCullough, R. D. Lowe, M. Jayaraman and D. L. Anderson, J. Org. Chem., 1993, 58, 904 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, R. S. Lowe and R. D. McCullough, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 5777 CrossRef CAS .
E. E. Sheina, J. Liu, M. C. Iovu, D. W. Laird and R. D. McCullough, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 1169 CrossRef .
R. D. McCullough, S. Tristam-Nagle, S. P. Wiliams, R. D. Lowe and M. Jayaraman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 4910 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Chen and R. D. Rieke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 10087 CrossRef CAS ; A. Chen, X. Wu and R. D. Rieke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 233 CrossRef .
K. Tamao, K. Sumitani and M. Kumada, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1972, 94, 9268 CrossRef CAS ; M. Kumada, Pure Appl. Chem., 1980, 52, 669 CrossRef ; E. Negishi, Pure Appl. Chem., 1981, 53, 2333 CrossRef ; J. K. Stille, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1986, 25, 508 CrossRef ; K. Tamao and N. Miyaura, Top. Curr. Chem., 2002, 219, 1 CrossRef .
T.-A. Chen and R. D. Rieke, Synth. Met., 1993, 60, 175 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Loewe, P. C. Ewbank, J. Liu, L. Zhai and R. D. McCullough, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 4324 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, M. S. Wilson, R. D. Rauh, P. Schottland, B. C. Thompson and J. R. Reynolds, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 2083 CrossRef CAS ; X. M. Hong, J. C. Tyson and D. M. Collard, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 3502 CrossRef .
A. Yokoyama, R. Miyakoshi and T. Yokozawa, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 1169 CrossRef CAS .
R. Miyakoshi, A. Yokoyama and T. Yokozawa, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2004, 25, 1663 CrossRef CAS .
E. E. Sheina, J. Liu, M. C. Iovu, D. W. Laird and R. D. McCullough, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 1169 CrossRef CAS ; M. C. Iovu, E. E. Sheina, R. R. Gil and R. D. McCullough, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 8649 CrossRef .
T. Yokozawa and H. Shimura, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 1999, 37, 2607 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jeffries-El, G. Sauvè and R. D. McCullough, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1017 CrossRef CAS ; M. Jeffries-El, G. Sauvè and R. D. McCullough, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 10346 CrossRef .
R. C. Hiorns, A. Khoukh, B. Gourdet and C. Dagron-Lartigau, Polym. Int., 2006, 55, 608 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Hiorns, R. De Bettignies, J. Leroy, S. Bailly, M. Firon, C. Sentein, A. Khoukh, H. Preud'homme and C. Dagron-Lartigau, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2263 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Sontag, N. Marshall and J. Locklin, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3354 RSC ; N. Marshall, S. K. Sontag and J. Locklin, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 2137 CrossRef CAS ; S. K. Sontag, G. Sheppard, N. S. Usselman, N. Marshall and J. Locklin, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 12033 CrossRef ; N. Marshall, S. K. Sontag and J. Locklin, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5681 RSC .
V. Senkovskyy, N. Khanduyeva, H. Komber, U. Oertel, M. Stamm, D. Kuckling and A. Kiriy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 6626 CrossRef CAS ; N. Khanduyeva, V. Senkovskyy, T. Beryozkina, V. Bocharova, F. Simon, M. Nitschke, M. Stamm, R. Grotzschel and A. Kiriy, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 7383 CrossRef ; N. Khanduyeva, V. Senkovskyy, T. Beryozkina, M. Horecha, M. Stamm, C. Uhrich, M. Riede, K. Leo and A. Kiriy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 153 CrossRef ; A. Kiriy, V. Senkovskyy and M. Sommer, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2011, 32, 1503 CrossRef .
V. Senkovskyy, R. Tkachov, T. Beryozkina, H. Komber, U. Oertel, M. Horecha, V. Bocharova, M. Stamm, S. A. Gevorgyan, F. C. Krebs and A. Kiriy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16445 CrossRef CAS .
T. Beryozkina, V. Senkovskyy, E. Kaul and A. Kiriy, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 7817 CrossRef CAS .
N. Doubina, A. Ho, A. K. Y. Jen and C. K. Luscombe, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 7670 CrossRef CAS ; N. Doubina, M. Stoddard, H. A. Bronstein, A. K. Y. Jen and C. K. Luscombe, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2009, 210, 1966 CrossRef ; K. Okamoto and C. K. Luscombe, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 2424 RSC .
H. A. Bronstein and C. K. Luscombe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12894 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sacco and P. Mastrorilli, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1994, 2761 RSC .
S.-H. Kim and R. D. Rieke, Synth. Met., 2009, 159, 1900 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Lanni and A. J. McNeil, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16573 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Kim and J.-G. Kim, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2010, 31, 193 CrossRef CAS .
A. Krasovski, A. Malakhov, A. Gavryushin and P. Knochel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 6040 CrossRef .
J.-G. Kim, S.-H. Kim and R. D. Rieke, Macromol. Res., 2011, 19, 749 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Kim and R. D. Rieke, Synth. Met., 2009, 159, 1900 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tamba, S. Tanaka, Y. Okubo, H. Meguro, S. Okamoto and A. Mori, Chem. Lett., 2011, 40, 398 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mosrin and P. Knochel, Org. Lett., 2009, 11, 1837 CrossRef CAS ; S. R. Dubbaka, M. Kienle, H. Mayr and P. Knochel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 9093 CrossRef ; S. H. Wunderlich and P. Knochel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7685 CrossRef .
R. H. Lohwasser and M. Thelakkat, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 3388 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Achord and J. W. Rawlins, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 8634 CrossRef CAS .
T. Higashihara, E. Goto and M. Ueda, ACS Macro Lett., 2012, 1, 167 CrossRef CAS .
A. Iraqi and G. W. Barker, J. Mater. Chem., 1998, 8, 25 RSC .
I. A. Liversedge, S. J. Higgins, M. Giles, M. Heeney and I. McCulloch, Tetrahedron Lett., 2006, 47, 5143 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hassan, M. Sevignon, C. Gozzi, E. Schulz and M. Lemaire, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 1359 CrossRef CAS ; A. F. Littke and G. C. Fu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 4176 CrossRef ; N. Miyaura, Top. Curr. Chem., 2002, 219, 11 CrossRef .
M. Melucci, G. Barbarella and G. Sotgiu, J. Org. Chem., 2002, 67, 8877 CrossRef CAS ; A. C. Spivey, D. J. Turner, M. L. Turner and S. Yeates, Org. Lett., 2002, 4, 1899 CrossRef ; C. A. Brihen and P. Bäuerle, J. Comb. Chem., 2002, 4, 457 CrossRef .
M. Jayaakannan, J. L. J. van Dongen and R. A. J. Janssen, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 5386 CrossRef ; M. Jayaakannan, X. Lou, J. L. J. van Dongen and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2005, 43, 1454 CrossRef .
J. P. Wolfe, R. A. Singer, B. H. Yang and S. L. J. Buchwald, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 9550 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, Y. Han, B. Li and Z. Bo, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2008, 46, 4556 CrossRef CAS .
S. Schluter, J. Fran, B. Karakaya and A. D. Schluter, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2000, 201, 139 CrossRef CAS ; A. R. Katritzky, Q. Rev., Chem. Soc., 1959, 18, 353 RSC .
N. Miyaura and A. Suzuki, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 2457 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. David, M. Portnoy and D. Milstein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1989, 111, 8742 CrossRef CAS ; D. Baranano and J. F. Hartwig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 2937 CrossRef .
D. Alberico, M. E. Scott and M. Lautens, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 174 CrossRef CAS ; L. Ackermann, R. Vicente and A. R. Kapdi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9792 CrossRef ; D. Zhao, J. You and C. Hu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 5466 CrossRef ; P. Berrouard, A. Najari, A. Pron, D. Gendron, P. O. Morin, J.-R. Pouliot, J. Veilleux and M. Leclerc, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2068 CrossRef ; A. Facchetti, L. Vaccaro and A. Marrocchi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3520 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, R. Takita, Y. Kikuzaki and F. Ozawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11420 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Herrmann, C. Brossmer, C.-P. Reisinger, T. H. Riermeier, K. Öfele and M. Beller, Chem.–Eur. J., 1997, 1357 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yokozawa, R. Suzuki, M. Nojima, Y. Ohta and A. Yojoyama, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2011, 32, 801 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yokozawa, H. Kohno, Y. Ohta and A. Yokohama, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 7095 CrossRef CAS .
M. Verswyvel, P. Verstappen, L. De Cremer, T. Verbiest and G. Koeckelberghs, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2011, 49, 5339 CrossRef CAS ; A. Smeets, K. Van den Bergh, J. De Winter, P. Gerbaux, T. Verbiest and G. Koeckelberghs, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 7638 CrossRef .
S. Amou, O. Haba, K. Shirato, T. Hayakawa, M. Ueda, K. Takeuchi and M. Asai, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 1999, 37, 1943 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yu, T. Hayakawa and M. Ueda, Chem. Lett., 1999, 559 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, N. E. Coates, D. Moses, T.-Q. Nguyen, M. Dante and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2002, 317, 222 CrossRef .
L. J. A. Koster, V. D. Mihailetchi and P. W. M. Blom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 093511 CrossRef CAS ; M. C. Scharber, D. Mühlbacher, M. Koppe, P. Denk, C. Waldauf, A. J. Heeger and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 789 CrossRef .
X. Yang, J. Loos, S. C. Veenstra, W. J. H. Verhees, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon, M. A. J. Michael and R. A. J. Janssen, Nano Lett., 2005, 4, 579 CrossRef CAS ; F. C. Krebs and H. Spangaard, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5235 CrossRef ; F. C. Krebs and K. Norrman, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2007, 15, 697 Search PubMed ; M. Bierring, J. S. Nielsen., A. Siu, N. C. Nielsen and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 772 CrossRef ; E. A. Katz, S. Gevorgian, M. S. Orynbayev and F. C. Krebs, Eur. Phys. J.: Appl. Phys., 2007, 36, 307 CrossRef ; J. A. Hauch, P. Schilinski, S. A. Choulis, R. Childers, M. Biele and C. J. Brabec, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 772 CrossRef .
M. D. Irwin, D. B. Buchholz, A. W. Hains, A. W. Chang and T. J. Marks, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 2783 CrossRef CAS .
L.-M. Chen, Z. Hong, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1434 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, S. Cook, S. M. Tuladhar, S. A. Choulis, J. Nelson, J. R. Durrant, D. D. C. Bradley, M. Giles, I. McCulloch, C.-S. Ha and M. Ree, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 197 CrossRef CAS .
M. Urien, L. Bailly, L. Vignau, E. Cloutet, A. de Cuendias, G. Wantz, H. Cramail, L. Hirsch and J.-P. Parneix, Polym. Int., 2008, 57, 764 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sivula, C. K. Luscombe, B. C. Thompson and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 13988 CrossRef CAS ; C. H. Woo, B. C. Thompson and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16324 CrossRef .
R. Mauer, M. Kastler and F. Laquai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2085 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ebadian, B. Gholamkhass, S. Shambayati, S. Holdcroft and P. Servati, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 2258 CrossRef CAS .
P. Schilinsky, U. Asawapirom, U. Scherf, M. Biele and C. J. Brabec, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 2175 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, C. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, J. Y. Kim, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2007, 28, 1776 CrossRef CAS .
C. Nicolet, D. Deribew, C. Renaud, G. Fleury, C. Brochon, E. Cloutet, L. Vignau, G. Wantz, H. Cramail, M. Geoghegan and G. Hadziioannou, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 12717 CrossRef CAS .
C. Müller, T. A. M. Ferenczi, M. Campoy-Quiles, J. M. Frost, D. D. C. Bradley, P. Smith, N. Stingelin-Stutzmann and J. Nelson, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3510 CrossRef .
D. Broseta, G. H. Frederickson, E. Helfand and L. Leibler, Macromolecules, 1990, 23, 132 CrossRef CAS ; S. Enders, A. Hinrichs, R. Horst and B. A. Wolf, J. Macromol. Sci., Part A: Pure Appl.Chem., 1996, 33, 1097 CrossRef ; R. Gelles and C. W. Frank, Macromolecules, 1983, 16, 1448 CrossRef .
P. Schilinski, C. Waldauf and C. J. Brabec, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 3885 CrossRef .
F. Padinger, R. S. Rittberg and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 85 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chirvase, J. Parisi, J. C. Hummelen and V. Diakonov, Nanotechnology, 2004, 15, 1317 CrossRef CAS .
I. Riedel and V. Diakonov, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2004, 201, 1332 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Olson, J. Piris, R. T. Collins, S. E. Shaheen and D. S. Ginley, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 496, 26 CrossRef .
Y. Kim, S. A. Choulis, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley, S. Cook and J. R. Durrant, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 063502/1 CAS .
G. Li, V. Shotriya, Y. Yao and Y. Yang, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 043704/1 CAS .
G. Li, V. Shotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864 CrossRef CAS .
M. Reyes-Reyes, K. Kim and D. L. Carroll, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 083506/1 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Kim, S. H. Kim, H. Ho Lee, K. Lee, W. Ma, X. Gong and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 572 CrossRef .
A. J. Moule, J. B. Bonekamp and K. Meerholz, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 094503/1 CrossRef CAS .
V. D. Mihailetchi, H. Xie, B. de Boer, L. M. Popescu, J. C. Hummelen, P. W. M. Blom and L. J. A. Koster, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 012107/1 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Laird, Plextronics NREL Certified Search PubMed .
Y. Zhao, Z. Xie, Y. Qu, Y. Geng and L. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 043504 CrossRef .
W. Wang, H. B. Wu, C. Y. Yang, C. Luo, Y. Zhang, J. W. Chen and Y. Cao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 183512 CrossRef .
S. Chaudhary, H. Lu, A. M. Muller, C. J. Bardeen and M. Ozkan, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1973 CrossRef CAS .
C.-J. Ko, Y.-K. Lin, F.-C. Chen and C.-W. Chu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 063509 CrossRef .
F.-C. Chen, H.-C. Tseng and C.-J. Ko, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 103316 CrossRef .
A. Gadisa, W. D. Oosterbaan, K. Vandewal, J. C. Bolsée, S. Bertho, J. D'Haen, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande and J. V. Manca, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3300 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jo, S.-I. Na, S. S. Kim, T. W. Lee, Y. Chung, S. J. Kang, D. Vak and D.-Y. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2398 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Park, M.-G. Kang, S. H. Ahn and L. J. Guo, Adv. Mater, 2010, 22, E247 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, X. Zhu, G. Cao and C. K. Luscombe, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2612 RSC .
M. Wang, Q. Tang, J. An, F. Xie, J. Chen, S. Zheng, K. Y. Wong, Q. Miao and J. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 2699 CAS .
L. Motiei, Y. Yao, J. Choudhury, H. Yan, T. J. Marks, M. E. van der Boom and A. Facchetti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12528 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Jeng, M.-W. Lin, Y.-J. Hsu, T.-C. Wen and T.-F. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 1192 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Assunta Marrocchi	Assunta Marrocchi is currently an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemistry of the University of Perugia. She earned a PhD in Chemical Sciences at the same Institution, working on a research project dealing with the design and synthesis of helically shaped polycyclic aromatics. Her main research interests include the design, sustainable synthesis, and properties of π-conjugated semiconductors for organic electronics, with a special emphasis on the preparation of semiconducting materials for organic solar cells.
Daniela Lanari	Daniela Lanari obtained her MS degree in Chemistry at the University of Perugia in 2001. She received her PhD degree from the same Institution in 2005. In the same year she joined the research group of James Fraser Stoddart at the University of California Los Angeles (UCLA) where she worked as a postdoctoral fellow on the template synthesis of mechanically interlocked molecules. In 2010 she was appointed Lecturer at the University of Perugia and currently she is an Assistant Professor teaching “Materials for Renewable Energies”. Her current research interests include the design and synthesis of solid catalysts for the sustainable preparation of organic semiconductors.
Antonio Facchetti	Antonio Facchetti obtained his PhD in Chemical Sciences from the University of Milan. In 2002 he joined Northwestern University where he is currently an Adjunct Professor of Chemistry. He is a co-founder and currently the Chief Technology Officer of Polyera Corporation. Dr Facchetti has published more than 250 research articles, 7 book chapters, and holds about 40 patents. He received the 2009 Italian Chemical Society Research Prize and he is a Kavli and AAAS Fellow. He was selected among the “TOP 100 MATERIALS SCIENTISTS OF THE PAST DECADE (2000–2010)” by Thomson Reuters.
Luigi Vaccaro	Luigi Vaccaro obtained his Laurea in Chemistry at the University of Naples – Federico II, and then earned a PhD in Chemical Sciences at the University of Perugia where he is currently an Associate Professor leading the Green S.O.C. group. He is the co-author of 75 scientific papers. He received the Europa Medal from the Society of Chemical Industry – London, the ADP Award from Merck's Chemistry Council for “Creative work in organic chemistry” and the G. Ciamician Medal of the Società Chimica Italiana. His research is currently focused on waste-minimized preparation of target molecules and materials.

Broader context
Over the past three decades organic photovoltaics (OPVs) has been identified as a fast growing technology with a large potential, as it holds the promise for cost-efficient, lightweight, (semi)-transparent, and mechanically flexible solar energy conversion platform. To date, head-to-tail (HT) regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) is one of the most studied materials for the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) structure. Many regioselective synthetic protocols to defect-free P3HT have been developed, enabling an extremely high degree of control over the molecular weight with narrow polydispersities, which remains the key to technological breakthroughs using polymeric materials in OPVs since batch-to-batch property variations are held to a minimum. Here we summarize recent progress on the chemical synthetic approaches to regioregular HT-P3HT, and attempt to merge current understandings of the influence of polymer regioregularity, molecular weight and polydispersity on its bulk properties and photovoltaic response. The well-defined structure of HT-P3HT avoided ambiguities in structure–properties correlations, thus allowing enhanced material properties and excellent BHJ OPVs performance. Importantly, all the HT-P3HT distinctive features steadily make it a relevant model to explore new controlled polymerization techniques, as well as to develop new advanced materials and to tune their performance in organic solar cells.


 	Fig. 1  Coupling regiochemistry of P3HT isomers.	 

 	Scheme 1  Synthesis of regioregular P3HT by McCullough's method.19Reagents and conditions: i, LDA, THF, −40 °C, 40 min; ii, MgBr2.Et2O, −60 to −40 °C per 40 min, −40 to 5 °C per 20 min; iii, Ni(dppp)Cl2, −5 to 25 °C, 18 h.	 

 	Scheme 2  Regiocontrolled synthesis of poly(3-hexylthiophene) by the Rieke method.23	 

 	Scheme 3  Catalytic cycle of transition metal-mediated cross-coupling reactions.	 

 	Scheme 4  Synthesis of HT-P3HT by the Grignard metathesis (GRIM) method.26,27	 

 	Scheme 5  Yokozawa's route for the synthesis of regioregular P3HT.28,29	 

 	Scheme 6  Yokozawa's proposed pathway for the formation of high-molecular weight P3HT promoted by water during polymerization quenching.29	 

 	Scheme 7  McCullogh's proposed mechanism for the nickel-catalyzed cross-coupling polymerization.32	 

 	Scheme 8  Metallation by GRIM metathesis of 2,5-bromo-3-hexylthiophene 4, as reported by Hiorns et al.33	 

 	Scheme 9  Preparation of HT-P3HT brushes grafted from a surface-bound nickel-coupling catalyst.36	 

 	Scheme 10  Preparation of a hairy P3HT/organosilica particle from surface-initiated polycondensation of 5-chloromagnesio-3-hexyl-2-bromothiophene 17.37	 

 	Scheme 11  Ph–Ni(PPh3)4–Br-initiated Kumada polycondensation, as reported by Kiriy and coworkers.38	 

 	Scheme 12  Synthesis of externally initiated regioregular P3HT by using nickel(II) complexes 20.40	 

 	Scheme 13  Preparation of thienylmanganese bromides and polymerization.42	 

 	Scheme 14  Synthetic routes to regioregular P3HT, as reported by Kim et al.44,46Reagents and conditions: i, Ni(dppe)Cl2, THF.	 

 	Scheme 15  Nickel-catalyzed polycondensation of 2-bromo-3-hexylthiophene (1), in the presence of (2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-1-yl)magnesium chloride·LiCl (25).48	 

 	Scheme 16  Active Grignard monomer formation and catalyst transfer polymerization for the preparation of P3HT using t-BuMgCl as such or in the presence of LiCl.50	 

 	Scheme 17  Halogen–metal exchange reaction and catalyst transfer polycondensation for the preparation of P3HT using t-Bu4ZnLi2.52	 

 	Scheme 18  Synthesis of regioregular HT P3HT by Stille coupling reaction.53	 

 	Scheme 19  Synthesis of HT regioregular P3HT by Suzuki coupling reaction.54	 

 	Fig. 2  Structures of electron-rich bulky phosphane ligands employed in Pd-catalyzed Suzuki coupling polymerization to afford regioregular P3HT.57	 

 	Scheme 20  Suzuki–Miyaura coupling of 3-hexyl-5-halothiophene-2-boronic pinacol esters 34, 35 with Pd(PPh3)4 or Pd(PTh3)3 as the catalyst precursors.59	 

 	Scheme 21  Pd-catalyzed dehydrogenative polycondensation of 2-bromo-3-hexylthiopene (1), using Herrmann's catalyst 36 as a palladium source.64	 

 	Scheme 22  Synthesis of regioregular P3HT by Suzuki–Miyaura coupling polymerization initiated with 37.67	 

 	Scheme 23  Synthesis of HT regioregular P3HT via chain-growth Pd[RuPhos]-catalyzed polymerization of 2-bromo-3-hexylthiophene (1).68	 

 	Scheme 24  Ueda's (a)69 and Yu's (b)70 routes for the synthesis of regioregular P3HT.	 

 	Fig. 3  Structure and operation principle of a BHJ OPV cell based on P3HT. (A) OPV cell material components and (B) energetics of the light absorption and charge collection processes involving P3HT as a donor material. In an OPV device the light passes through the transparent contact (typically indium tin oxide, ITO), and is absorbed in the active layer to generate hole–electron pairs (excitons), which dissociates into free charges at the interface between the donor and the acceptor interface. Holes and electrons flow in the donor (P3HT) and acceptor regions, respectively, and are collected at the electrodes, resulting in the generation of electrical power. Principal figures-of-merit include the power conversion efficiency (PCE), short circuit current (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), and fill factor (FF), defining, respectively, the ratio between the output device electrical energy vs. the input solar energy (Pin), the device current when no reverse bias is applied, the device voltage when no current flows through the cell, and the ratio between maximum power device and Jsc × Voc, respectively. PCEs of photovoltaic cells are calculated using the following equation: PCE = FF × Voc × Jsc/Pin.	 


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 1:2/Ca/Al	—	0.58	8.7b	0.55	2.8	2002(88)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 1:1/LiF/Al	—	0.55	8.5b	0.60	3.5c	2003(89)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 1:1/Al	—	0.6	6.35	0.63	2.39	2004(90)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 1:2/Al	Rieke	0.54	15.2b	0.37	3.1	2004(91)
ITO/ZnO nanorod/P3HT:PCBM/Ag	—	0.475	10.0	0.43	2.03	2005(92)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 1:1/Al	Merck	0.61	9.4	0.53	3.0	2005(93)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 1:1Ca/Al	—	0.607	10.631b	0.617	4.0	2005(94)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 1:1/Ca/Al	Rieke	0.61	10.6	0.674	4.37	2005(95)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PCBM:P3HT 0.8:1/LiF/Al	Aldrich	0.60	11.2	0.54	4.9	2005(96)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PHT:PCBM 1:0.8/Al	Rieke	0.63	9.5b	0.68	5.0	2005(83)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 1:1/Al	Merck	0.6	12.0	0.52	4.4	2006(84)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS//P3HT:PCBM 1:08/TiOx/Al	—	0.61	11.1	0.66	5.0	2006(97)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PCBM:P3HT 1:1/LiF/Al	Aldrich	0.6	10.4	0.61	3.7	2006(98)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PCBM:P3HT 1:1/LiF/Al	—	0.59	10.5	0.60	3.7d	2006(99)
ITO/P3HT:PCBM/Al	—	0.6	10	0.65	3.8	2006(100)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 10:8/Au	—	0.70	10.1	0.53	3.7	2007(101)
ITO/P3HT:PCBM:OAe 1:0.8:2/LiF/Al	—	0.56	9.61	0.607	4.3	2007(102)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/SWNT/P3HT:PCBM 1:0.8/Al	—	0.59	24.1	0.44	4.9	2007(103)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS (P)f/P3HT:PCBM 1:1/Ca/Al	Rieke	0.59	14.7	0.61	5.2	2007(104)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 55:45/Al	—	0.62	11.7	0.54	3.9	2008(79)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 1:1/Ca/Al	—	0.61	11.0	0.641	4.3	2008(105)
ITO/NiO/P3HT:PCBM 1:1/LiF/Al	Rieke	0.638	11.3	0.693	5.16	2008(75)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS//P3HT:PCBM 1:1/Ca/Al	—	0.574	12.0	0.675	4.6	2009(106)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 1:1/Ca/Al	Rieke	0.60	10.64	0.684	4.29	2009(107)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 1:1/LiF/Al	Rieke	0.59	8.75	0.691	3.50	2010(108)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 1.6:1/TiO2/LiF/Al	Rieke	0.68	8.0	0.60	3.2	2010(109)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 1:1/CrOx/Al	—	0.56	11.55	0.55	3.5	2010(110)
ITO/SPMAg /P3HT:PCBM 10:8/V2O5/Al	BASF	0.60	10.5	0.573	3.60	2010(111)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM 1:1/PEGDEh:Al(2:1)/Al	Rieke	0.58	10.95	0.63	4.0	2011(112)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
