Microwave-assisted synthesis of carbon dots and their applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TC01640F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TC01640F
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 7175-7195Microwave-assisted synthesis of carbon dots and their applications

        
          
            Tayline V. 
            de Medeiros
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            John 
            Manioudakis
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Farah 
            Noun
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Jun-Ray 
            Macairan
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Florence 
            Victoria
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Rafik 
            Naccache
          
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Chemistry and Biochemistry and the Centre for NanoScience Research, Concordia University, Montreal, QC H4B 1R6, Canada. E-mail: rafik.naccache@concordia.ca
bQuebec Centre for Advanced Materials, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Concordia University, Montreal, QC H4B 1R6, Canada
Received 
      26th March 2019
    , Accepted 24th May 2019First published on 28th May 2019AbstractCarbon dots, an emerging class within the carbon allotrope family, have gained significant attention largely due to their versatile and tunable physico-chemical and optical properties. These quasi-spherical carbon nanomaterials, less than 10 nm in size, can be prepared using numerous synthesis strategies resulting in unique properties that can be exploited for a myriad of applications. This review examines the bottom-up synthesis of these dots with a focus on their microwave-assisted synthesis, which can be used to prepare hydrophilic, hydrophobic or even amphiphilic carbon dots. It also investigates their application to multiple fields including sensing, bioimaging, solar cells and catalysis. Finally, a discussion of the challenges and perspectives are provided.
Tayline V. de Medeiros
Tayline V. de Medeiros completed both her BSc (2015) and MSc (2017) in Chemistry at the Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (Brazil). Her previous research focused on carbon-based materials such as carbon nanotubes and carbon nitrides for green chemistry applications. She is currently a PhD candidate in the Naccache Research group at the Concordia University. Her current research focus on development of hybrid materials targeting the enhancement of luminescent properties of carbon dots.
John Manioudakis
John Manioudakis received his BSc (2000) and PhD in biochemistry (2008) from Concordia University (Montreal, Canada). During his studies in enzymology, he investigated the structural and functional roles of ionizable amino acid residues in multi-domain, multi-functional enzymes. Prior to his current role as research associate in Dr Naccache's laboratory, he held an industrial research position focusing on analytical/bioanalytical method development and validation. His current research interests include fundamental studies on the formation and optical properties of carbon dots and the development of carbon dot-based pathogen detection systems.
Farah Noun
Farah Noun received her BSc (2016) in Chemistry from McGill University (Montreal). She is currently a PhD candidate in the Naccache Research Group at Concordia University (Montreal). Her research in the field of nanochemistry focuses on metal ion detection in water by carbon dots. More specifically, she seeks to understand the quenching mechanisms behind metal-carbon dot interactions as well as develop a sensitive and selective metal sensor using carbon dots.
Jun-Ray Macairan
Jun-Ray Macairan received his BSc Specialization in Biochemistry in 2016 at Concordia University (Montreal, Canada). He is currently a PhD candidate in Chemistry at Concordia University, working under the supervision of Dr Rafik Naccache. His research interests focus on the development of multimodal bioimaging probes using carbon dots with sensing capabilities (i.e. temperature and pH sensing).
Florence Victoria
Florence Victoria completed her BSc specialization in Biochemistry at Concordia University in 2017. She joined the Naccache Research Group in 2016 as an undergraduate co-op student and is currently a second year MSc candidate in the same lab. Her research interests include chirality in carbon nanomaterials.
Rafik Naccache
Rafik Naccache obtained his PhD in Chemistry at Concordia University in Quebec, Canada, where he worked on lanthanide-doped upconverting nanoparticles for imaging applications. He subsequently carried out his NSERC postdoctoral training in nanobiophotonics at l'Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique. Since December 2015, he is an assistant professor in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Concordia University and is currently a Petro-Canada Young Innovator and a Concordia University Research Fellow. His group's research program focuses on the study of the fundamental properties of fluorescent carbon nanomaterials and hybrid nanosystems for the development of sensing, imaging and drug delivery applications.
Introduction
Since their serendipitous discovery in 2004 by Scrivens and coworkers,1 carbon dots (CDs) have garnered significant interest stemming from the fact that they possess versatile physical, optical and chemical properties. The interest in these fluorescent nanomaterials is further amplified by the fact that they can be synthesized from relatively inexpensive sources including simple organic molecules such as citric acid,2 or more heterogeneous sources that include orange juice,3 rice,4 coffee beans,5 ashes6 or even waste.7 CDs are quasi-spherical nanoparticles, typically ranging from 1 to 10 nm, being primarily composed of carbon (mostly sp2 with some sp3 character), with some hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen moieties.8,9 However, their composition can be tailored according to the chemical makeup of the precursors.10 Due to their outstanding physical and chemical properties, a tremendous surge in CD-related research has been observed as evidenced by Fig. 1. Indeed, we note an exponential growth in the number of related publications since their discovery in 2004 leading up to 2018.
 Fig. 1  Number of carbon dot-related publications from 2004 to 2018. A nearly exponential surge is observed from 2012 onwards. 
CDs are generally regarded as having low chemical toxicity.11,12 Moreover, they have also been shown to possess minimal cytotoxicity and high biocompatibility.9,13 These sub-10 nm particles can offer a high fluorescence quantum yield (QY).14 For that reason, CDs have come to light as an economically and environmentally-viable class of nanomaterials for the development of new technologies. Moreover, they offer an interesting alternative to conventional fluorescent materials and are currently touted to possess a tremendous potential for integration in a myriad of applications15 including displays,16 lighting,17 sensing18 – both biological19,20 and chemical,21,22 catalysis,23 solar cells,24 imaging25–27 and drug delivery28 among others.
The interest in CDs is principally due to their optical properties. These nanomaterials do not necessarily act as classical quantum dots and as such their optical properties can be quite diverse. In fact, their fluorescence is highly dependent on the precursors, reaction parameters and synthesis route.29,30 Their optical properties can be designed and tailored to span the UV to the near infrared regions of the electromagnetic spectrum. In addition, CDs can exhibit fluorescent properties that are excitation wavelength dependent, which implies that as the excitation wavelength is varied from high energy (UV) to lower energy (visible or near infrared), the emission is red-shifted and vice versa. Hence, a single CD system can possess multiple fluorescence possibilities. It is also possible to design carbon dots with fluorescent properties that are excitation wavelength-independent. Thus, the observed fluorescence does not exhibit a shift regardless of the excitation wavelength.29,50 These capabilities are often dictated by surface passivation with chemical functional groups on their surface.51–53 CDs have also been shown to undergo multiphoton excitation, upconverting pulsed near infrared light to visible fluorescence.54,55 With respect to biological applications, particularly in vivo, this process can be very important as it can circumvent the requirement for UV or visible light as principle sources of excitation of the optical probe. Moreover, near infrared light minimizes autofluorescence events in biological background signals thereby enhancing imaging. In contrast to UV light, near infrared radiation is virtually eliminated by media and tissues, offering significantly better penetration depth, being also less prone to scattering and not imparting damage to the sample under study. This opens up novel avenues for integration in bioimaging, targeting and drug delivery applications.54 The optical properties and the efficiency of the fluorescence in carbon dots can be dictated by surface passivation with molecular precursors bearing functional groups such as amines, carboxyls, thiols and phosphates among others.15 Although to date the exact mechanism for surface passivation of carbon dots remains unclear, it is generally accepted that passivation, through electron donation, to surface states (e.g. localized carrier traps, functional domains, disorder-induced states) will: (i) allow recombination to take place from only one center rendering the dot excitation-independent, or (ii) decrease the contribution of non-radiative processes that quench the carbon dot fluorescence. According to the literature, different passivation agents and manipulation of the reaction conditions result in a wide range of quantum yields as shown in Table 1 and the references within.56
Table 1 Carbon dots synthesis routes and their optical properties. Adapted from ref. 56




Synthetic route
Precursorsa
Reaction conditions
Constituting elements
Emission propertiesb
Emission color
PLQYc (%)
Ref.





a BSA = bovine serum albumin; CA = citric acid; EDA = ethylenediamine; EDTA = ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid; FA = folic acid; SWCTs = single wall carbon nanotubes.
b SDPL = size-dependant PL; EDPL = excitation-dependant PL; EIPL = excitation-independent PL.
c PLQY = photoluminescent quantum yield.





Arc-discharge
Carbon soot
HNO3, boiled, 48 h
C, H, N, O
SDPL
Blue, yellow
1.6

1



Laser ablation
Carbon soot
Nd:YAG pulsed laser
C, H, O
EDPL
Green, yellow
1–10

31



Carbon soot
KrF pulsed laser
C, H, N, O
SDPL
Blue
—

32



Ionic liquid
Nd:YAG pulsed laser
—
EDPL
Blue
36

33



Electrooxidation
Graphite
Electrode in NaH2PO4
C, H, O
EIPL
Blue, yellow
1.2

34



Thermal oxidation
Citrate salts
300 °C, air, 2 h
C, H, O, N
EDPL
Full color
3

35



Ammonium carboxylate complex
250 °C, air, 2 h
C, H, O, N
EDPL
Blue, green
4

36



Microwave pyrolysis
Eggshell membrane
560 W, 2 min
C, H, N, O
SDPL
Blue
5

37



CA, L-cysteine, dextrin
800 W, 3 min
C, H, N, O, S
SDPL
Blue
22

21



Lactose, HCl
600 W, 15 min
C, H, N, O
EIPL
Blue
—

38



Glucose, H3PO4
700 W, 5 min
C, H, N, O, P
EIPL
Yellow
8

39



BSA, urea
700 W, 5 min
C, H, N, O
EDPL
Blue, green
14

40



Citric acid, amine
300 W, 10 min
C, H, N, O
EIPL
Blue
50

41



Ultrasonic synthesis
Polyamide resin, EDA
Water, 3 h
C, H, N, O
EIPL
Full color
28

42



Graphite powder, H2SO4 and HNO3
2 h
C, H, O
SDPL
Green, yellow
—

43



Glucose, NaOH or HCl
4 h
C, H, O
EDPL
Full color
7

44



Thermal pyrolysis
FA
Water, 240 °C, 6 h
C, H, N, O
EIPL
Blue
94

45



Hydrothermal synthesis
CA, EDTA
150–300 °C, 2 h
C, H, N, O
EIPL
Blue
73

46



SWCNTs, HNO3, HCl
100 °C, 24 h
C, H, N, O
EDPL
Yellow
5

26



Citric acid, cysteine
150 °C, 1.5 h
C, H, N, O, S
EDPL
Blue
31

47



Milk
180 °C, 2 h
C, H, N, O
EDPL
Blue
12

48



Banana juice
150 °C, 4 h
C, H, N, O
EDPL
Blue, green
9

49





Microwaves
The era of microwave-assisted chemical reactions began with Randall and Booth of the University of Birmingham, who developed the magnetron, a device which generated fixed microwave frequencies, for use as part of the radio detection and ranging system (RADAR) during WWII.57 The magnetron's remarkable ability for quickly heating water was soon realized prompting scientists to explore microwave heating theory in greater detail.58,59 The first instances of the use of microwaves in chemistry were reported in 1986, where Gedye et al. along with Giguere and Majetich, reported the unexpected rapid rates of organic reactions conducted in microwave reactors.59,60 Further exploration of microwaves in chemistry gave rise to expressions as “microwave-assisted synthesis” and “microwave reaction enhancement”. Despite the consensus regarding the benefits of microwaves in chemistry, it remains unclear whether the enhancements observed are solely attributed to dielectric heating effects in closed vessels, or whether there are microwave-specific effects that drive the reactions.61–65 Additional studies have been conducted to try to understand the nature of the phenomena surrounding microwave-induced acceleration of the rate of chemical reactions.66,67 Nonetheless, the benefits of microwaves in chemistry are unequivocal and high speed, microwave-assisted reactions have indeed increased in popularity.68,69
Microwaves are an electromagnetic radiation in the range of 0.3–300 GHz. However, most common microwave apparatuses emit electromagnetic radiation at 2.45 GHz to avoid interference with telecommunication devices.70,71 The success and efficiency of microwave-assisted chemistry stems from the ability of polar molecules to absorb microwave radiation and convert it into heat, via dielectric heating. This phenomenon is driven by dielectric polarization and conduction loss where polar molecules, which have an electrical dipole moment undergo molecular rotation when irradiated with microwaves, as they continually attempt to align themselves in the electric field. As the field alternates, the molecules reverse direction and generate heating through dielectric loss and friction between molecules.59,66,70 The ability of a substance to convert electromagnetic energy given by the microwave into heat is expressed by the loss factor, tanδ. Often, solvents (Table 2) are classified as strong, medium or weak microwave absorbers. The higher the tanδ of a particular solvent, the faster and more efficient its microwave heating process. Conversely, a low tanδ value is indicative of a slow and inefficient heating process following irradiation with microwaves.70
Table 2 Loss factor value, tanδ, of different solvents estimated at 20 °C.70




High (>0.5)
Medium (0.1–0.5)
Low (<0.1)


Solvent
tanδ
Solvent
tanδ
Solvent
tanδ




Ethylene glycol
1.350
2-Butanol
0.447
Chloroform
0.091


Ethanol
0.941
Dichlorobenzene
0.280
Acetonitrile
0.062


DMSO
0.825
NMP
0.275
Ethyl acetate
0.059


2-Propanol
0.799
Acetic acid
0.174
Acetone
0.054


Formic acid
0.722
DMF
0.191
THF
0.047


Methanol
0.659
1,2-Dichloroethane
0.127
DCM
0.042


Nitrobenzene
0.589
Water
0.123
Toluene
0.040


1-Butanol
0.571
Chlorobenzene
0.101
Hexane
0.020




Microwave-mediated syntheses offer significant advantages relative to conventional heating techniques. The former rely on the transfer of heat by convection or conduction where heterogeneous temperature distributions within the reaction vessel/sample are typically observed. The resulting temperature gradient, from the hotter outer vessel/sample to the cooler center, may result in incomplete reactions and/or promote the formation of by-products from competitive side reactions (Fig. 2).72
 Fig. 2  Temperature gradient in microwave versus oil bath-heated reactions vessels. After 1 minute of microwave irradiation (left) and heated in an oil bath (right). Sample is heated homogeneously when heated by microwaves, whereas the reaction vessel is heated before the sample, in an oil-bath. Copyright Wiley Online Library (2004), reproduced with permission.72 
Convection and conduction-based heating techniques also require longer reaction times to ensure the reaction medium has completely reached the set temperature. Prolonged exposure to heat may in some cases lead to degradation of reactants minimizing yield or simply preventing the reaction from occurring. In contrast to conventional heating methods, microwave radiation absorption bypasses the heating of the microwave-transparent reaction vessels, and directly heats the target molecules, offering faster reaction times.67,73 Also, since microwave irradiation can be instantly halted, the risk of overheating samples is typically minimized. In addition, due to the heating efficiency using microwave radiation, lower reaction temperatures can often be used to generate the same product when compared to conventional heating means.
One of the major challenges often encountered under a conventional heating regime is the sample volume. The ability to achieve uniform heat transfer across a given volume varies as a function of the volume size. For example, heating a small volume (e.g. 10 mL) requires significantly less time to achieve the set temperature and equilibration in comparison to a larger volume (e.g. 250 mL). This can have drastic effects on scale up is particularly if the precursors are susceptible to degradation or are unstable under prolonged heating regimes.
This is not the case with microwave heating where the vessel walls are virtually transparent to microwaves, so energy is directly absorbed by the solvents and solutes leading to direct molecular activation or localized superheating of molecules in solution. As such, reaction volumes as low as 200 μL to >100 mL can be used under the same experimental parameters yielding similar outcomes. Important innovations in microwave hardware and software have enabled scientists to synthesize a wide variety of materials ranging from organic compounds and catalysts to a myriad of nanomaterials with reported improvements in the control over reaction conditions such as temperature, ramp rate and pressure,74 as well as outcomes pertaining to morphology, phase, size and size distribution.66,72 Commercially available dedicated microwave reactors offer magnetic stirring capabilities, combined with fiber-optic probes and sensors, which allow for stringent control of synthesis temperature, thus providing excellent reproducibility, higher yields and purer compounds. In addition, the emergence of mono- and multimodal microwave reactors, which can accommodate reaction volumes ranging from 200 μL to >150 mL, combined with dedicated autosamplers, serve to increase sample processing and time efficiency for high throughput reactions.75–77 The main limitations of the microwave-assisted reactions are related to the pressure that the reactor can reach (∼300–400 psi), which is directly related to the solvent boiling point and the reaction temperature. Another drawback is the volume required for commercial scale-up. Most of the microwave reactors work in a small-vessel based system, precluding its use in large scale reactions more than 150 mL.
Microwave-assisted synthesis of carbon dots
As outlined above, CDs may be prepared from a plethora of precursors and synthetic routes all of which directly impact their chemical, physical and optical properties. Regarding microwave synthesis of CDs, polarity governs the interaction between the precursors and solvents allowing for the possibility of preparing hydrophilic, hydrophobic, or amphiphilic particles (Table 3). The following section summarizes key studies, to date, and illustrates the diversity and efficiency of microwave radiation in the preparation of different types of carbon dots.
Table 3 Types of carbon dots and the most common precursors used in microwave-assisted reactions




Type of CDs
Precursors
Ref.





a EDA = ethylenediamine.
b PEO–PPO–PEO = polyoxyethylene–polyoxypropylene–polyoxyethylene.
c PF-68 = co-polymer pluronic F-68.





Hydrophilic
Organic molecules
Citric acid

2



Glycerol

90



Household flour

91



Carbohydrates
Glucose

92



PEG 200

93



Xylitol, EDAa

94



Amino acids
Chitosan cysteine

21



Hydrophobic
Polymers
PEO–PPO–PEO,b PF-68c

95



Amphiphilic
Carbohydrates
Glucose

96





Hydrophilic carbon dots (hpCDs)
hpCDs are most commonly synthesized due to the fact that water can be used as a solvent and requiring low reaction temperatures. Their surface is typically decorated with oxygen- and nitrogen-containing moieties (carboxyls, hydroxyls and amines) that can be relevant in bio-imaging,78 sensing,79–82 drug delivery12,83 and photocatalytic applications.84,85 Indeed, several carbon sources have successfully been used for the microwave-assisted synthesis of carbon dots, notably carbohydrates,86,87 amino acids88 and proteins.40,89
Carbohydrates are essentially comprised of carbon, oxygen and hydrogen and contain functional groups such as alcohols and aldehydes, which contribute to their hydrophilicity. Wang et al.86 reported a single-step, microwave-assisted synthesis of hpCDs using carbohydrates and inorganic ions as precursors where a glycerol/phosphate buffer solution was heated in a domestic microwave oven (750 W) and irradiated for 14 min. The hpCDs ranged in size from 1.3–3 nm as determined by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and the surface was shown to have –OH and –COOH functional groups, both of which contributed to the water dispersibility. The hpCDs exhibited excitation-dependent fluorescence, with a maxima centered at 375 nm following 300 nm excitation and a quantum yield of 11%. Interestingly, it was observed that phosphate ions impacted the reaction showing a concomitant increase in both product and quantum yields of the hpCDs without altering the spectral properties. The hpCD synthesis also proved to be more efficient in the presence of ions, with increasing inorganic ion valence for both cations and anions. The latter was also further confirmed by synthesizing hpCDs using glycol, glucose or sucrose, in the presence of 10 mM AlCl3 resulting in a quantum yield of 5.8% for the glycol sample. In contrast, the absence of inorganic ions during synthesis conferred poor photoluminescent properties.
Liu et al. reported a microwave-assisted synthesis of hpCDs using denatured proteins as a precursor.40 The proteins used were either bovine serum albumin (BSA), lipase or pepsin, and were denatured with either urea or guanidine hydrochloride. A solution containing 9.0 × 10−5 mol L−1 of protein and 8.0 mol L−1 of denaturing agent in water was irradiated in a microwave (700 W) for 5 min. The resultant light-yellow solution was purified by centrifugation and dialysis and the hpCDs were 3–7 nm in size as determined by HR-TEM. The surface –OH, –NH2 and C–O–C moieties contributed to the hydrophilic nature of the dots. These hpCDs exhibited excitation-dependent fluorescence, and the emission maxima was centered at 400 nm when excited at 360 nm. Quantum yields were determined to be between 8.6–14.4% depending on the starting protein precursor. Additional experiments suggested that these hpCDs may be used as a pH-probe and a thermal nanosensor.
Manioudakis et al. reported a microwave assisted reaction between citric acid and nitrogen passivating agents, namely ammonia (NH3), ethylenediamine (ED2) and diethylenetriamine (DT3), to produce hpCDs and investigate the role of the passivating agent on their photophysical properties.41 The precursors were dispersed in an aqueous solution and reacted between 180–220 °C. The obtained hpCDs were all ∼2.5 nm in size, with narrow particle size distribution, regardless of the passivating agent used. FTIR and XPS studies showed the presence of –OH, –COOH, –NH2 and –N–CO moieties on the surface, imparting these materials with good dispersibility in water. Gel electrophoresis analysis was also carried out to better understand the surface of the amino passivated-hpCDs (Fig. 3) where it was possible to observe the presence of different charges and sizes in the CDs highlighting the importance of this technique in purification and characterization. Furthermore, they showed how hpCDs responded to pH variations. The NH3-passivated CDs presented a negative charge at all pH values, while at pH 4.6, ED2-passivated CDs were predominantly negatively charged, and finally DT3-passivated dots were mainly neutral. At a more basic pH (10.5), all the CDs were negatively charged due to the deprotonation of the functional groups on the dot's surface. All the amine-passivated hpCDs presented a similar wavelength-independent fluorescence profile when compared to the unpassivated controls, with an intensity maxima centered at approximately 450 nm. However, the quantum yields were strongly affected by the passivating agent. Increasing the N-doping content also led to an increase in the quantum yield ranging from 1.4% for NH3-CDs to 33% for DT3-CDs.
 Fig. 3  Electrophoresis gel images of amine passivated CDs at different pHs, under 365 nm light irradiation. The wells from left to right in each gel contain NH3-, ED2- and DT3-CDs, respectively, while the positive and negative poles are marked on the top and bottom left corners of each image. (A) 10 mM sodium acetate buffer at pH 4.57, (B) 10 mM potassium phosphate buffer at pH 7.52 and (C) 10 mM sodium tetraborate buffer at pH 10.53.41 Copyright Royal Society of Chemistry (2019), reproduced with permission. 
Recently, solid-phase synthesis has bypassed the water-insolubility restriction of hydrophobic CD and the starting materials.97–99 This technique was introduced in 1963 by Merrifield for the facile, high-yield preparation/purification of complex peptides and oligonucleotides. Merrifield effectively conducted a stepwise addition of amino acids to a growing polypeptide chain, which was bound to a resin particle; this method allowed for the easy removal of starting reagents and by-products, while keeping the elongated peptide.100 The emergence of nanomaterials and their chemistry inevitably drove the evolution and adaptation of Merrifield's protocol, to subsequently serve as the basis for the synthesis of ordered, 3-dimensional nanostructures. These methods, however, utilize the hydrothermal synthesis method, which usually require high temperatures, harsh conditions and long synthesis times.97,98,101 He et al. expanded on the methodology of the above-mentioned approach, by synthesizing hpCDs via a microwave-assisted method, using the poorly water-soluble L-glutamic acid as precursor. L-Glutamate and silica gel powder were reacted under microwave irradiation for 2.5 min, and further purified by centrifugation forming N-doped hpCDs 1 nm in size.102 The nanomaterials exhibited strong excitation-dependent blue fluorescence with the maxima centered at 450 nm when excited at 370 nm with a quantum yield of 41.2%.
Hydrophobic carbon dots (hbCDs)
hbCDs are of interest in biological applications for labelling hydrophobic microdomains in living systems but reports of their synthesis are not widespread, since they require the use of relatively water-insoluble carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen sources. Obvious candidates are most amino acids and lipids, which unfortunately, do not readily dissolve in water. Certain organic solvents may effectively enhance their solubilization but cannot subsequently be easily removed from the reaction mixture. Since even traces of some of these organic solvents are toxic to living organisms, their use is very limited in the development of biological applications. Mitra et al. reported the first microwave-assisted bottom-up synthesis of hbCDs using a poloxamer, polyoxyethylene–polyoxypropylene–polyoxyethylene (PEO–PPO–PEO) block co-polymer pluronic F-68 (PF-68).95 Using phosphoric acid, the acidified PF-68 solution was stirred to homogeneity and was then pyrolyzed in a domestic microwave for 4 minutes (450 W). This reaction yielded a brown solution, that was further purified using chloroform. The dried hbCDs were highly dispersible in acetone, ethanol, chloroform, toluene, THF, hexane, cyclohexane and DMF. FTIR analysis revealed the presence of –OH, C–H, CO, C–O and C–O–C moieties. Despite of the presence of these functional groups, the hydrophobic long chains of fragmented or un-fragmented PF-6828 resulted in the hydrophobic character of the CDs. X-ray diffraction indicated low crystallinity, while TEM showed spherical particles ranging from 5–20 nm in size. An excitation wavelength-dependent photoluminescence, with maximum centered at 442 nm was observed, when excited at 380 nm and quantum yield of 7% was measured for these dots.
Amphiphilic carbon dots (aCDs)
Xu et al. reported a rapid, microwave-assisted synthesis of amphiphilic CDs, where glucose was dissolved in deionized water and then supplemented with concentrated phosphoric acid. The resulting mixture was heated using a 700 W domestic microwave oven for 5 min.39 The crude product was purified by centrifugation and filtration. The purified CDs were soluble and easily extracted with chloroform and other organic solvents (ethanol, THF, toluene), clearly indicating their amphipathic nature. TEM and DLS (Dynamic Light Scattering) measurements both indicated a particle size of 4–13 nm. Following excitation at 360 nm, the aCDs showed two well-resolved fluorescent peaks centered at 447 and 560 nm, respectively. Additionally, the aCDs exhibited excitation-dependent emission behavior with maximum intensity centered at 442 nm and a quantum yield of 7.6% in water.
Microwave synthesis of surface-passivated and doped carbon dots
Despite presenting outstanding optical properties, the fluorescence mechanism(s) that govern the optical properties of CDs are under debate. However, there is a general agreement that quantum confinement effects,103–105 the presence of surface defects106–108 and the nature of the surface functional groups30,109 may all play a role in dictating the underlying fluorescence mechanisms. It is also believed that the mechanism at play will also be dependent on both the synthesis approach, as well as the precursors used.
Surface passivation, or doping, through the introduction of heteroatoms or capping agents is an efficient strategy to engineer and tune the physicochemical and optical properties of CDs.108,110 This approach can also lead to an increase in the fluorescence quantum yield, due to a reduction of the non-radiative pathways associated with the presence of defects and non-radiative sites/traps in the structure.41 Due to the difficulty of pinpointing the specific location of a heteroatom in the CDs, the nomenclature adapted refers to the inclusion of heteroatoms as doping, functionalization or passivation. The most common heteroatoms reported in literature are nitrogen, sulphur, phosphorous, boron, and combinations thereof.111
Numerous reports have discussed the preparation of amino-passivated CDs via microwave assisted reactions between citric acid and amines, such as ethanolamine,112 diethanolamine,113 ethylenediamine,41 triethylenetetramine,114 among others. It is interesting to note that in these reports, high fluorescence QYs (65–80%) were reported following the introduction of the nitrogen groups. The majority of these CDs also presented hydroxyl moieties, which have both electron donating/withdrawing properties, and the presence of nitrogen atoms creates intermediate electronic states that positively impact the QY of these nanoparticles.111,112
Zhang et al. reported the amino-passivated CDs (N-CDs) from a microwave-assisted reaction between citric acid and ethanolamine.112 The authors observed that the quantum yield of the PL emission centered at 420 nm could be tuned by varying the ratio between the precursors. A 1:1 ratio between citric acid and ethanolamine gave rise to N-CDs with an extremely high QY of 98%.
Sun et al. investigated phosphorous and nitrogen co-doped CDs (N,P-CDs) obtained by a reaction between of m-phenylene-diamine (mPDA), ortho-phosphoric acid (OPA) and ethylenediamine (EDA). The PL spectra of the N,P-CDs presented an excitation-wavelength dependent emission, presenting three maxima centered at 340, 450 and 510 nm when excited at 290 nm. The authors attributed the green emission (510 nm) to the introduction of defects induced by the presence of phosphorous, creating a highly localized state close to the Fermi level.
Jiang et al. reported the obtention of silicon-doped CDs (Si-CDs) by a microwave-assisted reaction between APTES (3-aminopropyl triethoxysilane) and glycerol.115 The Si-CDs presented an excitation-independent emission centered at 476 nm when excited at 365 nm, with a quantum yield of 12.4%.
The concept of doped-carbon dots can extend to metal doping whereby metal cations are including during the synthesis process. While it is not generally believed that the metal cations integrate within the carbon network, the presence of a plethora of functional groups allow for the coordination/chelation of the metal cation to the surface of the dot. While numerous metal-doped CD systems have already been reported;116,117 their microwave-assisted reactions remain scarce. This might be associated with the preconceived idea that metals are unsuitable for microwave-assisted reactions as it may cause plasma discharges.118–120
Mechanistic aspects of carbon dots formation
The mechanistic aspects of CD formation remain unclear. Few studies have attempted to characterize and study how CDs polymerize/carbonize following the formation of an intermediate molecule; however, in-depth investigations are required to clarify the chemical nature of the formed intermediate species and the chemical processes that are occurring.121 An additional complication arises from the versatility of preparing these dots from a myriad of precursors. Every precursor molecule and combinations thereof can contribute vastly different intermediate species, which can form dots through different pathways. To date, there does not exist any studies on the formation of intermediates in the microwave-assisted preparation of carbon dots; however, the proposed mechanisms for hydrothermal-assisted reactions are believed to be similar, as they are both temperature-assisted reactions, and could shed some light on future works in this field.
Song et al. investigated the reaction pathway of CDs obtained by a hydrothermal reaction between citric acid and ethylenediamine. Reaction intermediates were isolated and characterized by NMR and PL. The authors reported that the reaction mechanism is comprised of an initial conversion of precursor molecules to fluorophores (i.e. fluorescent molecules). These fluorophores, upon continuous heating, undergo polymerization and condensation ultimately followed by carbonization that leads to the CD formation.122
Similarly, Hu et al. investigated the reaction mechanism of the nitrogen-passivated carbon dots obtained by a hydrothermal assisted reaction between citric acid and monoethanolamine. The reaction intermediates were isolated and characterized showing the formation of fluorophores, followed by polymers that gave rise to carbon dots.123
The intermediate species formed in each mechanism are different and are directly dependent on the precursor's chemical nature. However, regardless of these intermediate species, the major steps (polymerization, carbonization and carbon dot formation) generally describe the preparation of these nanoparticles (Fig. 4). Undoubtedly, in-depth investigations on how microwave radiation could impact these steps and the intermediate species formed are required.
 Fig. 4  Reaction pathway for the carbon dots formation. With the increasing temperature the precursors undergo polymerization, followed by carbonization and finally forming the carbon dots. 
Advantages and disadvantages of the microwave synthesized carbon dots
The microwave-assisted preparation of carbon dots presents several advantages when compared to other bottom-up approaches. The reduction in reaction time is quite significant and is on the order of minutes in the microwave reactor in comparison to hours in the solvo/hydrothermal approach (∼2–12 hours). Moreover, microwave heating is more uniform allowing for quicker reactions, lower instances of side reactions and fewer by-product formation. In turn, this can reduce the number of steps required for purification. Lastly, this usually translates to more uniform physical, chemical and optical properties. This approach does however offer its drawbacks. The microwave reactors are usually restricted to small volumes, limiting their application in large scale reactions. Besides, the pressure of the system is also limited, reducing the usability of solvents with lower boiling points.
Applications of microwave synthesized carbon dots
Metal sensing
CDs have been extensively studied as nanosensors due to their ability to detect ions and molecules with great selectivity and sensitivity. This new and emerging technique surrounding CDs to detect metals using fluorescence probes/assays has gained popularity due to the non-destructive nature and simple instrumentation required for analysis when compared to the traditional detection methods. Spectroscopic techniques including atomic absorption and emission, auger-electron, absorption in the ultraviolet-visible region, are commonly used to detect and quantify metals. However, they often present some drawbacks, requiring both complex sample preparation and costly instrumentation. For that reason, compounds such as metal nanoclusters124 and semiconductor quantum dots (QDs),125,126 gained attention as probes to detect metals. These materials; however, unlike CDs, often demand more complicated syntheses and may potentially require the use of toxic precursors.
Qin et al. reported the microwave-assisted synthesis of CDs from household flour to detect mercury cations (Hg2+) in aqueous samples.91 Following 5 min of microwave irradiation at 180 °C and centrifugation-based purification, the process resulted in water-dispersible CDs ∼1–4 nm in size. The dots tuneable excitation-dependent fluorescence ranging from 438–550 nm. The CDs were primarily composed of hydroxyl, carboxyl and carbonyl moieties and trace amounts of silicon stemming from the manufacturing process of the flour. At pH 7, an increase in Hg2+ concentration, resulted in a decrease in fluorescence intensity suggesting the CDs could detect Hg2+ ions selectively (Fig. 5), at a concentration ranging from 0.5–10 nM most likely due their affinity for carboxyl groups. The results indicated that the affinity of Hg2+ ions for –COOH groups is affected by the pH of the medium with basic conditions favoring deprotonation of the carboxylic groups. Moreover, the CDs could be recycled by chelating the Hg2+ from the CD-Hg2+ ion complex using cysteine.
 Fig. 5  CD selectivity to Hg2+. Fluorescence intensity decreases in presence of metal ions relative to blank CD solution (λex 365 nm).91 Copyright Elsevier (2013), reproduced with permission. 
Xu et al. also investigated the detection of Hg2+ cations in the reported synthesis of nitrogen and sulphur doped-CDs (N,S-CDs) obtained from the microwave assisted reaction of glycerol and cysteine. The precursors were subjected to 900 W irradiation of a domestic microwave oven for 6 min giving rise to a brown water-soluble product that was further purified by dialysis for 48 h. The N,S-CDs were 1–6 nm in size. Surface characterization revealed the presence of –COOH, –OH, –NH2, –SH moieties and a fluorescence profile from 440–463 nm depending on the excitation wavelength.127 The conventional detection of metal ions in solution was based on the fluorescence quenching emission of the CDs where a non-fluorescent ground state complex is formed. This is due to the interaction between the CD and the metal ion resulting in the reduction or even the extinction of the CDs fluorescence.128 However, in this case, the N,S-CDs presented an enhanced emission with an increasing concentrations of Hg2+ solutions (Fig. 6).127 The authors reasoned that some functional groups, especially sulphur, present on the surface of the N,S-CDs have a high affinity to the Hg2+ ions, leading to the formation of a complex and aggregation of the CDs. These aggregates presented an enhanced blue-shifted fluorescence, when compared to the bare N,S-CDs. However, the enhancement mechanism remains unclear and demands further investigation. This method was used to detect Hg2+ in water samples with a linear range of 1–75 μM with a reported detection limit of 0.5 μM.
 Fig. 6  Fluorescence enhancement of the N,S-CDs due to the increase of Hg2+ concentration from 0 to 150 μM (a). Fluorescence intensity change fold (F/F0) against Hg2+ concentration (b).127 Copyright Springer (2018), reproduced with permission. 
CDs were also used to detect the presence of lead cations (Pb2+) in aqueous media. Gupta et al. described the preparation of a CD paper-based strip sensor.129 These 4.3 nm nanodots were obtained upon the microwave irradiation of the biological media PDA (Potato Dextrose Agar) for 3 min and exhibited excitation-dependent fluorescence, with an emission maximum at 415 nm, when excited at 310 nm. Time-resolved emission spectroscopy further revealed that their red-shift in fluorescence emission was due to energy sub-states present in the CDs. XPS analysis combined with FTIR, determined the composition of CDs to be 58.6% C, 34.9% O and 6.5% N, with CO, COOH, OH, NH and CH moieties present at the surface. The carboxyl and hydroxyl surface groups on the CDs were believed to interact with Pb2+ forming a complex, which quenched their photoluminescence intensity possibly through an excited-state electron-transfer mechanism. Fluorescence quenching was linear and inversely-proportional to increasing Pb2+ concentrations. The nanodots’ selectivity to lead(II) was investigated using various metal ions usually present in river and tap waters, and the results indicated a negligible effect on fluorescence from most metal ions, whereas some quenching was detected in the presence of Cr3+. Likewise, a paper strip sensor devised out of cellulosic filter papers with CDs tethered on the surface, was also found to be highly selective and sensitive with a detection limit of 106 pM (Fig. 7). Moreover, in vitro studies using MDA-MB 231 cell lines incubated with the CDs, indicated that the nanoparticles exhibited low cytotoxicity at concentrations up to 15 mg mL−1 and demonstrated fluorescence quenching upon addition of Pb2+.
 Fig. 7  CD selectivity for Pb2+ over other metal ions.129 Copyright Elsevier (2016), reproduced with permission. 
Yarur et al. developed a dual emissive carbon dots-based ratiometric sensor to detect heavy metals in aqueous solutions.130 The CDs were synthesized in a one-step microwave-assisted reaction of glutathione and formamide, heated at 180 °C for 5 min and purified by dialysis. The dots were 6–9 nm in size with a QY of 6.49% and presented –NH2, –COOH and –SH moieties on the surface. Fluorescence analysis showed two bands in the blue and red regions of the spectrum at 430–500 and 620–700 nm, respectively. Despite of the fact that the dual fluorescence mechanism has yet to be elucidated, the authors attributed the blue fluorescence to the core of the CDs, while the red fluorescence was ascribed to the surface states. This was further supported by the heavy metal sensing studies, in which Pb2+ was quantified by both absorbance and fluorescence (Fig. 8). It is interesting to note that no significant changes to the blue fluorescence were observed, while the red counterpart was progressively quenched by the increase of Pb2+ concentration (Fig. 8a). This can be associated with the interaction of the metal ion and functional groups such as COOH, CN and CS, on the surface of the dots, all of which can form complexes with the metal cations. A ratiometric quantification of the metal cation concentration in water was obtained by integrating the area under each of the blue and red fluorescence bands and plotting this as a function of the quencher concentration giving rise to a linear relation with a limit of detection of 37.1 nM. The absorbance profiles (Fig. 8c) also showed a sensitive linear relation to the quencher's concentration and selectivity to the metal quencher. This was noted in the form of a band related to formation of the CD-Pb2+ complex appeared at 475 nm. A quantification of the metal concentration was obtained by integrating the area under each peak in the absorbance spectrum and plotting the result as a function of the concentration of the metal ion quencher, giving a liner relation with limit of detection of 46.1 nM. The CD probe was also used in the detection of Co2+, Fe3+ and Hg2+, presenting a LOD in the nanomolar range for all of these cations.
 Fig. 8  Heavy metal monitoring through absorbance spectroscopy (a and c) and fluorescence (b and d). Quantitation of Pb2+ in the range 1–961 nM via ratiometric measure of the decreasing (A) and increasing (B) peaks of the absorbance spectrum using a 50 μg mL−1 dispersion CDs.130 Copyright Royal Society of Chemistry (2019), reproduced with permission. 
This ratiometric approach presented several advantages when compared to the intensity-based measurements, namely as it accounted for background interferences, selectivity in the presence of more than one metal cation and limits of the detection in the nanomolar range.
Li et al. reported the synthesis of citric acid and urea-based CDs produced under microwave assisted irradiation (800 W) for 3 min.22 The black product was purified by centrifugation, dialysis against water and precipitation with ethanol, producing CDs with 2–4 nm in size. FTIR and XPS studies revealed the presence of –NH2 and –COOH moieties that are associated with the excellent dispersibility of these CDs in water. The presence of the functional groups was also supported by UV-vis absorbance. The CDs presented a strong fluorescence emission at 524 nm when excited at 368 nm. This fluorescence signal was used to detect and quantify the presence of Ce3+, that quenched the green emission of the CDs (Fig. 9). The peak intensity decreased significantly in the presence of Ce3+ from 10−6 to 10−4 M, with limit of detection of 0.7 μM. The fluorescence emission remained unchanged in the presence of other lanthanide cations (as Pr3+, Nd3+, Pm3+, Sm3+, Eu3+, Gd3+, among others), suggesting that this probe was selective for Ce3+ in aqueous media.
 Fig. 9  Emission profile of CDs upon addition of 10−6–10−4 M of Ce3+ in aqueous solution (λexc = 386 nm). Inset photo: CQDs solution excited by UV light at 365 nm without (left) and with (right) 100 μM of Ce3+.22 Copyright Elsevier (2019), reproduced with permission. 
Vikneswaran et al. used dried banana peels that were resuspended in water, to develop a microwave-assisted method for the synthesis of CDs that could selectively detect Fe3+ ions.131 This procedure yielded hydrophilic, monodisperse nanoparticles averaging 5.9 nm in size with a surface decorated with –OH, –NH, CO, –SH, C–S, vinyl –CH, as well as both aromatic and aliphatic C–O–C moieties. The CDs exhibited excitation-dependent fluorescence from 280–460 nm, with a fluorescence band from 438–521 nm. In the presence of Fe3+, the fluorescence intensity decreased most likely due to their affinity of the quencher to the dots’ surface functional groups favouring quenching from energy or electron transfer mechanisms. Interestingly, the optical properties of the CDs were unaffected over a wide range of pH (4.5–10.1), rendering them extremely interesting for use in biological applications. Contrarily, in extreme acidic and basic conditions, nanoparticle aggregation caused a decrease in fluorescence intensity. These CDs allowed for the selective and sensitive determination of Fe3+ ions, among other metals, displaying a linear relationship ranging from 2–16 μM, with limit of detection of 0.211 μM (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  Fluorescence intensities of CDs in the presence of 20 mM of different cations (a). Fluorescence quenching of C-dots upon addition of increasing concentrations of Fe3+ (from 2 to 16 mM) (b).131 Copyright Elsevier (2014), reproduced with permission. 
Chemosensing
Although CDs are commonly used as metal sensors in aqueous samples, they have recently been targeted for the sensing of chemical analytes. Similar to metal ion sensing, chemical compounds are often analyzed using long and time-consuming techniques including high-performance liquid chromatography, electrophoresis, electroanalytical and fluorescence methods.38,112,132
Xiao et al. reported an inexpensive, green microwave-assisted synthesis for the development of CDs from an ionic liquid, which could detect flavonoids, the naturally occurring phenol-containing compounds found in plants, fruits and vegetables.133 One type of flavonoid, quercetin, is known to have beneficial health effects by preventing cardiovascular disease, cancer and oxidative stress, among others. The CDs were obtained from the microwave assisted reaction of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazoliumtetrafluoroborate at different reaction times (700 W microwave power). The 4 to 7 nm dots exhibited maximum fluorescence emission at 435 nm when excited at 354 nm, with a quantum yield of 0.05%. Further analysis by FTIR indicated that the nanoparticle surface was mainly composed of aliphatic and aromatic C–H groups, heterocyclic C–C, B–F, and aromatic C–N moieties. These CDs were employed for the fast and easy detection of quercetin in a 0.1 M NH3–NH4Cl buffer (pH 9.5), exhibiting high selectivity and sensitivity for this compound even in the presence of foreign substances such as bovine albumin serum and metal cations. Increasing quercetin concentrations resulted in the red-shift of the fluorescence with a concomitant decrease in fluorescence intensity, possibly due to electrostatic interactions between the two compounds (Fig. 11). This method of quercetin quantitation exhibited a linear dynamic range from 2.9–31.6 μM and a detection limit as low as 0.99 nM, as determined by the Stern–Volmer equation.
 Fig. 11  Chemical structure of quercetin (a). CD photoluminescence quenching with increasing quercetin concentrations (λex 354 nm) (b).133 Copyright Elsevier (2013), reproduced with permission. 
Heterocyclic aromatic amines (HAA) are often formed during the high temperature cooking process of meats and seafood (Fig. 12).38 These compounds have been known to be carcinogenic, prompting Lopez et al. to synthesize CDs, by microwave irradiation from lactose and hydrochloric acid, able to detect HAAs such as 2-amino-3,4-dimethyl-imidazo [4,5-f]-quinoline (MeIQ); 2-amino-3,8-dimethyl-imidazo[4,5-f]-quinoxaline (8-MeIQx); 2-amino-3,4,8-trimethylimidazo[4,5-f]-quinoxaline (4,8-DiMeIQx) and 2-amino-3,7,8-trimethyl-imidazo[4,5-f]-quinoxaline (7,8-DiMeIQx). Following purification by centrifugation, filtration, neutralization to pH 7 and freeze-drying, this process yielded CDs ∼7–14 nm in size, and a zeta potential of −29.2 ± 1.5 mV indicating good colloidal stability. The dots were comprised of nearly 80.0% C, 14.0% O, 3.6% Na and 2.4% Cl, with –COOH, –CO and C–Cl moieties on the surface, as determined by XPS, FTIR-ATR and Raman spectroscopies. The CDs exhibited maximum fluorescence at pH 5, with a maximum at 450 nm following 350 nm excitation. At this pH, the HAAs were protonated, allowing for optimal hydrogen bonding interactions with the negatively charged groups on the nanoparticles. Increasing HAA concentrations resulted in a proportional decrease of the fluorescence intensity. The authors also investigated the fluorescence lifetimes to elucidate that the HAAs acted as static quenchers for the dots. The detection limit of the analytes was determined to be 0.35, 0.41, 0.45 and 0.36 mg mL−1 for MeIQ, 8-MeIQx, 4,8-DiMeIQx and 7,8-DiMeIQx, respectively. The authors noted that aliphatic amines and amino acids did not cause significant interference during HAA detection, suggesting their potential for use as chemical sensors. 2,4,6-Trinitrotoluene (TNT) is a dangerous and explosive compound with additional harmful effects to both living organisms and environment due to its carcinogenic, mutagenic and inhibitive effects.
 Fig. 12  Chemical structures of the heterocyclic aromatic amines: 2-amino-3,4-dimethyl-imidazo (MeIQ); 2-amino-3,8-dimethyl-imidazo [4,5-f]-quinoxaline (8-MeIQx); 2-amino-3,4,8-trimethylimidazo [4,5-f]-quinoxaline (4,8-DiMeIQx) and 2-amino-3,7,8-trimethyl-imidazo [4,5-f]-quinoxaline (7,8-DiMeIQx).38 Copyright Elsevier (2015), reproduced with permission. 
Zhang et al. reported the microwave-assisted synthesis of CDs from citric acid and ethylenediamine, capable of detecting the explosive.134 The material was obtained by the irradiation of the precursors for 5 min (700 W microwave power), following purification by organic wash, centrifugation and vacuum drying. The CDs were determined to be 3 nm in size and were composed of 60% C, 27% N and 13% O. Further analysis of the dots was used to confirm that the surface was composed of O–H, N–H, –CH2, amide CO, amide N–H, C–N, and C–O functional groups. Interestingly, the dots could be used to detect TNT using both their fluorescent and electrochemical properties. The interaction of the aromatic nitro groups on TNT with the amine surface groups on the CDs, quenched their fluorescence intensity in a concentration-dependent manner, with a linear range 10–1500 nM and a detection limit of 1 nM. The interference of similar nitro-aromatic compounds was negligible compared to TNT. Moreover, examination of differential pulse voltammograms (DPV) revealed a greater response in the reduction current of the DPV with glassy carbon electrode modified with CDs in comparison to unmodified electrodes (Fig. 13). The linear range of the electrochemical method for TNT was much greater than the photoluminescence method, the former being able to detect concentrations of 5–30000 nM, with a detection limit of 1 nM.
 Fig. 13  (A) DPV (a and b) unmodified GC electrode, (c and d) CD-modified electrode, (a and c) absence of TNT, (b and d) presence of TNT. (B) DPV response to TNT concentrations (a–t: blank, 1, 5, 10, 20, 30, 80, 130, 230, 330, and 830 nM; 1.33, 2.33, 3.33, 4.33, 9.33, 14.33, 19.33, 29.33 and 39.33 μM).134 Copyright (2015) ACS Publications, reproduced with permission. 
Biological sensing
Ascorbic acid (AA), a vitamin and anti-oxidant, plays an important role in many of the cellular pathways involved in development and immunity; however, extreme levels may lead to cancer and diabetes making its detection and quantitation of key importance. Duan et al. reported the microwave-assisted synthesis of CDs from ethylenediamine and sulfamic acid, which in the presence of Cu2+, could detect AA by virtue of a decrease in their fluorescence intensity.132 The synthesis process employed microwave irradiation (800 W) for 2 minutes, followed by centrifugation-based purification and filtration through a 0.1 μm membrane, yielding monodisperse hydrophilic CDs with an average diameter of 6.3 nm. The CDs exhibited excitation-dependent fluorescence with an emission maximum at 424 nm, when excited at 391 nm, and a QY of 28%. FTIR and XPS analysis indicated a plethora of functional groups at the surface of the CDs including –OH, –NH, –SH, –SO3, CS, CO, CC, C–N, C–O and HN–CO groups. The detection mechanism was believed to involve the reduction of Cu2+ to Cu+ by AA with a higher affinity to SH groups thereby favouring the electron transfer (ET) processes fluorescence quenching (Fig. 14). The dots exhibited a linear reduction in fluorescence intensity in the presence of ascorbic acid from 0.057–3.97 μM, with a detection limit as low as 18 nM. Moreover, they determined that the fluorescence intensity was essentially unaffected between pH 5–9, whereas a decrease was observed outside that range, likely due to protonation/deprotonation of its surface groups. At pH 5.5, CDs exhibited high sensitivity and selectivity to ascorbic acid in the presence of Cu2+, without being affected by other organic molecules and metal ions such as Li+, Ca2+, Sr2+, Cu2+, Cd2+, Ni2+, Ba2+, Co2+, Zn2+, Mg2+, Mn2+, Pb2+, Al3+, Fe3+, Cr3+, Cr4+ at a concentration of 100 μM. Furthermore, the dots could be used to detect ascorbic acid in human serum and urine samples with a precision of 97.0–104.0%, further confirming its potential as a biological sensor.
 Fig. 14  Response mechanism of CDs to ascorbic acid in the presence of Cu2+ showing that the metal cation does not significantly influence the CD fluorescence. Upon addition of ascorbic acid, Cu2+ is reduced to Cu+ with a higher affinity to SH groups thereby favouring the electron transfer (ET) processes fluorescence quenching.132 Copyright Elsevier (2016), reproduced with permission. 
The versatility of CDs as sensors also extends to the detection of molecules such DNA, one of the four macromolecules present in all biological fluids. DNA samples are typically processed using complex methods and analyzed with expensive instruments such as mass spectrometry, chromatography and UV spectroscopy.135,136 Simple, quick, sensitive and accurate detection methods for DNA in complex biological samples are thus necessary.
In this matter, Huang et al. developed a novel ratiometric fluorescent nanosensor to determine DNA in samples with high selectivity and sensitivity.137 CDs, with 4–8 nm in size and a surface primarily composed of –COOH and –OH moieties were produced by a microwave-assisted synthesis using PEG, glycerine and L-serine. The CDs exhibited wavelength dependent fluorescence with a red-shift at higher excitations wavelengths, likely due to surface emissive traps. Conversely, a blue-shift was observed with increasing pH. The fluorescence profile presented an emission centered at 447 nm upon excitation at 375 nm, with a quantum yield of 12.1%. The ratiometric fluorescent nanosensor was comprised of the CDs and ethidium bromide (EB), which fluoresced in the red region of the spectrum through a dynamic quenching process. The sensor was self-calibrating and used the intensity ratio of two or more well-resolved wavelengths to quantify DNA concentrations. The authors demonstrated that it was more efficient and accurate than the conventional single wavelength-based detection methods as the latter could be easily affected by concentration changes, complex sample environments and changes in detector signal. In the absence of DNA, CD fluorescence was quenched by EB due to an electron transfer process, with no indication of resonance energy transfer under the same excitation regime. Moreover, the fluorescence was noted to red shift from 447 to 592 nm. Upon the addition of DNA, specific interactions between EB and DNA caused an increase in the intensity of the EB fluorescence at 592 nm, while having no effect on the fluorescence intensity of the CDs (Fig. 15). The ratiometric nanosensor worked optimally in phosphate buffer at pH 4 and the optimal addition sequence of sensor system was phosphate buffer, EB, DNA and the CD dispersion. This system could detect DNA in complex samples containing a mixture of amino acids, nucleotides, and proteins, at concentrations ranging from 1–300 μM.
 Fig. 15  Mechanism of DNA detection by CD using ethidium bromide (EB).137 Copyright Royal Society of Chemistry (2015), reproduced with permission. 
Schizophrenia, Parkinson's and Alzheimer's diseases are believed to stem from an imbalance of dopamine, a neurotransmitter in the brain. Jiang et al. reported a microwave-assisted, single precursor synthesis of CDs using diethanolamine, which could detect dopamine.112 The CDs had an average size of 16.4 nm, and exhibited fluorescence emission at 458. Their elemental composition was determined to be 72.7% C, 5.7% N and 20.8%, with surface functional groups including OH, –CH, CC, CN and CO. Dopamine was believed to interact with negatively charged carboxylic moieties present at the surface of the CDs, both electrostatically and via hydrogen bonding. Interestingly, this sensor did not exploit the photoluminescence of CDs, but rather their electrochemical properties. Differential pulse voltammetry was employed, using a glassy carbon electrode modified with CDs as the working electrode, a platinum counter electrode and an Ag/AgCl (saturated KCl) reference electrode. This system exhibited high sensitivity and selectivity for dopamine in PBS buffer (pH 6.5), even in the presence of ascorbic acid, which often co-exists with dopamine. Increasing dopamine concentrations resulted in an increase of the peak currents and exhibited linearity from 0.05–8 μM, with a detection limit as low as 1.2 nM (Fig. 16). These results suggested that the CDs show potential as dopamine sensors in diluted biological fluids, such as blood. Mercapto-biomolecules play a vital role in the redox and antioxidant systems of the body. The oxidation state of the thiol-containing groups in these molecules and their regulation is important for the maintenance of good health; an imbalance in oxidation states may be carcinogenic and lead to problems with major organs.
 Fig. 16  DPV response of CD-modified electrode with increasing concentration of dopamine ((a–i) 0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 6, 8 μM).112 Copyright Elsevier (2015), reproduced with permission. 
Lan et al. reported a microwave-hydrothermal procedure for the synthesis of CDs from melamine and trisodium citrate dihydrate, able to detect thiol-containing biomolecules such as cysteine (Cy), homocysteine (Hcy) and glutathione (GSH) in living cells.138 The obtained nanodots were 2.6 nm in diameter and composed of 57.0% C, 3.9% N and 39.1% O, with –NH, –OH, –CH, CN, CN, CO and COOH moieties on the surface. The CDs exhibited excitation-independent fluorescence with maximum emission at 437 nm when excited at UV wavelengths, and a quantum yield of 30%. In contrast to many of the quenching sensor systems, this CD-based sensor was a turn-on sensor activated by mercapto-molecules. The blue fluorescence of the dots was quenched in the presence of Hg2+ ions, which was restored, within 10 seconds, upon addition of thiol-containing biomolecules (Fig. 17). The authors argued that fluorescence quenching originated from the strong electrostatic interactions and metal–ligand coordination with Hg2+, resulting in non-radiative electron or energy transfer. Thiol-containing groups are strong chelators of Hg2+ ions, allowing the system to be reused up to 10 times, while recovering 85% of original fluorescence intensity, simply by the addition of mercapto-biomolecules or Hg2+ ions in excess. The CD-Hg2+ complex exhibited a concentration-dependent increase in emission intensity upon increasing concentrations of cysteine. The intensity increase was prominent at cysteine concentrations greater than 4 mM, with a 15 nM detection limit in HEPES buffer (pH 7.2). In addition to sensitivity, the CDs exhibited high selectivity to thiol-containing groups over other amino acids and metal ions, which had a negligible impact on their photoluminescence. The CD-Hg2+ sensing system, which was stable from pH 5 to 9, exhibited low toxicity and easy uptake by A549 cells illustrating their potential for in vitro sensing of thiol-containing biomolecules.
 Fig. 17  Mechanism of the turn-on CDs-based cysteine detection using Hg2+ ions.138 Copyright Royal Society of Chemistry (2015), reproduced with permission. 
Bioimaging
Bioimaging is an important, non-invasive technique that permits the visualization of intracellular compartments, cells and tissues, allowing for a better understanding of biological processes. With their inherent fluorescent properties, low toxicity, good biocompatibility and facile synthesis, CDs were investigated in this field and both in vitro and in vivo imaging have already been reported.139,140Table 4 summarizes the cell lines incubated and the CDs used for its bioimaging. Liu et al. reported the microwave-assisted synthesis of CDs using citric acid and various amine molecules such as ethylenediamine.141 The precursors, dissolved in an aqueous solution and irradiated (at a power of 700 W) for different periods of time (1–4 min), generated a brown solid that was further purified by dialysis. The CDs were ∼2 nm in size, and exhibited an intense blue excitation-dependent fluorescence, with the maxima centered at 460 nm and a quantum yield of 30.2%. To evaluate the toxicity of the CDs, MTT assays were carried out and showed very low cytotoxicity with 100% cell viability even at concentrations as high as 3 mg mL−1. Subsequently, L929 cells were incubated with CDs and visualized using a laser scanning confocal microscope at different excitation wavelengths (405 nm, 488 nm and 543 nm). Unlike the non-labeled control L929 cells, which were devoid of fluorescence, the images of the CD-treated L929 cells indicated that the dots penetrated the cell membrane and surrounded the cell nucleus (Fig. 18). The CDs were concentrated mainly in the cell membrane and cytoplasm, showing remarkable photostability and biocompatibility and proving to be a suitable candidate for bioimaging applications.
Table 4 Summary of the cell lines and CDs used for its bioimaging reviewed on this paper




Cell line label
Cell line description
Precursors of the CDs used
Ref.




L929
Mouse adipose tissue-fibroblast
Citric acid and amine

141



MCF-7
Human breast cancer
Citric acid and formamide

142



Glutathione and formamide

139



HeLa
Human cervical cancer
Glutathione and formamide

19



C6
Mouse glioma
Sucrose, diethylene glycol and Gd

143





 Fig. 18  Bioimaging of L929 cells using laser scanning confocal microscopy. Control sample without labeling as a negative control (a) and EDA-CDs labeled L929 cells (b).141 Copyright Royal Society of Chemistry (2012), reproduced with permission. 
Pan et al. reported a one-step microwave-assisted synthesis of CDs obtained from citric acid and formamide at 160 °C for 1 h.142 The resultant materials were ∼7 nm in size and presented a full color excitation-dependent emission, that can span almost the full visible spectrum when excited from 300–600 nm. However, some dominant fluorescence emission maxima notably at 466, 555 and 637 nm were observed when excited at 360, 450 and 540 nm, respectively (Fig. 19b). A broad absorbance band, especially in the visible region was also observed, indicating the presence of multiple electronic states. This observation was further confirmed by exciting the CDs at the maxima of their fluorescence (466, 555 and 637 nm) generating three extremely distinct emissions and also by lifetime measurements. The origins of the unique fluorescent properties of these CDs (F-CDs) were further examined by single-particle fluorescence imaging experiments where the excitation-dependent fluorescence of the CDs was probed at different excitation wavelengths. An overlay of the images indicated that the different emissive spots overlap, hence revealing the multicolor optical properties of the nanoparticles (Fig. 19c–f). The blue fluorescence of the F-CDs was believed to result from the presence of aromatic structures while the long-wavelength emissions were ascribed to CN, CO and C–N bonds. The cytotoxicity of the dots was determined to be low, with over 85% cell viability observed after 24 hours of incubation with MCF-7 cells at concentrations ranging from 10 to 50 μg mL−1. Interestingly, confocal fluorescence images of F-CD-treated MCF-7 cells revealed fluorescence throughout the entire cell, signifying that the dots not only passed through the cell membrane, but also the cell nuclei.
 Fig. 19  Excitation-dependent fluorescence profile of the full-emitting CDs (a); fluorescence emission of the CDs in aqueous solution upon irradiation from 330 to 600 nm (b); single particle emission of the CDs under excitation of 360 nm (c), 475 nm (d), 535 nm (e) and overlaid image (f).142 Adapted from ref. 141. Copyright Wiley Library (2015), reproduced with permission. 
Most CD studies reported to date show that they typically exhibit intense fluorescence in the blue and the green spectral regions following excitation with UV or blue wavelengths of light.110,144,145 The use of short excitation wavelengths of light can induce autofluorescence stemming from the biological matrix and may also result in photodamage. This presents major drawbacks for nanoparticle imaging applications in biomedicine for CDs.139
In order to circumvent this challenge, Pan et al. described the production of near-infrared-(NIR) emitting CDs synthesized from formamide and glutathione for two-photon fluorescence imaging (TPFI).139 This mode of imaging has drawn much attention due to the low energy excitation (NIR excitation), which provides a larger penetration depth, longer observation time and reduced autofluorescence and photodamage than traditional one-photon bioimaging.146 The precursors were irradiated at a power of 400 W for 1 h at 160 °C, forming a green product that was further purified by organic washes with methanol and acetone, given rise to the NIR-CDs with 2–5 nm. The NIR-CDs exhibit maximum fluorescence at 683 nm when excited at 420 and 850 nm (NIR femtosecond pulsed laser) with a quantum yield of 16.8%. The fluorescence was believed to originate from the surface states, where aromatic structures containing CO, CN and CS bonds are responsible for the NIR emission. NIR-CD cytotoxicity studies revealed over 80% cell viability for MCF-7 cells after 24 h of incubation at concentrations up to 500 μg mL−1. As additional proof of concept for drug delivery, NIR-CDs were also conjugated with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) as a model. The NIR-CDs were also used as bioimaging agents using one- and two-photon fluorescence techniques (Fig. 20) in MCF-7 cells. Similar results were obtained for both techniques, indicating that these NIR-CDs are promising for bioimaging applications.
 Fig. 20  Bioimaging of MCF-7 cells using the NIR-CDs as contrast agents. Two photon fluorescence images (a–c) under excitation with a femtosecond pulse laser of 850 nm. Bright field (a), dark field (b), and combined images (c). One photon fluorescence images (d–f), under excitation of 488 nm obtained in the ranges of 550–750 nm (d), 493–540 nm (e) and overlaid (f).139 Copyright (2016) Royal Society of Chemistry, reproduced with permission. 
Macairan et al. optimized the synthesis and purification of the NIR-CDs based on glutathione and formamide, using their dual emissive fluorescence properties as a probe to measure intracellular temperature.19 The precursors were reacted under microwave irradiation (at a power of 300 W), at 180 °C for 5 min and the product was purified by dialysis and organic washes. TEM analysis showed that the CDs were about 7 nm in size, with the presence of –COOH, –NH2, –CNO and –SH moieties on the surface. The optical properties were also investigated, showing an excitation-dependent dual emission with the first maximum in the range 370–500 nm (blue component) and the second from 645–730 nm (red component). A cumulative fluorescence quantum yield of 6.49% was obtained and further investigations revealed quantum yields of 0.38% and 6.11% ascribed to the blue and red components, respectively. The cell uptake and toxicity of CDs were evaluated using HeLa cells (Fig. 21a). It was possible to observe an accumulation in regions corresponding to the endomembrane network (Fig. 21b), and the IC50 was determined to be of ∼150 mg mL−1. HeLa cells were subjected to a heating/cooling cycle from 32 → 42 → 32 °C and a ratiometric approach integrating the area under the blue and red emission peaks was used to sense the temperature of the cells (Fig. 21c). A plot of the integrated area over the temperature presented a linear relation, proving that this system is efficient for in vitro and temperature sensing with potential applications to in vivo systems (Fig. 21d).
 Fig. 21  Fluorescence microscopy image showing the HeLa cancer cells uptake of CDs, co-stained with Hoechst to label DNA (blue) and Tubulin Tracker™ Green to label microtubules (green). The scale bar corresponds to a length of 10 mm (a). Magnification of a single cell, showing the nucleus (DNA; blue), microtubules (green) and red-emitting CDs (b). Fluorescence profile of the CDs (λex = 405 nm) as a function of the temperature (c), and the ratio of the integrated areas of the red and blue fluorescence components are plotted as a function of temperature (d).19 Copyright Royal Society of Chemistry (2018), reproduced with permission. 
The development of multimodal nanomaterials, capable of multiple modes of imaging (e.g. fluorescence and magnetic resonance imaging), targets the potential to harvest a multitude of diagnostic information using one system and addresses any shortcomings associated with a single technique. For example, magnetic resonance imaging provides images with high spatial resolution and deep tissue penetration but may present poor sensitivity. On the other hand, fluorescence imaging yields images with high sensitivity and subcellular resolution yet poor spatial resolution and limited tissue penetration depending on the excitation wavelength.147 Imaging agents capable of executing both modalities would hence surmount these challenges. Gadolinium, (Gd3+), a rare earth element that exhibits excellent contrast enhancement due to its paramagnetic properties, is often incorporated into nanoparticles to provide magnetic functionality.148 It is in this regard that Gong et al. explored the microwave-assisted synthesis of Gd3+-doped CDs (Gd-CD). The Gd-CDs were synthesized using sucrose, diethylene glycol and irradiated (at a power of 750 W) for 50 s.143 TEM images revealed a spherical shape for the Gd-CDs with a particle size of approximately 5 nm while FTIR analysis indicated the presence of –CO, –COO and –OH moieties on the surface. MTT cell proliferation assays further revealed low cytotoxicity to C6 cells at various concentrations of Gd-CDs, reporting that cell viability remained unaffected even at concentrations up to 1 mg mL−1. Gd-CDs-treated C6 cells displayed green luminescence upon excitation at 405 nm (Fig. 22). Interestingly, the fluorescent properties of the CDs were not affected by the addition of Gd3+, which had now also conferred magnetic resonance imaging modality to the dots. The efficacy of the Gd-CDs was evaluated by its relaxivity; calculations evaluated r1 and r2 relaxation rates to be 11.36 and 14.03 mM−1 s−1, respectively, yielding an r2/r1 ratio of 1.24 and hence suggesting that the Gd-CDs can be an effective T1 contrast agent. Gray-scaled T1-weighted images of Gd-CDs exhibited positive contrast enhancement with increasing Gd3+ concentrations.
 Fig. 22  Images of C6 cells (A–C) without and (D–F) with labelling of Gd-CDs (0.5 mg mL−1). The scale bar is 25 μm.143 Copyright American Chemical Society (2014), reproduced with permission. 
Solar cells
The perpetual search for clean and renewable energy sources has propelled development efforts of solar photovoltaic cells. These cells have become an increasingly popular alternative to fossil fuels and a significant emerging application for CDs. One of the major drawbacks of solar cells is their comparatively low conversion efficiency, that is their ability to convert photons into current. Although their conversion efficiency has been rising steadily over the years, many advancements must still be realized before solar cells can become a viable alternative to non-renewable energy sources.149 Enhancements to conversion efficiency have been achieved by increasing the absorption of solar light and/or the charge transport (CT).56 Many improvements brought about have entailed an increase in the complexity of these devices and in the use of rare or toxic compounds.150 Hence, there exists a need for a more benign, cost-efficient, scalable, and readily available CT material. Due to its chemical stability and electronics properties, followed by its metal-free composition, CDs are promising candidates to improve the solar cells efficiency.151–153
Margraf et al. studied dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), which are solar cells containing dyes that generate current when coupled with oxide electrodes in an electrochemical cell.152 Their aim was to synthesize and optimize CD-sensitized solar cells to reach an efficiency comparable to that of QD-sensitized solar cells. It was hypothesized that the underwhelming performance of CD-sensitized solar cells was likely due to inadequate photoelectrode coverage, non-optimized electrolytes and an imperfect understanding of CDs’ electronic structures. Consequently, a new synthesis method allowing for absorption of a larger part of the visible spectrum and procedures, which improve device assembly were presented. For this, CDs were synthesized in a domestic microwave oven using citric acid, urea and formic acid in water. The synthesized CDs absorbed in a wide range up to 700 nm (depending on the molar ratio of the precursors used during synthesis), exhibited excitation-wavelength dependence, and showed a poly-disperse size distribution with slight bi-modality. Two types of CDs were successfully obtained by varying the proportion between the precursors citric acid (CA), urea (U) and folic acid (FA): CND1 (CA:U:FA 1:1:2), which weakly absorbed beyond 550 nm, and CND2 (CA:U:FA 1:1:20) with a red-shifted absorption relative to CND1. Mesoporous TiO2 electrodes were then dipped into 1 mg mL−1 CD solutions for several hours to create the solar cells, using solvents of varying pHs to optimize the coating conditions. A lower pH led to improved coverage of the electrodes, resulting in increased photocurrent generation and greater solar cell efficiency. It was hypothesized that this was owed to a higher protonation of CDs, which would reduce dispersibility and hence promote adsorptivity. The protonation of TiO2 also raised its hydrophilicity, allowing for improved penetration of the mesoporous network. Conversely, it was noted that expanding the absorption range of CDs did not positively impact their performance, as the absorption of low energy photons did not efficiently transfer electrons to TiO2.
Zhang et al. carried out several studies on bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic photovoltaic cells (OPVs), which have absorption layers comprised of a mix of nanoscale donor and acceptor materials.151,153,154 Their research mainly focused on BHJ OPVs with active layers based on polymer and fullerene composites. These types of cells are low-cost, easily produced and more portable than Si-based inorganic cells. OPVs are classified as conventional and inverted. Conventional OPVs are composed of a low work-function (WF) metal cathode (metal cathode with a low minimum required energy to remove an electron from its solid surface), a bulk heterojunction (BHJ) composite active layer, and a hole-extracting layer (HEL) on indium-tin-oxide (ITO) glass. Conversely, inverted organic photovoltaic cells (I-OPVs) are typically composed of a high work function metal anode (composed of a metal with a high minimum required energy to remove an electron from its solid surface), a BHJ active layer, and electron buffer layers (EBL) such as a hole-extracting layer (HEL) and an electron extracting layer (EEL) on indium-tin-oxide (ITO) glass. Models of these solar cells are illustrated in Fig. 23. One major limitation for this type of solar cell is low power conversion efficiency (PCE), likely due to (electrons being trapped in the interface between the active layer and the metal oxide layer caused by surface defects), as well as mismatched work functions producing electron loss by slow charge injection. Much of the research has been focused on improving electron transfer efficiency, electron conductibility, and suppression of trap-assisted recombination. Zhang et al. doped the poly(3-hexylthiophene):indene–C60 bisadduct (P3HT:ICBA) active layer of a BHJ OSCs with CDs.153 Doping the active layer with nanodots promoted exciton dissociation and minimized bulk recombination (i.e. recombination of hole and electron resulting in loss of charge). However, it was found that once a 4 wt% doping amount was reached, the dopant became aggregated and formed an uneven film (Fig. 24), which deteriorated the contact between layers and degraded the interpenetrating pathway for CT, thus decreasing the conversion efficiency. Fill factor (FF) is a measure of the efficiency of a solar cell by comparing the maximum theoretical power with the maximum observed power output at the open circuit voltage and the short circuit current (Jsc), an electric circuit allowing current to travel through an unintended path without much electrical impedance. The 3 wt% doped devices showed better overall PCE (5.9% vs. 4.1% for the undoped device) and FF (61.1% vs. 54.9% for the undoped device). A 3 wt% doping also showed an increased absorption in the 300–700 nm range, possibly due to the increased light path length in the active layer from the CDs acting as scattering centers. Once more, a 4 wt% doping shows a decreased absorption capacity resulting from a distortion in the molecular arrangements of P3HT molecules in the over-doped layer. By observing the fluorescence from the active layer, a marked decrease in intensity was noted with increasing up to 4 wt%. This decrease reflected a more efficient charge transfer in the interpenetrating network shown by a gain in non-radiative energy transfer, thus generating a higher photocurrent. This more effective charge transfer was also observed from the decay time in femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy.
 Fig. 23  Schematic representation of a conventional OPV composed of a low work-function (WF) metal cathode, a bulk heterojunction (BHJ) composite, and a hole-extracting layer (HEL) on indium-tin-oxide (ITO) glass (a); an inverted OPV composed of a high work-function (WF) metal anode, a h a hole-extracting layer (HEL), a bulk heterojunction (BHJ) composite, and an electron-extracting layer (EEL) on indium-tin-oxide (ITO) glass (b).149 Copyright Royal Society of Chemistry (2016), reproduced with permission. 
 Fig. 24  AFM micrography of P3HT:ICBA active layer films doped with (a) 0 wt%, (b) 2 wt% (c) 3 wt%, and (d) 4 wt% carbon dots.153 Copyright ACS Publications (2016), reproduced with permission. 
Catalysis
Pham-Truong et al. synthesized CDs using glucose, and a mixture of glucose and glutamine in an ionic liquid (1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium ethylsulfate) Fig. 25a. Bare carbon dots, using just glucose as a precursor were also produced as a control to evaluate the role of the nitrogen doping in the oxidation reactions.96 The two different mixtures of precursors were then irradiated for different times, and the product was purified by dialysis generating CDs that were ∼12 nm in size.
 Fig. 25  Microwave-assisted reaction glucose and L-glutamine in liquid ionic to produce N-doped CDs (a). Hydrogen peroxide production and electron number as function of the potential for the CDs (b).96 Copyright Elsevier (2018), reproduced with permission. 
The presence of –COOH, –OCO, –CN and –NH2 moieties on the surface of the CDs suggested the formation of N-doped dots in both cases, as expected with the presence of the imidazoline ring. The obtained material was used as a free catalyst for the selective production of hydrogen peroxide from the oxidation of oxygen molecules. Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV), performed to analyze the performance of the catalysts, showed the presence of two reduction processes suggesting that the oxidative reduction reaction occurred in two steps forming H2O2 as an intermediate. The production of H2O2 was measured as a functional of the potential (Fig. 25b), and it was possible to observe that the maximum production (94%) is achieved at 0.3 V, concomitantly with the decrease of the electron number counting. The undoped CDs did not present substantial production of H2O2, indicating that the nitrogen atoms had a significant effect on the mechanism. However, the exact nature of how this process occurs demands further investigation. These results are extremely promising, as the obtained CDs proved to be efficient as reducing agents, with good stability.
Hybrid materials can present many advantages as they combine the individual properties of the constituents. As such, Martins et al. produced a N-doped CD/TiO2 composite for photocatalytic applications.155 To produce the CDs, glycerol, ammonium phosphate and TTDA (4,7,10-trioxa-1,13-tridecanediamine) were reacted in a microwave-assisted reaction (at a power of 700 W), for 7 min. The obtained materials were purified by dialysis, producing nanoparticles ∼9 nm in size (Fig. 26a and b), with –COOH, –OH, –NH2 and –NCO moieties on the surface. The hybrid material was obtained via the reaction between TiO2 (P25) and the obtained CDs in water, in a hydrothermal assisted method, at 130 °C for 4 h. TEM images confirmed the formation of the TiO2/N-doped CDs composite, as well as the Ti–O–C bond appearance in the XPS spectrum. Thermogravimetric analysis suggests that the CD content in the hybrid system was approximately 0.69%. The photocatalytic evaluation of the CDs was then investigated by the UV degradation of methylene blue (MB) and a control comprised of a physical mixture of P25 and the CDs (Fig. 26c). The degradation ratio of the composite was 2.35X higher when compared to pure P25 and the control. This was mainly attributed to the presence of the N-doping moieties on the CDs that can modify the bandgap of the TiO2, acting also as electron transporters and acceptors, reducing the recombination ratio and favouring the oxidative processes.
 Fig. 26  TEM images of the N-doped CDs (a), and size distribution (a-inset). TEM imagens of the hybrid composite TiO2/N-doped CDs (b). Methylene blue degradation over time (c).155 Copyright Elsevier (2016), reproduced with permission. 
Conclusions and outlook
Carbon dots have been extensively studied owing to their outstanding physical and optical properties, high quantum yields, low photoblinking and photobleaching, good chemical stability coupled with the ability to tune their surface chemistry. The ability to prepare these CDs from a myriad of readily available sources speaks to the cost efficiency of their preparation and the sustainability. Indeed, this has greatly contributed to the excitement surrounding this carbon allotrope. While there have been numerous publications on their synthesis, their preparation using microwave radiation has gained much traction as it offers the possibility of short reaction times and often reproducible results. Moreover, the more uniform heating encountered with microwave radiation often reduces the formation of by-products and may facilitate the purification process. Concerning the path forward, the preparation of CDs with uniform physico-chemical and optical properties can provide the impetus for further studies in order to clearly elucidate the fluorescence mechanism(s) that govern their optical properties, something which has yet to be accomplished.
It is noteworthy to mention that the microwave preparation of CDs is often carried out on small synthesis scales. As such, one challenge will be to scale up these materials in order to provide more useful quantities for both fundamental research and application development. Another important point that is seldom discussed is that CD synthesis reaction yields (including microwave-assisted syntheses) typically vary from 10–30%. Further investigations will need to focus on improving the reaction yields in order to generate larger quantities of materials using this method. Nonetheless, this route is extremely promising and many advances in microwave reactor technology, coupled with the current synthesis protocols, are expected to help overcome these challenges further stimulating the use of this route towards the preparation of nanoscale materials.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge funding sources for financial support for this research. RN is grateful to Concordia University for funding through Start-up and Strategic funds, as well as NSERC for funding through the Discovery Grant and Discovery Accelerator Supplement. RN is also grateful to the Quebec Centre for Advanced Materials for financial support. TVdM is grateful to the CAPES scholarship program for funding support.
References
X. Xu, R. Ray, Y. Gu, H. J. Ploehn, L. Gearheart, K. Raker and W. A. Scrivens, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12736–12737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Dhenadhayalan, K.-C. Lin, R. Suresh and P. Ramamurthy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 1252–1261 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sahu, B. Behera, T. K. Maiti and S. Mohapatra, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8835–8837 RSC .
H. Kalita, J. Mohapatra, L. Pradhan, A. Mitra, D. Bahadur and M. Aslam, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 23518–23524 RSC .
P. C. Hsu, Z. Y. Shih, C. H. Lee and H. T. Chang, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 917–920 RSC .
J. Wei, J. Shen, X. Zhang, S. Guo, J. Pan, X. Hou, H. Zhang, L. Wang and B. Feng, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 13119 RSC .
V. Sharma, P. Tiwari and S. M. Mobin, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 8904–8924 RSC .
Y. Wang and A. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 6921 RSC .
S. Hu, Chem. Rec., 2016, 16, 219–230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, H. Zhou, J. Tang, S. Deng, F. Yan, W. Li and M. Qu, Microchim. Acta, 2017, 184, 343–368 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, S. Zhu and B. Yang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 27184 RSC .
H. Tao, K. Yang, Z. Ma, J. Wan, Y. Zhang, Z. Kang and Z. Liu, Small, 2012, 8, 281–290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, L. Cheng and W. Liu, Sci. China: Chem., 2014, 57, 522–539 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, Y. Guo, A. Iqbal, Y. Dong, W. Li, W. Liu, W. Qin and Y. Wang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 107263–107269 RSC .
S. Y. Lim, W. Shen and Z. Gao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 362–381 RSC .
F. Yuan, S. Li, Z. Fan, X. Meng, L. Fan and S. Yang, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 565–586 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lu, L. Sui, J. Liu, S. Zhu, A. Chen, M. Jin and B. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1–6 Search PubMed .
X. Sun and Y. Lei, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 163–180 CrossRef CAS .
J. Macairan, D. B. Jaunky, A. Piekny and R. Naccache, Nanoscale Adv., 2019, 1, 105–113 RSC .
B. Kong, A. Zhu, C. Ding, X. Zhao, B. Li and Y. Tian, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5844–5848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, N. Zhang, H. Shi, W. Ji, X. Guo, W. Yuan and Q. Hu, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 3097–3101 RSC .
X. Li, Y. Zheng, Y. Tang, Q. Chen, J. Gao, Q. Luo and Q. Wang, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2019, 206, 240–245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Yuan, G. Liang and S. H. Yu, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1–6 Search PubMed .
L. Yan, Y. Yang, C. Q. Ma, X. Liu, H. Wang and B. Xu, Carbon N. Y., 2016, 109, 598–607 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, S. Yang, L. Cao, P. G. Luo, F. Lu, X. Wang, H. Wang, M. J. Meziani, Y. Liu and G. Qi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11308–11309 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Ding, L.-W. Cheng, Y.-Y. Ma, J.-L. Kong and H.-M. Xiong, New J. Chem., 2013, 37, 2515 RSC .
R. Angamuthu, R. Rajendran and R. Vairamuthu, J. Fluoresc., 2018, 28, 959–966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yuan, B. Guo, L. Hao, N. Liu, Y. Lin, W. Guo, X. Li and B. Gu, Colloids Surf., B, 2017, 159, 349–359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Wen and X. B. Yin, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 27829–27835 RSC .
X. Li, S. Zhang, S. A. Kulinich, Y. Liu and H. Zeng, Sci. Rep., 2015, 4, 4976 CrossRef .
D. Reyes, M. Camacho, M. Camacho, M. Mayorga, D. Weathers, G. Salamo, Z. Wang and A. Neogi, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11, 424 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Gonçalves, P. A. S. Jorge, J. R. A. Fernandes and J. C. G. Esteves da Silva, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 145, 702–707 CrossRef .
H. P. S. Castro, V. S. Souza, J. D. Scholten, J. H. Dias, J. A. Fernandes, F. S. Rodembusch, R. dos Reis, J. Dupont, S. R. Teixeira and R. R. B. Correia, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 138–143 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. L. Zhao, Z. L. Zhang, B. H. Huang, J. Peng, M. Zhang and D. W. Pang, Chem. Commun., 2008, 5116–5118 RSC .
A. B. Bourlinos, A. Stassinopoulos, D. Anglos, R. Zboril, V. Georgakilas and E. P. Giannelis, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4539–4541 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Bourlinos, R. Zbořil, J. Petr, A. Bakandritsos, M. Krysmann and E. P. Giannelis, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 6–8 CrossRef CAS .
B. N. Jusuf, N. S. Sambudi, R. Isnaeni and S. Samsuri, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 7426–7433 CrossRef CAS .
C. López, M. Zougagh, M. Algarra, E. Rodríguez-Castellón, B. B. Campos, J. C. G. Esteves Da Silva, J. Jiménez-Jiménez and A. Ríos, Talanta, 2015, 132, 845–850 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Xu, C. Wang, K. Jiang, H. Lin, Y. Huang and C. Zhang, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2015, 32, 1058–1062 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, T. Li, Y. Hou, Q. Wu, J. Yi and G. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 11711–11718 RSC .
J. Manioudakis, F. Victoria, C. Thompson, L. Brown, M. Movsum, R. Lucifero and R. Naccache, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 7, 1–14 Search PubMed .
H. Dang, L. K. Huang, Y. Zhang, C. F. Wang and S. Chen, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2016, 55, 5335–5341 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, B. P. Zhang, J. X. Zhao, Z. H. Ge, X. K. Zhao and L. Zou, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 279, 367–373 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, X. He, Y. Liu, H. Huang, S. Lian, S. T. Lee and Z. Kang, Carbon N. Y., 2011, 49, 605–609 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Z. Li, Y. Sun, X. Geng, Y. Hu, H. Meng, J. Ge and L. Qu, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 1–8 CrossRef .
S. Zhu, Q. Meng, L. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Song, H. Jin, K. Zhang, H. Sun, H. Wang and B. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3953–3957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, L. Hu, H. Wang, Y. Song, Y. Liu, H. Li, M. Shao, H. Huang and Z. Kang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 12734–12742 RSC .
L. Wang and H. S. Zhou, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 8902–8905 CrossRef CAS .
B. De and N. Karak, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 8286–8290 RSC .
H. Wang, C. Sun, X. Chen, Y. Zhang, V. L. Colvin, Q. Rice, J. Seo, S. Feng, S. Wang and W. W. Yu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 1909–1915 RSC .
A. Sachdev, I. Matai and P. Gopinath, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 20915–20921 RSC .
S. Chandra, S. H. Pathan, S. Mitra, B. H. Modha, A. Goswami and P. Pramanik, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 3602 RSC .
L. Li and T. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 7944–7970 RSC .
D. Li, P. Jing, L. Sun, Y. An, X. Shan, X. Lu, D. Zhou, D. Han, D. Shen, Y. Zhai, S. Qu, R. Zbořil and A. L. Rogach, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1–8 CAS .
M. Lan, S. Zhao, Z. Zhang, L. Yan, L. Guo, G. Niu, J. Zhang, J. Zhao, H. Zhang, P. Wang, G. Zhu, C. S. Lee and W. Zhang, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 3113–3123 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hola, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, E. P. Giannelis, R. Zboril and A. L. Rogach, Nano Today, 2014, 9, 590–603 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kaul, IEEE Potentials, 1989, 8, 11–13 Search PubMed .
K. S. Cole and R. H. Cole, J. Chem. Phys., 1941, 9, 341–351 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. P. Mingos and D. R. Baghurst, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1991, 20, 1–47 RSC .
R. Gedye, F. Smith, K. Westaway, H. Ali, L. Baldisera, L. Laberge and J. Rousell, Tetrahedron Lett., 1986, 27, 279–282 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Rosana, Y. Tao, A. E. Stiegman and G. B. Dudley, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 1240–1244 RSC .
C. R. Strauss, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 3589–3591 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Rathi, M. B. Gawande, R. Zboril and R. S. Varma, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2015, 291, 68–94 CrossRef CAS .
C. O. Kappe, B. Pieber and D. Dallinger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1088–1094 CrossRef CAS .
C. O. Kappe, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7924–7928 CrossRef CAS .
G. B. Dudley, R. Richert and A. E. Stiegman, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 2144–2152 RSC .
J. Sun, W. Wang and Q. Yue, Materials, 2016, 9, 231 CrossRef .
D. Adam, Nature, 2003, 421, 571–572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Gawande, S. N. Shelke, R. Zboril and R. S. Varma, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1338–1348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gabriel, S. Gabriel, E. H. Grant, B. S. J. Halstead and D. M. P. Mingos, ChemInform, 2010, 29, 213–224 CrossRef .

          D. Stuerga and M. Delmotte, Microwaves in Organic Synthesis, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, FRG,  2002, pp. 1–33 Search PubMed .
C. O. Kappe, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 6250–6284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Rosana, J. Hunt, A. Ferrari, T. A. Southworth, Y. Tao, A. E. Stiegman and G. B. Dudley, J. Org. Chem., 2014, 79, 7437–7450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-X. Gao, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 8120 CrossRef .
J. D. Ferguson, Mol. Diversity, 2003, 7, 281–286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Favretto, Mol. Diversity, 2003, 7, 287–290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Schanche, Mol. Diversity, 2003, 7, 291–298 CrossRef .
P. G. Luo, S. Sahu, S.-T. Yang, S. K. Sonkar, J. Wang, H. Wang, G. E. LeCroy, L. Cao and Y.-P. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 2116 RSC .
S. Barua, S. Gogoi and R. Khan, Synth. Met., 2018, 244, 92–98 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Cho and S. Y. Park, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 282, 719–729 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Liu, L. P. Lin, X. X. Wang, S. Q. Lin, W. L. Cai, L. H. Zhang and Z. Y. Zheng, Analyst, 2012, 137, 2637–2642 RSC .
J. Zhao, G. Chen, L. Zhu and G. Li, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 31–33 CrossRef CAS .
H. U. Lee, S. Y. Park, E. S. Park, B. Son, S. C. Lee, J. W. Lee, Y.-C. Lee, K. S. Kang, M. Il Kim, H. G. Park, S. Choi, Y. S. Huh, S.-Y. Lee, K.-B. Lee, Y.-K. Oh and J. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2015, 4, 4665 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Hu, R. Tian, Y. Dong, J. Yang, J. Liu and Q. Chang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11665–11671 RSC .
L. Li, G. Wu, G. Yang, J. Peng, J. Zhao and J.-J. J. Zhu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4015 RSC .
X. Wang, K. Qu, B. Xu, J. Ren and X. Qu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2445–2450 RSC .
M. L. Bhaisare, A. Talib, M. S. Khan, S. Pandey and H. F. Wu, Microchim. Acta, 2015, 182, 2173–2181 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, Y. He, S. Li and H. Cui, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 9634 RSC .
D. Wang, L. Zhu, C. McCleese, C. Burda, J. F. Chen and L. Dai, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 41516–41521 RSC .
N. Na, T. Liu, S. Xu, Y. Zhang, D. He, L. Huang and J. Ouyang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 787–792 RSC .
X. Qin, W. Lu, A. M. Asiri, A. O. Al-Youbi and X. Sun, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 184, 156–162 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hill and M. C. Galan, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2017, 13, 675–693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kim, Y. Choi, E. Shin, Y. K. Jung and B. S. Kim, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 23210–23213 RSC .
D. Chowdhury, N. Gogoi and G. Majumdar, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 12156–12159 RSC .
S. Mitra, S. Chandra, T. Kundu, R. Banerjee, P. Pramanik and A. Goswami, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 12129–12131 RSC .
T. N. Pham-Truong, T. Petenzi, C. Ranjan, H. Randriamahazaka and J. Ghilane, Carbon N. Y., 2018, 130, 544–552 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hyeon, S. Han, Y. E. Sung, K. W. Park and Y. W. Kim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 4352–4356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Worden, A. W. Shaffer and Q. Huo, Chem. Commun., 2004, 518 RSC .
J. D. Gilbertson, G. Vijayaraghavan, K. J. Stevenson and B. D. Chandler, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 11239–11245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Merrifield, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1963, 85, 2149–2154 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Zhang, G. Lin Wang, X. Ya Hu and W. Dong Zhou, J. Cryst. Growth, 2005, 285, 600–605 CrossRef CAS .
G. He, M. Xu, M. Shu, X. Li, Z. Yang, L. Zhang, Y. Su, N. Hu and Y. Zhang, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 395706 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Gan, H. Xu and Y. Hao, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 7794–7807 RSC .
H. Li, X. He, Z. Kang, H. Huang, Y. Liu, J. Liu, S. Lian, C. H. A. Tsang, X. Yang and S. T. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4430–4434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yuan, S. Li, Z. Fan, X. Meng, L. Fan and S. Yang, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 565–586 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ding, S.-B. Yu, J.-S. Wei and H.-M. Xiong, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 484–491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang and A. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 6921–6939 RSC .
L. Bao, C. Liu, Z.-L. Zhang and D.-W. Pang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1663–1667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Sun, B. Zhou, Y. Lin, W. Wang, K. A. S. Fernando, P. Pathak, M. J. Meziani, B. A. Harruff, X. Wang, H. Wang, P. G. Luo, H. Yang, M. E. Kose, B. Chen, L. M. Veca and S. Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7756–7757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Dimos, Curr. Org. Chem., 2016, 20, 682–695 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, T. Kuang, Y. Liu, L. Cai, X. Peng, T. Sreenivasan Sreeprasad, P. Zhao, Z. Yu and N. Li, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 7204–7219 RSC .
Y. Jiang, B. Wang, F. Meng, Y. Cheng and C. Zhu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 452, 199–202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, X. Liu, Y. Fan, X. Guo, L. Zhou, Y. Lv and J. Lin, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15281–15287 RSC .
M. M. Doroodmand and M. Askari, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2017, 968, 74–84 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, Z. Wang and Z. Dai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 3644–3650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. De and N. Karak, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1826–1859 RSC .
L. Lin, Y. Luo, P. Tsai, J. Wang and X. Chen, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2018, 103, 87–101 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Whittakera and D. M. P. Mingos, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1995, 2073–2079 RSC .
N. Gong, H. Wang, S. Li, Y. Deng, X. Chen, L. Ye and W. Gu, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 10933–10939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Rub Pakkath, S. S. Chetty, P. Selvarasu, A. Vadivel Murugan, Y. Kumar, L. Periyasamy, M. Santhakumar, S. R. Sadras and K. Santhakumar, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2018, 4, 2582–2596 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhu, X. Zhao, Y. Song, S. Lu and B. Yang, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 128–132 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, S. Zhu, S. Zhang, Y. Fu, L. Wang, X. Zhao and B. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 5976–5984 RSC .
Y. Hu, J. Yang, J. Tian and J. S. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 5608–5614 RSC .
L. Zhang and E. Wang, Nano Today, 2014, 9, 132–157 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lou, Y. Zhao, J. Chen and J.-J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 595–613 RSC .
M. Vázquez-González and C. Carrillo-Carrion, J. Biomed. Opt., 2014, 19, 101503 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xu, H. Li, B. Wang, H. Liu, L. Zhao, T. Zhou, M. Liu, N. Huang, Y. Li, L. Ding and Y. Chen, Microchim. Acta, 2018, 185, 252 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Guo, Z. Wang, H. Shao and X. Jiang, Carbon N. Y., 2013, 52, 583–589 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gupta, N. C. Verma, S. Khan, S. Tiwari, A. Chaudhary and C. K. Nandi, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 232, 107–114 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yarur, J.-R. Macairan and R. Naccache, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2019, 6, 1121–1130 RSC .
R. Vikneswaran, S. Ramesh and R. Yahya, Mater. Lett., 2014, 136, 179–180 CrossRef CAS .
J. Duan, J. Yu, S. Feng and L. Su, Talanta, 2016, 153, 332–339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xiao, D. Yuan, H. He and M. Gao, J. Lumin., 2013, 140, 120–125 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Y. Han, J. Zhu, Y. Zhai and S. Dong, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 2033–2036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tost and I. G. Gut, J. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 41, 981–995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. P. Singhal and J. P. Landes, J. Chromatogr., 1988, 458, 117–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Huang, L. Wang, F. Zhu, W. Su, J. Sheng, C. Huang and Q. Xiao, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 44587–44597 RSC .
M. Lan, J. Zhang, Y.-S. Chui, H. Wang, Q. Yang, X. Zhu, H. Wei, W. Liu, J. Ge, P. Wang, X. Chen, C.-S. Lee and W. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 127–134 RSC .
L. Pan, S. Sun, L. Zhang, K. Jiang and H. Lin, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 17350–17356 RSC .
P. Zhao, Q. Xu, J. Tao, Z. Jin, Y. Pan, C. Yu and Z. Yu, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol., 2018, 10, e1483 Search PubMed .
X. Zhai, P. Zhang, C. Liu, T. Bai, W. Li, L. Dai and W. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7955 RSC .
L. Pan, S. Sun, A. Zhang, K. Jiang, L. Zhang, C. Dong, Q. Huang, A. Wu and H. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7782–7787 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gong, H. Wang, S. Li, Y. Deng, X. Chen, L. Ye and W. Gu, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 10933–10939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tuerhong, Y. Xu and X.-B. Yin, Chin. J. Anal. Chem., 2017, 45, 139–150 Search PubMed .
H. Li, Z. Kang, Y. Liu and S. T. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24230–24253 RSC .
R. Wang and F. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 2422 RSC .
Y. Yuan, H. Sun, S. Ge, M. Wang, H. Zhao, L. Wang, L. An, J. Zhang, H. Zhang, B. Hu, J. Wang and G. Liang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 761–768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Bourlinos, A. Bakandritsos, A. Kouloumpis, D. Gournis, M. Krysmann, E. P. Giannelis, K. Polakova, K. Safarova, K. Hola and R. Zboril, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23327–23330 RSC .
K. Wang, C. Liu, T. Meng, C. Yi and X. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2937–2975 RSC .
X. Wang, G. Sun, N. Li and P. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45 Search PubMed .
X. Zhang, C. Liu, Z. Li, J. Guo, L. Shen, W. Guo, L. Zhang, S. Ruan and Y. Long, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 315, 621–629 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Margraf, F. Lodermeyer, V. Strauss, P. Haines, J. Walter, W. Peukert, R. D. Costa, T. Clark and D. M. Guldi, Nanoscale Horiz., 2016, 1, 220–226 RSC .
X. Zhang, Z. Li, Z. Zhang, C. Liu, J. Li, W. Guo and S. Qu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 2359–2365 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Z. Li, Z. Zhang, C. Liu, J. Li, W. Guo, L. Shen and S. Qu, Org. Electron. Phys. Mater. Appl., 2016, 33, 62–70 CAS .
N. C. T. Martins, J. Ângelo, A. V. Girão, T. Trindade, L. Andrade and A. Mendes, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 193, 67–74 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Tayline V. de Medeiros
	Tayline V. de Medeiros completed both her BSc (2015) and MSc (2017) in Chemistry at the Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (Brazil). Her previous research focused on carbon-based materials such as carbon nanotubes and carbon nitrides for green chemistry applications. She is currently a PhD candidate in the Naccache Research group at the Concordia University. Her current research focus on development of hybrid materials targeting the enhancement of luminescent properties of carbon dots.

John Manioudakis
	John Manioudakis received his BSc (2000) and PhD in biochemistry (2008) from Concordia University (Montreal, Canada). During his studies in enzymology, he investigated the structural and functional roles of ionizable amino acid residues in multi-domain, multi-functional enzymes. Prior to his current role as research associate in Dr Naccache's laboratory, he held an industrial research position focusing on analytical/bioanalytical method development and validation. His current research interests include fundamental studies on the formation and optical properties of carbon dots and the development of carbon dot-based pathogen detection systems.

Farah Noun
	Farah Noun received her BSc (2016) in Chemistry from McGill University (Montreal). She is currently a PhD candidate in the Naccache Research Group at Concordia University (Montreal). Her research in the field of nanochemistry focuses on metal ion detection in water by carbon dots. More specifically, she seeks to understand the quenching mechanisms behind metal-carbon dot interactions as well as develop a sensitive and selective metal sensor using carbon dots.

Jun-Ray Macairan
	Jun-Ray Macairan received his BSc Specialization in Biochemistry in 2016 at Concordia University (Montreal, Canada). He is currently a PhD candidate in Chemistry at Concordia University, working under the supervision of Dr Rafik Naccache. His research interests focus on the development of multimodal bioimaging probes using carbon dots with sensing capabilities (i.e. temperature and pH sensing).

Florence Victoria
	Florence Victoria completed her BSc specialization in Biochemistry at Concordia University in 2017. She joined the Naccache Research Group in 2016 as an undergraduate co-op student and is currently a second year MSc candidate in the same lab. Her research interests include chirality in carbon nanomaterials.

Rafik Naccache
	Rafik Naccache obtained his PhD in Chemistry at Concordia University in Quebec, Canada, where he worked on lanthanide-doped upconverting nanoparticles for imaging applications. He subsequently carried out his NSERC postdoctoral training in nanobiophotonics at l'Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique. Since December 2015, he is an assistant professor in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Concordia University and is currently a Petro-Canada Young Innovator and a Concordia University Research Fellow. His group's research program focuses on the study of the fundamental properties of fluorescent carbon nanomaterials and hybrid nanosystems for the development of sensing, imaging and drug delivery applications.

 	Fig. 1  Number of carbon dot-related publications from 2004 to 2018. A nearly exponential surge is observed from 2012 onwards.	 


Arc-discharge	Carbon soot	HNO3, boiled, 48 h	C, H, N, O	SDPL	Blue, yellow	1.6	
1

Laser ablation	Carbon soot	Nd:YAG pulsed laser	C, H, O	EDPL	Green, yellow	1–10	
31

Carbon soot	KrF pulsed laser	C, H, N, O	SDPL	Blue	—	
32

Ionic liquid	Nd:YAG pulsed laser	—	EDPL	Blue	36	
33

Electrooxidation	Graphite	Electrode in NaH2PO4	C, H, O	EIPL	Blue, yellow	1.2	
34

Thermal oxidation	Citrate salts	300 °C, air, 2 h	C, H, O, N	EDPL	Full color	3	
35

Ammonium carboxylate complex	250 °C, air, 2 h	C, H, O, N	EDPL	Blue, green	4	
36

Microwave pyrolysis	Eggshell membrane	560 W, 2 min	C, H, N, O	SDPL	Blue	5	
37

CA, L-cysteine, dextrin	800 W, 3 min	C, H, N, O, S	SDPL	Blue	22	
21

Lactose, HCl	600 W, 15 min	C, H, N, O	EIPL	Blue	—	
38

Glucose, H3PO4	700 W, 5 min	C, H, N, O, P	EIPL	Yellow	8	
39

BSA, urea	700 W, 5 min	C, H, N, O	EDPL	Blue, green	14	
40

Citric acid, amine	300 W, 10 min	C, H, N, O	EIPL	Blue	50	
41

Ultrasonic synthesis	Polyamide resin, EDA	Water, 3 h	C, H, N, O	EIPL	Full color	28	
42

Graphite powder, H2SO4 and HNO3	2 h	C, H, O	SDPL	Green, yellow	—	
43

Glucose, NaOH or HCl	4 h	C, H, O	EDPL	Full color	7	
44

Thermal pyrolysis	FA	Water, 240 °C, 6 h	C, H, N, O	EIPL	Blue	94	
45

Hydrothermal synthesis	CA, EDTA	150–300 °C, 2 h	C, H, N, O	EIPL	Blue	73	
46

SWCNTs, HNO3, HCl	100 °C, 24 h	C, H, N, O	EDPL	Yellow	5	
26

Citric acid, cysteine	150 °C, 1.5 h	C, H, N, O, S	EDPL	Blue	31	
47

Milk	180 °C, 2 h	C, H, N, O	EDPL	Blue	12	
48

Banana juice	150 °C, 4 h	C, H, N, O	EDPL	Blue, green	9	
49



Ethylene glycol	1.350	2-Butanol	0.447	Chloroform	0.091
Ethanol	0.941	Dichlorobenzene	0.280	Acetonitrile	0.062
DMSO	0.825	NMP	0.275	Ethyl acetate	0.059
2-Propanol	0.799	Acetic acid	0.174	Acetone	0.054
Formic acid	0.722	DMF	0.191	THF	0.047
Methanol	0.659	1,2-Dichloroethane	0.127	DCM	0.042
Nitrobenzene	0.589	Water	0.123	Toluene	0.040
1-Butanol	0.571	Chlorobenzene	0.101	Hexane	0.020

 	Fig. 2  Temperature gradient in microwave versus oil bath-heated reactions vessels. After 1 minute of microwave irradiation (left) and heated in an oil bath (right). Sample is heated homogeneously when heated by microwaves, whereas the reaction vessel is heated before the sample, in an oil-bath. Copyright Wiley Online Library (2004), reproduced with permission.72	 


Hydrophilic	Organic molecules	Citric acid	
2

Glycerol	
90

Household flour	
91

Carbohydrates	Glucose	
92

PEG 200	
93

Xylitol, EDAa	
94

Amino acids	Chitosan cysteine	
21

Hydrophobic	Polymers	PEO–PPO–PEO,b PF-68c	
95

Amphiphilic	Carbohydrates	Glucose	
96


 	Fig. 3  Electrophoresis gel images of amine passivated CDs at different pHs, under 365 nm light irradiation. The wells from left to right in each gel contain NH3-, ED2- and DT3-CDs, respectively, while the positive and negative poles are marked on the top and bottom left corners of each image. (A) 10 mM sodium acetate buffer at pH 4.57, (B) 10 mM potassium phosphate buffer at pH 7.52 and (C) 10 mM sodium tetraborate buffer at pH 10.53.41 Copyright Royal Society of Chemistry (2019), reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 4  Reaction pathway for the carbon dots formation. With the increasing temperature the precursors undergo polymerization, followed by carbonization and finally forming the carbon dots.	 

 	Fig. 5  CD selectivity to Hg2+. Fluorescence intensity decreases in presence of metal ions relative to blank CD solution (λex 365 nm).91 Copyright Elsevier (2013), reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 6  Fluorescence enhancement of the N,S-CDs due to the increase of Hg2+ concentration from 0 to 150 μM (a). Fluorescence intensity change fold (F/F0) against Hg2+ concentration (b).127 Copyright Springer (2018), reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 7  CD selectivity for Pb2+ over other metal ions.129 Copyright Elsevier (2016), reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 8  Heavy metal monitoring through absorbance spectroscopy (a and c) and fluorescence (b and d). Quantitation of Pb2+ in the range 1–961 nM via ratiometric measure of the decreasing (A) and increasing (B) peaks of the absorbance spectrum using a 50 μg mL−1 dispersion CDs.130 Copyright Royal Society of Chemistry (2019), reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 9  Emission profile of CDs upon addition of 10−6–10−4 M of Ce3+ in aqueous solution (λexc = 386 nm). Inset photo: CQDs solution excited by UV light at 365 nm without (left) and with (right) 100 μM of Ce3+.22 Copyright Elsevier (2019), reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 10  Fluorescence intensities of CDs in the presence of 20 mM of different cations (a). Fluorescence quenching of C-dots upon addition of increasing concentrations of Fe3+ (from 2 to 16 mM) (b).131 Copyright Elsevier (2014), reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 11  Chemical structure of quercetin (a). CD photoluminescence quenching with increasing quercetin concentrations (λex 354 nm) (b).133 Copyright Elsevier (2013), reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 12  Chemical structures of the heterocyclic aromatic amines: 2-amino-3,4-dimethyl-imidazo (MeIQ); 2-amino-3,8-dimethyl-imidazo [4,5-f]-quinoxaline (8-MeIQx); 2-amino-3,4,8-trimethylimidazo [4,5-f]-quinoxaline (4,8-DiMeIQx) and 2-amino-3,7,8-trimethyl-imidazo [4,5-f]-quinoxaline (7,8-DiMeIQx).38 Copyright Elsevier (2015), reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) DPV (a and b) unmodified GC electrode, (c and d) CD-modified electrode, (a and c) absence of TNT, (b and d) presence of TNT. (B) DPV response to TNT concentrations (a–t: blank, 1, 5, 10, 20, 30, 80, 130, 230, 330, and 830 nM; 1.33, 2.33, 3.33, 4.33, 9.33, 14.33, 19.33, 29.33 and 39.33 μM).134 Copyright (2015) ACS Publications, reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 14  Response mechanism of CDs to ascorbic acid in the presence of Cu2+ showing that the metal cation does not significantly influence the CD fluorescence. Upon addition of ascorbic acid, Cu2+ is reduced to Cu+ with a higher affinity to SH groups thereby favouring the electron transfer (ET) processes fluorescence quenching.132 Copyright Elsevier (2016), reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 15  Mechanism of DNA detection by CD using ethidium bromide (EB).137 Copyright Royal Society of Chemistry (2015), reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 16  DPV response of CD-modified electrode with increasing concentration of dopamine ((a–i) 0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 6, 8 μM).112 Copyright Elsevier (2015), reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 17  Mechanism of the turn-on CDs-based cysteine detection using Hg2+ ions.138 Copyright Royal Society of Chemistry (2015), reproduced with permission.	 

L929	Mouse adipose tissue-fibroblast	Citric acid and amine	
141

MCF-7	Human breast cancer	Citric acid and formamide	
142

Glutathione and formamide	
139

HeLa	Human cervical cancer	Glutathione and formamide	
19

C6	Mouse glioma	Sucrose, diethylene glycol and Gd	
143


 	Fig. 18  Bioimaging of L929 cells using laser scanning confocal microscopy. Control sample without labeling as a negative control (a) and EDA-CDs labeled L929 cells (b).141 Copyright Royal Society of Chemistry (2012), reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 19  Excitation-dependent fluorescence profile of the full-emitting CDs (a); fluorescence emission of the CDs in aqueous solution upon irradiation from 330 to 600 nm (b); single particle emission of the CDs under excitation of 360 nm (c), 475 nm (d), 535 nm (e) and overlaid image (f).142 Adapted from ref. 141. Copyright Wiley Library (2015), reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 20  Bioimaging of MCF-7 cells using the NIR-CDs as contrast agents. Two photon fluorescence images (a–c) under excitation with a femtosecond pulse laser of 850 nm. Bright field (a), dark field (b), and combined images (c). One photon fluorescence images (d–f), under excitation of 488 nm obtained in the ranges of 550–750 nm (d), 493–540 nm (e) and overlaid (f).139 Copyright (2016) Royal Society of Chemistry, reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 21  Fluorescence microscopy image showing the HeLa cancer cells uptake of CDs, co-stained with Hoechst to label DNA (blue) and Tubulin Tracker™ Green to label microtubules (green). The scale bar corresponds to a length of 10 mm (a). Magnification of a single cell, showing the nucleus (DNA; blue), microtubules (green) and red-emitting CDs (b). Fluorescence profile of the CDs (λex = 405 nm) as a function of the temperature (c), and the ratio of the integrated areas of the red and blue fluorescence components are plotted as a function of temperature (d).19 Copyright Royal Society of Chemistry (2018), reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 22  Images of C6 cells (A–C) without and (D–F) with labelling of Gd-CDs (0.5 mg mL−1). The scale bar is 25 μm.143 Copyright American Chemical Society (2014), reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 23  Schematic representation of a conventional OPV composed of a low work-function (WF) metal cathode, a bulk heterojunction (BHJ) composite, and a hole-extracting layer (HEL) on indium-tin-oxide (ITO) glass (a); an inverted OPV composed of a high work-function (WF) metal anode, a h a hole-extracting layer (HEL), a bulk heterojunction (BHJ) composite, and an electron-extracting layer (EEL) on indium-tin-oxide (ITO) glass (b).149 Copyright Royal Society of Chemistry (2016), reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 24  AFM micrography of P3HT:ICBA active layer films doped with (a) 0 wt%, (b) 2 wt% (c) 3 wt%, and (d) 4 wt% carbon dots.153 Copyright ACS Publications (2016), reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 25  Microwave-assisted reaction glucose and L-glutamine in liquid ionic to produce N-doped CDs (a). Hydrogen peroxide production and electron number as function of the potential for the CDs (b).96 Copyright Elsevier (2018), reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 26  TEM images of the N-doped CDs (a), and size distribution (a-inset). TEM imagens of the hybrid composite TiO2/N-doped CDs (b). Methylene blue degradation over time (c).155 Copyright Elsevier (2016), reproduced with permission.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
