Probing the excited state dynamics in perinone molecules for photovoltaic applications using transient absorption spectroscopy   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CP06075B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CP06075B
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2023, 25, 12363-12370Probing the excited state dynamics in perinone molecules for photovoltaic applications using transient absorption spectroscopy†

        
          
            Suman 
            Dhami
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yogesh 
            Kumar
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chaitrali 
            Sengupta
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Ravindra 
            Pandey
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, 247667 Haridwar, Uttarakhand, India. E-mail: rpandey@cy.iitr.ac.in;   Tel: +91-1332-285522
Received 
      30th December 2022
    , Accepted 13th March 2023First published on 6th April 2023AbstractNonfullerene polyaromatic molecules such as perinone are emerging as alternatives to fullerene derivatives due to their low manufacturing cost, ease of functionalization, and processing to improve the efficiency of optoelectronic devices. In this paper, we have used ultrafast transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy to probe the excited state dynamics in cis and trans perinone molecules. We have performed TA measurements in solution as well as thin films to provide a comprehensive understanding of excited-state processes occurring in cis and trans perinone molecules. Our results reveal the triplet state formation in perinone thin films through intersystem crossing and provide an in-depth understanding of the relaxation pathways of perinone molecules, which will be beneficial for designing and optimizing the device efficiencies of perinone based photovoltaic devices.
1. Introduction
Fullerene-based photovoltaic devices have been a long-standing subject of interest for several groups.1–3 However, the comparatively high cost of designing fullerene-based devices leads to research in the area of non-fullerene polyaromatic hydrocarbon-based optoelectronic devices such as organic solar cells, thin-film transistors, light-emitting diodes, etc. Polyaromatic hydrocarbons have been widely studied over the past decades due to their well-known optical and electronic properties. For the past several years, there have been large efforts to synthesize small molecules that act as non-fullerene molecules in organic solar cells to make the devices more economical.4 Perinone is a well-known class of organic compounds used as a pigment in the dye industry. Due to their significant charge mobility, large fluorescence quantum yields, and exceptional photochemical and thermal stability, they have emerged as promising molecules in the field of optoelectronic devices. The low-cost production, ease of molecular design, light weight, and flexibility make them promising for a variety of optoelectronic applications.4–7 The efficiency of photovoltaic devices is related to the relative energetics of charge transfer contributor molecules. The active layer present in polymer solar cells mostly consists of a partially phase-separated blend of an electron donating conjugated semiconducting polymer and an electron accepting material, which can be small molecules, conjugated polymers, or inorganic nanocrystalline semiconductors.
Organic compounds comprising polyaromatic moieties such as perylene monoimide, diimide, and naphthalene diimide are well known for excited state charge separation as well as triplet formation properties. Several groups have probed the triplet generation mechanism in such molecules by transient absorption spectroscopy.8–11 The photophysical characteristics of perinone are similar to those of perylene and naphthalene diimide derivatives which are widely used as n-type semiconductors in photovoltaics, light-emitting diodes, and organic field-effect transistors.12 Erten et al. fabricated dye-sensitized nanocrystalline TiO2 solar cells based on perinone dye. They have reported an open circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.344 V, a short circuit current density (ISC) of 5.93 mA cm−2, a filling factor (FF) of 0.45, and a power conversion efficiency (η) of 0.91% for the device, which were measured under simulated AM 1.5 illumination.13 They further fabricated a bilayer heterojunction solar cell based on zinc phthalocyanine (ZnPc) and naphthalene bis-benzimidazole. The photovoltaic characteristics of the bilayer cell were determined, which showed a power efficiency of 0.54%, an open circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.50 V, a short circuit current (JSC) of 2.11 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.51.14 In this system, although the band gaps of the donor and acceptor are very similar to each other (1.94 eV and 1.91 eV for ZnPC and naphthalene bis-benzimidazole, respectively), the efficiency of the device is not very high. To understand the reason of this disparity, we have to understand the dynamics of the excited state processes of constituent molecules. There is little information available on the dynamics of exciton dissociation and charge transfer. Therefore, we have decided to study the excited state processes in perinone molecules. After photoexcitation to an electronic excited state, several radiative and non-radiative channels open, which eventually leads to relaxation to the ground state via several processes. Understanding these processes is important to improve the optoelectronic device performance.
The electronic relaxation processes of photoexcited polyaromatic organic molecules are thus investigated largely with the aid of pulsed laser-based ultrafast spectroscopic techniques. Transient absorption spectroscopy can detect all excited species as it is a common technique for studying electronically excited states in solution and thin films. The photophysical properties of similar polyaromatic molecules have been reported to understand the mechanism of device efficiency.15–19
In this paper, we have synthesized the cis and trans perinone molecules. Due to the insolubility of trans perinone in a range of solvents, we could not perform solution phase experiments. Trans perinone is insoluble as the net dipole moment of trans perinone is less than that of cis-perinone (Fig. 1). Moreover, the trans isomers generally have better packing due to their molecular shape. Several similar types of examples are present in the literature; for example, cis-azobenzenes are 5–40 times more soluble than trans-azobenzenes.20 That is why, we have performed solution phase experiments only for cis perinone in methyltetrahydrofuran (Me-THF). Moreover, we have studied the static and time-resolved photophysical properties of two isomers of perinone chromophores in thin films. It has been observed that, after the photoexcitation, both cis and trans perinone thin films exhibit intersystem crossing (ISC) from S1 to T1 through the charge transfer state, which plays an important role in photovoltaic materials.21
 Fig. 1  Schematic of (a) cis perinone and (b) trans perinone. 
2. Experimental
2.1. Materials
1,4,5,8-Naphthalene tetracarboxylic dianhydride, o-phenylenediamine, glacial acetic acid, ethanol, and potassium hydroxide (KOH) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Quartz slides were purchased from Techinstro, India.
2.2. Synthesis and characterization of cis perinone and trans perinone
Synthesis and characterization of cis perinone and trans perinone are described in the ESI† (S.I. 1).21–24
2.3. Thin film preparation
Thin films of perinone molecules were prepared with the help of the thermal evaporation method. An HHV Smart Coat 3.0A was used for the preparation of thin films. Initially, the quartz substrates were washed with detergent and then sonicated in deionized water (DW), acetone, and isopropyl alcohol separately at 50 °C for 10 minutes. The cleaned substrates were dried with the help of a dryer before loading into a vacuum chamber. The substrates intended to be coated were held inverted at the top of the chamber, which kept on rotating at 5 rpm, to get a uniform film. The samples were placed in a molybdenum boat which was kept under a high vacuum of 10−6 mbar inside a chamber. Thin films with a desired thickness were obtained by thermal evaporation at a rate of 1 Å sec−1. The evaporation rate was monitored with the help of a quartz crystal oscillator.
2.4. Characterization
The synthesized cis and trans perinones were characterized using FT-IR (PerkinElmer) (Fig. S1, ESI†), powder XRD (Bruker, D8 Advance, X-ray source: 2.2 kW Cu anode, 40 kV/40 mA) (Fig. S3, ESI†), and TGA (EXSTAR, SII 6300 EXSTAR) (Fig. S2, ESI†).
The steady-state absorption spectra of perinone thin films were recorded using a UV-2600 UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Shimadzu) and the steady state photoluminescence (PL) emission was recorded using a FluoroMax-4 (Horiba Scientific) spectrofluorometer. Thin films were characterized using a thin film X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku SmartLab) (Fig. S4, ESI†). Variable-angle spectral ellipsometry (M-2000, J. A. Woollam) was used to determine the thickness of vapor-deposited films and had a thickness of 95 ± 5 nm. The time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) measurements of perinone thin films (Fig. S6, ESI†) and solution (Fig. S9b, ESI†) were carried out using a picosecond NANO-LED IBH-460 and the decay data were collected on a photomultiplier.
2.5. Transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy
The experimental setup for the TA measurement is schematically shown in Fig. S8(a) (ESI†). A Ti:sapphire (Spectra Physics, 1 kHz, 5 mJ) laser system generates an 800 nm pulse with a pulse duration of 100 fs. One part of the fundamental beam having an energy of 1.68 mJ is used to generate the pump pulse. The pump pulse is resonant with an electronic transition of the photosystem and promotes a certain number of molecules to their excited states via a Franck–Condon transition. In order to generate desired wavelengths, the pump beam is passed through an optical parametric amplifier (OPA). To eliminate polarization effects the polarization of the pump beam is set at the magic angle (54.7°) with respect to that of the probe beam. The pump beam before passing from the sample passes through a mechanical chopper that is synchronized to the amplifier, so that every other excitation pulse is blocked. Another portion of the fundamental beam having an energy of 0.78 mJ passes through a CaF2 window that is placed at a vertical crystal stage, in order to generate the white light continuum. The white-light continuum ranges from ∼410 to 750 nm and is used as a broadband probe pulse. The probe beam spatially and temporally overlaps with the pump beam in the sample. After the sample, the pump beam is blocked and the transmitted probe beam is collected on the detector. In order to vary the time delay between the pump and probe pulses, the probe pulse is sent through an optical delay stage (0 to 8.1 ns), which consists of a retroreflector mounted on a high-precision motorized computer-controlled translation stage. For each time delay, both the intensities of the probe pulse with and without a pump pulse (IPumpProbe and I0Probe, respectively) are recorded. The change of optical density ((ΔOD(λ, t)) is calculated as a function of wavelength and time. ((ΔOD(λ, t)) contains information on the dynamic processes that occur in the photosynthetic system under study, such as excited state energy migration, electron and/or proton transfer processes, isomerization, and intersystem crossing. The power of the pump pulse (3–4 μJ cm−2) is kept low enough to avoid sample degradation and multi-exciton effects. The instrument response function (IRF) has been obtained at ∼170 fs at the sample position for the experimental setup (Fig. S8(b), ESI†). All the data reported here are the average values obtained from three independent measurements. We have collected all the solution phase spectra in a 0.5 mm quartz cuvette.
2.6. TA data analysis
In order to extract the information from TA data, we have performed a global analysis with the help of the Glotaran program.25 The lifetime at any particular wavelength has been obtained by fitting decay profiles with Igor Pro 4 software. In the case of single-point kinetic analysis, we have mostly used the monoexponential and biexponential fitting functions.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Steady-state spectroscopy
The steady-state absorption and photoluminescence spectra measured for vapor-deposited thin films of perinone isomers on a quartz substrate are shown in Fig. 2. The cis chromophore exhibits broad absorption bands in the range of 400–650 nm with λmax at 486 and 521 nm. However, the trans chromophore exhibits a significant vibronic structure with maximum absorbance values at 451 nm, 491 nm, and 528 nm due to Π–Π* transitions. The observed photoluminescence is attributed to the fluorescence from the initially populated S1 state. Both the chromophores exhibit a broad emission spectrum that shows maxima at 682 and 627 nm for cis and trans isomers, respectively. After that, we performed nanosecond resolved time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) experiments of thin films of both cis and trans perinones (Fig. S6, ESI†). The fluorescence lifetime obtained for cis and trans perinones in thin films are <τ> = 2.24 ± 0.05 ns and 12.7 ± 0.03 ns, respectively. The fluorescence lifetimes of cis and trans perinones are largely different from each other. This is most probably due to the difference in the extent of conjugation in these two isomers. While in trans perinone the two carbonyl (–CO) groups are in extended conjugation with the central naphthalene ring, in the case of cis perinone, the extent of conjugation is reduced due to cross conjugation with the naphthalene ring, resulting in a shorter excited state lifetime. This difference in the extent of conjugation can be further supported with the IR spectra for cis and trans perinones. The carbonyl stretching frequency of cis perinone and trans perinone appears at ∼1703 cm−1 and ∼1698 cm−1, respectively. The stretching frequency of the carbonyl group in trans perinone at a lower wavenumber clearly indicates the higher extent of conjugation in trans perinone.
 Fig. 2  Normalised absorption (solid lines) and emission (dashed lines) spectra collected following excitation at λexc = 510 nm. The plotted absorption and emission spectra are for films grown on quartz substrates. 
3.2. TA spectroscopy of trans perinone and cis perinone thin films
In addition to the fluorescence study, the excited state dynamics of both trans and cis perinones have been investigated by femtosecond resolved transient absorption pump–probe spectroscopy to probe the excited state dynamics. A white light continuum in the range of 410–750 nm after 480 nm pump excitation has been used. The data have been recorded up to an 8.1 ns delay time. Fig. 3 presents the TA spectrum of the trans and cis perinone thin films composed of a three-dimensional contour plot (Fig. 3a), time-gated spectra at selective delay times (Fig. 3b), and time traces at selective probe wavelengths (Fig. 3c).
 Fig. 3  The fs TA profile pictures of (A) trans and (B) cis perinone thin films: (a) contour plot, (b) ΔOD time-gated spectra at selected delay times and (c) time traces at selected probe wavelengths, respectively, after excitation at 480 nm with a low pump power (3–5 μJ per pulse) to avoid multi-exciton generation and sample bleaching. The time axis is linear up to 10 ps and logarithmic thereafter. 
The femtosecond to nanosecond transient absorption spectra of trans perinone were probed in the wavelength range of 410 nm to 750 nm and at a 0–8.1 ns time scale. Fig. 3(A (a–c)) presents spectral features with a prominent negative signal of ground state bleaching (GSB) at ∼415–450 nm, ∼480 nm, and ∼525 nm, which corresponds to ground state absorption peaks at these wavelengths as evident from the UV absorption spectrum (Fig. 2). The GSB signal decreases gradually with time throughout the monitoring window (0 to 8.1 ns). In this spectrum, it has been observed that trans perinone shows the characteristic feature of excited state absorption (ESA) in the broad wavelength range of ∼540–750 nm with peak maxima at around ∼553 nm and at ∼470 nm and ∼510 nm. The signatures of ESA decay within our time window (∼8 ns) in the wavelength region of ∼575–700 nm. However, the signature of ESA lives beyond ∼8.1 ns in the wavelength range of ∼540–575 nm. This indicates that the excited state species has a long lifetime. For the trans isomer, the decay of the transient absorption signal is fast (∼75 ps) at a longer wavelength.

Cis perinone shows somewhat different excited state dynamics with different evolution timescales for states. The transient absorption spectra of cis perinone in the thin film are shown in Fig. 3(B). The experiments for the cis perinone thin film have been done under similar conditions to those for trans perinone. In the spectra, the negative absorption bands at 520 nm and 560 nm are attributed to the GSB signal. We observed a ground state recovery towards the baseline at 520 and 560 nm at 8.1 ns but not to a full extent. A band with positive ΔOD has been observed at 610 nm. This has been attributed to the ESA, which shows a complete decay to the baseline within the monitoring time window. A single-point kinetic analysis at 610 nm shows a decay time of 0.1 ps and 6.8 ps.
Dynamics of the excited state of cis and trans perinones from TA data have been analyzed using singular value decomposition (SVD) based global analysis to obtain a model-based description with precisely estimated lifetimes and species-related spectral signature.26
The global analysis of the TA data has been performed with the help of Glotaran software, yielding evolution-associated decay spectra (EADS). This gives the spectra of the individual excited-state species with the corresponding lifetime. We observe that three components are required for both cis and trans perinone thin films. Primarily, we assume the presence of a hot excited state, vibrationally relaxed state, charge transfer state, and triplet state in the model. All states are characterized by their respective EADS and time components associated with them. An unbranched sequential model has been applied for analysing the photoinduced processes occurring after photo-excitation of cis and trans perinone thin films. A three-state kinetic model has been employed for global analysis. For trans perinone, we obtained three lifetimes of 700 ± 30 fs, 20.9 ± 0.6 ps, and 19.81 ± 0.2 ns using their respective evolution associated difference spectra (EADS) shown in Fig. 4(A). Trans perinone, being excited by a 480 nm wavelength, most likely becomes excited to a higher vibrational level of the S1 state, leading to the preliminary population generation at the hot S1 state. The ultrafast timescale (700 ± 30 fs) has been assigned to a short-lived state (hot S1) and it decays to the vibrationally relaxed state within this time. Lin et al. reported vibrational relaxation with a short timescale (∼5 ps) in perylene diimide related thin films.27 Long et al. reported vibrational relaxation at ∼3.6 ps for the PDI monomer.28 This relaxed state gets transferred to the charge transfer state within ∼20.9 ± 0.60 ps with a rate constant of 0.05 ps−1. Ran et al. reported charge transfer kinetics in aggregated PDI molecules with a ∼3–79 ps timescale for charge separation and charge transfer.29 The ESA at 553 nm shows a decay of 0.53 and 14.79 ps for ultrashort and short components as reflected in single point kinetic analysis. We obtain the average fluorescence lifetime (<τ>) of trans perinone from TCSPC as <τ> = 12.7 ± 0.03 ns for trans perinone. The observed long fluorescence lifetime and ∼28% quantum yield of trans perinone suggest that S1 is probably its emissive state (Scheme 1). However, from the global analysis of transient absorption spectroscopy data, it has been seen that the longer-lived species live even after 8.1 ns which show a decay time constant of ∼19.81 ± 0.2 ns. We assign this longer decay time constant to the ISC to the triplet state of trans perinone in a thin film.10 Triplet state species generation in the case of the sulphur substituted perinone has already been reported by Wells et al. with a tens of nanosecond range timescale.30,31 Therefore, the third longer-lived species having a lifetime of 19.81 ± 0.2 ns obtained in our experiments, indicate the presence of a third state as consistent with results obtained from other groups. We discard any possibilities of singlet fission in trans perinone as we could not acquire any spectral signature of a triplet state at a faster timescale, and it is energetically unfavourable (the energies for E(S1) = 2.19 eV, E(T1)) = 1.03 eV are calculated from TD-DFT calculations as mentioned in the ESI† (S.I. 3). This longer-lived species present even at 8.1 ns could be attributed to the formation of a triplet state which occurs due to ISC in the trans isomer as shown in Scheme 1.
 Fig. 4  (a) Evolution associated difference spectra (EADS) and (b) population profile of each respective species in the visible range of (A) trans perinone and (B) cis perinone thin films. 
 Scheme 1  Energy diagram for (a) cis perinone and (b) trans perinone thin films. 
The EADS1 spectra shown in Fig. 4A(a) are assigned to the hot S1 state. Within a 700 ± 30 fs timescale this state undergoes vibrational relaxation from locally excited vibrational states to a vibrationally relaxed state. EADS2 corresponds to the relaxed S1 state which goes to the charge transfer state with a timescale of ∼21 ps. The EADS3 spectra are attributed to the charge transfer (CT) state which goes to the triplet state within a timescale of 19.81 ± 0.2 ns.
We used a similar model for the cis perinone thin film where three components are obtained using a three-state kinetic model to satisfactorily fit the data. The EADS of cis perinone is shown in Fig. 4B(b). The three time constants obtained from the global analysis are τ1 = 1.02 ± 0.02 ps, τ2 = 9.68 ± 0.2 ps, and τ3 = 17.58 ± 0.05 ns for vibrational relaxation, charge separation, and intersystem crossing, respectively. It has been observed from TCSPC experiments that in the case of cis perinone fluorescence decay is very fast compared to trans perinone. The fluorescence lifetime of cis perinone is ∼ 2.24 ± 0.05 ns. However, the ground state recovery produces a timescale of ∼18 ns from TA data. In Fig. 3B(b), it has been seen that the signature of ESA completely decays within 1.05 ns, which corroborates its fluorescence lifetime of 2.24 ± 0.05 ns. The observed lower fluorescence lifetime of cis perinone as compared to trans perinone, along with its quantum yield of ∼11%, suggests that the emission probably occurs from the CT state (Scheme 1). A moderately long-lived state is present here, which evolved at 100 ps with a characteristic lifetime of 17.58 ± 0.05 ns. This has been attributed to the formation of a triplet state of the molecule. This could be further confirmed as metal substituted perinone has been reported to have a considerable triplet yield. Castellano et al. reported triplet generation in unsubstituted perinone too.30,32 In the case of perinone molecules, we report the spectral evolution of long-lived species ascribed to the generation of a triplet state through ISC in simple perinone molecules in thin films. The longer timescale of the final time component (17.58 ± 0.05 ns), which is quite different from the fluorescence lifetime (2.24 ± 0.05 ns) of cis perinone, confirms the occurrence of ISC from the charge separated state in thin films.
Although very different excited state absorption features have been observed in the case of cis and trans isomers, the obtained timescales of the excited state processes are very similar. The thin film X-ray diffraction analysis (Fig. S4, ESI†) of both trans and cis perinones shows a nearly similar distance between layers, 12.7 Å and 12.5 Å, respectively. This possibly leads to a similar type of charge coupling and charge separation in both films. Therefore, it could be inferred that the trend of closely related decay time constants observed in both films is in accordance with the film structure. The SEM image (Fig. S7, ESI†) of the films also shows a similar kind of ribbon-like microstructure formed for both isomers.
Tapmeyer et al. and Lapkowski et al. synthesised several perinone derivatives and explored their steady-state photo-physical and crystallographic properties.6,33,34 Different theoretical and experimental studies have predicted that the relationship between the stacking geometry and charge transfer dynamics in organic thin films can be controlled by tuning the electronic coupling between the molecules.35–37 For instance, Castellano et al. observed a red shift in the absorbance bands of perinone after substituting O with S atoms and showed the conversion of dominant singlet state fluorescence in the O substituted perinone to long-lived triplet excited states in the S substituted perinone with a lifetime of 12.9 μs.10,30,38 Our investigation also confirms the triplet state generation with an ISC timescale of 17.58 ± 0.05 ns and 19.81 ± 0.2 ns for cis and trans perinones. However, a systematic experimental investigation examining how the intermolecular structure of perinone films impacts the charge transfer dynamics is still lacking. We reported the excited state dynamics of cis and trans perinones in thin films which may shed light on improving the efficiency of perinone based optoelectronic devices. Further, analysing the structure–function relationship in perinone derivatives may provide a potential explanation for optimizing charge transfer dynamics among similar molecular crystals. It could involve identifying favourable geometries that lead to optimal triplet generation and exploring the subtle relationship between stacking geometry, charge transfer dynamics, and crystal structure engineering in perinone derivatives.

3.2.1. TA spectroscopy of cis perinone in solution. 
To compare the excited state dynamics of the thin films with the monomer in the solution, we probed the excited state dynamics of cis perinone in Me-THF in the spectral range from 410 nm to 750 nm using a broad band white light continuum followed by 480 nm pump excitation at different probe delay times from 0 to 8.1 ns. The TA spectra of cis perinone in Me-THF are shown in Fig. S10 (ESI†). Trans perinone, being insoluble in all solvents, could not be probed in the solution. For cis perinone, after photoexcitation GSB at 442 nm is observed at a short time delay. However, a prominent positive band ranging from 500 nm to 750 nm with two peaks at 544 nm and 579 nm has been observed and attributed to ESA. From the ΔOD plots, it could be seen that, as the time delay between the pump and probe beam increases, the ESA signal decays to the baseline, indicating the decay of this state. Similarly, a decrease in the GSB feature can be seen at 442 nm to a full recovery which means all the molecules at a longer time delay comes to the ground state. The spectral shape and signature of the transient absorption spectra at different timescales resemble considerably those of more than one sulphur substituted perinone in solution reported by Castellano et al.38
We have employed a three-component sequential model to understand the spectral features and to determine the associated lifetime of the states. For cis perinone in Me-THF we obtained lifetimes of 439 ± 20 fs, 10.36 ± 0.2 ps, and 1.81 ± 0.2 ns. We assign the ultrashort timescale to the fast decay of a hot S1 state to the vibrationally relaxed state within 439 ± 20 fs as shown in Fig. S11(a) (ESI†). In solution, this very fast decay timescale is due to the solvent mediated vibrational relaxation. The second relaxed state evolves into another charge transfer (CT) state within a 10 ps time represented by EADS2. A very close resemblance between the fluorescence lifetime (Fig. S9(b), ESI†) and the third time constant obtained from the global analysis of TA data, which are 2.49 ns and 1.81 ns, respectively, has been observed. It could be inferred that, from the CT state, it transfers to the ground state within 1.8 ns. The presence of a conical intersection in the potential energy surface may drive the molecule to the ground state and has been observed in the case of perylene based molecules.32,33 Being a similar structure and conjugation in cis perinone, it may be possible that it has been driven to the ground state through conical intersection in solution.
The fluorescence lifetime of cis perinone has been observed to be 2.49 ns (Fig. S9(b), ESI†). The third (longest) timescale obtained from global analysis shows that the TCSPC measurement only measures the fluorescence decay time constant. The charge separated state decay lifetime shows a somewhat lower time constant of 1.81 ns, indicating a very little probability of ISC to the T1 state. It is possible that, in Me-THF solution, a very little contribution of triplet generation through ISC reduces the fluorescence lifetime of the S1 state in solution. Castellano et al. also reported this much of difference in time constant between TCSPC and TA measurement for the third (longest) decay time constants in sulphur substituted perinone derivatives.34 However, keeping a parity with their report with sulphur substituted perinones in solution, we are not assigning the ISC channel as a principal contributory one. All the timescales have been reduced due to the solvent mediated pathways in monomer solution.

Conclusion
In this paper, we have provided a comprehensive study of the excited state dynamics of cis and trans perinone molecules in thin films and solutions depicting lifetimes of different relaxation pathways. We have shown that the excited state spectroscopic signatures are quite different in the case of thin films compared to the solution. The thin films of both cis and trans perinones give rise to a long-time component in the order of tens of nanoseconds. However, cis perinone in solution shows a comparatively short fluorescence lifetime and a shorter third time component (in the ns order) obtained from TA data than that observed in films. It has been found from our TCSPC experiments that the different extents of conjugation in the thin films of cis and trans perinones reflect the significant difference between the fluorescence lifetimes (12.7 ± 0.03 ns and 2.24 ± 0.05 ns, respectively). However, it does not change the time scales of charge separation or ISC much between the thin films of trans and cis perinones. This observation is in agreement with the similar X-ray crystal structures of the thin films of both isomers. This indicates that in our study a facile generation of ISC driven triplet (T1) generation occurs in the thin films of perinones. A close alignment of molecules in thin films gives rise to strong coupling between molecules, leading to an increased probability of ISC resulting in the potential of higher efficiency of perinone based optoelectronic devices.
Author contributions
R. P., S. D. and Y. K. designed the experiments. Y. K. performed the synthesis and characterization of perinone molecules. S. D. prepared the films, characterized them and performed the transient absorption experiments. All authors were involved in the discussion, analysis of the results and writing the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
R. P. gratefully acknowledges the Ramanujan Fellowship (SB/S2/RJN-060/2017), and Core research grant (CRG/2018/001474) from Science and Engineering Research Board, Government of India, Ministry of Education, (STARS/APR2019/CS/310/FS) and IIT Roorkee for the financial support. S. D. and Y. K. acknowledge the support from UGC and CSIR, Government of India, respectively, for Senior Research Fellowships. C. S. is thankful to IIT Roorkee for the postdoctoral fellowship.
References
D. Liu, Q. Wang, C. J. Traverse, C. Yang, M. Young, P. S. Kuttipillai, S. Y. Lunt, T. W. Hamann and R. R. Lunt, Impact of Ultrathin C60 on Perovskite Photovoltaic Devices, ACS Nano, 2018, 12(1), 876–883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Ross, C. M. Cardona, D. M. Guldi, S. G. Sankaranarayanan, M. O. Reese, N. Kopidakis, J. Peet, B. Walker, G. C. Bazan, E. Van Keuren, B. C. Holloway and M. Drees, Endohedral Fullerenes for Organic Photovoltaic Devices, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8(3), 208–212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-F. Lin, M. Zhang, S.-W. Liu, T.-L. Chiu and J.-H. Lee, High Photoelectric Conversion Efficiency of Metal Phthalocyanine/Fullerene Heterojunction Photovoltaic Device, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2011, 12(1), 476–505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shi, A. Isakova, A. Abudulimu, M. van den Berg, O. K. Kwon, A. J. Meixner, S. Y. Park, D. Zhang, J. Gierschner and L. Lüer, Designing High Performance All-Small-Molecule Solar Cells with Non-Fullerene Acceptors: Comprehensive Studies on Photoexcitation Dynamics and Charge Separation Kinetics, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11(1), 211–220 RSC .

          M. Herbst and K. Hunger, Industrial Organic Pigments, vol. 3,  1993 Search PubMed .
M. Łapkowski, Perinone—New Life of an Old Molecule, Materials, 2021, 14(22), 6880 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Mamada, C. Pérez-Bolívar, D. Kumaki, N. A. Esipenko, S. Tokito and P. Anzenbacher Jr, Benzimidazole Derivatives: Synthesis, Physical Properties, and n-Type Semiconducting Properties, Chem. – A Eur. J., 2014, 20(37), 11835–11846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tian, A. A. Sukhanov, L. Bussotti, J. Pang, J. Zhao, V. K. Voronkova, M. Di Donato and M.-D. Li, Charge Separation and Intersystem Crossing in Homo- and Hetero-Compact Naphthalimide Dimers, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2022, 126(23), 4364–4378 CAS .
I. A. Howard, F. Laquai, P. E. Keivanidis, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, Perylene Tetracarboxydiimide as an Electron Acceptor in Organic Solar Cells: A Study of Charge Generation and Recombination, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113(50), 21225–21232 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Wells, J. E. Yarnell, S. Sheykhi, J. R. Palmer, D. T. Yonemoto, R. Joyce, S. Garakyaraghi and F. N. Castellano, Accessing the Triplet Manifold of Naphthalene Benzimidazole–Phenanthroline in Rhenium(i) Bichromophores, Dalton Trans., 2021, 50(37), 13086–13095 RSC .
M. S. Ahmed, C. Biswas, B. Bhavani, S. Prasanthkumar, D. Banerjee, V. Kumar, P. Chetti, L. Giribabu, V. Rao Soma and S. S. K. Raavi, Metalated Porphyrin-Napthalimide Based Donor-Acceptor Systems with Long-Lived Triplet States and Effective Three-Photon Absorption, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2023, 435, 114324 CrossRef CAS .
S.-L. Suraru and F. Würthner, Strategies for the Synthesis of Functional Naphthalene Diimides, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53(29), 7428–7448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Erten, E. Eren and S. Icli, Dye Sensitized Solar Cell Based on 1,8-Naphthalene Benzimidazole Comprising Carboxyl Group*, Eur. Phys. J.: Appl. Phys., 2007, 38(3), 227–230 CrossRef CAS .
S. Erten and S. Icli, Bilayer Heterojunction Solar Cell Based on Naphthalene Bis-Benzimidazole, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2008, 361(3), 595–600 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bansal, A. Kundu, V. P. Singh, A. K. Pal, A. Datta, J. Dasgupta and P. Mukhopadhyay, A Highly Contorted Push–Pull Naphthalenediimide Dimer and Evidence of
Intramolecular Singlet Exciton Fission, Chem. Sci., 2022, 13(39), 11506–11512 RSC .
A. K. Le, J. A. Bender, D. H. Arias, D. E. Cotton, J. C. Johnson and S. T. Roberts, Singlet Fission Involves an Interplay between Energetic Driving Force and Electronic Coupling in Perylenediimide Films, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140(2), 814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. C. Krishnapriya, P. Roy, B. Puttaraju, U. Salzner, A. J. Musser, M. Jain, J. Dasgupta and S. Patil, Spin Density Encodes Intramolecular Singlet Exciton Fission in Pentacene Dimers, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10(1), 33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Le, J. A. Bender and S. T. Roberts, Slow Singlet Fission Observed in a Polycrystalline Perylenediimide Thin Film, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7(23), 4922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nandi, B. Manna and R. Ghosh, Singlet Fission Dynamics in the 5,12-Bis(Phenylethynyl)Tetracene Thin Film, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125(4), 2583–2591 CrossRef CAS .
C. Brown, S. K. Rastogi, S. L. Barrett, H. E. Anderson, E. Twichell, S. Gralinski, A. McDonald and W. J. Brittain, Differential Azobenzene Solubility Increases Equilibrium Cis/Trans Ratio in Water, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2017, 336, 140–145 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Rusanov, A. M. Berlin, S. K. Fidler and F. I. Adyrkhaeva, Synthesis and Study of Some Bis(1′,8′-Naphthoylene-1,2-Benzimidazoles), Chem. Heterocycl. Compd., 1979, 15(7), 791–794 CrossRef .
M. Mamada, C. Pérez-Bolívar and P. Anzenbacher, Green Synthesis of Polycyclic Benzimidazole Derivatives and Organic Semiconductors, Org. Lett., 2011, 13(18), 4882–4885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tozlu, S. Erten-Ela and S. Icli, Photoresponsive N-Channel Organic Field Effect Transistor Based on Naphthalene Bis-Benzimidazole with Divinyltetramethyl Disiloxane-Bis (Benzo-Cyclobutene) Gate Insulator, Sens. Actuators, A, 2010, 161(1), 46–52 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mizuguchi, Crystal Structure and Electronic Characterization of Trans- and Cis-Perinone Pigments, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108(26), 8926–8930 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Snellenburg, S. Laptenok, R. Seger, K. M. Mullen and I. H. M. van Stokkum, Glotaran: A Java-Based Graphical User Interface for the R Package TIMP, J. Stat. Software, 2012, 49, 1–22 Search PubMed .
I. H. M. van Stokkum, D. S. Larsen and R. van Grondelle, Global and Target Analysis of Time-Resolved Spectra, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 2004, 1657(2), 82–104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Lin, N.-Z. She, C.-H. Chen, A. Yabushita, H. Lin, M.-H. Li, B. Chang, T.-F. Hsueh, B.-S. Tsai, P.-T. Chen, Y. Yang and K.-H. Wei, Perylene Diimide-Fused Dithiophenepyrroles with Different End Groups as Acceptors for Organic Photovoltaics, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14(33), 37990–38003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Long, Y. Wang, S. Vdović, M. Zhou, L. Yan, Y. Niu, Q. Guo and A. Xia, Energy Transfer and Spectroscopic Characterization of a Perylenetetracarboxylic Diimide (PDI) Hexamer, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17(28), 18567–18576 RSC .
G. Ran, J. Zeb, Y. Song, P. A. Denis, U. Ghani and W. Zhang, Photoinduced Symmetry Breaking-Charge Separation in the Aggregated State of Perylene Diimide: Effect of Hydrophobicity, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2022, 126(8), 3872–3880 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Wells, J. R. Palmer, J. E. Yarnell, S. Garakyaraghi, B. C. Pemberton, J. M. Favale, M. K. Valchar, A. Chakraborty and F. N. Castellano, Understanding the Influence of Geometric and Electronic Structure on the Excited State Dynamical and Photoredox Properties of Perinone Chromophores, Phys. Chem. Chem.
Phys., 2021, 23(42), 24200–24210 RSC .
A. J. Tilley, R. D. Pensack, T. S. Lee, B. Djukic, G. D. Scholes and D. S. Seferos, Ultrafast Triplet Formation in Thionated Perylene Diimides, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118(19), 9996–10004 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Tyson, C. R. Luman, X. Zhou and F. N. Castellano, New Ru(II) Chromophores with Extended Excited-State Lifetimes, Inorg. Chem., 2001, 40(16), 4063–4071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tapmeyer, M. Bolte, M. R. Chierotti and M. U. Schmidt, Structure of the Intermediates in the Industrial Separation of Perinone Isomers, Dyes Pigm., 2020, 181, 108442 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Zherebtsov, M. U. Schmidt, R. Niewa, C. P. Sakthidharan, F. V. Podgornov, Y. V. Matveychuk, S. A. Nayfert, M. A. Polozov, S. N. Ivashevskaya, A. I. Stash, Y.-S. Chen, D. E. Zhivulin, V. E. Zhivulin, S. V. Merzlov, E. V. Bartashevich, V. V. Avdin, H. S. Hsu and F. W. Guo, Two New Polymorphs of Cis-Perinone: Crystal Structures, Physical and Electric Properties, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci., Cryst. Eng. Mater., 2019, 75(3), 384–392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Mirjani, N. Renaud, N. Gorczak and F. C. Grozema, Theoretical Investigation of Singlet Fission in Molecular Dimers: The Role of Charge Transfer States and Quantum Interference, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118(26), 14192–14199 CrossRef CAS .
N. Renaud and F. C. Grozema, Intermolecular Vibrational Modes Speed Up Singlet Fission in Perylenediimide Crystals, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6(3), 360–365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Renaud, P. A. Sherratt and M. A. Ratner, Mapping the Relation between Stacking Geometries and Singlet Fission Yield in a Class of Organic Crystals. J. Phys, Chem. Lett., 2013, 4(7), 1065–1069 CAS .
J. R. Palmer, K. A. Wells, J. E. Yarnell, J. M. Favale and F. N. Castellano, Visible-Light-Driven Triplet Sensitization of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons Using Thionated Perinones, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11(13), 5092–5099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2cp06075bThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of (a) cis perinone and (b) trans perinone.	 

 	Fig. 2  Normalised absorption (solid lines) and emission (dashed lines) spectra collected following excitation at λexc = 510 nm. The plotted absorption and emission spectra are for films grown on quartz substrates.	 

 	Fig. 3  The fs TA profile pictures of (A) trans and (B) cis perinone thin films: (a) contour plot, (b) ΔOD time-gated spectra at selected delay times and (c) time traces at selected probe wavelengths, respectively, after excitation at 480 nm with a low pump power (3–5 μJ per pulse) to avoid multi-exciton generation and sample bleaching. The time axis is linear up to 10 ps and logarithmic thereafter.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Evolution associated difference spectra (EADS) and (b) population profile of each respective species in the visible range of (A) trans perinone and (B) cis perinone thin films.	 

 	Scheme 1  Energy diagram for (a) cis perinone and (b) trans perinone thin films.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2cp06075b

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2023
