Engineering polymer solar cells: advancement in active layer thickness and morphology  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC01860D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC01860D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 8746-8775Engineering polymer solar cells: advancement in active layer thickness and morphology

        
          
            Ritesh Kant 
            Gupta
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Rabindranath 
            Garai
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Maimur 
            Hossain
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Mohammad Adil 
            Afroz
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Dibashmoni 
            Kalita
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Parameswar Krishnan 
            Iyer
          
          
        
      *ab
aCentre for Nanotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati-781039, Assam, India
bDepartment of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati-781039, Assam, India. E-mail: pki@iitg.ac.in
Received 
      21st April 2021
    , Accepted 15th June 2021First published on 18th June 2021AbstractAchieving high power conversion efficiency (PCE) polymer solar cells (PSCs) has been very challenging and the ultimate goal for their commercialization. Precise investigation of the active layer morphology and newer methods to process these layers has been a crucial factor to realize high PCE. There is also a rising demand for the fabrication of PSCs with a thick active layer over a large area to facilitate their commercial application. However, to achieve higher thickness it has been observed that the active layer film morphology is compromised, which in turn reduces the device performance. Many device engineering techniques have been attempted by researchers to obtain the best possible morphology for enabling better charge transport and hence improved device efficiency. Reports of achieving thick active layer PSCs along with regulation of the morphology in favour of charge transport have also appeared in the literature. This review aims to cover important device engineering techniques which have been reported in the literature for obtaining high performance PSCs by modifying the morphology and those which have been targeted to achieve thick active layers for the same. Besides including general device engineering aspects, a discussion on varying the donor (D) and acceptor (A) ratio and thermal annealing for regulating the active layer is also included. Thereafter, solvent/additive engineering and materials engineering have been discussed to understand their role in the active layer morphology and fabrication of thick film solar cells. Lastly, all the advanced device engineering methods such as solvent vapor annealing, doctor blading, and hot-casting for the fabrication of high-performance PSCs have been covered. This review will be a good tool for all researchers who are considering various device engineering methods to obtain high performance thick PSCs.
Ritesh Kant Gupta
Ritesh Kant Gupta, from Kolkata (India), completed his BTech in Electronics and Instrumentation Engineering from JIS College of Engineering affiliated to the West Bengal University of Technology in 2013 and MTech in Advanced Materials Science and Technology from National Institute of Technology Durgapur in 2016. Currently, he is a Senior Research Fellow at the Centre for Nanotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, and pursuing his PhD under the supervision of Prof. Parameswar Krishnan Iyer. He is currently working on various techniques to obtain high-performance polymer and perovskite solar cells. He is inclined towards the study of device physics for various optoelectronic applications.
Rabindranath Garai
Rabindranath Garai completed his BSc in Chemistry from Midnapore College under Vidyasagar University, West Bengal (India), in 2014 and MS. from Indian Institute of Technology (Indian School of Mines), Dhanbad, in 2016. Currently, he is pursuing his PhD at the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, under the supervision of Prof. Parameswar Krishnan Iyer. He is working on the design and development of polymer and perovskite solar cells for higher efficiency and improved stability.
Maimur Hossain
Maimur Hossain from Murshidabad, West Bengal (India), received both a BSc (Hons.) in Chemistry and MSc (Organic Chemistry) from Aligarh Muslim University in 2013 and 2015 respectively. Presently, he is a Senior Research Fellow (SRF) under the supervision of Prof. Parameswar Krishnan Iyer at Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati. His research is focused on the design and development of semiconductor materials for photovoltaic applications.
Mohammad Adil Afroz
Mohammad Adil Afroz obtained his BSc (Hons.) and MSc in Industrial Chemistry from the Aligarh Muslim University in 2009 and 2011, respectively. Then he received his MTech in Polymer Science and Technology from the Indian Institute of Technology Delhi in 2013. In 2020, he was awarded a PhD degree in Chemistry from the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, working under the supervision of Professor Parameswar Krishnan Iyer. His research interest is in the development of semiconducting materials and optoelectronic devices.
Dibashmoni Kalita
Dibashmoni Kalita completed his BSc in Chemistry from B. Borooah College under Gauhati University, India, in 2016 and MSc from Gauhati University in 2018. Currently, he is pursuing a PhD at Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, under the supervision of Prof. Parameswar Krishnan Iyer. His research is focused on the design and development of highly stable and efficient perovskite materials for optoelectronic devices.
Parameswar Krishnan Iyer
Parameswar Krishnan Iyer received a PhD degree in Chemistry from the Central Salt and Marine Chemicals Research Institute, Bhavnagar, India, in 1999. He was a Post-Doctoral Researcher with Technion, Haifa, Israel, from 1999 to 2001, University of California Santa Barbara, CA, USA, from 2001 to 2003, and Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA, from 2003 to 2004. In 2004, he joined the Department of Chemistry, IIT Guwahati, India, as an Assistant Professor, and was promoted to a full-time Professor in 2013. His current research interests include the design and development of novel conjugated polymers, oligomers and hybrid materials for optoelectronic devices, sensors, imaging and therapeutics.
1. Introduction
Polymer solar cells (PSCs) have attracted many researchers due to their exceptional features like ease of fabrication using low-cost solution processing techniques, and light-weight, flexible and semi-transparent nature depending upon the application, which traditional inorganic solar cells do not provide.1,2 Recently, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs has reached beyond 18% making them one of the potential next generation photovoltaic technologies for commercialization.3–5 However, it is well-known that the working principle of PSCs is not as simple as inorganic solar cells, and it involves several steps for conversion of solar energy into electrical energy: (i) absorption of photons, (ii) generation of excitons, (iii) diffusion of excitons at the donor–acceptor (D–A) interface, (iv) formation of polarons, (v) charge dissociation, and (vi) charge transport and collection.6 A significant loss in the photocurrent as well as device performance happens in the process of generation of excitons, their diffusion and the transport of charges. These shortcomings were prevailed over by introducing the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) concept in PSCs in which a blend is utilized as the photo-active layer with a particular D–A ratio.7,8 This enabled lower exciton recombination loss as the domain sizes of the D and A materials were reduced to the order of tens of nanometers. This also provides pathways for bicontinuous carrier transport. Furthermore, the contact area between the D and A also increases, enabling more excitons to dissociate into holes and electrons.
Over the last two decades the D and A materials have gone through a lot of evolution.6,9,10 The choice of D and A materials with well-matched energy band alignment is one of the key factors to obtain high-performance PSCs. However, only the development of new photovoltaic materials does not ensure an optimum blend morphology for better exciton diffusion at the D–A interface and attaining a higher PCE. The processing solvent plays a crucial role in regulating the active layer morphology. Therefore, different solvent systems, i.e. chlorobenzene (CB), dichlorobenzene (DCB), chloroform (CF) etc., have been well explored to achieve a smooth blend morphology with proper phase separation.11 Even though PSCs are less environmentally hazardous, non-chlorinated green solvents, i.e. toluene, xylene, anisole etc., are also being utilized to process the blend nowadays and the efficacies are well-comparable to chlorinated solvents.12,13 Higher boiling point (bp) solvents are often added as an additive, i.e. 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO), N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) etc., to a small extent to slow down the drying process and this results in superior phase separation.14,15 The film morphology can be further modulated by optimizing the D–A ratio and blend concentration and varying the active layer thickness.16–19 Furthermore, some post-treatments, like thermal annealing at various temperatures to speed up solvent evaporation, can also be performed to tune the aggregation pattern.20,21 Exposing the active layer film to a high vacuum and annealing the film in the presence of some solvents are also being implemented to realize the desired phase separation.22,23
At present, the major challenge is to fabricate large-scale, roll-to-roll, thick and efficient PSCs for commercial applications.24–26 Large-scale active layer films often exhibit pin-holes that may spoil the devices or adversely impact the device performance due to the low fill factor (FF). Similarly, for roll-to-roll fabrication, customized blend/ink and high-end instruments are needed for coating good quality films.27,28 Also, thick active layer films tend to lose photocurrent due to higher recombination. Hence, a significant amount of research is focused nowadays on fabricating PSCs with high active layer thickness having better-quality morphology to support facile charge transport and thus having enhanced performance.
This review paper highlights up-to-date progress in PSC device engineering. It begins with molecular engineering of D and A materials, followed by modification of the interfacial layers for hole and electron transport, which is pivotal device engineering for obtaining high-performance photovoltaics. Thereafter, planar heterojunction (PHJ) PSCs and the effect of the D–A ratios in both binary and ternary BHJ solar cells have been discussed. Then, the importance of thermal annealing as a post-treatment is explained. Through this review article, information on various solvent engineering methods and their impact on high-performance solar cells have also been discussed. Lastly, a thorough description has been provided on all the advanced techniques that are being used to fabricate PSCs, viz. high vacuum treatment of active layer films, microwave reactors as an energy-efficient technique to synthesize polymer donors rapidly on a large scale, the solvent vapor annealing (SVA) method as an alternate to conventional thermal annealing, cooling a hot blend/ink for active layer coating, and the hot-casting technique. This section winds up with large-area PSC fabrication techniques such as doctor blade coating, slot-die coating and spray coating. All the topics in this review paper have a detailed discussion on the active layer morphology and the possibility of using it in thick film PSCs. Further, this review article is divided into five sections: materials engineering (donor materials, acceptor materials, and the transport layer), general device engineering (PHJ PSCs, the donor–acceptor ratio for BHJ PSCs, and thermal annealing), solvent engineering (solvent additives, solid additives, and green solvent systems), advanced device engineering (energy-efficient polymer synthesis, high vacuum treatment, solvent vapor annealing, the cooling a hot ink technique, the hot-casting technique, doctor blade coating, slot-die coating and spray coating), and conclusions and future prospects.
2. Materials engineering
The most important part of a photovoltaic device is the active layer, which absorbs solar light in the UV-visible range and produces charge carriers. It has always been a challenging task to develop suitable materials for efficient charge transport in PSCs. Photovoltaic materials for high-performance PSCs should have certain opto-electrical properties like (i) wide absorption (covering the entire UV visible and near IR region), (ii) balanced mobility of charge carriers, (iii) suitable energy level alignment of the blend components, and (iv) a proper aggregation nature of the D and A to produce an intermixed nano-morphology with optimum phase separation in the photoactive layer. Furthermore, photovoltaic materials should have planar molecular backbones with close π–π stacking, which can be correlated with their higher crystallinity.29,30 In 1995, Heeger and co-workers were the first to report PC61BM and conjugated donor polymer based BHJ PSCs.8 Subsequently, efficient D and A materials have been developed over the years to enhance the efficacy of PSCs.9 Yet again, modification of the transport layer has been carried out for further boosting the device performance.31–33 Further, researchers have also focused on molecular engineering of photoactive materials to produce high performance thick PSCs for real life applications.34–36
2.1 Donor materials
It is well known that the difference between the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the donor and the LUMO of the acceptor material should be more than 0.3 eV (ΔELUMO), which works as a driving force for charge separation in PSCs. Furthermore, the open circuit voltage (VOC) is directly proportional to the difference between the LUMO of the acceptor and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the donor.
Considering the mentioned criteria, wide band gap (WBG) polymers like P3HT have been used as standard donor materials to blend with fullerene acceptors (PC61BM and PC71BM) for the active layer in the early days of PSCs. The impact of regio-regularity in the P3HT polymer backbone was studied. The P3HT polymer with higher regio-regularity displayed improved absorbance and better molecular packing and hence higher crystallinity in thin films. Various molecular and device engineering techniques were utilized for P3HT:PC61BM based PSCs to improve their performance.37,38 But, the very weak absorption in the higher wavelength region (above 600 nm) of P3HT limits the improvement of the PCE for realization in commercial applications. Therefore, low band gap (LBG) donor–acceptor (D′–A′) based copolymers have been developed, instead of D′–D′ homo-polymers.39 Due to the intra-molecular charge transfer (ICT) between the electron rich D′ and electron deficient A′ units within the polymer backbone, D′–A′ copolymers have a lower band gap and enhanced absorption in the near infrared (NIR) region.
In this context of developing new LBG polymers, the benzodithiophene (BDT) unit has revolutionized the entire PSC research field (Fig. 1).40 It has gained huge popularity because of its large, planar π-conjugated structure and its ability to form finely ordered stacking in thin films.6,41–43 Among the many BDT-based co-polymers, one of the successful donors to display promising photovoltaic performance was PTB1. It was synthesized, in 2008, utilizing an alkoxy substituted BDT based core and thieno[3,4-b]-thiophene (TT) based monomer. This molecular combination (BDT and TT) initially gained popularity due to the formation of a planar quinoid structure. The PTB1:PC61BM blend displayed a very smooth film and inter-mixed network in atomic force microscopy (AFM) images, which can significantly improve the charge transport and the FF of the device. A transmission electron microscopy (TEM) study showed a nano-fibrous morphology and very fine domains with no large phases, which was an indication of an efficient D–A blend.44
 Fig. 1  Chemical structures of BDT based donors used in high performance PSCs. 
Later, using functional group modification and side chain engineering, PTB7 and PTB7-Th were synthesized, respectively.45,46 A fluorine atom was introduced in the TT unit of PTB1 to obtain the PTB7 polymer. Further, the alkoxy side chain on the BDT unit in PTB7 was also replaced by a conjugated side chain of alkylated thiophene to synthesize PTB7-Th. TEM images exhibited large domains when the PTB7:PC71BM blend was processed from CB only. This impacted exciton migration adversely making charge separation more difficult in the active layer. However, when the blend was prepared from CB/DIO mixed solvents, the smoother film with smaller phases displayed improved D–A miscibility.
Thereafter, PBDTTT-EFF and PBDTTT-EFS were synthesized by the incorporation of alkylated furan and alkylated selenophene respectively on to the BDT core (replacing alkylated thiophene) of PTB7-Th.47 The molecular structure and morphological correlation of all the active layers were studied using AFM and TEM. The PTB7-Th:PC71BM and PBDTTT-EFS:PC71BM blend films displayed almost similar aggregation patterns with very low surface roughness. Nevertheless, the PBDTTT-EFF:PC71BM blend exhibited a very unique morphology with a very high roughness and aggregation size on a scale of hundreds of nanometers, which was the reason for the higher geminate recombination and lower PCE. Thiophene containing PTB7-Th and selenophene containing PBDTTT-EFS had better miscibility with PC71BM resulting in a higher PCE. PTB7-Th was further structurally modified to design PBDT-TS1 by incorporation of a linear alkylthio chain, which improved its absorbance in the NIR region and enhanced the photon harvesting ability.48 In AFM and TEM images, the PBDT-TS1:PC71BM blend displayed a very smooth film with nano-scale phase separation with an appropriate aggregation size, which made it a suitable blend for smooth charge transport.
Simultaneously, new electron-deficient building blocks were being incorporated with BDT derivatives to develop new D′–A′ co-polymers. Hou and co-workers introduced the 1,3-bis(thiophen-2-yl)-5,7-bis(2-ethylhexyl)benzo[1,2-c:4,5-c′]dithiophene-4,8-dione (BDD) monomer and synthesized the BDT–BDD based PBDB-T polymer.49 The polymer thin film displayed temperature dependent aggregation that significantly controlled the blend morphology. For better understanding, AFM and TEM analysis were performed on the thin films that were prepared from the preheated blend solution at 30 °C and 90 °C. The AFM images depicted a very smooth surface morphology for both films, but in the TEM images the film processed at lower temperature displayed evenly permeated short fibrils and, contrarily, the film processed at higher temperature exhibited much longer fibrils with less efficient device performance. In continuation, PBDB-TS was synthesized by further modification of PBDB-T by introducing a linear alkylthiol chain on the thiophene conjugated side-chain of the BDT core.50 The blend films processed from various solvent additives depicted very homogenous aggregation patterns with nanoscale crystallites and such morphologies always effectively facilitate charge transport in thin films. AFM studies of these blend films revealed that the DIO processed active layers had smoother surfaces compared to the NMP processed active layers. Also compared to PBDB-T, the HOMO level of PBDB-TS is lowered, which improved VOC of the PBDB-TS:ITIC based device. To deepen the LUMO and HOMO levels simultaneously, the PBDB-T-SF polymer was synthesized by incorporation of a fluorine atom on the thiophene attached to the BDT core of the PBDB-TS polymer.51 The PBDB-T-SF:IT-4F blend film displayed a very smooth and nano-scale morphology which is very similar to the PBDB-T:ITIC blend film morphology as displayed from AFM and TEM analysis. The hole mobility of PBDB-T-SF is slightly enhanced compared to PBDB-T due to stronger π–π stacking. Nevertheless, PBDB-T-SF:IT-4F blend based PSCs led to better PCE due to lowering of the LUMO of the polymer, which resulted in higher VOC. The PM6 (also known as PBDB-T-2F) copolymer was synthesized by introducing a fluorine atom on the thiophene conjugated side chain of the BDT core in PBDB-T.52 The PM6:PC71BM blend film with optimum DIO as an additive displayed a nano-fibrillar morphology, which indicated significant improvement of phase separation in the photoactive layer. The PM6 co-polymer was further incorporated with IT-4F, a non-fullerene acceptor (NFA), and a PCE of >13% was achieved.53 The grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) study demonstrated that IT-4F improved the crystallinity in the PM6:IT-4F blend film compared to the pristine donor polymer film, which can be correlated with stronger π–π stacking diffraction. The PBDB-T-2Cl polymer was synthesized by replacing fluorine with chlorine atoms in PM6. This polymer when incorporated with IT-4F resulted in >14% PCE. The chlorinated polymer displayed a deeper HOMO level than PM6, which had a clear impact in enhancing VOC of PSCs. The PBDB-T-2Cl:IT-4F blend film revealed a similar aggregation pattern to the PM6:IT-4F blend film, but with lower roughness. In addition, TEM images of both the films displayed small aggregation patterns, which indicated good D–A miscibility and uniformity in the active layer morphology.
Recently, a new class of materials commonly known as terpolymers has been designed through incorporating a third monomer (either D′ or A′) in well known polymer backbones to avoid the rigorous synthetic routes required for developing new donors.54–57 The property of the resultant polymer directly depends on the nature and quantity of the third monomer. For one of the terpolymers, bithiophene (BTh) was used as the third monomer to replace 25% of TT units in the PTB7-Th backbone to synthesize PTB7-Th-T2.58 The incorporation of BTh significantly tuned the opto-electronic properties and enhanced the device performance. In AFM images, the DIO added blend film (PTB7-TH-T2:PC71BM) displayed a very uniform and intermixed morphology, which improved the charge transport properties. Likewise, a chlorinated TT unit was incorporated in the PTB7-Th backbone in a varied amount by replacing fluorinated TT to further modulate the photo-physical properties of PTB7-Th.59 PBTCl25 (containing 25% chlorinated TT) displayed better photovoltaic performance than other terpolymers. AFM and TEM images showed that the gradual increment of chlorinated TT smoothened the surface but formed larger aggregates compared to PTB7-Th films. PBTCl25 demonstrated balanced opto-electronic properties and optimum morphology on the nano-scale compared to other polymers with different concentrations of chlorinated TT units in the polymer backbone. To further enhance the performance of PTB7-Th and finely modulate properties like absorption, the morphological pattern and the energy band alignment, 2,5-difluorobenzene (FBZ) was incorporated as a third monomer (replacing a small amount of the TT unit) in the polymer backbone.60 m1PTB7-Th (containing 5% FBZ) showed better photovoltaic performance compared to m2PTB7-Th (containing 10% FBZ) and PTB7-Th when blended with PC71BM. m1PTB7-Th achieved higher hole and electron mobility in comparison to other polymers. AFM and TEM images were analyzed to understand the impact of the FBZ unit on the aggregation pattern of the blend film, in which all three blends displayed a very smooth surface but the m1PTB7-Th based film illustrated better phase separation compared to the other blends. This strategy of terpolymer synthesis reduces the cost of polymers and can be useful for large-scale commercial production.58
Consequently, numerous D–A copolymers were developed by incorporating benzothiadiazide (BT) derivatives with thiophene and BDT based donor moieties (Fig. 2).61,62 To enhance the mobility and solubility of the resulting polymers, side chain modified and fluorinated BT (FBT) units were simultaneously utilized to synthesize PBDTHDO-DTHBTff.63 This polymer achieved a PCE up to 8.30% for a ∼100 nm thick active layer (PBDTHDO-DTHBTff:PC71BM blend) and maintained a PCE > 6.5% even for 330 nm thick devices. The PCE of >6.5% at higher thickness can be attributed to the high mobility and interpenetrating blend morphology, which also facilitated smooth charge dissociation in thin films. Another donor polymer, BDT-FBT-2T, was also developed by incorporating FBT and thiophene substituted BDT monomers, which had very high hole mobility.64 The BDT-FBT-2T:PC71BM based PSCs displayed a PCE of 7.7% with an active layer thickness of 250 nm. TEM and AFM images depicted fibrillar structures with a bi-continuous network based morphology, which assisted smooth charge transport in the device. Another FBT based copolymer FBT-TH4 was also developed which had alkylated quarterthiophene that provided high hole mobility due to strong inter-chain aggregation.62 The PCE reached up to 7.64% for 230 nm thick devices with PC71BM as an acceptor. Further, the FBT-Th4 polymer was modified and three random copolymers were synthesized with a varied extent of siloxane-terminated side chains.65 Among these copolymers, PFBT4T-C5Si-25% exhibited incredibly high mobility in both the lateral and vertical directions due to the very strong side chain interaction induced by siloxane-terminated side chains. In TEM and AFM images the PFBT4T-C5Si-25%:PC71BM film displayed very small phase separation with lower roughness compared to the other blends. Consequently, the PFBT4T-C5Si-25% based blend displayed high efficiency above 10% for devices with varied active layer thickness between 270 and 600 nm. This high thickness tolerance of random copolymer based PSCs can be attributed to partial incorporation of the siloxane-terminated side chain, which significantly improved the mobility and morphology of the blend. Later, benzotriazole-fused based NFA Y-14 was blended with PFBT4T-C5Si-25%, which produced an efficiency >15% even for 600 nm thick active layer based PSCs.66 In AFM images, the blend displayed very high miscibility with lower roughness. This extraordinary retention of the PCE for thick active layer devices was achieved due to the high and optimally balanced charge mobility of the photoactive layer. Similarly, siloxane-terminated side chains at different substituent positions were incorporated in the polymer backbone to synthesize three random copolymers by modifying a BDT-difluorobenzotriazole based polymer.67 Among these polymers, PBZ-2Si with IT-M as the NFA achieved the highest PCE (>11%). When the thickness was increased up to 240 nm, a decent PCE of ∼9.5% was maintained. In AFM images, the PBZ-2Si based films exhibited the least surface roughness compared to the other blends. Grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) was further utilized to understand the molecular orientation in thin films, which showed that the face on orientation is predominant in all blends. Moreover, it was concluded that the PBZ-2Si based blend exhibited a very smooth surface morphology with balanced charge carrier mobility, which helped to achieve a high PCE with an even thicker photoactive layer.
 Fig. 2  Chemical structures of BDT based donors with BT, imide and lactam based acceptor moieties used in high performance PSCs. 
Imide and lactam based acceptor moieties have also been incorporated with BDT and thiophene based donors to develop copolymers (Fig. 2), which can display significantly high thickness tolerance and a respectable PCE. LBG polymers were synthesized by incorporating a BDT derivative and furan-substituted diketopyrrolopyrrole (FDPP) with varied side alkyl chains (branched and linear).68 Replacing the ethylhexyl group attached to FDPP with a linear side chain improved the opto-electronic properties significantly by improving the orderly packing and carrier mobility. The molecular packing and surface morphology were analyzed by GIWAXS. All the pristine polymer films displayed a face on orientation, which indicated that side chain modification did not influence the molecular packing in thin films. Even in the blend films the face on orientation was partially maintained by the polymers; however, the linear alkyl chain based polymers displayed more crystalline domains in blends. The N-decyl alkyl chain containing PBDTTFDPP-C10 based blend exhibited the highest PCE (6.9%) with a 200 nm thick device due to its higher mobility and crystalline nature. Further, a copolymer, PBTIBDTT-S, was synthesized utilizing an imide-lactam class acceptor 2,2′-bithiophene-3,3′-dicarboximide (BTI) unit with BDT derivatives having varied molecular weight.69 The polymer with the highest molecular weight of 38 kDa exhibited the best photovoltaic performance in comparison to other polymers. When GIWAXS was employed to study the molecular packing, it was found that as the molecular weight increased the face on orientation was observed in the polymers. In TEM images, polymers of all molecular weights displayed distinctive fibrillar structure. The width and length of the fibrils were enhanced gradually with an increment in the polymer molecular weight. The fine fibrillar morphology, high mobility and strong π–π stacking in the PBTIBDTT-S:PC71BM blend collectively contributed to achieving a PCE above 10% with a thick active layer of 210 nm. Similarly, analogous lactam derivatives like thieno[3,2-c]isoquinolin-5(4H)-one (TIQ), phenanthridin-6(5H)-one (PN) and dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyridin-5(4H)-one (DTP) were developed by incorporating with a thiophene-FBT based polymer backbone to synthesize efficient co-polymers.70 TIQ based polymer PTIQ4TFBT achieved the highest PCE (>10%) compared to other polymers with an active layer thickness of 267 nm. The morphology of the blend films was analyzed with AFM and TEM. PTIQ4TFBT displayed a nano-fibrillar morphology with the least surface roughness compared to PN and DTP based polymers.
2.2 Acceptor materials
An acceptor is an electron-deficient material which is, generally, blended with a donor polymer in BHJ PSCs for better phase-separation and enhanced charge extraction. Since 1995, fullerene derivatives (PC61BM and PC71BM) have been the most popular acceptors. However, fused ring core based NFAs (ITIC, IT-4F, Y6, etc.) developed recently have better miscibility with donors resulting in good quality morphology and higher PCE.71–73 The chemical structures of some well-known fullerene acceptors and NFAs are presented in Fig. 3. When fullerene derivatives were blended with P3HT, it resulted in very good quality active layer films. However, the PCE was limited to ∼3–4% because of weaker absorption in the higher wavelength region, as already discussed before. Therefore, several fullerene derivatives have been developed over the years to improve their electron mobility, solubility and absorption.74 IC70MA and IC70BA are two fullerene derivatives which achieved improved efficiency, compared to the analogous PC71BM, with the P3HT donor.75 Due to the careful structural engineering, there was a significant change in energy band alignment, which contributed to the enhancement of the device performance. AFM images showed that annealing had a significant impact on controlling the morphology of thin films. Without any thermal annealing the photoactive layer exhibited nano-sized fibers of P3HT on the surface with little presence of IC70BA. However, when the thin film was annealed at 150 °C an intermixed D–A network developed on the surface, which led to an improvement in the device performance. Similarly, another fullerene derivative, bis-PC61BM, was utilized as a morphology stabilizer.76 To suppress the high heat sensitivity of the PTB7-Th:PC61BM blend, a third component, bis-PC61BM, was incorporated in the photoactive layer in a small quantity. The bulkiness of bis-PC61BM resisted close interactions of fullerene cages in thin films and improved the overall D–A interaction. Primarily, optical microscopy was used to study the morphological changes in annealed thin films. For the bis-PC61BM based film, the surface images remained almost featureless even after heating for 15 hours at 100 °C, suggesting better thermal stability. Conversely, the PC61BM based film (without bis-PC61BM) displayed countless black dots, indicating thermal degradation of the photoactive layer. When TEM was employed to further understand the temperature dependent film degradation, some nano-sized aggregates started appearing on the surface of the PTB7-Th:PC61BM based film after 4 hours only. The population and size of the aggregates gradually increased up to a micrometer size with continuous heating of 15 hours. However, the bis-PC61BM containing film displayed much fewer aggregates, which indicated improved thermal stability of the film. When bis-PC61BM was incorporated into the blend, it improved the PCE of the PSCs as well.
 Fig. 3  Chemical structures of fullerene and non-fullerene acceptors used in high performance PSCs. 
Nevertheless, fullerene derivatives have some shortcomings like inferior absorption, lack of tunability in the opto-electronic properties and low thermal stability in devices which made them unsuitable for next generation solar cells. Even in the last decade some naphthalene diimide (NDI) and perylene diimide (PDI) based acceptors were reported, but they were never able to match the prerequisites for commercial applications.77,78 Thus, fused ring based NFAs have been established as new-generation acceptors and opened up a new horizon in PSC research.71 This new class of NFAs has great advantages like enhanced photon absorption and tunable energy levels by functional group modification. To synthesize advanced NFAs, a push–pull structure was utilized where the acceptor–donor–acceptor (A′–D′–A′) type molecular combination has gained huge interest. In this type of structure, aromatically fused ring based electron rich cores (D′) are utilized which are bonded to electron deficient (A′) units from both sides. Zhan and co-workers first reported the ITIC molecule where a seven fused aromatic ring based core (D′) was end-capped with electron deficient (A′) 2-(3-oxo-2,3-dihydroinden-1-ylidene) malononitrile (INCN).79 From the AFM study, it was concluded that the PTB7-Th:ITIC films displayed a smooth surface with less roughness. The AFM phase image confirmed phase-separation of a size of tens of nanometers and uniform crystal grains. Controlled aggregation and close π–π stacking, needed for superior charge transport, were confirmed from an X-ray diffraction (XRD) study. As per a Resonant Soft X-ray Scattering (R-SoXS) study, in another report, the blend displayed an extended coherence length with better domain purity, signifying that the A′–D′–A′ structure facilitated better stacking, which resulted in efficient charge transport and higher electron mobility.80 However, the PTB7-Th:ITIC based device revealed a slightly lower PCE, due to reduced photocurrent resulting from overlapping absorption, in comparison to the device based on PTB7-Th:PC71BM. To match the opto-electronic parameters of the ITIC acceptor, structural engineering in the polymer donor is also necessary to achieve complementary absorption for enhancing the device performance. Consequently, Hou and co-workers introduced the PBDB-T donor to the ITIC acceptor. The morphology of the PBDB-T:PC71BM and PBDB-T:ITIC blend was investigated by AFM and TEM.81 Both the blends displayed very similar phase distributions and aggregation patterns. An AFM and TEM study also gave an indication that the donor polymer plays a dominant role in determining the blend morphology through strong self-assembly to form nano-scale aggregates. Nevertheless, better performance was observed for the PBDB-T:ITIC blend due to improved photon harvesting in the NIR region and balanced charge transport. ITIC was the first NFA that triggered a new dimension in design of acceptors for application in high performance PSCs. Subsequently, IT-4F was designed and synthesized by modifying ITIC through substituting an extra two fluorine atoms each on both the terminal end groups.51 As discussed previously, the incorporation of fluorine atoms lowered the energy band position of IT-4F compared to ITIC. IT-4F exhibited higher electron mobility than ITIC. IT-4F has better absorption in the NIR region and fluorine assisted inter/intra molecular interactions which played an efficient role in improving the crystallinity of the film by increasing the orderly stacking in the blend film with the PBDB-T-SF polymer. Another A′–D′–A′-based NFA, IDIC, was synthesized with a simpler D′ core having fewer conjugated fused rings and modified side chains in comparison to ITIC.82 IDIC has a more planar backbone than ITIC and due to this IDIC achieved enhanced electron mobility. When IDIC was blended with the PM6 polymer, it displayed a smooth surface and high crystallinity with good phase separation.83 Nevertheless, the PM6:IDIC based PSCs exhibited a very high efficiency of over 11% even with a thicker film of ∼255 nm. Zhu et al. developed another fused ring based NFA, ZITI, which has an octacyclic dithienocyclopentaindenoindene central core. ZITI was blended with the PBDB-T and J71 donor polymers individually to fabricate PSCs.84 Although both the blend films exhibited a very smooth surface in an AFM study, the J71 based photoactive layer had lower roughness. In TEM analysis both the films showed very uniform and intermixed films with nano-scale phase separation. A PCE of above 13% was obtained for both the systems.
Apart from the A′–D′–A′ combination, the acceptor–donor–acceptor–donor–acceptor (A′–D′–A′′–D′–A′) combination is another emerging architecture to extend the absorption more towards the NIR region (above 900 nm) and enhance the photon harvesting ability. Benzotriazole (BTA) and 2,1,3-benzothiadiazole (BT) are mostly used as the central acceptor core (A′′) for development of this class of materials. Y series acceptors are the front runners of this class of molecules, which have certain advantages like ultra-narrow band gaps, high performance independent of the active layer thickness, and high stability and reproducibility.85 Yuan et al. designed Y6, a fused ring based benzothiadiazole (BT) core containing acceptor which had a ladder type electron deficient central building block.86 When this NFA was blended with the PM6 polymer, the blend films displayed high miscibility between the active layer constituents and a nano-fibrillar morphology with a very smooth surface in AFM images. The PCE reached around 16% for a 150 nm photoactive layer of PM6:Y6. Moreover, even a ∼300 nm thick photoactive layer showed an efficiency of ∼14%, which made it promising for real-world applications. To further improve the efficiency of PM6:Y6 based devices, a third component was also incorporated as a morphology modifier in the active layer to fabricate several ternary solar cells in recent times.87 Recently, Y6 has also been well utilized with the D18 donor polymer for achieving a PCE beyond 18%.4 Due to having very high mobility, this kind of wide band gap polymer with fused-ring acceptor units in the backbone exhibited incredible photovoltaic performance.
2.3 Transport layer
The morphology of the photoactive layer can be also significantly regulated by the modification of hole transport layers (HTLs) and electron transport layers (ETLs).88 Several strategies have been realized to modify the PEDOT:PSS layer, which is one of the familiar HTLs generally used in the conventional device architecture, which can improve the interfacial morphology as well as the active layer morphology for enhancing the charge transport property and device efficiency.89,90 The conductivity of PEDOT:PSS was increased by using common solvent (ethanol, methanol, DMF, DMSO, etc.) and organic salt (MAI and MABr) treatment.91 The plasmonic effect of silver (Ag) and gold (Au) nano-particles (NPs) has been extensively explored as an interlayer modifier for PEDOT:PSS.92–95 The blend morphologies of the P3HT:PC61BM blend coated on PEDOT:PSS with and without NPs were well studied through AFM and GIWAXS analysis.96 AFM analysis revealed that the active layer roughness was reduced after incorporation of NPs and the lowest roughness was observed for the Au NPs. The corresponding GIWAXS profiles confirmed that all the blend films exhibited similar crystallinity. Finally the best device performance was observed with the PEDOT:PSS films with Au NPs. Liu et al. incorporated a two-dimensional MXene (Mo1.33C) in an aqueous solution of PEDOT:PSS and revealed its effect on the PTB7-Th:PC71BM active layer.97 The active layer displayed lower surface roughness on the Mo1.33C modified PEDOT:PSS layer in comparison to bare PEDOT:PSS, confirming more exciton dissociation and better charge transport. Therefore, it can be concluded that the modification of the HTL can significantly control the active layer morphology, charge transport and PCE.
Zinc oxide (ZnO) is a very familiar ETL which is used to regulate the device performance and charge transport upon modification.33 In a recent report, a ZnO film was modified with a thin layer of a PDI based molecule.98 This thin layer suitably improved the hydrophobicity of the ZnO layer and offered better active layer film formation as well as better charge transport. As an efficient ETL in flexible PSCs, a polydopamine (PDA) modified aluminium-doped ZnO (AZO) layer has been utilized.99 The PSCs with the active layer on the AZO:1.5% PDA ETL offered a PCE > 11% on a flexible substrate. This ETL displayed distinct adhesion and ductility to the photoactive layer and improved the mechanical stability of the device. The SEM images of pristine AZO, AZO:1.5% PDA, AZO/PBDB-T:ITIC, and AZO:1.5% PDA/PBDB-T:ITIC films in the initial condition as well as after 50 and 200 bending cycles are shown in Fig. 4. Notable cracks were noticed for the AZO and active layer coated AZO films after 50 bending cycles only, whereas the AZO:1.5% PDA and active layer coated AZO:1.5% PDA very much retained the original morphology even upon bending of 200 cycles. This result illustrated that the mechanical stability (bending) of AZO can be reasonably boosted by PDA as it worked like an elastomeric binder within AZO nano-crystals. Such outstanding mechanical stability of the ETL is highly advantageous for large scale commercial fabrication of wearable and flexible PSCs.
 Fig. 4  Bending performance: SEM images of (a–c) AZO, (d–f) bendable AZO:1.5% PDA, (g–i) AZO/PBDB-T:ITIC, and (j–l) AZO:1.5% PDA/PBDBT:ITIC on a PET substrate before and after bending. The insets show the corresponding magnified SEM images, and the scale bar is 1 μm. Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
3. General device engineering
Only materials engineering does not assure a good quality active layer morphology for high-performance PSCs. These materials were first used in the PHJ architecture. However, due to several limitations, PHJ devices are less explored and the BHJ concept has been more popular. The BHJ blend morphology can also be appropriately tuned by varying the D–A ratio, which ensures adequate inter-mixing of the donor material with the acceptor material in thin films. For commercial applications, thick active layer PSCs, with better phase-separation, can also be fabricated by optimizing the D–A ratios.16,17 Furthermore, the active layer morphology is also known to be considerably affected by thermal annealing, which is recognized to increase the rate of residual solvent evaporation.20,21
3.1 Planar heterojunction (PHJ) PSCs
Among various device architectures for PSC fabrication, PHJs gained very limited research attention compared to BHJs due to their poor photovoltaic performance.100 The inferior performance of this architecture can be correlated with limited D–A interfaces and shorter exciton diffusion length (LD). However, after the emergence of NFAs with higher LD, the effective diffusion of excitons is possible even in PHJ solar cells.101,102 The absorption profiles of NFAs usually have a high extent of overlap with the photoluminescence spectra of the donor polymer, which indicates a higher LD. In recent times, ITIC, IT-4F, IDIC and PC71BM were used with PM6 in the PHJ model.103 The PM6:IT-4F based PSCs demonstrated superior photovoltaic performance with a PCE of 10.1%. All the NFA based devices achieved an efficiency of 9–10%. However, the PC71BM based devices had a PCE of only 3.41%, which can be attributed to the inferior photo physical properties of PC71BM compared to the NFAs. The morphology of the NFA top surface was analyzed by an AFM and GIWAXS study. The AFM images of the acceptor film on top of the donor layer displayed a fibrillar morphology with a relatively smoother surface compared to the pristine PM6 layer. The GIWAXS images indicated the well-ordered molecular packing in the out-of-plane direction of the NFAs above the PM6 layer, which is also crucial to enhance LD. Further, the PM6 and IT-4F combination was utilized with ICBA in BHJ, PHJ and pseudo PHJ models, where the PHJ based PSCs achieved a PCE of 10–11% for the PM6:IT-4F based devices, which was well comparable with the BHJ based devices.104 Similarly, the potential of a few more NFAs, e.g. ITIC-Th1, IDIC, IDICO1, IDICO2 and NIDCS-HO, was explored by utilizing them with PM6 to fabricate OSCs.105 The donor and acceptor had a thickness of 50 nm and 35 nm respectively in the PHJ model, which achieved an almost identical PCE of 11.0% (ITIC-Th1) in comparison to the BHJ device (11.2%). The morphological features of the bilayer films were characterized by TEM and GIWAXS. In the TEM images, the cross-sectional bilayer film of PM6 and IDIC showed that both the layers were well identified with different contrasts. The GIWAXS study also indicated the retention of the morphological features by the individual layers. The bilayer device had the advantages of effective excitonic movement between the donor and NFA layer, and substantial long-range energy transfer between layers.
3.2 Donor acceptor (D–A) ratio for BHJ PSCs
The proportion of D and A in the active layer, the D–A ratio, plays a major role in controlling the morphology and optoelectronic properties of the blend films and dramatically affects the device performance too. Many efforts have been made to optimize the active layer blend morphology for P3HT and fullerene blends by varying the D–A ratios. A P3HT to PC61BM ratio of 1:0.7 displayed a smoother texture with lower roughness in comparison to the blend containing a higher acceptor percentage.106 Solar cell devices fabricated with this ratio resulted in better device performance in comparison to the other proportions due to better phase separation. The effect of the PC61BM loading in P3HT:PC61BM based solar cell devices has also been explored.107 Electron tomography has been used as a significant tool for assessing the three-dimensional (3D) morphology of the photoactive layers consisting of different weight% of PC61BM. A dense network of nano-fibrillar P3HT with a high degree of polymer crystallinity was observed when the films were annealed with 40% PC61BM. Films with 60% PC61BM also displayed a nano-fibrillar P3HT network, with lower crystallinity. Among all the different D–A ratios studied, better device results were obtained for 40% PC61BM loading (i.e. 1:0.66 ratio). The effect of the molar mass ratio for P3HT:PC71BM was also well investigated and reported. The active layer film with a 1:0.8 D–A ratio displayed better phase separation and lesser surface roughness compared to other D–A percentages.19 The optimized solar cell devices with this same molar mass ratio gave better device output in comparison to the other proportions.
The PTB7:PC71BM blend system requires a higher acceptor concentration in comparison to the P3HT:PC71BM composition. The impact of the D–A ratio on the free charge carrier yield and mobility in PTB7:PC71BM based solar cells was thoroughly studied.108 All PC71BM-rich blends displayed faster carrier extraction whereas the polymer-rich phase exhibited much slower carrier extraction. The photoactive layer with 60% PC71BM showed similar electron and hole mobilities and better device performances. The electronic interaction in a blend of PTB7:PC71BM was explored by varying the D–A ratio.109 This study showed that the solar cell device with low fullerene content exhibited poor efficiency due to higher electron trapping, whereas the device performance and electron mobility were sharply enhanced with a gradual increase in the PC71BM content up to an optimal D–A ratio. Similarly, the effect of various D–A ratios of the same system in the blend film revealed the nano-scale arrangement of PC71BM in donor-rich domains through spectroscopic imaging with scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM-SI).110 This study presented the formation of acceptor clusters in the donor-phase in various D–A ratios. Simulation of the molecular dynamics of the D–A blends indicated that the mixing enthalpy of the polymer–fullerene mixture was accountable for cluster formation. At higher PC71BM concentration (D–A ratio 1:1.5), the development of the acceptor network inside the donor-phase significantly elevated the charge transport pathways through a hopping mechanism and efficiently diminished the trap states. The blend morphology of the PTB7-Th:PC71BM system also highly depends on the D–A ratio and affects the efficiency of solar cells. The active layer morphology of this blend film by estimating the domain size, optical properties and the polymer crystal structure with different PC71BM content was demonstrated.111 The nano-scale surface morphology was studied through AFM. Fine phase separation was noticed in all the blend films with varied acceptor concentration. However, some bulky fullerene-rich domains could be seen in high fullerene content blends. The PC71BM grain size was enhanced with an increase in the acceptor concentration up to D–A ratio 1:2 and reduced thereafter. The surface roughness obtained from the AFM analysis is lowest for the 1:1.5 blend ratio in comparison to the other D–A ratios. From 2D grazing incidence small-angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS) measurements and data modeling of all the blend films, the domain radii and domain centre to centre distance were estimated. The domain radii increased with the fullerene loading up to a 1:1.5 D–A ratio and eventually decreased for higher fullerene loading. Again, the blend films were characterized with GIWAXS and it was observed that the π–π stacking in the PTB7-Th crystals and adjacent polymer backbone distance were independent of the fullerene content. However, a very high acceptor concentration could hinder the formation of polymer crystals, which was established by smaller polymer crystal sizes along the (100) and (010) planes for a blend ratio above 1:1.5. In one recent report, a thick PSC was optimized by varying the D–A ratio of the PTB7-Th:PC71BM blend, which would be very helpful for large scale commercial fabrication through roll to roll processing.112 The thick device fabricated with a 1:1.5 D–A ratio resulted in a low FF. Optical modeling using the transfer matrix method (TMM) was carried out to investigate the cause of the lower FF with higher thickness. The exciton generation distribution profile demonstrated that the reason for the low FF was the unequal carrier transport originating from the lower electron mobility. Furthermore, the diode parameters obtained from simulation revealed that the defect states at the interface were significantly enhanced for the thicker active layer (270 nm and 1:1.5 ratio). When the PC71BM concentration was increased by changing the D–A ratio to 1:3, the device efficiency and FF increased drastically for the thicker active layer (270 nm). This was due to the balanced transport of holes and electrons and reduced charge carrier recombination loss. Janssen and co-workers have also varied the PC71BM concentration to fabricate thick PSCs.113 The molecular packing of PTB7-Th and PC71BM with different ratios of the acceptor in the blend films as well as thickness variation was well studied by GIWAXS measurements (Fig. 5a and b). When the active layer thickness increased from ∼100 to ∼220 nm for blend ratio 1:1.5, a small increment in the coherence length of the acceptor packing was observed. This coherence length was further enhanced for a ∼220 nm active layer thickness with a 1:3 blend ratio. This higher coherence length contributed to higher mobility of the thick active layer with a 1:3 D–A ratio. Moreover, the peak intensity at q ≈ 0.7 Å−1, which could be attributed to the aggregation of PC71BM outside the intermixed domains, was amplified for thick films with more fullerene loading. This signifies that the fullerene is well phase-separated in the high fullerene loading films with higher thickness and vitrified inside domains with low fullerene loading. The samples were investigated with RSoXS to estimate the phase separation of the active layer (Fig. 5c). The domain spacing was calculated from the RSoXS profiles, which increased significantly for the thick film (220 nm) with higher fullerene loading (1:3 ratio). In this case, it improved the charge transport and increased the device PCE. TEM analysis was further used to characterize the blend films for more insight. The thick (∼220 nm) and thin (∼100 nm) films with D–A ratio 1:1.5 exhibited a homogeneous nano-morphology with a slight contrast between the D and A phases. The morphology at low PC71BM content was highly intermixed and hindered faster charge transport because of extended and twisting percolation pathways, particularly for the thicker films. When the PC71BM concentration was increased for the 1:3 blend ratio, a less homogeneous nano-morphology was observed with an improved phase separation between the D and A. The films with higher PC71BM concentration amplified the inter-connectivity of the acceptor phases by forming large PC71BM domains. Therefore, the thick active layer with higher PC71BM concentration revealed improved electron mobility and reduced bimolecular recombination loss, which resulted in better device efficiency.
 Fig. 5  (a) Two-dimensional GIWAXS patterns of the blend films of PTB7-Th:PC71BM with specific D–A ratios and thickness, as indicated in the pictures. (b) Sector-averaged (±10°) profiles of the blend films (solid line: out-of-plane direction; dotted line: in-plane direction). (c) Lorentz corrected and thickness normalized RSoXS profiles of the blend films at a resonant energy of ∼284 eV. Reproduced from ref. 113 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
NFA based blend system PTB7-Th:ITIC also requires a higher acceptor concentration for better device efficiency. The solar cell of the PTB7-Th:ITIC system was optimized with different concentrations of the acceptor.79 The active layer with a 1:1.3 D–A ratio displayed crystalline grains in TEM analysis as well as lower roughness and exhibited better device efficiency. In another report the effect of different ITIC concentrations was studied with the PBFTT polymer, an analogous polymer to PTB7-Th.114 The blend film with a 1:1.5 D–A ratio showed lower rms roughness in an AFM study and a more uniform nano-fibrous structure with distinct D–A phase separation in TEM analysis.
Another approach to fine tune the morphology of the active layer is fabrication of ternary solar cells where a third component is used in the blend solution in a particular ratio.115,116 Generally, the absorption of the third component is complementary to the other two components, which allows maximum utilization of the solar radiation spectrum.117,118 This device engineering involves either two donors and one acceptor (D1:D2:A) or one donor and two acceptors (D:A1:A2) which are blended together to achieve a highly photon absorbing active layer.119,120 A highly efficient ternary solar cell using NFA SFBRCN along with two donor polymers PTB7-Th and PBDB-T for various D1:D2 ratios was fabricated and the active layer morphology was well studied with GIWAXS, R-SoXS and AFM analysis.121 For all the ternary blend films the lamellar spacings and π–π stacking distances were calculated. The lamellar spacing was almost similar for all the blends whereas the π–π stacking distance gradually reduced with increasing PTB7-Th proportion, indicating better charge transport. Noticeably, the active layer blend with 70% PTB7-Th showed the highest crystallinity as well as a face-on orientation, which improved the charge carrier mobility. The domain size for all the ternary blends was calculated from the R-SoXS profiles and that gradually increased with higher PTB7-Th concentration. However, the blend with 70% PTB7-Th revealed the optimum domain size with maximum domain purity. AFM analysis showed that the PBDB-T:SFBRCN blend exhibited lower roughness with a smaller domain size; both parameters gradually increased with higher PTB7-Th content and the highest roughness with a larger domain size was obtained for the PTB7-Th:SFBRCN blend. Remarkably, the blend with 70% PTB7-Th displayed better phase separation with optimal smoothness and a PCE of over 12% was achieved. In another report, two NFAs (m-INPOIC and IT-M) were used along with PBDB-T.122 Here, different concentrations of the IT-M molecule were used as a third component in the binary blend of PBDB-T:m-INPOIC. In the TEM analysis for the PBDB-T:m-INPOIC binary blend a homogeneous D–A distribution was observed, while for the ternary blend better phase separation was observed with higher domain purity. This showed lower recombination as well as better charge transport. The domain size was quantified from the GISAXS study and it was observed that the domains were enlarged with increasing concentration of the third component. This considerably enlarged domain size helped to boost the molecular packing of the donor polymer and produced an extended D–A network for effective charge transport. The ternary film with 10% IT-M exhibited optimum morphology, lower charge carrier recombination, higher mobility and a higher device efficiency of over 13%. Again, ternary solar cells with two NFAs (IDIC and ID-4F) and one donor polymer (PBDB-T-SF) were explored where various concentrations of ID-4F were introduced as a third component.123 TEM and AFM analysis revealed that the ternary blend film with 40 wt% ID-4F exhibited excellent phase separation with optimal roughness. A GISAXS study also showed that the blend film with 40 wt% of the third component exhibited better crystallinity with improved phase separated morphology, indicating better charge transport with a device efficiency of above 11%. A thick solar cell device (250 nm) was also fabricated with the same system to obtain a PCE of over 10%.
Recently, semitransparent OSCs have also attracted tremendous attention where the D–A ratios play important roles in these devices to control the average visible transmittance (AVT). In a recent approach the ternary blend of D18-Cl, Y6-1O, and Y6 was strategically investigated, where Y6 was used as the third component.124 Initially the binary blend film of D18-Cl and Y6-1O was optimized for high AVT with improved film morphology and characterized with GIWAXS and TEM analysis. GIWAXS revealed a highly crystalline and ordered film, which was again confirmed from the TEM analysis. After optimizing the binary blend, the Y6 molecule was introduced into it as a third component to further modify the AVT of the blend. The semitransparent device fabricated with the optimal opaque ternary blend resulted in a high PCE of 13.02% along with an AVT of 20.2%.
3.3 Thermal annealing
One of the most used techniques to control the morphology of the blend film is thermal annealing, which involves heating the active layer to an elevated temperature so that the phase separation between the D and A is adequate to support charge diffusion and transport. It is a low-cost, effective and convenient method to tune the film morphology and photovoltaic properties. At an optimized temperature, crystallization of the organic D–A blends is improved in the BHJ network and this enhances the light absorption. It also modifies the nano-scale phase segregation, which enables effective charge separation at the interface. Consequently, charge transport to the electrodes increases and improves the PCE of the photovoltaic devices.125,126
PSCs consisting of the P3HT:PC61BM blend showed large changes in morphology when annealed at 140 °C by varying the time as shown by scanning probe microscopy.127 Generally, in a conventional morphological study the phase-separation between the D and A domains is limited to 2-dimensions only. Therefore, a simulation-based study had been presented to understand the cross-sectional phase separation, i.e. in the z-direction, so that a 3-dimensional correlation can be made in the active layer phase-separation.125 It was observed that the average grain size of P3HT increased on annealing due to its proper phase-separation from the acceptor domains. Even for the crystallinity study, more pronounced lamellar peaks were observed for the active layer films which were processed through the annealing algorithm compared to the ones which were not annealed. The crystallinity of the active layer was confirmed experimentally and the results were very well matched to the simulated data for all D–A ratios and polymer chain lengths. However, more ordered phase-separation was observed for lower polymer chain length compared to higher polymer chain length. A similar result was found from the experimental X-ray diffraction data of different weight ratios. Again, the effect of annealing a P3HT:PC61BM based solar cell has been studied.128 Thick solar cell devices (∼180 to 200 nm) were fabricated and displayed improved PCE compared to thin devices due to better morphology which enhanced the charge transport.
A PSC consisting of the P3HT:PC71BM blend is known to exhibit better nano-scale morphology and photovoltaic performance compared to the P3HT:PC61BM blend. The combined effect on the photovoltaic parameters by varying the annealing temperature and its effect on the surface morphology of P3HT:PC71BM films has also been studied.19 AFM analysis performed at various temperatures confirmed that the thin films annealed at 150 °C with an optimized molar mass ratio showed better crystallinity and phase separation with minimum roughness. The diffusion of PC71BM in the P3HT phase resulted in an optimized nano-morphology of the blend film, which is also supported by the UV-visible study. This effect cumulative with superior band matching improved the PCE of the solar cell devices.
The complex chemical structure of PTB7, compared to P3HT, imposes certain restrictions on the active layer crystallinity and morphology at higher thermal stress. To counter the thermal instability of the blend morphology, the importance of interfacial layers (in this case ZnO as the electron extraction layer) along with different thermal annealing processes was explored.129 Double-sided confinement (post-annealing of the complete PSC) and single-sided confinement (pre-annealing of the active layer without any interlayer deposition) were attempted and morphological correlation was carried out. From the optical microscopy images, it was reported that, on thermal annealing at 140 °C for 1 day, the double-sided confinement suppressed the formation of unsuitable fullerene aggregates on the active layer surface, which limits crystallization of the polymer. The same result was obtained from the plasmon peak maps of single-sided and double-sided devices (Fig. 6) where high energy PC61BM regions were formed in excess in the former case. Moreover, the increased domain size and distance between D–A enriched domains resulted in small photocurrent density loss and improved electron extraction at the electrode as confirmed from STEM-SI images.
 Fig. 6  Plasmon peak maps of uncovered (single-sided confinement; (a)) and ZnO-covered (double-sided confinement; (b and c)) PTB7:PC61BM blends after thermal annealing at 140 °C for 1 day showing the nano-scale material phases (PC61BM-rich domains in red with high plasmon peak energy and PTB7-rich domains in green with low energy). As seen in (a), large PC60BM aggregates appear only for thermally stressed single-sided confined layers. For (c), the spectral contribution of the ZnO capping layer was removed from the data so that the plasmon peak energies can be compared to the map in (a). The scale bars represent 200 nm. Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Similarly, the PTB7:PC71BM system was found to be thermally stable till 90 °C. The active layer morphology improved till 90 °C and degraded on further increasing the annealing temperature.126 This is attributed to the formation of stable D–A mixed phases, which inhibits fullerene aggregates on the surface. Correlation of the effect of thermal annealing and the active layer thickness of the PTB7:PC71BM blend with the photovoltaic parameters was attempted. The surface morphology was confirmed from AFM analysis and it was found that the optimum annealing temperature was 90 °C with a film thickness of 100 nm, which resulted in higher PCE. The film quality and phase segregation improved, which ultimately enhanced the exciton dissociation in the active layer and charge collection at the electrodes. These were also justified by a photo-current and photo-voltage decay study which showed dependence of temperature and thickness on the kinetics of charge extraction and carrier recombination. A thick active layer PSC was also fabricated and a considerable PCE was achieved.
PTB7-Th:PC71BM based PSCs displayed a degradation in morphology on thermal annealing as confirmed by AFM analysis.130 The increased domain size and coarse phase separation of the blend caused lowering of the interfacial area between the D–A phases on thermal annealing, thereby minimizing the photo-generated charge density. However, on replacing PC71BM with an NFA under similar conditions, the film morphology was stabilized. AFM analysis of the PTB7-Th:ITIC blend revealed that the domain size and phase separation length remain unchanged when annealed at higher temperature as well. In contrast, the roughness value increased for PTB7-Th:PC71BM on thermal stress. Therefore, the PCE gradually decreased for PTB7-Th:PC71BM upon thermal annealing, but the PTB7-Th:ITIC system was found to be more thermally stable.
In-depth analysis of a PM6:Y6 based PSC and its photovoltaic changes on thermal annealing was carried out.131 The TEM images of both the as cast and thermally annealed films showed no change in the bulk phase separation where certain black dots were observed corresponding to Y6 due to its high electron density. The reduced domain size on thermal annealing improved the PM6:Y6 contact area facilitating efficient charge separation. AFM analysis confirmed the presence of fibrous PM6 on the top of the active layer film, whereas domain-like Y6 was dominantly present at the bottom surface for the non-annealed film. However, on annealing, Y6 moved upward and was found on the top surface along with PM6 where a both fibrous and domain-like morphology was observed. At the bottom surface of the annealed film only a domain-like structure was found with lower roughness. This was further confirmed using XPS elemental analysis, which supported the movement of Y6 from the bottom surface to the top surface on annealing. Thermal annealing facilitated sufficient hole injection and extraction at both the interfaces of the ETL and HTL. Hence, this morphology tuning led to better performance compared to the as-cast film. Recently, the effect of thermal annealing on the structural rearrangement and packing of m-INPOIC in the active layer blend PBDB-T:m-INPOIC was investigated.132 Active layer films were coated using the hot-casting technique and compared to room temperature cast films. It was found that the hot-cast film exhibited better morphology. However, this suppressed the ordered packing of PBDB-T aggregates, but facilitated an efficient π–π stacked arrangement of m-INPOIC. To overcome this shortcoming, thermal annealing was carried out, which resulted in ordered packing of PBDB-T aggregates and well-matched aggregation with m-INPOIC, as confirmed from the AFM data. This enhanced structural ordering and optimized morphology upon thermal stress allowed effective charge transfer and exciton dissociation and reduced charge recombination, thereby improving the PCE of the device.
Another effective strategy to optimize the thin film morphology for PSCs is a two step annealing method. The P3HT:PC71BM:SQ ternary blend showed a direct influence on the thin film morphology upon the two-step annealing process comprising solvent annealing followed by thermal annealing.133 From XRD analysis, it was observed that the diffraction intensities were significantly enhanced for the two-step annealing process. Also, there was a decrease in the full width at half maximum of the diffraction peaks when the annealing temperature was increased. This indicated that the crystallinity of the ternary blend was improved due to the aggregation of SQ molecules, which increased the effective conjugation length of P3HT. From AFM analysis, it was found that upon solvent annealing the roughness of the film increased followed by a slight decrease in surface roughness when thermally annealed. The non-smooth solvent annealed surface implied self-organization of ternary blends during the slow growth process, which enhanced the ordered structure. It was also aided by the improved interfacial contact between the film and electrodes after annealing at 80 °C due to the removal of residual solvent. This overall morphological modulation significantly improved the light harvesting ability, thereby enhancing the device performance.
4. Solvent engineering
PSCs have the advantage of fabrication by the solution processing technique.134 The solvent involved in the fabrication has a crucial role in regulating the domain size, morphology, and thickness of the BHJ active layer and hence the device performance. The blend morphology can be finely tuned by the use of different solvent additives, solid additives and green solvent systems. This section covers these common solvent engineering methodologies used in the fabrication of PSCs. A representative list of solvents and additives is presented in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  Chemical structures of some important solvents and additives used in high performance PSCs. 
4.1 Solvent additives
A solvent additive was first reported by Peet et al. in 2006 when it was observed that the presence of 1-octanethiol in cast solutions of P3HT:PC61BM resulted in higher photocurrent from blend films. Similar to thermal annealing, 1-octanethiol induced structural order in P3HT and enhanced the carrier mobility.135 The same group then utilized alkanedithiols as solvent additives with different alkyl chains (propyl to octyl) to enhance the performance of the PCPDTBT:PC71BM blend, which does not improve significantly with thermal annealing or solvent annealing.136 Among these additives, octanedithiol (ODT) was found to have the best performance, which improved the PCE significantly by promoting phase separation. A key report on solvent additives recognized the selection criteria based on the chemical properties and clarified the mechanism that governs the morphology control by these additives.137 The study was performed on the same active layer blend of PCPDTBT:PC71BM with a class of 1,8-di(R)octanes (R = various functional groups) as solvent additives. The best performance was obtained with DIO as the solvent additive compared to the blend where only CB (without DIO) was used as a processing solvent. It was found that the solvent additives work only as a morphology modifier but do not react with the polymer or PC71BM. Morphological changes were obtained after the removal of residual solvent from the film under a vacuum. PC71BM showed selective solubility in the alkanedithiol and hence three different phases were formed during the drying process: (i) a fullerene–alkanedithiol phase, (ii) a polymer–fullerene phase, and (iii) a polymer aggregate phase. As the additive solvent had a higher bp than the host solvent (CB), PC71BM remained longer in the solution and formed fullerene aggregates after complete drying. This allowed regulation of phase separation and subsequently the morphology. Two features were identified based on the results that are required in processing additives: (i) a much higher bp (less volatility) of the solvent additive compared to the host solvent, and (ii) differential solubility of the fullerene component.
Depending on the interaction with the D and A materials, the role of a particular solvent can be varied. For example, ortho-dichlorobenzene (o-DCB), which acts as an excellent host solvent in most cases, is occasionally used as a solvent additive too. pDPP, a copolymer of quaterthiophene and diketopyrrolopyrrole, is poorly soluble in o-DCB but has very good solubility in CF.138,139 Therefore, o-DCB worked as a solvent additive during the processing of such polymer:fullerene blends from a co-solvent system of o-DCB/CF due to its selective solubility towards the fullerene and lower vapor pressure (high bp) compared to CF. A multi-length scale morphology was obtained due to the differences in the solubility of pDPP and the fullerene in the two solvents and differences in the vapor pressures of the solvents.
Three different diiodoalkanes (butane, hexane, and octane) were utilized as solvent additives along with CF as a host solvent to process PBTTPD:PC71BM based active layers.140 Improvement of the PCE was demonstrated after incorporating 1,6-diiodohexane (DIH) having a suitable alkyl chain length. The morphology of the active layer was precisely elucidated with the help of TEM and simultaneously GISAXS as well as GIWAXS. It was found that the additive DIH not only induced higher crystallinity of the polymer but also decreased the average size of the aggregated PC71BM clusters.
The effect of variation of the surface composition and device configuration was explored using the blend of PBDTTT-C-T:PC71BM as the model system and DIO as the solvent additive.141 It was found that when DIO was used as a solvent additive with o-DCB as a host solvent, the top surface of the active layer was enriched with the donor polymer (PBDTTT-C-T), which was more favorable for the inverted device configuration compared to the conventional device architecture. This study confirmed that the solvent additive controls not only the bulk morphology but also the surface compositions in the active layers.
Two kinds of solvent additive were used with PffBT4T-2OD:PC71BM based PSCs to investigate their effect on the nano-scale ordering of the polymer fiber networks.142 The first type of solvent additive (ODT and DIO) only dissolved the acceptor PC71BM whereas the second type of additive (diphenylether, DPE, and 1-chloronaphthalene, CN) dissolved both the acceptor and donor molecules. GIXRD (Fig. 8) demonstrated that the molecular orientations obtained by DIO and CN are in different directions. In the blend film processed with CN, the (x00) diffraction of PffBT4T-2OD was more enhanced with a relatively large size. This was due to the alkyl stacking and contributed to charge transport inside the film. In contrast, preferable crystallization was obtained in the π–π stacking direction (010) with a comparatively small size with the DIO additive and charge transport across the active layer film was favored. The development of PSCs with a thick active layer could enhance the absorption and easy production of large-scale solar panels. However, due to the short exciton diffusion length and low crystallinity, most PSCs have substantially decreased efficiency when the active layer thickness exceeds 100 nm. To overcome this issue, DPE was used as a solvent additive and was found to enhance the PCE many fold for a PTB7 based solar cell with an active layer thickness of 180 nm.143 It was revealed that DPE promotes nano-fibrillar structure formation in the active layer, which improved charge transport and suppressed bimolecular recombination.
 Fig. 8  Two-dimensional GIWAXS patterns of the active layer with different treatments: (a) no treatment, (b) processed with DIO, and (c) processed with CN. (d) Grazing incident angle with out-of-plane and (e) in-plane scattering geometry for PffBT4T-2OD:PC71BM films with different additives. Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
DIO is mostly used as a solvent additive, but, due to its high bp, it is unfavorable for large scale processing considering its difficulty in removal from thin films. A solvent washing process can be used to remove DIO, but the cost will increase due to the extra washing process.144,145 With the aim to advance towards roll-to-roll solution-processing of BHJ PSCs, o-chlorobenzaldehyde (CBA) as a quickly-removable solvent additive was used to optimize the morphology of the PTB7:PC71BM active layer. PSCs were fabricated with an active layer thickness ranging from 100 to 300 nm with CBA (bp 212 °C) as an additive and CB (bp 132 °C) as a host solvent. The solvents were removed during spin coating, thus avoiding additional treatments such as inert solvent washing and vacuum drying. PCEs of 9.11%, 8.24%, and 7.11% were observed for the CBA-processed 100, 200, and 300 nm active layers, respectively. Compared to DIO, these superior performances with CBA were obtained due to the much better nano-scale morphologies, enhanced charge extraction, ideal hole and electron mobility, and longer carrier lifetime.146
The degradation behavior of PTB7-Th:PC71BM based solar cells was probed in operando.147In situ GISAXS was performed and simultaneously the solar cell performance was probed to study the influence of solvent additives (DIO and CBA) on the degradation mechanism. During the operation process of the solar cells, the polymer domain became larger when a solvent additive was not used and the degradation in the device performance was due to the decay in the short circuit current density (Jsc). In contrast, when DIO or CBA was used, the domains of PTB7-Th became smaller owing to the evaporation of these solvent additives from the active layer during operation. Shrinkage of the domains loosened their connection and charge trapping occurred. Consequently, the degradation, in this case, was driven by the decay in FF due to charge recombination. Therefore, morphological degradation through domain growth or domain shrinkage was confirmed depending on the presence of solvent additives.
Recently, synergistic effects of the processing solvent and additive on PSCs were demonstrated.148 It was proved that, for a BHJ system of the J71 donor and N2200 acceptor, a low bp host solvent CF with 1% DIO as a solvent additive provided optimum processing conditions and resulted in an ultrahigh FF of 77.86% and hence an outstanding PCE of 9.34%. Whereas, when the device was fabricated with CB + 1% DIO, due to the low Jsc value, a lower PCE was obtained despite its high FF. The superiority of the CF solvent to obtain uniform morphologies over CB was studied by AFM analysis, which revealed that the active layer film cast from the pure CB solvent had a coarse morphology with higher roughness. This caused strong aggregation during the film formation process. With the addition of 1% DIO additive, the morphology was slightly improved with reduced roughness. On the other hand, homogeneous and smooth films with a smaller roughness were obtained with the CF-based blend when the DIO content was ≤1%. The CF + 1% DIO based film showed a more apparent nano-scale network and phase separation, suggesting formation of fine domains and better connected pathways between the two polymer matrices.
4.2 Solid additives
Solid additives (SAs) are also known to tune the morphology of the PSC active layer for improved performance.4,149,150 1,10-Decanediol (DDO) was introduced as an SA into the PTB7-Th:PC71BM blend to achieve high efficiency and thermally stable PSCs.151 The addition of DDO optimized the D–A miscibility, improved the crystallinity of the donor, and regulated the vertical distribution of molecules. A semi-transparent PSC having a high PCE was also developed with the help of DDO as it gave good tolerance to the film thickness of the active layer. When the active layer thickness was increased to 300 nm, only a small drop in PCE was observed.
A method to directly enhance the inter molecular π–π interaction by adding volatilizable SAs (SA-1 to SA-8) was developed.152 A film from a solution of equimolar IT-4F and SA-1 was prepared, from which SA-1 volatilized when thermal annealing was done at 140 °C. The IT-4F film cast using this method exhibited enhanced π–π stacking resulting in improved electron mobility. The addition of SA-1 as a solid additive in an active layer blend system of PBDB-TF:IT-4F contributed to morphology optimization and enhanced the PCE. In addition to the improvement in the PCE, the devices processed with the SA-1 additive exhibited good stability and reproducibility along with tolerance towards an active layer thickness of 400 nm.
In another report on NFA based PSCs, Y6 was used with polymer donor PM6.149 Here, chlorine-functionalized graphdiyne (GCl) was used as a non-volatile SA to control the crystallization habit of Y6 and a comparison was made with a solvent additive CN. An AFM study revealed similar surface morphologies and roughness for the blend films fabricated using both the GCl and CN additives. Whereas, a TEM experiment showed a more pronounced phase separation for thin films processed with GCl compared to that of CN, which was beneficial for exciton dissociation and charge transport. Further investigation of the structural order of BHJs using GIWAXS confirmed a face-on orientation of the blend films. The GCl and CN processed thin films showed improved relative crystallinity when compared with control films without any additive. Further, the improvement in the relative crystallinity with GCl was slightly larger than that of CN. The enhanced crystallinity and pronounced phase separation in the GCl processed film resulted in enhanced mobility, increased charge extraction, and decreased charge recombination. As a result, the optimum devices showed a slightly higher Jsc and a significantly high FF, giving a much higher PCE of 17.3% compared with the CN processed device, which showed a PCE of 15.6%.
Recently, a binary additive system of DIO and 2,6-dimethoxynaphthalene (DMON) was used to control the morphology of PBDB-T:TTC8-O1-4F-based solar cells.153 A PCE of 13.22% was achieved with this binary additive system, which is higher than those of 12.05% for only DIO and 11.19% for only DMON based devices. Morphological characterization with GIWAXS revealed that DIO and DMON each had a different influence on the blend film. DIO induces ordered packing in the TTC8-O1-4F acceptor, whereas the formation of over packing or excessive aggregation of the D and A was suppressed by DMON. The binary additive system of DIO and DMON had a synergistic effect on the blend film to achieve a balanced and preferred morphology with suitable phase separation and crystallite size, resulting in improved performance of the solar cell devices.
4.3 Green solvent systems
Although PCEs of over 18% have been achieved for PSCs through recent developments, their fabrication commonly involves toxic solvents and additives such as CF, CB, o-DCB, DIO etc.3,4,150 The use of these halogenated solvents is a hurdle for commercial production and the practical application of PSCs as these pose a serious risk to the environment, human health and safety owing to their adverse effect on specific organs of animals and humans. Therefore, many research efforts are directed to resolve this issue by using green solvent systems.13 Green solvents that are used in the fabrication of PSCs can be classified into four categories: (i) non-halogenated and aromatic solvents, (ii) non-halogenated and non-aromatic solvents, (iii) alcohols, and (iv) water.154 The first two classes of solvents are also harmful but their toxicity is much lower compared to halogenated aromatic solvents; therefore, they are categorized as green solvents. Generally, due to their own structural properties, conjugated polymers have good solubility in chlorinated solvents. Green solvent processing of high performance solar cells can be realized by adapting green solvents with similar or better solubility to that of chlorinated solvents for the D–A blend. The Hansen solubility parameter can be utilized to estimate the solubility of conjugated polymers.155,156
An effort was made to replace halogenated solvent o-DCB with green solvents o-xylene and anisole for an active layer blend of PBQ-4:PC71BM.157 Also, the halogenated solvent additive DIO was replaced with NMP and DPE to regulate the morphologies of the active layer films. As a result, a PCE of 7.62% and 8.37% was obtained with the solvent system of o-xylene/NMP and anisole/DPE, respectively, which was very close to the 8.47% PCE achieved for the o-DCB/DIO solvent system.
In another report 1,2,4-trimethylbenzene (TMB) was used as the main solvent for a blend of PDTSTPD:PC71BM.158 However, TMB revealed poor solubility for fullerene acceptors in contrast to the conjugated donor material, which showed good solubility. Therefore, 1,5-dimethylnaphthalene (1,5-DMN) was wisely chosen as an additive which dissolved fullerenes. The TMB/DMN solvent system optimized the aggregation morphology of the blend with a well-organized bicontinuous interpenetrating network on the nano-scale. As a result, a high PCE was achieved for this solvent system, which was better than the devices processed with either CB/DIO or pure TMB or pure CB.
Generally, in a co-solvent system one solvent is used as the main solvent and the other as an additive (volume below 10%). However, a binary solvent system with two solvents in almost equal proportion can also be used to enhance the solubility of both the conjugated donor and the acceptor materials. A binary non-halogenated and non-aromatic solvent system was used to process PTB7:PC71BM and PTB7-Th:PC71BM blends where a mixture of 1,4-dioxane (DIOX) and terpinolene (TPO) was applied.159 The mixture of DIOX and TPO in their optimal ratio (58:42 by volume) resulted in high quality BHJ blend films with balanced carrier transport due to the optimum solubility. As a result, a PCE of 9.39% was achieved with the DIOX/TPO processed PTB7-Th:PC71BM film in the inverted configuration, slightly higher than the CB processed film (9.30%).
To avoid the extra step of removing high bp solvent additives, a single solvent based high efficiency PSCs was demonstrated.160 In this study, processing solvents such as o-xylene and tetrahydrofuran (THF) were used without any additive with the PTB7-Th:ITIC blend. An AFM study revealed that the green solvent processed blend films had a nano-scale island-like morphology which supported exciton diffusion and charge transport better than the halogenated solvents (CB, and o-DCB). A high PCE was achieved with the o-xylene processed blend compared to the toxic halogenated solvents.
A highly efficient thickness-insensitive PSC with an active layer of PTB7-Th:PC71BM was developed using 2-methylanisole (MA) as a single-component green solvent.161 This addressed both the issues of solvent toxicity and the junction thickness limitation. The study revealed that the use of MA prevented the large area cluster formation of PC71BM, resulting in reduced recombination of charge carriers and elimination of trap centers, thereby improving the thickness tolerance of the active layer. Moreover, an MA processed large area solar cell device (16 cm2) was fabricated using the blade coating technique, which resulted in a PCE of 7.25%.
5. Advanced device engineering
Several morphological modulation techniques have been developed over the years, ensuring smoother diffusion of the charges at the D–A interface and charge transport to the respective electrodes. A few of these techniques have also resulted in thick solar cells, where the diffusion and transport within the photovoltaic device have been maintained. This section will focus on some of the advanced fabrication techniques to achieve high-performance PSCs for large-scale commercial applications.
5.1 Energy-efficient polymer synthesis
The Stille coupling reaction is one of the best-known protocols for the synthesis of LBG polymers, displaying good performance in terms of PCE. Generally, this reaction mechanism takes place by a thermal heating process on a hot plate, but the reaction time is a few tens of hours to achieve high molecular weight polymers for possible application in PSCs.162 Polymers having high molecular weight exhibit high carrier mobility and improved morphology with lower rms roughness in the film due to which an excellent PCE is achieved.163,164 However, very high molecular weight polymers exhibit a risk of insolubility in the processing solvents, due to which the film formation property is hindered, and this offers a lower PCE due to the poor morphology.42 Therefore, an optimum molecular weight of the polymer is desirable for suitable solar cell properties. But, the time of synthesis does not allow large scale synthesis of polymers of desired molecular weights. This led to the use of a microwave reactor to synthesize polymers, which reduces the reaction time from a few hours to a few minutes to achieve a polymer with an optimal molecular weight and low polydispersity index. The method not only saves time of synthesis, but the overall power consumption is also less, making it an energy-efficient process. The PTB7-Th polymer was synthesized by varying the reaction time in a microwave reactor and the signature of the morphological changes was studied using AFM and GIWAXs (Fig. 9).165 The roughness obtained from the AFM image was almost similar for all molecular weight polymers when blended with PC71BM as an acceptor. However, noticeable changes were observed in the GIWAXS study, which suggested maximum crystallinity for the blend with the polymer having a reaction time of 35 minutes (MW35m) in the microwave reactor. Even the lamellar distance was the minimum for the MW35m polymer blend. The polymer which had a lower microwave reaction time displayed lower molecular weight and hence did not form proper phase separation to enhance the charge transport. Also, the polymer with a greater reaction time contained more radical species, as depicted by the ESR study, which behaved as trap states and hindered the charge transport in solar cell devices. The PSC fabricated with the MW35m polymer blend had the highest PCE of over 8%, which was well comparable to the thermally synthesized polymer having a reaction time of around 18 hours. Even the solar cell fabricated with the microwave synthesized polymer displayed less batch to batch variation and better stability than the one fabricated with a thermally synthesized polymer. Therefore, this technique can be implemented for large-scale synthesis of LBG polymers industrially.
 Fig. 9  AFM images of donor–acceptor blends for (a) MW25m, (b) MW35m, (c) MW45m, and (d) Thermal; and 2D GIWAXS images of donor–acceptor blends for (e) MW25m, (f) MW35m, (g) MW45m, and (h) Thermal. Reproduced from ref. 165 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
5.2 High vacuum treatment
As discussed before, additive engineering is an efficient technique to improve the active layer morphology. However, during device fabrication any residual additive in the film leads to photo-degradation of the active layer and solar cell devices.166–169 Commonly, thermal annealing is a useful technique for removal of additives, but it may lower the crystallinity of the blend films.130 Also, the active layer is post-treated with polar anti-solvents (in which the active layer is not soluble) like methanol, ethanol, etc., which is used to eliminate the residual additive from the film to improve the morphology.170 But, the post-treatments of the active layer do not assure complete removal of the additive, which still poses a problem of reproducibility in photovoltaic devices. The signature of the residual additive, varying the concentration of DIO, in films coated from a polymer solution and D–A blend was observed using X-ray fluorescence spectra (XRF) (Fig. 10a and b).171 Thereafter, the nano-morphological changes were studied using GIWAXS. The suggested reason for photo-degradation due to the presence of residual DIO in PTB7-Th was an increase in the alkyl stacking distance. However, when the cast films were vacuum treated, the XRF signal did not display any peak corresponding to DIO, confirming that the additive had been completely removed from the film (Fig. 10c and d). This method was initially applied unknowingly in the fabrication of solar cells during final electrode deposition that allowed the films to be exposed to a high vacuum inside the thermal deposition chambers. However, on further analysis, it was observed that when the cast films were rapidly dried in a high vacuum, the photovoltaic results were improved in comparison to slow drying in a low vacuum.169 It was also observed that the PCE obtained in the case of the high vacuum dried active layer film was improved compared to the thermally annealed film.
 Fig. 10  XRF spectra of (a) PTB7-Th and (b) PTB7-Th:PC71BM thin films on quartz as a function of DIO/CB solution concentration. The films show characteristic iodine fluorescence with the relative intensity corresponding to the DIO solution concentration. (c and d) When the films are held in a 10−8 torr vacuum for 1 h, the residual DIO is removed from the film and the iodine XRF signal is no longer detected. The vertical lines indicate the relative intensities of atomic iodine Lα and Lβ emission energy lines. Reproduced from ref. 171 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
5.3 Solvent vapor annealing (SVA)
In the SVA technique, the film coated with the photo-active layer is kept in a closed vessel with solvents at room temperature or some elevated temperature for vapor treatment, which can regulate the morphology to suppress trap-assisted recombination ensuring higher device performance. It has been observed that SVA can be a better alternative to thermal annealing.172 The SVA process controlled the size of the fullerene aggregates in the P3HT:PC61BM blend, which facilitated better nano-scale phase separation of the PC61BM phase with the polymer.173 It also increased the crystallinity of the polymer, which enabled smoother charge diffusion at the D–A interface and improved the overall charge transport. Polar anti-solvents like acetone, methanol, ethanol, isopropanol etc. have also been utilized in the SVA process to yield good crystallinity of the active layer.174,175 The time of exposure to the vapor of the solvents in the SVA process also facilitated better morphology control of the active layer. It was observed that more dense and high polarity solvents were more likely to support high crystallinity of the active layer. The active layer with the DPP(TBFu)2:PC71BM blend was exposed to various solvents (THF, CS2, CB, o-DCB etc.) and TEM analysis was used to recognize the morphological changes due to SVA.22 The CS2 treated active layer showed a homogeneous distribution of D–A phases as well as better charge transport and improved PCE compared to the other solvent treated films. Various treatments (thermal annealing, vacuum treatment and SVA) were performed on the PTB7-Th based blends with varied NFAs (BAF-4CN and BAF-2HDT) and the morphological changes were analyzed using GIXRD and AFM.172 The SVA treated films showed a strong lamellar stacking out-of-plane peak in the GIXRD line cut profile signifying higher crystallinity. On the other hand, the thermally annealed films depicted no such peak confirming their amorphous nature. This also confirmed that the SVA treated active layer had an organized film morphology in comparison to the other treatments. The AFM images (Fig. 11) also showed that the blend morphology changed due to various treatments and it was observed that for both the D–A systems the roughness was least for the SVA treated films. Finally, SVA treatment revealed improved PCE compared to other treatments. Furthermore, the importance of SVA treatment has also been realized in ternary PSCs. Optimum phase segregation was achieved in a ternary active layer composed of Y6 and its derivative Y6-1O as an acceptor and D18-Cl as a donor by employing upside-down SVA treatment with CS2 for 20 s.176 An ordered face-on orientation was obtained for the optimized ternary blend in the 2D-GIWAXS data, suggesting improved out-of-plane (010) and in-plane (100) diffraction peaks compared to the binary blends. As a result an ∼18% PCE was obtained for the ternary blend solar cell. In another report, SVA and thermal annealing were applied sequentially in a ternary blend comprising two structurally similar Y6 derivatives (Y6-1O and BTP-BO-4F) as acceptors and PM6 as a donor. SVA with CS2 vapor for 20 s followed by thermal annealing at 80 °C for 5 mins resulted in adequate phase separation between D–A to enhance charge transport.177 Several morphological studies including AFM, TEM and GIWAX reveal higher molecular crystallinity and more ordered face-on orientation in the optimized ternary blend. This resulted in better charge transport leading to an enhanced PCE of 17.59%.
 Fig. 11  Surface topographic AFM images of (a and b) annealed without an additive, (c and d) annealed with an additive, (e and f) vacuum treated, and (g and h) SVA treated blend films for a scanning area of 2 μm × 2 μm. The images on the left-hand side represent PTB7-Th:BAF-2HDT blend films, whereas the images on right-hand side illustrate PTB7-Th:BAF-4CN bulk composite films. Reproduced from ref. 172 with permission from Springer Nature. 
5.4 Cooling a hot ink technique
The thermal annealing and SVA processes for the modulation of the morphology are very time consuming, which is one of the hindering factors for commercialization of PSCs. Therefore, some new approach has to be developed that will save time by avoiding any post-treatment of the coated films. This led to the discovery of spin-coating of a hot ink (blend) on the substrate or cooling the ink to a lower temperature and then spin-coating on the substrate. PBDB-T:ITIC and PTB7-Th:PC71BM based PSCs were developed using this technique.178 The active layer films were characterized with UV-vis and PL studies for estimating the charge transport property. As shown in Fig. 12a, the absorption of the D–A peaks improved with an increase in the temperature of the ink. However, when the ink was cooled, the acceptor absorption peak intensity was maintained, but the donor peak intensity decreased. In PL when the films were energized at both the D and A excitation wavelengths individually, more quenching was observed for the film coated from the ink that was cooled down, confirming better charge separation and transport across the D–A phases (Fig. 12b and c). Intensive morphology characterization was carried out through AFM and GIWAXS. Distinct changes in the AFM phase images were noticed which suggested the highest domain purity and optimum domain size in the film coated from the ink cooled down from higher temperature (Fig. 12d–f). Diffraction peaks at (100) were observed in GIWAXS for the films coated with inks at higher temperature and cooled down (Fig. 12g–i). This confirmed that the films were multidirectional and charge transport was also possible in all directions. Heating the ink ensured close packing of the donor material that remained even after cooling. However, the stacking length decreased on cooling the ink. The morphology and domain size supported better charge transport, which resulted in higher JSC and better performance for the device which was fabricated from the ink that was cooled down.
 Fig. 12  (a) Film absorption spectra of PBDB-T/ITIC. (b and c) Film photoluminescence spectra of PBDB-T/ITIC: (b) excited at 570 nm; and (c) excited at 670 nm. (d–f) Atomic force microscopy (AFM) phase images of PBDB-T/ITIC blend films (2 μm × 2 μm) spin-coated at various solution temperatures: (d) 40 °C; (e) 60 °C; and (f) 60–40 °C. (g–i) Wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) plots of PBDB-T/ITIC blend films spin-coated at various solution temperatures: (g) 40 °C; (h) 60 °C; and (i) 60–40 °C. Reproduced from ref. 178 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
5.5 Hot-casting technique
In the hot-casting technique, the substrate to be coated is pre-heated at a higher temperature before moving it to the spin-coater and quickly casting the blend solution on it. The technique has been well developed for perovskite solar cells and large-area solar cells have also been fabricated.179–183 Recently, it has also been observed by various research groups that annealing the active layer degrades the morphology and hampers the device performance.76,130 Therefore, our group attempted the hot-casting technique on PSCs. However, unlike perovskite solar cells, a moderate temperature of 40 °C provided the best solar cell performance.184 In this work, it was observed that the thickness of the PTB7-Th:PC71BM active layer increased with an increase in the substrate temperature. However, the PCE of the hot-cast device was higher than the reference device fabricated at room temperature. The main reason was the reduction of the film roughness for the hot-cast film, and it was the least for the film fabricated at 40 °C. Experimental analysis showed that the fullerene loading in the film improved due to hot-casting, which resulted in better charge transport across the D–A phases. Also, the crystallinity of the film reduced as evident from the 2D GIWAXS plots. The highest efficiency of >9% was obtained for devices fabricated at 40 °C. A thick active layer device was also fabricated using a higher hot-casting temperature whose results were either better or comparable to the device fabricated at room temperature. Recently, the hot-casting technique was also utilized to fabricate PBDB-T:m-INPOIC based PSCs.132 A stacked arrangement of the acceptor was obtained using this process. However, to achieve ordered packing of the polymer, the active layer film was further annealed. Hence, a combination of hot-casting and thermal annealing resulted in a high PCE of the solar cell. This technique could also be utilized to fabricate large area thick PSCs.
5.6 Doctor blade coating
Doctor blade coating (DBC) is a well-known technique to fabricate thick and large-area solar cells. In this technique, the D–A blend or ink is coated from one part of the substrate and uniformly spread throughout the substrate in one direction to leave behind a smooth active layer film morphology. This technique facilitates polymer thin films to have a proper degree of alignment with a face-on orientation of blends, supporting better charge transport and improved device performance.185,186 DBC was used to fabricate both binary and ternary PSCs with two donors PTB7-Th and PBDB-T and one acceptor FOIC.187
High crystallinity and face-on orientation for all the three components of the ternary solar cell were evident from GIWAXS. All the three materials displayed in-plane (100) peaks, which confirmed highly ordered lamellar stacking, and out-of-plane (010) peaks, ensuring good π–π stacking. The blend was made with various concentrations of PTB7-Th and its effect on the morphology was studied using TEM and RSoXs analysis (Fig. 13a–d). The film with 0% PTB7-Th displayed two proper phases; one was a nano-fibril like structure due to the crystalline PBDB-T polymer and another large domain could be seen for the acceptor. This was due to poor D–A miscibility in the absence of PTB7-Th. However, the 100% PTB7-Th blend (with no PBDB-T) displayed only single scale domains because of good D–A miscibility. No nano-fiber like structure was seen due to the low crystallinity of PTB7-Th. However, in the 50% PTB7-Th film, nano-fibers were present, but large domains were missing, facilitating better charge generation and transport. In the RSoXs study, one scattering peak was observed for 100% PTB7-Th consistent with the TEM image, which had domains of the same scale. Two scattering peaks were observed for both the 0% and 50% PTB7-Th blend films as expected from the TEM images, but the calculated domain size was smaller for the 50% PTB7-Th blend film compared to the 0% PTB7-Th blend film. PTB7-Th incorporation in the blend film optimized the morphology by decreasing the crystallinity of the acceptor and reducing the domain size as shown in Fig. 13e. This was the suggested reason for charge balance in the 50% PTB7-Th based solar cell device and a PCE beyond 12%. Similarly, thick PSCs were also fabricated for the PM6:IT-4F system using the DBC technique.188 The device fabricated with a film thickness >400 nm through the DBC technique showed a higher PCE in comparison to the similar thickness device fabricated by the spin coating technique.
 Fig. 13  (a–c) TEM images and (d) RSoXS profiles of blade-coated films with different PTB7-Th content, and (e) the schematic diagram of the blade-coated PBDB-T:FOIC film, PBDB-T:PTB7-Th:FOIC film, and PTB7-Th:FOIC film, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 187 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
5.7 Slot die coating
The slot die coating (SDC) technique, unlike DBC, continuously feeds the blend solution through a thin slot on the substrate. However, the coating process is similar to DBC where the blend is uniformly spread throughout the substrate in one direction. This is an ideal technique to have roll-to-roll devices fabricated even of very large area and with high throughput. Ma and co-workers established that without any post-treatment of the active layer the device performance was superior compared to the spin-coating and DBC techniques, which required thermal annealing after the coating process.189 The SDC technique did not require any post treatments as it introduced shear stress on the molecules during the coating process. The speed of the coating process was optimized to produce dry films with high crystallinity, face-on orientation, and smaller domains for better charge transport and device performance. It was also demonstrated that the device performance was maintained even after increasing the thickness from ∼100 nm to ∼250 nm, whereas the PCE reduced for the other two coating techniques. Large-area PSCs of binary and ternary systems were also fabricated using SDC.190 The change in the morphological signatures across various systems was well studied using TEM and GIWAXS. TEM analysis revealed that the aggregation resulting from this technique allowed proper phase separation and an optimum domain size for improved device performance. The GIWAXS study provided the detailed orientation of the blend film due to the presence of either a highly crystalline polymer donor or a less crystalline small molecule acceptor as the bottom layer. It was concluded that, if the polymer was the bottom layer, instead of the acceptor, there was enhanced crystallinity in the blend layer. Further, the hot SDC technique was reported to achieve high performance thick PSCs.191 Both the head and substrate temperatures were carefully chosen to be either 25 °C or 80 °C and the active layer was coated using this technique. The highest efficiency was achieved for both a head and substrate temperature of 80 °C (H80–S80) with an active layer thickness of 250 nm. The morphology changes were thoroughly studied using field emission TEM (FETEM), AFM and GIWAXS studies (Fig. 14). The H80–S80 active layer displayed nano-fibrils of the polymer and a noticeable composite phase structure which enabled efficient charge transport. The same film also displayed a bicontinuous morphology with the least roughness in the AFM analysis. Accordingly, from the GIWAXS study, it was concluded that the H80–S80 active layer had highly ordered packing, which allowed better charge transport in devices and hence a high PCE.
 Fig. 14  (a–d) FE-TEM and (e–h) AFM topography images of active layers processed with the dual temperature treatment (H25–S25, H25–S80, H80–S25 and H80–S80). The RMS scale is 40 nm. (i and j) GIWAXS line-cut profiles of the qxy and the qz axis for the four films. Reproduced from ref. 191 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
5.8 Spray coating
Spray coating is another technique that is utilized to fabricate large scale roll-to-roll PSCs. It comprises a set up in which the active layer blend solution/ink is forced out through a nozzle to form an aerosol. It may also include an electrostatic charging and carrier gas to help the aerosol to be forced out in a particular direction at the substrate that is to be coated.27 This technique has been validated to be used for printing PSCs of micrometer thickness on fabrics and these have also been proved to retain their performance even after bending the fabric a number of times.192,193 Though a millimeter-scale pattern can be obtained using the spray coating technique, due to the overall complexity of the process and various parameters, it is always challenging to obtain active layers with good morphology.194 This led to very few reports using this technique to fabricate PSCs in the initial years.195–197 However, with the development of LBG polymers, the spray coating technique has once more attracted considerable research interest.198–201 This technique has also been used in the fabrication of PSCs by varying the concentration of blends and solvent combinations.202–204 The effect of solvent engineering was studied on the active layer blend solution, which was cast using the spray coating technique.205 The role of each solvent system in modulating the morphology of PTB7:PC71BM film was shown using optical microscopy (Fig. 15). The film that used 97 vol% CB and 3 vol% DIO as the solvent for the active layer blend displayed coffee ring like structures and large pinholes in the optical image. The large pinholes were responsible for reduction in the yield percentage of the devices. When a certain vol% of CB was replaced with TMB, the pinholes were reduced and a minimum 37 vol% of TMB was needed to diminish the pinholes completely. Also, there was a reduction in the density of coffee rings when the concentration of TMB was increased in the blend solution. Therefore, increased TMB resulted in higher device yield percentage and almost 100% yield was obtained from the devices with 97 vol% TMB. The thickness of the active layer was also varied from 180 nm to 300 nm, and the highest PCE of >8% was obtained for the 180 nm thick device having TMB, CB and DIO of 57 vol%, 40 vol% and 3 vol%, respectively. Mini solar module and solar cell array prototypes have also been developed using this technique.206,207
 Fig. 15  3D opt-digital microscope image of PTB7:PC71BM blend films using different volumes of TMB (a) 0, (b) 17%, (c) 37%, (d) 57%, (e) 77%, and (f) 97%. All the solutions contained 3 vol% DIO. Reproduced from ref. 205 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
6. Conclusions and future prospects
Even though extensive research is being carried out in the field of PSCs, the commercialization of this photovoltaic technology is very far from realization. Design and development of novel active layer materials with proper band alignment and higher absorption has led to very efficient PSCs on a laboratory scale only. Also, the device performance has been further improved by general device engineering through fine tuning of the active layer morphology and enhancing the carrier transport. But, once the focus shifts to large scale fabrication, which requires a thick active layer, the demand for suitable materials and advanced fabrication techniques increases. Further, it is very challenging to obtain an optimum blend morphology for large area devices with higher thickness. The concept of ternary blends can be utilized to obtain proper intermixing of D–A for enhanced photon harvesting. This review extensively covers various material and device engineering aspects along with all the advanced device engineering techniques that can tune the active layer morphology for high performance PSCs even on a large scale. It has been noted that all these advanced device engineering techniques result in a suitable morphology for large scale thick active layer devices. These techniques when combined together with general device engineering can lead towards large-scale commercialization. As is evident, for large scale fabrication, techniques like doctor blading, spray coating or slot die coating have to be utilized for manufacturing large-area flexible thick PSCs. The cooling a hot-ink and hot-casting techniques are new methods to fabricate PSCs, but only at the laboratory scale. Therefore, these techniques need to be utilized along with the large-area fabrication methods to achieve thick PSCs for commercial application. Thus, new materials along with basic device engineering can result in a high PCE value to some extent, but to increase it further a combination with advanced device engineering has to be utilized.
Author contributions
The manuscript was written through the contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge financial grants from DST, India, through projects DST/TSG/PT/2009/23, DST/CRG/2019/002164, Deity, India, No. 5(9)/2012-NANO (Vol. II), Max-Planck-Gesellschaft IGSTC/MPG/PG(PKI)/2011A/48 and MHRD, India, through SPARC project SPARC/2018–2019/P1097/SL. The Department of Chemistry and Centre for Nanotechnology, IIT Guwahati, are also acknowledged.
References
H. Kang, G. Kim, J. Kim, S. Kwon, H. Kim and K. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7821–7861 CrossRef CAS .
R. Søndergaard, M. Hösel, D. Angmo, T. T. Larsen-Olsen and F. C. Krebs, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 36–49 CrossRef .
Y. Lin, M. I. Nugraha, Y. Firdaus, A. D. Scaccabarozzi, F. Aniés, A.-H. Emwas, E. Yengel, X. Zheng, J. Liu, W. Wahyudi, E. Yarali, H. Faber, O. M. Bakr, L. Tsetseris, M. Heeney and T. D. Anthopoulos, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3663–3671 CrossRef .
Q. Liu, Y. Jiang, K. Jin, J. Qin, J. Xu, W. Li, J. Xiong, J. Liu, Z. Xiao, K. Sun, S. Yang, X. Zhang and L. Ding, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 272–275 CrossRef .

          K. Rahul, R. K. Meena, R. K. Gupta, P. K. Iyer, M. A. Tej and S. Nath,  2018 DOI:10.1109/ICPEICES.2018.8897350.
H. Yao, L. Ye, H. Zhang, S. Li, S. Zhang and J. Hou, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 7397–7457 CrossRef PubMed .
N. S. Sariciftci, D. Braun, C. Zhang, V. I. Srdanov, A. J. Heeger, G. Stucky and F. Wudl, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1993, 62, 585–587 CrossRef .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CrossRef .
C. Cui and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3225–3246 RSC .

          R. K. Gupta, R. N. Arunagirinathan, M. A. Afroz, R. Garai, A. Choudhury, M. Hossain, R. B. Yathirajula and P. K. Iyer, in Chemical Solution Synthesis for Materials Design and Thin Film Device Applications, ed. S. Das and S. Dhara, Elsevier,  2021, pp. 119–165,  DOI:10.1016/B978-0-12-819718-9.00019-4 .
Q. Wang, Y. Xie, F. Soltani-Kordshuli and M. Eslamian, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 56, 347–361 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, L. Ye, H. Zhang and J. Hou, Mater. Today, 2016, 19, 533–543 CrossRef .
S. Lee, D. Jeong, C. Kim, C. Lee, H. Kang, H. Y. Woo and B. J. Kim, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 14493–14527 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Pivrikas, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Sol. Energy, 2011, 85, 1226–1237 CrossRef .
C. McDowell, M. Abdelsamie, M. F. Toney and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707114 CrossRef .
X. Guo, M. Zhang, J. Tan, S. Zhang, L. Huo, W. Hu, Y. Li and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6536–6541 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, Y. Xu, M. J. Ford, F. Li, J. Sun, X. Ling, Y. Wang, J. Gu, J. Yuan and W. Ma, Adv.
Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800029 CrossRef .
J. A. Renz, T. Keller, M. Schneider, S. Shokhovets, K. D. Jandt, G. Gobsch and H. Hoppe, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 508–513 CrossRef CAS .
A. Singh, A. Dey and P. K. Iyer, Org. Electron., 2017, 51, 428–434 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, H. Han, Y. Zou, Y.-C. Lee, H. Oshima, K.-T. Wong and R. J. Holmes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 25418–25425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yi, W. Ni, Q. Zhang, M. Li, B. Kan, X. Wan and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 7247–7255 RSC .
K. Sun, Z. Xiao, E. Hanssen, M. F. G. Klein, H. H. Dam, M. Pfaff, D. Gerthsen, W. W. H. Wong and D. J. Jones, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9048–9054 RSC .
T. Goh, J.-S. Huang, B. Bartolome, M. Y. Sfeir, M. Vaisman, M. L. Lee and A. D. Taylor, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18611–18621 RSC .
J. E. Carlé, M. Helgesen, O. Hagemann, M. Hösel, I. M. Heckler, E. Bundgaard, S. A. Gevorgyan, R. R. Søndergaard, M. Jørgensen, R. García-Valverde, S. Chaouki-Almagro, J. A. Villarejo and F. C. Krebs, Joule, 2017, 1, 274–289 CrossRef .
F. C. Krebs, T. Tromholt and M. Jørgensen, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 873–886 RSC .
F. C. Krebs, S. A. Gevorgyan and J. Alstrup, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5442–5451 RSC .
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 394–412 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, J. Fyenbo and M. Jørgensen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8994–9001 RSC .
I. Osaka and K. Takimiya, Polymer, 2015, 59, A1–A15 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, L. Ye and J. Hou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502529 CrossRef .
J. P. Thomas, L. Zhao, D. McGillivray and K. T. Leung, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2383–2389 RSC .
J. Wang, F. Fei, Q. Luo, S. Nie, N. Wu, X. Chen, W. Su, Y. Li and C.-Q. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7834–7842 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liang, Q. Zhang, L. Jiang and G. Cao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3442–3476 RSC .
J. Gao, J. Wang, C. Xu, Z. Hu, X. Ma, X. Zhang, L. Niu, J. Zhang and F. Zhang, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000364 CrossRef CAS .
F. Qi, K. Jiang, F. Lin, Z. Wu, H. Zhang, W. Gao, Y. Li, Z. Cai, H. Y. Woo, Z. Zhu and A. K. Y. Jen, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 9–15,  DOI:10.1021/acsenergylett.0c02230 .
S. M. Hosseini, N. Tokmoldin, Y. W. Lee, Y. Zou, H. Y. Woo, D. Neher and S. Shoaee, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000498 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mauer, M. Kastler and F. Laquai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2085–2092 CrossRef CAS .
A. Singh, A. Dey, D. Das and P. K. Iyer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 10904–10910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Cheng and Y. Yang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 1218–1228 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, M.-H. Park, S. Zhang, Y. Yao, L.-M. Chen, J.-H. Li and Y. Yang, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 6012–6018 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zheng, L. Huo and Y. Li, NPG Asia Mater., 2020, 12, 3 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ratha, M. A. Afroz, R. K. Gupta and P. K. Iyer, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 4242–4252 RSC .
R. Ratha, A. Singh, M. A. Afroz, R. K. Gupta, M. Baumgarten, K. Müllen and P. K. Iyer, Synth. Met., 2019, 252, 113–121 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, Y. Wu, D. Feng, S.-T. Tsai, H.-J. Son, G. Li and L. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 56–57 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, Z. Xu, J. Xia, S.-T. Tsai, Y. Wu, G. Li, C. Ray and L. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E135–E138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Liao, H.-J. Jhuo, Y.-S. Cheng and S.-A. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4766–4771 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, L. Ye, W. Zhao, D. Liu, H. Yao and J. Hou, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 4653–4659 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ye, S. Zhang, W. Zhao, H. Yao and J. Hou, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3603–3605 CrossRef CAS .
D. Qian, L. Ye, M. Zhang, Y. Liang, L. Li, Y. Huang, X. Guo, S. Zhang, Z. A. Tan and J. Hou, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 9611–9617 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, Y. Zou, H. Yang, Y. Li, H. Li, C. Cui and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 37078–37086 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, S. Li, H. Yao, S. Zhang, Y. Zhang, B. Yang and J. Hou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7148–7151 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, X. Guo, W. Ma, H. Ade and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4655–4660 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Y. Qin, J. Zhu and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800868 CrossRef .
T. E. Kang, K.-H. Kim and B. J. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15252–15267 RSC .
M. H. Hoang, G. E. Park, D. L. Phan, T. T. Ngo, T. V. Nguyen, S. H. Park, M. J. Cho and D. H. Choi, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2018, 56, 1528–1535 CrossRef CAS .
T. E. Kang, H.-H. Cho, H. J. Kim, W. Lee, H. Kang and B. J. Kim, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 6806–6813 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Z. Liang, X. Li, H. Li, Y. Wang, J. Qin, J. Tong, L. Yan, X. Bao and Y. Xia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 8475–8484 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jiang, J. Yang, Y. Tao, C. Fan, L. Xue, Z. Zhang, H. Li, Y. Li and W. Huang, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 926–932 RSC .
S. Qu, H. Wang, D. Mo, P. Chao, Z. Yang, L. Li, L. Tian, W. Chen and F. He, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 4962–4971 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hossain, M. A. Afroz, R. Garai and P. K. Iyer, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 874–879 RSC .
Q. Peng, X. Liu, D. Su, G. Fu, J. Xu and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4554–4558 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, P. Cai, J. Chen, X. Liu, L. Zhang, L. Lan, J. Peng, Y. Ma and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2586–2591 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, Z. Chen, W. Wei and Z. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17060–17068 CrossRef CAS .
C. Duan, A. Furlan, J. J. van Franeker, R. E. M. Willems, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4461–4468 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, L. Nian, K. Gao, L. Zhang, L. Qing, Z. Wang, L. Ying, Z. Xie, Y. Ma, Y. Cao, F. Liu and J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17619–17631 RSC .
F. Pan, M. Luo, X. Liu, H. Jiang, Z. Wang, D. Yuan, Q. Wang, L. Qing, Z. Zhang, L. Zhang, Y. Zou and J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 7129–7136 RSC .
H. Jiang, F. Pan, L. Zhang, X. Zhou, Z. Wang, Y. Nian, C. Liu, W. Tang, Q. Ma, Z. Ni, M. Chen, W. Ma, Y. Cao and J. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 29094–29104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gao, L. Dou, W. Chen, C.-C. Chen, X. Guo, J. You, B. Bob, W.-H. Chang, J. Strzalka, C. Wang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300739 CrossRef .
Z. Li, D. Yang, X. Zhao, T. Zhang, J. Zhang and X. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705257 CrossRef .
D. Li, Z. Xiao, S. Wang, X. Geng, S. Yang, J. Fang, H. Yang and L. Ding, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800397 CrossRef .
D. Li, X. Zhang, D. Liu and T. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 15607–15619 RSC .
C. Yan, S. Barlow, Z. Wang, H. Yan, A. K. Y. Jen, S. R. Marder and X. Zhan, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 18003 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, J. Zhao, P. C. Y. Chow, K. Jiang, J. Zhang, Z. Zhu, J. Zhang, F. Huang and H. Yan, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 3447–3507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ganesamoorthy, G. Sathiyan and P. Sakthivel, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 161, 102–148 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, G. Zhao, B. Peng and Y. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3383–3389 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Hsieh, Y.-C. Huang, W.-S. Liu, Y.-A. Su, C.-S. Tsao, S.-P. Rwei and L. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 14808–14816 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, J. Wang, J. Jiao, L. Huang and J. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 28–43 RSC .
S. Vasimalla, S. P. Senanayak, M. Sharma, K. S. Narayan and P. K. Iyer, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 4030–4037 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, J. Wang, Z.-G. Zhang, H. Bai, Y. Li, D. Zhu and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1170–1174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yi, B. Gautam, I. Constantinou, Y. Cheng, Z. Peng, E. Klump, X. Ba, C. H. Y. Ho, C. Dong, S. R. Marder, J. R. Reynolds, S.-W. Tsang, H. Ade and F. So, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802702 CrossRef .
W. Zhao, D. Qian, S. Zhang, S. Li, O. Inganäs, F. Gao and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4734–4739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, Q. He, F. Zhao, L. Huo, J. Mai, X. Lu, C.-J. Su, T. Li, J. Wang, J. Zhu, Y. Sun, C. Wang and X. Zhan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2973–2976 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fan, Y. Wang, M. Zhang, B. Wu, X. Guo, Y. Jiang, W. Li, B. Guo, C. Ye, W. Su, J. Fang, X. Ou, F. Liu, Z. Wei, T. C. Sum, T. P. Russell and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704546 CrossRef .
W. Liu, J. Zhang, Z. Zhou, D. Zhang, Y. Zhang, S. Xu and X. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800403 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhao, C. Yao, M. U. Ali, J. Miao and H. Meng, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 3487–3504 RSC .
J. Yuan, Y. Zhang, L. Zhou, G. Zhang, H.-L. Yip, T.-K. Lau, X. Lu, C. Zhu, H. Peng, P. A. Johnson, M. Leclerc, Y. Cao, J. Ulanski, Y. Li and Y. Zou, Joule, 2019, 3, 1140–1151 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Mohapatra, V. Tiwari and S. Patil, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 302–319 RSC .

          A. Singh, T. B. Raju, A. Dey, R. K. Gupta and P. K. Iyer, In 2017 IEEE 44th Photovoltaic Specialist Conference (PVSC),  2017, pp. 1034–1036 Search PubMed.
H. Shi, C. Liu, Q. Jiang and J. Xu, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2015, 1, 1500017 CrossRef .
K. Sun, S. Zhang, P. Li, Y. Xia, X. Zhang, D. Du, F. H. Isikgor and J. Ouyang, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2015, 26, 4438–4462 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu, Y. Xia, D. Du and J. Ouyang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 11629–11638 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lu, Z. Luo, T. Xu and L. Yu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 59–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Peng, Z. Wan, W. Song, T. Yan, Q. Qiao, S. Yang, Z. Ge and M. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 42447–42454 CrossRef CAS .
A. Singh, A. Dey and P. K. Iyer, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 5646–5654 CrossRef CAS .
A. Singh, A. Dey and P. K. Iyer, Sol. Energy, 2018, 173, 429–436 CrossRef CAS .
A. Singh, A. Dey, D. Das and P. K. Iyer, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 6578–6587 RSC .
Y. Liu, Q. Tao, Y. Jin, X. Liu, H. Sun, A. E. Ghazaly, S. Fabiano, Z. Li, J. Luo, J. Rosen and F. Zhang, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2, 163–169 CrossRef CAS .
M. Abd-Ellah, J. Cann, S. V. Dayneko, A. Laventure, E. Cieplechowicz and G. C. Welch, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2019, 1, 1590–1596 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tan, Y. Wang, J. Zhang, S. Xiao, H. Zhou, Y. Li, Y. Chen and Y. Li, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801180 CrossRef .
C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183–185 CrossRef CAS .
H. Najafov, B. Lee, Q. Zhou, L. C. Feldman and V. Podzorov, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 938–943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Scully, P. B. Armstrong, C. Edder, J. M. J. Fréchet and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2961–2966 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Lee, S. Y. Park, W.-W. Park, X. Du, J. H. Son, N. Li, O.-H. Kwon, H. Y. Woo, C. J. Brabec and J. Y. Kim, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1628–1635 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, D. Chen, X. Hu, Z. Xing, J. Wan, L. Zhang, L. Tan, W. Zhou and Y. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003223 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Park, S. Chandrabose, M. B. Price, H. S. Ryu, T. H. Lee, Y. S. Shin, Z. Wu, W. Lee, K. Chen, S. Dai, J. Zhu, P. Xue, X. Zhan, H. Y. Woo, J. Y. Kim and J. M. Hodgkiss, Nano Energy, 2021, 84, 105924 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Jin, B. Vijaya Kumar Naidu, H.-S. Jeon, S.-M. Park, J.-S. Park, S. Chul Kim, J. Wook Lee and Y.-S. Gal, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 1187–1193 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. van Bavel, M. Bärenklau, G. de With, H. Hoppe and J. Loos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1458–1463 CrossRef CAS .
V. Pranculis, A. Ruseckas, D. A. Vithanage, G. J. Hedley, I. D. W. Samuel and V. Gulbinas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 9588–9594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Y. Ho, S. H. Cheung, H.-W. Li, K. L. Chiu, Y. Cheng, H. Yin, M. H. Chan, F. So, S.-W. Tsang and S. K. So, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602360 CrossRef .
S. Ben Dkhil, P. Perkhun, C. Luo, D. Müller, R. Alkarsifi, E. Barulina, Y. A. Avalos Quiroz, O. Margeat, S. T. Dubas, T. Koganezawa, D. Kuzuhara, N. Yoshimoto, C. Caddeo, A. Mattoni, B. Zimmermann, U. Würfel, M. Pfannmöller, S. Bals, J. Ackermann and C. Videlot-Ackermann, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 28404–28415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Song, W. Wang, E. Barabino, D. Yang, V. Körstgens, P. Zhang, S. V. Roth and P. Müller-Buschbaum, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 3125–3135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zang, Q. Xin, J. Zhao and J. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 16532–16539 CrossRef CAS .
C. Duan, Z. Peng, F. J. M. Colberts, S. Pang, L. Ye, O. M. Awartani, K. H. Hendriks, H. Ade, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 10794–10800 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chang, W. Li, X. Guo, B. Guo, C. Ye, W. Su, Q. Fan and M. Zhang, Org. Electron., 2018, 58, 82–87 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, J. Wang, Q. An, X. Ma, Z. Hu, C. Xu, X. Zhang and F. Zhang, Sci. China: Chem., 2020, 63, 83–91 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, Z. Xiao, W. Gao, Q. Liu, K. Jin, W. Wang, Y. Mi, Q. An, X. Ma, X. Liu, C. Yang, L. Ding and F. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801968 CrossRef .
Q. An, F. Zhang, J. Zhang, W. Tang, Z. Deng and B. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 281–322 RSC .
N. Gasparini, A. Salleo, I. McCulloch and D. Baran, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2019, 4, 229–242 CrossRef .
J. Gao, X. Ma, C. Xu, X. Wang, J. H. Son, S. Y. Jeong, Y. Zhang, C. Zhang, K. Wang, L. Niu, J. Zhang, H. Y. Woo, J. Zhang and F. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 129276,  DOI:10.1016/j.cej.2021.129276 .
M. Jiang, H. Bai, H. Zhi, L. Yan, H. Y. Woo, L. Tong, J. Wang, F. Zhang and Q. An, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021 10.1039/D1EE00496D .
X. Xu, Z. Bi, W. Ma, Z. Wang, W. C. H. Choy, W. Wu, G. Zhang, Y. Li and Q. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1704271 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Du, R. Geng, W. Li, D. Li, Y. Mao, M. Chen, X. Zhang, J. A. Smith, R. C. Kilbride, M. E. O’Kane, D. Liu, D. G. Lidzey, W. Tang and T. Wang, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2378–2385 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pan, L. Zhang, H. Jiang, D. Yuan, Y. Nian, Y. Cao and J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9798–9806 RSC .
Z. Hu, J. Wang, X. Ma, J. Gao, C. Xu, X. Wang, X. Zhang, Z. Wang and F. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 6797–6804 RSC .
J. Munshi, R. Dulal, T. Chien, W. Chen and G. Balasubramanian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 17056–17067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, X. Li, T. Dai, D. Xu, J. Xi and X. Chen, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 24895–24903 RSC .
Y.-C. Huang, Y.-C. Liao, S.-S. Li, M.-C. Wu, C.-W. Chen and W.-F. Su, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 888–892 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ouyang and Y. Xia, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1592–1597 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ben Dkhil, M. Pfannmöller, R. R. Schröder, R. Alkarsifi, M. Gaceur, W. Köntges, H. Heidari, S. Bals, O. Margeat, J. Ackermann and C. Videlot-Ackermann, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 3874–3884 CrossRef CAS .
L. Krishnan Jagadamma, M. T. Sajjad, V. Savikhin, M. F. Toney and I. D. W. Samuel, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 14646–14657 RSC .
W. Zhu, A. P. Spencer, S. Mukherjee, J. M. Alzola, V. K. Sangwan, S. H. Amsterdam, S. M. Swick, L. O. Jones, M. C. Heiber, A. A. Herzing, G. Li, C. L. Stern, D. M. DeLongchamp, K. L. Kohlstedt, M. C. Hersam, G. C. Schatz, M. R. Wasielewski, L. X. Chen, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 14532–14547 CrossRef CAS .
B. Du, R. Geng, W. Tan, Y. Mao, D. Li, X. Zhang, D. Liu, W. Tang, W. Huang and T. Wang, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 54, 131–137 CrossRef .
H. Wang, Y. Zheng, L. Zhang and J. Yu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 128, 215–220 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Diao, L. Shaw, Z. Bao and S. C. B. Mannsfeld, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2145–2159 RSC .
J. Peet, C. Soci, R. C. Coffin, T. Q. Nguyen, A. Mikhailovsky, D. Moses and G. C. Bazan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 252105 CrossRef .
J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497–500 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Lee, W. L. Ma, C. J. Brabec, J. Yuen, J. S. Moon, J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3619–3623 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, Y. Gu, C. Wang, W. Zhao, D. Chen, A. L. Briseno and T. P. Russell, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3947–3951 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Wienk, M. Turbiez, J. Gilot and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2556–2560 CrossRef CAS .
M.-S. Su, C.-Y. Kuo, M.-C. Yuan, U.-S. Jeng, C.-J. Su and K.-H. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3315–3319 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, M. Zhang, W. Ma, L. Ye, S. Zhang, S. Liu, H. Ade, F. Huang and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4043–4049 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, S. Zhao, Z. Xu, B. Qiao, D. Huang, L. Zhao, Y. Li, Y. Zhu and P. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 18231–18237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, T. Goh, P. Fan, W. Shi, J. Yu and A. D. Taylor, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 15724–15731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, Y. Zhang, J. Seifter, S. D. Collins, C. Luo, G. C. Bazan, T.-Q. Nguyen and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1646–1652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan, B. Yang, J. VanDerslice, J. Chen, O. Dyck, G. Duscher and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3068–3075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, L. Zhang, X. Jiang, K. Gao, F. Liu, X. Gong, J. Chen and Y. Cao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601344 CrossRef .
D. Yang, F. C. Löhrer, V. Körstgens, A. Schreiber, S. Bernstorff, J. M. Buriak and P. Müller-Buschbaum, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 464–470 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, X. Li, L. Wang, J. Fang and C. Yang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 4945–4952 RSC .
L. Liu, Y. Kan, K. Gao, J. Wang, M. Zhao, H. Chen, C. Zhao, T. Jiu, A.-K.-Y. Jen and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cui, H. Yao, J. Zhang, K. Xian, T. Zhang, L. Hong, Y. Wang, Y. Xu, K. Ma, C. An, C. He, Z. Wei, F. Gao and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Du, X. Li, H. Lin, L. Zhou, C. Zheng and S. Tao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7437–7450 RSC .
R. Yu, H. Yao, L. Hong, Y. Qin, J. Zhu, Y. Cui, S. Li and J. Hou, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4645 CrossRef .
Y. Ding, X. Zhang, H. Feng, X. Ke, L. Meng, Y. Sun, Z. Guo, Y. Cai, C. Jiao, X. Wan, C. Li, N. Zheng, Z. Xie and Y. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 27425–27432 CrossRef CAS .
C. McDowell and G. C. Bazan, Curr. Opin. Green Sustainable Chem., 2017, 5, 49–54 CrossRef .
B. Walker, A. Tamayo, D. T. Duong, X.-D. Dang, C. Kim, J. Granstrom and T.-Q. Nguyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 221–229 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Tait, T. Merckx, W. Li, C. Wong, R. Gehlhaar, D. Cheyns, M. Turbiez and P. Heremans, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3393–3398 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, Z. Wang, S. Zhang, Z. Zheng, B. Yang, W. Ma and J. Hou, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 69567–69572 RSC .
W. Cai, P. Liu, Y. Jin, Q. Xue, F. Liu, T. P. Russell, F. Huang, H.-L. Yip and Y. Cao, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500095 CrossRef .
C. Liu, Y. Zhu, Y. Cao and J. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 2105–2113 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Yu, T.-W. Tsai, C.-C. Yang and C.-P. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 21969–21974 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, Z. Chen, A. Armin, S. Dong, R. Xia, H.-L. Yip, S. Shoaee, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1700169 CrossRef .
R. Ratha, A. Singh, T. B. Raju and P. K. Iyer, Polym. Bull., 2018, 75, 2933–2951 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Hoefler, T. Rath, N. Pastukhova, E. Pavlica, D. Scheunemann, S. Wilken, B. Kunert, R. Resel, M. Hobisch, S. Xiao, G. Bratina and G. Trimmel, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9506–9516 RSC .
H. Kang, M. A. Uddin, C. Lee, K.-H. Kim, T. L. Nguyen, W. Lee, Y. Li, C. Wang, H. Y. Woo and B. J. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2359–2365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Garai, M. Adil Afroz, R. K. Gupta, A. Choudhury and P. K. Iyer, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 2747–2754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kim, J. K. Kim, E. Kim, T. K. Ahn, D. H. Wang and J. H. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 5954–5961 CrossRef CAS .
W. Huang, E. Gann, Z.-Q. Xu, L. Thomsen, Y.-B. Cheng and C. R. McNeill, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16313–16319 RSC .
A. Tournebize, A. Rivaton, H. Peisert and T. Chassé, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 9142–9148 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ye, Y. Jing, X. Guo, H. Sun, S. Zhang, M. Zhang, L. Huo and J. Hou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 14920–14928 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, W. Wen and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4505–4510 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Tremolet de Villers, K. A. O’Hara, D. P. Ostrowski, P. H. Biddle, S. E. Shaheen, M. L. Chabinyc, D. C. Olson and N. Kopidakis, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 876–884 CrossRef CAS .
R. Datt, Suman, A. Bagui, A. Siddiqui, R. Sharma, V. Gupta, S. Yoo, S. Kumar and S. P. Singh, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 8529 CrossRef .
H. Tang, G. Lu, L. Li, J. Li, Y. Wang and X. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 683–688 RSC .
Y. Zheng, S. Li, D. Zheng and J. Yu, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 2647–2653 CrossRef CAS .
B. Jung, K. Kim, Y. Eom and W. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13342–13349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, A. Zeng, J. Gao, Z. Hu, C. Xu, J. H. Son, S. Y. Jeong, C. Zhang, M. Li, K. Wang, H. Yan, Z. Ma, Y. Wang, H. Y. Woo and F. Zhang, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2020, 8, nwaa305 CrossRef .
X. Wang, Q. Sun, J. Gao, X. Ma, J. H. Son, S. Y. Jeong, Z. Hu, L. Niu, H. Y. Woo, J. Zhang and F. Zhang, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2100007 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, S. Ye and D. S. Seferos, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 979–984 CrossRef CAS .
W. Nie, H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J.-C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, G. Gupta, J. J. Crochet, M. Chhowalla, S. Tretiak, M. A. Alam, H.-L. Wang and A. D. Mohite, Science, 2015, 347, 522–525 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, J.-C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. J. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, M. A. Alam, G. Gupta, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, M. J. Bedzyk, M. G. Kanatzidis and A. D. Mohite, Nature, 2016, 536, 312–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Afroz, R. K. Gupta, R. Garai, M. Hossain, S. P. Tripathi and P. K. Iyer, Org. Electron., 2019, 74, 172–178 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Mallajosyula, K. Fernando, S. Bhatt, A. Singh, B. W. Alphenaar, J.-C. Blancon, W. Nie, G. Gupta and A. D. Mohite, Appl. Mater. Today, 2016, 3, 96–102 CrossRef .
R. K. Gupta, R. Garai, M. Hossain, A. Choudhury and P. K. Iyer, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 7993–8001 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Gupta, R. Garai, M. A. Afroz and P. K. Iyer, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 8191–8198 RSC .
L. Shaw, P. Hayoz, Y. Diao, J. A. Reinspach, J. W. F. To, M. F. Toney, R. T. Weitz and Z. Bao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9285–9296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ma, J. Reinspach, Y. Zhou, Y. Diao, T. McAfee, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, Z. Bao and H. Ade, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3131–3137 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, X. Xu, B. Lin, H. Zhao, T. Li, J. Xin, Z. Bi, G. Qiu, S. Guo, K. Zhou, X. Zhan and W. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1805041 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, H. Zhao, B. Lin, J. Yuan, X. Xu, J. Wu, K. Zhou, X. Guo, M. Zhang and W. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22265–22273 RSC .
H. Zhao, L. Zhang, H. B. Naveed, B. Lin, B. Zhao, K. Zhou, C. Gao, C. Zhang, C. Wang and W. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 42392–42402 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, G. Wang, Y. Wang, T. Xiao, M. A. Adil, G. Lu, J. Zhang and Z. Wei, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1800333 CrossRef .
S. Song, K. T. Lee, C. W. Koh, H. Shin, M. Gao, H. Y. Woo, D. Vak and J. Y. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3248–3255 RSC .
Y. Li, S. Arumugam, C. Krishnan, M. D. B. Charlton and S. P. Beeby, ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 407–412 CrossRef CAS .
S. Arumugam, Y. Li, M. Glanc-Gostkiewicz, R. N. Torah and S. P. Beeby, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2018, 8, 1710–1715 Search PubMed .
A. Reale, L. La Notte, L. Salamandra, G. Polino, G. Susanna, T. M. Brown, F. Brunetti and A. Di Carlo, Energy Technol., 2015, 3, 385–406 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ishikawa, M. Nakamura, K. Fujita and T. Tsutsui, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 2424–2426 CrossRef CAS .
D. Vak, S.-S. Kim, J. Jo, S.-H. Oh, S.-I. Na, J. Kim and D.-Y. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 081102 CrossRef .
G. Susanna, L. Salamandra, T. M. Brown, A. Di Carlo, F. Brunetti and A. Reale, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1775–1778 CrossRef CAS .
W. Nie, R. C. Coffin, J. Liu, Y. Li, E. D. Peterson, C. M. MacNeill, R. E. Noftle and D. L. Carroll, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 083301 CrossRef .
L. La Notte, P. Cataldi, L. Ceseracciu, I. S. Bayer, A. Athanassiou, S. Marras, E. Villari, F. Brunetti and A. Reale, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 7, 105–112 CrossRef .
M. V. Srinivasan, M. Ito, P. Kumar, K. Abhirami, N. Tsuda, J. Yamada, P.-K. Shin and S. Ochiai, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2015, 54, 181–187 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, N. W. Scarratt, T. Wang and D. G. Lidzey, Vacuum, 2017, 139, 154–158 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cai, Y. Zhang, R. Song, Z. Peng, L. Xia, M. Wu, K. Xiong, B. Wang, Y. Lin, X. Xu, Q. Liang, H. Wu, E. Wang and L. Hou, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 161, 52–61 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Srinivasan, N. Tsuda, P.-K. Shin and S. Ochiai, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 56262–56269 RSC .
T. Zhang, X. Zhao, D. Yang and X. Yang, Energy Technol., 2018, 6, 171–177 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cheng, R. Hu, X. Meng, Y. Li, X. Yan, X. Yang, X. Liao, L. Li, Q. Pei and K. B. Chong, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800064 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, J. Griffin, N. W. Scarratt, T. Wang and D. G. Lidzey, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2016, 24, 275–282 CrossRef CAS .
L. La Notte, G. V. Bianco, A. L. Palma, A. Di Carlo, G. Bruno and A. Reale, Carbon, 2018, 129, 878–883 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Ritesh Kant Gupta
	Ritesh Kant Gupta, from Kolkata (India), completed his BTech in Electronics and Instrumentation Engineering from JIS College of Engineering affiliated to the West Bengal University of Technology in 2013 and MTech in Advanced Materials Science and Technology from National Institute of Technology Durgapur in 2016. Currently, he is a Senior Research Fellow at the Centre for Nanotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, and pursuing his PhD under the supervision of Prof. Parameswar Krishnan Iyer. He is currently working on various techniques to obtain high-performance polymer and perovskite solar cells. He is inclined towards the study of device physics for various optoelectronic applications.

Rabindranath Garai
	Rabindranath Garai completed his BSc in Chemistry from Midnapore College under Vidyasagar University, West Bengal (India), in 2014 and MS. from Indian Institute of Technology (Indian School of Mines), Dhanbad, in 2016. Currently, he is pursuing his PhD at the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, under the supervision of Prof. Parameswar Krishnan Iyer. He is working on the design and development of polymer and perovskite solar cells for higher efficiency and improved stability.

Maimur Hossain
	Maimur Hossain from Murshidabad, West Bengal (India), received both a BSc (Hons.) in Chemistry and MSc (Organic Chemistry) from Aligarh Muslim University in 2013 and 2015 respectively. Presently, he is a Senior Research Fellow (SRF) under the supervision of Prof. Parameswar Krishnan Iyer at Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati. His research is focused on the design and development of semiconductor materials for photovoltaic applications.

Mohammad Adil Afroz
	Mohammad Adil Afroz obtained his BSc (Hons.) and MSc in Industrial Chemistry from the Aligarh Muslim University in 2009 and 2011, respectively. Then he received his MTech in Polymer Science and Technology from the Indian Institute of Technology Delhi in 2013. In 2020, he was awarded a PhD degree in Chemistry from the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, working under the supervision of Professor Parameswar Krishnan Iyer. His research interest is in the development of semiconducting materials and optoelectronic devices.

Dibashmoni Kalita
	Dibashmoni Kalita completed his BSc in Chemistry from B. Borooah College under Gauhati University, India, in 2016 and MSc from Gauhati University in 2018. Currently, he is pursuing a PhD at Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, under the supervision of Prof. Parameswar Krishnan Iyer. His research is focused on the design and development of highly stable and efficient perovskite materials for optoelectronic devices.

Parameswar Krishnan Iyer
	Parameswar Krishnan Iyer received a PhD degree in Chemistry from the Central Salt and Marine Chemicals Research Institute, Bhavnagar, India, in 1999. He was a Post-Doctoral Researcher with Technion, Haifa, Israel, from 1999 to 2001, University of California Santa Barbara, CA, USA, from 2001 to 2003, and Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA, from 2003 to 2004. In 2004, he joined the Department of Chemistry, IIT Guwahati, India, as an Assistant Professor, and was promoted to a full-time Professor in 2013. His current research interests include the design and development of novel conjugated polymers, oligomers and hybrid materials for optoelectronic devices, sensors, imaging and therapeutics.

 	Fig. 1  Chemical structures of BDT based donors used in high performance PSCs.	 

 	Fig. 2  Chemical structures of BDT based donors with BT, imide and lactam based acceptor moieties used in high performance PSCs.	 

 	Fig. 3  Chemical structures of fullerene and non-fullerene acceptors used in high performance PSCs.	 

 	Fig. 4  Bending performance: SEM images of (a–c) AZO, (d–f) bendable AZO:1.5% PDA, (g–i) AZO/PBDB-T:ITIC, and (j–l) AZO:1.5% PDA/PBDBT:ITIC on a PET substrate before and after bending. The insets show the corresponding magnified SEM images, and the scale bar is 1 μm. Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Two-dimensional GIWAXS patterns of the blend films of PTB7-Th:PC71BM with specific D–A ratios and thickness, as indicated in the pictures. (b) Sector-averaged (±10°) profiles of the blend films (solid line: out-of-plane direction; dotted line: in-plane direction). (c) Lorentz corrected and thickness normalized RSoXS profiles of the blend films at a resonant energy of ∼284 eV. Reproduced from ref. 113 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Plasmon peak maps of uncovered (single-sided confinement; (a)) and ZnO-covered (double-sided confinement; (b and c)) PTB7:PC61BM blends after thermal annealing at 140 °C for 1 day showing the nano-scale material phases (PC61BM-rich domains in red with high plasmon peak energy and PTB7-rich domains in green with low energy). As seen in (a), large PC60BM aggregates appear only for thermally stressed single-sided confined layers. For (c), the spectral contribution of the ZnO capping layer was removed from the data so that the plasmon peak energies can be compared to the map in (a). The scale bars represent 200 nm. Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Chemical structures of some important solvents and additives used in high performance PSCs.	 

 	Fig. 8  Two-dimensional GIWAXS patterns of the active layer with different treatments: (a) no treatment, (b) processed with DIO, and (c) processed with CN. (d) Grazing incident angle with out-of-plane and (e) in-plane scattering geometry for PffBT4T-2OD:PC71BM films with different additives. Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  AFM images of donor–acceptor blends for (a) MW25m, (b) MW35m, (c) MW45m, and (d) Thermal; and 2D GIWAXS images of donor–acceptor blends for (e) MW25m, (f) MW35m, (g) MW45m, and (h) Thermal. Reproduced from ref. 165 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  XRF spectra of (a) PTB7-Th and (b) PTB7-Th:PC71BM thin films on quartz as a function of DIO/CB solution concentration. The films show characteristic iodine fluorescence with the relative intensity corresponding to the DIO solution concentration. (c and d) When the films are held in a 10−8 torr vacuum for 1 h, the residual DIO is removed from the film and the iodine XRF signal is no longer detected. The vertical lines indicate the relative intensities of atomic iodine Lα and Lβ emission energy lines. Reproduced from ref. 171 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Surface topographic AFM images of (a and b) annealed without an additive, (c and d) annealed with an additive, (e and f) vacuum treated, and (g and h) SVA treated blend films for a scanning area of 2 μm × 2 μm. The images on the left-hand side represent PTB7-Th:BAF-2HDT blend films, whereas the images on right-hand side illustrate PTB7-Th:BAF-4CN bulk composite films. Reproduced from ref. 172 with permission from Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Film absorption spectra of PBDB-T/ITIC. (b and c) Film photoluminescence spectra of PBDB-T/ITIC: (b) excited at 570 nm; and (c) excited at 670 nm. (d–f) Atomic force microscopy (AFM) phase images of PBDB-T/ITIC blend films (2 μm × 2 μm) spin-coated at various solution temperatures: (d) 40 °C; (e) 60 °C; and (f) 60–40 °C. (g–i) Wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) plots of PBDB-T/ITIC blend films spin-coated at various solution temperatures: (g) 40 °C; (h) 60 °C; and (i) 60–40 °C. Reproduced from ref. 178 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a–c) TEM images and (d) RSoXS profiles of blade-coated films with different PTB7-Th content, and (e) the schematic diagram of the blade-coated PBDB-T:FOIC film, PBDB-T:PTB7-Th:FOIC film, and PTB7-Th:FOIC film, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 187 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a–d) FE-TEM and (e–h) AFM topography images of active layers processed with the dual temperature treatment (H25–S25, H25–S80, H80–S25 and H80–S80). The RMS scale is 40 nm. (i and j) GIWAXS line-cut profiles of the qxy and the qz axis for the four films. Reproduced from ref. 191 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  3D opt-digital microscope image of PTB7:PC71BM blend films using different volumes of TMB (a) 0, (b) 17%, (c) 37%, (d) 57%, (e) 77%, and (f) 97%. All the solutions contained 3 vol% DIO. Reproduced from ref. 205 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
