Study of light-induced degradation of polymer: fullerene solar cells   - New Journal of Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2NJ02001G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2NJ02001G
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2022, 46, 10765-10776Study of light-induced degradation of polymer: fullerene solar cells†

        
          
            Abhishek 
            Sharma‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Mihirsinh 
            Chauhan‡
c, 
      
        
          
            Jessica 
            Patel
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Manoj Kumar 
            Pandey
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Brijesh 
            Tripathi
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            J. P. 
            Tiwari
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Suresh 
            Chand
          
        
      ab
aAdvanced Materials and Devices Division, CSIR-National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 110012, India
bAcademy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), CSIR-National Physical Laboratory, Dr K. S. Krishnan Marg, New Delhi 110012, India. E-mail: jai_ti2002@yahoo.com; tiwarijp@nplindia.org;  Fax: +91-11-45609310;   Tel: +91 9013301619  Tel: +91-11-45608640
cDepartment of Solar Energy, School of Technology, Pandit Deendayal Energy University, Gandhinagar 382426, India
dDepartment of Physics, School of Technology, Pandit Deendayal Energy University, Gandhinagar 382426, India
Received 
      23rd April 2022
    , Accepted 27th April 2022First published on 28th April 2022AbstractIn the present study, the role of active and transport layer materials in the degradation mechanism is studied using different device geometries. Initially, the absorbance of the active layer materials as a function of the degradation time is compared with the photovoltaic characteristics. Also, it has been found that the hole- and electron-transport layers play a pivotal role in the degradation process for the observed decreased device efficiency. The theoretical charge-transport model complements these experimental photovoltaic parameters well. The results are attributed to the change in the quasi-Fermi level, and exciton splitting for the fresh and aged devices. These interesting and impactful results reveal a basic understanding of the degradation mechanism for the P3HT:PC71BM and PTB7:PC71BM blend systems and provide insights for achieving long-term stability in such solar-cell devices.
1. Introduction
Recently, BTP-eC9-based single-junction organic photovoltaic cells (OPVs) have reached a benchmark efficiency of ∼18%1 for a single junction. The power conversion efficiency of a two-terminal monolithic solution-processed tandem has been recorded as 17.29%2 for tandem OPV cells at the laboratory scale. These developments have made OPVs a promising candidate for commercialization in the near future. In view of this, most recent research and development efforts have been carried out to improve their efficiency, lifetime and flexibility, and lower their production costs. In fact, device stability is one of the biggest challenges, and its understanding at a microscopic level is essential for the successful commercialization of OPV technology.3–5 Reports are available on fullerene-based systems wherein the lifetime of ∼10000 h has already been achieved with encapsulation for both rigid as well as flexible substrates.6–9
For fullerene-based solar cells, studies have been demonstrated for the improved lifetimes of OPV devices under isolated environmental conditions (light-induced or thermal)10,11 and under the mixed environmental conditions of standard operating procedures, explaining their detailed degradation mechanisms.12–14 Their exposure to molecular oxygen and illumination has been the critical parameter for degradation in fullerene-based devices.15–17 It has been established that for polymer:PC71BM blends, the degradation is mainly defined by the pathway of the triplet-induced singlet oxygen generation through the polymer or fullerene.18,19 In particular, the light-induced degradation of fullerene-based solar cells has a dramatic impact on the intrinsic stability, thereby altering the electron transport as well as the recombination kinetics.12,20
In previous reports, the degradation of OPVs has been investigated via several factors, one of which is due to the alteration in the multilayered structure,3,4,16,21,22 and balanced morphology of the active layer.23,24 Evidently, the top electrode is essential for the degradation in which the oxide layer is formed when aluminum is used as the top cathode electrode and the work function or the conductivity of the electrode changes, which reduces the performance of the OPV.25–27 Interestingly, the effect of water (moisture) ingress has also been studied, which is one of the leading causes of degradation in OPVs.28–30 However, it is still unclear whether the water ingress from the grain boundaries or edge diffusion is more significant for the degradation. The degradation due to the low work function metal used in conventional devices is controlled by inverting the polarity of the devices (inverted structure) where the electron is collected at the anode electrode, and holes are collected at the cathode. It is well known that using the polymer poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene)polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) as the hole-transport layer (HTL) enhances the degradation compared with other HTLs.31–33 It is because the hygroscopic nature of PEDOT:PSS enhances the degradation in the solar cells.34,35 In the case of PEDOT:PSS as the HTL, the formation of large bubbles in the layer causes extensive voids at the cathode–active layer interface.36–38
Besides PEDOT:PSS, different types of oxide layer such as (molybdenum oxide (MoOx)) as HTL are used to increase the device stability in the presence of air.39–42 Furthermore, degradation in the OPV due to exposure to air is controlled by the proper encapsulation of the device as there is no chance of degradation due to the oxygen and moisture in the device.3,23,43,44 Materials having a high glass transition temperature show better stability at elevated temperatures since, above the transition temperature, the polymer chains and the molecules are able to move around in the films. Due to this rearrangement of the molecules, a macroscopic phase separation up to several micrometers is observed, decreasing the dissociation rate of the excitons into free electrons and holes at the donor–acceptor interface, promoting degradation in the device. Several researchers have used a different combination of electrodes, interface layers, and active layers to match the energy levels and enhance the efficiency of OPVs.9,45–49 However, due to the complex degradation process in OPVs, the improvement in the efficiency is limited. Hence a better understanding of the degradation mechanism in OPVs is the need of the hour.
Herein, we demonstrate the light-induced degradation of the active layer and the atmosphere-induced degradation of the devices using two different polymers (P3HT, and PTB7) under ambient conditions. The effect of altering the interface layers (PEDOT:PSS and MoO3) on the light-induced stability of the devices is demonstrated. The degradation in the performance of the device with time is correlated with the charge-carrier mobility and recombination mechanism due to different degradation processes in the device. These results unravel the critical role of device engineering for environmental stability in addition to the efficiency of the solar cells. Our findings will help to understand the light-induced degradation behavior of OPV devices and provide a pathway for developing better materials and device structures.
2. Experimental details
The patterned ITO glass substrates (sheet resistance = 15 Ω per □) were sonicated in a soap solution, acetone, and isopropanol for device fabrication. The cleaned ITO glass substrates were then exposed to ultraviolet-ozone irradiation for 20 min. In all the devices, the thickness of MoO3 was ∼10 nm, and PEDOT:PSS was spin-coated at 4000 rpm to give a thickness of ∼40 nm. The active layer is made from the spin coating of P3HT:PC71BM (1:1) and PTB7:PC71BM (1:1.5) blend systems, which was dissolved (25 mg ml−1 in both the cases) in dichlorobenzene. Finally, the Ca (20 nm)/Al (120 nm) electrode is thermally deposited under a high vacuum (∼8 × 10−6 mbar), over the active layer through a shadow mask. The following device structures were adopted for this study:
1. Device A: ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PC71BM/Al.
2. Device B: ITO/MoO3/P3HT:PC71BM/Al.
3. Device C: ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PC71BM/Ca/A.l.
4. Device D: ITO/MoO3/P3HT:PC71BM/Ca/Al.
5. Device E: MoO3/P3HT:PC71BM/Ca/Al (with encapsulation).
6. Device F: PTB7:PC71BM:MoO3/Ca/Al (with encapsulation).
In all cases, the active area of the devices was 4 mm2. Furthermore, for the encapsulation of the device, a glass sheet, and epoxy is used. The current–voltage (I–V) characteristics were measured using a Keithley 2420 unit under 100 mW cm−2 simulated AM 1.5G solar illumination. The light intensity was measured using a calibrated Si photodetector. The performance of the nanoscale morphology in solution-processed bulk heterojunction devices is governed by the miscibility of the donor and acceptor in the selected solvent. Since the P3HT:PC71BM and PTB7:PC71BM blend systems have been most prevalent in most of the research studies mentioned in the Introduction section and have been subject of study in this laboratory for a while, so these systems have been considered for study of the degradation mechanism in OPVs.
3. Results

Fig. 1a shows the schematic representation of the fundamental processes involved in the photon-to-electron formation. In the active layer, excitons are formed with the absorption of sunlight dissociating at the donor–acceptor interface into free charge carriers followed by charge transport and collection at their respective electrodes. Fig. 1b shows the chemical structures of the materials used for our study, with their corresponding energy levels and the work function of the interface layer used shown in Fig. 1c.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the fundamental processes involved in photon-to-electron conversion, (b) chemical structures of the materials under study, and (c) energy diagram and work function of the materials under study. 
3.1. UV-vis absorption degradation profile
The degradation behavior of the active layer films without and with sunlight exposure as a function of the exposure time under normal atmospheric conditions is investigated through UV-vis spectroscopy, as shown in Fig. 2. In the P3HT:PC71BM blend, the transition peaks for the blend at 507 nm, 550 nm, and 610 nm are attributed to the interchain and intrachain interactions denoted as 0–0, 0–1, and 0–2, respectively, for P3HT50 (Fig. 2a and c). Similarly, the prominent transition peaks for the blend that occur at 620 nm and 680 nm, attributed to the interchain coupling and degree of structural order, are denoted as 0–0 and 0–1, respectively, for the PTB751 polymer (shown in Fig. 2b and d). For both blend systems, the UV-vis absorption spectra show a minor change in the absorbance without sunlight exposure, indicating no change in the conjugation of the polymers. For both systems, after 400 h, there is no change in the peak position of the transition peaks for PC71BM:PTB7/P3HT, indicating no change in the conjugation of the polymer, which can be correlated with the images of the film quality shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†). However, in the presence of sunlight (intensity of the sunlight ∼70 mW cm−2), there is a decrease in the absorption for both blend systems when exposed for up to 75 h.
 Fig. 2  Absorption spectra under dark (a and b) and sunlight (c and d) conditions for P3HT:PCBM and PTB7:PC71BM active layers. 

Fig. 3 shows the evolution of P3HT and PTB7 photo-bleaching (measured by the loss of P3HT and PTB7 absorbance in the blend film) in the presence of sunlight, revealing a strong dependence of the photo-bleaching of P3HT and PTB7 on the blending acceptors. It is evident that PC71BM shows minimal photo-bleaching in blends with P3HT, while more pronounced photo-bleaching is shown in blends with PTB7. This may be attributed to the amorphous character of PTB7, which creates short conjugation lengths and increases the oxygen attack at the random positions of the backbone.52 After 75 h, there is complete bleaching in the polymer, which may be due to the disrupted conjugated structure of PTB7. Furthermore, the light penetration and the diffusion of oxygen create a depth-dependent degradation where the lower layers of material are intact, but the upper part of the layer facing the incident sunlight and oxygen is strongly oxidized. It is known that the crystalline regions of PC71BM18,53 exhibit a lower permeability to oxygen than the amorphous regions of PTB7 with the degradation which disrupts the π-conjugation of the upper layer due to exposure to sunlight. Thereby, more crystalline layers are preserved below, which explains the degradation mechanism in PTB7:PC71BM. Furthermore, the shape of the absorption spectrum in the PC71BM region does not alter significantly compared with the faster decrease in the absorption peak at 680 nm, which may suggest that the PCBM layer present in the lower part of the sample is still intact and PTB7 is already degraded.
 Fig. 3  Evolution of the normalized P3HT and PTB7 absorbance peaks in blend films under sunlight illumination at the wavelength of 507 nm and 680 nm, respectively. 
3.2. Effect of degradation on OPV device performance without encapsulation
To correlate the absorption profile, we investigated the decrease in performance due to degradation of OPVs upon exposure to an open atmosphere. Previous reports have concluded that light and/or oxygen exposure of un-encapsulated devices resulted in rapid device degradation due to the diffusion and subsequent reaction of molecular oxygen with the polymer component of the active layer materials.54–57 Hence, to study the effect of encapsulation on the stability of the OPV system of P3HT:PC71BM and PTB7:PC71BM, we initially studied the degradation without encapsulation. Fig. 4a and b show the degradation of the current density–voltage (J–V) curve of P3HT:PC71BM (Device A) and PTB7:PC71BM (Device B), respectively, with PEDOT:PSS as the hole-transport layer (HTL) and aluminum (Al) under AM 1.5G conditions. Both of the devices were exposed to ambient conditions for ∼10 minutes before Al deposition. It was done to observe the relative degradation of the device based on the two active layers after Al deposition. It is striking to observe that after only 1 h, an overall power conversion efficiency (PCE) loss of over 22.47% and 29.41% was registered due to a simultaneous drop in the short-circuit current density (JSC) and fill factor (FF), respectively, for both devices. It is known that the electrodes possess mobility, which results in device instability. The drop in the photovoltaic parameters may be due to the Al contact, which forms an oxide layer (Al2O3), causing a fast degradation process.58 This oxide layer causes pinholes and voids, resulting in lowering the performance. The dark J–V curve also shows similar behavior (Fig. S2, ESI†) for Device A and B systems extended for degradation study up to 13 h and 10 h, respectively. These devices were aged and tested periodically as they degrade. Fig. 4c shows the schematic representation of the different external parameters that influence the degradation in the OPV devices.
 Fig. 4  (a) Light current–voltage characteristics of P3HT:PC71BM (Device A), and (b) PTB7:PC71BM (Device B) with PEDOT:PSS; and (c) schematic representation of the different parameters influencing degradation in OPVs. 
Furthermore, to understand the role of the interface layer on the degradation process in our system, we performed experiments using interface layers such as MoO3 and PEDOT:PSS underneath the active layer to identify the origin of the device degradation and to quantify the degradation products. Fig. 5a shows the J–V curves of the unencapsulated devices with structures ITO/PEDOT:PSS (∼40 nm)/P3HT:PC71BM (∼100 nm)/Ca (∼20 nm)/Al (∼120 nm) (Device C), and Fig. 5b shows the devices with structures ITO/MoO3 (∼10 nm)/P3HT:PC71BM (∼100 nm)/Ca (∼20 nm)/Al (∼120 nm) (Device D) evaluated for degradation under ambient conditions via exposure to AM 1.5G conditions. The change in the photovoltaic parameters for both devices was considered at the described time intervals during the degradation process listed in Tables S1 and S2 (ESI†), respectively. Evaluation of the performance with time showed a fast degradation in the initial stages and a relatively slow degradation afterwards.
 Fig. 5  Current–voltage characteristics of P3HT:PC71BM/Ca/Al with (a) PEDOT:PSS (Device C), and (b) MoO3 (Device D) as the HTL. Points represent the experimental data and lines represent the theoretical curves. 

Fig. 6 demonstrates the burn-in period of the photovoltaic parameters with respect to the degradation time. The decay in performance parameters has been fitted with linear and polynomial equations according to their degradation trend, and the fitted parameters are listed in Tables S3 and S4 (ESI†). JSC was observed to decrease very quickly during the initial stage until 200 h (1 to 0.24 mA cm−2) and then slowly afterwards for Device C (Fig. 6a). Compared with Device C, Device D exhibited a slower linear degradation in JSC with increasing time. Similarly, losses in VOC in Device C exhibited a linear trend with a higher reduction compared with Device D, in which the loss in VOC is minimal and shows a polynomial decay trend (Fig. 6b). These different decay trends for VOC were observed due to the different work functions of the HTL in both devices. Apart from this, both devices have same active layer donor–acceptor material so that the difference of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the donor and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the acceptor molecules remains constant. Because of the hygroscopic nature of PEDOT:PSS, it absorbs water and loses its electronic properties, and as a result, the work function is reduced.
 Fig. 6  (a) Current density, (b) open circuit voltage, (c) fill factor, and (d) PCE as a function of time for P3HT:PC71BM devices with PEDOT:PSS and MoO3 as the HTLs. 
Because of the creation of more free electrons in ITO, the Fermi level goes up.59 Now, the difference between the work functions of the ITO/PEDOT:PSS and Ca/Al electrodes is reduced, which results in the reduction in VOC.
These result in higher recombination, reduction in the mobilities of the charge carriers in the active layer matrix, and the introduction of a higher number of traps have a significant effect on electric field distribution of Device C compared with Device D, and is ultimately responsible for a reduction in FF with time (Fig. 6c). Compared with PEDOT:PSS, MoO3 forms fewer voids with Ca/Al as an electrode, which helps to increase the lifetime of Device D. All these parameters are directly correlated with the PCE. As per our results, the maximum reduction in the PCE of Device C compared with Device D is due to the higher losses in JSC, and it also shows a similar polynomial decay trend (Fig. 6d). After 350 h, due to the negligible photocurrent response, the degradation of the device was observed because of the built-in electric field absence. Compared with Device C, Device D showed a higher long-term air stability due to its lower hygroscopic and oxidation behavior. The dark J–V characteristics of the same devices are depicted in Fig. S3 (ESI†). Hence, from this study, it can be concluded that, apart from the interface layer, the electrode plays an integral part in the stability of the devices. All losses discussed above can be removed or decreased if the factors influencing the morphology as well as the charge generation and transport are taken into account. Also, we can consider the role of the interface in the charge transport; for instance, using the less oxidized interface layer can have a noteworthy effect on the stability of the devices with higher efficiencies. To further understand the degradation mechanism in this system, we encapsulated the devices and studied their degradation patterns.
3.3. Effect of degradation on OPV device performance with encapsulation
Encapsulation provides mechanical stability from bending and scratching, which are more prevalent with outdoor devices. Initially, we compared the P3HT:PC71BM devices with PEDOT:PSS and MoO3 as HTLs. It is concluded that, using MoO3 as the HTL, the stability of the device is increased with Ca/Al as the cathode layer.
Here, we encapsulate the P3HT:PC71BM devices (Device E) and study their degradation behavior, as shown in Fig. 7a up to 5600 h. It can be observed with encapsulation that the stability of the P3HT:PC71BM devices was increased. The encapsulation acts as a filter, removing the unwanted/harmful part of the solar spectrum, water, and oxygen ingress. This increases the mechanical stability and provides resistance against scratching. The type and quality of the encapsulation play an essential role in the device's overall lifetime and stability. Several encapsulation studies have been reported which provide a shelf-life of the devices extended up to several thousand hours.60–72 Such is the case for P3HT:PC71BM devices with MoO3 as HTL. Table S5 (ESI†) shows the photovoltaic parameters for encapsulated P3HT:PC71BM/MoO3 devices. It is observed that the VOC and FF show a negligible decrease in their values. JSC shows a prominent decrease in its value with degradation up to 5600 h. To add more evidence of the stability of OPVs with the use of MoO3 as the HTL and Ca/Al as a cathodic layer, we further performed a degradation analysis for the PTB7:PC71BM system keeping other layers constant. For the PTB7:PC71BM system (Device F) (Fig. 7b), a similar trend in the photovoltaic parameters as for P3HT:PC71BM is observed up to 800 h. The FF and VOC values show negligible change due to the degradation, but JSC shows a prominent change in its values. These results may indicate the importance of encapsulation for these devices compared with the unencapsulated devices discussed before.
 Fig. 7  Current–voltage characteristics of encapsulated (a) MoO3/P3HT:PC71BM/Ca/Al (Device E) and (b) PTB7:PC71BM:MoO3/Ca/Al (Device F). 
To investigate the details of unencapsulated and encapsulated devices further, all J–V curves of Fig. 5 and 7 were fitted using the charge-transport model given by Neher et al.64 In this model, a closed-form approximation of the J–V curve under transport-limited photocurrent conditions was derived including the dimensionless ideality parameter α. This parameter includes all physical parameters, like the effective charge-carrier mobility (μd), the active layer thickness (d), the temperature, and the bimolecular recombination coefficient (kL), and is expressed as: (1)
Using α, the J–V expression can be derived as, (2)
This equation is used for fitting the J–V curves in Fig. 5 and 7. Excellent agreement was observed for all J–V curves under various degradation times. Herein, it is observed that the value of α increases linearly for all fitted solar cells with time, as listed in Table S7 (ESI†). The term (1 + α) in eqn (2) brings in a better fit for the transport-limited photocurrent and can be understood as an apparent ideality factor to measure the non-ideal behavior of fabricated organic solar cells (OSCs) during the degradation process. It is observed that Device C shows the highest degradation with an increased α of about 123% for the final J–V curve compared with a fresh device (0 h). By contrast, Device D shows a better performance due to a lower increment in α (63%) for the final degraded J–V curve. This is closely related to our previous explanation that three variants of OPVs without encapsulation showed strong degradation trends, which might involve both material deformation (burn-in) and oxidation effects. These two physical properties may affect the charge-carrier mobility by increasing the number of traps at the interface, ultimately enhancing the recombination. Therefore, an understanding has been gained by finding the value of α, which includes the all-important physical and electrical parameters responsible for degradation. Furthermore, the fitted J–V curves of the encapsulated device suggest that, for both devices (Device E and Device F), only a drop in JSC is responsible for a decrease in PCE, and it is directly correlated with the small enhancement in α.
To evaluate the given model, we further investigated the change in the quasi-Fermi level splitting by plotting the internal voltage (Vint) as a function of the bias voltage (Fig. 8). For unencapsulated devices (Devices C and D), the slope of Vintversus V is similar (S = 0.24) and is calculated via linear fitting of the fresh device. This slope dropped dramatically for Device C (S = 0.12) compared with Device D (S = 0.16). Therefore, an important conclusion is that the decrease in mobility for Device C made a massive change to the quasi-Fermi level splitting in the bulk material and thus a major drop in the charge-carrier density. These findings establish that the proper selection of the HTL plays an important role in increasing the lifetime of OSCs. Furthermore, there is a negligible change in Vint under short-circuit conditions (V = 0 V) for Device E, which suggests that the charge-carrier mobility remains unchanged. Similarly, there is a very small drop in Vint under short-circuit conditions for Device F, which suggests a slight degradation in the charge-carrier mobility, which might affect the charge-carrier density.
 Fig. 8  Internal voltage Vintversus external voltage V as extracted from the J–V curves of fresh and aged devices. 
4. Discussions
Let us first summarize the essential experimental results from the degradation study. (i) Absorption spectroscopy was performed for the active layers made using two different donors (P3HT and PTB7) and PCBM as the acceptor material. The optical density remains the same for both active layers while stored in a dark room under normal atmospheric conditions. However, there was a dramatic decrease in the optical density of the donor material upon exposure to sunlight due to burn-in losses, which is consistent with the literature reports. (ii) In both bulk hetero-junction (BHJ) solar cells (P3HT:PC71BM and PTB7:PC71BM) using PEDOT:PSS as the HTL and Al as the cathode, there is a dramatic decrease in performance, although the absorbance remains constant. (iii) By introducing Ca with Al as the cathode, the lifetime of the devices with PEDOT:PSS was increased, although this is not suitable for commercialization. Replacing PEDOT:PSS with MoO3 shows a lot of potential. There is a 50% improvement in the short-circuit photocurrent for devices with MoO3, a small change in the VOC, and only a 10% reduction in FF, which ultimately improved the device stability. (iv) Encapsulation of the devices reduced recombination at the interface by avoiding oxygen and water ingress, which are the known degradation factors. (v) Charge-transport model simulations were carried out to understand the degradation of the different physical parameters via a single ideality parameter α, and the simulated results were compared with experimental results.
Based on the present experimental results, we shall critically examine role of the HTL and the cathode layer, particularly with regard to the time dependence of the J–V curves. By comparing the J–V curves (Fig. 4), we observed that the performance was reduced for both devices (A and B), although there is no degradation to the optical density (Fig. 2(a and b)). In particular, this degradation is due to a reduction in the dissociation efficiency of free charge carriers from the excitons. So, both PEDOT:PSS and Al were degraded due to the presence of large amounts of bubbles and voids, which rapidly decrease the device performance. One can also understand this behavior by analyzing the J–V curves under dark and illumination conditions (Fig. S2, ESI†). Substituting MoO3 for PEDOT:PSS and the cathode Al replaced by Ca/Al reduces this degradation process due to their less hygroscopic nature. By comparing the dark (Fig. S3, ESI†) and light J–V (Fig. 5) curves of Device D with Device C, we understand that there is a low charge-carrier loss, which means that contact degradation becomes slow. This can be understood in detail by investigating the trend in the performance parameters with time (Fig. 6).
As explained in the Results section, the reduction in PCE is mainly due to photo-current loss because of an imbalance in the charge-carrier mobility, active layer degradation, or contact degradation. To overcome this, not only is good encapsulation of OSCs necessary to enhance their lifetime but also it is important to explore newer stable material combinations. With proper encapsulation, both devices (E and F) show excellent stability around 5600 h with only a 30% loss (Fig. 6a) and approximately 800 h with a 37% loss (Fig. 6b) in PCE, respectively. Simulation of the time dependence of the J–V-curves using the charge-transport model given by Neher et al. is a powerful tool to understand the impact of the various parameters on device degradation.64 We fitted the time dependence J–V curves of four devices (C, D, E, and F), including the behaviour of the transport-limited photocurrent, which can be well described by an analytical eqn (S6) (ESI†) containing the term 1 + α. The initial J–V curve of all the devices showed nearly similar values of α, and thus the initial transport losses are equivalent. However, due to the absence of an encapsulation layer, the value of α is nearly double for the aged devices C and D. Here, the essential parameters, such as the contact resistance, FF, the effective mobilities, and the charge-carrier generation rate, play an important role in understanding the degradation mechanisms and can be expressed as a function of α (eqn (S4), ESI†). Therefore, we show the importance of α as an ideal parameter to study the degradation phenomena. In the recent literature, several transport models have been reported that mainly focus on correlation of the electrical parameters with the degradation time or studying the morphology with respect to degradation. Our approach is different since it provides a proper explanation for the entire time-dependent J–V curves, and since the derived value of α contains all relevant parameters, including the ratio between the bimolecular recombination coefficient and the effective charge-carrier mobility.
In our case, the P3HT:PC71BM device shows JSC ≈ 7.5 mA cm−2 and for the PTB7:PC71BM device JSC ≈ 11.5 mA cm−2. The value of kL/μd2 is typically in the range of 10−2 sV2 m−1 for these solar cells, which means that the effective mobility for all devices is in the same range. However, for the aged devices, these values increase from 10−2 to 1, suggesting significant transport losses. Such conditions may be due to the blend morphology, the polymer chain alignment, the interface, and contact degradation. This can be visualized via the increasing trend of kL/μd2 as a function of α, as shown in Fig. 9. Our consideration highlights that a decrease in the value of the mobility with an increasing value of kL ultimately increases the value of kL/μd2, which is responsible for reducing the PCE. For the encapsulated devices (Devices E and F), the reduced charge traps control the active layer mobility degradation. These predictions are in accordance with the experimental results. For example, Device E has a prolonged degradation rate, which explains the minimal transport losses, and this is similar for Device F. Thus, ​eqn (S4)​ and eqn (S6) (ESI†) explain well the charge-carrier losses, which are essential for understanding the J–V performance.
 Fig. 9  Transport loss study using the relationship between the bimolecular recombination coefficient and the effective mobility as a function of α. 
5. Conclusions
Fundamentally, OPVs with a BHJ active layer configuration consist of at least two electronically dissimilar molecules in which photoabsorption in the donor generates excitons. Exciton dissociation at the donor–acceptor interface leads to the formation of free charge carriers. However, the performance of the device deteriorates very rapidly compared with established commercialized solar PV technologies. In the past decade, most of the progress towards improved device performance has been directed by the rapid development of novel donor and acceptor materials. Among these donor materials, poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) has produced a better performance despite the mismatch of its absorption coefficient with the solar emission spectrum. Another donor, poly([4,8-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b]dithiophene-2,6-diyl]) (PTB7), with the fullerene derivative [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) has received widespread attention. Still, understanding the degradation pathways in OPVs is essential for achieving long-term device stability and improving their commercialization potential. This study of various device configurations for P3HT:PC71BM and PTB7:PC71BM systems revealed several possible degradation mechanisms that reduce the lifetime of OSCs. In addition, to represent the complex degradation phenomenon in OPVs, the J–V curves were fitted using a charge-transport model, and the derived parameters were analyzed to explore the effect of charge-carrier mobility, trap states, the morphology, and degradation due to contact. It is observed that light-induced degradation is responsible for the poor charge-transport properties of the devices. The poor charge-transport properties result in a large splitting of the quasi-Fermi levels due to the accumulation of free charge carriers, resulting in enhanced non-geminate recombination. The observed degradation trends for all the performance parameters were fitted with linear or polynomial equations. This study highlights that a decrease in the value of carrier mobility is responsible for the reduction in the PCE. It is indicated that the light-induced degradation of the constituent materials of OPVs is responsible for the decrease in the carrier mobility with respect to exposure to light, and that leads to a decrease in JSC and FF. These conceptual studies provide insight into the possible mechanisms for increasing the lifetime of solar cells.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors are thankful for the fund provided under the TAPSUN project funded by the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR, NWP-54) and Indo-UK project “Advancing the effectiveness and production potential of excitonic solar cells (APEX)”. Furthermore, Dr J. P. Tiwari is thankful to SERB (DST) for the project “Development of interface layer of perovskite solar cells in view of silicon-perovskite tandem solar cell fabrication (SERB/EMR/2017/002252)”, which supported us during COVID-19.
References
Y. Cui, H. Yao, J. Zhang, K. Xian, T. Zhang, L. Hong, Y. Wang, Y. Xu, K. Ma, C. An, C. He, Z. Wei, F. Gao and J. Hou, Single-Junction Organic Photovoltaic Cells with Approaching 18% Efficiency, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Meng, Y. Zhang, X. Wan, C. Li, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Ke, Z. Xiao, L. Ding and R. Xia, Organic and Solution-Processed Tandem Solar Cells with 17.3% Efficiency, Science, 2018, 361, 1094–1098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman and F. C. Krebs, Stability/Degradation of Polymer Solar Cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 686–714 CrossRef .
M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman, S. A. Gevorgyan, T. Tromholt, B. Andreasen and F. C. Krebs, Stability of Polymer Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 580–612 CrossRef PubMed .
C. J.-M. Emmott, D. Moia, P. Sandwell, N. Ekins-Daukes, M. Hösel, L. Lukoschek, C. Amarasinghe, F. C. Krebs and J. Nelson, In-Situ, Long-Term Operational Stability of Organic Photovoltaics for off-Grid Applications in Africa, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 149, 284–293 CrossRef CAS .
A. Guerrero, H. Heidari, T. S. Ripolles, A. Kovalenko, M. Pfannmöller, S. Bals, L.-D. Kauffmann, J. Bisquert and G. Garcia-Belmonte, Shelf Life Degradation of Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells: Intrinsic Evolution of Charge Transfer Complex, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401997 CrossRef .
F. C. Krebs and K. Norrman, Analysis of the Failure Mechanism for a Stable Organic Photovoltaic during 10000 h of Testing, Prog. Photovolt. Res. Appl., 2007, 15, 697–712 CrossRef CAS .
R. Cheacharoen, W. R. Mateker, Q. Zhang, B. Kan, D. Sarkisian, X. Liu, J. A. Love, X. Wan, Y. Chen and T.-Q. Nguyen, Assessing the Stability of High-Performance Solution Processed Small Molecule Solar Cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 161, 368–376 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, K. Fukuda, A. Karki, S. Park, H. Kimura, H. Jinno, N. Watanabe, S. Yamamoto, S. Shimomura and D. Kitazawa, Thermally Stable, Highly Efficient, Ultraflexible Organic Photovoltaics, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 4589–4594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cha, J. Wu, A. Wadsworth, J. Nagitta, S. Limbu, S. Pont, Z. Li, J. Searle, M. F. Wyatt and D. Baran, An Efficient, “Burn in” Free Organic Solar Cell Employing a Nonfullerene Electron Acceptor, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701156 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Gasparini, M. Salvador, S. Strohm, T. Heumueller, I. Levchuk, A. Wadsworth, J. H. Bannock, J. C. de Mello, H.-J. Egelhaaf and D. Baran, Burn-in Free Nonfullerene-Based Organic Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700770 CrossRef .
H. K.-H. Lee, A. M. Telford, J. A. Röhr, M. F. Wyatt, B. Rice, J. Wu, A. de Castro Maciel, S. M. Tuladhar, E. Speller and J. McGettrick, The Role of Fullerenes in the Environmental Stability of Polymer: Fullerene Solar Cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 417–428 RSC .
Y. Wang, M. J. Jafari, N. Wang, D. Qian, F. Zhang, T. Ederth, E. Moons, J. Wang, O. Inganäs and W. Huang, Light-Induced Degradation of Fullerenes in Organic Solar Cells: A Case Study on TQ1:PC 71 BM, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11884–11889 RSC .
N. Deb, R. R. Dasari, K. Moudgil, J. L. Hernandez, S. R. Marder, Y. Sun, A. Karim and D. G. Bucknall, Thermo-Cross-Linkable Fullerene for Long-Term Stability of Photovoltaic Devices, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21856–21863 RSC .
I. Fraga Domínguez, A. Distler and L. Lüer, Stability of Organic Solar Cells: The Influence of Nanostructured Carbon Materials, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601320 CrossRef .
A. Distler, P. Kutka, T. Sauermann, H.-J. Egelhaaf, D. M. Guldi, D. Di Nuzzo, S. C.-J. Meskers and R. A.-J. Janssen, Effect of PCBM on the Photodegradation Kinetics of Polymers for Organic Photovoltaics, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 4397–4405 CrossRef CAS .
E. T. Hoke, I. T. Sachs-Quintana, M. T. Lloyd, I. Kauvar, W. R. Mateker, A. M. Nardes, C. H. Peters, N. Kopidakis and M. D. McGehee, The Role of Electron Affinity in Determining Whether Fullerenes Catalyze or Inhibit Photooxidation of Polymers for Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1351–1357 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Soon, S. Shoaee, R. S. Ashraf, H. Bronstein, B. C. Schroeder, W. Zhang, Z. Fei, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and J. R. Durrant, Material Crystallinity as a Determinant of Triplet Dynamics and Oxygen Quenching in Donor Polymers for Organic Photovoltaic Devices, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1474–1482 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Speller, J. D. McGettrick, B. Rice, A. M. Telford, H. K.-H. Lee, C.-H. Tan, C. S. De Castro, M. L. Davies, T. M. Watson and J. Nelson, Impact of Aggregation on the Photochemistry of Fullerene Films: Correlating Stability to Triplet Exciton Kinetics, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 22739–22747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. MacLeod, B. J. Tremolet de Villers, P. Schulz, P. F. Ndione, H. Kim, A. J. Giordano, K. Zhu, S. R. Marder, S. Graham and J. J. Berry, Stability of Inverted Organic Solar Cells with ZnO Contact Layers Deposited from Precursor Solutions, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 592–601 RSC .
Y. W. Soon, H. Cho, J. Low, H. Bronstein, I. McCulloch and J. R. Durrant, Correlating Triplet Yield, Singlet Oxygen Generation and Photochemical Stability in Polymer/Fullerene Blend Films, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 1291–1293 RSC .
C. M.-S. Yau, S. I. Pascu, S. A. Odom, J. E. Warren, E. J.-F. Klotz, M. J. Frampton, C. C. Williams, V. Coropceanu, M. K. Kuimova and D. Phillips, Stabilisation of a Heptamethine Cyanine Dye by Rotaxane Encapsulation, Chem. Commun., 2008, 2897–2899 RSC .
Z. Li, H. C. Wong, Z. Huang, H. Zhong, C. H. Tan, W. C. Tsoi, J. S. Kim, J. R. Durrant and J. T. Cabral, Performance Enhancement of Fullerene-Based Solar Cells by Light Processing, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2227 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Piersimoni, G. Degutis, S. Bertho, K. Vandewal, D. Spoltore, T. Vangerven, J. Drijkoningen, M. K. Van Bael, A. Hardy and J. D’Haen, Influence of Fullerene Photodimerization on the PCBM Crystallization in Polymer: Fullerene Bulk Heterojunctions under Thermal Stress, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2013, 51, 1209–1214 CrossRef CAS .
E. Voroshazi, B. Verreet, A. Buri, R. Müller, D. Di Nuzzo and P. Heremans, Influence of Cathode Oxidation via the Hole Extraction Layer in Polymer: Fullerene Solar Cells, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 736–744 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamanari, T. Taima, J. Sakai, J. Tsukamoto and Y. Yoshida, Effect of Buffer Layers on Stability of Polymer-Based Organic Solar Cells, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 49, 01AC02 CrossRef .
N. S. Sariciftci, D. Braun, C. Zhang, V. I. Srdanov, A. J. Heeger, G. Stucky and F. Wudl, Semiconducting Polymer-buckminsterfullerene Heterojunctions: Diodes, Photodiodes, and Photovoltaic Cells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1993, 62, 585–587 CrossRef CAS .
N. Grossiord, J. M. Kroon, R. Andriessen and P. W.-M. Blom, Degradation Mechanisms in Organic Photovoltaic Devices, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 432–456 CrossRef CAS .
K. Norrman, M. V. Madsen, S. A. Gevorgyan and F. C. Krebs, Degradation Patterns in Water and Oxygen of an Inverted Polymer Solar Cell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16883–16892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Norrman, N. B. Larsen and F. C. Krebs, Lifetimes of Organic Photovoltaics: Combining Chemical and Physical Characterisation Techniques to Study Degradation Mechanisms, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2793–2814 CrossRef CAS .
L. Groenendaal, F. Jonas, D. Freitag, H. Pielartzik and J. R. Reynolds, Poly(3,4-Ethylenedioxythiophene) and Its Derivatives: Past, Present, and Future, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 481–494 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kirchmeyer and K. Reuter, Scientific Importance, Properties and Growing Applications of Poly(3,4-Ethylenedioxythiophene), J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 2077 RSC .
Z. Hu, J. Zhang, Z. Hao and Y. Zhao, Influence of Doped PEDOT:PSS on the Performance of Polymer Solar Cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 2763–2767 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kawano, R. Pacios, D. Poplavskyy, J. Nelson, D. D.-C. Bradley and J. R. Durrant, Degradation of Organic Solar Cells Due to Air Exposure, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 3520–3530 CrossRef CAS .
C. W.-T. Bulle-Lieuwma, W. J.-H. van Gennip, J. K.-J. van Duren, P. Jonkheijm, R. A.-J. Janssen and J. W. Niemantsverdriet, Characterization of Polymer Solar Cells by TOF-SIMS Depth Profiling, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2003, 203–204, 547–550 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Dupont, M. Oliver, F. C. Krebs and R. H. Dauskardt, Interlayer Adhesion in Roll-to-Roll Processed Flexible Inverted Polymer Solar Cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 97, 171–175 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. De Jong, L. J. van IJzendoorn and M. J.-A. de Voigt, Stability of the Interface between Indium-Tin-Oxide and Poly(3,4-Ethylenedioxythiophene)/Poly(Styrenesulfonate) in Polymer Light-Emitting Diodes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 2255–2257 CrossRef CAS .
M.-C. Chen, Y.-S. Chiou, J.-M. Chiu, A. Tedla and Y. Tai, Marked Improvement in the Stability of Small Molecule Organic Photovoltaics by Interfacial Modification Using Self-Assembled Monolayers to Prevent Indium Diffusion into the Active Layer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3680 RSC .
S. Shao, J. Liu, J. Bergqvist, S. Shi, C. Veit, U. Würfel, Z. Xie and F. Zhang, In Situ Formation of MoO 3 in PEDOT:PSS Matrix: A Facile Way to Produce a Smooth and Less Hygroscopic Hole Transport Layer for Highly Stable Polymer Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 349–355 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yi, P. Zhai, Y. Sun, Y. Lou, J. Zhao, B. Sun, B. Patterson, H. Luo, W. Zhang and L. Jiao, Aqueous Solution-Deposited Molybdenum Oxide Films as an Anode Interfacial Layer for Organic Solar Cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 18218–18224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, C. J. Takacs, S. R. Cowan, J. H. Seo, X. Gong, A. Roy and A. J. Heeger, Efficient, Air-Stable Bulk Heterojunction Polymer Solar Cells Using MoOx as the Anode Interfacial Layer, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2226–2230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, L. Chen and Y. Chen, Universal and Versatile MoO 3 -Based Hole Transport Layers for Efficient and Stable Polymer Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 9930–9938 CrossRef CAS .
T. Heumueller, W. R. Mateker, A. Distler, U. F. Fritze, R. Cheacharoen, W. H. Nguyen, M. Biele, M. Salvador, M. von Delius and H.-J. Egelhaaf, Morphological and Electrical Control of Fullerene Dimerization Determines Organic Photovoltaic Stability, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 247–256 RSC .
S. Wood, J. Wade, M. Shahid, E. Collado-Fregoso, D. D.-C. Bradley, J. R. Durrant, M. Heeney and J.-S. Kim, Natures of Optical Absorption Transitions and Excitation Energy Dependent Photostability of Diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP)-Based Photovoltaic Copolymers, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3222–3232 RSC .
A. Sharma, G. Andersson and D. A. Lewis, Role of Humidity on Indium and Tin Migration in Organic Photovoltaic Devices, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 4381–4387 RSC .
S. T. Lee, Z. Q. Gao and L. S. Hung, Metal Diffusion from Electrodes in Organic Light-Emitting Diodes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 1404–1406 CrossRef CAS .
E. Voroshazi, G. Uytterhoeven, K. Cnops, T. Conard, P. Favia, H. Bender, R. Muller and D. Cheyns, Root-Cause Failure Analysis of Photocurrent Loss in Polythiophene:Fullerene-Based Inverted Solar Cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 618–623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Rösch, D. M. Tanenbaum, M. Jørgensen, M. Seeland, M. Bärenklau, M. Hermenau, E. Voroshazi, M. T. Lloyd, Y. Galagan and B. Zimmermann, Investigation of the Degradation Mechanisms of a Variety of Organic Photovoltaic Devices by Combination of Imaging Techniques—the ISOS-3 Inter-Laboratory Collaboration, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6521–6540 RSC .
R. Franke, B. Maennig, A. Petrich and M. Pfeiffer, Long-Term Stability of Tandem Solar Cells Containing Small Organic Molecules, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 732–735 CrossRef CAS .
R. Noriega, J. Rivnay, K. Vandewal, F. P.-V. Koch, N. Stingelin, P. Smith, M. F. Toney and A. Salleo, A General Relationship between Disorder, Aggregation, and Charge Transport in Conjugated Polymers, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 1038–1044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bartesaghi, G. Ye, R. C. Chiechi and L. J.-A. Koster, Compatibility of PTB7 and [70] PCBM as a Key Factor for the Stability of PTB7:[70]PCBM Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502338 CrossRef .
T. Xiao, H. Xu, G. Grancini, J. Mai, A. Petrozza, U.-S. Jeng, Y. Wang, X. Xin, Y. Lu and N. S. Choon, Molecular Packing and Electronic Processes in Amorphous-like Polymer Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells with Fullerene Intercalation, Sci. Rep., 2015, 4(1), 5211 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Heumueller, W. R. Mateker, I. T. Sachs-Quintana, K. Vandewal, J. A. Bartelt, T. M. Burke, T. Ameri, C. J. Brabec and M. D. McGehee, Reducing Burn-in Voltage Loss in Polymer Solar Cells by Increasing the Polymer Crystallinity, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2974–2980 RSC .
A. Seemann, T. Sauermann, C. Lungenschmied, O. Armbruster, S. Bauer, H.-J. Egelhaaf and J. Hauch, Reversible and Irreversible Degradation of Organic Solar Cell Performance by Oxygen, Sol. Energy, 2011, 85, 1238–1249 CrossRef CAS .
J. Adams, M. Salvador, L. Lucera, S. Langner, G. D. Spyropoulos, F. W. Fecher, M. M. Voigt, S. A. Dowland, A. Osvet and H.-J. Egelhaaf, Water Ingress in Encapsulated Inverted Organic Solar Cells: Correlating Infrared Imaging and Photovoltaic Performance, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501065 CrossRef .
K. Norrman, S. A. Gevorgyan and F. C. Krebs, Water-Induced Degradation of Polymer Solar Cells Studied by H 2 18 O Labeling, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 102–112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. S. Glen, N. W. Scarratt, H. Yi, A. Iraqi, T. Wang, J. Kingsley, A. R. Buckley, D. G. Lidzey and A. M. Donald, Grain Size Dependence of Degradation of Aluminium/Calcium Cathodes in Organic Solar Cells Following Exposure to Humid Air, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 140, 25–32 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fahlman, P. Bröms, D. A. dos Santos, S. C. Moratti, N. Johansson, K. Xing, R. H. Friend, A. B. Holmes, J. L. Brédas and W. R. Salaneck, Electronic Structure of Pristine and Sodium-doped Cyano-substituted Poly(2,5-dihexyloxy-p-phenylenevinylene): A Combined Experimental and Theoretical Study, J. Chem. Phys., 1995, 102, 8167–8174 CrossRef CAS .
U. Würfel, D. Neher, A. Spies and S. Albrecht, Impact of Charge Transport on Current-Voltage Characteristics and Power-Conversion Efficiency of Organic Solar Cells, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6951 CrossRef PubMed .
F. C. Krebs, Encapsulation of Polymer Photovoltaic Prototypes, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 3633–3643 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jeranko, H. Tributsch, N. Sariciftci and J. Hummelen, Patterns of Efficiency and Degradation of Composite Polymer Solar Cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 83, 247–262 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Katz, D. Faiman, S. M. Tuladhar, J. M. Kroon, M. M. Wienk, T. Fromherz, F. Padinger, C. J. Brabec and N. S. Sariciftci, Temperature Dependence for the Photovoltaic Device Parameters of Polymer-Fullerene Solar Cells under Operating Conditions, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 90, 5343–5350 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Katz, S. Gevorgyan, M. S. Orynbayev and F. C. Krebs, Out-Door Testing and Long-Term Stability of Plastic Solar Cells, Eur. Phys. J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 36, 307–311 CrossRef CAS .
D. Neher, J. Kniepert, A. Elimelech and L. J.-A. Koster, A New Figure of Merit for Organic Solar Cells with Transport-Limited Photocurrents, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 24861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Duan and A. Uddin, Progress in Stability of Organic Solar Cells, Adv. Sci., 2020, 1903259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, Y. Li and Y. Li, Challenges to the Stability of Active Layer Materials in Organic Solar Cells, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2020, 41, 1900437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lee, J. Kim, G. Park, H. W. Bae, M. An and J. Y. Kim, Enhanced Operating Temperature Stability of Organic Solar Cells with Metal Oxide Hole Extraction Layer, Polymers, 2020, 12, 992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, Z. Luo, R. Sun, J. Guo, T. Wang, Y. Wu, W. Wang, J. Guo, Q. Wu, M. Shi, H. Li, C. Yang and J. Min, Simultaneous enhanced efficiency and thermal stability in organic solar cells from a polymer acceptor additive, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Mansour, H. Kim, S. Park, T. Schultz, D. X. Cao, T. Q. Nguyen, W. Brütting, A. Opitz and N. Koch, Conductive Polymer Work Function Changes due to Residual Water: Impact of Temperature-Dependent Dielectric Constant, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2020, 6, 2000408 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cameron and P. J. Skabara, The damaging effects of the acidity in PEDOT: PSS on semiconductor device performance and solutions based on non-acidic alternatives, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 1759 RSC .
L. Duan and A. Uddin, Progress in Stability of Organic Solar Cells, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gu, L. Yan, S. Saxena, X. Shi, X. Zhang, Z. Li, Q. Luo, H. Zhou, Y. Yang, X. Liu, W. W.-H. Wong and C.-Q. Ma, Revealing the Interfacial Photoreduction of MoO3 with P3HT from the Molecular Weight-Dependent“Burn-In” Degradation of P3HT: PC61BM Solar Cells, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 9714–9723 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2nj02001g‡ Authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the fundamental processes involved in photon-to-electron conversion, (b) chemical structures of the materials under study, and (c) energy diagram and work function of the materials under study.	 

 	Fig. 2  Absorption spectra under dark (a and b) and sunlight (c and d) conditions for P3HT:PCBM and PTB7:PC71BM active layers.	 

 	Fig. 3  Evolution of the normalized P3HT and PTB7 absorbance peaks in blend films under sunlight illumination at the wavelength of 507 nm and 680 nm, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Light current–voltage characteristics of P3HT:PC71BM (Device A), and (b) PTB7:PC71BM (Device B) with PEDOT:PSS; and (c) schematic representation of the different parameters influencing degradation in OPVs.	 

 	Fig. 5  Current–voltage characteristics of P3HT:PC71BM/Ca/Al with (a) PEDOT:PSS (Device C), and (b) MoO3 (Device D) as the HTL. Points represent the experimental data and lines represent the theoretical curves.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Current density, (b) open circuit voltage, (c) fill factor, and (d) PCE as a function of time for P3HT:PC71BM devices with PEDOT:PSS and MoO3 as the HTLs.	 

 	Fig. 7  Current–voltage characteristics of encapsulated (a) MoO3/P3HT:PC71BM/Ca/Al (Device E) and (b) PTB7:PC71BM:MoO3/Ca/Al (Device F).	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 8  Internal voltage Vintversus external voltage V as extracted from the J–V curves of fresh and aged devices.	 

 	Fig. 9  Transport loss study using the relationship between the bimolecular recombination coefficient and the effective mobility as a function of α.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2nj02001g
‡ Authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2022
