Role of direct and inverted undoped spiro-OMeTAD–perovskite architectures in determining solar cells performances: an investigation via electrical imp ...  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CP00564A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CP00564A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 6613-6621Role of direct and inverted undoped spiro-OMeTAD–perovskite architectures in determining solar cells performances: an investigation via electrical impedance spectroscopy†

        
          
            Marianna 
            Ambrico
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Paolo F. 
            Ambrico
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Luisa 
            De Marco
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Rosabianca 
            Iacobellis
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Arianna 
            D’Abramo
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Teresa 
            Ligonzo
          
        
      c
aCNR Istituto di Nanotecnologia, Via Amendola, 122/D I-70127 Bari, Italy. E-mail: marianna.ambrico@cnr.it
bCNR Istituto di Nanotecnologia, Via Monteroni, Lecce, Italy
cDipartimento Interateneo di Fisica M. Merlin, Universita’ degli Studi di Bari, Italy
Received 
      29th January 2019
    , Accepted 22nd February 2019First published on 22nd February 2019AbstractThe present study involved an investigation on the reasoning behind the dependence of the perovskite solar cells photovoltaic efficiencies on the relative position of the undoped spiro-OMeTAD hole-transport material with respect to the perovskite in the device. We adopted impedance spectroscopy to investigate the modification of the carrier transport mechanisms across the spiro-OMeTAD/perovskite interface constituting the active part where the main device processes occur. We investigated two interface structures, referred to as the direct (or regular, n–i–p) and the inverted (p–i–n) configuration. This work also intended to further stress the possible adoption of alternative device structures working with undoped hole-transport materials.
Introduction
The discovery of methylammonium lead halide perovskite (CH3NH3PbX3) as a solution, processable material able to contemporary generate and separate electron–holes couples under light irradiation pushed organic solar cells’ engineering towards its introduction as an optically active material in the third-generation of solar cells, thereafter renamed as perovskite solar cells (PSCs).1–3
The basic working principle of a PSC includes efficient charge separation and the collection of hole–electron pairs photogenerated in the perovskite promoted by two layers, each one inserted on the side of perovskite and characterized by a suitable energy levels alignment, respectively, with its conduction band (CB) and valence band (VB).4
This condition allows the device to be able to accept only one type of photogenerated carrier and promotes hole–electron transport towards the device contacts. Such layers are therefore called hole- or electron-transport materials (HTMs/ETMs). Initially, the insertion of the perovskite layer in liquid-based dye-sensitized solar cells returned a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.8–6.5%.3 Such a low value was dictated mainly by the high perovskite instability and degradation due to the device working in the liquid electrolytes environment as hole-transport medium. These results pushed the need to fabricate solid-state HTM layers. As a consequence of this design improvement, in the last five years, an impressive PCE increase has been achieved up to the most recent and highest one declared as 23.7%.5–7
Nowadays, typical perovskite solar cells employing a solid-state HTM include a 20–50 nm thick blocking layer (TiO2) on a transparent conductive oxide (TCO) followed by a 100–200 nm thick mesoporous TiO2 as the electron-transport layer (ETL), the perovskite, the hole-transport material (HTM), and the Au or Ag electrode.4 The HTM plays a crucial role in these devices. In fact, besides the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level alignment mentioned above, the HTM should show a high hole mobility and be a solution-processable material for facilitating the insertion in a PSC solid-state solar cell.8,9
Doped spiro-OMeTAD represented till now the most suitable HTM for tailoring perovskite solar cells with a quite high efficiency.10 HTM doping is considered essential for increasing hole transport and extraction together with the cell PCE efficiency. In the case of spiro-OMeTAD, the doping is accomplished by the addition of an ionic liquid, cobalt or lithium salts (LiTFSi).11 The effect of doping is not to directly oxidize the HTM, but instead to promote the oxidation when the HTM is exposed to light or thermally treated.
As expressed above, the doping still remains an expensive procedure, thus enhancing the production costs due to the series of synthesis procedures required. Finally, if a spiro-OMeTAD is used in a cell directly in its oxidized form, the device instabilities and light absorbance at 520 nm, i.e., in the visible range, would result in a detrimental device efficiency.
For these reasons, overcoming the doping procedure nowadays represents one of the key challenges together with the search for novel and easily processable HTMs and the engineering of new device configurations.12–15
Researchers in our group recently demonstrated that undoped HTMs, including spiro-OMETAD, allowed the achievement of an interesting PCE by modifying the solar cell engineering. In particular, we played with the localization of the HTM layer in the device, which was considered as a key factor implicated in the governing of the achievable device efficiency.16 Following the commonly adopted labelling, we define as direct or regular, the n–i–p, (inverse, p–i–n) configuration as one where the perovskite is deposited under (onto) the spiro-OMeTAD. Our results evidenced that the inverse (p–i–n) (ITO/HTM/perovskite/ETL/LiF/Al) device structure was able to return a PCE of 15% with an FF of around 70%, whereas much lower values were found when adopting the direct (n–i–p, ITO/ETL/perovskite/HTM/Al) structure.16
 Fig. 1  Experimental two-probes set-up for the EIS measurements, showing the sample holder and sample under test. 
It can be an argument that n–i–p and p–i–n devices work differently due to the carrier transport influenced by the HTM/perovskite interface, with the latter being a fundamental building block of the solar cell device. The growth of an HTM on perovskite or vice versa can provide a differently structured interface that can substantially affect the electrical response and thereby the PCE. The aim of this work was, therefore, to investigate how the interfaces can influence the carrier transport, thus helping explain the entirely different device performances.
In this framework, we investigated the carrier transport across the spiro-OMeTAD/perovskite interface via electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS, see experimental setup in Fig. 1). The interface was inserted between ITO/glass and a Au contact and assembled in the two elicited configurations, mimicking the one present in solar cell devices. We primary studied the electrical transport separately on each layer constituting the device and then again after sandwiching them together in order to replicate the one adopted in solar cell devices and to discriminate the contribution of each interface component. It is noteworthy to underline that nowadays the EIS technique is largely adopted since it is an appealing and smart method. Furthermore, it has been recognized to be particularly suitable to investigate the modification of the carrier transport across differently engineered interfaces via one class of measurements only.17–19
Results and discussion
EIS results

Spiro-OMeTAD and perovskite. 
We started by studying the impedance response in the dark of a structure consisting of a 120 nm spiro-OMeTAD and 300 nm perovskite layer, each one sandwiched between Au and ITO/glass contacts (Fig. 2a and b). Nyquist plots (NPs) were performed consisting in both cases of a single semicircle at all values of the applied DC voltage (Fig. 2c).
 Fig. 2  (a and b) Representative sketches of the examined spiro-OMeTAD and perovskite layers sandwiched between Au and ITO/glass contacts; NPs (c) and (d) phase ϕ vs. f dispersion readout for 120 nm thick spiro-OMeTAD (red stars) and 300 nm thick perovskite (blue circles) single layers. The continuous red (spiro-OMeTAD) and blue (perovskite) lines represent the best-fit curves. (e) Equivalent circuit adopted for the best fitting of the NPs’ results. 
In the case of spiro-OMeTAD and perovskite single layers, the NPs best fit was achieved by using the Bisquert equivalent circuit as representative of the carrier transport mechanisms inside.19,20
The representation of the simulated NPs and the phase ϕ vs. f corresponding to the overall response of the layer evidenced that the dielectric relaxation frequency peaked at VDC = 0.0 V at around 10 kHz in the perovskite and at 100 kHz in the spiro-OMeTAD (Fig. 2c). Moreover, a broader peak was observed in the perovskite than in the spiro-OMeTAD, evidencing a broader frequency relaxation dispersion. The peak frequency was slightly downward shifted in the perovskite and upward in the spiro-OMeTAD (data not shown) structure under the application of a positive or negative bias.
The NP representation via the equivalent circuit best fitting of the experimental data (Fig. 2e) included the contact resistance Rc, as a term not depending on the frequency, and the Debye dielectric relaxation component, i.e. RDr, in series with the capacitance due to Debye relaxation, i.e. CDr, ascribed to the frequency-dependent polarization. Finally, the parallel of the recombination resistance, Rrec, and the chemical capacitance, Cμ, were placed in parallel to the Debye one. This component is due to the charge build-up at the interface between the layers and the adjacent Au or ITO/glass contacts. Specifically, the Cμ element describes the charge accumulation in the layer determining the position of the carrier Fermi level concerning the corresponding band edge (i.e. a quasi-Fermi level).
The best fit outputs at VDC = 0.0 V (see Table S1a, ESI†) evidenced that both in the spiro-OMeTAD and perovskite layers, the conditions CDr ≫ Cμ holds, allowing to extract two time constants assigned to the high frequency and low frequency processes, namely τ1 = (Rrec + RDr)CDr and τ2 = R‖Cμ with R‖ = RrecRDr/(Rrec + RDr), referring to the transient times associated to the dielectric polarization (τ1) and drift–diffusion recombination (τ2).20
The corresponding dielectric polarization times were τ1 = 23 μs and τ1 = 1.6 μs in the perovskite, while the drift–diffusion-recombination values were of the same order of magnitude (τ2 = 7.4 ns and τ2 = 9.0 ns in the perovskite and spiro-OMeTAD, respectively). The different values encountered in the τ1 values descend from the expected higher polarizability (meaning a higher charge separation effect) of the perovskite with respect to the more conductive spiro-OMeTAD. Moreover, these values were negligibly affected by the positive voltage application.


Direct vs. inverted configurations. 
The raw experimental data evidenced that in the inverted device structure (Fig. 3a), the values of both the real (ReZ) and imaginary (−IMZ) parts of the impedance Z were one order of magnitude lower than that of the direct one (Fig. 3b and c).
 Fig. 3  (a) Simplified sketch of the inverted P–I structure; (b) Nyquist plots; and (c) phase (ϕ) vs. f dispersion in P–I (inverted) device structure collected at VDC = 0.0 V, +0.6 V (direct polarization bias) and −0.6 V (inverse polarization) (see text). (d) Equivalent circuit representative of the observed behaviour consisting of the parallel of the recombination carrier resistance and contact capacitance further combined in parallel with the Debye relaxation impedance. 
A general impedance reduction occurs under the application of a positive DC bias in the inverted device and a negative bias in the direct one. The reduction descends from the preferential hole transport of the p-type spiro OMETAD layer and from the position with respect to the glass/ITO electrode where the bias is applied and the ground electrode (Al) (see the sketch in Fig. 1). Specifically, under a positive bias the inverted P–I structure is under direct polarization, meaning a lower impedance, while direct polarization occurs when a negative bias is applied to the direct I–P structure.
In order to elucidate better the carrier transport mechanisms behind the impedance behaviours, the basic elements constituting the representative circuit of the experimental NPs were analogous to those adopted for the single-layer NP analysis, i.e., the Rrec//Cμ and the Debye relaxation term assigned to the charge build-up of the structure with the electrodes.
We recall that the transport mechanisms were mainly due to carrier drift and recombination inside the perovskite layer, while the role of the spiro-OMeTAD should be to promote the hole transfer from the perovskite towards the contacts due to the relative position of the CB–VB levels.
Interestingly, the inverted and direct configurations displayed different experimental phase dispersions, notwithstanding the corresponding NPs featured by only one circle. In fact, at zero bias, in the inverted (P–I) configuration, one relaxation peak was observed (Fig. 3), while two peaks were found in the direct (I–P) one (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  (a) Simplified sketch of the direct I–P structure; (b) Nyquist plots and (c) phase (ϕ) vs. f dispersion in an I–P (direct) device structure collected at VDC = 0.0 V, +0.6 V (inverse polarization) and −0.6 V (direct polarization). The voltage sign is reverted due to the presence of the spiro-OMeTAD layer (p-layer) being close to the negative bias side. (d) Equivalent circuit representation of the observed behaviour consisting of the parallel of the recombination carrier resistance and contact capacitance combined in parallel with the Debye relaxation impedance. 
The representation of the impedance result via the specific capacitance dispersion C vs. f and comparison of the ϕ vs. f behaviours further clarified the results allowing us to identify the carrier mechanisms responsible for the observed behaviour.
In the inverted (P–I) configuration, the peak frequency (around 20 kHz) in the ϕ vs. f dispersion occurs in the presence of the transition from the capacitance contribution due to the structure geometric capacitance Cg to the chemical capacitance Cμ one when going towards lower frequencies. Therefore the dielectric response is featured by one distribution of dielectric relaxation lifetimes that justifies the choice of the equivalent circuit in Fig. 3, as representative of the experimental NP. The peak shape and position slightly shift when applying a bias.
Two relaxation peaks characterised the ϕ vs. f of the direct (I–P) structure at VDC = 0.0 V and under a direct polarization regime (i.e. to negative DC voltage, considering the position of the HTM layer), while the peaks overlapped under the inverse (positive DC voltage) polarization regime (Fig. 4). The high-frequency peak position was at 200 kHz, and did not depend on the DC applied bias. The peak at a lower frequency was shifted between 4 kHz and 20 kHz by increasing the positive DC bias. The comparison of the phase dispersion of the I–P structure with that one of those resulting from the NPs simulation of the single layers (see Fig. 5) suggested that the peak at the lower frequency refers to the distribution of the dielectric relaxation times of the perovskite, while that at a higher frequency referred to the spiro-OMeTAD. This hypothesis was also confirmed when separately simulating Rrec//Cμ,P and Rrec//Cμ,I of the I–P by using the best-fit parameters returned by adopting the circuit in Fig. 4c.
 Fig. 5  Representations of the phase ϕ vs. f dispersions for direct (I–P, stars) and inverse (P–I, pentagons) device structures at VDC = 0.0 V. The continuous lines represent the best fit. The simulation of the Rrec,P//Cμ,P and Rrec,I//Cμ,I circuital elements corresponding to perovskite (green line) and spiro-OMeTAD (red line) impedance layers alone and in the P–I and I–P structures (see legend) are also reported. In the P–I configuration, only one contribution was determined, whose values and phase dispersion evidenced a dominant contribution of the perovskite element. In the I–P configuration, two separate contributions were detected and ascribed to the spiro OMeTAD and perovskite. 
The attribution was further confirmed when representing the I–P impedance behaviour via the specific capacitances frequency dispersion (C vs. f, Fig. 6) at 0.0 VDC. Here three onsets are present: from right to left, we attribute the first onset to the transition from the structure geometric capacitance Cg to the spiro-OMETAD chemical capacitance (Cμ,P), the second one at f < 10 kHz to the onset of the perovskite one (Cμ,I) and the third one at a f < 10 Hz to the capacitance due to Debye relaxation mechanisms (CDr),20 with the latter defining the charge accumulation of the overall structure at the interface with the contacts.
 Fig. 6  Frequency dispersion of the specific capacitances (C vs. f) for the I–P (stars) and P–I (squares) device structures. Three onsets are visible in the I–P direct structure and are attributed to spiro-OMeTAD and perovskite. The attribution descends from the measurements of the capacitance dispersion of single layers. The onset are not present in the P–I inverted structure. 
In this case, we used the series of two Rrec//Cμ terms as the equivalent circuit, where one refers to the spiro-OMeTAD, Rrec//Cμ,P, and the other to the perovskite, Rrec//Cμ,I, and a parallel component is ascribed to the Debye recombination at the electrodes. It is noteworthy that the elicited circuit introduced a new component not present in the previous modelling.
The best fit parameters (see Table S1, ESI†) evidenced that the condition CDr ≫ Cμ was not satisfied, as also underlined by the presence of one arc only in the NPs impedance representations. Therefore we adapted Bisquert's model via further calculation steps for the extraction of the corrected expressions for the transient times associated with the dielectric polarization τ1 and drift–diffusion-recombination τ2.
In the case of the inverted P–I structure, we obtained (see details in the ESI†): τ1 = (RDr + Rrec(1 + Cμ/CDr))CDr(1) τ2 = (RDr + Rrec)Cμ/(RDr + Rrec(1 + Cμ/CDr))(2)While in the direct I–P structure, we obtained:τ1 = (RDr + Rrec,eq(1 + Cμ,eq/CDr))CDrτ2 = (RDrRrec,eq) × Cμ,eq/(RDr + Rrec(1 + Cμ,eq/CDr))where Rrec,eq = Rrec,PRrec,I/(Rrec,P + Rrec,I)(3)and Cμ,eq = Cμ,P + Cμ,I(4)
Moreover, it has been recognized that the transient times τ1 and τ2 determine the PL decay times observed in the time domain and thereby the charge recombination time.21
As a matter of fact, the elicited results agree with those of our previous work, where the transient photoluminescence decay times were enhanced in the inverted structure, with spiro-OMeTAD and also when other HTMs were used [ref. 15 and Fig. S2, ESI†].
The values of the transient times (see Table 1) suggested that in the inverted structure and under a bias simulating the hole injection (positive in I–P and negative in P–I), both the times associated with dielectric polarization and with drift–diffusion-recombination are around one order of magnitude higher in I–P (τ1 = 0.63 ms and τ2 = 0.13 ms in I–P vs. τ1 = 25 μs and τ2 = 21 μs in P–I).
Table 1 Values of the transient times referred to the dielectric polarization (τ1) and drift–diffusion-recombination times (τ2) in direct and inverted structures under three different bias conditions as extracted from the best fit parameters after recalculation following expressions (1) and (2) (see the ESI). The labeling direct polarization refers to the bias allowing the hole injection conditions





V
DC (V)

τ
1 (μs)

τ
2 (μs)




Direct (I–P)


0.0
92
52


0.6
20
2.6


−0.6 (direct pol.)
25
21






Inverted (P–I)


0.0
85
0.6


0.6 (direct pol.)
630
132


−0.6
111
0.7




The best fit parameters summarized in Table S2 (ESI†) evidence the increase of τ1 and τ2 in the inverted structure due to the higher values of the sum and product of Rrec and RDr and the capacitances. Specifically, τ1 suggests a more effective charge separation effect while τ2 a higher charge density build-up at the electrodes.21 As a consequence, higher recombination times and an increase of the open circuit voltage, short circuit current and efficiency can be observed (see Table 2).
Table 2 Working parameters of the undoped spiro-OMeTAD-based solar cells engineered by using the inverted (p–i–n, a) and direct (n–i–p, b) configurations under forward and reverse voltage scan directions




Scan direction
FF [%]

V
oc [V]

J
sc [mA cm−2]
PCE [%]




(a) Inverted (p–i–n)


Reverse
76
0.979
19.7
14.7


Forward
73
0.968
19.8
13.9






(b) Direct (n–i–p)


Reverse
57
0.987
17.8
10.1


Forward
55
0.966
18.1
9.8






Solar cell device performances vs. impedance results. 
As evidenced by the impedance results, the specific features of the carrier transport across P–I and I–P interfaces evidenced by EIS enabled explaining the photovoltaic performances. As a result, we further validated that the inverted interface leads to better operation than the corresponding direct devices (see Fig. 7 and Table 2).
 Fig. 7  Comparison between the J–V behaviour in spiro-OMeTAD–perovskite solar cells device embedding the I–P (p–i–n) and I–P (n–i–p) device structure configurations. Details on the device full structure can be found in ref. 16. 
In fact, the p–i–n solar cell achieved a 14.7% efficiency with a Jsc of 19.7 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.979 V and an FF of 0.76, while the n–i–p solar cell gave 10.1% efficiency with a Jsc of 17.8 mA cm−2 a Voc of 0.987 V and an FF of 0.57. Conversely, the direct device showed a rather low FF value (0.57), while a significantly higher FF (0.76) was recorded for the inverted cell. Moreover, in the inverted structure, the presence of one recombination mechanism underlines that the trap recombination at the interface was probably reduced due to the smoother (although partially mixed) interface when the perovskite was deposited on the smoother spiro-OMeTAD layer (see Fig. 7). Interestingly, the recombination may occur inside the perovskite only while the spiro-OMeTAD layer acts only as a promoter of the carrier transport.
This was further underlined by the polarization time (and then polarizability), which are much higher in the inverted structure (see Table 1), thus implying a much more efficient charge separation due to the dominant role of the perovskite layer. Finally, the recombination time under injection conditions was one order of magnitude higher than that observed in the direct structure, which is believed could guarantee a long lifetime of the photogenerated carrier to explain the achieved solar cell efficiency.


Inverse vs. direct structure architecture and solar cell performance. 
The basic strategy adopted to enhance the perovskite solar cells performance is to increase the carrier recombination time.21 The latter results from the effect of the grain boundaries and interfacial trap recombination channels of the device structure, constituting the main loss mechanisms.22
Since the dielectric response relates also to losses, the returned results when the I–P or P–I structure are embedded in the device may be helpful to explain the observed quite different values of the working parameters (FF and PCE) and the performances of the corresponding solar cells (Fig. 7 and Table 2).
As described in previous sections, the main difference between the inverted and direct device structure stems from the relative position of the HTM spiro-OMeTAD and of the perovskite in the device.
As evidence, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) investigations (Fig. 8) showed that the spiro-OMeTAD surface was smooth and homogenous when deposited onto ITO/glass (p–i–n inverted structure) (Fig. 8a), probably due to the more favourable arrangement of the molecule onto the smoother ITO surface, while it was rough when deposited on top of it following the perovskite roughness (Fig. 8b).
 Fig. 8  Surface morphology from SEM analysis of (a) spiro on ITO in the inverted P–I, (b) spiro-OMeTAD on perovskite in the I–P direct device configuration, (c) perovskite on spiro-OMeTAD, (d) perovskite on ITO/glass. 
However, the perovskite grain structure was not affected when the growth occurred on the spiro-OMeTAD or on the ITO/glass support (see Fig. 8c and d), evidencing that the perovskite growth mechanism was basically the same either when perovskite was deposited on the ITO/glass or on the spiro-OMeTAD. This can be the result of a growth on top of a smooth surface (ITO or spiro-OMeTAD) with similar wetting properties.23 Moreover, we deduced that the carrier losses mechanisms in the structure were due to the trap density at the interface between the HTM and the perovskite.
In the direct structure, the rougher perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD interface (Fig. 8b) suggested the presence of a more defective interface and thereby a higher trap density (and trap charge accumulation layer) at the perovskite/HTM interface and inside the HTM layer, resulting in the detectable spiro-OMeTAD chemical capacitance.
The ϕ vs. f behaviours and the area below these curves represent the fingerprint of the overall dielectric losses inside the structure, which may afterward affect the device performances. It was noteworthy to observe that the frequencies of the onsets of the chemical capacitances plateaux corresponded to the peaks in the ϕ vs. f dispersions. The lower magnitude of the losses in the inverse structure was evidenced by the area below the ϕ vs. f curves being larger than that observed in the inverted structure. The C vs. f curves evidenced also the presence of a peculiar carrier distribution in P–I and I–P, leading to different energetics of the interface.
The comparison with the peaks frequency range observed in the single layer measurements led to assigning them to the spiro-OMeTAD and perovskite. As for the mechanisms behind the dielectric losses, we consider the recombination at the HTM/perovskite or perovskite/HTM interfacial traps and at the perovskite and/or spiro-OMeTAD grain boundaries (GBs) to be the cause.
In the inverted structure, the results suggested the presence of one dominant interfacial trap distribution due to the corresponding frequency range we assigned to the HTM/perovskite interface for recombination at the perovskite grain boundaries. Conversely, the recombination at the spiro-OMeTAD grain and traps at the spiro-OMeTAD/perovskite interface were low due to the smoothness of the HTM layer. As a final result, only one chemical potential was evidenced due to the perovskite carrier distribution and trapping mechanisms at the GBs. Furthermore, the localization of the HTM and perovskite energy levels positions promoted hole injection to the anode and electrons to the cathode (see Fig. 9a).
 Fig. 9  Sketches representing the P–I (a) and I–P (b) structures at 0.0 VDC. The energy levels are reported for the two structures evidencing the lower/higher interface trap density at the P–I (a) and (b) I–P interfaces together with the different energy level alignments. 
In the direct structure, the recombination mechanisms were due to the traps at the rougher perovskite/HTM interface for recombination at the perovskite GB and at the spiro-OMeTAD GBs (Fig. 6 and 9b). Conversely, in the direct structure, both the presence of spiro-OMeTAD GBs and a higher density of interface traps increased the accumulated charge at the interface. This also explains the presence of two detectable chemical capacitance levels due to the spiro-OMeTAD and perovskite trapping mechanisms at the corresponding GBs. Considering the Fermi energy level alignment in the two structures, it follows that the hole motion is more favoured in the inverted structure. In fact, in the direct structure, the electrons also have to overcome the small energy wall due to the different relative positions of the perovskite and HTM energy levels, thus further explaining the higher values of the real part of the impedance (see Fig. 3 and 4) and then a lower conductivity.
Overall, the losses magnitude and the energetics of the interface in the two architectures may be considered as the main factors determining the observed carrier conductivity and transient times, finally resulting in the enhancement of the short circuit current Jsc and fill factor FF (see Table 2).

Conclusions
This work provides insights into the observed different performances of perovskite solar cells built under two device architectures, namely direct (regular) and inverted configurations. The undoped spiro-OMeTAD was tested as an HTM. The study was performed in the dark and on two HTM/perovskite basic architectures (direct and inverted) constituting the device building blocks. The corresponding label descended from where the HTM was facing the perovskite, i.e. above (directed) or below it (inverted). The analysis of the ϕ vs. f dispersion derived from the impedance spectroscopy data evidenced that the HTM and perovskite phase dispersion overlapped in the case of the inverted structure, while they were separate in the direct one. These correspond to the presence of one recombination mechanism in the inverted structure, due to the perovskite GB traps. The recombination times were higher than that observed in the perovskite-only device and in the direct architecture, leading us to hypothesize there was a lower density of grain boundary and interface traps in the perovskite, possibly due to a large grain growth on top of a smoother HTM. Therefore, the inverted configuration displayed a reduced resistance to hole motion together with a higher capacitance, implying the former had a more favourable mobility, while the latter enhanced the charge separation, also explaining the observed higher recombination times. We, therefore, believed that all the elicited results could be helpful to explain, albeit only partially, the observed device performances in terms of fill factor and efficiency. Moreover, it further underlines the advantage of using the inverted instead of the direct configuration in the case of undoped HTM, as also already observed in previous works.
Materials and methods
We label the perovskite as I and the spiro-OMeTAD as P. The I–P corresponds to the interface in the direct (or regular) device-like configuration with the perovskite below the HTM, while the P–I configuration is that of the inverted one, where the perovskite is deposited onto the HTM layer. Highly conducting indium tin oxide (ITO) on glass supports were used for the deposition of the spiro-OMeTAD, the perovskite layers alone (Fig. 4a and 3a), and the I–P and P–I device-like structures.
Support preparation
The glass/ITO supports were cleaned before the layers and interface depositions were performed by the standard procedures. Briefly, they were first sonicated in a water and chloroform solution, and then soaked in TL1 washing solution (H2O2/NH3/H2O 5:1:1, v/v) before being heated at a temperature of 80 °C for 10 min for the removal of any organic contamination, and then rinsed ten times in water. Finally, they were flushed in acetone and chloroform solution for the achievement of the best surface wetting properties suitable for deposition from organic solution.
Fabrication of the spiro-OMETAD and perovskite layers
The spiro-OMETAD and perovskite layers deposition on the ITO/glass substrate was performed via spin coating in a glove box environment to avoid air exposure. Spiro-OMeTAD layers 120 nm thick were deposited starting from 80 μL of the solution at a concentration of 60 mg mL−1 onto the ITO/glass support at 3000 rpm for 30 s. The 300 nm thick perovskite layer (300 nm) was prepared to start from a precursor solution in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) made up of lead(II) iodide (PbI2), methylammonium iodide (CH6IN) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). The solution was spin-coated on the ITO/glass substrate for 25 s at 4000 rpm. Afterwards, the sample was annealed for 1 min at 65 °C and for 9 min at 100 °C for the complete solvent.
Fabrication of the inverted P–I and directed I–P structures for the EIS measurements
For the fabrication of the inverted (P–I) structure, a 40 nm thick spiro-OMeTAD layer was deposited by spin-coating 80 μL at a solution concentration of 20 mg mL−1 at 3000 rpm for 30 s and subsequently dried at 60 °C for 10 min. The 300 nm thick perovskite films were deposited from a precursor solution of 43% w/w containing 461 mg of PbI2, 159 mg of CH3NH3I and 78 mg of DMSO (molar ratio 1:1:1) in 743 mg of DMF. The wholly dissolved solution was filtered and then spin-coated on the HTMs layer at 4000 rpm for 25 s, and then 300 μL of toluene was poured on the spinning substrate 14 s before the end of the program. The films were heated at 65 °C for 1 min and 100 °C for 9 min to obtain a dense perovskite film.
For the fabrication of the direct (I–P) structure, 300 nm thick perovskite films were deposited from a precursor solution of 43% w/w containing 461 mg of PbI2, 159 mg of CH3NH3I and 78 mg of DMSO (molar ratio 1:1:1) in 743 mg of DMF and then spin-coated on the ITO/glass layer at 4000 rpm for 25 s. 300 μL of toluene was poured on the spinning substrate 14 s before the end of the program. The films were heated at 65 °C for 1 min and 100 °C for 9 min to obtain a dense CH3NH3PbI3 film. Afterwards, 40 nm thick spiro-OMeTAD layers were deposited by spin-coating 80 μL at a solution concentration of 20 mg mL−1 at 3000 rpm for 30 s.
The structures for the EIS measurements were afterwards completed by direct evaporation off the Au contact electrodes in a high vacuum through a shadow mask.
The active area of the Au electrodes in the fabricated structure was 0.04 cm2, similar to that adopted in solar cell devices. We refer the reader to ref. 15 for the experimental procedure for solar cell fabrication on the elicited architecture.
Electrical characterizations
The samples under tests were stored in vacuum to avoid air exposure during the transportation from the production to the electrical characterization labs.
Electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements readouts were performed in the dark on the perovskite and spiro-OMeTAD layers sandwiched between the Au and ITO/glass contact and on the two device architectures, i.e. the inverted one with spiro-OMeTAD deposited on the glass/ITO support (i.e. glass/ITO/spiro-OMeTAD/perovskite/Au), and the direct one with spiro-OMeTAD deposited onto the perovskite (i.e. glass/ITO/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au).
The inverted and direct configurations are termed as (glass/ITO/P–I/Au) and (glass/ITO/I–P/Au), respectively. In the measurements, the Au contact was used as the ground electrode, and the voltage bias was applied on the ITO/glass side.
The probe set-up and the adopted bias configuration are shown in Fig. 1. All the items were tested in the same environmental starting conditions, achieved by placing the samples in a vacuum chamber where the pumping was immediately started, and the module of the impedance Z vs. time t was also read out during vacuum procedure. All the electrical measurements were launched at the base pressure of p = 1.0 × 10−5 mbar providing that the module of the impedance Z vs. time (t) had reached a stable value. The EIS spectra were acquired by a NOVOCONTROL impedance spectrum analyzer at an applied AC voltage VAC = 5 mV and in the frequency range between 1.0 Hz and 1.0 MHz either with no applied DC voltage (VDC = 0.0 V) or by superimposing a DC voltage in the range ±0.8 V.
We analysed the EIS data by the data representation via Nyquist plots (NP), i.e. by reporting the Z imaginary part (−Im(Z)) vs. the real part (Re(Z)), the overall capacitance and the phase frequency dispersion (i.e. C vs. f and the ϕ vs. f, respectively). The NPs data were subsequently fitted by hypothesizing an electrical circuit able to reproduce the corresponding experimental ones. A free downloadable EIS Analyzer software24 enabled us to perform the best fitting procedure that returned a set of electrical parameters attributable to the specific electrochemical or transport mechanisms.
The solar cells devices were characterized under an Air Mass 1.5 Global (AM 1.5G) solar simulator with an irradiation intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The current density (J) vs. voltage (V) characteristics of the PV devices were studied using a Keithley 2400 Source Measure Unit and a solar simulator Spectra-Physics Oriel 150 W with an AM 1.5G filter set.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
P. F. A. and M. A. and T. L. acknowledge the Potenziamento Strutturale PONa3_00369 (CUP H91D11000310007) “Laboratorio per lo Sviluppo Integrato delle Scienze e delle TEcnologie dei Materiali Avanzati e per dispositivi innovativi (SISTEMA)” dell’Università degli Studi di Bari “A. Moro”. M. A., P. F. A. and T. L. greatly acknowledge Mr Giuseppe Casamassima for technical support. L. D. M. acknowledges the ERC project ElecOpteRgrant number 780757, the project “TECNOMED – Tecnopolo di Nanotecnologia e Fotonica per la Medicina di Precisione”, (Ministry of University and Scientific Research (MIUR)) Decreto Direttoriale no. 3449del 4/12/2017, CUP B83B17000010001 and the project PERSEO-PERrovskite-based Solar cells: towards high E_ciency and lOng-term stability (Bando PRIN 2015-Italian Ministry of University and Scientific Research (MIUR)) Decreto Direttoriale 4 novembre 2015 no. 2488, project number 20155LECAJ.
Notes and references
A. B. Djurišić, F. Z. Liu, H. W. Tam, M. K. Wong, A. Ng, C. Surya, W. Chen and Z. B. He, Perovskite solar cells – An overview of critical issues, Prog. Quantum Electron., 2017, 53, 1–37 CrossRef .
T. Hakamata, K. Shimamura, F. Shimojo, R. K. Kalia, A. Nakano and P. Vashishta, The nature of free-carrier transport in organometal halide perovskites, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 19599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, Organometal Halide Perovskites as Visible-Light Sensitizers for Photovoltaic Cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Park, Perovskite solar cells: an emerging photovoltaic technology, Biochem. Pharmacol., 2015, 18, 65–72 CAS .
F. Zhang, Z. Wang, H. Zhu, N. Pellet, J. Luo, C. Yi, X. Liu, H. Liu, S. Wang, X. Li, Y. Xiao, S. M. Zakeeruddin, D. Bi and M. Grätzel, Over 20% PCE perovskite solar cells with superior stability achieved by novel and low-cost hole-transporting materials, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 469–475 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, J.-P. Correa-Baena, C. M. Wolff, M. Stolterfoht, N. Phung, S. Albrecht, D. Neher and A. Abate, How to Make over 20% Efficient Perovskite Solar Cells in Regular (n–i–p) and Inverted (p–i–n) Architectures, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 4193–4201 CrossRef CAS .
Best Research-Cell Efficiencies Chart, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/pdfs/pv-efficiency-chart.20181221.pdf.
G. Meng, Y. Shi, X. Song, M. Ji, Y. Xue and C. Hao, Theoretical insight into the carrier mobility anisotropy of hole transport material Spiro-OMeTAD, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2017, 17, 1316–1322 CrossRef .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Efficient Hybrid Solar Cells Based on Meso-Superstructured Organometal Halide Perovskites, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ameen, M. A. Rub, S. A. Kosa, K. A. Alamry, M. S. Akhtar, H.-S. Shin, H.-K. Seo, A. M. Asiri and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Perovskite Solar Cells: Influence of Hole Transporting Materials on Power Conversion Efficiency, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 10–27 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, P. Yang, Z. Hu, T. Jiang, X. Lai, H. Lin and X. Zhao, Cobalt Salt as Efficient Dopant for Spiro-MeOTAD in Cesium-Containing Planar Perovskite Solar Cells, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2018, 18, 2898–2902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, Y. Wu, C. Qin, X. Yang, T. Yasuda, A. Islam, K. Zhang, W. Peng, W. Chen and L. Han, A dopant-free hole-transporting material for efficient and stable perovskite solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2963–2967 RSC .
S. Paek, P. Qin, Y. Lee, K. T. Cho, P. Gao, G. Grancini, E. Oveisi, P. Gratia, K. Rakstys, S. A. Al-Muhtaseb, C. Ludwig, J. Ko and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Dopant-Free Hole-Transporting Materials for Stable and Efficient Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606555 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Sun, Q. Xue, Z. Zhu, Q. Xiao, K. Jiang, H. Yip, H. Yan and Z. Li, Fluoranthene-based dopant-free hole transporting materials for efficient perovskite solar cells, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 2698–2704 RSC .
L. Wang, J. Zhang, P. Liu, B. Xu, B. Zhang, H. Chen, A. K. Inge, Y. Li, H. Wang, Y.-B. Cheng, L. Kloo and L. Sun, Design and synthesis of dopant-free organic hole-transport materials for perovskite solar cells, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 9571–9574 RSC .
R. Iacobellis, S. Masi, A. Rizzo, R. Grisorio, M. Ambrico, S. Colella, P. F. Ambrico, G. P. Suranna, A. Listorti and L. De Marco, Addressing the Function of Easily Synthesized Hole Transporters in Direct and Inverted Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 1069–1076 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pitarch-Tena, T. T. Ngo, M. Vallés-Pelarda, T. Pauporté and I. Mora-Seró, Impedance Spectroscopy Measurements in Perovskite Solar Cells: Device Stability and Noise Reduction, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1044–1048 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, E. Palomares, L. Otero, D. Kuang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Correlation between photovoltaic performance and impedance spectroscopy of dye-sensitized solar cells based on ionic liquids, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6550–6560 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Pascoe, N. W. Duffy, A. D. Scully, F. Huang and Y.-B. Cheng, Insights into Planar CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite Solar Cells Using Impedance Spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 4444–4453 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, L. Bertoluzzi, I. Mora-Sero and G. Garcia-Belmonte, Theory of impedance and capacitance spectroscopy of solar cells with dielectric relaxation, drift-diffusion transport, and recombination, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 18983–18991 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lu, M. Liang, P. Dai, K. Miao, C. Zhang, Z. Sun and S. Xue, A Strategy for Enhancing the Performance of Borondipyrromethene Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 25657–25667 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Sherkar, C. Momblona, L. Gil-Escrig, J. Ávila, M. Sessolo, H. J. Bolink and L. J. A. Koster, Recombination in Perovskite Solar Cells: Significance of Grain Boundaries, Interface Traps, and Defect Ions, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1214–1222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bi, Q. Wang, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan, Z. Xiao and J. Huang, Non-wetting surface-driven high-aspect-ratio crystalline grain growth for efficient hybrid perovskite solar cells, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–7 Search PubMed .

          A. S. Bondarenko and G. A. Ragoisha, Eis Spectrum Analyser, http://www.abc.chemistry.bsu.by/vi/analyser/.

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cp00564aThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Experimental two-probes set-up for the EIS measurements, showing the sample holder and sample under test.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a and b) Representative sketches of the examined spiro-OMeTAD and perovskite layers sandwiched between Au and ITO/glass contacts; NPs (c) and (d) phase ϕ vs. f dispersion readout for 120 nm thick spiro-OMeTAD (red stars) and 300 nm thick perovskite (blue circles) single layers. The continuous red (spiro-OMeTAD) and blue (perovskite) lines represent the best-fit curves. (e) Equivalent circuit adopted for the best fitting of the NPs’ results.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Simplified sketch of the inverted P–I structure; (b) Nyquist plots; and (c) phase (ϕ) vs. f dispersion in P–I (inverted) device structure collected at VDC = 0.0 V, +0.6 V (direct polarization bias) and −0.6 V (inverse polarization) (see text). (d) Equivalent circuit representative of the observed behaviour consisting of the parallel of the recombination carrier resistance and contact capacitance further combined in parallel with the Debye relaxation impedance.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Simplified sketch of the direct I–P structure; (b) Nyquist plots and (c) phase (ϕ) vs. f dispersion in an I–P (direct) device structure collected at VDC = 0.0 V, +0.6 V (inverse polarization) and −0.6 V (direct polarization). The voltage sign is reverted due to the presence of the spiro-OMeTAD layer (p-layer) being close to the negative bias side. (d) Equivalent circuit representation of the observed behaviour consisting of the parallel of the recombination carrier resistance and contact capacitance combined in parallel with the Debye relaxation impedance.	 

 	Fig. 5  Representations of the phase ϕ vs. f dispersions for direct (I–P, stars) and inverse (P–I, pentagons) device structures at VDC = 0.0 V. The continuous lines represent the best fit. The simulation of the Rrec,P//Cμ,P and Rrec,I//Cμ,I circuital elements corresponding to perovskite (green line) and spiro-OMeTAD (red line) impedance layers alone and in the P–I and I–P structures (see legend) are also reported. In the P–I configuration, only one contribution was determined, whose values and phase dispersion evidenced a dominant contribution of the perovskite element. In the I–P configuration, two separate contributions were detected and ascribed to the spiro OMeTAD and perovskite.	 

 	Fig. 6  Frequency dispersion of the specific capacitances (C vs. f) for the I–P (stars) and P–I (squares) device structures. Three onsets are visible in the I–P direct structure and are attributed to spiro-OMeTAD and perovskite. The attribution descends from the measurements of the capacitance dispersion of single layers. The onset are not present in the P–I inverted structure.	 
τ1 = (RDr + Rrec(1 + Cμ/CDr))CDr	(1)
τ2 = (RDr + Rrec)Cμ/(RDr + Rrec(1 + Cμ/CDr))	(2)
τ1 = (RDr + Rrec,eq(1 + Cμ,eq/CDr))CDr
τ2 = (RDrRrec,eq) × Cμ,eq/(RDr + Rrec(1 + Cμ,eq/CDr))
Rrec,eq = Rrec,PRrec,I/(Rrec,P + Rrec,I)	(3)
Cμ,eq = Cμ,P + Cμ,I	(4)

Direct (I–P)
0.0	92	52
0.6	20	2.6
−0.6 (direct pol.)	25	21


Inverted (P–I)
0.0	85	0.6
0.6 (direct pol.)	630	132
−0.6	111	0.7

(a) Inverted (p–i–n)
Reverse	76	0.979	19.7	14.7
Forward	73	0.968	19.8	13.9


(b) Direct (n–i–p)
Reverse	57	0.987	17.8	10.1
Forward	55	0.966	18.1	9.8

 	Fig. 7  Comparison between the J–V behaviour in spiro-OMeTAD–perovskite solar cells device embedding the I–P (p–i–n) and I–P (n–i–p) device structure configurations. Details on the device full structure can be found in ref. 16.	 

 	Fig. 8  Surface morphology from SEM analysis of (a) spiro on ITO in the inverted P–I, (b) spiro-OMeTAD on perovskite in the I–P direct device configuration, (c) perovskite on spiro-OMeTAD, (d) perovskite on ITO/glass.	 

 	Fig. 9  Sketches representing the P–I (a) and I–P (b) structures at 0.0 VDC. The energy levels are reported for the two structures evidencing the lower/higher interface trap density at the P–I (a) and (b) I–P interfaces together with the different energy level alignments.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cp00564a

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2019
