Printable photo-supercapacitor using single-walled carbon nanotubes  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0EE00296H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0EE00296H
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 413-416Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsPrintable photo-supercapacitor using single-walled carbon nanotubes

        
          
            Grace 
            Wee†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Teddy 
            Salim†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Yeng Ming 
            Lam
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Subodh G. 
            Mhaisalkar
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Madhavi 
            Srinivasan
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore, 639798. E-mail: madhavi@ntu.edu.sg;   Tel: +65 67904626
bEnergy Research Institute @ NTU(ERI@N), Level 5, Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637553
Received 
      22nd July 2010
    , Accepted 11th October 2010First published on 26th October 2010AbstractA printable, all solid-state photo-supercapacitor (PSC) incorporating both organic photovoltaic (OPV) and supercapacitor (SC) functions has been demonstrated utilizing a single-walled carbon nanotube network, enabling a thinner (< 0.6 mm) and lighter (< 1 g) device architecture, which leads to a 43% reduction in device internal resistance as compared to external wire connected OPVs and SCs.

Broader context
A photo-supercapacitor (PSC) made up of energy harnessing (organic photovoltaic (OPV)) and energy storage (supercapacitor) components has been demonstrated using a layer-by-layer device fabrication approach, utilizing single-walled carbon nanotube (CNT) networks as a common integration platform. This hybrid device, in which photogenerated charge is stored at the electric double layer, was constructed by assembling a supercapacitor electrode and a polymer electrolyte on top of a multilayered OPV. This hybrid device architecture was thinner (< 0.6 mm), lighter (< 1 g) and lead to a 43% reduction in device internal resistance as compared to external wire connected OPVs and supercapacitors. The thickness of the CNT network is tunable to accommodate the charges generated from OPVs with different area coverages. Under an illumination of 100 mW cm−2 for 70 s, the hybrid device with an unoptimized OPV yielded a specific capacitance of 28 F g−1 when discharged in the dark. This specific capacitance could be further improved to 80 F g−1 by connecting two OPVs in series. Such integration also opens up the possibility of printability and flexibility for hybrid devices, with further possibilities of integration with printed electronics, which may comprise functional circuitry as well as display elements.

Countries worldwide are placing greater emphasis on electricity generated from renewable sources such as solar energy in order to alleviate global warming and fossil fuel dependence. Since the fabrication of silicon-based solar cells in the 1950s, research efforts for the development of low-cost solar cells have intensified. Organic photovoltaics (OPVs) comprising phase-separated composites of conjugated molecules (viz bulk heterojunction solar cells) or organic/inorganic nanostructures (viz. dye-sensitized solar cells) offer exceptional opportunities as low-cost 3rd generation solar cells because they can be fabricated via roll-to-roll, low-cost printing and coating technologies on flexible substrates.1–8
The efficiencies (η) of these solar cells, however, still hover in the 6% range for bulk heterojunction cells and 11% for dye-sensitized solar cells.9–11 Although there is optimism that these efficiencies may reach 15%, two application regimes are clearly emerging for solar cells: ‘power generation’ at η > 15% and ‘harvesting’ at η < 10%. The low power conversion efficiency of OPVs has limited their competitive existence in the market as stand-alone devices. Integrating OPVs with energy storage devices such as supercapacitors (SC) and batteries thus offers a promising opportunity to store energy, to use it on demand for harnessing applications and to provide electricity reliably for off-grid and commercial applications.
Photovoltaic energy storage modules by externally interconnecting solar cells with batteries and capacitors have been reported.12–14 However, such an integration method requires external electrical interconnections between the OPV and the charge storage device, which results in energy losses due to resistance from these connections and is not compatible with roll-to-roll printing, a flexible substrate-based process. On the other hand, the low power density and poor cycle-stability of Li ion batteries15 has limited the charging–discharging capability of these devices, thus reducing the energy storage and efficiency of this integrated OPV-battery module. Nevertheless, a successful demonstration of the hybrid module for practical use in the “Lighting Africa” initiative has been reported by Krebs et al.16,17
In this Communication, we demonstrate a new approach to fabricate a printable, all solid-state photo-supercapacitor (PSC) by integrating an OPV and a SC, which has a higher power density (∼10 kW kg−1) compared to a battery and a higher energy density (5 Wh kg−1) compared to a conventional capacitor.15,18 A printable PSC architecture employs the use of (i) a layer-by-layer device fabrication approach, (ii) printable nanoscale materials and polymer electrolytes, and (iii) a single-walled carbon nanotube (CNT) network as a common interface between both devices. CNTs were earlier explored as photoactive materials and conducting electrodes for OPVs,19,20 and also electrodes for energy storage devices such as SCs,21 batteries22 and fuel cells23 due to their high electrical conductivity, chemical stability, high robustness and solution processibility.24 However, we demonstrate herein the utilization of CNTs as an integration platform that allows the elimination of external OPV–charge storage interconnects and leads to an improved performance by reducing internal resistance. In addition, such an integrated device with a simplified architecture is compatible with the roll-to-roll printing process, creating a new opportunity for thin, light-weight and flexible devices, enabling a new class of integrated energy harnessing and storage devices for full integration with the emerging field of printed electronics.
The fabrication of the PSC involved the etching of indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrates (Kintec Company, 7 Ω cm−2) with hydrochloric acid (37 wt%), and then the substrates were cleaned by using detergent, de-ionized water, acetone and isopropanol. Each washing step involved immersing the substrates for 15 min in an ultrasonic bath. The substrates were then blow-dried using N2, and plasma cleaned for 2 min to remove any remaining organic contaminants and for the surface treatment of ITO. A poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS, H. C. Starck Clevios, GmbH) solution was spin-coated onto the substrates after the plasma cleaning process at 3000 rpm for 30 s, and a thickness of ∼30 nm could be obtained. After spin-coating, the substrates were transferred to a glove box and baked on a hotplate for 10 min to remove any moisture. A blend of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) (1:1 by weight, 10 mg ml−1) was stirred overnight at 50 °C and spin-coated (700 rpm, 30 s) onto the PEDOT:PSS to yield a ∼100 nm-thick photoactive layer. Patterned Al cathodes (∼100 nm thick) were deposited by thermal evaporation (10−6 mbar, evaporation rate of 0.2 Å s−1) through a shadow mask. The layer-by-layer OPV fabrication was completed by thermal annealing after Al deposition at 150 °C for 30 min. The OPV device performance was characterized by measuring the current density vs. voltage (J–V) characteristics with a Keithley 2400 multistat in the dark and under AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2) using a Newport 66902 solar simulator.
To integrate a SC on top of the OPV, the CNT solution (3 mg ml−1 in isopropanol) was drop-cast on top of the Al cathodes of the OPV at room temperature to create a CNT network that acts as the integration platform as well as the electrode of the SC. This is then followed by the stacking of a free-standing polymer electrolyte, made up of polyvinyl alcohol with 1 M acid phosphoric dopant (PVA-H3PO4),25 on top of the CNT network. The device was completed by stacking a free-standing CNT network21 on top of the polymer electrolyte, such that the PVA–H3PO4 polymer electrolyte was sandwiched between two CNT networks (PSC device configuration shown in Fig. 1(a)). Cyclic voltammetry (CV), galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) cycles and self-discharge measurements were carried out in a two-electrode configuration using a computer-controlled bipotentiostat (Pine Instrument, AFBP1) in the potential range 0–1 V (scan rate of 20 mV s−1) at a constant current ranging from 0.2 to 1 mA, respectively.
 Fig. 1  (a) A schematic representation of a PSC fabricated using the layer-by-layer approach, with the thickness indicated for each layer of components. (b) J–V curves in the dark under AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2) of the P3HT:PCBM-based OPV device. (c) CV curves for the SC with CNT electrodes and a PVA–H3PO4 polymer electrolyte measured at 20 mV s−1. 
For scaling-up the fabrication of the PSC, the OPV device can be fabricated by making use of the roll-to-roll processing technique, as reported by Krebs et al.5–8 The deposition of CNT films on the Al cathode of the OPV can be achieved by spray coating or printing.18 The use of polymer electrolytes,26,27 which combines both the separator and the electrolyte into a single layer, is identified as one of the key steps for fabricating thin (∼0.5 mm), light-weight (<1 g) and all solid-state PSCs, as well as preventing the potential leakage of the electrolyte. Such polymer electrolytes can be patterned through molding technology, and this is a rather important contributing factor in up-scaling the fabrication of PSCs.
Before measuring the performance of the PSC, the individual device performance of the OPV and SC were first tested. Fig. 1(b) shows both dark and light J–V curves of the OPV. The dark J–V profile shows the ideal behavior of a diode, whereas from the light J–V profile, short-circuit current densities (JSC) as high as 10.37 mA cm−2 could be obtained from the OPV when no bias was applied. The device yielded an open circuit voltage (VOC) of ∼ 0.6 V, which was the highest voltage achievable for an OPV in charging the SC in the hybrid device. Analysis of the series resistance of the device gave a low value of 12 Ω cm2, which correlates with its relatively high fill factor (FF) of 55% and power conversion efficiency (η) of 3.39%.
CV curves of the SC device are shown in Fig. 1(c), where the near-rectangular shape of the CV curves indicate good capacitive characteristics of the device,28 with a specific capacitance of 84.5 F g−1. Similar observations were also obtained from the measurement of specific capacitance using the GCD method with a constant current of 0.2 mA, yielding a specific capacitance of 86 F g−1, mirroring the CV results. By increasing the thickness of the CNT network, which is proportional to its mass (by assuming the same network area), the charge capacity also increased accordingly, as indicated by the larger current–voltage curve shown in Fig. 1(c). This implies that during productization, the form factor and device architecture can be readily optimized—that is, the SC can match the OPV through a variation in area or the SC may only partially match the OPV area coverage, with the thickness variation accounting for any mismatch between the energy generated by the OPV and the charge storage capacity of the SC. Potentiostatic measurements yielded a power density of 0.15 kW kg−1 and an energy density of 2.96 Wh kg−1 for the SC device, which compares favourably with the reported ranges (0.01–10 kW kg−1) of commercial SCs and is similar to other reported flexible devices.25,29

Fig. 2(a) shows the schematic and circuit illustration of PSC charging, in which the ITO and another free-standing CNT electrode of the SC are connected in series (denoted as terminal 1), whereas both the OPV and SC are integrated in parallel with a common interface consisting of the drop-cast CNT network on the Al cathode of the OPV (denoted as terminal 2). The band diagram in Fig. 3(a) illustrates the electron and hole transfers within the PSC. During the charging process, photons (hν) are absorbed by P3HT, and the generated excitons dissociate to produce free charges, with the holes and electrons being transported by the bi-continuous P3HT and PCBM phases. The work function difference between the electrodes drives the holes along the highest occupied molecular orbitals (HOMOs) of P3HT, PEDOT:PSS, to the ITO anode. On the other hand, electrons from the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of PCBM are transported towards the Al cathode. Upon reaching the anode and cathode of the OPV, both electrons and holes are further transferred to the CNT electrodes and subsequently charge the adjoining SC.
 Fig. 2  Schematic and circuit illustration of a PSC during (a) the charging process and (b) galvanostatic discharge. The voltage and current profiles plotted vs. time for the (c) charging and (d) discharging process of a PSC. 
 Fig. 3  (a) Band diagram and charge transport of a PSC device. (b) Charge–discharge cycle stability of a PSC (the inset shows the self-discharge curves of a PSC and a SC plotted as a function of time). The GCD curves of (c) PSC, and (d) an OPV and a SC connected externally using electrical wires. 
After charging the SC for 70 s under an illumination of 100 mW cm−2, the light source was switched off and the discharge was undertaken by connecting a 1 kΩ resistor in parallel to terminals 1 and 2 of the SC (Fig. 2(b)), which acts as a load that draws a maximum current of 0.6 mA from the SC. The charge and discharge curves of the SC are plotted as a function of voltage and current vs. time, as shown in Fig. 2(c) and 2(d), and yields a capacitance of 28 F g−1. This lower specific capacitance of the PSC as compared to individual SCs is mainly due to the VOC limitation of 0.6 V from the un-optimized OPV, which is insufficient to charge the SC up to its maximum capacity. The cycle stability of the PSC was also investigated by employing the charge–discharge process described previously for 10 cycles, and the discharge capacity of the device was able to retain up to ∼47% of its initial capacity (17.5 Cg−1), as demonstrated in Fig. 3(b). The self-discharge of a SC with and without coupling to an OPV are shown in the inset of Fig. 3(b) after charging for 30 min with 1 V in an ambient environment. The shorter self-discharge life span of the PSC (∼ 64 s) as compared to the SC (∼ 60 min) may be attributed to the degraded energy conversion capability of the OPV under ambient conditions, which can be further improved by proper sealing of the device. The self-discharge of the PSC could also be improved by the addition of a diode to prevent possible charge backflow into the OPV. On the other hand, the internal resistance of the PSC was found to be 115 Ω from the initial voltage drop of its discharge curve (Fig. 3(c)), which is almost 43% less than when connecting the two individual devices, respectively, using an external wire (200 Ω), as indicated by the larger voltage drop of the discharge curve illustrated in Fig. 3(d).
The common integration platform not only leads to a reduction in internal resistance, but also to a hybrid device that is thinner (<0.6 mm) and lighter (<1 g) compared to that where the two individual devices are connected by an external wire, underlining the potential of PSCs for applications that require light weights and portability, such as electronic paper and wearable electronics.30,31 However, the low energy storage capability of PSCs reflects the need to increase the charging voltage, either through optimizing the performance of a single OPV, by connecting several OPVs in series or with tandem solar cell architectures.32,33 We have demonstrated that doubling of the charging voltage can be achieved by connecting two OPVs in series (Fig. 4(a)); the voltage and current profiles of GCD curves plotted as a function of time are shown in Fig. 4(b) and 4(c), respectively. Increasing the charging voltage and current has proven critical in charging the SC to its maximum storage capability, yielding a specific capacitance of 79.8 F g−1, which is nearly three times higher compared to a SC integrated with a single OPV.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic and circuit illustration of a PSC showing the SC connected in parallel to two OPVs in series during the charging process. Charge–discharge curves of the PSC plotted as a function of (b) voltage and (c) current vs. time. 
Another strategy to optimize charge storage can be realized through PV cell area modification. The energy produced by the OPV, EOPV, is represented by equation (eqn) (1), whereas the energy stored in the SC, ESC, is represented by eqn (2), where V is the open circuit voltage of the OPV, J is the current density produced by the OPV, t is the OPV charging time, FF is the OPV fill factor, G is the OPV-to-SC charge transfer efficiency, AOPV is the area of the OPV, C′ is the capacitance per unit area and ASC is the area of the SC. EOPV = VJAOPVtFFG(1) (2)
As charges transfer from the OPV to the SC, both equations can be equalized and the following relational equation can be obtained (eqn (3)): (3)
For an OPV area of 1 cm2 subjected to an 8 h exposure of sunlight, assuming a 10% charge transfer efficiency (G = 0.1), the ASC needed for storing all of the charge at a CNT concentration of 0.2 mg ml−1 is ∼ 498 cm2. However, with the low mass per unit area of CNTs (2.3 mg cm−2), the equivalent mass for a 498 cm2 CNT network is just 1.1 g. As described earlier, the amount of charge stored in SCs scales with the weight (or thickness) of the CNT network, and thus the area, ASC, can be easily reduced by utilizing thicker CNT networks.
Conclusions
In conclusion, the feasibility of a printable, all-solid-state, self-charging PSC has been proven by utilizing a CNT network that functions as an integration platform of the hybrid device as well as the electrode of the SC. The elimination of wiring between both devices significantly reduces the internal resistance of the PSC, simplifies the device architecture with less thickness (< 0.6 mm) and weight (< 1 g), and thus leads to potential cost reductions in materials and manufacturing processes. To fully utilize the energy storage capacity of the SC, the power conversion efficiency of the OPV needs to be optimized to provide a sufficient charging voltage, which can also be achieved by connecting several OPVs in series. It should be noted that the methodologies presented herein are not only restricted to integrating a SC with an OPV, but also to thin film silicon-based photovoltaics and flexible dye-sensitized solar cells. Further developments of this approach may include metal nanoparticle-decorated CNTs, the tunability of the CNT work function of which using metal nanoparticle decoration will also enable the use of these materials as common electrode materials and would further support the development of ‘solar-batteries’ or ‘solar-supercapacitors’.
References
W. Ma, C. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, W. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Tao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864 CAS .
K. Kim, J. Liu, M. A. G. Namboothiry and D. L. Carroll, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 163511 CrossRef .
J. K. Lee, W. Ma, C. J. Brabec, J. Yuan, J. S. Moon, J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. C. Bazan, A. J. Heeger and J. Am, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3619 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, T. Tromholt and M. Jørgensen, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 873–886 RSC .
F. C. Krebs, S. A. Gevorgyan and J. Alstrup, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5442–5451 RSC .
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 465–475 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 394–412 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497–500 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, Y. Wu, D. Feng, S. T. Tsai, H. J. Son, G. Li and L. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131(1), 56–57 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Yum, P. Chen, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 699–707 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dennler, S. Bereznev, D. Fichou, K. Holl, D. Ilic, R. Koeppe, M. Krebs, A. Labouret, C. Lungenschmied, A. Marchenko, D. Meissner, E. Mellikov, J. Me'ot, A. Meyer, T. Meyer, H. Neugebauer, A. Opik, N. S. Sariciftci, S. Taillemite and T. Wohrle, Sol. Energy, 2007, 81, 947–957 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hauch, A. Georg, U. O. Krasovec and B. Orel, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A1208 CrossRef CAS .
T. Miyasaka and T. N. Murakami, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 3932–3934 CrossRef CAS .

          B. E. Conway, Electrochemical Supercapacitors: Scientific Fundamentals and Technological Application, Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York,  1999 Search PubMed .
F. C. Krebs, T. D. Nielsen, J. Fyenbo, M. Wadstrøm and M. S. Pedersen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 512–525 RSC .
F. C. Krebs, J. Fyenbo and M. Jørgensen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8994–9001 RSC .
M. Kaempgen, C. K. Chan, J. Ma, Y. Cui and G. Gruner, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1872–1876 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Thompson and J. M. J. Frechet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 58–77 CrossRef .
P. R. Somani, S. P. Somani and M. Umeno, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 033315 CrossRef .
M. Kaempgen, G. Wee, J. Ma, S. G. Mhaisalkar and G. Gruner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 264104 CrossRef .
A. Kiebele, M. Kaempgen and G. Gruner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 144104–144107 CrossRef .
M. Kaempgen, M. Liebert, N. Nicoloso and S. Roth, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 094103 CrossRef .
A. G. Pandolfo and A. F. Hollekamp, J. Power Sources, 2006, 157, 11–27 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wee, W. F. Mak, A. Kiebele, N. Phonthammachai, M. V. Reddy, B. V. R Chowdari, G. Gruner, M. Srinivasan and S. G. Mhaisalkar, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A179–A184 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Stephen, Eur. Polym. J., 2006, 41, 21–42 .
C. A. Vincent, Prog. Solid State Chem., 1987, 17, 145–261 CrossRef CAS .
E. Frackowiak and F. Beguin, Carbon, 2001, 39, 937–950 CrossRef CAS .
C. Meng, C. Liu and S. Fan, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 186–189 CrossRef CAS .
F. N. Ishikawa, H. Chang, K. Ryu, P. Chen, A. Badmaev, L. Arco, G. Shen and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 73–79 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Street, W. S. Wong, S. E. Ready, M. L. Chabinyc, A. C. Arias, S. Limb, A. Salleo and R. Lujan, Mater. Today, 2006, 9, 32–37 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lungenschmied, G. Dennler, H. Neugebauer, S. N. Sariciftci, M. Glatthaar, T. Meyer and A. Meyer, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 379–384 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yakimov and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 1667–1669 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Broader context
A photo-supercapacitor (PSC) made up of energy harnessing (organic photovoltaic (OPV)) and energy storage (supercapacitor) components has been demonstrated using a layer-by-layer device fabrication approach, utilizing single-walled carbon nanotube (CNT) networks as a common integration platform. This hybrid device, in which photogenerated charge is stored at the electric double layer, was constructed by assembling a supercapacitor electrode and a polymer electrolyte on top of a multilayered OPV. This hybrid device architecture was thinner (< 0.6 mm), lighter (< 1 g) and lead to a 43% reduction in device internal resistance as compared to external wire connected OPVs and supercapacitors. The thickness of the CNT network is tunable to accommodate the charges generated from OPVs with different area coverages. Under an illumination of 100 mW cm−2 for 70 s, the hybrid device with an unoptimized OPV yielded a specific capacitance of 28 F g−1 when discharged in the dark. This specific capacitance could be further improved to 80 F g−1 by connecting two OPVs in series. Such integration also opens up the possibility of printability and flexibility for hybrid devices, with further possibilities of integration with printed electronics, which may comprise functional circuitry as well as display elements.


 	Fig. 1  (a) A schematic representation of a PSC fabricated using the layer-by-layer approach, with the thickness indicated for each layer of components. (b) J–V curves in the dark under AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2) of the P3HT:PCBM-based OPV device. (c) CV curves for the SC with CNT electrodes and a PVA–H3PO4 polymer electrolyte measured at 20 mV s−1.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic and circuit illustration of a PSC during (a) the charging process and (b) galvanostatic discharge. The voltage and current profiles plotted vs. time for the (c) charging and (d) discharging process of a PSC.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Band diagram and charge transport of a PSC device. (b) Charge–discharge cycle stability of a PSC (the inset shows the self-discharge curves of a PSC and a SC plotted as a function of time). The GCD curves of (c) PSC, and (d) an OPV and a SC connected externally using electrical wires.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic and circuit illustration of a PSC showing the SC connected in parallel to two OPVs in series during the charging process. Charge–discharge curves of the PSC plotted as a function of (b) voltage and (c) current vs. time.	 
EOPV = VJAOPVtFFG	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
