Charge transfer state in highly efficient polymer – fullerene bulk heterojunction solar cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2JM15027A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2JM15027A
(Application)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4141-4150Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsCharge transfer state in highly efficient polymer–fullerene bulk heterojunction solar cells

        
          
            Claudia 
            Piliego
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Maria Antonietta 
            Loi
          
          
        
      *
      Photophysics and Optoelectronic, Zernike Institute for Advanced Materials, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4, 9747 AE Groningen, The Netherlands. E-mail: M.A.Loi@rug.nl;  Fax: +31(0)50-3638751
Received 
      6th October 2011
    , Accepted 10th January 2012First published on 30th January 2012AbstractIn recent years, steady improvements in organic photovoltaic (OPV) performance have been reported with power conversion efficiency (PCE) reaching 9%. Despite this rapid improvement, the mechanisms limiting the existing performance are not completely known; therefore a better understanding of the loss processes is necessary. In this respect a crucial role may be played by the charge transfer (CT) state, which is the intermediate state between the excitons and the fully dissociated charges. In this review article we outline the dynamics of this intermediate state in light of their influence on the photovoltaic performance, with central emphasis on highly efficient polymer–fullerene bulk heterojunction solar cells.Claudia PiliegoClaudia Piliego studied Material Science and obtained her PhD degree at the University of Salento (Italy) in 2008, with a thesis on organic materials for light emitting diode and transistor applications. In 2008 she accepted a postdoctoral position at the University of California, Berkeley, in the group of Prof. Jean M. J. Fréchet doing research on organic solar cells. She is currently a Post-doc in the Photophysics and OptoElectronic group of the Zernike Institute for Advanced Materials, at the University of Groningen.Maria AntoniettaMaria Antonietta Loi studied physics and received her PhD in 2001 from the University of Cagliari (Italy) with a thesis on photoexcitations and intermolecular interactions in organic single crystals. In 2001 she started a post-doctoral work at the University of Linz (Austria) in the group of Prof. N. S. Sariciftci. Later she moved to the Institute for Nanostructured Materials of the Italian National Research Council in Bologna. In 2006 she became Assistant Professor at the Zernike Institute for Advanced Materials of the University of Groningen (The Netherlands). She is currently Associate Professor and chair of the Photophysics and OptoElectronic department.
Introduction
Bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells have attracted considerable attention over the past few years due to their potential for being one of the first ultra-low-cost photovoltaic technologies. They offer the opportunity to significantly reduce solar energy cost by employing earth abundant active materials and cheap manufacturing techniques, such as roll to roll and ink-jet printing. This could lead to a watt-peak price considerably below that of inorganic solar cells.1
Efficiencies of BHJ cells higher than 9% have been reported and certified by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL).2–4 Theoretical and experimental studies suggest that power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) in the range of 10–12% can be achieved with single junction devices.5
In order to increase the PCE over 10%, which is considered a threshold for a widespread deployment of organic photovoltaic cells,6 both the design of new materials and different device architectures are necessary. However, to identify the guidelines for both new material synthesis and device engineering, it is important to understand the origin of the losses limiting the performance.
Several different factors have already been identified, including the limited absorption, the nano-morphology7 of the photoactive layer, the high exciton binding energy, losses due to charge carrier recombination,8 inefficient charge transport9 and the non-optimized offset between the donor and the acceptor energy levels.10
Recently a lot of studies have pointed out the role of the charge transfer (CT) state, since both its presence and its dissociation–recombination dynamics may ultimately influence the performance of the device.
In organic semiconductors, the absorption of light leads to the generation of strongly bound electron–hole pairs, called excitons. Due to their low dielectric constant (ε = 2–4), the exciton binding energy (0.3–0.5 eV) is considerably higher than in inorganic semiconductors (0.01–0.05 eV). In order to overcome this energy and to create free charges a type two heterojunction is necessary. The heterojunction is constituted by an electron donor (hole transporting) material and an acceptor (electron transporting) material. The optimal heterojunction structure is the BHJ, in which the two components form a bicontinuous network, maximizing the interfacial area where the exciton dissociation can take place. In state-of-the-art systems, the donor is generally a narrow band gap polymer, and the acceptor a fullerene derivative. In the commonly accepted scheme, the working mechanism of this class of solar cells has four fundamental steps:11 (i) absorption of light and formation of the exciton, (ii) diffusion of the exciton at the interface, (iii) dissociation of the exciton with formation of charges, and (iv) charge transport and charge collection. However, the details of the free charge generation have not been fully understood.
Recent studies have pointed out also the presence of an intermediate state between the exciton and the separated charges, namely the CT state. In this case, a part of the excited state population will form a weakly bound state at the interface between the donor and the acceptor (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Schematic of a bulk heterojunction solar cell and the simplified energy level diagram of a donor/acceptor interface in the type two heterojunction, showing the formation of the charge transfer state. 
Different mechanisms have been identified to compete with the photocurrent generation: the “geminate” and the “non-geminate” recombinations. Geminate recombination indicates the recombination of the originally generated bound charges, the CT exciton, to the ground state. This mechanism therefore competes directly with the dissociation at the interface. Alternatively, charges can recombine after their dissociation, the “non-geminate” recombination, during the transport to the respective electrodes.
From this simplified description of the photocurrent generation in organic solar cells, it is clear that the dissociation–recombination dynamics of the CT state may be of critical importance in achieving high efficiency.
In this review article, after describing the spectroscopic evidence of the existence of the CT state, we will discuss the dynamics of this intermediate state in relation to the photovoltaic performance. Central emphasis will be devoted to state-of-the-art, high efficiency polymer–fullerene BHJ solar cells. For a general treatment of the charge photogeneration in organic solar cells the reader can refer to more extensive reviews recently published.12–14
Charge transfer state
The charge transfer state is described as an excited state where the promoted electron is transferred to the nearest neighbouring molecular site, but still remains coulombically correlated with its parent hole.15
Different terms are used in the literature to refer to this intermediate state between the exciton and the fully separated charge. Some examples are: geminate pair, bound polaron pair and exciplex. However, these different terms refer to different physical properties. The “charge transfer exciton” is accessible from the ground state,15 while the terms exciplex, geminate pair and polaron pair are substantially synonyms.16 In this text we will refer to “charge transfer state” and “charge transfer exciton”.
Evidence of charge transfer state in polymer:fullerene blends
The CT state can be populated via the photo-excitation of the donor or acceptor molecules followed by relaxation into the CT state or via direct excitation in the CT band. After population, the CT state relaxes to the ground state radiatively or non-radiatively or it may eventually dissociate forming free charge carriers. If the CT states are coupled radiatively to the ground state, they are easily observed by using steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) techniques. Emissive CT states have been shown to be characterized by a broad, red-shifted PL band, with a long radiative lifetime, that occurs only in the blend and cannot be assigned to PL from either of the individual components. Therefore a detailed analysis of the ground-state absorption and the PL of donor–acceptor blends allows for the identification of the transition characteristic of the CT state.
Most examples of intermediate state emission come from polymer:polymer blends,17,18 and this is often considered as an ‘exciplex’ emission. There have been few reports of such emissions from polymer:fullerene blends.
One of the first reports by Loi et al.19 showed the presence of the CT state in blends of poly((2,7-(9,9-(di-n-octyl)fluorene)-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole))) F8DTBT (F8DTBT has also been called APFO-3 in the literature) and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM), by combining steady-state PL spectroscopy and time resolved measurements. The comparison of the PL spectrum of the pristine polymer with the emission from the blends containing different amounts of PCBM (Fig. 2a) revealed the appearance of a new peak at low energy. This emission, which cannot be attributed either to the pristine polymer or the fullerene, showed a strong red shift by increasing the percentage of PCBM. By studying the dynamics of this emission, it was possible to ascribe it to the presence of a new excited state in the blend. In the 66% blend, while the lifetime of the pristine polymer emission (630 nm) is strongly reduced by the addition of PCBM, the low energy peak at 820 nm shows a bi-exponential decay time (τ1 = 320 ps and τ2 = 3.1 ns) that cannot be found in the polymer or the PCBM (Fig. 2b), therefore confirming the existence of an emission from the CT state. The authors also explained that the observed red-shift of this emission is due to the increasing amount of PCBM in the blend. The addition of PCBM to the blend increases the average dielectric constant of the medium (εPCBM ≈ 3.920 and εpolymer ≈ 2.5–321), therefore reducing the coulombic interaction between the hole and the electron at the interface. These conclusions are very important in the light of the following discussion regarding the role of the CT state. Moreover, the authors underline that for the formation of the CT state, the relative positions of the HOMO (highest occupied molecular orbital) level of the polymer and the LUMO (lowest unoccupied molecular orbital) of the fullerene are important.
 Fig. 2  (a) Photoluminescence spectra of F8DTBT, PCBM and F8DTBT/PCBM blend thin films. The spectra are normalized to the maximum intensity. (b) Photoluminescence dynamics of F8DTBT, PCBM and of 33%F8DTBT/66%PCBM blend at different wavelengths. (M. A. Loi, S. Toffanin, M. Muccini, M. Forster, U. Scherf and M. Scharber, Charge transfer excitons in bulk heterojunctions of a polyfluorene copolymer and a fullerene derivative, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2111–2116. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.) 
The same conclusions were reported by Benson-Smith et al.22 who analysed the blend films of poly[9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-N-(4-methoxyphenyl)diphenylamine] polymer (TFMO) and PCBM, using photothermal deflection spectroscopy (PDS) and photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy. Comparison of this polymer blend with other polyfluorene polymer/PCBM blends showed that the appearance of the CT state is correlated with the HOMO level of the polymers. From these first reports, despite the correlation that can be drawn between the CT state and the energy level of the donor polymer it is still unclear whether or not the formation of the CT state is a requirement for the efficient dissociation of the exciton.
A deeper understanding regarding the role of the CT state has been possible by using electroluminescent measurements. By injecting a charge carrier into the solar cell device and by recording the electroluminescence (EL) spectra it was possible to detect the CT state emission. In this case the electron–hole recombination comes from the lowest energy excited state of the blend system, which is the CT state. By using this method it is possible to observe the CT states in systems where their PL emission is too weak. Furthermore, the CT EL can be observed without interfering with coinciding PL emission from the individual components in the blend.23
The advantage of the EL measurements was shown by Veldman et al.24 who studied the electro-optical properties of blends of a fluorine copolymer (PF10TBT) and PCBM by using absorption spectroscopy, PL and EL. A distinct difference between the PL and EL spectra of the blends is the absence of any emission in the EL spectrum from either of the two separate components, demonstrating that in EL, PF10TBT and PCBM are not directly excited. Instead the injected charges recombine at the interface of the two materials, populating the intermolecular excited CT state.
To prove that EL measurements are a simple and efficient way to detect the CT state, Tvingstedt et al.25 used this technique to study several polymer:fullerene BHJ solar cells, including P3HT:PCBM, MDMOPPV:PCBM, and APFO-based polymers.
In each of these examples, red-shifted EL in the blend film was observed compared to the EL of the pristine materials (Fig. 3). The main conclusion of this study was that the CT state acts as an interfacial recombination centre. Because of the demonstrated bimolecular radiative recombination of injected carriers, it is reasonable to expect that in BHJ solar cells CT states can provide a route for the recombination of free charges.
 Fig. 3  Electroluminescence for three blends compared to the EL of the pure material comprising the blends. The chosen polymer:fullerene ratios correspond to the best PV performance. (Reprinted with permission from K. Tvingstedt, K. Vandewal, A. Gadisa, F. Zhang, J. Manca and O. Inganäs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11819. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society.) 
However, the authors suggested that different techniques are necessary in order to investigate other “non-radiative” recombination routes.
The difficulty in collecting direct evidence of the formation and dissociation of CT states through photoluminescence and electroluminescence studies is due to the weak emission of this state. The presence of the CT state can also be observed through its ground state optical absorption. However, since the CT state exhibits a very low oscillator strength, standard steady-state absorption spectroscopy does not provide reliable data.
Using photothermal deflection spectroscopy (PDS), a more sensitive probe for sub-band gap transitions, Goris et al. provided the first evidence of a direct optical excitation from the ground state to the interfacial CT state.26,27
The low intensity CT absorption bands were observed by Vandewal et al.28 using a highly sensitive measurement of the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum by means of Fourier-transform photocurrent spectroscopy (FTPS). The authors were able to detect the formation of ground state CT in blends of a range of poly(p-phenylene vinylene) (PPV) polymers, regiorandom and regioregular P3HT and a soluble poly(thienylene vinylene) (PTV) derivative, all blended with PCBM. Due to its high sensitivity, FTPS enables the measurement of the photocurrent generated by the direct long-wavelength absorption of the CT state.
Indirect evidence of the formation and recombination of CT states was obtained from the observation of enhanced triplet exciton,29,30 yield in donor/acceptor blends, which was assigned to geminate charge recombination from the CT state. In order to have transfer from the CT states to the triplet state, the energy level of the polymer triplet has to lie below that of the charge separated states. This can represent an additional loss mechanism in polymer–fullerene systems.
Dynamics of charge transfer state in narrow band-gap polymers
Most material combinations we reviewed till now did not provide very efficient solar cells. In order to analyse the dynamics of the CT state and to correlate them with the device performance, it is more meaningful to look at systems with higher efficiency.
A great advance in the performance of organic solar cells has been obtained by the recent development of new polymers with narrow band gaps, which are able to absorb a larger portion of the solar spectrum. Narrow band gap polymers31 are in general defined as polymers able to absorb light with wavelengths longer than 620 nm. The most extensively used synthetic strategy for the realization of narrow band gap polymers32 consists of combining an electron rich (D) and an electron deficient (A) monomer units to obtain a donor–acceptor copolymer. The intramolecular charge-transfer transition between the donor and acceptor unit can result in strong absorption at lower energy. To not create confusion with the previous terminology, it should be kept in mind that these polymers constitute the hole-transporting material in the BHJ solar cells.
One of the first examples of an efficient narrow band gap polymer is poly[2,6-(4,4-bis-(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b;3,4-b′]dithiophene)-alt-4,7-(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)] (PCPDTBT) (Fig. 4), which in combination with PCBM has shown PCE varying from 3% to 6%, depending on the processing condition.33,34
 Fig. 4  Absorption and photoluminescence spectra of thin PCPDTBT films. Inset: chemical structure of PCPDTBT. (D. Jarzab, F. Cordella, J. Gao, M. Scharber, H.-J. Egelhaaf and M. A. Loi, Low-temperature behaviour of charge transfer excitons in narrow-bandgap polymer-based bulk heterojunctions, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 604. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.) 
An initial study on this polymer suggested that the charge-transfer character of PCPDTBT might favour charge photogeneration by reducing the Coulomb attraction of the CT state.35 Later, both photophysics36 and device physics37 studies on the PCPDTBT:PCBM heterojunction underlined that the CT state, generated upon photo-excitation, limits the charge generation yield causing recombination losses.
The transient absorption (TA) spectra for pristine PCPDTBT and for the PCPDTBT:PCBM composites,36 shown in Fig. 5, demonstrate a clear difference in the spectral shape. In the TA spectra of the blend two new bands appear with respect to the spectrum of the pristine polymer. The PIA band at ∼900 nm appears within 0.5 ps after excitation and decays within 300 ps, while a longer-lived PIA centered at approximately 1200 nm persists with essentially constant amplitude for times beyond 1000 ps. Both bands are attributed by the authors to charge transfer states. The faster recombination of the initial charge-transferred state probed in the 900 nm PIA band is a limiting factor that indicates a loss of potentially useful photo carriers. This is evident from the spectrum of the annealed PCPDTBT:PCBM 1:3.3 blend in Fig. 5. In this sample the intermediate CT state with PIA band at 900 nm is almost completely suppressed compared to the long-lived PIA band (at 1200 nm) that arises from the mobile positive and negative carriers. These observations correlate with the device performance: solar cells made with the annealed 1:3.3 blend yield efficiencies of 3.6% while cells made from the 1:1 blend exhibit an efficiency of only ∼1%.
 Fig. 5  Transient absorption spectra obtained from films of PCPDTBT and PCPDTBT:PCBM bulk heterojunction materials (1:1 composites measured before and after annealing, and the 1:3.3 composite measured after annealing) at several delay times; the pump wavelength was 700 nm and the intensity was 200 μJ cm−2 (I.-W. Hwang, C. Soci, D. Moses, Z. Zhu, D. Waller, R. Gaudiana, C. J. Brabec and A. J. Heeger, Ultrafast electron transfer and decay dynamics in a small band gap bulk heterojunction material, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2307. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission). 
The authors therefore concluded that when the carrier recombination to the ground state occurs from the intermediate CT state, the corresponding fraction of mobile carriers is lost and does not contribute to the macroscopic photocurrent, identifying the formation of the CT state as a loss mechanism.
To shed light on the population and depopulation mechanisms of the CT state, Jarzab et al.38 recently provided a detailed photo-physical study of the blend composed of PCPDTBT and PCBM. Their data on the CT exciton emission are in agreement with some of the features previously reported also in other BHJ, such as the red-shift by increasing the percentage of PCBM in the film19 and the long lifetime of the CTE emission. In particular, for a composition of the blend PCPDTBT:PCBM 1:1 the PL spectrum is characterised by two peaks: the broad emission at 1037 nm, from the CT state and the emission of the pristine polymer at 846 nm. By performing low temperature measurements the authors were able to investigate the population mechanism of the CT state (Fig. 6). Both PL peaks show an intensity increment at low temperature but with different dynamics. From room temperature to 5 K the PL lifetime of the CT state remains constant in contrast to the lifetime of the polymeric emission. This behaviour points out that the CT state is a localised state that does not take part in any diffusion process. Moreover, no energy transfers from this state towards other low-lying states appear possible. These are very important findings that help understanding the kinetics of the CT state in relation to other excited states. Moreover, PL spectra performed in device configuration under bias show a decrease of the CT state emission indicating the reduction, but not the suppression of the CT exciton population by applying a weak electric field.
 Fig. 6  Temperature dependence of (a) PL spectra and (b) PL dynamics detected at ∼850 nm (the integration area is indicated in panel (a)) and (c) ∼1100 nm of thin films of PCPDTBT:PCBM (1:1) (the integration area is indicated in panel (a)). (D. Jarzab, F. Cordella, J. Gao, M. Scharber, H.-J. Egelhaaf and M. A. Loi, Low-temperature behaviour of charge transfer excitons in narrow-bandgap polymer-based bulk heterojunctions, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 604. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.) 
These results seem to be in contradiction with previous studies where it was shown that the electric field acts to dissociate the CT state into free charge carriers. However it is important to note that the studies addressing the influence of electric fields on CT emission39,40 only observed significant effects of the applied electric field under strong reverse bias conditions (typically up to −10 V). In the operating range of organic photovoltaic devices only relatively modest effects were observed. This is in agreement with a recent study by Shuttle et al.41 By using transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy the authors were able to determine that the yield of dissociation, in P3HT:PCBM devices, was almost independent of the electric field from 0 to +0.6 V. By applying the same technique, Durrant and co-workers42 arrived at the same conclusion on a PCPDTBT:PC70BM blend, where the field dependence of the charge generation efficiency is negligible.
Therefore, on the basis of these photophysical studies we can conclude that at least for these material systems, macroscopic electric fields may not strongly influence charge photogeneration over the bias range corresponding to device operation.
From this experimental evidence we can draw a schematic representation of the photo-induced charge carrier formation mechanism in the BHJ. The diagram in Fig. 7 summarizes all the transitions between the electronic states following the diagram initially proposed by Brédas et al.14 For simplicity, only the singlet and triplet states of the polymer and not the ones of the fullerene derivative are depicted. In this diagram a manifold of CT states and charge separated states are represented. The CT state can be populated from direct excitation in the weak CT band from the ground state,43,44via photo excitation of the donor and acceptor molecule followed by a transition into lowest CT band, or by the recombination of electrons and holes.45 The last pathway is evidenced by EL experiments and by the reported forward bias PL measurements. It is important to note that, in agreement with this scheme, it is not possible to form free charges once the lowest CT state has been reached. This is demonstrated by the temperature independence of the CT exciton emission and by the dynamics of the PL under bias.38
 Fig. 7  Schematic representation of the photo-induced charge carrier formation mechanism in a BHJ. A manifold of CT states are represented together with the charge separated states. Note that the transfer from the CT state to the triplet state can only occur when the energy levels are in the represented configuration. 
Another channel for the depopulation of the CT state is through the triplet excited state of the blend. The recombination of the charge carriers at the donor acceptor interface can populate this state.46–48
This was shown in a recent work by Di Nuzzo et al.49 By combining the observation of the reduced photoluminescence from the PCPDTBT polymer, upon addition of PCBM, with the high intensity of the PIA signal in the blend, the authors concluded that the triplet excited state in the blend is populated via transition from the CT state. In order for this process to take place, the energy of the CT states and charge separated states of the polymer:PCBM heterojunction should be positioned above the triplet state. These results point out that, in order to avoid this kind of losses, the energy of the lowest triplet state of the polymer must be properly adjusted with respect to the energy of the CT and charge separated states (Fig. 7).
In the same paper, the authors also investigate the effect of the processing additive, diiodooctane (DIO), in the blend of PCPDTBT with PCBM. They observe that the use of a processing additive can increase the formation of free carriers by suppressing the transfer mechanism for the CT state to the triplet excited state of the polymer (Fig. 8). This partially explains the better performance obtained in the devices with an additive, in which a substantial increase of the short circuit current (Jsc) was registered together with an improvement in the fill factor. However, the open circuit voltage (Voc) decreased in the device processed with additive from 0.69 V to 0.62 V. This study suggests that by controlling the morphology of the film it is possible to tune the energy of the CT state.
 Fig. 8  (a) PIA spectra of films of PCPDTBT:[60]PCBM (1:2 weight ratio) processed by spin coating from chlorobenzene with (solid squares) and without diiodooctane (open circles). Excitation photon energy Eex = 1.49 eV, T = 80 K. (b) PIA spectra of PCPDTBT:[60]PCBM (1:1) (solid triangles) and PCPDTBT (open triangles) in toluene solution, Eex = 2.54 eV, T = 293 K. PIA spectrum of a pristine PCPDTBT film (solid diamonds). Eex = 1.49 eV, T = 80 K. (c) Differential absorbance for PCPDTBT induced upon slight oxidation in solution (open squares) with thianthrenium hexafluorophosphate (solid triangles) and in a solid film with chloranil (circles) at T = 293 K. (D. Di Nuzzo, A. Aguirre, M. Shahid, V. S. Gevaerts, S. C. J. Meskers and R. A. J. Janssen, Improved film morphology reduces charge carrier recombination into the triplet excited state in a small bandgap polymer–fullerene photovoltaic cell, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4321. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.) 
Despite the fact that it is still unclear what determines the energy of the CT state and the dynamics of dissociation in the BHJ solar cells, a few factors have been identified as crucial.
For example, the structure of the polymer and the arrangement of the polymer chains, thus its mobility and the formation of dipoles, have a strong influence on the formation of free charges.
An example of how a small variation in the structure of the polymer can greatly influence the performance is given by polysilole, poly[(4,40-bis(2-ethylhexyl)dithieno[3,2-b:20,30-d]silole)-2,6-diyl-alt-(4,7-bis(2-thienyl)-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)-5,50-diyl] (Si-PCPDTBT), which is obtained by replacing a carbon atom with a silicon atom on the main chain of the PCPDTBT. This polymer, Si-PCPDTBT, blended with [6,6]-phenyl C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC70BM) was able to give efficiencies of 5.2%, being the first narrow band gap polymer with a certified efficiency of over 5%.50
In a recent study, comparing the electrical and optical properties of PCPDTBT and Si-PCPDTBT,51 it was notably shown that replacing the bridging carbon atom in the cyclopentadithiophene by a silicon atom leads to a more crystalline material. This polymer in blend with PCBM showed no evidence of CT emission. This study pointed out that increasing the crystallinity of the material may induce a better charge transport which leads to a reduced bimolecular recombination.
The same effect has been observed in several studies on the effect of annealing in photocurrent generation in P3HT:PCBM blends.52 Upon thermal annealing, the crystallinity of P3HT is increased, due to the more ordered packing of the polymer chains. This brings to the formation of distinct P3HT phases and PCBM aggregates in the film. The consequent change in the blend morphology reduces the charge recombination, and the resultant enhanced photocurrent has been often attributed to the higher charge carrier mobility.53,54
The same conclusions have been reported by Hwang et al. on the effect of the processing additive, octane-dithiol (ODT) on the performance of the PCPDTBT:PC70BM blend.55 They found that the ODT increases the generation of free charge carriers, similar to a thermal annealing of a P3HT:PCBM film. However the effect was not strong enough to explain the observed increase in the PCE of the BHJ devices processed using ODT. Therefore they conclude that the enhanced charge carrier mobility is the main source for the higher device efficiencies.
High local mobility in the blend has often been reported as an explanation for enhanced charge dissociation. However, in a study by Ohkita et al.,56 no correlation was observed between polymer hole mobility and charge photogeneration yield, although the mobility of the different polymers was varied by four orders of magnitude.
This example points out that concomitant factors can influence the dissociation.
A more exhaustive study on the effect of the processing additive ODT on the CT state dynamics in the PCPDTBT:PCBM blend has been reported in a very recent work by Scharber et al.57 This is of particular interest since the efficiency of the solar cells can be enhanced from a value of 3% to a value of 5.8% by using the additive.34
In the low energy part of the EQE spectra they observed a weak CT absorption for the BHJ cells processed with and without an additive (Fig. 9a). The excitation of this state leads to a photocurrent in both systems; however, the PL and the EL spectra were reported to be different in the two samples. The emission of the PCPDTBT:PCBM blend processed without ODT is dominated by the CT exciton emission. The CT state emission shows the expected dependence on the electric field and the radiative recombination of injected charge carriers is predominantly via the CT state. In contrast, PL and EL of PCPDTBT:PCBM blends processed with the additive are dominated by the emission of the donor polymer. Only a weak CT state emission is present in recorded spectra and this is also evidenced as a weak long-lived component in the transient PL measurements (Fig. 9c). Moreover in this case, the CT emission does not show any significant electric field dependence. From this experimental evidence the authors conclude that the population of the CT state limits the number of the extracted charge carriers from the BHJ solar cells, representing therefore a loss mechanism in the device operation.
 Fig. 9  (a) External quantum efficiency spectra of a PCPDTBT diode (squares), PCPDTBT diode processed with ODT (triangles), PCBM-diode (line), PCPDTBT-PCBM bulk-heterojunction solar cell without (dots) and with (stars) octane-dithiol. (b) Normalized photoluminescence spectra of the pristine polymer thin film and of the 1:1 BHJ with and without ODT. (c) Photoluminescence decays of the pristine polymer and of the BHJ 1:1 with and without ODT, measured in the spectral range between 950 nm and 1050 nm. Reproduced from ref. 57. 
These conclusions are supported by the performance of the device: in the solar cells processed with ODT, the authors measured higher Jsc and FF, leading to better PCE compared to the devices without any additive. However, as in the case of the devices processed with DIO,49 they also measured a reduction of the Voc. The origin of the reduced Voc is not fully understood and seems to be in contradiction with previous reports.58
This report underlines once more the importance of the morphology control through the use of the additive. The effect of ODT on the electrical59 and morphological60,61 properties of PCPDTBT:PCBM blend has been also reported in previous studies, where a clear correlation was drawn between the increased device performance and the more defined morphology. The use of the additive in the blend leads to the formation of PCBM clusters, surrounded by PCPDTBT fibrils. Scharber et al. agreed that a more ordered morphology allows a more extended delocalization of the CT states generated at the interface, which decreases substantially their binding energy. The authors attributed the residual CT emission, still visible in the blend treated with additive, to regions of the film with a lower molecular order or to a small fraction of the surfactant still present in the solid film. Therefore, they suggest that further optimization in the processing conditions can lead to a more pronounced reduction of the CT emission intensity.
All the results collected until now on the PCPDTBT:PCBM system seem to point out that the formation of the CT state is detrimental to the efficiency of solar cells. However, since the properties of the CT state can strongly depend on the nature of the interface between the polymer and the fullerene, they may have different impact on other high performing systems.
For example, in studies62,63 on poly[N-11′′-henicosanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole)] (PCDTBT) polymer,64 which in combination with PC70BM is able to provide 6% efficiency with internal quantum efficiency approaching 100%,65 the authors suggested that the role played by the CT state in the loss mechanism is negligible.
The reports on both the pristine polymer66 and the blend with PCBM67 showed that for this material, in an optimized system, an “ultrafast photoinduced charge separation” takes place. The authors arrived at this conclusion by using broadband pump probe spectroscopy over the entire relevant time range of charge generation and recombination. The time range measuring about 100 fs is incompatible with typical exciton diffusion dynamics. Therefore they suggested an alternative picture where exciton quenching leads directly to two populations: bound CT excitons and free charges. They also provided an estimation of the contribution of the concomitant decay channels, the geminate recombination of CT states and non-geminate recombination of free charge carriers. The results revealed that only ∼11% of the initial photo-excitation generates interfacial CT states that recombine exclusively by nanosecond geminate recombination and therefore do not contribute to the photocurrent. The remaining excitons (∼89%) create free charge carriers on an ultrafast time scale that contribute to the extracted photocurrent. The conclusion is that geminate recombination plays a minor role in the loss mechanism of this system and that free charge carriers are created without passing through CT states as intermediate. However, even if geminate recombination can be efficiently suppressed, non-geminate recombination, due to limited charge transport in the blend, still needs to be addressed to improve the performances. The authors suggest that this is a general feature of highly efficient polymer:fullerene systems. The lack of experimental data on other high performing blends leaves the debate still open.
For example, a detailed study of the mechanism of charge generation in the class of polymers with alternating thieno[3,4-b]thiophene and benzodithiophene units (PTB), which have shown efficiency higher than 6%,68 is still missing. A recent report pointed out that the strong intramolecular interaction, due to the “donor–acceptor” structure of the polymers, is the main motivation for the high photocurrent generation in this class.69
Conclusions
We have provided an overview of the knowledge available on CT states in highly efficient polymer:fullerene BHJ solar cells. We focused our attention on narrow band gap donor–acceptor polymers, since recent advances in the performance of organic solar cells have all been based upon this class of materials. All the results collected until now and reviewed in this report seem to point out that the formation of the CT state is detrimental to the efficiency of solar cells. The population of the lowest CT state limits the number of the extracted charge carriers from the BHJ, representing a loss mechanism in the device operation. We conclude that, for the design of new systems, the objective should be to avoid the formation of this state.
As we have shown, several strategies have already been identified. For example, it has been demonstrated that increasing the mobility, the crystallinity and the donor–acceptor character of the polymer has a beneficial effect on the suppression of the CT state.
In this context, an effective strategy could be to increase the dielectric constant of narrow band gap polymers, as suggested by Loi et al.19
As also pointed out in this review, the use of an additive that allows to reach an optimised blend morphology70 has a great influence on the CT state formation and on charge generation. Several studies49,55,57 have correlated the use of additives in the blend and the increased device performances with the suppression of the CT state.
In the reviewed optimised systems, the CT states are almost completely eliminated. In this case the major role in the loss mechanism is played by the non-geminate recombination.
Effective strategies to reduce the non-geminate recombination can be: increasing the mobility of both components71 in the blend and the insertion of an interlayer at the interface with the electrode.72
Finally, we would like to underline that only a multidisciplinary approach, involving modelling, synthetic chemistry, advanced photophysical analysis and experimental efforts on device engineering, can provide the understanding necessary to achieve high efficiency organic solar cells.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank M. C. Schaber, H.-J. Egelhaaf and the other collaborators at Konarka Technologies. This work would have not been possible without the contribution of all members of the Photophysics and Optoelectronic group, in particular F. Cordella, D. Jarzab and J. Gao. Finally we would like to acknowledge the colleagues who have provided us with their figures. Funding from the Zernike Institute for Advanced Material and the FOM Focus Group Groningen are gratefully acknowledged.
Notes and references
C. J. Brabec, S. Gowrisanker, J. J. M. Halls, D. Laird, S. Jia and S. P. Williams, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3839 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa and W. Warta, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2012, 20, 12 Search PubMed .
H. Chen, J. Hou, S. Zhang, Y. Liang, G. Yang, Y. Yang, L. Yu, Y. Wu and G. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 649 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Service, Science, 2011, 332, 293 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Scharber, D. Mühlbacher, M. Koppe, P. Denk, C. Waldauf, A. J. Heeger and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 789 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Servaites, M. A. Ratner and T. J. Marks, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4410 CAS .
X. Yang and J. Loos, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 1353 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pivrikas, N. S. Sariciftci, G. Juska and R. Österbacka, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2007, 15, 677 CrossRef CAS .

          L. J. A. Koster, V. D. Mihailetchi, M. Lenes and P. W. M. Blom, in Organic Photovoltaics: Materials, Device Physics, and Manufacturing Technologies, ed. C. Brabec, V. Dyakonov and U. Scherf, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co, KGaA, Weinheim,  2008, ch. 10 Search PubMed .
D. Veldman, S. C. J. Meskers and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1939 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 15 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Clarke and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6736 CrossRef CAS .
C. Deibel, T. Strobel and V. Dyakonov, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4097 CrossRef CAS .
J.-L. Brédas, J. E. Norton, J. Cornil and V. Coropceanu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1691 CrossRef .

          M. Pope and C. E. Swenberg, Electronic Process in Organic Crystals, Oxford University Press, Claredon Press, Oxford,  1982, ch. 1 Search PubMed .

          N. S. Sariciftci, Primary Photoexcitations in Conjugated Polymers: Molecular Exciton versus Semiconductor Band Model, World Scientific Publishing Co Pte Ltd, Singapore,  1997, ch. 4 Search PubMed .
A. C. Morteani, R. H. Friend and C. Silva, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 122, 244906 CrossRef .
M. M. Alam and S. A. Jenekhe, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 2479 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Loi, S. Toffanin, M. Muccini, M. Forster, U. Scherf and M. Scharber, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2111 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Tuladhar, D. Poplasky, S. A. Choulis, J. R. Durrant, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1171 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. M. Blom, M. J. M. de Jong and M. G. van Muster, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1997, 55, R656 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Benson-Smith, L. Goris, K. Vandewal, K. Haenen, J. V. Manca, D. Vanderzande, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 451 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Müller, J. M. Lupton, J. Feldmann, U. Lemmer, M. C. Scharber, N. S. Sariciftci, C. J. Brabec and U. Scherf, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 195208 CrossRef .
D. Veldman, Ö. Ipek, S. C. J. Meskers, J. Sweelssen, M. M. Koetse, S. C. Veenstra, J. M. Kroon, S. S. van Bavel, J. Loos and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7721 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tvingstedt, K. Vandewal, A. Gadisa, F. Zhang, J. Manca and O. Inganäs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11819 CrossRef CAS .
L. Goris, K. Haenen, M. Nesládek, P. Wagner, D. Vanderzande, L. Schepper, J. D'haen, L. Lutsen and J. V. Manca, J. Mater. Sci., 2005, 40, 1413 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Holcombe, J. E. Norton, J. Rivnay, C. H. Woo, L. Goris, C. Piliego, G. Griffini, A. Sellinger, J.-L. Brédas, A. Salleo and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12106 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vandewal, A. Gadisa, W. D. Oosterbaan, S. Bertho, F. Banishoeib, I. Van Severen, L. Lutsen, T. J. Cleij, D. Vanderzande and J. V. Manca, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2064 CrossRef CAS .
R. Schueppel, C. Uhrich, M. Pfeiffer, K. Leo, E. Brier, E. Reinold and P. Baeuerle, ChemPhysChem, 2007, 8, 1497 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ohkita, S. Cook, Y. Astuti, W. Duffy, M. Heeney, S. Tierney, I. McCulloch, D. D. C. Bradley and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Commun., 2006, 3939 RSC .
C. Risko, M. D. McGehee and J.-L. Brédas, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1200 RSC .
P.-L. T. Boudreault, A. Najari and M. Leclerc, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 456 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mühlbacher, M. Scharber, M. Morana, Z. Zhu, D. Waller, R. Gaudiana and C. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2884 CrossRef .
J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497 CrossRef CAS .
C. Soci, I.-W. Hwang, D. Moses, Z. Zhu, D. Waller, R. Gaudiana, C. J. Brabec and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 632 CrossRef CAS .
I.-W. Hwang, C. Soci, D. Moses, Z. Zhu, D. Waller, R. Gaudiana, C. J. Brabec and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2307 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lenes, M. Morana, C. J. Brabec and P. W. M. Blom, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1101 Search PubMed .
D. Jarzab, F. Cordella, J. Gao, M. Scharber, H.-J. Egelhaaf and M. A. Loi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 604 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Morteani, P. Sreearunothai, L. M. Herz, R. H. Friend and C. Silva, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 247402 CrossRef .
V. D. Mihailetchi, L. J. A. Koster, J. C. Hummelen and P. W. M. Blom, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 216601 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Shuttle, B. O. Regan, A. M. Ballantyne, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley and J. R. Durrant, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 113201 CrossRef .
F. C. Jamieson, T. Agostinelli, H. Azimi, J. Nelson and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3306 CrossRef CAS .
L. Goris, A. Poruba, L. Hod'ákova, M. Vaněček, K. Haenen, M. Nesládek, P. Wagner, D. Vanderzande, L. De Schepper and J. V. Manca, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 052113 CrossRef .
K. Vandewal, L. Goris, I. Haeldermans, M. Nesladek, K. Haenen, P. Wagner and J. V. Manca, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 7135 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Frankevich, A. A. Lymarev, I. Sokolik, F. E. Karasz, S. Blumstengel, R. H. Baughman and H. H. Hörhold, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1993, 46, 9320 CrossRef .
T. A. Ford, I. Avilov, D. Beljonne and N. C. Greenham, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 125212 CrossRef .
T. Offermans, P. A. van Hal, S. C. J. Meskers, M. M. Koetse and R. A. J. Janssen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 045213 CrossRef .
S. Westenhoff, I. A. Howard, J. M. Hodgkiss, K. R. Kirov, H. A. Bronstein, C. K. Williams, N. C. Greenham and R. H. Friend, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13653 CrossRef CAS .
D. Di Nuzzo, A. Aguirre, M. Shahid, V. S. Gevaerts, S. C. J. Meskers and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4321 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dennler, M. C. Scharber and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1323 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Scharber, M. Koppe, J. Gao, F. Cordella, M. A. Loi, P. Denk, M. Morana, H.-J. Egelhaaf, K. Forberich, G. Dennler, R. Gaudiana, D. Waller, Z. Zhu, X. Shi and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 367 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Clarke, A. M. Ballantyne, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley and J. R. Durrant, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 4029 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 45 RSC .
J. Peet, C. Soci, R. C. Coffin, T. Q. Nguyen, A. Mikhailovsky, D. Moses and G. C. Bazan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 252105 CrossRef .
I.-W. Hwang, S. Cho, J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, N. E. Coates, D. Moses and A. J. Heeger, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 033706 CrossRef .
H. Ohkita, S. Cook, Y. Astuti, W. Duffy, S. Tierney, W. Zhang, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3030 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Scharber, C. Lungenschmied, H.-J. Egelhaaf, G. Matt, M. Bednorz, T. Fromherz, J. Gao, D. Jarzab and M. A. Loi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 5077 CAS .
K. Vandewal, K. Tvingsted, A. Gadisa, O. Inganänas and J. M. Manca, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 904 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cho, J. K. Lee, J. S. Moon, J. Yue, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 1107 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Lee, W. L. Ma, C. J. Brabec, J. Yuen, J. S. Moon, J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3619 CrossRef CAS .
M. Morana, H. Azimi, G. Dennler, H.-J. Egelhaaf, M. Scharber, K. Forberich, J. Hauch, R. Gaudiana, D. Waller, Z. Zhu, K. Hingerl, S. S. van Bavel, J. Loos and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1180 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tong, N. E. Coates, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger, S. Beaupré and M. Leclerc, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 125210 CrossRef .
R. A. Street, M. Schoendorf, A. Roy and J. H. Lee, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 205307 CrossRef .
N. Blouin, A. Michaud and M. Leclerc, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2295 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupré, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297 CrossRef CAS .
N. Banerji, S. Cowan, M. Leclerc, E. Vauthey and A. J. Heeger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 17459 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Horward, R. Mauer, M. Meister and F. Laquai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14886 CrossRef .
Y. Liang, D. Feng, Y. Wu, S.-T. Tsai, G. Li, C. Ray and L. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 7792 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zang, Y. Liang, L. Yu and B. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 923 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and J. Nelson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1185 RSC .
S. Shoaee, Z. An, X. Zhang, S. Barlow, S. R. Marder, W. Duffy, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Commun., 2009, 5445 RSC .
Z. He, C. Zhong, X. Huang, W.-Y. Wong, H. Wu, L. Chen, S. Su and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4636 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Claudia Piliego	Claudia Piliego studied Material Science and obtained her PhD degree at the University of Salento (Italy) in 2008, with a thesis on organic materials for light emitting diode and transistor applications. In 2008 she accepted a postdoctoral position at the University of California, Berkeley, in the group of Prof. Jean M. J. Fréchet doing research on organic solar cells. She is currently a Post-doc in the Photophysics and OptoElectronic group of the Zernike Institute for Advanced Materials, at the University of Groningen.
Maria Antonietta	Maria Antonietta Loi studied physics and received her PhD in 2001 from the University of Cagliari (Italy) with a thesis on photoexcitations and intermolecular interactions in organic single crystals. In 2001 she started a post-doctoral work at the University of Linz (Austria) in the group of Prof. N. S. Sariciftci. Later she moved to the Institute for Nanostructured Materials of the Italian National Research Council in Bologna. In 2006 she became Assistant Professor at the Zernike Institute for Advanced Materials of the University of Groningen (The Netherlands). She is currently Associate Professor and chair of the Photophysics and OptoElectronic department.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of a bulk heterojunction solar cell and the simplified energy level diagram of a donor/acceptor interface in the type two heterojunction, showing the formation of the charge transfer state.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Photoluminescence spectra of F8DTBT, PCBM and F8DTBT/PCBM blend thin films. The spectra are normalized to the maximum intensity. (b) Photoluminescence dynamics of F8DTBT, PCBM and of 33%F8DTBT/66%PCBM blend at different wavelengths. (M. A. Loi, S. Toffanin, M. Muccini, M. Forster, U. Scherf and M. Scharber, Charge transfer excitons in bulk heterojunctions of a polyfluorene copolymer and a fullerene derivative, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2111–2116. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 3  Electroluminescence for three blends compared to the EL of the pure material comprising the blends. The chosen polymer:fullerene ratios correspond to the best PV performance. (Reprinted with permission from K. Tvingstedt, K. Vandewal, A. Gadisa, F. Zhang, J. Manca and O. Inganäs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11819. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 4  Absorption and photoluminescence spectra of thin PCPDTBT films. Inset: chemical structure of PCPDTBT. (D. Jarzab, F. Cordella, J. Gao, M. Scharber, H.-J. Egelhaaf and M. A. Loi, Low-temperature behaviour of charge transfer excitons in narrow-bandgap polymer-based bulk heterojunctions, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 604. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 5  Transient absorption spectra obtained from films of PCPDTBT and PCPDTBT:PCBM bulk heterojunction materials (1:1 composites measured before and after annealing, and the 1:3.3 composite measured after annealing) at several delay times; the pump wavelength was 700 nm and the intensity was 200 μJ cm−2 (I.-W. Hwang, C. Soci, D. Moses, Z. Zhu, D. Waller, R. Gaudiana, C. J. Brabec and A. J. Heeger, Ultrafast electron transfer and decay dynamics in a small band gap bulk heterojunction material, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2307. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission).	 

 	Fig. 6  Temperature dependence of (a) PL spectra and (b) PL dynamics detected at ∼850 nm (the integration area is indicated in panel (a)) and (c) ∼1100 nm of thin films of PCPDTBT:PCBM (1:1) (the integration area is indicated in panel (a)). (D. Jarzab, F. Cordella, J. Gao, M. Scharber, H.-J. Egelhaaf and M. A. Loi, Low-temperature behaviour of charge transfer excitons in narrow-bandgap polymer-based bulk heterojunctions, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 604. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic representation of the photo-induced charge carrier formation mechanism in a BHJ. A manifold of CT states are represented together with the charge separated states. Note that the transfer from the CT state to the triplet state can only occur when the energy levels are in the represented configuration.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) PIA spectra of films of PCPDTBT:[60]PCBM (1:2 weight ratio) processed by spin coating from chlorobenzene with (solid squares) and without diiodooctane (open circles). Excitation photon energy Eex = 1.49 eV, T = 80 K. (b) PIA spectra of PCPDTBT:[60]PCBM (1:1) (solid triangles) and PCPDTBT (open triangles) in toluene solution, Eex = 2.54 eV, T = 293 K. PIA spectrum of a pristine PCPDTBT film (solid diamonds). Eex = 1.49 eV, T = 80 K. (c) Differential absorbance for PCPDTBT induced upon slight oxidation in solution (open squares) with thianthrenium hexafluorophosphate (solid triangles) and in a solid film with chloranil (circles) at T = 293 K. (D. Di Nuzzo, A. Aguirre, M. Shahid, V. S. Gevaerts, S. C. J. Meskers and R. A. J. Janssen, Improved film morphology reduces charge carrier recombination into the triplet excited state in a small bandgap polymer–fullerene photovoltaic cell, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4321. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) External quantum efficiency spectra of a PCPDTBT diode (squares), PCPDTBT diode processed with ODT (triangles), PCBM-diode (line), PCPDTBT-PCBM bulk-heterojunction solar cell without (dots) and with (stars) octane-dithiol. (b) Normalized photoluminescence spectra of the pristine polymer thin film and of the 1:1 BHJ with and without ODT. (c) Photoluminescence decays of the pristine polymer and of the BHJ 1:1 with and without ODT, measured in the spectral range between 950 nm and 1050 nm. Reproduced from ref. 57.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
