Highly efficient walking perovskite solar cells based on thermomechanical polymer films   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA09336B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA09336B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26154-26161Highly efficient walking perovskite solar cells based on thermomechanical polymer films†

        
          
            Jiabin 
            Qi
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Linpeng 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hao 
            Xiong
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Aurelia Chi 
            Wang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Chengyi 
            Hou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qinghong 
            Zhang
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Yaogang 
            Li
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Hongzhi 
            Wang
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory for Modification of Chemical Fibers and Polymer Materials, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Donghua University, Shanghai 201620, People's Republic of China. E-mail: wanghz@dhu.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-21-67792855;   Tel: +86-21-67792943
bEngineering Research Center of Advanced Glasses Manufacturing Technology, MOE, Donghua University, Shanghai 201620, People's Republic of China. E-mail: zhangqh@dhu.edu.cn
cSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia 30332, USA
Received 
      24th August 2019
    , Accepted 28th October 2019First published on 30th October 2019AbstractConsidering the trends towards miniaturization and automation of electronics, increasing attention should be given to self-actuating microenergy technologies. In particular, it is important for these systems to simultaneously possess simple structure, self-powered energy supply, and high power density. Using a facile and ultrafast fabrication approach, a highly efficient walking perovskite solar cell is constructed as a prototype actuator with a straightforward design but advanced functions. The device demonstrates a high walking speed of 10 mm min−1, excellent mechanical strength (the ability to lift an object 15 times its own weight), and high photoelectric efficiency, achieving a power conversion efficiency of 17.75% as a low-temperature flexible solar cell. The dynamic output of the device during passive heliotropic walking is also evaluated. The maximum output power of the device reaches 215 W m−2. This device shows promise for use as a mobile energy source in various technological applications including microsensors, micropumps, and microrobots.
Introduction
Compared with other energy resources, solar energy is more sustainable and far more abundant than our projected energy needs as a species.1–6 As long as it is daytime, solar energy can be continuously harvested; thus, it is considered the most promising energy source for the future.7–9 However, it is extremely difficult to maximize access to solar energy in practical applications because of the narrow angular range of direct solar radiation.10 Practical application environments are complex and highly variable with constant changes in solar altitude angle and solar direct emission points. Existing large arrays of solar cells are unable to change their position in real time, which means that they cannot maximize efficient use of solar energy.11 As a result, the photocurrent output from solar cells is suboptimal in practice.
Heliotropism is an attribute of some plants whose leaves or flowers, when directly driven by sunlight, can follow the sun to increase light interception.12,13 Inspired by natural heliotropism, it is of great practical significance to develop an artificial heliotropic device that can follow the sun to raise light interception. An Austrian technology company created the world's first “integrated” solar power system called Smart-Flower, which was inspired by the sunflower. To realize the heliotropic function of the Smart-Flower, the system contains multiple miniature sensors and actuators that provide control over the device via external stimulation and environmental changes. However, such a complicated transmission system and heavy silicon solar cells cannot be used in next-generation electronics such as intelligent aircrafts and smart microrobots, which have extremely high demands for their real-time energy supplies.14 Therefore, a new material design strategy to produce light-weight and high-output solar cells on a simple and efficient actuator substrate to realize self-deformable and heliotropic walking solar cells is strongly desired.
Organic–inorganic hybrid lead halide perovskite solar cells currently attract great attention as energy sources. Such solar cells can display excellent power conversion efficiencies (PCEs), with a PCE of 24.2% achieved recently.15 Perovskite solar cells possess desirable photoelectronic properties, for instance, a suitable band gap of ∼1.5 eV, extremely long charge diffusion lengths of >175 μm for a monocrystal and >1 μm for a polycrystal, and high charge carrier mobility of ∼66 cm2 V−1 s−1 for a single crystal and ∼11.6 cm2 V−1 s−1 for a polycrystal. In addition, these solar cells boast the features of mechanical flexibility, solution processability, low cost, and light weight, which enables their use as high-performance solar cells16–28 in heliotropic walking devices.
An integrated device consisting of a perovskite solar cell and a small walking machine should be able to rapidly and autonomously change its shape to seek out a light source in complex environments so as to realize and maximize sustainable energy enrichment and ensure long-term stable operation. However, there are several factors that need to be considered when these two components are integrated: the remote control of the device, walking performance, cyclic stability of deformation, and the dynamic output relationship between electrical performance and walking behavior. This is not a trivial combination of existing technologies and many hidden difficulties need to be addressed.
In this work, a thermomechanical polymer film that responds to near-infrared (NIR) light is used in a heliotropic solar cell. The thermomechanical film consists of commercially available polymer films and behaves as a walking substrate to realize heliotropic perovskite solar cells. The developed NIR-responsive walking solar cell has four distinguishing features: (a) remote control using NIR light, (b) low-temperature operation, (c) effective walking ability, and (d) efficient photoelectric conversion performance. Heliotropic perovskite solar cells show great potential for use as mobile energy sources for micro-sensors, -pumps, and -robots.
Results and discussion
The structure of the heliotropic walking perovskite solar cell, as shown in Fig. 1a, can be divided into the perovskite solar cells and thermomechanical polymer actuator. The inset on the left contains optical photos of our device, taken from the top and bottom view. The perovskite solar cells were fabricated on indium tin oxide (ITO)/polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrates, which are light, cost-effective, and flexible. Tin dioxide annealed at low temperature (LT-SnO2) was used as an electron transport layer (ETL). Generally, ETLs annealed at low temperature are inferior to those annealed at high temperature because carrier mobility increases with crystallinity, which increases with annealing temperature.29 The high performance of the solar cells containing LT-SnO2 was caused by the high film coverage and low electron concentration of LT-SnO2, which led to effective interface passivation (ESI S1†). X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) were used to analyze the phase composition and microstructure of LT-SnO2. The LT-SnO2 layer on the surface of the ITO/PET substrate was of uniform thickness and completely covered the substrate (Fig. S1a†). The high quality of the LT-SnO2 layer was confirmed by strong (110), (111) and (211) peaks in its XRD pattern (Fig. S1b†).
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the heliotropic perovskite solar cell. (b and c) Phototropic bending of the composite strips with different alignment directions of LDPE in response to visible light. (d) CTE measurements of LDPE aligned in different directions. 2D XRD patterns of (e) PP and (f) LDPE. 
The bilayer structure of the low-density polyethylene (LDPE)/polypropylene (PP) actuator is depicted schematically in Fig. 1b. Fabrication details are described below in the experimental section. The materials in the LDPE/PP composite were selected for the following reasons. First, the coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) of PP (124 ppm K−1)30 is much smaller than that of LDPE (479.71 ppm K−1), as indicated in Fig. 1d. According to the parameter table of CTE values for various common polymers (Table S1†), PP and PE contrast one another greatly. Thus, a bilayer structure of these materials is expected to show obvious bending actuation when heated because of the large mismatch between CTEs. In addition, the CTE of PP is similar to the transverse tension of LDPE, so the bilayer only has one bending direction (Fig. 1c). It should be noted that there is no relative positional relationship between the two layers during the bending movement, and the specific mechanism will be described later. The different CTEs of LDPE in the longitudinal and transverse directions can be explained by crystal orientation. The two-dimensional X-ray diffraction (2D XRD) patterns in Fig. 1e and f confirm the crystal orientation of LDPE and crystallization of PP. Second, unlike the curing required for previously reported electrothermal actuators based on polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), both PP and LDPE films are commercially available, which shortened our fabrication time to a few minutes. Unlike one reported biaxially oriented PP-based actuator, which was externally thermally actuated and fabricated by a solution-casting process,31 our LDPE/PP actuator is photoactive and its fabrication process is solvent-free, making it suitable for industrial production.
The LDPE/PP actuator consisted of two different polymer films bonded together by an acrylic ester. When heated, the actuator bent because of the different CTEs of the component films. As shown in Fig. S2a and c,† the film was clamped and then placed in an oven. The actuator bent towards the PP side upon heating and then returned to its original state upon cooling (i.e., upon removal from the oven). The maximum bending curvature of the actuator in different temperature ranges was measured (Fig. S2b†). With increasing temperature difference, the bending motion intensified. When the temperature difference reached 50 °C, the curvature exceeded 1.8 cm−1. The mechanical properties of the actuator were then investigated. To ensure reliable measurements, the actuator was heated by electricity using single-walled carbon nanotubes as the conducting layer. The ends of the actuator were clamped to a universal testing machine (Instron 5969). Under a voltage of 7.0 V, the actuator produced a force exceeding 0.7 N (Fig. S2d†).
The mechanism of the LDPE/PP actuator is presented in Fig. 2a and b. In the initial state, LDPE film is composed of large crystals and amorphous chains. When the LDPE/PP actuator deforms at a certain temperature, the crystals of LDPE begin to melt and diminish in micromorphology (Fig. 2c), and the original amorphous molecular chain is elongated (unfolded), which leads to an expansion in macromorphology. The melted microphase regions retain connectivity through the long PE chain, leaving many unordered small crystals of LDPE. The microstructure of the PP film does not change noticeably (Fig. S3†), which leads to unchanged macroscopic performance. The interaction between the two causes our LDPE/PP actuator to bend. After cooling without releasing the load of the PP film, the LDPE chains reform a physically cross-linked network via organized small crystals, which can restore the actuator to its original state. In situ 2D-XRD images and patterns of the LDPE/PP actuator membrane (Fig. S4 and S5†) provided further confirmation of this mechanism. With rising temperature, the ring of light in in situ 2D-XRD images narrowed, indicating melting and decreased order of the LDPE crystals. This is also reflected in the decreased peak area in the XRD patterns (Fig. S5†). We also observed the surface morphology of LDPE films under dynamic temperature changes by in situ atomic force microscopy (AFM) (Fig. S6†). As the temperature rises, the regions of LDPE break and drift apart, whereas the PP layer hardly changes (Fig. S7†).
 Fig. 2  Schematic mechanism of the LDPE/PP actuator in its original state (a) and bending state (b). (c) Polarizing optical microscope diagram showing grain size change of the LDPE crystal, with a scale bar of 100 μm. (d) Dynamic thermomechanical analysis of the LDPE/PP film. (e) Photographs of the film under load. 
Finite element analysis and a mathematical approximation were used to simulate the real physical system (geometry and load conditions). The parameters used in the simulation are listed in Table S2.† It was difficult to analyze the system as a whole, therefore, it was necessary to divide the system into a finite number of relatively simple units. The actuator was divided into 18800 thermodynamic coupling basic units (inset of Fig. S8a†) to obtain a discrete problem consisting of basic elements. The calculated light irradiation period was 10 s, then the NIR light was removed and a free cooling simulation was conducted for 40 s. A Mises stress cloud image of the LDPE/PP bilayer after 10 s of light exposure is illustrated in Fig. S8b.† Because the perovskite solar cells on both sides of the device can be regarded as rigid units, there is basically no force in these regions. In the middle section of the device, because of the different degrees of movement of LDPE and PP induced by heating, stress is generated, and bending will occur. Fig. 2d reveals that tanδ suddenly increases when the temperature rises to 45 °C. Such a mild temperature change has little effect on the performance of perovskite solar cells. The residual thermal stress in the device after 40 s of cooling is presented in Fig. S8c.† The simulation analysis showed that the residual stress was almost the same in all parts of the device, indicating that 40 s was sufficient time to restore the device to its original state. During this relaxation period, the device tolerated a load of 0.6588 g, which is almost 15 times its own weight (Fig. 2e).
As for the low-temperature flexible perovskite solar cells, Fig. S9a† shows an SEM image of the perovskite (FA0.85MA0.15PbI2.55Br0.45) layer, indicating its pinhole-free uniform surface morphology. Fig. S9b† displays an XRD pattern of the perovskite film formed on SnO2, which illustrates its high crystallinity. No diffraction peak at 2θ = 14° from PbI2 was observed, which further indicates the high quality of the perovskite film. Strong (110) and (220) peaks were observed in the XRD pattern, revealing that the in-plane growth of perovskite grains was dominant.32 The high crystallinity of the perovskite film is consistent with the grain morphology observed in SEM images. The AFM images in Fig, S9d and e† present the surface morphology and average surface roughness (Ra) of the perovskite layer. The largest grain size detected by AFM was 525.22 nm, which was consistent with the SEM results (Fig. S9a†). The SnO2 layer under the perovskite film possessed a very smooth surface with an Ra of 9.58 nm and grain size of 200 nm, since it was spin coated on the ultrasmooth ITO/PET substrate (Fig. S10†). As a result, a smooth perovskite layer with an Ra of 12.31 nm formed on the SnO2 layer (Fig. S9d and e†). This level of surface roughness is comparable to that of perovskite layers fabricated by a solvent-based process or the modification of lead precursors.32,33 Overall, a large-area, pinhole-free, uniform perovskite film was fabricated (Fig. S11†). The large grains resulted in a low percentage of grain boundaries, which can improve the performance of perovskite solar cells. Moreover, the large grain size also indicates the high crystallinity of the perovskite film, as confirmed by XRD analysis. Fig. S9c† shows the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the perovskite solar cell without the actuator. The device displayed a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 22.85 mA cm−2, fill factor (FF) of 70.36%, open circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.10 V, and PCE of 17.75%. The ultrasmooth perovskite film in our solar cell enabled the formation of a conformal junction between the SnO2 and Spiro-OMeTAD layers, which provided the high FF and PCE. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) curve of the cell shown in Fig. S9f† indicates that its spectral response is in the range of 350 to 800 nm. The estimated integrated photocurrent density obtained from the EQE curves is 22.80 mA cm−2, which corresponds to the Jsc obtained using the solar simulator. Our fabricated PSCs are very light (150 mg), which is extremely suitable for applying them with LDPE/PP actuators as mobile solar energy harvesting devices. Bending stability is an important quality indicator of flexible solar cells. Fig. S12a† shows the normalized PCE of the flexible PSCs measured after bending at different curvature radii (see specific parameters in Table S3†), and photographs of the bending test are presented in the inset. After bending at a radius of 9 mm, the PCE retained 91.8% of its initial value. The J–V curves of flexible PSCs bending at different radius during 500 repeated cycles are presented in Fig. S12b.† The lower Jsc and FF likely resulted from the fracturing of the perovskite layer and higher sheet resistance after bending, which has been confirmed by other reports.34
Finally, the perovskite solar cell and LDPE/PP actuator were integrated together using a thin PDMS layer. The sample was placed on a platform and irradiated with NIR light (100 mW cm−2) normal to its surface (the light was offset from the vertical direction by about 30°). Fig. 3a depicts the walking action of the solar cell device on the platform. The walking behavior involves in five successive steps (1 → 2 → 3 → 2* → 1*), which are controlled by the NIR light. In the first step, the entire device bends upwards into an arch because of the swelling of the LDPE/PP bilayer at low temperature. Subsequently, the LDPE/PP layer shrinks after light irradiation, causing the device to extend forward in the direction of the NIR light (1 →2 →3). When the laser is switched off, the LDPE/PP bilayer expands again and the device remains bent into an arch (3 → 2* → 1*). By controlling its NIR light exposure, the solar cell device can travel in one direction in a step-by-step manner towards the NIR light source driven by the interfacial stress within the LDPE/PP bilayer, as presented in Fig. 3b (In order to see the movement more clearly, here we placed the gold electrode layer facing up.)
 Fig. 3  (a) Illustrations of the walking movements of the device. (b) Time profiles of the walking movements of the solar cell device with and without NIR light irradiation. The mechanical model used to describe the walking behavior of the device with the NIR light turned (c) on and (d) off. (e) Temperature response of the walking device during NIR irradiation. (f) Stability test of the device as a function of the number of switching cycles of NIR irradiation. 
The force analysis of the device is shown in Fig. 3c and d. Because the device is asymmetric, the normal force (N) acting on either end is different. The device on the left is heavier than that on the right; thus, N2 < N1. The contact area between each device and substrate was the same, so it was assumed that the friction coefficient μ was also the same. The maximum static friction acting on the left end is F1 = μN1 and the maximum static friction acting on the right end is F2 = μN2. After NIR irradiation, the LDPE/PP layer will contract and create a forward thrust F, which causes the walking device to stretch forward along the direction of the NIR light (Fig. 3c). As a result, the right end of the device will remain static, while the left end is driven by the bending actuation and moves forward. After the NIR light is switched off, there is no external force involved (Fig. 3d). The maximum static friction acting on the right end is larger than that on the left. In this case, the left end of the device remains stationary while the right end moves forward. The device recovers to its original state and moves forward, which overall results in a biomimetic walking motion. The force analysis is shown in Fig. 3d. According to Fig. 3e, the temperature of the walking device increased from 12 to 42.5 °C after 10 s of NIR irradiation and then decreased to its original state within 35 s after the light was turned off. Here, we also explored the effect of external temperature on the performance of perovskite solar cells. Continuous infrared irradiation can lead to an increase in the temperature of solar cells. We measured the surface temperature of PSCs irradiated by NIR light for 60 s, which can be up to 79 °C (Fig. S13†). Because the surface temperature of PSCs irradiated by NIR light is instantaneous, it is difficult to test the photoelectric output of PSCs during the irradiation period. Therefore, we applied the method of heating PSCs on the hot plate for 3 minutes to obtain a constant temperature. We found that the PCE of the PSC barely changes when the temperature is below 55 °C, and the PCE decrease is more obvious when the temperature exceeds 55 °C, since this seriously affects the normal operation of the PSC (Fig. S14†). The main reason for this PCE change can be attributed to the organic charge transport layer (Spiro-OMeTAD), because the other functional layers (i.e., ITO, SnO2, perovskite layer) can withstand high temperatures of at least 100 °C. The PCE can be considered constant within temperature ranges below 55 °C, owing to stable Spiro-OMeTAD. However, when the temperature rises, temperature-activated charge transport in the Spiro-OMeTAD layer will dramatically increase the series resistance, thus decreasing Jsc and Voc.35 In our work, the NIR light irradiation temperature for controlling the walking process is 42.5 °C, which is well within the stable temperature range. Moreover, the PCE of the PSCs hardly changes after heating them on a hot plate at below 55 °C for 3 minutes, showing very good stability. The irradiation time for remotely controlling the walking process is 10 seconds, which is far less than 3 minutes. Thus, the remotely controlled temperature range has no effect on the performance of our PSCs. At the same time, we also measured the temperature change of PSCs irradiated by simulated sunlight. We found that after a long period of sunlight irradiation (about 5 minutes), the maximum surface temperature of the actuating device reached 39.2 °C, which was still below target deformation temperature (42.5 °C) by a few degrees (Fig. S15†). This is because the majority of simulated sunlight is visible light, and the infrared part only accounts for 43% (Fig. S16†). When the device is irradiated by simulated sunlight with the same power as the NIR light, the temperature will not rise very high and the rising rate will be slow. The thermal stability of the device as a function of the number of switching cycles of NIR irradiation is presented in Fig. 3f. Using periodic NIR light exposure as a stimulus, the device showed good thermal stability and a continuous walking motion that mimics the motion of animals such as worms. The device, which can lift a sample heavier than itself, exhibited a high walking speed of 10 mm min−1, which is almost three times faster than that of a reported walking robot (3.8 mm min−1).36 Overall, the device shows excellent mechanical properties together with rapid distance coverage.
In addition to mechanical stability, the dynamic electrical characterization of the perovskite solar cells under different angles of illumination and light intensity is a prerequisite for their use in practical applications. Fig. 4a illustrates that with decreasing incident angle of simulated solar light, Voc of the device remained unchanged and Jsc decreased from 22.85 to 2.34 mA cm−2 (Table S4†). The maximum output was obtained when the device was positioned horizontally (at 90° to the light source). To explore the influence of light conditions on the output performance of solar cells, the light intensity that horizontally placed solar cells were exposed to was changed. Fig. 4b and c show similar trends to that in Fig. 4a. As the light intensity decreased, the output power decreased due to the change of PCE (Fig. S17†). The output voltage of the device remained unchanged but Jsc and PCE both decreased. The maximum output (Pout = PCE × light intensity = Jsc × Voc × FF) was achieved from the device under one standard sun (100 mW cm−2); see Table S5† for details. This result indicates that the maximum output can be obtained only if the solar cell is placed horizontally under one standard sun. Therefore, the design of the heliotropic walking perovskite solar cell is very important. As illustrated in Fig. 4d, solar cells can walk towards the light source to obtain maximized output performance under the control of NIR light. When the NIR light is turned on, the front end of the device (A) remains where it is, and the back end (B) begins to move forward (B1) because of the swelling of the LDPE/PP actuator. When the NIR light is turned off, based on the actuating mechanism discussed earlier, the rear of the device remains motionless (B1) and the front region moves forward (A → A1). Finally, the solar cell is completely exposed to the sun (A2) and the maximum output is obtained. During this heliotropic walking process, the dynamic changes of voltage (Fig. 4e) and current (Fig. 4f) of the solar cells were measured in real time. When the NIR light was turned on, the voltage increased slightly (0.2 V), whereas the current remained almost unchanged. The voltage change is mainly caused by the NIR irradiation containing some visible light (730–800 nm). During NIR irradiation, the solar cell was only irradiated by NIR light (not the solar light), so the performance of the device did not change significantly. When the NIR irradiation was turned off, the front solar cell of the device was positioned almost parallel to the incident solar light. When the device moves into the solar light, Voc rises sharply. In contrast, the current rises slowly, which is mainly due to the solar cell changing from being parallel to the incident light to perpendicular to the incident light at this stage. During this angle change, as the height of the solar cell changes, the intensity of the light on its surface will also change. However, this process will only change the Jsc and not Voc, which is consistent with the previous discussion. Through this heliotropic walking process, the output power of the solar cells increased up to 21.5 mW cm−2, which is sufficient to operate many small electrical devices.
 Fig. 4  (a) J–V curves of perovskite solar cells with different incident angles of simulated solar light. (b) Output power of perovskite solar cells at different light intensities. (c) Normalized Voc and Jsc of perovskite solar cells at different light intensities. (d) Schematic diagram of perovskite solar cells walking towards a region irradiated with sunlight under remote control by NIR light. Dynamic changes of the (e) voltage, (f) current, and (g) power density of solar cells measured in real time during the heliotropic walking process. 
Conclusion
A simple LDPE/PP actuator was fabricated that was driven by NIR light with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The actuator exhibited bending actuation under NIR irradiation in which the curvature exceeded 1.0 cm−1 and the bending angle exceeded 180°. A heliotropic walking perovskite solar cell containing the actuator exhibited a high walking speed of 10 mm min−1, excellent mechanical properties, and a high PCE of 17.75%. The dynamic electrical properties of the device during heliotropic walking were assessed. We note that our devices are not spontaneously heliotropic, but remotely controlled by NIR light. Based on our improved material design, we expect more effective heliotropism walking solar cell devices being explored and used to maximize solar energy harvesting as a renewable, clean energy source. With further development, this composite device will be attractive for use as a mobile energy source for sensors, microrobots, and micropumps.
Experimental section
Fabrication of the LDPE/PP actuator
A piece of commercial LDPE film (60 mm × 25 mm × 30 μm) was spread on a piece of flat glass. A commercial PP film (60 mm × 25 mm × 40 μm) was attached to the LDPE film using acrylic as an adhesive to give an LDPE/PP actuator with dimensions of 60 mm × 25 mm × 70 μm.
Fabrication of SnO2 colloid
The SnCl4·5H2O (17.78 g) was dissolved with water (200 mL) and stirred vigorously for 0.5 h as well as adding 200 mL ammonia solution (5 mM) at the same time after heating up to 70 °C, followed by successive washing with extra pure water until pH 7 was obtained. The resulting white translucent precipitate was added to 200 mL of H2O2 solution (1 M) and allowed to stand for 12 hours. The hydrothermal treatment was performed at 150 °C for 5 hours. After removal of the impurities by careful washing using H2O, the final homogenous suspension of SnO2 crystals was dispersed in H2O.
Fabrication of perovskite solar cells
Diluted SnO2 colloid (30 μL, 15 mg mL−1 in water solution) was spin coated on an ITO/PET substrate in ambient air and then annealed at 150 °C for 30 min to form an SnO2 nanoparticle film. After depositing the ETL, the perovskite layer was deposited by the spin-coating method described in our previous work.37–39 After perovskite film formation, the structure was transferred into a spin coater to form the Spiro-OMeTAD hole transport layer. Spiro-OMeTAD in chlorobenzene (30 μL, 90 mg mL−1) was coated on the perovskite film at 3000 rpm for 30 s. The Spiro-OMeTAD solution also contained Li-TFSI in acetonitrile (45 μL, 170 mg mL−1) and tBP (10 μL). An Au back electrode was then deposited by thermal evaporation at a pressure of 3 × 10−6 Pa.
Fabrication of the walking device
First, an LDPE/PP actuator was prepared as described above. Second, flexible perovskite solar cells were fabricated. Finally, the Au back electrodes of two perovskite solar cells were attached to each end of the actuator using a thin PDMS layer to form the walking solar cell.
Characterization
Components were analyzed using an X-ray diffractometer (Bruker, D2 Phaser). The morphology of the perovskite film was observed using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (S-8010, Hitachi, Japan). Surface topography, Ra, and height profiles were obtained using an atomic force microscope (Park System, NX10) in non-contact mode. J–V curves were measured using a source meter (Keithley, 2400). A solar simulator (96160, Newport, USA) equipped with a 300 W xenon lamp was used as a solar light source. The light intensity was adjusted using an NREL-calibrated Si solar cell with a KG-1 filter to approximate AM 1.5G one-sun light intensity. IPCE spectra were measured as a function of wavelength from 300 to 900 nm using a specially designed IPCE system (Newport, USA). The solar cells were not encapsulated during measurement or storage. The bending angle of the actuator was captured by a digital camera. The temperature of the actuator was measured using an infrared thermal camera (FLIR A300) and laser sight infrared thermometer (Optris LS). Mechanical properties were measured using an electronic universal testing machine (Shimadzu, AGS-500ND).
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the financial support by Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2232019A3-02), Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51572046, 51590902), Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (16JC1400700), and the Innovation Program of Shanghai Municipal Education Commission (2017-01-07-00-03-E00055). Dr C. Hou gives thanks to the supports from the Shanghai Natural Science Foundation (16ZR1401500), the Shanghai Sailing Program (16YF1400400), and Young Elite Scientists Sponsorship Program by CAST (2017QNRC001). Mr J. Qi gives thanks to the support from the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities and Graduate Student Innovation Fund of Donghua University (CUSF-DH-D-2018002 and BCZD2019001).
References
J. Liang, L. Li, X. Niu, Z. Yu and Q. Pei, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 817–824 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Wang, X. Wang, Z. L. Wang and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5696–5700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Zhao, C. Yao, T. R. Liu, J. C. Hamill Jr, G. O. N. Ndjawa, G. M. Cheng, N. Yao, H. Meng and Y. L. Loo, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1904494 CrossRef PubMed .
R. H. Kim, H. J. Kim, I. Bae, S. K. Hwang, D. B. Velusamy, S. M. Cho, K. Takaishi, T. Muto, D. Hashizume, M. Uchiyama, P. André, F. Mathevet, B. Heinrich, T. Aoyama, D.-E. Kim, H. Lee, J. C. Ribierre and C. Park, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3583 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Ma, K. W. Zhang and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703694 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Xu, Y. Zhang, J. Cho, J. Lee, X. Huang, L. Jia, J. A. Fan, Y. Su, J. Su and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1543 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Lee, K. Y. Lee, M. K. Gupta, T. Y. Kim, D. Y. Lee, J. Oh, C. Ryu, W. J. Yoo, C. Y. Kang and S. J. Yoon, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 765–769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. W. Zhang, Z. L. Wang and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10331–10338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zheng, R. X. Peng, G. Wang, J. L. Logsdon, B. H. Wang, X. B. Hu, Y. Chen, V. P. Dravid, M. R. Wasielewski, J. S. Yu, W. Huang, Z. Y. Ge, T. J. Marks and A. Facchetti, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Deng, X. Sun, H. Li and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2643–2647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Son, J. Lee, S. Qiao, R. Ghaffari, J. Kim, J. E. Lee, C. Song, S. J. Kim, D. J. Lee and S. W. Jun, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 397–404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Sherry and C. Galen, Plant, Cell Environ., 1998, 21, 983 CrossRef .
C. S. Li, Y. Liu, X. Z. Huang and H. R. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 5166–5174 CrossRef CAS .
Q. W. Shi, J. H. Li, C. Y. Hou, Y. L. Shao, Q. H. Zhang, Y. G. Li and H. Z. Wang, Chem. Comm., 2017, 53, 11118–11121 RSC .

          National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Best research-cell efficiencies chart, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/pdfs/best-research-cell-efficiencies-190416.pdf, accessed date:  06-28-2019 Search PubMed.
K. W. Zhang, S. H. Wang and Y. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601852 CrossRef .
D. Zheng, G. Wang, W. Huang, B. Wang, W. Ke, J. L. Logsdon, H. Wang, Z. Wang, W. Zhu and J. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 1900265 CrossRef .
N. Ye, J. J. Qi, Z. Qi, X. M. Zhang, Y. Yang, J. Liu and Y. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 5806–5809 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wehrenfennig, G. E. Eperon, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1584–1589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Kim, D. H. Kim, Y.-Y. Lee, H.-W. Shin, G. S. Han, J. S. Hong, K. Mahmood, T. K. Ahn, Y.-C. Joo and K. S. Hong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 916–921 RSC .
B. Ouyang, K. W. Zhang and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2017, 2, 1700208 CrossRef .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu and T. L. Kelly, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 133–138 CrossRef CAS .
J. You, Z. Hong, Y. M. Yang, Q. Chen, M. Cai, T.-B. Song, C.-C. Chen, S. Lu, Y. Liu and H. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1674–1680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Wu, X. D. Zhong, X. Wang, Y. Yang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 1631–1639 CrossRef CAS .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Liao, T. L. D. Tam, P. Guo, Y. Wu, E. F. Manley, W. Huang, N. Zhou, C. M. M. Soe, B. Wang, M. R. Wasielewski, L. X. Chen, M. G. Kanatzidis, A. Facchetti, R. P. H. Chang and T. J. Marks, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600502 CrossRef .
W. J. Ke, D. W. Zhao, A. J. Cimaroli, C. R. Grice, P. L. Qin, Q. Liu, L. B. Xiong, Y. F. Yan and G. J. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24163–24168 RSC .
P. W. Lech, R. A. Lee, B. A. Sexton and F. Smith, Microelectron. Eng., 2007, 84, 109–113 CrossRef .
Y. J. Jin, B. S. Kim, W. E. Lee, C. L. Lee, H. Kim, K. H. Song, S. Y. Jang and G. Kwak, NPG Asia Mater., 2014, 6, e137 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 14, 245–256 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yang, R. X. Yang, J. Zhang, Z. Yang, S. Z. Liu and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3208–3214 RSC .
W. Tress, K. Domanski, B. Carlsen, A. Agarwalla, E. A. Alharbi, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 568–574 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, J. Feng, L. Peng, Y. Ni, H. Liang, L. He and Y. Xie, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18584–18591 RSC .
H. Xiong, Y. C. Rui, Y. G. Li, Q. H. Zhang and H. Z. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 6848–6854 RSC .
J. B. Qi, H. Xiong, G. Wang, H. Q. Xie, W. Jia, Q. H. Zhang, Y. G. Li and H. Z. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2018, 376, 46–54 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Rui, H. Xiong, B. Su, H. Z. Wang, Q. H. Zhang, J. L. Xu and P. M. Buschbaum, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 227, 49–60 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta09336bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the heliotropic perovskite solar cell. (b and c) Phototropic bending of the composite strips with different alignment directions of LDPE in response to visible light. (d) CTE measurements of LDPE aligned in different directions. 2D XRD patterns of (e) PP and (f) LDPE.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic mechanism of the LDPE/PP actuator in its original state (a) and bending state (b). (c) Polarizing optical microscope diagram showing grain size change of the LDPE crystal, with a scale bar of 100 μm. (d) Dynamic thermomechanical analysis of the LDPE/PP film. (e) Photographs of the film under load.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Illustrations of the walking movements of the device. (b) Time profiles of the walking movements of the solar cell device with and without NIR light irradiation. The mechanical model used to describe the walking behavior of the device with the NIR light turned (c) on and (d) off. (e) Temperature response of the walking device during NIR irradiation. (f) Stability test of the device as a function of the number of switching cycles of NIR irradiation.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) J–V curves of perovskite solar cells with different incident angles of simulated solar light. (b) Output power of perovskite solar cells at different light intensities. (c) Normalized Voc and Jsc of perovskite solar cells at different light intensities. (d) Schematic diagram of perovskite solar cells walking towards a region irradiated with sunlight under remote control by NIR light. Dynamic changes of the (e) voltage, (f) current, and (g) power density of solar cells measured in real time during the heliotropic walking process.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta09336b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
