Sputtering processed highly efficient Cu 2 ZnSn(S,Se) 4 solar cells by a low-cost, simple, environmentally friendly, and up-scalable strategy   - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5GC02417J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5GC02417J
(Paper)
Green Chem., 2016, 18, 700-711Sputtering processed highly efficient Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 solar cells by a low-cost, simple, environmentally friendly, and up-scalable strategy†

        
          
            Myeng Gil 
            Gang‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Seung Wook 
            Shin‡§
b, 
      
        
          
            Chang Woo 
            Hong
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            K. V. 
            Gurav
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jihye 
            Gwak
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jae Ho 
            Yun
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jeong Yong 
            Lee¶
*b and 

        
          
            Jin Hyeok 
            Kim¶
*a
aOptoelectronic Convergence Research Center, Department of Materials Science and Engineering Chonnam Nation University, 300 YongBongDong, Puk-Gu, Gwangju 500-757, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jinhyeok@chonnam.ac.kr;   Tel: +82-62-530-1709;  Fax: +82-62-530-1699
bCenter for Nanomaterials and Chemical Reactions, Institute for Basic Science, Daejeon 305-701, Korea. E-mail: j.y.lee@kaist.ac.kr;   Tel: +82-42-350-4216;  Fax: +82-42-350-3310
cPhotovoltaic Laboratory, Korea Institute of Energy Research, 71-2 Jang-Dong Yuseong-Gu, Daejeon 305-343, South Korea
Received 
      8th October 2015
    , Accepted 23rd November 2015First published on 27th November 2015AbstractEarth abundant copper–zinc–tin chalcogenide (CZTSSe) is an emerging material for the development of low cost and sustainable thin film solar cells (TFSCs). A low cost, green, and up-scalable approach to the fabrication of TFSCs through a sputtering process is the main challenge to achieve high efficiency for Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTSSe) solar cells for industrialization. Based on a closed isothermal chamber annealing system, we could precisely calculate and control the chalcogenide partial vapour pressure during the annealing process. We designed, developed, and optimized an environmentally friendly strategy to synthesise a high quality CZTSSe absorber thin film and to fabricate a solar cell without using toxic H2Se and H2S gases as the Se and S sources or any other volatile compounds (SnS and Sn), and a chalcogenide diffusion barrier layer. We fabricated a CZTSSe TFSC with 9.24% efficiency, which is the highest performance for sputtering processed CZTSSe TFSC prepared without using toxic gases and additional processes. Based on this green strategy, we also fabricated the integrated submodule using CZTSSe absorber layers with efficiencies as high as η = 2.76% with eight interconnected cells (active area of 22.4 cm2). Our studies on this green synthesis strategy for CZTSSe solar cells could introduce a possible pathway to green fabrication for the low cost and highly efficient TFSC industrialization field.
Introduction
The semiconductor Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTSSe) containing earth abundant elements is an attractive candidate for light absorbing materials for low cost and highly efficient thin film solar cells (TFSCs) due to its outstanding optical characteristics and high theoretical efficiency.1,2 The reported studies over the last several years on CZTSSe-based TFSCs have been adopted from that of Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGS) because of the similarity to the optical characteristics and structure of TFSCs.3 With their outstanding characteristics and the many research efforts devoted to them, solar cells based on CZTSSe compounds showed rapid improvements and reached efficiencies up to 12.7%,4 however, the device efficiencies are still far behind those of commercialized absorber materials such as CIGS (η = 21.7%)5 and CdTe (η = 19.6%).6
Several synthetic techniques including vacuum and non-vacuum methods, have been reported in the literature for the CZTSSe absorber layers.1,7,8 The highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 12.7% for CZTSSe TFSCs was obtained using a hydrazine based solution process approach.4 Although the performance of CZTSSe TFSCs adapting the hydrazine based hybrid slurry approach has been reported to be the highest, the hazards associated with highly toxic and explosive hydrazine may inhibit adaption of this technique.9 More classical deposition methods were studied for easy transferability to industrial applications.10,11 In particular, the magnetron sputtering and co-evaporation processes were particularly successful and have shown comparable efficiencies.3 Repins et al. have reported a 9.15% efficient CZTSe solar cell using the CZTSe absorber prepared by a single step co-evaporation process.12 With careful control of deposition rates and substrate temperature, Repins et al. successfully controlled the evaporation of volatile phases and prepared phase pure CZTSe films.12 The 8.9% and 11.6% efficient CZTSe TFSCs prepared by selenization of a co-evaporated Cu–Zn–Sn–S containing precursor on thin TiN diffusion barrier/Mo coated soda lime glass at 590 °C on a hot plate under an excess Se + N2 atmosphere have been reported by Shin and Lee et al.10,13 Recently, Brammertz et al. have achieved a CZTSe TFSC with 9.7% efficiency by the sputtering of Cu, Zn, and Cu1Sn9 layers followed by selenization using a toxic H2Se gas at 460 °C for 15 min.14 The adhesion issue of the metallic Cu1Sn9 layer in contact with Mo during the selenization process resulted in the formation of voids at the Mo/CZTS interface.14 Although these studies have achieved high efficiency using CZTSSe absorber layers, the fabrication process is limited for commercial use of the emerging CZTSSe-based technologies due to the use of a toxic H2Se gas (sputtering) or the lack of large area uniformity (co-evaporation). Considering the issues with these processes, the best fabrication route for CZTSSe is a two-step method, which should involve the sequential deposition of high-purity sputtered Cu, Zn and Sn from elemental targets followed by annealing at high temperatures using less toxic Se pellets instead of a toxic H2Se gas. It is very important to control the thickness and morphology of each metallic layer in the two-step process because these two factors eventually control the composition and morphology of the CZTSSe absorber layer after the annealing process. However, the CZTSSe TFSCs prepared using the two-step fabrication process suffered poor performances due to (i) the formation of many voids and unexpected phases between the Mo and CZTSSe layers and (ii) the Mo(S,Se)2 interfacial layer that was too thick (over 500 nm), during the annealing process under high vapour pressures of chalcogenide materials.15–18
Normally, the formation of voids and, unexpected phases, as well as the increased instability near the back contact region, is closely related to the Sn loss from the kesterite CZTSSe thin films during the annealing process.16,17 This Sn loss behaviour from the kesterite CZTSSe thin film is attributed to the instability of the Sn(IV) element, which is the particular chemistry of multivalent Sn during the annealing process.16 The oxidation state of the multivalent Sn is determined by the partial pressure of the chalcogenide materials and the annealing temperature.16 The oxidation state of Sn(II) is favoured, and the Sn(II) based compound is easily formed and vaporized at high annealing temperatures, low vapour pressures of the chalcogenide materials and under an open annealing atmosphere (particularly, Ar or N2 gas flow during the annealing process).16,17 This unusual chemistry of multivalent Sn in the kesterite thin films is the driving force for CZTS decomposition at the surface and back contact regions.16 This detrimental effect worsens when the CZTSSe thin films are prepared by sulfurization or selenization in the open annealing system, indicating the uncontrollable chalcogenide vapour composition and pressure.2 To prevent Sn loss from the kesterite thin film during annealing, research groups developed the annealing process under an atmosphere comprised of chalcogenide and Sn-containing materials.19
Conversely, the Mo back contact region reacts with the chalcogenide to form the Mo(S,Se)2 interfacial layer, whose thickness mainly depends on the vapour pressures of the chalcogenide materials.10 They facilitate the formation of the Ohmic contact between the Mo and CZTSe layers of approximately one hundred manometers, while they adversely affect the poor performances under the thicker thickness of the Mo(S,Se)2 interfacial layer.10,16 This behaviour implied that the vapour pressure of the chalcogenide materials should be precisely controlled to achieve the high performance device.16 Recently, the device performance could be effectively improved by introducing thin Se diffusion barrier layers such as TiN, TiB2, Ag, and i-ZnO between the precursor and the Mo layer10,19,20 The enhanced device performances are attributed to reduction of the series resistance (Rs) from the thinner Mo(S,Se)2 interfacial layer and improvement of the open circuit voltage (Voc) from the improved stability in the back contact region and reduction of unexpected phases. However, these additional processes including Sn-based compounds and the Se diffusion barrier layer in the fabrication of CZTSSe TFSCs might lead to significant limitations for industrial uses of the photovoltaic device. These issues clearly suggested that a new scientific approach is required that, can control the Sn loss and the thickness of the Mo(S,Se)2 interfacial layer during the annealing process to form high quality kesterite thin films. Recently, a possible solution for these difficulties in the CZTSSe TFSC was reported by Li et al.21 They demonstrated the controllable thickness of MoSe2 in the CZTSe absorber layer through an alloying process for the metallic precursor (called soft annealing), which acts as a temporary Se diffusion barrier, resulting in the fabrication of the 8.7% efficient CZTSe TFSC.21 One possibility for the fabrication of highly efficient CZTSSe TFSCs without using additional barrier layers has been suggested by introducing a soft-annealing step in the metallic precursor preparation and by precisely controlling the vapour pressures of the chalcogenide materials in the annealing process.
In this study, we report the kesterite CZTSSe TFSCs prepared by a sputtering technique and demonstrate a PCE of 9.24%, which is the highest recorded efficiency for CZTSSe films prepared without using a toxic H2Se gas. An important feature of this research is that the annealing process is conducted in a closed isothermal chamber system, and a green synthesis strategy is used to prepare the high quality CZTSSe absorber layer without using a toxic gas, any other volatile compounds, and a Se diffusion barrier layer on the precursor. This annealing system is expected to reach equilibrium without the loss of Sn, and the vapour pressures of the chalcogenide materials can be precisely controlled in the reaction chamber during the annealing process. Based on this annealing system, we could precisely calculate the chalcogenide partial vapour pressure during the annealing process using the study on chalcogenide species chemistry (see Fig. 1). Thus, we systematically designed, developed, and optimized the CZTSSe absorber layer and the CZTSSe TFSCs using a green synthesis process under precisely controllable vapour pressures of chalcogenide materials. The best device performance represents the CZTSSe TFSCs with the highest reported efficiency without using toxic gases and additional processes, which is certified by an external, accredited laboratory (Korea Institute of Energy Research, KIER) (ESI Table 1S and Fig. 7S†). Table 1S† summarizes the experimental conditions, the institutions involved, and the reported performances of CZTSSe TFSCs prepared by various deposition techniques and under different fabrication conditions. In addition, we fabricated and characterized the integrated submodule using the CZTSSe absorber layers to investigate the possibility for low cost and highly efficient CZTSSe TFSC manufacturing through a green synthesis strategy.
 Fig. 1  Vapour pressures of Se (a) and S (b) inside the annealing chamber with different annealing temperatures and amounts of S and Se powders at 406 cm3. 
Experimental
The Cu–Sn–Zn stacked metallic precursor thin films were deposited on Mo coated soda lime glass substrates using the DC sputtering technique at 273 K. The precursor thin films were annealed under a N2 atmosphere to easily form the Cu–Zn and Cu–Sn alloys. To synthesize the CZTSe and CZTSSe thin films, the chalcogenide powders and precursor thin films were placed in a graphite box (406 cm3), in a closed isothermal chamber system and heated to 540 °C for 10 min (Fig. S1†). After the annealing process, the films were naturally cooled for 1 h. The TFSCs were fabricated with a multi-layered structure of SLG/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/i-ZnO/AZO/Al/MgF2. The detailed experimental conditions, compositions, and chalcogenide vapor pressure of samples are listed in Table S2.†
Results and discussion
Controllable MoSe2 layer thickness in CZTSe thin films by adjusting Se vapour pressure
Because we adapted a closed isothermal chamber for the annealing process, it is presumably important to calculate the formation of the chalcogenide partial pressure at different temperatures for different quantities of chalcogenide powders. We calculate the chalcogenide vapour pressure in the isothermal closed chamber system using the ideal gas law and the reported temperature-dependent chalcogenide vapour speciation data. Details of the pressure calculations can be found in the literature.22–26 When the temperature increases in the closed isothermal chamber, the vapour pressure of chalcogenide materials can be followed in the equilibrium vapour curve (brown line Fig. 1(a) and dark yellow line Fig. 1(b)) until reaching the saturated pressure. The chalcogenide exists in the liquid and vapour phases below the saturated temperature (Ts) under the equilibrated system and then all of the chalcogenide liquid phase is converted into the vapour pressure at a higher temperature than Ts; then, the pressure can be calculated from the ideal gas law.23–26Ts is the temperature at the saturation vapour pressure that exceeds the amount of chalcogenide placed in the annealing chamber. Fig. 1 shows the vapour pressure of Se (a) and S (b) inside the annealing chamber with different temperatures and the amount of chalcogenide powders. The different colour lines in Fig. 1 indicate the vapour pressure of chalcogenide materials in the closed isothermal chamber. The vapour pressures of chalcogenide materials can be varied by controlling the temperature and amount of the chalcogenide powders in the isothermal closed annealing system. We found that the vapour pressure of chalcogenide materials in the annealing chamber can be controlled from 5.77 to 45 Torr (Se, Fig. 1(a)) and from 11.54 to 53 Torr (S, Fig. 1(b)) under different annealing conditions.
The thickness of the MoSe2 layer can be controlled by systematically tuning the Se partial pressure.15 Based on the calculated Se vapour pressure (Fig. 1(a)), the CZTSe thin films were prepared using different Se vapour pressures to measure the thickness of MoSe2 interfacial layers. Fig. 2 shows the thickness of the MoSe2 interfacial layers under different Se vapour pressures by FE-SEM characterization. The annealed thin film is not observed in the MoSe2 interfacial layer at 0 Torr. The thickness of the MoSe2 interfacial layers increases from 10 nm to 1.8 μm as the Se vapour pressure increases; however, they saturate over 35 Torr. This behaviour results from the limitation of Se diffusion in the CZTSe and MoSe2 layers during the selenization process. In this case, the CZTSe thin film prepared at 5.77 Torr shows poor adhesion and uniformity at the surface. Therefore, we selected the Se vapour pressure of 11.54 Torr to improve the adhesion between the Mo and CZTSe absorber layer as well as to minimize the MoSe2 interfacial layer.
 Fig. 2  Thicknesses of the MoSe2 layer with different Se vapour pressures from the CZTSe thin films by selenization at 540 °C for 10 min. 
Characterization of the precursor, the CZTSe thin films, and their performance in the solar cell
The metallic precursor thin films were prepared by annealing under a N2 atmosphere from 200 to 500 °C for 10 min to form the Cu–Zn and Cu–Sn alloys, which act as a temporary Se diffusion barrier during the selenization process and this process is called a soft-annealing process. Fig. 3 shows the FE-SEM images of (a) as-dep. and (b) annealed precursor thin films. The rough Sn layer covered by a smoother Zn and Cu layer is evident. The combined total thickness of the Cu–Zn–Sn precursor layer is approximately 500 nm. No formation of an interfacial layer between the Mo and precursor is observed in the as-dep. and annealed thin films. The as-dep. precursor thin film shows a dense microstructure with a relatively rough morphology and, some voids located near the Mo back contact layer, and this film consists of small sized grains in the bottom region and large sized grains in the middle and top regions. However, the annealed precursor thin film prepared at 300 °C for 10 min (Fig. 2(b)) shows a denser microstructure consisting of larger size grains than that without the soft-annealing process. The single peak from the metal phases (Cu and Sn) and from the Cu-based alloy phases (CuZn, Cu5Zn4, and Cu5Zn8) are observed in the as-dep. precursor thin film, while the single diffraction peaks obtained from metal phases disappear and the Cu6Zn5 phase is observed after the soft-annealing process. Due to the low mutual solubility of the Sn and Zn, there is no formation of a Sn–Zn alloy.27–29 With an increase in the soft annealing temperature, the single peak from the Sn metal in the films is weakened. The compositional ratio of the as-dep. precursor and the annealed thin films indicates the Cu poor and Zn rich (Cu/(Zn + Sn) = 0.66 ± 0.05, Cu/Sn = 1.96 ± 0.1, and Zn/Sn = 1.94 ± 1.1) conditions shown in the ESI Table S2.† The precursor thin films prepared with different soft annealing temperatures were selenized at 540 °C for 10 min (here, Se vapour pressure is 11.54 Torr) to synthesise the kesterite CZTSe absorber layers. Fig. 2S† shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) (a) and Raman spectra (b) of CZTSe absorber layers under different soft-annealing conditions. The XRD for all of the selenized thin films shows the strong diffraction peaks located at 27°, 45.1°, and 53.5°, which correspond to the (112), (204), and (312) planes for the kesterite CZTSe structure, respectively. In addition, several weak diffraction peaks are observed, regardless of the soft-annealing conditions and they have a phase pure kesterite CZTSe structure. All of the selenized thin films show a strong Raman peak located at 196 cm−1, which corresponds to the kesterite structure. However, the Raman peaks from the ZnSe compounds are observed in the soft-annealed films at 400 and 500 °C. Other weak Raman peaks correspond to the kesterite CZTSe compounds regardless of the soft-annealing conditions.
 Fig. 3  FE-SEM images of (a) as-dep. and (b) annealed precursor thin films at 300 °C for 10 min and (c) X-ray diffraction patterns of as-dep. and soft annealed samples. 

Fig. 4 shows the FE-SEM images for CZTSe absorber layers without soft-annealing and with different soft-annealing temperatures. All of the annealed thin films have a dense microstructure consisting of submicron sized grains with 1.5 μm thickness and some voids between the Mo and CZTSe layers. A relatively smooth morphology is also observed, while it is rougher in the CZTSe thin film soft-annealed at 500 °C. Interestingly, the thicknesses of the MoSe2 layers in the CZTSe thin films are dependent on the soft annealing process. The interfacial MoSe2 layer of the CZTSe thin film without soft-annealing is estimated to be approximately 230 nm, which can be effectively reduced to less than 50 nm by applying the soft annealing process prior to the selenization process. The formation of dense microstructure of Cu–Zn, and the Cu–Sn alloyed layer after soft annealing preferably act as a temporary Se diffusion barrier during the selenization process, which minimizes the direct reaction of Mo with chalcogenide (Se) at high selenization temperatures. This thin interfacial MoSe2 layer suggests that the series resistance (Rs) might be minimized in the solar cell device.
 Fig. 4  FE-SEM images for CZTSe absorber layers without soft-annealing and with different soft-annealing temperatures; (a) no soft annealing, (b) 200 °C, (c) 300 °C, (d) 400 °C, and (e) 500 °C. 
The CZTSe solar cells were fabricated based on samples prepared with different soft-annealing conditions and the device performances are shown in Fig. 5. Each sample contained 4–6 solar cells. The average performances, including the short circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF), and efficiency (η), of the CZTSe TFSCs are improved when the soft-annealing temperatures increase to 300 °C, and then they deteriorate when the soft-annealing temperatures further increase to 500 °C. Interestingly, the average open circuit voltage (Voc) of the CZTSe TFSCs shows the best value at a soft-annealing temperature of 200 °C, and then it decreases with increasing soft-annealing temperatures. The CZTSe TFSC prepared at a soft-annealing temperature of 300 °C (CZTSe-3 sample) shows the best performances; where η is 5.26%, Voc is 0.326 V, Jsc is 33.02 mA cm−2, and FF is 49%.
 Fig. 5  Device performances of the CZTSe solar cells with different soft annealed samples: (a) Jsc, (b) Voc, (c) FF, and (d) η, respectively. Each sample contained 4–6 solar cells. 

Fig. 6 shows the device parameters, including the shunt conductance (Gsh), ideal factor (A), reverse saturation current density (J0), and series resistance (Rs) from the light J–V curve of CZTSe TFSCs with the best performances of samples under different soft-annealing conditions. The decreased value of A for samples prepared with soft-annealing compared with those prepared without soft-annealing leads to the reduced defect generation near the space charge region, which causes tunnelling near the space charge region and ultimately increases the carrier recombination dramatically.3,12 It is clearly observed in the device parameters that they are significantly improved compared with those without soft-annealing when the soft-annealing temperatures are increased to 300 °C. The improved parameters including Gsh and Rs result in an improved microstructure and a reduced MoSe2 thickness (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 6  Device parameters from the light J–V curve of CZTSe TFSCs with different soft annealed samples: (a) Gsh and A, (b) J0 and Rs. These parameters were calculated from the J–V curve equation under light conditions in the ESI.† 
The values of the device parameters of the samples deteriorate when soft-annealing temperatures are increased to 400 °C. In particular, the increase in the values of Rs, J0, and Gsh at soft-annealing temperatures of 400 °C and 500 °C is attributed to the presence of ZnSe secondary phases, as shown in the Raman spectra results (ESI Fig. 2S(b)†) and the rougher surface morphology (Fig. 4(e)), indicating that they may lead to increased resistivity and recombination near the space charge region in the devices.12
Band gap tuneable characteristics of CZTSSe thin films by adjusting the S and Se partial pressure
It is well known that the band gap energy near 1.1–1.2 eV of kesterite and CIGS TFSCs showed the best performances even though their theoretical performances were expected to achieve the best efficiency at a band gap energy of 1.5 eV.6,9,30 We designed the experimental conditions under different ratios of (S/(S + Se)) vapour pressures to precisely control the band gap energy of annealed thin films (details are shown in the ESI Table 2S†). Fig. 4S† shows the XRD (a) and Raman spectra (b) of annealed thin films prepared under different ratios of (S/(S + Se)) vapour pressures. All of the annealed thin films show three strong diffraction peaks corresponding to the (112), (220), and (312) planes from a pure kesterite CZTS-based structure without unexpected phases. In addition, the shoulder peaks located to the right of the (112) planes are observed in the CZTSSe thin films regardless of the soft-annealing temperatures, which corresponds to the (103) plane from kesterite CZTS-based compounds. The diffraction peak positions of the (112) planes for CZTSSe thin films systemically shift toward a higher diffraction angle with increasing ratio of (S/(S + Se)) vapour pressures. Yin et al. reported the calculated equilibrium of S and Se vapour pressures versus temperature for the formation reactions of Cu2Se, SnSe2, ZnSe, Cu2SnSe3, CZTS and CZTSe.31 The research results and the calculated vapour pressure (Fig. 1) indicated that the equilibrium pressure of S vapour is higher than that of Se over 540 °C. This thermodynamic behaviour suggests that the S atoms in the vapour easily reacted with the metallic precursor compared with that of Se at 540 °C. The composition ratios of (S/(S + Se)) in the CZTSSe thin films increase with increasing ratio of (S/(S + Se)) vapor pressures (ESI Table 2S†), which agrees well with the thermodynamic behaviour. Based on these demonstrations, the appearance of the diffraction peak shift for CZTSSe thin films can be explained by the difference in the ionic radius between S2− (0.184 nm) and Se2− (0.198 nm).9 The CZTSSe thin films were characterized by Raman spectroscopy to further confirm their phase purity due to the similar crystal parameters between kesterite and the unexpected phases. The A1 modes result from the vibrations of S or Se atoms surrounded by motionless neighbouring atoms.25 The A1 modes of the Raman peaks of CZTS and CZTSe compounds are observed at 338 cm−1 and 196 cm−1, respectively. Notably, the CZTSe-3 sample shows a strong Raman peak at 196 cm−1, while the CZTSSe samples show a Raman peak around 200 cm−1, and 330 cm−1 and they shift towards higher wave numbers and decreased peak intensities. The presence of two A1 modes for the Raman peaks from the CZTS and CZTSe compounds indicates a bi-modal behaviour and has been previously observed in intermediate compounds.3,32–34 No unexpected phases are observed in the CZTSSe thin films regardless of the different ratios of (S/(S + Se)) vapour pressures.

Fig. 7 shows the FE-SEM images for CZTSSe thin films prepared under different ratios of (S/(S + Se)) vapour pressures. The CZTSSe thin films show a dense microstructure with voids between the Mo and CZTSSe layers regardless of the ratios of (S/(S + Se)) vapour pressures and number of voids increase with increasing ratios of (S/(S + Se)) vapour pressures. This microstructural behaviour is attributed to the higher S vapour pressure at 540 °C (Fig. 1) and it deteriorates the stability of the back contact region. Scragg et al. reported chemical insights into the instability of CZTS films during annealing, and they demonstrated the range of the S vapour pressure of decomposition for CZTS thin films during the annealing process.16,22 Based on these studies, our S vapour pressures (11.54–53 Torr) might suggest the facile formation of SnS (gas phase) through the decomposition of CZTSSe near the back contact region during the annealing process, finally leading to the void formations near the back contact region and the number increases with increasing S vapour pressure. The thin Mo(S,Se)2 layers below 50 nm are observed in the CZTSSe thin films, regardless of the ratio of the (S/(S + Se)) vapour pressures, indicating that the Rs could be reduced in the solar cell devices.
 Fig. 7  FE-SEM images of CZTSSe absorber layers with different ratios of S/(S + Se) vapour pressures: (a) 0.51, (b) 0.68, (c) 0.78, and (d) 0.82. 
The CZTSSe solar cells were fabricated based on samples prepared with different ratios of (S/(S + Se)) vapour pressures. Fig. 8 shows the device performances for CZTSe solar cells prepared with different ratios of (S/(S + Se)) vapour pressures. Each sample contained six solar cells. The average values of Jsc in the CZTSSe solar cells decrease as the ratio of (S/(S + Se)) vapour pressures increases, while those of Voc show the opposite tendency. These performance behaviours are strongly related to the band gap energy of the absorber layers.1,2,6,35 The band gap energies of CZTSSe absorber layers estimated from external quantum efficiency (EQE) graphs are wider with an increasing ratio of (S/(S + Se)) vapour pressures (Fig. 5S†). The absorbable wavelength of the absorber layer increases with decreasing band gap energy, and a similar tendency for kesterite solar cells has been reported by several researchers.3,6 The average values of FF and η of CZTSSe solar cells are enhanced up to a ratio of (S/(S + Se)) vapour pressure of 0.68 while those values deteriorate at a higher ratio of (S/(S + Se)) vapour pressures. The CZTSSe TFSC prepared at a ratio of (S/(S + Se)) vapour pressure of 0.68 (CZTSSe-2 sample; band gap energy of 1.1 eV) shows the best performances, with values of η: 7.01%, Voc: 0.380 V, Jsc: 31.45 mA cm−2, and FF: 58%. Fig. 9 shows the device parameters including Gsh, A, J0, and Rs from the light J–V curve of CZTSe TFSCs with the best performances under different ratios of (S/(S + Se)) vapour pressure to clearly analyse the origin of this tendency. The values of A and J0 for CZTSSe solar cells increase with increasing ratio of (S/(S + Se)) vapour pressure. The increased values of the A and J0 for samples are attributed to the increased S elements in the CZTSSe absorber layers. Duan et al. reported the role of S in the kesterite thin films and its effect on the defect properties. They observed a higher surface and bulk defect densities at higher S elements in the kesterite thin films by employing admittance spectroscopy.36 This behaviour of defect densities results in a strong recombination, even though the value of Voc increased at high S content in the solar cells (Fig. 7(b)), and the overall device efficiency was reduced (Fig. 7(d)). The device parameters including Gsh, and Rs of CZTSSe solar cell devices indicate a similar tendency of FF and η. The values of Gsh, and Rs for samples at low S elements in the CZTSSe thin films (CZTSSe-1 and CZTSSe-2 samples) are similar to that of CZTSe-3, and those parameters at further higher S contents increase with increasing ratio of (S/(S + Se)) vapour pressure. The least favorable device parameters (Gsh, and Rs) resulted from increased voids between the Mo and CZTSSe layers (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 8  Device performances of the CZTSSe solar cells with different ratios of S/(S + Se) vapor pressures: (a) Jsc, (b) Voc, (c) FF, and (d) η. Each sample contained six solar cells. 
 Fig. 9  Device parameters from the light J–V curve of the CZTSSe solar cells with different ratios of (S/(S + Se)) vapour pressures: (a) Gsh and A, (b) J0 and Rs. 
Best efficiency characterization
To improve the efficiency of CZTSSe solar cells, we optimized the fabrication by controlling the ratio of the composition and (S/(S + Se)) vapour pressure in the kesterite absorber layer, the thickness and compositional ratio of the CdS buffer layer, and the thickness of the i-ZnO and AZO thin films. The optimized conditions for each layer are as follows: (i) absorber layer: Cu/(Zn + Sn) = 0.70, Zn/Sn = 1.05, and ratio of (S/(S + Se)) = 0.73; (ii) CdS layer: 65 nm; (iii) TCO layers; i-ZnO (70 nm) and AZO (380 nm); and (iv) MgF2 layer: 150 nm. Fig. 10 shows the light J–V characteristics (a) and EQE at zero bias (b) of the best performance for CZTSSe TFSCs. The solar cell has a PEC of 9.24% with an active area of 0.433 cm2 under an AM 1.5 illumination. The performance characteristics of the CZTSe TFSC are as follows: Voc = 454.6 mV, Jsc = 32.14 mA cm−2, and FF = 63.29%. These values were certified by KIER. To the best of our knowledge, this efficiency is one of the best cell efficiencies from CZTSSe TFSC prepared via the sulfo-selenization process of a sputtered precursor without the use of toxic gases and additional processes. The EQE of the CZTSSe solar cell shows nearly 90% in the visible region and decreases in the higher wavelength region (Fig. 10(b)), which is attributed to the short carrier diffusion length and the low minority charge carrier lifetime in the absorber layer.3 This short carrier diffusion length is a common problem for kesterite based solar cells and it causes the high defect density in the kesterite absorber layer.3 The optical band gap energy of the CZTSe absorber layer estimated from the EQE graph is approximately 1.1 eV. Fig. 6S† shows photo (a) and cross sectional FE-SEM images for the best performance of the CZTSSe solar cell. The cross sectional FE-SEM image for the CZTSSe solar cell shows a dense microstructure consisting of submicron sized grains and many voids between the Mo and CZTSSe layers. The 40 nm thick Mo(S,Se)2 layer is observed on the Mo back contact layer. The CZTSSe solar cell with the best performance was used to clearly detect the element distributions and the segregation in the absorber layer near the back contact region. Fig. 11 shows the STEM images and STEM-EDS elemental mapping results for the best performance of CZTSSe TFSC. The STEM image shows that the presence of large voids (300–500 nm) is clearly observable in the bottom region of the CZTSSe absorber layer. All of the elements are well distributed in the submicron sized CZTSSe grains located at the top region of the CZTSSe absorber layer. The sharp interfacial layers are clearly observed between the CdS, TCO, and MgF2 layers, indicating no formation of any interfacial compounds or interfacial reactions during each layer in the deposition process. In particular, the unexpected phase formations of Zn(S,Se)x and SnOx between the CZTSSe absorber and the Mo back contact layers are clearly observed.
 Fig. 10  
J–V (a) and EQE (b) of best efficient CZTSSe TFSC. The insert is a plot of (ln(1 − EQE))2versus energy, which is used to determine the band gap energy of the absorber layer. 
 Fig. 11  STEM image and STEM-EDS elemental mapping results for best efficient CZTSSe TFSC. 
Discussion
Comparative study of the IBM cell
To understand the lower performance of the CZTSSe solar cell compared with the highest efficiency IBM device prepared using a hydrazine based solution process, the performances and parameters for the best efficient CZTSSe solar cell and the previously reported IBM cell are summarized in Table 1. The solar cell parameters were obtained and are shown in Fig. 12. Fig. 12 shows the dJ/dV vs. V curve (a), dV/dJ vs. (J + JL) curve (b), and log scale (J + Jsc − GV) vs. (V−RJ) (c) of the CZTSe TFSC under light conditions from a one-diode model (ESI eqn (1S) and (2S)†). The different performance of Voc and FF is clearly observed between the present results and the IBM cells. In addition, all of the device parameters including Gsh, A, J0, and Rs for the present results are higher than those of the IBM cell. The Voc-deficit characteristic, obtained from the difference between the band gap energy and the Voc of the present cell (685 mV), is worse than that of the IBM cell (617 mV) (Table 1). The Voc-deficit characteristics are attributed to a high recombination rate in the buffer/absorber interface and a low minority charge carrier lifetime, as reported in earlier CIGS- and CZTS-based TFSCs studies.35 The higher values of A (1.58) and J0 (6.14 × 10−6 mA cm−2) for the present results compared with that of the IBM cell (A; 1.45 and J0; 7.0 × 10−8 mA cm−2) imply a higher recombination rate in the buffer/absorber interface. Finally, the Voc for the present result shows a lower value, even though they have similar optical band gap energies (Table 1).3 These higher recombination rate behaviours provide evidence for higher defect concentrations in the absorber surface region for the present cell than that of the IBM cell.6 In addition, the lower value of FF for the present results than that of IBM is strongly related to the parameters including J0, A, and Rs. In particular, the value of Rs (1.28 Ω cm2) in the present cell is approximately two times higher than that of the IBM cell (0.72 Ω cm2). The higher Rs in the present cell could explain the unexpected phase formations of Zn(S,Se)x and the amorphous like SnOx near the bottom region of the CZTSSe absorber layer (Fig. 11). The XRD and Raman spectra results for the CZTSSe absorber thin film do not detect Zn(S,Se)x and SnOx (ESI Fig. 4S†). Recently, Sardashti et al. reported the formation of grain boundaries surrounded by SnOx for high efficient CZTSSe solar cells with a 12.6% efficiency using a highly surface-sensitive Auger Nano probe elemental mapping characterization, which acts as a unique effective passivation that limits electron–hole recombination.37 In the case of the present results, the location of SnOx is near voids in the bottom region of the CZTSSe absorber layer, and it does not play a role in passivation for recombination in the grain boundaries, but it increases the Rs in the solar cell device due to the higher resistivity of amorphous like SnOx. In addition, the Zn(S,Se)x phase has a high resistivity leading to an increased Rs in the solar cell device. The value of Gsh in the present cell is 1.96 mS cm−2, which is higher than that of the IBM cell (1.61 mS cm−2) as presented in Table 1. This higher value of Gsh in the present cell might explain the presence of unexpected secondary phases and many voids near the bottom region, which leads to the reduced Jsc value in the present device. Based on these discussions for comparative studies, we conclude that the solar cell parameters of the present device are worse than those of the IBM cell because of the presence of voids, unexpected phases including Zn(S,Se)x and SnOx, and the high defect density of the absorber layer. These factors lead to a higher recombination rate at the interface between the CdS/CZTSSe absorber (resulting in the increase in A, Gsh, and J0) and higher Rs than those of the IBM cell. It is thought that the efficiency of our CZTSSe cell can be improved by removing the voids and unexpected phases near the back contact.
 Fig. 12  Plots of dJ/dV vs. V (a), dV/dJ vs. (J + Jsc) − 1 (b), and ln(J + Jsc − GV vs. V − RJ) (c) redrawn from the light J–V curves of the best efficient CZTSSe solar cell. 
Table 1 Device characterization and comparison with the best reported CZTSSe devices using the sputtering technique




Method
Institute

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (mV)
FF (%)

η


E
g (eV)

E
g (eV)/q-Voc (mV)

G
SL

 (mS cm−2)

R
s

 (Ω cm2)

A




J
o

 (mA cm−2)
Ref.





a Light shunt conductance (G), series resistance (Rs), ideal factor (A), and reverse saturation current density (J0) were calculated from J–V curve under the light conditions (ESI eqn (1S) and (2S)).
b All of the parameters are taken from the hydrazine based CZTSSe thin film solar cells reported by IBM researchers.38





Sputtering (Se vapor)
CNU
32.14
454.6
63.29
9.24
1.10
685
1.96
1.28
1.58
6.14 × 10−6
This work


Solution (hydrazine, Se vapor)b
IBM
35.2
513.4
69.8
12.6
1.13
617
1.61
0.72
1.45
7.0 × 10−8

38





Applicability of CZTSSe submodules
The CZTSSe submodule was fabricated and characterized to investigate the possibility for low cost and highly efficient CZTSSe TFSC manufacturing using a green synthesis strategy. The CZTSSe submodules were fabricated using a commonly integrated process that employs 3-step patterning methods. The detailed fabrication process of the CZTSSe submodule is described in the experimental part of the ESI and ESI Fig. 8S.† The CZTSSe submodule monolithically integrated eight cells (active area: 22.4 cm2). Using this fabrication process, we achieved 2.76% efficiency (Voc: 3.74 V, Jsc: 40.31 mA cm−2, and FF: 42%). The best performance was achieved at eight interconnected submodule solar cells. However, their performance dramatically decreased when the night solar cells were interconnected. This poor performance was attributed to the poor fill factor. They could create a large dead area in the submodule. Although the CZTSSe submodule indicates poor performances, this research could introduce a pathway to green fabrication in the low cost and highly efficient TFSC industrialization. Studies on optimizing the precise control of the compositional ratio in the CZTSSe absorber layer, deposition conditions for each layer, and changing from mechanical patterning to laser patterning (P2 and P3) are currently in progress.
Conclusions
In summary, a 9.24% efficient CZTSSe TFSC was successfully fabricated by a non-toxic, short, and simple sulfo-selenization process of Cu/Sn/Zn metal stacked precursor thin films without using a toxic H2S gas, even though the CZTSSe layer has a relatively thin thickness (1 μm), unexpected phases including Zn(S,Se)x and amorphous like SnOx, and many voids near the back contact region. The device parameters for the present cells are poor compared with those of the IBM cell due to the higher recombination rate at the interface between the CdS/CZTSSe absorber and the higher Rs in the solar cell. Our best performance exhibited an efficiency of 9.24%, which is the highest efficiency reported for pure CZTSSe TFSCs prepared by the sulfo-selenization of a sputtered precursor without the use of toxic gases and additional processes. We are undertaking the development and application of a Cd-free buffer layer prepared by chemical bath deposition and atomic layer deposition techniques to balance the toxicity with high performance. We also achieved 2.76% efficient CZTSSe submodule by monolithically integrating eight cells (active area: 22.4 cm2). The performance of the CZTSSe solar cell and the submodule could be improved by an additional optimization process, including removal of voids and unexpected phases, and using a thicker absorber layer. This research presents a good possibility for the development of non-toxic, highly efficient and cost effective CZTSe TFSCs for the industrialization field.
Acknowledgements
This work is partially supported by the Human Resources Development (No. 20124010203180) of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) grant funded by the Korea Government Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy and is partially supported by IBS-R004-G3.
References
A. Polizzotti, I. L. Repins, R. Noufi, S.-H. Wei and D. B. Mitzi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3171–3182 CAS .
M. Johnson, S. V. Baryshev, E. Thimsen, M. Manno, X. Zhang, I. V. Veryovkin, C. Leighton and E. S. Aydil, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1931–1938 CAS .
D. B. Mitzi, O. Gunawan, T. K. Todorov, K. Wang and S. Guha, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1421–1436 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, H. Hiroi, T. K. Todorov, O. Gunawan, M. Kuwahara, T. Gokmen, D. Nair, M. Hopstaken, B. Shin, Y. S. Lee, W. Wang, H. Sugimoto and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7427–7431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Jackson, D. Hariskos, R. Wuerz, O. Kiowski, A. Bauer, T. M. Friedlmeier and M. Powalla, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2015, 9, 28–31 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Winkler, W. Wang, O. Gunawan, H. J. Hovel, T. K. Todorov and D. B. Mitzi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1029–1036 Search PubMed .
S. W. Shin, J. H. Han, C. Y. Park, A. V. Moholkar, J. Y. Lee and J. H. Kim, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 516, 96–101 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Shin, S. M. Pawar, C. Y. Park, J. H. Yun, J.-H. Moon, J. H. Kim and J. Y. Lee, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 3202–3206 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Shin, J. H. Han, Y. C. Park, G. L. Agawane, C. H. Jeong, J. H. Yun, A. V. Moholkar, J. Y. Lee and J. H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21727–21732 RSC .
B. Shin, Y. Zhu, N. A. Bojarczuk, S. Jay Chey and S. Guha, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 053903 CrossRef .
B. Shin, O. Gunawan, Y. Zhu, N. A. Bojarczuk, S. J. Chey and S. Guha, Prog. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2011, 21, 72–76 CrossRef .
I. Repins, C. Beall, N. Vora, C. DeHart, D. Kuciauskas, P. Dippo, B. To, J. Mann, W. C. Hsu, A. Goodrich and R. Noufi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 101, 154–159 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Lee, T. Gershon, O. Gunawan, T. K. Todorov, T. Gokmen, Y. Virgus and S. Guha, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 5, 1401372 Search PubMed .
G. Brammertz, M. Buffière, S. Oueslati, H. ElAnzeery, K. Ben Messaoud, S. Sahayaraj, C. Köble, M. Meuris and J. Poortmans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 163904 CrossRef .
B. Shin, N. A. Bojarczuk and S. Guha, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 091907 CrossRef .
J. J. Scragg, T. Kubart, J. T. Wätjen, T. Ericson, M. K. Linnarsson and C. Platzer-Björkman, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3162–3171 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Scragg, J. T. Wätjen, M. Edoff, T. Ericson, T. Kubart and C. Platzer-Björkman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19330–19333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cui, X. Liu, F. Liu, X. Hao, N. Song and C. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 041115 CrossRef .
S. Lopez-Marino, M. Placidi, A. Perez-Tomas, J. Llobet, V. Izquierdo-Roca, X. Fontane, A. Fairbrother, M. Espindola-Rodriguez, D. Sylla, A. Perez-Rodriguez and E. Saucedo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 8338–8343 CAS .
F. Liu, K. Sun, W. Li, C. Yan, H. Cui, L. Jiang, X. Hao and M. A. Green, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 051105 CrossRef .
J. Li, Y. Zhang, W. Zhao, D. Nam, H. Cheong, L. Wu, Z. Zhou and Y. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402178 Search PubMed .
J. J. Scragg, T. Ericson, T. Kubart, M. Edoff and C. Platzer-Björkman, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4625–4633 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Baker, J. Chem. Soc. A, 1968, 1089–1092 RSC .
H. Rau, T. R. N. Kutty and J. R. F. Guedes De Carvalho, J. Chem. Thermodyn., 1973, 5, 833–844 CrossRef CAS .
H. Rau, J. Chem. Thermodyn., 1974, 6, 525–535 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Peng and J. Zhao, J. Chem. Thermodyn., 2001, 33, 1121–1131 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Scragg, D. M. Berg and P. J. Dale, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2010, 646, 52–59 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Scragg, P. J. Dale and L. M. Peter, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 639–642 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Scragg, P. J. Dale and L. M. Peter, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2481–2484 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Shin, I. Y. Kim, K. V. Gurav, C. H. Jeong, J. H. Yun, P. S. Patil, J. Y. Lee and J. H. Kim, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2013, 13, 1837–1843 CrossRef .
X. Yin, C. Tang, L. Sun, Z. Shen and H. Gong, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2005–2014 CrossRef CAS .
I. V. Bodnar’, Semiconductors, 1997, 31, 41–43 CrossRef .
L. Grenet, S. Bernardi, D. Kohen, C. Lepoittevin, S. Noël, N. Karst, A. Brioude, S. Perraud and H. Mariette, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 101, 11–14 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Kontos, Y. S. Raptis, M. Straßburg, U. W. Pohl and D. Bimberg, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 428, 185–189 CrossRef CAS .
U. Ghorpade, M. Suryawanshi, S. W. Shin, K. Gurav, P. Patil, S. Pawar, C. W. Hong, J. H. Kim and S. Kolekar, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 11258–11273 RSC .
H. S. Duan, W. Yang, B. Bob, C.-J. Hsu, B. Lei and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1466–1471 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sardashti, R. Haight, T. Gokmen, W. Wang, L.-Y. Chang, D. B. Mitzi and A. C. Kummel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402180 Search PubMed .
W. Wang, M. T. Winkler, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen, T. K. Todorov, Y. Zhu and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 4, 1301465 Search PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, additional characterization data, and certificated conversion efficiency data. See DOI: 10.1039/c5gc02417j‡ M. G. Gang and S. W. Shin contributed equally to this work.§ Present address: Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA.¶ J. Y. Lee and J. H. Kim contributed equally to this work as corresponding authors.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Vapour pressures of Se (a) and S (b) inside the annealing chamber with different annealing temperatures and amounts of S and Se powders at 406 cm3.	 

 	Fig. 2  Thicknesses of the MoSe2 layer with different Se vapour pressures from the CZTSe thin films by selenization at 540 °C for 10 min.	 

 	Fig. 3  FE-SEM images of (a) as-dep. and (b) annealed precursor thin films at 300 °C for 10 min and (c) X-ray diffraction patterns of as-dep. and soft annealed samples.	 

 	Fig. 4  FE-SEM images for CZTSe absorber layers without soft-annealing and with different soft-annealing temperatures; (a) no soft annealing, (b) 200 °C, (c) 300 °C, (d) 400 °C, and (e) 500 °C.	 

 	Fig. 5  Device performances of the CZTSe solar cells with different soft annealed samples: (a) Jsc, (b) Voc, (c) FF, and (d) η, respectively. Each sample contained 4–6 solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 6  Device parameters from the light J–V curve of CZTSe TFSCs with different soft annealed samples: (a) Gsh and A, (b) J0 and Rs. These parameters were calculated from the J–V curve equation under light conditions in the ESI.†	 

 	Fig. 7  FE-SEM images of CZTSSe absorber layers with different ratios of S/(S + Se) vapour pressures: (a) 0.51, (b) 0.68, (c) 0.78, and (d) 0.82.	 

 	Fig. 8  Device performances of the CZTSSe solar cells with different ratios of S/(S + Se) vapor pressures: (a) Jsc, (b) Voc, (c) FF, and (d) η. Each sample contained six solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 9  Device parameters from the light J–V curve of the CZTSSe solar cells with different ratios of (S/(S + Se)) vapour pressures: (a) Gsh and A, (b) J0 and Rs.	 

 	Fig. 10  
J–V (a) and EQE (b) of best efficient CZTSSe TFSC. The insert is a plot of (ln(1 − EQE))2versus energy, which is used to determine the band gap energy of the absorber layer.	 

 	Fig. 11  STEM image and STEM-EDS elemental mapping results for best efficient CZTSSe TFSC.	 

 	Fig. 12  Plots of dJ/dV vs. V (a), dV/dJ vs. (J + Jsc) − 1 (b), and ln(J + Jsc − GV vs. V − RJ) (c) redrawn from the light J–V curves of the best efficient CZTSSe solar cell.	 


Sputtering (Se vapor)	CNU	32.14	454.6	63.29	9.24	1.10	685	1.96	1.28	1.58	6.14 × 10−6	This work
Solution (hydrazine, Se vapor)b	IBM	35.2	513.4	69.8	12.6	1.13	617	1.61	0.72	1.45	7.0 × 10−8	
38

Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, additional characterization data, and certificated conversion efficiency data. See DOI: 10.1039/c5gc02417j
‡ M. G. Gang and S. W. Shin contributed equally to this work.
§ Present address: Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA.
¶ J. Y. Lee and J. H. Kim contributed equally to this work as corresponding authors.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
