Gaining further insight into the effects of thermal annealing and solvent vapor annealing on time morphological development and degradation in small m ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA04769J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA04769J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18101-18110Gaining further insight into the effects of thermal annealing and solvent vapor annealing on time morphological development and degradation in small molecule solar cells†

        
          
            Jie 
            Min
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Nusret S. 
            Güldal
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jie 
            Guo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chao 
            Fang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xuechen 
            Jiao
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Huawei 
            Hu
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Thomas 
            Heumüller
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Harald 
            Ade
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Christoph J. 
            Brabec
          
        
      be
aThe Institute for Advanced Studies, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China. E-mail: Min.Jie@whu.edu.cn
bInstitute of Materials for Electronics and Energy Technology (i-MEET), Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Martensstraße 7, 91058 Erlangen, Germany
cDepartment of Physics and Organic and Carbon Electronics Laboratory (ORaCEL), North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695, USA
dDepartment of Chemistry and Energy Institute, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong
eBavarian Center for Applied Energy Research (ZAE Bayern), Immerwahrstraße 2, 91058 Erlangen, Germany
Received 
      1st June 2017
    , Accepted 4th August 2017First published on 7th August 2017AbstractNumerous articles on thermal annealing (TA) and solvent vapor annealing (SVA) treatments have shown that both strategies effectively improve bulk morphology, reduce carrier recombination and thus improve photovoltaic performance of bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells (OSCs). In previous work, we found that both TA and SVA treated devices based on a blend composed of a 3-ethyl-2-thioxothiazolidin-4-one containing molecule as donor (named DRCN5T) and [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC70BM) as acceptor show the similar photovoltaic performance, but their bulk microstructures are difference. Here employing in situ photoluminescence (PL) setup and X-ray scattering technologies, we found that the early stages of SVA remarkably affect the surface of film, and in contrast TA affects the whole bulk. Meanwhile, a plurality of experimental results all further confirm the different thermodynamics and kinetics of morphology evolution processed either by TA treatment or SVA treatment. Importantly, it was found that the SVA-treated film showed the increased photo-degradation in devices as compared to the TA-treated layer, resulting from obvious bulk morphology changes under illumination over 500 hours. The aim is to provide comprehensive insight into the influence of TA and SVA on time morphological evolution and degradation in OSCs.
1. Introduction
Solution-processed bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells (OSCs) have attracted extensive attention in the past two decades due to their intrinsic advantages, such as mechanical flexibility, light weightedness, freedom of form, and scalability.1,2 The combination of a broad understanding of material synthesis, interface and device engineering and physical process control, combined with theoretical studies, has driven the power conversion efficiency (PCE) beyond the 11% milestone.3–6 Apart from a smart molecular design and device engineering, microstructure engineering is one of the key strategies to achieve well-ordered and crystalline domains as well as effective charge transport properties,7 allowing to further improve device performance. Generally, BHJ composites comprise binary components and/or multiple components that are arranged in complicated phases,7 among them several pristine component phases as well as a mixed amorphous or disordered regime resulting from partial miscibility of the components.8–11 Thus, phase separation is a complex process usually resulting in metastable morphologies, which is determined by the interplay between kinetics (e.g. solvent evaporation and molecular ordering), thermodynamics (e.g. solubility and miscibility) and other external factors during the drying processes involved in the thin film preparation.7,11–13
To date, several strategies to effectively control the nanoscale blend morphology were demonstrated, including additives,14–16 TA17–19 and SVA,8,20,21etc. These morphological control approaches are useful to achieve remarkable interpenetrating network with nanoscale domain sizes as well as a suitable interfacial area, and positively impact the optical and electronic properties of the BHJ blends and also influence their carrier dynamics.12,22 By reviewing hundreds of publications with respect to the morphological control, we found that TA and SVA as the most common post-treatments applied in BHJ systems, including polymer-fullerene systems,23 small molecule-fullerene systems,24 and non-fullerene systems,25 can effectively improve device photovoltaic performance. Meanwhile, a general statement is that both strategies effectively improve donor crystallinity, enhance fullerene aggregation and improve both, domain spacing and phase purity.7,13 However, the thermodynamics and kinetics of morphology evolution processed either by TA treatment or SVA treatment as well as the differences between their dynamic and static typing in BHJ films are not investigated in details.26,27 Besides, the operating stability with suitable nanoscale architectures of film morphology remains a critical missing piece of information for projecting practical implementation against competing photovoltaic technologies (e.g. wafer based cells and copper indium gallium diselenide (CIGS) cells).28–30 Therefore, gaining knowledge over the mechanisms of morphology evolution and correlating this information with the photovoltaic performance and long term stability of films are essential.
In this work, we explore the correlation between morphological characteristics, carrier mechanisms and device performance in a small molecule-fullerene system, and significantly highlight the different dynamic effects of TA and SVA on morphology evolution during film preparations as well as their influences on device degradation processes under illumination. The subject of this study is small molecule donor (5Z,5′Z)-5,5′-((3,3′′′′,3′′′′′,3′′′′′′,4′,4′′-hexaoctyl-[2,2′:5′,2′′:5′′,2′′′:5′′′,2′′′′-quinquethiophene]-5,5′′′′′′diyl)-bis(methanylylidene))bis(3-ethyl-2-thioxothiazolidin-4-one) (DRCN5T, see Scheme 1), blended with [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC70BM) as acceptor. Prior investigations demonstrated that the DRCN5T:PC70BM BHJ films processed either by TA treatment or SVA treatment exhibit the improved PCEs of over 6.50% as compared to untreated device with a PCE of 3.57%, but their morphological characteristics investigated by atomic force microscopy (AFM), grazing-incidence wide angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS), and resonant soft X-ray scattering (R-SoXS) were huge differences.12 Hence, we applied an in situ photoluminescence (PL) setup to further delineate nanoscale microstructure evolution of BHJ layers processed either by TA treatment or SVA treatment. Meanwhile, combining the physical analyzations (time delayed collection field (TDCF), transient photovoltage (TPV) and charge extraction (CE) techniques) with relevant morphological characterizations (secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) and X-ray scattering techniques), the nanoscale microstructures of TA or SVA processed active layers were categorized according to their electro-optical properties and carrier dynamics as well as light-induced degradation in devices. Our aim is to provide a schematical summary insight into the morphological evolution via either TA treatment or SVA treatment and its relation to fundamental dynamics in films as well as the observed trade-offs in device efficiency and photo-stability.
 Scheme 1  Molecular structure of the investigated DRCN5T. 
2. Results and discussion
A conventional device structure, ITO/PEDOT:PSS/DRCN5T:PC70BM (1:0.8, wt%)/Ca/Al, was used in previous work. It was also applied in this investigation. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves and resulting photovoltaic parameters, including short-circuit current density (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF) and PCE were measured under AM 1.5 solar illumination, which are shown in Fig. S1 and in Table S1.† As compared to the un-treated BHJ layer, both TA and SVA treatments exhibit higher PCEs of over 6.50%.12 Nevertheless, the different optical absorption of TA and SVA annealed layers (see Fig. S2†) indicate the different morphological characteristics observed by AFM and GIWAXS and R-SoXS techniques (see Table 1).
Table 1 Comparison of the photovoltaic performance and morphological characteristics of films without and with treatments




Conditions
PCE (%)
AFM; RMSa (nm)
2-D GIWAXS pattern
Total ISIb
Domain spacing (nm)


Middle q
Low q





a RMS: root-mean-squared (rms) roughness (AFM images; 1 × 1 μm2).
b ISI: total integrated scattering intensity.





W/O
3.57






0.65
43.3
—


TA
6.73






0.82
38.1
—


SVA
6.64






0.99
37.1
59.5




As exhibited in Table 1 and Fig. S3,† AFM images show rather flat and uniform surfaces for the un-annealed and TA films with small root-mean-square (RMS) surface roughness. The surface image of SVA film in contrast exhibits significantly better developed bi-continuous interpenetrating networks with well-expressed fibrillary structures as compared to the TA processed layer. Moreover, advanced X-ray techniques, including two-dimensional (2D) GIWAXS and RSoXS, were employed to probe the detailed microstructure. As shown in Table 1, both of annealed films display well defined scattering rings in addition to scattering spots. However, the non-annealed films feature only scattering rings. From the 1D GIWAXS profiles, as depicted in Fig. S4,† the film with SVA treatment shows relatively weak peaks at q ≈ 1.7 Å−1 from DRCN5T stacking and q ≈ 1.3 Å−1 from PC70BM aggregation, suggesting that the annealed film is slightly less ordered as compared to TA layer.
RSoXS is a complementary tool to GIWAXS to probe mesoscale domains, including domain purity with high spatial resolution and chemical sensitivity.12 Fig. S5† illustrates the Lorentz corrected circular RSoXS profiles of several films. From the scattering profiles of the TA layer we observe only slight variations to the non-annealed film, and, in turn, similar mesoscale phase separation. Interestingly, the SVA annealing process shifts the dominant scattering peak towards low-q, implying that larger domains are formed after SVA treatment. The total integrated scattering intensity (ISI, see Table 1) of different films further highlight that both TA and SVA processes contribute towards higher domain purity and better phase separation as compared to that of non-annealed film. Apart from the discussions of domain purity based on the ISI analysis, multi-peak fitting (MPF) is implemented to all RSoXS profiles to extract information regarding domain spacing and domain purity at multi-length scales. The MPF results are exhibited in Fig. S6† and Table 1. Scattering profiles of non-annealed and TA films can be fit by two peaks (denoted as middle-q and high-q), while the film with SVA treatment requires a three peak fit (denoted as low-q, middle-q and high-q). Thus, SVA treatment shifts the dominant scattering peak towards low-q (domain spacing is 59.5 nm, see Table 1), implying that larger domains are formed after SVA, which was also consistent with the AFM images. Nevertheless, TA enhances domain purity to lesser extent in contrast to SVA treatment, indicating that TA induces higher molecular ordering in films than SVA, although this is not in complete agreement with the observed topography images. Furthermore, the RSoXS profiles are quantitatively compared with images in real space. The power spectral density (PSD) of AFM phase images, rather than height images match well with 284.2 eV RSoXS results (see Fig. S7†), indicating that these phase images reflect the material contrast between donor-rich domains and acceptor-rich domains within the bulk of the films. In short, our results suggest distinctly different thermodynamic driving forces for these two post-treatment technologies.
To directly understand the origin of the observed changes in blend morphologies upon different annealing treatments and the nature of the molecular order suggested by the above-mentioned optical data and morphological characteristics, in situ PL setup is used as a real-time measurement technique to probe nanoscale microstructure and observe mechanisms of morphology evolution.31 The setup using light scattering (LS) and PL combined measurements was built as a chamber with a volume of 38 × 17 × 9 cm3 (see Fig. S8†). In order to confirm the thickness value calculated by WVASE software, profilometer measurements were additionally performed on the dry layer, which resulted in a thickness range of 98–112 nm. As expected, the swelling of layer leads to an increase in the total layer (dtotal). Meanwhile, the thickness of effective medium approximation (EMA) layer (dblend+solvent) increases accordingly over time (see Fig. S9†). As shown in Fig. 1a, dtotal is calculated at 60th second. The thickness of the annealed film is 112 nm, while the thickness of EMA layer is approximately 6 nm. The absorption peak fits much well with the reflection spectrum of 60 seconds treated layer (see Fig. S10a†). Note that we also used the other three models to fit the reflectometry data, the fits of reflection spectrum with respect to the absorption peak and intensity, however, are not agree well with the corresponding models (see Fig. S10†). These indicate that the early stages of SVA mainly influence the surface rather than the whole bulk layer; hence the increased device efficiency can be significantly attributed to the annealed surface morphology. These results are agree well with the above-mentioned GIWAXS and R-SoXS data.
 Fig. 1  The evolution of thickness (a) during SVA of DRCN5T:PC70BM with chloroform vapor, and the evolution of LS (b) and PL (c) during SVA and TA processes. dblend+solvent represents the EMA layer as explained in the ESI.† 
LS signal originates from structures/aggregates whose size is in the order of the excitation wavelength. The increase in LS signal is a clear sign for an increase in the size of the measured structures/aggregates independent from any crystallization.32,33 Theoretically the LS signal originates from the refractive index contrast between phase present in the film. Hence, the signal can be an indication of morphology evolution. As shown in Fig. 1b, the behavior of LS signal of TA film shows a slight increase in the signal with a continuously decreasing rate. The reflection spectra confirm that the crystallization occurs within the first 60 seconds, indicating that TA may be a very fast process. Unlike TA process, as soon as the chloroform vapor is present on the layer, the LS signal of SVA film increases continuously, indicating a greater phase separation.12 Besides, as shown in Fig. S12,† the slightly shifted position of the peak at 620 nm suggest that the nature of crystals in SVA film is different with the crystals of TA film.
The fast changes of crystallization in TA film are additionally observed by the PL signal, as presented in Fig. 1c. As expected, PL signal is quenched within first 30 seconds, and the signal is mostly stabilized after 60 seconds. The signal of SVA film in contrast increases until it reaches a maximum value at around 90 seconds. Then the PL signal of SVA film experiences a sharp decrease until around 200 seconds. Additionally, the reflection spectra (see Fig. S12† inset) show two shoulders, which are slowly forming at approximately 620 and 660 nm after 100 seconds. This indicates that the optical constants of the SVA film change during that time, and this can be correlated with the crystallization peaks (see Fig. S2†). Note that the decrease in the PL signal seen after 90 seconds is caused by the improvement of donor crystallization as well as the formation of big islands with respect to the donor crystallizations, which have been demonstrated by our previous results.8 The process of crystallization slows down at around 200 seconds, which is also confirmed by the reflection spectra (Fig. S12†). After that the evolution of PL signal shows a trend of linear increase resulting from the further increasing phase separation.
Based on all these investigations we derive a simplified picture for the morphology evolution as a time of post-treatment conditions, as depicted in Fig. 2. Two different mechanisms of TA and SVA based morphology evolution measured very precisely with our drying chamber are demonstrated. Combining with the laser scattering signal and the above-mentioned morphological characterizations, it was found that TA treatment leads to donor crystallites and acceptor aggregations in the whole bulk. However, unlike TA, the film gradually gains better domain purity with increasing phase separation after a short SVA period from 0 to 90 s, and then film is mainly caused by the improvement of small molecule donor crystallization after 90 seconds. Importantly, combined with the vertical anno-to-mesoscale morphologies of active layers at 90 s SVA as the fitting thicknesses of EMA layer, we can speculate that on one hand SVA treatment mainly modify the surface layer of bulk microstructure. On the other hand, some chloroform molecules can diffuse into the bulk, and thus enhancing DRCN5T donor diffusion forming a donor-enriched top layer. This conclusion is further demonstrated by the SIMS analysis, as presented in Fig. S13.† In short, these two models for the mechanisms of morphology evolution is consistent with all our experimental data and already allows quite deep insight into the fundamental dynamics and device photo-stability behind TA treatment or SVA treatment as discussed below.
 Fig. 2  The evolution of morphological characteristics as a function of post-treatment conditions. Small red circles and green lines represent PC70BM and DRCN5T, respectively. 
The above-mentioned optical data and morphological characteristics clearly demonstrated that the thermodynamics and kinetics of the TA or SVA processed BHJ thin films are difference. The variation in blend morphology is therefore particularly important as it also changes the interfacial area between donor and acceptor materials and thus significantly affects the BHJ forming pathways for efficient charge transport and collection.8,34 Here the different fundamental mechanisms of TA or SVA processed films are systematically analyzed. As shown in Fig. 3a, the good correlation between Jsc and reverse photocurrent (Jph (Vin = −4 V)) and their quite comparable magnitudes highlight that the devices were already quite well optimized with respect to thickness. The slightly higher Jsc and Jph values in SVA-treated devices are mainly contributed to the broader optical absorption of SVA film as compared to the TA film. In order to further investigate the influence of voltage dependent geminate recombination in DRCN5T:PC70BM devices, time delayed collection field (TDCF) measurements were performed with a delay time of 10 ns and a strong collection bias (Vcoll) of −4 V. Measuring Qtot as a function of Vpre using a short td (≈10 ns) and low pulse fluence of 0.05 μJ cm−2 such that non-geminate recombination losses are negligible during delay.35 The results of TDCF experiments are shown in Fig. 3b where it is clear that for both of annealed devices the total collected charge (Qtot) depends on the bias applied during the generation process. The Qtot for TA devices, however, exhibits a slightly weaker voltage dependence as compared to the SVA devices. Additionally, the Qtot value of SVA device at 4 V is slightly higher than that of TA device, which is consistent with the trend in the light current under reverse bias. Actually, many factors such as domain order, domain purity, and molecular orientation at the donor–acceptor interface or a mix of ordered and disordered domains may contribute to the trends in voltage dependent generation observed here.36–38 Thus, it is worth noting that recent TDCF experiments revealed that different microstructures in these films caused the similar influence of voltage dependence of geminate recombination in related devices.
 Fig. 3  (a) Jph plotted against the Vin for the devices processed with DRCN5T:PC70BM layers processed either by TA treatment or SVA treatment. (b) Measured data of total extracted charge from TDCF measurements in dependence on the applied pre-bias voltage. (c) The measured Voc of DRCN5T:PC70BM devices as a function of light intensity (symbols), together with linear fits to the Voc data (solid lines). (d) Charge carrier lifetime τ, obtained from TPV, as a function of charge density n, calculated from CE measurements under Voc conditions (from 0.2 to 4 suns). The inset table presents the recombination order (R) of the studied systems without and with treatment. The dashed lines represent linear fits of the data. 
In order to further understand the relationship between charge transport and composite microstructure, we determined the hole and electron only mobilities from space charge limited current (SCLC) measurements on representative thin film devices, as exhibited in Fig. S14.† Although both annealed films show comparable hole mobilities, TA film exhibit slightly higher electron mobility as compared to the SVA film. This result is consistent with the enhanced acceptor aggregation as discussed above. Besides, the electron mobility in the devices processed either by TA treatment or SVA treatment is about one order of magnitude lower than the hole mobility, which lead to severe extraction problems at low bias and thus limit the FF. As a result, an unsuitable vertical phase separation in SVA film could result in poor charge transport properties. Nevertheless, a comprehensive understanding of the device performance requires the acquisition of both, the recombination dynamics as well as the transport dynamics.8,12,39,40 Thus, we further studied the relative recombination losses, as a function of light intensity (Fig. 3c). The slopes of Vocversus light intensity are 1.22kT/q for TA treated device and 1.53kT/q for SVA treated device, respectively. Indeed, trap-assisted monomolecular recombination is stronger in the device with SVA treatment.40 In parallel, we also studied the charge carrier lifetime (τ) and charge carrier density (n) using transient photovoltage (TPV) and charge extraction (CE) measurements, respectively, under Voc conditions with different background illumination intensity (from 0.2 to 4 suns).10 In Fig. 3d, TPV and CE are combined to yield the charge carrier lifetime τ as a function of charge carrier density under open circuit conditions, τ(n).41 Note that the τ and n values in TA or SVA treated devices are comparable. Here we found that both TA and SVA treatments enhance the carrier lifetime in devices compared to the un-annealed devices. And the charge carrier density values show the same trend as τ. Furthermore, a non-geminate recombination order R (R = λ + 1) can be calculated via the equation τ = τ0(n0/n)λ, where τ0 and n0 are constants and λ is the so-called recombination exponent.42 Generally, a recombination order higher than two is attributed to the effect of trapping and release in energetic traps, as well as morphological traps.10,41,43 The fitting of the data yield R = 3.61 for device without treatment. Such a recombination order higher than 3 can be directly correlated to the spatial non-uniform charge carrier distributions through active layer.44 In addition, a slightly higher recombination order value (R = 2.62) for the SVA device as compared to the TA device (R = 2.53). A reasonable conclusion is that a narrow slot of SVA duration with 60 seconds mainly prevents carrier recombination from the surface microstructure defects, which most probably arise in the disordered amorphous phase. In short, the results of the non-geminate recombination dynamic analysis coupled with the voltage dependence of geminate recombination and charge carrier mobilities finally underpin the complex morphology outline above and give detailed insight into subtle mechanisms being responsible for device parameters, although their device efficiencies are comparable.
Since blend morphology has a strong impact on the device photostability,40 we further explored the light-induced degradation of the annealed films in order to comprehensively understand the nature of special microstructures. As showed in Fig. 4, the photo-stability (degradation of PCE) of TA or SVA treated devices are hugely different: light-induced losses to 92% for TA layer and 73% for SVA layer within 500 hours, respectively. In details, Voc and FF losses are rather negligible TA film, but significant for SVA system with Voc losses of ca. 8% and FF losses of ca. 15% (see Fig. S15†). While both annealed systems give rise to a continuous Jsc loss during illumination with a tempered trend. The SVA film resulted in the poor light-induced stability in devices, probably resulting from the non-optimum distribution of domain compositions.
 Fig. 4  Variation of normalized average PCE losses over illumination time for the encapsulated devices processed either by TA treatment or SVA treatment. 
Further studies are required to understand whether this can be assigned to a delayed burn-in effect caused by microstructural ordering or whether this is a true signature of light-induced degradation. Thus, TA or SVA processed films were examined via optical spectra and SIMS measurements over illumination time to clarify the reason why both devices exhibit the different photostability, although both of them show the comparable PCEs at the beginning of the tests. As shown in Fig. S16,† TA film didn't exhibit the obvious changes of absorption spectra. In contrast, the down-shifted position of absorption peaks at 572 nm and 620 nm, and the slightly red-shifted spectrum of SVA film strongly demonstrate the significant changes of morphology evolution before and after 500 illumination hours. The results show that the bulk microstructure with TA treatment is much more stable. Besides, since SIMS as a highly chemical sensitive technique can effectively provide the depth profiles of each component across the whole thickness of the active layers, we further observed the characteristic mass fragments of relevant organic layers before and after illumination time (see Fig. S17†). As plotted in Fig. S18,† the mass ratio of DRCN5T in the DRCN5T:PC70BM film changed significantly in the whole bulk, indicating obvious “metastable” microstructures of non-annealed layer. Furthermore, we found that the depth profiles of TA films with the respect to mass ratio of DRCN5T before and after illumination time are similar as shows in Fig. 5a, probably resulting from the positive effects of TA treatment on the whole bulk. However, the depth distribution of DRCN5T in the SVA film didn't changed obviously at the top of 10% SIMS sputtering time but was distinctly different during the extended sputtering time (see Fig. 5b). These results not only demonstrate the above-mentioned morphology analysis that SVA film possesses the “metastable” microstructures at the bottom, but also provide a guide for solidifying nanoscale microstructure of active layer via smart strategies.
 Fig. 5  SIMS ion yield as a function of sputtering time for fresh and aged samples with (a) TA treatment and (b) SVA treatment, respectively. The depth distribution of DRCN5T molecules is shown here and the blue dashed line is an indicator for the bottom interface between active layer and cathode. 
3. Conclusion
In summary, thermal annealing (TA) and solvent vapor annealing (SVA) are amazingly effective to improve the photovoltaic performance of DRCN5T:PC70BM based solar cells by optimizing the composite's microstructure. Although both TA and SVA devices show the similar photovoltaic parameters with the PCEs of over 6.5%, their bulk microstructures are different, resulting from the different dynamic mechanisms of morphology evolution. These two dynamics caused by the variations in the three-dimensional morphological characteristics were investigated carefully by AFM, GIWXAS, and R-SoXS techniques as well as an in situ PL setup. In our analysis, the early stages of SVA remarkably affect the surface, and in contrast TA affects the whole bulk. As TA time increases (from 0 to ∼60 s), donor crystallinity in blend is improved, along with enhanced domain purity. However, further extending TA time does not change the optical data as well as its blend morphology in five minutes' time. Note that as SVA time increases (from 0 to ∼90 s), phase separation is occurred firstly. Further extending SVA time mainly results in improved donor crystallinity and enhanced crystal growth in the top layer of annealed film. In addition, a plurality of experimental results all prove the respectively morphologies: absorption spectroscopy, voltage dependent charge generation via TDCF technique, hole and electron only mobility measurements, analysis of the light intensity dependence of J–V curves, determination of the recombination kinetics via TPV and CE data as well as the light-induced degradation, -they all confirm the different thermodynamics and kinetics of morphology evolution, meanwhile our results clarify the fundamental mechanisms behind optimized TA and SVA conditions, respectively, and builds the morphology-physical dynamics relation to related device performance. Finally, combining the different values of long-term stability in TA or SVA treated devices with the optical data and SIMS analysis, the mechanisms of morphology evolution processed either by TA treatment or SVA treatment under illumination are systematically analyzed, indicating the bulk microstructures of TA film are more stable. In short, understanding the dynamic effects of TA and SVA on the morphology evolution plays an important role in helping the precise options of the specific post-processing approaches and is a valuable asset for the design of new photovoltaic materials and thin film nanoscale architectures.
4. Experimental section
Materials
DRCN5T and PC70BM was purchased from 1-Material (Dorval, Quebec, Canada). The chloroform solvent used in device fabrication process was purchased from Alfa Aesar.
Device fabrication
The solar cells were fabricated on ITO coated glass substrates, and subsequently processed and characterized in ambient atmosphere. Pre-structured ITO coated glass substrates (as obtained from Osram) were subsequently cleaned in acetone and isopropyl alcohol for 10 min each. After drying, the substrates were bladed with 30 nm PEDOT:PSS (Heraeus, Clevios P VP.Al 4083). The DRCN5T bulk films (ca. 120 nm) were spin-coated in ambient air from solutions of DRCN5T:PC70BM (1:0.8, wt%; 15 mg mL−1) in chloroform. Subsequently, the active layers were further processed with different processing conditions. For the TA treatment, the DRCN5T:PC70BM blend film as cast was heated on a hotplate at 100 °C for 10 min in glovebox. For the SVA procedure, the samples were loaded in the middle of Petri dish containing 120 μL chloroform for 60 s. The detailed SVA treatment can be found in ref. 8. For solar cell devices 15 nm Ca and 100 nm Al were thermally evaporated at a base pressure below 10−6 mbar through shadow masks to form an active area of 10.4 mm2.
Measurements
The current–voltage characteristics of the solar cells were measured under AM 1.5G irradiation of an OrielSol1A Solar simulator (100 mW cm−2). Intensity dependence studies were done using a set of neutral density filters, allowing a range of intensity from 1 mW cm−2 to 100 mW cm−2. The light intensity transmitted through the filter was independently measured via a power meter. The films were deposited on glass substrates (ca. 110 nm thick). The optical investigations of these thin films were carried out by UV-VIS-NIR spectrometer (Lambda 950, from Perkin). The thicknesses of the thin films were measured by a profilometer (Tencor Alpha Step).

In situ PL measurement
A custom-made chamber (Fig. S4†), equipped with a heat-controlled stage and controlled atmosphere system, was used for in situ SVA and TA measurements. Samples were prepared by spin coating DRCN5T solutions on top of Si wafers with 2 nm thick natural SiO2. All in situ experiments were conducted with white light reflectometry (Filmetrics F20-UV, integration time of 500 ms), light scattering (LS) and integrated photoluminescence (PL). Stingray lasers from Coherent Inc. with 516 and 783 nm wavelengths were used for PL and LS measurements, respectively. Lasers were triggered with a universal trigger with 0.25 ms. 630 nm long-pass filter (RG630 from Schott) was used for PL to filter out the laser light. The optical geometry used for PL and LS measurements is as in the following: the laser beam had an incidence angle of 34° from the normal and directed on the substrate. The polarization (E vector) was in the plane of incidence. The axis of the detection path was inclined from the plane of incidence by 23° (azimuth angle); the polar angle was 37°. The numerical aperture of the polarization-insensitive collection optics is 0.13. The signal from LS and PL was collected with a silicon diode with an integrated transimpedance amplifier (Roithner LaserTechnik GmbH). The collected signal was then processed with Signal Recovery dual-phase lock-in amplifier (model 7265) with a time constant of 222 ms. For SVA measurements, saturated chloroform atmosphere (carrier gas: nitrogen) was used at room temperature. The pressure of the whole chamber was kept at atmospheric pressure, and the measurements were conducted in stagnation. TA experiments were conducted under nitrogen atmosphere at 100 °C. Thickness values for swollen films from SVA treatment were calculated by WVASE software, which is explained in detail in ESI.† It is, however, assumed that the thickness of thermally annealed sample did not change during the treatment.
SIMS
The secondary ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS) was carried out in an ION TOF TOF-SIMS 5. Dual-beam dynamic SIMS mode was used to provide high depth resolution and chemical resolution simultaneously, where Bi+ was employed as the primary ion and Cs+ was employed as a sputtering source. The sputtering time was set to be 360 s for all samples.
Other morphological characteristics
The morphology was firstly investigated by AFM (Veeco Model D3100, tapping mode). GIWAXS and R-SoXS measurements were performed at the Advanced Light Source (ALS), Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. GIWAXS, R-SoXS, and relevant NEXAFS reference spectroscopy measurements were performed at beamline 7.3.3, beamline 11.0.1.2 and beamline 5.3.2.2, respectively. In GIWAXS measurement, the 10 keV X-ray beam was incident at a grazing angle of 0.13°, which maximized the scattering intensity from the bulk of the samples. In R-SoXS measurement, samples are investigated under high vacuum (1 × 10−7 torr) in order to reduce the absorption of soft X-rays in air.
TDCF
In the TDCF experiments pulsed excitation (5.5 ns pulse width, 500 Hz repetition rate) was realized with a diode-pumped, Q-switched neodymium-doped yttrium aluminum garnet (Nd:YAG) laser (NT242, EKSPLA). The photogenerated charge carriers were extracted by applying a high rectangular voltage pulse with a pulse generator (Agilent 81150A) in reverse direction. The current through the device was measured with an Agilent DSO9054H oscilloscope via a 50 Ω input resistor. In TDCF, a pre-bias (Vpre) is applied to a solar cell device that is then pulsed with a laser. After a fixed delay time (td), a strong collection bias (Vcoll) is applied to the device in order to sweep out all remaining photogenerated charge carriers. The resulting photocurrent transient can be integrated to determine the total collected charge (Qtot). Measuring Qtot as a function of Vpre using a short td (≈10 ns) and low pulse fluence such that non-geminate recombination losses are negligible during delay can be taken as a direct measure of voltage dependence of geminate recombination for most organic systems.
TPV and CE measurements
A 405 nm laser diode was used to keep the devices in approximately Voc conditions. Driving the laser intensity with a waveform generator (Agilent 33500B) and measuring the light intensity with a highly linear photodiode allowed reproducible adjustments of the light intensity with an error below 0.5% over a range from 0.2 to 4 suns. A small perturbation was induced with a second 405 nm laser diode driven by a function generator from Agilent. The intensity of the short (50 ns) laser pulse was adjusted to keep the voltage perturbation below 10 mV, typically at 5 mV. After the pulse, the voltage decays back to its steady state value in a single exponential decay. The characteristic decay time was determined from a linear fit to a logarithmic plot of the voltage transient, and returned the small perturbation charge carrier lifetime. In CE measurements, a 405 nm laser diode illuminated the device for 200 μs, which was sufficient to reach a constant Voc with steady state conditions. At the end of the illumination period, an analogue switch was triggered that switched the solar cell from open-circuit to short-circuit (50 Ω) conditions within less than 50 ns.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
J. Min gratefully acknowledge the support of Wuhan University. The authors also acknowledge the support of the Cluster of Excellence “Engineering of Advanced Materials” at the University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, which is funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG) within the framework of its “Excellence Initiative”. The work has been also partially funded by the Sonderforschungsbereich 953 “Synthetic Carbon Allotropes”. We also thank the support of “Solar Technologies go Hybrid” (SolTech) project and the Energy Campus Nürnberg (EnCN) financed by the Bavarian state government. X-ray characterization by NCSU was supported by the Office of Naval Research (Award No. N000141410531 and N000141512322).
References
Y. Chen, X. Wan and G. Long, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2645–2655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Min, Z. Zhang, C. Cui, Y. N. Luponosov, I. Ata, P. Schweizer, T. Przybilla, F. Guo, T. Ameri, K. Forberich, E. Spiecker, P. Bäuerle, S. A. Ponomarenko, Y. Li and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4543–4550 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zheng, O. M. Awartani, B. Gautam, D. Liu, Y. Qin, W. Li, A. Bataller, K. Gundogdu, H. Ade and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604241 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Zhao, S. Dai, Y. Wu, Q. Zhang, J. Wang, L. Jiang, Q. Ling, Z. Wei, W. Ma, W. You, C. Wang and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700144 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Baran, R. S. Ashraf, D. A. Hanifi, M. Abdelsamie, N. Gasparini, J. A. Rohr, S. Holliday, A. Wadsworth, S. Lockett, M. Neophytou, C. J. Emmott, J. Nelson, C. J. Brabec, A. Amassian, A. Salleo, T. Kirchartz, J. R. Durrant and I. McCulloch, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 363–369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Gasparini, L. Lucera, M. Salvador, M. Prosa, G. D. Spyropoulos, P. Kubis, H. Egelhaaf, C. J. Brabec and T. Ameri, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 885–892 CAS .
Y. Huang, E. J. Kramer, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 7006–7043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Min, X. Jiao, I. Ata, A. Osvet, T. Ameri, P. Bäuerle, H. Ade and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502579 CrossRef .
J. Min, T. Ameri, R. Gresser, M. Lorenz-Rothe, D. Baran, A. Troeger, V. Sgobba, K. Leo, M. Riede, D. M. Guldi and C. J. Brabec, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 5609–5616 CAS .
N. Gasparini, X. Jiao, T. Heumueller, D. Baran, G. J. Matt, S. Fladischer, E. Spiecker, H. Ade, C. J. Brabec and T. Ameri, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16118 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) P. A. Troshin, H. Hoppe, J. Renz, M. Egginger, J. Y. Mayorova, A. E. Goryachev, A. S. Peregudov, R. N. Lyubovskaya, G. Gobsch, N. S. Sariciftci and V. F. Razumov, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 779–788 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) P. A. Troshin, D. K. Susarova, E. A. Khakina, A. A. Goryachev, O. V. Borshchev, S. A. Ponomarenko, V. F. Razumov and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18433–18441 RSC .
J. Min, X. Jiao, V. Sgobba, B. Kan, T. Heumüller, S. Rechberger, E. Spiecker, D. M. Guldi, X. Wan, Y. Chen, H. Ade and C. J. Brabec, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 241–249 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Treat and M. L. Chabinyc, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2014, 65, 59–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Min, O. K. Kwon, C. Cui, J.-H. Park, Y. Wu, S. Park, Y. Li and C. J. Brabec, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14234–14240 CAS .
S. Mukherjee, C. M. Proctor, J. R. Tumbleston, G. C. Bazan, T. Q. Nguyen and H. Ade, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1105–1111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhao, D. Qian, S. Zhang, S. Li, O. Inganas, F. Gao and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4734–4739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kan, M. Li, Q. Zhang, F. Liu, X. Wan, Y. Wang, W. Ni, G. Long, X. Yang, H. Feng, Y. Zuo, M. Zhang, F. Huang, Y. Cao, T. P. Russell and Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3886–3893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bin, Z. G. Zhang, L. Gao, S. Chen, L. Zhong, L. Xue, C. Yang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4657–4664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mukherjee, C. M. Proctor, G. C. Bazan, T.-Q. Nguyen and H. Ade, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500877 CrossRef .
C. D. Wessendorf, G. L. Schulz, A. Mishra, P. Kar, I. Ata, M. Weidelener, M. Urdanpilleta, J. Hanisch, E. Mena-Osteritz, M. Lindén, E. Ahlswede and P. Bäuerle, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400266 CrossRef .
J. L. Wang, K. K. Liu, J. Yan, Z. Wu, F. Liu, F. Xiao, Z. F. Chang, H. B. Wu, Y. Cao and T. P. Russell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7687–7697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. D. Treat, P. Westacott and N. Stingelin, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2015, 45, 459–490 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, Y. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864–868 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sun, Z. Xiao, S. Lu, W. Zajaczkowski, W. Pisula, E. Hanssen, J. M. White, R. M. Williamson, J. Subbiah, J. Ouyang, A. B. Holmes, W. W. H. Wong and D. J. Jones, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bin, L. Gao, Z. G. Zhang, Y. Yang, Y. Zhang, C. Zhang, S. Chen, L. Xue, C. Yang, M. Xiao and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, Y.-C. Hsiao, B. Hu and M. Dadmun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5129–5136 CrossRef CAS .
E. Verploegen, R. Mondal, C. J. Bettinger, S. Sok, M. Toney, F. Michael and Z. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3519–3529 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman, S. A. Gevorgyan, T. Tromholt, B. Andreasen and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 580–612 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Grossiord, J. M. Kroon, R. Andriessen and P. W. M. Blom, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 432–456 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yamane, Y. Suzuki, T. Miyadera, T. Koganezawa, K. Arai, Y. Akiyama, M. Chikamatsu, Y. Yoshida, H. Suda and J. Mizukado, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 151, 96–101 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Güldal, T. Kassar, M. Berlinghof, T. Ameri, A. Osvet, R. Pacios, G. L. Destri, T. Unruh and C. J. Brabec, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 2178–2186 RSC .

          K. Hinrichs and K. J. Eichhorn, Ellipsometry of Functional Organic Surfaces and Films, Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, 1st edn,  2014 Search PubMed .

          A. Campa, NIKA-Model for extracting refractive indices, 48th Int. Conf. Microelectron. Devices Mater. Work. Ceram. Microsystems,  2012 Search PubMed .
J. Seifter, Y. Sun, H. Choi, B. H. Lee, T. L. Nguyen, H. Y. Woo and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4989–4996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kniepert, M. Schubert, J. C. Blakesley and D. Neher, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 700–705 CrossRef CAS .
C. Groves, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1546–1551 CAS .
A. Ojala, A. Petersen, A. Fuchs, R. Lovrincic, C. Pölking, J. Trollmann, J. Hwang, C. Lennartz, H. Reichelt, H. W. Höffken, A. Pucci, P. Erk, T. Kirchartz and F. Würthner, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 86–96 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Proctor, S. Albrecht, M. Kuik, D. Neher and T.-Q. Nguyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400230 CrossRef .
N. D. Treat, M. A. Brady, G. Smith, M. F. Toney, E. J. Kramer, C. J. Hawker and M. L. Chabinyc, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 82–89 CrossRef CAS .
J. Min, Y. N. Luponosov, N. Gasparini, M. Richter, A. V. Bakirov, M. A. Shcherbina, S. N. Chvalun, L. Grodd, S. Grigorian, T. Ameri, S. A. Ponomarenko and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500386 CrossRef .
A. Foertig, J. Kniepert, M. Gluecker, T. Brenner, V. Dyakonov, D. Neher and C. Deibel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1306–1311 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Shuttle, B. O'Regan, A. M. Ballantyne, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley, J. de Mello and J. R. Durrant, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 093311 CrossRef .
A. Baumann, T. J. Savenije, D. H. K. Murthy, M. Heeney, V. Dyakonov and C. Deibel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1687–1692 CrossRef CAS .
O. Semeniuk, G. Juska, J. O. Oelerich, M. Wiemer, S. D. Baranovskii and A. Reznik, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 33359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta04769jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Molecular structure of the investigated DRCN5T.	 



W/O	3.57	

	

	0.65	43.3	—
TA	6.73	

	

	0.82	38.1	—
SVA	6.64	

	

	0.99	37.1	59.5

 	Fig. 1  The evolution of thickness (a) during SVA of DRCN5T:PC70BM with chloroform vapor, and the evolution of LS (b) and PL (c) during SVA and TA processes. dblend+solvent represents the EMA layer as explained in the ESI.†	 

 	Fig. 2  The evolution of morphological characteristics as a function of post-treatment conditions. Small red circles and green lines represent PC70BM and DRCN5T, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Jph plotted against the Vin for the devices processed with DRCN5T:PC70BM layers processed either by TA treatment or SVA treatment. (b) Measured data of total extracted charge from TDCF measurements in dependence on the applied pre-bias voltage. (c) The measured Voc of DRCN5T:PC70BM devices as a function of light intensity (symbols), together with linear fits to the Voc data (solid lines). (d) Charge carrier lifetime τ, obtained from TPV, as a function of charge density n, calculated from CE measurements under Voc conditions (from 0.2 to 4 suns). The inset table presents the recombination order (R) of the studied systems without and with treatment. The dashed lines represent linear fits of the data.	 

 	Fig. 4  Variation of normalized average PCE losses over illumination time for the encapsulated devices processed either by TA treatment or SVA treatment.	 

 	Fig. 5  SIMS ion yield as a function of sputtering time for fresh and aged samples with (a) TA treatment and (b) SVA treatment, respectively. The depth distribution of DRCN5T molecules is shown here and the blue dashed line is an indicator for the bottom interface between active layer and cathode.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta04769j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
