Electron rich APFO polymer with dual electrochromism and electroluminescence   - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1JM10345H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1JM10345H
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6480-6482Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsElectron rich APFO polymer with dual electrochromism and electroluminescence†

        
          
            Unsal 
            Koldemir
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kenneth R. 
            Graham
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Danielle H. 
            Salazar
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tracy D. 
            McCarley
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            John R. 
            Reynolds
          
        
      *a
aThe George and Josephine Butler Polymer Research Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, Center for Macromolecular Science and Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA. E-mail: reynolds@chem.ufl.edu
bDepartment of Chemistry, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70803, USA
Received 
      22nd January 2011
    , Accepted 3rd March 2011First published on 29th March 2011AbstractWe demonstrate the ability of a new alternating polyfluorene (APFO) type polymer employing dialkoxythiophene moieties to operate efficiently as both an electrochromic (EC) and electroluminescent (EL) material, thereby providing for incorporation into a dual EC/EL device. In addition, the new APFO type polymer was blended with PC[70]BM in a bulk heterojunction photovoltaic cell resulting in a power conversion efficiency of 1.66% with a high open circuit voltage of 0.87 volts.
Over the past decade significant advances have been made both in the development of electrochromic (EC) and electroluminescent (EL) organic materials for display applications. Due to the need for functioning in a variety of different lighting conditions a display which can operate in both of these modes efficiently is of current research interest. Specifically, dual EC/EL devices promise to work under any ambient light conditions where a pixel consists of a conjugated polymer that can exhibit either EC or EL behavior depending on the operating mode.1 Thus, it performs as a combination of both an electrochromic display and a light-emitting device, depending on which set of electrodes are biased. In low ambient light environments the device could function as an electroluminescent device, whereas in high ambient light environments where electroluminescent devices become difficult to see, the device could operate in an electrochromic mode.
The literature provides few examples of polymers which show adequate simultaneous performance in both electrochromism and electroluminescence. This is mainly attributed to the different demands of each application on the band gap, HOMO–LUMO levels, and hole and electron mobilities. Therefore, strategies such as the donor acceptor (D–A) approach have been utilized to ease-control of the target polymer by balancing the donor and acceptor character in the π-conjugated backbone. For example, in the neutral colored to transmissive cathodically coloring EC polymers a high HOMO level is needed to achieve low switching potentials and a specific band gap is needed for color control.2 In the luminescent polymers balanced hole and electron mobilities and emission wavelength control are of core importance. In conjunction with EC and EL, polymers may also show photovoltaic activity. In solar cells high hole mobilities, a deep HOMO level and a low band gap are intended. Thus, polymers designed for one specific type of application are generally only suited for that one such application, thereby limiting their future diversity in sophisticated device designs. However, materials such as MEH-PPV,3Ru complexes,4 polycarbazoles5 and (thienylene)–[1,6-dithienylhexa-1,3,5-trienylene] copolymers6 have been studied to show adequate performance in more than one application. These materials all show electroluminescent and electrochromic behaviour, and therefore they could all potentially be used in dual EC/EL devices. Recently, Toppare et al. reported a new donor–acceptor polymer which is luminescent and electrochromic in 5 different colors.7 Our group has also studied a yellow to transmissive electrochrome with green emission.8
Herein we report a purple to transmissive electrochrome with red to near-infrared (near-IR) electroluminescence by utilizing APFO type polymers. These type of polymers, as illustrated in Scheme 1, are based on alternating fluorene with donor–acceptor–donor (D–A–D) units consisting of thiophene and various acceptors to tune the HOMO–LUMO levels. This polymer family has been studied extensively by the Andersson and Inganas groups primarily for photovoltaics.9
 Scheme 1  General chemical composition for APFO type polymers. 
The new APFO–DOT polymer incorporates dialkoxythiophenes to provide facile oxidation for electrochromic applications, while the dioctylfluorene moieties tune the mobility and the HOMO level to provide good photoluminescence properties and a moderate Voc for solar cell applications. Dioxythiophenes were functionalized with propyl groups to aid in the solubility and give a platform to provide ordering and π stacking between repeat units. The electroactive APFO–DOT was synthesized via Suzuki coupling from the corresponding monomers affording a Mn of 34.5 kg mol−1 with a 1.94 PDI and a moderate yield of 75%, while showing adequate solubility in common organic solvents (Scheme 2). MALDI-MS analysis revealed the expected repeat unit mass of 919 g mol−1 indicating the presence of dioctylfluorene and dialkoxythiophene–BT–dialkoxythiophene repeat units while FT-IR spectrum showed the absence of ketonebands associated with the oxidation of the fluorene units as previously reported by List et al.10 (see the ESI†).
 Scheme 2  Synthesis of APFO–DOT by Suzuki–Miyaura coupling. 
The UV-VIS absorption and photoluminescence spectra for APFO–DOT in solution and in film are shown in Fig. 1. Thin film measurements show a ca. 10 nm bathochromic shift compared to the solutions due to possible π–π stacking. The polymer is perceived as purple colored in solution and in thin films due to the low absorbance in the blue (ca. 445 nm) and red regions (ca. 650 nm). Thin films exhibit two band absorptions (black, triangles) dictated by donor–acceptor interactions in the main chain with maxima at 390 nm and 555 nm tailing off to 750 nm while leaving a minimum at 445 nm. Additionally, thin films prepared by spraying the polymer on glass show a broad photoluminescence band with a maximum at 730 nm tailing off to the near-IR region (blue, crosses).
 Fig. 1  Absorption (in solution: circles, in film: triangles) and emission (in solution: diamond, in film: crosses) spectra of APFO–DOT. 
Even though a large portion of the emission is in the near-IR, bright photoluminescence prompted us to investigate this polymer's ability to function in PLEDs. The PLEDs fabricated with this polymer show a sufficiently bright visible red light. PLEDs were fabricated from APFO–DOT in a simple device configuration consisting of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/APFO–DOT/Ca/Al. The APFO–DOT films were deposited from chloroform solution and the devices were minimally optimized.
The PLEDs show strong red to near-IR electroluminescence with an emission maximum at 742 nm, thereby making them appear deep red in color with a significant proportion of the emission appearing in the near-IR region as shown in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  
Electroluminescence spectra of a PLED at 12 V applied bias. 
The PLEDs displayed a maximum radiant emittance of nearly 3 mW cm−2 with external quantum efficiencies (EQEs) between 0.2 and 0.3% at current densities of 20 mA cm−2 to almost 1000 mA cm−2 as shown in Fig. 3. To the best of our knowledge, these performance parameters are among the best for a PLED emitting in the 700–800 nm range in which the polymer is serving as the near-IR emitting species.11
 Fig. 3  Current density (black) and radiant emittance (red) vs. applied bias plot for an APFO–DOT PLED (a) and the corresponding EQEvs. current density plot (b). 

        APFO–DOT is p-dopable and n-dopable as shown by electrochemical characterization by CV and DPV (see the ESI†). CV measurements reveal that there are redox processes between −1.8 V and 1.0 V. APFO–DOT shows an E1/2 of 0.68 V versusAg/Ag+ with a peak-to-peak separation of 0.16 V. The small peak-to-peak separation is further investigated by scan-rate dependence studies between 5 mV s−1 and 50 mV s−1 (see the ESI†). The linear correlation between the scan rate and anodic peak current supports the idea that the rate of the redox processes is surface bound. The onset of oxidation was determined by DPV as 0.40 V vs.Ag/Ag+ whereby the HOMO level is estimated to be −5.5 eV assuming that Fc/Fc+ redox couple is −5.1 eV relative to vacuum.12 The LUMO level is estimated in the same way placing it at −3.6 eV relative to vacuum. The corresponding band gap was measured as 1.87 eV which is in good agreement with the optical measurements.
Spectroelectrochemical measurements were conducted to evaluate the band structure of APFO–DOT and its electrochromic behavior. Fig. 4 shows the oxidation spectroelectrochemistry for an APFO–DOT film spray cast on ITO-coated glass in an argon purged 0.2 M LiBTI/PC supporting electrolyte solution. The voltage was stepped slowly from −0.5 V to 0.82 V vs.Ag/Ag+ by following its CV trace while holding the potential for 5 min at each voltage increment. In the neutral state, two absorption maxima due to π–π* transitions at 562 and 391 nm, with a trough at 447 nm, induce a purple color in the neutral film (at −0.5 V, the purple thick line in Fig. 4). From the onset of absorption in the neutral state, the optical band gap was determined as 1.78 eV. The intensity of both bands in the visible region decreases as the potential is increased and two new bands appear in the near-IR range of the spectrum due to the formation of polarons and bipolarons. Further increase of the potential and the spontaneous bleaching of the two bands in the visible region resulted in a transmissive film at 0.82 V, which is very important for display applications. Furthermore, 40% electrochromic contrast was measured by chronoabsorptivity measurements at 555 nm where the human eye is the most sensitive (see the ESI†).
 Fig. 4  The spectroelectrochemistry of APFO–DOT films coated on ITO glass in 0.2 M LiBTI/PC supporting electrolyte between −0.5 V and 0.82 V versusAg/Ag+ reference electrode with an inset of photographs of neutral and oxidized states. 
In order to further evaluate the color of the polymer films between neutral and oxidized states as the human eye perceives them, the L*a*b* values (1976 CIE colour model) for a 0.8 a.u. optical density film were measured as a function of electrochemical doping level (50 mV steps, −0.2 to 0.85 V vs.Ag/Ag+) (see the ESI†). In the neutral state, a*b* (18, −9) values indicate the polymer is in the purple region of the color circle as perceived by the human eye. This color is also evident in the photograph in the inset of Fig. 4. At intermediate doping levels, the material still keeps its purple color, as the two visible bands have not been completely bleached. At around 0.75 V, the polymer reaches its highest transmissive state as a*b* values go to near zero (0, +2) as also shown in the photograph in the inset of Fig. 4.
Given the good performance and high Voc's (>1.0 V) previously obtained in solar cells with APFO type polymers, solar cells based on APFO–DOT:PCBM blends were fabricated and characterized. The devices employed APFO–DOT as the electron donor and PC[60]BM or PC[70]BM as the electron acceptor. Better performance was achieved with PC[70]BM than PC[60]BM and therefore PC[70]BM was focused on for the optimization. Both chlorobenzene and chloroform were used as solvents and better results were obtained with chlorobenzene. With either solvent domain sizes were observed to be larger than ideal through AFM (100–300 nm in width) and these large domain sizes were unable to be significantly reduced through variation of common processing parameters. The cells processed with chlorobenzene show a relatively high Voc of 0.87 V, short circuit current density (JSC) of 4.38 mA cm−2, fill factor of 0.43, and power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 1.66% as shown in Fig. 5. The low JSC is attributed to the large domains and could likely be improved with a reduction in domain size.
 Fig. 5  
J–V curves of APFO–DOT:PC70BM processed from chloroform and chlorobenzene under AM1.5 illumination (solid) and in the dark (dashed). 
Conclusions
We have demonstrated a new APFO type polymer, APFO–DOT, based on dialkoxythiophenes showing purple to transmissive electrochromism upon p-doping with a 40% electrochromic contrast and strong red to near-IR emission in the range of 700–800 nm. Consequently, this material can be used in dual EC/EL devices capable of operating in various lighting conditions. In addition, the polymer shows decent photovoltaic performance with a high Voc of 0.87 V and PCE of 1.66%.
Notes and references

          J. R. Reynolds, US Pat. 7557499 B2,  2009 .
M. Icli, M. Pamuk, F. Algi, A. M. Onal and A. Cihaner, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4034 CrossRef CAS ; A. Balan, D. Baran and L. Toppare, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9861 RSC .
L. F. Santos, L. Gaffo, M. Magno De Carvalho, D. Goncalves and R. M. Faria, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst. Sci. Technol., Sect. A, 2002, 374, 469 CAS ; D. Braun and A. J. Heeger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1991, 58, 1982 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, X. Li, S. Xun, X. Wan and Z. Y. Wang, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 7502 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Wang, H. S. Hsiao, G. S. Liou and C. H. Sun, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2010, 48, 4775 CrossRef CAS .
F. Embert, J. P. L. Porte, J. J. E. Moreau, F. S. Spirau, A. Right and J. L. Sauvajol, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 718 RSC .
A. Balan, D. Baran, G. Gunbas, A. Durmus, F. Ozyurt and L. Toppare, Chem. Commun., 2009, 44, 6768 Search PubMed .
C. M. Amb, J. A. Kerzulis, E. J. Thompson, A. L. Dyer and J. R. Reynolds, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 812 RSC .
J. S. Park, T. I. Ryu, M. Song, K. J. Yoon, M. J. Lee, I. A. Shin, G. D. Lee, J. W. Lee, Y. S. Gal and S. H. Jin, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2008, 6175 CrossRef CAS ; O. Inganas, F. Zhang and M. R. Andersson, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1731 CrossRef CAS ; L. J. Lindgren, F. Zhang, M. Andersson, S. Barrau, S. Hellstrom, W. Mammo, E. Perzon, O. Inganas and M. R. Andersson, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3491 CrossRef CAS ; O. Inganas, M. Svenson, F. Zhang, A. Gadisa, N. K. Persson, X. Wang and M. R. Andersson, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2004, 9, 31 CrossRef .
L. Romaner, A. Pogantsch, P. S. De Freitas, U. Scherf, M. Gaal, E. Zojer and E. J. W. List, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 597 CrossRef CAS .
R. Q. Yang, R. Y. Tian, J. G. Yan, Y. Zhang, J. Yang, Q. Hou, W. Yang, C. Zhang and Y. Cao, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 244 CrossRef CAS ; B. C. Thompson, L. G. Madrigal, M. R. Pinto, T.-S. Kang, K. S. Schanze and J. R. Reynolds, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2005, 43, 1417 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Thompson, Y. G. Kim, T. D. McCarley and J. R. Reynolds, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12714 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Synthesis procedure and the supplementary characterization data. See DOI: 10.1039/c1jm10345hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  General chemical composition for APFO type polymers.	 

 	Scheme 2  Synthesis of APFO–DOT by Suzuki–Miyaura coupling.	 

 	Fig. 1  Absorption (in solution: circles, in film: triangles) and emission (in solution: diamond, in film: crosses) spectra of APFO–DOT.	 

 	Fig. 2  
Electroluminescence spectra of a PLED at 12 V applied bias.	 

 	Fig. 3  Current density (black) and radiant emittance (red) vs. applied bias plot for an APFO–DOT PLED (a) and the corresponding EQEvs. current density plot (b).	 

 	Fig. 4  The spectroelectrochemistry of APFO–DOT films coated on ITO glass in 0.2 M LiBTI/PC supporting electrolyte between −0.5 V and 0.82 V versusAg/Ag+ reference electrode with an inset of photographs of neutral and oxidized states.	 

 	Fig. 5  
J–V curves of APFO–DOT:PC70BM processed from chloroform and chlorobenzene under AM1.5 illumination (solid) and in the dark (dashed).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Synthesis procedure and the supplementary characterization data. See DOI: 10.1039/c1jm10345h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
