Solution processable D–A small molecules for bulk-heterojunction solar cells  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C003946B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C003946B
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1427-1436Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsSolution processable D–A small molecules for bulk-heterojunction solar cells

        
          
            Yaowen 
            Li
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Qing 
            Guo
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zaifang 
            Li
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jianing 
            Pei
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Wenjing 
            Tian
          
          
        
      *
      State key laboratory of supramolecular structure and materials, Jilin University, Changchun, 130012, P. R. China. E-mail: wjtian@ jlu.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-431-85193421;   Tel: +86-431-85166368
Received 
      5th March 2010
    , Accepted 24th June 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      27th August 2010
    AbstractSolution processable small molecules have been widely applied for photovoltaic (PV) devices in recent years because they show strong absorption properties, and they can be easily purified and deposited onto flexible substrates at low cost. Introducing different donor and acceptor groups to construct donor–acceptor (D–A) structure small molecules has proved to be an efficient way to improve the properties of organic solar cells (OSCs). This review deals with the recent progress of solution processable D–A structure small molecules and discusses the key factors affecting the properties of OSCs based on D–A structure small molecules: sunlight absorption, charge transport and the energy level of the molecules. Then we give some suggestions for designing new solution processable D–A structure small molecules for high performance OSCs.Yaowen LiYaowen Li received his Bachelor’s Degree in the Department of Chemistry, Jilin University in 2005, and now he is in grade three of his PhD degree in the research group of Prof. Wen-jing Tian in the Department of Chemistry, Jilin University. His research focuses on organic/polymer design, synthesis and device fabrication for photovoltaic applications.Qing GuoQing Guo received his Master’s Degree in the Department of Physics, Jilin University in 2007, and now he is in grade one of his PhD degree in the research group of Prof. Wen-jing Tian in the Department of Chemistry, Jilin University. His research focuses on organic/polymer optoelectronic materials and devices, as well as theoretical calculation of organic optoelectronic materials.Zaifang LiZaifang Li received his Bachelor’s Degree in the Department of Chemistry, Qufu Normal University in 2006, and now he is in grade two of his PhD degree in the research group of Prof. Wen-jing Tian in the Dept. of Chemistry, Jilin University. His research focuses on the design and synthesis of organic small molecule photovoltaic materials.Jianing PeiJianing Pei received his Bachelor’s Degree in the Department of Physics, Changchun University of Science and Technology in 2006, and now he is in grade two of his PhD degree in the research group of Prof. Wen-jing Tian in the Department of Chemistry, Jilin University. His research focuses on organic/polymer optoelectronic materials and devices.Wenjing TianProf. Dr Wenjing Tian received her Bachelor’s Degree in the Department of Physics, Jilin University in 1988, and received her PhD in the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 1993. She was a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Chemistry, Jilin University from 1994 to 1996. She was an associate professor in the Department of Chemistry, Jilin University from 1996 to 2001, and a professor from 2001. Her research focuses on organic/polymer optoelectronic materials and devices. She has published more than 30 papers in the research field of organic photovoltaic materials and devices.

Broader context
Organic solar cells (OSCs) have been extensively investigated over the past 20 years. It should be emphasized that the solution-processable OSCs have attracted increasing attention because of their unique potential advantages such as easy fabrication, low cost, light weight, large area, and mechanical flexibility. Theoretical and experimental advances in OSCs have demonstrated that D–A type small molecules have great potential as one class of promising materials in solution-processable OSCs. Firstly, the conjugated molecules consisting of electron-donating and electron-accepting units combined through π-conjugated linkers have an intrinsic intra-molecular charge transfer (ICT) character which can reduce the optical band gap and allow the absorption of the molecule to match well with the solar spectrum. Secondly, by flexible selection or modification of the electron donating and accepting functional groups, desirable optical properties, electronic structures, and even opto-electronic properties may be achieved.

1. Introduction
Harvesting energy directly from sunlight using photovoltaic technology is considered one of the most significant ways to address the growing global energy crisis by utilizing renewable resources. Organic solar cells (OSCs) are a promising alternative for producing clean and renewable energy due to the fact that there is the potential to fabricate the OSCs on large areas of lightweight flexible substrates by solution processing at a low cost. Since the pioneering work by Tang in 1986,1 bilayer heterojunction configuration containing a p-type layer (as electron donor) for hole transport and n-type layer (as electron acceptor) for electron transport has been implemented in photovoltaic devices, and remarkable advances have been made in OSCs over the following 20 years.2–5 A major breakthrough was made in 1995, when the first bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cell based on polymer (donor) and (6,6)-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester fullerene derivative (PCBM)(acceptor) was constructed.5,6 Up until now, many kinds of organic molecules with distinct optoelectronic properties have been applied in BHJ OSCs, mainly through two primary thin film preparation methods: solution processing of soluble molecules and high vacuum deposition of thermally stable molecules. Solution processing is generally believed to be more cost efficient than vacuum deposition, as it does not involve expensive high vacuum systems and is feasible for large-scale roll-to-roll production.7,8 Today, researchers are focusing on searching for materials that show strong absorption in the visible and near-infrared regions of the solar spectrum, controlling phase separation between donor and acceptor in the active layer, increasing and balancing hole and electron mobilities of donor and acceptor molecules.
Bulk heterojunction OSCs utilizing solution-processable small molecules as donors and fullerene as acceptors have made their debut.9–12 Solution-processable small molecules are attractive for OSCs as they are easier to synthesize and purify, offer easier processing compared with polymers, and show, in general, higher charge carrier mobilities.13,14 The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of solution processable small-molecules have steadily improved over the past decade from about 0.03% to over 4.4%,15–27 due to considerable efforts toward the development of new molecules. Particularly, significant progress has been made in the synthesis and processing of donor–acceptor (D–A) small molecules. Theoretical and experimental advances in OSCs have demonstrated that such D–A small molecules and polymers have great potential to be one class of promising materials for OSCs.28,29
The D–A small molecules were considered as efficient donor materials for OSCs because of their several key advantages: (i) the D–A small molecules are usually easier to be purified and synthesized; (ii) the absorption spectrum of the D–A molecules can be extended towards longer wavelength by intra-molecular charge transfer (ICT) transition between donor and acceptor inside molecules;30 (iii) the energy level can be easily controlled by introducing various electron-donating or accepting groups into the molecules.
Here, we review the recent developments of solution-processable D–A structure small molecules for BHJ OSCs. We start with a general introduction of the critical factors for BHJ solar cells, which are greatly affected by the structure of molecules used in solar cells. Then, we discuss several series of solution processable D–A structure molecules which have shown promising photovoltaic properties. In the last part, we suggest possible routes for further improvements of the solution-processable D–A structure small molecules for BHJ OSCs and give some conclusions and outlook.
2. Critical factors for BHJ solar cells
Since ultrafast charge transfer was found between conjugated polymer and buckminsterfullerene C60 in 1992,2 BHJ OSCs are of particular interest. In BHJ OSCs (Fig. 1), the active layer, which consists of two kinds of molecules, electron-donating molecule (donor), and electron-accepting molecule (acceptor), is sandwiched between two electrodes with different work functions and one of which is transparent.
 Fig. 1  Typical structure of BHJ OSCs. 
The physical process of a BHJ OSC is shown in Fig. 2. When incident photons are absorbed by the active layer, the donor and acceptor in the active layer will be excited, i.e. electrons leap from the HOMO (highest occupied molecular orbital) level to the LUMO (lowest unoccupied molecular orbital) level, and excitons (bound electron-hole pairs) are formed inside donor and acceptor. The created excitons diffuse within the active layer until they reach the interface between the donor and acceptor. At the interface, because the LUMO level of the acceptor is lower than that of the donor, and the HOMO level of the donor is higher than that of the acceptor, the electrons transfer from the LUMO level of donor to that of acceptor, and the holes transfer from the HOMO level of acceptor to that of donor within 100 fs.31 However, the electrons in the LUMO level of acceptor and the holes in the HOMO level of donor are still coulombically bonded. Since the work functions of the two electrodes are different, there is a built-in electric field inside the active layer. With the aid of the built-in electric field, the bonded electron-hole pairs will dissociate into free charges (electrons and holes). Then the separated free electrons/holes will be collected by the respective electrodes and driven into the external circuit.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the physical process of BHJ OSCs. 
According to the physical process of BHJ OSCs, there are some critical factors influencing the properties of BHJ OSCs significantly, which are discussed in the following sections.
2.1 Light absorption
The physical process of BHJ OSCs is initialized by incident photon absorption. Therefore, light absorption is a fundamental and essential step of the physical process of BHJ OSCs. The value of the short-circuit current (Jsc) of OSCs is closely related to the number of excitons generated by the absorption of the active layer. Generally, in the active layer, PCBM was chosen as the acceptor, whose absorption is only in the range of less than 400 nm; therefore, the absorption of donor molecule is predominant in the physical process of OSCs. Because of the relatively large band gap of most organic molecules, only small amounts of the incident sunlight can be absorbed. Consequently, the implementation of new molecules with narrow band gap absorbing the red and near infrared part of the solar spectrum is the target being pursued. A great deal of conjugated molecules has been designed and synthesized to successfully harvest sunlight with high absorption coefficient by modifying their chemical structures.32–36
In order to make the absorption of the active layer match the sunlight emission, researchers have paid intense attention to developing molecules with donor–acceptor structures whose optical and electronic properties could be tuned through changing the strength and intensity of the ICT from donor to acceptor groups.37 Some donor and acceptor groups which attract much attention when synthesizing small molecules with D–A structure are shown in Fig. 3. Additionally, Fig. 4 shows the ICT transition in D–A small molecules. Small molecules with D–A structure can have their absorption spectrum extended to the near-infrared region by choosing relatively strong electron-donor groups and electron-acceptor groups. Therefore, the synthesis of molecules with D–A structure that can efficiently harvest the majority of the energy of the solar spectrum is an effective way to obtain low band gap molecules for efficient OSCs.15–27
 Fig. 3  Some donor and acceptor groups used in small molecules with D–A structure. 
 Fig. 4  Diagram of ICT transition in D–A structure small molecules. 
2.2 Charge transport
After the photo-induced electron transfer at the donor/acceptor interface, the excitons dissociate into free charge carriers (electrons and holes) with the aid of a built-in electric field. Then the free charges are transported inside the active layer toward the two respective electrodes. So charge carrier mobility is of paramount importance in determining the properties of BHJ OSCs. Generally, electrons are transported in the acceptor phase, while holes are transported in the donor phase. Therefore, the charge carrier mobilities are highly dependent on the morphology and the phase separation of donor and acceptor in the active layer.38,39 Since the exciton diffusion lengths of organic molecules are in the range of 10–20 nm,40–42 before the excitons reach the maximum diffusion length they need to dissociate into free charges, otherwise, recombination and other decays will occur. So, the ideal phase separation dimension should be several dozens of nanometres, which enables most excitons to reach the interface between donor and acceptor within their lifetimes.39,43
The interpenetrating network of blended electron donor and acceptor molecules provides a large interface between the two kind of molecules, allowing significant exciton separation and carrier transport to the respective electrodes. However, the PCE is still limited by the space–charge effects due to the imbalance of electron mobility (μe) and hole mobility (μh). In general, hole transport is less efficient than electron transport in an active layer consisting of conjugated molecules as donor and PCBM as acceptor. Balanced mobilities of the charge carriers are needed to avoid the build-up of space charge in the active layer. It has been demonstrated that photocurrent reaches the fundamental space charge limit when the electron and hole mobilities differ by more than two orders of magnitude. The build-up of space charge as well as high levels of bimolecular recombination have a strong effect on reducing the fill factor (FF) in OSCs.44 Therefore, high efficiency of OSCs could be achieved through reduction of bimolecular recombination, elimination of space charge and the balance of charge-carrier mobilities. The charge carrier mobility is also highly dependent on the solid state nanoscale morphology of the two components (donor/acceptor) in the active layer. Up until now, several methods have been proposed to improve and balance the charge mobilities, which include solvent and thermal annealing, increasing the interface for charge separation, and varying the molar ratio between the donor and acceptor. For D–A structure small molecules, the charge carrier mobilities can be improved and balanced through regulating the donor and acceptor groups of the D–A small molecules.
2.3 Energy level
The optimization of the energy level of molecules could enhance the performance of OCSs.45–48 When electrons transfer from the LUMO level of the donor to the LUMO level of the acceptor, sufficient driving force is needed, and at the same time, the energy loss should be as little as possible.46,49 The LUMO level of the electron donor must be higher than that of the electron acceptor (at least 0.3 eV) in order to have sufficient driving force for electron transfer from donor to acceptor, and the HOMO level of the electron donor must be low enough in order to get relatively high open circuit voltage (Voc) which is determined by the difference between the HOMO level of the donor and LUMO level of the acceptor. On the other hand, the molecules should have good stability with HOMO energy level being below the air oxidation threshold (ca. −5.27 eV).50
In terms of D–A structure small molecules, through changing the donor group and/or acceptor group and even the linking bridge between donor and acceptor, the energy levels of the molecule could be adjusted conveniently.51 On these accounts, more and more research projects have been focusing on developing small molecules with suitable D–A structures for BHJ OSCs.
3. Solution processable donor–acceptor small molecules
Up until now, the polymer/fullerene material system has emerged as a performance leader for solution-processed photovoltaic solar cells, with PCEs of more than 7%.52–55 As far as D–A structure small molecule based OSCs is concerned, the highest efficiency of the solar cell is around 4.4%.27
As discussed above, the electron-donating molecules in the active layer of BHJ OSCs should have the following features: (1) the molecule should have broad absorption (e.g. 400–800 nm), which can efficiently harvest a large amount of energy from the solar spectrum; (2) the molecule must be air stable, i.e. the HOMO level must be lower than the air oxidation threshold (ca. −5.27 eV),56 which assures a relatively high Voc; (3) the LUMO level of the molecule should be different by 0.3 eV from that of the electron-accepting molecule in the active layer, for decreasing the energy loss during the electron transfer between donor and acceptor inside the active layers;57,58(4) the molecule should have a balanced mobility between the hole mobility and the electron mobility, which can decrease the carrier recombination at the interface of the donor and acceptor;44 (5) the molecule should have good miscibility with acceptor so as to form an interpenetrating network between the donor and acceptor, which can ensure maximum exciton dissociation at the interface between the donor and acceptor and increase Jsc of OSCs. In other words, the ideal electron-donating molecule should show broad absorption, appropriate HOMO and LUMO levels, appropriate and balanced carrier mobilities and better miscibility with the acceptor.
Recently, many conjugated donor–acceptor (D–A) structure small molecules, oligomers, and polymers have been synthesized and implemented in OSCs. Here, we mainly review the solution processable D–A small molecules classified according to their structures.
3.1 Oligothiophene based D–A small molecules
Unsubstituted oligothiophenes possess electron-donating and hole-transporting properties. The chemical stability of oligothiophenes and their easy functionalization allow the fine tuning of relevant properties. Increasing oligothiophene length provides stronger light absorption and promotes better π–π stacking/aggregation of the oligothiophenes and hence charge carrier transport. The combination of electron-donating oligothiophene building blocks with strongly electron-withdrawing groups results in the emergence of a new band assigned to an ICT transition that gives rise to the extension of the absorption spectrum of the resulting molecules. In the past few years, a series of conjugated D–A small molecules consisting of electron-withdrawing groups coupled to different oligothiophene segments (Fig. 5) were conceptually designed and synthesized to provide new electroactive materials for application in OSCs. Wong et al. have reported a series of oligothiophene based D–A small molecules in which oligothiophenes are asymmetrically endcapped with diphenylaminofluorenyl and dicyanovinyl groups.59,60 This class of oligothiophene derivatives offers a sufficient introduction of dicyanovinyl or tricyanovinyl acceptors that the optical band gap of oligothiophene thin films are significantly reduced to 1.93–1.46 eV, and the light absorption and intermolecular π–π stacking in the solid state phase are greatly enhanced upon extension of oligothiophene length. For example, the highest PCE of BHJ OSCs based on a blend of PhN-OFOT(4)-DCN and PCBM is 2.7% (AM1.5 corrected for the spectral mismatch). Another effective new class of diketopyrrolopyrrole-based oligothiophene D–A small molecules was reported by Nguyen et al. The optical and electronic properties and molecular packing of the materials can be controlled by changing the substituents and/or the number of thiophene units. The electrochemical band gaps of diketopyrrolopyrrole-based oligothiophene derivatives (SMDPPEH) ranged from 1.80 eV to 2.25 eV and the highest PCE reached 3.0%.25,26
 Fig. 5  Oligothiophene based D–A small molecules. 
3.2 Triphenylamine based amorphous D–A small molecule
In recent years, many triphenylamine (TPA) based D–A small molecules, whose molecular structure are shown in Fig. 6, have been widely investigated as active materials for OSCs. TPA-based compounds can be viewed as three-dimensional (3D) systems, which can lead to amorphous materials with isotropic optical and charge-transport properties. In addition, TPA possesses a high oxidation potential, and thus a high Voc could be expected. Therefore organic small molecules based on a 3D system are viewed as one of the promising photovoltaic materials for OSCs. Li and Roncali et al. have used TPA-based starburst molecules containing dicyanovinyl, 2-pyran-4-ylidenemalononitrile (PM) or benzothiadiazole (BT) acceptor groups as donor in BHJ OSCs.19,24,61,62,63 For enhancing the absorption of TPA based materials, they suggested the following molecular design principles: (1) connection of electron-donor and electron-acceptor moieties should be by a conjugated bridge and (2) the pull-push electrons ability of the acceptor and donor moieties should be adjusted in order to control the energy levels of the molecules and the simultaneous creation of an ICT, which leads to an extension of the spectral response and increase of Voc of the resulting OSCs.12,17 The maximum PCE of the OSC based on a blend of S(TPA-BT-4HT) and PC71BM (1:3, w/w) reached 2.39% under the illumination of AM.1.5, 100 mW cm−2.24
 Fig. 6  Triphenylamine based amorphous D–A small molecule. 
A few recent reports have described the use of star-shaped TPA-containing molecule with TPA as core and various electron-donors or acceptors as arms. Roncali et al. have confirmed that increasing the numbers of electron-withdrawing dicyanovinyl groups at the end of the star-shaped molecule can induce and increase an intramolecular charge transfer. Cyclic voltammetry shows that oxidation potential increased with the number of electron-withdrawing groups in the structure which lead to the increase of Voc from 0.48 V to 0.96 V. These synergistic effects allow PCEs to reach 1.20% under simulated AM1.5 solar irradiation at 100 mW cm−2.12 Li et al. have also reported a TPA based star-shaped molecule, S(TPA-BT), and the linear L(TPA-BT). The star shaped S(TPA-BT) shows broader and stronger absorption in the visible region, higher hole mobility, and appropriate HOMO and LUMO energy levels. The PCE of the bulk-heterojunction device based on S(TPA-BT) as donor and PCBM as acceptor reached 1.33%, which is 3.8 times greater than that of the device based on L(TPA-BT).19 A systematic investigation on various end groups in the arms of the TPA based star molecules was also reported. A TPA-containing molecule with TPA as core and benzothiadiazole-(4-hexyl) thiophene as arms exhibits similar electrochemical properties, but stronger absorbance and better morphology compared with that of benzothiadiazole-TPA as arms, S(TPA-BT), which lead to a Jsc of 8.58 mA cm−2 and PCE of 2.39%.24 Tian et al. have investigated the influence of the π-spacer and dendrimers on the TPA based D–A small molecules. The symmetrical donor-(π-bridge)-acceptor-(π-bridge)-donor (D-π-A-π-D) organic dye molecule 2-{2,6-bis-[2-(4-diphenylamino-phenyl)-vinyl]-pyran-4-ylidene}-malononitrile (DADP) has a shorter distance between the triphenylamine (TPA) group and the 2-pyran-4-ylidenemalonitrile (PM) group than TPA-DCM-TPA.17 The small structural difference results in a lower-lying HOMO energy level and higher hole mobility in DADP, and ultimately leads to the increased PCEs of the DADP-based devices. They also designed and synthesized three novel dendrimers (G0, G1 and G2) with symmetrical D-π-A-π-D structure with sulfonyldibenzene as the core and triphenylamines as dendrons. G0 displays two absorption peaks at 304 nm and 410 nm, which are ascribed to the absorption of the n–π* transition of the SDB moiety and the ICT between the TPA donor and the SDB acceptor, respectively. The decrease of the extinction coefficient from G0 to G2 films is due to the large size of TPA dendrons which occupy a large space in the dendrimer films. When the thickness of the films of G0, G1 and G2 is the same (70 nm), the number of G2 molecules in the film is less than those of G0 and G1, resulting in less ICT transition and ultimately the decrease of the absorption from G0 to G2 films. The PCE of the TPA based D–A small molecules with fewer π-spacers (DADP) and smaller dendrimers (G0) reached 1.50% and 0.34%, respectively.18,64
3.3 Diketopyrrolopyrrole based D–A small molecules
P3HT is a kind of donor conjugated polymer material used for OSCs. P3HT:PCBM blends have been explored thoroughly for the past decade and have yielded PCEs up to 5%. The high efficiency of P3HT:PCBM devices can be explained by the ability of self-organization that can lead to phase separation and crystallization into desirable BHJ morphologies after processing, allowing for efficient charge separation and transport.65,66 Recently, Nguyen et al. have reported a new class of D–A small molecules based on self-assembled diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP) derivatives. The molecular structure is shown in Fig. 7. These molecules contain the DPP chromophore as core unit, thiophene units on the 2nd and 5th positions and various alkyl chains on the N,N-positions of the lactam rings to control the π-stacking and physical properties, including solubility, crystallization, transition temperatures, energy levels and self-assembly processes. They found that highly ordered nanostructures are formed after thermal annealing, and the morphology is related to the molecular structure of the individual units. The DPP core includes a planar conjugated bicyclic structure, which leads to strong π–π interactions, with polar carbonyl groups capable of hydrogen bonding.
 Fig. 7  Diketopyrrolopyrrole based D–A small molecule. 
The self-assembly of DPP moiety substituted with a variety of neutral hydrocarbon chains and the changing numbers of oligothiophenes demonstrate that the optical and electronic properties and molecular packing of the materials can be controlled by changing the substituents and/or the conjugation lengths. More appropriate for incorporation into devices is the excellent tendency to self-assemble into well-organized and persistent domains. Two oligothiophenes containing ethylhexyl substituents on the 2nd and 5th positions were incorporated into diketopyrrolopyrrole (SMDPPEH) which is a new oligothiophene-DPP system for application in solar cells. The morphology of SMDPPEH:PCBM blend film are very smooth and formed fiber-like structures, which indicated the high degree of ordering due to the self-organization of SMDPPEH. The blends also exhibit balanced electron and hole mobilities. The device shows a Jsc of 9.2 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.75V and PCE of 3.0%.26 In order to further improve the PCE value of DPP derivatives, Nguyen et al. aimed to increase Voc. The LUMO level of the acceptor should be at least 0.3 eV lower than that of the donor to drive charge separation after exciton formation. An offset greater than 0.3 eV will result in energy loss during electron transfer. Based on these considerations they envisioned using a fused benzofuran system to replace the terminal bithiophene units. The fused system maintains a highly conjugated structure while the electronegative oxygen atom stabilizes the HOMO of the molecule. They found that solution processed films of the benzofuran-substituted DPP(TBFu)2 have good absorption properties and frontier energy levels that are appropriately aligned with those of PC71BM in BHJ OSCs. DPP(TBFu)2:PC71BM mixtures form good quality films and can self-assemble into BHJ morphologies with bi-continuous networks of donor and acceptor rich domains after annealing. Annealed DPP(TBFu)2:PC71BM devices yield PCEs of up to 4.4% with Voc of 0.9 V.
3.4 Merocyanine and squaraine based D–A small molecule
In the past few years, many different acceptor dyes have been introduced into the D–A small molecules. Although dyes have allowed most molecules to obtain a narrow band gap, the efficiencies are still lower than 1%. Meerholz has prepared a series of merocyanine (MC) dye based D–A small molecules (Fig. 8).20 These D–A small molecules offer sufficiently large variability in the position of the HOMO/LUMO levels, and high absorption coefficients (1.4 × 105 M−1 cm−1). The MC family is a successful demonstration of the D–A structure small molecules, and illustrates the high potential of these kinds of materials for OSCs. The highest PCE of a MC-based (MD304) solar cell was 1.74% and the Jsc was 6.3 mA cm−2. Marks has investigated the squaraine dye based D–A small molecules (Fig. 8) which showed broad absorption and high absorption coefficients (2 × 105 M−1 cm−1).67 The best efficiency of the OSC based on the squaraine D–A small molecule was 1.24%.
 Fig. 8  Merocyanine and squaraine based D–A small molecule. 
3.5 Acceptor molecules
PCBM is the most promising acceptor material for BHJ OSCs and few better acceptors have been found so far. However, PCBM has some disadvantages, such as a weak absorption in the visible region of the solar spectrum and the offset of LUMO energy level between the donor and PCBM should be further optimized. The ideal acceptor should have a strong absorption and a better energy level matching to the donor, which ensures efficient charge transfer and a high Voc. In addition, the acceptor needs to exhibit sufficient electron mobility after blending with donor. A significant number of D–A small molecules (Fig. 9) that can act as acceptors have been synthesized to improve the absorption, vary the HOMO/LUMO levels, and change the morphology of the active layer.70–72 Recently, Sellinger et al. have reported a D–A small molecule acceptor (EV-BT),68 which exhibited a favorably located LUMO level of −3.6 eV and strong absorption in the visible spectrum up to 520 nm compared with the widely used acceptor PCBM. The BHJ OSCs were prepared by blending the acceptor EV-BT with a donor poly(2,7-carbazole) (PCz), and a high Voc of 1 V or above, compared to typical Voc values in the range of 0.5–1 V for PCBM-based BHJ OSCs, was obtained. The high IPCEs (50%–70%) and good FF (approaching 50%) indicated relatively low energy losses. Unluckily, the relatively low Jsc (1.44 mA cm−2) resulted in a relatively low PCE (0.75%). Tian et al. have reported a novel D–A molecule, N-propyl-3,6-bis[2-(3-dicyanomethylene-5,5-dimethylcyclohex-1-enyl)vinyl]carbazole (PDHC), as the acceptor for BHJ OSCs. The cells exhibit higher Voc than the corresponding cells with PCBM as the acceptor due to the higher-lying LUMO energy level of the D–A molecule; the PCEs of the cells based on MEH-PPV:PDHC are around 0.2% and P3HT:PDHC are around 0.13%.71,72 Müllen and Shin have reported a series of PDI derivative acceptors.69 When blending PDI derivatives with P3HT or PCz, the absorption of the long wavelength region can be increased and the Voc of the devices can be raised. Although, the D–A small molecules have effectively improved the absorption and various energy levels of the acceptors compared to PCBM, and then increased the IPCEs and Voc values, the rather low Jsc implied that the miscibility with donor and carrier mobility of D–A small molecule acceptors should be optimized further.
 Fig. 9  Solution processable acceptor D–A small molecules. 
Conclusions and outlook
So far, solution processable D–A small molecules for BHJ OSCs are still in their early stages. People are doing their best to design and synthesize new D–A small molecules for efficient BHJ OSCs. The general requirements of specific intrinsic properties necessary for an ideal electron-donating D–A small molecule include (1) low band gap for a broad and high coefficient absorption to capture more solar energy; (2) high charge carrier mobilities for accelerating charge transport and efficient charge collection which can increase the FF and efficiency of BHJ devices; (3) an ideal phase-separated morphology consisting of a percolating and interpenetrating network of donor/acceptor phases which can greatly increase the charge carrier transport efficiency; (4) appropriate HOMO and LUMO energy levels to ensure a large Voc and a downhill energy offset for exciton dissociation.
Structural analysis of the current successful low band gap conjugated D–A small molecules reveals that as an electron-donating molecule, first of all, the electron-donating segments should be composed of multicyclic aromatic rings with efficient ICT transition, enforced planarity and long conjugated length. In accordance with the guideline, the further development of promising D–A small molecules might be directed toward hybridizing different electron-donating aromatic units into mutually fused structures in the anticipation of benefiting from the individual intrinsic advantages. Secondly, with respect to the development of electron-accepting units, the electron-accepting ability of an acceptor in the D–A small molecule needs to be carefully tweaked to ensure both efficient ICT transition and electron transfer. An overly strong electron withdrawing ability will cause the formation of electron traps with deep-lying LUMO levels, resulting in poor electron transfer to the acceptor and hence lowering the carrier mobility. Meanwhile, the offset of LUMO energy level (ΔLUMO) between donor and acceptor should be in the range of 0.3–0.5 eV, which can reduce the energy loss during the electron transfer from donor to acceptor. Thirdly, the bulk morphological factors, which are closely related to charge dissociation and transport, are mainly responsible for this discrepancy. Introduction of self-assembled moieties in the molecules can lead to better interpenetrating network morphology. However, with a higher stereo-structure moiety in D–A conjugated molecules, the degree of stacking in the solid state will be decreased. Hence, the style and the position of branched solubilizing groups that are introduced into the molecules to ensure solubility sometimes turn out to be able to attenuate intermolecular interactions in the solid state. Furthermore, the morphology of self-assembled D–A small molecules can also be controlled by external treatments (thermal or solvent annealing), which lead to efficient charge dissociation. The development of amorphous-oriented molecules exhibiting high hole mobility might be an alternative way to eliminate the need of post-treatment.
From what has been discussed above, we conclude with some other suggestions for design and synthesis of promising solution processable D–A small molecules. Firstly, some polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon electron-donating units with high coplanarity, such as 2,7-carbazole, dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole, benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene, etc., should be introduced for constructing new D–A small molecules, which may be facilitated to form molecules with higher carrier mobility and more enhanced intermolecular π–π interactions. Secondly, various electron-accepting units with different electron-accepting abilities and high coplanarity, such as benzothiadiazole, 2-pyran-4-ylidenemalononitrile, thieno[3,4-b]pyrazine and [1,2,5]thiadiazolo[3,4-g] quinoxaline, etc., should be used to couple with a well-chosen electron-donating unit for fine tuning of the band gap, energy levels, and the balance of hole and electron transport of new D–A small molecules. Thirdly, the ester alkyl and fluorine moieties should be connected onto the electron-donating or electron-accepting units of the D–A small molecules, which can efficiently improve the compatibility and nanoscale self-assembly property with the traditional acceptor, PCBM. In summary, the future development of high efficiency BHJ OSCs based on solution processable D–A small molecules will exploit new materials with ideal energy levels and high carrier mobility, which have nanostructure engineering of the morphology. Key challenges include the search for new moieties with high ICT transition intensity for obtaining a low band gap, appropriate electron-donating or electron-accepting ability for balanced carrier mobility, and the ability to self-assemble for facilitating charge transport.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the State Key Development Program for Basic Research of China (Grant No. 2009CB623605), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 50673035, 20874035), the 111 Project (Grant No. B06009), the Project of Jilin Province (20080305), and the Project 20091008 Supported by Graduated Innovation Fund of Jilin University.
References
C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183–185 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Sariciftci, L. S. Smilowitz, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Science, 1992, 258, 1474–1476 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Shaheen, C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci, F. Padinger, T. Fromherz and J. C. Hummelen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 841–843 CrossRef CAS .
F. Padinger, R. S. Rittberger and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 85–88 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CrossRef CAS .
V. C. Sundar, J. Zaumseil, V. Podzorov, E. Menard, R. L. Willett, T. Someya, M. E. Gershenson and J. A. Rogers, Science, 2004, 303, 1644–1646 CrossRef CAS .
L. Schmidt-Mende, A. Fechtenkötter, K. Müllen, E. Moons, R. H. Friend and J. D. MacKenzie, Science, 2001, 293, 1119–1122 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Shaheen, R. Radspinner, N. Peyghambarian and G. E. Jabbour, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 2996–2998 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gustafsson, Y. Gao, G. M. Treacy, F. Klavetter, N. Colaneri and A. J. Heeger, Nature, 1992, 357, 477–479 CrossRef CAS .
J. Roncali, P. Frere, P. Blanchard, R. de Bettignies, M. Turbiez, S. Roquet, P. Leriche and Y. Nicolas, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 511–512, 567–575 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Sun, Y. H. Zhou, W. C. Wu, Y. Q. Liu, W. J. Tian, G. Yu, W. F. Qiu, S. Y. Chen and D. B. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7702–7707 CrossRef CAS .
S. Roquet, A. Cravino, P. Leriche, O. Alévêque, P. Frère and J. Roncali, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3459–3466 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Lloyd, J. E. Anthony and G. G. Malliaras, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 34–41 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Rand, J. Genoe, P. Heremans and J. Poortmans, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2007, 15, 659–676 Search PubMed .
X. B. Sun, Y. Q. Liu, X. J. Xu, C. H. Yang, G. Yu, S. Y. Chen, Z. H. Zhao, W. F. Qiu, Y. F. Li and D. B. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 10786–10792 CrossRef CAS .
C. He, Q. G. He, Y. J. He, Y. F. Li, F. L. Bai, C. H. Yang, Y. Q. Ding, L. X. Wang and J. P. Ye, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 1815–1827 CrossRef CAS .
C. He, Q. G. He, X. D. Yang, G. L. Wu, C. H. Yang, F. L. Bai, Z. G. Shuai, L. X. Wang and Y. F. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 8661–8666 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Xue, J. T. He, X. Gu, Z. F. Yang, B. Xu and W. J. Tian, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 12911–12917 CrossRef CAS .
C. He, Q. G. He, Y. P. Yi, G. L. Wu, F. L. Bai, Z. G. Shuai and Y. F. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4085–4090 RSC .
N. M. Kronenberg, M. Deppish, F. Würthner, H. W. A. Ledemann, K. Deing and K. Meerholz, Chem. Commun., 2008, 6489–6491 RSC .
T. Rousseau, A. Cravino, T. Bura, G. Ulrich, R. Ziessel and J. Roncali, Chem. Commun., 2009, 1673–1675 RSC .
F. Silvestri, M. D. Irwin, L. Beverina, A. Facchetti, G. A. Pagani and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 17640–17641 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Wu, G. J. Zhao, C. He, J. Zhang, Q. G. He, X. M. Chen and Y. F. Li, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 108–113 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. Yang, C. He, Y. J. He, G. J. Zhao and Y. F. Li, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 7619–7622 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Tamayo, B. Walker and T. Q. Nguyen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11545–11551 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Tamayo, X. D. Dang, B. Walker, J. Seo, T. Kent and T. Q. Nguyen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 103301 CrossRef .
B. Walker, A. B. Tamayo, X. D. Dang, P. Zalar, J. H. Seo, A. Garcia, M. Tantiwiwat and T. Q. Nguyen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3063–3069 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mataga, H. Chosrowjan and S. Taniguchi, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2005, 6, 37–39 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, M. Park, S. Zhang, Y. Yao, L. Chen, J. Li and Y. Yang, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 6012–6018 CrossRef CAS .
S. Roquet, A. Cravino, P. Leriche, O. Alévêque, P. Frère and J. Roncali, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3459–3466 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, G. Zerza, G. Cerullo, S. D. Silvestri, S. Luzzati, J. C. Hummelen and S. Sariciftci, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 340, 232–236 CrossRef CAS .
M. Svensson, F. Zhang, S. C. Veenstra, W. J. H. Verhees, J. C. Hummelen, J. M. Kroon, O. Inganäs and M. R. Andersson, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 988–991 CrossRef CAS .
O. Inganäs, M. Svensson, F. Zhang, A. Gadisa, N. K. Persson, X. Wang and M. R. Andersson, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2004, 79, 31–35 CrossRef .
F. Zhang, K. G. Jespersen, C. Björström, M. Svensson, M. R. Andersson, V. Sundström, K. Magnusson, E. Moons, A. Yartsev and O. Inganäs, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 667–674 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, W. Mammo, L. M. Andersson, S. Admassie, M. R. Andersson and O. Inganäs, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2169–2173 CrossRef CAS .
C. P. Chen, S. H. Chan, T. C. Chao, C. Ting and B. T. Ko, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12828–12833 CrossRef CAS .
K. Colladet, S. Fourier, T. J. Cleij, L. Lutsen, J. Gelan, D. Vanderzande, L. H. Nguyen, H. Neugebauer, S. Sariciftci, A. Aguirre, G. Janssen and E. Goovaerts, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 65–72 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. J. van Duren, X. Yang, J. Loos, C. W. T. Bulle-Lieuwma, A. B. Sievel, J. C. Hummelen and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 425–434 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hoppe, T. Glatzel, M. Niggemann, W. Schwinger, F. Schaeffler, A. Hinsch, M. Ch. Lux-Steiner and N. S. Sariciftci, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 511–512, 587–592 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Nunzi, C. R. Phys., 2002, 3, 523 Search PubMed .
J. J. M. Halls and R. H. Friend, Synth. Met., 1997, 85, 1307–1308 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Markov, C. Tanase, P. W. M. Blom and J. Wildeman, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 045217 CrossRef .
H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 45–61 RSC .
L. J. A. Koster, V. D. Mihailetchi and P. W. M. Blom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 052104 CrossRef .
L. J. A. Koster, V. D. Mihailetchi and P. W. M. Blom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 093511 CrossRef .
M. C. Scharber, D. Mühlbacher, M. Koppe, P. Denk, C. Waldauf, A. J. Heeger and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18(6), 789–794 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dennler, M. C. Scharber and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21(13), 1323–1338 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Thompson, Y. G. Kim and J. R. Reynolds, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 5359–5362 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Bredas, D. Beljonne, V. Coropceanu and J. Cornil, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4971–5004 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Li, L. L. Xue, H. Li, Z. F. Li, B. Xu, S. P. Wen and W. J. Tian, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 4491–4499 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, S. Choi, J. Haliburton, T. Cleveland, R. Li, S. Sun, A. Ledbetter and C. E. Bonner, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 4317–4326 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497–500 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Hou, H. Y. Chen, S. Q. Zhang, G. Li and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16144–16145 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Liang, Y. Wu, D. Q. Feng, S. T. Tsai, H. J. Son, G. Li and L. P. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 56–57 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupre, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297–302 Search PubMed ; H. Y. Chen, J. H. Hou, S. Q. Zhang, Y. Y. Liang, G. W. Yang, Y. Yang, L. P. Yu, Y. Wu and G. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 649–653 Search PubMed .
D. M. de Leeuw, M. M. J. Simenon, A. R. Brown and R. E. F. Einhard, Synth. Met., 1997, 87, 53–59 CrossRef .
S. A. Choulis, J. Nelson, Y. Kim, D. Poplavskyy, T. Kreouzis, J. R. Durrant and D. D. C. Bradley, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 3812–3814 CrossRef CAS .
V. D. Mihailetchi, J. K. J. Van Duren, P. W. M. Blom, J. C. Hummelen, R. A. J. Janssen, J. M. Kroon, M. T. Rispens, W. J. H. Verhees and M. M. Wienk, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 43–46 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Xia, X. J. Feng, J. P. Lu, S. W. Tsang, R. Movileanu, Y. Tao and M. S. Wong, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4810–4815 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Xia, X. J. Feng, J. P. Lu, R. Movileanu, Y. Tao, J. M. Baribeau and M. S. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 16714–16720 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Zhao, J. L. Wu, C. He, F. Q. Bai, H. X. Xi, H. X. Zhang and Y. F. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 2636–2642 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cravino, P. Leriche, O. Alévêque, S. Roquet and J. Roncali, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 3033–3037 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cravino, S. Roquet, P. Leriche, O. Alévêque, P. Frère and J. Roncali, Chem. Commun., 2006, 1416–1418 RSC .
K. P. Li, J. L. Qu, B. Xu, Y. H. Zhou, L. J. Liu, P. Peng and W. J. Tian, New J. Chem., 2009, 33, 2120–2127 RSC .
Y. Kim, S. Cook, S. M. Tuladhar, S. A. Choulis, J. Nelson, J. R. Durrant, D. D. C. Bradley, M. Giles, I. McCulloch, C. S. Ha and M. Ree, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 197–203 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wei, T. Nishizawa, K. Tajima and K. Hashimoto, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2211–2216 CrossRef CAS .
F. Silvestri, M. D. Irwin, L. Beverina, A. Facchetti, G. A. Pagani and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 17640–17641 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Shin, H. H. Jeong, M. K. Kim, S. H. Jin, M. R. Kim, J. K. Lee, J. W. Lee and Y. S. Gal, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 384–390 RSC .
Z. E. Ooi, T. L. Tam, R. Y. C. Shin, Z. K. Chen, T. Kietzke, A. Sellinger, M. Baumgarten, K. Mullen and J. C. deMello, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4619–4622 RSC .
Y. F. Lim, Y. Shu, S. R. Parkin, J. E. Anthony and G. G. Malliaras, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3049–3056 RSC .
Y. H. Zhou, J. N. Pei, Q. F. Dong, X. B. Sun, Y. Q. Liu and W. J. Tian, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7882–7886 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Zhou, P. Peng, L. Han and W. J. Tian, Synth. Met., 2007, 157, 502–507 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:
Yaowen Li	Yaowen Li received his Bachelor’s Degree in the Department of Chemistry, Jilin University in 2005, and now he is in grade three of his PhD degree in the research group of Prof. Wen-jing Tian in the Department of Chemistry, Jilin University. His research focuses on organic/polymer design, synthesis and device fabrication for photovoltaic applications.
Qing Guo	Qing Guo received his Master’s Degree in the Department of Physics, Jilin University in 2007, and now he is in grade one of his PhD degree in the research group of Prof. Wen-jing Tian in the Department of Chemistry, Jilin University. His research focuses on organic/polymer optoelectronic materials and devices, as well as theoretical calculation of organic optoelectronic materials.
Zaifang Li	Zaifang Li received his Bachelor’s Degree in the Department of Chemistry, Qufu Normal University in 2006, and now he is in grade two of his PhD degree in the research group of Prof. Wen-jing Tian in the Dept. of Chemistry, Jilin University. His research focuses on the design and synthesis of organic small molecule photovoltaic materials.
Jianing Pei	Jianing Pei received his Bachelor’s Degree in the Department of Physics, Changchun University of Science and Technology in 2006, and now he is in grade two of his PhD degree in the research group of Prof. Wen-jing Tian in the Department of Chemistry, Jilin University. His research focuses on organic/polymer optoelectronic materials and devices.
Wenjing Tian	Prof. Dr Wenjing Tian received her Bachelor’s Degree in the Department of Physics, Jilin University in 1988, and received her PhD in the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 1993. She was a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Chemistry, Jilin University from 1994 to 1996. She was an associate professor in the Department of Chemistry, Jilin University from 1996 to 2001, and a professor from 2001. Her research focuses on organic/polymer optoelectronic materials and devices. She has published more than 30 papers in the research field of organic photovoltaic materials and devices.

Broader context
Organic solar cells (OSCs) have been extensively investigated over the past 20 years. It should be emphasized that the solution-processable OSCs have attracted increasing attention because of their unique potential advantages such as easy fabrication, low cost, light weight, large area, and mechanical flexibility. Theoretical and experimental advances in OSCs have demonstrated that D–A type small molecules have great potential as one class of promising materials in solution-processable OSCs. Firstly, the conjugated molecules consisting of electron-donating and electron-accepting units combined through π-conjugated linkers have an intrinsic intra-molecular charge transfer (ICT) character which can reduce the optical band gap and allow the absorption of the molecule to match well with the solar spectrum. Secondly, by flexible selection or modification of the electron donating and accepting functional groups, desirable optical properties, electronic structures, and even opto-electronic properties may be achieved.


 	Fig. 1  Typical structure of BHJ OSCs.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the physical process of BHJ OSCs.	 

 	Fig. 3  Some donor and acceptor groups used in small molecules with D–A structure.	 

 	Fig. 4  Diagram of ICT transition in D–A structure small molecules.	 

 	Fig. 5  Oligothiophene based D–A small molecules.	 

 	Fig. 6  Triphenylamine based amorphous D–A small molecule.	 

 	Fig. 7  Diketopyrrolopyrrole based D–A small molecule.	 

 	Fig. 8  Merocyanine and squaraine based D–A small molecule.	 

 	Fig. 9  Solution processable acceptor D–A small molecules.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
