A hierarchical 2D Ni–Mo–S nanosheet@nitrogen doped graphene hybrid as a Pt-free cathode for high-performance dye sensitized solar cells and fuel cells ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA04807F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA04807F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17896-17908A hierarchical 2D Ni–Mo–S nanosheet@nitrogen doped graphene hybrid as a Pt-free cathode for high-performance dye sensitized solar cells and fuel cells†

        
          
            Jayaraman 
            Balamurugan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shaik Gouse 
            Peera
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Meng 
            Guo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Thanh Tuan 
            Nguyen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Nam Hoon 
            Kim
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Joong Hee 
            Lee
          
        
      *ab
aAdvanced Materials Institute of BIN Technology (BK21 Plus Global), Dept. of BIN Convergence Technology, Chonbuk National University, Jeonju, Jeonbuk 561-756, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jhl@chonbuk.ac.kr; nhk@chonbuk.ac.kr;  Fax: +82 832702341;   Tel: +82 832702342
bCarbon Composite Research Centre, Department of Polymer-Nano Science and Technology, Chonbuk National University, Jeonju, Jeonbuk 561-756, Republic of Korea
Received 
      2nd June 2017
    , Accepted 25th July 2017First published on 26th July 2017AbstractA novel hybrid of 2D Ni–Mo–S nanosheet integrated nitrogen doped graphene (NG) is successfully developed via a simple, scalable, and cost-effective hydrothermal process, and its application towards energy conversion devices is explored. The presence of exclusive mesoporous structures combined with an excellent conducting NG network in the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid exhibits superior electrocatalytic activities as a counter electrode (CE) for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) in alkaline electrolytes. SEM and TEM studies demonstrate the uniform anchoring of ultra-thin Ni–Mo–S nanosheets on NG networks. The hierarchical Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid outperformed Ni–Mo–S, NG, and Pt when used as a CE in DSSCs and showed excellent ORR activity. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of DSSCs with the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid as the CE achieved 9.89%, outperforming conventional Pt CEs (8.73%). Furthermore, Ni–Mo–S/NG showed high catalytic activity for the ORR with an onset of 0.98 VRHE and outstanding durability compared to commercial Pt/C. The present study demonstrates the unique role of integrated Ni–Mo–S nanosheets anchored NG towards I3− reduction and the ORR, and demonstrates an efficient strategy for designing highly catalytically active and cost-effective electrocatalysts for DSSC and fuel cell applications.
Introduction
The efficiency of energy conversion devices like solar cells and fuel cells largely depends on the appropriate selection of electrode materials. To date, Pt based catalysts are considered suitable electrocatalysts for tri-iodide (I3−) and oxygen reduction processes, which occur in dye sensitized solar cells, fuel cells, and metal–air batteries. Practical applications of solar cells and fuel cells are hindered primarily by their high costs and secondarily by the scarcity of Pt. In addition, Pt catalysts showed serious long term stability issues. Hence, it is highly desirable to search for alternative cost effective and stable electrocatalysts that would surpass the activity of Pt catalysts. Accordingly, numerous efforts have been dedicated to spot novel electrocatalysts for I3− and oxygen reduction processes.1–4 Among the various proposed alternative electrocatalysts, two-dimensional (2D) transition metal chalcogenides (TMCs) have been considered as pivotal electrode materials, due to their distinctive electronic properties, exclusive mesoporous structures, exceptional specific surface areas, fascinating chemical activities, and environmental friendliness.5–9 To date, 2D TMCs (e.g., MS = NiS, CoS, CuS, SnS, MoS2, or WS2) anchored with nitrogen doped graphene (NG) nanosheets have been shown to create MS–Nx nanoarchitectures. Such imparted MS–Nx active sites are believed to play a vital role in greatly enhancing electronic conductivity, functional properties and hence the electrochemical performance of TMCs.8,9 Thus, TMCs anchored with graphene synchronized with nitrogen are emerging as the most promising substitute for Pt toward counter electrodes in DSSCs and electrocatalysts of the ORR.10,11 Nevertheless, the lack of ability to engineer TMC nanostructures frequently leads to agglomeration of TMCs during high temperature synthesis processes, which leads to a decrease in the number of catalytically active sites. Therefore, the fabrication of hierarchical nanoarchitectures of graphene with abundant and homogeneous doped N atoms is desirable to obtain the highest possible electrocatalytic performance of TMCs.10,11
MoS2 has been widely investigated as an electrocatalyst for energy conversion devices such as solar cells and fuel cells because of its unique two-dimensional layered structure, attractive nanostructure, excellent electronic conductivity, high specific surface area, unique porous architecture, and low toxicity.12–14 Recently, enormous efforts have been dedicated to synthesize MoS2via high-temperature CVD12,13 and hydrothermal techniques.14,15 The former technique is usually utilized for the fabrication of the crystalline MoS2, however it lacks reproducibility and is difficult to scale up. In contrast, the hydrothermal technique is simple to perform and easy to scale up; however, the final products tend to agglomerate, making the selection of suitable hydrothermal conditions crucial to obtain a material with exceptional catalytic properties.14,15
It was further proposed that the electrocatalytic properties of MoS2 can be further improved by the incorporation of transition metals (M = Co, Ni or Cu), termed as ternary metal sulfides. This can also alter the morphology and intrinsic characteristics of MoS2, potentially enhancing its electrocatalytic activity. Among the transition metals, Ni is incorporated in MoS2 (Ni–Mo–S) which is considered as an electrocatalyst with a high catalytic activity. However, the unsupported Ni–Mo–S suffers from poor long term stability as it degrades during electrochemical operation. In order to overcome these stability issues, durable supports for ternary metal sulphides, such as Ni–Mo–S, are currently being developed, which are expected to fulfill the present industrial needs in terms of durability. The introduction of conductive supports is a powerful approach to enhance the electrical conductivity, electrochemical stability, and durability of TMCs. Such conducting supports include carbon black, carbon nanotubes, mesoporous carbon, and graphene, and not only deliver a high electrical conductivity to TMCs, but also enhance the electrochemical stability and durability during the catalytic activity in DSSCs and the ORR.
Graphene has been extensively utilized as a support to create TMC-graphene hybrids for various energy storage/conversion device applications due to its exceptionally high specific surface area, high electrical conductivity, superior flexibility, chemical stability, corrosion resistance, and environmental friendliness.16 Besides, heteroatom (N) doped graphene has been used as a support for TMCs and other electrocatalysts.8,10 The combination of TMCs with NG showed improved electrochemical properties over hybrid materials made with un-doped graphene nanosheets. The introduction of nitrogen into graphene networks enhances the electrical conductivity, which supports effective charge-transfer and therefore catalytic activity.8,10 NG materials possess outstanding electrocatalytic activity due to their charge polarization caused by the difference in electronegativity between N and C, which enhances their catalytic activity and electron transport kinetics.17 One of the most favourable approaches to overcome the agglomeration and electrochemical instability problem of TMCs is to confine them on NG supports. If the synthesis of ternary metal sulphides on NG supports could be performed in a single step, then it would yield a high-performance electrocatalyst with the desired stability.
Recent investigations reported that MoS2–graphene based hybrids could be used as alternative counter electrodes in DSSC applications with superior photovoltaic performance and long-term stability instead of Pt electrodes.18–21 Also, a two-dimensional (2D) MoS2/NG hybrid was achieved via the physical mixing method, and the resultant electrocatalyst was used as an electrocatalyst for the ORR.22 However, the existing synthesis techniques to fabricate such MoS2–graphene based hybrids are associated with processing difficulties, special instruments, or the use of multi-step processes that make severe problems, which avoid their use in practical energy conversion device applications. In this circumstance, developing a simple, scalable and cost-effective method for synthesizing hierarchical 2D ternary metal sulphide nanosheet–NG based materials is still a challenging task. To the best of our knowledge, the 2D Ni–Mo–S nanosheet integrated NG as an efficient Pt-free cathode for high-performance DSSCs and the ORR has not been reported until now.
Herein, we report a novel strategy for the fabrication of facile and single-step synthesis of Ni–Mo–S nanosheets supported on NG as effective electrode materials for DSSCs and the ORR, using a simple, scalable, and cost-effective synthesis method. Pure forms of Ni–Mo–S nanosheets are effectively anchored on NG sheets from their precursors. Also, no additional reduction process for GO is required, due to the instantaneous reduction of GO under the effective hydrothermal conditions of the Ni–Mo–S nanosheets synthesis. N doping of the reduced graphene nanosheets was simultaneously performed using thiourea. The structure and electrocatalytic activity of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid was thoroughly studied and will be discussed in detail. The as-synthesized Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrids showed superior electrocatalytic activity towards I3− reduction with a PCE (η) of 9.89%, which is among the most efficient CE so far reported for TMC based hybrid CE based DSSCs. This PCE was expressively higher than that of DSSCs using Pt (PEC = 8.73%) as the counter electrode assembled under the same experimental conditions. Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid materials showed superior electrochemical performance when compared to other recently reported ternary metal sulphide based hybrid materials.23–26 In addition, the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid material exhibits excellent catalytic parameters for the ORR with a positive onset (∼0.96 VRHE) and half-wave potential (∼0.88 VRHE), which are higher than those of commercial Pt/C catalysts. The here-presented Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid catalysts are a powerful alternative to currently used electrocatalysts for DSSCs and fuel cells applications.
Experimental
Synthesis of the hierarchical Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid
Graphite oxide (GO) was prepared from graphite powder as stated in our previous study.27 The synthesis of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid was carried out using the following procedure: in a typical synthesis, 0.5 mmol of Ni(OCOCH3)2·4H2O, 0.5 mmol of (NH4)6Mo7O24, and 2.0 mmol thiourea were dissolved in 10 mL of DI H2O and sonicated for 10 min. 45 mg of GO were dispersed in 15 mL of DI H2O and ultra-sonicated for 30 min to obtain a homogeneous dispersion and were added to the metal precursor solution. After that, 2 mL of ethylenediamine and 2 mL of NH4OH were added to the above mixture and magnetically stirred for 2 h to obtain a homogeneous mixture. The whole mixture was transferred into a 50 mL Teflon lined stainless steel autoclave. The autoclave was kept at a temperature of 180 °C for 12 h, after that the autoclave was slowly cooled down to room temperature. The as-synthesized material was thoroughly washed with H2O and ethanol to remove impurities as well as unreacted precursors and the resulting material was dried at 60 °C for 6 h in a vacuum oven. For comparison, NG and pure Ni–Mo–S nanosheets were prepared using a similar procedure without metal precursors and GO, respectively.
Fabrication of CEs for DSSCs
About 20 mg of the as-synthesized materials were dispersed in 1 mL of isopropanol with 25 μL ethylene glycol and ultrasonicated for 1 h to obtain the catalyst paste. The resulting homogeneous catalyst paste was coated on the FTO conducting glass substrate by the screen printing technique with a thickness of ∼10 μm. Finally, the as-synthesized materials coated on FTO were annealed at 310 °C for 1 h in an argon atmosphere.
Fabrication of DSSCs
The TiO2 paste with an average particle size of ∼20 nm was screen printed on the FTO conducting glass substrate until the target thickness of ∼10 μm was reached, followed by screen printing a 5 μm light scattering film on the coated TiO2 layer. The TiO2 film was annealed at 500 °C for 30 min in an argon atmosphere. Next, the TiO2 electrode was immersed in a 0.5 mM ethanolic solution that contained N719 dye for 12 h under ambient conditions. The effective area of the photo-anode was 0.25 cm2. DSSCs were composed of a dye-sensitized TiO2 photo-anode and different CEs, assembled by using an interlayer spacer of 25 μM type thick hot melt Surlyn 1702 (Solaronix). The working electrolyte composition was prepared with 0.05 M I2, 0.1 M LiI, 0.6 M 4-tert-butyl pyridine, and 1,2-dimethyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide (DMPII) with 85:15 vol% of acetonitrile and valeronitrile as the solvent. The J–V performance of the DSSCs were examined with a Keithley digital source meter (Keithley 2601, USA) and simulated under AM ∼1.5 illumination through a solar simulator of 100 mW cm−2.
Estimation of electrocatalytic activity towards I−/I3− reduction
Electrochemical studies of the as-synthesized NG, pure Ni–Mo–S, Ni–Mo–S/NG and Pt coated FTO conducting glass were implemented on a PGSTAT 30, Autolab, Eco-Chemie machine. During the CV measurements, the fabricated CEs act as the working electrode, a saturated Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode, and a Pt foil as the counter electrode, and all the electrodes are immersed in the acetonitrile electrolyte composed of 1 mM I2, 10 mM LiI, and 0.1 M LiClO4 at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. The electrochemical stability of the CEs was investigated by 500 consecutive potential sweeps at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. EIS and Tafel polarization measurements were measured by scanning the symmetric cell (CE/electrolyte/CE) with a potentiostat from 100 kHz to 0.1 Hz with a perturbation amplitude of 10 mV.
Evaluation of electrocatalytic activity of the catalysts towards the ORR
The ORR activities of the catalyst are analyzed by cyclic voltammetry and linear sweep voltammetric techniques at 25 °C in a standard three electrode system. The glassy carbon electrode is used as a substrate (working electrode), whereas a Pt wire and Ag/AgCl electrode were used as counter and reference electrodes, respectively. All the electrochemical measurements were carried out with a potentiostat from CH instruments. For the electrochemical measurements, the required amount of the catalyst is dispersed in ethanol water mixture (1:3) along with 10 μL of Nafion ionomer (5 wt% provided by DuPont). The resulting dispersion was ultra-sonicated for 30 min to form an ink. 15 μL of the ink is dropped onto the alumina-polished GCE and slowly dried at room temperature to obtain a catalyst loading of 1000 μg cm−2. In case of the Pt/C catalyst, the Pt loading was fixed to 60 μg cm−2. All electrochemical characterizations were performed using aqueous 0.1 M KOH solution. The CV measurements were recorded in N2 or O2 saturated electrolyte in the potential range of −0.8 to 0.2 V at the scan rate of 50 mV s−1. The LSVs were performed in the O2 saturated electrolyte between 0.2 V and −0.8 V vs. the Ag/AgCl reference electrode on the rotating working electrode. The rotation speed was varied from 800–2800 per min at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. A stability test is performed by repeating the CVs for 2000 potential cycles at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 and LSVs were recorded before and after the cycling test to assess the ORR behavior. All the potentials were corrected for electrolyte pH (ERHE = E(Ag − AgCl) + (0.059 V pH of the electrolyte)) and presented with respect to the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) scale for convenience, unless otherwise stated.
Structural characterizations
SEM pictures of the as-obtained materials were obtained with a FE-SEM (SUPRA 40 VP; Carl Zeiss, Germany) in the Center for University-Wide Research Facilities (CURF) at Chonbuk National University, South Korea. The morphology of the as-obtained material was further studied using an AFM (XE-100, Park System Co., Korea). The elemental compositions of the as-obtained materials were examined by ICP-AES (J-A1100; Jarrell-Ash Company, Japan) and EDAX (SUPRA 40 VP; Carl Zeiss, Germany). The intrinsic morphology of the as-obtained materials was analyzed by TEM, HR-TEM, and STEM/EDS using a JEM-2200 FS (JEOL Ltd., Japan, 200 kV). The crystallinity and nature of the as-obtained materials were examined via Powder XRD (Rigaku Corporation, Japan, Cu Kα radiation, λ = 0.154 nm). The structural disorders of the as-obtained materials were investigated by Raman spectroscopy (Tokyo Instruments Co., Japan). The elemental composition and the oxidation state of the as-obtained materials were determined via XPS (Theta Probe AR-XPS System; Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) in the Busan center at KBSI. N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms were recorded at ∼77 K with a Micromeritics ASAP 2020, used to calculate the BET surface area and pore size distribution of the as-obtained materials.
Results and discussion
Synthesis and structural characterization of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid

Fig. 1 illustrates the one-step hydrothermal synthesis of Ni–Mo–S nanoarchitectures and NG nanosheets from nickel acetate, ammonium molybdate, thiourea, ethylene diamine, and graphene oxide precursors. During the hydrothermal process, decomposition of thiourea releases NH3 and H2S, which are sources of N and S species, respectively. Functional groups of graphene oxide, such as –OH and –COOH, bind to the metal source and consequently, a 2D Ni–Mo–S nanosheet is grown on the graphene sheets.8 The released H2S gas reduces MO to MS (M = Ni–Mo). The released NH3 gas forms an N source for graphene oxide, leading to the formation of NG while simultaneously reducing graphene oxide to graphene. Thiourea performs a dual role, both as a sulfurizing agent to the MO as well as a nitrogen source for GO.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the single-step synthesis of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid and its use as the bifunctional electrocatalyst for DSSC and fuel cell applications. 
The surface morphology of the as-synthesized Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid via the single-step hydrothermal method is shown in Fig. 2. FE-SEM and TEM pictures revealed that the ultra-thin 2D Ni–Mo–S nanosheets are uniformly anchored on NG nanosheets without free growth of the unattached metal sulphide nanosheets (Fig. 2a). This confirms that the metal precursor solutions were easily converted into ultra-thin Ni–Mo–S nanosheets with well-ordered nanostructures. The HR SEM picture shown in the inset of Fig. 2a revealed that Ni–Mo–S nanosheets were attached to NG, the support network, with a sponge-like nanostructured morphology. The interesting nanostructure formation during the hydrothermal synthesis can be ascribed to the robust NG support and slow sulfurization followed by nitrogen doping at a relatively low reaction temperature (180 °C). The AFM three-dimensional topography of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid architecture shown in Fig. 2b clearly displays the ultra-thin Ni–Mo–S with a porous architecture anchored on NG nanosheets. The cross-sectional measurements of the AFM image (Fig. S1†) and its respective height profile show that the ultra-thin Ni–Mo–S nanosheets of ∼4.3 nm are well attached on the NG matrix, with no phase separation. Altogether, these exclusive nanoarchitectures of Ni–Mo–S/NG offer advantages when used as the counter electrode of DSSCs and the electrocatalyst in the ORR: (i) this hybrid material offers excellent mechanical strength and better electron transport kinetics during the electrocatalytic properties,8,9 (ii) the porous network of the hybrid architectures can enhance the electrolyte diffusion, simplifying the reduction process of I−/I3− (DSSCs), and O2 diffusion towards the ORR,11 and (iii) the integrated Ni–Mo–S nanosheets along with the NG enhances the durability of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid.
 Fig. 2  (a) SEM picture (inset shows the high magnification SEM picture), (b) AFM image, (c) TEM image (inset shows the EDAX spectrum), and (d) HR-TEM image of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid. 
Furthermore, the three-dimensional AFM topography of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid architecture is shown in Fig. 2b, which clearly displays the ultra-thin Ni–Mo–S with a porous architecture anchored on NG nanosheets (Fig. 2b). The cross sectional measurements of the AFM image (Fig. S1†) and its respective height profile display that the ultra-thin Ni–Mo–S nanosheets of ∼4.3 nm are well attached on the NG matrix, with no phase separation.

Fig. 2c and d show the intrinsic structural morphology of the as-synthesized Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid through TEM and HR-TEM analysis. The TEM picture shows that the ultra-thin layered Ni–Mo–S is effectively anchored on NG networks. The energy dispersive X-ray spectrum (EDAX) confirms the presence of the elements Ni, Mo, S, N, and C in the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid (the inset of Fig. 2c). No other elemental peak was detected, confirming that the synthesis protocol followed in this study is facile and efficient. The weight percentages of the element Ni, Mo, S, N, and C in the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid material are summarized in Table S1.† The corresponding atomic weight percentages of the as-synthesized hybrid material are examined from the ICP-AES measurements, which are illustrated in Table S1.† The HR-TEM picture in Fig. 2d shows the crystalline nature of Ni–Mo–S nanosheets over the NG matrices. The presence of incoherent patches in their lattices further authenticates their integrated architecture. From Fig. 2d, the interplanar distance was measured to be ∼0.191 nm, corresponding to the d-spacing of the (042) plane of Ni–Mo–S.
STEM-EDS mapping of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid confirms that the elements Ni, Mo, S, N, and C are uniformly distributed over the layered NG hybrid structures (Fig. 3). The NG network appears to act as a backbone to support the formation of the hierarchical Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid architectures. Furthermore, the effective NG layer with its ultra-high surface area minimizes the stacking of the Ni–Mo–S nanosheets during the synthesis process and improves the electron transport kinetics due to its high electronic conductivity. High amounts of sulfur and nitrogen are present in the hybrid material, which confirms that the current one-step hydrothermal synthesis method effectively sulfurizes and dopes nitrogen into the hybrid matrices, improving the electrocatalytic activity and stability during DSSCs and ORR performance studies.
 Fig. 3  HAADF-STEM image of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid and its corresponding STEM/EDS colour elemental mapping respect to Ni–K, Mo–K, S–K, N–K, and C–K. 
The crystalline structure of the pure Ni–Mo–S nanosheets and Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid was investigated by XRD patterns, which are shown in Fig. S2a.† The XRD pattern of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid show a major peak at ∼26.2°, which corresponds to the (002) plane of the NG nanosheets. The diffraction peaks at ∼18.7°, 36.7°, 43.4°, 47.6°, 53.5° and 74.5° correspond to the (110), (104), (13–2), (042), (21–5), (603) planes of the ultra-thin NiMo3S4 nanosheets, respectively (JCPDS 88-1802). The broad diffraction peaks confirm the nanoscale sizes of ultra-thin 2D Ni–Mo–S anchored on the NG network. These results are well-consistent with previously reported planes of NiMo3S4 nanocomposites.28 The interlayer spacing between the Ni–Mo–S nanosheets is calculated using Bragg's law to be ∼0.192 nm to 0.195 nm. This result is consistent with our HR-TEM observations (∼0.191 nm), as shown in the inset of Fig. 2d.
Raman spectroscopy was used to examine the structural disorder of the graphene and its hybrid architecture. The Raman spectrum of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid in Fig. S2b† shows a G band at ∼1592 cm−1, which corresponds to the sp2 vibration mode of the 2D carbon lattice. The D band at ∼1367 cm−1 corresponds to graphene layer defects.9 The G band of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid is shifted toward higher wave numbers (1592 cm−1) when compared to the as-synthesized NG (1583 cm−1), which reveals the synergistic interaction between the ultra-thin Ni–Mo–S layer structures and NG nanosheets in the hybrid architecture.29 No shift was observed in the D band (1367 cm−1) of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid, which corresponds to the defects of the graphene layers.
The intensity of the D to G band ratio (ID/IG) of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid is ∼0.99, which is slightly lower than that of NG (ID/IG = 1.08). This is due to the anchoring of Ni–Mo–S on NG sheets with a high degree of graphitization, which is beneficial for the improvement of the electronic conductivity of the hybrid architecture.30,31
XPS measurements were used to further investigate the chemical states and elemental composition of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid (Fig. 4a–e). The elemental composition of the Ni–Mo–S/NG was determined by Ni 2p, Mo 3d, S 2p, N 1s, C 1s, and O 1s spectral characteristics. The contents of Ni, Mo, S, N, C, and O of Ni–Mo–S/NG were found to be 3.62%, 3.54%, 9.06%, 10.24%, 67.25% and 6.29%, respectively. The high-resolution XPS spectrum of Ni in Fig. 4a shows two major peaks at ∼855.2 and 857.1 eV, which correspond to the Ni 2p3/2 orbital, which is very close to those reported for Ni–Mo alloys.32 The Ni spectra also show an additional peak at ∼873.3 eV, assigned to the Ni 2p1/2 orbital. The high-resolution XPS spectrum of Mo shows two peaks at ∼229.3 eV and ∼231.9 eV, which relate to the Mo4+ 3d5/2 and the Mo4+ 3d3/2, respectively, and which are very close to those reported in Ni–Mo alloy systems.33 An additional peak at ∼225.6 eV is related to the S 2s in the Ni–Mo–S layered structure (Fig. 4b). The high-resolution XPS spectrum of S 2p (Fig. 4c) displays a doublet with the S 2p3/2 subsiding on ∼161.9 eV, confirming the oxidation state of sulfur in molybdenum sulfide, which is very close to the reported values in the literature.28,34 The presence of a spin–orbital peak at higher binding energies in the S 2p region serves as additional evidence for the existence of higher oxidation states of Mo. However, the binding energy values of sulfur are higher in hybrid architectures, revealing the high coupling interaction between Ni–Mo and S in the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid material.35 The high-resolution of the N 1s spectrum (Fig. 4d) shows four components with different binding energies for pyridinic-N (398.4 eV), pyrrolic-N (399.3 eV), graphitic-N (400.9 eV), and oxidized-N (403.8 eV).36 Among the four nitrogen bonding energies, those representing graphitic-N and pyridinic-N are related to the significant improvement of the electrocatalytic activity for energy storage and conversion applications.37 The nitrogen content of the as-synthesized Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid is ∼10.24, which is significantly higher than previously reported data.3,10 The high percentage of nitrogen doping could enhance the electronic conductivity as well as reduce the charge-transfer resistance (Rct) of the electrode materials.38 The high-resolution C 1s spectrum (Fig. 4e) includes the following carbon bond energies: 284.6 eV (CC), 285.5 eV (C–O), and 286.6 eV (C–N). The C 1s spectrum shows the well-resolved C–N bond, which confirms the effective doping of nitrogen into the graphene network. The effective nitrogen doping results in defects in the stacking of graphene matrices, the defects in the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid can also be a result of the wrinkled nature of the graphene nanosheets. Thus, the aim of fabricating a higher number of edge defect sites in the graphene network, therefore delivering a higher number of active catalytic sites, was performed in our present synthesis technique through the single-step hydrothermal preparation of metal sulfide based hybrid architectures. The calculated atomic weight percentages of Ni to Mo is ∼1:1, which is consistent with the stoichiometric ratio of ∼1:1 for Co–Mo–S nanosheets, obtained from EDAX results (Table S1†).
 Fig. 4  High-resolution XPS spectra of (a) Ni 2p, (b) Mo 3d, (c) S 2p, (d) N 1s, (e) C 1s of Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid, and (f) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm of Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid (the inset shows a pore-size distribution of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid). 
To investigate the specific surface area and pore size distribution of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid, N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm studies were performed (Fig. 4f). The N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid reveal a type IV isotherm with hysteresis loops at high relative pressures in the range of ∼0.8 to 1.0 (P/Po). Hysteresis loops are a consequence of micropore as well as mesopore formation. The Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid material has a calculated specific surface area of ∼657 m2 g−1 with a pore size distribution of around 5–7 nm (the inset of Fig. 4f). Such a high surface area and unique mesoporous architecture obtained without any additional heat treatment during synthesis is an additional advantage of the current synthesis method. The exceptional surface area results in more electroactive sites in the hybrid architecture, which could enhance electron transport kinetics as well as improve the catalytic activity of the electrode materials in energy conversion devices. 2D TMC based hybrid architectures with attractive structures have been described for applications in energy storage and energy conversion devices, such as supercapacitors, Li-ion batteries, solar cells, and fuel cells.39 It is therefore desirable to develop 2D TMC based hybrid nanostructures via self-aggregation. So far, the formation of 2D TMC based nanoarchitectures requires highly sophisticated techniques, for instance CVD, and generally requires high temperature treatment. Here, we propose a successful synthesis of the 2D TMC based hybrid architecture which realized the hierarchical 2D TMC based nanoarchitecture in a single-step hydrothermal method, which is simple, scalable, and cost-effective, and therefore suitable for commercialization.
DSSC performance of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid
We investigated the electrocatalytic activity of different counter electrodes (CEs), including the as-synthesized NG, pure Ni–Mo–S, Ni–Mo–S/NG, and Pt by using cyclic voltammetry (CV) in a three-electrode configuration (Fig. 5a).
 Fig. 5  DSSC performance of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid: (a) cyclic voltammetry curves verified in the three-electrode system towards I−/I3− reduction (scan rate: 50 mV s−1), (b) EIS of symmetric cell configuration with NG, pure Ni–Mo–S, Ni–Mo–S/NG and Pt as CEs (the inset shows the equivalent circuit for fitting the EIS), (c) Tafel plot of symmetric cell configuration with NG, pure Ni–Mo–S, Ni–Mo–S/NG and Pt as CEs, and (d) J–V curves of DSSCs assembled with the performance of NG, pure Ni–Mo–S, Ni–Mo–S/NG and Pt CEs at 100 mW cm−2 of simulated solar illuminations. 
CV was performed in an electrolyte, comprising acetonitrile with 1 mM I2, 10 mM LiI, and 0.1 M LiClO4, at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. The counter electrode was fabricated via drop casting the as-synthesized NG, pure Ni–Mo–S, and Ni–Mo–S/NG on a FTO conducting substrate with a thickness of ∼10 μm (more details are described in the Experimental section). The CV curves of all catalysts show a pair of strong redox peaks which correspond to the oxidation and reduction reaction of I species as given in eqn (1) and (2): 3I− → I3− + 2e− (oxidation)(1) I3− + 2e− → 3I− (reduction)(2)
The anodic peak current (Ipa) results from the oxidation of I− and the cathodic peak current (Ipc) results from the reduction of I3− ions in the redox reaction medium. The importance of Ipc relates to the electrocatalytic activation of the CE for the reduction of I3− ions in DSSC devices. In order to measure the exchange current density of the oxidation and reduction, we use the redox couple (I−/I3−) in CV performance. The peak to peak separation between anodic and cathodic peaks is well-known to inversely relate to the typical electrochemical rate constant of the redox reaction kinetics, whereas the current density of the cathodic peak is directly correlated with the CE electrocatalytic activity. The separation between anodic and cathodic peaks (Epp) for Ni–Mo–S/NG is ∼212 mV, which is significantly smaller than those for the other CEs (Epp of NG ∼320 mV, pure Ni–Mo–S ∼252 mV, and Pt ∼301 mV). The higher current density and lower Epp properties of Ni–Mo–S/NG are directly related to the enhancement of electrocatalytic activity towards the I−/I3− redox reaction, thereby increasing the efficiency of DSSCs, which is a result of the hierarchical architecture and the higher number of wide-open edge sites on the NG support. Upon anchoring Ni–Mo–S onto the NG framework, Ni–Mo–S/NG exhibits excellent performance, showing the highest peak current density as well as the lowest Epp when compared to other CEs. Further enhancement of electrocatalytic activity requires the formation of Ni–Mo–S with a higher number of electroactive sites and greater extent of doping of nitrogen into the graphene framework during the synthesis process.
The CV curves at different scan rates for the Ni–Mo–S/NG with a voltage window of −0.4 to 0.4 V are shown in Fig. S4.† All CV curves show strong redox peaks as well as increased current densities with respect to the scan rates from 5 to 100 mV s−1. When the scan rate increases from 5 to 100 mV s−1, there was no change observed in shapes of these CV curves, indicating improved electron transport kinetics, remarkable electronic conductivity, superior rate performance, and low Rct. A linear relationship was found between the square root scanning rates and the peak (cathodic as well anodic) current densities. This linear relationship indicates that the oxidation and reduction reactions are diffusion-limited for the transport of I−/I3− species in the direction of the CE in DSSC devices. Since the electrochemical stability of CEs is an essential requirement for real applications in DSSCs, the NG, pure Ni–Mo–S, Ni–Mo–S/NG and Pt CEs were further investigated by CV measurements with a scan rate of 50 A g−1 (Fig. S5, ESI†). The CV was recorded for the Ni–Mo–S/NG CE before and after 500 consecutive cycles; the CV curves did not show significant changes in anodic and cathodic peak potentials. In contrast, the Pt CE shows significant changes already after 100 consecutive cycles in cathodic and anodic peak current densities (Fig. S5†). To the best of our knowledge, such an electrochemical stability of Ni–Mo–S/NG has not been reported yet. These results confirm that the Ni–Mo–S/NG CE possesses exceptional reversible redox properties, outstanding electrochemical stability, and robust adhesiveness on the FTO conducting substrate.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was used to investigate the electron transport properties between the CE and electrolyte. In order to investigate the charge transfer resistance and electrocatalytic activity of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid architecture, we fabricated symmetric cells with two identical CEs, using a sandwich-type pattern to eliminate the impact of the photo-anode. Nyquist plots of the as-synthesized NG, pure Ni–Mo–S, Ni–Mo–S/NG, and Pt CEs are shown in Fig. 5b. All CEs show two distinctive semicircles. The high frequency region semicircle reveals the Rct of the redox shuttle in electrolyte solution. The high frequency semicircle beginning point was used to estimate the series resistance (Rs) of the interfacial resistance between the electrode materials and the FTO conducting glass substrate. The low frequency region semicircle specifies the Nernst diffusion impedance (ZN) for the redox shuttle in the whole electrolyte solution. All EIS spectra were fitted with an equivalent circuit model using NOVA software (the inset Fig. 5b), and the obtained EIS parameters are shown in Table 1. The NG CE shows a lower Rct value (0.96 Ω cm2) when compared to the Pt CE (Rct = 2.18 Ω cm2). The low Rct of the NG CE is a result of exceptional electronic conductivity and many electrocatalytic Ni–Mo–S active sites. The anchoring of 2D Ni–Mo–S with nanoarchitectures into the NG matrices leads to a significantly reduced Rct (0.07 for Ni–Mo–S/NG), representing its superior electrocatalytic activity as the redox shuttle in DSSCs.
Table 1 Photovoltaic parameters of DSSCs with different CEs and the simulated data from EIS spectraa




CEs

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF

η (%)

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
ct (Ω cm2)

E
pp (mV)





a 
J
sc: short-circuit photocurrent density; Voc: open-circuit voltage; FF: fill factor; η: energy conversion efficiency. Rs: series resistance; Rct: charge-transfer resistance; photocurrent–voltage measurements under simulated AM 1.5 solar illuminations at 100 mW cm−2. The samples were covered with a black mask with an aperture to prevent extra light coming through the lateral space. The active areas of the samples were about 0.25 cm2 for all of the samples. Epp: the peak-to-peak splitting from CV curves.





Pt
14.54
0.77
0.78
8.73
2.17
2.18
301


NG
13.19
0.75
0.76
7.52
2.19
0.96
320


Ni–Mo–S/NG
15.65
0.79
0.80
9.89
2.15
0.07
212


Ni–Mo–S
14.28
0.76
0.77
8.36
2.18
0.64
252




Tafel polarization measurement is a great technique to examine the charge-transfer kinetics of the as-synthesized NG, pure Ni–Mo–S, Ni–Mo–S/NG, and Pt CEs as I−/I3− redox shuttles. Symmetric cells with the sandwich-type configuration of CEs are fabricated to validate the Tafel curves, as shown in Fig. 5c. The slopes of Tafel polarization curves reveal the best value for the Ni–Mo–S/NG when compared to the other CEs (NG, pure Ni–Mo–S, and Pt CEs), indicating a trend similar to that of the Rct values obtained from EIS. The exchange current density (Jo), which is obtained from the Tafel polarization curve slope, is directly correlated with the Rct. The Jo is derived from the following eqn (3): (3)where T is the temperature, R is the gas constant, n is the number of electrons involved in the reduction at the electrolyte–CE interfaces, and F is the Faraday constant. Impressively, Ni–Mo–S/NG CE has a superior limiting current density (Jlim), which is directly related to the diffusion co-efficient in the reduction of I3− in the redox couple,40 which is derived from the following eqn (4) (4)where D is the diffusion coefficient of I3− in the redox couple, l is the thickness of the spacer, n is the number of the electrons involved in the reduction of I3− at the surface of the CE, and C is the I3− concentration. This Tafel polarization study reveals that the Ni–Mo–S/NG CE has the highest Jo as well, confirming its high efficiency for the reduction process of I3− to I− in the redox shuttle in DSSCs when compared to the Pt CE. This Tafel polarization result is well consistent with the CV and EIS studies.
The performed electrochemical studies including CV, EIS, and Tafel polarization show that the Ni–Mo–S/NG CE has superior electrocatalytic activity towards I3− reduction compared to the Pt CE. This is a result of highly synergistic interactions between the Ni–Mo–S and NG nanosheets, which result from its hierarchical hybrid architecture and unique porous network. Next, we assembled DSSCs with different CEs and examined the photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) characteristics as demonstrated in Fig. 5d, and the resultant photovoltaic parameters are shown in Table 1. The power conversion efficiency (η) of the as-obtained NG nanosheet-based DSSCs reached ∼7.52%, which is slightly lower than that of the Pt (η = 8.73%). The Ni–Mo–S/NG based DSSCs reached their highest power conversion efficiency of ∼9.89% with the following photovoltaic parameters: short circuit current density (Jsc) = 15.65 mA cm−2, open circuit voltage (Voc) = 0.79 V, and fill factor (FF) = 0.80. The photovoltaic parameters of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid-based DSSCs are superior to the DSSCs made with Pt CEs (Jsc = 14.54 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.77 V, FF = 0.78 V). This result proposes that the power conversion efficiency of the hierarchical Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid (∼9.89%) is noticeably higher than that of recently reported TMC based CEs in DSSCs (Table S1, ESI†). Such an exceptional photovoltaic performance of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid was anticipated from its hierarchical 2D Ni–Mo–S nanosheets with unique structures in the NG framework. The ultra-thin Ni–Mo–S nanosheets are well-known to have a perfect adsorption energy for the I− medium, leading to naturally superb electrocatalytic activity and electrochemical stability towards the reduction of I3− in the DSSCs.41
The long-term stability of the electrode is an essential requirement for industrial application in DSSCs. In general, the electrolyte, sensitizer and sealant have been deliberated as crucial factors for a long cycle life of DSSCs.42,43 Even though the Pt based CEs are easily corroded by the I−/I3− electrolyte medium, in order to generate PtI4.44 The long-term stabilities of the fabricated DSSCs are investigated based on various CEs namely the as-synthesized NG, pure Ni–Mo–S, Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid and Pt which are illustrated in Fig. S6.† It can be observed that the Ni–Mo–S/NG based CE of the DSSCs shows negligible changes of PCE for up to 500 h. This finding confirms that the Ni–Mo–S/NG CE had superior stability when compared to other CEs which is consistent with the CV stability test of the CEs (Fig. S5†). To the best of our knowledge, such long-term cycling stability has not been reported to date. This is because the Ni–Mo–S nanosheets are highly integrated with NG, not only to improve the catalytic activity of photocatalytic performance, but also to act as spacers to prevent the restacking of NG sheets, resulting in extraordinary enrichment of DSSC performance. The current study reveals that there are high synergistic interactions between the Ni–Mo–S nanosheets and NG in the hybrid. Therefore, our as-synthesized Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid architecture based CE, fabricated by 2D Ni–Mo–S nanosheets anchored on NG networks, could be a promising alternative to replace the conventional Pt CE in DSSCs.
The high electrocatalytic activity of the CE for DSSCs is one of the significant key issues, and also the fast electrolyte species diffusion act as a vital role in the performance of the photovoltaic applications. The N-doped graphene sheets can integrate 2D Ni–Mo–S nanosheets within the interspaces as well as the surface of NG sheets, and could be favourable in the construction of the bifunctional hybrids. Definitely, the utilization of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid as the CE can noticeably reduce Rct and diffusion impedance. In the present work, the foremost contribution of the NG sheets is to guarantee superior contact between electrode–electrolyte contacts, in order to enhance the electron transport kinetics of the electroactive Ni–Mo–S nanosheets and also facilitate an ultra-fast diffusion pathway for the species of the electrolyte. The anchored Ni–Mo–S nanosheets can act as spacers to prevent the restacking of NG sheets to accelerate the electrolyte diffusion and also improve their electrocatalytic activity (Fig. 6). Besides, both Ni–Mo–S nanosheets as well as NG sheets possess excellent intrinsic electrical conductivity, which has the capability to reduce the electron loss observed at the CEs from the device external circuit. Meanwhile, after 500 consecutive cycles, the CV curves show unchanged anodic and cathodic peak potentials as well as CV curve shapes (Fig. S5, ESI†), demonstrating the outstanding electrochemical stability of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid in the I−/I3− electrolyte. Thus, exceptional photovoltaic characteristics of DSSCs with the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid as the Pt-free CE can be endorsed for the combination of the superior electrocatalytic activity of Ni–Mo–S nanosheets and ultra-fast electrolyte diffusion species within a layer in the NG sheets.
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the electrochemical reaction process in the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid. 
Electrocatalytic activity of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid catalyst towards electrochemical oxygen reduction in alkaline media
The electrochemical behavior of Ni–Mo–S, NG and Ni–Mo–S/NG catalysts are investigated for the electrochemical ORR by analyzing CVs and LSVs in the O2 saturated 0.1 M aqueous KOH electrolyte as shown in Fig. 7. CVs were recorded both in N2 and O2 atmospheres. All samples showed a well-defined O2 reduction peak in the potential range between 0.7–0.9 V vs. the RHE (Fig. 7a). These reduction peaks were not replicated in the N2 atmosphere, indicating that the obtained peaks are typical ORR peaks. It is interesting to note that the ORR redox potential shifts to higher values for the Ni–Mo–S/NG (0.82 V) catalyst compared to NG (0.80 V) and Ni–Mo–S (0.77 V) catalysts, indicating a higher intrinsic activity of Ni–Mo–S/NG. The insights on the ORR activities of these catalysts are further investigated via linear sweep voltammograms (LSVs) recorded in O2 saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte as shown in Fig. 7b. For a comparison, the ORR activity of a commercial Pt/C catalyst with a Pt loading of 60 mg cm−2 is also recorded.
 Fig. 7  ORR activity of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid: (a) cyclic voltammetry curves of NG, pure Ni–Mo–S, Ni–Mo–S/NG and Pt/C in the O2 saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte, (b) LSV curves of NG, pure Ni–Mo–S, Ni–Mo–S/NG and Pt/C in O2 saturated 0.1 M KOH at a rotation speed of 1600 rpm, (c) LSV curves of Ni–Mo–S/NG at different rotation rates from 800 to 2800 rpm, and (d) LSV curves of Ni–Mo–S/NG in O2 saturated 0.1 M KOH at the first cycle and 2000th cycles. 
The Ni–Mo–S/NG catalyst shows excellent ORR kinetics when compared to NG, Ni–Mo–S/NG catalysts, as well as the commercial Pt/C catalyst. The ORR half wave potentials of Ni–Mo–S, NG, Pt/C, and Ni–Mo–S/NG catalysts are found to be 0.76, 0.83, 0.84 V and 0.88 V, respectively. The high ORR half wave potentials of the Ni–Mo–S/NG catalyst indicate best ORR kinetics compared to other catalysts. It is noteworthy that the half wave potential of the Ni–Mo–S/NG catalyst is higher by 120 mV and 50 mV than those of the Ni–Mo–S and NG, respectively. This increase in ORR activity is due to the synergistic effect of NG and Ni–Mo–S towards the ORR. It is well reported that the NG functions as metal free ORR catalysts due to the existence of ORR active graphitic-N, pyridinic-N and pyrrolic-N. Although the order of these different forms of N towards ORR varies, it is believed that all three forms are active towards the ORR.45 It is also well understood that N doping increases the electronic conductivity of the catalyst and enhances the interaction with supported metal nanoparticles.46 Hence, NG performs a dual role, both as a metal free ORR catalyst and an effective electron conducting support. The high ORR activity of the Ni–Mo–S/NG catalyst is also due to the NG support, which effectively assists in fast electron transport to the ORR active Ni–Mo–S sites. The superiority of the Ni–Mo–S/NG catalyst is confirmed by its higher half wave potential of about 40 mV when compared to a Pt/C catalyst.
The electrochemical kinetics of Ni–Mo–S, NG, Pt/C and Ni–Mo–S/NG catalysts were evaluated for their kinetic current (ik), mass activity (im), and Tafel behaviors (Fig. S7†). The ORR polarization curves were mass transport-corrected before calculating the kinetic parameters.47 The deduced Tafel slopes for Ni–Mo–S, NG, Pt/C, and Ni–Mo–S/NG catalysts are 190, 63, 71 and 57 mV dec−1, respectively. The lowest Tafel slope was observed for the Ni–Mo–S/NG catalyst and suggests faster ORR kinetics of the Ni–Mo–S/NG catalyst than for other catalysts. The calculated ik values at 0.9 V are −0.071, −0.904, −1.31, and −2.92 mA mg−1 and im values at 0.9 V are 0.71, 9.04, 21.98, and 29.2 mA mg−1 catalyst for Ni–Mo–S, NG, Pt/C, and Ni–Mo–S/NG catalysts, respectively. The higher ik and im values and lower Tafel slope clearly confirms the high ORR activity of the Ni–Mo–S/NG catalyst. The number of electrons (n) involved in the ORR is a tool to evaluate the efficiency of the catalyst. It is desirable that the electrocatalyst performs the ORR via a direct 4 electron transfer. Koutecky–Levich (K–L) plots (eqn (5)–(7)), which are plots of inverse of current density (id−1) as a function of inverse of the square root of the rotation rate (ω−1/2), are used to quantify the number of electrons involved in a reaction.48 (5) (6) B = 0.62nFCO2DO22/3υ−1/6(7)where j is the measured current density, jk is the kinetic current density, ω is the rotation rate and B is a constant evaluated from eqn (5)–(7), where, F is the Faraday constant (96485 C mol−1), n is the number of electrons transfer per 2 molecules, DO2 is the diffusion co-efficient of oxygen in the solution (1.9 × 10−5 cm2 s−1), CO2 is the concentration of oxygen in the electrolyte (1.2 × 10−6 mol cm−3), and υ is the kinematic viscosity of the 0.1 M aqueous KOH electrolyte (0.01 cm2 s−1), 0.62 is a constant. Fig. 7c and S8a–e† show the RDE measurements recorded with rotation speeds between 800 and 2800 rpm and corresponding K–L plots of Ni–Mo–S, NG, Pt/C, and Ni–Mo–S/NG catalysts. All catalysts show nearly parallel K–L plots in the potential range between 0.7–0.3 V, indicating first order ORR reaction kinetics and similar electron transfer numbers in the whole potential range. The calculated number of electrons from the slopes of K–L plots for Ni–Mo–S, NG, Pt/C, and Ni–Mo–S/NG catalysts was found to be 3.65, 3.91, 3.95 and 3.96, respectively. This indicates that the Ni–Mo–S/NG catalyst presents a dominant 4-electron reduction of O2 to OH−, similar to the commercial Pt/C catalyst.
The stability of the Ni–Mo–S/NG catalyst is also evaluated by repeated potential cycling tests. To this end, the potential of the working electrode is cycled between 0.15 and 1.1 V vs. the RHE for 2000 cycles and the degradation of ORR activity is assessed by measuring the LSVs before and after the stability test, as shown in Fig. 7d. The Ni–Mo–S/NG catalyst showed almost no degradation in its ORR activity after 2000 cycles, indicating its excellent stability in basic media. The excellent stability of Ni–Mo–S/NG is ascribed to the stable NG support, which greatly mitigates the Ni–Mo–S aggregation during the cycling test. For comparison, a commercial Pt/C catalyst is also evaluated (Fig. S9†). In the case of Pt/C, a negative shift of 70 mV in its half-wave potential is observed. The degradation ORR activity of Pt/C might be due to the carbon corrosion phenomenon. It was recently reported by Zadick et al. that the Pt/C catalyst is susceptible to severe carbon corrosion in alkaline media, due to its poor degree of graphitization of the carbon support. This accelerates the aggregation of Pt nanoparticles and reduces the electrochemical active surface area and hence the ORR activity.49 This is not observed for the Ni–Mo–S/NG catalyst, where stable, high graphitized N-doped graphene sheets are less prone to carbon corrosion as reported by many authors.50–52 These results further encourage the development of Ni–Mo–S/NG as an admirable electrocatalyst alternative to the traditional costly Pt/C catalyst for the efficient ORR in alkaline fuel cells and metal–air batteries.
Conclusions
In summary, for the first time, we have established a simple, cost-effective, and versatile route for the synthesis of hierarchical Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid architectures. The resulting hybrid architectures exhibit an ultra-thin nanoarchitecture, an exceptional specific surface area, a multiscale porous network system, and a higher number of highly active Ni–Mo–S sites, all of which contribute to outstanding catalytic activities toward DSSCs and ORR performances. Electrochemical studies of CV, EIS and Tafel polarization delivered reliable evidence of excellent electrocatalytic I3− reduction activity of the hierarchical Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid. As a consequence, a DSSC device based on Ni–Mo–S/NG was built and showed a power conversion efficiency of ∼9.89%, which is higher than that of Pt (7.88%) and that of other recently reported DSSC devices based on TMC hybrids. The hierarchical Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid also revealed outstanding potential catalytic activity towards the ORR with a half-wave potential of ∼0.88 VRHE, as well as outstanding durability, superior to that of commercial Pt/C catalysts with the same parameters. This work demonstrates the rational fabrication of the hierarchical nanostructure of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid as an extremely active bifunctional electrocatalyst for DSSCs and fuel cells and its potential as a substitute for Pt in industrial energy conversion and storage applications.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge support from the Basic Research Laboratory Program (NRF-2014R1A4A1008140), the Nano-Material Technology Development Program (NRF-2016M3A7B4900117) and the Korea Research Fellowship program (2015H1D3A1062145) through the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning of Republic of Korea.
Notes and references
S. H. Ahn and A. Manthiram, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501814–1501821 CrossRef .
J. Balamurugan, R. Thangamuthu and A. Pandurangan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5070–5080 CAS .
P. Sennu, M. Christy, V. Aravindan, Y. G. Lee, K. S. Nahm and Y. S. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5726–5735 CrossRef CAS .
J. Balamurugan, R. Thangamuthu, A. Pandurangan and M. Jayachandran, J. Power Sources, 2013, 225, 364–373 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, J. Zhang, R. Yanzhang, M. Du, Q. Wang, G. Gao, J. Wu, G. Wu, M. Zhang, B. Liu, J. Yao and X. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4752–4759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Douglas, R. Carter, L. Oakes, K. Share, A. P. Cohn and C. L. Pint, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11156–11165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tang, B. Zhu, X. Shi, J. Wu and X. Meng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601985 CrossRef .
D. H. Youn, S. K. Stauffer, P. Xiao, H. Park, Y. Nam, A. Dolocan, G. Henkelman, A. Heller and C. B. Mullins, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10778–10788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Guo, J. Balamurugan, T. D. Thanh, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17560–17571 CAS .
J. Xiao, Y. Xia, C. Hu, J. Xi and S. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11114–11123 CAS .
S. H. Ahn, M. J. Klein and A. Manthiram, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601979 CrossRef .
L. Samad, S. M. Bladow, Q. Ding, J. Zhuo, R. M. Jacobberger, M. S. Arnold and S. Jin, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7039–7046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ling, Y. H. Lee, Y. Lin, W. Fang, L. Yu, M. S. Dresselhaus and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 464–472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, L. Wang, X. Liu, S. Zhang, C. Liu, D. Yan, Y. Zeng, Y. Pei, Y. Liu and S. Luo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16524–16530 CAS .
M. Wang, G. Li, H. Xu, Y. Qian and J. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1003–1008 CAS .
K. Chang and W. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4720–4728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Gong, F. Du, Z. Xia, M. Durstock and L. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Lin, C. Y. Chan and S. W. Chou, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 1440–1442 RSC .
C. J. Liu, S. Y. Tai, S. W. Chou, Y. C. Yu, K. D. Chang, S. Wang, F. S. S. Chien, J. Y. Lin and T. W. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21057–21064 RSC .
C. Yu, X. Meng, X. Song, S. Liang, Q. Dong, G. Wang, C. Hao, X. Yang, T. Ma, P. M. Ajayan and J. Qiu, Carbon, 2016, 100, 474–483 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Lin, A. L. Su, C. Y. Chang, K. C. Hung and T. W. Lin, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 720–725 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhao, W. Gu, L. Zhao, C. Zhang, W. Peng and Y. Xian, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 169, 142–149 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Fan, J. H. Chen, C. T. Li, K. W. Cheng and K. C. Ho, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 562–569 CAS .
C. Wang, D. Y. Wang, Y. T. Jiang, H. A. Chen, C. C. Chen, K. C. Ho, H. L. Chou and C. W. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 6694–6698 CrossRef PubMed .
S. H. Chang, M. D. Lu, Y. L. Tung and H. Y. Tuan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9443–9451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Duan, Q. Tang, J. Liu, B. He and L. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 14569–14574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Balamurugan, G. Karthikeyan, T. D. Thanh, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2016, 308, 149–157 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, M. Gao, W. Sheng and Y. Yan, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 15466–15471 CrossRef .
Y. Hou, S. Cui, Z. Wen, X. Guo, X. Feng and J. Chen, Small, 2015, 11, 5940–5948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, K. Wang, Q. Xu, Y. Zhou, F. Cheng and S. Guo, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3369–3376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, F. Cheng, J. Zhang, Z. Chen, Q. Xu and S. Guo, Small, 2016, 12, 2839–2845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Houssenbay, J. P. Bonnelle, J. Grimblot, S. Kasztelan and H. Toulhoat, J. Phys. Chem., 1989, 93, 7176–7180 CrossRef CAS .
J. Miao, F. X. Xiao, H. B. Yang, S. Y. Khoo, J. Chen, Z. Fan, Y. Y. Hsu and H. M. Chen, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, 1500259 Search PubMed .
J. Kibsgaard, Z. Chen, B. N. Reinecke and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 963–969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xie, A. Riedinger, M. Prato, A. Casu, A. Genovese, P. Guardia, S. Sottini, C. Sangregorio, K. Miszta, S. Ghosh, T. Pellegrino and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17630–17637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Deng, Y. Xie, K. Zou and X. Ji, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1144–1173 CAS .
J. Balamurugan, T. D. Thanh, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9555–9565 CAS .
D. H. Youn, A. Heller and C. B. Mulins, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1343–1347 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tan and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2713–2731 RSC .
J. Balamurugan, T. D. Thanh, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1500348 CrossRef .
X. Cui, J. Xiao, Y. Wu, P. Du, R. Si, H. Yang, H. Tian, J. Li, W. H. Zhang, D. Deng and X. Bao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 126, 6820–6824 CrossRef .
M. K. Kashif, M. Nippe, N. W. Duffy, C. M. Forsyth, C. J. Chang, J. R. Long, L. Spiccia and U. Bach, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 5527–5531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, C. Bao, K. Zhu, T. Yu, F. Li, J. Liu, Z. Li and Z. Zou, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 4824–4826 RSC .
E. Olsen, G. Hagen and S. E. Lindquist, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 63, 267–273 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lai, J. R. Potts, D. Zhan, L. Wang, C. K. Poh, C. Tang, H. Gong, Z. Shen, J. Lin and R. S. Ruoff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7936–7942 CAS .
S. G. Peera, A. K. Sahu, A. Arunchander, S. D. Bhat, J. Karthikeyan and P. Murugan, Carbon, 2015, 93, 130–142 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, K. Liu, T. Wang, Y. You, J. Liu, P. Wang, X. Pan, G. Wang, J. Luo and J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3336–3345 CAS .

          C. Song and J. Zhang, PEM Fuel Cell Electrocatalysts and Catalyst Layers: Fundamentals and Applications, Springer-Verlag, London,  2008 Search PubMed .
A. Zadick, L. Dubau, N. Sergent, G. Berthome and M. Chatenet, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4819–4824 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Peera, A. Arunchander and A. K. Sahu, Carbon, 2016, 107, 667–679 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Zhou, Y. H. Du, S. M. Yin, X. Z. Tian, H. B. Yang, X. Wang, B. Liu, H. M. Zheng, S. Z. Qiao and R. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2563–2570 CAS .
J. Ma, A. Habrioux, Y. Luo, G. Ramos-Sanchez, L. Calvillo, G. Granozzi, P. B. Balbuen and N. Alonso-Vante, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11891–11904 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta04807fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the single-step synthesis of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid and its use as the bifunctional electrocatalyst for DSSC and fuel cell applications.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) SEM picture (inset shows the high magnification SEM picture), (b) AFM image, (c) TEM image (inset shows the EDAX spectrum), and (d) HR-TEM image of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid.	 

 	Fig. 3  HAADF-STEM image of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid and its corresponding STEM/EDS colour elemental mapping respect to Ni–K, Mo–K, S–K, N–K, and C–K.	 

 	Fig. 4  High-resolution XPS spectra of (a) Ni 2p, (b) Mo 3d, (c) S 2p, (d) N 1s, (e) C 1s of Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid, and (f) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm of Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid (the inset shows a pore-size distribution of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid).	 

 	Fig. 5  DSSC performance of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid: (a) cyclic voltammetry curves verified in the three-electrode system towards I−/I3− reduction (scan rate: 50 mV s−1), (b) EIS of symmetric cell configuration with NG, pure Ni–Mo–S, Ni–Mo–S/NG and Pt as CEs (the inset shows the equivalent circuit for fitting the EIS), (c) Tafel plot of symmetric cell configuration with NG, pure Ni–Mo–S, Ni–Mo–S/NG and Pt as CEs, and (d) J–V curves of DSSCs assembled with the performance of NG, pure Ni–Mo–S, Ni–Mo–S/NG and Pt CEs at 100 mW cm−2 of simulated solar illuminations.	 
3I− → I3− + 2e− (oxidation)	(1)
I3− + 2e− → 3I− (reduction)	(2)


Pt	14.54	0.77	0.78	8.73	2.17	2.18	301
NG	13.19	0.75	0.76	7.52	2.19	0.96	320
Ni–Mo–S/NG	15.65	0.79	0.80	9.89	2.15	0.07	212
Ni–Mo–S	14.28	0.76	0.77	8.36	2.18	0.64	252
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the electrochemical reaction process in the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid.	 

 	Fig. 7  ORR activity of the Ni–Mo–S/NG hybrid: (a) cyclic voltammetry curves of NG, pure Ni–Mo–S, Ni–Mo–S/NG and Pt/C in the O2 saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte, (b) LSV curves of NG, pure Ni–Mo–S, Ni–Mo–S/NG and Pt/C in O2 saturated 0.1 M KOH at a rotation speed of 1600 rpm, (c) LSV curves of Ni–Mo–S/NG at different rotation rates from 800 to 2800 rpm, and (d) LSV curves of Ni–Mo–S/NG in O2 saturated 0.1 M KOH at the first cycle and 2000th cycles.	 
	(5)
	(6)
B = 0.62nFCO2DO22/3υ−1/6	(7)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta04807f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
