Structure–processing–property correlations in solution-processed, small-molecule, organic solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TC30774C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TC30774C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 5250-5260Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsStructure–processing–property correlations in solution-processed, small-molecule, organic solar cells†

        
          
            Benjamin H. 
            Wunsch§‡
*a, 
      
        
          
            Mariacristina 
            Rumi§
a, 
      
        
          
            Naga Rajesh 
            Tummala§
a, 
      
        
          
            Chad 
            Risko
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dun-Yen 
            Kang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            K. Xerxes 
            Steirer
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jeremy 
            Gantz
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Marcel 
            Said
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Neal R. 
            Armstrong
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jean-Luc 
            Brédas¶
a, 
      
        
          
            David 
            Bucknall
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Seth R. 
            Marder
          
        
      a
aSchool of Chemistry and Biochemistry and Center for Organic Photonics and Electronics, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332-0400, USA. E-mail: bwunsch22@gmail.com
bSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332-0245, USA
cDepartment of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA
Received 
      25th April 2013
    , Accepted 27th June 2013First published on 17th July 2013AbstractAlkyl chains are often attached to the periphery of semiconductor molecules to impart solubility and they represent a pervasive structural element in solution processable, organic photovoltaics (OPV). It is important to understand the effects of such substitutions on the morphology and performance of organic solar cells. This investigation focuses on determining structure–property correlations in OPV devices constructed with small-molecule, solution processable electron donors based on benzothiadiazole–dithienopyrrole, mixed with the electron acceptor PCBM. Two donor molecules with the same opto-electronic molecular properties but differing alkyl substituents – without (BD) or with (BD6) hexyl side chains – are studied. The resulting device data for fabricated solar cells, across a range of processing conditions, is compared to thin-film morphology, spectroscopy, thermal analysis, and molecular dynamics simulations. Two device states of higher and lower performance, depending on the casting solvent, are obtained for the molecule without the side chains (BD); both states have amorphous mesoscale structure, but show subtle differences in the nanoscale phase separation. In contrast, for the molecule with side chains (BD6) devices have highly variable reproducibility and middling efficiency and photocurrent. The BD6 donor exhibits lower miscibility with PCBM, which correlates with the formation of a donor-enriched layer on the surface of the solar cell.
Introduction
Solution processing is a promising method for mass-fabricating organic photovoltaic (OPV) cells. Using an appropriate carrier solvent to dissolve mixtures of electron donor and acceptor organic semiconductors that can be co-printed into a single active layer (termed bulk heterojunction,1 BHJ, solar cells) has produced some of the highest efficiency OPV solar cells to date.2 Recently, it has been demonstrated that an entire solar cell can be printed with organic semiconductors, opening the way towards roll-to-roll solar cell production.3 The ability to manufacture solar-cell modules with established, high throughput printing methods4 makes solution processing an attractive technology; it has garnered increasing research attention towards illuminating the structure–processing–property relationships in blends of OPV materials, with the intention to inform material selection and development.
A central issue in solution processed OPV blends is the morphology: the hierarchy of structure in the active layer, from the packing of the individual molecules to the mesoscale interconnectivity of donor–acceptor domains across the active layer. Morphology influences the coupling of the electronic states between molecules and thus the overall capacity of the material for generating and transporting charge. In most solution processed OPVs, the morphology can be a highly diverse assembly of disordered and ordered regions, with coupling between regions depending on the details of the local molecular orientations and packing. The electronic behavior of an OPV material can depend subtly on the aggregate effects of molecular, nano- and micro-scale structure, and this suggests the need to build correlations of morphology to OPV performance across all length scales of the material.
Here we report on a study of morphology–performance correlations with respect to differing side-chain structure. Many organic semiconductors have limited solubility in most organic solvents unless modified with side-chain moieties. These side chains are generally linear or branched aliphatic groups and clearly affect the final morphology of the active layer.5 In the process of drying from solution, the degree of solubility influences the nucleation and growth kinetics of phase domains, and hence the granularity and connectivity of the resulting film.6 In the solid state, side chains can influence the molecular packing, affecting the degree of overlap and orientation of the π-systems, thus altering the electronic coupling between molecules.7,8
That even the introduction of solubilizing hydrocarbon side chains can influence the structure and thus electronics of OPV blends makes it important to establish correlations between the molecular structure, the processing of the active layer, the resulting morphology, and finally the solar-cell operation itself. Despite the large number of organic semiconductors synthesized and investigated to date, such sets of correlations are not widely published for many classes of electron-donor and acceptor blends.7,9 The current work focuses on small electron-donor molecules, as opposed to semiconducting polymers, since: (i) the former have been shown to produce solar cells of comparable performance to polymeric systems, (ii) they can often be purified to a higher degree more readily than polymers, and (iii) they have well defined molecular structures (without the effect of variables such as degree of polymerization or polydispersity, which can be challenging to control reproducibly in polymers).10 The selected donors, previously synthesized in our laboratory,11 are based on the triad core bis-benzothiadiazole-dithienopyrrole (BD) with a dodecyl side chain on the central pyrrole nitrogen. This base structure was then further modified through substitution at the α-position with n-hexyl side chains (BD6) to create the second molecule of interest (Fig. 1). Both molecules exhibit nearly identical molecular electronic properties,11 providing a prototype system for isolating and charting how molecular structure influences the morphology and device output.
 Fig. 1  (A) Chemical structures of the small-molecule, electron donors used. (B) Energy level diagram showing the estimated electron affinities and ionization potentials for the electron-donor BD and BD6 molecules11 and electron-acceptor PCBM.12 Energy levels of the donor molecules were estimated from cyclic voltammetry in solution.13 
Solar cells were produced from blends of BD or BD6 with the fullerene acceptor [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM). From device data on systems that span several processing conditions and blend compositions we identify three clusters of device performance (i.e. photocurrent, open circuit voltage and power conversion efficiency) that we term performance states. Analyses of the thin-film morphology show that BD6, despite its extra hexyl side chains, more readily forms a crystalline phase that separates from PCBM to form an overlayer. In contrast, the BD:PCBM system shows highly amorphous films with weak nanoscale fluctuations in the donor:acceptor distribution. Thermal analysis of the blends shows that the miscibility in PCBM is much higher for BD than BD6, correlating with the amorphous/crystalline divergence in the two donors' morphologies. Quantum-chemical calculations and molecular dynamics simulations are used to examine molecular-scale details that drive the materials' differences.
Results
Device performance of organic solar cells
To build correlations between morphology, processing, and solar cell performance, it is necessary to identify a series of reproducible, statistically distinguishable material structures of varying performance when one or more of the device preparation steps is altered. A spread of device performance parameters allows the identification of the morphological differences, if present, between a nonfunctional, mid, and high performance solar cell for a given donor molecule, and comparison of the morphologies for the two donors as a function of identical processing conditions. Because BD and BD6 have nearly the same opto-electronic molecular properties but different side chains,11 it is plausible to isolate correlations between molecular structure and performance. A series of solar cells was fabricated by solution processing of BD:PCBM and BD6:PCBM inks (see Experimental in ESI†). We focused on variations in: (1) composition (50, 67, 80 wt% PCBM); (2) spin coating speed (1000 or 2000 RPM); (3) ink solvent (chloroform, CF, or chlorobenzene, CB); and (4) post-fabrication annealing (70 to 150 °C, 5 min). Many current OPV systems have been observed to require a post-annealing step to refine the morphology and improve device performance.10 CF and CB are common solvents used in OPV solution processing and allow rapid (<10 s) and slow (∼60 s) drying rates, respectively, at the chosen spin speeds. It is noted that the drying rate cannot be extricated from other factors, mainly that CB is aromatic while CF is not, and that there is a molecular size and dipole difference between the two solvents (CF = 1.06 D, CB = 1.80 D).14

Fig. 2A plots the average value (from 5–25 individual cells) for each processing combination for the short circuit current density (Jsc) and power conversion efficiency (%PCE) as a function of open circuit voltage (Voc).
 Fig. 2  (A) Scatter plot of absolute current density (|Jsc|) and open circuit voltage (Voc) for the three performance states observed for BD:PCBM and BD6:PCBM bulk heterojunction organic solar cell devices. Color hue depicts the relative value of the power conversion efficiency (%PCE) for each demarcated performance state. Each point represents the averaged value for a device consisting of 5–25 cells (non-functioning cells omitted). Legend: circles – BD high state, triangles – BD6 state, squares – BD low state. (B) Combined histogram of the power conversion efficiency for the three observed performance states. (C) J–V-curves of the highest output individual cell observed for each performance state and (D) semi-log of the same J–V-curves. 
Three clusters of device properties are observed: (1) a higher performance BD state (termed “BD high”) produced using CB, with a best, individual cell output of Jsc = −2.5 mA cm−2 and Voc = 750 mV; (2) a lower performance BD state (termed “BD low”) produced using CF, with best Jsc = −0.50 mA cm−2 and Voc = 700 mV; and (3) an intermediate performance state produced from BD6 for all composition and processing variable combinations attempted, with best Jsc = −1.8 mA cm−2 and Voc = 570 mV. J–V-curves of the highest performing devices for each of the three performance states (Fig. 2C and D) show that the BD high performance state exhibits larger photocurrent and Voc compared to the BD low state. All devices suffer from a low photocurrent and poor fill factor (see Fig. 2C), which is in part due to a high series resistance in the solar cell. Multiple trials were made for each performance state (see Fig. S1, ESI†) to determine the batch-to-batch reproducibility, to judge if the observed states were statistically distinguishable, and to see if sub-clusters of devices could be observed. For the BD6 system, we chose two processing conditions with values representative of the property cluster to test reproducibility: a “CB state” processed from chlorobenzene at 2000 RPM and annealed at 100 °C for 5 min, and a “CF state” processed from chloroform at 1000 RPM and annealed at 100 °C for 5 min. Statistical variation was tested on the Voc, Jsc and %PCE properties using ANOVA methods with α = 0.05 (95% confidence). Deviation in device properties between batches for a given performance state provides a measure of how well a given performance state is repeatable, and sets the confidence bands by which different states can be distinguished. Testing Jsc, Voc and %PCE separately for the batches of devices shows variations in the observed statistical significance (see Table S1, ESI†). In general, the BD high and low states show moderate reproducibility. The BD6 states, however, are generally irreproducible for all three properties. Both the CB and CF states have narrow distributions of their Voc but large spreads in the photocurrent density, leading to variable device efficiencies. The irreproducibility in BD6 devices makes it difficult to distinguish between the CB and CF states, and, by extension, any of the processing conditions, and thus all BD6 devices must be treated as belonging to a single performance state under the current experimental conditions (see Fig. 2A). For BD:PCBM, the dominant factor observed for the processing conditions tested is the solvent type used, as seen in the comparison of the two performance states, which are found to be statistically different for all three device properties. Coincidentally, both BD states are also distinct from the BD6 clustering, as shown in the histogram in Fig. 2B for the %PCE. Devices based on the BD:PCBM system are sensitive to the deposition solvent but have modest reproducibility between batches, while devices using BD6:PCBM show a large variability between batches, which precludes distinguishing unique states based on processing conditions, leading to a larger clustering of devices in a single performance state. Two questions arise from the device data: what differences exist in the morphology of the performance states, and, if any differences do exist, what is their correlation with the molecular structure of the donors?
Thin film morphology of performance states
The surface structure of the BD and BD6 performance state thin films was analyzed using atomic force microscopy in intermittent contact mode. Scans of the BD:PCBM films for the high and low states show smooth, amorphous surfaces of root mean square roughness (RMS) of ∼0.4 nm (Fig. 3A and B). There is no distinguishable difference in the surface textures for the two states, although the BD low state is somewhat more pocked with nanometer deep impressions. At the scanning resolution of ∼10 nm, no distinct grains or domain features can be ascertained, limiting the surface composition to crystallites on the order or smaller than this range, and suggesting that the material is disordered on the mesoscale. In contrast, the BD6 CB state (Fig. 3C) and CF state (Fig. 3D) show large crystalline textures on the order of microns in length and hundreds of nanometers in width for the as-prepared films, with RMS of ∼2.0–3.5 nm. Annealing at 100 °C for 5 min, as was done with the solar cells, leads to no change in the surface textures (the same is true for BD:PCBM, see Fig. S2, ESI†). For crystallites that can be measured clearly in topography, the step height of the crystals is on the order of ∼10 nm. Between the two donors, BD6 shows a higher degree of crystalline texture on the surface compared to BD. It is possible that the surface features represent an enrichment (stratification) of one of the compounds, or the formation of a structurally different layer compared to the inner volume of the film.
 Fig. 3  Atomic force microscopy topography scans of thin films produced with the performance state formulations. (A) BD high state: 67 wt% PCBM, chlorobenzene; (B) BD low state: 67 wt% PCBM, chloroform; (C) BD6 CB reproduction state: 50 wt% PCBM, chlorobenzene; (D) BD6 CF reproduction state: 50 wt% PCBM, chloroform. 
The possibility of stratification of material in the BD and BD6 systems was addressed through the analysis of the depth profile of the chemical composition in the performance state films by means of dynamic secondary ion mass spectrometry (D-SIMS). Results for a BD:PCBM mixed layer with 67 wt% PCBM and prepared from chlorobenzene (BD high-performance state) are shown in Fig. 4A. The depth profile is given as a function of sputtering time due to differences in ablation rate with composition (see ESI† for details). The D-SIMS data on this sample suggest that the composition of the layer is constant through the thickness of the films (the small changes observed in the first 20 s are not consistent for all the fragments expected to originate from the donor or acceptor components of the film and are probably due to surface contaminants). The film has also been investigated after annealing (at 100 °C for 5 min) and no significant changes in ion signals are observed with respect to the as-prepared sample. These results in combination with the surface morphology information obtained by AFM indicate that this blend appears to be well mixed, uniform and amorphous and remains so even after annealing close to the melting temperature of the BD donor. The corresponding BD:PCBM film prepared from chloroform (BD low state) also showed a constant composition profile as prepared (see Fig. 4A) and after annealing at 100 °C. The same uniform depth profile was observed for BD films containing 50 and 80% PCBM, prepared from either chloroform or chlorobenzene.
 Fig. 4  Depth profiles by D-SIMS for donor:PCBM films on PEDOT:PSS/SiO2/Si. (A) BD donor with 67 wt% PCBM content, from a chlorobenzene solution (BD high state), and a chloroform solution (BD low state). (B) BD6 donor with 50% PCBM from chlorobenzene and chloroform, before and after annealing at 100 °C for 5 min. The data are reported as signal intensities for fragments centered at 45.973 u (SN−) and 79.974 u (C4S−) with respect to the intensity at 13.008 u (CH−) at the same sputter time. 
In the case of a BD6:PCBM (50 wt%) film cast from chlorobenzene, a larger fraction of S-containing ions is observed at short sputter times (near the film surface) than deeper in the film (Fig. 4B), indicating a donor-rich surface. When this film was annealed at 100 °C for 5 min (Fig. 4B), the fraction of donor at the surface increased (larger SN−/CH− and C4S−/CH− signals ratios at short sputter times) and this donor enrichment seemed to affect a thicker slice of the film (the relative signal values do not reach a stable value until about 120 s for the annealed sample, to be compared to 50 s for the as-cast film). Thus, the BD6 donor partly segregates from PCBM during the film casting step, but significant mass migration occurs with annealing (even below the melting temperature), leading to a larger chemical gradient in the thickness direction. The behavior is quite similar for the analogue film prepared from chloroform: the film surface is initially richer in BD6 than deeper sections of the film and the donor-rich phase becomes thicker with annealing (Fig. 4B). However, no measurable chemical gradient was observed in as-prepared films when the PCBM content was increased to 67 wt% (for both the chloroform and chlorobenzene case), but the film surface became rich in BD6 after annealing.
In summary, D-SIMS did not reveal any distinctive feature of the high-performance state with respect to the low-performance state for BD and both have uniform composition profiles through the thickness of the film. In the case of BD6, the presence of a composition gradient seems to depend on the PCBM content (50 and 67 wt% PCBM). In all BD6 cases tested, though, annealing was observed to be accompanied by large mass migration of the donor component toward the surface of the film. The presence of a donor-rich surface is consistent with the appearance of the film surface, as obtained by AFM (large crystallites seem to be present, of similar appearance to that of a neat-BD6 film surface). A segregation of donor and acceptor in the film is also in line with the lower degree of miscibility of BD6 than BD in PCBM, surmised from DSC investigation of bulk samples (vide infra).
Grazing incidence X-ray scattering (GIXRS) was carried out to provide information on the thin-film through-volume structure. 2D grazing incidence wide angle scattering (2D GIWAXS) is used to probe structure for q ∼ 0.1–2.0 Å−1 (60–3 Å), in the range of molecular/nanoscale ordering. For BD:PCBM, neither films from the high nor low performance states produce detectable scattering in the WAXS region (Fig. 5A and B), indicating the films are highly amorphous, consistent with the AFM and D-SIMS findings. For BD6:PCBM, as-prepared CB and CF films show only weak scattering intensity (Fig. 5C and D). Annealing at 100 °C leads to the appearance of a discernible diffraction pattern (Fig. 5E and F), suggesting an increase in crystallinity. The observed pattern does not fit the known diffraction of PCBM,15 indicating it arises from a BD6 enriched phase or a co-crystal of BD6:PCBM.
 Fig. 5  2D GIWAXS patterns for (A) BD high state: 67 wt% PCBM, from CB; (B) BD low state: 67 wt% PCBM, from CF; (C) BD6 CB performance state: 50 wt% PCBM, CB, 2000 RPM; and (D) BD6 CF performance state: 50 wt% PCBM, CF, 1000 RPM. The scattering patterns for the BD6 CB and CF states are also shown after annealing at 100 °C for 10 min (E & F, respectively). 
To identify the scattering patterns of the donor molecules in the 2D GIWAXS, pure films of each donor were prepared and analyzed, as shown in Fig. S3.† The pure BD thin film shows only very weak scattering in the out-of-plane direction, with detectable scattering intensities at qz = 3.9, 5.7, and 10.4 Å−1, indicative of a mostly amorphous material. In contrast, pure BD6 shows numerous reflections with wide azimuthal intensity distributions, showing the as-prepared film is highly polycrystalline, and of a much higher crystallinity than BD. Progressive annealing of the films was used in an attempt to increase crystalline order/diffraction quality (see ESI, Fig. S3†). Annealing the neat BD6 film to 140 °C causes an increase in the relative intensity of the scattering reflections, as well as a decrease in the azimuthal distribution, with almost no azimuthal spread to the diffraction spots at 140 °C. Using the diffraction pattern from the pure BD6, the scattering observed in the BD6:PCBM performance state films could be identified as the BD6 crystalline phase. Combined with the D-SIMS and AFM data, this suggests the BD6:PCBM film separate to form a BD6 crystalline phase that is predominantly localized at the film surface.
Although the data show morphological differences between the BD6 and BD systems, which can be correlated with the solar cell performances, there is no clear evidence for structural and morphological differences between the BD high and low states. The homogenous nature of the disordered state suggests the BD and PCBM molecules are distributed evenly in the film for both states, which should afford good exciton splitting based on the high probability of an excited donor to be close to an acceptor. Indeed, fluorescence spectroscopy on the thin films of both the BD high and low states show almost complete quenching of the BD emission by PCBM (see ESI†). In contrast, in the BD6 state, PCBM only partially quenches the excited state of the donor, and yet solar cells of this type perform better than those in the BD low performance state.
Considering the highly amorphous nature of the BD films, correlations in the distribution of molecules were sought using small angle X-ray scattering (2D GISAXS). 2D GISAXS was applied to investigate the meso-scaled microstructures in the BD:PCBM and BD6:PCBM thin films; specifically, the interface surface-to-volume ratios (S/V) were deduced from the raw GISAXS patterns using Porod's law.16 The results are summarized in Table S2† and the details of the deduction are presented in the ESI.† The S/V values from the samples composed of BD:PCBM show a stronger solvent dependence than samples of BD6:PCBM blends. The BD:PCBM films prepared from chlorobenzene have higher S/V values in comparison to samples from chloroform, implying a better donor–acceptor intermixing with smaller domains in the BD high state.
Thickness and optical properties
The optical spectra of BD:PCBM films (obtained by spectroscopic ellipsometry, see ESI†) have almost the same shape when the films are prepared from chlorobenzene and chloroform and the absorption coefficients k are comparable over a wide wavelength range (k is the imaginary component of the refractive index and it was estimated from fitting spectroscopic ellipsometry data). Similarly, the optical spectra are approximately the same for the films cast from chlorobenzene and chloroform in the case of in BD6:PCBM blends.
A general difference between films prepared from chlorobenzene and chloroform solutions was their thickness (as obtained from ellipsometry measurements) with the donor:PCBM films from chloroform being 1.5 to 3.0 times thicker than the corresponding films cast from chlorobenzene. For example, for the 1:1 donor:acceptor blends spun at 1000 rpm, the thicknesses were estimated to be 52 and 94 nm for BD prepared from chlorobenzene and chloroform, respectively; for BD6, the thicknesses were 54 and 102 nm, from chlorobenzene and chloroform, respectively. The greater thicknesses for the chloroform films are likely due to the faster evaporation rate for this solvent with respect to chlorobenzene.
In devices, the donor:acceptor blend is only one of the optical layers in the film. The fraction of light absorbed by the device depends not only on the absorption coefficient and thickness of the BHJ layer but on the optical properties of all the layers. Because of the mismatch in refractive indices between the layers, multiple reflections at interfaces can occur, giving rise to constructive and destructing interference at certain wavelengths. As a result of this optical interference process, the relationship between fraction of light absorbed and film thickness is not monotonic, but shows an oscillatory behavior.17,18 If we assume for the moment that the effect of optical interference could be neglected, from the greater thickness of the films prepared from chloroform with respect to chlorobenzene, and the similarity in the k values irrespective of solvent, we would expect the absorbances of the former BHJ layer to be larger than those of the latter. Thus, the fraction of light absorbed by the device is expected to be larger for BD:PCBM blends prepared from chloroform (low-performance state) than from chlorobenzene (high-performance state). Yet, the photocurrent was much lower in the former case. This would indicate that light absorption is not the factor limiting the performance of the BD-containing devices. If the effect of optical interference is non-negligible, this conclusion can no longer be drawn for every given pair of devices prepared from chloroform or chlorobenzene and with the same composition. However, the mismatch in thicknesses due to the casting solvent is valid for every pair tested (but by different amounts) and the short circuit current for the low and high BD states differ by a factor of three or higher. Thus, it is unlikely that optical interference will always act in the opposite direction to thickness changes in determining the fraction of light absorbed. Thus, we believe the conclusion that light absorption is not the performance limiting factor should hold true for a large number of device pairs based on the BD donor. As a consequence, the low efficiency in the chloroform-prepared devices has to derive from a physical property affecting the charge separation or migration after generation of the excitons, such as bi-molecular recombination,19 or a de-excitation or other loss mechanism that depends non-linearly on distance.
Bulk thermal analysis of miscibility in donor:PCBM blends
It is of interest to investigate if the increased crystallinity of BD6 relative to BD affects the miscibility of the compounds with PCBM and see if the observed phase behaviors correlate with the solar cell performance of the two donors. To analyze the miscibility, thermal analysis of the blends was carried out using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). Composition series of each system were prepared, ranging from 0 to 100 wt% PCBM, from both chloroform and chlorobenzene (see ESI†). Samples were run at 10 °C min−1 from −60 up to 200 °C, the upper temperature limit being chosen because above 200 °C the planarizing and hole-transport layer of PEDOT:PSS in the solar cell test devices is expected to degrade. It is important to note that the maximum temperature of 200 °C is below the melting point of pure PCBM (Tonset = 270 °C (ref. 20)) The melting and crystallization temperatures of the mixtures that can be assigned to the donor phases can be charted as a function of PCBM loading and plotted as a phase diagram (Fig. 6, S6 & S7†). Two thermal regimes are recorded: (i) the first heating cycle, probing the as-prepared material, which can be in a highly non-equilibrium state due to the kinetics of drying, and which is therefore relevant to understanding the behavior of non-annealed films; (ii) the quasi-equilibrated system after sequential heating/cooling cycles.21
 Fig. 6  Phase diagrams of the second heating cycle derived from DSC for the BD:PCBM and BD6:PCBM systems for the deposition solvents chlorobenzene and chloroform. Cycles are taken from −60 to 200 °C. The phase diagram has been truncated from the full −60 to 200 °C to focus only on the temperature range in which transitions are observed. First order transitions are reported as onset temperature values. The roman numerals refer to regions described in the text. Tcc – cold crystallization temperature, Tm – melting temperature, Tg – glass transition temperature. The 1st and 2nd subscripts in the legend entries refer to sequential transitions occurring at increasing temperature within the same cycle. 
The pure BD molecule exhibits three distinct endothermic transitions upon its first melting cycle, and two upon equilibrium cycling, but has only a single observable crystallization event, suggesting that at least one of the endotherms is a polymorphic transition between crystal structures. In contrast, BD6 only shows a single melting/crystallization event. The BD6 melting temperature is 155 °C whereas the BD's two endotherms (polymorph and melting) are observed at 107 and 111 °C. The enthalpy of melting of BD6 is 63 kJ mol−1, significantly larger than that of the BD molecule, 26 kJ mol−1, which is consistent with the former producing more crystalline thin films.
For the BD:PCBM system deposited from chlorobenzene, the quasi-equilibrium cycle phase diagram (Fig. 6A) shows a continual depression in the BD enriched phase's melting temperature as a function of increasing PCBM content, up to 90 wt% PCBM (the lowest BD content blend measured), indicating there is at least partial intermixing of the compounds. Between 20 and 70 wt% PCBM the behavior of the blend changes (region I) with respect to blends with lower and higher PCBM content (region II): upon cooling from the melt there is no observed recrystallization, only a glass transition, which indicates the material has entered a vitreous state. The BD crystallinity only recovers after days at room temperature, or by reheating the sample above the cold re-crystallization temperature. Significantly, the vitreous state is not obtainable below 20 wt% or above 70 wt% (regions II) suggesting the intermixing is driven primarily by the entropy of the system. For the BD:PCBM system deposited from chloroform a similar behavior is observed, but with two important differences: (i) the higher temperature polymorph is favored; (ii) between 20 and 60 wt% PCBM, an amorphous gap is observed (region III, Fig. 6B) but at 50 wt% PCBM there is no recovery of crystallinity upon annealing and the system remains in a vitreous state. Thus, the DSC shows that for BD:PCBM, from both chloroform and chlorobenzene, there is at least partial miscibility between the donor and the acceptor components of the blends.
In contrast to the BD:PCBM system, DSC of BD6:PCBM shows a divergence in the miscibility of the two components depending on the deposition solvent. From chlorobenzene, the BD6-enriched phase shows a melting temperature that is not suppressed significantly for all compositions tested. This implies there is little miscibility between the BD6 and the PCBM, and this correlates well with the strong phase separation seen in the thin film state. When BD6:PCBM is cast from chloroform, there is a moderate depression in the melting temperature with increasing PCBM loading, suggesting an increase in disorder in the BD6 crystalline phase due rapid drying during sample preparation. This depression appears in both the first (as-prepared) and second heating cycles, indicating the disordering effects persists despite melt/recrystallization, and suggesting the presence of the PCBM solid phase (which does not go through a melt transition in the temperature range scanned) influences the BD6's recrystallization. Overall, the DSC shows the persistence of a BD6 enriched phase, indicating a lower miscibility with PCBM compared to BD.
To begin to understand the differences in the intermolecular interactions driving these different material properties, we evaluated the intermolecular binding energy for face-on stacked dimers via density functional theory (DFT) calculations using Grimme's dispersion corrected B97 functional,22,23 as implemented in the Gaussian 09 software suite,24 and the 6-31G(d,p) basis set. The minima of the potential energy surfaces reveal that BD6 (0.44 nm) has a propensity for modestly closer (face-on) packing vs. BD (0.48 nm). Importantly, however, the BD6 binding energy is stronger by some ∼75.3 kJ mol−1, indicating that the alkyl chains help to drive a closer packing configuration. To further understand the bulk packing and thermodynamics of BD and BD6, we performed molecular dynamics (MD) simulations (see Experimental in ESI† for further details). In addition to BD and BD6, we evaluated a series of alkyl substituents of increasing chain length at the α-position of the benzothiadiazole – denoted BD2 (ethyl), BD3 (propyl), BD4 (butyl), BD8 (octyl), and BD9 (nonyl) – to better understand how the alkyl chain length affects the bulk packing. For BD and BD6, the simulated melting temperatures (∼389 K and ∼439 K) are in good agreement with the experimentally determined values (∼384 K and ∼428 K), though they are slightly overestimated due to super-heating effects;25 this good agreement provides confidence in the ability of the simulations to represent the molecular systems. The results from simulations suggest that the enthalpy of melting for BD is ∼9 kJ mol−1 compared to ∼80 kJ mol−1 for BD6 (computed at 375 and 425 K, respectively), values that are quantitatively similar to the enthalpy of melting for BD and BD6 obtained from the calorimetry experiments.
To compare the packing characteristics of the BD series in the amorphous state, radial distribution functions were determined from the trajectories of the final 300 ps of the simulations performed at 300 K (Fig. 7). As a further check, in some instances, the final configurations at 300 K were simulated for 5 more ns; the results were qualitatively similar to the shorter runs. For the BDX series, the numbers of nearest neighbors are smallest for BD and the degree of close packing gradually increases with increased alkyl chain length on the α-position of the benzothiadiazole. We observe saturation for the aggregation of the BDX series as the alkyl chain length reaches 6 carbon atoms, as noted by the limited change in magnitude of the first peak at 0.5 nm in Fig. 7. A smaller peak at 0.75 nm is evident for all of the BDX molecules except BD, whereas a peak at 1.2 nm is solely observed for the BD molecules; these results indicate differences in the amorphous packing configurations as a function of the presence of the α-substituted alkyl chains. The molecular dynamics simulations on the pure materials suggest overall that the alkyl chains appended to the α-position help to drive closer intermolecular contacts in the film, consistent with the higher degree of crystallinity noted for BD6 with respect to BD.
 Fig. 7  Radial distribution functions among central nitrogen atoms of the dithienopyrrole moieties for a series of BDX molecules as a function of the length of the aliphatic side chain attached to the α-position of benzothiadiazoles. 
We also employed molecular dynamics simulations to examine the relative miscibility of the materials. First, from the simulations of the pure materials, we evaluated the cohesive energy density and corresponding Hildebrand (δT)26 and Hansen27 solubility parameters (see ESI†), following procedures described elsewhere.28 The differences in the Hildebrand solubility parameters for PCBM (δT = 10.65 [cal cm−3]0.5, density = 1.52 g cm−3), BD (δT = 10.23 [cal cm−3]0.5, density = 1.27 g cm−3), and BD6 (δT = 9.76 [cal cm−3]0.5, density = 1.16 g cm−3) are modest, indicating that PCBM should be relatively miscible both in BD and BD6.
The Flory–Huggins parameter (χ) was computed from the cohesive energy density of the individual components and the blends, as has been done for polymer mixtures.29 For χAB < χcr (where χcr is the critical Flory–Huggins point), the components A and B are miscible, with a negative χAB suggesting exothermic mixing; if χAB > χcr, components A and B are not miscible.30Fig. 8A shows χBD:PCBM and χBD6:PCBM as a function of weight% PCBM in the simulated blend (see ESI† for simulation details). BD and PCBM are least miscible at low PCBM fraction and miscible for a wide range of compositions >20 wt% PCBM; however, the limited miscibility (characterized by χBD:PCBM close to χcr) at 20–70 wt% PCBM might be the reason for the vitreous state observed in calorimetry experiments.
 Fig. 8  (A) Flory–Huggins interaction parameters for mixtures of BD:PCBM and BD6:PCBM at varying compositions and representative snapshots of BD:PCBM mixtures: (B) 14 wt% PCBM, (C) 60 wt% PCBM, (D) 93 wt% PCBM. Cyan spheres represent atoms in the PCBM molecules, while the red spheres represent atoms in the BD molecules. 
Representative snapshots from different blend simulations of BD:PCBM are also shown in Fig. 8. At 93 wt% PCBM, (0.9 mole fraction PCBM) (Fig. 8D), where χBD:PCBM has the smallest value (indicative of the maximum miscibility), the BD molecules aggregate (mostly dimers) and are dispersed within the PCBM phase. At 60 wt% PCBM, micro-phase separated mixtures are observed, indicative of incomplete mixing. Finally, at 14 wt% PCBM, PCBM molecules become dispersed in the BD phase; in this configuration, the Flory–Huggins parameter is both positive and greater than the χcr, indicating that individually dispersed PCBM molecules within the BD phase are energetically unfavorable. The radial distribution functions (not reported) also indicate similar behavior. For the randomly generated BD6:PCBM mixtures, PCBM is miscible at weight-percents less than ∼20%, where the energetic loss in the BD6–BD6 interactions due to the presence of PCBM molecules is minimal. The simulation results are qualitatively in line with the above experimental analysis, with limitations arising due to the simulation spatial and time scales that cannot approach the scales measured experimentally.
We observe large fluctuations in the density of BD6 and PCBM molecules in the MD simulations of BD6:PCBM mixtures at 50 mol% PCBM, compared to BD:PCBM mixtures. The results (reported in Fig. S16 of ESI†) indicate that frequent, large-magnitude changes (PCBM rich phase to BDX rich phase indicating segregation and phase separation between BDX and PCBM) occur significantly more within the BD6:PCBM mixture than the BD:PCBM mixture. This qualitatively agrees with the experimental findings that layer phases may be present in films of BD6:PCBM.
Discussion
It should be noted that the efficiencies of the solar cells investigated in this report are quite low relative to current state-of-the-art devices; however, the reproducible and distinguishable differences in the behavior of our device performance states are the discerning features of this work. This allows us to identify and isolate differences both within a single semiconductor blend and between semiconductors of differing molecular structure. It is this ability to distinguish different behaviors that is the basis for the discussion that follows.
The difference in the BD and BD6 bulk miscibility with PCBM shows a strong correlation with the thin film morphology. The depression in melting temperature with increasing PCBM loading, as well as the formation of a vitreous state upon cooling from the melt, shows BD readily intermixes with PCBM. This intermixing to form an amorphous material holds in the thin film state as well, as no crystalline order is observed in any of the BD:PCBM solar cells. In contrast, BD6 shows phase separation into an enriched, crystalline phase when mixed with PCBM, regardless of processing conditions (e.g. ink solvent). These differences in thermodynamic and material behavior correlate with the presence of the n-hexyl side chains. The additional gain in the enthalpy of fusion and increased crystallinity going from BD to BD6 demonstrates that the side chains contribute a substantial amount of cohesive energy and must be packing into an ordered state within the BD6 crystal. Thus, the hexyl side chains appear to stabilize the BD6 crystalline phase preferentially over dissolution with PCBM. This may be in part due to the fact that PCBM, whose structure consists predominantly of an isotropic π-conjugated system, has low driving force to dissolve into the aliphatic enriched environment presented by the BD6 molecule. Also, it has been shown that the fullerene C60 can mix with a π-conjugated molecule such as pentacene as soon as it can interact with the pentacene π-backbone;31 however, when there occur BD6–PCBM interactions, the energetic loss due to the missing BD6–BD6 interactions outweigh the favorable backbone–fullerene interactions, which overall tends to prevent the latter interactions.
We also note studies conducted on the subject of phase behavior of mixtures as a function of shape, and in particular mixtures of spherical- and disc-shaped colloids.32,33 Though the scale may be different in this study (1–5 nm for the molecules vs. 20–100 nm for the colloidal studies), we can take this as a cue and consider the PCBM molecules to be ‘spherical’ and the BDX molecules to be ‘discs’ so as to speculate on their miscibility. It has been shown that as the ratio of the disc-to-sphere diameter increases the isotropic–nematic coexistence region decreases; in other words, demixing of the spheres and platelets is observed at low volume fractions.34 This description is qualitatively captured in our experiments: i.e. the immiscibility of BD6 (effective diameter of ∼2.6 nm computed from simulations) compared to the miscibility of BD (effective diameter of ∼1.7 nm) with PCBM (effective diameter of ∼1.2 nm). The increasing effective thickness of the disc/platelet due to the conformational changes in the alkyl chain also causes increased depletion attraction, owing its origin to the entropy, between the spherical PCBM molecules33,35 and also enhances the demixing and phase separation.
The divergence in miscibility and crystallinity from the molecular structures of the donors affects the formation and structure of the solar cell thin films. For BD6, the device films exhibit some degree of phase separation of BD6 to form an overlayer at the surface, regardless of processing, consistent with the observed immiscibility. The BD6 overlayer is at least partially crystalline, as observed from scanning probe and GIWAXS data. The presence of a donor layer at the top surface of the BHJ film, where the electron selective electrode would be deposited, is expected to be detrimental to the charge transport in the film and thus the device performance. This could explain why all BD6-containing devices exhibited poorer performance parameters (short circuit current, power conversion efficiency) compared to the best BD-containing devices (which have uniform composition through the thickness). This, however, does not explain why annealing at 100 °C led to improved device performance, at least in some cells, with respect to the as-prepared devices: a thicker donor layer near the Al electrode should reduce the charge collection efficiency. It cannot be excluded, though, that the donor migration toward the top surface could occur to a different extent when the annealing step is performed after the deposition of the electrode (different interface with respect to the air/film case). A different behavior has been observed for P3HT:PCBM blends when the annealing step was performed before or after the electrode deposition.36
Morphologically, the thin films of the low and high BD:PCBM performance states appear nearly identical microscopically and mesoscopically. Only from the Porod analysis of the GISAXS data do we observe divergence in the film morphologies, with the chlorobenzene derived, higher performance state having a larger surface-to-volume ratio. The surface-to-volume ratio provides a measure of the amount of interface between nanoscale concentrations of donor and acceptor molecules. The existence of a positive correlation between increasing interface density and the device harvesting efficiency suggests that what distinguishes the two performance states is a subtle difference in the distribution of the molecules from the casting solvent. This effect is barely distinguishable morphologically in the materials, but has a substantial influence on the overall devices.
The observation of polymorphism in BD may also contribute to the divergence in the high and low performance states, as substantial evidence exists that polymorphs can significantly affect the opto-electronic properties of organic semiconductors.37 For neat BD cast from chlorobenzene or chloroform, three endothermic transitions, assigned as polymorphs, are observed upon the first heating cycle, at approximately T1 ∼ 105 °C, T2 ∼ 115 °C and T3 ∼ 121 °C. The T1 polymorph is observed to persist upon addition of PCBM for both solvents, but from chloroform the T3 transition persists while from chlorobenzene it is the T2 polymorph that is observed, implying a divergence in molecular packing as a function of processing solvent, which would correlate with the divergence in cell performance. Although in DSC both polymorphs are not observed at >40 wt% PCBM, and no crystalline diffraction could be observed in GIWAXS, it cannot be ruled out that nano-scale crystalline domains exist in the corresponding device thin films and influence the electronic properties of the films. The inability to obtain single crystals or thin-film diffraction prevents a quantification of the polymorph crystal structures.
There also appears to be a correlation between the thickness of the devices and their performance, with the thicker, chloroform cast film operating less efficiently than the thinner chlorobenzene-cast devices. The surface-to-volume and thickness correlations may be related: as the morphology in BD:PCBM is mostly amorphous, the intimate mixture of donors and acceptors increases the probability for hole–electron recombination, so that longer distances that carriers must traverse to the electrodes would imply higher recombination losses. This would favor a thinner film over a thicker one, as in the comparison of the BD high and low states, for producing a higher photocurrent and device efficiency. The drop in Voc between the high and low BD states also suggests that there is a larger recombination loss for the thicker, CF derived film, than the thinner, CB one. We note that, because the absorption coefficient for the films of the BD high and low states are similar but the thickness is significantly larger for the low state (CF derived) films, solar cells of the BD low state would actually absorb a larger fraction of the incident light than BD high state solar cells, and thus for these systems a larger exciton density does not necessarily lead to a better solar cell efficiency. In arriving at this conclusion, we have implicitly assumed that the effect of optical inference on the total absorption of the device is small with respect to the effect of solvent-related thickness differences. Determination of the fraction of light absorbed either experimentally or through simulation of the light propagation in the multilayer devices could be used to support this interpretation. Even in the case of favorable optical interference, an increase in thickness of the donor:acceptor layer does not always lead to an increase in photocurrent if charge transport is inefficient, as has been reported for blends of the polymer PCDTBT and fullerene PC70BM.18
It is important to address the limitations of the current study. The very low performance of the donor:PCBM blend solar cells, compared to state-of-the-art devices, limits the ready applicability of the results and calls for an expansion of this work and its methodology using molecules with proven high performance, but which can be synthesized with the criterion of similar molecular opto-electronic properties and different molecular structures. The resolution of performance states from the device data is strongly coupled to the number of devices that can be fabricated and the number of independent reproduction trials that can be made, thus larger data sets would facilitate finer discernment and increased statistical confidence. Furthermore, the parameter space can be enlarged to encompass a wider range of processing conditions and take into account greater subtlety in these conditions (e.g. distinguishing between effects of aromaticity and volatility for the ink solvent). In all of this, the limitations of time and resources restrict the size of the data set obtainable, and thus the ability to differentiate performance states.
Conclusion
The investigation presented here shows that in changing the side chains of only the donor component in a binary blend, substantial divergences in the material and device properties can be observed. Differences in miscibility lead to either a highly amorphous mixture, as in BD, or mesoscale phase separation, as for BD6. For the amorphous system, it is difficult to correlate any single morphological factor strongly to the device performance, and we see that the subtlety of the mixing between donor and acceptor may make the system ultimately limited by the proximity of the electrodes. In the case of the highly crystalline and immiscible donor, we observe the opposite effect: the immiscibility drives phase separation in the film, which is not significantly altered by the processing conditions. From these two systems we have an example of an organic semiconductor blend that is sensitive to the processing conditions and one that is insensitive to processing and appears to be dominated by the thermodynamic properties of the blend. These results highlight the need to experimentally observe the correlations between molecular structure, morphology, and final solar cell, as a foundation for developing more complete structure–property relationships in organic photovoltaics and electronics.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge funding from Total S.A. (AFM, D-SIMS, spectroscopy, GIXRS and DSC analysis; simulation of molecular and material properties) and as part of the Center for Interface Science: Solar Electric Materials (CISSEM), an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, under Award Number DE-SC0001084 (solar cell fabrication and testing). Dr Shaffiq Jaffer and Dr Hadjar Benmansour are gratefully acknowledged for overview, support, insightful discussions, suggestions, and review of the work. Dr Chris Nicklin and Jonathan Rawle at the Diamond Light Source, Beamline I07 and Dr Philippe Deblay, Dr Javier Perez and Dr Florian Meneau at the Soleil Synchrotron, SWING Beamline are gratefully acknowledged for help with the GIXRS work. We thank Dr Lauren Polander for supplying the semiconductor molecules used in this study.
References
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Sun, G. C. Welch, W. L. Leong, C. J. Takacs, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Mater., 2011, 11, 44–48 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, C. Fuentes-Hernandez, J. Shim, J. Meyer, A. J. Giordano, H. Li, P. Winget, T. Papadopoulos, H. Cheun, J. Kim, M. Fenoll, A. Dindar, W. Haske, E. Najafabadi, T. M. Khan, H. Sojoudi, S. Barlow, S. Grahmn, J. L. Bredas, S. R. Marder, A. Kahn and B. Kippelen, Science, 2012, 336, 327–332 CrossRef CAS .
R. Søndergaard, M. Hösel, D. Angmo, T. T. Larsen-Olsen and F. C. Krebs, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 36–49 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, T. T. Steckler, R. R. Dasari, S. Ohira, W. J. Potscavage, S. P. Tiwari, S. Coppee, S. Ellinger, S. Barlow, J. L. Bredas, B. Kippelen, J. R. Reynolds and S. R. Marder, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 2010, 123–134 Search PubMed .
T. Wang, A. D. F. Dunbar, P. A. Staniec, A. J. Pearson, P. E. Hopkinson, J. E. MacDonald, S. Lilliu, C. Pizzey, N. J. Terrill, A. M. Donald, A. J. Ryan, R. A. L. Jones and D. G. Lidzey, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 4128–4134 RSC ; B. Schmidt-Hansberg, M. F. G. Klein, K. Peters, F. Buss, J. Pfeifer, S. Walheim, A. Colsmann, U. Lemmer, P. Scharfer and W. Schabel, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 124501 CrossRef .
K. Kanai, T. Miyazaki, H. Suzuki, M. Inaba, Y. ouchi and K. Seki, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 273–282 RSC .
M. A. Ruderer and P. Muller-Buschbaum, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 5482–5493 RSC .
H. Hoppe, T. Glatzel, M. Niggemann, A. Hinsch, M. C. Lux-Steiner and N. S. Sariciftci, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 269–274 CrossRef CAS ; H. Sirringhaus, P. J. Brown, R. H. Friend, M. M. Nielsen, K. Bechgaard, B. M. W. Langeveld-Voss, A. J. H. Spiering, R. A. J. Janssen, E. W. Meijer, P. Herwig and D. M. de Leeuw, Nature, 1999, 401, 685–688 CrossRef CAS ; R. Kline, M. McGehee, E. Kadnikova, J. Liu, J. Frechet and M. Toney, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 3312–3319 CrossRef CAS ; R. J. Kline, D. M. DeLongchamp, D. A. Fischer, E. K. Lin, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and M. F. Toney, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 062117 CrossRef .
B. Walker, C. Kim and T. Q. Nguyen, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 470–482 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Polander, L. Pandey, S. Barlow, S. P. Tiwari, C. Risko, B. Kippelen, J.-L. Bredas and S. R. Marder, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23149–23163 CAS .
Z. Guan, J. B. Kim, H. Wang, C. Jaye, D. A. Fischer, Y. Loo and A. Kahn, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 1779–1785 CrossRef CAS .
L. Micaroni, F. C. Nart and I. A. Hummelgen, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2002, 7, 55–59 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Israelachvili, Intermolecular & Surface Forces, Academic Press,  1991 Search PubMed .
E. Verploegen, R. Mondal, C. J. Bettinger, S. Sok, M. F. Toney and Z. A. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3519–3529 CrossRef CAS .

          R. J. Roe, Methods of X-ray and Neutron Scattering in Polymer Science, Oxford University Press, New York,  2000 Search PubMed .
G. Dennler, M. Scharber and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1323–1338 CrossRef CAS .
T.-Y. Chu, P. G. Alem, S. Verly, S. Wakim, Y. Lu, Y. Tao, M. Beaupre, M. Leclerc, D. Belanger, S. Desilets, S. Rodman, D. Waller and R. Gaudiana, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 063304 CrossRef .
B. P. Lyons, N. Clarke and C. Groves, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7657–7663 RSC .
J. Zhao, A. Swinnen, G. Van Assche, J. Manca, D. Vanderzande and B. Van Mele, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 1587–1591 CrossRef CAS ; C. Muller, T. A. M. Ferenczi, M. Campoy-Quiles, J. M. Frost, D. D. C. Bradley, P. Smith, N. Stingelin-Stutzmann and J. Nelson, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3510–3515 CrossRef CAS .
N. Cho, H.-L. Yip, S. K. Hau, K.-S. Chen, T.-W. Kim, J. A. Davies, D. F. Zeigler and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6956–6961 RSC .
S. Grimme, J. Comput. Chem., 2006, 27, 1787–1799 CrossRef .
A. D. Becke, J. Chem. Phys., 1997, 107, 8554–8560 CrossRef CAS .

          M. J. T. Frisch, G. W. Trucks, H. B. Schlegel, G. E. Scuseria, M. A. Robb, J. R. Cheeseman, J. A. Montgomery, Jr, T. Vreven, K. N. Kudin, J. C. Burant, J. M. Millam, S. S. Iyengar, J. Tomasi, V. Barone, B. Mennucci, M. Cossi, G. Scalmani, N. Rega, G. A. Petersson, H. Nakatsuji, M. Hada, M. Ehara, K. Toyota, R. Fukuda, J. Hasegawa, M. Ishida, T. Nakajima, Y. Honda, O. Kitao, H. Nakai, M. Klene, X. Li, J. E. Knox, H. P. Hratchian, J. B. Cross, V. Bakken, C. Adamo, J. Jaramillo, R. Gomperts, R. E. Stratmann, O. Yazyev, A. J. Austin, R. Cammi, C. Pomelli, J. W. Ochterski, P. Y. Ayala, K. Morokuma, G. A. Voth, P. Salvador, J. J. Dannenberg, V. G. Zakrzewski, S. Dapprich, A. D. Daniels, M. C. Strain, O. Farkas, D. K. Malick, A. D. Rabuck, K. Raghavachari, J. B. Foresman, J. V. Ortiz, Q. Cui, A. G. Baboul, S. Clifford, J. Cioslowski, B. B. Stefanov, G. Liu, A. Liashenko, P. Piskorz, I. Komaromi, R. L. Martin, D. J. Fox, T. Keith, M. A. Al-Laham, C. Y. Peng, A. Nanayakkara, M. Challacombe, P. M. W. Gill, B. Johnson, W. Chen, M. W. Wong, C. Gonzalez and J. A. Pople, Gaussian 09, revision A.01, Gaussian Inc., Wallingford CT,  2009 Search PubMed.
S. W. Watt, J. A. Chisholm, W. Jones and S. Motherwell, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 121, 9565–9573 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Hildebrand and R. L. Scott, J. Chem. Phys., 1952, 20, 1520–1521 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Hansen, J. Paint Technol., 1967, 39, 104 Search PubMed .
M. Belmares, M. Blanco, W. A. Goddard, R. B. Ross, G. Caldwell, S. H. Chou, J. Pham, P. M. Olofson and C. Thomas, J. Comput. Chem., 2004, 25, 1814–1826 CrossRef CAS ; N. R. Tummala, Y. T. Fu, S. Mehraeen, C. Risko and J. L. Bredas, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013 DOI:10.1002/adfm.201300918 .
S. S. Jawalkar, S. G. Adoor, M. Sairam, M. N. Nadagouda and T. M. Aminabhavi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15611–15620 CrossRef CAS ; S. S. Patnaik and R. Pachter, Polymer, 2002, 43, 415–424 Search PubMed .

          P. C. Hiemenz, Polymer Chemistry, Boca Raton, CRC Press,  2007 Search PubMed .
Y. T. Fu, C. Risko and J. L. Bredas, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 878–882 Search PubMed .
S. M. Oversteegen and H. N. W. Lekkerkerker, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2003, 68, 021404 Search PubMed ; S. M. Oversteegen, C. Vonk, J. E. G. J. Wijnhoven and H. N. W. Lekkerkerker, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2005, 71, 041406 CrossRef CAS ; F. Cousin, V. r. Cabuil, I. Grillo and P. Levitz, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 11422–11430 Search PubMed .
S. M. Oversteegen and H. N. W. Lekkerkerker, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 120, 2470–2474 CrossRef CAS .
N. Doshi, G. Cinacchi, J. S. v. Duijneveldt, T. Cosgrove, S. W. Prescott, I. Grillo, J. Phipps and D. I. Gittins, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2011, 23, 194109 Search PubMed .
L. Harnau and S. Dietrich, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2005, 71, 011504 CrossRef CAS .
A. Orimo, K. Masuda, S. Honda, S. Ito, H. Ohkita and H. Tsuji, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 043305 CrossRef ; D. Chen, A. Nakahara, D. Wei, D. Nordlund and T. P. Russell, Nano Lett., 2010, 11, 561–567 .
A. Troisi and G. Orlandi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 1849–1856 CrossRef CAS ; O. D. Jurchescu, D. A. Mourey, S. Subramanian, S. R. Parkin, M. V. Brandon, E. A. John, T. N. Jackson and D. J. Gundlach, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 085201 CrossRef ; K. Vasseur, B. P. Rand, D. Cheyns, K. Temst, L. Froyen and P. Heremans, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2395–2400 Search PubMed ; D. Placencia, W. Wang, J. Gantz, J. Jenkins and N. R. Armstrong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 18873–18884 Search PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Full experimental details and ESI figures. See DOI: 10.1039/c3tc30774c‡ Present address: Aerogel Technologies, LLC. South Boston, MA, 02143, USA.§ These authors contributed equally to the work and manuscript. All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.¶ Also affiliated with the Department of Chemistry, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (A) Chemical structures of the small-molecule, electron donors used. (B) Energy level diagram showing the estimated electron affinities and ionization potentials for the electron-donor BD and BD6 molecules11 and electron-acceptor PCBM.12 Energy levels of the donor molecules were estimated from cyclic voltammetry in solution.13	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Scatter plot of absolute current density (|Jsc|) and open circuit voltage (Voc) for the three performance states observed for BD:PCBM and BD6:PCBM bulk heterojunction organic solar cell devices. Color hue depicts the relative value of the power conversion efficiency (%PCE) for each demarcated performance state. Each point represents the averaged value for a device consisting of 5–25 cells (non-functioning cells omitted). Legend: circles – BD high state, triangles – BD6 state, squares – BD low state. (B) Combined histogram of the power conversion efficiency for the three observed performance states. (C) J–V-curves of the highest output individual cell observed for each performance state and (D) semi-log of the same J–V-curves.	 

 	Fig. 3  Atomic force microscopy topography scans of thin films produced with the performance state formulations. (A) BD high state: 67 wt% PCBM, chlorobenzene; (B) BD low state: 67 wt% PCBM, chloroform; (C) BD6 CB reproduction state: 50 wt% PCBM, chlorobenzene; (D) BD6 CF reproduction state: 50 wt% PCBM, chloroform.	 

 	Fig. 4  Depth profiles by D-SIMS for donor:PCBM films on PEDOT:PSS/SiO2/Si. (A) BD donor with 67 wt% PCBM content, from a chlorobenzene solution (BD high state), and a chloroform solution (BD low state). (B) BD6 donor with 50% PCBM from chlorobenzene and chloroform, before and after annealing at 100 °C for 5 min. The data are reported as signal intensities for fragments centered at 45.973 u (SN−) and 79.974 u (C4S−) with respect to the intensity at 13.008 u (CH−) at the same sputter time.	 

 	Fig. 5  2D GIWAXS patterns for (A) BD high state: 67 wt% PCBM, from CB; (B) BD low state: 67 wt% PCBM, from CF; (C) BD6 CB performance state: 50 wt% PCBM, CB, 2000 RPM; and (D) BD6 CF performance state: 50 wt% PCBM, CF, 1000 RPM. The scattering patterns for the BD6 CB and CF states are also shown after annealing at 100 °C for 10 min (E & F, respectively).	 

 	Fig. 6  Phase diagrams of the second heating cycle derived from DSC for the BD:PCBM and BD6:PCBM systems for the deposition solvents chlorobenzene and chloroform. Cycles are taken from −60 to 200 °C. The phase diagram has been truncated from the full −60 to 200 °C to focus only on the temperature range in which transitions are observed. First order transitions are reported as onset temperature values. The roman numerals refer to regions described in the text. Tcc – cold crystallization temperature, Tm – melting temperature, Tg – glass transition temperature. The 1st and 2nd subscripts in the legend entries refer to sequential transitions occurring at increasing temperature within the same cycle.	 

 	Fig. 7  Radial distribution functions among central nitrogen atoms of the dithienopyrrole moieties for a series of BDX molecules as a function of the length of the aliphatic side chain attached to the α-position of benzothiadiazoles.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Flory–Huggins interaction parameters for mixtures of BD:PCBM and BD6:PCBM at varying compositions and representative snapshots of BD:PCBM mixtures: (B) 14 wt% PCBM, (C) 60 wt% PCBM, (D) 93 wt% PCBM. Cyan spheres represent atoms in the PCBM molecules, while the red spheres represent atoms in the BD molecules.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Full experimental details and ESI figures. See DOI: 10.1039/c3tc30774c
‡ Present address: Aerogel Technologies, LLC. South Boston, MA, 02143, USA.
§ These authors contributed equally to the work and manuscript. All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.
¶ Also affiliated with the Department of Chemistry, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
