DNA mediated wire-like clusters of self-assembled TiO 2 nanomaterials: supercapacitor and dye sensitized solar cell applications   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4NR01836B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4NR01836B
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8010-8023DNA mediated wire-like clusters of self-assembled TiO2 nanomaterials: supercapacitor and dye sensitized solar cell applications†

        
          
            U. 
            Nithiyanantham
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ananthakumar 
            Ramadoss
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Sivasankara Rao 
            Ede
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Subrata 
            Kundu
          
        
      *a
aElectrochemical Materials Science (ECMS) Division, CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute (CECRI), Karaikudi-630006, Tamil Nadu, India. E-mail: skundu@cecri.res.in; subrata_kundu2004@yahoo.co.in;  Fax: +91-4565-227651;   Tel: +91-4565-241487
bNanomaterials and System Lab, Faculty of Applied Energy System, Science and Engineering College, Jeju National University, Jeju 690-756, Republic of Korea
Received 
      4th April 2014
    , Accepted 9th May 2014First published on 12th May 2014AbstractA new route for the formation of wire-like clusters of TiO2 nanomaterials self-assembled in DNA scaffold within an hour of reaction time is reported. TiO2 nanomaterials are synthesized by the reaction of titanium-isopropoxide with ethanol and water in the presence of DNA under continuous stirring and heating at 60 °C. The individual size of the TiO2 NPs self-assembled in DNA and the diameter of the wires can be tuned by controlling the DNA to Ti-salt molar ratios and other reaction parameters. The eventual diameter of the individual particles varies between 15 ± 5 nm ranges, whereas the length of the nanowires varies in the 2–3 μm range. The synthesized wire-like DNA–TiO2 nanomaterials are excellent materials for electrochemical supercapacitor and DSSC applications. From the electrochemical supercapacitor experiment, it was found that the TiO2 nanomaterials showed different specific capacitance (Cs) values for the various nanowires, and the order of Cs values are as follows: wire-like clusters (small size) > wire-like clusters (large size). The highest Cs of 2.69 F g−1 was observed for TiO2 having wire-like structure with small sizes. The study of the long term cycling stability of wire-like clusters (small size) electrode were shown to be stable, retaining ca. 80% of the initial specific capacitance, even after 5000 cycles. The potentiality of the DNA–TiO2 nanomaterials was also tested in photo-voltaic applications and the observed efficiency was found higher in the case of wire-like TiO2 nanostructures with larger sizes compared to smaller sizes. In future, the described method can be extended for the synthesis of other oxide based materials on DNA scaffold and can be further used in other applications like sensors, Li-ion battery materials or treatment for environmental waste water.
Introduction
The controllable synthesis of zero and one dimensional (1-D) inorganic nanostructures has received tremendous interest both in theoretical1 and technological2 view points because they exhibit a wide range of electrical and optical properties, depending on both their size and shape.1–3 Materials at the nanoscale show intrinsic properties that are governed by their size, shape, composition, arrangements and structure. Most efforts in colloidal chemistry have focused on 1-D metal and semi-conductor nanomaterials, whereas other systems such as oxides remain poorly explored.4,5 Therefore, considerable attention has been devoted to ‘bottom-up’ methods where molecular components self-assemble into more complex structures. Thus, it is crucial to figure out a facile route for the synthesis of 1-D self-assembled nanostructures in an easy manner and in a shorter time scale. Among the different oxide materials studied so far, titanium dioxide (TiO2), an n-type semiconductor and a typical photocatalyst, has attracted much attention from both fundamental and practical view points. TiO2 has been used in various applications such as sensors, solar energy conversion, photocatalyst, ductile ceramics, supercapacitors, etc.6–9 Recently, 1-D nanostructures have been used extensively instead of nanocrystalline films in photoelectrochemical cells. It is reported that more than two fold increase in maximum photo-conversion efficiency for water splitting has been observed by replacing TiO2 nanocrystalline films with TiO2 nanowires.10 The technological potential of TiO2 is expected to be remarkably extended if a fine tuning of the particles morphology is achieved.
Various types of processes have been utilized for the preparation of 1-D nanostructures. Different types of bio-molecules, such as proteins, peptides and amino acids, have been used as a template for different types of nanoscale materials.11–13 Among the various bio-molecules, deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) has been widely investigated as a potential template to build various nanostructures because it is an inexpensive, well characterized, controllable and easily adaptable material. In native state, DNA has a diameter of nearly ∼2–3 nm and a length of ∼0.34 nm per nucleoside sub-unit. The overall length of DNA can be extended to few microns depending upon the number of base pairs available. The chemical structure of DNA is composed of three basic units, the negatively charged phosphate group that binds with deoxyribose sugar unit, which then binds with aromatic base molecules. The backbone of DNA is built with alternate phosphate groups and sugar molecules, which can be bound with different metal cations and positively charged nanomaterials by simple electrostatic interaction of covalent modifications.14–16 There are four base molecules present in DNA where thymine (T) pairs with adenine (A) and cytosine (C) pairs with guanine (G). This versatile nature makes DNA an effective material for molecular self-assembly. In general, there are three known approaches for using DNA as a mediator of nanoparticle (NP) formation and also for building NP assemblies. First, DNA can be used as an electronegative structure attracting template where metal cations can be absorbed into the DNA backbone and be subsequently reduced to continuous nanoparticulate-superstructures.14 Second, modified NPs/nanocrystals with positively charged shells can be assembled along the DNA molecule backbone as a guiding, negatively charged ‘organized molecule’.17 Finally, NPs/nanocrystals with tethered DNA form different superstructures due to base-pairing.15
Different routes have been demonstrated for the fruitful synthesis of TiO2 nanomaterials,18–24 including sol–gel techniques,18 micro-emulsion technique,19 precipitation route,20 hydrothermal method,21 solvothermal method,22 electrochemical process,23 and biological24 process. Unfortunately, all these routes typically provide insoluble wire or tubular-like TiO2 nanostructures or generate particles with a mixture of various shapes and generally occur at higher temperature, resulting in uncontrollable particles sizes and shapes. In this context, numerous wet-chemical synthetic routes for crystalline TiO2 have been described, although preparative routes to unidirectional TiO2 crystal in the nano-size regime need to be further developed and rationalized. Therefore, in this scenario, the search for one-step low-temperature routes to well-crystallized TiO2 nanomaterials with controlled morphologies remains an open challenge. The synthesis of TiO2 nanomaterials utilizing different chemical routes has been reported earlier.25–31 Very recently, TiO2 nanomaterials with different morphologies were prepared using various chemical and physical techniques, and were utilized in photocatalysis and dye-sensitized solar cell applications.32–37 Kundu et al. previously synthesized DNA based metal and semi-conductor nanostructures utilizing simple microwave or UV-photoactivation routes.38–41 To the best of our knowledge, information is not available on the formation of TiO2 nanomaterials self-assembled in DNA template in a wire-like fashion within an hour of reaction time at low temperature ∼60 °C. Moreover, the synthesized DNA based TiO2 nanostructures have been found suitable for energy related applications such as electrochemical supercapacitors and DSSCs.
In the present report, we studied for the first time the synthesis of the wire-like clusters of TiO2 nanomaterials in DNA scaffold within an hour of reaction time. TiO2 nanomaterials are synthesized by the reaction of Ti-isopropoxide with ethanol and water in the presence of DNA under continuous stirring and heating at 60 °C. Individual TiO2 NPs are self-assembled in DNA and generate a wire-like morphology. The size of the individual particles and diameter of the wires can be tuned by controlling the DNA to Ti-salt molar ratios and other reaction parameters. The synthesized DNA–TiO2 nanomaterials are excellent materials for electrochemical supercapacitor and DSSC applications. From the electrochemical supercapacitor experiment, it was found that the TiO2 nanomaterials showed different specific capacitance (Cs) values for various DNA–TiO2 wires, and the order of Cs values was wire-like clusters (small size) > wire-like clusters (large size). The highest Cs of 2.69 F g−1 was observed for TiO2 having wire-like structure with small sizes. The DNA–TiO2 nanomaterials were also examined in photo-voltaic applications, and the observed efficiency was found to be higher in the case of wire-like larger size TiO2 nanomaterials compared to smaller size. The proposed synthesis method is simple, easy, less time consuming and robust.
Experimental section
Reagents and instruments
Double-stranded herring testes DNA with an average molecular weight ∼50 kbp (base pair) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. The Ti(IV) isopropoxide and ethanol solution were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich and were used as received. Lithium iodide (LiI), iodine (I), hexachloroplatinic acid (H2PtCl6), di-tetrabutylammonium cis-bis(isothiocyanato)bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato)ruthenium(II) (also called as N719 dye), N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP), and fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO, resistivity 7 Ω per square) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Acetonitrile was purchased from Fisher Scientific and was used as received. Ethyl cellulose was purchased from Burgoyne Burbidges & Co, Mumbai, and was used as received. Polyethylene glycol (PEG 400 MW) was purchased from S D Fine Chemical Limited. Sodium sulfate (Na2SO4), carbon black, and polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) were obtained from Alfa Aesar. De-ionized (DI) water was used during the entire synthesis and application process. The synthesized shape-selective DNA–TiO2 nanomaterials were characterized using several spectroscopic techniques such as UV-Visible (UV-Vis) absorption spectra, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis, energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS), field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis, LASER Raman, photoluminescence (PL) study, Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy and thermal analysis studies. All the electrochemical experiments were examined using an AUTOLAB PGSTAT302N electrochemical work station. The detailed specifications of all the instruments are provided in the ESI section.†
Preparation of wire-like clusters of TiO2 nanomaterials on DNA scaffold
TiO2 nanoclusters (NCs) having wire-like morphology were synthesized by the reaction of Ti-isopropoxide with ethanol and water in the presence of DNA with conventional heating and stirring for one hour at 60 °C. For a typical synthesis, 30 mL of ethanol was mixed with 5 mL of stock DNA solution (concentration ∼ 1.23 × 10−1 M) and stirred for 10 minutes without any heating. Afterwards, 1 mL of Ti-isopropoxide solution was added drop wise while stirring and the reaction temperature was maintained at 60 °C. After 20 minutes of stirring, a light white colored colloidal solution started to appear. 50 mL of DI water was then added at once while continuously heating and stirring. After 5 minutes, the entire solution mixture turned white in color. The stirring was continued for another 40 minutes. The white precipitate then settled down at the bottom of the beaker. The purification process was carried out by washing with DI water and ethanol. Finally, to get the solid mass the precipitate was centrifuged at 8000 rpm, and the white mass was annealed in a box furnace at 550–600 °C for an hour. The white DNA–TiO2 powder was utilized for different characterization and application purposes. Table 1 shows the different final concentrations of all the reagents used, size and shape of the particles. Scheme 1 shows the schematic representation of the entire synthesis process. From Table 1 it was clearly observed that small size and large size TiO2 nanomaterials were generated and assembled on the DNA scaffold to produce wire-like morphologies.
Table 1 The different final concentrations of all reagents used, and size and shape of the particles for the formation of wire-like TiO2 nanomaterials on DNA




Set no.
Final conc. of DNA (M)
Final conc. of Ti-isopropoxide (M)
Volume of ethanol added (mL)
Total time of heating (min)
Shape of the TiO2 nanomaterials
Approx. size of the TiO2 nanomaterials
Shape distribution




1
7.1 × 10−3
4.0 × 10−2
30
60
Wire-like clusters
Individual particles ∼15 ± 5 nm, chain diameter ∼180 ± 20 nm
100% wire-like (large size)


2
6.9 × 10−3
3.9 × 10−2
30
60
Wire-like clusters
Individual particles ∼10 ± 2 nm, chain diameter ∼40 ± 5 nm
100% wire-like (small size)




 Scheme 1  The schematic representation of the synthesis of DNA–TiO2 nanomaterials. 
Fabrication of electrodes for electrochemical supercapacitor applications
The working electrodes were prepared by mixing electro-active materials, carbon black and polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) in the mass ratio of 80:10:10 in the presence of N-methyl pyrrolidone (NMP), and the resulting slurry was pasted on a nickel foam (1 cm × 1 cm). Then, the electrodes were dried at 100 °C for 12 h in a vacuum oven. All the electrochemical experiments were examined using an AUTOLAB PGSTAT302N electrochemical work station in 1 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution. A typical three-electrode experimental cell, equipped with a working electrode, platinum foil as a counter electrode and an Ag/AgCl reference electrode, was used for measuring the electrochemical properties of the working electrode. The cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements were obtained at various scan rates (5, 10, 25, 50, 75, 100, and 125 mV s−1) over the potential range of 0–0.8 V. The galvanostatic charge–discharge curves were obtained over the potential range of 0–0.8 V at different current densities (20, 30, 40, 50, and 60 μA cm−2). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were carried out over the frequency range 100 kHz to 0.1 Hz with a potential amplitude of 10 mV.
Preparation of electrodes for DSSC studies
The synthesized DNA–TiO2 powder was used to prepare a paste for DSSC cell fabrication. Typically, the paste was prepared by mixing 3 mL of poly(ethylene) glycol (PEG) solution with 7 mL of ethyl cellulose aqueous solution. Then, the required amount of DNA–TiO2 powder was added to the abovementioned solution mixture. The concentration of the solution mixture was adjusted to get a paste by grinding using an agate mortar. The TiO2 films were prepared on fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass substrates using the doctor blade technique. Then, the prepared TiO2 films were air dried for 30 min. The air dried samples were then kept in a microprocessor controlled furnace and annealed at 400 °C with an increment of 2 °C min−1. The thickness of the resulting layer was measured to be approximately 14 μm, and the active area of the prepared TiO2 electrode was 0.25 cm2. The sintered TiO2 electrodes were immersed in 3 × 10−4 M of N-719 ethanolic dye solution for 4 h at room temperature. The immersed TiO2 electrode was removed from the dye solution, rinsed with ethanol and finally dried at room temperature. A Pt counter electrode was prepared by thermal reduction of a thin film using 5 mg of hexachloroplatinic acid (H2PtCl6) in 1 mL of isopropyl alcohol (C3H8O) solution at 400 °C for 60 min. The TiO2 photoelectrode and the Pt counter electrode were separated using a spacer, and sealing was performed by keeping the structure in a hot-air oven at 70 °C for a few seconds. An electrolyte solution was introduced through a drilled hole on the counter electrode. The liquid electrolyte was composed of 0.3 M lithium iodine (LiI) and 0.03 M iodine (I) in acetonitrile. Finally, the fabricated device was utilized for the analysis of I–V characteristics measurements.
Preparation of sample for other characterizations
The shape-selective DNA–TiO2 nanostructures were characterized using UV-Vis, TEM, EDS, XRD, photoluminescence (PL), LASER-Raman, FT-IR, and thermal analysis (TGA/DTA) studies. The TiO2 nanostructure solution after successive centrifugation and annealing was used for the measurement in UV-Vis spectrophotometer after dispersing in aqueous solution. The same solution was used for TEM and PL analysis. TEM samples were prepared by placing a drop of the corresponding TiO2 NPs solution onto a carbon coated Cu grid followed by the slow evaporation of solvent at ambient conditions. For EDS, XRD, laser Raman, and FT-IR analysis, glass slides were used as substrates for thin film preparation. The slides were cleaned thoroughly in acetone and sonicated for about 30 min. The cleaned substrates were covered with TiO2 nanomaterials solution, and then dried in air. After the first layer was deposited, subsequent layers were deposited by repeatedly adding more TiO2 solution and drying. Final samples were obtained after deposition for 4–5 times and were then analyzed by the above mentioned techniques. For thermal analysis, the as-prepared DNA–TiO2 nano powders are directly used for the measurement. The sample preparation of supercapacitor and DSSC applications are already discussed above.
Results and discussion
UV-Vis spectroscopic study

Fig. 1 shows the room temperature (RT) UV-Vis absorption spectra of the different solution mixtures for the synthesis of TiO2 nanomaterials on DNA scaffold. Curve a in Fig. 1A shows the absorption spectra of only aqueous DNA solution with a λmax at 258 nm because of the absorption of aromatic base molecules in its skeleton. The titanium isopropoxide solution has a band maximum at 281 nm (not shown here) due to ligand to metal charge transfer (LMCT) spectra.42 Similar types of LMCT bands were also observed for other metal salts.43 A mixture of Ti-isopropoxide with aqueous DNA solution gives a prominent absorption hump at 240 nm to 335 nm range, and the highest intensity was observed at a λmax of 274 nm (curve b, Fig. 1A). This is because of the interaction of Ti4+ ions with negatively charged DNA molecules. Curve c and curve d show the excitonic absorption bands of TiO2 nanomaterials on DNA. Curve c is for the DNA–TiO2 nanomaterials having a wire-like shape with larger sized individual particles. Curve d is the similar absorption spectra of the DNA–TiO2 nanomaterials with the small sized individual particles. The curves c and d are enlarged to get a clear view, as shown in Fig. 1B. From Fig. 1B, curve a is for larger sized TiO2 particles, and curve b is for smaller sized TiO2 particles. From curve a, we observed a small intense peak at a lower wavelength of 265 nm due to DNA, and a broad peak ranging from 323 to 460 nm with a peak maxima at 370 nm due to excitonic band of TiO2. Similarly, from curve b, the DNA peak appeared at nearly 265 nm and the broad TiO2 peak appeared at 315 to 440 nm ranges with a peak maximum at 357 nm. It is observed that the peak maxima of TiO2 have been shifted to a higher wavelength region when the particles sizes are comparatively large. Both the absorption peak of DNA–TiO2 nanomaterials matches with the absorption band of bulk TiO2 for anatase phase at 385 nm having a band gap energy, Eg = 3.2 eV.44a In both the cases, the excitonic feature observed in the range of 355 nm to 370 nm matches with earlier reports.25,28,44b A blue shift of 15–28 nm relative to bulk anatase TiO2 is evident for the synthesized DNA–TiO2 nanomaterials, which signifies that the synthesized wire-like TiO2 materials are ultra-small in size and are self-assembled in a DNA scaffold to generate the wire-like shapes. The shifting of absorption maxima and the change in the band gap of the semiconductor materials were found to be dependent on particle size.44c The band gap increases with the decreasing particle, size and the absorption edge is also shifted towards the higher energy (blue shift) region with decreasing particle size. In our synthesized DNA–TiO2 nanomaterials, a blue shifting of the absorption band maxima compared to bulk TiO2 can be assigned to the direct transition of electrons in the TiO2 nanomaterials.
 Fig. 1  (A) UV-Visible (UV-Vis) absorption spectra of the different solution mixtures for the synthesis of TiO2 nanomaterials on DNA scaffold. Curve a shows the absorption spectra of only aqueous DNA solution; curve b shows the absorption spectrum of the mixture of Ti-isopropoxide with aqueous DNA solution; curves c and d show the excitonic absorption bands of wire-like TiO2 nanomaterials on DNA with larger and smaller sized individual particles, respectively. (B) Enlarged view of excitonic absorption bands of wire-like TiO2 nanomaterials for large (curve a) and small (curve b) size TiO2 particles. 
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) analysis

Fig. 2 shows the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of the TiO2 nanomaterials on DNA scaffold. Fig. 2A–C shows the low and high magnified TEM image of the larger sized TiO2 nanomaterials having a wire-like shape in DNA. From the low magnified image it is seen that the wires are not fully uniform and the TiO2 particles are assembled on the chain and they formed a wire-like or network-like structure. The average size of the individual particles obtained from Fig. 2B is ∼15 ± 5 nm. The nominal length of the wires assembled by TiO2 nanomaterials are ∼1–2 μm. From the image, it is clear that a few DNA chains are cross-linked together to generate the wire-like structure and the eventual diameters of the wires are ∼180 ± 20 nm. Fig. 2C shows the high magnified TEM image from the same sample where the lattice fringes and the average spacing between the two individual planes is ∼0.25 nm. The inset of Fig. 2C shows the corresponding selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern, which shows that the TiO2 particles are crystalline in nature. Fig. 2D–F shows the low and high magnified TEM images of the small size TiO2 nanomaterials having a wire-like shape on DNA scaffold. From the low magnified image in Fig. 2D and E, it is clear that the small size TiO2 particles are self-assembled and grow in the DNA chain to generate the wire-like morphology. The presence of DNA is clearly visible from the image and the particles are found growing over the DNA chain. The average size of the individual TiO2 particles on DNA is ∼10 ± 2 nm and the average diameter of the nanochains is 40 ± 5 nm. The chains are cross-linked together and are not fully uniform. The nominal length of the DNA-chains is ∼0.5–1.5 μm. Fig. 2F shows the high magnified TEM image from the same sample and the image shows the crystal planes. The average diameters between the two individual planes are calculated as ∼0.31 nm. The inset of Fig. 2F shows the corresponding SAED pattern, indicating the crystalline nature of the particles. Fig. S-1 (A and B; in ESI)† shows the low and high magnified FE-SEM image of the large sized TiO2 nanomaterials having assembled to a wire-like shape in the DNA. From the image it is seen that the nominal lengths of the wires are ≥2–3 μm and they are cross-linked with few other nearby chains. From the high magnified FE-SEM image it is clear that the materials are composed of small spherical particles having an average diameter of ∼18 ± 5 nm. Fig. S-1 (C and D; in ESI)† shows the low and high magnified FE-SEM image of the TiO2 nanomaterials having a small size (like Fig. 2D–F in the main text). From the image, we can clearly see that the small sized spherical TiO2 particles are assembled together to generate the big particles, and then they grow on the DNA chain to produce the wire-like morphology. The average sizes of the individual TiO2 particles are ∼14 ± 5 nm. By analyzing the TEM images in Fig. 2 and FE-SEM images in Fig. S-1† we can confirm that the present synthesis process generates TiO2 particles that are self-assembled and grow on the DNA chain to produce the wire-like morphology.
 Fig. 2  Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of the wire-like TiO2 nanomaterials on DNA scaffold. (A)–(C) show the low and high magnified TEM image of the larger size TiO2 nanomaterials; the inset of C shows the corresponding selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern. (D)–(F) show the low and high magnified TEM image of the small size TiO2 nanomaterials; the inset of F shows the corresponding SAED pattern. 
Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis
Fig. S-2 (in ESI)† shows the energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) analysis, which is used to identify the elements present in our synthesized DNA–TiO2 nanomaterial sample. The EDS spectrum consists of different peaks for Ti, O, Si and P, and the detailed discussion of EDS analysis is given in the ESI section.† X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the two different morphologies of the TiO2 nanomaterials in DNA are shown in Fig. 3A and B. Fig. 3A shows the XRD pattern of the as-synthesized TiO2 nanomaterials on DNA (before annealing). The curves a and b indicate the XRD pattern of the DNA–TiO2 nanomaterials before annealing at different reagent concentrations. From both the curves we did not find any intense peak rather than flat lines with small humps, which indicate that the TiO2 particles were amorphous before annealing. Fig. 3B shows the XRD pattern of the TiO2 nanomaterials on DNA after annealing to 550–600 °C temperatures. Curves a and b denote the larger and smaller sized TiO2 nanomaterials, respectively. In both the cases, the diffraction pattern consists of the peaks originated from (101), (004), (200), (105), (211), (204), (116), (220) and (215) planes. The XRD analysis was performed in the 2θ range of 20–80°. All the above diffraction peaks matched well with the anatase phase of TiO2 and have good agreement with the JCPDS file number of TiO2 as 21-1272.25,45–47 At the lower 2θ range of below 20° we did not observe any peak, which indicates that there is an absence of any impurities due to Ti(OH)4 or any unreacted Ti-isopropoxide. Moreover, we have not observed any crystallization peak for un-reacted or unbound DNA at lower 2θ values, which indicates that our sample is perfectly pure and the anatase phase of TiO2 nanomaterials can be synthesized using the present route.
 Fig. 3  X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the two different morphologies of the TiO2 nanomaterials in DNA. (A) shows the XRD pattern of the as-synthesized TiO2 nanomaterials and (B) shows the XRD pattern after annealing to 550–600 °C temperatures. In both the cases, curve a and curve b indicate the large and smaller sized particles, respectively. 
Photoluminescence (PL) study
The optical property of a semiconductor nanomaterial is determined by its electronic structure, and the essence of light absorption can be found by studying the relationship between the electronic structure and optical properties of TiO2 nanomaterials. After light excitation by photon, the electron–hole pair might recombine during the process of migration from inside to the surface of the crystal, and the recombination rate is closely related to the electronic and crystal structure. Due to the broadband absorption nature of TiO2 nanomaterials, the excitation spectrum is very important to determine the excitation wavelength at which it has the maximum emission. From the excitation spectra (not shown here) we have seen that the highest emission appears at an excitation wavelength of 374 nm. Fig. S-3 (in ESI)† shows that the PL emission spectra and the emission bands are located at 377, 428, 487 and 529 nm, respectively. Curves A and B denote the emission spectra of wire-like TiO2 nanomaterials having large and small sized TiO2 particles, respectively. Both the spectra found similar types of spectral pattern as expected. The emission band at 377 nm is due to excitonic emission, whereas 428 nm, 487 nm and 529 nm bands are assigned to the surface state emission and the recombination of trapped electron–hole arising from dangling bonds in the TiO2 nanomaterials.48 The surface state is generally localized within the band gap of the semi-conductor and they can trap the excited state electron and lead to higher wavelength emission. PL study is mainly a surface phenomenon, thus the change in surface environment would have significant effect on the PL process. Our observed PL bands found similarities with the earlier reported studies.49,50 Saraf et al. observed PL peak of TiO2 nanomaterials at 412 nm, and they assigned the PL band to self-trapped excitation localized on TiO6 octahedra.51 Serpone et al. observed the PL band of anatase TiO2 nanocrystals at the long wavelength at 465 nm and 529 nm and they attributed this to oxygen vacancies.52
LASER Raman study
The Raman spectra of the wire-like TiO2 nanomaterials obtained after annealing the sample above 550–600 °C is presented in Fig. S-4 (in ESI).† Raman spectra can be employed to confirm the crystalline phase of TiO2 having different morphology. Moreover, it can sensitively identify the anatase and rutile phase of TiO2 on the basis of their characteristic Raman bands. For this LASER Raman study, we used 632.8 nm He–Ne LASER as an excitation source. Curve A and B in Fig. S-4† shows the Raman spectra of the TiO2 nanomaterials having wire-like shape with large and small size, respectively. In both the samples in curves A and B, four Raman bands at 174 cm−1, 404 cm−1, 523 cm−1 and 644 cm−1 are highly intense whereas the peak at 204 cm−1 is less intense. All the five Raman modes are in good agreement with the typical Raman feature of an anatase TiO2 phase, and confirm that the TiO2 is in the same anatase phase in both the samples.53,54 The peak at 174, 204, 404, 523 and 644 cm−1 are ascribed to the five Raman active modes of anatase phase with the symmetries of Eg, Eg, B1g, A1g and Eg, respectively.53 It is important to mention that the Raman bands of the typical rutile phase appeared at 143, 235, 447 and 612 cm−1, which are absent in our prepared sample, indicating that the synthesized DNA–TiO2 nanomaterials only belong to the anatase phase.
Thermal analysis study
A thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential thermal analysis (DTA) were carried out to examine the thermal stability and the crystalline condition of the DNA–TiO2 nanomaterials. The as-prepared TiO2 nanomaterials were heated from RT to 1000 °C with an increment of 10 °C min−1 in air. Curves A and B in Fig. 4 show the TGA and DTA curves of TiO2 nanomaterials having a wire-like structure. From the TGA curve, we can see that the first weight loss occurs near 100 °C, indicating that the excess ethanol and water molecules started to evaporate from the sample. Another weight loss occurs above 100 °C to below 400 °C, which could be attributed to the removal of unhydrolyzed isopropoxide or the excess DNA molecule attached with TiO2 or present in the nanomaterials samples. Above 400 °C to the end and up to 1000 °C, the curve is straight and linear, which is significant because further weight loss does not occur. From the curve A, we can see that we started the analysis with 2.53 mg of sample and after heating up to 1000 °C, the amount of sample remaining is 1.85 mg. Thus, the % of weight loss for our analysis is 26.8%. In the DTA curve, as indicated by curve B, two sharp exothermic peaks appear at 253 and 393 °C probably because of the phase change of the powder from amorphous to anatase phase. Our TGA-DTA result found similarities with the previous results although their peak position were observed in different place because of the use of different reagents in their synthesis.27,55 Zaban et al. observed a three-step weight-loss pattern in the temperature range of 30–100 °C, 150–350 °C, and 350–950 °C in their TGA analysis of titanium glycolate complex.27 The first weight loss (8%) corresponds to physically adsorbed water molecules and the second one (33%) is associated with the removal of ethylene glycol units and the degradation of organic groups contained in the precursor particles. Similarly, Sopyan et al. observed different weight loss at temperatures of 100 °C to 300 °C, which could be attributed to the removal of unhydrolyzed isopropoxide ligands bonded in the titanium.55 Moreover, from the DTA curves, different sharp exothermic reaction peak appeared for different samples in different temperatures indicating a phase change of the powder from amorphous to anatase, which matched well with our present experiment.
 Fig. 4  Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential thermal analysis (DTA) of the TiO2 nanomaterials in DNA. Curve A and B show the TGA and DTA curve of TiO2 nanomaterials having wire-like structure, respectively. 
Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopic analysis
The Fourier-transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra of bare DNA and DNA bound TiO2 nanomaterials are found in Fig. 5 at the wavenumber scale from 4000 to 400 cm−1. Curve A denotes the FT-IR spectra of only DNA and curve B denotes the FT-IR spectra of DNA bound TiO2 nanomaterials. Both the TiO2 samples give rise to similar types of spectra, which are quite expected because in both cases the TiO2 nanomaterials are synthesized using the same DNA molecule. A careful and detailed comparison of both the spectra not only indicates the presence of DNA in the TiO2 nanomaterials surface but also highlights the nature of interaction occurring between them. The phosphate backbone and the organic base functionalities in DNA are the main candidates for their specific growth and stabilization. In the case of DNA (curve A), four sharp peaks observed at lower wavenumber region at 924 cm−1, 979 cm−1, 1129 cm−1 and 1240 cm−1 is attributed to the stretching vibration of the phosphate group in DNA. These specific peaks are very weak in intensity and are not visible in the case of DNA bound TiO2 (curve B). The peak in the region from 1400 to 1750 cm−1 is assigned to the ν(C–O–X) mode. In this region two sharp peaks at 1494 cm−1 and 1723 cm−1 are observed for only DNA sample due to carbonyl stretching. However, in the case of DNA bound TiO2, only one peak was observed in the region at 1619 cm−1, which is attributed to the binding of the TiO2 nanomaterials with DNA molecule. There is a prominent peak at 2373 cm−1 for DNA–TiO2 sample, which is very weak and not clearly observed in the case of only DNA sample probably because of the binding of TiO2 nanomaterials with DNA. The stretching vibration appearing in the range 2900–3650 cm−1 is due to OH group. The OH stretching bond for DNA at 3615 cm−1 is shifted in the case of DNA bound TiO2 to 3425 cm−1, indicating the interaction of TiO2 with the hydroxyl group present in the DNA molecule. The C–H stretching vibration appeared for only DNA at nearly 2812 cm−1, which is very weak and shifted in the case of DNA bound TiO2. A very high intense peak in the range of 490–660 cm−1 for DNA–TiO2 sample is observed, which is absent in only DNA sample and is attributed to the characteristic absorption of Ti–O–Ti bonds that matches with earlier reports.56,57 Liu et al. also observed similar types of bands in the range of 400–600 cm−1 for TiO2 sample.46 Thus, from the above mentioned analysis it is confirmed that the phosphate backbone and the sugar moieties of DNA mainly interact and help in the binding of TiO2 particles with DNA. Therefore, the present FT-IR analysis clearly states that TiO2 nanomaterials are bound with DNA molecule and stabilize them after the formation of wire-like morphology. The experimentally observed FT-IR bands of DNA compared with the reported values, and the assignments of different peaks are summarized in the ESI in Table T-1.†58
 Fig. 5  The Fourier-transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra of bare DNA (curve A) and DNA bound TiO2 nanomaterials (curve B) at the wavenumber scale from 4000 to 400 cm−1. 
Reaction mechanisms for the formation of wire-like clusters of TiO2 NPs on DNA
DNA mediated wire-like clusters of TiO2 nanomaterials are synthesized by the reaction of Ti-isopropoxide with ethanol and water in the presence of DNA molecule under continuous stirring and heating at 60 °C. The wire-like morphology of the TiO2 nanomaterials embedded on the DNA scaffold is formed at a specific concentration that is given in Table 1. It is important to note that the presence of DNA is extremely important for the formation of the wire-like structure. In the absence of DNA and keeping other reaction parameters fixed, only aggregated TiO2 particles with un-uniform shape are formed, as observed from the TEM analysis (not shown here). Thus in our synthesis, DNA acts as a stabilizing agent and also helps during the growth of the TiO2 particles to generate the specific wire-like morphology. Ti-isopropoxide was used as the Ti-salt precursor, which is a colorless to light yellow color liquid with a low melting point (∼17 °C) and a high boiling point (∼232 °C) and is soluble in various solvents such as ethanol, ether, benzene, chloroform, etc. It reacts with ethanol and initially generates Ti(OC2H5)4 and finally decomposes to form TiO2. Thus, the overall reaction of Ti-isopropoxide with ethanol is:Ti{OCH(CH3)2}4 + 4C2H5OH → Ti(C2H5O)4 + 4(CH3)2CHOH    
Once the TiO2 nuclei are formed, they grow on DNA which is already present in the solution and generate the wire-like morphology. From the FT-IR analysis in Fig. 5, we have seen that the phosphate backbone and the hydroxyl group in sugar analogue of DNA is mostly responsible to bind with TiO2 and to control their specific growth of wire-like morphology. Initially, we assumed that after the addition of Ti-isopropoxide in DNA, the Ti4+ ions are adsorbed on DNA because of the electrostatic interaction of the oppositely charged ions, which can be confirmed from the shift of the UV-Vis absorption maxima of the mixture of DNA–Ti-isopropoxide salt solution compared to pure DNA, as seen in Fig. 1. After the addition of ethanol solution with continuous heating and stirring, the Ti4+ ions react with ethanol and generate Ti(C2H5O)4 initially. Then, it reacts with water to generate TiO2 as a white colored precipitate. The initially formed TiO2 nuclei grew along the DNA backbone and formed the wire-like morphology. Scheme 2 shows the schematic formation of the wire-like clusters of TiO2 nanomaterials on DNA scaffold. From Scheme 2, we can see that initially Ti4+ ions are attached with DNA. In the presence of ethanol, water and heating, they first formed Ti(C2H5O)4 and finally TiO2 and stabilized on DNA. At higher DNA concentration, the pre-formed TiO2 particles initially grow on DNA to generate the wire-like morphology. However, because of high concentration of DNA solution, the wires further aggregate to a larger size, as seen in Scheme 1. On the other hand, at low DNA concentration the TiO2 particles grow on the DNA chain and produce wire-like smaller sized particles. Careful observation showed that in the both cases the individual TiO2 particles formed spherical shapes but smaller and larger size depends on the concentration of DNA in the solution. When the DNA concentration increases, the diameter of the wire-like structure also increases, although the diameter of the individual TiO2 particles is small due to the restricted growth of TiO2 nuclei on highly dense DNA solution. But while the concentration of DNA is comparatively less, the diameter of wires is less but the individual size of the TiO2 particles is more. Shilong et al. and Zhu et al. previously observed that DNA with PO and C–O–P group could be absorbed on the surface of TiO2 nanomaterials by chemical adsorption.28,59,60 Although, at this point we have not fully confirmed the detailed attachment of specific functional groups, and further study by changing specific base sequences of DNA is necessary to obtain a clear insight on the mechanism of the generation of wire-like morphology of TiO2. The two types of morphology of wire-like clusters of TiO2 NPs on DNA have been utilized in two different potential applications; one is electrochemical supercapacitor studies and the other is dye-sensitized solar cell applications.
 Scheme 2  The schematic representation of the formation of the wire-like clusters of TiO2 nanomaterials on DNA scaffold. 
Electrochemical supercapacitor applications of the wire-like TiO2 nanomaterials on DNA scaffold
The electrochemical performances of the as-prepared electrodes were investigated by cyclic voltammetry (CV) and charge–discharge techniques. Fig. 6a shows the CV curves of the large (a-1) and small (b-1) sized wire-like TiO2 electrodes at a scan rate of 25 mV s−1 in 1 M Na2SO4 electrolyte solution. It can be observed that both the electrodes exhibited a rectangular shape, which demonstrates the ideal capacitive behavior of the electrodes. Further, the small size wire-like TiO2 electrode displayed higher integrated area compared to the large size TiO2, confirming the excellent electrochemical performance of the small size wire-like TiO2 electrode. To obtain more detailed information on the electrochemical performance of the as-prepared electrodes, additional CV studies were conducted. Fig. 6b and c show the CV curves of the large and small size wire-like TiO2 electrodes at various scan rates of 5, 10, 25, 50, 75, 100 and 125 mV s−1. All the CV curves are nearly rectangular in shape, even at very high scan rates, representing ideal capacitive properties and excellent reversibility of working electrodes. The specific capacitances of the as-fabricated electrodes were calculated from the CV curves, according to the following equation:61 (1)where Cs is the specific capacitance (F g−1), m is the mass of the active material (g), v is the scan rate (mV s−1), ΔV is the potential window (V) and ∫Idv is the integrated area of the CV curve. The maximum specific capacitance of the large and small sized wire-like TiO2 electrodes is 1.29 and 2.69 F g−1, respectively, at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. The relationship between the specific capacitance and scan rates are shown in Fig. 6d. The decrease in specific capacitance with increasing scan rate is due to the cations, which are mainly adsorbed on the outer surface of the electrode. At low scan rates the cations can approach the deep pores of the electrodes, which leads to the higher specific capacitance.62 It can be observed that the small sized wire-like TiO2 electrode exhibited higher specific capacitance compared to the large sized wire-like TiO2 at all scan rates. This can be attributed to the small sized wire exhibiting high surface area and increased electro-active sites, which effectively reduce the diffusion path length, and enchaining fast ion insertion/extraction and electron transport in the electrode matrix.61,63
 Fig. 6  (a) shows the CV curves of large and small size of wire-like TiO2 electrodes. Curves b and c show the large and small sized wire-like TiO2 electrodes at different scan rates. Curve d shows the variation of specific capacitance with scan rates for large and small sized wire-like TiO2 electrodes. 
The ideal capacitive behavior of the as-prepared electrodes could be further confirmed by galvanostatic charge–discharge technique. Fig. 7a shows the charge–discharge curves of large and small sized wire-like TiO2 electrodes at a current density of 20 μA cm−2. It can be seen that both the curves exhibit a nearly triangular shape, suggesting the good electrochemical behavior of the electrodes. The specific capacitance of the as-fabricated electrodes was calculated from the charge–discharge data according to the following equation:64 (2)where Cs is the specific capacitance, I is the constant discharging current, Δt is the discharging time, ΔV is the potential window, and m is the mass loading of the electro-active material. The calculated specific capacitance of large and small sized wire-like TiO2 electrodes is about 0.34 and 0.68 F g−1, respectively. Further, as presented in Fig. 7b and c, the charge–discharge curves of the large and small sized wire-like TiO2 electrodes at different current densities from 20 to 60 μA cm−2 are approximately symmetrical, indicating that the nanostructure electrode has a better capacitive performance and a good electrochemical reversibility. The specific capacitance of this device is compared with other TiO2 nanowires.65,66 Although, it is important to note that there is no similar report on the formation of wire-like TiO2 nanomaterials embedded on DNA scaffold.
 Fig. 7  (a) Charge–discharge curves of large and small size wire-like TiO2 electrodes in 1 M Na2SO4 solution at a current density of 20 μA cm−2. Charge–discharge curves of large (b) and small size (c) wire-like TiO2 electrodes at different current densities. (d) Nyquist plot of large and small sized wire-like TiO2 electrodes. (e) Cycling performance with small sized TiO2 electrode. 
The Cs of TiO2 nanowires on porous alumina template was roughly estimated to be around 93 μF cm−2.65 Very recently, Li et al. observed high specific capacitance for the hydrogenated TiO2 nanotube arrays.66
To obtain more information regarding the conductive performance of the as-prepared electrodes, EIS measurements were conducted. As shown in Fig. 7d, Nyquist plots composed of a semi-circle in the high-frequency region are followed by a straight line in the low-frequency region. The almost straight line indicates a low diffusion resistance and expresses a good capacitor behavior of the electrodes. The semi-circle arc at a high-frequency region was due to charge transfer resistance (Rct). The Rct values of the as-prepared large and small size wire-like TiO2 electrodes are 410 and 15 Ω, respectively. Compared to large-sized wire, the small sized wire shows low Rct value, indicating small ion diffusion resistance and more capacitance performance than the large sized wire-like TiO2. When the wire size is reduced to the nanometer scale, the surface area and electro-active sites increase, which effectively reduce the diffusion length of the Na+ ion in the electrode matrix, and finally leading to the higher specific capacitance.61 The long-term cycle stability of the small sized wire-like TiO2 electrode was further evaluated by repeating the CV measurement at a scan rate of 150 mV s−1 for 5000 cycles. From Fig. 7e, it is observed that the capacitance only decreases by about 20% of the initial capacitance, even after 5000 cycles, indicating a good cycling life of the electrode materials. The enhanced cycling performance and specific capacitance of the small size wire-like TiO2 electrode are mainly attributed to the higher surface area and increased electro-active sites of the electrodes.
DSSC application of the wire-like TiO2 nanomaterials on DNA
DSSC is based on a semiconductor formed between a photo-sensitized anode and an electrolyte in a photo-electrochemical system. It is mainly composed of a porous layer of metal oxide NPs covered with a molecular dye that adsorbs the sunlight. Light energy is stored in the form of photons and the solar cells convert it into an electron–hole-pair. Here, the TiO2 nanostructures increase the surface area, and electrons are transported through the semi-conducting TiO2 layer to reach the counter electrode. Platinum counter electrode was used to reduce the redox mediator located in the electrolyte of the DSSC. The iodine and lithium iodide redox mediator diffuse to meet and regenerate the oxidized dye molecules. Ruthenium dye increases the absorption of the photon energy and rapidly injects an electron to the conduction band of TiO2. Once sunlight passes through the cathode and the conductor, it withdraws the electron from the anode. These electrons travel through electrolyte from anode to the cathode and create an electrical current. Thus a charge separation occurs between the dye, semiconductor and the electrolyte. Nanomaterials are used as scaffold to hold a large number of dye molecules for any given surface area of a cell. Among the different oxide materials tested for DSSC, ZnO and TiO2 are used mostly as anode materials. The first report on DSSC was by Gratzel in 1991 while using TiO2 as anode material with 7% efficiency.7 Wang and co-workers from Georgia Tech (USA) reported that ZnO nanowires generate six times more efficient DSSC when compared with ZnO spherical particles with the same surface area.67 Thus, the proper investigation of oxide nanomaterials with control size and shape and their application in DSSC is currently an active area of research. There are reports of differently sized and shaped TiO2 nanomaterials used in DSSC, although there are no such reports where self-assembled TiO2 nanomaterials on DNA scaffold with a wire-like morphology have been used in DSSC studies.
According to the Schottky equation, short-circuit current (Isc) and the open-circuit voltage (Voc) are dependent on the light intensity. The short circuit current increases linearly as the light intensity increases, and in-turn enhances the photon-to-current conversion rate. The power conversion efficiency η is determined from the eqn (3) using parameters such as short circuit current density (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), incident light intensity (Ps) and maximum power output (Pmax). (3)where, (Jsc = Isc/area) (4)where, (Pmax = Vmax × Imax)
In eqn (4), Imax and Vmax referred to maximum photocurrent and photo voltage at the maximum power output (Pmax). Curves A and B in Fig. 8 show the current–voltage characteristic of wire-like TiO2 nanostructures (larger and smaller sizes respectively) for the measurement of DSSC efficiency. The corresponding experimental data obtained from the equations are given in Table 2. From Fig. 8 and Table 2 we can see that the DSSC efficiency is higher in the case of wire-like DNA–TiO2 nanostructure having larger sizes. It is reported that with the increase in the thickness of TiO2 layer, the dye absorption and photocurrent also increases, and at the same time the charge transfer resistance increases.68 To avoid this problem, we used the wire-like TiO2 nanostructures, which in-turn reduce the thickness of the TiO2 layer and increase the transmittance of the incident light towards dye surface. The enhanced performance of DSSCs is achieved by increasing the contact area between TiO2 nanostructures and the FTO substrate. The contact area increases in the order of wire-like TiO2 (larger size) > wire-like TiO2 (smaller size) because of high surface to volume ratio. The electron transport in thin films prepared by small sized nanomaterials takes into account the electron transport in both the boundary and crystal.69 Here, the enhanced Jsc is attributed to the increase in surface area of the films fabricated using wire-like DNA–TiO2 nanostructures, and consequently it also increases the dye adsorption of the respective photoelectrodes in the cells.70 The enhanced Voc value may be due to the improved adherence, which can increase the electron transfer between the FTO interfaces with the nanomaterials. The compact TiO2 film can not only improve the adherence of TiO2 to FTO but also provides a larger TiO2/FTO contact area, which effectively reduces the electron recombination by minimizing the direct contact between the redox electrolyte and the conductive FTO surface. In our study, the wire-like DNA–TiO2 structure having larger size show high efficiency because of their better absorption of dye molecules due to their increased exposed surface area. Although, this is not the final conclusion and we are going to fabricate more cells by controlling various other reaction parameters to obtain better efficiency, which will be updated in our upcoming studies.
 Fig. 8  Current (I) vs. voltage (V) characteristics for the DSSC using self-assembled TiO2 nanomaterials on DNA scaffold. 
Table 2 Summary of the different parameters used to calculate the efficiency of DSSC




Shapes of the DNA–TiO2 nanostructures

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
Power conversion efficiency (η) (%)




Wire-like (larger size)
10.52
0.483
0.598
3.03


Wire-like (smaller size)
10.32
0.539
0.445
2.47




Conclusion
In conclusion, DNA mediated wire-like clusters of TiO2 nanomaterials have been synthesized within an hour of reaction time by a simple wet-chemical route. The smaller and larger size TiO2 NPs self assembled on DNA and generated a wire-like morphology. The TiO2 nanomaterials are synthesized by the reaction of titanium iso-propoxide with aqueous ethanol solution in the presence of DNA under continuous stirring and heating at 60 °C. The specific size, shape and other properties of the materials are analyzed using different spectroscopic tools. The specific role of DNA on the formation and growth of the TiO2 particles is discussed in detail. The synthesized DNA–TiO2 wire-like structures have been utilized in two different energy related applications. First, the DNA–TiO2 wire-like structure has been used for electrochemical supercapacitor applications. It was found that the DNA–TiO2 nanomaterials showed different specific capacitance (Cs) values for various nanowires, and the order of Cs values are as follows: wire-like clusters (small size) > wire-like clusters (large size). The maximum Cs of 2.69 F g−1 was observed for TiO2 having a wire-like structure with small sizes. In addition, the electrode exhibited an excellent cycle life with capacitance retention of about 80% after 5000 cycles. Second, the DNA–TiO2 nanowires were utilized in DSSC applications. It was found that both the synthesized morphologies of TiO2 act as suitable anode materials in DSSC. Among the two different morphologies, the DNA–TiO2 nanowire with larger sizes shows better efficiency compared to smaller sizes. The present synthesis process is fast, simple and reproducible. In future, the described method can be extended for the synthesis of other oxide based materials on DNA scaffold and can be further used in other applications such as sensors, Li-ion battery materials or treatment for environmental pollution and waste water.
Acknowledgements
The research funding from DST, SERB, New Delhi (DST Fast Track Project number # SR/FT/CS-98/2011, GAP 7/12), support from the Central Instrumental Facility (CIF) and help from Mr A. Rathishkumar (TEM in-charge, CIF), Mr R. Ravishankar and Mr J. Kennedy (SEM in-charge, CIF), CSIR-CECRI, Karaikudi are greatly appreciated. U. Nithiyanantham wishes to thank CSIR-CECRI for fellowship and S. R. Ede wishes to acknowledge the council for scientific and industrial research (CSIR) for JRF fellowship. S. Kundu wishes to thank Dr Vijayamohanan K. Pillai, Director and Dr M. Jayachandran, HOD, ECMS Division, CSIR-CECRI for their continuous support and encouragement.
References
X. Peng, L. Manna, W. Yang, J. Wickham, E. Scher, A. Kadavanich and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2000, 404, 59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. L. Colvin, M. C. Schlamp and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 1994, 370, 354 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, T. W. Odom and C. M. Lieber, Acc. Chem. Res., 1999, 32, 435 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Pan, Z. R. Dai and Z. L. Wang, Science, 2001, 291, 1947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Manna, E. C. Scher and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 12700 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, J. Shi, Z. Zhang, C. Zhang and X. Zhang, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74, 120 CrossRef CAS .
B. O'Regan and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, C. C. Wang, R. Zakaria and J. Y. Ying, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 10871 CrossRef CAS .
J. Karch, R. Birringer and H. Gleiter, Nature, 1987, 330, 556 CrossRef CAS .
S. U. M. Khan and T. Sultana, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 76, 211 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Lee, C. B. Mao, C. E. Flynn and A. M. Belcher, Science, 2002, 296, 892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Mcmillan, C. D. Paavola, J. Howard, N. J. Zaluzec and J. D. Trent, Nat. Mater., 2002, 1, 247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Scheibel, R. Parthasarathy, G. Sawicki, X. M. Lin, H. Jaeger and S. L. Lindquist, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 4527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Braun, Y. Eichen, U. Sivan and G. Ben-Yoseph, Nature, 1998, 391, 775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Mirkin, R. L. Letsinger, R. C. Mucic and J. J. Storhoff, Nature, 1996, 382, 607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Warner and J. E. Hutchison, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang and R. W. Murray, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 95 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) K. Matsui, T. Kyotani and A. Tomita, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1216 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) W. Li, F. Wang, S. Feng, J. Wang, Z. Sun, B. Li, Y. Li, J. Yang, A. A. Elzatahry, Y. Xia and D. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wu, J. Long, A. Huang and Y. Luo, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 8822 CrossRef CAS .
H. E. Namin, H. Hashemipour and M. Ranjbar, Int. J. Mod. Phys. B, 2008, 22, 3210 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Q. Chen, W. Zhou, G. Du and L. M. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1208 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) X. H. Yang, Z. Li, C. Sun, H. Gui Yang and C. Li, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3486 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Lee, M. Kang, S. M. Cho, G. Y. Han, B.-W. Kim, K. J. Yoon and C.-H. Chung, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2001, 146, 121 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Yamamoto, A. Tan, R. Shiratsuchi, S. Hayase, C. R. Chenthamarakshan and K. Rajeshwar, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1823 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. H. Bang and P. V. Kamat, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1970 CrossRef CAS .
V. Bansal, D. Rautaray, A. Bharde, K. Ahire, A. Sanyal, A. Ahmad and M. Sastry, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 2583 RSC .
P. D. Cozzoli, A. Kornowski and H. Weller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 14539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Gupta and M. Tripathi, Cent. Eur. J. Chem., 2012, 10, 279 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Pol, Y. Langzam and A. Zaban, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 11211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. S. Qiang, Z. Hong, Z. R. Rong, S. X. Yu, Y. S. De and W. S. Long, Sci. China, Ser. B: Chem., 2008, 51, 367 CrossRef PubMed .
C. C. Wang and J. Y. Ying, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 3113 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Hay and H. M. Raval, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3396 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, Y. Lin, P. Liu, J. M. Meziani, L. F. Allard and Y. P. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 11514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zha, L. Shen, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, B. A. Korgel, A. Gupta and N. Bao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 122 CAS .
M. Ye, D. Zheng, M. Wang, C. Chen, W. Liao, C. Lin and Z. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2893 Search PubMed .
W. Li, Y. Bai, W. Zhuang, K.-Y. Chan, C. Liu, Z. Yang, X. Feng and X. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 3049 CAS .
A. Hernández-Gordillo, A. Hernández-Arana, A. Campero and L. I. Vera-Robles, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 4084 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, G. Wang, Q. Deng, D. H. L. Ng and H. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 3008 Search PubMed .
T. T. D. Vu, F. Mighri, A. Ajji and T. -On Do, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 3888 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kundu, K. Wang, D. Huitink and H. Liang, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 10146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kundu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 14107 RSC .
S. Kundu and M. Jayachandran, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 16486 RSC .
S. Kundu and H. Liang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 826 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gratzel, Pure Appl. Chem., 2001, 73, 459 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Mason III and H. B. Gray, Inorg. Chem., 1968, 7, 55 CrossRef .

  (a) C. Kormann, D. W. Bahnemann and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 92, 5196 CrossRef ; 
  (b) R. Vijayalakshmi and V. Rajendran, Arch. Appl. Sci. Res., 2012, 4, 1183 CAS ; 
  (c) K. M. Reddy, S. V. Manorama and A. R. Reddy, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2002, 78, 239 CrossRef .
F.-F. Cao, S. Xin, Y.-G. Guo and L.-J. Wan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 2014 RSC .
G. Q. Liu, Z. G. Jin, X. X. Liu, T. Wang and Z. F. Liu, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Dhage, S. P. Gaikwad and V. Ravi, Bull. Mater. Sci., 2004, 27, 487 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Zhang, G. H. Li, Y. X. Jin, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang and L. D. Zhang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2002, 365, 300 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mochizuki, Physica B, 2003, 340–344, 944 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Pan, N. Zhao, Q. Wang, S. Jiang, X. Ji and L. An, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1991 CrossRef CAS .
L. V. Saraf, S. I. Patil, S. B. Ogale, S. R. Sainkar and S. T. Kshirsager, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A, 1998, 12, 2653 Search PubMed .
N. Serpone, D. Lawless and R. Khairutdinow, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 16646 CrossRef CAS .
T. Oshaka, F. Izumi and Y. Fujiki, J. Raman Spectrosc., 1978, 7, 321 CrossRef .
J. Shi, J. Chen, Z. Feng, T. Chen, Y. Lian, X. Wang and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 693 CAS .
N. Hafizah and I. Sopyan, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2009, 2009, 962783 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Yu, L. Z. Zhang, Z. Zheng and J. C. Zhao, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 2280 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Crepaldi, G. J. De, A. A. Soler-IIIia, D. Grosso, F. Cagnol and F. Ribot, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 9770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Banyay, M. Sarkar and A. Graslund, Biophys. Chem., 2003, 104, 477 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Zhu, S. L. Wang and R. Zhang, Chin. J. Chem., 2007, 25, 958 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Zhu, S. L. Wang, X. Y. Sun, R. Zhang and S. D. Yao, Sci. China, Ser. B: Chem., 2007, 50, 272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ramadoss and S. J. Kim, Carbon, 2013, 63, 434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Dubal, S. V. Patil, G. S. Gund and C. D. Lokhande, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 552, 240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yana, T. Wei, W. Qiao, B. Shao, Q. Zhao, L. Zhang and Z. Fan, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 6973 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Ramadoss, G.-S. Kim and S. J. Kim, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 10222 RSC .
J. Lee, J. Choi, J. Lee, S. K. Choi and H. D. Chun, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 1449 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, G. Wang, T. Zhai, M. Yu, J. Gan, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Weintraub, Y. Wei and Z. L. Wang, Angew. Chem., 2009, 121, 9143 CrossRef .
M. J. Jeng, Y. L. Wung, L. B. Chang and L. Chow, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2013, 9, 563897 Search PubMed .
S. Nakade, Y. Saito, W. Kubo, T. Kitamura, Y. Wada and S. Yanagida, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 8607 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. N. O. A. Sreekala, J. Indiramma, K. B. S. P. Kumar, K. S. Sreelatha and M. S. Roy, Journal of Nanostructure in Chemistry, 2013, 3, 19 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The details about the instrument used for various characterizations and figures related to FE-SEM analysis, EDS analysis, photoluminescence (PL) and LASER Raman study are provided. Table related to FT-IR analysis is also provided. See DOI: 10.1039/c4nr01836bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

1	7.1 × 10−3	4.0 × 10−2	30	60	Wire-like clusters	Individual particles ∼15 ± 5 nm, chain diameter ∼180 ± 20 nm	100% wire-like (large size)
2	6.9 × 10−3	3.9 × 10−2	30	60	Wire-like clusters	Individual particles ∼10 ± 2 nm, chain diameter ∼40 ± 5 nm	100% wire-like (small size)

 	Scheme 1  The schematic representation of the synthesis of DNA–TiO2 nanomaterials.	 

 	Fig. 1  (A) UV-Visible (UV-Vis) absorption spectra of the different solution mixtures for the synthesis of TiO2 nanomaterials on DNA scaffold. Curve a shows the absorption spectra of only aqueous DNA solution; curve b shows the absorption spectrum of the mixture of Ti-isopropoxide with aqueous DNA solution; curves c and d show the excitonic absorption bands of wire-like TiO2 nanomaterials on DNA with larger and smaller sized individual particles, respectively. (B) Enlarged view of excitonic absorption bands of wire-like TiO2 nanomaterials for large (curve a) and small (curve b) size TiO2 particles.	 

 	Fig. 2  Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of the wire-like TiO2 nanomaterials on DNA scaffold. (A)–(C) show the low and high magnified TEM image of the larger size TiO2 nanomaterials; the inset of C shows the corresponding selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern. (D)–(F) show the low and high magnified TEM image of the small size TiO2 nanomaterials; the inset of F shows the corresponding SAED pattern.	 

 	Fig. 3  X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the two different morphologies of the TiO2 nanomaterials in DNA. (A) shows the XRD pattern of the as-synthesized TiO2 nanomaterials and (B) shows the XRD pattern after annealing to 550–600 °C temperatures. In both the cases, curve a and curve b indicate the large and smaller sized particles, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential thermal analysis (DTA) of the TiO2 nanomaterials in DNA. Curve A and B show the TGA and DTA curve of TiO2 nanomaterials having wire-like structure, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  The Fourier-transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra of bare DNA (curve A) and DNA bound TiO2 nanomaterials (curve B) at the wavenumber scale from 4000 to 400 cm−1.	 
Ti{OCH(CH3)2}4 + 4C2H5OH → Ti(C2H5O)4 + 4(CH3)2CHOH

 		 

 		 

 	Scheme 2  The schematic representation of the formation of the wire-like clusters of TiO2 nanomaterials on DNA scaffold.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 6  (a) shows the CV curves of large and small size of wire-like TiO2 electrodes. Curves b and c show the large and small sized wire-like TiO2 electrodes at different scan rates. Curve d shows the variation of specific capacitance with scan rates for large and small sized wire-like TiO2 electrodes.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 7  (a) Charge–discharge curves of large and small size wire-like TiO2 electrodes in 1 M Na2SO4 solution at a current density of 20 μA cm−2. Charge–discharge curves of large (b) and small size (c) wire-like TiO2 electrodes at different current densities. (d) Nyquist plot of large and small sized wire-like TiO2 electrodes. (e) Cycling performance with small sized TiO2 electrode.	 
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 8  Current (I) vs. voltage (V) characteristics for the DSSC using self-assembled TiO2 nanomaterials on DNA scaffold.	 

Wire-like (larger size)	10.52	0.483	0.598	3.03
Wire-like (smaller size)	10.32	0.539	0.445	2.47
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The details about the instrument used for various characterizations and figures related to FE-SEM analysis, EDS analysis, photoluminescence (PL) and LASER Raman study are provided. Table related to FT-IR analysis is also provided. See DOI: 10.1039/c4nr01836b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
