Antisolvent treatment of copper( i ) thiocyanate (CuSCN) hole transport layer for efficiency improvements in organic solar cells and light-emitting di ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC02897A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC02897A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 10435-10442Antisolvent treatment of copper(I) thiocyanate (CuSCN) hole transport layer for efficiency improvements in organic solar cells and light-emitting diodes†

        
          
            Pimpisut 
            Worakajit
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Taweesak 
            Sudyoadsuk
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Vinich 
            Promarak
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Akinori 
            Saeki
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Pichaya 
            Pattanasattayavong
          
        
      *ac
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, School of Molecular Science and Engineering, Vidyasirimedhi Institute of Science and Technology (VISTEC), Rayong 21210, Thailand. E-mail: pichaya.p@vistec.ac.th
bDepartment of Applied Chemistry, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka University, 2-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan
cResearch Network of NANOTEC-VISTEC on Nanotechnology for Energy, Vidyasirimedhi Institute of Science and Technology (VISTEC), Rayong 21210, Thailand
Received 
      22nd June 2021
    , Accepted 22nd July 2021First published on 22nd July 2021AbstractCopper(I) thiocyanate (CuSCN) has been widely used as a hole-transport layer in organic optoelectronic devices. However, being a coordination polymer, its solution-processing is not straightforward; the typical process requires sulfide-based solvents that strongly interact with Cu(I). Herein, we show that a simple step of washing the CuSCN HTL with antisolvents, specifically acetone (Ace) or tetrahydrofuran (THF), can significantly increase the short-circuit current (Jsc) and fill factor (FF) of organic photovoltaic (OPV) cells. The treatment leads to an increase in the average power conversion efficiency (PCE) from 8.18% for OPV devices based on untreated CuSCN to 9.16% and 9.25% for cells based on Ace- and THF-treated CuSCN HTL, respectively. Furthermore, for organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) based on CuSCN HTL, the treatment by THF also increases the external quantum efficiency (EQE) from 5.2% to 8.2%. The facile antisolvent treatment can be readily applied to the solution-processing of CuSCN which is already employed in various organic optoelectronic devices.
1. Introduction
The essential functions of a hole transport layer (HTL) are the enhancement of hole injection/extraction and simultaneous blockage of electrons between the anode and the active layer. An effective HTL generally requires two important properties: high optical transparency to maximize photon harvesting or light emission of the active layer and well-matched energy levels to minimize energy losses from electrical resistance and interfacial recombination.1–4 Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)–poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) has long remained the standard HTL in optoelectronic devices due to its solution processability, relatively high transparency (80–87%), and large work function (≈5.1 eV).5 Despite its widespread usage, PEDOT:PSS has disadvantages, such as its acidic nature which could be detrimental to the adjacent layers and lack of electron-blocking ability that leads to efficiency loss.6–9
Among the PEDOT:PSS alternatives, copper(I) thiocyanate (CuSCN), a coordination polymer exhibiting p-type semiconducting properties, has emerged as one of the most promising HTLs for extensive optoelectronic applications including various solar cell architectures as well as organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs).10–16 CuSCN films can be deposited using simple solution-processing routes and exhibit favorable properties including high transparency in the visible range (>98%), excellent hole mobility (>0.01 cm2 V−1 s−1), and suitable energy alignments for hole-transporting/electron-blocking properties (valence band maximum or VBM around 5.5 eV and conduction band minimum or CBM around 2 eV).17 With the pervasive applications of CuSCN, further developments to improve the properties of CuSCN and the resulting devices can bring about a wide-ranging impact. To this end, solvent engineering is one essential tool for controlling the properties of CuSCN films. Importantly, CuSCN is not soluble in common solvents; the advantage is that its processing is highly compatible with that of organic semiconductors which are processed by orthogonal organic solvents. CuSCN is typically deposited from dipropyl sulfide (DPS) or diethyl sulfide (DES) solutions for device applications.10,11,18,19 There have been attempts at finding alternative solvents, such as aqueous ammonia,20 dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO),21 or mixed acetonitrile–DPS;22 nevertheless, DES has remained the standard solvent due to its high solubility of CuSCN, non-corrosive nature, and good film-forming properties.23,24 CuSCN can be classified as a coordination polymer; solvent molecules can then act as coordinating ligands and form complexes with Cu(I).18,25,26 Our recent report showed that the coordination by DES molecules plays a highly significant role on the film morphology of CuSCN and the resulting hole transport properties. We also found that an antisolvent treatment step could modify the film properties and increase the field-effect hole mobility for transport in the planar directions of CuSCN films up to 0.05 cm2 V−1 s−1 as measured in thin-film transistors (TFTs).27
Herein, we apply the antisolvent treatment to CuSCN HTLs in organic optoelectronic devices, namely organic photovoltaics (OPVs) and OLEDs, and demonstrate that the out-of-plane hole transport through CuSCN films can also be markedly improved. Treating CuSCN films with tetrahydrofuran (THF) was found to yield the highest enhancements in device performance. The average power conversion efficiency (PCE) of OPVs increases from 8.18% for cells based on untreated CuSCN to 9.25% for cells based on THF-treated CuSCN. In addition, the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of OLEDs increases from 5.2% to 8.2% following the antisolvent treatment by THF.
2. Results and discussion
2.1. Antisolvent treatment
During the spin-coating step of the CuSCN layer from a DES solution, an antisolvent was dispensed dynamically onto the forming CuSCN film (full experimental details in ESI†). Four DES-miscible antisolvents were employed: tetrahydrofuran (THF), acetone (Ace), methanol (MeOH), and isopropanol (IPA). Similar to our previous report,27 the optical properties of CuSCN films are not affected by the antisolvent treatment; all films exhibit high transparency of >95% in the visible region with an optical band gap of 3.95 eV. The VBM levels of all films are located at −5.5 eV with respect to the vacuum level. We showed in our previous work that the antisolvent treatment mainly affects the nanoscale crystallinity and adsorption of DES molecules on the surface or at the grain boundaries of CuSCN films.27 This results in significant improvements in the planar hole transport properties in TFTs, especially when treated by THF or Ace. In this work, we show that the method can be applied to CuSCN films optimized for HTL applications in OPVs and OLEDs (thicker layers compared to TFT applications) and that the out-of-plane hole transport can also be improved, leading to increased device efficiencies.
2.2. Surface morphology of antisolvent-treated CuSCN films
The effects of the antisolvent treatment on the surface morphology of CuSCN layer were investigated using atomic force microscope (AFM) under ambient condition. CuSCN films were prepared on indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrates, identical to the structures employed for OPVs and OLEDs. Fig. 1a–e show the surface topography images acquired using a scan area of 1 × 1 μm2. Both the pristine (untreated) and antisolvent-treated films exhibit nanoscale ellipsoidal grains similar to previous reports.20,27 The histograms of the AFM surface height values (ZAFM) are shown in Fig. 1f. The root-mean-square surface roughness (σrms) from the histograms is plotted against the average grain diameter (Davg) in Fig. 1g. The untreated film shows the largest average grain size and correspondingly highest roughness, Davg ≈ 9 nm and σrms ≈ 4 nm, respectively. The antisolvent treatment results in slightly smaller grains and smoother surfaces with THF yielding the lowest Davg and σrms of 7.7 and 3.3 nm, respectively. The values of Davg and σrms are reported in Table S1 (ESI†).
 Fig. 1  (a–e) AFM topography images (1 × 1 μm2) of untreated, THF-, Ace-, MeOH-, and IPA-treated CuSCN films on ITO, respectively. (f) Histograms of AFM Z-height (ZAFM). (g) Root-mean-square roughness (σrms) vs. average grain size (Davg). (h) CuSCN film thickness (h) from profilometry. 
The results show evidence of the antisolvents accelerating the crystallization by decreasing the solubility which then increases heterogeneous nucleation sites for CuSCN on the substrate.28 This mechanism leads to the observed reduction in Davg and σrms. The thickness of the films (h) was also measured by profilometry, and the results are included in Table S1 (ESI†). The untreated CuSCN film was approximately 45 nm thick, which is the optimum thickness for applications investigated herein. The film thickness increases following the antisolvent treatment as shown in Fig. 1h. THF results in the thickest film of around 100 nm whereas Ace, MeOH and IPA yield similar thicknesses around 80 nm. The increase in film thickness following the antisolvent treatment can be explained based on the trapping of solvent molecules (DES) in the films. Our previous analyses based on thermogravimetry (TGA) and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) showed that washing the films with antisolvents could lead to higher DES content in the films; the reason is ascribed to the adsorption of DES molecules on surfaces or between grain boundaries.27 As the grain size decreases upon treatment, the surface area and grain boundaries increase, allowing more adsorption of DES.
2.3. Application in organic solar cells
OPV cells were fabricated using poly[4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b;4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl-alt-(4-(2-ethylhexyl)-3-fluorothieno[3,4-b]thiophene-)-2-carboxylate-2-6-diyl] (PTB7-Th) and [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) as the photoactive bulk heterojunction (BHJ) layer. Fig. 2a shows the molecular structures of the donor polymer PTB7-Th and the fullerene derivative acceptor PC71BM. The bottom anode was ITO, and the HTL was either pristine (untreated) CuSCN or antisolvent-treated CuSCN. In addition, cells with PEDOT:PSS as the HTL were also fabricated for reference. The top cathode was Al with bathocuproine (BCP) employed as the electron transport layer (ETL). The final OPV structure consisted of ITO/HTL/PTB7-Th:PC71BM/BCP/Al as illustrated in Fig. 2b (shown with CuSCN as the HTL) with an active area of 0.0707 cm2. The schematic energy diagram of the various layers is shown in Fig. 2c.
 Fig. 2  (a) Chemical structures of PTB7-Th polymer donor and PC71BM fullerene derivative acceptor. (b) Schematic device structure of OPV cells. (c) Energy diagram for different layers of OPV cells. (d) Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of OPV cells based on CuSCN HTL with different antisolvent treatment. (e) External and internal quantum efficiency (EQE and IQE) spectra. (f) Close-up of EQE and IQE spectra in the visible range. 
Representative current density vs. voltage (J–V) characteristics of OPV cells with different CuSCN HTLs are shown in Fig. 2d. Statistics of device parameters obtained from 10 cells for each set are listed in Table S2 (ESI†) and shown as box plots in Fig. S1 (ESI†). OPV cells with untreated CuSCN HTL show a PCE of 8.18%, a short circuit current (Jsc) of 15.9 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.80 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 64% (all are mean values). Interestingly, all devices based on different CuSCN conditions exhibit similar Voc in the range of 0.80–0.81 V, indicating that the antisolvent treatment does not cause detrimental effects on the interface. The minimally affected Voc is consistent with the unchanged optical band gap and energy levels of CuSCN following the treatment as discussed above. However, the four antisolvents can generally increase FF to 68–69% after the treatment. For OPV cells based on MeOH- and IPA-treated CuSCN HTL, the PCE is increased to 8.60% and 8.53%, respectively. Furthermore, the treatment by THF and Ace also leads to a significant increase in Jsc to 16.7 and 16.4 mA cm−2, respectively. For the latter two, the improvements in FF and Jsc combine to enhance the PCE from 8.18% (untreated) to 9.25% (THF) and 9.16% (Ace). For reference, OPV cells based on PEDOT:PSS HTL show a PCE of 8.92% from a Jsc of 15.5 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.81 V, and an FF of 71% (device parameters also included in Table S2 (ESI†) and a representative J–V plot shown in Fig. S2, ESI†).
As the thickness of the CuSCN layer also increases following the antisolvent treatment, we also studied OPV cells of different (untreated) CuSCN thicknesses (by varying the solution concentration) as shown in Fig. S2 (ESI†). Indeed, the 45 nm thick film (from 20 mg ml−1 solution) is the optimum condition for untreated CuSCN HTL, and the thicker pristine layer of 53 nm (from 25 mg ml−1 solution) results in lower Jsc (16.0 mA cm−2) and FF (62%), hence reduced PCE (8.03%). Therefore, we conclude that the observed improvements in OPV performance following the antisolvent treatment do not originate from the change in the thickness. The external and internal quantum efficiency (EQE and IQE) spectra of OPV cells based on different CuSCN HTLs are shown in Fig. 2e and f. The average EQE and IQE in the visible region (400–700 nm) along with the Jsc integrated from the EQE spectra are reported in Table S3 (ESI†). The EQE-integrated Jsc values correlate well with the Jsc obtained from the J–V characteristics, confirming the reliability of the measurements. The treatment by THF and Ace indeed leads to an increase in both EQE and IQE which corroborates the larger Jsc. As discussed further in the following section, this is due to better hole transport properties through the THF- and Ace-treated CuSCN layers. Another contributing reason for the improvements may be ascribed to the decrease in surface roughness that can facilitate the charge conduction pathway at the HTL/BHJ interface and reduce the density of shunting pathway,11,29 with the latter evident from the higher shunt resistance (Rsh, also included in Table S2, ESI†).
2.4. Impedance spectroscopy and space charge limited current analysis
To further investigate the effects of antisolvent treatment on the electrical characteristics of the OPVs, the cells were studied by impedance spectroscopy under dark condition at a bias of 0.8 V (near Voc). The forward bias condition leads to carrier injection into the cells which allows the characterization of carrier transport.30 The results are shown as a Nyquist plot in Fig. 3a and a Bode plot in Fig. S3a (ESI†). It is apparent that the overall cell resistance decreases following the antisolvent treatment of the CuSCN HTL, and specifically THF and Ace lead to a larger decease compared to MeOH and IPA. The results are consistent with the trends observed for FF and Jsc discussed above. The complex impedance data were fitted with an equivalent circuit for BHJ devices (inset in Fig. 3a), and the fitting results are reported in Table S4 (ESI†). Based on the BHJ equivalent circuit model,31,32 the high-frequency component of the impedance spectra is related to the transport resistance (Rt) whereas the low-frequency part corresponds to the recombination resistance (Rrec). Rt is the resistance related to charge extraction mechanism from the BHJ to the electrodes and should be small for good OPV performance; Rrec is the parameter associated with recombination processes and should be large.31–33
 Fig. 3  (a) Nyquist plot from impedance spectroscopy of OPV cells based on CuSCN HTL with different antisolvent treatment. Open circles are measured data points, and solid lines are fitting results. The equivalent circuit model for BHJ devices is shown in the inset. (b) OPV short-circuit current (Jsc) vs. transport resistance (Rt) from impedance spectroscopy analysis. (c) OPV Jscvs. device hole mobility from space charge limited current analysis (μSCLCh) of hole-only devices (structure shown in inset). 
As can be seen from Table S4 (ESI†), Rrec of all devices are similar around 184 Ω, implying that the recombination losses in the different cells are similar; the trend is consistent with the similar Voc for all sample sets mentioned above. This is mainly due to the same BHJ layer being employed for all samples and also suggests that the electron-blocking property of CuSCN HTL is unaffected by the antisolvents, resulting in similar loss characteristics. On the other hand, notable changes in Rt can be observed after treating the HTL with antisolvents; in particular, THF and Ace are found to reduce Rt significantly, from 359 Ω (untreated CuSCN) down to 84 and 126 Ω, respectively. To show the relationship between the transport resistance and OPV performance, Fig. 3b plots Jsc against Rt for each of the CuSCN HTL condition. It is evident that lower Rt can lead to larger Jsc as in the case of OPV cells treated with THF or Ace. Furthermore, the impedance spectroscopy of cells based on pristine and THF-treated CuSCN HTL was also conducted at different DC bias between 0.7 and 0.9 V, and Rt values based on the same analysis are shown in Fig. S3b (ESI†). Increasing the DC bias (i.e., forward-biasing) introduces more charge carriers through electrical injection at the electrodes resulting in the decreasing trend in Rt.31 Here, Rt of both devices decrease monotonically with the increasing bias, and Rt of the cell based on THF-treated CuSCN is lower than that of the control sample throughout the tested bias range.
In order to scrutinize the effects of the antisolvent treatment on the hole transport properties in OPV cells, hole-only devices with a structure composed of ITO/CuSCN/PTB7-Th:PC71BM/MoO3/Au were fabricated (inset of Fig. 3c). The J–V characteristics were measured under dark condition in an ambient environment and analyzed using the space charge limit current (SCLC) model to obtain the hole mobilities (details in ESI†). Note that the mobility obtained from this structure is related to the transport through the whole cell including the BHJ layer because a single CuSCN layer is too thin to observe the operation in the SCLC region. The measured data and the SCLC fitting results are shown in Fig. S4 (ESI†) while the hole mobilities obtained from the fitting (μSCLCh) are listed in Table S5 (ESI†). The antisolvent treatment by THF and Ace increases the device hole mobility from 9.5 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 (based on untreated CuSCN) to 14.1 × 10−5 and 11.0 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, or an increase of 48% and 16%, respectively. Since the BHJ layer in all devices is the same, the enhancement of hole mobility can be ascribed to improved hole transport through the CuSCN HTL following the treatment by THF and Ace and possibly the better injection at the HTL/BHJ interface due to a smoother HTL surface. By plotting the OPV Jsc against μSCLCh as shown in Fig. 3c, we may deduce that the higher hole mobility through the CuSCN HTL gives rise to larger Jsc. The results from both the impedance spectroscopy of OPV cells and SCLC analysis of hole-only devices clearly indicate that washing CuSCN by THF and Ace could significantly improve the hole transport through the CuSCN HTL which results in the substantial enhancement of OPV performance. Indeed, improving the carrier mobility of the HTL while maintaining other optical and electronic properties is an effective strategy to increase the efficiencies of solar cells.34,35
2.5. Application in organic light-emitting diodes
In addition to the HTL application in OPVs, CuSCN has also been employed in OLEDs as a PEDOT:PSS replacement.10,36,37 To this end, we also investigated the antisolvent treatment of CuSCN HTL by THF for use in OLED devices. The emissive layer (EML) consisted of a phosphorescent green emitter, bis(2-phenylpyridine)(acetylacetonate)iridium(III) [Ir(ppy)2(acac)], as a guest and 4,4′-bis(N-carbazolyl)-1,1′-biphenyl (CBP) as a host. The ETL was 2,2′,2′′-(1,3,5-benzinetriyl)-tris(1-phenyl-1-H-benzimidazole) (TPBi), and lithium fluoride/aluminum (LiF/Al) was employed as the cathode. The structure of the OLED devices comprised ITO/CuSCN/Ir(ppy)2(acac):CBP/TPBi/LiF/Al with an active area of 0.04 cm2 (fabrication details in ESI†). The chemical structures and energy diagram of the different layers are shown in Fig. 4a and b.
 Fig. 4  (a) Chemical structures of Ir(ppy)2(acac) green emitter, CBP host, and TBPi ETL employed in OLED devices. (b) Energy diagram of different layers in OLED devices. (c) and (d) Current density (J) and luminance (L) vs. voltage (V), respectively. (e–g) External quantum efficiency (EQE), power efficiency (PE), and current efficiency (CE) as a function of L, respectively. 
The device characteristics and performance parameters of OLEDs based on untreated and THF-treated CuSCN HTL are displayed in Fig. 4c–g and Table S6 (ESI†), respectively. Note that devices based on PEDOT:PSS HTL were also fabricated as reference devices. Current density and luminance (L) of the devices with untreated CuSCN as the HTL are similar to the previous report based on the same device structure.37 Compared to the reference PEDOT:PSS devices, the use of CuSCN as the HTL reduces the turn-on voltage (Von) from around 5 V to 3 V due to a smaller hole injection barrier resulting from better energy level matching between CuSCN HTL and the EML. The luminance of CuSCN-based OLEDs is also higher from the onset until high forward biases (>10 V), after which the reference PEDOT:PSS devices yield higher luminance values and correspondingly less efficiency roll-off at high L. The observation that the current density in CuSCN devices still increases at high voltages while the luminance struggles to increase suggests an issue of charge carrier imbalance. We speculate that this may be due to the hole current dominating over the electron current and the shift in the recombination zone toward the ETL side.38 One possible route to address this issue is to further optimize the ETL to ensure effective electron–hole recombination at high voltages.
Focusing on the differences between devices based on untreated and THF-treated CuSCN, the former shows high current density at voltages below Von, which is also indicative of imbalanced carrier injection. Once treated with THF, the hole transport in CuSCN is improved, and this undesirable characteristic is suppressed. We also note that the device based on THF-treated CuSCN HTL requires lower operating current (Fig. 4c and d). This leads to substantially enhanced efficiencies in all metrics, including current efficiency (CE), power efficiency (PE), and EQE for OLEDs based on THF-treated CuSCN HTL, especially for luminance up to 1000 cd m2 (Fig. 4e–g). The maximum CE, PE, and EQE for the pristine CuSCN device are 19.4 cd A−1, 11.0 lm W−1, and 5.2%, respectively. The THF treatment of CuSCN increases these parameters to 29.9 cd A−1, 22.8 lm W−1, and 8.2% (Table S6, ESI†). The enhancements can also be attributed to the improved hole transport as discussed in the previous section, which gives rise to better hole injection and more efficient conversion of charges into photons.
3. Conclusion
We report on the broad improvements in OPV and OLED device performance based on the use of antisolvent-treated CuSCN HTL. Washing CuSCN films with an antisolvent (THF, Ace, MeOH, or IPA) results in smoother films as observed by AFM. All four antisolvents increase the FF of OPV cells; furthermore, THF and Ace also significantly raise the Jsc, which subsequently increases the average PCE to 9.25% and 9.16% (max = 9.39% and 9.22%), respectively, compared to an average PCE of 8.18% (max = 8.41%) for OPV cells based on untreated CuSCN HTL. The positive effects can be ascribed mainly to improved hole transport through the antisolvent-treated CuSCN HTL as elucidated by impedance spectroscopy and SCLC analysis of hole-only devices. In addition, the same processing route can be extended to OLEDs, in which the treatment of CuSCN yields an increase in EQE from 5.2% (untreated CuSCN) to 8.2% (THF-treated CuSCN). In summary, this study shows that the antisolvent treatment is a simple and cost-effective method to further improve the hole transport properties of CuSCN and the resulting device performance. As CuSCN has emerged as a highly promising HTL candidate, the facile treatment investigated in this work can have wide-ranging applications in various optoelectronic devices.
Author contributions
Pimpisut Worakajit: methodology, investigation, formal analysis, visualization, and writing – original draft. Taweesak Sudyoadsuk: methodology and supervision. Vinich Promarak: supervision, resources, and funding acquisition. Akinori Saeki: methodology, validation, supervision, resources, and writing – review & editing. Pichaya Pattanasattayavong: conceptualization, funding acquisition, resources, supervision, validation, visualization, writing – review & editing, and project administration.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by funding from Thailand Science Research and Innovation (TSRI) under grant number FRB640087. P. W. and P. P. acknowledge Vidyasirimedhi Institute of Science and Technology (VISTEC) for PhD scholarship and research funding. A. S. acknowledges the support from Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) (Grant No. JP20H05836).
References
Shahnawaz, S. S. Swayamprabha, M. R. Nagar, R. A. K. Yadav, S. Gull, D. K. Dubey and J.-H. Jou, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 7144–7158 RSC .
P.-K. Kung, M.-H. Li, P.-Y. Lin, Y.-H. Chiang, C.-R. Chan, T.-F. Guo and P. Chen, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800882 CrossRef .
H. Xu, F. Yuan, D. Zhou, X. Liao, L. Chen and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 11478–11492 RSC .
Z. Yin, J. Wei and Q. Zheng, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500362 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Groenendaal, F. Jonas, D. Freitag, H. Pielartzik and J. R. Reynolds, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 481–494 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Mauger, L. Chang, C. W. Rochester and A. J. Moulé, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 2747–2756 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Hains, J. Liu, A. B. F. Martinson, M. D. Irwin and T. J. Marks, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 595–606 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cameron and P. J. Skabara, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 1759–1772 RSC .
E. L. Ratcliff, B. Zacher and N. R. Armstrong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1337–1350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Perumal, H. Faber, N. Yaacobi-Gross, P. Pattanasattayavong, C. Burgess, S. Jha, M. A. McLachlan, P. N. Stavrinou, T. D. Anthopoulos and D. D. C. Bradley, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 93–100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yaacobi-Gross, N. D. Treat, P. Pattanasattayavong, H. Faber, A. K. Perumal, N. Stingelin, D. D. C. Bradley, P. N. Stavrinou, M. Heeney and T. D. Anthopoulos, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401529 CrossRef .
N. Arora, M. I. Dar, A. Hinderhofer, N. Pellet, F. Schreiber, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2017, 358, 768–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wijeyasinghe and T. D. Anthopoulos, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2015, 30, 104002 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, M. T. Hoang, D. Yao, N. D. Pham, V. T. Tiong, X. Wang and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 12723–12734 RSC .
A. Montgomery, L. Guo, C. Grice, R. A. Awni, S. Saurav, L. Li, Y. Yan and F. Yan, Prog. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2019, 27, 665–672 CAS .
T. Ding, N. Wang, C. Wang, X. Wu, W. Liu, Q. Zhang, W. Fan and X. W. Sun, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 26322–26327 RSC .
P. Pattanasattayavong, V. Promarak and T. D. Anthopoulos, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1600378 CrossRef .
G. R. R. A. Kumara, A. Konno, G. K. R. Senadeera, P. V. V. Jayaweera, D. B. R. A. De Silva and K. Tennakone, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2001, 69, 195–199 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pattanasattayavong, N. Yaacobi-Gross, K. Zhao, G. O. Ngongang Ndjawa, J. Li, F. Yan, B. C. O’Regan, A. Amassian and T. D. Anthopoulos, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1504–1509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wijeyasinghe, A. Regoutz, F. Eisner, T. Du, L. Tsetseris, Y.-H. Lin, H. Faber, P. Pattanasattayavong, J. Li, F. Yan, M. A. McLachlan, D. J. Payne, M. Heeney and T. D. Anthopoulos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701818 CrossRef .
N. Chaudhary, R. Chaudhary, J. P. Kesari and A. Patra, Opt. Mater., 2017, 69, 367–371 CrossRef CAS .
A. Khorasani, M. Marandi, A. Iraji zad and N. Taghavinia, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2019, 30, 11576–11587 CrossRef CAS .
U. Er, K. C. Icli and M. Ozenbas, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2020, 24, 293–304 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ye, X. Sun, X. Zhang and S. Hao, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 62, 459–476 CrossRef .
P. Pattanasattayavong, D. M. Packwood and D. J. Harding, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 12907–12917 RSC .
K. M. Miller, S. M. McCullough, E. A. Lepekhina, I. J. Thibau, R. D. Pike, X. Li, J. P. Killarney and H. H. Patterson, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 7239–7249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Worakajit, F. Hamada, D. Sahu, P. Kidkhunthod, T. Sudyoadsuk, V. Promarak, D. J. Harding, D. M. Packwood, A. Saeki and P. Pattanasattayavong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002355 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xiao, F. Huang, W. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, Y. Zhu, J. Etheridge, A. Gray-Weale, U. Bach, Y.-B. Cheng and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9898–9903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shao and M. A. Loi, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 1901469 CrossRef CAS .
G. Garcia-Belmonte, A. Munar, E. M. Barea, J. Bisquert, I. Ugarte and R. Pacios, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 847–851 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Leever, C. A. Bailey, T. J. Marks, M. C. Hersam and M. F. Durstock, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 120–128 CrossRef CAS .
A. Guerrero, T. Ripolles-Sanchis, P. P. Boix and G. Garcia-Belmonte, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 2326–2332 CrossRef CAS .
A. Seitkhan, M. Neophytou, M. Kirkus, E. Abou-Hamad, M. N. Hedhili, E. Yengel, Y. Firdaus, H. Faber, Y. Lin, L. Tsetseris, I. McCulloch and T. D. Anthopoulos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1905810 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, Y. Ma, Z. Wang, Z. Mu, W. Gao, W. Fan, W.-S. Li and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 3421–3428 RSC .
W. Liu, Y. Ma, Z. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, M. Khalil, H. Wang, W. Gao, W. J. Fan, W.-S. Li and Q. Zhang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 9600–9609 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, Y. Li, L. Chen, J. Wang, C. Zheng, Y. Qi, R. Chen and W. Huang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 17178–17183 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Chavhan, T. H. Ou, M.-R. Jiang, C.-W. Wang and J.-H. Jou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 18836–18840 CrossRef CAS .
C. Murawski, K. Leo and M. C. Gather, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6801–6827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1tc02897aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a–e) AFM topography images (1 × 1 μm2) of untreated, THF-, Ace-, MeOH-, and IPA-treated CuSCN films on ITO, respectively. (f) Histograms of AFM Z-height (ZAFM). (g) Root-mean-square roughness (σrms) vs. average grain size (Davg). (h) CuSCN film thickness (h) from profilometry.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Chemical structures of PTB7-Th polymer donor and PC71BM fullerene derivative acceptor. (b) Schematic device structure of OPV cells. (c) Energy diagram for different layers of OPV cells. (d) Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of OPV cells based on CuSCN HTL with different antisolvent treatment. (e) External and internal quantum efficiency (EQE and IQE) spectra. (f) Close-up of EQE and IQE spectra in the visible range.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Nyquist plot from impedance spectroscopy of OPV cells based on CuSCN HTL with different antisolvent treatment. Open circles are measured data points, and solid lines are fitting results. The equivalent circuit model for BHJ devices is shown in the inset. (b) OPV short-circuit current (Jsc) vs. transport resistance (Rt) from impedance spectroscopy analysis. (c) OPV Jscvs. device hole mobility from space charge limited current analysis (μSCLCh) of hole-only devices (structure shown in inset).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Chemical structures of Ir(ppy)2(acac) green emitter, CBP host, and TBPi ETL employed in OLED devices. (b) Energy diagram of different layers in OLED devices. (c) and (d) Current density (J) and luminance (L) vs. voltage (V), respectively. (e–g) External quantum efficiency (EQE), power efficiency (PE), and current efficiency (CE) as a function of L, respectively.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1tc02897a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
