Approaching optimal hole transport layers by an organic monomolecular strategy for efficient inverted perovskite solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA13167A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA13167A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 16560-16569Approaching optimal hole transport layers by an organic monomolecular strategy for efficient inverted perovskite solar cells†

        
          
            Wang 
            Li‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Hui 
            Liu‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Changwen 
            Liu‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Weiguang 
            Kong
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Hong 
            Chen
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Weijun 
            Wang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Haichao 
            Zhang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xian 
            Zhang
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Chun 
            Cheng
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology (SUSTech), Shenzhen, 518055, China. E-mail: chengc@sustech.edu.cn
bShenzhen Engineering Research and Development Center for Flexible Solar Cells, Southern University of Science and Technology (SUSTech), Shenzhen, 518055, China
Received 
      2nd December 2019
    , Accepted 15th July 2020First published on 15th July 2020AbstractRecently, prominent works using organic monomolecular layers (MLs) as efficient hole transport layers (ML-HTLs) in inverted perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have been reported to evidently promote device performance; however, these results were achieved individually on specific organic molecules and the power conversion efficiency (PCE) was less than 20%. Herein, to explore the feasibility of extending the strategy of organic ML-HTLs to efficient PSCs and the underlying general enhancement mechanism as well as further optimizing devices to achieve competitive performances, we report an universal ML-HTL strategy, employing MLs of widely used organic hole transport materials to construct HTLs, including small molecules and polymers that are hydrophobic/hydrophilic in nature. This strategy enabled optimal MLs to be formed on ITO substrates with full coverage; meanwhile, the optimal ML thickness resulted in maximum reduction of the charge carrier transit time. Generally, the ML-HTLs not only improve the wettability of the perovskite precursor that favors the formation of compact perovskite films, but also raise the effective work function of ITO towards better energy level alignment by the formation of interface dipoles. Consequently, a substantially improved fill factor of 81.86% and a champion PCE of 20.58% were achieved with the hydrophobic small molecule ML-HTL, which are record values ever reported for inverted PSCs based on ML-HTLs. Apart from small molecules, the use of ML-HTL based on either hydrophobic or hydrophilic polymers also showed improved performances. Furthermore, the better shrouded and more compact perovskite films on ML-HTLs increased the reproducibility of PSCs, which is beneficial for commercial applications. This work demonstrates the totality and in-depth understanding of the ML-HTL strategy and its potential for the development of highly efficient inverted PSCs.
Introduction
Hybrid organic–inorganic trihalide perovskite materials are widely employed in photovoltaic applications due to their high absorption coefficient, tunable bandgap and long charge carrier diffusion length. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has rocketed from 3.8% to over 25% within few years, and their stability has improved significantly.1–3 To date, two types of configurations defined as regular n–i–p and inverted p–i–n structures have been widely investigated, with record efficiency exceeding 25% and 21%, respectively.4,5 Although the efficiency is less prominent, inverted PSCs have attracted extensive attention due to their solution and low temperature processability (<150 °C), and thus have great potential for the development of flexible and tandem devices.4,6–10
In inverted PSCs, the HTMs are mainly divided into inorganic p-type semiconductors such as NiOx,11 CuxO,12–14 CuSCN,15 and MoO3,16 and organic semiconductors such as poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS), 4,4′-cyclohexylidenebis[N,N-bis(4-methylphenyl)benzenamine] (TAPC) and poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA). In many reported works, conventional HTLs with thickness of tens of nanometer are generally required to guarantee full coverage on ITO substrates, and are essential to adjust the energy level alignment, improve hole extraction, and suppress interfacial charge recombination.9,17–19 However, thick HTLs may cause large charge transport resistance and transit time, parasitic absorption, and degradation to the perovskite layer.20,21 Stolterfoht and co-workers have recently investigated the effect of HTL thickness on the performance of inverted PSCs, and found that a reduced thickness was essential for a suitable device fill factor (FF) due to reduced hole transit time through the HTL; however, an evident loss in the open circuit voltage (Voc) was observed when the thickness of the HTL was smaller than 8 nm due to incomplete coverage of the HTL on ITO.22 Therefore, it is highly desirable to explore strategies to develop optimal HTLs with a minimal thickness, while maintaining or promoting the performance of PSCs.
Recently, a prominent work using ultra-thin but compact organic monomolecular layers (MLs) as efficient HTLs (ML-HTLs) in inverted PSCs has been reported, which demonstrated a promoted performance compared to the corresponding control devices.18,20,21 ML-HTLs are found to significantly improve the energy level alignment, hole extraction efficiency, and charge transport properties, besides the potential to address the issues arising from thick HTLs. However, these results were achieved individually on several specific organic molecules such as home-made small molecules and the commercial PEDOT:PSS and TAPC.18,20,21 To date, the feasibility of applying the ML-HTL strategy to other organic molecules for the constructing of high performance PSCs is still unclear and a systematic investigation of the underlying general enhancement mechanism of ML-HTLs on inverted PSCs is still lacking. Furthermore, the optimization of ML-HTL-based PSCs is urgently required to achieve competitive performances compared to conventional PSCs.
In this work, the ML-HTL strategy was systematically investigated by applying several typical organic molecules to inverted PSCs, including a small molecule (TAPC) and polymers (hydrophobic polymer PTAA and hydrophilic polymer PEDOT:PSS). It was found that the ML-HTLs generally not only increased the effective work function of ITO for better energy level alignment with perovskite, but also improved the wettability of the perovskite precursor, favoring film formation with the perovskite. Consequently, for all the studied organic materials, the ML-HTL-based PSCs demonstrated significantly improved PCEs in comparison with conventional PSCs based on pristine HTLs (p-HTLs) with a thickness of tens of nanometers. The enhanced PCEs are mainly attributed to the substantial improvement in FF (approaching 82%) together with the slight increase in short-circuit current density (Jsc). Encouragingly, the devices based on ML-TAPC achieved a promising PCE as high as 20.58% with enhanced device stability; which is the highest value reported to date for inverted PSCs based on ML-HTLs. More importantly, the widely reported organic HTLs with hydrophobic property always suffer from the common problem of poor wettability with perovskite precursors, which easily causes pinholes and large exposed areas in the perovskite films. This ML-HTL method was proven to be a facile, effective and non-destructive strategy to solve this non-wetting issue. It was found that better coverage perovskite films were formed on the MLs. The PCE deviation of the ML-HTL-based devices was smaller than that of the p-HTL devices, indicating that the ML-HTLs are beneficial to improving the reproducibility of PSCs. This stable property can effectively reduce the defective rate, which is of great significance for commercial application. Our results indicate the universality of the ML-HTL strategy for the application of organic hole transport materials in high performance and reproducible PSCs.
Results and discussion
A schematic illustration of the ML-HTL strategy to construct inverted PSCs is shown in Fig. 1. To prepare organic ML on ITO, the HTL solution was firstly spin-coated on the substrate, and then annealed on a hot plate to obtain p-HTL. After cooling to room temperature, corresponding solvent for the respective HTL was dropped onto the p-HTL to wash away redundant molecules by spin-coating (refer to Experimental section for details). Finally, ML-HTL was achieved for perovskite deposition. In this work, both a small molecule (TAPC) and polymers (hydrophobic PTAA and hydrophilic PEDOT:PSS) were employed to illustrate the universality of the ML-HTL strategy, and inverted devices with the typical structure of ITO/ML-HTL (or p-HTL)/perovskite/C60/BCP/Ag were fabricated to certify the effects of ML-HTLs.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram for the preparation of the ML-HTL on ITO substrate, configuration of the inverted device, and chemical structures of TAPC, PEDOT:PSS and PTAA. 
High-resolution X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed to confirm the existence of TAPC, PTAA, and PEDOT:PSS on ITO after solvent washing (Fig. 2a–c, respectively). Both the TAPC and PTAA samples exhibited a peak at 398 eV, which is assigned to the N 1s signal. It has been proven that the N atom can interact strongly with the Sn atom in ITO via an Sn–N bond.18 Thus, TAPC and PTAA still existed on the ITO substrate despite washing with their respective solvent. In the case of the PEDOT:PSS sample, the displayed peaks at around 164 eV and 167 eV are assigned to the S 2p signals in PEDOT and PSS, respectively, and their existence after solvent washing is due to the interaction between PSS and ITO through the In–O–S bond.21 Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) is a powerful technique to study the film topography at the nanoscale and the contact potential differences between the tip and film.23 According to the contact potential distribution, one can get direct information with respect to the uniformity of the surface of a sample. As shown in Fig. 2d–f, it is clear that the surface potential distribution of the TAPC, PTAA, and PEDOT:PSS films, respectively, is uniform and continuous, indicating that the films remained compact without any pinholes after solvent washing. Fig. 2g–i show the XPS spectra of In 3d5/2, of which the intensity dramatically decreased when p-HTLs were formed on ITO. However, the intensity was only reduced slightly for the films washed by their respective solvent compared with ITO, indicating that the thickness of the remaining films was several nanometers since the effective thickness for XPS detection is within ∼10 nm. In fact, the film thickness can be estimated from the variation in the In 3d5/2 peak intensity according to the Beer–Lambert law:24A = −lgI/I0 = alwhere A, I0, a, and l are the absorbance, peak intensity of ITO, a constant related to the absorption coefficient of HTL, and the film thickness, respectively. Since a is a constant, the thickness of the washed film can be calculated using the intensities and the pristine film thickness, which is 22 nm, 10 nm, and 28 nm obtained from a step profiler for p-TAPC, p-PTAA, and p-PEDOT:PSS, respectively. Accordingly, the thickness of the washed TAPC, PTAA, and PEDOT:PSS is 0.9 nm, 1.2 nm, and 1.6 nm, respectively. Ellipsometry measurements were carried out to further estimate the thickness of the HTL. As displayed in Fig. S1,† the thickness of ML-TAPC and ML-PTAA are 1.00 ± 0.08 and 0.79 ± 0.13 nm, which was obtained by fitting the dispersion formula, respectively. These results are consistent with the thickness of 0.9 nm for ML-TAPC and 1.2 nm for ML-PTAA (obtained by Beer–Lambert law), further highlighting the reliability of the result. Since the typical vertical size of the TAPC and PTAA molecules is ≈1 nm, it is reasonable to regard the washed films as MLs. Thus, the above results confirm that uniform and compact MLs from various organic molecules can be prepared successfully on the ITO substrate.
 Fig. 2  XPS spectra of (a) N 1s of ML-TAPC, (b) N 1s of ML-PTAA, and (c) S 2p of ML-PEDOT:PSS. (d–f) KPFM images of ML-TAPC, ML-PTAA, and ML-PEDOT:PSS, respectively. (g–i) In 3d5/2 spectra of TAPC, PTAA, and PEDOT:PSS, respectively. 
Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was conducted to measure the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) levels of the HTLs and to investigate the energy level alignment between the HTLs and perovskite (Fig. S2 in ESI†). The extracted Fermi level (Ef) and HOMO values are listed in Table S1 in the ESI.† As can be seen, the energy offset (Eoffset) between Ef and the HOMO was reduced for all the ML-HTLs in comparison with that for the p-HTLs, indicating that the MLs exhibit more p-type characteristic, and consequently the hole concentration is higher in the MLs compared with the pristine films. The perovskite CH3NH3PbI3−xClx (MAPbI3−xClx) was spin-coated on the HTLs based on our previous reports.9,18,25Fig. 3a shows the energy level alignment between MAPbI3−xClx and TAPC at the equilibrium state with all the energy levels being referenced to a common Fermi level.26 Clearly, the HOMO level of p-TAPC does not match well with the valence band (VB) of MAPbI3−xClx, where the downward band bending of the VB toward interface is disadvantageous to the hole transfer.27 However, much better matching was obtained by substituting ML-TAPC for the p-TAPC film due to its lower Ef compared with that of MAPbI3−xClx, and thus the energy level offset (ΔE) between the HOMO of the HTL and VB of the perovskite was reduced significantly from 0.2 eV to 0.01 eV, indicating improved charge transfer with negligible energy loss. This improvement would be beneficial to the device Jsc and FF.18 A decrease in ΔE was also observed for the ML-PTAA and ML-PEDOT:PSS films in comparison with that of the p-PTAA and p-PEDOT:PSS films, with the values changing from 0.08 eV to 0.03 eV and 0.38 eV to 0.13 eV, respectively (Table S1†).
 Fig. 3  (a) Energy level alignment between TAPC and perovskite. (b) Schematic illustration of vacuum level (VL) shift caused by interface dipoles. Solid and hollow dots represent photogenerated electrons and holes, respectively. 
Generally, the smaller ΔE obtained from all three different organic molecules indicates optimized energy level alignment between the perovskite and ML-HTLs together with substantially reduced energy loss.28 In fact, the decrease in ΔE benefits largely from the interface dipoles (IDs) formed on the ITO substrate by strong van der Waals force between the ML-HTLs and ITO, and the dipoles pointing towards the ITO surface would slow down electron escape for an increase in the work function (WF) of the electrode (Fig. 3b and 2a–c).18,29 The effective work function of the ML-modified ITO (WFeff) correlates with the intrinsic WF of ITO as follows:18WFeff = WF + EIDwhere EID is the energy of ID formed on the ITO substrate, which generally depends on the surface density and dielectric constant of organic molecules as well as the molecular dipole moment. The work function of ITO was measured to be 4.32 eV according to our previous report.18 In contrast, the WFeff is evidently increased after ML modification (Table S1†), indicating improved hole extraction and the potential for its application in HTL-free PSCs.18,30
Besides the electrical properties, the wettability of the perovskite precursor on HTLs is crucial to the performance and reproducibility of PSCs.31 The widely used solvents for MAPbI3−xClx are the hydrophilic DMF and DMSO, while hydrophobic chlorobenzene is used both for TAPC and PTAA. As shown in Fig. 4a, the contact angle (θ) decreased evidently when the precursor was dripped onto the ML-TAPC film in comparison with the p-TAPC film. A similar result was observed on the PTAA films. However, the contact angle did not show an evident difference on the PEDOT:PSS films, which is due to the common hydrophilic nature of the solvents used in the perovskite and aqueous PEDOT:PSS solutions. Fig. 4b shows the typical appearance of the MAPbI3−xClx films on the HTLs. Except for the hydrophilic PEDOT:PSS, it is clearly notable that large exposed areas can be observed regularly on the p-TAPC and p-PTAA films. In contrast, high coverage and uniform perovskite films were formed on the ML-TAPC and ML-PTAA films. Further investigation by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Fig. S3 in the ESI†) revealed that the as-formed MAPbI3−xClx films on the HTLs exhibited similar morphologies, e.g. uniform, compact and with a similar grain size, which is comparable to the film thickness, indicating the good quality and transport properties of the perovskite films.25,26
 Fig. 4  (a) Contact angle measurement of perovskite precursor on p-HTLs and ML-HTLs. (b) Typical appearance of perovskite films on HTLs (ITO glass size 1.5 × 1.5 cm). 
Steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence (PL and TRPL, respectively) spectroscopy were performed to study the photogenerated charge transfer properties. For simple discussion, TAPC is selected as a typical example for the investigation due to its superior photovoltaic performance (shown in the following study). As shown in Fig. 5a, the PL intensity decreased significantly for MAPbI3−xClx grown on ML-TAPC compared with on p-TAPC. The TRPL spectra (Fig. 5b) show that the average decay lifetime is 28.3 ns and 12.0 ns for MAPbI3−xClx grown on p-TAPC and ML-TAPC, respectively (Table S2 in the ESI†). The decrease in PL intensity/lifetime can be ascribed to either the improved charge transfer or increased trap-assisted non-radiative recombination, which correlates tightly with the trap density (Ntrap) in the perovskite film.10 To further determine this, a space-charge-limited current (SCLC) analysis was conducted based on the hole-only devices with the structure of ITO/HTL/MAPbI3−xClx/MoO3/Ag (Fig. 5c and d). SCLC is regarded as the maximum current sustained within a semiconductor. It can be obtained by charge injection from electrodes with a complete filling of the trap states in the trap-filled limit (TFL) region, where the onset voltage (VTFL) is directly associated with Ntrap in the perovskite film as follows:32  where q is the elementary charge, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, εr is the relative dielectric constant of the perovskite, and L is the thickness of the perovskite film. Clearly, the much smaller VTFL of 0.76 V for ML-TAPC in comparison with that of 0.90 V for p-TAPC indicates that the trap density was reduced when the perovskite was grown on ML-TAPC, which is favorable to reducing the non-radiative recombination.10,33 Consequently, it is reasonable to conclude that the substitution of ML-TAPC for p-TAPC can significantly enhance the charge transfer efficiency, indicating that ML-HTLs can not only reduce the charge transit time by the maximum due to the ML thickness, but also favor the charge transfer between the perovskite and ML-HTL, which is beneficial for the charge collection efficiency. Further investigation in the SCLC region (J ∝ Vn, n = 2) revealed that a variation in the HTL did not influence the hole mobility of the perovskite film (Fig. S4 in the ESI†). TPV and TPC measurements (Fig. S5†) were further carried out to evaluate the effects of TAPC and ML-TAPC on the corresponding charge-recombination lifetime and charge extraction time of the PSCs, respectively. The ML-TAPC-based device exhibited a larger charge-recombination lifetime (649 μs) and smaller charge-extraction time (0.58 μs) relative to that of the TAPC-based device (508 and 1.09 μs), indicating that charge recombination was slower, and the extraction efficiency was enhanced. Therefore, this confirmed that the perovskite/ML-HTL interface has superior charge transfer property in comparison with the conventional perovskite/p-HTL interface, which mainly originates from the improved energy level alignment at the interface and lower trap density in the perovskite film.18
 Fig. 5  (a) Steady-state PL and (b) TRPL of perovskite grown on ITO, p-TAPC and ML-TAPC. (c) and (d) SCLC analysis of the hole-only devices. 
Typical inverted PSCs were fabricated to investigate the effects of the ML-HTLs on the performance of the devices. The statistical photocurrent–voltage (J–V) results are shown in Fig. 6 and the detailed parameters are listed in Table S3 in the ESI.† According to the statistical data, it was found that the Voc, Jsc, and especially FF for the ML-HTL based devices all generally improved in comparison with that of the p-HTL-based devices. Accordingly, the average PCE increased from 18.53 ± 0.65% to 19.45 ± 0.46%, 18.34 ± 0.46% to 18.62 ± 0.34%, and 15.38 ± 0.70% to 16.18 ± 0.50% for TAPC, PTAA, and PEDOT:PSS, respectively. The device Voc has been reported to remain almost constant by reducing the HTL thickness to a certain degree, while an evident loss in Voc was observed when the thickness of the HTL was too thin to entirely cover the ITO substrate.22 However, in the present work, the Voc of the ML-HTL-based devices remained almost unchanged compared to the conventional p-HTL-based devices, which resulted from the ultra-thin MLs with excellent coverage on the ITO substrate (Fig. 2), together with their superior wetting behavior for the perovskite precursor (Fig. 4). In addition, all the ML-HTL-based devices showed a moderately increased Jsc, with the increment of 0.11, 0.09, and 0.54 mA cm−2 on average for the TAPC-, PTAA-, and PEDOT:PSS-based devices, respectively (Table S3†). This enhancement is mainly due to the improved energy level alignment and charge transfer for efficient charge collection (Fig. 3 and 5). Furthermore, the FF exhibited a notable promotion, with the increment of 3.22%, 0.39%, and 1.15% on average for the TAPC-, PTAA-, and PEDOT:PSS-based devices (Table S3†). Clearly, the FF makes the major contribution to the enhancement of the PCEs. Stolterfoht et al. reported that the FF correlates strongly with the thickness of HTLs, where the thinner the HTLs, the shorter the hole transit time.22 Therefore, the ML-HTLs enabled the optimization of the FF by providing ML-level HTLs and forming enhanced energy level alignment with perovskite, which plays a vital role in restraining charge recombination and increasing charge collection efficiency.9,18,28 In particular, a relatively smaller standard deviation was observed for the ML-HTL-based devices (Table S3†), which means that the reproducibility was promoted as the result of the improved film coverage of perovskite on the ML-HTLs.
 Fig. 6  Statistical J–V parameters of the devices based on p-HTLs and ML-HTLs. (a) Voc, (b) Jsc, (c) FF, and (d) PCE. 
According to the statistical results, it can be seen that the ML-TAPC-based devices exhibited the best performance among the three investigated hole transport materials, which is due to the best energy level alignment between ML-TAPC and MAPbI3−xClx (Fig. 3a). Accordingly, to simplify the discussion, the devices based on TAPC were chosen for further investigation. Fig. 7a shows the J–V curves of the best devices based on p-TAPC and ML-TAPC, with the efficiency of 19.62% and 20.58%, respectively. The detailed parameters are listed in Table S4 in the ESI.† To the best of our knowledge, the champion efficiency of 20.58% (FF = 81.86%) is currently the highest value among the inverted PSCs based on ML-HTLs (Table 1). Besides the efficiency, significantly reduced hysteresis was observed for the ML-TAPC-based device compared to the p-TAPC-based device (Fig. 7a). The hysteresis characteristics were further compared by calculating the hysteresis index (Table S5 in the ESI†), which is 0.028 and 0.059 for the devices based on ML-TAPC and p-TAPC, respectively. The evident decrease in hysteresis index suggests improved hole extraction efficiency as a result of the formation of an optimal hole transport interface between the perovskite and ML-HTL.20,34 According to the EQE spectra (Fig. 7b), the integrated Jsc was 21.93 and 22.11 mA cm−2 for the p-TAPC- and ML-TAPC-based devices, respectively. These values are in good accordance with the average Jsc of 21.84 and 21.95 mA cm−2 achieved from the J–V curves, respectively, as shown in Table S3.† Devices based on ML-PTAA with 1 and 5 times of washing were also prepared and the results of their photovoltaic performance are listed in Table S6.† The results show that the performance of these devices remained almost unchanged after 5 times of washing, indicating that the PTAA molecules are tightly attached to ITO.
 Fig. 7  (a) J–V curves of the champion devices based on p-TAPC and ML-TAPC with forward and reverse scans. (b) EQE and integrated Jsc curves. (c) Stabilized Jsc and PCE upon light exposure. (d) Long-term stability of devices based on p-TAPC and ML-TAPC. (e) Schematic illustration of stability improvement upon ML usage. 
Table 1 Performance of inverted PSCs based on ML-HTLs




Year
ML-HTL
PCE (%)
FF (%)
Reference





a HTL with reduced thickness less than 8 nm, which was not identified in ref. 21.





2017
Polymer, PTAAa
17.1
84.0

21



2018
Small molecule, V1036 + C4
17.8
76.5

20



2018
Polymer, PEDOT:PSS
18.0
80.6

19



2019
Small molecule, TAPC
19.4
78.9

16



2019
Small molecule, TAPC
20.6
81.9
This work




Besides the photovoltaic performance, the stability was also improved for the devices employing ML-TAPC. Stabilized efficiency measurement from maximum power point tracking was carried out under ambient conditions. As shown in Fig. 7c, both devices based on ML-TAPC and p-TAPC exhibited good stability upon continuous light exposure. Additionally, a long-term stability test was performed for comparison. For this test, the unencapsulated devices were stored in the dark in ambient atmosphere under the relative humidity of 40%. After 700 h storage, the device based on ML-TAPC still kept 84% of its initial efficiency, while the conventional device based on p-TAPC lost 43% efficiency (Fig. 7d). The evident improvement in stability is believed to originate from the much better coverage of the perovskite films on the ML-HTL-covered substrate because film pinholes and exposed area lead to the direct incursion of moisture, resulting in poor stability,35,36 and more importantly, from the strong chemical bond between ML and ITO, which can effectively retard the oxidation process. As shown in Fig. 7e, it was easier for oxygen to oxidize the non-bonded organic molecules within the p-HTLs,37 which would exacerbate the interface between perovskite and HTL thus causing the degradation of device performance.38,39
Conclusion
In summary, we reported the universality of the ML strategy on three widely investigated hole transport materials to construct optimal HTLs. Our comprehensive characterization showed that compared to conventional p-HTLs of tens of nanometers, the ML-HTLs demonstrated several advantages for high performance PSCs as follows: (1) significantly improved surface wetting for perovskite precursor solution, leading to full coverage of the perovskite films; (2) better energy level alignment with perovskite and thus improved charge transfer with less energy loss; and (3) the smallest hole transit time due to the ML level thickness. Consequently, all the inverted PSCs based on the ML-HTLs showed enhanced PCEs and reproducibility, demonstrating the effectiveness and universality of our strategy. The champion efficiency of 20.58% was achieved from ML-TAPC, which to date, is the highest efficiency in inverted PSCs based on organic ML-HTLs. Further investigation showed that the hysteresis and long-term stability of the ML-TAPC-based devices also evidently improved. It is worth noting that our strategy provides the possibility to reduce the consumption of materials by decreasing the content of HTLs in inverted PSCs to the minimum and increases the reproducibility of PSCs. Thus, the major findings in this work are expected to provide guidance for the development of low cost, high performance inverted PSCs.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Project funding from the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (Grants No. 2016YFA0202400 and 2016YFA0202404), the Peacock Team Project funding from Shenzhen Science and Technology Innovation Committee (Grant No. KQTD2015033110182370), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51776094), the Guangdong Natural Science Funds for Distinguished Young Scholars (Grant No. 2015A030306044), the Guangdong-Hong Kong Joint Innovation Project (Grant No. 2016A050503012), the Foundation Research funding from Shenzhen Science and Technology Innovation Committee (JCYJ20180302174021198), and the Guangdong High-level Personnel of Special Support Program-Outstanding Young Scholar in Science and Technology Innovation (Grant No. 2015TQ01C543).
References
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, Organometal Halide Perovskites as Visible-Light Sensitizers for Photovoltaic Cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131(17), 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, H. Na, E. H. Jung, T.-Y. Yang, Y. G. Lee, G. Kim, H.-W. Shin, S. Il Seok, J. Lee and J. Seo, A fluorene-terminated hole-transporting material for highly efficient and stable perovskite solar cells, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3(8), 682–689 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cho, Y.-H. Kim, C. Wolf, H.-D. Lee and T.-W. Lee, Improving the Stability of Metal Halide Perovskite Materials and Light-Emitting Diodes, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(42), 1704587 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Luo, W. Yang, Z. Wang, A. Sadhanala, Q. Hu, R. Su, R. Shivanna, G. F. Trindade, J. F. Watts, Z. Xu, T. Liu, K. Chen, F. Ye, P. Wu, L. Zhao, J. Wu, Y. Tu, Y. Zhang, X. Yang, W. Zhang, R. H. Friend, Q. Gong, H. J. Snaith and R. Zhu, Enhanced photovoltage for inverted planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells, Science, 2018, 360(6396), 1442–1446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html
        .
F. De Angelis, D. Meggiolaro, E. Mosconi, A. Petrozza, M. K. Nazeeruddin and H. J. Snaith, Trends in Perovskite Solar Cells and Optoelectronics: Status of Research and Applications from the PSCO Conference, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2(4), 857–861 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gong, M. Li, X. B. Shi, H. Ma, Z. K. Wang and L. S. Liao, Controllable Perovskite Crystallization by Water Additive for High-Performance Solar Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25(42), 6671–6678 CrossRef CAS .
I. K. Popoola, M. A. Gondal and T. F. Qahtan, Recent progress in flexible perovskite solar cells: materials, mechanical tolerance and stability, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 82, 3127–3151 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, C. Liu, Y. Li, W. Kong, X. Wang, H. Chen, B. Xu and C. Cheng, Polymer Assisted Small Molecule Hole Transport Layers Toward Highly Efficient Inverted Perovskite Solar Cells, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2(11), 1800173 CrossRef .
C. Liu, W. Kong, W. Li, H. Chen, D. Li, W. Wang, B. Xu, C. Cheng and A. K. Y. Jen, Enhanced stability and photovoltage for inverted perovskite solar cells via precursor engineering, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(26), 15880–15886 RSC .
X. T. Yin, P. Chen, M. D. Que, Y. L. Xing, W. X. Que, C. M. Niu and J. Y. Shao, Highly Efficient Flexible Perovskite Solar Cells Using Solution-Derived NiOx Hole Contacts, ACS Nano, 2016, 10(3), 3630–3636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Savva, I. T. Papadas, D. Tsikritzis, G. S. Armatas, S. Kennou and S. A. Choulis, Room temperature nanoparticulate interfacial layers for perovskite solar cells via solvothermal synthesis, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5(38), 20381–20389 RSC .
F. Galatopoulos, A. Savva, I. T. Papadas and S. A. Choulis, The effect of hole transporting layer in charge accumulation properties of p-i-n perovskite solar cells, APL Mater., 2017, 5(7), 076102 CrossRef .
A. Savva, I. T. Papadas, D. Tsikritzis, A. Ioakeimidis, F. Galatopoulos, K. Kapnisis, R. Fuhrer, B. Hartmeier, M. F. Oszajca, N. A. Luechinger, S. Kennou, G. S. Armatas and S. A. Choulis, Inverted Perovskite Photovoltaics Using Flame Spray Pyrolysis Solution Based CuAlO2/Cu-O Hole-Selective Contact, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2(3), 2276–2287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Arora, M. I. Dar, A. Hinderhofer, N. Pellet, F. Schreiber, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Graetzel, Perovskite solar cells with CuSCN hole extraction layers yield stabilized efficiencies greater than 20%, Science, 2017, 358(6364), 768–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Hou, Z. Su, F. Jin, X. Yan, L. Wang, H. Zhao, J. Zhu, B. Chu and W. Li, Efficient and stable planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells with an MoO3/PEDOT:PSS hole transporting layer, Nanoscale, 2015, 7(21), 9427–9432 RSC .
L. E. Greene, M. Law, B. D. Yuhas and P. Yang, ZnO–TiO2 Core–Shell Nanorod/P3HT Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111(50), 18451–18456 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kong, W. Li, C. Liu, H. Liu, J. Miao, W. Wang, S. Chen, M. Hu, D. Li, A. Amini, S. Yang, J. Wang, B. Xu and C. Cheng, Organic Monomolecular Layers Enable Energy-Level Matching for Efficient Hole Transporting Layer Free Inverted Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Nano, 2019, 13(2), 1625–1634 CAS .
C. Liu, Z. Qiu, F. Li, W. Meng, W. Yue, F. Zhang, Q. Qiao and M. Wang, From binary to multicomponent photoactive layer: a promising complementary strategy to efficient hybrid solar cells, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 686–697 CrossRef CAS .
A. Magomedov, A. Al-Ashouri, E. Kasparavičius, S. Strazdaite, G. Niaura, M. Jošt, T. Malinauskas, S. Albrecht and V. Getautis, Self-Assembled Hole Transporting Monolayer for Highly Efficient Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(32), 1801892 CrossRef .
L. Hu, M. Li, K. Yang, Z. Xiong, B. Yang, M. Wang, X. Tang, Z. Zang, X. Liu, B. Li, Z. Xiao, S. Lu, H. Gong, J. Ouyang and K. Sun, PEDOT:PSS monolayers to enhance the hole extraction and stability of perovskite solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(34), 16583–16589 RSC .
M. Stolterfoht, C. M. Wolff, Y. Amir, A. Paulke, L. Perdigón-Toro, P. Caprioglio and D. Neher, Approaching the fill factor Shockley–Queisser limit in stable, dopant-free triple cation perovskite solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10(6), 1530–1539 RSC .
V. W. Bergmann, S. A. L. Weber, F. Javier Ramos, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel, D. Li, A. L. Domanski, I. Lieberwirth, S. Ahmad and R. Berger, Real-space observation of unbalanced charge distribution inside a perovskite-sensitized solar cell, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. E. Wentworth, Dependence of Beer-Lambert Absorption Law on Monochromatic Radiation - an Experiment in Spectrophotometry, J. Chem. Educ., 1966, 43(5), 262–264 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, C. Liu, W. Kong, H. Chen, D. Li, A. Amini, B. Xu and C. Cheng, Liberating Researchers from the Glovebox: A Universal Thermal Radiation Protocol Toward Efficient Fully Air-Processed Perovskite Solar Cells, Sol. RRL, 2019, 1800324 CrossRef .
C. Liu, R. Zhu, A. Ng, Z. Ren, S. H. Cheung, L. Du, S. K. So, J. A. Zapien, A. B. Djurisic, D. Lee Phillips and C. Surya, Investigation of high performance TiO2 nanorod array perovskite solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5(30), 15970–15980 RSC .
S. Wang, T. Sakurai, W. Wen and Y. Qi, Energy Level Alignment at Interfaces in Metal Halide Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5(22), 1800260 CrossRef .
F. Tan, H. Tan, M. I. Saidaminov, M. Wei, M. Liu, A. Mei, P. Li, B. Zhang, C.-S. Tan, X. Gong, Y. Zhao, A. R. Kirmani, Z. Huang, J. Z. Fan, R. Quintero-Bermudez, J. Kim, Y. Zhao, O. Voznyy, Y. Gao, F. Zhang, L. J. Richter, Z.-H. Lu, W. Zhang and E. H. Sargent, In Situ Back-Contact Passivation Improves Photovoltage and Fill Factor in Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31(14), 1807435 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Krüger, U. Bach and M. Grätzel, Modification of TiO2 Heterojunctions with Benzoic Acid Derivatives in Hybrid Molecular Solid-State Devices, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12(6), 447–451 CrossRef .
S. Khodabakhsh, B. M. Sanderson, J. Nelson and T. S. Jones, Using Self-Assembling Dipole Molecules to Improve Charge Collection in Molecular Solar Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16(1), 95–100 CrossRef CAS .
H. Choi, C.-K. Mai, H.-B. Kim, J. Jeong, S. Song, G. C. Bazan, J. Y. Kim and A. J. Heeger, Conjugated polyelectrolyte hole transport layer for inverted-type perovskite solar cells, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, Z. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Cai, Y. Zhou, Q. Qin, X. Lu, X. Gao, L. Shui, S. Wu and J.-M. Liu, Enhanced performance of planar perovskite solar cells using low-temperature processed Ga-doped TiO2 compact film as efficient electron-transport layer, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 272, 68–76 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tu, X. Yang, R. Su, D. Luo, Y. Cao, L. Zhao, T. Liu, W. Yang, Y. Zhang, Z. Xu, Q. Liu, J. Wu, Q. Gong, F. Mo and R. Zhu, Diboron-Assisted Interfacial Defect Control Strategy for Highly Efficient Planar Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(49), 1805085 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Chen, Q. Hu, T. Liu, L. Zhao, D. Luo, J. Wu, Y. Zhang, W. Zhang, F. Liu, T. P. Russell, R. Zhu and Q. Gong, Charge-Carrier Balance for Highly Efficient Inverted Planar Heterojunction Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(48), 10718–10724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Jeng, Y. F. Chiang, M. H. Lee, S. R. Peng, T. F. Guo, P. Chen and T. C. Wen, CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite/Fullerene Planar-Heterojunction Hybrid Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25(27), 3727–3732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Song, A. Abate, S. C. Watthage, G. K. Liyanage, A. B. Phillips, U. Steiner, M. Graetzel and M. J. Heben, Perovskite Solar Cell Stability in Humid Air: Partially Reversible Phase Transitions in the PbI2-CH3NH3I-H2O System, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6(19), 1600846 CrossRef .
A. Heller, Chemistry and applications of photocatalytic oxidation of thin organic films, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28(12), 503–508 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, Z. Qiu, W. Meng, J. Chen, J. Qi, C. Dong and M. Wang, Effects of interfacial characteristics on photovoltaic performance in CH3NH3PbBr3-based bulk perovskite solar cells with core/shell nanoarray as electron transporter, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 59–68 CrossRef CAS .
T.-H. Han, S. Tan, J. Xue, L. Meng, J.-W. Lee and Y. Yang, Interface and Defect Engineering for Metal Halide Perovskite Optoelectronic Devices, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1803515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta13167a‡ W. Li, H. Liu, and C. Liu contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram for the preparation of the ML-HTL on ITO substrate, configuration of the inverted device, and chemical structures of TAPC, PEDOT:PSS and PTAA.	 
A = −lgI/I0 = al

 	Fig. 2  XPS spectra of (a) N 1s of ML-TAPC, (b) N 1s of ML-PTAA, and (c) S 2p of ML-PEDOT:PSS. (d–f) KPFM images of ML-TAPC, ML-PTAA, and ML-PEDOT:PSS, respectively. (g–i) In 3d5/2 spectra of TAPC, PTAA, and PEDOT:PSS, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Energy level alignment between TAPC and perovskite. (b) Schematic illustration of vacuum level (VL) shift caused by interface dipoles. Solid and hollow dots represent photogenerated electrons and holes, respectively.	 
WFeff = WF + EID

 	Fig. 4  (a) Contact angle measurement of perovskite precursor on p-HTLs and ML-HTLs. (b) Typical appearance of perovskite films on HTLs (ITO glass size 1.5 × 1.5 cm).	 

 		 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Steady-state PL and (b) TRPL of perovskite grown on ITO, p-TAPC and ML-TAPC. (c) and (d) SCLC analysis of the hole-only devices.	 

 	Fig. 6  Statistical J–V parameters of the devices based on p-HTLs and ML-HTLs. (a) Voc, (b) Jsc, (c) FF, and (d) PCE.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) J–V curves of the champion devices based on p-TAPC and ML-TAPC with forward and reverse scans. (b) EQE and integrated Jsc curves. (c) Stabilized Jsc and PCE upon light exposure. (d) Long-term stability of devices based on p-TAPC and ML-TAPC. (e) Schematic illustration of stability improvement upon ML usage.	 


2017	Polymer, PTAAa	17.1	84.0	
21

2018	Small molecule, V1036 + C4	17.8	76.5	
20

2018	Polymer, PEDOT:PSS	18.0	80.6	
19

2019	Small molecule, TAPC	19.4	78.9	
16

2019	Small molecule, TAPC	20.6	81.9	This work
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta13167a
‡ W. Li, H. Liu, and C. Liu contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
