Graphene and its derivatives for the development of solar cells, photoelectrochemical, and photocatalytic applications  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE23586F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE23586F
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1362-1387Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsGraphene and its derivatives for the development of solar cells, photoelectrochemical, and photocatalytic applications

        
          
            Da 
            Chen
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Hao 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Liu
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Jinghong 
            Li
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. E-mail: jhli@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 10 6279 5290;   Tel: +86 10 6279 5290
bCollege of Materials Science & Engineering, China Jiliang University, Hangzhou 310018, China
cDepartment of Chemistry and James Frank Institute, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA
Received 
      22nd September 2012
    , Accepted 22nd February 2013First published on 26th February 2013AbstractDue to its unique atom-thick 2D structure and remarkable physicochemical properties, graphene has been making a profound impact in many areas of science and technology. In particular, a great deal of recent attention has been attracted to explore graphene and its derivatives for photoelectrochemical applications, with the potential to harness graphene's excellent properties for opening up new opportunities in next generation photoelectrochemical systems. Over the past few years, much work has been done in the design and preparation of novel graphene-based materials for a wide range of applications in photoelectrochemistry, ranging from photoelectrochemical solar cells, photocatalytic decomposition of organic pollutants, photocatalytic splitting of H2O, photocatalytic conversion for fuels, and so on. In this review article, we summarize the state of research on graphene-based materials from the standpoint of photoelectrochemistry. The prospects and further developments in this exciting field of graphene-based materials are also discussed.Da ChenDa Chen is currently an associate professor at China Jiliang University, China. He received his MSc in 2004 from Zhejiang University and his PhD in 2008 from University of Science & Technology of China under the supervision of Prof. Jinghong Li. In 2011, he carried out postdoctoral research in the group of Professor Donghai Wang at the Pennsylvania State University. His current research interest is mainly focused on the design and synthesis of functional graphene-based materials and semiconductor nanostructures, as well as their applications for electrochemical sensing and energy conversion and storage.Hao ZhangHao Zhang received his BSc in 2007 and his M.Sc in 2010 from Dept. of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, China, under the supervision of Prof. Jinghong Li on the photoelectrochemical properties of chemically modified metal oxide semiconductors. Currently he is pursuing his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Dmitri V. Talapin in the University of Chicago, USA.Yang LiuYang Liu is currently an associate professor in the Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University. He received his BS degree from Huazhong University of Sciences and Technology in 2001, and PhD from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2006. He worked as a post-doctoral at the University of California at Riverside and Oakland University since 2007 to 2009. He joined the Chemistry Department of Tsinghua University in Nov. 2009. His current research is focused on electroanalytical chemistry, nanomaterial electrochemistry and biosensors.Jinghong LiJinghong Li is currently a Cheung Kong Professor at Tsinghua University, China. He received his PhD in 1996 from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He spent several years at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, University of California at Santa Barbara, Clemson University, and Evonyx Inc., New York. He returned to Changchun in May 2001 and then moved to Tsinghua University in July 2004. His current research interests include electroanalytical chemistry, bioelectrochemistry and sensors, physical electrochemistry and interfacial electrochemistry, electrochemical materials science and nanoscopic electrochemistry, fundamental aspects of energy conversion and storage, advanced battery materials, and photoelectrochemistry.

Broader context
During the past decades, various semiconductors (such as TiO2 and ZnO) have been proven to be excellent photocatalysts for photoelectrochemical applications. However, there are still many challenges that need to be resolved, including the enhancement of solar energy conversion, the suppression of the recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs, and the effective utilization of visible light. On the basis of graphene's unique structure and excellent properties, the combination of graphene with semiconductors presents the possibility to possess simultaneously excellent adsorptivity, transparency, conductivity and controllability, which could facilitate effective photoelectrochemical performance. Over the past few years, much work has been attempted on the design and preparation of novel graphene-based materials and the exploration of their applications in photoelectrochemistry, and considerable advances in this area have already been made. This review article explores and summarizes the recent advances in graphene-based materials for photoelectrochemical applications, including photoelectrochemical solar cells, photocatalytic decomposition, photocatalytic splitting of H2O, photocatalytic conversion for fuels, and so forth. Also, the prospects and further developments of graphene-based materials in this exciting field are suggested.

1 Introduction
As a rapidly rising star in the field of materials science, graphene has generated increasing interest both in fundamental science and potential applications due to its unique structure and remarkable properties such as excellent conductivity, high electron mobility, superior chemical stability and large surface-to-volume ratio.1–6 Comprehensive reviews on the properties and applications of this material are available.7–22 With respect to its physical structure, graphene is composed of a single layer of carbon atoms arranged in a two-dimensional (2D) honeycomb network of six-membered rings.23 The one-atom-thick structure provides graphene with high transparency24 and an ultrahigh theoretical surface area of 2600 m2 g−1.25 Particularly, long range π-conjugation in graphene permits ballistic transport, meaning that the electrons in graphene can behave like massless relativistic particles and travel without scattering at mobilities exceeding ∼15000 m2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature.1,2,26,27 This makes graphene possess a number of very peculiar electronic properties such as the quantum Hall effect, an ambipolar electric field effect, the Klein paradox, and transport via relativistic Dirac fermions.28 Apart from these unique electronic properties, graphene can be made insulating, semiconducting, or semimetallic by appropriately tuning the oxidation or reduction process to control its structural order.29,30 Moreover, the surface properties of graphene could be also adjusted via chemical modification, which offers tremendous opportunities for functionalized graphene-based materials.31 Thus, these unique physicochemical properties of graphene suggest the potential to provide new approaches and critical improvements for many applications including energy storage,15,32 catalysis,33–35 biosensors,14,18,36–43 and drug delivery,44etc.
Since the discovery of the photocatalytic splitting of water on TiO2 electrodes by Fujishima and Honda in 1972,45 semiconductor materials-based photoelectrochemical systems have been extensively studied to alleviate the deterioration of natural environments created by toxic pollutants and the exhaustion of energy resources by photogeneration of electricity and photocatalytic hydrogen production from water utilizing light.46–52 It is known that the unique electronic structure of a semiconductor, consisting of a filled valence band (VB) and an empty conduction band (CB), plays a key role in photoelectrochemical processes. When the semiconductor is excited by a photon with energy equal to or higher than its band gap energy (Eg), an electron in the VB is thus promoted to the CB, leaving a positive hole in the VB. The photo-generated electrons and holes that migrate to the surface of the semiconductor without recombination can, respectively, reduce and oxidize the reactants adsorbed by the semiconductor. The reduction and oxidation reactions are the basic mechanisms of photocatalytic pollutant degradation, photocatalytic hydrogen production and solar photovoltaics. Theoretically, semiconductors that satisfy the above-mentioned requirements can be used as photocatalysts for light-induced electrochemical reaction. To date, a number of semiconductors (e.g., TiO2, ZnO, Fe2O3, WO3, CdS, Bi2WO4 and NaTaO3, etc.) have been proven to be excellent photocatalysts for photoelectrochemical applications, and considerable advances in this area have already been made. However, there are still many challenges that are yet to be met before these photoelectrochemical processes become economically feasible, including the enhancement of solar energy conversion, the suppression of the recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs, as well as the effective utilization of visible light.53–55 In order to solve these problems, a variety of strategies have been developed to improve the photoelectrochemical performance and enhance the visible light response of semiconductor materials, for example, via addition of electron donors (hole scavengers),56–58 controlled incorporation of oxygen vacancies,59 noble metal loading,60 metal ion doping,61,62 anion doping,63,64 dye sensitization65,66 and formation of composite semiconductors.67–71 In particular, much recent attention has been attracted to explore graphene and its derivatives for photoelectrochemical applications, with the potential to harness graphene's excellent properties for opening up new opportunities in next generation photoelectrochemical systems. On the basis of graphene's unique structure and excellent properties, the application of graphene in combination with semiconductor materials presents the possibility to possess simultaneously excellent adsorptivity, transparency, conductivity, and controllability, which could facilitate effective photoelectrochemical performance. Over the past few years, much work has been attempted to design and prepare novel graphene-based materials and explore their applications in photoelectrochemistry. Examples include the use of graphene-based materials as transparent conductive electrodes or active materials in solar cells,15,72–75 photocatalysts for pollutant degradation,33,76–78 photocatalytic hydrogen production33,77,79 and photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to hydrocarbon fuels.80,81
In this review article, we briefly review the state of research on graphene-based materials from the standpoint of photoelectrochemistry. Focusing on the discussion of photoelectrochemical properties and processes of graphene-based materials, we then explore and summarize the exciting recent progress on the use of graphene-based materials for photoelectrochemical applications (Fig. 1), including photoelectrochemical solar cells, photocatalytic decomposition, photocatalytic splitting of H2O, photocatalytic conversion for fuels and so forth. In addition, the prospects and further developments of graphene-based materials in this exciting field will be also suggested.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of graphene-based materials for a wide range of applications in photoelectrochemistry, including photoelectrochemical solar cells, photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants, photocatalytic splitting of H2O for H2 production, photocatalytic conversion of CO2 for fuels, and so on. 
2 Photoelectrochemical properties and processes of graphene-based materials
As is known, photoelectric events (such as photonic absorption, electrons and holes separation/recombination, etc.) and mass transfer (such as adsorption/desorption, diffusion, etc.) are key steps that can affect photoelectrochemical activity.82,83 Thus, it is important to elucidate the role of graphene in photoelectric events and mass transfer during photoelectrochemical processes to improve the photoelectrochemical properties of graphene-based materials and facilitating their photoelectrochemical applications. To date, graphene-based materials have been proven to possess improved photoelectrochemical activities. However, the roles of graphene in promoting photoelectrochemical activities are still not clearly understood, and the elucidation of the roles of graphene in photoelectrochemical processes needs to be further explored.
A photoelectrochemical process can be defined as a photoinduced reaction, which involves transforming light into other forms of energy, on the basis of semiconductor materials. In an illuminated semiconductor-based photoelectrochemical system, three key processes usually take place in sequence.84 The first key process is the absorption of photons to create electron–hole pairs. The ability of a semiconductor to absorb light at various wavelengths is exclusively determined by its electronic structure, namely the position of the valence and conduction bands (ΦVB and ΦCB). For photons to be absorbed, they must be energetic enough to promote electrons from the valence to the conduction band (hν ≥ ΦVB − ΦCB). The second key process is the separation and migration of the photogenerated electrons and holes to surface reaction sites, or recombination. The most widely used parameters to characterize this type of transport are the diffusion length of holes and electrons, and the recombination rate. It has been revealed by time resolved spectroscopic studies that electron–hole trapping or recombination rates are extremely fast (of the order of 10−6 to 10−15 s),46,85 which can substantially lower the photoelectrochemical activity. When the particle size is reduced, however, the diffusion length of the photogenerated holes and electrons to surface reaction sites tends to be reduced, thereby reducing the recombination probability.53 The final key process involves the surface chemical reactions, usually including at least two reactions, i.e., oxidation by photogenerated holes and reduction by photogenerated electrons, in which several highly reactive species (such as ˙OH, ˙O2−, and H2O2) are usually involved.77 For the surface chemical reactions, of importance are surface character (active sites) and quantity (surface area). The use of cocatalysts (such as Pt, NiO, and RuO2) to introduce suitable active sites and increase the rate of surface reactions is extremely common, while increased surface area can be obtained by using highly porous materials, and/or reducing their sizes. Thus, from the viewpoint of the above three key processes, there are three fundamental approaches for enhancement of photoelectrochemical activities:84 (i) band-gap tuning and/or extension of excitation wavelength by use of photosensitizers; (ii) minimizing charge carrier recombination; and (iii) promotion of the surface chemical reactions through provision of adequate quality and quantity of active sites.
On the basis of the intrinsic physical and chemical characteristics of graphene, the application of graphene in combination with semiconductor nanoparticles presents the opportunity to cover simultaneously all three of the mechanisms of photoelectrochemical enhancement, as described above. Employed as a scaffold, graphene can create a 2D conductive support path for charge transport and collection, which can be used to enhance the electron transport properties of nanostructured semiconductors and dye-sensitized photoelectrochemical systems.86 Because of its higher work function, graphene can act as an electron shuttle to induce easier electron transfer from the conduction band of semiconductors or the excited dye to graphene, leading to an efficient charge separation and significant enhancement in photocatalytic activity.86–91 The electron transfer from excited semiconductors or dyes into graphene nanosheets continues until the two systems attain charge equilibration.92 Some of these transferred electrons are consumed in the reduction reaction on the surface of graphene while some are stored in the graphene network.92,93 In addition to serving as a sink and shuttle for photoexcited electrons, the formation of chemical bonds and nano-sized Schottky interfaces at the contacts between semiconductor and graphene can narrow the band gap of semiconductor particles and extend the photoresponse range,93–96 thus leading to enhanced photoelectrochemical activities. Besides, graphene can provide large amounts of surface reaction sites due to the extra large surface area, and the surface chemistry of graphene may be tailored to promote specificity towards adsorbents. Very recently, it has also been revealed that graphene may enhance photoelectrochemical activities by acting as a photosensitizer, and transferring the excited electrons in the upper valence band from graphene to the conduction band of semiconductor nanoparticles due to the large difference in work function between graphene and semiconductor nanoparticles.96–98
Thus, it can be concluded from the above discussion that although graphene is much more popular than its forebears (carbon nanotubes, fullerenes, and activated carbon) at present, graphene-based materials basically exhibit four positive factors that can potentially enhance photoelectrochemical activity, including: the minimization of electron–hole recombination; band gap tuning; provision of high quality highly adsorptive active sites; and photosensitization. In fact, all four factors were well established in other carbon-based photocatalysts, and the previous literature99 has strongly shown that graphene-based semiconductor photocatalysts are in essence the same as other carbon (carbon nanotubes, fullerenes, and activated carbon)-based semiconductor photocatalysts in the enhancement of photocatalytic activity. Therefore, it is still hard to clarify whether graphene is superior to other carbon materials when combined with other semiconductor photocatalysts for enhanced photoelectrochemical activities. A full understanding of the role of graphene to the photoelectrochemical properties and mechanisms of graphene-based materials in photoelectrochemical process still needs more evidence. However, it should be noted that graphene has a number of unique intrinsic properties that make possible graphene's superiority to other carbon materials in photoelectrochemical applications. One important advantage is that electrons move much faster through graphene than through other carbon materials. They behave as massless Dirac fermions and travel at 1/300 the speed of light.10 Another advantage is that graphene is also very good at absorbing light over a very wide range of wavelengths, ranging from the visible to the infrared.100,101 Other carbon materials do not work over such a wide range. Other advantages include an ultrahigh theoretical surface area of 2600 m2 g−1 and high transparency, which is much higher than those exhibited by other carbon materials.
On the other hand, except for the above-mentioned functions of graphene for the enhancement of photoelectrochemical activity, graphene itself (or its derivatives) have been proven to possess intrinsic photoelectrochemical properties. For example, as one of the graphene derivatives, graphene oxide (GO) itself has been found to possess a significant level of self-photocatalytic ability for water splitting, with encouraging results due to its tunable band-gap by adjusting the degree of oxidation.79 Under irradiation with UV or visible light, the GO photocatalyst could steadily catalyze H2 generation from a 20 vol% aqueous methanol solution and pure water. For another example, the high-quality monolayer or bilayer graphene itself has demonstrated an intrinsic photoresponse,102 and the origin of the intrinsic photoresponse in graphene is attributed to either thermoelectric or photovoltaic effects.103 This kind of intrinsic photoresponse may offer a path to hot carrier-assisted optoelectric technologies for efficient solar energy harvesting.
3 Photoelectrochemical applications
3.1 Photoelectrochemical solar cells
A solar cell (also known as photovoltaic (PV) device) can convert sunlight into electrical energy, and thus has been considered as one of the state-of-the-art solutions to energy issues. Besides the well commercialized Si based solar cells, inexpensive alternatives, including organic PVs, dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and quantum dot sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs), have also attracted extensive investigation. Graphene-based materials, owing to their excellent electrical conductivities, high transparency, strong capability in accepting electrons, wide band tunability, as well as flexibility, have been much involved in recent advances in the field of solar cells.

3.1.1 Organic/polymer solar cells. 
Polymer solar cells, or organic solar cells (also known as organic photovoltaics, OPV), are of great interest as a promising alternative to traditional solar cells due to their light weight, ease of manufacture, compatibility with flexible substrates, and low cost.104 However, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the OPVs is still inferior to the traditional Si or quantum dots (QDs)-based PVs. To date, graphene-based materials have been applied in OPVs as transparent electrodes, electron acceptors or hole transporters and so on, with a view to achieving enhanced performances.
3.1.1.1 Graphene-based materials as the transparent electrodes. 
An ideal transparent electrode for a solar cell should fulfil the requirements of high transparency (>80%) in a wide window, low sheet resistivity (Rs < 100 Ω per square), as well as a proper work function (4.5–5.2 eV).105 Currently, the transparent electrode in organic solar cells is indium tin oxide (ITO), which possesses a transparency of >90% at the wavelength of 550 nm, a Rs of 10–30 Ω per square and a favorable work function.105 However, the use of ITO is increasingly problematic due to the scarcity of the indium source, its sensitivity toward acid–base, susceptibility to ion diffusion into polymer layers, as well as the brittle nature of the oxides.106 As opposed to the rising cost and brittleness of ITO, the low cost, unique optical and electrical properties, chemical robustness, as well as the high flexibility facilitate graphene as a promising new generation transparent electrode. Recently, graphene and its derivatives have been employed as alternative transparent electrodes for OPVs, and the corresponding OPVs exhibited promising performances as shown in Table 1. For example, Chen and coworkers107,108 explored the possibility of the chemically and thermally reduced GO (rGO) as the transparent electrode for OPVs. It was found that the transmittance of as-prepared rGO was as high as >80% in the range of 400–1800 nm, while the Rs was ≥1 kΩ per square, which was much higher than that of the ITO electrode. They also demonstrated that the transmittance and conductivity were dependent on the thickness of the graphene film. By stacking more layers of graphene nanosheets, the conductivity increased whereas the transmittance was compromised. As for the OPV devices based on the graphene film with thicknesses of 4 and 7 nm, the transmittance and Rs of the graphene films were measured to be 95–85% and 100 to 500 kΩ per square, respectively. Due to the relatively high resistance, the optimized power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the graphene-based OPV device was reported to be 0.4%, which was lower than that of the ITO-based OPV device (0.84%). Though the rGO-based OPV devices show high resistance and low PCEs, the rGO films offer a unique advantage of excellent flexibility over ITO-based films as the transparent flexible electrodes in OPVs.106,109 As reported by Zhang and co-workers,106 rGO was transferred onto flexible substrates such as polyethylene terephthalate (PET), and then used as transparent and conductive electrodes for OPVs. The highest PCE obtained in such a rGO–PET-based OPV was 0.78% with a transparency of 55% and a Rs of 1.6 kΩ per square, which was still inferior to that of ITO-based OPVs. With an applied tensile strain (∼2.9%), the fabricated rGO–PET-based OPVs were able to sustain a thousand cycles of bending, whereas the ITO-based OPVs showed obvious cracks upon bending (Fig. 2). In addition, compared to chemical or thermal reduction of GO, the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method has surged as a reliable and scalable way to obtain high quality graphene with a large and smooth area, high transmittance and electrical conductivity.109,110 For example, Zhou and co-workers109 explored the implementation of large-area, smooth, few-layer graphene films obtained by CVD as the transparent electrodes in flexible OPVs. The prepared CVD graphene film was continuous with a minimal surface roughness of ∼0.9 nm and a Rs value down to 230 Ω per square at 72% transparency. Such a CVD graphene-based OPV device showed a relatively high PCE of 1.18%, which was comparable with the ITO-based OPV device (PCE of 1.27%). Also, the CVD graphene-based flexible OPV device demonstrated an outstanding capability to operate under bending conditions up to 138°, whereas the ITO-based devices displayed cracks and irreversible failure under bending of 60°.
Table 1 Summary of graphene-based transparent electrodes and the PCEs of the corresponding OPVs




Graphene material

R
s (kΩ per square)

T (%)
Device structurea
PCE (%)
Ref.





a G represents graphene or its derivatives (including reduced graphene oxide (rGO), doped graphene, or multilayered graphene, etc.)-based transparent electrodes.





rGO
100–500
85–95
G/CuPc/C60/BCP/Ag
0.4

108



rGO
1.6
55
G/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/TiO2/Al
0.78

106



CVD
0.23–8.3
72–91
G/PEDOT:PSS/CuPc/C60/BCP/Al
1.18

109



CVD—multilayer
0.374
84.2
G/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Ca:Al
1.17

112



CVD—AuCl3 doped
0.5–0.3
97.1, 91.2
G/PEDOT:PSS/CuPc/C60/BCP/Ag
1.63

115



CVD—acid doped
0.08
90
G/MoO3/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/LiF/Al
2.5

114



CVD—organic molecules doped
0.278
92.2
G/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Ca:Al
2.58

117



rGO/CNTs
0.24
86
G/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Ca:Al
0.85

120





 Fig. 2  (A) Photograph of rGO/PET; (B) schematic representation of the layer structure of the device, i.e., rGO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/TiO2/Al, with rGO as the transparent electrode; (C) current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the device after applying (I) 400, (II) 800, and (III) 1200 cycles of bending; (D) the short-circuit current density (Jsc), overall power conversion efficiency (η), and the sheet resistance (RSR) of the device as a function of bending cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 106. Copyright © 2010 American Chemical Society. 
As is known, the key challenge for graphene to replace ITO as the transparent electrode is the high sheet resistivity, leading to a decrease in the short circuit current (Jsc) and fill factor (FF), and consequently the low PCE of the OPVs. In principle, the sheet resistance of graphene is given by Rs = (σ2DN)−1, where σ2D is the 2D sheet conductivity and N is the number of layers.111 Stimulated by the theoretical prediction, many efforts have been made on reducing the Rs of the graphene films by stacking of multiple graphene layers (increasing N)112,113 and chemical doping (increasing σ2D by increasing the carrier concentration).114 For example, Choi et al.112 reported the fabrication of the organic solar cells on the CVD-grown multilayer graphene (MLG) films. The MLG film showed a relatively low Rs value of 374 Ω per square at 84.2% transparency, and the MLG film-based OPV device exhibited a PCE of 1.17%. As for the graphene doping, different species have been used as dopants for increasing carrier concentration in graphene, such as Au,115,116 acid,113,114 and organic molecules.117,118 For example, Kong and co-workers115 reported the doping of graphene with AuCl3. The introduction of AuCl3 dopants could improve the compatibility between the hydrophobic graphene electrodes and the hydrophilic poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)/poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT/PSS) hole transporting layers, thus leading to an enhanced efficiency of the graphene-based OPV device, which was comparable with the ITO-based OPVs. Wang et al.114 reported the acid (HCl and HNO3) doped multi-layer stacked graphene as the transparent electrode for OPVs. The doped four-layer graphene film exhibited a Rs of ∼80 Ω per square and a transmittance of ∼90% at 550 nm, and the constructed graphene-based solar cell showed a PCE of 2.5%, which was 80% of the PCE of ITO-based solar cell. Despite the high efficiency of the acid doped graphene, it suffered in long term stability. This can be ascribed to the fact that the acid dopants were easily eliminated by heating or electrical stress, causing reliability issues in electronic applications.119 Moreover, the possible acid diffusion from acid-doped graphene to organic layers could also degrade the device performance. Organic molecules have been also used for the doping of graphene. Li and co-workers117 reported the use of layer-by-layer graphene–tetracyanoquinodimethane (TCNQ) stacked films as the transparent electrode for OPVs. The TCNQ molecules were thermally evaporated onto the surface of graphene sheets, and embedded between two graphene layers. As a p-doping agent, the inclusion of TCNQ significantly increased the hole concentration in the graphene layers, leading to a decrease of Rs and an enhanced PCE of 2.58% for flexible OPVs. Besides the small organic molecules, ferroelectric polymers such as poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-trifluoroethylene) (P(VDF-TrFE)) were also reported as p-doping agents for graphene.118 It is important to note that the P(VDF-TrFE) polymer is highly stable under ambient atmosphere and essentially transparent (>95%) in the visible range. In this graphene–P(VDF-TrFE) hybrid structure, large-scale graphene was heavily doped up to 3 × 1013 cm−2 by nonvolatile ferroelectric dipoles, yielding a low sheet resistance of 120 Ω per square at ambient conditions.
In addition to the doping strategies, the composites of graphene and carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have been also proven to exhibit notably enhanced electrical conductivity compared to either pristine CNTs or graphene while maintaining their optical transmittance. For example, Yang's group120 reported the formation of the composites of chemically converted graphene and CNTs (G–CNTs) via a solution based route. After chemical doping with SOCl2, the optimized G–CNTs showed a Rs value of ∼240 Ω per square at 86% transmittance, and the G–CNT based OPV device exhibited a PCE of 0.85%. Later, King et al.121 developed a water-based route to obtain graphene–CNT composites. The addition of a small amount (3 wt%) of graphene into CNTs could render an increase of the material's conductivity by 40%. Optimized, the graphene–CNTs based composite films displayed a transmittance of 80% coupled with a sheet resistance of 100 Ω per square.
3.1.1.2 Graphene-based materials as the electron acceptors. 
Unlike in traditional inorganic solar cells where free electrons and holes are generated upon irradiation, light absorption in organic solar cells leads to the formation of excitons, or closely bound electron–hole pairs. To separate these closely bound electron–hole pairs, an electron acceptor, whose electron affinity (EA) is larger than that of the donor polymer, but still smaller than its ionization potential (IP), is necessary.122 At the current stage, the most successful OPVs are based on bulk heterojunction (BHJ) structures with a combination of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) or poly(3-octylthiophene) (P3OT) with [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) as the electron donor–acceptor pair, showing an overall efficiency of 5–6%.123,124 However, the fullerene-based PCBM is not necessarily the optimum choice for electron acceptors in view of the relatively low PCE of the OPVs. Accordingly, the replacement of PCBM with its carbon allotropes such as CNTs has been thoroughly investigated. However, the unexpectedly low PCE (<0.5%) was obtained in the OPVs with CNTs as the electron acceptors, which can be attributed to poor solubility and impurities as well as the bundling structures of the CNTs. Graphene, with a mobility as high as 7 × 104 cm2 V−1 s−1, is considered to be a promising electron acceptor in OPVs.105 For example, Chen and coworkers125,126 reported the application of the solution-processable functionalized graphene (SPFGraphene) material as an electron-acceptor material in the OPVs, with P3OT and P3HT as electron donors. The efficient electron transport from the electron donors to the SPFGraphene was evidenced by significant photoluminescence (PL) quenching. After the annealing treatment, the SPFGraphene-based OPV device showed a PCE of 1.4%, which was comparable to most of the best OPV devices using materials other than fullerenes as electron acceptors. Similarly, Liu et al.127 mixed the SPFGraphene and functionalized multi-walled CNTs (f-MWCNTs) together in the active layer, and fabricated OPVs with a structure of ITO/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT):poly(styrenesulfonate)(PSS)/P3HT-f-MWCNTs-SPFGraphene/LiF/Al, where SPFGraphene acted as the electron acceptor and also provided the percolation path for electrons, and f-MWCNTs served as an efficient hole transporter. The combination of the two carbon allotropes would facilitate a fast separation of the electron–hole pairs and thus suppress the recombination, achieving a PCE of 1.05%.
In addition, due to their high specific surface area for a large interface, high mobility and tunable band gap, graphene quantum dots (GQDs) exhibit great potential as an electron acceptor material in photovoltaic devices.128 For example, Gupta et al.129 synthesized aniline-functionalized GQDs (ANI-GQDs) via a hydrothermal method and explored their applications as electron acceptors in OPVs (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:ANI-GQDs/LiF/Al). For comparison, the solar cells based on P3HT–ANI-graphene sheets (ANI-GSs) were also fabricated. When 1 wt% GQDs were added, the optimized performance for the ANI-GQDs-based OPVs was achieved with a PCE of 1.14%, better than that of the optimized ANI-GSs-based cells (0.65%). The superior performance suggested that the GQDs could be a promising electron acceptor in OPVs.
As shown in the above examples, however, the performances of the OPVs based on the graphene sheets or GQDs electron acceptors were still inferior to those of the fullerene acceptor-based OPVs. Thus, an intuitive strategy to improve the performance of OPVs can be constituted by using the fullerene–graphene hybrid as an electron acceptor for OPVs. Recently, Yu et al.130 reported the use of fullerene-grafted graphene hybrids as the electron acceptors in OPVs. The covalent interaction between the mono-substituted C60 and graphene sheets was obtained by a lithiation reaction. As shown in the energy diagram, graphene possessed a work function of −4.5 eV, which was lower than the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) (−4.4 eV) of C60 and close to the work function of the Al cathode, indicating graphene could act as an effective electron acceptor between C60 and Al. The device based on C60-grafted graphene:P3HT showed the highest PCE of 1.22%. In comparison, the devices based on C60:P3HT and the C60–graphene mixture:P3HT exhibited much lower PCEs of 0.47% and 0.44%, respectively.
3.1.1.3 Graphene-based materials as hole transporting layers. 
In an OPV device with the BHJ structure, the hole transporting layer (HTL) is deposited on top of the transparent electrode to suppress the carrier recombination and minimize current leakage.131 An ideal HTL should be composed with a wide band gap p-type semiconductor, which plays the following roles:105 (1) to adjust the energetic barrier height between the active layer and the transparent electrodes; (2) to form a selective transporting layer for holes, while blocking the electrons; (3) to modify the surface property to alter active layer morphology; (4) to prohibit a chemical or physical reaction between the active layer and electrodes; (5) to act as an optical spacer. Some inorganic oxides, such as V2O5,132 MoO3 (ref. 132) and NiO,133 have been employed as the HTL for OPVs, yielding a PCE as high as 3–5%. However, the inorganic oxide-based HTL layers are usually fabricated by using the vacuum deposition technique, which is not only incompatible with the solution processable advantages of OPVs, but also adds to the cost.131 Thus, the most commonly used HTL in the OPVs is the organic semiconductor PEDOT:PSS. The advantages of PEDOT:PSS reside in the solution based processing, which minimizes the detrimental effect on the roughness of ITO, as well as the alignment of the energy barriers of ITO and the active layer for efficient hole collecting. However, there still remain several shortcomings of PEDOT:PSS, including the high acidity (pH ∼ 1 during the deposition) and consequently the corrosion of the ITO electrode at elevated temperatures, hygroscopic properties, and inhomogeneous electrical properties, resulting in poor long-term stability.134
Recently, GO thin films have been reported as an alternative HTL material for high performance OPVs. Compared to PEDOT:PSS, GO can be deposited from neutral aqueous suspensions, avoiding corrosion of the electrode. Moreover, the optical band-gap of GO and the band structures can be chemically or thermally tuned for a better alignment of the work functions of ITO and the active layer. In addition, GO also offers significantly higher transparency than PEDOT:PSS. For example, Li et al.131 reported the use of the GO thin films deposited in neutral aqueous suspensions as an efficient HTL for OPVs. In the OPV device with the structure of ITO/GO/P3HT:PCBM/Al (Fig. 3(A)), the work function of GO (4.9 eV) matched well with the work function of ITO and the LUMO of P3HT (Fig. 3(B)), facilitating an efficient hole transfer. The optimized PCE for the OPV with 2 nm GO as the HTL was 3.5%, which was highly comparable with its counterpart (PEDOT:PSS, 3.6%) (Fig. 3(C)). Furthermore, the OPVs with GO as the HTL have demonstrated significantly improved long-time stability compared to the PEDOT:PSS devices. Murray et al.135 reported the employment of GO as the HTL in the OPV devices based on the active layer of the electron donor poly[[4,8-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl][3-fluoro-2-[(2-ethylhexyl)carbonyl]-thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl]] (PTB7) and the fullerene electron acceptor [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric-acid-methyl-ester (PC71BM). Such GO HTL-based OPVs exhibited PCEs as high as 7.5% while providing a 5× enhancement in thermal aging lifetime and a 20× enhancement in humid ambient lifetime compared to the analogous PEDOT:PSS-based OPV devices.
 Fig. 3  (A) Schematic of the photovoltaic device structure consisting of the following: ITO/GO/P3HT:PCBM/Al. (B) Energy level diagrams of the bottom electrode ITO, interlayer materials (PEDOT:PSS, GO), P3HT (donor), and PCBM (acceptor), and the top electrode Al. (C) J–V characteristics of photovoltaic devices with no hole transport layer (curve labeled as ITO), with a 30 nm PEDOT:PSS layer, and a 2 nm thick GO film. (D) J–V characteristics of ITO/GO/P3HT:PCBM/Al devices with different GO thickness. All of the measurements were under simulated A.M. 1.5 illumination at 100 mW cm−2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 131. Copyright © 2010 American Chemical Society. 
As reported in Li and co-workers' work,131 the PCE of the OPV device is highly sensitive to the thickness of the GO HTL thin films (Fig. 3(D)). As the thickness increased from 2 nm to 10 nm, the PCE dropped from 3.5% to 0.9%, due to the insulating property of GO. However, to deposit ultrathin GO films (2 nm or 1 or 2 monolayers) via spin coating is extremely challenging because the resulting films also need to cover fully the underlying surface. Therefore, allowing thicker GO films to be used as the HTL can greatly facilitate the integration of GO into OPVs. For this purpose, Kim et al.136 studied the composites of GO and single-walled CNTs (SWCNTs) as the HTL in OPVs. A small amount of SWCNTs (with a small diameter of ∼1 nm) could significantly improve the vertical conductivity of GO while not notably affecting the surface roughness, allowing the use of thicker and thus easier-to-make GO films as HTL. The GO:SWCNT composite-based devices showed comparable performances to the PEDOT:PSS-based ones. In the absence of SWCNTs, the PCEs of the cells decreased from 3.28 ± 0.14% to 2.36 ± 0.28% when the GO thickness increased from around 1 nm to around 3–4 nm, respectively. However, after adding SWCNTs, the difference between the PCEs of the two types of cells (3.66 ± 0.18% and 3.13 ± 0.11%, respectively) became much smaller. Another way to allow the use of thicker GO films is to reduce them. By means of chemical reduction, the insulating property of GO can be tuned to semimetallic conducting and facilitate a more efficient carrier transport.137 Yun et al.138 compared the cell performance of OPVs with GO, rGO, and p-toluenesulfonyl hydrazide reduced GO (pr-GO) as the HTLs. The pr-GO devices with a thickness of 2 and 5 nm showed a PCE of 3.63 and 3.53%, respectively, which were comparable to the PEDOT:PSS devices. The long term stability of the pr-GO device was also superior to the PEDOT:PSS counterpart.
More interestingly, by simple charge neutralization of the COOH groups in GO with Cs salts, the charge extraction property of GO could be reversed in BHJ OPVs.139 The obtained cesium derivative (GO-Cs) could act as an efficient electron extraction material in BHJ, whose work function matched well with the active layer and the cathode. The normal and inverted devices based on GO hole- and GO-Cs electron-extraction layers showed a PCE of 3.67% and 2.97%, respectively, which both outperformed the corresponding standard BHJ solar cells with the state-of-the-art hole- and electron-extraction PEDOT:PSS layers.
3.1.1.4 Graphene-based materials in tandem OPVs. 
In contrast to the traditional inorganic PVs, one of the key limitations of OPVs is the narrow absorption window. One strategy to harvest complementary absorption spectrum is to stack materials with different band gaps together. By connecting two sub-cells in either a serial or parallel fashion, a tandem solar cell can be obtained, which in principle should exhibit double open circuit voltage (Voc) or short-circuit current density (Jsc).140 However, the progress in tandem organic solar cells, especially in solution-processed ones, has been limited. As a key part in the tandem PVs, the interconnecting layer (also called the intermediate layer) needs to possess high conductivity, minimal light absorption, low surface roughness, dense coverage, and high mechanical and chemical stability. More importantly, the interlayer material needs to have orthogonal processability to maintain the stacking integrity and avoid intermixing between the different layers in the device.140,141 Recently, Huang and coworkers141 reported the GO/PEDOT:PSS gel as a sticky interconnecting layer for a serial tandem OPV. The insulating GO increased the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS by altering its resonating ground states and morphology through strong π–π interaction and hydrogen bonding. The Voc of the tandem cell was 0.94 V, reaching 84% of the sum of the two sub-cells' Voc. The PCE of the final tandem cell was calculated to be 4.14%, which was higher than that of either of the two cells (2.92% and 3.75%, respectively). Tong et al.140 employed MoO3 modified graphene as the intermediate layer (IML) in both the serial and parallel tandem cells. The coating of MoO3 was performed on the CVD-grown graphene sheets for the modification of the work function, and the intermediate layer formed an ohmic contact with the photoactive layers. Using MoO3-modified graphene IML, a high Voc of 1 V and a high Jsc of 11.6 mA cm−2 could be obtained in series and parallel connection, respectively, in contrast to a Voc of 0.58 V and Jsc of 7.6 mA cm−2 in single PV cell.


3.1.2 Dye sensitized solar cells. 
Dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), also known as Grätzel cells,142 have attracted increasing scientific and industrial interest due to their relatively high efficiency and low cost. Generally, a DSSC is composed of a dye-sensitized nanocrystalline TiO2 film on a transparent conducting electrode (ITO or fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO)), a counter electrode and an electrolyte usually containing an I−/I3− redox couple. Upon irradiation, the dyes (also known as the sensitizers) are excited, followed by ultrafast electron-injection into the conduction band of the semiconductor film. The dye molecule is then regenerated by I−, which is oxidized to I3− and then restored at the counter electrode–electrolyte interface. Though a high PCE of ∼12% has been reported,143 there still remain several challenges for DSSCs, including the suppression of the charge recombination, the high cost of the Pt-based counter electrode, and so forth. Graphene-based materials have been explored to act as different components in DSSCs including transparent electrodes, counter electrode materials and electron acceptors as well as light absorbers, showing a great potential in the fabrication of cost-effective DSSCs with promising performance.
3.1.2.1 Graphene-based materials as transparent electrodes. 
As discussed above, graphene fulfils all the criteria for a promising alternative to ITO or FTO transparent electrodes. Wang et al.72 revealed the possibility of using graphene as the transparent electrode in DSSCs. In their work, an aqueous solution of GO was dip-coated on the substrate, followed by subsequent thermal reduction. The obtained graphene thin film showed a high conductivity of 550 S cm−1 and a transparency of more than 70% over the 1000–3000 nm range. Based on this transparent electrode, the solid state DSSC device (graphene/TiO2/dye/spiro-OMeTAD/Au device (spiro-OMeTAD = 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenilamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene)) exhibited a PCE of 0.26%, which was lower than that of the comparable FTO-based device (0.84%).
3.1.2.2 Graphene-based materials as the counter electrodes. 
In DSSCs, the counter electrode is an indispensable part, which injects electrons into the electrolyte and restores the redox couple (from I3− to I−). The counter electrode can dictate the cathodic activity and affect the performance of the photoanode through the regeneration of dyes. For an ideal counter electrode, the commonly referenced performance targets for its RCT (charge transfer resistance) are less than 10 Ω cm2, and 2–3 Ω cm2.144,145 A conventional counter electrode is the Pt-deposited on ITO or FTO electrode, which possesses high catalytic activity and outstanding conductivity, as well as stability towards the I3−/I− redox couple. However, due to the scarcity of Pt and the issues during the fabrication of Pt/transparent conducting electrodes (high cost in the magnetron sputtering and the weak adhesion of Pt onto the ITO/FTO in the thermal decomposition),146 inexpensive and abundant materials such as graphene have been intensively studied as alternative counter electrode materials in DSSCs.
Lee et al.147 reported the CVD-grown 3D nano-foam of graphene layers (3D-NFG) as a counter electrode for DSSCs. The 3D-NFG-based DSSC showed a Jsc of 12.1 mA cm−2 and a Voc of 0.7 V, which were similar to the Pt counter electrode-based DSSC. However, the FF and overall efficiency of the 3D-NFG DSSC was slightly lower (FF: 60% versus 69.2%; PCE: 5.2% versus 5.7%), which could be ascribed to the ∼10 times higher Rct of the 3D-NFG counter electrode compared to its Pt counterpart. Aksay and coworkers148 also investigated graphene sheets as the counter electrode in DSSCs. The graphene-based cell performed comparably to the Pt-based cell (conversion efficiencies of 5.0 and 5.5%, respectively, at 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G simulated light).
A unique advantage of graphene over the conventional Pt counter electrode is its superior catalytic activities towards other redox couples. Despite the merits of the commonly used I3−/I− redox mediator, its redox potential is too low (ca. 0.35 V vs. SHE) to achieve the optimum voltage of the DSSC system and, consequently, the best power conversion efficiency.149 Moreover, the triiodide itself absorbs light, reducing the efficiency of the device. Accordingly, other mediators based on cobalt,150 sulfur,151 and iron152 compounds have been explored, among which a Co(bpy)33+/Co(bpy)32+ redox shuttle in conjunction with an optimized combination of dyes demonstrated a recording PCE of 12.3%.143 For such redox mediators, Pt is not necessarily the optimum choice as the counter electrode material. In contrast to the excellent catalytic activity towards the reduction of triiodide, Pt shows less efficient performance with Co mediators, and much worse with sulfur-based mediator systems.153 Kavan et al.153,154 revealed that graphene nanoplatelets (GNPs) (1–15 nm thick stacks of graphene) could outperform platinum for the reduction of the cobalt mediator. The use of GNPs instead of graphene sheets was due to a larger number of active edges sites for the catalysis. When using the GNPs deposited on FTO glass as the counter electrode for the catalysis of Co(bpy)33+/Co(bpy)32+ redox couple, the optimized GNPs-based DSSCs could achieve the highest efficiency of 9.6%, which was superior to the Pt-based DSSCs. The chemical stability of the GNPs–FTO counter electrode was also proven to be much higher than that of the conventional Pt–FTO. Similarly, Aksay and co-workers155 explored a few layers of functionalized graphene sheets (FGSs) and a sacrificial binder of ethyl cellulose for catalytic performance in DSSCs. These FGSs-based counter electrodes exhibited lower effective charge transfer resistance (<1 Ω cm2) than the thermally decomposed chloroplatinic acid electrodes traditionally used. DSSCs using these FGS electrodes had efficiencies (η) equal to or higher than those using thermally decomposed chloroplatinic acid electrodes in each of the three major redox mediators (i.e., iodide, cobalt and sulfur complexes).
A shortcoming for graphene as the counter electrode is the relative inert basal plane, which limits the interaction between graphene and the electrolyte, and consequently the redox reactions only occur at the edges. Therefore, the modification of graphene with F-doping or polymers has been explored with a view to an improved performance. For example, Das et al.156 reported the fabrication of large-area fluorinated graphene by using CF4 reactive ion plasma treatment, and its electrocatalytic properties for iodine reduction in DSSCs. The introduction of F− induced more active sits, and thus enhanced the interfacial electron transfer at the graphene–electrolyte interfaces, leading to an improved efficiency. Shi and coworkers157 revealed the feasibility of the polymer modified graphene (PEDOT-PSS–graphene) electrode as the counter electrode in DSSCs. The PEDOT-PSS–graphene-based counter electrode exhibited high transmittance (>80%) at visible wavelengths and high electrocatalytic activity. With the PEDOT-PSS–graphene-based counter electrode, the energy conversion efficiency of the cell reached 4.5%, which was comparable to 6.3% of the cell with a platinum counter electrode. Very recently, other polymers, such as PEDOT158 and polyaniline (PANI),159 have been also reported for the hybridization of graphene. The hybrid film used as counter electrode in DSSCs could exhibit enhanced electrocatalytic activity towards the I3−/I− redox mediator, comparable to the Pt counterpart. In addition to the doping or polymer modification, the introduction of Pt146 or MWCNTs160 can also increase the catalytic activity of graphene. In the former case, the Pt–graphene composite was fabricated by electrostatic layer-by-layer self-assembly (ELSA) based on poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA), and a comparable efficiency (7.66%) to a sputtered Pt counter electrode (8.16%) was achieved. In the latter case, the addition of MWCNTs provided many sharp edges as the catalytic sites and lowered the resistance of graphene, which in turn led to a reasonable PCE of 7.55%.
Recently, there was a report on the use of graphene nanoribbons as the counter electrode and its highly reversible photobleaching for the I3−/I− redox couple.161 The unique effect has never been reported for other nanocarbons, even other forms of graphene. Photobleaching and the resultant decrease of electrolyte absorption significantly improved the performance of the inverted configuration. Hence, this photobleaching effect provided by few-layer graphene nanoribbons can be used advantageously for structurally inverted dye solar cells and tandem solar cells.
3.1.2.3 Graphene-based materials as the electron transporter/acceptor. 
Although a ∼12% PCE has been achieved in DSSCs, a hurdle for the further enhancement in PCE is the transport of photogenerated electrons across the network of TiO2 nanoparticles, which competes with charge recombination.143 To suppress the charge recombination, several strategies, such as the fabrication of a semiconductor heterostructure and the introduction of 1D transporting materials (e.g. CNTs), have been adopted.162 Compared to the 1D CNTs and the point contact between TiO2 and CNTs, 2D graphene sheets have been reported to benefit the charge separation due to their excellent conductivity and good contact with TiO2 nanoparticles (Fig. 4).163 More importantly, the work function of graphene is in the range of 4.42–4.5 eV, which is much lower than the CB of TiO2, which in turn facilitates an effective charge injection from the semiconductor to graphene.164 In addition, the higher light scattering contributes to the efficient charge separation to a certain extent.163 Tang et al.165 reported large area graphene nanosheets (GS)–TiO2 on ITO as the photoanode in DSSC. The GS–TiO2 exhibited much higher conductivity compared to the bare TiO2 film, since the GS could provide the pathways for the photogenerated electrons. The cell based on the GS–TiO2 film gave a Jsc of 6.67 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.56 V, and a FF of 0.45, yielding a PCE of 1.68%. In comparison, the cell based on the bare TiO2 film showed corresponding values of 1.95 mA cm−2, 0.52 V, 0.31, and 0.32%, respectively. The increased Jsc and FF were mainly attributed to the enhanced electron transport. Another report by Hayashi et al.166 investigated the electron transfer cascade by organic–inorganic ternary composites of porphyrin (ZnP), zinc oxide nanoparticles (ZnONP), and rGO on a tin oxide electrode. It was suggested that the role of the rGO could reside in two aspects: (i) accepting electrons from the ZnONP–ZnP composites; and (ii) providing a medium to store and shuttle electrons within the composite film.
 Fig. 4  Differences between (A and C) 1D and (B and D) 2D nanomaterial composite electrodes. In 2D nanomaterial composite electrodes (graphene bridges), the TiO2 particles can anchor in the graphene better, and the photoinduced electrons can be captured and transferred by the graphene; however, with the 1D nanomaterial compositing, there are less intermolecular forces and connection between TiO2 and the 1D nanomaterial; therefore, the transfer barrier is larger and it is much easier for the recombination to happen. Reprinted with permission from ref. 163. Copyright © 2010 American Chemical Society. 
3.1.2.4 Graphene-based materials as the light absorber. 
Li and co-workers167 successfully synthesized GQDs with a uniform and tunable size via solution chemistry. GQDs consisted of graphene moieties containing 168, 132, and 170 conjugated carbon atoms, respectively. By enclosing the graphene dots in three dimensions with covalently attached multiple 1,3,5-trialkyl-substituted phenyl moieties, they could be highly soluble in various common organic solvents, such as chloroform, tetrahydrofuran, or toluene, with a solubility up to 30 mg mL−1 at room temperature.168 The GQDs (∼5 nm in diameter) showed maximum absorbance at 591 nm, with an extinction coefficient of 1.0 × 105 M−1 cm−1, nearly an order of magnitude larger than that of the metal-complex-based dyes commonly used in dye-sensitized solar cells. To explore the feasibility of the use of GQDs as the dyes in DSSCs, TiO2 DSSCs were fabricated with GQDs replacing the conventional Ru-complex-based dyes. The measured Voc (0.48 V) and FF (0.58) were comparable to those of cells with ruthenium complexes, while the measured Jsc was more than one order of magnitude lower (200 μA cm−2). The extremely low Jsc could be ascribed to the low affinity of GQDs with the oxide surfaces as a result of physical adsorption, as well as the consequent poor charge injection.


3.1.3 Quantum dot sensitized solar cells. 
In principle, the quantum dot sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs) adopt a similar design to the DSSCs, except for the replacing of organic dyes by inorganic QDs, such as CdS, CdSe, PbS, InAs, etc.169 Compared to the organic dyes, the QDs have the advantages of high extinction coefficients, tunable band gaps, large intrinsic dipole moments, and good stability, all known to increase the overall PCE of solar cells.170,171 A more alluring feature for QDSSCs is the multiple electron generation and hot electron utilization, boosting the theoretical PCE (44%)172 beyond the 32% Shockley–Queisser limit in silicon-based solar cells.173 However, the practical performance (3–4%) still lags behind that of DSSCs at present.164 The low PCE can be ascribed to limitations, such as charge recombination at the semiconductor–electrolyte interface and the poor redox activity of the counter electrode.174 To overcome these challenges, graphene-based materials have been incorporated into the QDSSCs and played a crucial role as the counter electrode materials or the electron transporters.
3.1.3.1 Graphene-based materials as the counter electrode materials. 
Unlike in the case of DSSCs, the redox couple commonly used in QDSSCs is the polysulfide (S2−/Sn2−), since it is beneficial to the stability of the QDs photoanode. Under this circumstance, the application of Pt as the counter electrode material is problematic due to the chemisorption of the redox couple on the surface of Pt and the induced poisoning effect.175 To circumvent this, other counter electrode materials such as PbS, CoS, and Cu2S have been developed.176 However, such chalcogenides also present issues with long term stability, including continual corrosion and disintegration from the electrode.169
Kamat and coworkers169,177 reported the use of Cu2S–rGO composites as the counter electrode in QDSSCs. The high surface area of the 2D rGO sheets facilitated the spread of the Cu2S reactive sites across the surface. Furthermore, the rGO also served to shuttle electrons across the 2D mat to the Cu2S catalyst sites where the electrons were used to reduce the oxidized polysulfide. With a poly(vinylidene) fluoride (PVDF) binder, the cast Cu2S–rGO film-based QDSSC exhibited a Jsc of 18.2 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.52 V, and a FF of 0.43, yielding a unsurpassed PCE of 4.4%. In comparison, the Cu2S–rGO film without a binder and the Pt film-based cells showed a PCE of 2.5% and 1.6%, respectively. The authors suggested the PCE could be further enhanced over the 5% limit by tackling other issues such as charge recombination processes at the photoanode–electrolyte interface. Another work by Zhu et al.178 revealed the possibility of using a reduced graphene–Au (RG–Au) composite as the counter electrode in QDSSCs. The RG–Au composite was prepared by one-step microwave-assisted reduction of chloroaurate in alkaline solution with graphite oxide dispersion. The cell with a RG–Au counter electrode showed a PCE of 1.36%, which was higher than those of cells employing conventional Pt, Au, or RG counter electrodes.
3.1.3.2 Graphene-based materials as the electron acceptors. 
A key challenge in achieving higher PCE in QDSSCs is efficient electron–hole pair disassociation and electron collection. More specifically, to arrive at the current collecting electrode (photoanode), the photogenerated electrons must complete a great number of hopping events without undergoing recombination or trapped-state termination. However, the existence of surface state in QDs can capture photoinduced electrons and lead to recombination of carriers. Moreover, if the surface state is located below the conduction band of the photoanode material, injection of photoinduced electrons into photoanode will be inhibited.164 To circumvent these problems, conducting materials, especially carbonaceous materials,179,180 are used to assist the transport and collection of the photogenerated electrons in QDSSCs. The 2D graphene with a unique sheet morphology and excellent electron conductivity has been investigated as a promising scaffold for more-effective charge separation and transport in QDSSCs. For example, our group181 reported the application of QDs-sensitized graphene in light harvesting and energy conversion. The chemically reduced graphene sheets were first functionalized with pyrenebutyrate (PB), which served as a linker in the following deposition of QDs. Then, Cd2+ and S2− ions were sequentially added, resulting in the formation of CdS QDs (3–5 nm) on the surface of the graphene (Fig. 5(A)). The CdS sensitized graphene film showed an extended light absorption range as well as a reduced charge transfer resistance (Fig. 5(C) and (D)), thus leading to a better performance as a photoelectrode. Compared to the CdS film, the CdS sensitized graphene film exhibited a 140% higher incident-photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) (Fig. 5(B)). Similarly, Lin et al.88 reported the synthesis of linker-free CdSe–rGO composites via in situ growth of CdS on rGO. Due to the efficient transfer of the photoinduced electrons from CdSe NPs to rGO, the CdSe–rGO composites showed a drastically increased photoresponse in comparison with CdSe, rGO and physically mixed CdSe and rGO.
 Fig. 5  (A) Scheme of in situ growth of CdS QDs on graphene and QDs sensitized graphene photoelectrodes. (B) Monochromatic IPCE (380–600 nm) of PB–graphene (a), CdS QDs (b) and CdS QDs sensitized graphene photoelectrodes (c). (C) Diffuse reflectance spectra of CdS QDs and CdS QDs/PB–graphene. (D) Nyquist plots of CdS QDs (a) and CdS QDs/PB–graphene (b) film on ITO. Electrolyte: 5 mM [Fe(CN)6]3−/4− aqueous solution with 100 mM KCl. Frequency: from 0.1 Hz to 100 kHz, Amplitude: 10 mV. Inset: general equivalent circuit. Reprinted with permission from ref. 181. Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. 
Besides the excellent electrically conductivity, another important advantage for graphene as an electron acceptor and transporter is its proper work function (4.42–4.5 eV), which is much lower than the CB of the commonly used metal oxide photoanode materials such as TiO2, ZnO, and so forth. Accordingly, more effective electron injections are expected to occur into graphene than directly into the photoanodes. Sun et al.164 reported the assembly of CdSe on the surface of graphene sheets and the application of the composite in the QDSSCs. The QDSSC with the graphene–CdSe composite showed a significantly higher PCE (0.76%) compared to graphene (0.009%) or CdSe (0.016%) based cells. Moreover, the optimal PCE was also notably greater than the efficiency (<0.1%) of C60 or CNTs related cells.179,180 The improved efficiency could be assigned to two effects. On the one hand, work function of graphene is lower than the CB of QDs CdSe (Fig. 6(A)). This energetic alignment favours the electron transfer from photoexcited CdSe to graphene. On the other hand, the high electron mobility of graphene facilitates the fast transport of the electrons.164 For a further improvement in the charge separation and electron transport, Au or other metals can be introduced into the graphene–QD based systems and serve as the electron sink. Narayanan et al.182 fabricated a quaternary composite of TiO2/CdSe/ionic liquid functionalized GO (FGO)/Au for enhanced solar cell performance. The role of each component could be described as follows: CdSe as the exciton generator; Au nanoparticles as an electron sink; FGO for storage and shuttling of electrons; and TiO2 as the robust support. In addition, the band alignment of these components could facilitate an effective electron transport and electron collection on the electrode. Accordingly, the quaternary composite-based solar cell showed superior performance compared to the individual/binary/ternary component cells. More recently, Lightcap et al.183 investigated quantitatively the relative rates of the electron and energy transfer from QDs to the GO or rGO by comparing the photoluminescence lifetime characteristics. As shown in Fig. 6(B) and (C), the incorporated graphene sheets in QD films could provide pathways for effective electron transfer, and contribute to the enhanced photoresponse.
 Fig. 6  (A) Schematic diagrams for energy level matching in the graphene–CdSe based QDSSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 164. Copyright © 2011 American Institute of Physics. (B) Electron transfer routes from photoexcited CdSe QDs to a current-collecting electrode. Electron hopping leads to poor film conductivity in thicker QD films (middle QD cluster). The addition of graphene to QD films should promote improved electron transport to the electrode (right cluster). (C) IPCE of CdSe, CdSe–GO and CdSe–RGO films. (B and C) reprinted with permission from ref. 183. Copyright © 2012 American Chemical Society. 


3.1.4 Silicon or quantum dots-based solar cells. 
3.1.4.1 Silicon-based solar cells. 
Silicon (Si) represents the state of the art material in the solar cell industry due to its broad absorption range and well-developed processing techniques. However, Si-based solar cells suffer from a high material cost as well as elaborate processing conditions.184 To replace partially Si and thus reduce the cost of the overall solar cell, graphene has been integrated with Si to form a Schottky junction and efficient solar cells. For example, Li et al.185 reported the first example of the graphene-on-silicon Schottky junction solar cell. In their report, the CVD grown graphene nanosheets could be conformally coated on the Si with 100% coverage, and form a Schottky junction with a relatively large built-in field (0.55–0.75 V), which favored the carrier separation. Additionally, the graphene sheet could also serve as a semitransparent electrode and an anti-reflection coating, leading to a reduced reflection by ∼70% in the visible region and ∼80% in the near-IR region. Under AM 1.5 conditions, a Voc of 0.42–0.48 V, a Jsc of 4.0–6.5 mA cm−2, and an average PCE of about 1.5% was achieved. Apparently, the efficiency was far lower than those of the pure Si based devices. The authors suggested that the efficiency could be enhanced with an improved understanding of the electronic coupling, surface passivation, doping, and junction formation, etc.
Since then, several strategies have been proposed to improve the efficiency of the graphene–Si Schottky solar cells. The first strategy is to use the newly Si substrate materials. For example, to improve the efficiency of the graphene–Si Schottky solar cells, the silicon-pillar-array (SPA) was adopted instead of planar Si.186 The SPA was fabricated using photolithography followed by a dry etching process. The geometry of SPA lead to a drastically suppressed reflectance and enhanced light harvesting. A typical graphene–SPA device exhibited a Voc of 0.465 V, a Jsc of 15.19 mA cm−2, and a PCE of ∼2.90%. Similarly, an Si nanowire array prepared by chemical etching187 or the CVD method188 was also adopted to enhance the light harvesting, and the assembled devices demonstrated higher efficiency than the planar Si based counterparts.
Moreover, the performance of the graphene–Si solar cells can be improved by p-doping of the graphene. Such a p-type doping would increase the work function of graphene, leading to an increase in not only the conductivity but also the built-in field at the interface. Thus, the p-graphene–n-Si based devices could show superior overall performance compared to the pristine assemblies. So far, various doping methods have been adopted. HNO3,186 AuCl3189 or SOCl2188 was used as the p-dopant, and the resultant p-graphene–n-Si heterojunction based devices exhibited improved PCE compared to the undoped counterparts. In addition, B has also been reported as an effective p-dopant for the graphene–Si solar cells.190 A Voc of 0.53 V, a Jsc of 18.8 mA cm−2, and a PCE of 2.3% was measured in an unoptimized cell, where both the Voc and Jsc were higher than the pristine graphene-based assemblies. Further surface treatment with HNO3 fumes increased the work function of graphene and the conductivity of the device, resulting in an enhanced performance with a Voc of 0.57 V, a Jsc of 21.0 mA cm−2, and a PCE of 3.4%. Very recently, a surprisingly high PCE (8.6%) was achieved in the p-doped graphene–n-Si based solar cell devices.191 The p-doping was realized by spin-casting a layer of bis-(trifluoromethanesulfonyl) amide (TFSA) on the pristine graphene–n-Si layer. Upon doping with TFSA, the Voc, Jsc, and FF all increased from 0.43 to 0.54 V, 14.2 to 25.3 mA cm−2, and 0.32 to 0.63, respectively. As a result, the PCE was boosted from 1.9% to 8.6%, which is the highest record for the graphene–Si-based solar cells to date.
3.1.4.2 Quantum dots-based solar cells. 
The QD thin film based solar cell is the leading technology for next generation energy products.192 Compared to Si, the QDs solar cells possess the potential to exceed the Shockley–Queisser limit (PCE ∼ 32%) for Si solar cells and achieving size-tunable optical absorption and efficient multiple carrier generation.193,194 The main challenge to achieve high performance in QDs solar cells is the efficient separation of the photo-generated electrons and holes, and the effective collection of the charges at the electrodes.195 One strategy to circumvent this is to introduce nanomaterials with a suitable energy band as efficient acceptors. Specifically, carbon materials including fullerenes and SWCNTs have been used in QDs solar cells as efficient electron acceptors.196,197 However, even the highest IPCE reported in these systems (∼5%) is still too far away from the requirements of commercialization.
Recently, graphene has been reported as an efficient electron acceptor for QDs solar cells. For example, Li and co-workers90 developed the layered graphene–CdS QDs for high efficiency solar cells. Graphene sheets offered several advantages compared to other carbon materials such as CNTs. First, the 2D planar geometry of graphene facilitated a uniform distribution of the CdS quantum dots on the surface, maximizing the light absorption and the charge collection. Second, graphene showed a better energy match with CdS compared to the CNTs, leading to a more efficient transport of the electrons at the interfaces. Accordingly, the ITO/graphene/CdS QDs bilayer exhibited an IPCE of 5%, which was much superior to that of the ITO/SWCNTs/CdS QDs. Furthermore, by repeating the assembly of the graphene–CdS QDs layers, the increase in light absorption as well as the decrease in the charge recombination losses could be accomplished simultaneously. The optimized graphene–CdS QDs multilayer nanoassemblies showed an IPCE of up to 16%, which was drastically higher than those of other carbon materials/QDs based solar cells.
In addition, graphene sheets with both high transparency and electrical conductivity can serve as the front electrode in the QDs solar cells. For example, Bi and co-workers198 reported the replacement of ITO by ambient pressure CVD (APCVD) grown graphene films in CdTe solar cells. The graphene films exhibited an extremely high carrier mobility (up to 600 cm2 V−1 s−1) with a sheet resistance and optical transmittance in the range from 1150 Ω per square and 97.1% to 220 Ω per square and 83.7%, respectively. The resultant device exhibited an encouraging PCE of 4.17%, as well as a much lower cost in comparison with the solar cells with ITO as the front electrode. On the other hand, pristine and doped graphene can also serve as the back electrode material, which is crucial for the stability and overall performance of the QDs solar cells. For example, Lin et al.199 compared the performance of CdTe solar cells with pristine APCVD grown graphene (PG), boron doped graphene (BG), and chemically reduced GO (rGO) as the back electrodes. The PCE increased from 6.50% for rGO to 7.41% for PG due to the lower resistivity of PG. Upon doping with B, the impedance was further decreased with an increased work function, allowing BG to serve as an ohmic back contact for CdTe. Thus, a PCE ∼ 7.86% was achieved in the CdTe solar cells with BG as the back electrode. Later, the same group developed a composite of Cu nanowires and graphene as the back contact for CdTe solar cells.200 The PCE was up to 12.1%, which was superior to the traditional back contacts using Cu particle-doped graphite (PCE 10.5%) and Cu thin films (PCE 9.1%).

3.2 Photocatalytic decomposition of organic pollutants

3.2.1 TiO2-graphene based photocatalysts. 
The photocatalytic decomposition (also known as photodegradation) of the organic pollutants has been considered as an energy-effective pathway for environmental remediation. The photodegradation process is mainly achieved by the oxidation of organic pollutants by photogenerated radicals (e.g. ˙OH, ˙O2−) from semiconductor photocatalysts. Among all the photocatalysts used in photodegradation, TiO2 is considered as the dominant photocatalyst due to its high oxidation power, low cost and long term stability.201 However, a large band-gap (3.2 eV) of anatase TiO2 restricts its use only to the narrow light-responding range of ultra-violet (<5% of sunlight). In addition, the carrier recombination in TiO2 should also be suppressed for a higher efficiency. Graphene nanosheets have been incorporated with TiO2 to form composite catalysts, which exhibit significantly enhanced activities in the photodegradation of the organic pollutants.
Our group76 reported the photodegradation of organic compounds (methylene blue (MB)) using TiO2 (commercial P25, Degussa)–graphene (P25–GR) nanocomposites for the first time. P25–graphene (P25–GR) nanocomposites were obtained via a facile, one-step hydrothermal method using P25 and GO as the starting materials. Compared to the bare P25 catalyst, the P25–GR composite exhibited three advantages. First, the π–π stacking between MB and the aromatic regions of graphene enhanced the adsorptivity of the dyes on the surface of the catalysts (Fig. 7(A)), leading to a synergetic effect between adsorptivity and photoreactivity. Second, the introduction of graphene extended the light responding range of P25 by 30–40 nm (Fig. 7(B)), facilitating a more efficient visible light driven photocatalysis. The red shift could be attributed to the formation of the Ti–O–C bonds during the preparation.202 Last but not least, P25–graphene showed a decrease in the solid state interface layer resistance and the charge transfer resistance on the surface compared to bare P25, according to the electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) (Fig. 7(C)). Thus, P25–GR nanocomposites demonstrated significant advancement over bare P25 in the photodegradation of MB dye under both UV and visible light irradiation (Fig. 7(D) and (E)). In view of the high efficiency achieved in the P25–graphene catalyst, many efforts have been devoted to the growth of TiO2 nanostructures on graphene through in situ or one-pot routes. In most studies, TiO2 nanostructures were fabricated on graphene via: the hydrolysis of various Ti precursors including TiF4,203 titanium(IV) ammonium oxalate204 and TiCl4205 on graphene; the solvothermal process;206 or the two step method (hydrolysis of a Ti precursor, e.g. Ti(BuO)4, in the presence of GO, followed by the solvothermal reaction207). Moreover, Kamat et al.208,209 and Ng et al.210 developed the fabrication of TiO2–graphene composites by carrying out UV-assisted photocatalytic reduction of graphite oxide using TiO2 nanoparticles. In addition, other methods, such as the microwave-assisted synthesis211 and the redox reaction between Ti3+ and GO,212 can be also adopted to form the TiO2–graphene composites. All of the obtained TiO2–graphene nanocomposites exhibited superior performance in the photodegradation compared to pure TiO2. The improvement in the photocatalytic activities can be attributed to the enhanced adsorptivity of dyes, extended photo-response range, and enhanced charge separation and transportation properties, as mentioned above. Despite the success with the TiO2–graphene photocatalysts, there still remain several challenges, such as the exploration of a decent visible light photocatalytic activity, and a further suppression of the charge recombination. To circumvent these, several strategies including tuning the crystal facets of TiO2, morphology control of the composites, as well as coupling of TiO2–graphene with other materials have been attempted.
 Fig. 7  (A) Schematic structure of the P25–graphene composite and tentative processes of the photodegradation of MB, illustrating adsorption of MB on graphene sheets, and the role of graphene. (B) Diffuse reflectance absorption spectra and (C) electrochemical impedance of (1) P25 and (2) P25–GR, respectively. Comparison of photocatalytic activity in the degradation of MB under (D) UV light and (E) visible light over (1) P25, (2) P25–CNTs, and (3) P25–GR photocatalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright © 2010 American Chemical Society. 
Theoretical and experimental studies have revealed that the photocatalytic reactivity of TiO2 {001} or {100} facets, is much higher than that of the thermodynamically stable {101} facets.213–215 The higher reactivity can be attributed to the higher surface energy (0.90 J m−2 for {001} > 0.53 J m−2 for {100} > 0.44 J m−2 for {101}).216,217 Therefore, the combination of {001} or {100} dominant TiO2 crystals with graphene can lead to an improved photocatalytic reactivity. Recently, Wang et al.202 and Liu et al.94 reported the hydrothermal synthesis of {001} dominant TiO2–graphene composites, respectively. During the synthesis process, the introduction of F− played a crucial role in the controlled growth of the facets. As expected, the {001} facets-exposed TiO2–graphene nanocomposites demonstrated a significant advancement over bare P25 or the normal TiO2–graphene nanocomposites in the photodegradation of MB or methyl orange under both UV and visible light irradiation.
The morphology control can also be adopted to enhance the photocatalytic activities. Cheng and co-workers218 reported a simple template-free self-assembly of uniform mesoporous anatase TiO2 nanospheres on graphene sheets. The resultant mesoporous TiO2–graphene compounds showed a comparable activity in the photodegradation of Rhodamine B (RhB) with the benchmark P25 catalyst. Du et al.219 fabricated a hierarchically ordered macro-mesoporous TiO2–graphene composite film using a polystyrene template. The mesopores in TiO2 provided a photocatalytic platform with a large surface area, while the incorporation of interconnected macropores in mesoporous films could improve the mass transport through the film, reduce the length of the mesopore channel, and increase the accessible surface area of the thin film. In addition, the integrated graphene served as an effective electron acceptor and suppressed the charge recombination. Thus, the obtained macro-mesoporous TiO2–graphene nanocomposites demonstrated better performance in the degradation of MB than the sole mesoporous TiO2 as well as the mesoporous TiO2–graphene without the macropores. One dimensional (1D) TiO2 nanostructure–graphene composites have been also fabricated for enhanced photocatalytic activities.220–223 Compared to the spherical nanoparticles, 1D TiO2 materials possess excellent mobility of charge carriers, high surface areas, more light scattering at the red part of the solar spectrum, and enhanced charge collection and transport, which are favorable for the photocatalytic process. Liu et al.220 and Zhu et al.221 reported the fabrication of rice-shaped TiO2 rod–graphene and TiO2 nanotube array–graphene composites for photocatalytic application, respectively. Compared to unmodified TiO2 nanomaterials, both of the systems showed greatly enhanced photocatalytic activities in the photodegradation of organic dyes, indicating the possibility for the application of well-designed low dimensional TiO2–graphene catalysts in the photodegradation of pollutants. In addition, Lee et al.224 reported the synthesis of graphene-wrapped TiO2 nanoparticles as a novel photocatalyst for the photodegradation of organic dyes under visible light. In this work, GO sheets were self-assembled on the surface of the amine-modified TiO2 nanoparticles, and the reduction of GO and the crystallization of TiO2 were simultaneously achieved during the subsequent hydrothermal treatment. It was revealed that the wrapping of graphene significantly reduced the band gap of TiO2 (3.27 to 2.80 eV), while the band gap of the TiO2–graphene sheet composite was 3.19 eV. As a result, the graphene-wrapped TiO2 exhibited a photodegradation rate constant of 3.4 × 10−2 min−1 in the photodegradation of MB under visible light, which was much higher than that of bare anatase TiO2 NPs, graphene–TiO2 NPs (obtained via the two-step hydrothermal method), and P25 NPs.
To harness the visible light in the solar spectrum, TiO2–graphene composites have been coupled with various visible light reactive species. For instance, Wen et al.225 reported the incorporation of Ag in the TiO2–graphene composite. The plasmonic absorption of Ag under visible light and the subsequent electron transfer to TiO2–graphene provided the visible light photocatalytic activity for the catalyst, and the Schottky junction between TiO2 and Ag nanoparticles and the high electron mobility of graphene sheets facilitated an efficient charge separation. Thus, the photodegradation of MB in the presence of Ag/TiO2/graphene catalysts under visible light was superior to those with bare P25, graphene or TiO2–graphene. In addition, the upconversion (UC) nanocrystals (such as YF3:Yb3+, Tm3+) were also introduced into the TiO2–graphene nanocomposites for an advanced sunlight-activated photocatalyst.226 Under sunlight irradiation, the UC materials could absorb the near IR light and emit UV light, and the TiO2 nanocrystals could absorb the UV light either directly from the sunlight, or from the secondary energy transfer from UC nanocrystals, to form the electron–hole pairs. The graphene sheets within this novel ternary nanocomposite could serve as the electron acceptor and transporter, improve the adsorptivity of dyes on the catalysts' surface, as well as extending the light-responding range to violet–blue. Under simulated solar light and near IR light, the resultant UC/TiO2/graphene catalysts showed significantly improved efficiency in the degradation of MB compared to P25, UC–P25 and P25–graphene catalysts. Furthermore, GO and GQDs can be also coupled with TiO2 to act as the sensitizer in the visible light photodegradation of organic dyes. As is known, GO has been demonstrated to be either a p- or n-type semiconductor by tuning the degree of oxidation and the species of the oxygen containing groups.227,228 Chen et al.97 reported the synthesis of visible-light responsive GO–TiO2 nanocomposites with p–n heterojunction via a solution-based process. It was found that either a p-type or n-type semiconductor was formed by GO in GO–TiO2 nanocomposites, dependent on the concentration of GO in the starting solution. These GO semiconductors, possessing a band gap smaller than 2.43 eV, could be excited by visible light with wavelengths longer than 510 nm and acted as sensitizers in GO–TiO2 composites for visible light driven photodegradation of methyl orange. Compared to commercial P25 and sole TiO2 nanoparticles, the GO–TiO2 nanocomposites showed significantly enhanced photocatalytic performances under visible-light irradiation. Another interesting work reported by Zhuo et al.229 revealed the use of GQDs as the sensitizer in the complex photocatalysts (rutile TiO2–GQD and anatase TiO2–GQD systems), which were designed to harness the visible spectrum of sunlight for the photodegradation process. Under visible light irradiation, GQDs in the TiO2–GQD composites were excited to produce photoluminescence (PL), and the energy was then transferred to TiO2 to generate electron–hole pairs, which were subsequently involved in the photodegradation process. Because the energy of the PL (3.05 eV) emitted from GQDs was larger than the band gap of rutile TiO2 (3.0 eV, 414 nm) but smaller than that of anatase TiO2 (3.2 eV, 388 nm), the photocatalytic rate of the rutile TiO2–GQD complex system (0.0576 min−1) was ca. 9 times larger than that of the anatase TiO2–GQD complex (0.0063 min−1) under visible light (λ > 420 nm) irradiation in the degradation of MB.
Besides the photodegradation of the aforementioned organic dyes, TiO2–graphene based photocatalysts can also conduct the decomposition of other water contaminants from agricultural and industrial products, including 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D),230 anthracene-9-carboxylic acid,220 phenol,206p-nitrophenol,231 and 2-propanol,204etc. For example, Ng et al.230 reported the photodegradation of 2,4-D by rGO–TiO2 thin films, which exhibited a 4-fold increase in the rate of degradation compared to the bare TiO2 based films. The enhancement was attributed to two aspects. First, the incorporation of graphene to TiO2 could ensure the rapid transport of the carriers and suppress the recombination. Second, the interaction between graphene and the pollutants could concentrate the organics near the surface of the catalysts and accelerate the photodegradation. Another report by Jiang et al.206 investigated the photodegradation of phenol by solvothermal-synthesized TiO2–graphene composites under UV or visible light. In both cases, the composite catalysts showed enhanced efficiency compared to the commercial P25 due to the increased charge separation, enhanced absorption intensity and width, and good adsorptivity of pollutants of the TiO2–graphene composites. Moreover, gas phase pollutants such as acetone232 and aromatic compounds (such as benzene99) in the air could also be decomposed reportedly by TiO2–graphene based photocatalysts. In these reports, owing to the effective charge separation, the TiO2–graphene photocatalysts exhibited superior activity to bare TiO2 or commercial P25 TiO2.


3.2.2 Other graphene-based photocatalysts. 
Many non-TiO2 based photocatalysts have also been incorporated with graphene, including metal oxides (such as ZnO233,234), magnetic materials (such as Fe3O4,235 CoFe2O4236), metal chalcogenides (such as ZnSe237), metallate (such as Bi2WO6238), plasmonic materials (such as Ag/Ag halides239–241), and so forth. Similar to the TiO2–graphene photocatalysts, the introduction of graphene to these catalysts can also enhance the adsorptivity of organic pollutants, extend the photoresponding range, and facilitate effective charge separation, thus leading to improved photocatalytic activities. For instance, Luo et al.233 reported the synthesis of hierarchical hollow ZnO sphere–rGO composites, which showed a 5 times enhancement in the UV-assisted degradation of MB compared to the pure ZnO hollow spheres. In another work, Yoo et al.234 investigated the photocatalytic performance of a multidimensional heterojunction composed of decorated Ag nanoparticles on ZnO nanorods vertically grown on chemically converted graphene (CCG). It was found that both Ag and graphene could serve as the traps/acceptors for the photogenerated electrons and facilitate an effective charge separation. The degree of photodegradation by Ag/ZnO/CCG was much higher than the sum of photodegradations by Ag/ZnO and ZnO/CCG samples. The in situ growth of the magnetic Fe3O4235 or CoFe2O4236 on graphene for photocatalysis has also been reported. The existence of graphene in such composites led to an enhanced activity in the visible light driven photodegradation, and the maintained magnetic properties of Fe3O4 or CoFe2O4 facilitated a rapid separation of the catalysts from the aqueous solution. Chen et al.237 reported the in situ growth of ZnSe on N-doped graphene sheets via a hydrothermal method. It was revealed that the p–n junction could be formed at the interface between ZnSe and N-doped graphene, and the formed p–n junction could promote the charge collection and separation at the interfaces. Accordingly, the composites showed drastically enhanced visible light driven photodegradation activities compared to P25 or bare ZnSe nanoparticles. As a representative of the Bi(III)-based photocatalysts, Bi2WO6 has shown promising properties in the visible light photodegradation of organic pollutants. The electronic interaction and charge equilibration between graphene and Bi2WO6 led to the shift of the Fermi level and decreased the conduction band potential.238 Such a band alignment promoted the migration of the photoinduced electrons, contributing to the enhanced photocatalytic activity of Bi2WO6–graphene nanocomposites compared to sole Bi2WO6 or graphene catalysts.
Moreover, visible light triggered plasmonic photocatalysts such as Ag/Ag halides (Ag/AgX, X = Cl, Br239,241) and Au have also been coupled with graphene or GO, showing the great potential for alternatives to the traditional UV- or visible light driven photocatalysts. Zhang et al.239 reported the synthesis of graphene sheet grafted Ag@AgCl composites by a deposition–precipitation method. The composite catalyst showed a 4-fold enhancement in the visible light photodegradation of RhB compared to Ag/AgCl. Similarly, Liu and coworkers240,241 reported the fabrication of well-defined GO enwrapped Ag/AgX (X = Br, Cl) nanocomposites via a water/oil system. It was suggested that the hybridization of Ag/AgX with GO nanosheets could lead to a decent adsorptive capacity of Ag/AgX/GO for methyl orange molecules, the smaller size of the Ag/AgX nanoparticles in Ag/AgX/GO, the facile charge transfer, and the suppressed recombination of electron–hole pairs in Ag/AgX/GO. All of these factors contributed to the enhanced photocatalytic activity. In addition, the graphite like carbon nitride (g-C3N4), which was reported as a sustainable and “metal-free” photocatalyst with a band gap of 2.7 eV,242 was also assembled with GO for the preparation of a novel visible-light-triggered photocatalyst.243 The presence of a heterojunction between GO and g-C3N4 facilitated the charge separation, thus leading to an enhanced photocatalytic activity. As a result, the pseudo-first-order kinetic constants of photocatalytic degradation of RhB and 2,4-dichlorophenol under visible light irradiation with GO/g-C3N4 were 3.80 and 2.08 times as large as those with pristine g-C3N4, respectively.

3.3 Photocatalytic splitting of H2O
Production of clean hydrogen fuel from photoinduced water splitting has been considered as one of the most promising solutions to address the increasing demand for energy and associated environmental concerns. A variety of semiconductor photocatalysts have been reported to catalyze hydrogen evolution from water under irradiation. Considering its superior electronic properties and giant 2D structure, graphene can serve as not only a 2D mat for the catalysts, but also an efficient electron acceptor to enhance the photoinduced charge transfer and to inhibit the backward reaction by separating the evolution sites of hydrogen and oxygen.92
Among all the semiconductor catalysts for water splitting, TiO2 and CdS have been extensively studied. Since the pioneering work by Honda and Fujishima,45 TiO2 has been the most widely used photocatalyst because of its high activity, chemical inertness, low cost and nontoxicity. However, it suffers from a limited light absorption range and severe charge recombination.244–247 On the other hand, CdS possesses a relatively narrow band gap (2.4 eV), making it effective in absorbing incident visible light, as well as appropriate band positions which are sufficient for the evolution of both hydrogen and oxygen from water. However, the long term stability, toxicity, and the rapid recombination of photoexcited electron and holes limit its practical application.248 Generally, noble metals such as Pt, Pd, Ru and Rh can be loaded on the surface of TiO2 or CdS as the co-catalyst to improve the charge separation within the catalysts, as well as to provide a redox pathway with low overpotential, leading to significant enhancements in the efficiency of water splitting.249 Nevertheless, the scarcity and high cost of these noble metals can be an obvious limitation in practical applications, and alternative cocatalysts based on nonprecious materials need to be pursued. Very recently, our group250 reported the use of graphene sheets as a metal-free cocatalyst in light driven water splitting with TiO2 or CdS (Fig. 8(A)). In the presence of Na2S and Na2SO3 as sacrificial electron donors, the CdS-modified graphene catalyst (CdS-mG, 2 wt% graphene) showed a higher activity compared to the CdS–Pt catalyst, and ca. 4 fold enhancement compared to bare CdS (Fig. 8(B)). For the TiO2 (P25)–graphene (P25–G) catalyst obtained via a one step hydrothermal method, the amount of the evolved hydrogen was around 45% and 50% that of P25–Pt under UV-visible and visible light irradiation, respectively (Fig. 8(C) and (D)). In both cases, the role of graphene as a cocatalyst for CdS and TiO2 could be ascribed to the following three aspects. (i) The graphene acted as an electron acceptor and mediator, promoting the separation of the photoexcited electron–hole pairs. (ii) The graphene acted as a support with large surface area, offering more active adsorption sites and photocatalytic reaction centers. (iii) The graphene itself could catalyze the evolution of hydrogen with the surface carbon atoms as the catalytic centers. Accordingly, the inexpensive, environmentally benign graphene can serve as an alternative cocatalyst for highly efficient hydrogen evolution from photocatalytic splitting of H2O. Shen et al.251 reported an ionic liquid-assisted one-step hydrothermal synthesis of TiO2–rGO composite, which showed a dramatic improvement in the hydrogen evolution compared to TiO2 catalyst under UV light. In another work,252 nanocomposites of P25 and rGO which were prepared by several techniques, including UV-assisted photocatalytic reduction, hydrazine reduction, and a hydrothermal method, were studied as photocatalysts for the evolution of hydrogen from alcohol solution under UV-vis irradiation. The incorporation of rGO into P25 significantly enhanced the photocatalytic activity for H2 evolution. This enhancement could be ascribed to the intimate contact between P25 and rGO, which could accelerate the transfer of photogenerated electrons on P25 to rGO and suppress the recombination of charge carriers, thus increasing the photocatalytic performance. All of these composite catalysts exhibited better photocatalytic performance for H2 evolution than P25 alone, and the P25–rGO composite prepared by the hydrothermal method possessed the best performance (74 μmol h−1, 10-fold higher than P25 alone). In addition to CdS–graphene and TiO2–graphene photocatalysts, other photocatalysts (such as BiVO4253 and g-C3N4254) combined with graphene have also been reported for efficient H2 evolution from water splitting. Ng et al.253 reported the incorporation of BiVO4 with rGO to improve its photoresponse in visible light. A remarkable 10-fold enhancement in the photoelectrochemical water splitting reaction was observed on the BiVO4–rGO composite compared with pure BiVO4 under visible illumination. This improvement could be attributed to the longer electron lifetime of excited BiVO4, as the electrons were injected to rGO instantly at the site of generation, minimizing the charge recombination. As reported by Xiang et al.,254 graphene and g-C3N4 composite photocatalysts were prepared by a combined impregnation–chemical reduction strategy. The resulting graphene–g-C3N4 composites showed an H2 evolution rate 3 times higher than pure g-C3N4 under visible-light irradiation due to the efficient charge carrier separation on the photocatalyst.
 Fig. 8  (A) Schematic illustration of the charge separation and transfer in the semiconductor nanoparticle (CdS or TiO2)–graphene system under irradiation; (B) hydrogen production based on CdS nanoparticles, CdS-mG and CdS–Pt composite photocatalysts in 20 mL Na2S (0.05 M) and Na2SO3 (0.07 M) aqueous solution as a function of irradiation time under visible light irradiation (λ > 380 nm); (C and D) hydrogen production based on P25 and its composite photocatalysts in 30 mL water and methanol (v/v = 2:1) solution upon irradiation with (C) UV-vis and (D) visible light irradiation (λ > 380 nm), respectively. Reproduced from ref. 250. Copyright © 2012 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition, graphene derivatives can also be adopted as metal free cocatalysts. Jia et al.255 studied the photocatalytic H2-production activity of N-doped graphene–CdS nanocomposites from aqueous solutions containing Na2S and Na2SO3 as sacrificial agents under visible-light irradiation. With a 2 wt% doping of N, the catalyst showed a H2 evolution rate as high as 210 μmol h−1 (5 times higher than that of pure CdS), which was superior to the graphene–CdS and GO–CdS composites. This enhancement could be ascribed to the increased electrical conductivity as well as the change in the density of states by doping. More importantly, the N-graphene–CdS photocatalyst did not show deactivation for H2 evolution for longer than 30 h, indicating that the cocatalyst of N-graphene acted as a protective layer preventing CdS from photocorrosion under light irradiation. Choi and co-workers256 reported enhanced activity in the water splitting of reduced nanographene oxide (rNGOs)–TiO2 compared to the reduced large graphene oxide (micrometer sized, rLGOs)–TiO2. The advantages of rNGOs over rLGOs could be mainly attributed to the full contact between the rNGO and TiO2, which facilitated the transfer of the photogenerated electrons from TiO2 to rNGO. Besides the aforementioned catalysts with graphene as the metal-free cocatalyst, other inexpensive cocatalyst can be added for a further enhanced H2 evolution. Xiang et al.257 reported the use of a layered MoS2–graphene (MG) hybrid as the cocatalyst in the photogeneration of hydrogen with TiO2 nanoparticles. In the ternary catalyst system, the photogenerated electrons was transferred from TiO2 to MoS2 nanosheets through the graphene sheets (which acted as a conductive electron transport “highway”) and then reacted with the adsorbed H+ ions at the edges of MoS2 to form H2. The synergetic effect between graphene and MoS2 nanosheets not only suppressed the charge recombination, but also provided more active sites for H2 evolution. As a result, the optimized TiO2–MG catalyst showed a H2 production rate of 165.3 μmol h−1, which was significantly higher than the TiO2–graphene catalyst (29.7 μmol h−1) and bare TiO2 (ca. 4 μmol h−1).
A small amount of Pt has commonly been coupled with the semiconductor catalyst to promote H2 generation. In this scenario, the semiconductor/graphene/Pt catalysts have exhibited significantly improved performance compared to semiconductor/Pt or semiconductor/graphene counterparts.258–260 As an example, Li et al.258 reported the fabrication of CdS-decorated graphene sheet composites as photocatalysts in visible-light-driven water splitting. In the presence of a small amount (0.5 wt%) of Pt, the optimized CdS–graphene showed a H2 production rate of 1.12 mmol h−1 and a quantum efficiency of 22.5%, in comparison with the sole CdS catalyst with a H2 production rate of 0.23 mmol h−1 and a quantum efficiency of 4.6%. The photogenerated electrons from CdS could transfer in one of three following ways: (1) to Pt deposited on the surface of CdS clusters; (2) to carbon atoms on the graphene sheets; (3) to Pt located on the graphene nanosheets, and subsequently participate in the H2 evolution process. In another report, Gao et al.259 combined GO, CdS and Pt nanoparticles for efficient photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. The results showed that the GO–CdS–Pt composite containing 0.5 at% Pt exhibited the highest hydrogen evolution rate of 123 mL h−1 g−1 (5.5 mmol h−1) with a reliable photostability, which was about 2.5 times higher than that of GO–CdS and 10.3 times higher than that of CdS. The increased photocatalytic hydrogen generation efficiency could be attributed to the effective charge separation and anti-recombination with the addition of GO and Pt, as well as the low overpotential of Pt for water splitting.
Interestingly GO itself, with an appropriate oxygen level and band structure, can also play a role as the photocatalyst in the evolution of both H2 and O2.79,261 Previous studies have proved that GO can be considered as a p-type semiconductor, whose band gap is dependent on the oxygen levels.262 Teng et al.79 reported a GO specimen with a band gap of 2.4–4.3 eV as the water splitting catalyst in an aqueous methanol solution or pure water under UV or visible light irradiation. A steady evolution of H2 was observed even in the absence of the Pt cocatalyst. Although the reduction in the band gap of GO occurred during the irradiation, the conduction band edge seemed almost unchanged and remained high enough to supply an overpotential for the H2 generation. The same group also investigated the evolution of O2 with GO as the catalyst.261 Unlike the stable H2 production, the O2 evolution was negligibly small due to mutual photocatalytic reduction of the GO with upward shift of the valence band edge under illumination. When NaIO3 was used as a sacrificial reagent to suppress the mutual reduction mechanism under illumination, strong O2 evolution was observed over the GO specimens.
The ultimate goal for the light-driven water splitting is the steady and simultaneous evolution of H2 and O2. Iwase et al.91 reported the application of photoreduced GO (PRGO) as the mediator in the Z-scheme photocatalytic system with BiVO4 and Ru/SrTiO3:Rh as the O2 and H2 photocatalysts, respectively. The PRGO could transfer electrons generated in the O2 photocatalyst to holes in the excited H2 photocatalyst, thus resulting in efficient oxidation and reduction of water on the O2 and H2 photocatalysts, respectively.
3.4 Photocatalytic reduction of CO2
The photocatalytic conversion of CO2 to valuable hydrocarbons is an attractive solar-to-fuel process, in that it can simultaneously solve the global warming and the energy shortage problems. Graphene-based materials have been employed as photocatalysts for photocatalytic CO2 conversion. Liang et al.93 investigated the influence of defects of graphene on the photocatalytic reduction of CO2. The two major solution-based pathways for producing graphene, oxidation–reduction and solvent exfoliation, resulted in nanoplatelets with different defect densities. It was demonstrated that the TiO2–graphene catalysts based on solvent exfoliated graphene (SEG) exhibited higher activity due to less defects and enhanced carrier mobility. In comparison with the bare TiO2 catalyst, the optimized TiO2–graphene nanocomposites yielded ca. a 7-fold improvement in the photoreduction of CO2. Moreover, Liang et al.263 also investigated the role of carbon nanomaterial dimensionality on the photoreduction of CO2 by comparing the two photocatalysts of SEG–TiO2 nanosheets (TiNS) and SWCNT–TiNS. During the photoreduction of CO2, SEG–TiNS produced 73.5% more CH4 compared to SWCNT–TiNS. The enhancement could be attributed to the fact that the 2D SEG possessed more intimate electronic and physical coupling with TiNS in comparison to 1D SWCNT, facilitating a more efficient suppression of the recombination of the photogenerated electrons and holes. Very recently, Tu et al.81 reported the synthesis of the robust hollow spheres consisting of alternating TiO2 nanosheets and graphene nanosheets (G–Ti0.91O2) via a layer-by-layer deposition method for efficient photocatalytic CO2 conversion. Compared to the TiO2–graphene nanocomposites prepared by dispersing TiO2 nanoparticles on the surface of graphene sheets, G–Ti0.91O2-based hollow spheres exhibited a 9-fold enhancement in the photoreduction of CO2. The enhancement could be attributed to three aspects: (i) the ultrathin nature of Ti0.91O2 nanosheets allowing charge carriers to move rapidly onto the surface; (ii) the sufficiently compact stacking of ultrathin Ti0.91O2 nanosheets with graphene nanosheets enabling the photogenerated electron to make a fast transfer from Ti0.91O2 nanosheets to graphene, enhancing the lifetime of the charge carriers; and (iii) the hollow structure potentially acting as a photon-trap well to allow the multi-scattering of incident light for the enhancement of light absorption.
3.5 Other photoelectrochemical applications
In addition to the above mentioned photoelectrochemical applications, graphene-based materials have also been involved in other photoelectrochemical applications, such as selective chemical synthesis,264–267 the disinfection process,95,268 photodynamic anticancer269 and photoelectrochemical cytosensing.270
Photocatalysis has been considered as an alternative to conventional synthetic routes in the selective transformation of organic compounds. The required mild conditions and the possibility to decrease the generation of undesired substances highlight its potential as a promising route for organic synthesis.271 Recently, graphene-based materials have been used as novel photocatalysts for selective transformation of organic compounds. For example, Xu and coworkers reported the use of CdS–graphene264 and TiO2–graphene266 as catalysts in the light-driven selective oxidation of alcohols, respectively. In the former case, the CdS–graphene catalyst showed significantly enhanced conversion and yield in the oxidation of alcohols into aldehydes compared to the pure CdS. The high photoactivity of CdS–graphene could be ascribed to the integrative effect of enhanced light absorption intensity, high electron conductivity of graphene, and its significant influence on the morphology and structure of the samples. In the latter case, three TiO2–graphene composites (TiO2–GR via Hummers method, TiO2-solvent exfoliated graphene (SEG) via dimethylformamide-assisted exfoliation, and P25–SEG) were compared. All the three composites showed decent selectivities (>95%), and the TiO2–SEG catalyst exhibited the highest yield and conversion. The high performance of TiO2–SEG could be attributed to the low density of defects in the SEG and the improved interfacial contact between TiO2 and SEG. In another work, Pan et al.265 reported the visible light induced oxidative C–H functionalisation of tertiary amines catalyzed by the combination of GO and Rose Bengal. The introduction of GO as a cocatalyst typically resulted in an increase in both the reaction rate and the yield, though the role of GO was not clear at this stage.
In addition, graphene has shown the potential to modify the TiO2 surface to contrive photoresponsive biomaterials for photoelectrochemical bio-related applications. For instance, Akhavan et al.268 investigated the photoinactivation of the bacteria of the graphene–TiO2 composite thin film. It was found that the graphene–TiO2 composite thin films were able to destroy more than 99.9% of E. coli bacteria in an aqueous solution under solar light irradiation. Compared to the pure TiO2, the antibacterial activity was improved by a factor of about 7.5. Very recently, these authors95 also investigated the inactivation of viruses photocatalyzed by a graphene–tungsten oxide (graphene–WO3) composite under visible light irradiation. The graphene–WO3 composite showed an enhanced visible light photocatalytic performance in the photoinactivation of viruses, as compared to WO3. It was revealed that the photocatalysis of the viruses on surface of the graphene–WO3 composite film resulted in a nearly complete destruction of the viral protein and a sharp increase in RNA efflux after 3 h light irradiation at room temperature. In addition, Hu et al.269 demonstrated the visible light driven photodynamic anticancer activity of GO–TiO2 hybrid (GOT). Consistent with the photocatalytic performance of TiO2, GOT generated reactive oxygen species after visible light irradiation, which could be used for photodynamic anticancer processes. It was found that GOT (0–100 μg mL−1) didn't show cytotoxicity during long incubation times without irradiation. When cancer cells were exposed to GOT under visible-light irradiation, however, a marked decrease in mitochondrial membrane potential, cell viability, activities of superoxide dismutase, catalase and glutathione peroxidase, as well as increased malondialdehyde production were observed. Moreover, GOT further caused significant elevation in caspase-3 activity, and induced apoptotic death. Furthermore, the heteronanostructure of the graphene–semiconductor nanocomposites is known to facilitate the spatial separation of the charge carriers, thus resulting in enhanced photocurrent intensity, which makes it a promising candidate for photoelectrochemical biosensing. Recently, Zhao et al.270 reported a facile one-step synthesis of graphene–CdS nanocomposites for photoelectrochemical cytosensing. The graphene–CdS nanocomposites-based photoelectrochemical cytosensor was fabricated by using a layer-by-layer assembly process. This photoelectrochemical cytosensor showed a good photoelectronic effect and cell-capture ability, and had a wide linear range and low detection limit for HeLa cells.
4 Conclusions and future prospects
Since its discovery in 2004, graphene has attracted global attention because of its unique atom-thick 2D structure and excellent electrical, thermal, mechanical and optical properties. Moreover, graphene can be made insulating, semiconducting, or semimetallic by appropriately tuning the oxidation or reduction process to control its structural order. The surface properties of graphene could also be adjusted via chemical modification, which offers tremendous opportunities for functionalized graphene-based materials. On the basis of the unique structure and excellent properties of graphene, the coupling of graphene with semiconductor materials presents the possibility to design and fabricate novel graphene-based materials for a wide range of applications in photoelectrochemistry, ranging from photoelectrochemical solar cells, photocatalytic decomposition of organic pollutants, photocatalytic splitting of H2O, photocatalytic conversion for fuels, and so on. Considerable advances in this area have already been made in recent years. In this review, we have summarized the recent advances in the field of graphene from photoelectrochemistry. These exciting developments have opened up new pathways to develop novel photoelectrochemical systems for their potential in high-performance photoelectrochemical applications.
Despite these advances, the studies in this field are at an early stage. A number of challenges still exist in the exploitation of graphene-based materials for their photoelectrochemical applications, and further developments are required. First, one of the key challenges is related to the facile synthesis and processing of graphene on a large scale in a somewhat controlled fashion. Many critical problems are still waiting for efficient solutions, particularly regarding the precise structural engineering of graphene, which is crucial for both band-gap adjustment and building-block functionalization. More controlled strategies have to be developed for preparing high-quality graphene or graphene oxide sheets with high purity, well-defined structure, uniform morphology and tunable sizes of layers, compositions and defects. Second, it's known that the photoelectrochemical performances of graphene-based functional materials are highly dependent on the surface microstructure of materials. Thus, the structural evolution of loaded functional nanomaterials on the 2D graphene supports should be highlighted, through controlling their morphologies, phase structures, porosities, surface active sites, as well as tailoring the interface, interactions, and assembly behavior among graphene layers and between graphene and other materials. Further improvement of photoelectrochemical performance is expected via structural optimization of the graphene-based nanoarchitectures. Third, a full understanding of the role of graphene in photoelectrochemical properties and photoelectrochemical mechanisms of graphene-based materials still needs more exploration. Specific attention should be paid to understanding, designing and controlling the mechanisms of photoelectrochemical enhancement induced by graphene-based materials. For this purpose, all aspects of the fundamental processing–structure–properties relationship will need to be better understood and controlled. Furthermore, the development and endorsement of standardized testing methods is also important for the investigation of photoelectrochemical activities of graphene-based materials. Finally, the construction of graphene-based photoelectrochemical devices is another challenging work. In this regard, extra efforts are needed to further improve the quality of synthetic graphene-based materials and the device fabrication technique to make a well-defined device structure so that its properties and functions can be fully utilized for high-performance photoelectrochemical applications. Nevertheless, researchers in the world are nowadays making rapid progress toward the exploration of graphene-based materials for photoelectrochemical applications, and it is certain that the remaining challenges will soon be circumvented. Thus, graphene-based materials are expected to be developed as competitive materials for photoelectrochemical applications with a view to addressing various environmental and energy-related issues. The future in this area should be interesting and fantastic.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful for financial support from the National Basic Research Program of China (Grant no. 2011CB935704, no. 2013CB934004), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant no. 21235004, 20975060 and 21003111), Research Fund of Ministry of Education of China (Grant no. 20110002130007).
References
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Zhang, Y. W. Tan, H. L. Stormer and P. Kim, Nature, 2005, 438, 201–204 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, Z. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Morozov, H. L. Stormer, U. Zeitler, J. C. Maan, G. S. Boebinger, P. Kim and A. K. Geim, Science, 2007, 315, 1379 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Z. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902–907 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Bunch, S. S. Verbridge, J. S. Alden, A. M. van der Zande, J. M. Parpia, H. G. Craighead and P. L. McEuen, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2458–2462 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS .
K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef .
S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 217–224 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. R. Rao, A. K. Sood, K. S. Subrahmanyam and A. Govindaraj, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7752–7777 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. H. Castro, F. Guinea, N. M. R. Peres, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2009, 81, 109–162 CrossRef .
M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 132–145 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Loh, Q. L. Bao, P. K. Ang and J. X. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2277–2289 RSC .
D. Chen, L. H. Tang and J. H. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3157–3180 RSC .
Y. Y. Shao, J. Wang, H. Wu, J. Liu, I. A. Aksay and Y. H. Lin, Electroanalysis, 2010, 22, 1027–1036 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Sun, Q. Wu and G. Q. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1113–1132 CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. H. Li, J. Wang, J. H. Li and Y. H. Lin, Trends Biotechnol., 2011, 29, 205–212 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, Z. Y. Yin, S. X. Wu, X. Y. Qi, Q. Y. He, Q. C. Zhang, Q. Y. Yan, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 1876–1902 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kuila, S. Bose, P. Khanra, A. K. Mishra, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 4637–4648 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, Z. Y. Zeng, Z. X. Fan, J. Q. Liu and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5979–6004 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, H. B. Feng and J. H. Li, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 6027–6053 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, X. Y. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .
Q. Y. He, S. X. Wu, Z. Y. Yin and H. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 1764–1772 RSC .
J. C. Meyer, A. K. Geim, M. I. Katsnelson, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth and S. Roth, Nature, 2007, 446, 60–63 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Nair, P. Balke, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. M. R. Peres and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 1308 CrossRef CAS .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, G. H. B. Dommett, K. M. Kohlhaas, E. J. Zimney, E. A. Stach, R. D. Piner, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2006, 442, 282–286 CrossRef CAS .
C. Berger, Z. M. Song, T. B. Li, X. B. Li, A. Y. Ogbazghi, R. Feng, Z. T. Dai, A. N. Marchenkov, E. H. Conrad, P. N. First and W. A. de Heer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 19912–19916 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, M. I. Katsnelson, I. V. Grigorieva, S. V. Dubonos and A. A. Firsov, Nature, 2005, 438, 197–200 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Dreyer, S. Park, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 228–240 RSC .
O. V. Gamayun, E. V. Gorbar and V. P. Gusynin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 075429 CrossRef .
G. Eda, C. Mattevi, H. Yamaguchi, H. Kim and M. Chhowalla, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 15768–15771 CAS .
O. C. Compton and S. T. Nguyen, Small, 2010, 6, 711–723 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Cao, Y. M. Shi, W. H. Shi, G. Lu, X. Huang, Q. Y. Yan, Q. C. Zhang and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 3163–3168 CrossRef CAS .
Q. J. Xiang, J. G. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 782–796 RSC .
B. F. Machado and P. Serp, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 54–75 CAS .
S. X. Wu, Q. Y. He, C. M. Zhou, X. Y. Qi, X. Huang, Z. Y. Yin, Y. H. Yang and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2478–2483 RSC .
Z. J. Wang, X. Z. Zhou, J. Zhang, F. Boey and H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14071–14075 CAS .
Q. Y. He, H. G. Sudibya, Z. Y. Yin, S. X. Wu, H. Li, F. Boey, W. Huang, P. Chen and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3201–3208 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pumera, Mater. Today, 2011, 14, 308–315 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Y. He, S. X. Wu, S. Gao, X. H. Cao, Z. Y. Yin, H. Li, P. Chen and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5038–5044 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Wang, J. Zhang, P. Chen, X. Z. Zhou, Y. L. Yang, S. X. Wu, L. Niu, Y. Han, L. H. Wang, P. Chen, F. Boey, Q. C. Zhang, B. Liedberg and H. Zhang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 3881–3886 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Cao, Q. Y. He, W. H. Shi, B. Li, Z. Y. Zeng, Y. M. Shi, Q. Y. Yan and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 1199–1202 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Yin, Q. Y. He, X. Huang, J. Zhang, S. X. Wu, P. Chen, G. Lu, P. Chen, Q. C. Zhang, Q. Y. Yan and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 293–297 RSC .
Z. J. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Y. Yin, S. X. Wu, D. Mandler and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2728–2733 RSC .
Y. Zhang, T. R. Nayak, H. Hong and W. B. Cai, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3833–3842 RSC .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Hoffman, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef .
D. A. Tryk, A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 2363–2376 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ni, M. K. H. Leung, D. Y. C. Leung and K. Sumathy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2007, 11, 401–425 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li and J. Z. Zhang, Laser Photonics Rev., 2009, 4, 517–528 CrossRef .
G. M. Wang, Y. C. Ling, H. Y. Wang, X. Y. Yang, C. C. Wang, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6180–6187 CAS .
X. H. Lu, G. M. Wang, S. L. Xie, J. Y. Shi, W. Li, Y. X. Tong and Y. Li, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7717–7719 RSC .
G. M. Wang, Y. C. Ling, X. H. Lu, H. Y. Wang, F. Q. Qian, Y. X. Tong and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8215–8219 CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
X. B. Chen, S. H. Shen, L. J. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Wheeler, G. M. Wang, Y. C. Ling, Y. Li and J. Z. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6682–6702 CAS .
H. Park and W. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 3885–3890 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Li, G. X. Lu and S. B. Li, Chemosphere, 2003, 52, 843–850 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, M. Higashi, D. L. Lu, R. Abe and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5858–5868 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, Y. C. Ling and Y. Li, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6682–6691 RSC .
M. Murdoch, G. I. N. Waterhouse, M. A. Nadeem, J. B. Metson, M. A. Keane, R. F. Howe, J. Llorca and H. Idriss, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 489–492 CAS .
A. S. Weber, A. M. Grady and R. T. Koodali, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 683–693 CAS .
K. Gurunathan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2004, 29, 933–940 CrossRef CAS .
Y. D. Hou, X. C. Wang, L. Wu, X. F. Chen, Z. X. Ding, X. X. Wang and X. Z. Fu, Chemosphere, 2008, 72, 414–421 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, P. Niu, C. H. Sun, S. C. Smith, Z. G. Chen, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11642–11648 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Youngblood, S. H. A. Lee, K. Maeda and T. E. Mallouk, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1966–1973 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kim, T. Tachikawa, T. Majima and W. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 10603–10609 CAS .
D. Chen, H. Zhang, S. Hu and J. H. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 117–122 CAS .
X. F. Chen, X. C. Wang and X. Z. Fu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 872–877 CAS .
L. L. Zhang, H. C. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, New J. Chem., 2012, 36, 1541–1544 RSC .
Z. Y. Yin, Z. Wang, Y. P. Du, X. Y. Qi, Y. Z. Huang, C. Xue and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5374–5378 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Zhou, Z. Y. Yin, Y. P. Du, X. Huang, Z. Y. Zeng, Z. X. Fan, H. Liu, J. Y. Wang and H. Zhang, Small, 2013, 9, 140–147 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, L. J. Zhi and K. Müllen, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 323–327 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Hong, Y. X. Xu, G. W. Lu, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1555–1558 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Yin, S. X. Wu, X. Z. Zhou, X. Huang, Q. C. Zhang, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Small, 2010, 6, 307–312 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Song, Z. Y. Yin, Z. J. Yang, P. Amaladass, S. X. Wu, J. Ye, Y. Zhao, W. Q. Deng, H. Zhang and X. W. Liu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 10832–10837 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, X. J. Lv, Y. M. Li, Y. Wang and J. H. Li, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 380–386 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. An and J. C. Yu, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 1426–1434 RSC .
L. L. Tan, S. P. Chai and A. R. Mohamed, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1868–1882 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Yeh, J. M. Syu, C. Cheng, T. H. Chang and H. S. Teng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2255–2262 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Izumi, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2013, 257, 171–186 CrossRef CAS .
W. G. Tu, Y. Zhou, Q. Liu, Z. P. Tian, J. Gao, X. Y. Chen, H. T. Zhang, J. G. Liu and Z. G. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1215–1221 CrossRef CAS .
T. Maschmeyer and M. Che, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1536–1539 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Chen, L. Liu, P. Y. Yu and S. S. Mao, Science, 2011, 331, 746–750 CrossRef CAS .
R. Leary and A. Westwood, Carbon, 2011, 49, 741–772 CrossRef CAS .
O. Carp, C. L. Huisman and A. Reller, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2004, 32, 33–177 CrossRef CAS .
S. X. Min and G. X. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 13938–13945 CAS .
Z. G. Xiong, L. L. Zhang, J. Z. Ma and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6099–6101 RSC .
Y. Lin, K. Zhang, W. F. Chen, Y. D. Liu, Z. G. Geng, J. Zeng, N. Pan, L. F. Yan, X. P. Wang and J. G. Hou, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3033–3038 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cao, Z. Liu, S. S. Chu, M. H. Wu, Z. M. Ye, Z. W. Cai, Y. L. Chang, S. F. Wang, Q. H. Gong and Y. F. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 103–106 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Guo, H. B. Yang, Z. M. Sheng, Z. S. Lu, Q. L. Song and C. M. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3014–3017 CrossRef CAS .
A. Iwase, Y. H. Ng, Y. Ishiguro, A. Kudo and R. Amal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11054–11057 CrossRef CAS .
I. V. Lightcap, T. H. Kosel and P. V. Kamat, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 577–583 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Liang, B. K. Vijayan, K. A. Gray and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2865–2870 CrossRef CAS .
B. T. Liu, Y. J. Huang, Y. Wen, L. J. Du, W. Zeng, Y. R. Shi, F. Zhang, G. Zhu, X. H. Xu and Y. H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7484–7491 RSC .
O. Akhavan, M. Choobtashani and E. Ghaderi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 9653–9659 CAS .
J. J. Guo, Y. Li, S. M. Zhu, Z. X. Chen, Q. L. Liu, D. Zhang, W. J. Moon and D. M. Song, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 1356–1363 RSC .
C. Chen, W. M. Cai, M. C. Long, B. X. Zhou, Y. H. Wu, D. Y. Wu and Y. J. Feng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6425–6432 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Du, Y. H. Ng, N. J. Bell, Z. H. Zhu, R. Amal and S. C. Smith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 894–899 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Zhang, Z. R. Tang, X. Z. Fu and Y. J. Xu, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7303–7314 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Yan, F. N. Xia, W. J. Zhu, M. Freitag, C. Dimitrakopoulos, A. A. Bol, G. Tulevski and P. Avouris, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9854–9860 CrossRef CAS .
Q. L. Bao and K. P. Loh, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3677–3694 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Gabor, J. C. W. Song, Q. Ma, N. L. Nair, T. Taychatanapat, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, L. S. Levitov and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Science, 2011, 334, 648–652 CrossRef CAS .
M. Freitag, T. Low, F. N. Xia and P. Avouris, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 7, 53–59 CrossRef .
N. G. Sahoo, Y. Z. Pan, L. Li and S. H. Chan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4203–4210 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Wan, G. K. Long, L. Huang and Y. S. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5342–5358 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Yin, S. Y. Sun, T. Salim, S. X. Wu, X. Huang, Q. Y. He, Y. M. Lam and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5263–5268 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Becerril, J. Mao, Z. F. Liu, R. M. Stoltenberg, Z. N. Bao and Y. S. Chen, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 463–470 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Wu, H. A. Becerril, Z. N. Bao, Z. F. Liu, Y. S. Chen and P. Peumans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 263302 CrossRef .
L. G. De Arco, Y. Zhang, C. W. Schlenker, K. M. Ryu, M. E. Thompson and C. W. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2865–2873 CrossRef .
S. K. Bae, H. K. Kim, Y. B. Lee, X. F. Xu, J. S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. R. Kim, Y. I. Song, Y. J. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Ozyilmaz, J. H. Ahn, B. H. Hong and S. Iijima, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574–578 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bonaccorso, Z. Sun, T. Hasan and A. C. Ferrari, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 611–622 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Choi, S. J. Kang, H. K. Kim, W. M. Choi and S. I. Na, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 96, 281–285 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kasry, M. A. Kuroda, G. J. Martyna, G. S. Tulevski and A. A. Bol, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3839–3844 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, S. W. Tong, X. F. Xu, B. Ozyilmaz and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1514–1518 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Park, J. A. Rowehl, K. K. Kim, V. Bulovic and J. Kong, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 505204 CrossRef .
H. S. Park, P. R. Brown, V. Bulovic and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 133–140 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Hsu, C. T. Lin, J. H. Huang, C. W. Chu, K. H. Wei and L. J. Li, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5031–5039 CrossRef CAS .
G. X. Ni, Y. Zheng, S. Bae, C. Y. Tan, O. Kahya, J. Wu, B. H. Hong, K. Yao and B. Özyilmaz, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3935–3942 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Pei, J. P. Zhao, J. H. Du, W. C. Ren and H. M. Cheng, Carbon, 2010, 48, 4466–4474 CrossRef CAS .
V. C. Tung, L. M. Chen, M. J. Allen, J. K. Wassel, K. Nelson, R. B. Kaner and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1949–1955 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. King, U. Khan, M. Lotya, S. De and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4238–4246 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xue, B. P. Rand, S. Uchida and S. R. Forrest, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 66–71 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kasry, M. E. Ashry, R. A. Nistor, A. A. Bol, G. S. Tulevski, G. J. Martyna and D. M. Newns, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 4827–4830 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, N. E. Coates, D. Moses, T. Q. Nguyen, M. Dante and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2007, 317, 222–225 CrossRef CAS .
Z. F. Liu, Q. Liu, Y. Huang, Y. F. Ma, S. G. Yin, X. Y. Zhang, W. Sun and Y. S. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3924–3930 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, Z. F. Liu, X. Y. Zhang, L. Y. Yang, N. Zhang, G. L. Pan, S. G. Yin, Y. S. Chen and J. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 894–904 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Liu, D. W. He, Y. S. Wang, H. P. Wu, J. G. Wang and H. T. Wang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 2148–2153 CrossRef CAS .
Z. F. Wang, Q. W. Shi, Q. X. Li, X. P. Wang, J. G. Hou, H. X. Zheng, Y. Yao and J. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 053109 CrossRef .
V. Gupta, N. Chaudhary, R. Srivastava, G. D. Sharma, R. Bhardwaj and S. Chand, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9960–9963 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Yu, K. S. Park, M. Durstock and L. M. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1113–1118 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Li, K. H. Tu, C. C. Lin, C. W. Chen and M. Chhowalla, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3169–3174 CrossRef CAS .
V. Shrotriya, G. Li, C. W. Chu and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 073508 CrossRef .
M. D. Irwin, D. B. Buchholz, A. W. Hains, R. P. H. Chang and T. J. Marks, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 2783–2787 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jorgensen, K. Norrman and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 686–714 CrossRef .
I. P. Murray, S. J. Lou, L. J. Cote, S. Loser, C. J. Kadleck, T. Xu, J. M. Szarko, B. S. Rolczynski, J. E. Johns, J. X. Huang, L. P. Yu, L. X. Chen, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 3006–3012 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, V. C. Tung and J. X. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 1052–1057 CrossRef CAS .
S. Stankovich, R. D. Piner, X. Q. Chen, N. Q. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 155–158 RSC .
J. M. Yun, J. S. Yeo, J. Kim, H. G. Jeong, D. Y. Kim, Y. J. Noh, S. S. Kim, B. C. Ku and S. I. Na, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4923–4928 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. H. Xue, Y. X. Gao, D. S. Yu, M. Durstock and L. M. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2228–2233 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Tong, Y. Wang, Y. Zheng, M. F. Ng and K. P. Loh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 4430–4435 CrossRef CAS .
V. C. Tung, J. Kim, L. J. Cote and J. X. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9262–9265 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef .
A. Yella, H. W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W. G. Diau, C. Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629–634 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hauch and A. Georg, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 3457–3466 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Trancik, S. C. Barton and J. Hone, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 982–987 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gong, H. Wang and Z. S. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 17676–17682 RSC .
J. S. Lee, H. J. Ahn, J. C. Yoon and J. H. Jang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 7938–7943 RSC .
J. D. Roy-Mayhew, D. J. Bozym, C. Punckt and I. A. Aksay, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6203–6211 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Hamann and J. W. Ondersma, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 370–381 CAS .
S. M. Feldt, E. A. Gibson, E. Gabrielsson, L. Sun, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16714–16724 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, N. Chamberland, L. Breau, J. E. Moser, R. Humphry-Baker, B. Marsan, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 385–389 CrossRef CAS .
T. Daeneke, T. H. Kwon, A. B. Holmes, N. W. Duffy, U. Bach and L. Spiccia, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 213–215 CrossRef .
L. Kavan, J. H. Yum and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5501–5506 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kavan, J. H. Yum and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 165–172 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Roy-Mayhew, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and I. A. Aksay, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2794–2800 CAS .
S. Das, P. Sudhagar, V. Verma, D. H. Song, E. Ito, S. Y. Lee, Y. S. Kang and W. B. Choi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3729–3736 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Hong, Y. X. Xu, G. W. Lu and G. Q. Shi, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1555–1558 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Lee, Y. B. Lee, J. Y. Lee, J. H. Ahn and J. H. Park, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 379–382 CrossRef CAS .
G. Q. Wang, W. Xing and S. P. Zhuo, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 66, 151–157 CrossRef CAS .
J. Velten, A. J. Mozer, D. Li, D. Officer, G. Wallace, R. Baughman and A. Zakhidov, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 085201 CrossRef .
J. A. Velten, J. Carretero-Gonzalez, E. Castillo-Martinez, J. Bykova, A. Cook, R. Baughman and A. Zakhidov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 25125–25131 CAS .
A. Kongkanand, R. Martinez-Dominguez and P. V. Kamat, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 676–680 CrossRef CAS .
N. L. Yang, J. Zhai, D. Wang, Y. S. Chen and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 887–894 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Sun, L. Gao, Y. Q. Liu and J. Sun, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 093112 CrossRef .
Y. B. Tang, C. S. Lee, J. Xu, Z. T. Liu, Z. H. Chen, Z. B. He, Y. L. Cao, G. D. Yuan, H. S. Song, L. M. Chen, L. B. Luo, H. M. Cheng, W. J. Zhang, I. Bello and S. T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3482–3488 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hayashi, I. V. Lightcap, M. Tsujimoto, M. Takano, T. Umeyama, P. V. Kamat and H. Imahori, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7684–7687 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, X. Cui and L. S. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5944–5945 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, X. Cui, B. S. Li and L. S. Li, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1869–1873 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Radich, R. Dwyer and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2453–2460 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. E. Moser, R. Hummphry-Baker, P. Comte, V. Aranyos, A. Hagfeldt, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1806–1811 CrossRef CAS .
R. Vogel, P. Hoyer and H. Weller, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 3183–3188 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Klimov, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 16827–16845 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510 CrossRef CAS .
V. Chakrapani, D. Baker and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9607–9615 CrossRef CAS .
T. Loučka, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1972, 36, 355–367 CrossRef .
G. Hodes, J. Manassen and D. Cahen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1980, 127, 544–549 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Genovese, I. V. Lightcap and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 865–872 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhu, L. K. Pan, H. C. Sun, X. J. Liu, T. Lv, T. Lu, J. Yang and Z. Sun, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 769–773 CrossRef CAS .
P. Brown and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8890–8891 CrossRef CAS .
B. Farrow and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11124–11131 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Chang, X. J. Lv, H. Zhang and J. H. Li, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 483–487 CrossRef CAS .
R. Narayanan, M. Deepa and A. K. Srivastava, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 767–778 RSC .
I. V. Lightcap and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7109–7116 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ye and L. Dai, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24224–24229 RSC .
X. M. Li, H. W. Zhu, K. L. Wang, A. Y. Cao, J. Q. Wei, C. Y. Li, Y. Jia, Z. Li, X. Li and D. H. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2743–2748 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. Feng, D. Xie, Y. X. Lin, H. M. Zhao, Y. Chen, H. Tian, T. L. Ren, X. Li, Z. Li, K. L. Wang, D. H. Wu and H. W. Zhu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2130–2133 RSC .
C. Xie, P. Lv, B. Nie, J. S. Jie, X. W. Zhang, Z. Wang, P. Jiang, Z. Z. Hu, L. B. Luo, Z. F. Zhu, L. Wang and C. Y. Wu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 133113 CrossRef .
G. F. Fan, H. W. Zhu, K. L. Wang, J. Q. Wei, X. M. Li, Q. K. Shu, N. Guo and D. H. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 721–725 CAS .
Y. M. Shi, K. K. Kim, A. Reina, M. Hofmann, L. J. Li and J. Kong, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2689–2694 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, L. L. Fan, Z. Li, K. L. Wang, M. L. Zhong, J. Q. Wei, D. H. Wu and H. W. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 425–429 CrossRef CAS .
X. C. Miao, S. Tongay, M. K. Petterson, K. Berke, A. G. Rinzler, B. R. Appleton and A. F. Hebard, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2745–2750 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zweibel, Science, 2010, 328, 699–701 CrossRef CAS .
O. M. Bakr, V. Amendola, C. M. Aikens, W. Wenseleers, R. Li, L. Dal Negro, G. C. Schatz and F. Stellacci, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 5921–5926 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18737–18753 CAS .
L. M. Dai, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 797–799 CrossRef CAS .
G. Centi and S. Perathoner, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2009, 3851–3878 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Gabor, Z. H. Zhong, K. Bosnick, J. Park and P. L. McEuen, Science, 2009, 325, 1367–1371 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bi, F. Q. Huang, J. Liang, X. M. Xie and M. H. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3202–3206 CrossRef CAS .
T. Q. Lin, F. Q. Huang, J. Liang and Y. X. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 862–865 Search PubMed .
J. Liang, H. Bi, D. Y. Wan and F. Q. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1267–1271 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Hernandez-Alonso, F. Fresno, S. Suarez and J. M. Coronado, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 1231–1257 CAS .
Z. Y. Wang, B. B. Huang, Y. Dai, Y. Y. Liu, X. Y. Zhang, X. Y. Qin, J. P. Wang, Z. K. Zheng and H. F. Cheng, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 1687–1692 RSC .
H. J. Zhang, P. P. Xu, G. D. Du, Z. W. Chen, K. Oh, D. Y. Pan and Z. Jiao, Nano Res., 2010, 4, 274–283 CrossRef .
T. Kamegawa, D. Yamahana and H. Yamashita, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15049–15053 CAS .
M. S. A. S. Shah, A. R. Park, K. Zhang, J. H. Park and P. J. Yoo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3893–3901 Search PubMed .
B. J. Jiang, C. G. Tian, W. Zhou, J. Q. Wang, Y. Xie, Q. J. Pan, Z. Y. Ren, Y. Z. Dong, D. Fu, J. L. Han and H. G. Fu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 8379–8387 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Liang, H. L. Wang, H. S. Casalongue, Z. Chen and H. J. Dai, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 701–705 CrossRef CAS .
G. Williams, B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1487–1491 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 520–527 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Ng, A. Iwase, N. J. Bell, A. Kudo and R. Amal, Catal. Today, 2011, 164, 353–357 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Liu, L. K. Pan, T. Lv, G. Zhu, T. Lu, Z. Sun and C. Q. Sun, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 1245–1249 RSC .
J. T. Zhang, Z. G. Xiong and X. S. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3634–3640 RSC .
D. Q. Zhang, G. S. Li, X. F. Yang and J. C. Yu, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4381–4383 RSC .
X. Q. Gong, Q. Kuang, M. S. Jin, Z. X. Xie and L. S. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3152–3153 CrossRef .
H. G. Yang, C. H. Sun, S. Z. Qiao, J. Zou, G. Liu, S. C. Smith, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, Nature, 2008, 453, 638–641 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lazzeri, A. Vittadini and A. Selloni, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2001, 63, 155409 CrossRef .
U. Diebold, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2003, 48, 53–229 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, G. Liu, C. Zhen, F. Li, L. L. Zhang and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1717–1722 CrossRef CAS .
J. Du, X. Y. Lai, N. L. Yang, J. Zhai, D. Kisailus, F. B. Su, D. Wang and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 590–596 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Liu, Y. R. Teng, R. H. Liu, S. L. Luo, Y. H. Tang, L. Y. Chen and Q. Y. Cai, Carbon, 2011, 49, 5312–5320 CrossRef CAS .
P. N. Zhu, A. S. Nair, S. J. Peng and S. Ramakrishna, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 581–585 Search PubMed .
S. D. Perera, R. G. Mariano, K. Vu, N. Nour, O. Seitz, Y. Chabal and K. J. Balkus, Jr, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 949–956 CrossRef CAS .
X. Pan, Y. Zhao, S. Liu, C. L. Korzeniewski, S. Wang and Z. Y. Fan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3944–3950 CAS .
J. S. Lee, K. H. You and C. B. Park, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1084–1088 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Wen, H. M. Ding and Y. K. Shan, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4411–4417 RSC .
L. Ren, X. Qi, Y. D. Liu, Z. Y. Huang, X. L. Wei, J. Li, L. W. Yang and J. X. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11765–11771 RSC .
X. Wu, M. Sprinkle, X. Li, F. Ming, C. Berger and W. A. de Heer, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 026801 CrossRef .
S. Gilje, S. Han, M. Wang, K. L. Wang and R. B. Kaner, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3394–3398 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Zhuo, M. W. Shao and S. T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1059–1064 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Ng, I. V. Lightcap, K. Goodwin, M. Matsumura and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2222–2227 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, L. Han, C. Z. Zhu, Y. M. Zhai and S. J. Dong, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 1153–1162 CrossRef CAS .
W. G. Wang, J. G. Yu, Q. J. Xiang and B. Cheng, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 119–120, 109–116 CrossRef CAS .
Q. P. Luo, X. Y. Yu, B. X. Lei, H. Y. Chen, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 8111–8117 CAS .
D. H. Yoo, T. V. Cuong, V. H. Luan, N. T. Khoa, E. J. Kim, S. H. Hur and S. H. Hahn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 7180–7184 CAS .
H. Sun, L. Cao and L. Lu, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 550–562 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Fu, H. Q. Chen, X. Q. Sun and X. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 111–112, 280–287 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, T. Y. Xiao, H. H. Li, J. J. Yang, Z. Wang, H. B. Yao and S. H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 712–719 CrossRef CAS .
E. P. Gao, W. Z. Wang, M. Shang and J. H. Xu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 2887–2893 RSC .
H. Zhang, X. F. Fan, X. Quan, S. Chen and H. T. Yu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 5731–5736 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Zhu, P. L. Chen and M. H. Liu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4529–4536 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Zhu, P. L. Chen and M. H. Liu, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 3385–3390 CrossRef CAS .
X. C. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2008, 8, 76–80 CrossRef .
G. Z. Liao, S. Chen, X. Quan, H. T. Yu and H. M. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2721–2726 RSC .
G. K. Mor, H. E. Prakasam, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2356–2364 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Chiarello, E. Selli and L. Forni, Appl. Catal., B, 2008, 84, 332–339 CrossRef CAS .
B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18946–18952 CAS .
G. M. Wang, H. Y. Wang, Y. C. Ling, Y. C. Tang, X. Y. Yang, R. C. Fitzmorris, C. C. Wang, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3026–3033 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Li, Y. F. Hu, S. Q. Peng, G. X. Lu and S. B. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 9352–9358 CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 663–672 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Lv, W. F. Fu, H. X. Chang, H. Zhang, J. S. Cheng, G. J. Zhang, Y. Song, C. Y. Hu and J. H. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1539–1546 RSC .
J. F. Shen, M. Shi, B. Yan, H. W. Ma, N. Li and M. X. Ye, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 795–806 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Fan, Q. H. Lai, Q. H. Zhang and Y. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 10694–10701 CAS .
Y. H. Ng, A. Iwase, A. Kudo and R. Amal, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2607–2612 CrossRef CAS .
Q. J. Xiang, J. G. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7355–7363 CAS .
L. Jia, D. H. Wang, Y. X. Huang, A. W. Xu and H. Q. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 11466–11473 CAS .
H. I. Kim, G. H. Moon, D. Monllor-Satoca, Y. S. Park and W. Y. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 1535–1543 CAS .
Q. J. Xiang, J. G. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6575–6578 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, B. D. Guo, J. G. Yu, J. R. Ran, B. H. Zhang, H. J. Yan and J. R. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10878–10884 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gao, J. C. Liu, S. Lee, T. Zhang and D. D. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2292–2298 RSC .
J. G. Hou, Z. Wang, W. B. Kan, S. Q. Jiao, H. M. Zhu and R. V. Kumar, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7291–7299 RSC .
T. F. Yeh, F. F. Chan, C. T. Hsieh and H. S. Teng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 22587–22597 CAS .
R. J. W. E. Lahaye, H. K. Jeong, C. Y. Park and Y. H. Lee, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 125435 CrossRef .
Y. T. Liang, B. K. Vijayan, O. Lyandres, K. A. Gray and M. C. Hersam, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1760–1765 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, Y. H. Zhang, X. Y. Pan, X. Z. Fu, S. Q. Liu and Y. J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23501–23511 CAS .
Y. H. Pan, S. Wang, C. W. Kee, E. Dubuisson, Y. Y. Yang, K. P. Loh and C. H. Tan, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 3341–3344 RSC .
Y. H. Zhang, N. Zhang, Z. R. Tang and Y. J. Xu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 9167–9175 RSC .
N. Zhang, Y. H. Zhang, X. Y. Pan, M. Q. Yang and Y. J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 18023–18031 CAS .
O. Akhavan and E. Ghaderi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20214–20220 CAS .
Z. Hu, Y. D. Huang, S. F. Sun, W. C. Guan, Y. H. Yao, P. Y. Tang and C. Y. Li, Carbon, 2012, 50, 994–1004 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Zhao, S. W. Zhou, L. P. Jiang, W. H. Hou, Q. M. Shen and J. J. Zhu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 4974–4981 CrossRef CAS .
A. Maldotti, A. Molinari and R. Amadelli, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 3811–3836 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Da Chen	Da Chen is currently an associate professor at China Jiliang University, China. He received his MSc in 2004 from Zhejiang University and his PhD in 2008 from University of Science & Technology of China under the supervision of Prof. Jinghong Li. In 2011, he carried out postdoctoral research in the group of Professor Donghai Wang at the Pennsylvania State University. His current research interest is mainly focused on the design and synthesis of functional graphene-based materials and semiconductor nanostructures, as well as their applications for electrochemical sensing and energy conversion and storage.
Hao Zhang	Hao Zhang received his BSc in 2007 and his M.Sc in 2010 from Dept. of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, China, under the supervision of Prof. Jinghong Li on the photoelectrochemical properties of chemically modified metal oxide semiconductors. Currently he is pursuing his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Dmitri V. Talapin in the University of Chicago, USA.
Yang Liu	Yang Liu is currently an associate professor in the Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University. He received his BS degree from Huazhong University of Sciences and Technology in 2001, and PhD from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2006. He worked as a post-doctoral at the University of California at Riverside and Oakland University since 2007 to 2009. He joined the Chemistry Department of Tsinghua University in Nov. 2009. His current research is focused on electroanalytical chemistry, nanomaterial electrochemistry and biosensors.
Jinghong Li	Jinghong Li is currently a Cheung Kong Professor at Tsinghua University, China. He received his PhD in 1996 from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He spent several years at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, University of California at Santa Barbara, Clemson University, and Evonyx Inc., New York. He returned to Changchun in May 2001 and then moved to Tsinghua University in July 2004. His current research interests include electroanalytical chemistry, bioelectrochemistry and sensors, physical electrochemistry and interfacial electrochemistry, electrochemical materials science and nanoscopic electrochemistry, fundamental aspects of energy conversion and storage, advanced battery materials, and photoelectrochemistry.

Broader context
During the past decades, various semiconductors (such as TiO2 and ZnO) have been proven to be excellent photocatalysts for photoelectrochemical applications. However, there are still many challenges that need to be resolved, including the enhancement of solar energy conversion, the suppression of the recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs, and the effective utilization of visible light. On the basis of graphene's unique structure and excellent properties, the combination of graphene with semiconductors presents the possibility to possess simultaneously excellent adsorptivity, transparency, conductivity and controllability, which could facilitate effective photoelectrochemical performance. Over the past few years, much work has been attempted on the design and preparation of novel graphene-based materials and the exploration of their applications in photoelectrochemistry, and considerable advances in this area have already been made. This review article explores and summarizes the recent advances in graphene-based materials for photoelectrochemical applications, including photoelectrochemical solar cells, photocatalytic decomposition, photocatalytic splitting of H2O, photocatalytic conversion for fuels, and so forth. Also, the prospects and further developments of graphene-based materials in this exciting field are suggested.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of graphene-based materials for a wide range of applications in photoelectrochemistry, including photoelectrochemical solar cells, photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants, photocatalytic splitting of H2O for H2 production, photocatalytic conversion of CO2 for fuels, and so on.	 


rGO	100–500	85–95	G/CuPc/C60/BCP/Ag	0.4	
108

rGO	1.6	55	G/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/TiO2/Al	0.78	
106

CVD	0.23–8.3	72–91	G/PEDOT:PSS/CuPc/C60/BCP/Al	1.18	
109

CVD—multilayer	0.374	84.2	G/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Ca:Al	1.17	
112

CVD—AuCl3 doped	0.5–0.3	97.1, 91.2	G/PEDOT:PSS/CuPc/C60/BCP/Ag	1.63	
115

CVD—acid doped	0.08	90	G/MoO3/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/LiF/Al	2.5	
114

CVD—organic molecules doped	0.278	92.2	G/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Ca:Al	2.58	
117

rGO/CNTs	0.24	86	G/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Ca:Al	0.85	
120


 	Fig. 2  (A) Photograph of rGO/PET; (B) schematic representation of the layer structure of the device, i.e., rGO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/TiO2/Al, with rGO as the transparent electrode; (C) current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the device after applying (I) 400, (II) 800, and (III) 1200 cycles of bending; (D) the short-circuit current density (Jsc), overall power conversion efficiency (η), and the sheet resistance (RSR) of the device as a function of bending cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 106. Copyright © 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Schematic of the photovoltaic device structure consisting of the following: ITO/GO/P3HT:PCBM/Al. (B) Energy level diagrams of the bottom electrode ITO, interlayer materials (PEDOT:PSS, GO), P3HT (donor), and PCBM (acceptor), and the top electrode Al. (C) J–V characteristics of photovoltaic devices with no hole transport layer (curve labeled as ITO), with a 30 nm PEDOT:PSS layer, and a 2 nm thick GO film. (D) J–V characteristics of ITO/GO/P3HT:PCBM/Al devices with different GO thickness. All of the measurements were under simulated A.M. 1.5 illumination at 100 mW cm−2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 131. Copyright © 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Differences between (A and C) 1D and (B and D) 2D nanomaterial composite electrodes. In 2D nanomaterial composite electrodes (graphene bridges), the TiO2 particles can anchor in the graphene better, and the photoinduced electrons can be captured and transferred by the graphene; however, with the 1D nanomaterial compositing, there are less intermolecular forces and connection between TiO2 and the 1D nanomaterial; therefore, the transfer barrier is larger and it is much easier for the recombination to happen. Reprinted with permission from ref. 163. Copyright © 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Scheme of in situ growth of CdS QDs on graphene and QDs sensitized graphene photoelectrodes. (B) Monochromatic IPCE (380–600 nm) of PB–graphene (a), CdS QDs (b) and CdS QDs sensitized graphene photoelectrodes (c). (C) Diffuse reflectance spectra of CdS QDs and CdS QDs/PB–graphene. (D) Nyquist plots of CdS QDs (a) and CdS QDs/PB–graphene (b) film on ITO. Electrolyte: 5 mM [Fe(CN)6]3−/4− aqueous solution with 100 mM KCl. Frequency: from 0.1 Hz to 100 kHz, Amplitude: 10 mV. Inset: general equivalent circuit. Reprinted with permission from ref. 181. Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Schematic diagrams for energy level matching in the graphene–CdSe based QDSSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 164. Copyright © 2011 American Institute of Physics. (B) Electron transfer routes from photoexcited CdSe QDs to a current-collecting electrode. Electron hopping leads to poor film conductivity in thicker QD films (middle QD cluster). The addition of graphene to QD films should promote improved electron transport to the electrode (right cluster). (C) IPCE of CdSe, CdSe–GO and CdSe–RGO films. (B and C) reprinted with permission from ref. 183. Copyright © 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Schematic structure of the P25–graphene composite and tentative processes of the photodegradation of MB, illustrating adsorption of MB on graphene sheets, and the role of graphene. (B) Diffuse reflectance absorption spectra and (C) electrochemical impedance of (1) P25 and (2) P25–GR, respectively. Comparison of photocatalytic activity in the degradation of MB under (D) UV light and (E) visible light over (1) P25, (2) P25–CNTs, and (3) P25–GR photocatalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright © 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Schematic illustration of the charge separation and transfer in the semiconductor nanoparticle (CdS or TiO2)–graphene system under irradiation; (B) hydrogen production based on CdS nanoparticles, CdS-mG and CdS–Pt composite photocatalysts in 20 mL Na2S (0.05 M) and Na2SO3 (0.07 M) aqueous solution as a function of irradiation time under visible light irradiation (λ > 380 nm); (C and D) hydrogen production based on P25 and its composite photocatalysts in 30 mL water and methanol (v/v = 2:1) solution upon irradiation with (C) UV-vis and (D) visible light irradiation (λ > 380 nm), respectively. Reproduced from ref. 250. Copyright © 2012 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
