Interplay between efficiency and device architecture for small molecule organic solar cells   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4CP01295J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4CP01295J
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 11398-11408Interplay between efficiency and device architecture for small molecule organic solar cells†

        
          
            Graeme 
            Williams
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Sibi 
            Sutty
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Hany 
            Aziz
          
        
      
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering & Waterloo Institute for Nanotechnology, University of Waterloo, 200 University Avenue, Waterloo, ON, Canada N2L 3G1. E-mail: g3willia@uwaterloo.ca
Received 
      25th March 2014
    , Accepted 28th April 2014First published on 29th April 2014AbstractSmall molecule organic solar cells (OSCs) have experienced a resurgence of interest over their polymer solar cell counterparts, owing to their improved batch-to-batch (thus, cell-to-cell) reliability. In this systematic study on OSC device architecture, we investigate five different small molecule OSC structures, including the simple planar heterojunction (PHJ) and bulk heterojunction (BHJ), as well as several planar-mixed structures. The different OSC structures are studied over a wide range of donor:acceptor mixing concentrations to gain a comprehensive understanding of their charge transport behavior. Transient photocurrent decay measurements provide crucial information regarding the interplay between charge sweep-out and charge recombination, and ultimately hint toward space charge effects in planar-mixed structures. Results show that the BHJ/acceptor architecture, comprising a BHJ layer with high C60 acceptor content, generates OSCs with the highest performance by balancing charge generation with charge collection. The performance of other device architectures is largely limited by hole transport, with associated hole accumulation and space charge effects.
Introduction
Recent progress in organic solar cells (OSCs) has seen a shift from intensive research on polymer solar cells toward the development of small molecule donor species,1–5 an area of research that had been previously overshadowed by the rapid progress of polymer donors.6–8 Small molecule OSCs are interesting from a manufacturing standpoint where they can provide high batch-to-batch reproducibility compared to their polymer counterparts. Such small molecule donors have been shown to provide efficiencies competitive with polymer donors for OSCs, whether the small molecule OSCs are formed by solution processing,9,10 or by vacuum deposition.11–14 Vacuum-deposited small molecule OSCs are especially of research interest, as this device fabrication methodology lends itself to multi-layer devices with precise control over both layer thicknesses and bulk heterojunction (BHJ) layer composition – a significantly more difficult feat with solution processing. Understanding the physics of the various device architectures can provide insights into factors governing charge transport, charge extraction and stability in OSCs, with consequences that apply to both vacuum deposition and solution processing fabrication methodologies. For example, the planar-mixed molecular heterojunction (PM-HJ) was initially developed using vacuum deposition methods, and was shown to allow for efficient charge generation with a BHJ layer while maintaining reasonable charge collection properties with neat donor and acceptor layers.15 More recently, this device structure has been realized with solution processing to allow for 75% fill factor (FF) OSCs.16 A more comprehensive understanding of the role of device architecture in device performance is thus invaluable for achieving high performance OSCs. It follows that a systematic study on device architecture as it relates to OSC performance also allows for simpler cross comparisons within the wealth of different device structures studied in literature. To this end, such a study can isolate the reasons that a particular device architecture may be best suited for a particular donor:acceptor materials system.
In the present work, we examine small molecule OSCs of varying device architectures with active regions comprising: a planar heterojunction (PHJ), a BHJ, a BHJ/acceptor, a donor/BHJ and a donor/BHJ/acceptor. Within this subset of device architectures, we maintain a constant total device thickness while varying the acceptor (fullerene, C60) content from 25% to 87.5%. The inclusion of devices with high C60 content allows for research on the Schottky OSC, an emerging device architecture, with high efficiencies and impressive open circuit voltages (Voc), that is still relatively unexplored.17–21 The different devices are tested for their photovoltaic output parameters, their external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra and their transient photoresponse to provide a complete picture of the operation and the inherent limitations of the various device architectures. Transient photocurrent decay measurements, known from literature to be a powerful technique for investigating charge transport as well as charge trapping effects,22–25 help us to distinguish between charge sweep-out and charge recombination in the various device architectures. These measurements further elucidate the role of space charge effects in device performance.
The results show that the improvement in performance with device architecture is strongly associated with minimizing charge trapping and associated charge recombination. To this end, the donor/BHJ/acceptor device architecture is shown to reduce charge recombination effects compared to a simple BHJ with equivalent thickness; however, the limited charge transport properties of the constituent materials result in space charge effects that ultimately degrade device performance. The results thus lend credence to the heavily doped organic layers employed in p-i-n OSCs.26–28 Basic Schottky OSCs are shown to offer a fast transient response and are thus less prone to space charge effects, but are ultimately limited by the poor charge transport properties and associated charge recombination within the thick mixed donor:acceptor layer. It follows that, due to limited donor hole mobility and the absence of doped organic layers, the highest performing OSCs employ a Schottky architecture OSC with an additional neat C60 acceptor layer. This architecture optimizes the trade-off between charge generation and charge collection. The comprehensive set of devices and the associated characterization techniques employed in this work are shown to allow for judicious determination of the device architecture required to achieve high efficiency OSCs with optimal charge collection characteristics.
Results and discussion
In the present study, ClGaPc and C60 are incorporated into various device architectures, as detailed in Fig. 1, while maintaining a total device thickness of 40 nm. This device thickness is specifically chosen to provide reasonable efficiencies – thicker devices generally suffer from poor FFs, while thinner devices suffer from poor short circuit current densities (Jsc). In all devices, a 5 nm MoO3 hole extraction layer (HEL) and an 8 nm BCP electron extraction layer (EEL) are used. The devices are labelled ‘A’ through ‘E’, corresponding to the PHJ, BHJ, BHJ/acceptor (BHJ/a), donor/BHJ (d/BHJ) and donor/BHJ/acceptor (d/BHJ/a, also known as a full PM-HJ) device architectures respectively. In the case of the PHJ, the thicknesses of the donor and acceptor layers are varied in order to vary the acceptor/C60 content within the device. In devices B through E, only the mixing concentration within the BHJ layer is varied. As will be discussed in greater detail below, for the cases where high C60 content is used and the mixed BHJ layer is in direct contact with the ITO/MoO3 anode, a Schottky contact is formed. In effect, the structures presented in Fig. 1 represent the full spread of viable device architectures available with the constituent materials, and thus can provide a full picture of charge transport as it relates to OSC efficiency. The energy level diagram for the various species employed in the OSCs in this work as well as the absorption spectra for both ClGaPc and C60 are provided in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 1  Illustration of OSC device architectures, including: (A) planar heterojunction (PHJ), (B) bulk heterojunction (BHJ). (C) BHJ with a neat acceptor layer, (D) BHJ with a neat donor layer and (E) BHJ with both a neat donor and a neat acceptor layer. 
 Fig. 2  (i) Energy level diagram for ClGaPc/C60 organic solar cells. (ii) Absorption spectra of 50 nm films of C60 and ClGaPc. 
The photovoltaic output parameters for devices A through E as a function of C60 content are provided in Fig. 3 (light JV characteristics are provided in ESI†). From panel i in the figure, it is clear that the BHJ and BHJ/acceptor device architectures (structures B and C respectively) offer the highest efficiencies – the latter demonstrating 2.9% power conversion efficiency (PCE) at 87.5% C60 content. The worst performing devices are those that employ a donor/BHJ device architecture (structure D), with PCE values substantially lower than the BHJ/acceptor architecture for the same mixing concentrations. The donor/BHJ/acceptor device architecture (structure E) grants slightly improved efficiencies compared to that of equivalent PHJ devices (structure A). However, the donor/BHJ/acceptor structure drops in efficiency at higher C60 content, and so it cannot compete with devices B and C for BHJ layers with 75% to 87.5% C60 content. In general, all devices show improvement in PCE when they have more C60 content than ClGaPc donor content. To better understand these trends in efficiency, it is necessary to examine the photovoltaic output parameters (Jsc, FF and Voc) in greater depth and in combination with EQE measurements as well as transient photoresponse measurements. To accomplish this task in a meaningful manner, the device architectures are compared incrementally in terms of their structural complexity.
 Fig. 3  Photovoltaic output parameters of ClGaPc:C60 OSCs with varying device architectures and varying acceptor (C60) content. Devices A through E correspond to the PHJ, BHJ, BHJ/acceptor, donor/BHJ and donor/BHJ/acceptor device architectures respectively. 
Bulk heterojunction versus planar heterojunction structures
We begin our analysis with a comparison of the most straightforward device architectures, the PHJ and BHJ (structures A and B respectively from Fig. 1). This follows naturally from the historical development of OSCs in literature, which evolved from the simple bilayer heterojunction (PHJ)29 to the BHJ.30–32 Such comparisons have also recently been made from a theoretical standpoint to better understand photocurrent generation.33 This basic comparison serves as an ideal starting point to allow us to later analyse the more complicated device architectures (structures C through E) in light of our chosen suite of characterization techniques. For the PHJ, the C60 content is varied by changing the layer thicknesses while maintaining a summative active layer thickness of 40 nm. In contrast, the BHJ comprises a fully mixed 40 nm active layer with varied donor-to-acceptor content.
The PHJ device (structure A) shows moderate PCE values, varying from 0.7% to 1.6% with higher performance for thicker C60 layers (thinner ClGaPc layers). Improvements in PCE with a thicker C60 layer are largely due to the improvements in FF with increasing C60 content, as shown in Fig. 3iv. This enhanced FF is associated with a decrease in series resistance, as is visible from Fig. 3vi. The stark decrease in series resistance and increase in fill factor with a thicker C60 layer is indicative of improved charge transport properties of C60 compared to ClGaPc. It is worth noting that optimal PHJ configurations that employ relatively thick C60 layers in bilayer heterojunction devices have been used for numerous other small molecule donor species in literature, so the comparatively poor mobility of ClGaPc is not believed unique to this specific donor.34–36 In fact, the relatively poor hole mobility of CuPc, a close relative of ClGaPc, compared to C60 is also well established in literature, and is even more strongly evident when considering hole–electron mobilities in mixed layers.37
Interestingly, the Jsc is also shown to improve with increasing C60 layer thickness and decreasing ClGaPc layer thickness. This is counterintuitive, as ClGaPc absorbs much more strongly in the visible wavelengths compared to C60. Therefore, it would seem that decreasing the ClGaPc content should decrease the amount of photocurrent generated within the OSC. In order to understand this effect, it is useful to examine the EQE spectra, as shown in Fig. 4i. It is clear that the photocurrent contributions from ClGaPc quickly reach their maximum levels even at the smallest ClGaPc thickness (10 nm ClGaPc/30 nm C60), suggesting that the ClGaPc exciton diffusion length is the most critical limitation for this device architecture (i.e. excitons generated greater than 10 nm from the heterojunction do not yield photocurrent). Furthermore, the increase in Jsc with increasing C60 layer thickness is found to be largely due to the strong increase in EQE at 450 nm, which we have previously shown to be due to C60 aggregate absorption.19 It follows that increasing the thickness of the C60 layer increases the number of C60 aggregates, and hence also increases their contributions to photocurrent. An additional contributor to photocurrent with increasing C60 layer thickness (decreasing ClGaPc thickness) is the broad increase in EQE from 530 nm to 730 nm. While this appears as a hypsochromatic shift of the 750 nm ClGaPc absorption, the improved EQE in this region is due to tail-end absorption from low energy C60 Frenkel excitons,38,39 as shown and discussed further in the ESI.†
 Fig. 4  External quantum efficiency spectra of the (i) PHJ and (ii) BHJ ClGaPc:C60 OSCs with different layer thicknesses (PHJ) and C60 content (BHJ). 
It is now interesting to compare the PHJ device (structure A) architecture to those devices that use a 40 nm BHJ (structure B), beginning with their photovoltaic output parameters in Fig. 3. While the PHJ reaches its maximum PCE at 1.6% with 62.5% C60 content, the BHJ reaches a substantially higher PCE of 2.4% at 75% C60 content. The most significant improvement in the transition from the PHJ to the BHJ structure is the increase in Jsc, owed to the improved exciton collection efficiency from the interpenetrating donor:acceptor network. In terms of EQE, shown in Fig. 4ii, it is clear that the BHJ shows much improved photocurrent contributions from both ClGaPc and C60 at nearly all mixing concentrations. As the BHJ is varied from ClGaPc-rich to C60-rich, there is a clear trade-off between photocurrent from ClGaPc in the red/near-IR wavelengths and from C60 aggregates at 450 nm. It is more difficult to form C60 aggregates with high ClGaPc content, and so the 450 nm absorption disappears with only 25% C60 content. Furthermore, the Jsc is optimized at 75% C60 content, which balances the ClGaPc and C60 photocurrent contributions optimally. The transition from the PHJ to the BHJ structure offers an additional benefit to the Voc, as shown in Fig. 3iii. For the PHJ, the Voc remains at ∼770 mV regardless of C60 content; however, for the BHJ, the Voc is observed to increase with increasing C60 content to a maximum value of 1020 mV at 87.5% C60 content. This enhancement in Voc occurs as a consequence of a Schottky junction formed between the BHJ layer and the high work function ITO/MoO3 anode, which occurs only when the BHJ layer contains a high concentration of C60.17–19 The PHJ, using a neat donor layer adjacent to the anode, cannot possibly benefit from this Schottky interface. Consequently, for the PHJ, the Voc is dictated by the HOMOdonor–LUMOacceptor offset, whereas for the Schottky device architecture (BHJ with high C60 content), the Voc is set by the band-bending at the organic/anode interface – essentially by the C60 LUMO and the anode's effective work function.17
While the transition from the PHJ to the BHJ device architecture enhances the Jsc, it also degrades the FF due to the poor charge transport properties of the mixed organic layers compared to neat organic layers.18,37,40 From Fig. 3iv, the BHJ shows a ∼40% FF compared to the ∼60% FF for the PHJ when both OSCs have 75% C60 content. This loss in FF is primarily manifested as a lower shunt resistance, suggesting that the BHJ is generally more prone to charge recombination. To better understand these charge recombination effects, it is useful to employ transient photoresponse measurement techniques. To this end, the OSCs are excited with a pulse of light from an LED, and the photocurrent decay is measured immediately after the light pulse. Single exponential fits are used to characterize the photocurrent decay, as per eqn (1) below, to calculate the relevant fall time constant τ. In eqn (1), I is the current measured at time t, following the end of the light pulse, and C1 & C2 are fitting parameters. I = C1·exp (−C2t), C2 = 1/τ(1)
The specific details of the transient photoresponse measurement technique are described in the experimental section; however, some crucial notes for analysing these data are discussed presently. When considering transient photocurrent decay, there are two major pathways that significantly alter τ sweep-out of free carriers and charge recombination. Faster sweep-out of charge carriers is generally beneficial, and helps to prevent charge trapping and space charge effects. Increased recombination, however, also serves to reduce the fall time, and is a harmful effect that can lower the fill factor and degrade the OSC performance. It is thus emphasized that faster devices do not always correspond to more efficient devices, and so it is necessary to examine the transient photocurrent measurements in the context of their device architectures and all of their photovoltaic output parameters. To this end, the presented transient photocurrent measurements do not individually provide concrete information regarding recombination, but they can allow for a much more robust understanding of carrier dynamics, especially when examined with the FF, Rsh, Rs and EQE. This is in contrast to transient photovoltage techniques, which can be used as a more direct probe of charge recombination,24,41,42 but at open circuit conditions that may alter carrier dynamics compared to regular operation (e.g. by suppressing field-assisted de-trapping of charges).
The extracted τ values as a function of the C60 content within the OSC for both the PHJ (structure A) and the BHJ (structure B) are shown in Fig. 5. In both cases, it is clear that the τ values decrease with increasing C60 content (i.e. C60-rich devices are ‘faster’). For the PHJ, the faster photocurrent transient can be explained simply: C60 exhibits superior electron transport properties compared to the hole transport properties of ClGaPc. This conclusion corresponds well to the previous analysis of the OSC photovoltaic output parameters, which showed an increase in FF and decrease in series resistance with increasing C60 content. The reduced series resistance results in a smaller voltage drop over the active layers of the device, and so the sweep-out of free carriers is expected to be more effective. With a faster sweep-out of free carriers, the transient photocurrent decay time decreases, as is observed in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  Single exponential fit τ values for transient photocurrent decay (falling current) after illumination with a white LED pulse. τ values are plotted vs. C60 content for PHJ (A) and BHJ (B) ClGaPc:C60 OSCs. 
The τ values for the BHJ OSC are found to change more strongly with varying C60 content compared to the PHJ OSC. With low C60 content (25% C60), the BHJ OSCs are slower than the PHJ OSCs – 21 μs versus 18 μs for the two structures respectively. This is attributed to the generally poor charge mobilities in the ClGaPc-rich BHJ layer as compared to the neat layer counterparts. With high C60 content, the BHJ is faster than the PHJ – the BHJ has a τ value of 10 μs at its highest C60 concentration. The ultimately faster transient photoresponse of the BHJ is attributed to an increase in charge trapping and recombination within the device. Such stipulations are supported by the generally lower fill factors of the BHJ OSCs compared to the PHJ OSCs. Charge trapping and recombination effects are likely prevalent in C60-rich ClGaPc:C60 BHJs, where poor hole mobility coupled with incomplete percolation of donor material (i.e. islands of donor) make it difficult for holes to reach the anode. Hence, hole transport in C60-rich OSCs would be problematic for holes formed far (up to 40 nm away) from the anode. In light of these findings, the increased rates of recombination (due to trapped holes deep within the BHJ layer) are suggested to be responsible for the 10 μs τ values in 87.5% C60 BHJ OSCs. The enhanced sweep-out, which also occurs as a consequence of higher C60 content (and potentially due to Schottky band bending effects), may also play a role in reducing the transient fall times. These stipulations are revisited and bolstered in the subsequent section, where neat donor and acceptor layers bordering the BHJ layers are considered for their effect on transient photocurrent.
Planar-mixed versus bulk heterojunction structures

BHJ/acceptor structures. 
We now consider the performance of OSCs that employ the BHJ device architecture (structure B) relative to the OSCs that employ a BHJ in combination with a neat donor and/or a neat acceptor layer (Fig. 1, structures C through E for the BHJ/acceptor, donor/BHJ and donor/BHJ/acceptor respectively), starting with the BHJ/acceptor structure. The BHJ/acceptor structure is particularly interesting given its very high performance in literature, with recent tetraphenyldibenzoperiflanthene (DPB):C70/C70 OSCs granting 8.1% PCE single cell efficiencies.43 In the present work, the BHJ/acceptor structure employs a 20 nm ClGaPc:C60 BHJ adjacent to a 20 nm neat C60 layer, as compared to the 40 nm simple BHJ discussed in the previous section. As shown in Fig. 3i, both the BHJ and the BHJ/acceptor structures offer similar PCE values when the BHJ layer has 25% to 75% C60 content. Within this range, the BHJ/acceptor structure generally has PCE values ∼0.2 to 0.3% higher than the BHJ structure. The BHJ/acceptor structure is further the only device architecture that improves in PCE from 75% to 87.5% C60 content. At 87.5% C60, the BHJ/acceptor structure obtains the highest PCE values for this study at 2.9%.
Following the same approach as in the previous section, we expound these trends by first examining the individual photovoltaic output parameters in greater detail. From Fig. 3iii, both the BHJ and the BHJ/acceptor structures share nearly identical Voc values for all donor:acceptor ratios, increasing strongly with increasing C60 concentration. This follows naturally, as both device structures include a MoO3/ClGaPc:C60 interface, with their Voc values dictated by the Schottky band bending effects, as described earlier. From Fig. 3ii, the Jsc values are also similar among the two device structures, with the BHJ having slightly better Jsc values compared to the BHJ/acceptor structure for BHJ layers with higher C60 content. In terms of EQE, shown in Fig. 6iversusFig. 6ii, this can be understood from the small increase in ClGaPc photocurrent contributions and a larger increase in C60 aggregate photocurrent contributions. The improvement in C60 aggregate photocurrent with the simple BHJ is particularly interesting – it was initially expected that the generally higher C60 content in the BHJ/acceptor structure, due to the presence of the neat C60 layer, would result in higher photocurrent contributions from C60. Instead, it is observed that intermolecular C60 (aggregate) excitons are more efficiently separated into free carriers when the C60 aggregates are homogenously mixed with the donor, rather than being present in a pure layer and adjacent to a donor/mixed material. This stipulation is supported by our past work, which showed that a small concentration of a suitable donor is required for harvesting photocurrent from the C60 aggregates,19 thus implying that photocurrent generation from C60 aggregates is strongly reliant on the presence of a donor species. Interestingly, when the BHJ layer instead has very low C60 content, the BHJ/acceptor structure shows higher Jsc values compared to the BHJ structure. This variation can also be explained from the EQE in Fig. 6. For structure B, it is observed that C60 aggregates cannot be formed in the BHJ layer at 25% C60 (due the very low C60 content) and so the photocurrent contributions at 450 nm are suppressed. However, in structure C, the neat C60 layer, which is not present in structure B, still consists of C60 aggregates. It follows that this added C60 layer allows for meagre C60 aggregate photocurrent contributions, as is evident from the EQE near 450 nm for 25% C60 OSCs (serving to augment the Jsc).
 Fig. 6  External quantum efficiency spectra of the BHJ (B), BHJ/acceptor (C), donor/BHJ (D) and donor/BHJ/acceptor (E) ClGaPc:C60 OSCs with varying C60 content. 
Since the Voc is nearly identical for both the BHJ and BHJ/acceptor structures, and the changes in Jsc between the structures are not significant, the main source of differences in PCE between these two device architectures is due to the FF. The BHJ/acceptor structure exhibits strongly improved FF values compared to the BHJ, as shown in Fig. 3iv. Furthermore, while the BHJ structure shows relatively constant FF values with variations in BHJ layer C60 content, the BHJ/acceptor structure has strongly improved FF with increased C60 content. This difference in FF can be readily explained in terms of the high electron mobility in neat C60 compared to the poorer electron mobility in a mixed BHJ layer. Replacing 20 nm of ClGaPc:C60 with C60 serves to reduce the series resistance and enhance the FF. This trend in series resistance is also visible from Fig. 3vi for devices with high C60 content. A second consequence of the BHJ/acceptor structure is that the BHJ layer is only present in close proximity to the anode since a neat C60 layer replaces the region near the cathode. In the previous section, it was stipulated that isolation and subsequent accumulation of holes within the BHJ layer, especially in regions far from the hole-collecting electrode, can cause carrier accumulation and recombination effects. As such, it is logical that removing the BHJ layer from this region of the device substantially improves the fill factor. This fact is further supported by the increase in shunt resistance for the BHJ/acceptor structure compared to the BHJ structure, especially for BHJ layers with high C60 content, as shown in Fig. 3v.
To further verify and explain the improvement in FF, Rs and Rsh in the BHJ/acceptor structure compared to the BHJ structure, we use transient photocurrent decay measurements, extending the analysis from the previous section. The single exponential τ values from transient photocurrent decay experiments for the BHJ and the BHJ/acceptor device are shown in Fig. 7, alongside the data for the remaining device structures (D and E, the donor/BHJ and donor/BHJ/acceptor respectively). As with the simple BHJ, the BHJ/acceptor structure exhibits decreasing τ values with increasing C60 content. This can again be attributed to more efficient sweep-out of free carriers due to the superior transport properties of C60-rich films, as compared to donor-rich films.37 Of more critical interest, the τ values for the BHJ/acceptor structure are found to be generally higher than those for the simple BHJ structure, especially when the BHJ layer has high C60 content. This can be explained in terms of the fact that replacing 20 nm of the BHJ layer with neat C60 (i.e. comparing structure B to structure C) reduces hole accumulation and, as a consequence, reduces the associated recombination effects. To understand this phenomenon, consider that the BHJ/acceptor structure is essentially a BHJ structure that has no donor material present deep within the device (far from the anode). As such, holes cannot become isolated and subsequently accumulate in the sparsely distributed donor regions deep in the BHJ layer. Rather, holes are only formed in the 20 nm BHJ layer adjacent to the anode, where they may be more effectively collected. Reducing recombination effectively slows the device, and so the BHJ/acceptor structure is observed to have a slower transient response (larger τ) compared to the simple BHJ. This observation coincides well with the fact that the BHJ/acceptor structure has higher fill factor values than the simple BHJ structure at all C60 concentrations.
 Fig. 7  Single exponential fit τ values for transient photocurrent decay (falling current) after illumination with a white LED pulse. τ values are plotted vs. C60 content for BHJ (B), BHJ/acceptor (C), donor/BHJ (D) and donor/BHJ/acceptor (E) ClGaPc:C60 OSCs. 


Donor/BHJ structures. 
Given the strong enhancement in device performance with the addition of the neat C60 layer to the simple BHJ structure, it is natural to question the effect of instead adding a neat donor layer. As such, we now turn our attention to the donor/BHJ (structure D) as compared to the simple BHJ (structure B). From Fig. 1, structure D replaces 10 nm of the BHJ layer adjacent to the anode in the simple BHJ with a neat ClGaPc layer. The photovoltaic output parameters for this structure are plotted in Fig. 3, where it is immediately clear that the inclusion of the neat donor layer strongly degrades OSC performance. The donor/BHJ structure is shown to be the worst-performing device architecture, with only 0.3% PCE when the BHJ layer has 25% C60 content, and PCE values much less than half of those of the simple BHJ structure at all other mixing concentrations. The most immediate hint for this decrease in efficiency is the generally high series resistance for the donor/BHJ structure, as shown in Fig. 3vi, which increases drastically with 25% and 50% C60 content in the BHJ layer. The strong increase in series resistance follows from the generally poor charge transport properties of ClGaPc compared to C60, established with the PHJ above. The effect of poor charge transport in the donor/BHJ structure, however, is further intensified by two additional factors:
– the poor charge transport properties of the donor:acceptor BHJ layer, as compared to the neat C60 film that is employed in the PHJ
– the much higher increase in photogenerated carriers due to the innumerable donor/acceptor interfaces in the BHJ layer, as compared to the single PHJ interface
The combination of these factors results in a device architecture that is incredibly susceptible to space charge effects, and consequently suffers from poor charge extraction. To this end, upon illumination, a large number of holes are generated within the BHJ layer of the device and traverse to the donor/BHJ layer interface. The generally poor transport properties of the donor layer result in an accumulation of holes to cause space charge effects and to further degrade OSC performance. As the BHJ layer increasingly becomes acceptor-rich, the device performance approaches that of the 10 nm ClGaPc/30 nm C60 PHJ studied in the previous section.
Taking this explanation into consideration, the performance of the donor/BHJ structure may be broken into two different regimes: BHJ layers with low/moderate C60 content, and BHJ layers with high C60 content. For the low C60-content devices, the series resistance is very high for the reasons discussed above. Furthermore, comparing the donor/BHJ structure to the simple BHJ structure at 25% and 50% C60 content, the addition of the neat donor layer ultimately results in charge blockage, leading to an increase in shunt resistance, as observed in Fig. 3v. With a near-complete loss of diode characteristics and small photocurrents, the device operates less like an efficient heterojunction solar cell, but instead more like a resistive (albeit photo-sensitive) organic film. It follows that both the FF and Jsc suffer strongly with these mixing concentrations. As shown by the EQE in Fig. 6iii, photocurrent contributions are strongly decreased across all wavelengths for these mixing concentrations. The photocurrent contributions also lose their fine spectral detail, with the peak and shoulder of the ClGaPc photocurrent merged together. Furthermore, the OSCs with 25% and 50% C60 content provide virtually no C60 aggregate photocurrent contributions, since it is more difficult to form C60 aggregates at these mixing concentrations. The poor FF at these mixing concentrations is supported by the substantial increase in the time constant of the transient photoresponse of the donor/BHJ device, shown in Fig. 7. Specifically, the τ values increase drastically to 31 μs for 50% C60 content and 520 μs for 25% C60 content (the latter point not shown in the figure). While the poor charge transport properties of the neat donor layer and the donor-rich BHJ layer clearly limit the performance of these OSCs, it is worth noting that the charges present within these devices are incredibly long-lived. This shows that the photogenerated carriers are not being swept out quickly; however, they are also not undergoing rapid recombination.
While increasing the C60 content in the BHJ layer can alleviate charge transport problems in the donor/BHJ structure, the ultimate performance of this device architecture is still quite poor. Specifically, since this structure employs a neat donor layer, and thus lacks the interface between the BHJ layer and the high work function anode, it no longer benefits from the Schottky interface enhancement to Voc. This is observed clearly in Fig. 3iii, where the Voc for structure D generally tracks the Voc values set by the PHJ (structure A). The Jsc for the donor/BHJ structure is also lower than that of the BHJ, as the excitons that are formed in the neat ClGaPc layer far from the BHJ layer interface do not generate photocurrent (established with the PHJ earlier). This effect is clearly visible in the EQE in Fig. 6, where the peak photocurrent contributions from ClGaPc in the donor/BHJ structure (75% to 87.5% C60 content) are much lower than that of the simple BHJ device, in spite of the 10 nm neat ClGaPc layer. It is also observed that, with the replacement of 10 nm ClGaPc:C60 with 10 nm of ClGaPc (again comparing structures B and D), the C60 photocurrent contributions are reduced accordingly. Interestingly, the τ values extracted from the transient photocurrent experiments for the donor/BHJ structure are nearly identical to those of the simple BHJ when both structures employ high C60 content in their BHJ layer. This is observed clearly in Fig. 7 for 75% and 87.5% C60 content. The fast response at these mixing concentrations follows from the high level of recombination due to holes formed in isolated pockets of donor deep within the BHJ layer. This is the same effect established for the simple BHJ in earlier sections – essentially trapped holes formed far from the anode are unable to traverse the BHJ layer due to the BHJ layer's low donor content.


Full donor/BHJ/acceptor structures. 
The final device architecture studied in this work is the donor/BHJ/acceptor (structure E), which makes use of both a neat donor and a neat acceptor layer. When compared to the simple BHJ (structure B), 10 nm of the BHJ layer near the anode is replaced with neat ClGaPc and 20 nm of the BHJ layer near the cathode is replaced with C60 in this structure. Therefore, this final device structure encompasses both of the alterations made for the BHJ/acceptor structure and the donor/BHJ structures examined above. From Fig. 3i, the donor/BHJ/acceptor structure generates devices with moderate PCE values in between those of the other device structures examined in this work. Furthermore, the donor/BHJ/acceptor structure has PCE values that are the least dependent on C60 content in the BHJ layer – between 1.4% and 1.8% for C60 content varying from 25% to 83%. One major contributor to this independence of PCE on mixing concentration is that the donor/BHJ/acceptor structure exhibits a relatively constant Voc (Fig. 3iii). As noted for the donor/BHJ structure, this is due to the neat ClGaPc layer separating the high work function anode from the BHJ layer. As a consequence, the Voc is simply set by the HOMOdonor–LUMOacceptor offset, and does not benefit from the Schottky interface enhancement observed in structures B and C. In Fig. 3ii, the donor/BHJ/acceptor structure's Jsc is also shown to be relatively constant with variations in C60, with values near ∼4 mA cm−2 for all mixing concentrations. This is also consistent with observations from Fig. 6, where EQE spectra show much less drastic variations in intensity, especially when compared to the simple BHJ. This is due to the fact that, with neat layers of both ClGaPc and C60, there are always moderate contributions to photocurrent from both the ClGaPc and C60. Furthermore, as the C60 content is increased in the BHJ layer, any loss in photocurrent from ClGaPc is compensated by an increase in photocurrent from the C60 aggregate band (and vice versa). Regardless, the Jsc for the donor/BHJ/acceptor structure is, as expected, shown to be lower than that of the simple BHJ, since the simple BHJ has a much thicker mixed donor:acceptor layer to generate a substantially larger number of free carriers from photogenerated excitons.
Intriguingly, while the donor/BHJ/acceptor structure makes use of a neat donor layer, it does not suffer from the same increases in series resistances as observed for the donor/BHJ structure. It is thus shown to be the combination of the neat donor layer and a thick (>10 nm) BHJ layer (especially when the BHJ layer has low C60 content) to be the cause of the strongly increased series resistance for the donor/BHJ structure. In fact, the donor/BHJ/acceptor structure is shown to have the some of the best shunt and series resistances (highest and lowest in Fig. 3v and vi respectively) for the various device architectures studied in this work. The devices that outperform the donor/BHJ/acceptor in this regard are those that employ the PHJ structure, and those that use the BHJ/acceptor structure with high C60-content – the latter was shown to be the highest performing structure in the present study. The donor/BHJ/acceptor structure's high shunt resistances and low series resistances translate to a relatively high FF for the donor/BHJ/acceptor for most mixing concentrations, as shown in Fig. 3iv (especially when compared to the simple BHJ). The high FF is explained by the fact that this device structure replaces a large portion of the BHJ layer, known to have poor charge transport characteristics and a higher propensity for charge recombination, with neat layers that lessen such issues. The operation of the donor/BHJ/acceptor is thus similar to that of the PHJ examined previously, but with a higher capacity for photocurrent generation due its 10 nm BHJ layer. At very high C60 concentrations in its BHJ layer, however, the donor/BHJ/acceptor shows a slight reduction in FF, which can be attributed to poor hole transport characteristics through the BHJ layer, and increased hole accumulation/recombination effects.
The general transient photocurrent response for the donor/BHJ/acceptor as a function of the BHJ layer's C60 content is similar to that of the other device structures examined throughout this work. As shown in Fig. 7, increasing the C60 content in the BHJ layer serves to decrease the time constant τ, implying that the C60-rich donor/BHJ/acceptor device is faster. As with the simple BHJ, this is attributed to enhanced sweep-out of free carriers, owing to the superior charge transport characteristics of C60 compared to ClGaPc. The τ value for the donor/BHJ/acceptor at the highest C60 concentration, however, is slower than that of the simple BHJ and the donor/BHJ structure. This further verifies our previous stipulations regarding the accumulation and trapping of holes deep within the BHJ layer (i.e. far from the anode). Since the donor/BHJ/acceptor employs only a 10 nm thin BHJ layer, and has a neat 20 nm C60 layer near the cathode, isolated donor domains can only be formed 10 to 20 nm away from the anode. As such, isolated holes are not formed far away from the anode, and recombination effects due to the confinement of these holes are reduced. With reduced recombination effects in the donor/BHJ/acceptor structure, charge carriers are observed to have longer lifetimes.
In structures B through D (those that employ a BHJ layer), the observed maximum FF of ∼50% leaves significant room for improvement, especially with optimized polymer OSCs proven to be capable of FF values up to 75%.16 To further understand these limitations, we extend our transient photocurrent analysis by employing coloured LEDs with much higher brightness values at the materials' major absorption wavelengths (blue and red LEDs, for C60 and ClGaPc respectively). The effect is to substantially increase the number of excitons generated at a given LED power compared to the white LED, as the emission spectrum overlaps more strongly with the absorption spectrum. In literature, it has been shown that increasing the number of excitons, and thus the number of photogenerated carriers, can lead to space charge effects visible in transient photocurrent experiments.23–25,44 In a transient photocurrent experiment, space charge effects are manifested as a peak increase in photocurrent and subsequent stabilization at lower photocurrents with the initial pulse of light. In some cases, researchers have noticed a negative photocurrent peak recovery at the end of the light pulse. The negative photocurrent implies the injection of carriers from the contacts to neutralize carriers that remain within the device due to insufficient sweep-out, essentially arising from space charge effects.23 It is also worth noting that this negative recovery is strongly dependent on the device architecture, as the carriers must favour accumulation over various potential avenues for recombination (i.e. the charge carrier lifetime must be quite long). This negative photocurrent recovery is demonstrated in Fig. 8, which shows the transient photocurrent decay for a ClGaPc:C60 OSC (with the donor/BHJ/acceptor device structure) after being exposed to both dim and bright light pulses. In the case of a dim LED pulse, no negative transient is observed, but in the case of a bright LED pulse, a significant negative spike and subsequent recovery is observed. In fact, all of the mixing concentrations in the donor/BHJ/acceptor structure show this negative photocurrent recovery at the end of the bright light pulse. However, this behaviour is not observed for any of the other device architectures – it is unique to the structure E, the full donor/BHJ/acceptor, and it emphasizes the generally low recombination rates and high FF with this device architecture.
 Fig. 8  Transient photocurrent decays of a ClGaPc:C60 donor/BHJ (87.5% C60)/acceptor OSC after illumination from a bright LED pulse and a dim LED pulse. 
Upon illumination, the interface between the BHJ layer and the neat donor or acceptor layer is a region of high charge density, as this interface contains charges from two sources:
– excitons formed throughout the full thickness of the BHJ layer
– excitons formed in the neat layer and within the exciton diffusion length of the mixed/neat interface
The large concentration of free carriers at this interface is a potential contributor to space charge effects, especially in consideration of the generally poor hole transport within these materials, as established through our previous analysis. Structure E has both donor/mixed and mixed/acceptor interfaces present, and so it suffers from these effects most strongly. As further evidence of these effects, we observed that all structures that have a neat donor or acceptor layer adjacent to a BHJ layer have both a fast and slow decay component with a dim LED pulse when fitted with a bi-exponential fit. The slow decay components are suggested to be attributed to space charge effects, as described in greater detail in the ESI.† While space charge effects have been noted as a strong limiter toward device performance for the donor/BHJ/acceptor structure, the remarkably long free carrier lifetimes in this device architecture are re-emphasized. The donor/BHJ/acceptor structure is therefore a promising device architecture for high performance OSCs, but only in the case where both the donor and acceptor materials are optimized for high free carrier mobilities and thus to prevent space charge effects. The success of more complicated device structures in literature, such as the p-i-n architecture,4 or those that employ gradient mixed layers,45 can at least in part be attributed to their tackling space charge effects. In the prior case, this is accomplished explicitly by bolstering the charge transport properties of the neat layers. In the latter case, space charge effects are minimized implicitly by minimizing the accumulation of charges at any specific region within the photo-active layers. In the present work, we have shown that a much simpler device architecture, with an active region comprising BHJ/acceptor layers (structure C), can achieve a high level of performance without the need for these further complications in device fabrication.

Conclusions
In this work, we have studied a wide set of different device architectures and examined their photovoltaic properties extensively in consideration of their transient photoresponse characteristics. The BHJ/acceptor device structure is shown to generate the highest PCE values, owing to its capacity to optimize the trade-off between charge generation and charge collection. Its high performance is strongly associated with enhanced sweep-out, and thus with minimizing both charge trapping and charge recombination effects. This is further accomplished while maintaining a relatively high Jsc by balancing ClGaPc photocurrent contributions with the contributions from C60 aggregates. The BHJ/acceptor structure also benefits from Schottky contact effects to increase its Voc to values in excess of 1 V, and so its performance is maximized with high C60 content in its BHJ layer. In contrast, the donor/BHJ/acceptor device structure, another frequently studied device structure in literature, minimizes charge recombination, but ultimately suffers from hole accumulation and space charge effects that limit its sweep-out. Transient photocurrent measurements suggest that space charge effects may be present and potentially problematic for any device architecture that employs BHJ layers in combination with neat donor or acceptor layers. The results emphasize the significant impact that the choice of device architecture plays on device performance, and further highlight the BHJ/acceptor architecture as an especially promising structure for high performance OSCs.
Experimental methods
Device fabrication
To fabricate the devices, patterned ITO slides were first cleaned by successive sonication in acetone, Micro-90 surfactant and isopropyl alcohol. The slides were scrubbed with a cotton swab after the acetone and Micro-90 sonication steps. The slides were then placed in an oven at 100 °C for at least one hour but no longer than one day before use. The substrates were then treated with O2 plasma in a Trion RIE/ICP system at 20 mTorr pressure and 100 W ICP power (flow rate of O2 kept at 20 sccm). 5 nm of MoO3 (Sigma Aldrich) was then deposited by thermal evaporation (<5 × 10−6 Torr base pressure) at a rate of 2 Å s−1. The organic materials were subsequently deposited by thermal evaporation. The mixed layers were fabricated by the simultaneous co-deposition of C60 (>99.9%, M.E.R. Corporation) and the chlorogallium phthalocyanine (ClGaPc) donor material. ClGaPc is a relatively new donor material in the realm of OSCs, with only a few uses in literature.21,46,47 However, it is shown here to provide reasonable efficiencies (upwards of 2.9% PCE) when mixed with C60. Its behaviour as a donor, with regard to both processing and inherent physical properties, is similar to that of chloroindium phthalocyanine (ClInPc), a donor that is somewhat more studied in literature,19–21,48 with strong absorption in the red/near-IR (peak at 750 nm, shoulder at 664 nm). Different mixing concentrations were achieved by varying the deposition rates of ClGaPc and C60, and the sum total deposition rate of all materials was kept at 2 Å s−1. The thicknesses of the deposited layers were monitored by quartz crystal microbalances in the deposition chamber that were calibrated with a Veeco Dektak 8 Stylus Profiler. ClGaPc was obtained from the Xerox Research Centre of Canada, where it was also purified by train sublimation. 8 nm of BCP (Luminescence Technology Corp, >99%, sublimed-grade) was then deposited by thermal evaporation at 2 Å s−1 prior to the cathode. To finish the OSCs, 100 nm of Al was deposited by thermal evaporation at 3 Å s−1. A final device area of 0.2 cm2 was defined by the intersection of the Al electrode with the patterned ITO.
Device characterization
Photovoltaic output parameters were measured with 1-sun AM1.5G radiation from an ABET Sun 3000 Class AAA Solar Simulator and a Keithley 2400 SourceMeter. Both illuminated and dark testing of the devices were done in an inert N2 atmosphere. UV/Visible absorption measurements were performed in air with a Shimadzu UV-2501PC UV/Vis Spectrophotometer. External quantum efficiency measurements were obtained in inert N2 atmosphere with a set-up employing a Newport 260 Cornerstone Monochromator and a Stanford Research 830 Lock-in Amplifier, as controlled by custom software. Transient photocurrent measurements were performed with white or coloured LEDs, a Stanford Research Systems DG535 pulse generator (pulsed for 5 μs at 100 Hz) and a Tektronix TDS5054 oscilloscope. To measure within the relevant bias point and timeframe for our devices, a 1 kOhm resistor was placed in series with the DUT during illumination, and the voltage was measured over the resistor with the oscilloscope. A custom MATLAB program was used to extract the transient photocurrent decay (falling) data and to calculate single/bi-exponential fits.
Acknowledgements
We would like to acknowledge Dr Matthew Heuft and Dr Richard Klenkler from the Xerox Research Centre of Canada (XRCC) for helpful discussions. ClGaPc used in this study was generously provided by XRCC. Financial support to this work from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) is gratefully acknowledged. SS acknowledges financial support through Ontario Graduate Scholarship (OGS) and Waterloo Institute for Nanotechnology (WIN) Nanofellowship. GW acknowledges financial support through NSERC Alexander Graham Bell Canada Graduate Scholarship, OGS, and WIN Nanofellowship.
Notes and references
A. Mishra and P. Bäuerle, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2020–2067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, Y. Li and X. Zhan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4245–4272 RSC .
B. Walker, C. Kim and T. Q. Nguyen, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 470–482 CrossRef CAS .
M. Riede, C. Uhrich, J. Widmer, R. Timmreck, D. Wynands, G. Schwartz, W. M. Gnehr, D. Hildebrandt, A. Weiss, J. Hwang, S. Sundarraj, P. Erk, M. Pfeiffer and K. Leo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3019–3028 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Coughlin, Z. B. Henson, G. C. Welch and G. C. Bazan, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 47, 257–270 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. J. Cheng, S. H. Yang and C. S. Hsu, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5868–5923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Günes, H. Neugebauer and N. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324–1338 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Bundgaard and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 954–985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Walker, A. B. Tomayo, X. D. Dang, P. Zalar, J. H. Seo, A. Garcia, M. Tantiwiwat and T. Q. Nguyen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3063–3069 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Sun, G. C. Welch, W. L. Leong, C. J. Takacs, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 44–48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Chen, L.-Y. Lin, C.-W. Lu, F. Lin, Z.-Y. Huang, H.-W. Lin, P.-H. Wang, Y.-H. Liu, K.-T. Wong and J. Wen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13616–13623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, D. Yokoyama, X.-F. Wang, Z. Hong, Y. Yang and J. Kido, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 249–255 CAS .
R. Pandey, Y. L. Zou and R. J. Holmes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 033308 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Xiao, J. D. Zimmerman, B. E. Lassiter, K. J. Bergemann and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 073302 CrossRef PubMed .
J. G. Xue, S. Uchida, B. P. Rand and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 5757–5759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, L. Ma, Y. Li, Y. Liu, D. Zhu and X. Zhan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 4, 1–6 Search PubMed .
M. Zhang, H. Ding, Y. Gao and C. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 183301 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zhang, H. Wang, H. Tian, Y. Geng and C. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4960–4964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sutty, G. Williams and H. Aziz, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 2392–2400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Williams and H. Aziz, Org. Electron., 2013, 15, 47–56 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Williams, S. Sutty, R. Klenkler and H. Aziz, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 124, 217–226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Tremolet
de Villers, R. C. MacKenzie, J. J. Jasieniak, N. D. Treat and M. L. Chabinyc, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 1–10 Search PubMed .
W. Tress, S. Corvers, K. Leo and M. Riede, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 873–880 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, F. Gao, N. C. Greenham and C. R. McNeill, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1419–1431 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, J. Huang, Z. Xiong and F. Li, Org. Electron., 2012, 14, 621–627 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Riede, T. Mueller, W. Tress, R. Schueppel and K. Leo, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 424001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Maennig, J. Drechsel, D. Gebeyehu, P. Simon, F. Kozlowski, A. Werner, F. Li, S. Grundmann, S. Sonntag, M. Koch, K. Leo, M. Pfeiffer, H. Hoppe, D. Meissner, N. S. Sariciftci, I. Riedel, V. Dyakonov and J. Parisi, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2004, 79, 1–14 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Drechsel, B. Mannig, F. Kozlowski, M. Pfeiffer, K. Leo and H. Hoppe, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 244102 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183–185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Halls, C. Walsh, N. Greenham, E. Marseglia, R. Friend, S. Moratti and A. Holmes, Nature, 1995, 376, 498–500 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1790 CAS .
G. Yu and A. J. Heeger, J. Appl. Phys., 1995, 78, 4510–4515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Pinto, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 2287–2297 CAS .
R. Lessmann, Z. Hong, S. Scholz, B. Maennig, M. Riede and K. Leo, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 539–543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, D. Placencia and N. R. Armstrong, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 383–393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zang, J. Yu, J. Huang, R. Jiang and G. Huang, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2012, 45, 175101 CrossRef .
B. P. Rand, J. Xue, S. Uchida and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 124902 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Yang, F. Guo, Y. Yuan, Z. Xiao, Y. Lu, Q. Dong and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 25, 572–577 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kazaoui, R. Ross and N. Minami, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1995, 52, R11665 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, H. Sasabe, Z. Wang, X. Wang, Z. Hong, J. Kido and Y. Yang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 14661–14666 RSC .
A. Maurano, R. Hamilton, C. G. Shuttle, A. M. Ballantyne, J. Nelson, B. O'Regan, W. Zhang, I. McCulloch, H. Azimi and M. Morana, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4987–4992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sanchez-Diaz, L. Burtone, M. Riede and E. Palomares, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 16384–16390 CAS .
X. Xiao, K. J. Bergemann, J. D. Zimmerman, K. Lee and S. R. Forrest, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201301557 .
I. Hwang, C. R. McNeill and N. C. Greenham, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 094506 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Pandey and R. J. Holmes, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5301–5305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. M. Bamsey, A. P. Yuen, A. M. Hor, R. Klenkler, J. S. Preston and R. O. Loutfy, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1970–1973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Yuen, S. M. Jovanovic, A. M. Hor, R. A. Klenkler, G. A. Devenyi, R. O. Loutfy and J. S. Preston, Sol. Energy, 2012, 86, 1683–1688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. M. Bamsey, A. P. Yuen, A. M. Hor, R. Klenkler, J. S. Preston and R. O. Loutfy, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 2937–2940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Further information on EQE of PHJ OSCs and negative photocurrent transients in planar-mixed OSCs, as well as representative JV characteristics for all studied device structures (w/ varying C60 content). See DOI: 10.1039/c4cp01295jThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Illustration of OSC device architectures, including: (A) planar heterojunction (PHJ), (B) bulk heterojunction (BHJ). (C) BHJ with a neat acceptor layer, (D) BHJ with a neat donor layer and (E) BHJ with both a neat donor and a neat acceptor layer.	 

 	Fig. 2  (i) Energy level diagram for ClGaPc/C60 organic solar cells. (ii) Absorption spectra of 50 nm films of C60 and ClGaPc.	 

 	Fig. 3  Photovoltaic output parameters of ClGaPc:C60 OSCs with varying device architectures and varying acceptor (C60) content. Devices A through E correspond to the PHJ, BHJ, BHJ/acceptor, donor/BHJ and donor/BHJ/acceptor device architectures respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  External quantum efficiency spectra of the (i) PHJ and (ii) BHJ ClGaPc:C60 OSCs with different layer thicknesses (PHJ) and C60 content (BHJ).	 
I = C1·exp (−C2t), C2 = 1/τ	(1)

 	Fig. 5  Single exponential fit τ values for transient photocurrent decay (falling current) after illumination with a white LED pulse. τ values are plotted vs. C60 content for PHJ (A) and BHJ (B) ClGaPc:C60 OSCs.	 

 	Fig. 6  External quantum efficiency spectra of the BHJ (B), BHJ/acceptor (C), donor/BHJ (D) and donor/BHJ/acceptor (E) ClGaPc:C60 OSCs with varying C60 content.	 

 	Fig. 7  Single exponential fit τ values for transient photocurrent decay (falling current) after illumination with a white LED pulse. τ values are plotted vs. C60 content for BHJ (B), BHJ/acceptor (C), donor/BHJ (D) and donor/BHJ/acceptor (E) ClGaPc:C60 OSCs.	 

 	Fig. 8  Transient photocurrent decays of a ClGaPc:C60 donor/BHJ (87.5% C60)/acceptor OSC after illumination from a bright LED pulse and a dim LED pulse.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Further information on EQE of PHJ OSCs and negative photocurrent transients in planar-mixed OSCs, as well as representative JV characteristics for all studied device structures (w/ varying C60 content). See DOI: 10.1039/c4cp01295j

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2014
