Porphyrins for dye -sensitised solar cells: new insights into efficiency-determining electron transfer steps   - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CC30677H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CC30677H
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 4145-4162Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsPorphyrins for dye-sensitised solar cells: new insights into efficiency-determining electron transfer steps†

        
          
            Matthew J. 
            Griffith
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kenji 
            Sunahara
          
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Pawel 
            Wagner
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Klaudia 
            Wagner
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Gordon G. 
            Wallace
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            David L. 
            Officer
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Akihiro 
            Furube
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Ryuzi 
            Katoh
          
          
        
      bd, 
      
        
          
            Shogo 
            Mori
          
          
        
      *e and 

        
          
            Attila J. 
            Mozer
          
          
        
      *a
aARC Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science and Intelligent Polymer Research Institute, AIIM Facility, Innovation Campus, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, NSW 2500, Australia. E-mail: attila@uow.edu.au
bNational Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Tsukuba Central 5, 1-1-1 Higashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8565, Japan
cGraduate School of Pure and Applied Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8571, Japan
dDepartment of Chemical Biology and Applied Chemistry, College of Engineering, Nihon University, Tamura, Koriyama, Fukushima 963-8642, Japan
eFaculty of Textile Science and Technology, Shinshu University, 3-15-1 Tokida, Ueda, Nagano 386-8567, Japan. E-mail: shogmori@shinshu-u.ac.jp
Received 
      31st January 2012
    , Accepted 6th March 2012First published on 23rd March 2012AbstractPorphyrin molecules offer immense potential as the light harvesting component of dye-sensitised nanocrystalline TiO2 solar cells. Synthetic porphyrin dyes were amongst the first dyes trialled for sensitisation of inorganic semiconducting oxides. Today, they exhibit the best performance reported for dye-sensitised solar cells. Accompanying the significant performance improvement over the last two decades is a much improved understanding of efficiency-determining fundamental electron transfer steps, from charge photogeneration to recombination. In this feature article we highlight our recent discoveries of the influence of porphyrin molecule structure on efficiency determining electron transfer kinetics and device performance by systematically changing the molecular structure and observing electron injection and recombination kinetics using time-resolved optical and electrical probes. Despite our observation of ultrafast charge injection for all porphyrin dyes studied by transient absorption spectroscopy, the injection yield estimated using an internal standard remains below 100% and depends strongly on the molecular structure. The observed discrepancy between kinetic competition and the injection yield is attributed to non-injecting dyes, probably arising due to inhomogeneity. A very interesting sub-ns (0.5 ns to 100 ns) charge recombination channel between photo-injected electrons and porphyrin cations is observed, which is found to be more prominent in free-base porphyrin dyes with a conjugated linker. Charge recombination between the acceptor species in the redox containing electrolyte and injected electrons is shown to be an important limitation of most porphyrin-sensitised solar cells, accelerated by the presence of porphyrin molecules at the TiO2–electrolyte interface. This recombination reaction is strongly dependent on the porphyrin molecular structure. Bulky substituents, using a porphyrin dimer instead of a porphyrin monomer, a light soaking treatment of freshly prepared films and co-sensitization of TiO2 with multiple dyes are shown to be successful strategies to improve electron lifetime. Finally, new developments unique to porphyrin dye-sensitised solar cells, including performance enhancements from a light exposure treatment of a zinc porphyrin dye, a significant performance improvement observed after co-sensitisation of TiO2 with free-base and zinc porphyrin dyes and the use of porphyrin dimers with increased light harvesting in thin-film TiO2 solar cells are described.
Matthew J. Griffith
Matthew Griffith (born 1985) studied chemistry at the University of Wollongong (Australia) and recently submitted his PhD thesis, completed at the University of Wollongong under the supervision of Professors David Officer and Gordon Wallace (2012). As a doctoral student he worked on analysing the unique photophysics of porphyrin molecules as sensitizers in organic photovoltaic devices, earning a Prime Ministers Australia Asia Endeavour award from the Australian Federal government to augment this work in Japan during 2010 and 2011. His current research interests include investigating organic molecules for solar cell applications and studying the fundamental physical chemistry of photoinduced chemical reactions.
Kenji Sunahara
Kenji Sunahara obtained a bachelor of engineering from Shinshu University in 2008, studying electrochemical characterization and analysis of dye-sensitized solar cells under the supervision of Assoc. Prof. Shogo Mori. After this, under the supervision of Assoc. Prof. Akihiro Furube, he obtained a Master of Science from University of Tsukuba in 2011, studying photo-induced charge transfer dynamics on nanocrystline semiconductor for dye-sensitized solar cells. Now he is in the PhD program.
Pawel Wagner
Pawel Wagner is a research fellow at Intelligent Polymer Research Institute and ARC Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science at University of Wollongong. He obtained his PhD in 1999 at Silesian University of Technology, Poland, and was a postdoctoral fellow at Adam Mickiewicz University, Poland, Hasselt University, Belgium and Massey University, New Zealand. His research focuses on synthetic organic chemistry with special interest in synthesis of electroactive materials for optoelectronics, and interactions of molecules in solid state phase. He is co-author of more than 80 peer-reviewed articles.
Ryuzi Katoh
Ryuzi Katoh is a professor in Nihon university (2011–). He worked in Gakushuin University as a research associate (1986–1995) and received his PhD from Gakushuin University in 1992. He worked at Hahn-Meitner Institute as a guest researcher (1993). In 1995, he moved to National Institute of Materials and Chemical Research (NIMC) and after reorganization of the institute in 2001 he worked in National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and technology (AIST). His research interest is physical chemistry in solar-energy conversion reaction systems.
Shogo Mori
Shogo Mori is an associate professor of Faculty of Textile Science and Technology at Shinshu University in Japan, where he has been since 2005. His former family name is Nakade. He received a MS from University of Toledo, USA, in 1998 and the PhD from Osaka University, Japan, in 2004. From 1999 to 2005, he was a research engineer at Nokia Research Center at Tokyo in Japan. His current research interests are interactions between photon and materials, charge transport in nanostructured materials, and charge transfer at various interfaces, especially in dye-sensitized solar cells and organic solar cells.
Attila J. Mozer
Attila J. Mozer is an Australian Research Fellow (2011–2015) and a Senior Fellow (since 2010) at the Australian Research Council (ARC) Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science (ACES). He is the lead Chief Investigator on three ARC grants focusing on dye-sensitised and polymer/fullerene bulk heterojunction solar cells. He is the Associate Program Leader of the energy program at ACES and a member of its Executive Committee. He received his PhD at the Linz Institute for Organic Solar Cells (2004) and MSc in Chemical Engineering at the Technical University of Budapest (2002). He has co-authored 41 publications since 2004.
1 Introduction
Emulating photosynthesis, the process through which plants convert sunlight into chemical energy, represents one of the greatest scientific challenges. The crucial component of photosynthetic structures are the chlorophyll antennae found in plants and green algae, which contain several densely packed porphyrin molecules embedded in a matrix of proteins and fats.1,2 Imitating the extraordinary chlorophyll-based photosynthetic light harvesting apparatus has inspired researchers to investigate porphyrin dyes as sensitizers in a wide range of different light harvesting applications.3–6 Amongst these emerging technologies, porphyrin sensitizers have found a unique niche in dye-sensitised solar cells (DSSCs), an innovative solar energy conversion technology which provides a pathway for the development of low cost, renewable and environmentally acceptable energy production.7–9 Porphyrin dyes were amongst the first examined in this type of solar cell,10 and to this day they continue to be one of the most frequently studied11–14 and most efficient classes of dyes.15–19
The typical DSSC is constructed by chemically grafting a sensitising dye to a nanocrystalline wide-band gap semiconductor, with this porous photoanode then immersed in an electrolyte, which contains a redox mediator (Fig. 1). The photosensitising dye harvests solar photons and initiates efficient charge separation through photoinduced electron injection from the excited state of the dye into the conduction band of the semiconductor. The resulting dye cations are subsequently reduced by the redox electrolyte.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of a typical dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC). 
The power conversion efficiencies of the best porphyrin-sensitised devices were in the range of 2–4% a decade ago.20 By systematically changing the molecular structure, including the size, metal centre,21 ligands,22 substituents and conjugation of molecules,23 we were subsequently able to make significant progress in optimizing the performance of our porphyrin dyes leading to a record efficiency of 7% in 2007.24 Several other groups were able to produce porphyrin-sensitised solar cells exhibiting comparable efficiencies in DSSCs.25–33 Early photophysical investigations of porphyrin DSSCs concluded that porphyrin dyes exhibited identical behaviour to other chromophores in DSSCs,34–38 however, our studies, in addition to other literature reports, could not always be rationalised based on this initial view. Many important and challenging questions arose, including: “What is the origin of the generally lower performance of free-base dyes compared to zinc porphyrins under identical solar cell fabrication conditions?”, “Why is the open circuit voltage of porphyrin-sensitised solar cells consistently lower than their N719 ruthenium complex-sensitised analogues?”, “Why do we observe a significant improvement in all parameters of porphyrin-sensitised solar cell performance after a brief light exposure treatment?”, “How can the improved light harvesting of multichromophore porphyrin arrays be translated to improved device performance with high injection yields?”, “What is the origin of observed differences in the solar cell performance induced by changing the conjugation within the linker group, the linker position or the chemical nature of the anchoring group?”
In this feature article we will answer these questions based on new insights into fundamental electron transfer steps using advanced time-resolved optical and electrical probes. We begin by examining the performance of a series of dyes with different metal centres, substituent groups, linker groups and conjugation (Fig. 2). We will then focus on femtosecond charge injection measurements and compare the injection kinetics of several porphyrin dyes to the commonly used N719 standard. A significant section of the article is then dedicated to charge recombination studies. Two different charge recombination channels, one occurring on the sub-nanosecond time scale between injected electrons and porphyrin cations, and a second channel occurring on the millisecond time scale between injected electrons and the acceptor species, are studied. In the final section, new developments that are rather unique to porphyrin-sensitised DSSCs are highlighted. Firstly, a significant improvement to all performance parameters of porphyrin-sensitised solar cells under a brief white light illumination treatment is reported and its origin is studied. Secondly, a significant performance enhancement using a synergistic porphyrin co-sensitising strategy is presented. Finally, the light harvesting efficiency of thin-film TiO2-sensitised solar cells is boosted by employing a covalently-linked porphyrin dimer sensitiser, a strategy which is conceptually similar to three-dimensional light harvesting in naturally occurring chlorophylls.
 Fig. 2  Chemical structures and naming codes for the porphyrin compounds employed in our studies. 
2 Device performance of porphyrin-sensitised TiO2 solar cells
Early investigations demonstrated that the performance of porphyrin DSSCs was highly dependent on the structure of the porphyrin molecules.20 Direct comparison between various reports was partly hindered by variations in device fabrication protocols, device architecture, and in many cases personnel experience in solar cell fabrication. We decided to develop a simple platform for testing and comparison of our dyes. High reproducibility, relatively simple fabrication procedures and a device geometry that is compatible with the various spectroscopic tools we subsequently employed were the main criteria for our platform. The last criterion was particularly important since our aim was to establish the effect of molecular structure on the efficiency-determining electron transfer steps and device performance. Therefore, all DSSC results in this article are reported using devices prepared with thin TiO2 films (2–4 μm), which is a requirement for reliable charge transport and charge extraction studies.39 Selected dyes have been optimised to produce champion devices reaching efficiencies of up to 6.1% for GD224 and 4.8% for ZnC.37

Fig. 3 shows the current density–voltage (J–V) curves measured under 100 mW cm−2 simulated AM 1.5 conditions for DSSCs constructed with various porphyrin dyes, with photovoltaic performance parameters for these devices reported in Table 1. All devices were prepared with a standard DSSC electrolyte consisting of 0.6 M dimethylpropylimadazolium iodide (DMPImI), 0.5 M tert-butyl pyridine (TBP), 0.1 M lithium iodide (LiI) and 0.05 M iodine (I2), an electrolyte also employed consistently throughout this study for all spectroscopic measurements. These measurements showed that the performance of all the porphyrin dyes was inferior to that of the benchmark ruthenium complex N719. Furthermore, the large variation in device performance across the various porphyrin dyes suggests clear structure–function relationships. The performance of a solar cell is characterised by its power conversion efficiency (η). This is determined by the maximum power output of the solar cell normalised to the incident optical power from the light source. The maximum power point is obtained by multiplying the short circuit current (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc) and the fill factor (FF) of the solar cell. The fill factor characterises the shape of the current–voltage curve in the photovoltaic quadrant and is computed as:FF = JMPP × VMPP/Jsc × Voc.The efficiency of photo-current generation is dependent on three processes; the light harvesting efficiency of the solar cell (QLHE) (mostly the sensitiser in DSSC), charge injection efficiency (QINJ) and charge extraction efficiency (QCE). The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) is given by the product of the efficiencies as:IPCE(λ) = QLHE(λ) × QINJ(λ) × QCE(λ).The integral IPCE(λ) with the AM 1.5 solar spectrum gives the Jsc. The main reason for employing thin TiO2 layers in this study is that QCE is almost unity. QLHE can be calculated by measuring the absorbance of the dye-sensitised TiO2 film and imputing these data into an optical model. We used an optical model that accounts for absorption by the redox-containing electrolyte and back-reflection from the platinised counter electrode.22 Thus,QINJ = IPCE(λ)/(QLHE × QCE),and the charge injection efficiency can be calculated from steady state photo-current measurements. The Voc is dependent on the accumulation of electrons in the semiconductor according to the balance of charge injection and recombination. Consequently, it is important to measure the electron density and the injection and recombination rates to understand the differences in device Voc.
 Fig. 3  Current density–voltage curves measured under one sun illumination for (a) DSSCs constructed with various zinc porphyrin dyes, and (b) DSSCs constructed from zinc dyes and their free base analogues. The TiO2 film thickness was in the range of (a) 4 to 5 μm; and (b) 3 μm. 
Table 1 Photovoltaic performance parameters for DSSCs prepared from several different porphyrin dyes




Sensitizera

V
oc/mV

J
sc/mA cm−2
Fill factor

η (%)





a 2 × 10−4 M porphyrin solution in ethanol, 2 hours dye uptake time.






N719

724
9.71
0.681
4.78



P159

687
9.01
0.628
3.89



P199

585
6.55
0.670
2.59



P10

651
7.39
0.630
3.05



FbNC

451
0.194
0.519
0.045



ZnNC

553
0.966
0.660
0.353



FbC

521
1.00
0.607
0.316



ZnC

625
4.26
0.627
1.67



GD2

603
8.41
0.675
3.42



Fb-GD2

535
2.57
0.688
0.970




Using the J–V data in Fig. 3 and Table 1, correlations between the following porphyrin property and device performance can be established:
(i) the coordinating metal (zinc vs. free base), i.e.GD2vs.FbGD2, FbCvs.ZnC, FbNCvs.ZnNC;
(ii) the linker group conjugation, i.e.FbNCvs.FbC, ZnNCvs.ZnC;
(iii) the substituents at the meso positions of the porphyrin ring, i.e.GD2vs.P159; and
(iv) the number of porphyrin chromophore units, i.e.P10vs.P199.
A comparison of zinc and free base porphyrins demonstrates that the metalloporphyrins exhibit much higher Jsc values than their free base analogues. This result is attributed to the different excited state energy levels of the dyes with the free base dyes exhibiting a lower energy excited states, causing smaller overlap between dye excited state orbitals with the acceptor states in TiO2. This conclusion was confirmed by observing that zinc and free base dyes both have similar highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) levels but that the free base dyes have lower optical band gaps, and thus lower estimated energy excited states.21 Furthermore, when the TiO2 electrodes were replaced by SnO2, a semiconductor whose conduction band edge potential is located at a much more positive potential, the Jsc values obtained from the zinc and free base dyes were comparable. It is therefore suggested that zinc porphyrins produce larger photocurrents than free base porphyrins in TiO2 DSSCs due to a better overlap between the dye LUMO and the TiO2 acceptor states.

Fig. 4 displays the IPCE spectra for DSSCs constructed with various porphyrin dyes. Given that QLHE is close to unity at the absorption peak wavelength in the Soret band for all porphyrins dyes and the use of thin TiO2 films assuming charge collection yields close to unity, the differences in IPCE values amongst the zinc porphyrin dyes are ascribed to a variation in the charge generation efficiency. We determined the absorbed photon-to-current conversion efficiency (APCE) of these devices, calculated by dividing the IPCE by QLHE, and found only small variations between zinc dyes with malonic or cyanoacrylic acid linker groups (P199, P10, GD2, P159). The zinc dyes with benzoic acid linkers (FbNC, FbC, ZnNC, ZnC) show lower photocurrents, again confirmed by APCE measurements to arise from poorer injection yields for these dyes.21,39 Conversely, Fig. 3 and 4 indicate that there is a much greater difference between the Jsc and IPCE values of the free base dyes in comparison to the spread observed for the zinc dyes. We attribute this to a lower lying LUMO of the free base porphyrins (typically by approximately 200 mV), therefore generally smaller overlap between the LUMO and the TiO2 acceptor states leading to lower injection efficiencies. The injection efficiency of the free base dyes are much more sensitive to minor variations in their chemical structure as the dye LUMO is closer to the TiO2 conduction band edge potential.
 Fig. 4  IPCE spectra for (a) DSSCs constructed with various zinc porphyrin dyes, and (b) DSSCs constructed from zinc dyes and their free base analogues. 
The binding moiety employed on each dye to facilitate charge injection from the chromophore into the semiconductor has also been reported to have a strong influence on charge injection behaviour.40–43 For porphyrin dyes, previous results indicated that β-substituted structures exhibited more efficient charge injection.20 However, the results obtained here suggest that there are minimal differences between the photocurrents obtained using dyes with β-pyrrolic (GD2, P159) or meso-substitution (P199, P10), indicating that the linker substitution position is not the critical factor in determining the injection efficiency. Conversely, it appears that the chemical nature of the linker group dominates the injection behaviour, with the malonic acid group exhibiting the best performance, followed by the cyanoacrylic group; both of which produce higher Jsc values than the benzoic acid moiety. To further explore the influence of the linker group structure on performance, we investigated the importance of conjugation in the linker. Conjugation is generally considered to be critical in obtaining efficient injection,44 although high efficiencies have also been reported for structures without conjugated linker moieties.45 For the four porphyrin dyes ZnC and ZnNC and for FbC and FbNC, a comparison of the J–V curves in Fig. 3 clearly demonstrates that removal of the linker conjugation decreases the Jsc values in both zinc and free base porphyrin dyes. The reduction in the Jsc was previously attributed to slower injection kinetics based on transient emission decay measurements.21 We recently re-examined this dye system using transient absorption spectroscopy, and concluded that the kinetics was not the main limiting factor. The existence of non-injecting dyes on the TiO2 surface was a more critical issue in limiting the injection.46 This issue of non-injecting dyes has significant implications for developing highly efficient porphyrin dyes for DSSCs, and it will be discussed in more detail in Section 3.
Open circuit voltages of the DSSCs with all porphyrin dyes were also lower than that of ruthenium benchmark N719. We showed in 2008 that the lower Voc of zinc porphyrin dyes arises from a faster recombination rate between TiO2 electrons and the acceptor species in the I−/I3− redox electrolyte.47 At that time, it was generally observed that the application of organic dyes leads to shorter electron lifetime limiting the open circuit voltage.48–50 Since the diffusion coefficient characterising electron transport did not significantly change by using porphyrin dyes, we suggested that the Zn porphyrin dyes attract the electron accepting I3− ions closer to the TiO2 interface accelerating the recombination reaction between injected electron and I3−. We suggested that the positively charged zinc ion may not be completely shielded and therefore may attract the negative I3− to the TiO2 surface. Fig. 3 reveals that employing dyes with bulky substituents such as octyl chains (P159), or another entire porphyrin unit (on the dimer, P10) produces the highest Voc. This is most likely due to a steric blocking effect by the dye layers on the TiO2 surface. However, Fig. 3 reveals that removal of the zinc ion from the porphyrin does not increase the Voc. This indicates that the origin of the short lifetime of Zn porphyrin dyes is not that simple, and a more detailed study involving the effect of dye conjugation (polarisability), surface blocking and electrostatic interactions between the dye and I3− is needed. A detailed discussion of electron lifetime is presented in Section 4.
3 Monitoring injection kinetics by femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy
3.1 Charge injection and injected electron–dye cation recombination kinetics
Electron injection and injected electron–dye cation recombination are key processes in DSSCs. As illustrated in Fig. 5, after electrons are injected from the dye into the conduction band of a TiO2 particle they will subsequently recombine with the oxidized dye molecules in the absence of a redox mediator. To achieve high performance, it has been firmly established that the electron injection must be fast and highly efficient and the recombination must be slow.51–53 In order to verify that this condition is observed in porphyrin based devices, we employed transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy to monitor both the injection and recombination process. This technique represents a tool for studying kinetic processes, able to probe the electronic structure of the oxidized dye, the rate constants and the efficiency of the key reactions depending on the focus of the study. Based on many years of experience in this field we noted that we could study injection and recombination processes by observing the absorption signal of the oxidized dye and/or the conducting electrons in TiO2 on various time scales following photoinduced injection. In the following section, we discuss the development of our transient absorption studies to probe porphyrin DSSCs, focusing on the measurements of electron injection and recombination in porphyrin based DSSCs. We will briefly discuss measurements of the transient absorption spectra to provide information on the electronic structure of the dyes, direct determination of the electron injection and charge recombination kinetics with femtosecond and picosecond time resolution, and determination of the electron injection yield through the deployment of an internal standard. We then briefly discuss the two types of recombination we observed in porphyrin DSSCs; a fast process occurring on the sub-ns time scale (0.5 ns to 100 ns) and a slow process occurring within the millisecond time region.
 Fig. 5  An illustration of electron injection and injected electron–dye cation recombination processes in DSSCs. 
3.2 Transient absorption spectra
Upon photoexcitation, the excited state of the photosensitizer is populated, followed by ultrafast electron injection into a TiO2 particle. Therefore, it is possible to observe the excited state of the dye within a time region of several picoseconds, with the absorption spectra of the oxidized dyes then detected in later time regions. The absorption signal of electrons in TiO2 occurs in the near-IR and mid-IR wavelength region (>1000 nm), appearing as a broad peak lacking distinct features.54 Accordingly, in addition to the excited state and oxidized state of the photosensitizer, the electron injection kinetics can also be directly monitored without spectral interference from other species.
We have previously observed that detection of the oxidized dye absorption spectra can provide information about the electronic structure of the photosensitizer.55Fig. 6 shows TA spectra for porphyrin dyes GD2 and Fb-GD2 adsorbed on TiO2. Both spectra were obtained between 2 and 15 μs after excitation at 532 nm. The zinc and free base dyes show distinct oxidized dye spectra, with the zinc dye exhibiting a narrow peak centred at 685 nm and the free base dye displaying a broader peak centred at 710 nm. Even larger difference between zinc and free base dye was observed by comparing the spectra of ZnNC and FbC in Fig. 17. These results indicate that the TA spectra are sensitive to molecular structure, able to detect differences in the metallation state of the oxidized dye molecule. We demonstrate the power of this observation by using the spectra to determine the location of the positive charge in a unique zinc/free base co-sensitised dye system later in this report.
 Fig. 6  Transient absorption spectra of GD2 and Fb-GD2 adsorbed on TiO2 films. 
3.3 Kinetics of electron injection
Electron injection kinetics can be followed by observing TA signals within the picosecond time region. In this time region, absorption from the excited state of the dye is overlapping with that of the oxidized dye in the visible wavelength region. However, observation of the TA signal in the IR region due to electron absorption allows electron injection kinetics to be discussed without any spectral interference from other species. Fig. 7 shows temporal behaviour of TA signals monitored at 3440 nm for TiO2 films sensitized with GD2, Fb-GD2, ZnC, FbC, ZnNC and FbNC after excitation at 532 nm. Fig. 7 also displays the TA signal obtained from an N719 sensitized TiO2 film, employed as an internal standard. The absorbance in the TA signal is proportional to the concentration of the charged species. We have previously shown that the injection efficiency of the N719 dye approaches unity.56 Therefore, comparison of the magnitude of the electron absorption signal, normalised to the absorbed photon fraction at the pump wavelength, between the porphyrin dyes and that of the N719 reference allows the injection yield of the dyes to be discussed quantitatively on an ultrafast time scale. It is evident from Fig. 7(a) that the TA signals of GD2 and Fb-GD2 are significantly lower than that of N719, clearly indicating that the injection efficiency of these dyes are much less than unity, at least in this time region. This result agrees with the low IPCE values spectra obtained for these dyes, i.e. low IPCE values even within the Soret absorption band, where almost all photons incident on the dye-coated TiO2 layer are absorbed.
 Fig. 7  (a) A comparison of the transient absorption signals for TiO2 films sensitized with GD2, Fb-GD2, ZnC and N719 in the presence of standard (0.1 M LiI, 0.6 M DMPImI, 0.05 M I2, 0.5 M tBP in acetonitrile), denoted as LiI (0.1 M), and Li+ rich (0.7 M LiI and 0.05 M I2 in acetonitrile), denoted as LiI (0.7 M), electrolytes. (b) A comparison of the transient absorption signals for TiO2 films sensitized with ZnC, FbC, ZnNC and FbNC in the presence of standard electrolytes. Samples were probed at 3440 nm after excitation with femtosecond pulses at 532 nm. 

Fig. 7 demonstrates that the TA signals for all dyes appear in the femtosecond time region, within the time-resolution of our instruments (200 fs), indicating ultra-fast electron injection. For GD2 and N719, a second rise in the picosecond time region was also observed, suggesting that a slower injection process also exists. Conversely, no slow injection was observed for any of the other dyes. The origin of the slow injection process in N719 DSSCs has been studied, with many reports suggesting that its origin is electron injection from the triplet excited state after ultrafast intersystem crossing from the singlet state produced by excitation.57–59 However, by comparing GD2 and ZnC porphyrin dyes adsorbed on TiO2 films, multiple injection processes could be involved depending on the adsorption site and/or linker components. The origin of this slow injection for porphyrins remains unclear.
In a simplified kinetic model, the electron injection process is in competition with deactivation channels from the excited state, such as radiative and non-radiative relaxation into the ground state. In this context, the electron injection yield is classically derived from the rate competition between the injection and relaxation channels.53,60 It would therefore be expected that the observed ultrafast electron injection combined with the typical porphyrin excited state lifetimes of 1–10 ns would produce an electron injection yield close to unity. However, as observed in Fig. 7(a), for porphyrin dyes GD2 and Fb-GD2 the injection yield was determined to be much lower than unity. Fig. 7(b) shows normalised transient absorption signals recorded for dye-sensitised TiO2 films sensitised with ZnC, FbC, ZnNC and FbNC dyes. We only observed femtosecond injection kinetics for all 4 dyes independent of coordination metal (free base versus zinc) or conjugated versus non-conjugated linker. The signal magnitude for all four dyes (not shown) was much lower than that obtained using the internal reference N719, with corresponding injection yields within the range of 10% to 40%. These rather low injection yields are also evident from short circuit current (Table 1), IPCE measurements (Fig. 4(b)) and APCE measurements (Fig. 16(b)), showing much lower performance compared to GD2 or P199 dye. Fig. 7 clearly demonstrates that the electron injection process is not simply a competitive process with relaxation from the excited state of dyes, but is also limited by other factors. This limiting factor for electron injection remains a fruitful area for future research, and we believe it could be due to site-heterogeneity as we have proposed previously.61
It has also been firmly established that the presence of additives in the electrolyte has a strong influence on solar cell performance.62–63 In particular, lithium ions are commonly employed to increase the Jsc. The Voc, however, is decreased, suggesting that Li+ ions shift the conduction band position of TiO2 towards more positive potential. We have also examined the injection of porphyrin dyes in the presence and absence of additional Li+ ions to examine their effect on porphyrin DSSCs (Fig. 7a). The TA signal with additional Li+ (0.7 M LiI) clearly demonstrates that the injection rate becomes faster and the injection yield is increased compared to the sample with a standard redox electrolyte (0.1 M LiI), as expected from a positive conduction band shift. To check that the increased electron injection yield in TA measurements indeed results in improved photocurrent, IPCE spectra of GD2 in different electrolytes were measured. The injection yields determined from TA measurements were plotted against the maximum IPCE value of the fully assembled DSSCs in Fig. 8. The observed electron injection yield (Φinj) shows good agreement with the IPCE maximum (IPCEmax) trend, confirming that the injection yield determined from TA measurements using N719 internal standard correlates well to device performance.
 Fig. 8  Electron injection yields determined from TA kinetics plotted against the maximum IPCE value for DSSCs fabricated with N719, GD2 and ZnC and filled with electrolytes containing 0.1 M and 0.7 M LiI. The IPCE value for N719 of 80% was taken as equivalent to 100% electron injection yield after accounting for transmission losses from the FTO-glass. Reprinted with Permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
4 Recombination channels probed by sub-ns transient absorption and photovoltage transients
For an illuminated DSSC, the Voc of DSSCs under illumination is determined by the difference between the Fermi level of electrons in the semiconductor and the redox potential of the electrolyte. The semiconductor Fermi level depends on the conduction band edge potential and electron density in the TiO2 electrode, with the electron density in turn governed by the steady state balance of charge injection and recombination. By analysing Vocversus electron density plots for various porphyrin dyes, information on the conduction band potential and intra-band charge traps can be obtained, which then can be used to explain trends in the recombination kinetics and the Voc of DSSCs.
In general, there are two types of charge recombination channels, which will be considered separately. The first is a fast (geminate) recombination process, which occurs between an oxidized dye and the injected electron that originates from the same dye. The second process proceeds on a slower time scale and occurs between electrons and either oxidized dye molecules or the redox mediator (Fig. 9). We now consider both of these recombination channels for porphyrin based DSSCs.
 Fig. 9  A schematic illustration of the two charge recombination pathways in DSSCs following injection from the photoexcited dye state (S*). 
4.1 Charge recombination in the sub-nanosecond (0.5 ps to 100 ns) time region
For DSSCs prepared using ruthenium complex dyes on TiO2 films, no fast recombination has been reported. It was often confirmed that this process had a negligible impact on performance. On the other hand, recent reports have detected significant levels of fast recombination for some organic dyes, including a zinc porphyrin molecule.43,64–66

Fig. 10 shows TA signals observed at 750 nm for TiO2 films sensitised with porphyrin dyes GD2 and Fb-GD2 in the nanosecond time region. Each sample was excited at 532 nm using laser pulses from a TA spectrometer with sub-ns time resolution (500 ps) built in our laboratory.67 A slow rise can be observed for the GD2 sample, suggesting a slow charge injection process in the picosecond time region. This is consistent with our measurements on faster time scales (Fig. 7). In contrast, the Fb-GD2 sample showed no slow rise, and, instead it exhibited a 20% decay of the initial TA signal on the nanosecond time scale. The decay rate was much slower than the measured fluorescence lifetime of the sensitised film, indicating that the TA signal decay arises from a fast recombination process.
 Fig. 10  TA signals observed at 750 nm for TiO2 films sensitized with porphyrin dyes GD2 and Fb-GD2 in the nanosecond time region. Each sample was excited at 532 nm. 
4.2 Millisecond charge recombination: photovoltage decay measurements
Reverse transfer of electrons from the semiconductor to the acceptor species in the electrolyte is a second possible recombination channel in DSSCs, and proceeds on a slower time scale to recombination with oxidized dye molecules. Since the electrolyte penetrates through the entire semiconductor film to the FTO anodic contact, recombination with the redox mediator can occur across multiple interfaces, including the semiconductor–electrolyte or the FTO–electrolyte interface. The location at which the majority of recombination occurs will somewhat depend on the properties of each component, however it has been widely demonstrated that the semiconductor–electrolyte interface is dominant for electron transfer to the redox mediator. We therefore have confined our discussion to a description of this interface.68
There are multiple techniques which have been used to probe this recombination process in DSSCs, with intensity modulated photovoltage spectroscopy,69,70 electrochemical impedance spectroscopy71,72 and voltage rise and decay time measurements73 amongst the most frequently employed. Our studies employed stepped-light induced measurements of photocurrent and photovoltage (SLIM-PCV), a technique we developed in 2005. SLIM-PCV employs small modulations in the intensity of the light illumination to induce a decay of the voltage or current from one steady state to another.74 We have employed this technique to probe the effect of several structural features of porphyrin dyes on the rate of recombination with the standard I−/I3− redox couple.

4.2.1 A comparison of porphyrin and ruthenium complex dyes. 
Measurement of the electron lifetime of DSSCs is the most common way to analyse recombination rates between electrons in the semiconductor and the acceptor species in the redox mediator. The recombination rate is inversely proportional to the electron lifetime, and is usually described by a pseudo-first order rate equation. As previously discussed, the open circuit voltages of the porphyrin dyes examined in Fig. 3 exhibited significant variations, which were attributed to different recombination rates. We have probed this set of dyes in greater detail, with Fig. 11 displaying the lifetime of the injected electrons in the TiO2 electrode and the open circuit voltage of all the porphyrin dyes. The electron density in the TiO2 for each device was determined by a charge extraction method in which the light intensity was switched off at the same time the DSSC was switched from open to short circuit.75
 Fig. 11  (a) Electron lifetime and (b) open circuit voltage plotted as a function of electron density for DSSCs constructed from different zinc porphyrin sensitizers. (c) A comparison of the electron lifetime and (d) open circuit voltage plotted as a function of electron density for DSSCs constructed from zinc porphyrins and their free base analogues. 
All studied porphyrin dyes exhibited electron lifetimes, which were dependent on the electron density, a feature consistent with trap limited recombination.76 We therefore interpreted our results according to this model for recombination. It was clear that there were no shifts in either the slope or the y-intercept of the Vocvs. electron density (ED) plots for any of the dyes in Fig. 11. Since the redox mediator potential was constant in each case, the Vocvs. log(ED) plot is indicative of the TiO2 Fermi level relative to the redox potential. The equivalent slopes of each plot indicate identical density of states distributions. The Vocvs. electron density (ED) plots therefore can indicate the relative conduction band edge potential for each device. Given no shifts were observed in these plots for any of the dyes, it was concluded that the variation in Voc of the porphyrin DSSCs cannot be explained by conduction band shifts and must be due to the measured differences in the electron lifetime.
Electron diffusion coefficients characterising electron transport in TiO2 were also measured by SLIM-PCV and showed little variation with changes in the molecular structure of the sensitisers. Therefore, the electron lifetime is probably dominated by the concentration of the acceptor species in the vicinity of the TiO2 surface. For devices which display reduced lifetimes, it is possible that the dye molecules could increase the acceptor concentration by dispersion forces or by electrostatic forces from induced dipole interactions or partial charges, respectively. Alternatively, when dyes are densely adsorbed on the TiO2 surface, the dye layer could block the approach of the acceptor species to the TiO2 surface, decreasing the acceptor concentration. Fig. 11 demonstrates that the lifetime of the all porphyrin-sensitised solar cells were shorter than that of the ruthenium complex-sensitized solar cells. This suggests that the porphyrins attract acceptor species in comparison to the ruthenium dye, and that the degree of the attraction depends on the structure.


4.2.2 A comparison of zinc and free base porphyrins. 
When a zinc atom is coordinated in the porphyrin ring, the positively charged metal ion is exposed to the electrolyte. Thus, it is possible that the zinc atom could attract I3−, increasing the surface concentration and consequently the recombination rate. We note that a highly efficient zinc porphyrin dye has been recently reported, with the structure of this dye ensuring that the central zinc atom is completely surrounded by bulky alkyl chain substituents.77,78 The high Voc of DSSCs constructed from this dye suggest there may be benefits for the electron lifetime in protecting the zinc ion from exposure to the electrolyte. On the other hand, if this hypothesis were true, then removal of the zinc atom from a porphyrin to give the free base analogue would also have resulted in an increased electron lifetime. Fig. 11 indicates that DSSCs based on FbC and Fb-GD2 show substantially shorter electron lifetimes than those of their zinc counterparts, ZnC and GD2, respectively. This result suggests that the zinc ion is not the dominant factor attracting I3− to the surface to influence the electron lifetime in these porphyrin DSSCs. Alternatively, it has also been observed using triphenylamine dyes that the electron lifetime becomes shorter as the conjugation length of the linker increases.79 This observation was attributed to an increase in the dispersion force between the dyes and I3−, which leads to attraction of I3− to the region of the conjugated linker, increasing the surface I3− concentration. In a similar context, it was noted that Fb-GD2 and FbC also have high polarisabilities, and thus, they could both increase the surface I3− concentration by attracting the acceptor to their linker groups through dispersion forces, leading to their observed short lifetimes. The higher lifetimes of the zinc dyes could then be attributed to the partial positive charge of the zinc atom, which disrupts the dispersion forces by trapping the I3− near the zinc atom, preventing the approach of the I3− towards the linker group and surface region. In this case, the distance from the surface of TiO2 to the trapped I3− is expected to be longer than the distance between the surface and the I3− attracted to the conjugated linkers of Fb-GD2 and FbC, explaining the longer lifetimes of the zinc dyes in comparison to their free base analogues. We note that the discussion here concerns the relative contribution of the above two factors within porphyrin DSSCs. In comparison to N719-based DSSCs, both trapping of I3− by the Zn, and attraction to the linker group probably cause shorter lifetimes of porphyrin DSSCs.

4.3 Effect of the molecular size
Appending bulky substituents to the porphyrin core structure has been a successful technique to improve the performance of porphyrin based DSSCs.80,81 We have recently shown in a set of organic dyes that the origin of such improvements is an increase in electron lifetime upon addition of the bulky substituents.48 The improved electron lifetime is produced when the position and size of the substituents are appropriate to cover the exposed spaces between dyes adsorbed on the surface, causing the dye layer to act as a physical blocking layer preventing the approach of the acceptor species to the semiconductor surface. We examined this concept by appending long alkyl chains to GD2, creating the P159 dye structure. Fig. 11 indicates that the addition of these alkyl chains results in an increase of the electron lifetime compared to DSSCs constructed from GD2, confirming that judiciously selected substituents can indeed improve the electron lifetime of porphyrin sensitizers in DSSCs. This principle is again observed in the dimer P10, with results from this system discussed further in Section 5.
4.4 Millisecond charge recombination: transient absorption measurements
Slow recombination between the oxidized dye and electrons in the TiO2 is rarely observed in DSSCs as it is generally intercepted by reduction of the oxidized dye with the redox mediator. For these studies, care must be taken to ensure the laser excitation intensity is sufficiently weak in order to prevent production of two or more electrons in a semiconductor particle, since this condition artificially accelerates the recombination rate.82

Fig. 12 shows TA signals probed at 700 nm for TiO2 films sensitised with porphyrin dyes GD2 and Fb-GD2 in the absence of any electrolyte in the millisecond time region after excitation at 532 nm. Under this excitation condition, we confirmed that less than one electron was produced in a TiO2 particle. Fig. 12 shows that the recombination rate of GD2 is very similar to that of Fb-GD2, suggesting that the recombination between the porphyrin dyes and TiO2 electrons is limited by the nature of the TiO2 particles. The millisecond recombination in Fig. 12 is faster than the electron lifetime shown in Fig. 11, which implies that in the presence of the redox electrolyte, dye cations are effectively reduced by I−. Otherwise, the electron lifetime in Fig. 11 would have been the same order of magnitude as the decay in Fig. 12.
 Fig. 12  TA signals observed at 700 nm for dry TiO2 films sensitized with porphyrin dyes GD2 and Fb-GD2 in the absence of the electrolyte in the millisecond time region. Each sample was excited at 532 nm. 
5 New developments unique to porphyrin-sensitised DSSCs
5.1 The GD2 light exposure effect
The exposure of DSSCs to light for various time periods almost always produces some change in performance, typically a small decrease in the Voc and increase in the FF and Jsc.83,84 Results published prior to our work suggested that the behaviour of DSSCs in response to light exposure is complex, with various authors suggesting that light exposure enhances electron transport by creating shallow energy TiO2 electronic states,83 produces a positive conduction band shift through photo-production of surface states in the TiO2,85 or induces a rearrangement of the dye molecules.86 Our recent observations of a simultaneous enhancement in all photovoltaic performance parameters of DSSCs constructed from GD2 were unique and could not be fully explained by these factors. Furthermore, screening of several other porphyrin dyes revealed that the magnitude of improvement for porphyrins dyes varied widely. We therefore employed the spectroscopic tools discussed in previous sections to elucidate the mechanism of the light induced performance enhancements for DSSCs constructed from GD2.39
DSSCs were prepared from porphyrin dye GD2 and their J–V characteristics were immediately recorded. DSSCs were then treated with a one hour light exposure at an open circuit and the J–V characteristics were re-measured (Fig. 13). The 1 hour light exposure produced a 6% increase in the Jsc in conjunction with a simultaneous 5% increase in both the Voc and fill factor, leading to a 16% enhancement of the power conversion efficiency. The Jsc, Voc and the fill factor of devices were all improved simultaneously after light exposure. The reproducibility and stability of the light-induced performance enhancements were then monitored by periodically comparing the performance of several identically prepared samples stored in the dark to those exposed to light for 1 hour after initial testing. The light exposed samples exhibited improvement in all parameters immediately following the light exposure post-treatment, with this elevated performance found to be stable over the next 11 days. In contrast, the control devices stored in the dark displayed gradual and smaller improvement in performance which was attributed to an incremental light exposure effect induced by measuring the photovoltaic performance of devices. The wavelength dependence of the light exposure effect, separated from the effect of heating the samples without light, was also tested. It was observed that the efficiency increases for the light treatment (25%) were much greater than those exposed to heat alone (10%). Furthermore, performance enhancements achieved in devices with an unfiltered light exposure treatment were identical to those treated with IR and UV cut-off filters, providing a strong indication that the increases in performance for GD2-sensitised solar cells subjected to a short light exposure resulted from illumination of the DSSCs with wavelengths in the visible region.
 Fig. 13  Current density–voltage curves measured for as prepared (black) and light exposed (red) GD2 DSSCs under AM 1.5 illumination (solid lines) and in the dark (dashed lines). The inset shows the photovoltaic performance parameters for each device. 
Having established the reproducibility and permanent nature of the performance enhancements, we then monitored the influence of the light exposure treatment on the charge injection process using two complimentary techniques. The first is ultrafast TA spectroscopy. The second technique involved a measurement of the absorbed photon-to-current conversion efficiency (APCE), calculated by normalizing the IPCE spectra of devices by the light harvesting efficiency, QLHE, of the dye as described in Section 2. Since thin films were consistently employed in our studies, charge collection losses can be assumed to be negligible at short circuit and the APCE value represents the charge injection yield, QINJ.
The TA signal obtained by probing the electron absorption in the TiO2 after excitation with femtosecond laser pulses and the APCE spectra for GD2 DSSCs are shown in Fig. 14. The fs-TA results indicated that the electron injection kinetics were unaffected by the light exposure treatment, however, the magnitude of the signal was increased following light exposure. The APCE value increased from 65% to approximately 90% following light exposure. In comparison, the APCE for a DSSC prepared with ruthenium dye N719 exhibited a value close to 100%, in agreement with previously published injection yields for this dye. The APCE enhancement was uniform across a wide spectral range, indicating that charge injection has improved independent of wavelength. Both the steady state APCE data and the time-resolved fs-TA data therefore suggested that the light exposure treatment produces an enhanced electron injection yield without affecting the injection kinetics. The enhancement in the IPCE and the Jsc of GD2 DSSCs was therefore attributed to a light-induced improvement of the electron injection yield.
 Fig. 14  (a) Femtosecond transient absorption kinetic traces probed at 3440 nm before and after light exposure for GD2-sensitised DSSCs. (b) Absorbed photon-to-current conversion efficiencies (APCEs) for as-prepared (light green) and light exposed (dark green) GD2 DSSCs. N719 (black) is included as a reference. 
To investigate the improved Voc produced by the light exposure effect, we analysed the recombination using TA spectroscopy in the nanosecond region and SLIM-PCV in the millisecond region. Examination of the TA kinetics for DSSCs prepared with and without an I−/I3− redox electrolyte indicated that the dye cation signal decay was significantly accelerated in the presence of the redox mediator, demonstrating that the mediator efficiently regenerates the oxidized dye molecules and prevents recombination with the TiO2 electrons. Furthermore, the dye regeneration kinetics did not change after a light exposure treatment, which confirmed that the improvement in Jsc is not due to improved dye cation regeneration.
Electron lifetimes and open circuit voltages were then measured with SLIM-PCV before and after a 1 hour light exposure treatment to investigate the recombination between TiO2 electrons and the redox mediator. These results are presented in Fig. 15. The electron lifetime after light exposure was found to increase by a factor of two to three at matching electron density. This increase in the electron lifetime suggests a reduced recombination rate between TiO2 electrons and I3− ions in the electrolyte since the regeneration of dye cations by I− is efficient. Such reduced recombination is also consistent with the increased dark current onset potential in Fig. 13. The diffusion coefficient of electrons in the TiO2 was also checked and was found to decrease after light exposure by a similar magnitude to the lifetime increases, resulting in an invariant electron diffusion length before and after light exposure. Vocversus electron density plots exhibited neither a detectable shift along the Voc axis nor any change in the slope of the Vocversus electron density profile before and after light exposure. As discussed in Section 4, this plot is indicative of the TiO2 conduction band edge potential and thus the lack of change indicates that there was no change in the TiO2 conduction band edge potential following light exposure. The improved Voc observed after light exposure was therefore attributed to the combined effect of improved charge injection and reduced charge recombination. These measurements successfully categorized the sources of the current and voltage enhancements observed after light exposure for porphyrin dye GD2. Further measurements of the dye binding and orientation found minimal morphological changes of the dye layer, suggesting that the effect was not due to a dye layer rearrangement under illumination.39
 Fig. 15  (a) Electron lifetime and (b) open circuit voltage plotted as a function of electron density for as prepared (black) and light exposed (red) DSSCs constructed from GD2. 
5.2 The mixed dye co-sensitisation effect
There has been great interest in combining different sensitisers in order to achieve panchromatic sensitisation.87–89 We became interested in such co-sensitisation studies after observing an unexpected significant improvement in the performance of inefficient porphyrin dyes ZnNC and FbC when simultaneously anchored to the same TiO2 electrode. Preliminary studies of this system suggested that the effect was not related to an extension of the absorption spectrum and were difficult to comprehend, not least because combining dyes potentially creates several new photophysical pathways. These possible new interactions include energy transfer between dyes,87 electron or hole injection from one dye to another90,91 and chemical reactions between the dyes.92 These interactions are often detrimental to device performance. Some progress has been made by combining other sensitizers,93,94 with previous examples of DSSCs created by combining multiple porphyrin species.95 We realized that the co-sensitised device could be utilized to probe the merits of a mixed dye system, in which the functions of a single sensitiser are distributed between two sensitiser molecules.96

J–V curves for the individual dyes and the mixture with the highest performance (76% ZnNC on the TiO2 surface or ∼3:1 ZnNC:FbC) demonstrated that the power conversion efficiencies of the devices improved from 0.4% for FbC and 0.7% for ZnNC to 2.1% for the best mixture. Efficiency enhancements were driven by an increase in the Jsc from 0.95 mA cm−2 for FbC and 1.37 mA cm−2 for ZnNC to 3.75 mA cm−2 for the 3:1 mixture. The Voc of the mixed DSSCs also increased, from 580 mV for FbC and 650 mV for ZnNC to 685 mV for the best mixture. The IPCE was also found to increase equally across all wavelengths for the mixed dye device. Significantly, both dyes exhibited improved performance in the mixture compared to their performance as individual sensitisers.
APCE spectra for thin-film DSSCs, shown in Fig. 16, were calculated from measured IPCE curves to probe the charge injection behaviour in the mixture. The individual dyes displayed APCE values of 2% (FbC) and 7% (ZnNC), whereas the APCE of the 3:1 mixture was 24%, much higher than either individual dye. The mixture APCE was enhanced in the absorption regions of both dyes, indicating that injection yields for both dyes are enhanced in the mixture. The magnitude of the mixture APCE enhancement closely correlated with that of the Jsc and conversion efficiency enhancements, providing clear evidence that an improvement in the charge injection yield of both dyes produces the enhancements in the Jsc in the co-sensitized device.
 Fig. 16  (a) Normalised UV-vis absorption (solid) and photoluminescence (dashed) spectra for porphyrin dyes ZnNC (black) and FbC (grey) immobilised on semiconducting oxides. The inset shows energy levels for dyes bound to TiO2 and potential charge transfer processes. (b) Absorbed photon-to-current conversion efficiencies (APCEs) for devices sensitised with ZnNC (red), FbC (purple), the 3:1 ZnNC:FbC dye mixture (green) and N719 (black). 
We considered several possibilities, which could lead to such an improvement in the injection yield for the mixture. Changes in the dye layer packing density or orientation, prevention of porphyrin aggregation in the mixture and enhanced dye electronic coupling to TiO2 were all able to be discounted by various measurements. We therefore considered photoinduced excited state interactions such as energy or charge transfer reactions, noting that such interactions could affect the charge generation yield through two key processes: (i) energy or electron transfer from a non-injecting dye to a dye with high QINJ; (ii) reduced recombination between TiO2 electron and dye cation by faster “regeneration” via hole transfer from a dye with longer dye cation lifetime. This mechanism would operate if a fast component of TiO2 electron/dye cation recombination limits the photocurrent. We determined that energy transfer from ZnNC to FbC, possible due to the spectral overlap between ZnNC emissions and FbC absorptions (Fig. 16), had a theoretical yield of 85% based upon a simple approximation from the equations governing Förster resonance energy transfer.96 Although this process could potentially allow ZnNC to inject through the more efficient conjugated linker of FbC, measurements of emission and photoluminescence excitation spectra (at FbC emissions) for the dye mixture adsorbed onto ZrO2 (a high band gap semiconducting oxide which prevents electron injection) were not able to find conclusive evidence for this energy transfer process.
Charge transfer interactions could also affect the injection yield in the mixture. Since ZnNC has higher HOMO and LUMO energies compared to FbC, there is a driving force for hole transfer (HT) from FbC+ to neutral ZnNC of ∼200 meV (Fig. 16). To examine this process in greater detail we measured the transient absorption spectra for the individual dyes and the mixture on the sub-ns TA spectrometer we have previously described. Distinct peaks from both ZnNC cations and FbC cations could be observed in the mixture spectrum after 1 ns (Fig. 17), however, whilst the ZnNC peak is maintained out to a time delay of 75 ns, the FbC peak at 750 nm disappears from the mixture spectrum on a time scale of 1–5 ns. Since individual FbC samples were clearly detectable out to 75 ns, this result indicates that the FbC cations are removed on a fast time scale in the mixed dye sample. This could be caused by either an accelerated FbC recombination in the presence of ZnNC in the mixture, or alternatively, by charge transfer from FbC+ to ZnNC. We noted earlier that HT may lead to an improved charge generation yield for FbC if kHT≫kEDR,FbC≫kDR,FbC, where kEDR,FbC is the rate constant for charge recombination between TiO2 electrons and FbC+, and kDR,FbC is the rate constant for dye regeneration of FbC. Based on this, the results shown in Fig. 17 are more likely due to a hole transfer from FbC+ to ZnNC than an accelerated FbC recombination in the presence of ZnNC.
 Fig. 17  (a) A comparison of spectra for FbC, ZnNC and the 3:1 ZnNC:FbC mixture 1 ns after excitation, and (b) transient absorption spectra shown at various time delays after excitation with picosecond laser pulses for TiO2 films sensitized with the 3:1 ZnNC:FbC mixture. 
The possibility that mixing the dyes could reduce the potential barrier for through-space electron injection from the dyes to TiO2 was also considered. To examine this, we altered the cation additive species in the redox electrolyte such that it resided near the TiO2 surface (lithium, Li+) or outside the dye layer (tetrahexylammonium, THA+) due to the size. Replacing Li+ cations with THA+ produced a ∼150 mV negative shift in the TiO2 conduction band potential (measured using a charge extraction method), however, the Jsc of the device was unaffected (Fig. 18) despite the reduced driving force for injection. A third electrolyte in which Li+ was replaced with rubidium (Rb+), both of which can approach the surface and thus create a Helmholtz double layer with a narrow width, produced a ∼125 mV negative shift in the conduction band potential but also resulted in a 30% Jsc decrease. It was therefore concluded that the Jsc in the mixed dye devices was sensitive to the injection driving force in cations, which adsorbed to the surface. However, the unaffected Jsc for the THA+ devices could be due to a change in the local potential profile at the TiO2/dye interface when the dyes are combined on the surface, an effect which is amplified for THA+ as the Helmholtz double layer extends beyond the dye layer and thus does not screen these electric fields. This field, present only in the mixture, could improve electron injection from both dyes by aiding charge separation, reducing the barrier height for through-space electron tunnelling or altering dipole alignment.
 Fig. 18  Open circuit voltage plotted as a function of electron density in the TiO2 for DSSCs sensitized with a 3:1 ZnNC:FbC mixture containing either Li+ (red circles), Rb+ (pink triangles) or THA+ (blue diamonds) cations in the electrolyte. 
We were able to demonstrate that the combination of two individually poor dyes created a mixed porphyrin DSSC, which exhibits a remarkable simultaneous increase in Jsc and Voc. The enhancement was due to improved charge generation yield. It was suggested that photoexcited interactions or local electric fields at the TiO2 interface were the likely sources of the improved injection.
5.3 The multichromophore effect
Increasing the light harvesting efficiency of a sensitiser by appending it to additional chromophore units to create a light harvesting array has been extensively examined, with porphyrin dyes used almost exclusively in such studies given the congruence of these arrays to natural light absorption systems.97 We recently discovered a porphyrin dimer which produced a higher DSSC performance than its associated monomers in thin-film DSSCs.22 The first reports of enhanced spectral responses in porphyrin dimer-sensitised TiO2 films then became available,98 and we subsequently investigated the use of a variety of porphyrin arrays in DSSCs with a view towards producing the highly absorbing thin-film devices which are required to utilize more viscous electrolytes or solid-state hole transport materials.99,100 Our early studies did not obtain any evidence for improved photocurrent generation,20 however we were finally able to produce porphyrin dimer P10, built by linking together efficient monoporphyrin dyes P199 and ZnC, which showed great promise in DSSCs. We therefore employed this sensitizer as the simplest possible building block of a 3-D multichromophore array, employing our familiar spectroscopic tools to probe the success of the multichromophore approach to enhancing light harvesting efficiency in DSSCs.22
The UV-visible spectra of dimer P10, shown in Fig. 19, exhibited molar extinction coefficients double those of monomer P199 in the Q-band absorption band (the second monomer, ZnC, showed an almost identical UV-visible spectrum to P199). The P10 absorption spectrum is a simple superposition of the monomers and no additional spectral features were observed, indicating negligible interaction between the two porphyrin moieties in the ground state. However, to ensure the enhanced light harvesting results in increased charge generation, efficient electron injection from both chromophores must be achieved. This condition is extremely difficult to demonstrate for dyes employing identical chromophores due to the matching spectroscopic features of each unit, making distinguishing them impossible. We were able to monitor this system using our ultrafast TA spectrometer since the probe beam monitors the electron signal produced after injection rather than the dye itself. By comparing the magnitude of the absorption signal from the dimer to that of the N719 reference after normalization of the signal (Fig. 19) we showed that the injection yield from the dimer was greater than 50%, only possible if both chromophores inject electrons. We therefore produced the first spectroscopic evidence for electron injection from both chromophores of a light harvesting array into TiO2.
 Fig. 19  (a) Molar extinction coefficients of a porphyrin monomer P199 (green) and dimer P10 (blue) in solution. (b) Femtosecond TA signals (corrected for the absorbed pump intensity) of porphyrin-sensitized TiO2 films in a redox containing electrolyte. An N719 signal obtained in air is also shown. Samples were excited by 150 fs pulses at 532 nm. 
A comparison of the solar cell efficiencies of DSSCs based on porphyrin-sensitised TiO2 films of identical 2.5 μm thicknesses found that the Jsc of dimer P10 was higher than that of N719 and up to 10% higher than that of P199. This was attributed to the enhanced photon absorption in the thin films with only a small reduction of the injection yield. The IPCE of the dimer was observed to be ∼10% larger than that of P199 in the Q-band spectral region, and furthermore, the IPCE was also above 50%, which can only be achieved if both porphyrin units contribute to charge injection. The APCE values of the dimer and monomer, again employed to determine the charge injection yield in operational devices, were found to be 70–80% for both P10 and P199, consistent with the TA measurements.
The Voc of all the porphyrin DSSCs was lower than the N719 reference, a result attributed to a shorter electron lifetime as was discussed earlier. It is significant to note however that the Voc of the dimer was improved by up to 80 mV compared to the monoporphyrin dyes. This suggests that the dimer may reduce the recombination rate compared to the monomer. To analyse the recombination processes, photocurrent and photovoltage transients were measured with the SLIM-PCV technique. The electron diffusion coefficients, lifetimes and open circuit voltages determined from these measurements are shown in Fig. 20. The electron lifetime of the dimer P10 was 3–5 times higher than that of either monomer, with the lifetimes of ZnC and P199 shown to be invariant at matched electron densities. Little difference was observed in the diffusion coefficients of each dye system, suggesting that the electron lifetime differences cannot be attributed to faster charge transport in the TiO2. The Vocversus electron density plots displayed no differences in either the slope or the y-intercept between ZnC, P199 and P10, indicating no shifts of the TiO2 conduction band edge potential following dye uptake. The longer electron lifetime of the dimer can therefore be attributed to reduced recombination in operating devices, which is consistent with the elevated Voc. When the dye loading of P10 and P199 was reduced, the electron lifetime was reduced with respect to the full coverage devices, likely due to a more open surface, which more readily allows the approach of the I3− acceptor species to the TiO2 surface. There was no longer a difference in the electron lifetimes of the dimer and monomer in these reduced dye devices, suggesting that the reduced recombination for P10 at full coverage is due to a steric blocking of the oxide surface by the bulky dimer molecule, an effect removed as the dye concentration is reduced.
 Fig. 20  (a) Electron diffusion coefficient in the TiO2vs. Jsc, (b) electron density at open (noc) and short (nsc) circuit vs. Jsc, (c) electron lifetime vs. noc, (d) Vocvs. noc for DSSCs constructed with varying dye loadings of porphyrin monomers P199 and ZnC and dimer P10. 
We were therefore able to demonstrate that both porphyrin units of the multichromophore dye P10 show electron injection into TiO2. Combined with the improved light harvesting offered by the dimer in comparison to the monomer, improvements in the device performance were achieved in DSSCs constructed from the dimer. Furthermore, analysis of the electron lifetime indicated that the dimer provides an additional steric blocking effect not present with the monomers, thus resulting in an elevated device Voc. We therefore concluded that the concept of multichromophore porphyrin arrays can be applied in DSSCs to improve the power conversion efficiencies.
6 Summary and outlook
In this feature article we have highlighted important new insights into the influence of porphyrin molecular structure on efficiency-determining charge transfer steps in DSSCs. We have investigated the performance in DSSCs of a series of porphyrin dyes with systematic variations in structural features such as the molecular size, metal centre, ligands, substituents, and conjugation of molecules. Measurements of the current density–voltage and IPCE curves indicate that photocurrent production is dominated by the excited state energy levels of the dye, and to a lesser extent, the chemical nature of the linker group and conjugation. We have discussed the application of transient absorption spectroscopy from the femtosecond to the millisecond time region to measure the charge generation and recombination process. Although electron injection is found to be within the 200 fs time resolution for all porphyrin dyes, the yield at 1 ns is much lower than unity. The technique was also used to demonstrate >50% injection yield using a porphyrin dimer, indicating that both chromophores contribute to charge injection in this novel approach. We have also discussed charge recombination probed using transient absorption and photovoltage transient measurements. It has been shown that probing the dye cation absorbance signal on the nanosecond time scale can provide information about fast recombination processes, whilst analysis of the electron lifetime and open circuit voltages obtained from photovoltage transients can be used to interpret the recombination rate on a slower time scale.
It was shown that a light exposure treatment of a zinc porphyrin dye produces a permanent improvement in the solar cell performance driven by an enhanced electron injection yield and a reduced recombination rate. We also showed how a remarkable improvement in the performance of a zinc and free base porphyrin co-sensitized to the same TiO2 electrode arises from an enhanced charge generation yield of both dyes in the mixture. Using our spectroscopic toolbox we revealed that the origin of this improvement is most likely due to photoexcited energy and charge transfer interactions between the dyes aided by the development of an electric field at the dye/TiO2 interface.
These specific examples demonstrate the immense potential of porphyrins as light harvesting chromophores in solar energy conversion applications. Spectroscopic studies by various groups have contributed to an improved knowledge of such systems, establishing the effect of the anchoring groups and substituents on factors such as the dye orientation and the kinetics of charge generation and recombination. The continual development of innovative spectroscopic techniques accompanied by novel device optimisation strategies is taking these dyes to new levels of understanding and device efficiencies. We are greatly encouraged not only by the current status of porphyrin based DSSCs, but also for the possibilities that the future holds for this remarkable class of sensitisers.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Australian Research Council through the ARC Centre of Excellence, Federation Fellowship, Discovery, and LIEF schemes. MJG acknowledges the additional support of an Australian Postgraduate Award and a Prime Minister's Asia Australia Endeavour Award from the Australian Federal government. We also thank Dr Kohjiro Hara and Dr Nagatoshi Koumura for helping us prepare samples at AIST. Support from the Australian National Fabrication Facility - Materials Node is acknowledged.
References
A. Ben-Shem, F. Frolow and N. Nelson, FEBS Lett., 2004, 564, 274 CrossRef CAS .

          H. van Amerongen and J. P. Dekker, in Light-Harvesting Antennas in Photosynthesis, ed. B. R. Green and W. W. Parson, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht,  2003, p. 219 Search PubMed .
Y. S. Nam, T. Shin, H. Park, A. P. Magyar, K. Choi, G. Fantner, K. A. Nelson and A. M. Belcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1462 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, S. H. Lee, J. S. Lee, M. Lee and C. B. Park, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10227 RSC .
S. Prathapan, T. E. Johnson and J. S. Lindsey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 7519 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Moore, J. D. Blakemore, R. L. Milot, J. F. Hull, H.-e. Song, L. Cai, C. A. Schmuttenmaer, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2389 CAS .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Gledhill, B. Scott and B. A. Gregg, J. Mater. Res., 2005, 20, 3167 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Shaheen, D. S. Ginley and G. E. Jabbour, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 10 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kay and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 6272 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. F. Martinson, T. W. Hamann, M. J. Pellin and J. T. Hupp, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 4458 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Martinez-Diaz, G. de la Torrea and T. Torres, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7090 RSC .
H. Imahori, T. Umeyama and S. Ito, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1809 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, W. M. Campbell, E. E. Bonfantani, K. W. Jolley, D. L. Officer, P. J. Walsh, K. Gordon, R. Humphry-Baker, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15397 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yella, H.-W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W.-G. Diau, C.-Y. Yeh, S. M Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lee, C. She, N. C. Jeong and J. T. Hupp, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6090 RSC .
A. Forneli, M. Planells, M. A. Sarmentero, E. Martinez-Ferrero, B. C. O'Regan, P. Ballester and E. Palomares, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1652 RSC .
M. Gervaldo, F. Fungo, E. N. Durantini, J. J. Silber, L. Sereno and L. Otero, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20953 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. Campbell, A. K. Burrell, D. L. Officer and K. W. Jolley, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1363 CrossRef CAS .
T. Dos Santos, A. Morandeira, S. Koops, A. J. Mozer, G. Tsekouras, Y. Dong, P. Wagner, G. Wallace, J. C. Earles, K. C. Gordon, D. L. Officer and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 3276 CAS .
A. J. Mozer, M. J. Griffith, G. Tsekouras, P. Wagner, G. G. Wallace, S. Mori, K. Sunahara, M. Miyashita, J. C. Earles, K. C. Gordon, L. Du, R. Katoh, A. Furube and D. L. Officer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15621 CrossRef CAS .
C.-F. Lo, S.-J. Hsu, C.-L. Wang, Y.-H. Cheng, H.-P. Lu, E. W.-G. Diau and C.-Y. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 12018 CAS .
W. M. Campbell, K. W. Jolley, P. Wagner, K. Wagner, P. J. Walsh, K. C. Gordon, L. Schmidt-Mende, M. K. Nazeeruddin, Q. Wang, M. Grätzel and D. L. Officer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 11760 CAS .
D. F. Watson, A. Marton, A. M. Stux and G. J. Meyer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 11680 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rochford, D. Chu, A. Hagfeldt and E. Galoppini, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 4655 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Rio, P. Vazquez and E. Palomares, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2009, 13, 645 CrossRef CAS .
H. Imahori, S. Hayashi, T. Umeyama, S. Eu, A. Oguro, S. Kang, Y. Matano, T. Shishido, S. Ngamsinlapasathian and S. Yoshikawa, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 11405 CrossRef CAS .
S. Eu, S. Hayashi, T. Umeyama, Y. Matano, Y. Araki and H. Imahori, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4396 CAS .
H. Imahori, Y. Matsubara, H. Iijima, T. Umeyama, Y. Matano, S. Ito, M. Niemi, N. V. Tkachenko and H. Lemmetyinen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 10656 CAS .
M. Ishida, S. W. Park, D. Hwang, Y. B. Koo, J. L. Sessler, D. Y. Kim and D. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 19343 CAS .
S. Mathew, H. Iijima, Y. Toude, T. Umeyama, Y. Matano, S. Ito, N. V. Tkachenko, H. Lemmetyinen and H. Imahori, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 14415 CAS .
Y.-C. Chang, C.-L. Wang, T.-Y. Pan, S.-H. Hong, C.-M. Lan, H.-H. Kuo, C.-F. Lo, H.-Y. Hsu, C.-Y. Lin and E. W.-G. Diau, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8910 RSC .
Y. Tachibana, S. A. Haque, I. P. Mercer, J. R. Durrant and D. R. Klug, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 1198 CrossRef CAS .
S. Akimoto, T. Yamazaki, I. Yamazaki and A. Osuka, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1999, 309, 177 CrossRef CAS .
F. Odobel, E. Blart, M. Lagrée, M. Villieras, H. Boujtita, N. E. Murr, S. Caramori and C. A. Bignozzi, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 502 RSC .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, R. Humphry-Baker, D. L. Officer, W. M. Campbell, A. K. Burrell and M. Grätzel, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 6514 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. R. Viseu, G. Hungerford and M. I. C. Ferreira, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 1853 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wagner, M. J. Griffith, M. James, A. J. Mozer, P. Wagner, G. Triani, D. L. Officer and G. G. Wallace, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 317 CAS .
M.-W. Lee, S.-B. Cha, S.-J. Yang, S. W. Park, K. Kim, N.-G. Park and D.-H. Lee, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2009, 30, 2269 CrossRef CAS .
K. Srinivas, K. Yesudas, K. Bhanuprakash, V. J. Rao and L. J. Giribabu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20117 CAS .
A. Kathiravan and R. Renganathan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 331, 401 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wiberg, T. Marinado, D. P. Hagberg, L. Sun, A. Hagfeldt and B. Albinsson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 3881 CAS .
J. Cai, N. Satoh and L. Han, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 6033 CAS .
T. Horiuchi, H. Miura, K. Sumioka and S. Uchida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12218 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sunahara, A. Furube, R. Katoh, S. Mori, M. J. Griffith, G. G. Wallace, P. Wagner, D. L. Officer and A. J. Mozer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 22084 CAS .
A. J. Mozer, P. Wagner, D. L. Officer, G. G. Wallace, W. M. Campbell, M. Miyashita, K. Sunaharac and S. Mori, Chem. Commun., 2008, 4741 RSC .
M. Miyashita, K. Sunahara, T. Nishikawa, Y. Uemura, N. Koumura, K. Hara, A. Mori, T. Abe, E. Suzuki and S. Mori, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 17874 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. O'Regan, I. López-Duarte, M. V. Martínez-Díaz, A. Forneli, J. Albero, A. Morandeira, E. Palomares, T. Torres and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2906 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Jennings, Y. Liu, Q. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 6637 RSC .
S. A. Haque, E. Palomares, B. M. Cho, A. N. M. Green, N. Hirata, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3456 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sánchez-de-Armas, J. Oviedo, M. A. S. Miguel and J. F. Sanz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 11293 Search PubMed .
R. Katoh, A. Furube, A. V. Barzykin, H. Arakawa and M. Tachiya, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1195 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yoshihara, R. Katoh, A. Furube, Y. Tamaki, M. Murai, K. Hara, S. Murata, H. Arakawa and M. Tachiya, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 3817 CrossRef CAS .
R. Katoh, A. Furube, S. Mori, M. Miyashita, K. Sunahara, N. Koumura and K. Hara, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 542 CAS .
R. Katoh, A. Furube, T. Yoshihara, K. Hara, G. Fujihashi, S. Takano, S. Murata, H. Arakawa and M. Tachiya, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 4818 CrossRef CAS .
G. Benkö, J. Kallioinen, J. E. I. Korppi-Tommola, A. P. Yartsev and V. Sundström, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 489 CrossRef .
S. E. Koops, B. C. O’Regan, P. R. F. Barnes and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4808 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. H. Pijpers, R. Ulbricht, S. Derossi, J. N. H. Reek and M. Bonn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 2578 CAS .
M. Grätzel, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6841 CrossRef .
R. Katoh, A. Furube, K. Hara, S. Murata, H. Sugihara, H. Arakawa and M. Tachiya, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 12957 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, A. Hagfeldt, X.-R. Xiao and S.-E. Lindquist, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1998, 55, 267 CrossRef CAS .
G. Boschloo, L. Häggman and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 13144 CrossRef CAS .
H. Imahori, S. Kang, H. Hayashi, M. Haruta, H. Kurata, S. Isoda, S. E. Canton, Y. Infahsaeng, A. Kathiravan, T. Pascher, P. Chabera, A. P. Yartsev and V. Sundstrom, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 3679 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Barnes, A. Y. Anderson, M. Juozapavicius, L. Liu, X. Li, E. Palomares, A. Forneli and B. C. O'Regan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 3547 RSC .
C.-W. Chang, L. Luo, C.-K. Chou, C.-F. Lo, C.-Y. Lin, C.-S. Hung, Y.-P. Lee and E. W.-G. Diau, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 11524 CAS .
R. Katoh, M. Murai and A. Furube, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 461, 238 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Frank, N. Kopidakis and J. van de Lagemaat, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1165 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Fisher, L. M. Peter, E. A. Ponomarev, A. B. Walker and K. G. U. Wijayantha, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 949 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Peter, N. W. Duffy, R. L. Wang and K. G. U. Wijayantha, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2002, 524–525, 127 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Sero, G. Garcia-Belmonte and S. Gimenez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17278 CAS .
Q. Wang, J. E. Moser and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 14945 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. O'Regan, K. Bakker, J. Kroeze, H. Smit, P. Sommeling and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 17155 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nakade, T. Kanzaki, Y. Wada and S. Yanagida, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 10803 CrossRef CAS .
N. W. Duffy, L. M. Peter, R. M. G. Rajapakse and K. G. U. Wijayantha, Electrochem.
Commun., 2000, 2, 658 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nelson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1999, 59, 15374 CrossRef CAS .
C.-P. Hsieh, H.-P. Lu, C.-L. Chiu, C.-W. Lee, S.-H. Chuang, C.-L. Mai, W.-N. Yen, S.-J. Hsu, E. W.-G. Diau and C.-Y. Yeh, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1127 RSC .
T. Bessho, S. M. Zakeeruddin, C.-Y. Yeh, E. W.-G. Diau and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6646 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wiberg, T. Marinado, D. P. Hagberg, L. Sun, A. Hagfeldt and B. Albinsson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 14358 CrossRef CAS .
C.-W. Lee, H.-P. Lu, C.-M. Lan, Y.-L. Huang, Y.-R. Liang, W.-N. Yen, Y.-C. Liu, Y.-S. Lin, E. W.-G. Diau and C.-Y. Yeh, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 1403 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hosomizu, M. Oodoi, T. Umeyama, Y. Matano, K. Yoshida, S. Isoda, M. Isosomppi, N. V. Tkachenko, H. Lemmetyinen and H. Imahori, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 16517 CrossRef CAS .
R. Katoh, M. Kasuya, A. Furube, N. Fuke, N. Koide and L. Han, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 471, 280 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Z. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 7084 CAS .
S. Ferrere and B. A. Gregg, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 7602 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Gregg, S.-G. Chen and S. Ferrere, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2003, 107, 3019 CrossRef CAS .
F. Sauvage, M. K. R. Fischer, A. Mishra, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. Bäuerle and M. Grätzel, ChemSusChem, 2009, 2, 761 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Cid, J.-H. Yum, S.-R. Jang, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. Martínez-Ferrero, E. Palomares, J. Ko, M. Grätzel and T. Torres, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8358 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. Pechy, T. Renourd, S. M. Zakeeruddin, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Comte, P. Liska, L. Cevey, E. Costa, V. Shklover, L. Spiccia, G. B. Deacon, C. A. Bignozzi and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 1613 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Yum, E. Baranoff, S. Wenger, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 4, 842 Search PubMed .
F. Farzad, D. W. Thompson, C. A. Kelly and G. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 5577 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Clifford, A. Forneli, H. Chen, T. Torres, S. Tan and E. Palomares, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1693 RSC .
W. R. Scheidt, K. E. Buentello, N. Ehlinger, A. Cinquantini, M. Fontani and F. Laschi, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2008, 361, 1722 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Clifford, E. Palomares, M. K. Nazeeruddin, R. Tham, M. Grätzel and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5670 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Hardin, E. T. Hoke, P. B. Armstrong, J.-H. Yum, P. Comte, T. Torres, J. M. J. Fréchet, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 406 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hayashi, M. Tanaka, H. Hayashi, S. Eu, T. Umeyama, Y. Matano, Y. Araki and H. Imahori, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 15576 CAS .
M. J. Griffith, A. J. Mozer, G. Tsekouras, Y. Dong, P. Wagner, K. Wagner, G. G. Wallace, S. Mori and D. L. Officer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 163502 CrossRef .
G. M. Hasselman, D. F. Watson, J. R. Stromberg, D. F. Bocian, D. Holten, J. S. Lindsey and G. J. Meyer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25430 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. M. Koehorst, G. K. Boschloo, T. J. Savenije, A. Goossens and T. J. Schaafsma, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 2371 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kuang, S. Ito, B. Wenger, C. Klein, J.-E. Moser, R. Humphry-Baker, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4146 CrossRef CAS .
U. Bach, D. Lupo, P. Comte, J. E. Moser, F. Weissrtel, J. Salbeck and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1998, 395, 583 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† This article is part of the ChemComm ‘Porphyrins and Phthalocyanines' web themed issue.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Matthew J. Griffith
	Matthew Griffith (born 1985) studied chemistry at the University of Wollongong (Australia) and recently submitted his PhD thesis, completed at the University of Wollongong under the supervision of Professors David Officer and Gordon Wallace (2012). As a doctoral student he worked on analysing the unique photophysics of porphyrin molecules as sensitizers in organic photovoltaic devices, earning a Prime Ministers Australia Asia Endeavour award from the Australian Federal government to augment this work in Japan during 2010 and 2011. His current research interests include investigating organic molecules for solar cell applications and studying the fundamental physical chemistry of photoinduced chemical reactions.

Kenji Sunahara
	Kenji Sunahara obtained a bachelor of engineering from Shinshu University in 2008, studying electrochemical characterization and analysis of dye-sensitized solar cells under the supervision of Assoc. Prof. Shogo Mori. After this, under the supervision of Assoc. Prof. Akihiro Furube, he obtained a Master of Science from University of Tsukuba in 2011, studying photo-induced charge transfer dynamics on nanocrystline semiconductor for dye-sensitized solar cells. Now he is in the PhD program.

Pawel Wagner
	Pawel Wagner is a research fellow at Intelligent Polymer Research Institute and ARC Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science at University of Wollongong. He obtained his PhD in 1999 at Silesian University of Technology, Poland, and was a postdoctoral fellow at Adam Mickiewicz University, Poland, Hasselt University, Belgium and Massey University, New Zealand. His research focuses on synthetic organic chemistry with special interest in synthesis of electroactive materials for optoelectronics, and interactions of molecules in solid state phase. He is co-author of more than 80 peer-reviewed articles.

Ryuzi Katoh
	Ryuzi Katoh is a professor in Nihon university (2011–). He worked in Gakushuin University as a research associate (1986–1995) and received his PhD from Gakushuin University in 1992. He worked at Hahn-Meitner Institute as a guest researcher (1993). In 1995, he moved to National Institute of Materials and Chemical Research (NIMC) and after reorganization of the institute in 2001 he worked in National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and technology (AIST). His research interest is physical chemistry in solar-energy conversion reaction systems.

Shogo Mori
	Shogo Mori is an associate professor of Faculty of Textile Science and Technology at Shinshu University in Japan, where he has been since 2005. His former family name is Nakade. He received a MS from University of Toledo, USA, in 1998 and the PhD from Osaka University, Japan, in 2004. From 1999 to 2005, he was a research engineer at Nokia Research Center at Tokyo in Japan. His current research interests are interactions between photon and materials, charge transport in nanostructured materials, and charge transfer at various interfaces, especially in dye-sensitized solar cells and organic solar cells.

Attila J. Mozer
	Attila J. Mozer is an Australian Research Fellow (2011–2015) and a Senior Fellow (since 2010) at the Australian Research Council (ARC) Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science (ACES). He is the lead Chief Investigator on three ARC grants focusing on dye-sensitised and polymer/fullerene bulk heterojunction solar cells. He is the Associate Program Leader of the energy program at ACES and a member of its Executive Committee. He received his PhD at the Linz Institute for Organic Solar Cells (2004) and MSc in Chemical Engineering at the Technical University of Budapest (2002). He has co-authored 41 publications since 2004.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of a typical dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC).	 

 	Fig. 2  Chemical structures and naming codes for the porphyrin compounds employed in our studies.	 
FF = JMPP × VMPP/Jsc × Voc.
IPCE(λ) = QLHE(λ) × QINJ(λ) × QCE(λ).
QINJ = IPCE(λ)/(QLHE × QCE),

 	Fig. 3  Current density–voltage curves measured under one sun illumination for (a) DSSCs constructed with various zinc porphyrin dyes, and (b) DSSCs constructed from zinc dyes and their free base analogues. The TiO2 film thickness was in the range of (a) 4 to 5 μm; and (b) 3 μm.	 



N719
	724	9.71	0.681	4.78

P159
	687	9.01	0.628	3.89

P199
	585	6.55	0.670	2.59

P10
	651	7.39	0.630	3.05

FbNC
	451	0.194	0.519	0.045

ZnNC
	553	0.966	0.660	0.353

FbC
	521	1.00	0.607	0.316

ZnC
	625	4.26	0.627	1.67

GD2
	603	8.41	0.675	3.42

Fb-GD2
	535	2.57	0.688	0.970

 	Fig. 4  IPCE spectra for (a) DSSCs constructed with various zinc porphyrin dyes, and (b) DSSCs constructed from zinc dyes and their free base analogues.	 

 	Fig. 5  An illustration of electron injection and injected electron–dye cation recombination processes in DSSCs.	 

 	Fig. 6  Transient absorption spectra of GD2 and Fb-GD2 adsorbed on TiO2 films.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) A comparison of the transient absorption signals for TiO2 films sensitized with GD2, Fb-GD2, ZnC and N719 in the presence of standard (0.1 M LiI, 0.6 M DMPImI, 0.05 M I2, 0.5 M tBP in acetonitrile), denoted as LiI (0.1 M), and Li+ rich (0.7 M LiI and 0.05 M I2 in acetonitrile), denoted as LiI (0.7 M), electrolytes. (b) A comparison of the transient absorption signals for TiO2 films sensitized with ZnC, FbC, ZnNC and FbNC in the presence of standard electrolytes. Samples were probed at 3440 nm after excitation with femtosecond pulses at 532 nm.	 

 	Fig. 8  Electron injection yields determined from TA kinetics plotted against the maximum IPCE value for DSSCs fabricated with N719, GD2 and ZnC and filled with electrolytes containing 0.1 M and 0.7 M LiI. The IPCE value for N719 of 80% was taken as equivalent to 100% electron injection yield after accounting for transmission losses from the FTO-glass. Reprinted with Permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  A schematic illustration of the two charge recombination pathways in DSSCs following injection from the photoexcited dye state (S*).	 

 	Fig. 10  TA signals observed at 750 nm for TiO2 films sensitized with porphyrin dyes GD2 and Fb-GD2 in the nanosecond time region. Each sample was excited at 532 nm.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Electron lifetime and (b) open circuit voltage plotted as a function of electron density for DSSCs constructed from different zinc porphyrin sensitizers. (c) A comparison of the electron lifetime and (d) open circuit voltage plotted as a function of electron density for DSSCs constructed from zinc porphyrins and their free base analogues.	 

 	Fig. 12  TA signals observed at 700 nm for dry TiO2 films sensitized with porphyrin dyes GD2 and Fb-GD2 in the absence of the electrolyte in the millisecond time region. Each sample was excited at 532 nm.	 

 	Fig. 13  Current density–voltage curves measured for as prepared (black) and light exposed (red) GD2 DSSCs under AM 1.5 illumination (solid lines) and in the dark (dashed lines). The inset shows the photovoltaic performance parameters for each device.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Femtosecond transient absorption kinetic traces probed at 3440 nm before and after light exposure for GD2-sensitised DSSCs. (b) Absorbed photon-to-current conversion efficiencies (APCEs) for as-prepared (light green) and light exposed (dark green) GD2 DSSCs. N719 (black) is included as a reference.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Electron lifetime and (b) open circuit voltage plotted as a function of electron density for as prepared (black) and light exposed (red) DSSCs constructed from GD2.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Normalised UV-vis absorption (solid) and photoluminescence (dashed) spectra for porphyrin dyes ZnNC (black) and FbC (grey) immobilised on semiconducting oxides. The inset shows energy levels for dyes bound to TiO2 and potential charge transfer processes. (b) Absorbed photon-to-current conversion efficiencies (APCEs) for devices sensitised with ZnNC (red), FbC (purple), the 3:1 ZnNC:FbC dye mixture (green) and N719 (black).	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) A comparison of spectra for FbC, ZnNC and the 3:1 ZnNC:FbC mixture 1 ns after excitation, and (b) transient absorption spectra shown at various time delays after excitation with picosecond laser pulses for TiO2 films sensitized with the 3:1 ZnNC:FbC mixture.	 

 	Fig. 18  Open circuit voltage plotted as a function of electron density in the TiO2 for DSSCs sensitized with a 3:1 ZnNC:FbC mixture containing either Li+ (red circles), Rb+ (pink triangles) or THA+ (blue diamonds) cations in the electrolyte.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Molar extinction coefficients of a porphyrin monomer P199 (green) and dimer P10 (blue) in solution. (b) Femtosecond TA signals (corrected for the absorbed pump intensity) of porphyrin-sensitized TiO2 films in a redox containing electrolyte. An N719 signal obtained in air is also shown. Samples were excited by 150 fs pulses at 532 nm.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Electron diffusion coefficient in the TiO2vs. Jsc, (b) electron density at open (noc) and short (nsc) circuit vs. Jsc, (c) electron lifetime vs. noc, (d) Vocvs. noc for DSSCs constructed with varying dye loadings of porphyrin monomers P199 and ZnC and dimer P10.	 
Footnote
† This article is part of the ChemComm ‘Porphyrins and Phthalocyanines' web themed issue.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
