Self-powered ion detectors based on dye-sensitized photovoltaics   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4NR03417A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4NR03417A
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11019-11023Self-powered ion detectors based on dye-sensitized photovoltaics†

        
          
            Kanika L. 
            Agrawal
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Max 
            Shtein
          
        
      *
      Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA. E-mail: mshtein@umich.edu
Received 
      19th June 2014
      
    , Accepted 1st August 2014First published on 6th August 2014AbstractAutonomous sensing of metal ion contamination in remote environments with high reproducibility and sensitivity could unlock many new applications, but involves trade-offs between compactness, sensitivity, and power provisioning. In prior demonstrations of semi-autonomous sensors, the power source (e.g. a solar cell) was an additional component. Here, we demonstrate a concept, wherein a dye-sensitized solar cell is used for both power generation and sensitive detection of ionic analytes, unlocking a new pathway for ultra-miniaturization and integration.
Selective and sensitive detection of metal ions is important in a wide variety of applications,1–3 with but a few examples capable of measuring down to single nanomolar concentrations of charged species. Successful recent demonstrations include plasmonic resonance based energy transfer spectroscopy,4 total internal reflection fluorescence spectroscopy,5 photonic hydrogel based colorimetric detection6 and other absorption/emission based techniques.7 One major limitation for deploying such optical schemes in many intended applications is the need for complex auxiliary instrumentation, which is cumbersome, requires external power sources, and lacks robustness. Several chemotransistors have been developed to address this limitation; in these devices, an electrical signal is modulated in response to an analyte interacting with a variety of electrode and semiconductor materials, including graphene8,9 and organic polymers.10,11 Although requiring fewer components than optical detection schemes, chemotransistor-based detection of metal ions still requires an external power source. Some sensors incorporating photovoltaic cells as power sources have been demonstrated;12 however, they are separate modules, increasing device cost and complexity. The need persists for compact, robust, and energy efficient ion detection with high sensitivity.
To address this need, we propose a sensing scheme in which the presence of ionic analytes disrupts (or triggers) the flow of electrical current between two electrodes, with the electromotive force ultimately provided by absorbed ambient light. Here we demonstrate an implementation of this concept, using the classical dye-sensitized solar cell structure consisting of cis-bis(isothiocyanato)bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato)-ruthenium(II) sensitizing dye (N3) and the iodide/triiodide redox shuttle.13 We demonstrate the detection of Ag+ ions, with high sensitivity and reproducibility, low cost and a compact form factor.
Since its inception,14,15 dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) technology has demonstrated adequate stability, low cost and ease of fabrication while being able to maintain competitive power conversion efficiencies for some applications. This platform is particularly compatible with detecting species in solution, because rapid charge transport in high efficiency DSSCs occurs in a liquid or gel electrolyte. For the proof-of-concept demonstration, we examine a ‘turn off’ type mode of operation where the presence of an ionic (or ionized) analyte shuts off photocurrent production. In this scheme, the device operates optimally to begin with and then sees a photocurrent drop in response to a detection event, such as adsorption of the analyte on to an electrode or quenching of the dye excited state (Fig. 1(a) and (b)). The ionic target species can also be generated using an auxiliary release mechanism16,17 so as to allow for indirect detection of biological analytes.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of a dye sensitized photovoltaic cell responsive to the presence of ionic species such as silver by producing a change in its electrical characteristics. For example, introducing silver ions into the electrolyte of a normally operating DSSC results in the adsorption of Ag ions as well as the formation of metallic precipitates on the mesoporous TiO2 electrode, shown here in orange. (b) An energy level diagram, showing how the processes described in part (a) alter key steps in the device operation. The solid black lines represent the forward processes in normal DSSC operation while the black dotted lines represent the possible recombination pathways in the system. Shown in orange is how the adsorption of Ag ions may shift the conduction band potential of the TiO2 and reduce the driving force for charge injection while the formation of metallic precipitates can render dye sites inactive and block recombination between electrons injected into the TiO2 and triiodide ions in the electrolyte. These effects are discussed in detail in the results section. (c) Schematic of the testing protocol for the control and sensor tests performed in this study. Step 1: the electrolyte is introduced into the cavity using a vacuum syringe and the device characteristics are measured. (d) Step 2 (control): the electrolyte is sucked out of the cavity and the electrolyte + acetonitrile is vacuum filled into the cavity; device characteristics are measured. This step is repeated several times on the same device. (e) Step 2 (sensor): the electrolyte is extracted out of the cavity using the syringe and the electrolyte + AgNO3 dissolved in acetonitrile, is vacuum filled into the cavity; device characteristics are measured. This step is repeated for each concentration of Ag+ on the same device. 
Dye-sensitized solar cell devices were fabricated as per standard procedures, described in the supplemental information accompanying this article. The assembled devices were connected to a Solartron Analytical Modulab MTS Materials Test System and their electrical characteristics and impedance spectra were measured under 1 sun illumination and in the dark. A schematic representation of the testing procedure is shown in Fig. 1(c). We performed identical tests on both, control devices, wherein a fixed volume of pure solvent was added to the device in addition to the electrolyte (Fig. 1(d)) and on the sensors, wherein silver nitrate dissolved in acetonitrile was injected into the device in addition to the electrolyte, at concentrations ranging from 1 nM to 10 mM (Fig. 1(e)). The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics for a typical device used in this study are shown in Fig. 2(a); the inset shows the corresponding solar cell characterization parameters and material system employed; the caption lists essential performance characteristics.
 Fig. 2  (a) Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of a high efficiency DSSC based on (cis-bis(isothiocyanato)bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato)-ruthenium(II) dye (N3) and iodide/triiodide in acetonitrile) fabricated in this study, under AM 1.5 (100 mW cm−2) simulated sunlight. The area of the dye coated TiO2 region was 0.1 cm2. Inset: schematic showing the molecular structures of the sensitizing dye and redox shuttle used along with the obtained performance parameters for one such device. Nominal power conversion efficiency (PCE) = 7.4%, fill factor (FF) = 69%, short circuit photocurrent (JSC) = 14.8 mA cm−2, and open circuit voltage (VOC) = 0.722 V. (b) J–V characteristics of a device for which AgNO3 dissolved in acetonitrile is added to the electrolyte at varying concentrations. From top to bottom, the bold lines represent curves under illumination while the dotted lines represent curves in the dark for 0 M, 1 μM, 10 μM, 100 μM and 1 mM [Ag+] respectively. 
The changes in device response in the presence of Ag+ are shown in Fig. 2(b). The practical utility of this scheme is manifested in the observation that the power conversion efficiency of the device never drops below 70% of its original value, thus ensuring that sufficient power is generated to modulate the intensity of an external circuit element even when a very high concentration of the analyte is present in the electrolyte. The JSC and VOC obtained from these measurements were plotted as a function of Ag+ concentration (Fig. 3). A distinct drop in JSC, accompanied by a steady increase in VOC was observed for concentrations of Ag+ ranging between 1 μM and 1 mM. Concentrations of Ag+ below 1 μM did not cause an appreciable change in the device characteristics, while concentrations greater than 1 mM caused the device to become resistive. We also performed electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements and fitted the obtained data to an equivalent circuit model to obtain the resistances corresponding to electron recombination at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface (RR), and to charge transfer through the counter electrode (RCT).18,19 (see ESI Fig. 1†) As Fig. 3(c) and (d) show, there is a dramatic increase in both of these parameters with the addition of Ag+, attributable to the formation of electrodeposited silver clusters and/or the reduction of silver iodide precipitate on the TiO2 electrode to metallic silver under illumination. In both cases, charge transport is inhibited and the precipitate may render some dye sites inactive, while also blocking electron recombination at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface.20 A decrease in the reverse dark saturation current (JSC), extracted by fitting the observed data to the generalized Shockley model, qualitatively agrees with the hypothesis that the overall recombination rate is lowered with the addition of Ag+ (see ESI Fig. 2 and 3†). This also supports the observed increase in VOC, which can be described using the following equation:21,22 (1)where k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, q is the magnitude of the electron charge, Jinj represents the injected electron flux, krec is the recombination rate constant and nc,0 is the density of conduction band electrons in the dark.
 Fig. 3  (a) Changes in short-circuit current density as a function of [Ag+]. Inset: changes in JSC for a reference device that is repeatedly tested in a manner analogous to the sensor. These variations were found to be negligible. (b) Changes in VOC as a function of [Ag+]. Inset: VOC for the reference devices shows a steady increase with repeated testing, smaller in magnitude to VOC changes observed from the effect of Ag addition. (c) Fitted changes in the charge transfer resistance at the counter electrode (RCT), plotted as a function of [Ag+]. Inset: RCT for the reference devices. (d) Fitted changes in resistance at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface (RR), plotted as a function of [Ag+]. Inset: RR for the reference devices. 
Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) was performed on the TiO2 electrode following the Ag+ sensing experiments, confirming the formation of silver clusters, as seen in Fig. 4. Furthermore, optical microscopy and scanning electron microscopy of the TiO2 electrode revealed that a large proportion of the silver clusters are concentrated directly underneath the electrolyte-filling hole, due to the larger concentration driving force and a thinner boundary layer directly below the injection site (see ESI Fig. 4†). The limit of detection may be significantly improved by concentrating light in this region of the device, or by replacing the glass support for the counter electrode with a porous membrane that would eliminate the need for a filling hole, thereby allowing the analyte to interact homogenously with the entire device area.
 Fig. 4  (a) EDS spectrum obtained for the region marked with a yellow cross on the SEM image of the TiO2 electrode. Inset: relative atomic weight percentages of the four primary elements expected to be present on the electrode surface. The high percentage of silver is indicative of the fact that silver clusters are indeed formed on the electrode. (b) EDS mapping overlaid on an SEM image of the electrode, showing Ag rich regions in red and TiO2 rich regions in blue/green. 
To ensure that the dilution of the electrolyte by solvent addition and repeated electrolyte filling do not corrupt the test, we performed control tests. As the insets of Fig. 3 show, we found no substantial changes in the JSC with repeated testing. However, it was observed that the VOC does undergo small increases with repeated electrolyte filling. This observation is consistent with reports of the same effect,23 attributed to an increase in the conduction band edge potential of TiO2 arising from a loss of surface bound Li+ ions and an increase in the amount of tBP from repeated pumping. We note also that since a similar increase in RR is observed for the reference devices, some of this VOC increase be due to a reduced electron recombination rate at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface.
An additional effect that is likely to contribute towards the observed trends in JSC and VOC, especially at small concentrations of Ag+, is the shift in the conduction band edge (VCB) of TiO2 due to the adsorption of Ag+ cations on its surface. Previous work reported that, although large cations such as Cs+ and Rb+ cannot intercalate into the TiO2 lattice like the smaller cations such as Li+ and Na+, they can cause a significant upward shift of the TiO2VCB as a result of a potential drop across the Helmholtz layer formed at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface.24 This typically results in an increase in VOC and a drop in JSC, arising from a reduced driving force for electron injection. A further drop in the photocurrent is expected from the fact that larger cations are typically less solvated and can form the Bjerrum–Fuoss pairing with triiodide, lowering the mobility and ionic activity of triiodide ions in solution.25,26 (see ESI Fig. 5†) Since these effects scale with ionic radius, we expect the device response to be highly sensitive to the presence of larger cations in the electrolyte. This suggests that other metal-ion species of interest such as Hg+ and Pb+ can sensitively be detected using the proposed system. Selectivity may be achieved by functionalizing the TiO2 surface to allow for specific adsorption of the target analyte, or by using a selectively permeable membrane.
We also considered the reaction between Ag+ and I−, energetically favorable in comparison to the reaction between I− and the oxidized dye molecule, which could slow down the dye regeneration process by depleting the electrolyte of iodide ions. This effect however, is found to be insignificant within the range of Ag+ concentrations examined in this study, since the concentration of iodide present in the electrolyte is orders of magnitude larger than the largest concentration of Ag+ tested.
An alternative sensing mechanism that may be realized using the demonstrated platform is one wherein the electrolyte is chosen such that the analyte of interest constitutes one part of the redox couple required for normal DSSC operation. In the absence of the analyte, no redox reaction takes would place, and the PV cell would produce virtually no photocurrent. Introducing the analyte into the electrolyte would then allow the redox reaction to proceed, spiking the photocurrent in proportion to the concentration of the analyte. While the effect of increasing triiodide in the electrolyte on device performance has been studied extensively,27–29 this simple concept may be adapted to a wide variety of target species by replacing the iodide/triiodide based electrolyte with an alternate one (e.g. based on a [FeCN6]3−/4− or [Co(bpy)3]2+/3+ redox shuttle). Sufficient power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) have already been demonstrated using these electrolyte systems30–32 to allow for an external circuit element to be modulated in response to detection events. In addition, improved stability and speed of response may be realized via the use of non-corrosive and kinetically fast redox couples. Further, water may be employed as the electrolyte solvent with most such redox couples or the liquid electrolyte may be replaced altogether with a hydrogel,33,34 to enable the use of such systems in either one of the ‘turn on’ or ‘turn off’ configurations for continuous monitoring of metal-ion content in contaminated water.
We note that the metallic deposition on the photoanode cannot be removed without damaging the dye-coated TiO2 film underneath; as a result, the formulation of the sensor demonstrated in this study implies one-time use. However, since the sensing mechanism demonstrated is essentially independent of device area, the size of each sensor can be reduced to, for example, a tenth of it's present size, allowing for an array of 10–100 sensors to be accommodated on a 1′′ by 1′′ substrate.35,36 Cheap metal foil or plastic can be used to replace the glass substrates, lowering the material cost, as well as flexible form factor for low cost, roll-to-roll fabrication of disposable sensors. With conventional and emerging fabrication approaches (e.g. micromolding/embossing, 3D printing, CNC milling, etc., many of which are also compatible with continuous processing), costs are expected to be essentially independent of the number of sensors, down to individual sensor size in the 10 micrometer or smaller scale. Individual sensors in arrays of 100 or more can be activated sequentially, spanning a significantly longer overall period of time.
At the same time, there are target analytes for which the detection mechanism proceeds exclusively through cationic effects (discussed previously), without altering the structure of the TiO2 film. Such target analytes physically adsorb to the surface of the TiO2 film for charge compensation under bias and can be removed by flushing the cavity with fresh electrolyte solution. Such regeneration can also be realized for applications wherein the ‘turn on’ detection mechanism is employed.
In summary, we demonstrated a novel and versatile detection scheme, in which power generation as well as sensing are achieved using a single dye-sensitized solar cell device. We found that this approach can reliably detect small concentrations of charged species in solution, without making substantial modifications to an efficient and well-understood photo-electro-chemical system. Changes in sensor response arising from extraneous factors can be eliminated using simple circuitry (e.g. a bridge or a variant) that compares the responses of a control device and that of a device exposed to the target analyte. This compensating arrangement is standard (and usually extremely compact) for many types of sensors and modulators, where light intensity, temperature, or other variables may be present.37 Although further efforts are required to arrive at a fully integrated device that is ready for commercialization, the concept discussed here represents an important step toward realizing autonomous, ultra-compact sensing devices.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Department of Air Force grant: FA9550-12-1-0435. The authors also thank Dr Michael Mayer, Steven Morris and Matthew Sykes for helpful discussions. K.L.A would also like to thank Pilar Herrera-Fierro for help with EDS measurements, Hengxi Yang and Anton Li from Dr Peter Green's group, for help with EIS measurements, and Joseph Broses for assisting with device fabrication. This work used equipment at the Lurie Nanofabrication Facility at the University of Michigan, a member of the National Nanotechnology Infrastructure Network funded by the National Science Foundation.
Notes and references
G. Aragay, J. Pons and A. Merkoci, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Zhang, Y. Zhou, J. Yoon and J. S. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3416 RSC .
C. J. Chang, J. Jaworski, E. M. Nolan, M. Sheng and S. J. Lippard, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 101, 1129 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Choi, Y. Park, T. Kang and L. P. Lee, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Long, A. Zhu, H. Shi, H. Wang and J. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2308 Search PubMed .
W. Hong, W. Li, X. Hu, B. Zhao, F. Zhang and D. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17193 RSC .
H. Li, J. Zhai and X. Sun, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 4305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kumar, 
            et al.
          , Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ohno, K. Maehashi, Y. Yamashiro and K. Matsumoto, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Knopfmacher, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 2954 Search PubMed .
K. Schmoltner, J. Kofler, A. Klug and E. J. W. List-Kratochvil, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. N. Supino and J. J. Talghader, Autonomous metal ion sensors, in MEMS 2006, 19th IEEE International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems, Technical Digest, IEEE, New York,  2006, pp. 370–373 Search PubMed .
B. O'Reagan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef .
M. Grätzel, Photoelectrochemical cells, Nature, 2001, 414, 338 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem Rev., 2010, 110, 6595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Uram, K. Ke, A. J. Hunt and M. Mayer, Small, 2006, 2, 967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. C. Yusko, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kern, R. Sastrawan, J. Ferber, R. Stangl and J. Luther, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 4213 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, J. E. Moser and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 14945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Gregg, F. Pichot, S. Ferrere and C. L. Fields, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 1422 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, 
            et al.
          , J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 6382 CrossRef CAS .
G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1819 Search PubMed .
K. Miettunen, P. R. F. Barnes, X. Li, C. H. Law and B. C. O'Regan, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2012, 41, 677 Search PubMed .
B. Enright, G. Redmond and D. Fitzmaurice, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 6195 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, A. Hagfeldt, X. R. Xiao and S. E. Lindquist, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1998, 55, 267 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lindström, 
            et al.
          , J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 7710 CrossRef .
S. Nakade, 
            et al.
          , J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 3480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Lan, T. C. Wei, S. P. Feng, C. C. Wan and G. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 49, 116 Search PubMed .
A. Mathew, V. Anand, G. M. Rao and N. Munichandraiah, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 87, 92 CAS .
T. Daeneke, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Yum, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 631 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Xiang, F. Huang, Y. B. Cheng, U. Bach and L. Spiccia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 121 CAS .
S. J. Park, 
            et al.
          , ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xiang, W. Huang, U. Bach and L. Spiccia, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 8997 RSC .
W. Guo, X. Xue, S. Wang, C. Lin and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cho, H. Park, M. Kim, S. Kim and S. Lee, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 491 CrossRef PubMed .

          J. N. Mandalakas, US Pat., 3,480,781,  1969 .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Methods and additional figures. See DOI: 10.1039/c4nr03417aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of a dye sensitized photovoltaic cell responsive to the presence of ionic species such as silver by producing a change in its electrical characteristics. For example, introducing silver ions into the electrolyte of a normally operating DSSC results in the adsorption of Ag ions as well as the formation of metallic precipitates on the mesoporous TiO2 electrode, shown here in orange. (b) An energy level diagram, showing how the processes described in part (a) alter key steps in the device operation. The solid black lines represent the forward processes in normal DSSC operation while the black dotted lines represent the possible recombination pathways in the system. Shown in orange is how the adsorption of Ag ions may shift the conduction band potential of the TiO2 and reduce the driving force for charge injection while the formation of metallic precipitates can render dye sites inactive and block recombination between electrons injected into the TiO2 and triiodide ions in the electrolyte. These effects are discussed in detail in the results section. (c) Schematic of the testing protocol for the control and sensor tests performed in this study. Step 1: the electrolyte is introduced into the cavity using a vacuum syringe and the device characteristics are measured. (d) Step 2 (control): the electrolyte is sucked out of the cavity and the electrolyte + acetonitrile is vacuum filled into the cavity; device characteristics are measured. This step is repeated several times on the same device. (e) Step 2 (sensor): the electrolyte is extracted out of the cavity using the syringe and the electrolyte + AgNO3 dissolved in acetonitrile, is vacuum filled into the cavity; device characteristics are measured. This step is repeated for each concentration of Ag+ on the same device.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of a high efficiency DSSC based on (cis-bis(isothiocyanato)bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato)-ruthenium(II) dye (N3) and iodide/triiodide in acetonitrile) fabricated in this study, under AM 1.5 (100 mW cm−2) simulated sunlight. The area of the dye coated TiO2 region was 0.1 cm2. Inset: schematic showing the molecular structures of the sensitizing dye and redox shuttle used along with the obtained performance parameters for one such device. Nominal power conversion efficiency (PCE) = 7.4%, fill factor (FF) = 69%, short circuit photocurrent (JSC) = 14.8 mA cm−2, and open circuit voltage (VOC) = 0.722 V. (b) J–V characteristics of a device for which AgNO3 dissolved in acetonitrile is added to the electrolyte at varying concentrations. From top to bottom, the bold lines represent curves under illumination while the dotted lines represent curves in the dark for 0 M, 1 μM, 10 μM, 100 μM and 1 mM [Ag+] respectively.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Changes in short-circuit current density as a function of [Ag+]. Inset: changes in JSC for a reference device that is repeatedly tested in a manner analogous to the sensor. These variations were found to be negligible. (b) Changes in VOC as a function of [Ag+]. Inset: VOC for the reference devices shows a steady increase with repeated testing, smaller in magnitude to VOC changes observed from the effect of Ag addition. (c) Fitted changes in the charge transfer resistance at the counter electrode (RCT), plotted as a function of [Ag+]. Inset: RCT for the reference devices. (d) Fitted changes in resistance at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface (RR), plotted as a function of [Ag+]. Inset: RR for the reference devices.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) EDS spectrum obtained for the region marked with a yellow cross on the SEM image of the TiO2 electrode. Inset: relative atomic weight percentages of the four primary elements expected to be present on the electrode surface. The high percentage of silver is indicative of the fact that silver clusters are indeed formed on the electrode. (b) EDS mapping overlaid on an SEM image of the electrode, showing Ag rich regions in red and TiO2 rich regions in blue/green.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Methods and additional figures. See DOI: 10.1039/c4nr03417a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
