Degradation and stability of polymer -based solar cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2JM33645F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2JM33645F
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24265-24283Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsDegradation and stability of polymer-based solar cells

        
          
            Jea Uk 
            Lee
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jae Woong 
            Jung
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jea Woong 
            Jo
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Won Ho 
            Jo
          
          
        
      *b
aComposite Materials Research Group, Korea Institute of Materials Science, Changwon, Gyeongnam 642-831, Korea
bWCU Hybrid Materials Program and Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, Korea
Received 
      6th June 2012
    , Accepted 30th July 2012First published on 31st July 2012AbstractStability of polymer solar cells (PSCs) is critically important for PSCs to be commercialized. The performance deterioration of PSCs arises mainly from macrophase separation of the finely tuned nanoscale morphology of donor–acceptor blends, photo-degradation of active layer materials, and oxidative degradation of donor polymers due to diffusion of oxygen and water molecules from the interlayer/electrode. In this article, the degradation mechanisms of various types of active layer materials are discussed and the methods how to protect the active layer materials from degradation to stabilize the device performance of PSCs are extensively discussed based on recent publications.Jea Uk LeeJea Uk Lee is a senior researcher at the Korea Institute of Materials Science, South Korea. He received his PhD degree from Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, South Korea in 2010 under the supervision of Professor Won Ho Jo, working on the synthesis and self-assembly of conjugated polymers for organic solar cells. His current research interests include graphenes, organic conjugated materials and nanoparticles for electronic and energy-related applications.Jae Woong JungJae Woong Jung is currently a PhD candidate in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Seoul National University, South Korea, under the supervision of Professor Won Ho Jo. He received his BS degree in Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Seoul National University in 2007. His research focuses on the molecular design and synthesis of novel organic materials for high performance organic electronics including field effect transistor and solar cells.Jea Woong JoJea Woong Jo is a graduate student to pursue a PhD degree under the supervision of Professor Won Ho Jo at Seoul National University. He received his BS degree in Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, South Korea in 2009. His PhD research includes the synthesis of organic conjugated materials and device fabrication of organic electronics.Won Ho JoWon Ho Jo is B. J. and C. H. Park Distinguished Professor of Materials Science and Engineering Department, Seoul National University. He received a BS from Seoul National University in 1973 and a PhD from the Polytechnic Institute of New York in 1979. He is currently a fellow of the Korean Academy of Science & Technology. He was the President of the Polymer Society of Korea (2005). His current research interests include fabrication of conductive transparent electrodes based on CNTs and graphenes and synthesis of active layer materials for high efficient organic photovoltaics.
1. Introduction
Polymer solar cells (PSCs) based on the BHJ (BHJ) concept have emerged as an alternative to conventional Si-based solar cells owing to their unique advantages of low cost, ease of fabrication and the potential for flexible and large-area solar cells. For the past few years, a great advance to improve the efficiency of PSCs has been achieved owing to development of new materials, understanding of organic semiconductor physics and advancement in device optimization, including interface engineering. As a result, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) has continuously increased to its current value of higher than 8%.1,2 However, still much lower efficiency and poorer long term stability than Si-based solar cells limits the commercialization of PSCs. Therefore, further improvement in the device performance of PSCs is needed.
To enhance the PCE, many approaches have been proposed: (i) synthesis of low bandgap conjugated copolymers to harvest the solar spectrum more effectively; (ii) synthesis of semi-conducting polymers with deep HOMO levels to enhance VOC; (iii) synthesis of planar conjugated polymers to afford high hole mobility; (iv) control of the vertical composition gradient across the active layer to reduce the charge recombination and thus to increase the fill factor; (v) development of effective hole (or electron) transport layer-materials; (vi) synthesis of new fullerene derivatives as acceptor materials; (vii) thermal and/or solvent annealing to induce crystallization with nanoscale morphology; and (viii) addition of additives to control favorably phase-separation in active layer, and others.
Another critical issue to be solved for the commercialization of PSCs in the future is to enhance the stability and durability of PSCs. This stability issue has been given relatively little consideration as compared to efforts for enhancement of the PCE of PSCs. When the PSCs are exposed to sunlight under an ambient environment, the performance of PSCs deteriorates because of the degradation of the nanoscale morphology, thermo-oxidation and photo-oxidation of active layer materials, and electrochemical degradation of active layer materials due to the diffusion of oxygen and water through the electrode/interlayer materials. Although some efforts have been devoted to understand the degradation of PSCs, the degradation mechanism is still not fully understood because the degradation process often follows many complicated pathways and at the same time many factors for degradation are coupled with each other. Nevertheless the methods to improve the stability of PSCs have recently been proposed with the elucidation of the degradation mechanism.
This feature article reviews the recent efforts to improve morphology stability (the first part of this article), thermo- and photo-oxidation stability (the second part) and electrochemical stability (the third part) of active layer materials. A thorough review before the year of 2008 for stability and degradation of polymer solar cells was documented in an excellent paper by Krebs and his co-workers.3
2. Morphology stabilization of donor–acceptor blends for BHJ solar cells
For efficient BHJ solar cells, the control of the three dimensional bicontinuous and nanometer-scale morphology of the active layer is of the utmost importance, because efficient photo-induced charge generation, transport and collection at each electrode depend crucially on the morphology of the blend films.4,5 Over the last decade, many research groups have systematically analyzed external parameters such as the relative concentration of the donor and acceptor, the choice of spin-coating solvent,6,7 thermal annealing8,9 and solvent annealing procedures10,11 in order to optimize the BHJ morphology for high efficiency solar cells. However, controlling the morphology of the donor–acceptor blend and optimizing the device performance are extremely difficult because the nanometer-scale morphology of the active layer is not thermodynamically stable and therefore obtained only by kinetically controlling the non-equilibrium state. Furthermore, exposure to sunlight for a long period of time will cause macrophase separation of the donor–acceptor blend on the micrometer-scale, which is much larger than the exciton diffusion length in conjugated polymers. It has been reported that a prolonged thermal annealing induces the formation of large aggregates of PCBM, which deteriorates the device performance.12
With this insight, three major approaches have been reported to control and stabilize nanoscale BHJ structure. The first approach is to modify the chemical structure of the conjugated polymer (electron donor) and fullerene derivative (electron acceptor). The second approach explores the use of thermo- or photo-crosslinkable units for locking-in the optimized BHJ morphology. The last approach involves the use of a compatibilizer for reducing the interfacial tension between the two dissimilar components in BHJ, thus suppressing their phase separation.
2.1. Structural modification of donor and acceptor materials
Poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), the most widely used electron donor material, has superior environmental stability compared to other conjugated polymers, such as polyphenylene vinylenes (PPVs), presumably due to the absence of easily oxidizable vinylene groups.3 However, since the P3HT/PCBM blend morphology is thermodynamically unstable, controlling the morphology for long term stability is very difficult. Many research groups have attempted to improve the morphological stability and hence enhance the device performance by modifying the chemical structure of conjugated polymers.
The first stability improvement in this category was found for PSCs made from P3CT.13 This insoluble polymer is prepared in situ by thermo-cleavage from the soluble polythiophene derivative, P3MHOCT, as shown in Fig. 1. A comparative study between devices based on the soluble precursor P3MHOCT and P3CT revealed that virtually no decay of performance was observed for P3CT while the former device degraded rapidly over a few hours. However, prolonged degradation studies have shown that P3CT-based devices do decay albeit at a much slower rate than P3HT devices. A possible explanation for the longevity is that P3CT is a very hard material that may retard diffusion. Furthermore, P3CT films subjected to a temperature of 310 °C lead to decarboxylation of P3CT, giving native unsubstituted polythiophene (PT).14 The device with a BHJ of PT/PC71BM showed the best efficiency of 1.5% (1000 W m−2, AM 1.5G, 70 °C) as well as a slow decay of the performance over 500 h under continuous illumination in a nitrogen atmosphere (330 W m−2, AM 1.5G, 25 °C).
 Fig. 1  Chemical transformation of P3MHOCT to P3CT at 200 °C and further transformation to PT at 300 °C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 14. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. 
Enhanced thermal stability of the morphology and hence the device performance have been reported for P3HT-based copolymers with a small amount (∼4 mol%) of 3,4-dihexyl-thiophene.15 The introduction of a dialkyl substituted monomer induces a slight structural disorder and thus lowers the regioregularity of the copolymer. Devices based on this copolymer formed stable BHJ structures with nanoscale phase-separation on short-time annealing (30 min, 150 °C). The authors surmise that the high device efficiencies obtained with commercial P3HT (5%) may be due to a fortuitously lower regioregularity.
There have been some approaches to synthesize all conjugated block copolymers containing polythiophene derivates in both segments. Hashimoto et al.16 reported the synthesis of poly(3-alkylthiophene)-based diblock copolymers with a fullerene-attached block and their application in single component polymer solar cells. Very recently, Watkins et al.17 also reported the self-assembly of functionalized fullerenes and all conjugated block copolymers containing polythiophene derivatives in both segments. Favorable hydrogen bonding interactions between the COOH-functionalized fullerene, bis-[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid (bis-PCBA), and the oligo(ethylene oxide) side chain of poly(3-hexylthiophene)-block-poly[3-(2,5,8,11-tetraoxadodecane)thiophene] (P3HT-b-P3TODT) allows for high loading of bis-PCBA (up to 40 wt% to the blend) within the P3TODT domains, while preserving the lamellar morphology (Fig. 2). The hydrogen bonding between bis-PCBA and P3TODT segments further suppresses crystallization and macrophase separation of the fullerenes, even under harsh annealing conditions (150 °C for 12 h). Accelerated aging experiments reveal enhanced thermal stability as a result of the limited translational mobility of COOH-functionalized fullerene in P3HT-b-P3TODT.
 Fig. 2  Chemical structures of P3HT-b-P3TODT and bis-PCBA, and schematic of the ordered, self-assembled blend that serves as the active layer in the BHJ device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
As new acceptor materials for BHJ polymer solar cells, Jen et al.18 have reported the synthesis of amorphous fullerene derivatives, which are based on the modification of PCBM by replacing the planar phenylene ring with a bulky triphenylamine (TPA) or 9,9-dimethylfluorene (MF) for the purpose of suppressing the crystallization of the resulting compounds (Fig. 3). These new compounds show a comparable electron mobility to PCBM in organic field effect transistors (OFETs) and high power conversion efficiency (∼4%) in polymer solar cells. More significantly, thermal stability of the polymer solar cells is remarkably enhanced by suppressing the destructive phase segregation between conjugated polymer and fullerene due to the amorphous nature and high glass-transition temperature of the new PCBMs. When these new amorphous PCBMs are used as acceptors, no significant degradation in morphology was observed even after 10 h annealing at 150 °C.
 Fig. 3  Chemical structures of PCBM, TPA-PCBM, and MF-PCBM. 
2.2. Crosslinkable conjugated materials
The crosslinking strategy is a powerful solution for achieving long-term thermal stability of BHJ solar cells by locking-in the active layer morphology. The morphology stabilization of conjugated polymer–fullerene blend films have been first reported by introducing the polymerizable fullerene C61-butyric acid glycidol ester (PCBG) as the acceptor material (Fig. 4).19,20 The polymerization reaction can be induced by an initiator (tris(pentafluorophenyl)borane) or by heat, leading to a network of fullerene molecules throughout the bulk of the active layer that prevents further diffusion of fullerene molecules. The novelty of this approach is that the PCBG molecule is very similar to the well-established acceptor PCBM and therefore this method can be applied to other polymer–fullerene blend systems.
 Fig. 4  Chemical structure of C61-butyric acid glycidol ester (PCBG). 
The first crosslinkable conjugated polymer, regioregular poly(3-(5-hexenyl)thiophene) (P3HNT), was synthesized by Hashimoto group.21 After thermal treatment, P3HNT crystallizes and generates nanoscale phase separated structures in a manner similar to the case of P3HT/PCBM films due to their structural similarity (Fig. 5a). At the same time, the thermal treatment induces a crosslinking reaction of vinyl group at the side chain. After the crosslinking is complete, the diffusion of PCBM into the film is reduced and thus the formation of large aggregations is suppressed, which leads to a more stable device performance of P3HNT than that of P3HT (Fig. 5c). The initial performance of P3HNT device after short thermal annealing is comparable to that of P3HT due to the high crystallinity of P3HNT.
 Fig. 5  (a) Polymerization and side chain conversion reactions for the synthesis of P3HNT. Optical microscopic images of (b) P3HT:PCBM (c) P3HNT:PCBM films after thermal annealing at 150 °C. Annealing times are presented in the images (scale bar: 200 μm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 
Thermal treatments used to induce crosslinking of thermally crosslinkable donors and acceptors may be problematic because they interfere with the thermal annealing process required for morphology control and device optimization. Hence, many research groups have recently synthesized photo-crosslinkable conjugated polymers.22–24 Fréchet and co-workers22 prepared a P3HT-r-poly(3-(6-bromohexyl)thiophene) (P3HT-Br) random copolymer, which is crosslinked upon irradiation at 254 nm. Thermal annealing of crosslinked devices led to a minimal (∼10%) decrease in PCE over 50 h, while the optical microscopy and atomic force microscopy (AFM) confirmed good film uniformity. Photo-crosslinkable polythiophene with azide group attached to the end of alkyl side chain (P3HT-azide) has also been synthesized, which shows excellent performance with high solvent resistance and thermal stability (Fig. 6a).25 OFETs of P3HT-azide copolymers exhibited excellent charge carrier mobility with stable operation after washing with organic solvent. Furthermore, the BHJ solar cells containing 15% of P3HT-azide copolymer show an average efficiency higher than 3.3% after 40 h annealing at an elevated temperature of 150 °C (Fig. 6b). This improved stability is due to an in situ chemical bonding between the P3HT-azide copolymer and the acceptor material in the BHJ interface that suppresses macro-phase separation.
 Fig. 6  (a) Synthesis of P3HT-azide copolymers and their functions as a hole-transporting material for solvent-resistant OFETs and in situ compatibilizer for thermally stable organic solar cells. (b) Efficiencies of P3HT:PCBM devices containing 0, 10, or 15% of P3HT-azide copolymers during thermal annealing at 150 °C with PCBM as the electron acceptor. (c) Current–voltage curves of the 0% and 15% P3HT-azide10 devices with initial (full symbols, 3 h) and long-term (open symbols, 40 h) thermal annealing. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Although BHJ devices based on the P3HT:PCBM blend represent a benchmark in the solar cell literature, low-bandgap polymers consisting of electron-rich and electron-deficient monomers, so-called donor–acceptor (D–A) type alternating copolymers, have been synthesized in an effort to improve the device efficiency.26–28 Recently, the photo-crosslinkable donor–acceptor conjugated polymer, the thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione (TPD)-based polymer, has been reported for BHJ polymer solar cells.29–31 This new polymer contains TPD repeat units with a terminal, primary bromide functionality attached to the chain end of octyl solubilizing group (TPD-Br) (Fig. 7), thereby allowing for photo-crosslinking of the polymer in devices. By synthetically tuning the number of Br units in the polymer and by employing UV-mediated photo-crosslinking, BHJ devices with high PCE and excellent thermal stability were fabricated. When the devices fabricated from copolymers with varying amounts of Br units, 0% Br units (TPD-Br0), 16% Br units (TPD-Br16), and 33% Br units (TPD-Br33), were tested, the PCE of TPD-Br0 device was sharply decreased while the device from photo-crosslinked TPD-Br16 demonstrated a remarkable long-term thermal stability: after 72 h of thermal annealing at 150 °C, an average PCE of 4.6% was obtained with a short circuit current density (JSC) of 10.1 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.85 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 54%.
 Fig. 7  Molecular structure of the thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione (TPD)-based polymer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
2.3. Compatibilizer
Many efforts to control the nanoscale film morphology of BHJ solar cells by the use of a compatibilizer have been reported. It is well known that a proper compatibilizer can reduce the domain size of the blend and also suppress the rate of phase separation in the blend system. For example, conventional polymer plasticizers such as polystyrene32 and polyvinylcarbazole33 have been used for controlling the morphology of conjugated polymer–fullerene blends. It has also been reported that the use of a thiophene-based plasticizer yields well dispersed fullerene domains in poly(3-octylthiophene) matrix.34 Hadziioannou et al.35 synthesized brush type copolymers composed of a polythiophene backbone and poly(vinylquinoline) grafts, and used these copolymers as a compatibilizer for an immiscible P3HT:polyquinoline blend. Although these early reports demonstrated that the compatibilizers could control the film morphology of the donor–acceptor blend to some extent, the BHJ devices with these compatibilizers showed much poorer PCEs as compared with that of the reference P3HT:PCBM solar cell.

2.3.1. Block copolymer compatibilizer. 
Ground-breaking work in this area was first reported by Fréchet et al. in 2006.36 In this work, the graft–block type copolymer based on pendent P3HT repeat units in one segment and pendent fullerene derivatives in the other has been synthesized by the means of ring-opening metathesis polymerization (Fig. 8). Although it showed a poor performance as the active material for the single-component solar cells, it can be used as a compatibilizer to improve the stability of the P3HT:PCBM BHJ solar cells. Following this report, many research groups have synthesized donor–acceptor type block copolymers. Thelakkat et al.37 reported enhancement of phase separation by applying the donor–acceptor block copolymer, P3HT-b-poly(perylene bisimide acrylate) as a compatibilizer. Sary et al.38 have reported that an addition of P3HT-b-P4VP improves thermal stability and also increases internal quantum efficiency.
 Fig. 8  Synthesis of graft–block type copolymers incorporating fullerene and P3HT macromer. Reprint with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2006, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
Recently, Lee et al. have synthesized a well-defined diblock copolymer (P3HT-b-C60) based on regioregular P3HT and fullerene, and used the block copolymer as a compatibilizer for P3HT:PCBM BHJ solar cells.39,40 First, regioregular P3HT was synthesized through the Grignard metathesis polymerization, and then methyl methacrylate (MMA) and 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA) were copolymerized by using an end-functionalized P3HT as a macroinitiator for the atom transfer radical polymerization to yield a diblock copolymer (P3HT-b-P(MMA-r-HEMA)). A fullerene derivative functionalized with carboxylic acid, [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid (PCBA), was then chemically linked to the HEMA unit in the second block (P(MMA-r-HEMA)) to produce a diblock copolymer with the second block containing fullerenes (Fig. 9). They have studied the effect of P3HT-b-C60 diblock copolymer on the morphology and performance of P3HT/PCBM BHJ solar cells by changing the amount of the diblock copolymer and the thermal annealing time. The addition of a small amount of P3HT-b-C60 improves the high-temperature stability of device performance, which can be explained by considering two facts: first, addition of P3HT-b-C60 may lower the interfacial tension between P3HT and PCBM phases due to the preferential location of the diblock copolymer at the interface between the two phases, resulting in reduction of phase sizes of the P3HT/PCBM blend with uniform distribution. The second is a kinetic effect by which the diblock copolymer can suppress the rate of agglomeration of domains, resulting in improvement of long-term stability of device performance.
 Fig. 9  Synthesis of P3HT-b-C60 diblock copolymer compatibilizer. Reprinted from ref. 39 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Heeger and his co-workers41 have also reported rod–coil block copolymers consisting of P3HT donor and C60 acceptor chromophores (P3HT-b-P(SxAy)-C60). In a thin film of the resulting block copolymer, reproducible self assembly into well-defined “nanofibrils” is observed. Furthermore, by adding a small amount of the diblock copolymer to P3HT:PCBM, the interfacial morphology between the two immiscible components can be altered, resulting in a noticeable difference in phase segregation of the BHJ films. The characteristics of the solar cells were evaluated by the addition of various amounts of the diblock copolymer (0, 5, 10, and 20 wt%) as a compatibilizer in the BHJ system (P3HT:PCBM, 1:0.7 w/w). The BHJ device with an addition of 5% diblock copolymer afforded a significant enhancement of JSC by creating suitable phase domains, leading to about 35% increase in PCE relative to the reference P3HT:PCBM cell fabricated without the compatibilizer.
As a compatibilizer for P3HT/PCBM solar cells, Tsai et al.42 synthesized coil–rod–coil triblock copolymer poly(4-vinyltriphenylamine)-b-poly(3-hexylthiophene)-b-poly(4-vinyltriphenylamine) (PTPA-P3HT-PTPA) (Fig. 10). In the P3HT:PCBM:PTPA-P3HT-PTPA ternary blends, the fiber-like structure was observed for surfactant ratios of 0–5%, while a sphere-like nanostructure was observed for the surfactant ratio of 1.5%. The sphere-like nanostructure led to a smaller domain size and increased the interfacial area for charge separation as compared to the fiber-like structure. On the other hand, the increased hole mobility in the blend with addition of PTPA-P3HT-PTPA resulted in better balanced hole and electron mobility. The PCE of the device was enhanced from 3.9 to 4.4% in the presence of the 0–5% PTPA-P3HT-PTPA under illumination of AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2). The addition of PTPA-P3HT-PTPA compatibilizer not only extended the lifetime of solar cells but also reduced the PCBM aggregation upon annealing, resulting in better thermal stability.
 Fig. 10  Synthetic route for coil–rod–coil triblock copolymer PTPA-P3HT-PTPA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
Although the block copolymer compatibilizer could control the nanometer-scale morphology and improve the long-term thermal stability of conjugated polymer–fullerene BHJ solar cells, the synthesis of a block copolymer compatibilizer composed of conjugated polymer and fullerene derivative blocks is burdensome because of multiple post-polymerization steps and the low solubility of fullerenes. Furthermore, the presence of a substantial amount of insulating moieties inevitably required for introducing C60 in the second block can deteriorate the charge carrier transport in the BHJ devices. To overcome these limitations of block copolymers, Lee et al.43 have synthesized a C60-end capped P3HT (P3HT-C60) via controlled polymerization followed by directly linking a fullerene derivative at the chain end of the regioregular P3HT (Fig. 11). They reported that the phase size of P3HT/PCBM does not change significantly after long time thermal annealing and the well-defined bicontinuous network morphology also remains nearly unchanged when 2.5 wt% of P3HT-C60 is added to the blend of P3HT:PCBM. The PCE of the P3HT:PCBM device without compatibilizer decreases below 1% of PCE after 140 h at 100 °C, whereas the device with the addition of 2.5 wt% P3HT-C60 exhibits a much smaller decrease in the PCE as compared to the reference P3HT:PCBM device.
 Fig. 11  Synthesis of C60-end capped P3HT. Reprinted from ref. 43 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.3.2. Small molecule compatibilizer. 
Loo et al.44 has synthesized small-molecule thiophene-C60 dyads (nT-C60) and used them as a compatibilizer for inverted BHJ polymer solar cells. Macrophase separation in active layers depends strongly on the molecular architecture of dyads. 4T-C60 is most effective among the derivatives tested: the addition of 5 wt% 4T-C60 to P3HT:PCBM blend effectively suppresses macrophase separation, even upon extended thermal annealing of the active layers. In sharp contrast to 4T-C60, 8T-C60 is miscible with P3HT, and therefore the addition of 8T-C60 to active layers of inverted solar cells does not arrest macrophase separation on extended annealing.
Very recently, new kinds of donor–acceptor type solution-processable small molecule composed of C60 derivatives and thiophenes have been synthesized. Among them, PCBTTE, which has three thiophene units, was the most effective compatibilizer (Fig. 12).45 The device performance of P3HT:PCBM was enhanced in the presence of 5% PCBTTE, showing a PCE of 4.37% under AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) illumination. Additionally, the introduction of PCBTTE as a compatibilizer reduced the PCBM aggregation upon annealing, resulting in improved thermal stability.
 Fig. 12  Synthesis of PCBTE, PCBBTE and PCBTTE. Reprinted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2012, Elsevier. 

3. Photodegradation and stabilization of active layer materials
3.1. Photo-oxidation of donor materials
The active layer of polymer solar cells are generally constructed with conjugated polymeric compound, in which π-electrons are highly delocalized and therefore afford electro-optical properties such as photon absorption and charge carrier transport for device operation. When the π-conjugation in conjugated materials is disrupted by chemical reactions, the optical absorption and charge transport properties of the conjugated materials are diminished, and as a result, the device performance of solar cells is deteriorated.
In early days, poly(phenylene vinylene) derivatives have been used as an active layer material for organic photovoltaics. However, since the PPV derivatives have low photochemical stability, the PCEs of devices are dramatically decreased when the solar cell devices of PPV derivatives are exposed to light in environmental conditions. The photo-oxidation mechanism of PPV derivatives was well investigated.46–50 Chambon et al.48–50 studied the degradation of poly[2-methoxy-5-(3′,7′-dimethyloctyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene] (MDMO-PPV) using infrared (IR) analysis and UV-visible spectroscopy. They have found that the oxidation process of MDMO-PPV is related to both ether degradation and double-bond saturation, as shown in Fig. 13. Ether linkage of the side chain on the polymer is converted to peroxy radical by hydrogen abstraction on the carbon atom in the α-position to the oxygen atom of ether, oxygen fixation and decomposition of hydroperoxide. Then, the cage reaction, β-scission and H-abstraction leads to the formation of ester, formate and alcohol, respectively. The degradation of the PPV polymer backbone arises from the radical attack to an unsaturated double bond. The radical attack generates alkoxy radical via a similar process to the degradation of the ether linkage.
 Fig. 13  Oxidation mechanism of MDMP-PPV and P3HT. 
The most widely used conjugated polymer for PSCs is P3HT. Although P3HT is known to have higher stability than PPV derivatives, it is still vulnerable to photo-degradation under ambient atmosphere.51 A previous work nproposed that the photo-oxidation of P3HT is induced by singlet oxygen and its reaction with thienyl compound via 1,4 Diels–Alder addition.52 However, recent papers have reported that the photo-oxidative degradation of P3HT is initiated from oxidation of the alkyl side chain instead of direct attack to the thiophene rings by singlet oxygen.53,54 They proposed the degradation mechanism of P3HT based on the change of IR spectra before and after exposure to UV-visible irradiation and thermal aging: oxidation involves the radical oxidation of the n-hexyl side chains and the subsequent degradation of the thiophene rings (Fig. 13). Consequently the breaking of polymer backbone resulted in a loss of π-conjugation, provoking the bleaching of the sample.
In recent years, low bandgap polymers have been considered as the most promising candidates for highly efficient PSCs because their absorption ranges can be extended to longer wavelengths. Although remarkable progress in the efficiency of low bandgap polymers in photovoltaic devices has been achieved, the photo-oxidative degradation and stability have not been fully understood yet. Manceau et al.55 have studied by comparing the photo-oxidative behaviors of several low bandgap polymers (Fig. 14), and established the following basic rules: (i) the use of exocyclic double bonds in the main backbone (e.g., MEH-PPV, MDMO-PPV) leads to a poor stability; (ii) moieties containing a quaternary carbon site are very unstable (e.g. fluorine, cyclopentadithiophene) because of its easy oxidizability; (iii) the presence of readily cleavable bonds (e.g. C–N or C–O) limits the stability; (iv) aromatic polycyclic units generally exhibit a good photochemical stability; (v) a side chain provides a degradation site to the conjugated polymer and therefore its absence largely improves stability.
 Fig. 14  Photostability of several electron-donating and electron-accepting building blocks. Reprinted from ref. 55 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
One of the interesting phenomena in the degradation of conjugated polymers in PSCs is that PCBM enhances the photo-oxidative stability of conjugated polymers. Under UV-visible irradiation in the absence of oxygen, the absorbance of P3HT at 550 nm decreases to 75% after 5000 h irradiation, whereas the absorbance of the P3HT:PCBM blend remains nearly unchanged after 10000 h exposure.56 This slow degradation of the P3HT:PCBM blend was also observed under ambient (photo-oxidation) conditions.57 The vibronic shoulder of P3HT disappeared after 200 h photo-oxidation, but the vibronic shoulder of P3HT:PCBM blend was still alive after 1000 h. The exact reason for the stability improvement of P3HT:PCBM blend due to the presence of PCBM is still not understood, but it may be related to quenching of the excited P3HT or scavenging radical by PCBM. Another example is photo-oxidation of MDMO-PPV and its blend with PCBM. The ether band (1352 cm−1) in IR spectrum of MDMO-PPV:PCBM showed only 10% decrease during 200 h photo-oxidation while the ether band of MDMO-PPV disappeared after 100 h photo-oxidation.58
3.2. Photodoping of donor materials
One of another degradation pathway in active layer is photodoping. Oxygen can act as a quencher, which leads to a decrease in charge carrier mobility. Furthermore, the photodoping enhances the formation of deeper traps, which results in a loss of JSC.59,60 Recently, Cook et al.61 observed the charge transfer complex of P3HT with oxygen by fluorescence spectroscopy. Abdou et al.62 and Aguirre et al.63 also detected the (P3HT–O2)* complex using electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy. The formation of the (P3HT–O2)* complex decreases the charge carrier mobility of P3HT, because this complex can act as a trap site during charge transport. At the same time, after the (P3HT–O2)* complex is formed, the complex decays back to the ground states of P3HT and oxygen, because polythiophene is chemically stable to singlet oxygen (Fig. 15). The formation and decay of the (P3HT–O2)* complex leads to the loss of charge carrier generation.
 Fig. 15  Proposed degradation pathway of P3HT attacking by oxygen from air. Reprinted from ref. 61 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.3. Degradation of fullerene
Fullerene in the active layer can also be degraded in the presence of oxygen.64 When PCBM is exposed to light in the ambient environment for 1000 h, the oxidation products of PC61BM are generated.58 Since the mass difference between oxidation products and PC61BM is shown to be n × 16 (n = 1–8) m/z in MALDI-TOF, PCBM is oxidized successively by addition of one oxygen atom at each step, where the traps formed by oxidized the PCBM reduce the charge carrier mobility in the PC61BM domain.65,66
3.4. Stabilization of photo-oxidation
As mentioned in Section 3.1, the side chain of a conjugated polymers provides an initiation site for photo-oxidative degradation. Hence, one of the strategies to enhance the stability is to introduce a hermo-cleavable side group, which is easily removed upon annealing for device fabrication, into conjugated polymers.67–75 It should be noted here that the introduction of a side chain is necessary to afford solubility to conjugated polymers. Helgesen et al.74 synthesized conjugated polymers with ester side chains and studied the thermal decomposition of side groups (Fig. 16). The ester side chains in the polymer can be removed by thermal treatment at 200 °C. The stability test showed that the pristine polymer with an ester side chain was unstable while the photochemical stability of thermally cleaved polymer was enhanced by 50% in terms of the time to reach half of its initial absorbance. However, PCEs of devices based on their thermo-cleavable polymers are still below 2%, because a high temperature annealing is required to decompose the side chain. Therefore, the development of a low temperature cleavable side chain is necessary to obtain a high PCE.
 Fig. 16  Thermo-cleavage of low bandgap polymer and evolution of the normalized absorption during accelerated photochemical aging in air under 100 mW cm−2 solar intensities. Reprinted from ref. 74 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4. Degradation from interfaces and stability improvement
4.1. Degradation from interlayer/electrode
The early studies on the stability of organic electronics have demonstrated that the oxygen and water molecules rapidly diffuse into the device and easily react with organic materials.76–78 Since the most common device structure for PSCs is indium tin oxide (ITO)/hole-transporting layer/active layer/electron transport layer/Ca (or LiF)/Al, the diffusion route of oxygen and water passes through the metal cathode/electron transport layer or from the ITO/hole-transporting layer. In particular, the low work-function metal cathode is highly reactive with oxygen and water. The oxidized metal cathode is known to degrade the device lifetime and can be a source of oxygen or water. The influx of oxygen and water into the device can be prevented by encapsulation of the device with glass or epoxy resins. However, since this review focuses on the degradation of organic materials in PSCs and its impact on the deterioration of photovoltaic performance, the encapsulation of devices is not discussed here. Meanwhile, the most widely used hole-transporting layer, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS), is highly acidic with a pH of 1–3 and is processed from aqueous solution in air, which can corrode the ITO and degrade the solar cell device.79 This is another serious problem of the stability of PSCs and therefore, the stability issue arising from the interfaces of the device should be also taken into account.80
4.2. Degradation and stability of PSCs from the metal electrode
The most commonly used materials for the electrode of PSCs are aluminum (Al) and calcium (Ca). These metals are highly reactive with oxygen or water due to their low work-function (ΦAl = 4.1 eV, ΦCa = 2.8 eV).81 Therefore, when a PSC with a low work-function metal cathode device is exposed to ambient air, the cathode is easily oxidized, leading to formation of oxidized metal complex which changes the work function of the cathode. As a result, the efficient exciton dissociation and electron collection are hindered with an increase in the resistance of the solar cell device.82 Furthermore, the metal oxide complex is electrically insulating and therefore acts as a barrier for electron transport, resulting in poor performance with shorter lifetime of the solar cell device.
4.3. Cathode interfacial layer for stable PSCs
To overcome the instability of metal electrodes and to enhance the device lifetime, various interfacial materials have been introduced into polymer solar cells. Among various interfacial materials between polymer and Al electrodes, lithium fluoride (LiF) is one of the successful interlayer materials in PSCs. Introduction of thin LiF layer in PSCs enhances photovoltaic performance. Brabec et al.83 reported that the insertion of a thin interfacial layer of LiF under the cathode metal electrode (Al or Au) in PSCs significantly enhanced the FF and VOC. Compared to devices without LiF, the performance of the PSCs was increased by over 20%. However, the substitution of LiF by another insulating material such as SiOx resulted in lower efficiencies. In the case of an LiF/Au electrode, a substantial efficiency enhancement is observed compared to a pristine Au electrode. The insertion of a thin LiF layer between the active layer and Al also increased the stability of PSCs compared to the pristine Al electrode. Kawano and Adachi84 reported that the PSC device exhibited superior air stability when LiF was used as an interlayer material. Furthermore, as a 3 nm C60 and a 0.5 nm LiF were inserted between the active layer and Al cathode in PSCs, the device lifetime under continuous illumination was dramatically enhanced (see Fig. 17). The 3 nm C60 layer forms a unique surface pattern of microscopic domes, and the combination with a 0.5 nm LiF layer forms an Ohmic contact between the active layer and the Al cathode, resulting in a significant reduction in the degradation of the PSCs, as seen in Fig. 18. Kumar et al.85 also reported high performance PSCs with a C60/LiF interfacial layer between the active layer and the Al electrode. The PCE of the solar cell was increased up to 4.5%, although they did not report the device stability. In short, the introduction of LiF as an interfacial layer has enhanced both the photovoltaic performance and the device stability by modifying the work function of Al and protecting the active layer from Al deposition.83 However, there have been some controversies that the LiF-based PSCs showed rapid degradation under thermal annealing after electrode evaporation because LiF is dissociated into Li and F ion during Al deposition followed by Li ion diffusion into the active layer and its combination with excitons.86–89
 Fig. 17  Cell characteristics, normalized by their initial values, as a function of illumination time under continuous simulated AM 1.5G irradiation (100 mW cm−2) of the PSCs: (a) reference, (b) 0.5 nm LiF layer, (c) 1 nm C60 and 0.5 nm LiF layers, (d) 3 nm C60 and 0.5 nm LiF layers, and 5 nm C60 and 0.5 LiF layers. Current–voltage data were collected at 1 to 3 h intervals under simulated AM 1.5G solar irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2010, American Institute of Physics. 
 Fig. 18  AFM images of C60 evaporated on the top of P3HT:PC61BM photoactive layer surface with a thickness of: (a) 0 nm, (b) 1 nm, (c) 3 nm, and (d) 5 nm. AFM images were obtained for 2 μm × 2 μm surface areas. The scale bar is 1 μm in all four images. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2010, American Institute of Physics. 
Organic materials were also investigated as an interfacial layer in PSCs (see Fig. 19). Wei et al.90 reported that a fluorinated PCBM (F-PCBM) enhanced the performance of PSCs due to spontaneous surface segregation of F-PCBM on the top of the active layer, when a solution of active layer materials and F-PCBM was simply cast as an active layer. Zhang et al.91 reported that the performance of PSC was improved when nonconjugated polymers, poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO), were used as a buffer layer between the active layer and Al cathode. The increased PCE was attributed to the enhancement of the internal electrical field, thereby improving the exciton dissociation and charge transportation. Chen et al.92,93 developed a more simple method to form a PEG interfacial layer by inducing self-assembly of PEG molecules via simple mixing of PEG and P3HT:PCBM. As the solvent evaporates, the PEG molecules spontaneously migrate onto the surface where they reacted with the Al cathode to form Ohmic contacts. The device incorporating the self-organized PEG exhibited higher stability than the device without PEG (see Fig. 20). Jung et al. also developed a fullerene end-capped poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG-C60) as an self-assembled interfacial buffer layer.94 When PEG-C60 was added to P3HT:PCBM blend, the self-segregation of PEG-C60 led to the formation of thin interfacial PEO layer on the top of active layer. When 5 wt% PEG-C60 was added, VOC was enhanced due to generation of the interfacial dipole moment and the vacuum level shift of metal cathode, and FF was also increased because of the formation of an ideal vertical morphology in the BHJ active layer. The self-assembled buffer layer of PEG-C60 prevents effectively the active layer from oxidation, and provides the possibility to use high work-function metal (i.e. Au, Ag, or Cu) as a cathode material. Hence, the protection of the active layer by PEG-C60 improved the oxidative stability of the PSCs. The PSC device retained 80% of initial PCE after 360 h under ambient condition when both PEG-C60 and Cu was used (see Fig. 21). Jeon and Lee95 used a phosphine oxide-based interfacial layer, 2,7-bis(diphenylphosphoryl)-9,9′-spirobi(fluorine) (SPPO13), to improve the stability of the PSCs at high temperature. The SPPO13 cathode buffer layer improved the high temperature stability (90 °C) of the P3HT:PCBM solar cells. Wang et al.96 introduced lithium benzoate (C6H5COOLi) as the cathode buffer layer between active layer and Al cathode and found that the shunt resistance and the photo-generated charge collection were effectively increased. This performance enhancement may attributed to the dissociation of C6H5COOLi upon deposition which reduces the interface resistance between the active layer and cathode.
 Fig. 19  Molecular structures of represent organic materials of electron transport layer used in polymer solar cells. 
 Fig. 20  (a) Normalized PCEs and (b) open-circuit voltages (VOC) of devices fabricated with various cathode structures plotted as functions of time. These devices, which were not encapsulated, were stored in a cabinet in which the relative humidity was controlled at ca. 50%. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of a bulk heterojunction solar cell with PEG-C60 as a buffer layer and (b) SEM images of the surface of P3HT:PCBM films with addition of different amount of PEG-C60 and J–V curves of organic solar cells (c) with various amount of PEG-C60 and (d) with the use of different metal cathode, and (e) the normalized efficiency decay of organic solar cells in ambient atmosphere. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
Various inorganic materials have been used as an interfacial layers for PSCs. Since titanium sub-oxide (TiOx) can function as a diffusion barrier to oxygen and water, it can protect the active layer, as shown in Fig. 22a. When densely packed TiOx was applied to PSCs, the device showed good electron selectivity and its lifetime was increased by nearly two orders of magnitude (see Fig. 22b).97 Interestingly, due to its high transparency, the TiOx layer can act as an optical spacer in PSCs.98,99 These unique optoelectronic characteristics of TiOx led to a high PCE over 6% in the tandem-structured solar cell with a low bandgap polymer.100,101 Gilot et al.102 also demonstrated similar results with a ZnO layer as an optical spacer in PSCs. It was also reported that the doping of the TiO2 layer with Cs can enhance the solar cell performance.103
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic view of the device architecture with a TiOx layer. The TiOx functional layer is inserted between the active layer and the Al electrode with a structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/TiOx/Al. The TiOx layer acts as a shielding and scavenging layer which prevents the intrusion of oxygen and humidity into the electronically active polymers. A brief flow chart of the steps involved in the preparation of the TiOx layer is also shown. Comparison of (b) the power conversion efficiencies and (c) luminous efficiency as a function of storage time for polymer solar cells with and without the TiOx layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2007, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
4.4. Anode interfacial layer for stable PSCs
A conducting polymer blend, PEDOT:PSS, has most widely been used as a hole-transporting layer (HTL) to improve the anode contact and enhance hole collection in organic electronics. When the HTL has been introduced in optoelectronic devices, both stability and performance of the devices has been improved by smoothing the ITO surface, lowering the work function of the anode, and promoting hole transport. Especially in PSCs, the PCE has largely been increased, when PEDOT:PSS was introduced as HTL, by lowering the contact resistance and leakage current.104–107 However, PEDOT:PSS has several problems such as strong acidity, hygroscopic properties and inhomogeneous electrical properties which lead poor stability of the devices.108 The PEDOT:PSS is also known to be easily photo-oxidized.109 These disadvantages have driven the development of new HTL materials to replace PEDOT:PSS, as shown in Fig. 23. To overcome those problems with PEDOT:PSS, Bae et al. developed water-soluble and self-doped conducting copolymers (poly(styrenesulfonic acid)-graft-polyaniline (PSSA-g-PANI))110 and polypyrrole (poly(styrenesulfonic acid)-graft-polypyrrole (PSSA-g-PPY)).111 They introduced the PSSA-g-PANI as a hole-transporting layer in the PSCs based on P3HT:PCBM.112 The uniquely high transparency at 450–650 nm wavelength and high electrical conductivity of PSSA-g-PANI resulted in high JSC and VOC of PSCs than those of the devices with PEDOT:PSS. The PSSA-g-PANI also exhibited superior electrochemical stability to PEDOT:PSS, which would be beneficial to PSCs (see Fig. 24a). The PSC fabricated with the most-conductive PSSA-g-PANI exhibited the highest power conversion efficiency, which was 20% higher than that of the device with PEDOT:PSS (see Fig. 24b). Later, it was reported that the PSSA-g-PANI can be processed with a perfluorinated ionomer (PFI) to tune its work function.113 As the ratio of PFI to PSSA-g-PANI increases, the work function of PSSA-g-PANI increases from 5.28 eV to 6.09 eV. The PSCs fabricated with the PFI-doped PSSA-g-PANI exhibited 30 fold higher stability than the PEDOT:PSS-based solar cells (see Fig. 25). The authors explained that the improved stability is attributed to the high doping stability of PSS-g-PANI and blocking of the metal ion by the self-organized PFI surface layer. Li et al.114 developed another self-doped conducting polymer, sulfonated poly(diphenylamine) (SPDPA). When SPDPA was used as the HTL for the solar cell based on P3HT:PCBM, a higher PCE (4.2%) and fill factor (0.68) was achieved as compared to those with PEDOT:PSS (3.6% and 0.65). The enhanced device performance is attributed to the improved hole mobility and the increased crystallinity of P3HT due to the ordered structure of SPDPA.
 Fig. 23  Molecular structures of organic materials for the hole-transporting layer used in polymer solar cells. 
 Fig. 24  (a) Cyclic voltammetry curves after 5 and 100 cycles of PSSA-g-PANI and PEDOT:PSS films and (B) J–V curves of organic solar cells using different conductivity of PSSA-g-PANI of PEDOT:PSS. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 25  Device characteristics of polymer solar cells with PEDOT:PSS (square); PANI:PSS (diamond); PSS-g-PANI (circle); PSS-g-PANI/PFI (triangle). (a) Current density–voltage curve for illumination of 100 mW cm−2, (b) device stability measurement under constant illumination (100 mW cm−2) until normalized power conversion efficiencies were reduced by half. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
Several crosslinked hole-transporting layers have also been developed due to their unique advantages, such as tunability of the energy level and good charge carrier mobility. In addition, the crosslinked HTL exhibits high physical and electrochemical stability. These materials can be thermally or photochemically crosslinked to form robust charge transporting films with improved solvent resistance for subsequent processing of the active layer. Hains et al.115 demonstrated that the PSCs with the mixture of 4,4-bis[(p-trichlorosilylpropylphenyl)-phenylamino]biphenyl (TPDSi2) and poly[9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-N-[4-(3-methylpropyl)]-diphenylamine] (TFB) exhibited not only an enhanced PCE but also improved thermal stability over those with PEDOT:PSS. Especially after treating at 60 °C for 1 h, the solar cell device with TPDSi2:TFB functioned exactly the same as before while the device with PEDOT:PSS no longer exhibited photovoltaic response. Sun et al.116 demonstrated that a HTL of thermally crosslinked TPD-BVB exhibited high electron-blocking characteristics at the anode and that the stability of the PSCs under ambient conditions was significantly improved. The reason for the superior long term stability is the hydrophobic nature of crosslinked TPD-BVB, which prevents water molecules from diffusion into the device, which is the main reason for poor stability of PEDOT:PSS-based devices. They further developed another crosslinkable HTL material (IDT-BTPA-BVB) which has extended aromatic backbones.116 The IDT-BTPA-BVB showed a very high electrochemical stability. Moreover, by introducing a bilayer structure consisting of a neutral layer and a p-doped layer, the PSCs with the bilayer as HTL showed enhanced photovoltaic performance due to the high conductivity, good electron-blocking ability and high transparency of the HTL.
Inorganic p-type transition metal oxides have been used as an important class of HTL materials for high performance and stable PSCs. The large bandgap of p-type transition metal oxides possess good optical transparency in visible region, and the low valence band allows high electrochemical stability. Also, because the conduction band of these p-type semiconducting oxides is sufficiently higher than the LUMO of both the donor and acceptor materials of the active layer, the electron transport to the anode is effectively blocked. In addition, the high charge carrier mobility of transition metal oxides provides efficient hole collection at the anode. Irwin et al.117 deposited thin layers of nickel oxide (NiO) by pulsed laser deposition directly onto ITO. Insertion of the NiO layer afforded a high PCE of 5.2% and a FF of ∼70%, and increased the stability of PSC device. Under continuous AM 1.5G radiation, the PSC device with a 5 nm NiO retained a quite similar PCE to the initial value (less than 10% decay). The solar cell device with thick NiO showed no decay of PCE for 20 days under continuous light illumination. Recently, a solution processable NiOx film prepared by a sol–gel process was also developed and introduced in PSCs.118 Although the PSCs with NiOx exhibited a comparable PCE to that with PEDOT:PSS, the lifetime of PSCs with NiOx was 10 times longer than the PEDOT:PSS-based solar cells. Solution processed vanadium oxide (V2O5) was also used as a HTL material in PSCs. Zilberberg et al.119 have demonstrated that the PSCs with V2O5 showed better performance than that with PEDOT:PSS. Molybdenum oxides (MoOx) were also used as an HTL material in PSCs.120 The use of MoOx enhanced light absorption within the active layer and thereby led to a PCE over 6% which is comparable to the PEDOT:PSS-based PSC, and further enhancement up to 7.2% was demonstrated by using an antireflection coating. Furthermore, PSCs with MoOx exhibited superior long-term air stability as compared to the PSCs with PEDOT:PSS. It has also been reported that MoOx-based PSCs exhibited an enhanced lifetime with superior stability.121,122
Very recently, graphenes have emerged as an interesting material for various electronic devices such as transistor, displays, LEDs and solar cells. Graphene oxide (GO) is a very interesting material for electronic applications, because it has shown a potential for a novel HTL material in the PSCs owing to its adequate energy levels (HOMO = ∼5.2 eV, LUMO = ∼1.6 eV), suggesting that GO can transport holes and block electrons and therefore facilitate efficient hole collection at the anode in PSCs. Several groups have explored the use of GO as HTL in PSCs and demonstrated that the devices with GO exhibited a comparable performance to those of PEDOT:PSS-based PSCs.123–125 Recently, Yun et al.126 demonstrated that the PSCs with reduced GOs (r-GOs) exhibited high PCEs comparable to those of PEDOT:PSS-based solar cells. Furthermore, the solar cell devices with r-GOs manifested much longer lifetimes compared to the devices with PEDOT:PSS (see Fig. 26). These results clearly demonstrated that chemically r-GOs could be a promising interfacial material and a practical replacement for conventional PEDOT:PSS.
 Fig. 26  (a) Device structure (left) and representative J–V curves of polymer solar cells based on different hole-transporting layers (right). Influence of the different hole-transporting layer of varying thicknesses on the (b) PCE, (c) FF, (d) JSC, and (e) VOC of solar cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
5. Conclusions and outlook
Although improvement in stability is critically important for PSCs to be commercialized as an alternative to Si-based solar cells, relatively less attention has been given to the stability improvement of PSCs. Since PSCs have complicated multi-layer structures, where each layer may deteriorate for different reasons under different environments, the stability should be studied from various aspects. Although recent progresses in stability and durability of PSCs are remarkable as described above, further researches are still needed for PSCs to be commercialized and competitive with Si-based solar cells.
5.1. Morphology stabilization
The morphology stability can be improved by introduction of crosslinking in donor polymers to stabilize the nanoscale phase morphology of the active layer and/or addition of compatibilizer to control and suppress the macro-phase separation in the active layer. However, this method may sacrifice the PCE of the original device because of the loss of crystallinity due to crosslinking in the donor polymer. Hence, the crosslinking must be introduced in the donor polymer as little as possible. The use of a compatibilizer may also suppress effectively the macro-phase separation, where block copolymers are the most efficient. However, the block copolymers may contain inevitably a significant amount of insulating moiety, which gives a negative effect on the PCE. As a consequence, the development of a compatibilizer based on small molecules is strongly needed to minimize their insulating compenent.
5.2. Photo-oxidation and stabilization
Since the alkyl side chain on conjugated polymers, exocyclic double bonds in the main backbone, and moieties containing a quaternary carbon lead a poor stability to photodegradation, one may reduce the introduction of such groups into conjugated polymers to the minimum required for stability improvement. Another possibility to stabilize photodegradation is to use photo-sensitizers, which absorb high energy photons and dissipate the photon energy into heat. In this case, one should consider possible negative effects such as morphology change and the loss of photon absorption of the active layer. Since the PSCs are sensitive to oxygen and moisture, it is necessary to protect them with some sort of encapsulation, and therefore the encapsulation polymers must have a low permeability to oxygen and moisture.
5.3. Degradation from interface layers
A proper choice of interlayer materials along with the use of high work function metals as electrode may protect the active layer from diffusion of oxygen and water through the metal cathode/electron transport layer or the ITO/hole-transporting layer. The use of high work function metals enables us to fabricate inverted photovoltaic cells for enhancement of oxidative stability. The use of materials with deep HOMO energy levels can also prevent oxidative degradation. However, a deep HOMO energy level may result in a high bandgap, which may cause low JSC, and therefore fine tuning of molecular levels is needed.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (MEST), Republic of Korea for financial support through the Global Research Laboratory (GRL) and the WCU Hybrid Materials programs.
References
Z. He, C. Zhong, X. Huang, W. Y. Wong, H. Wu, L. Chen, S. Su and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4636–4643 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dou, J. You, J. Yang, C. C. Chen, Y. He, S. Murase, T. Moriarty, K. Emery, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 180–185 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 686–714 CrossRef .
J. Jo, S. I. Na, S. S. Kim, T. W. Lee, Y. Chung, S. J. Kang, D. Vak and D. Y. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2398–2406 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Chuang, H. L. Chen, W. H. Lee, Y. C. Huang, W. F. Su, W. M. Jen and C. W. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5554–5560 RSC .
S. E. Shaheen, C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci, F. Padinger, T. Fromherz and J. C. Hummelen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 841–843 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Kim, S. A. Choulis, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley, S. Cook and J. R. Durrant, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 063502 CrossRef .
W. Ma, C. Yang, X. Gong, K. H. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617–1622 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Huang, S. Y. Chuang, M. C. Wu, H. L. Chen, C. W. Chen and W. F. Su, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 034506 CrossRef .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864–868 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jo, S. S. Kim, S. I. Na, B. K. Yu and D. Y. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 866–874 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, Y. Yao and Y. Yang, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 043704 CrossRef .
F. C. Krebs and H. Spanggaard, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5235–5237 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Gevorgyan and F. C. Krebs, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4386–4390 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sivula, C. K. Luscombe, B. C. Thompson and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 13988–13989 CrossRef CAS .
S. Miyanishi, Y. Zhang, K. Tajima and K. Hashimoto, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6723–6725 RSC .
Y. Lin, J. A. Lim, Q. Wei, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, A. L. Briseno and J. J. Watkins, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 622–632 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, H. L. Yip, O. Acton, S. K. Hau, F. Huang and A.-K. Y. Jen, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2598–2600 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, S. Hadjikyriacou, D. Waller and R. Gaudiana, J. Macromol. Sci., Part A: Pure Appl.Chem., 2004, A41, 1467–1487 CAS .
M. Drees, H. Hoppe, C. Winder, H. Neugebauer, N. S. Sariciftci, W. Schwinger, F. Schaffler, C. Topf, M. C. Scharber, Z. Zhud and R. Gaudiana, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 5158–5163 RSC .
S. Miyanishi, K. Tajima and K. Hashimoto, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 1610–1618 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Kim, Y. Miyamoto, B. Ma and J. M. J. Fréchet, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2273–2281 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Nam, Y. Qin, Y. S. Park, H. Hlaing, X. Lu, B. M. Ocko, C. T. Black and R. B. Grubbs, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 2338–2347 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, L. Chen, Y. Chen, F. Li and K. Yao, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 104–113 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Kim, A. Han, C. H. Cho, H. Kang, H. H. Cho, M. Y. Lee, J. M. J. Fréchet, J. H. Oh and B. J. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 215–221 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Chen, J. Hou1, S. Zhang, Y. Liang, G. Yang, Y. Yang, L. Yu, Y. Wu1 and G. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 649–653 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lee, T. P. Russell and W. H. Jo, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 846–853 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lee, N. Y. Min and W. H. Jo, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8583–8590 RSC .
C. Piliego, T. W. Holcombe, J. D. Douglas, C. H. Woo, P. M. Beaujuge and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7595–7597 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Zou, A. Najari, P. Berrouard, S. Beaupre, B. R. Aich, Y. Tao and M. Leclerc, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5330–5331 CrossRef CAS .
G. Griffini, J. D. Doulgas, C. Piliego, T. W. Holcombe, S. Turri, J. M. J. Fréchet and J. L. Mynar, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1660–1664 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, F. Padinger, N. S. Sariciftci and J. C. Hummelen, J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 85, 6866–6872 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, H. Johannson, F. Padinger, N. Neugebauer, J. C. Hummelen and N. S. Sariciftci, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 61, 19–33 CrossRef CAS .
N. Camaioni, M. Catellani, S. Luzzati and A. Migliori, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 403–404, 489–494 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Economopoulos, C. L. Chochos, V. G. Gregoriou, J. K. Kallitsis, S. Barrau and G. Hadziioannou, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 921–927 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sivula, Z. T. Ball, N. Watanabe and J. M. J. Fréchet, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 206–210 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sommer, S. Huttner, U. Steiner and M. Thelakkat, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 183308 CrossRef .
N. Sary, F. Richard, C. Brochon, N. Leclerc, P. Leveque, J. N. Audinot, S. Berson, T. Heiser, G. Hadziioannou and R. Mezzenga, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 763–768 CrossRef CAS .
J. U. Lee, A. Cirpan, T. Emrick, T. P. Russell and W. H. Jo, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1483–1489 RSC .
J. U. Lee, A. Cirpan, T. Emrick, T. P. Russell and W. H. Jo, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 105201–105209 CrossRef .
C. Yang, J. K. Lee, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5416–5423 RSC .
J. H. Tsai, Y. C. Lai, T. Higashihara, C. J. Lin, M. Ueda and W. C. Chen, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 6085–6091 CrossRef CAS .
J. U. Lee, J. W. Jung, T. Emrick, T. P. Russell and W. H. Jo, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3287–3294 RSC .
J. B. Kim, K. Allen, S. J. Oh, S. Lee, M. F. Toney, Y. S. Kim, C. R. Kagan, C. Nuckolls and Y. L. Loo, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5762–5773 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Lai, T. Higashihara, J. C. Hsu, M. Ueda and W. C. Chen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 97, 164–170 CrossRef CAS .
H. Neugebauer, C. Brabec, J. C. Hummelen and N. S. Sariciftci, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 61, 35–42 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rivaton, S. Chambon, M. Manceau, J. L. Gardette, N. Lamaitre and S. Guillerez, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2010, 95, 278–284 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chambon, A. Rivaton, J. L. Gardette, M. Firon and L. Lutsen, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2007, 45, 317–331 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chambon, A. Rivaton, J. L. Gardette and M. Firon, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2009, 47, 6044–6052 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chambon, A. Rivaton, J. L. Gardette and M. Firon, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2011, 96, 1149–1158 CrossRef CAS .
A. Saeki, M. Tsuji and S. Seki, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 661–669 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. A. Abdou and S. Holdcroft, Macromolecules, 1993, 26, 2954–2962 CrossRef CAS .
M. Manceau, A. Rivaton and J. L. Gardette, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2008, 29, 1823–1827 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hintz, H. J. Egelhaaf, H. Peisert and T. Chasse, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2010, 95, 818–825 CrossRef CAS .
M. Manceau, E. Bundgaard, J. E. Carle, O. Hagemann, M. Helgesen, R. Sondergaard, M. Jorgensen and F. C. Krebs, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4132–4141 RSC .
M. Manceau, S. Chambon, A. Rivaton, J. L. Gardette, S. Guillerez and N. Lemaitre, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1572–1577 CrossRef CAS .
M. O. Reese, A. M. Nardes, B. L. Rupert, R. E. Larsen, D. C. Olson, M. T. Lloyd, S. E. Shaheen, D. S. Ginley, G. Rumbles and N. Kopidakis, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3476–3483 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chambon, A. Rivaton, J. L. Gardette and M. Firon, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 394–398 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schafferhans, A. Baumann, A. Wagenpfahl, C. Deibel and V. Dyakonov, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 1693–1700 CrossRef CAS .
L. Luer, H. J. Egelhaaf, D. Oelkrug, G. Cerullo, G. Lanzani, B. H. Huisman and D. de Leeuw, Org. Electron., 2004, 5, 83–89 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cook, A. Furube and R. Katoh, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4282–4289 RSC .
M. S. A. Abdou, F. P. Orfino, Y. Son and S. Holdcroft, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 4518–4524 CrossRef CAS .
A. Aguirre, S. C. J. Meskers, R. A. J. Janssen and H. J. Egelhaaf, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 1657–1662 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Matsuo, A. Ozu, N. Obata, N. Fukuda, H. Tanaka and E. Nakamura, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3878–3880 RSC .
R. Konenkamp, G. Priebe and B. Pietzak, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1999, 60, 11804–11808 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tapponnier, I. Biaggio and P. Gunter, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 112114 CrossRef .
M. Manceau, M. Helgesen and F. C. Krebs, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2010, 95, 2666–2669 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bjerring, J. S. Nielsen, N. C. Nielsen and F. C. Krebs, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 6012–6013 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Gevorgyan and F. C. Krebs, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4386–4390 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tromholt, S. A. Gevorgyan, M. Jorgensen, F. C. Krebs and K. O. Sylvester-Hvid, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 2768–2777 CAS .
M. Helgesen and F. C. Krebs, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 1253–1260 CrossRef CAS .
M. Helgesen, M. Bjerring, N. C. Nielsen and F. C. Krebs, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5617–5624 CrossRef CAS .
M. Helgesen, S. A. Gevorgyan, F. C. Krebs and R. A. J. Janssen, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4669–4675 CrossRef CAS .
M. Helgesen, M. V. Madsen, B. Andreasen, T. Tromholt, J. W. Andreasen and F. C. Krebs, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 2536–2542 RSC .
M. H. Petersen, S. A. Gevorgyan and F. C. Krebs, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 8986–8994 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chambon, A. Rivaton, J.-L. Gardette, M. Firon and L. Lutzen, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2007, 45, 317–331 CrossRef CAS .
K. Norrman and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 213–227 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, J. E. Carle, N. Cruys-Bagger, M. Andersen, M. R. Lilliedal, M. A. Hammond and S. Hvidt, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 86, 499–516 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, S. A. Gevorgyan and J. Alstrup, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5442–5451 RSC .
M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman, S. A. Gevorgyan, T. Tromholt, B. Andreasen and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 580–612 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, E. Westerweele, C. Zhang, P. Smith and A. J. Heeger, J. Appl. Phys., 1995, 77, 694–698 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Wakimoto
          
            et al.
          , Technical Digest, International Symposium on Inorganic and Organic Electroluminescence,  1994, p. 77 Search PubMed .
C. J. Brabec, S. E. Shaheen, C. Winder, N. S. Sariciftci and P. Denk, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 1288–1290 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kawano and C. Adachi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 053307 CrossRef .
A. Kumar, G. Li, Z. Hong and Y. Yang, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 165202–165205 CrossRef .
S. K. M. Jönsson, E. Carlegrim, F. Zhang, W. R. Salaneck and M. Fahlman, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, 3695–3701 CrossRef .
B. N. Limketkai and M. A. Baldo, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 085207 CrossRef .
C. Gu, F. Stepniak, D. M. Poirier, M. B. Jost, P. J. Benning, Y. Chen, T. R. Ohno, J. L. Martins, J. Fure and R. E. Smalley, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1992, 45, 6348–6351 CrossRef CAS .
C. I. Wu, G.-R. Lee and T.-W. Pi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 212108 CrossRef .
Q. S. Wei, T. Nishizawa, K. Tajima and K. Hashimoto, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2211–2216 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, M. Ceder and O. Inganas, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1835–1838 CrossRef .
F. C. Chen and S. C. Chien, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 6865–6869 RSC .
S. C. Chien, F. C. Chen, M. K. Chung and C. S. Hsu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 1354–1360 CAS .
J. W. Jung, J. W. Jo and W. H. Jo, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1782–1787 CrossRef CAS .
S. O. Jeon and J. Y. Lee, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1102–1106 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, L. Yang, C. Yao, W. Qin, S. Yin and F. Zhang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1243–1247 CrossRef .
K. Lee, J. Y. Kim, S. H. Park, S. H. Kim, S. Cho and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2445–2449 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, S. H. Kim, H.-H. Lee, K. Lee, W. Ma, X. Gong and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 572–576 CrossRef CAS .
A. Roy, S. H. Park, S. Cowan, M. H. Tong, S. Cho, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 013302 CrossRef .
J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, N. E. Coates, D. Moses, T.-Q. Nguyen, M. Dante and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2007, 317, 222–225 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupre, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297–302 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gilot, I. Barbu, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 113520 CrossRef .
M. H. Park, J. H. Li, A. Kumar, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1241–1246 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Carter, M. Angelopoulos, S. Karg, B. J. Brock and J. C. Scott, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 70, 2067–2069 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, G. Yu, C. Zhang, R. Menon and A. J. Heeger, Synth. Met., 1997, 87, 171–174 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Brown, J. S. Kim, R. H. Friend, F. Cacialli, R. Daik and W. J. Feast, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 1679–1681 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Jones, S. Khodabakhsh, B. M. Sanderson, J. Nelson and T. S. Jones, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 95–100 CrossRef .
H. S. Kang, H. S. Kang, J. K. Lee, J. W. Lee, J. Joo, J. M. Ko, M. S. Kim and J. Y. Lee, Synth. Met., 2005, 155, 176–179 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vazquez, J. Bobacka, A. Ivaska and A. Lewenstam, Sens. Actuators, B, 2002, 82, 7–13 CrossRef .
W. J. Bae, K. H. Kim, Y. H. Park and W. H. Jo, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2768–2769 RSC .
W. J. Bae, K. H. Kim, Y. H. Park and W. H. Jo, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 1044–1047 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Jung, J. U. Lee and W. H. Jo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 633–637 CAS .
M. R. Choi, T. H. Han, K. G. Lim, S. H. Woo, D. H. Huh and T. W. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6274–6277 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Li, T. C. Wen and T. F. Guo, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4478–4482 RSC .
A. W. Hains, J. Liu, A. B. F. Martinson, M. D. Irwin and T. J. Marks, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 595–606 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, X. Gong, B. B. Y. Hsu, H.-L. Yip, A. K. Y. Jen and A. J. Heeger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 193310 CrossRef .
M. D. Irwin, B. Buchholz, A. W. Hains, R. P. H. Chang and T. J. Marks, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 2783–2787 CrossRef CAS .
K. X. Steirer, P. F. Ndione, N. E. Widjonarko, M. T. Lloyd, J. Meyer, E. L. Ratcliff, A. Kahn, N. R. Armstrong, C. J. Curtis, D. S. Ginley, J. J. Berry and D. C. Olson, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 813–820 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zilberberg, S. Trost, H. Schmidt and T. Riedl, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 377–381 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, C. J. Takacs, S. R. Cowan, J. H. Seo, X. Gong, A. Roy and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2226–2230 CrossRef CAS .
E. Voroshazi, B. Verreet, A. Buri, R. Mueller, D. Di Nuzzo and P. Heremans, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 736–744 CrossRef CAS .
C. Girotto, E. Voroshazi, D. Cheyns, P. Hereman and B. P. Rand, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3244–3247 CAS .
S. S. Li, K. H. Tu, C. C. Lin, C. W. Chen and M. Chhowalla, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3169–3174 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Tu, S. S. Li, W. C. Li, D. Y. Wang, J. R. Yang and C. W. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3521–3526 CAS .
M. S. Ryu and J. Jang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 2893–2896 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Yun, J. S. Yeo, J. Kim, H. G. Jeong, D. Y. Kim, Y. J. Noh, S. S. Kim, B. C. Ku and S. I. Na, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4923–4928 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Jea Uk Lee	Jea Uk Lee is a senior researcher at the Korea Institute of Materials Science, South Korea. He received his PhD degree from Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, South Korea in 2010 under the supervision of Professor Won Ho Jo, working on the synthesis and self-assembly of conjugated polymers for organic solar cells. His current research interests include graphenes, organic conjugated materials and nanoparticles for electronic and energy-related applications.
Jae Woong Jung	Jae Woong Jung is currently a PhD candidate in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Seoul National University, South Korea, under the supervision of Professor Won Ho Jo. He received his BS degree in Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Seoul National University in 2007. His research focuses on the molecular design and synthesis of novel organic materials for high performance organic electronics including field effect transistor and solar cells.
Jea Woong Jo	Jea Woong Jo is a graduate student to pursue a PhD degree under the supervision of Professor Won Ho Jo at Seoul National University. He received his BS degree in Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, South Korea in 2009. His PhD research includes the synthesis of organic conjugated materials and device fabrication of organic electronics.
Won Ho Jo	Won Ho Jo is B. J. and C. H. Park Distinguished Professor of Materials Science and Engineering Department, Seoul National University. He received a BS from Seoul National University in 1973 and a PhD from the Polytechnic Institute of New York in 1979. He is currently a fellow of the Korean Academy of Science & Technology. He was the President of the Polymer Society of Korea (2005). His current research interests include fabrication of conductive transparent electrodes based on CNTs and graphenes and synthesis of active layer materials for high efficient organic photovoltaics.

 	Fig. 1  Chemical transformation of P3MHOCT to P3CT at 200 °C and further transformation to PT at 300 °C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 14. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Chemical structures of P3HT-b-P3TODT and bis-PCBA, and schematic of the ordered, self-assembled blend that serves as the active layer in the BHJ device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Chemical structures of PCBM, TPA-PCBM, and MF-PCBM.	 

 	Fig. 4  Chemical structure of C61-butyric acid glycidol ester (PCBG).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Polymerization and side chain conversion reactions for the synthesis of P3HNT. Optical microscopic images of (b) P3HT:PCBM (c) P3HNT:PCBM films after thermal annealing at 150 °C. Annealing times are presented in the images (scale bar: 200 μm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Synthesis of P3HT-azide copolymers and their functions as a hole-transporting material for solvent-resistant OFETs and in situ compatibilizer for thermally stable organic solar cells. (b) Efficiencies of P3HT:PCBM devices containing 0, 10, or 15% of P3HT-azide copolymers during thermal annealing at 150 °C with PCBM as the electron acceptor. (c) Current–voltage curves of the 0% and 15% P3HT-azide10 devices with initial (full symbols, 3 h) and long-term (open symbols, 40 h) thermal annealing. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Molecular structure of the thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione (TPD)-based polymer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 8  Synthesis of graft–block type copolymers incorporating fullerene and P3HT macromer. Reprint with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2006, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 9  Synthesis of P3HT-b-C60 diblock copolymer compatibilizer. Reprinted from ref. 39 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  Synthetic route for coil–rod–coil triblock copolymer PTPA-P3HT-PTPA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Synthesis of C60-end capped P3HT. Reprinted from ref. 43 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  Synthesis of PCBTE, PCBBTE and PCBTTE. Reprinted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2012, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  Oxidation mechanism of MDMP-PPV and P3HT.	 

 	Fig. 14  Photostability of several electron-donating and electron-accepting building blocks. Reprinted from ref. 55 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  Proposed degradation pathway of P3HT attacking by oxygen from air. Reprinted from ref. 61 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  Thermo-cleavage of low bandgap polymer and evolution of the normalized absorption during accelerated photochemical aging in air under 100 mW cm−2 solar intensities. Reprinted from ref. 74 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  Cell characteristics, normalized by their initial values, as a function of illumination time under continuous simulated AM 1.5G irradiation (100 mW cm−2) of the PSCs: (a) reference, (b) 0.5 nm LiF layer, (c) 1 nm C60 and 0.5 nm LiF layers, (d) 3 nm C60 and 0.5 nm LiF layers, and 5 nm C60 and 0.5 LiF layers. Current–voltage data were collected at 1 to 3 h intervals under simulated AM 1.5G solar irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2010, American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 18  AFM images of C60 evaporated on the top of P3HT:PC61BM photoactive layer surface with a thickness of: (a) 0 nm, (b) 1 nm, (c) 3 nm, and (d) 5 nm. AFM images were obtained for 2 μm × 2 μm surface areas. The scale bar is 1 μm in all four images. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2010, American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 19  Molecular structures of represent organic materials of electron transport layer used in polymer solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Normalized PCEs and (b) open-circuit voltages (VOC) of devices fabricated with various cathode structures plotted as functions of time. These devices, which were not encapsulated, were stored in a cabinet in which the relative humidity was controlled at ca. 50%. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of a bulk heterojunction solar cell with PEG-C60 as a buffer layer and (b) SEM images of the surface of P3HT:PCBM films with addition of different amount of PEG-C60 and J–V curves of organic solar cells (c) with various amount of PEG-C60 and (d) with the use of different metal cathode, and (e) the normalized efficiency decay of organic solar cells in ambient atmosphere. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic view of the device architecture with a TiOx layer. The TiOx functional layer is inserted between the active layer and the Al electrode with a structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/TiOx/Al. The TiOx layer acts as a shielding and scavenging layer which prevents the intrusion of oxygen and humidity into the electronically active polymers. A brief flow chart of the steps involved in the preparation of the TiOx layer is also shown. Comparison of (b) the power conversion efficiencies and (c) luminous efficiency as a function of storage time for polymer solar cells with and without the TiOx layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2007, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 23  Molecular structures of organic materials for the hole-transporting layer used in polymer solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Cyclic voltammetry curves after 5 and 100 cycles of PSSA-g-PANI and PEDOT:PSS films and (B) J–V curves of organic solar cells using different conductivity of PSSA-g-PANI of PEDOT:PSS. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  Device characteristics of polymer solar cells with PEDOT:PSS (square); PANI:PSS (diamond); PSS-g-PANI (circle); PSS-g-PANI/PFI (triangle). (a) Current density–voltage curve for illumination of 100 mW cm−2, (b) device stability measurement under constant illumination (100 mW cm−2) until normalized power conversion efficiencies were reduced by half. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Device structure (left) and representative J–V curves of polymer solar cells based on different hole-transporting layers (right). Influence of the different hole-transporting layer of varying thicknesses on the (b) PCE, (c) FF, (d) JSC, and (e) VOC of solar cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
