Organosilica hybrid nanomaterials with a high organic content: syntheses and applications of silsesquioxanes  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6NR06862F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6NR06862F
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 19945-19972Organosilica hybrid nanomaterials with a high organic content: syntheses and applications of silsesquioxanes

        
          
            Jonas G. 
            Croissant
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Xavier 
            Cattoën
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jean-Olivier 
            Durand
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Michel 
            Wong Chi Man
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Niveen M. 
            Khashab
          
          
        
      *a
aSmart Hybrid Materials Laboratory, Advanced Membranes and Porous Materials Center, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal 23955, Saudi Arabia. E-mail: niveen.khashab@kaust.edu.sa
bInstitut Néel, Université Grenoble Alpes and CNRS, Grenoble, France
cInstitut Charles Gerhardt Montpellier UMR-5253 CNRS-UM2-ENSCM-UM1cc, 1701 Place Eugène Bataillon, F-34095 Montpelliercedex 05, France
Received 
      30th August 2016
    , Accepted 4th November 2016First published on 7th November 2016AbstractOrganic–inorganic hybrid materials garner properties from their organic and inorganic matrices as well as synergistic features, and therefore have recently attracted much attention at the nanoscale. Non-porous organosilica hybrid nanomaterials with a high organic content such as silsesquioxanes (R-SiO1.5, with R organic groups) and bridged silsesquioxanes (O1.5Si-R-SiO1.5) are especially attractive hybrids since they provide 20 to 80 weight percent of organic functional groups in addition to the known chemistry and stability of silica. In the organosilica family, silsesquioxanes (R-SiO1.5) stand between silicas (SiO2) and silicones (R2SiO), and are variously called organosilicas, ormosil (organically-modified silica), polysilsesquioxanes and silica hybrids. Herein, we comprehensively review non-porous silsesquioxane and bridged silsesquioxane nanomaterials and their applications in nanomedicine, electro-optics, and catalysis.Jonas G. CroissantDr Jonas Croissant is a post-doctoral researcher at the King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (Saudi Arabia) and UCLA. He received his Ph.D. from the École Nationale Supérieure de Chimie de Montpellier (France) in 2014 under the supervision of Profs. Jean-Olivier Durand and Michel Wong Chi Man. He was awarded the Ballard Chemistry Foundation as well as the Société Chimique de France Languedoc Roussillon doctoral thesis awards. His research interests include the design and applications of organosilica nanocomposites.Xavier CattoënDr Xavier Cattoën was born in 1978 in Poitiers (France). He graduated from ENS Cachan and then completed his Ph.D. in 2004 under the supervision of Prof. G. Bertrand and Dr D. Bourissou in Toulouse. After a post-doctoral stay at ICIQ in Tarragona (Spain) in M. A. Pericàs’ group, he joined the CNRS in 2007 at the ICG Institute (Institut Charles Gerhardt Montpellier), and then moved to the Néel Institute in Grenoble in 2013 where he is developing structured hybrid materials for applications in biophotonics.Jean-Olivier DurandDr Jean-Olivier Durand graduated from the Ecole Nationale Supérieure de Chimie de Paris in 1990 and obtained his Ph.D. in organic chemistry with Prof. J. P. Genêt in 1993. He conducted postdoctoral studies with Prof. W. Oppolzer at the University of Geneva (Switzerland). After two other postdoctoral studies in Rennes (Prof. Le Corre) and Paris (Dr M. Larchevêque), he was appointed a CNRS researcher in 1996 at the Laboratoire de Chimie Moléculaire et Organisation du Solide, Institut Charles Gerhardt Montpellier. His research interests include the development of mesoporous silica nanoparticles for photodynamic therapy and drug delivery.Michel Wong Chi ManDr Michel Wong Chi Man studied at the University of Montpellier (France) before completing an AvH Postdoctoral Fellowship at the University of Heidelberg (Germany). Currently he is a CNRS Research Director working at the ICGM (Institut Charles Gerhardt Montpellier) and has also been serving on the Board of the ISGS (International Sol–Gel Society) since 2011. He is an expert in organosilicon and hybrid silica chemistry and over the past two decades he has developed pioneering work on bridged silsesquioxanes (BSQ) producing significant scientific advances in this field. He was the first to report right- and left-handed helical BSQ and self-structured BSQ at the nanoscale. He has also developed BSQ for application in several fields: catalysis, optics, and separation chemistry.Niveen M. KhashabDr Niveen M. Khashab received her B.Sc. from the American University of Beirut in 2002 and her Ph.D. from the University of Florida, Gainesville in 2007 with Alan Katritzky. She conducted postdoctoral studies with Sir J. Fraser Stoddart in UCLA and Northwestern University from 2007 to 2009. She then joined the King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, and was promoted to Associate Professor in 2016. She was awarded the L'Oréal-UNESCO Women in Science award of 2017 for the Africa & Arab States. Her major interests include hybrid materials, stimuli responsive systems, controlled release and delivery applications, and self-assembly.
1. Introduction
1.1. Organosilica hybrid nanomaterials
Hybrid materials are well-known to uniquely garner properties from their organic and inorganic components in a synergistic way. Organosilica hybrids obtained by sol–gel processes have attracted particular attention owing to their ability to control the processability of the materials via the chemistry of silica and combine it with highly tunable organic properties.1–29 The pursuit of nanoscaled organosilica hybrids is of great interest for many applications such as nanomedicine,1,3,30–39 separation,40–55 catalysis56–69 and opto-electronics11,70–80 due to new properties available at the nanoscale and novel behaviors between nanomaterials and their surrounding media.1,81,82
Various types of organosilica composite nanomaterials were thus designed, and they may be distinguished in the following four categories: mesoporous organosilica, non-porous organosilica, periodic mesoporous organosilica, and non-porous silsesquioxane NPs (Fig. 1). Mesoporous organosilica NPs could be prepared by co-condensation of a silica source (e.g. tetraethoxysilane (TEOS)) with a mono or a bridged organoalkoxysilane in a templated aqueous solution which affords NPs with functional pores (Fig. 1A and B).34,83–88 Non-porous organosilica NPs are prepared in a similar manner in the absence of structure directing agents (Fig. 1C),89–91 or can be prepared by post-functionalizing silica NPs (Fig. 1D).92–97 The latter two strategies have been applied to design organosilica nanocomposites with low to intermediate organic contents on the order of 1 to 30 weight percent,98–105 which limits their properties and applications. The doping of silica with organic moieties could also be done without covalent alkoxysilane linkages. This comes from the synthetic challenge to maintain the porosity and the compositional homogeneity at higher organic contents. On the other hand, organosilica nanocomposites with much higher organic contents (typically 30–70%) could be designed via sol–gel processes of mono or bridged organoalkoxysilane without a silica source (Fig. 1E–H).106,107 In the presence of structure directing agents, the condensation of bridged alkoxysilane may lead to periodic mesoporous organosilicas (PMOs, also called mesoporous bridged silsesquioxanes),1,108–124 while in their absence non-porous (though not always) silsesquioxanes are obtained from mono or bridged-organoalkoxysilanes (Fig. 1H and G). We recently reviewed comprehensively mesoporous bridged silsesquioxane NPs.1 A few years ago, reviews have been published on bulk silsesquioxane materials.18,125–127 Silsesquioxane NPs obtained from mono-alkoxysilylated organosilanes were reviewed in 2005 by John Hay et al.128 The present review focuses on the state of the art of nanoscaled non-porous silsesquioxanes and bridged silsesquioxanes with a comprehensive survey of their syntheses and applications. Note that polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxanes (POSS)129–135 which are silsesquioxane polyhedra nanodots are not described since they form another wide field of research. The frontier between these materials is, however, narrow since trimethoxyorganosilanes can form POSS,136–138 and POSS can be fragmented to prepare various silsesquioxanes.139 Mesoporous POSS materials140–144 and POSS-bridged silsesquioxane hybrid materials were also reported.145–152 For the purpose of this review we will describe silsesquioxanes with at least one dimension below 1000 nm. A few polydisperse nano/micro-particles requiring size optimizations are also presented since their concepts are relevant to the field.
 Fig. 1  Structures and synthetic pathways of various organosilica nanocomposites: organically-doped mesoporous silica NPs (A and B), organically-doped (C) and surface-functionalized (D) non-porous silica NPs, periodic mesoporous organosilica NPs (E and F), and non-porous silsesquioxane NPs with or without surface functionalization (H and G respectively). Cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) is a typical surfactant in sol–gel processes. Organoalkoxysilane and bridged organoalkoxysilane precursors possess ethoxy or methoxy R groups. *Not sensu stricto but generally with a disorganized low micro or mesoporosity. 
1.2. Design and properties of silsesquioxane NPs
Herein, we differentiate on the one hand silsesquioxane (SQ) NPs prepared from mono-organoalkoxysilane precursors (Fig. 2A), and on the other hand bridged silsesquioxane (BSQ) NPs prepared from bis- (n = 1) or multi-organoalkoxysilane (n ≥ 1) precursors (see Fig. 2B). Most reported BSQ NPs were, however, synthesized from bis-organoalkoxysilanes. Chlorosilanes153,154 and organoalkoxysilanes with methoxy, propoxy, and isopropoxy leaving groups were also used for sol–gel processed materials,155,156 though organotriethoxysilanes are usually preferred since they generate ethanol by-products and have a lower reactivity which allows a greater synthetic control to tailor the nanostructures.136,156–159 Both nanomaterials are obtained via hydrolysis and condensation reactions under acidic, basic, or fluoride catalysis.160 The resulting materials differ in the interconnectivity of the siloxane network, which is bridged by organic moieties in the case of BSQ NPs. In terms of properties, compared to organosilicas, the organic repetitive units of SQ and BSQ allow the tunability of the porosity, thermal and mechanical stabilities, refractive index, optical clarity, chemical resistance, hydrophobicity and dielectric constant.1,106,161 BSQ materials are generally more likely than SQ materials to have a molecular periodicity via hydrogen bonding or π–π stackings between bridging units, which may or may not be desirable for a given application.72,74,162–169 However, since the thermal, chemical, and mechanical stabilities of such materials are related to the degree of the siloxane entanglement, BSQ materials are generally more stable than SQ materials for a given organic moiety, though synthetic conditions may affect the textural properties of the materials (meso-, nano-pores) and in turn modify their stability. Such considerations are particularly important for the kinetics of the particle degradation and for the diffusion of molecules as discussed in section 3. BSQ materials are also more likely to be mesoporous than SQ materials with templating agents or additives.1
 Fig. 2  Representation of the synthesis and chemical structure of silsesquioxane (A) and bridged silsesquioxane NPs (B) from organoalkoxysilanes (R is generally an ethoxy or a methoxy group). 
Historically, bulk SQ materials were already studied and patented in the 60s and 70s,170–172 but the controlled synthesis of BSQ nanomaterials was only achieved in the year 2000 by Brinker and Loy via an evaporation-induced self-assembly method.20 From 2006 onwards,173 Shea and co-workers then published many pioneering studies on BSQ NPs.174,175 The advances in the controlled syntheses of SQ and BSQ NPs with various sizes, morphologies, and organic constituents are reviewed in section 2.
2. Synthesis of silsesquioxane and bridged silsesquioxane NPs
2.1. Synthesis of silsesquioxane (SQ) NPs
Since the first elaborations of SQ nanomaterials, a wide variety of compositions have been investigated as shown in Fig. 3 displaying saturated and unsaturated alkyl chains, phenyl, aminopropyl, as well as larger and more complex structures listed with increasing size. Besides, SQ NPs have been designed with various morphologies such as spherical, hollow, core–shell, and Janus NPs. In the following sub-sections SQ nanomaterials are classified according to their morphologies, and their syntheses are briefly discussed.
 Fig. 3  Versatile chemical structures of reported SQ NPs obtained from mono-organoalkoxysilyl precursors. Stars indicate that the corresponding trimethoxy- or triethoxy-organosilane precursors are commercially available. 

SQ nanospheres. 
Several modifications of the Stöber sol–gel route have been employed to prepare monodisperse SQ nanospheres. In 2003, Arkhireeva and Hay designed methyl (1, see numbering in Fig. 3), ethyl (2), vinyl (3), and phenyl (7) SQ nanospheres with sizes ranging from 60 to 180 nm.176 The silicon–carbon bonds remained stable during the hydrolysis–condensation of organoalkoxysilanes and the authors measured low surface areas (<100 m2 g−1) with mesopores (2–4 nm) arising from the steric effects of the organic groups. They later managed to tune the nanomaterial sizes from 300 to 3 nm with methyl and vinyl bridges leading to highly monodisperse particles (Fig. 4A and B).177 Higher porosities could be obtained with benzethonium chloride surfactants.128 In another study, a systematic assessment of the influence of seven different organic groups on the syntheses and properties of SQ NPs was described.157 Nearly monodisperse 100 to 400 nm nanospheres were synthesised with methyl (1, see Fig. 4C), ethyl (2), vinyl (3), pentyl (5), octyl (6), phenyl (7), and aminopropyl (8) groups. Rhodamine B-doped NPs were also prepared to study the influence of the organic groups on the optical properties and the doping efficiencies. Methyl (1) SQ NPs enabled the highest doping while the aggregation of the dye was less favored with vinyl NPs and led to the highest yield in rhodamine emission. Mercaptopropyl (10) SQ NPs were first prepared by Nakamura and Ishimura from mercaptopropyl-trimethoxysilane.178 They then investigated the influence of methoxy and ethoxy leaving groups finding similar kinetics for the formation of NPs via the Stöber method,179 and they also prepared NPs from (3-mercaptopropyl)methyldimethoxysilane at higher ammonia concentration.180 The same group later prepared epoxy (17) SQ NPs from the sol–gel process of 2-(3,4-epoxycyclohexyl)ethyltrimethoxysilane in different reaction mixtures, affording 100 to 1500 nm spherical particles.181 Mercaptopropyl (10) SQ NPs doped with fluorescein-aminopropyl (29) SQ NPs were prepared in aqueous ammonia.182 Larger phenyl (7) SQ particles of 400 nm in diameter and incorporating fluorescent dansylamide derivatives (22) were recently described by Loy et al. in order to prepare hybrid membranes by thermal sintering of NPs on a ceramic support.183 The Stöber method was also used recently to synthesize silsesquioxane nanocrystals for the first time.184 Until that report, SQ NPs were mostly disorganized, but lowering the condensation of vinyl (3) SQ NPs allowed the π–π stacking of the vinyl groups which generated fluorescence in 2 to 6 nm large nanocrystals by quantum confinement.
 Fig. 4  TEM micrographs of monodisperse vinyl (3) SQ NPs of 7 nm (A)177 and 3 nm (B).128 Reproduced with permission from Elsevier and Springer-Verlag. SEM micrograph of monodisperse methyl (1) SQ NPs (C).157 Adapted with permission from Elsevier. 
Non-hydrolytic sol–gel methods were later reported to prepare spherical particles of 100 nm to 2 μm in diameter by reacting organotrichlorosilane precursors in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), which was used both as a solvent and as an oxygen donor in the absence of a catalyst.185 Through this approach various SQ NPs were obtained with methyl (1), ethyl (2), and phenyl (7) groups, though the materials were aggregated on quite large scales. Mercaptopropyl (10) SQ NPs with propyldisulfide functions186 were obtained via self-condensation in DMSO as well.187
An emulsion synthesis was developed by Prasad and co-workers for the preparation of various SQ NPs (typically with vinyl groups) and organically-doped SQ NPs, often called “ormosil” for organically-modified silica. The method is based on the Aerosol-OT surfactant (AOT: sodium bis(2-ethylhexyl)-sulfosuccinate) in the non-polar core of AOT/1-butanol/water micelles.188 By this process, they prepared vinyl (3) and iodopropyl (14) SQ nanospheres of 30 nm.188 Kong et al. prepared vinyl (3) SQ NPs in a reverse emulsion reaction, then modified surface vinyls into carboxylic acid upon addition of KMnO4, and eventually pegylated the SQ particles through the formation of carbamate linkers. Kong and co-workers synthesized SQ NPs from N-(3-trimethoxy-silylethyl)-ethylenediamine (leading to 15) through a miniemulsion process using sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS) as an emulsifier, and obtained 100 nm spherical particles.189 Several SQ NPs with physically-encapsulated photosensitizers in their core were prepared. One example was reported using AOT/DMSO/water emulsions to stabilize photoactive molecules in DMSO, and then form the physically-doped vinyl (3) SQ NPs.190 Vinyl (3) or aminopropyl (8) SQ NPs were physically-doped with Nile red dyes to act as optical probes.191 Propyl (4) SQ NPs were also used to encapsulate two-photon absorbers.192
Inspired by the reproducibility and applicability of the miniemulsion method for SQ nanospheres, multiple SQs were mixed to form multifunctional NPs. The nanomaterials were composed of one or more short groups (mercaptopropyl, vinyl, etc.) to guide the nanoscale condensation and to provide hydrophobic properties with the organosilica matrix, and in some cases, longer and more functional groups were also mixed for the target application. Bifunctional hydrophobic SQ NPs with methyl (1)/propyl (4) and, or propyl (4)/octyl (6) SQ compositions were prepared via an emulsion polymerization under alkaline conditions in a SDS/water mixture at 35 °C.193 Bifunctional SQ NPs could be obtained by physical doping of specific molecules,190,194–197 but the covalent linkage was often preferred to prevent the leakage of the doping agents after an extended period of time. Mono-alkoxysilylated chlorin (30)198 and rhodamine B (28)199 were thus covalently incorporated into vinyl (3) SQ NPs. Typically, a mixture of AOT and 1-butanol co-surfactant was used to form micelles in water, dyes or drugs were added, and the addition of the SQ precursor (vinyl, amino-propyl, mercaptopropyl, etc.) triggered the particle formation at room temperature. The resulting nanomaterials were monodisperse and their sizes were tuned according to the amount of organosilanes added. Importantly for biomedical applications, non-aggregated 20 to 30 nm NPs were reproducibly obtained. Multiple organic functions were also incorporated into a single 20 nm SQ system with vinyl (3), aminopropyl (8), and a near-infrared (NIR) fluorophore (32) for biomedical applications (see section 3.1).200 The covalent incorporation of naphthalenyl-vinylenepyridine (23) into vinyl (3) SQ NPs was similarly carried out for analysing linear and nonlinear optical properties.195 Highly pegylated (24–27) vinyl (3) SQ NPs doped with the IR755-dye (31) SQ NPs were also prepared in one pot according to this synthesis.201,202 More biocompatible nanomaterials endowed with a stealth behavior were obtained via pegylation.203
Hydrofluoric acid catalysis was used to prepare ultrasmall 2 to 4 nm SQ NPs from N,N-di(2,3-dihydroxypropyl)(aminopropyl)-triethoxysilane thus affording a tretraol branched (18) SQ NPs. The synthesis was performed in a methanol/water mixture at room temperature for 2 h. The authors identified partial intermolecular cyclization within the silsesquioxane structure,204,205 which probably accounted for the restricted extent of the particle growth.106


SQ hollow nanospheres. 
SQ nanomaterials with hollow internal cavities are also desirable for many applications and have hence been synthesized using sol–gel science by template and non-template syntheses.69 In 2003, Koo et al. first prepared monodisperse 450 nm hollow phenyl (7) SQ NPs without a template via a two-step method in an aqueous solution (see Fig. 5).206 The mechanism of the formation of the hollow structure was discovered to be a self-templating synthesis based on the dissolution of non-condensed organoalkoxysilanes inside growing particles upon ethanolic washing.207 Besides, the thickness of the shells could be precisely tuned from 75 to 165 nm, simply by decreasing the sol–gel reaction time, which lowered the extent of the condensation. Conversely, the absence of washing led to dense SQ NPs.
 Fig. 5  SEM (A–C) and TEM (B) micrographs of monodisperse hollow phenyl (7) SQ NPs. TEM scale bar of 600 nm (B).206 Adapted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The hard template approach is nonetheless generally preferred for its wider applicability. Ha and co-workers produced fluorinated (12) hollow SQ NPs via polystyrene beads as a hard template further coated with polyvinylene-pyrrolidone and then a silsesquioxane layer.208 The use of the polymer template, subsequently dissolved by the addition of ammonia, allowed the preparation of monodisperse 200 nm hollow SQ NPs. Trifluoropropyls were maintained and provided an interesting framework for various applications. The same group recently extended this approach to prepare trifluoropropyl (12), phenyl (7), vinyl (3), and methyl (1) SQ hollow NPs (Fig. 6).209 Cage-like methacryloxy-propyl (16) SQs were also copolymerized with styrene to controllably produce hollow SQs, after etching of the polystyrene cores.210
 Fig. 6  Sol–gel precursors (A) of highly monodisperse SQ NPs from a polystyrene hard template, as shown by TEM (A and B) and SEM (C) micrographs. TEM scale bars of 20 nm (A).209 Adapted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 


SQ core–shell nanoparticles. 
Müller et al. prepared 30 to 40 nm SQ-glycopolymer hybrid nanomaterials from the 4 nm tetra-hydroxyalkyl branched aminopropyl (18) SQs.211 First, they mixed four equivalents of 2-bromo-2 methylpropionyl bromide to modify the SQ alcohol functions in order to make the resulting (19) SQ NPs a macroinitiator for atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP). Second, they conducted the ATRP with large sugar bearing methacrylate monomers to design the core–shell nanomaterials.
Several hydrophobic small NPs (<5 nm) were also encapsulated into the SQ framework for the design of multifunctional nanoplatforms. Quantum dots composed of CdSe/CdS/ZnS as well as magnetic Fe3O4 nanospheres were incorporated inside vinyl (3) SQ NPs by an emulsion method conducted at room temperature for 20 h.212 The encapsulation of gold NPs along with two dyes (fluorescein and malachite green isothiocyanate) inside mercaptopropyl (10) SQ NPs was performed for multimodal imaging.213
A number of SQ-polymer hybrid latex nanomaterials were recently developed,214 reminiscent of the polystyrene hard template previously highlighted. These approaches were inspired by a pioneering study involving the design of silica–polystyrene core–shell NPs obtained via the silica coating of methacryloxy(propyl)trimethoxysilane to initiate the polystyrene copolymerization.215 The group of Li designed polystyrene@SQ,216 SQ@poly(styrene-butyl acrylate-fluorinated acrylate),217 and polymethacryloxy-SQ@polyacrylate core@shell nanocomposites.218 Typically, γ-methacryloxypropyl (16) SQ cores or shells are grown in water or water–ethanol mixtures under basic or acidic catalysis at moderate temperatures (50 to 80 °C) for several hours. Vinyl SQ NPs were also used to co-polymerize onto preformed polystyrene spheres in order to design SQ-polystyrene hybrid latex particles.219
Yolk–shell silica@mercaptopropyl (10) SQ NPs were recently synthesized by selective etching of the silica cores (Fig. 7A)220 previously described for PMO NPs221 and silica@silica nanorattles.222 The resulting yolk–shell framework allowed the incorporation of palladium NPs to afford elegant nanoreactors. The hybrid composition of the nanomaterials was demonstrated by the combination of electron microscopy and elemental mapping techniques (Fig. 7B).
 Fig. 7  Schematics for the synthesis of SQ-silica nanorattles and the encapsulation of Pd NPs (A). Elemental mappings of NPs visualized via electron microscopy (B).220 Adapted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 


SQ Janus nanoparticles. 
Mesoporous silica nanospheres asymmetrically-capped with phenyl (7) SQs were described by the group of Kuroda.223 A dispersion of 30 nm mesostructured silica spheres was first prepared in an aqueous CTAB template, then mixed with phenyltriethoxysilane, and stirred at 80 °C for 12 h at pH 8.2. The nanomaterials were finally dialyzed in order to remove the surfactant. The size of the phenyl (7) SQ phase could be increased by the amount of organoalkoxysilane added to the NP dispersion.

2.2. Synthesis of bridged silsesquioxane (BSQ) NPs
BSQ nanomaterials have been reported mainly from bridged organoalkoxysilanes constituted of two alkoxysilyls, and a few examples involved more than two alkoxysilyls (see Fig. 8, the numbering follows the size of the bridges). The variety of the organic bridging units range from simple alkyl and alkene (I–III), aromatic (IV–VII), or alkylamine (VIII–X)174,224 groups to polyaromatic conjugated groups such as coumarin dimers (XXIX),173 chlorins (XXXI, XXXII), and tetra-clicked diphenylbutadiene (XXXVII)225 and porphyrins (XXXX–XXXXIII).226–230 In the following sub-sections, BSQ nanomaterials are classified according to their morphologies, and their syntheses are briefly discussed.
 Fig. 8  Diverse chemical structures of reported bridged silsesquioxane NPs obtained from bis- or multi-organoalkoxysilyl precursors. Stars indicate that the corresponding trimethoxy- or triethoxy-organosilane precursors are commercially available. 

BSQ nanospheres. 
An original evaporation-induced self-assembly (EISA) method was first reported by Brinker and Loy to produce non-aggregated BSQ NPs with a spherical morphology.20 They used dilute homogeneous ethanolic solutions of the precursors with various surfactants and hydrochloric acid solutions. They obtained multi-lamellar vesicular BSQ NPs with 2,3-butadienylene (III) bridging groups, and mesoporous phenylene (IV) BSQ NPs.
The first ‘chimie douce’ method involved the design of coumarin dimer (XXIX) based BSQ NPs by Shea and co-workers.173 The nanospheres were obtained under acidic sol–gel conditions in a water/tetrahydrofuran mixture leading to NPs with sizes in the range of 50 to 100 nm. The same group later reported the sol–gel reaction of the o-nitrobenzyl-N,N-bis(trimethoxysilylpropyl)carbamate precursor in a water/propanol mixture to prepare the corresponding (XVI) BSQ particles of 200 nm in diameter.231 Monodisperse propyldisulfide-based (XI) BSQ NPs of 200 nm were reported in basic water/ethanol at 80 °C by Durand et al.113
Reverse microemulsion reactions were also performed to synthesize BSQ NPs. The controlled syntheses of various monodisperse NPs with dipropyl-bipyridinium-based (XV) and alkyldiamine-based (X) BSQ NPs were achieved via water-in-oil emulsions in acidic water and cyclohexane.174 Cis-platin-based (XXII) BSQ aggregated NPs were prepared in an ammonium hydroxide-catalyzed sol–gel polymerization involving an anionic reverse microemulsion composed of the AOT surfactant and hexane.232 A reverse microemulsion method was also applied to construct gadolinium-based (XXVI) BSQ NPs.233 The reaction medium involved an aqueous mixture of the Triton X-100 surfactant, 1-hexanol, cyclohexane (100 mL), with ammonium hydroxide catalyst and was stirred for one day at room temperature. Vivero-Escoto et al. also prepared chlorin-based (XXXI, XXXII) BSQ NPs.234
Modified Stöber syntheses were also used for the preparation of BSQ nanospheres. Shea et al. fabricated various alkylene (I, II), phenylalkylene (IV, V), and alkylamine-based (IX) BSQ nano or microparticles (see Fig. 9A and B).224 The average particle sizes were systematically controlled between 20 nm and 1.5 μm by adjusting parameters such as the 1-propanol content. Two competitive mechanisms were proposed, the “monomer addition” consisting of the growth of seeds with remaining monomers in solution, and the “chemical aggregation” which described the growth of particles through the aggregation of seeds (Fig. 9C). The rough surface of NPs suggests that the latter mechanism was favored (Fig. 9B).
 Fig. 9  SEM micrograph of BSQ NPs obtained from (III) (A),174 and (II) (B).224 Artistic representation of the competitive mechanisms for particle growth and size limitation.224 Adapted with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Loy et al. recently investigated the non-hydrolytic formation of silica and BSQ NPs.235 Using a method involving formic acid (4–8 equivalents) in toluene or toluene/tetrahydrofuran solutions, they successfully prepared polydisperse 500 to 1500 nm phenylene (IV) BSQ NPs, and aggregated ethylene (I) and bis(propyl)tetrasulfide-based (XI) BSQ NPs. A non-hydrolytic sol–gel method involving a mixture of bis-silylated bipyridine, DMF and trichloride lanthanides (TbCl3, EuCl3) at 100 °C produced nano- and micron-sized (XX) BSQ particles aggregated on large scales.236


BSQ hollow nanospheres. 
The group of Khashab recently reported the design of hollow and non-hollow BSQ NPs via a nitrophenylene bridge derivative (XVIII) (Fig. 10). The preparation of para-xylylene-bridged (V) periodic mesoporous organosilicas and the related hollow spherical nanoparticles was reported.237 Interestingly, the internal cavity of the latter hollow BSQ spheres could be adjusted by simply changing the relative amount of the xylene swelling agent.
 Fig. 10  Synthesis of nitrophenylene-based (XVIII) BSQ and hollow BSQ NPs as shown by TEM micrographs.239 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society. 


BSQ hollow nanorings. 
Tetrasilylated lysine-based (XXXVIII) BSQ NPs with a hollow ring-like morphology were recently developed.238 The silane precursor was dissolved in DMF, then added to a solution of CTAB/H2O/NH3, and stirred for 2 h at 50 °C. The dimensions of the nano-objects were 220 nm in diameter and a cross-section of about 50 nm. The hollow feature was removed in the absence of the CTAB template, which supported the key role of CTAB ammonium groups with the silanes. On the other hand, lower and higher volumes of water produced nanofibers and nanospheres, respectively. These facts suggested the essential role of the lysine precursor concentration, coupled with its intra and intermolecular interactions, in the formation of hollow ring-like BSQ particles.


BSQ nanotubes and nanofibers. 
The anisotropic growth of BSQ nanomaterials appears to be mainly directed by the self-assembly of bridging units via hydrogen bonds or aromatic–aromatic interactions. The direction for the anisotropic assembly was thus strongly influenced by structural geometry characteristics such as chirality.240 Studies involving the self-assembly of organic bridges via the H-bonding driving force were reported via bis-urea-functionalized organosilyl precursors. Moreau and co-workers described the control of the morphology of diaminocyclohexane (XIX with n = 1) BSQ materials with hollow tube or spherical shapes (Fig. 11).241 The organo-bridged bis(triethoxy)silane, prepared as (R,R; S,S) enantiopure forms or as a racemic mixture, was hydrolyzed in basic ethanolic solution (pH 12) for 6 days at 80 °C. Interestingly, the pure enantiomeric compounds led to 2 ± 12 μm long and 300 to 1500 nm wide rectangular hollow rods with 100 nm thicknesses, while the racemic mixture led to spherical objects under similar conditions.
 Fig. 11  Syntheses of the molecular (XIX) precursors and BSQ (A) with various morphologies (B–E). TEM images of BSQ nanotubes obtained from the (R,R) or (S,S) precursors (B). SEM image of BSQ nano- and micro-spheres obtained from the racemic mixture (C). SEM images of BSQ nanotubes obtained from the (R,R) or (S,S) precursors (D). SEM images of nanofibers obtained from the (R,R) precursor after precipitation (before sol–gel) (E).241 Adapted with permission from Wiley. 
Using a similar synthetic method they later could obtain much downsized BSQ nanotubes of tris-(propylureido)benzene-based (XXXVI), which were 1–3 μm long and 40–100 nm wide, along with monodisperse microparticles.243 The structure and hydrophobicity of the BSQ precursor were responsible for the variation of the final shape of the nanomaterials. It was observed that higher aqueous contents in water/ethanol solutions lead to faster kinetics and lower solubility of the trisilylated precursor, thus favoring the self-assembly of the moieties and the generation of tubular nanostructures. The condensation of the bis-silylated triazine, in the presence of cyanuric acid complexing three triazine moieties via H-bond, produced BSQ (XXV) aggregated in wire-like morphologies. Another example of BSQ NRs was described by Wu et al. with (XXIII) bithiazole bridges.244 The materials were obtained in a water/ethanol mixture under reflux, affording 900 nm wide and 3 μm long objects. Interestingly, the shape of the particles was changed when the sol–gel process was carried out in the presence of the nickel (XXIII) and lanthanide (XXIV) ions complexing the bithiazole bridges. The latter one led to aggregated nanospheres of about 200 nm. The change in the morphology may have arisen from a loss of self-assembly upon the ion complexations due to the ligations of lanthanides with carbonyls.
Long bis(propylurea)alkyl-based BSQ materials were also reported by various groups. In these cases, intermolecular van der Waals forces may also have contributed to the self-assembly, though to a minor extent. Moreau and co-workers prepared bis(propylurea)dodecylene (XXXIV) BSQ lamellar materials which consisted of thin plates up to 1–2 μm large, 3–5 μm long, and 50–100 nm thick. The fabrication in acidic aqueous solution involved the intermolecular urea H-bond directed self-assembly of the BSQ organic linkers.166
Hammer and co-workers designed a silicon-based organically-bridged nanomaterial similar to BSQ with a general formula of O0.5(CH3)2Si-R-Si(CH3)2O0.5, (XXVIII) with perylenediimide R bridges (Fig. 12A).242 Upon the variation of the concentration of the sol–gel catalyst, various morphologies were reported such as 200 nm × 15 μm nanowires and 200 nm × 9 μm nanorods (Fig. 12B and C). The structure was rigid despite the lower siloxane crosslinking, which could be ascribed to the self-assembly of aromatic moieties.
 Fig. 12  Design of silicon-based organically-bridged nanorods and nanowires with perylenediimide R bridges (XXVIII).242 Adapted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Chiral BSQ nanofibers were also designed via the use of chiral BSQ NP precursors (Fig. 13A–H). Chiral BSQ with bis(propylurea)cyclohexylene (XIX) bridges were prepared with right-handed and left-handed helical nanofiber morphologies.164 The nanofibers were 15 μm long and a few hundred nanometers wide and the helical handedness could be controlled via the choice of the (R,R) or the (S,S)-diamino-cyclohexane core (Fig. 13A and B). The particles were polydisperse spheres of 300 nm to 2 microns. Interestingly, modifying the structure of the bridges (XIX) with alkyl spacers (n = 3, 4, 5, 10) between each urea group and the cyclohexane resulted in 15 μm long chiral microfibers of 500 to 2000 nm in diameter for short alkyl lengths (n = 3, 4), and plate-like stacked structures for longer spacers (n = 5, 10).250 The self-assembly of a large bridges, possessing two urea and two amide functions separated with central alkylene segments of 9 or 12 carbons (XXXIV) with chiral (DD or LL) functionalities guiding the handedness, was also used to prepare chiral nanofibers (Fig. 13C–F).246 The synthesis was performed in 1,4-dioxane with a HCl catalyst and led to polydisperse nano- and micro-fibers. Interestingly, the helical handedness of the bundles followed an odd–even effect according to the number of carbons of the central alkylene segments.251 The dodecyl derived (XXXIV) BSQ fibers notably depicted both superoleophilic and superhydrophobic properties. This strategy was extended to a similar bridge with a biphenyl spacer (XXXV) to design right- of left-handed BSQ helicoidal nanofibers (Fig. 13G and H).
 Fig. 13  SEM micrographs of various BSQ nanofibers and nanotubes. Chiral bis-(propylurea)cyclohexylene (XIX) BSQ right-handed (A) and left-handed (B) helical nanofibers, respectively obtained from the corresponding (R,R) and (S,S) bis(triethoxysilyl)organosilane precursors.164 Chiral bis(propylurea-amide)biphenylene (XXXV) BSQ with right-handed (C and D) and left-handed (E and F) helical nanofiber morphologies, respectively obtained from the corresponding (D,D) and (L,L) bis(triethoxysilyl)organosilane precursors.245 Chiral bis(propylurea-amide)dodecylene (XXXIV, n = 2) BSQ left-handed (G) and right-handed (H) helical nanofibers, respectively obtained from the corresponding (S,S) and (R,R) bis(triethoxysilyl)organosilane precursors.246 Chiral helicoidal phenylene (IV) BSQ nanofibers were designed from the transfer of chirality of gelator 12K in water (I and J), while in water/ethanol nanotubes were obtained (K).247 SEM and TEM images of helicoidal biphenyl (VII) BSQ nanofibers obtained via an anionic chiral gelator248 (L and M respectively).249 
The self-assembly of the chiral gelator was employed as a soft template for the preparation of organic–inorganic nanofibers and nanotubes (Fig. 13I–M).252 The group of Yang designed a so-called “sol–gel transcription method” with chiral gelator self-assembled templates. Chiral SQ/BSQ nanotubes and nanoribbons were obtained with a gelator involving the stepwise formation of aminopropyl (8) SQ and phenylene (IV) BSQ under stirring at 0 °C for 10 minutes, static growth at 0 °C for 1 day, and then for 4 hours at 80 °C.253,254 The APTES silane was used as a co-templating agent. The same approach was also extended to 4,4′-biphenylene (VII) BSQ nanoribbons with the transfer of the chirality of gelator 12K.255 Nanoribbons were synthesized in water (Fig. 13I and J) while nanotubes were obtained in a water/ethanol solution (Fig. 13K).247 A higher ethanol content induced the formation of left-handed tubular ribbons with chiral aromatic ring packings, according to circular dichroism measurements. Impressively, the chirality was probed at both the nano and angstrom scales. While the nanoribbons displayed left-handedness at the nanolevel, the aromatic stacking was of left- or of right-handedness as a function of the self-assembly of the gelator.256 Biphenylene (VII) BSQ chiral nanotubes and single-layered nanoribbons were also fabricated via an anionic chiral gelator (Fig. 13L and M).249 The pyrolysis of these nano-objects was recently reported leading to carbonaceous tubular nanoribbons and single-layered nanoribbons respectively after silica removal through HF treatment. Interestingly the tubular nanoribbons exhibited optical activity while the single-layered ones did not as shown by circular dichroism spectra.257 Note that the same group further described various chiral mesoporous phenylene (IV) BSQ NPs.258,259


BSQ core–shell nanoparticles. 
Fluorescent BSQ core silica shell NPs were prepared by Tang et al. with either tetraphenylethene (XXVII) or silole (XXX) derivatives. The procedure first involved the sol–gel synthesis of (XXVII or XXX) BSQ cores by ammonium hydroxide catalysis in an ethanol/water mixture at room temperature for 3 h, followed by silica coating via TEOS to form the core–shell nanosystem.260 Monodisperse nanospheres of 60, 175, and 250 nm in diameter were obtained for the tetraphenylethene-based core, and 45, 200, and 270 nm NPs for the silole one, via the variation of the TEOS and catalyst concentrations.
Diphenylbutadienylene derivative-based (XXXVII) BSQ NPs, and the associated gold core BSQ shell (Au@BS) and gold-decorated BSQ (BS@Au) NPs were recently reported (Fig. 14). As shown by TEM and SEM micrographs the NPs were of 100 to 200 nm with 15 nm gold NPs. Au@BS was prepared according to a modified one-pot synthesis of a gold core mesoporous silica shell involving the in situ nucleation of gold nanocrystals followed by the coating of BSQ in a water/ethanol mixture with a sodium hydroxide catalyst.225 The timing of the addition of the BSQ precursor was crucial to avoid the aggregation of gold cores. On the other hand, BSQ NPs could be prepared and then mixed with freshly prepared gold NPs to decorate their surface without additional capping agents.
 Fig. 14  Representation of various (XXXVII) BSQ NPs entitled as BSNPs, BS@AuNPs, and Au@BSNPs along with their TEM micrographs (A–C).225 Reproduced with permission from Elsevier. 

3. Applications of silsesquioxane and bridged silsesquioxane NPs
3.1. Nanomedicine
Despite the fact that SQ and BSQ nanomaterials have very diverse properties, several general features characterize them and account for their increased biomedical applications. First, like mesoporous silica NPs, the size, morphology, and surface functionalization of SQ and BSQ nanomaterials are controllable by materials chemists, as shown by the variety of syntheses presented in section 2. Second, the combination of organic and inorganic chemistries to elaborate novel organosilyl precursors and their corresponding SQ and BSQ hybrid NPs fosters interdisciplinary collaborations for the design and biological applications of nanosystems with unprecedented properties. Third, the unique high organic content of SQ and BSQ NPs (20–80 wt%) can be used for theranostic purposes and thus provide NPs applicable at much lower doses than that of silica or organosilica analogs. For instance, SQ or BSQ NPs mainly composed of photosensitizers are very effective for photodynamic therapy (PDT), while the efficiency of photosensitizer-doped silica is limited by the doping threshold. Fourth, the amorphous hybrid organosilica framework generally (though not always) leads to low cytotoxicity below 100 mg mL−1 for both SQ194,200,228,261,262 and BSQ NPs225,230,234,263 with various organic fragments, as reported for mesoporous organosilica NPs.39
Furthermore, several in-depth biological studies on specific SQ NPs highlighted their potential for nanomedicine. For instance, the biodistribution and clearance of 20 nm pegylated vinyl (3) SQ chemically doped with the NIR dye DY776 (32) SQ was investigated by the group of Prasad.200 One day after the injection of SQ NPs in mice, the free NIR dye was mainly biodistributed in the intestine, the liver, and the kidney, while NPs were mainly found in the liver. After 360 hours, the clearance of the nanomaterial was evidenced (Fig. 15A), which opens promising biomedical applications with very low NP bio-accumulation, hence limiting potential side-effects. Additionally, Mancin et al. showed that serum proteins absorbed on the surface of non-PEGylated SQ NPs which prevented their aggregation in saline solutions.265 Conversely, pegylated NPs benefitted so-called “stealth” behavior against the phagocytic capture by human macrophages, which promises slower blood clearance,201 though the group of Nakamura recently identified ‘pegylated-resistant’ macrophages.182 Gunawardena and co-workers showed that 20 nm vinyl (3) SQ doped with rhodamine B (28) and conjugated with transferrin proteins fed to Drosophila had no effect on viability, and penetrated into living brains and neurons.264 According to their findings, SQ NPs were found in the cytoplasm (and not the nucleus) of the neuronal cell body without inducing aberrant neuronal death or interfering with normal neuronal processes (Fig. 15B–F). These biological investigations thus support the potential of small-sized SQ and BSQ NPs for brain-related nanomedicine.
 Fig. 15  Clearance of the vinyl (3)-NIR-dye (31) SQ NPs intravenously injected into the mice (upper panel) compared with the free dye injected mice as the control (lower panel) (A).200 Adapted with permission from the American Chemical Society. Drosophila cellular imaging displaying that vinyl (3)-Rhodamine B (28) SQ NPs (red) do not move into the nucleus and are found in the cytoplasm (B). DAPI dyes stained nuclei (C) and the merged image (D). (E) Image of larval segmental nerves from dissected larvae showing the presence of SQ NPs (arrows), without any effect on the axonal transport pathway as shown by the synaptic vesicle antibody, CSP (F).264 Adapted with permission from PLoS One. 
Bioimaging and sensing
Due to the versatility of organic components that could be linked to SQ and BSQ NPs, several strategies have been explored to endow the particles with imaging capabilities. The first approach involved the application of SQ NPs with short organic hydrophobic moieties, such as methyl and vinyl groups, to serve as vehicles for physically entrapped dyes into SQ NPs. One of the earliest examples of bioimaging via SQ-based NPs was reported with vinyl (3) bridges. In this work, SQ NPs were doped with Nile red dyes and a large two-photon conjugated molecule, in order to generate Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) upon two-photon-excited (TPE) fluorescence-imaging in the NIR.197 He et al., described a similar strategy with nile red-doped amino-propyl (8) and vinyl (3) SQ NPs which were then pegylated and functionalized with apo-transferrin or folic acid.191 Indocyanine green-doped methyl (1) SQ NPs functionalized with antibodies were applied for photoacoustic imaging.266 The covalent attachment of rhodamine B (23) SQ within vinyl (3) SQ NPs functionalized with transferrin targeting moieties was also reported.267
Another approach was the use of luminescent semiconducting quantum dots inside SQ NPs. Multifunctional SQ NPs were prepared with a vinyl (3) framework encapsulating both quantum dots (CdSe/CdS/ZnS) and iron oxide (Fe3O4) NPs for magnetically-guided TPE-imaging of cancer cells.212 The SQ coating has the advantage to prevent the aggregation of these cores, as well as the rapid dissolution of iron oxide.
The SQ frameworks of the previous designs allowed the formation of nanoscaled particles with controlled non-aggregated morphologies with the encapsulation of NPs or hydrophobic species for bio-imaging. These approaches have the advantages of the relative simplicity of synthesis since the sol–gel precursors are commercially available and afford reproducible monodisperse small-size SQ NPs containing physically entrapped hydrophobic cargos. This approach is nonetheless limited since the entrapment content will generally reach only a few weight percent, and uncontrolled leakage of cargos cannot be excluded with this methodology. The covalent grafting was thus used to overcome this challenge, and higher contents of fluorescent moieties were usually garnered into BSQ NPs.
One elegant strategy for imaging applications with BSQ NPs was to take advantage of the surprising phenomenon of aggregation-induced emission (AIE).268,269 The aggregation of fluorophores generally leads to the decrease or the complete quenching of their fluorescence,98,270 except in the case of molecules prone to AIE such as silole and tetraphenylethene derivatives.271,272 Tang and co-workers synthesized tetraphenylethene (XXVII) as well as silole (XXX) BSQ@SiO2 NPs as biosensors and intracellular bioimaging probes, thanks to BSQ composed of AIE-sensitive aromatic bridges (Fig. 16A).260 The AIE feature of BSQ@SiO2 NPs was demonstrated upon UV exposure, while the silole and tetraphenylethene precursors and bare silica NPs did not fluoresce (Fig. 16B and D). The core–shell particles were monodisperse, tunable in diameter, stable in aqueous solution, and were applied to image HeLa cancer cells. Qian et al. recently reported the doping of the TTF fluorophore (2,3-bis(4(phenyl(4(1,2,2-triphenylvinyl)phenyl)amino)phenyl)fumaronitrile) into vinyl (3)-aminopropyl (8) SQ NPs for AIE two-photon imaging of HeLa cells.273
 Fig. 16  Representation of BSQ@SiO2 core shell NPs composed of tetraphenylethene (XXVII) or silole (XXX) bridging groups aggregated to generate AIE imaging (A). Photographs of solutions and suspensions of the silane precursor, silica NP control, and BSQ@SiO2 NPs in ethanol and irradiated at 365 nm depicting the strong blue and green emissions from (XXVI) (B) and (XXX) (D) BSQ NPs. Fluorescence images of HeLa cells stained by (XXVII) (C) and (XXX) (E) BSQ NPs.260 Adapted with permission from Wiley. 
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) via BSQ NPs was described with a remarkable example of particles containing gadolinium(III) diethylenetriamine pentaacetate-disulfide (XXVI) bridges.233 These BSQ nanospheres were also pegylated and functionalized with anisamide to provide stealth behavior and an increase of cellular internalization. The BSQ particles carried 50 wt% of the Gd(III) complex, which was three times higher than that of mesoporous silica NPs.274,275 The disulfide groups endowed the BSQ NPs with a redox-actuated delivery mechanism of Gd(III) complexes (Fig. 17A). The relaxivities were measured with a 3 tesla magnetic resonance scanner on a per Gd basis. BSQ NPs showed r1 and r2 values of 13.1 and 28.6 mM−1 s−1, respectively. The relaxivities of the functionalized BSQ-PEG and BSQ-PEG-anisamide nanomaterials, however, respectively decreased to 8.4 mM and 5.9 mM−1 s−1 for r1, and to 33.0 and 7.0 mM−1 s−1 for r2 (Fig. 17B and C). The results were attributed to the inhibition of the interactions between Gd centers and surrounding water molecules due to steric hindrances caused by the surface modifications. The MIR-active NPs were then applied for in vitro imaging and 90% of the Gd chelates were released in solution after two days.
 Fig. 17  Release profiles of gadolinium chelates from (XXVI) BSQ NPs (circles) and BSQ-PEG NPs (triangles) in the presence of 10 mM cysteine at 37 °C (A). T1- (B) and T2-weighted (C) MR phantom images of BSQ, BSQ-PEG, and BSQ-PEB-anisamide NPs at various Gd concentrations.233 Adapted with permission from Elsevier. Schematic representation of the synthesis and enzymatic degradation of BSQ NPs via the cleavage of amide bonds (D). CLSM images of (XV)-BS-FITC NPs in cells (E and F). Nuclei are stained in blue with DAPI dyes and cell membranes in red with CellMask™ (F). Scale bars of 20 μm.237 Adapted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Biodegradable BSQ biomedical nanoprobes were recently reported by Khashab et al. The BSQ design involved enzymatically-cleavable oxamide bridges (XIV) (Fig. 17D).263 The extensive oxamide coverage allowed a progressive degradation of 100 nm NPs upon the addition of trypsin enzymes which led to 10 to 50 nm particle fragments after 48 h. The nanomaterial was also chemically-doped with fluorescein SQ, and applied as an optical bio-probe for HeLa cancer cells (Fig. 17E and F).

Photodynamic therapy. 
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) applications have been described via SQ and BSQ nanomaterials physically or chemically encapsulating photosensitizers able to induce the generation of reactive oxygen species, such as singlet oxygen (1O2), upon appropriate irradiation.225 Landmark studies on PDT via SQ NPs doped with photosensitizers were reported by Prasad and co-workers. The first involved a photosensitizer, the Photochlor® used for another phase II clinical trials.194 Photosensitizers were physically entrapped into monodisperse vinyl (3) SQ NPs of 30 nm which generated 1O2 upon laser irradiation at 650 nm for 10 min with a fluence of 1.4 mW cm−2, and caused nearly 90% of cancer cell killing. The first example of a TPE-PDT with organosilica NPs was also reported via vinyl (3) SQ NPs doped with 2hν fluorophores generating FRET towards entrapped photosensitizers.196 The same group later reported the covalent encapsulation of chlorin photosensitizer (30) SQ via co-condensation with the vinyltriethoxysilane.198 He et al. doped protoporphyrin IX photosensitizers or IR-820 NIR fluorophores into vinyl (3)-aminopropyl (8) SQ NPs for direct TPE-PDT in vitro or in vivo imaging of the brain in mice.190 The NPs could also target the subcutaneously xenografted tumor in mice for NIR imaging for 24 hours. Importantly, NPs were fully cleared after 10 days. In order to increase the PDT efficiency in single NPs, particles entirely composed of a two-photon photosensitizer (XXXVII)225 based on diphenylbutadiene photoresponsive groups were prepared for two-photon-excited photodynamic therapy (TPE-PDT).276
Interestingly, the two-photon cross section of the chromophore was enhanced from 100 GM in the precursor to 140 GM in BSQ NPs, and gold-BSQ core–shell NPs provided even higher values of about 260 GM (Fig. 18). These properties were correlated by exalted TPE-fluorescence imaging and enhanced TPE-PDT for gold-BSQ NPs on cancer cells. This photosensitizer was also used for TPE-PDT in PMO NPs combining drug delivery.108
 Fig. 18  Application of BSQ and gold core BSQ shell NPs obtained from (XXXVII) for TPE-PDT and imaging in cancer cells.225 Reproduced with permission from Elsevier. 
Following these results, biodegradability was conferred to the BSQ nanospheres, which were applied for TPE-PDT and imaging.230 Two types of photoresponsive NPs were evaluated: diphenylbutadiene (XXXVII) or zinc tetraphenyl-porphyrin (XXXVIII) bridges (see Fig. 19), while the biodegradability was provided by propyldisulfide (XI) bridges. Hence, the addition of 2 mM of the mercaptoethanol reducer caused the degradation of NPs (Fig. 19A–D). These materials could be used for both TPE-fluorescence imaging and for TPE-PDT (Fig. 19E, F and G respectively). Using a similar approach, the synthesis of a tetrakis(carboxyphenylene)porphyrin silane tetra-functionalized with disulfides (XXXXI, and a control without disulfides: XXXXII) was performed for the delivery of the photosensitizers and for an efficient one-photon-actuated PDT in cells.277 One of the most advanced PDT in vivo therapy performed via organosilica NPs was recently reported via BSQ NPs by Hayashi et al. in a nanosystem combining photothermal therapy.228 Monodisperse 50 nm spherical particles incorporating tetraalkoxysilylated porphyrin (XXXXIII) BSQ and iodopropyl (14) SQ groups were prepared (Fig. 20A and B). The relative quantum yield of the production of 1O2 was enhanced via the external heavy atom effect278 of iodine affording a higher yield (0.85) than that of photosensitizers currently used in clinics (0.3 to 0.77). The increase of the PDT efficacy via iodine atoms had been previously demonstrated in vitro with iodopropyl (14) SQ NPs containing the HPPH photosensitizers,188 but unlike this study the porphyrins had both higher PDT and PTT efficacies. The solution temperature elevation was even higher than that of gold nanorods, and the NPs were more photostable than the latter ones. In vivo studies were performed on mice with tumors of diameter 250 mm3, and irradiation was carried out with a diode laser at 650 nm with a fluence of 5 mW cm−2 for 20 min (22 mm spot size, a total of 6 J cm−2). Impressively, mice injected with NPs had tumor growth ten times lower than that of control ones and survived for 10 weeks (Fig. 20C and D). These NPs were also applied for x-ray computed tomography and fluorescence dual-modal imaging.229
 Fig. 19  TEM micrographs of BSQ NPs designed from propyldisulfide (XI) and diphenylbutadiene (XXXVII) bridges (DIS2 NPs, A and C) or propyldisulfide (XI) and Zn-porphyrin (XXXX) bridges (DISP NPs, B and D) before (A and B) and after 48 h of degradation by mercaptoethanol (ME) (C and D). TPE-confocal microscopy images of cells incubated for 20 h with 80 μg mL−1 of DIS2 (E) and DISP (F). Scale bars of 10 μm. TPE-triggered cancer cell killing on DIS2 (irradiated at 760 nm) and 50 nm DISP NPs (irradiated at 800 nm). NP concentration of 50 μg mL−1 (G).230 Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 20  Synthesis of iodopropyl (14) SQ-porphyrin (XXXXIII) BSQ NPs and their PDT/PTT combination therapy by the enhancement of 1O2 generation via the heavy atom effect and the conversion of the energy absorbed from photons into heat (A). TEM image of BSQ NPs (B). Tumor growth behavior and (B) the survival period of mice (circle: mice without treatment, diamond: mice injected with FA-PEG-ISP HNPs, triangle: mice exposed to LED light, square: mice exposed to LED light after injection of FA-PEG-ISP HNPs).228 Reproduced with permission from Wiley. 


Small-sized cargo release and delivery. 
Both SQ and BSQ NPs have been designed and applied for cargo release and delivery applications. Two general pathways were investigated for these applications. The first approach is relatively rare and consists of surface-loaded BSQ NPs. An elegant example was reported by Shea et al. with BSQ NPs composed of bis-propylamine bearing nitrophenylene (XVI) groups. These particles were negatively-charged with a diameter of 260 nm, and their charge could be reversed upon UV irradiation through the photocleavage of nitrophenylene groups affording bispropylammonium at neutral pH. This feature was utilized to complex the surface with negatively-charged smaller silica NPs upon light actuation (Fig. 21A and B), or to release positively-charged plastic antibodies adsorbed onto the surface of BSQ NPs (Fig. 21C).279
 Fig. 21  SEM micrographs of the dried mixture suspension of (XIV) BSQ NPs and smaller silica NPs before (A) and after UV irradiation (B). Application of the charge reversal feature for antibody release (C).231 Adapted with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
The most common pathway for cargo release and delivery applications of non-porous SQ and BSQ NPs, however, is the internal loading of cargos via one-pot syntheses or pro-drug design of latent ‘drug-bridges’. The former was recently studied by the group of Prasad with vinyl (3) SQ nanomaterials loaded with doxorubicin anticancer drugs for a sustained-release for two weeks. The driving force of the loading of drug cargos was the hydrophobicity of vinyl groups. This concept was also used for loading of ruthenium-tris-(2,20-bipyridyl)dichloride dyes.280 The drawback of these nanosystems is that the release of cargos is not controlled.
The release or delivery of cargos encapsulated inside SQ or BSQ NPs with strong interactions or covalent linkage was hence investigated. In an original approach, hydrogen bonding was used to enable the release of small molecules. In a first example, cyanuric acid was loaded within BSQ polydisperse particles based on triazine moieties hydrogen-bonded to cyanuric acid through a triple donor–acceptor–donor pattern (XXV) (Fig. 22).281 In a second example, the same strategy was used with a prodrug containing three 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) moieties. The material successfully released the prodrug at pH ≤ 5.5, which was itself active against MCF-7 cancer cells. Unfortunately, the material could only be obtained as a gel, which prevented any evaluation of the potential activity against cancer cells.282 Bringing those systems to the nanoscale would therefore be very promising for application in nanomedicine. BSQ bearing oxaliplatin derived (XXII) bridges were synthesized for autonomous delivery in cancer cells.232 The system showed nearly 25 wt% of drug loading. Another advantage of these BSQ NPs was the presence of silanol and carboxylic acid groups upon which PEG and targeting ligands were grafted. Superior cell killing was measured when compared to free oxaliplatin against four cancer cell lines and the targeting improved the efficacy of the therapy. The same group later extended this strategy to the delivery of cisplatin.283
 Fig. 22  Representation of the preparation of cyanuric-loaded BSQ NPs obtained from (XXV) and of the acidic-actuated release.281 Adapted with permission from the American Chemical Society. 


DNA delivery. 
An impressive study was reported with various highly monodisperse vinyl (3) SQ NPs loaded with porphyrin for optically-tracked DNA delivery.284 Amino-grafted SQ NPs were able to electrostatically bind both plasmid and genomic DNA while preventing their enzymatic degradations. In order to track the delivery of DNA, they monitored the fluorescence of the porphyrin, which played the acceptor role in a FRET mechanism involving another dye acting as a donor intercalated into DNA strands. SQ NPs were found to deliver DNA into the cytoplasm, and subsequently diffuse into nuclei. This strategy was then applied in mice for gene delivery and expression in the brain.285 SQ NPs did not induce any observable toxicity four weeks after transfection. Several groups later reported studies via SQ nanosystems for the delivery of DNA in the brain.286–291
The delivery of DNA was recently reported via BSQ NPs by the group of Khashab.239 Unlike the previous SQ NPs, the use of BSQ allowed the controlled delivery of DNA upon light actuation. The BSQ contained positively-charged nitrophenylene (XVIII) bridges, and upon irradiation, the photochemical production of neutral imine groups caused a charge reversal as the resulting surface was now governed by silanolates (Fig. 23A). Hence, plasmid DNA bound NPs without further chemical modifications and could be released on demand via a light stimulus (Fig. 23B–D). The nanosystem delivered DNA in cancer cells as shown by the expression of green fluorescent proteins.
 Fig. 23  Zeta potentials of nitrophenylene (XVIII) BSQ NPs before and after UV irradiation (A). Positively-charged BSQ NPs (B) electrostatically binding DNA (C) for light-triggered delivery (D). The negative charge of NPs results from the neutralization of the charge of the organic bridges.239 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society. 

3.2. Opto-electronics
Applications in optoelectronics were mostly reported on BSQ nanomaterials with specific organic bridges. The interest given to this area of research arose from a wide array of aromatic functional groups which can be engineered between stable siloxane networks. Various UV-sensitive materials were reported such as photodeformable BSQ NPs based on photocleavable coumarin dimer (XXIX) bridges,173 or SQ NPs bearing methoxycinnamamide (20) and dimethylaminobenzamide (21) groups.292 More complex bridges and advanced applications were also investigated, and we review in this section the publications on photoluminescence, photovoltaics, and electrochromism.

Photoluminescence. 
Thin films (<100 nm thick) of bridged silsesquioxanes incorporating europium(III) ions are particularly interesting for application such as luminescent solar concentrators.293,294 Among the numerous BSQs investigated, picolinamides295 and ureido-bipyridine-based structures8,12,236,296,297 have given particularly good results, as they feature a high density of strong ligands able to efficiently harvest light. Recently, Gan et al. reported the design of BSQ particles of nano- and micro-meter sizes composed of bispropylurea-bipyridylene (XXI) bridges complexing either Eu3+ or Tb3+ ions (Fig. 24A and B).236 The spherical particles could be precipitated on a plate and irradiated with UV light to emit a red or a green color according to the type of ions (Fig. 24C–E). Interestingly, using a 2:1 (XXI)/EuCl3 ratio, the Eu loading in bulk BSQ can reach 11 wt%, a value that is also expected in thin films. The precise structures of the Eu(III) complexes in such materials have not been elucidated to date, though the remarkably high quantum yield values and the particular Eu3+ environment detected when the 6,6′-isomer of (XXI) was used suggest a cage-like structure in this case (Fig. 25).8 Interestingly, a remarkable blue shift in the excitation spectra and a strong increase in the excited state lifetime of the Eu3+ ions and in the emission quantum yield are usually found when going from the bulk powder to the thin films using similar compositions.8,12,294 Differences in the nanostructure of the material (such as the cluster size and porosity) occurring because of the very fast gelation during spin-coating may produce such increases in performances. Owing to the elevated refractive index of the coatings induced by the high content in europium ions, the 50 nm films are able to guide light to the edges of a glass substrate, which confers them promising application as luminescent solar concentrators for photovoltaic cells (Fig. 25).
 Fig. 24  Design and proposed structure of lanthanide-containing (XXI) BSQ NPs (A–B), and the digital photo of the precipitate of BSQ NPs onto a plate then irradiated with a UV lamp (254 nm) (C). Excitation and emission spectra of spherical BSQ NPs containing Eu3+ (D) and Tb3+ ions (E).236 Adapted with permission from Springer Science. 
 Fig. 25  Representation of the possible complexation modes of lanthanide ions by the various isomers of (XXI) (A). Photograph of the BSQ thin film excited at 365 nm (B).8 Adapted with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Interestingly, BSQ rectangular micro- and nano-plates (500 nm to 2 mm in diameter) were obtained with a β-diketone (XVII) bridge in the presence of EuCl3·6H2O or NdCl3·6H2O.297 The material displayed intense luminescence with high monochromatic purity in the red spectral region with Eu3+ ions or in the NIR region with Nd3+ ions.


Photovoltaics. 
Organosilica nanomaterials incorporating perylenediimide semiconducting bridges (XXVIII) were recently reported. The synthesis of 120 nm nanospheres with the sol–gel perylenediimide precursor and a small fraction of TEOS is depicted in Fig. 11A, providing a 70 wt% organic content as estimated by thermogravimetry.298 The nanomaterial was blended with polythiophene:perylene diimide (P3HT/PDI) and then applied for bulk heterojunction photovoltaics between a typical indium tin oxide–poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (ITO/PEDOT:PSS) anode and a calcium–aluminium cathode (see Fig. 26A). The performances of the heterojunction could be improved threefold by the optimization of the P3HT blend in the devices, affording an efficiency of 1.56%. The current–voltage curves of the devices showed enhancement of the current density for the annealed sample at 150 °C (Fig. 26B). The device had an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.53 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 6.88 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.42. The electronic properties of the solely derived perylenediimide alkoxysilane materials with nanowire and nanorod morphologies (Fig. 12) were also reported.242 The nanomaterials were processed into thin films and the photovoltaic measurements were performed (Fig. 26C and D). The nanowires depicted a higher Voc than that of the nanorods with a FF of 0.42 and a Jsc of 1.8 mA cm−2. However, the power conversion efficiency was only of 0.96 and 0.26% for the nanowires and the nanorods, respectively, which may have arisen from poorer self-organization of perylenediimide groups. This investigation thus highlights the role of the morphology of the BSQ nanomaterials in the photovoltaic performances.
 Fig. 26  Schematic representation of the device configuration of glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/polymer (XXVIII) BSQ NPs/Ca–Al (A). Current–voltage curves for the device at room temperature (RT), annealed at 150 °C, or in the dark for devices prepared from nanospheres (B),298 nanowires (C), and nanorods (D).242 Adapted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 


Electrochromism. 
Electrochromic materials which can change color upon oxidation or reduction through an electric potential have become abundantly applied in an era when work and leisure are increasingly accompanied by display devices.299 In this arena of research, processability of materials is a key factor in developing commercial devices. BSQ materials are here advantageous for the multiple processes and final morphologies readily available via sol–gel science.300,301 Though several studies have been reported on the POSS type of SQ,302–308 the only study on BSQ was reported a few years ago by Shea and Heflin.309 In their study, a high-contrast solid-state electrochromic device was prepared via viologen (XV) BSQ NPs174 deposited by a layer-by-layer (Lbl) assembly process onto ITO electrodes. The Lbl assembly involved the subsequent deposition of positively-charged BSQ NPs and negatively-charged poly[2-(acrylamido)-2-methylpropanesulfonic acid] (PAMPS) as counter ions affording a 20 or 40 bilayer film of BSQ NPs/PAMPS (Fig. 27A). The nanomaterials packed onto the 20 bilayers with 900 nm thick films could be readily observed via SEM (Fig. 27B), and were then sandwiched with another electrode coated with polyaniline (PANI)/PAMPS for electrochromic testing. The cyclic voltammetry analysis was performed on the BSQ NP/PAMPS film which displayed a deep-purple color upon the first reduction scan between −0.7 and −0.9 V (monocationic radicals), and then changed to pale yellow (dicationic radicals) upon potentials higher than −0.9 V, to finally recover the original transparent state when fully oxidized (Fig. 27C). The same results were reported with the sandwiched device which could be switched on and off with an unprecedentedly high contrast (∼45% at 633 nm, Fig. 27D). This study highlights how the electrochromic properties of BSQ bridges could be applied for display devices.
 Fig. 27  Asymmetric solid-state electrochromic device from LbL films of 40 bilayers of (XV) BSQ NPs/PAMPS and PANI/PAMPS (A). SEM image of 20 bilayer films of BSQ NPs/PAMPS (B). Cyclic voltammetry of a 40-bilayer BSQ NP/PAMPS film (C). Transmission spectra from 0 to 3 V of a solid-state sandwiched device. The inset shows photographs of the device changing the color from yellow-green to dark purple-blue (D). Adapted with permission from the American Chemical Society.309 

3.3. Heterogeneous catalysis
SQ and BSQ nanomaterials have also been studied as heterogeneous nanocatalysts.310 BSQ precursors often lead to periodic mesoporous organosilica which have also been applied extensively for catalytic applications.1 In this section, the application of non-porous SQ for catalysis is discussed. Various metal-supported SQ NPs were used for catalytic applications.
Gold-supported SQ nanorattles were elaborated and tested for the classic hydrogenation reaction of 4-methoxy-nitrobenzene to 4-methoxy-phenylamine, as a model reaction to assess their catalytic activity. Ha et al. used original cyanopropylene (13) hollow SQ doped with 1.5 wt% of gold NPs (Fig. 28A) to carry out the hydrogenation with high efficiencies. Reaction yields of the order of 98% were obtained with a decrease to 93% after 5 cycles (Fig. 28B). The SQ framework exclusively based on cyanopropylene pending groups allowed the grafting of numerous 2 to 5 nm gold NPs per hollow SQ nanoreactor and provided high catalytic properties.
 Fig. 28  Hollow cyanopropylene (13) SQ-Au catalyst nanoreactor (A). UV-Vis spectra of 4-nitrophenol reduction. Insets are the reaction scheme, the associated color change from bright yellow to colorless and the conversion of the 4-nitrophenol graph in 60 min for 5 runs of catalyst cycles.311 Adapted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Palladium-supported silica-SQ nanorattles were also applied by Huo et al. for multiple catalytic processes.220 The hydrogenation reaction of 4-methoxy-nitrobenzene was initially demonstrated with the mercaptopropyl (10) SQ-Pd composition with high activities maintained for five cycles (Fig. 29A and B). Then, the oxidation of thiol groups was performed to generate sulfonated (11) SQ acidic nanocatalysts. Sulfonated SQ nearly quantitatively converted benzaldehyde dimethyl acetal into benzaldehyde, while the reaction did not occur with thiolated SQ. The multi-step reaction of 2-(2-aminophenyl)-1H-benzimidazole from 2-nitrobenzaldehyde and 1,2-phenylenediamine could also be performed with sulfonated SQ-Pd NPs (Fig. 29C). The first step of the reaction is catalyzed by the SO3H group and the second occurs inside the nanorattles via Pd NPs. Quantitative conversions were continuously obtained for five cycles as supported by the values of turnover frequencies (TOF), and the final yields ranging from 97 to 86% (Fig. 29D).
 Fig. 29  Hydrogenation reaction of 4-methoxy-nitrobenzene to 4-methoxy-aniline and the bar diagram for recyclability of thiolated (10) SQ-SH/Pd-silica nanorattles (A). TEM image of SQ nanorattles after five cycles (B). Multistep reaction sequence for the synthesis of 2-(2-aminophenylene)-1H-benzimidazole (C). Table for the recyclability of SO3H (11) SQ-Pd in the cascade reaction along with the turnover frequency (D).220 Adapted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.4. Pollutant removal
Various hollow silsesquioxane NPs were used for the removal of the benzophenone water contaminant.209 Monodisperse methyl (1), vinyl (3), trifluoropropyl (12), and phenyl (7) SQ NPs obtained via a hard template with a size of 180 nm, a shell thickness of 30 nm, and low porosities of about 20–30 m2 g−1 were mixed with waste water and the efficiencies of the pollutant adsorptions were quantified by UV-VIS spectroscopy. Efficiencies of 95 and 82% were respectively obtained for methyl and trifluoropropyl-based particles while 56 and 19% were obtained for phenyl- and vinyl-based SQ, respectively. These results mainly followed the hydrophobicity of the particles, as shown by the water contact angle data, with the exceptions of the phenyl which was attributed to a high content of surface silanol groups.
4. Conclusions
In this review, we presented an overview of the syntheses and applications of non-porous silsesquioxane nanomaterials. We distinguished silsesquioxanes (R-SiO1.5, with R organic groups) and bridged silsesquioxanes with two (O1.5Si-R-SiO1.5) or more silicon connectivities. We highlighted the high organic content of such nanomaterials in the broader organosilica NP family, and their resulting unique structures and properties. Both types of materials generally have higher thermal stability and mechanical stability than that of organically-doped silica NPs. Furthermore, the nature and high content (20 to 80 wt%) of the organic functions of silsesquioxanes and bridged silsesquioxanes provide properties inaccessible to organosilica NPs. Bridged silsesquioxanes can be used owing to their ability to promote the self-assembly of organic units for applications requiring molecular periodicity, though the fabrication of long range order is still challenging.312 While nano-sized silsesquioxanes are mainly employed as structural units that carry dopants, such as fluorophores, bridged silsesquioxanes are usually designed so that the organic group bridging the siliceous domains brings the targeted functionality.
A wide array of syntheses of bridged and non-bridged silsesquioxanes has been reported with about seventy different alkoxysilanes affording particles of spherical, core–shell, and hollow morphologies via soft and hard templates. The main challenges for the synthesis of bridged and non-bridged silsesquioxanes include the limited number of silane precursors which are commercially available, and the difficulty in obtaining monodisperse non-aggregated particles, owing to the high reactivity of the alkyl(trialkoxy)silanes and to the self-assembling propensity of the large organic groups. This can lead to anisotropic morphologies such as nanorods, nanofibers, and nanowires thanks to intra- and inter-molecular interactions. In terms of functionality, most silsesquioxanes were designed with small functional groups (methyl, vinyl, phenyl, etc.) while bridged silsesquioxanes have organic fragments of varied sizes from phenyl to polyaromatic and porphyrin bridges. Larger species were also incorporated into non-bridged silsesquioxanes via chemical or physical doping but the resulting content (up to 20 wt%) is thus much lower than that attainable with bridged ones (up to 80%).
Application-wise, silsesquioxanes are mostly obtained from commercially available precursors, and can be doped in one pot affording monodisperse non-aggregated 10 to 50 nm particles, which are especially attractive for biomedical applications. Biodegradable, pro-drug, or photodynamic therapy nanosystems are on the other hand available and more advanced via bridged silsesquioxanes. Applications in optoelectronics were mostly reported via bridged silsesquioxanes with polyaromatic organic units with voltaics, photoluminescence, and electrochromism properties. Thanks to their high organic content and hydrophobicity, silsesquioxanes were applied for heterogeneous catalysis and metal-supported heterogeneous catalysis, typically via hollow or nanorattle NPs containing gold nanodots, though mesoporous bridged silsesquioxanes are more desirable for catalytic applications. Many applications of silsesquioxanes and bridged silsesquioxanes have recently begun to be explored in nanomedicine, but applications in other fields are still in their infancy. The remarkable control of the synthesis and composition of such particles thus offers a vast field of research for the years to come.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST).
References
J. G. Croissant, X. Cattoën, M. Wong Chi Man, J.-O. Durand and N. M. Khashab, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 20318–20334 RSC .
N. M. Khashab, M. E. Belowich, A. Trabolsi, D. C. Friedman, C. Valente, Y. Lau, H. A. Khatib, J. I. Zink and J. F. Stoddart, Chem. Commun., 2009, 5371–5373 RSC .
N. Ž. Knežević and J.-O. Durand, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 2199–2209 RSC .
A. Stein, B. J. Melde and R. C. Schroden, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1403–1419 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kickelbick, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 3102–3104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Hoffmann, M. Cornelius, J. Morell and M. Froeba, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 3216–3251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ciriminna, A. Fidalgo, V. Pandarus, F. o. Béland, L. M. Ilharco and M. Pagliaro, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 6592–6620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Graffion, X. Cattoën, M. Wong Chi Man, V. R. Fernandes, P. S. André, R. A. Ferreira and L. D. Carlos, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4773–4782 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fernandes, R. A. Ferreira, X. Cattoën, L. D. Carlos, M. Wong Chi Man and V. de Zea Bermudez, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2013, 65, 61–73 CrossRef CAS .
A. Monge-Marcet, R. Pleixats, X. Cattoën, M. Wong Chi Man, D. A. Alonso and C. Nájera, New J. Chem., 2011, 35, 2766–2772 RSC .
J. Graffion, X. Cattoën, V. T. Freitas, R. A. Ferreira, M. Wong Chi Man and L. D. Carlos, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6711–6715 RSC .
J. Graffion, A. M. Cojocariu, X. Cattoën, R. A. Ferreira, V. Fernandes, P. S. André, L. D. Carlos, M. Wong Chi Man and J. R. Bartlett, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13279–13285 RSC .
P. Borah, S. Sreejith, P. Anees, N. V. Menon, Y. Kang, A. Ajayaghosh and Y. Zhao, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500390 Search PubMed .
N. Mizoshita and S. Inagaki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11999–12003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Angelos, E. Choi, F. Voegtle, L. De Cola and J. I. Zink, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6589–6592 CAS .
E. A. Prasetyanto, A. Bertucci, D. Septiadi, R. Corradini, P. Castro-Hartmann and L. De Cola, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 55, 3323–3327 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Parambadath, V. K. Rana, D. Zhao and C.-S. Ha, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2011, 141, 94–101 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dong and C.-S. Ha, Macromol. Res., 2012, 20, 335–343 CrossRef CAS .
N. Liu, K. Yu, B. Smarsly, D. R. Dunphy, Y.-B. Jiang and C. J. Brinker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 14540–14541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, H. Fan, N. Doke, D. A. Loy, R. A. Assink, D. A. LaVan and C. J. Brinker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 5258–5261 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Klichko, N. M. Khashab, Y.-W. Yang, S. Angelos, J. F. Stoddart and J. I. Zink, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2010, 132, 435–441 CrossRef CAS .
S. Angelos, N. M. Khashab, Y.-W. Yang, A. Trabolsi, H. A. Khatib, J. F. Stoddart and J. I. Zink, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12912–12914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ma, D. Zhang, Y. Duan and H. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 392, 194–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Tolbert, P. D. McFadden and D. A. Loy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 3160–3174 CAS .
C. M. Burkett, L. A. Underwood, R. S. Volzer, J. A. Baughman and P. L. Edmiston, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1312–1321 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mizoshita, K.-I. Yamanaka, S. Hiroto, H. Shinokubo, T. Tani and S. Inagaki, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 3987–3994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mizoshita, Y. Goto, Y. Maegawa, T. Tani and S. Inagaki, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2548–2554 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-B. Jiang, G. Xomeritakis, Z. Chen, D. Dunphy, D. J. Kissel, J. L. Cecchi and C. J. Brinker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15446–15447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xiong and S.-Z. Qiao, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 17446–17450 RSC .
M. Vallet-Regí, M. Colilla and B. González, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 596–607 RSC .
J. Croissant and J. I. Zink, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7628–7631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Couleaud, V. Morosini, C. Frochot, S. Richeter, L. Raehm and J. O. Durand, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1083–1095 RSC .
Z. Li, J. C. Barnes, A. Bosoy, J. F. Stoddart and J. I. Zink, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2590–2605 RSC .
C. Argyo, V. Weiss, C. Bräuchle and T. Bein, Chem. Mater., 2013, 26, 435–451 CrossRef .
C. Mauriello-Jimenez, Y. Galàn Rubio, N. Knezevic, S. Szunerits, K. Manakamana, O. Hocine, J. G. Croissant, M. Seric, L. Raehm, V. Stojanovic, M. Maynadier, M. Garcia, M. Gary-Bobo and J. O. Durand, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 5803–5808 RSC .
Y. Chen, Q. Meng, M. Wu, S. Wang, P. Xu, H. Chen, Y. Li, L. Zhang, L. Wang and J. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16326–16334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Datz, H. Engelke, C. V. Schirnding, L. Nguyen and T. Bein, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2016, 225, 371–377 CrossRef CAS .
V. Cauda, C. Argyo and T. Bein, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8693–8699 RSC .
H. Mekaru, J. Lu and F. Tamanoi, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2015, 95, 40–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kruk and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3169–3183 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dib, M. Boufatit, S. Chelouaou, F. Sadi-Hassaine, J. Croissant, J. Long, L. Raehm, C. Charnay and J. O. Durand, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 24838–24841 RSC .
M. Wu, R. a. Wu, Z. Zhang and H. Zou, Electrophoresis, 2011, 32, 105–115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Castricum, G. G. Paradis, M. C. Mittelmeijer-Hazeleger, R. Kreiter, J. F. Vente and J. E. Ten Elshof, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2319–2329 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Tian, M. L. Ye, L. H. Hu, X. Li and H. F. Zou, J. Sep. Sci., 2007, 30, 2204–2209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ide, E. De Canck, I. Van Driessche, F. Lynen and P. Van Der Voort, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 5546–5552 RSC .
S. Martens, R. Ortmann, F. J. Brieler, C. Pasel, Y. Joo Lee, D. Bathen and M. Fröba, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 2014, 640, 632–640 CrossRef CAS .
M. Arslan, S. Sayin and M. Yilmaz, Tetrahedron: Asymmetry, 2013, 24, 982–989 CrossRef CAS .
V. Rebbin, R. Schmidt and M. Fröba, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 5210–5214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Cintrón and L. A. Colón, Analyst, 2002, 127, 701–704 RSC .
Y. Kong, X. Shen, M. Fan, M. Yang and S. Cui, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 283, 1059–1068 CrossRef CAS .
P. Rekha, V. Sharma and P. Mohanty, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2016, 219, 93–102 CrossRef CAS .
J. Alauzun, E. Besson, A. Mehdi, C. Reyé and R. J. P. Corriu, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 503–513 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Z. Dai, J. Wu, N. Zhao and J. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4494–4497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dąbrowski, M. Barczak, E. Robens, N. V. Stolyarchuk, G. R. Yurchenko, O. K. Matkovskii and Y. L. Zub, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2007, 253, 5747–5751 CrossRef .
Y. Wei, X. Li, R. Zhang, Y. Liu, W. Wang, Y. Ling, A. M. El-Toni and D. Zhao, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 20769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Diaz, D. Brunel and A. Corma, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 4083–4097 RSC .
X. Liu, Y. Goto, Y. Maegawa, T. Ohsuna and S. Inagaki, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 113308 CrossRef .
B. Karimi, H. M. Mirzaei and A. Mobaraki, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 828–834 CAS .
Q. Yang, J. Liu, L. Zhang and C. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1945–1955 RSC .
X. Li, B. Li, M. Cheng, Y. Du, X. Wang and P. Yang, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2008, 284, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. López, D. Esquivel, C. Jiménez-Sanchidrián, F. J. Romero-Salguero and P. Van Der Voort, J. Catal., 2015, 326, 139–148 CrossRef .
M. Hartmann, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4577–4593 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Grüning, G. Siddiqi, O. V. Safonova and C. Copéret, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2014, 356, 673–679 CrossRef .
J. H. Clark, D. J. MacQuarrie and S. J. Tavener, Dalton Trans., 2006, 4297–4309 RSC .
D. Moelans, P. Cool, J. Baeyens and E. F. Vansant, Catal. Commun., 2005, 6, 307–311 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Y. Maegawa, Y. Goto, K. Hara and S. Inagaki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 128, 8075–8079 CrossRef .
H. Takeda, M. Ohashi, Y. Goto, T. Ohsuna, T. Tani and S. Inagaki, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5068–5077 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zou, R. Wang, X. Li, X. Wang, S. Zeng, S. Ding, L. Li, Z. Zhang and S. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12403–12412 CAS .
X. Li, Y. Yang and Q. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1525–1535 CAS .
H. Li, J. Lin, H. Zhang, L. Fu, Q. Meng and S. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 3651–3655 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walcarius, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3351–3372 CrossRef CAS .
V. T. Freitas, L. Fu, A. M. Cojocariu, X. Cattoën, J. R. Bartlett, R. Le Parc, J.-L. Bantignies, M. Wong Chi Man, P. S. André and R. A. Ferreira, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 8770–8778 CAS .
S. S. Nobre, X. Cattoën, R. A. Ferreira, C. Carcel, V. de Zea Bermudez, M. Wong Chi Man and L. D. Carlos, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3599–3609 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Nobre, C. D. Brites, R. A. Ferreira, V. de Zea Bermudez, C. Carcel, J. J. E. Moreau, J. Rocha, M. Wong Chi Man and L. D. Carlos, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4172–4182 RSC .
Y. Yamamoto, H. Takeda, T. Yui, Y. Ueda, K. Koike, S. Inagaki and O. Ishitani, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 639–648 RSC .
K.-I. Yamanaka, T. Okada, Y. Goto, M. Ikai, T. Tani and S. Inagaki, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 14865–14871 CAS .
F. Auras, Y. Li, F. Löbermann, M. Döblinger, J. Schuster, L. M. Peter, D. Trauner and T. Bein, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 14971–14975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo, K. Matsukawa, T. Miyata, T. Okubo, K. Kuroda and A. Shimojima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15434–15440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Kamino and T. P. Bender, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5119–5130 RSC .
H. Peng, J. Tang, L. Yang, J. Pang, H. S. Ashbaugh, C. J. Brinker, Z. Yang and Y. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 5304–5305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sanchez, B. Julian, P. Belleville and M. Popall, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3559–3592 RSC .
A. Sayari and S. Hamoudi, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3151–3168 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Coti, M. E. Belowich, M. Liong, M. W. Ambrogio, Y. A. Lau, H. A. Khatib, J. I. Zink, N. M. Khashab and J. F. Stoddart, Nanoscale, 2009, 1, 16–39 RSC .
J. Croissant, A. Chaix, O. Mongin, M. Wang, S. Clément, L. Raehm, J.-O. Durand, V. Hugues, M. Blanchard-Desce, M. Maynadier, A. Gallud, M. Gary-Bobo, M. Garcia, J. Lu, F. Tamanoi, D. P. Ferris, D. Tarn and J. I. Zink, Small, 2014, 10, 1752–1755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Croissant, M. Maynadier, A. Gallud, H. PeindyN'Dongo, J. L. Nyalosaso, G. Derrien, C. Charnay, J.-O. Durand, L. Raehm, F. Serein-Spirau, N. Cheminet, T. Jarrosson, O. Mongin, M. Blanchard-Desce, M. Gary-Bobo, M. Garcia, J. Lu, F. Tamanoi, D. Tarn, T. M. Guardado-Alvarez and J. I. Zink, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 125, 14058–14062 CrossRef .
S. Giret, M. Wong Chi Man and C. Carcel, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 13850–13865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Croissant, C. Qi, M. Maynadier, X. Cattoën, M. Wong Chi Man, L. Raehm, O. Mongin, M. Blanchard-Desce, M. Garcia, M. Gary-Bobo and J.-O. Durand, Front. Mol. Biosci., 2016, 3 DOI:10.3389/fmolb.2016.00001 .
J. G. Croissant, D. Zhang, S. Alsaiari, J. Lu, L. Deng, F. Tamanoi, A. M. AlMalik, J. I. Zink and N. M. Khashab, J. Controlled Release, 2016, 229, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Soenen, B. Manshian, S. H. Doak, S. C. De Smedt and K. Braeckmans, Acta Biomater., 2013, 9, 9183–9193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, B. A. Moosa, J. G. Croissant and N. M. Khashab, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 127, 6908–6912 CrossRef .
Z. A. ALOthman, Materials, 2012, 5, 2874–2902 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tang and J. Cheng, Nano Today, 2013, 8, 290–312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Tolnai, F. Csempesz, M. Kabai-Faix, E. Kálmán, Z. Keresztes, A. L. Kovács, J. J. Ramsden and Z. Hórvölgyi, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 2683–2687 CrossRef CAS .
M. Karimi, I. Chaudhury, C. Jianjun, M. Safari, R. Sadeghi, M. Habibi-Rezaei and J. Kokini, J. Mol. Catal. B: Enzym., 2014, 104, 48–55 CrossRef CAS .
M. Qhobosheane, S. Santra, P. Zhang and W. Tan, Analyst, 2001, 126, 1274–1278 RSC .
Y. Wu, C. Chen and S. Liu, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 1600–1607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-L. Liu, C.-Y. Hsu and K.-Y. Hsu, Polymer, 2005, 46, 1851–1856 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Croissant, O. Mongin, V. Hugues, M. Blanchard-Desce, X. Cattoën, M. Wong Chi Man, V. Stojanovic, C. Charnay, M. Maynadier, M. Gary-Bobo, M. Garcia, L. Raehm and J.-O. Durand, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 5182–5188 RSC .
S. Huh, J. W. Wiench, J.-C. Yoo, M. Pruski and V. S. Y. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 4247–4256 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walcarius and C. Delacôte, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 4181–4192 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Grudzien, S. Pikus and M. Jaroniec, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4875–4884 CAS .
F. M. Gaslain, C. Delacôte, A. Walcarius and B. Lebeau, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2009, 49, 112–124 CrossRef CAS .
V. Lebret, L. Raehm, J. O. Durand, M. Smaihi, C. Gerardin, N. Nerambourg, M. H. V. Werts, M. Blanchard-Desce, D. Methy-Gonnod and C. Dubernet, Med. Sci., 2009, 25, 744–746 Search PubMed .
V. Lebret, L. Raehm, J. O. Durand, M. Smaihi, C. Gerardin, N. Nerambourg, M. H. V. Werts and M. Blanchard-Desce, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2174–2183 CrossRef CAS .
X.-J. Wu and D. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2774–2775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Shea and D. A. Loy, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3306–3319 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Loy and K. J. Shea, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 1431–1442 CrossRef CAS .
J. Croissant, D. Salles, M. Maynadier, O. Mongin, V. Hugues, M. Blanchard-Desce, X. Cattoën, M. Wong Chi Man, A. Gallud, M. Garcia, M. Gary-Bobo, L. Raehm and J.-O. Durand, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 7214–7220 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, P. Xu, H. Chen, Y. Li, W. Bu, Z. Shu, Y. Li, J. Zhang, L. Zhang, L. Pan, X. Cui, Z. Hua, J. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3100–3105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mizoshita, T. Tani and S. Inagaki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 789–800 RSC .
C. Mauriello-Jimenez, J. Croissant, M. Maynadier, X. Cattoën, M. Wong Chi Man, J. Vergnaud, V. Chaleix, V. Sol, M. Garcia, M. Gary-Bobo, L. Raehm and J.-O. Durand, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 3681–3684 RSC .
J. Croissant, X. Cattoën, M. Wong Chi Man, P. Dieudonné, C. Charnay, L. Raehm and J. O. Durand, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 145–149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Croissant, X. Cattoën, M. Wong Chi Man, A. Gallud, L. Raehm, P. Trens, M. Maynadier and J. O. Durand, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6174–6180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Park, M. Santha Moorthy and C.-S. Ha, NPG Asia Mater., 2014, 6, e96 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bi, Y. Li, S. Wang, Z. Zhu, Y. Chen, Y. Chen, B. Li and Y. Yang, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2010, 53, 619–625 CrossRef CAS .
J. Croissant, Y. Fatieiev, K. Julfakyan, J. Lu, A. Emwas, D. Anjum, H. Omar, F. Tamanoi, J. Zink and N. Khashab, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 14806–14811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Croissant, Y. Fatieiev, H. Omar, D. H. Anjum, A. Gurinov, J. Lu, F. Tamanoi, J. I. Zink and N. M. Khashab, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 9607–9615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Teng, J. Zhang, W. Li, Y. Zheng, X. Su, Y. Tang, M. Dang, Y. Tian, L. Yuwen and L. Weng, Small, 2016, 12, 3550–3558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, J. Zhang, M. Dang, J. Wang, Z. Tu, L. Yuwen, G. Chen, X. Su and Z. Teng, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 475, 66–71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Croissant, S. Picard, D. Aggad, M. Klausen, C. Mauriello-Jimenez, M. Maynadier, O. Mongin, G. Clermont, E. Genin, X. Cattoën, M. Wong Chi Man, L. Raehm, M. Garcia, M. Gary-Bobo, M. Blanchard-Desce and J.-O. Durand, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 5567–5574 RSC .
X. Li, L. Zhou, Y. Wei, A. M. El-Toni, F. Zhang and D. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5903–5906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, L. Zhou, Y. Wei, A. M. El-Toni, F. Zhang and D. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15086–15092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wu, Q. Meng, Y. Chen, Y. Du, L. Zhang, Y. Li, L. Zhang and J. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 215–222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, J. Liu, X. Li, X. Liu and Q. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3676–3684 CrossRef CAS .
L.-C. Hu and K. J. Shea, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 688–695 RSC .
K. J. Shea and D. A. Loy, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 707–716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Shea and D. A. Loy, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3306–3319 CrossRef CAS .
A. Arkhireeva, J. N. Hay and W. Oware, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2005, 351, 1688–1695 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ghanbari, B. G. Cousins and A. M. Seifalian, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2011, 32, 1032–1046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Y. Kannan, H. J. Salacinski, P. E. Butler and A. M. Seifalian, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38, 879–884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-M. Leu, Y.-T. Chang and K.-H. Wei, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 9122–9127 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Pu, K. Li, X. Zhang and B. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4186–4189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, L. Wang, H. Ni and C. U. Pittman Jr., J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym., 2001, 11, 123–154 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Pielichowski, J. Njuguna, B. Janowski and J. Pielichowski, in Supramolecular Polymers Polymeric Betains Oligomers, Springer, Berlin,  2006, vol. 201, pp. 225–296 Search PubMed .
P. A. Ledin, W. Xu, F. Friscourt, G.-J. Boons and V. V. Tsukruk, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 8146–8155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Loy, B. M. Baugher, C. R. Baugher, D. A. Schneider and K. Rahimian, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 3624–3632 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peng, K. Xu, H. Cai, J. Wu, W. Lin, Z. Yu and M. Chen, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 7124–7131 RSC .
N. Hurkes, C. Bruhn, F. Belaj and R. Pietschnig, Organometallics, 2014, 33, 7299–7306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chaikittisilp, M. Kubo, T. Moteki, A. Sugawara-Narutaki, A. Shimojima and T. Okubo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13832–13835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, H. C. L. Abbenhuis, Q. Yang, Y.-M. Wang, P. C. M. M. Magusin, B. Mezari, R. A. van Santen and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 119, 5091–5094 CrossRef .
M. Seino, W. Wang, J. E. Lofgreen, D. P. Puzzo, T. Manabe and G. A. Ozin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18082–18085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gandhi, P. Kumar, K. Thandavan, K. Jang, D.-S. Shin and A. Vinu, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 2766–2769 RSC .
S. Marchesi, F. Carniato, L. Marchese and E. Boccaleri, ChemPlusChem, 2015, 80, 915–918 CrossRef CAS .
S. Marchesi, F. Carniato, L. Palin and E. Boccaleri, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 2042–2046 RSC .
U. Díaz, T. García, A. Velty and A. Corma, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 8659–8672 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Sun, Y. Chen, L. Zhao, Y. Chen, D. Qi, K.-M. Choi, D.-S. Shin and J. Jiang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 12613–12618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wada, K. Iyoki, A. Sugawara-Narutaki, T. Okubo and A. Shimojima, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 1700–1705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kim, K. Koh, M. F. Roll, R. M. Laine and A. J. Matzger, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 6995–7000 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jing, F. Sun, H. Ren, Y. Tian, M. Guo, L. Li and G. Zhu, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2013, 165, 92–98 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chaikittisilp, A. Sugawara, A. Shimojima and T. Okubo, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4841–4843 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, Y. Zhou, X. Wang, J. Li, S. Xue, Y. Liu, Q. Wang and J. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11236 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Qin, H. Ren, F. Zhu, L. Zhang, C. Shang, Z. Wei and M. Luo, Eur. Polym. J., 2011, 47, 853–860 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ardes-Guisot, J. O. Durand, M. Granier, A. Perzyna, Y. Coffinier, B. Grandidier, X. Wallart and D. Stievenard, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 9406–9408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fujimoto, M. Heishi, A. Shimojima and K. Kuroda, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 5151–5157 RSC .
L. L. Hench and J. K. West, Chem. Rev., 1990, 90, 33–72 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kuroda, A. Shimojima, K. Kawahara, R. Wakabayashi, Y. Tamura, Y. Asakura and M. Kitahara, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 211–220 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dirè, V. Tagliazucca, E. Callone and A. Quaranta, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2011, 126, 909–917 CrossRef .
B. Tan and S. E. Rankin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 22353–22364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. J. Dautel, G. Wantz, R. Almairac, D. Flot, L. Hirsch, J.-P. Lere-Porte, J.-P. Parneix, F. Serein-Spirau, L. Vignau and J. J. E. Moreau, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4892–4901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Tilgner, P. Fischer, F. Bohnen, H. Rehage and W. Maier, Microporous Mater., 1995, 5, 77–90 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Hobson and K. Shea, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 616–623 CrossRef CAS .
G. Creff, B. P. Pichon, C. Blanc, D. Maurin, J.-L. Sauvajol, C. Carcel, J. J. E. Moreau, P. Roy, J. R. Bartlett, M. Wong Chi Man and J.-L. Bantignies, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 5581–5588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Dieudonné, M. Wong Chi Man, B. P. Pichon, L. Vellutini, J.-L. Bantignies, C. Blanc, G. Creff, S. Finet, J.-L. Sauvajol, C. Bied and J. J. E. Moreau, Small, 2009, 5, 503–510 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. E. Moreau, L. Vellutini, M. Wong Chi Man and C. Bied, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 1509–1510 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. E. Moreau, L. Vellutini, M. Wong Chi Man, C. Bied, P. Dieudonné, J. L. Bantignies and J. L. Sauvajol, Chem. – Eur. J., 2005, 11, 1527–1537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. E. Moreau, L. Vellutini, M. Wong Chi Man, C. Bied, J.-L. Bantignies, P. Dieudonné and J.-L. Sauvajol, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 7957–7958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. E. Moreau, B. P. Pichon, C. Bied and M. Wong Chi Man, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3929–3936 RSC .
B. P. Pichon, S. Scampini, C. Bied, J. J. E. Moreau and M. Wong Chi Man, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2012, 2012, 5312–5322 CrossRef CAS .
R. Pleixats and M. Wong Chi Man, Chem. – Asian J., 2013, 8, 2235–2241 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Sprung and F. Guenther, J. Polym. Sci., 1958, 28, 17–34 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Katchman, U.S. Patent, 3162614,  1964 Search PubMed .

          J. J. Cekada, U.S. Patent, 3355399,  1967 Search PubMed .
L. Zhao, D. A. Loy and K. J. Shea, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14250–14251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Khiterer and K. J. Shea, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2684–2687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhao, M. Vaupel, D. A. Loy and K. J. Shea, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1870–1876 CrossRef CAS .
A. Arkhireeva and J. N. Hay, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 3122–3127 RSC .
A. Arkhireeva, J. N. Hay, J. M. Lane, M. Manzano, H. Masters, W. Oware and S. J. Shaw, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2004, 31, 31–36 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nakamura and K. Ishimura, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18892–18898 CAS .
M. Nakamura and K. Ishimura, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 5099–5108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nakamura, S. Ozaki, M. Abe, H. Doi, T. Matsumoto and K. Ishimura, Colloids Surf., B, 2010, 79, 19–26 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nakamura and K. Ishimura, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 12228–12234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nakamura, K. Hayashi, M. Nakano, T. Kanadani, K. Miyamoto, T. Kori and K. Horikawa, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1058–1071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, S. Tolbert and D. A. Loy, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2013, 298, 715–721 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, L. Wang, C. Cui, J. Lei and J. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 6154–6157 RSC .
A. Arkhireeva, J. N. Hay and M. Manzano, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 875–880 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Sharma, S. Das and A. Maitra, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2004, 277, 342–346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Irmukhametova, G. A. Mun and V. V. Khutoryanskiy, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 9551–9556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, D. Bharali, Y. Chen, R. K. Pandey and P. N. Prasad, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 12641–12644 CAS .
Z.-M. Xu, Y.-X. Wang, P. Dai and W.-Q. Kong, Mater. Lett., 2012, 89, 93–96 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qian, D. Wang, F. Cai, Q. Zhan, Y. Wang and S. He, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 4851–4860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qian, X. Li, M. Wei, X. Gao, Z. Xu and S. He, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 19568–19578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bertazza, L. Celotti, G. Fabbrini, M. A. Loi, M. Maggini, F. Mancin, S. Marcuz, E. Menna, M. Muccini and U. Tonellato, Tetrahedron, 2006, 62, 10434–10440 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, S. Huang, Z. Xu, F. Gao and J. Zhu, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 4996–5002 RSC .
I. Roy, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, H. E. Pudavar, E. J. Bergey, A. R. Oseroff, J. Morgan, T. J. Dougherty and P. N. Prasad, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 7860–7865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, H. E. Pudavar and P. N. Prasad, Chem. Commun., 2006, 2071–2073,  10.1039/B600926C .
S. Kim, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, H. E. Pudavar, R. K. Pandey and P. N. Prasad, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 2669–2675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, H. Huang, H. E. Pudavar, Y. Cui and P. N. Prasad, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5650–5656 CrossRef CAS .
T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, I. Roy, L. N. Goswami, Y. Chen, E. J. Bergey, R. K. Pandey, A. R. Oseroff and P. N. Prasad, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2835–2842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kumar, I. Roy, T. Y. Hulchanskyy, L. N. Goswami, A. C. Bonoiu, E. J. Bergey, K. M. Tramposch, A. Maitra and P. N. Prasad, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 449–456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kumar, I. Roy, T. Y. Ohulchanskky, L. A. Vathy, E. J. Bergey, M. Sajjad and P. N. Prasad, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 699–708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. M. Rio-Echevarria, F. Selvestrel, D. Segat, G. Guarino, R. Tavano, V. Causin, E. Reddi, E. Papini and F. Mancin, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2780–2787 RSC .
R. Tavano, D. Segat, E. Reddi, J. Kos, M. Rojnik, P. Kocbek, S. Iratni, D. Scheglmann, M. Colucci and I. M. R. Echevarria, Nanomedicine, 2010, 5, 881–896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Moret, F. Selvestrel, E. Lubian, M. Mognato, L. Celotti, F. Mancin and E. Reddi, Arch. Toxicol., 2015, 89, 607–620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Mori, M. G. Lanzendörfer, A. H. Müller and J. E. Klee, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 5228–5238 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mori, A. H. Müller and J. E. Klee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 3712–3713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Hah, J. S. Kim, B. J. Jeon, S. M. Koo and Y. E. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2003, 1712–1713 RSC .
Q. Wang, Y. Liu and H. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2007, 2339–2341 RSC .
F. Dong, W. Guo, S.-W. Chu and C.-S. Ha, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7498–7500 RSC .
F. Dong, W. Guo, S.-S. Park and C.-S. Ha, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10744–10749 RSC .
Y. Xing, J. Peng, K. Xu, W. Lin, S. Gao, Y. Ren, X. Gui, S. Liang and M. Chen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 2114–2126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Muthukrishnan, F. Plamper, H. Mori and A. H. Müller, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 10631–10642 CrossRef CAS .
W.-C. Law, K.-T. Yong, I. Roy, G. Xu, H. Ding, E. J. Bergey, H. Zeng and P. N. Prasad, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 7972–7977 CAS .
Y. Cui, X.-S. Zheng, B. Ren, R. Wang, J. Zhang, N.-S. Xia and Z.-Q. Tian, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1463–1469 RSC .
R. Bai, T. Qiu, F. Han, L. He and X. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 7683–7688 CrossRef CAS .
S.-W. Zhang, S.-X. Zhou, Y.-M. Weng and L.-M. Wu, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 2124–2128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, C. Song, T. Qiu, L. Guo and X. Li, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 92–101 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Bai, T. Qiu, M. Duan, G. Ma, L. He and X. Li, Colloids Surf., A, 2012, 396, 251–257 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhong, Y. Pei, Q. Han, L. Tang, Q. Chen and L. Wu, Compos. Interfaces, 2014, 21, 455–465 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhenqian, X. Bo, W. Pei and Y. Ninyyi, Colloids Surf., A, 2015, 482, 422–430 CrossRef .
X. Wang, B. Guan, Y. He, D. An, Y. Zhang, Y. Cao, X. Li, Y. Liu and Q. Huo, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 3719–3725 RSC .
J. Liu, H. Q. Yang, F. Kleitz, Z. G. Chen, T. Yang, E. Strounina, G. Q. Lu and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 591–599 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, L. Li, F. Tang and S. Qi, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3804–3807 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ujiie, A. Shimojima and K. Kuroda, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 3211–3214 RSC .
L.-C. Hu, M. Khiterer, S.-J. Huang, J. C. C. Chan, J. R. Davey and K. J. Shea, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5244–5250 CrossRef CAS .
J. Croissant, M. Maynadier, O. Mongin, V. Hugues, M. Blanchard-Desce, A. Chaix, X. Cattoën, M. Wong Chi Man, A. Gallud, M. Gary-Bobo, M. Garcia, L. Raehm and J.-O. Durand, Small, 2015, 11, 295–299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hayashi, M. Nakamura, H. Miki, S. Ozaki, M. Abe, T. Matsumoto and K. Ishimura, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3539–3546 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hayashi, M. Nakamura and K. Ishimura, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2013, 2, 756–763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hayashi, M. Nakamura, H. Miki, S. Ozaki, M. Abe, T. Matsumoto, T. Kori and K. Ishimura, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 503–513 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hayashi, S. Wataru and T. Yogo, J. Asian Ceram. Soc., 2014, 2, 429–434 CrossRef .
J. G. Croissant, C. Mauriello-Jimenez, M. Maynadier, X. Cattoën, M. Wong Chi Man, L. Raehm, O. Mongin, M. Blanchard-Desce, M. Garcia and M. Gary-Bobo, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12324–12327 RSC .
L.-C. Hu, Y. Yonamine, S.-H. Lee, W. E. van der Veer and K. J. Shea, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11072–11075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Rocca, R. C. Huxford, E. Comstock-Duggan and W. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10330–10334 CrossRef PubMed .
J. L. Vivero-Escoto, W. J. Rieter, H. Lau, R. C. Huxford-Phillips and W. Lin, Small, 2013, 9, 3523–3531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Vivero-Escoto, D. DeCillis, L. Fritts and D. L. Vega, SPIE BiOS, 2014, 89310Z–89310Z Search PubMed .
D. Boday, S. Tolbert, M. Keller, Z. Li, J. Wertz, B. Muriithi and D. Loy, J. Nanopart. Res., 2014, 16, 1–13 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, Y. Wang and Q. Gan, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2010, 56, 141–144 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Manchanda and M. Kruk, Langmuir, 2015, 32, 900–908 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Maggini, L. Travaglini, I. Cabrera, P. Castro-Hartmann and L. De Cola, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 3697–3703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fatieiev, J. Croissant, S. Alsaiari, B. A. Moosa, D. H. Anjum and N. M. Khashab, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 24993–24997 CAS .
A. Brethon, J. J. E. Moreau and M. Wong Chi Man, Tetrahedron: Asymmetry, 2004, 15, 495–502 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. E. Moreau, L. Vellutini, M. Wong Chi Man and C. Bied, Chem. – Eur. J., 2003, 9, 1594–1599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xu, V. R. Manda, L. E. McNamara, M. P. Jahan, H. Rathnayake and N. I. Hammer, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 30172–30179 RSC .
B. P. Pichon, M. Wong Chi Man, P. Dieudonné, J. L. Bantignies, C. Bied, J. L. Sauvajol and J. J. E. Moreau, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2349–2355 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, Q. Chen, Z. Lv, W. Sun, L. Chen and J. Wu, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2011, 60, 214–220 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, S. Lin, J. Qin, Y. Li, B. Li and Y. Yang, Chirality, 2016, 28, 44–48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, M. Nakazawa, M. Suzuki, M. Kimura, H. Shirai and K. Hanabusa, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 3791–3793 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, B. Li, Y. Chen, X. Wu, J. Zhang, Y. Li, K. Hanabusa and Y. Yang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2009, 118, 135–141 CrossRef CAS .
V. Čaplar, M. Žinić, J. L. Pozzo, F. Fages, G. Mieden-Gundert and F. Vögtle, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2004, 4048–4059 CrossRef .
L. Wang, Y. Li, H. Wang, M. Zhang, Y. Chen, B. Li and Y. Yang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2010, 124, 609–613 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qinghong, J. J. E. Moreau and M. Wong Chi Man, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2004, 32, 111–115 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, M. Nakazawa, M. Suzuki, H. Shirai and K. Hanabusa, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2936–2943 RSC .
M. Llusar and C. Sanchez, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 782–820 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, B. Li, X. Wu, X. Zhu, M. Suzuki, K. Hanabusa and Y. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2008, 4948–4950 RSC .
Y. Li, H. Wang, L. Wang, F. Zhou, Y. Chen, B. Li and Y. Yang, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 135605 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, B. Li, Y. Chen, M. Zhang, S. Wang, Y. Li and Y. Yang, Chin. J. Chem., 2009, 27, 1860–1862 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, S. Wang, M. Xiao, M. Wang, Z. Huang, B. Li and Y. Yang, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 035603 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Liu, B. Li, Y. Guo, Y. Li and Y. Yang, Chirality, 2015, 27, 809–815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, S. Ji, Y. Li, B. Li, X. Zhu, K. Hanabusa and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5986–5993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, W. Zhuang, B. Li, L. Wu, S. Wang, Y. Li and Y. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 7215–7217 RSC .
M. Faisal, Y. Hong, J. Liu, Y. Yu, J. W. Y. Lam, A. Qin, P. Lu and B. Z. Tang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 4266–4272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tang, H. Xu, R. Kopelman and M. A. Philbert, Photochem. Photobiol., 2005, 81, 242–249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kumar, I. Mutreja, P. C. Keshvan, M. Bhat, A. K. Dinda and S. Mitra, J. Pharm. Sci., 2015, 104, 3943–3951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fatieiev, J. Croissant, K. Julfakyan, L. Deng, D. H. Anjum, A. Gurinov and N. Khashab, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 15046–15050 RSC .
F. Barandeh, P.-L. Nguyen, R. Kumar, G. J. Iacobucci, M. L. Kuznicki, A. Kosterman, E. J. Bergey, P. N. Prasad and S. Gunawardena, PLoS One, 2012, 7, e29424 CAS .
C. Compagnin, L. Bau, M. Mognato, L. Celotti, G. Miotto, M. Arduini, F. Moret, C. Fede, F. Selvestrel, I. M. R. Echevarria, F. Mancin and E. Reddi, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 345101 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Kim, S.-W. Huang, K. C. Day, M. O'Donnell, R. R. Agayan, M. A. Day, R. Kopelman and S. Ashkenazi, J. Biomed. Opt., 2007, 12, 044020–044020 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Kumar, I. Roy, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, L. N. Goswami, A. C. Bonoiu, E. J. Bergey, K. M. Tramposch, A. Maitra and P. N. Prasad, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 449–456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hong, J. W. Lam and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5361–5388 RSC .
Y. Hong, J. W. Lam and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4332–4353 RSC .
X. Gu, G. Zhang and D. Zhang, Analyst, 2012, 137, 365–369 RSC .
J. Luo, Z. Xie, J. W. Lam, L. Cheng, H. Chen, C. Qiu, H. S. Kwok, X. Zhan, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2001, 1740–1741 RSC .
M. Wang, G. Zhang, D. Zhang, D. Zhu and B. Z. Tang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1858–1867 RSC .
Z. Zhu, X. Zhao, W. Qin, G. Chen, J. Qian and Z. Xu, Sci. China: Chem., 2013, 56, 1247–1252 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Taylor-Pashow, J. D. Rocca and W. Lin, Nanomaterials, 2011, 2, 1–14 CrossRef PubMed .
J. L. Vivero-Escoto, K. M. Taylor-Pashow, R. C. Huxford, J. Della Rocca, C. Okoruwa, H. An, W. Lin and W. Lin, Small, 2011, 7, 3519–3528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Beaumont, J. C. Lambry, A. C. Robin, P. Martasek, M. Blanchard-Desce and A. Slama-Schwok, ChemPhysChem, 2008, 9, 2325–2331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Vega, P. Lodge and J. Vivero-Escoto, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2015, 17, 56 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kearvell and F. Wilkinson, Mol. Cryst., 1968, 4, 69–81 CrossRef CAS .
L.-C. Hu, Y. Yonamine, S.-H. Lee, W. E. van der Veer and K. J. Shea, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11072–11075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Roy, P. Kumar, R. Kumar, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, K.-T. Yong and P. N. Prasad, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 53498–53504 RSC .
L. Fertier, C. Théron, C. Carcel, P. Trens and M. Wong Chi Man, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2100–2106 CrossRef CAS .
S. Giret, C. Théron, A. Gallud, M. Maynadier, M. Gary-Bobo, M. Garcia, M. Wong Chi Man and C. Carcel, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 12806–12814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Rocca, M. E. Werner, S. A. Kramer, R. C. Huxford-Phillips, R. Sukumar, N. D. Cummings, J. L. Vivero-Escoto, A. Z. Wang and W. Lin, Nanomedicine, 2015, 11, 31–38 CAS .
I. Roy, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, D. J. Bharali, H. E. Pudavar, R. A. Mistretta, N. Kaur and P. N. Prasad, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 279–284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Bharali, I. Klejbor, E. K. Stachowiak, P. Dutta, I. Roy, N. Kaur, E. J. Bergey, P.
N. Prasad and M. K. Stachowiak, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 11539–11544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Roy, M. K. Stachowiak and E. J. Bergey, Nanomedicine, 2008, 4, 89–97 CAS .
E. K. Stachowiak, I. Roy, Y.-W. Lee, M. Capacchietti, J. M. Aletta, P. N. Prasad and M. K. Stachowiak, Integr. Biol., 2009, 1, 394–403 RSC .

          R. Colaco, M. C. Goncalves, L. M. D. Goncalves, A. J. Almeida and M. B. Martins, Synthesis of monodispersed ORMOSIL nanoparticles and conjugation with DNA for gene therapy, in 1st Portuguese Meeting in Bioengineering (ENBENG), 2011, IEEE,  2011.
I. Klejbor, E. Stachowiak, D. Bharali, I. Roy, I. Spodnik, J. Morys, E. Bergey, P. Prasad and M. Stachowiak, J. Neurosci. Methods, 2007, 165, 230–243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Barbu, É. Molnàr, J. Tsibouklis and D. C. Górecki, Expert Opin. Drug Delivery, 2009, 6, 553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Bae, W. Tan and J.-I. Hong, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2270–2282 RSC .
S. Kim, V. Kim and Y. Kim, Macromol. Res., 2012, 20, 437–446 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. H. Correia, P. P. Lima, P. S. André, M. R. S. Ferreira and L. A. D. Carlos, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 138, 51–57 CrossRef CAS .
V. T. Freitas, L. Fu, A. M. Cojocariu, X. Cattoën, J. R. Bartlett, R. Le Parc, J.-L. Bantignies, M. Wong Chi Man, P. S. André, R. A. S. Ferreira and L. D. Carlos, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 8770–8778 CAS .
A.-C. Franville, D. Zambon, R. Mahiou and Y. Troin, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 428–435 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, N. Lin, Y. Wang, Y. Feng, Q. Gan, H. Zhang, Q. Dong and Y. Chen, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2009, 2009, 519–523 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, Y. Wang, P. Cao, Y. Li and H. Li, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 177–181 RSC .
H. Rathnayake, J. Binion, A. McKee, D. J. Scardino and N. I. Hammer, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4631–4640 RSC .
P. M. Beaujuge and J. R. Reynolds, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 268–320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Innocenzi and B. Lebeau, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3821–3831 RSC .
H. W. J. Oviatt, K. J. Shea, S. Kalluri, Y. Shi, W. H. Steier and L. R. Dalton, Chem. Mater., 1995, 7, 493–498 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ak, B. Gacal, B. Kiskan, Y. Yagci and L. Toppare, Polymer, 2008, 49, 2202–2210 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xiong, Y. Xiao, J. Ma, L. Zhang and X. Lu, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2007, 28, 281–285 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xiong, P. Jia, K. Y. Mya, J. Ma, F. Boey and X. Lu, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 3523–3530 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jia, A. A. Argun, J. Xu, S. Xiong, J. Ma, P. T. Hammond and X. Lu, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4434–4441 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xiong, J. Ma and X. Lu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 2113–2117 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhou, K. P. Pramoda, W. Liu, D. Zhou, G. Ding, C. He, Y. W. Leong and X. Lu, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 146, 224–230 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mihelčič, V. Francetič, P. Pori, H. Gradišar, J. Kovač and B. Orel, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 313, 484–497 CrossRef .
V. Jain, M. Khiterer, R. Montazami, H. M. Yochum, K. J. Shea and J. R. Heflin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 83–89 CAS .
M. Ferre, R. Pleixats, M. Wong Chi Man and X. Cattoën, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 881–922 RSC .
F. Dong, W. Guo, S.-K. Park and C.-S. Ha, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1108–1110 RSC .
A. Chemtob, L. Ni, C. Croutxé-Barghorn and B. Boury, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 1790–1806 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:
Jonas G. Croissant	Dr Jonas Croissant is a post-doctoral researcher at the King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (Saudi Arabia) and UCLA. He received his Ph.D. from the École Nationale Supérieure de Chimie de Montpellier (France) in 2014 under the supervision of Profs. Jean-Olivier Durand and Michel Wong Chi Man. He was awarded the Ballard Chemistry Foundation as well as the Société Chimique de France Languedoc Roussillon doctoral thesis awards. His research interests include the design and applications of organosilica nanocomposites.
Xavier Cattoën	Dr Xavier Cattoën was born in 1978 in Poitiers (France). He graduated from ENS Cachan and then completed his Ph.D. in 2004 under the supervision of Prof. G. Bertrand and Dr D. Bourissou in Toulouse. After a post-doctoral stay at ICIQ in Tarragona (Spain) in M. A. Pericàs’ group, he joined the CNRS in 2007 at the ICG Institute (Institut Charles Gerhardt Montpellier), and then moved to the Néel Institute in Grenoble in 2013 where he is developing structured hybrid materials for applications in biophotonics.
Jean-Olivier Durand	Dr Jean-Olivier Durand graduated from the Ecole Nationale Supérieure de Chimie de Paris in 1990 and obtained his Ph.D. in organic chemistry with Prof. J. P. Genêt in 1993. He conducted postdoctoral studies with Prof. W. Oppolzer at the University of Geneva (Switzerland). After two other postdoctoral studies in Rennes (Prof. Le Corre) and Paris (Dr M. Larchevêque), he was appointed a CNRS researcher in 1996 at the Laboratoire de Chimie Moléculaire et Organisation du Solide, Institut Charles Gerhardt Montpellier. His research interests include the development of mesoporous silica nanoparticles for photodynamic therapy and drug delivery.
Michel Wong Chi Man	Dr Michel Wong Chi Man studied at the University of Montpellier (France) before completing an AvH Postdoctoral Fellowship at the University of Heidelberg (Germany). Currently he is a CNRS Research Director working at the ICGM (Institut Charles Gerhardt Montpellier) and has also been serving on the Board of the ISGS (International Sol–Gel Society) since 2011. He is an expert in organosilicon and hybrid silica chemistry and over the past two decades he has developed pioneering work on bridged silsesquioxanes (BSQ) producing significant scientific advances in this field. He was the first to report right- and left-handed helical BSQ and self-structured BSQ at the nanoscale. He has also developed BSQ for application in several fields: catalysis, optics, and separation chemistry.
Niveen M. Khashab	Dr Niveen M. Khashab received her B.Sc. from the American University of Beirut in 2002 and her Ph.D. from the University of Florida, Gainesville in 2007 with Alan Katritzky. She conducted postdoctoral studies with Sir J. Fraser Stoddart in UCLA and Northwestern University from 2007 to 2009. She then joined the King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, and was promoted to Associate Professor in 2016. She was awarded the L'Oréal-UNESCO Women in Science award of 2017 for the Africa & Arab States. Her major interests include hybrid materials, stimuli responsive systems, controlled release and delivery applications, and self-assembly.

 	Fig. 1  Structures and synthetic pathways of various organosilica nanocomposites: organically-doped mesoporous silica NPs (A and B), organically-doped (C) and surface-functionalized (D) non-porous silica NPs, periodic mesoporous organosilica NPs (E and F), and non-porous silsesquioxane NPs with or without surface functionalization (H and G respectively). Cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) is a typical surfactant in sol–gel processes. Organoalkoxysilane and bridged organoalkoxysilane precursors possess ethoxy or methoxy R groups. *Not sensu stricto but generally with a disorganized low micro or mesoporosity.	 

 	Fig. 2  Representation of the synthesis and chemical structure of silsesquioxane (A) and bridged silsesquioxane NPs (B) from organoalkoxysilanes (R is generally an ethoxy or a methoxy group).	 

 	Fig. 3  Versatile chemical structures of reported SQ NPs obtained from mono-organoalkoxysilyl precursors. Stars indicate that the corresponding trimethoxy- or triethoxy-organosilane precursors are commercially available.	 

 	Fig. 4  TEM micrographs of monodisperse vinyl (3) SQ NPs of 7 nm (A)177 and 3 nm (B).128 Reproduced with permission from Elsevier and Springer-Verlag. SEM micrograph of monodisperse methyl (1) SQ NPs (C).157 Adapted with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  SEM (A–C) and TEM (B) micrographs of monodisperse hollow phenyl (7) SQ NPs. TEM scale bar of 600 nm (B).206 Adapted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  Sol–gel precursors (A) of highly monodisperse SQ NPs from a polystyrene hard template, as shown by TEM (A and B) and SEM (C) micrographs. TEM scale bars of 20 nm (A).209 Adapted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematics for the synthesis of SQ-silica nanorattles and the encapsulation of Pd NPs (A). Elemental mappings of NPs visualized via electron microscopy (B).220 Adapted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  Diverse chemical structures of reported bridged silsesquioxane NPs obtained from bis- or multi-organoalkoxysilyl precursors. Stars indicate that the corresponding trimethoxy- or triethoxy-organosilane precursors are commercially available.	 

 	Fig. 9  SEM micrograph of BSQ NPs obtained from (III) (A),174 and (II) (B).224 Artistic representation of the competitive mechanisms for particle growth and size limitation.224 Adapted with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Synthesis of nitrophenylene-based (XVIII) BSQ and hollow BSQ NPs as shown by TEM micrographs.239 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Syntheses of the molecular (XIX) precursors and BSQ (A) with various morphologies (B–E). TEM images of BSQ nanotubes obtained from the (R,R) or (S,S) precursors (B). SEM image of BSQ nano- and micro-spheres obtained from the racemic mixture (C). SEM images of BSQ nanotubes obtained from the (R,R) or (S,S) precursors (D). SEM images of nanofibers obtained from the (R,R) precursor after precipitation (before sol–gel) (E).241 Adapted with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 12  Design of silicon-based organically-bridged nanorods and nanowires with perylenediimide R bridges (XXVIII).242 Adapted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  SEM micrographs of various BSQ nanofibers and nanotubes. Chiral bis-(propylurea)cyclohexylene (XIX) BSQ right-handed (A) and left-handed (B) helical nanofibers, respectively obtained from the corresponding (R,R) and (S,S) bis(triethoxysilyl)organosilane precursors.164 Chiral bis(propylurea-amide)biphenylene (XXXV) BSQ with right-handed (C and D) and left-handed (E and F) helical nanofiber morphologies, respectively obtained from the corresponding (D,D) and (L,L) bis(triethoxysilyl)organosilane precursors.245 Chiral bis(propylurea-amide)dodecylene (XXXIV, n = 2) BSQ left-handed (G) and right-handed (H) helical nanofibers, respectively obtained from the corresponding (S,S) and (R,R) bis(triethoxysilyl)organosilane precursors.246 Chiral helicoidal phenylene (IV) BSQ nanofibers were designed from the transfer of chirality of gelator 12K in water (I and J), while in water/ethanol nanotubes were obtained (K).247 SEM and TEM images of helicoidal biphenyl (VII) BSQ nanofibers obtained via an anionic chiral gelator248 (L and M respectively).249	 

 	Fig. 14  Representation of various (XXXVII) BSQ NPs entitled as BSNPs, BS@AuNPs, and Au@BSNPs along with their TEM micrographs (A–C).225 Reproduced with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 15  Clearance of the vinyl (3)-NIR-dye (31) SQ NPs intravenously injected into the mice (upper panel) compared with the free dye injected mice as the control (lower panel) (A).200 Adapted with permission from the American Chemical Society. Drosophila cellular imaging displaying that vinyl (3)-Rhodamine B (28) SQ NPs (red) do not move into the nucleus and are found in the cytoplasm (B). DAPI dyes stained nuclei (C) and the merged image (D). (E) Image of larval segmental nerves from dissected larvae showing the presence of SQ NPs (arrows), without any effect on the axonal transport pathway as shown by the synaptic vesicle antibody, CSP (F).264 Adapted with permission from PLoS One.	 

 	Fig. 16  Representation of BSQ@SiO2 core shell NPs composed of tetraphenylethene (XXVII) or silole (XXX) bridging groups aggregated to generate AIE imaging (A). Photographs of solutions and suspensions of the silane precursor, silica NP control, and BSQ@SiO2 NPs in ethanol and irradiated at 365 nm depicting the strong blue and green emissions from (XXVI) (B) and (XXX) (D) BSQ NPs. Fluorescence images of HeLa cells stained by (XXVII) (C) and (XXX) (E) BSQ NPs.260 Adapted with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 17  Release profiles of gadolinium chelates from (XXVI) BSQ NPs (circles) and BSQ-PEG NPs (triangles) in the presence of 10 mM cysteine at 37 °C (A). T1- (B) and T2-weighted (C) MR phantom images of BSQ, BSQ-PEG, and BSQ-PEB-anisamide NPs at various Gd concentrations.233 Adapted with permission from Elsevier. Schematic representation of the synthesis and enzymatic degradation of BSQ NPs via the cleavage of amide bonds (D). CLSM images of (XV)-BS-FITC NPs in cells (E and F). Nuclei are stained in blue with DAPI dyes and cell membranes in red with CellMask™ (F). Scale bars of 20 μm.237 Adapted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  Application of BSQ and gold core BSQ shell NPs obtained from (XXXVII) for TPE-PDT and imaging in cancer cells.225 Reproduced with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 19  TEM micrographs of BSQ NPs designed from propyldisulfide (XI) and diphenylbutadiene (XXXVII) bridges (DIS2 NPs, A and C) or propyldisulfide (XI) and Zn-porphyrin (XXXX) bridges (DISP NPs, B and D) before (A and B) and after 48 h of degradation by mercaptoethanol (ME) (C and D). TPE-confocal microscopy images of cells incubated for 20 h with 80 μg mL−1 of DIS2 (E) and DISP (F). Scale bars of 10 μm. TPE-triggered cancer cell killing on DIS2 (irradiated at 760 nm) and 50 nm DISP NPs (irradiated at 800 nm). NP concentration of 50 μg mL−1 (G).230 Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 20  Synthesis of iodopropyl (14) SQ-porphyrin (XXXXIII) BSQ NPs and their PDT/PTT combination therapy by the enhancement of 1O2 generation via the heavy atom effect and the conversion of the energy absorbed from photons into heat (A). TEM image of BSQ NPs (B). Tumor growth behavior and (B) the survival period of mice (circle: mice without treatment, diamond: mice injected with FA-PEG-ISP HNPs, triangle: mice exposed to LED light, square: mice exposed to LED light after injection of FA-PEG-ISP HNPs).228 Reproduced with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 21  SEM micrographs of the dried mixture suspension of (XIV) BSQ NPs and smaller silica NPs before (A) and after UV irradiation (B). Application of the charge reversal feature for antibody release (C).231 Adapted with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  Representation of the preparation of cyanuric-loaded BSQ NPs obtained from (XXV) and of the acidic-actuated release.281 Adapted with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  Zeta potentials of nitrophenylene (XVIII) BSQ NPs before and after UV irradiation (A). Positively-charged BSQ NPs (B) electrostatically binding DNA (C) for light-triggered delivery (D). The negative charge of NPs results from the neutralization of the charge of the organic bridges.239 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  Design and proposed structure of lanthanide-containing (XXI) BSQ NPs (A–B), and the digital photo of the precipitate of BSQ NPs onto a plate then irradiated with a UV lamp (254 nm) (C). Excitation and emission spectra of spherical BSQ NPs containing Eu3+ (D) and Tb3+ ions (E).236 Adapted with permission from Springer Science.	 

 	Fig. 25  Representation of the possible complexation modes of lanthanide ions by the various isomers of (XXI) (A). Photograph of the BSQ thin film excited at 365 nm (B).8 Adapted with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  Schematic representation of the device configuration of glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/polymer (XXVIII) BSQ NPs/Ca–Al (A). Current–voltage curves for the device at room temperature (RT), annealed at 150 °C, or in the dark for devices prepared from nanospheres (B),298 nanowires (C), and nanorods (D).242 Adapted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 27  Asymmetric solid-state electrochromic device from LbL films of 40 bilayers of (XV) BSQ NPs/PAMPS and PANI/PAMPS (A). SEM image of 20 bilayer films of BSQ NPs/PAMPS (B). Cyclic voltammetry of a 40-bilayer BSQ NP/PAMPS film (C). Transmission spectra from 0 to 3 V of a solid-state sandwiched device. The inset shows photographs of the device changing the color from yellow-green to dark purple-blue (D). Adapted with permission from the American Chemical Society.309	 

 	Fig. 28  Hollow cyanopropylene (13) SQ-Au catalyst nanoreactor (A). UV-Vis spectra of 4-nitrophenol reduction. Insets are the reaction scheme, the associated color change from bright yellow to colorless and the conversion of the 4-nitrophenol graph in 60 min for 5 runs of catalyst cycles.311 Adapted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 29  Hydrogenation reaction of 4-methoxy-nitrobenzene to 4-methoxy-aniline and the bar diagram for recyclability of thiolated (10) SQ-SH/Pd-silica nanorattles (A). TEM image of SQ nanorattles after five cycles (B). Multistep reaction sequence for the synthesis of 2-(2-aminophenylene)-1H-benzimidazole (C). Table for the recyclability of SO3H (11) SQ-Pd in the cascade reaction along with the turnover frequency (D).220 Adapted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
