Rational design of hierarchical ZnO superstructures for efficient charge transfer: mechanistic and photovoltaic studies of hollow, mesoporous, cage-li ...  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CP07687K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CP07687K
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 5344-5357Rational design of hierarchical ZnO superstructures for efficient charge transfer: mechanistic and photovoltaic studies of hollow, mesoporous, cage-like nanostructures with compacted 1D building blocks†

        
          
            Tridip Ranjan 
            Chetia
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Mohammad Shaad 
            Ansari
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Mohammad 
            Qureshi
          
        
      *
      Materials Science Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Assam, 781039, India. E-mail: mq@iitg.ernet.in;  Fax: +91-361-2582349;   Tel: +91-361-2582320
Received 
      13th December 2015
    , Accepted 14th January 2016First published on 19th January 2016AbstractMesoporous and hollow zinc oxide (ZnO) hierarchical superstructures assembled with compact 1D building blocks that provide an efficient and faster transport pathway for photo-generated charge carriers have been synthesized using a biomass derived polysaccharide “alginic acid”. To understand the interactions between the organic bio-template and inorganic growth units of ZnO in aqueous medium, the effects of additives such as the alginate ion (ALGI) and ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH), along with the controlled reaction conditions, are investigated using Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy (FESEM) and powder X-ray diffraction. Dynamic and steady-state photoluminescence measurements are carried out to understand the charge transfer processes in the compact 1D superstructures. Experimental analyses reveal that the alginate ions, under hydrothermal reaction conditions, act as a structure directing agent and assemble 1D ZnO nanorods (NRs) hierarchically while NH4OH assists the formation of ZnO growth units. A plausible mechanism for ZnO cage formation is proposed based on the experimental observations. Morphology dependent photovoltaic properties of ZnO heterostructures, i.e., for ZnO cages, ZnO NRs and ZnO PNPs, have been studied along with electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). Enhancement of ∼60% and ∼35% in power conversion efficiency (PCE) is observed in ZnO cage based devices as compared to ZnO NR- and ZnO PNP-based devices, respectively.
Introduction
Recent advances in the rational design and development of inorganic semiconductor nanomaterials having excellent charge transport and optical properties have received considerable attention among the scientific community.1–6 Synthetic processes of these materials involve utilization of a range of structure directing agents and additives which can alter the classical arrangement of respective growth units. Among these synthetic methodologies, bio-inspired synthetic approaches utilize naturally abundant chemicals as structure directing agents and allow us to achieve control over morphology of materials to offer exotic electrical, optical, as well as magnetic properties.7,8 In particular, bio-templates are relatively economical and environmentally benign. The control over crystallization of inorganic materials achieved in biomimetic synthetic procedures has been a motivation for the development of new simple synthetic routes to materials of technological interest.9 For instance, a number of naturally profuse bio-species such as peptides,10 butterfly wings,11 shell membranes,12 cellulose fibers,13 sodium carboxymethyl cellulose,14 pollen grains,15 gelatin,16 hyaluronic acid and chondroitin-6-sulfate,17 and pectin18 are employed as templates in the synthetic methods of inorganic functional materials. In the presence of these bio-templates, the crystal growth processes might in certain aspects mimic the bio-mineralization processes.19 However, the formation mechanisms of aggregate morphologies are still scarce and need to be understood for better design of materials. It is believed that the formation of aggregates might be inspired by the templating effect of the bio-polymers along with the electrostatic force driven, non-classical arrangement of the growth units.9,20 In order to achieve novel structures of various materials, it is important to understand the interactions between the soft bio-materials and inorganic materials.
Zinc oxide (ZnO) is an important direct band gap semiconductor which has received extensive research interest due to its unique physical and chemical properties.21–24 Moreover, transport and optical properties of ZnO can be tuned by tailoring into various architectures such as zero dimensional (0-D), one dimensional (1-D) and two dimensional (2-D) nanostructures as well as three dimensional (3-D) superstructures which opens up potential applicability in a wide spectrum of areas. This is possible in the case of ZnO partly due to its ease of crystallization and anisotropic growth behavior of crystal planes.25–27 Among all the heterostructures, synthesis of 3-D superstructures assembled with 1-D nanostructures is a great challenge as they are enriched with superior optical and electrical properties for photovoltaic as well as photocatalytic applications.2,28 Apart from ZnO, synthesis of 3D superstructures of other important transition metal oxides such as TiO2, MnO2, and Fe2O3 is also performed and achieved promising solar energy harvesting ability.29–32 3-D superstructures have the potential to provide a high surface area for adsorption of the sensitizer molecule and excellent light scattering ability along with direct and faster transport pathways for photo-generated electrons.23 Additionally, porous and hollow characteristics of these materials are conducive to the diffusion of electrolyte for better functioning of the redox couple in the photovoltaic devices. Very few synthetic protocols are developed to achieve anticipated superstructures of ZnO by various research groups.33–37
Herein, mesoporous and hollow 3-D ZnO superstructures assembled with compact 1D nanorods which can provide faster photogenerated charge transfer pathways are synthesized in a faster (1.5 h) and low temperature (120 °C) hydrothermal synthetic protocol. In the synthetic process we have utilized a soft bio-template alginic acid in the form of sodium alginate (ALG) as a structure directing agent and ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH) as a precipitating base. ALG is an easily available anionic polysaccharide which is extracted from seaweeds and its chemical structure is depicted in Fig. 1. We have optimized the reaction conditions by varying the time and the sequence of addition of ALG and NH4OH. Based on the systematic experimental observations, a plausible formation and growth mechanism is proposed for the as-synthesized ZnO superstructures. The technological importance of the material is established by evaluating the photovoltaic properties and comparing the performance parameters with similar devices fabricated using conventional ZnO morphologies, i.e., ZnO nanorods (NRs) and porous ZnO nanoparticles (PNPs). Improved photovoltaic performance is observed for the devices based on ZnO superstructures over the ZnO NRs and ZnO PNPs.
 Fig. 1  The chemical structure of sodium alginate in water. 
Experimental
Materials
The chemicals and reagents used in the synthesis and preparation were analytically pure and used directly as received without further purification. Zinc nitrate hexahydrate (Merck), sodium alginate (Himedia), ammonium hydroxide (Merck), a triblock copolymer poly(ethylene glycol)-block-poly(propylene glycol)-block-poly(ethylene glycol) or PEG–PPG–PEG (Sigma Aldrich), terpineol (Himedia), chloroplatinic acid (Sigma Aldrich), lithium iodide (Sigma Aldrich), iodine (Merck), 4-tert-butylpyridine (Himedia), acetonitrile (HPLC grade, Merck), valeronitrile (Sigma Aldrich), 1-butyl 3-methyl imidazolium iodide (Sigma Aldrich), methanol (Merck), ethanol (TMEDA) and hydrogen chloride (Merck) are used without further purification. Low temperature thermoplastic films were used as the sealant material (Dyesol). Fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass substrates having a sheet resistance of 12–14 Ω cm−2 were obtained from Sigma Aldrich USA. The FTOs are used as substrates for fabrication of both the electrodes, i.e., the photoanode and the cathode. For all the experiments high grade Milli-Q water (18.2 MΩ cm−2) is used.
Synthesis of ZnO cages
The typical synthetic procedure of alginic acid assisted ZnO is as follows. A calculated amount of 0.1 wt% sodium alginate (0.025 g) is dissolved in 25 mL of Milli-Q water with continuous stirring followed by the addition of zinc nitrate hexahydrate (1 mmol, 0.297 g). Instantly a jelly-like precipitate is observed in the solution and thereafter it is stirred continually for another 15 min. Subsequently, an optimized amount of 25% NH4OH (1.5 mL) is slowly added to the solution. It is observed that immediately after the addition of NH4OH, a white precipitate possibly of Zn(OH)2 appears in the solution. Upon further addition of NH4OH up to 0.8 mL to the reaction mixture, the white precipitate disappears completely and a clear solution is obtained. After complete addition of NH4OH up to 1.5 mL, the pH of the solution is found to be ∼10. The clear solution is transferred into a teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave, sealed tightly and kept at 120 °C for 1.5 h. After cooling down to room temperature, the precipitate is centrifuged, washed with distilled water and absolute ethanol several times and dried in a hot air oven at 70 °C for 6 h. Control reactions in the absence of NH4OH and sodium alginate, respectively, are carried out. We have also investigated the reaction in detail by varying the addition sequence of NH4OH and ALG keeping other reaction conditions same in order to gain insights into the effects of both the additives. In addition, reactions are carried out at different periods of time, i.e., for 40 min, 60 min, 90 min and 120 min so as to follow and understand the growth process of the superstructures.
Fabrication of photoanodes and devices
All ZnO based photoanodes were fabricated by making a homogenous paste of zinc oxide and coating it over the conductive glass substrates i.e. FTO. For the preparation of ZnO paste, ZnO powder (0.1 g) was ground with a mixture of terpineol and a triblock copolymer (PEG–PPG–PEG) in an agate mortar until a homogenous paste was formed. This homogenous paste was coated on a pre-cleaned conductive glass substrate i.e. FTO via the doctor blade technique and the films were dried in air, followed by calcination at 520 °C for 60 min to remove the polymer. The thickness of the ZnO layer was measured using a surface profilometer (Veeco Dektak-150) and it was found to be in the range of 12–15 μm. These substrates were then immersed in N719 dye solution in ethanol (0.3 mM) for 2.5 h at 50 °C. The sensitized photoanodes were taken out from the dye solution, washed with absolute ethanol and dried in hot air blow. The dye sensitized solar cell (DSSC) devices were fabricated by sandwiching the photoanodes and counter electrodes. To fabricate the counter electrode, a solution of 5 mM chloroplatinic acid in isopropanol was spin coated on a cleaned, ozonized FTO substrate. The spin coated FTO substrate was then calcined at 450 °C for 30 min (heating ramp of 5 °C min−1) in a muffle furnace. The furnace was cooled down to room temperature naturally and the as-prepared platinum coated counter electrode was taken out. The electrolyte solution was introduced into the devices after sealing (using a low-temperature thermoplastic sealant, thickness ∼50 μm) through a hole in the counter electrode which was made by drilling using a glass driller. The I−/I3− electrolyte solution was prepared by dissolving 0.5 M LiI, 0.05 M I2, 0.1 M guanidium thiocyanate, and 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine in a solvent mixture of acetonitrile:valeronitrile (9:1, v/v). The active area of all fabricated devices was fixed and it was found to be 0.25 cm2. Before the photovoltaic measurements i.e. (I–V), IPCE and EIS measurements, the fabricated devices were kept in dark for 24 h.
Measurements and material characterization
The powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) measurements were carried out by using a Bruker D2 Phaser X-ray diffractometer having a Cu–Kα (λ = 1.54 Å) X-ray source. The operating voltage and current were 30 kV and 30 kA respectively. The scan rate was fixed at 0.1° s−1 for recording the XRD patterns within the 2θ range of 10–80°. The UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS) were recorded via a JASCO Model V-650 spectrophotometer by using a 150 mm integrating sphere and BaSO4 was used as an internal standard. Steady state photoluminescence (PL) studies were carried out using a Horiba–Jobin Yvon Fluoromax 4 spectrophotometer. Beckman-Coulter SA 3100 N2 adsorption apparatus was used for Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area analysis. Prior to surface area analysis, the samples were degassed at 150 °C for 3 h. The morphology of the as-synthesized materials was investigated by performing field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM). A FESEM instrument, manufactured by Zeiss (Model: Sigma), was employed to take the images. The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) measurements were performed on a JEOL JEM 2100 microscope with an operating voltage of 200 kV. A Veeco Dektak-150 surface profilometer was used to measure the thickness of the ZnO layer deposited onto FTO substrates. Current density–voltage (J–V) measurements of the fabricated devices were conducted in dark and under light illumination with AM 1.5G artificial solar light of 100 mW cm−2 and recorded using a Keithley 2400 source-meter. Calibration of the arc lamp (intensity 450 W) of a Newport ORIEL Sol3A solar simulator was done using a standard Si photovoltaic cell. A Newport ORIEL IQE-200 instrument fitted with a 250 W quartz tungsten halogen lamp was employed to record incident photon to current conversion efficiencies (IPCEs) of the fabricated devices. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed by using the CH Instruments model CHI680E, Inc., Austin, TX.
Results and discussion
Powder X-ray diffraction analysis

Fig. 2(A) depicts powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) patterns and intensity variation of the peaks for crystal planes (100), (0002) and (101) of as-synthesized ZnO heterostructures. Trace (a) represents the PXRD pattern of ZnO synthesized in the presence of both ALG and NH4OH (reaction 1). Traces (b) and (c) are ZnO synthesized in the control reactions; in the presence of only NH4OH (reaction 2) and in the presence of only ALG (reaction 3). It is observed that an amorphous product is obtained, presumably an adduct of Zn2+ with alginate ions in reaction 3 [trace (d)] which is converted into pure ZnO after calcination at 520 °C for 1 hour as evident from the PXRD patterns, traces (c) and (d). Crystal phases for all the three types of ZnO are defined to be a hexagonal wurtzite phase with (100), (0002), (101), (102), (110), and (103) planes with a P63mc space group symmetry and Zn atoms in tetrahedral sites according to the JCPDS Card No. 36-1451 (Fig. S1, see ESI†). No peaks due to impurity are detected in the PXRD patterns which indicates that the as-synthesized products are pure ZnO with good crystalline characteristics.
 Fig. 2  (A) Powder X-ray diffraction patterns of the products synthesized under different reaction conditions showing intensity variation of the peaks for (100), (0002) and (101) crystal planes of ZnO, in the presence of (a) both ALG and NH4OH (reaction 1) (b) only NH4OH (reaction 2) (c) only ALG after calcination and (d) before calcination (reaction 3). (B) Plot of the (100)/(0002) intensity ratio obtained from the spectra (a), (b) and (c) of Fig. 1(A)vs. all the ZnO nanostructures synthesized under three reaction conditions namely (1), (2) and (3). Insets to Fig. 1(B) show FESEM images of (a) ZnO cages, (b) ZnO nanorods (NRs) and (c) ZnO porous nanoparticles (PNPs). 
It is noteworthy that the intensity ratio of (100) to (0002) crystal planes varied significantly for all the three types of ZnO which is indicative of different tropism of the products under the three reaction conditions, namely reactions 1, 2 and 3.38 A smaller value of the (100)/(0002) ratio indicates the formation of ZnO rods showing a preferential growth along the c-axis which also reflects the larger number of planes along the (0001) direction of the rod, whereas a larger value of the (100)/(0002) ratio specifies inhibited growth along the c-axis.39,40Fig. 2(B) presents a plot of the (100)/(0002) intensity ratio obtained from the PXRD patterns (a), (b) and (c) of Fig. 1(A)vs. all the ZnO nanostructures synthesized under three reaction conditions. From Fig. 2(B) it is pragmatic that the increasing order of the (100)/(0002) intensity ratio for ZnO obtained from the reactions (1)–(3) is: (a) ALG + NH4OH or reaction 1< (c) Only ALG or reaction 3< (b) only NH4OH or reaction 2. The lowest value of the (100)/(0002) intensity ratio for ZnO obtained in reaction 1 indicates crystal growth anisotropy along the longitudinal c-axis while higher values obtained from the products of reactions 2 and 3 suggest inhibited growth along the c-axis. Topographies and dimensions of the products are further confirmed from FESEM analysis as we have displayed in the insets of Fig. 2(B). In the case of reaction 1, ZnO superstructures assembled with tiny 1D ZnO nanorods are obtained while ZnO nanorods (NRs) and ZnO porous nanoparticles (PNPs) are formed under reaction conditions (2) and (3) respectively. The FESEM images of the products obtained from reactions 1 and 3 are in good agreement with the inferences on the crystal growth behaviour of ZnO from PXRD patterns on the basis of previously reported studies, while it is not in the case of ZnO obtained from reaction 2. It is expected that the structure of ZnO in this case should be nanoparticles or nano-disks with less number of crystal planes along the c-axis, i.e. the (0001) direction, whereas it is observed to be due to the formation of ZnO nanorods. This observation might be due to the random arrangement of ZnO NRs in the horizontal plane of the substrate which causes less exposure of the crystal planes along (0001). It should be mentioned that if a maximum number of ZnO NRs are aligned vertically on the substrate (i.e., normal to the substrate), strong appearance of a (0002) diffraction peak at (2θ ≈ 34.61°) is noted (Fig. S2, see ESI†). However, in the case of ZnO superstructures numerous tiny ZnO NRs (diameter in the range ∼8–10 nm) are hierarchically arranged which increases the percentage of vertically aligned ZnO NRs and consequently upsurges the intensity of the (0002) peak from the crystal planes along the (0001) direction.
Material morphology

Fig. 3(A)–(E) shows the FESEM features of as-synthesized cage like ZnO superstructures at different magnifications. From the FESEM images (A)–(C) we have seen that the as-synthesized product comprises both multi-cage and single cage 3D ZnO superstructures. The average longitudinal dimension of the ZnO multi-cage structures are in the range of 2–3 μm and ∼1 μm for a single cage ZnO. Each multi-cage superstructure is composed of two main bigger cages adjoined opposite to each other, which are observed to be of similar size; while the branched cages growing from the adjoining point are smaller and have a random size distribution. Consequently, there will be three types of ZnO cages in the sample, namely: (a) multi-cage ZnO, (b) bigger size single cage ZnO [indicated with red arrows in image (C)] and (c) smaller size single cage ZnO. It is obvious that the latter two types of cages [i.e., (b) and (c)] originate due to the fracture of multi-cage ZnO at the adjoining points. However, the presence of smaller cage ZnO is expected to be beneficial for the fabrication of the photoanode with higher light harvesting ability. It can be ascribed to the high probability of smaller cage ZnO to occupy the voids produced in between the bigger size single cage ZnO and multi-cage ZnO. This in turn will improve the inter-particle electrical connectivity to act as the photoinduced electron channels that lead to an increase in the current density (Jsc) value as well as light scattering. Fig. 3(D) and (E) show FESEM images representing the top and side views of ZnO cages at higher resolution. The width of the as-obtained ZnO cages is around 1–1.5 μm and it is open with a macropore of diameter ∼300 nm. The pore is representing the adjoining point of the cages in the multi-cage ZnO superstructures resulting from the detachment of the cages and is confirming the hollow characteristic of the material. It is observed that the ZnO cages are composed of numerous tiny ZnO NRs. Fig. 3(F) shows a cracked ZnO cage at higher magnifications which confirms the hierarchical arrangement of the nanorods to form ZnO superstructures. The attachment of the nanorods with different lengths leads to the formation of pores in-between them and thereby these superstructures may behave as mesoporous materials. Furthermore, we have performed TEM and surface area analysis (BET measurements) to verify the morphological results obtained from FESEM analysis.
 Fig. 3  FESEM images (A–E) of as-synthesized cage like ZnO superstructures at different magnifications. Image (F) shows a broken ZnO superstructure. 
The TEM images Fig. 4(A) and (B) represent a multi-cage and a single cage ZnO superstructure respectively. The high resolution TEM image [trace (C)] reveals that the ZnO cages are composed of a number of tiny ZnO NRs with a diameter of ∼8–10 nm which is in accordance with the FESEM analysis. The density of ZnO NRs at the adjoining point of the ZnO cages is minimum which divulged through the higher transparency towards the electron beam at these points [Fig. 4(A) and (B)]. Accordingly, mechanical strength of the multi-cage ZnO superstructures at the adjoining point will be very less which is the most probable cause for detachment of the superstructures at this specific point. The selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of ZnO cages is indexed to the (100) zone axis and is shown in the inset of Fig. 4(C). The red dotted lines in Fig. 4(C) indicate two adjacent ZnO NRs. The SAED pattern unfolds the wurtzite single crystalline structure of each ZnO NR and crystal growth anisotropy along (0002) crystal planes which is consistent with the PXRD results [Fig. 2(A) and (B)]. The Inverse Fast Fourier Transform (IFFT) of atomic planes is carried out for the indicated part of trace 4(C) and is as depicted in Fig. 4(D). The interplanar distance of the crystal planes is found to be ∼0.51 nm which for (0001) crystal planes is attributed to the preferable crystal growth along the c-axis or in the (0001) direction. The inset of Fig. 4(D) shows the related fast Fourier transform (FFT) pattern and verifies the single crystalline nature of the ZnO NRs.
 Fig. 4  TEM images (A) and (B) showing a multi-cage and a single cage ZnO superstructure respectively. High resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image of the ZnO superstructure (trace C) and the inset to it shows the related SAED pattern. Trace (D) represents Inverse fast Fourier transform (IFFT) of atomic planes for the specified part of trace (C) with the corresponding FFT in the inset. 
In order to understand the growth mechanism and evolution of cage like morphology of ZnO superstructures we have investigated the reaction in detail under controlled conditions by varying the amount of addition of NH4OH, ALG and reaction times. The change in morphological characteristics and crystallinity of the products are monitored by performing FESEM and PXRD analyses respectively.
Effect of ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH)
In order to realize the role of NH4OH in the growth process of cage like ZnO superstructures, we have carried out the reactions by sequentially varying the amount of NH4OH per 25 mL of the reaction mixture. It should be noted that the amount of ALG added and the time of the reaction are kept constant at 0.1 wt% and 1.5 h.
Control reactions are performed by varying the amount of NH4OH from 0.0 mL to 2.0 mL with an increment of 0.5 mL, and topographies are presented in Fig. 5. Additionally, a reaction with 0.8 mL of NH4OH is also carried out, wherein we have observed a sudden disappearance of a gelatinous precipitate. The observation of a gelatinous precipitate could be due to an amorphous complex formation, ALGI–Zn2+ [Fig. S3, trace (a) and Fig. S4, trace (A), see ESI†]. After calcination at 520 °C for 1 h in a muffle furnace, it transforms into aggregates of ZnO nanoparticles with pores (abbreviated as ZnO PNPs) in the range of 10–20 nm, respectively, as we have observed from trace (A), Fig. 5. BET surface area analysis of the sample is conducted and discussed later. The size of the nanoparticles is in the range of 10–15 nm and they are single crystalline as confirmed from TEM analysis (Fig. S5, see ESI†). On addition of 0.5 mL of NH4OH to the reaction mixture, two types of spherical ZnO aggregates, one with a size distribution of ∼(0.5–1) μm and another with ∼(1–3) μm are observed, trace (B). Further addition of NH4OH (up to 0.8 mL), i.e., the precipitate disappearing point, results in the formation of star shaped co-joined lobes of ZnO (size ∼0.5–1 μm) along with the spherical aggregates (size range ∼1–3 μm). An increase in the amount of NH4OH to 1.0 mL leads to the formation of cage like ZnO with a smaller diameter (∼500 nm) of uniform size distribution [see trace (D) and Fig. S4, image (E), in ESI†]. Although, these cages originate from the flower like superstructures as indicated in image (D), the adjoining points of the single cages are not open. Image (E) manifests the anticipated ZnO cages with open hollow structures obtained on addition of 1.5 mL of NH4OH. The crystallinity of this product is also observed to be superior relative to all others [Fig. S3, trace (f), see ESI†], including the structures acquired in the case of 2.0 mL of NH4OH as displayed in image (F). Hence, the optimum amount of NH4OH to be added in the reaction is found to be 1.5 mL per 25 mL of the reaction mixture and is kept constant in further reactions. The size distribution of the ZnO cages perceived in the reaction with 2.0 mL of NH4OH is noted to be very similar to that obtained in the reaction with 1 mL [Fig. S4, image (G); see ESI†]. However, dumbbell shaped structures of ZnO appeared as indicated in image (F), instead of flower like superstructures as in the case of 1 mL of NH4OH. From all the above discussions it is clear that the addition of NH4OH in the reaction has a profound effect on the material morphology as well as in the crystallinity of the superstructures. It is also clear that only the addition of NH4OH facilitates the formation of ZnO under hydrothermal conditions, which confirms that the growth units are Zn(OH)42− and Zn(NH3)42+. It is well known that NH4OH could provide both NH3 and OH− ions to the aqueous solution and both are good coordinating ligands of Zn2+.41 In Scheme 1, we have schematically represented the controlled reaction condition pathways for the formation of ZnO superstructures in the presence alginate ions by varying the concentration of NH4OH.
 Fig. 5  FESEM features of the as-prepared products with different amounts of NH4OH: (A) 0.0 mL, (B) 0.5 mL, (C) 0.8 mL i.e., at the precipitate disappearing point, (D) 1 mL, (E) 1.5 mL and (F) 2 mL. Insets show the corresponding higher magnification FESEM images for better clarity. 
 Scheme 1  Effect of ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH) on morphology variation of ZnO. 
ZnO cages are observed to be formed in the reaction which is carried out in the presence of both ALG and NH4OH. Therefore, it is important to understand the effects of the “bio-template” in the growth process of the superstructures.
Effect of sodium alginate (ALG) addition
To further prove the effect of bio-templates, reactions are carried out by varying the concentration of ALG from 0.0 wt% to 0.2 wt%, and FESEM images are shown in Fig. 6. The amount of NH4OH and temperature of the reactions are kept constant at 1.5 mL and 120 °C respectively. Formation of ZnO nanorods with the diameter in the range 300–400 nm is observed with only NH4OH in the absence of ALG (0.0 wt%) as portrayed in the image in Fig. 6(A) and in its inset. These nanorods are single crystalline having a hexagonal wurtzite crystal structure with a preferential crystal growth along the (0001) direction as resolved from the SAED and IFFT patterns, respectively, [Fig. S6(A) and (B), see ESI†]. In the reaction with an increase in the concentration of ALG to 0.05 wt% of ALG, bigger size ZnO cages (longitudinal diameter ∼2 μm) along with some irregular multi-cages and tiny aggregates are noticed as indicated by blue arrows in Fig. 6(B) and inset to it [Fig. S7, trace (B); see ESI†]. The tiny ZnO aggregates may be due to the presence of excess NH4OH compared to ALG which leads to higher number of growth units [i.e., Zn(NH3)42+ and Zn(OH)42−] in the reaction mixture relative to the alginate ions (ALGI) and random crystal growth of them (note that the concentration of NH4OH is fixed at 1.5 ml). In contrast, uniform multi-cages as well as single cages of ZnO appeared in the case of the reaction with 0.1 wt% ALG; trace (C) and inset to it [Fig. S7(C), see ESI†]. Upon further increase in the amount of ALG up to 0.2 wt%, partially formed ZnO cages are observed [indicated with blue arrows in image (D) and inset to it], which is possibly due to inhibited crystal growth of ZnO in the presence of excess ALGI. It is noteworthy that the carboxylate groups in the ALGI can preferentially bind to the Zn-populated (0001) crystal planes of the ZnO crystallites and adhere to the surface of them to impede the favorable longitudinal c-axis growth as well as the lateral growth of ZnO crystals under hydrothermal conditions.38 This claim is also in accordance with the formation of larger size ZnO NRs (length ∼8–10 μm, diameter ∼300–400 nm) in the controlled reaction carried out in the absence ALG compared to the nanorods in the superstructures (length ∼0.5–0.8 μm, diameter ∼10–15 nm). For better clarity, we have shown the corresponding low magnification FESEM images in the ESI† (Fig. S7). The above discussions establish that the optimum amount of ALG to be employed in the reaction is 0.1 wt% which results in uniform and highly crystalline ZnO superstructures compared to the products obtained in both the reactions with 0.05 wt% and 0.2 wt%. However, the crystallinity of the ZnO NRs obtained in the controlled experiment is found to be the highest (PXRD analysis and Fig. S8 in ESI†) among all the synthesized products and this unveils the role of ALG as a crystal growth inhibitor and a structure directing agent.
 Fig. 6  FESEM images of the as-synthesized products with different amounts of ALG: (A) 0.0 wt%, (B) 0.05 wt%, (C) 0.1 wt% and (D) 0.2 wt%. Insets show the corresponding higher magnification FESEM images for better clarity. 
Effect of reaction time
For all the aforementioned reactions we have maintained the reaction time at 90 min. In order to optimize the time of the reaction and explore the growth behaviour of ZnO superstructures, morphological characterization of the material at different intervals of time (i.e., from 40 min to 120 min) is carried out and are depicted in Fig. 7. Variation of crystallinity is also probed for all the products from PXRD patterns and is discussed in the ESI† (Fig. S9).
 Fig. 7  FESEM topographies of the as-obtained products at various times i.e., after: (A) 40 minutes, (B) 60 minutes, (C) 90 minutes and (D) 120 minutes. Insets show the corresponding higher magnification FESEM images for better clarity. 
Morphology of the product at 40 minutes (min) of reaction time is represented in image (A) and inset to it, Fig. 7. Cage like ZnO with hollow characteristics is observed in this case. However, partially developed narrower and smaller size cages are also observed [indicated with red arrows in image (A); Fig. S10(A), see ESI†]. This is an indication of incomplete reaction and is confirmed from the low crystallinity of the product compared to the other two cases, i.e., reactions with 60 min and 90 min (Fig. S9, see ESI†). Although the morphologies of ZnO cages observed at reaction times of 60 min and 90 min are very similar as we have seen from traces (B) and (C), respectively, the crystallinity of the latter is superior to the former. This implies that adequate time is achieved by the product, for aging in the reaction with time at 90 min which allows the most possible regular arrangement of the ZnO crystal planes. Furthermore, with an increase in the reaction time to 120 min, dissolution of the superstructures is noted, as evident from the high magnification FESEM image portrayed in the inset of image (D), Fig. 7. The dissolution of ZnO obtained in a wet chemical synthetic process is an inherent characteristic of the material, which leads to a decrease in crystallinity.41 The dissolution effect becomes more dominant in the case of a prolonged reaction time. The growth process reaches a certain equilibrium with the growth units; Zn(OH)42− and Zn(NH3)42+ after the formation of ZnO cages. As the reaction progresses, the concentrations of Zn(OH)42− and Zn(NH3)42+ are decreased. In order to maintain the equilibrium, the dissolution of ZnO cages in the reaction occurs and results in degraded ZnO cages with poor crystallinity. The PXRD analysis of the material is also in good agreement with the FESEM observations (Fig. S9, see ESI†). The increase in the population of broken ZnO cages in this case, as indicated with red arrows in image (D), infers excess reaction time [Fig. S10(B), see ESI†]. Therefore, the optimum time for the completion of the reaction is established to be 90 min.
Evolution process and mechanism of ZnO superstructure formation
Based on all the above discussions, the plausible formation mechanism of ZnO cages under optimized reaction conditions can be explained by Scheme 2.
 Scheme 2  Schematic representation of step-by-step evolution process of ZnO cage formation in the reaction. 
Alginic acid is a linear copolymer of 1 → 4 covalently linked β-D-mannuronic acid and its C-5 epimer α-L-glucuronic acid residues in different sequences to construct the backbone chain. The sodium salt of alginic acid, i.e., sodium alginate (ALG), is a naturally abundant polysaccharide or a “biopolymer” extracted from the cell walls of brown seaweed. It is soluble in water and ionizes to its anionic form, i.e., the alginate ion (see Fig. 1). 0.1 wt% solution of ALG in water is found to be negatively charged with zeta potential (ζ) ≈ −60 mV. These negatively charged alginate ions with carboxylate groups interact with the positively charged Zn2+ ions in the solution due to electrostatic forces and form a complex (1): [Zn2+–ALGI].38 This complex appears in the reaction mixture as a gelatinous precipitate which is formed immediately after the addition of Zn(NO3)2·6H2O to the solution of ALG. We have probed the formation of the complex [Zn2+–ALGI] by performing Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy analysis for the gelatinous precipitate extracted from the reaction mixture and discussed in the ESI† (Fig. S11). On addition of NH4OH, initially a water insoluble white precipitate possibly of Zn(OH)2 is observed. Upon further addition of NH4OH up to the optimized amount, i.e., 1.5 mL per 25 mL, the aqueous solution becomes transparent and pH is found to be ∼10 which indicates the formation of water soluble Zn(OH)42− and Zn(NH3)42+ ions. It is well known that Zn(OH)42− and Zn(NH3)42+ act as the growth units of ZnO crystals in the wet chemical reactions carried out under basic conditions.42 Subsequently, due to Coulombic interactions the growth units Zn(OH)42− and Zn(NH3)42+ are believed to be attached with the negatively charged alginate ions to form an adduct complex (2): [Zn(OH)42−–ALGI–Zn(NH3)42+]. Under hydrothermal reaction conditions, the growth units initiate the nucleation process and form numerous nuclei of ZnO. These ZnO nuclei tend to grow along (±) c-axes, i.e., along Zn2+ populated + (0001) and O2− populated − (0001) high energy polar crystal facets promoted by Zn(OH)42− and the Zn(NH3)42+ growth units, respectively, which lead to the formation of ZnO NRs.43 Since the ZnO crystal growth along the (−) c-axis is the slowest growth direction, the predominant growth units are Zn(OH)42− ions.44 Simultaneously, the negatively charged alginate ions with (–COO−) groups anchor to the positive Zn2+ populated + (0001) crystal facets of ZnO and adhere to the surface of ZnO NRs. Thus, the growth of ZnO NRs in the presence of ALG is inhibited due to the minimized contact between the growth units and (0001) crystal surfaces. Additionally, the free (–OH) and (–COO−) groups in the ALGI backbone chain triggers the assembling process of ZnO NRs and arranges hierarchically to form ZnO superstructures as shown in step 4. In this step, the presence of an optimum amount of NH4OH and equilibrium between gas and liquid in the autoclave are the crucial factors to acquire the anticipated size and shape of the product. As the reaction proceeds, some of the multi-cage super-structures fracture at the adjoining points and result in single cage superstructures.
UV-visible absorption and photoluminescence analyses

Fig. 8(A) represents UV-visible absorption spectra of all the synthesized ZnO heterostructures, i.e., ZnO cages (red line), ZnO NRs (blue line) and ZnO PNPs (black line). We have observed a moderate red shift of absorption onset in the case of ZnO NRs (∼25 nm) and ZnO PNPs (∼30 nm) as compared to the ZnO cages. This may be due to the smaller size distribution of ZnO NRs (∼8–10 nm) in the superstructures relative to the particle size distribution in the other two samples (∼1 μm and ∼2 μm respectively). The optical band gap values for all the samples are estimated from the corresponding Tauc plots as depicted in the inset of Fig. 8(A), considering ZnO as a direct bandgap material. In Tauc's plot, (αhν)2 is plotted against the photon energy (hν), where α is the absorption coefficient. The band gap values of ZnO hetero-structures are estimated to be 3.2 eV for ZnO cages, 3.06 eV for ZnO NRs and 2.95 eV for ZnO PNPs. The observed lowering of band gap values for ZnO PNPs and ZnO NRs in contrast to ZnO cages is in accordance with the red shift of absorption profiles.
 Fig. 8  (A) UV-visible absorption profiles for all the ZnO heterostructures (ZnO PNPs, ZnO NRs and ZnO cages). Inset to it shows the corresponding Tauc plots. (B) Room temperature steady state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of all the ZnO heterostructures. Inset to it shows the corresponding electronic transitions of the peaks indicated in the spectra with green arrows. 
The emission characteristics and defect states of all three different morphologies of ZnO are analysed by performing room temperature steady state photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy at an excitation wavelength of 355 nm and illustrated in Fig. 8(B). For all the samples, sharp emission in the UV range (∼395 nm) followed by a shoulder at around 410 nm and a sharp peak at ∼465 nm are noticed. A green broad emission band with satellite peaks at around ∼500–580 nm is also observed. The sharp emission in the UV range signifies near-band-edge emission which is attributed to radiative exciton annihilation45 as depicted in inset (1). The shoulder peak at around 410 nm and the sharp peak at ∼ 465 nm originate from co-ordinatively unsaturated Zn2+ interstitial sites (Zni, shallow donor) in the ZnO nanostructures [see the corresponding transitions in the inset (2)]. The emission peaks observed in the broad visible region (i.e., 500–580 nm) are attributed to the transitions from the conduction band to the deep trap levels of ZnO (created by oxygen vacancies in the ZnO crystal structure, Oi), as shown in inset (3).45,46 From Fig. 8(B), it is clear that the intensity of near band-edge emission is comparable for ZnO NRs and ZnO cages while for ZnO PNPs the intensity is appreciably decreased. However, the intensities of the emission peaks due to zinc and oxygen defect sites are higher for ZnO PNPs as compared to ZnO NRs and ZnO cages. This is a clear reflection of higher population of defect sites in ZnO PNPs relative to the ZnO NRs and ZnO cages. This observation may be due to the maximum population probability of grain boundary induced defect sites in ZnO PNPs, as they are composed of numerous inter-connected ZnO NPs.
Furthermore, to gain insights into the variation of defect sites in the photoanodic films after the calcination, we have performed steady state and dynamic photoluminescence measurements (Fig. S12, see ESI†). Form Fig. S12 (ESI†), we have observed that upon calcination of photoanodes at 520 °C for 1 h in a muffle furnace, intensity of the broad emission band in the visible region (∼500–580 nm) which is attributed to the oxygen vacancies (or Oi) in the ZnO crystal structure is reduced. Among all the three samples, a maximum reduction of the oxygen vacancy distribution is observed in the case of ZnO cages while it is minimum for ZnO PNPs. However, intensities of the shoulder peak at around 410 nm and the sharp peak at ∼465 nm are slightly higher for ZnO cages which is an indication of higher concentration of Zni defects sites in the photoanode than its counterparts, i.e., ZnO NRs and ZnO PNPs.
The exciton lifetime in ZnO cages before and after the calcination is monitored by time resolved PL (TRPL) analysis to understand the charge transport kinetics in the photoanode as shown in Fig. 9. It should be noted that the calcination temperatures were kept intentionally at 520 °C in order to match with the fabrication of photoanodes, wherein similar temperature regimes were used to remove the binder and the other additives.
 Fig. 9  Time resolved photoluminescence spectra of ZnO cages recorded at an excitation wavelength of 355 nm before and after calcination, showing a sharp decline in the average lifetimes of the calcined samples. 
The PL decay traces of all the samples were fitted with a tri-exponential function to calculate the exciton lifetime. A multi-exponential emission decay pattern is observed mainly due to the influence of distribution in the recombination rate constants on the decay kinetics. The values of the fitting parameter (χ2), exciton lifetimes (τ1, τ2, and τ3), pre-exponential factors (α1, α2, and α3) and average exciton lifetimes 〈τ〉 are listed in Table 1.
Table 1 The values of fitting parameters (χ2), exciton lifetimes (τ1, τ2, τ3), pre-exponential factors (α1, α2, α3) and calculated values of average exciton lifetimes 〈τ〉




Sample (ZnO cage)

χ
2


τ
1 (ns)

τ
2 (ns)

τ
3 (ns)

α
1


α
2


α
3

〈τ〉 (ns)




Before calcination
0.99
2.9
21.6
190.7
9.9
18.3
71.8
185.6


After calcination
1.05
2.8
12.5
61.9
44.7
33.9
21.4
46.8




The average lifetime values were calculated using eqn (1).47 (1) From Table 1, we have seen that the value of the average lifetime, 〈τ〉, is decreased about four times for the calcined ZnO cages as compared to the non-calcined sample. The faster exciton lifetime of calcined ZnO cages signifies improved charge separation and transport through the tiny 1D ZnO NR building blocks. This may be due to the minimized oxygen vacancies in the ZnO cage based photoanode after calcination, also evident from the steady state PL analysis. It is well known that the oxygen defect sites in the ZnO crystal structure can act as radiative recombination centres for photoexcited electrons and increase the exciton lifetime.48
BET surface area analysis
The N2 adsorption and desorption isotherms of surface area analysis for all the as-synthesized ZnO with different morphologies are shown in Fig. 10(A).
 Fig. 10  (A) Nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms and (B) Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) pore size distribution plots of the as-synthesized ZnO PNPs, ZnO cages and ZnO NRs. 
It is expected that if a wide band gap semiconductor material (i.e. photoanodic materials) is to be used in dye sensitized solar cell devices (DSSCs), it should have (i) high surface area and (ii) high porosity, in order to achieve a better photovoltaic performance. Type IV isotherms and H3 hysteresis loops observed for ZnO PNPs and ZnO cages confirm the characteristic mesoporous nature of both the materials. The observed BET surface area of the as-synthesized ZnO PNPs is found to be ∼78 m2 g−1, for ZnO cages it is ∼61 m2 g−1, and for ZnO NR it is ∼10 m2 g−1. Fig. 10(B) demonstrates the corresponding Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) pore size distribution curves for the ZnO heterostructures, namely ZnO PNPs (black line), ZnO cages (red line) and ZnO NRs (blue line). We have observed that the pore size distribution for ZnO PNPs is ∼10–25 nm and for ZnO cages it is in a broad range ∼10–150 nm, while there is no indication of pores in the case of ZnO NRs. The broad range pore size distribution observed in the case of ZnO cages is due to the presence of two type of pores in them, i.e., (i) pores in between the tiny NRs and (ii) the macro-pores formed due to the fracture of the multi-cages at the adjoining points as we have discussed in the FESEM analysis section.
UV-visible absorption spectroscopy and diffused reflectance analysis of the photoanodes

Fig. 11(A) demonstrates the normalized UV-vis diffuse reflectance absorption profiles of N719 dye sensitized photoanodes fabricated with the as-synthesized ZnO heterostructures, i.e. ZnO PNPs, ZnO cages and ZnO NRs.
 Fig. 11  (A) UV-vis diffused reflectance absorption spectra of all fabricated photoanodes sensitized with N719 dye. (B) Diffused reflectance spectra of ZnO cage, ZnO NR and ZnO PNP based films of comparable thickness deposited on the FTO substrates. 
An increasing order of absorbance is observed in the visible region (∼420–700 nm) for the photoanodes: ZnO NRs < ZnO cages < ZnO PNPs, which suggests higher dye absorption in the ZnO PNPs and ZnO cages as compared to the ZnO NR scaffolds. It is well known that the N719 dye absorbs photon energy in the region (420–670 nm) starting the absorption onset from 710 nm. This observation validates the assumption of increase in the dye loading capability of a material with an increase in the surface area. Accordingly, it is expected that the flux of photogenerated electron injection will be higher for the ZnO PNP based photoanode relative to the other two photoanodes.
Reflectance measurements are carried out for all the photoanode films of comparable thickness based on ZnO cages (red line), ZnO NRs (blue line) and ZnO PNPs (black line) deposited on FTO substrates to investigate the light scattering effects as depicted in Fig. 11(B). The film based on ZnO cages exhibits a distinct higher reflectance in the wavelength range 500–800 nm than that of other two films based on ZnO NRs and ZnO PNPs. This confirms efficient light scattering by the ZnO cages in the photoanode to enhance the repeated excitation process of dye molecules over the ZnO NR- and ZnO PNP-based photoanodes. Hollow characteristic of ZnO cages is believed to be the most probable reason for superior light scattering which is not observed in the case of ZnO PNP- and ZnO NR-based photoanodes. The ZnO NR- and ZnO PNP-based films have shown similar reflectance abilities.
Photovoltaic characteristics of the solar cells
In order to ensure the technological importance and superiority of ZnO cages over ZnO PNPs and ZnO NRs, DSSC devices are fabricated and their performance parameters are compared. Fig. 12(A) presents the characteristic current density–voltage (J–V) curves for the N719 sensitized ZnO cage, ZnO PNP and ZnO NR based devices. Fig. 12(B) shows IPCE plots of the respective devices.
 Fig. 12  (A) Current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the photovoltaic devices (a) ZnO cage [red line], (b) ZnO PNP [black line] and (c) ZnO NR [blue line] (B) IPCE plots for the respective devices employing I−/I3− as the redox couple. Inset shows advantages of ZnO cages in terms of light scattering and electron transport in solar cell devices. 
The photovoltaic performance parameters such as short circuit current density (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF) and the overall power conversion efficiency (PCE, η) for all the fabricated devices, namely (a) ZnO cage, (b) ZnO PNPs, and (c) ZnO NRs, are listed in Table 2.
Table 2 Short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (η) for the fabricated solar cells incorporating different photoanodes




Devices

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (mV)
FF (%)
PCE (%)




(a) ZnO cage
11.8 (±0.7)
720 (±7)
50 (±3)
4.26


(b) ZnO PNPs
9.8 (±0.8)
702 (±8)
40 (±4)
2.75


(c) ZnO NRs
4.8 (±0.7)
690 (±6)
50 (±5)
1.67




From Fig. 12(A) and (B), higher values of Jsc and IPCE of ZnO cage based device (a) [11.8 mA cm−2 and 50%] in contrast to the ZnO PNP based device (b) [9.8 mA cm−2 and 40%] and the ZnO NR based device (c) [4.8 mA cm−2 and 27%] are observed which indicate a better absorption of solar radiation by device (a), probably due to a better light scattering ability and higher flux of photoinduced electron injection. As explicit from the IPCE plot, better light harvesting ability and red shift towards a longer wavelength of about 50 nm of device (a) are attributed to efficient light confinement and repeated excitation of dye molecules in the ZnO cage based photoanode.49,50 Efficient light confinement in the ZnO cage based photoanode is expected due to hollow characteristic of ZnO cages and is shown in the inset (1) of Fig. 12(B), which upsurges the value of Jsc.51 Additionally, mesoporous characteristics of ZnO cages expedite the diffusion of electrolyte for better functioning of the redox mediator, and the tiny 1-D ZnO NR building blocks act as the transport channels for faster migration of photo-induced electrons to boost the photovoltaic performances [depicted in the insets (2) and (3) of Fig. 12(B)].52,53 Lower values of Jsc (∼9.8 mA cm−2) and FF (40%) for device (b) compared to device (a), even though it has higher dye loading, authenticate the presence of maximum population of crystal defect induced trap sites in ZnO PNPs as discussed in the PL analysis. Similarly, minimum dye loading in the ZnO–NR based photoanode is reflected in its low value of Jsc (4.8 mA cm−2) and Voc (690 mV). However, an appreciated value of FF (∼50%) furnished by device (c) is indicative of facilitated diffusion of electrolyte in the photoanode as compared to the ZnO PNP based photoanode. It is believed that ZnO NRs in the photoanodic film are randomly arranged and fused to form bigger and higher number of inter-particle pores as compared to the ZnO PNP based photoanodes which expedite the electrolyte diffusion process for better functioning of redox shuttle. It should be noted that ZnO PNPs have an agglomerated structure of numerous interconnected ZnO NPs which decreases the probability of inter-particle pore formation and smooth diffusion of electrolyte in the photoanodic film. In summary, the enhanced photovoltaic performance parameters of the ZnO cage based device lead to an appreciated value of PCE (∼4.26%) in the current scenario (Table S5, see ESI†) which establishes the material to be of good technological importance.
We have investigated the morphological features of ZnO cages in the fabricated photoanodes by performing top view and cross-sectional FESEM analysis and shown in Fig. 13 for the stability of the superstructures under rigorous device making conditions.
 Fig. 13  Cross-sectional (A & B) and top view (C & D) FESEM images of the as-fabricated ZnO cage based photoanode. 

Fig. 13(A) and (B) present cross-sectional FESEM images of the ZnO cage based photoanode whereas Fig. 13(C) and (D) show the top view images. From the FESEM images, it is clear that cage-like ZnO superstructures remain intact even after the film deposition and calcination processes. This result confirms the beneficial role of hollow and mesoporous characteristics of ZnO cages in enhancing their photovoltaic properties.
Electron transport and recombination kinetics in the photovoltaic devices, namely device (a) ZnO cage, device (b) ZnO PNP, and device (c) ZnO NR, are monitored by employing electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). Nyquist and Bode phase plots under dark conditions in the frequency range from 0.1 Hz to 100 kHz at an applied bias equivalent to the open-circuit voltages are shown in Fig. 14(A) and (B). From the Nyquist plots, i.e.Fig. 14(A), the bigger semicircles in the medium-frequency region (right semicircle) specify the process of charge-transfer at the working electrode/electrolyte interface while the smaller semicircles in the high frequency region (left semicircle) describes the counter electrode/electrolyte interfacial redox reactions.54 The corresponding Bode phase plots are portrayed in Fig. 14(B). The characteristic peak frequencies in the medium frequency region (fmax) for the ZnO cage, ZnO PNP and ZnO NR based device are located at ∼56.2 Hz, ∼38.3 Hz and ∼36.95 Hz respectively. We have calculated the photo-induced electron life time (τe) in the conduction band (CB) of the ZnO cage, ZnO PNP and ZnO NR by using formula (2):55 (2) The τe values are found to be ∼2.8 ms, ∼4.15 ms, and ∼4.3 ms for the ZnO cage, ZnO PNP and ZnO NR respectively. It is observed from Fig. 14(A) that the diameter (Rk) of the right semicircle for the ZnO NR based device is larger in contrast to all other devices. The increasing trend of Rk and lifetime (τe) of the photoinduced electrons in the CB of ZnO heterostructures is ZnO Cage < ZnO PNP < ZnO NR. It is well known that Rk encompasses the charge recombination resistance and the partial contribution from transport resistance.56 Higher values of Rk and τe for the ZnO NR based device confirm the minimum photoinduced electron interception to the I−/I3− redox shuttle at the ZnO NR/dye/electrolyte interface compared to the ZnO PNPs and ZnO cages, respectively, which is also reflected in the elevated value of FF (∼50%) for the device.57,58 This may be due to the single crystalline nature of ZnO NRs and minimum intrinsic defect sites as revealed from TEM and PL analyses, respectively, which eventually increases the diffusion length of photo-injected electrons. However, the flux of photo-induced electrons is expected to be minimum in the case of the ZnO NR based photoanode due to a lesser amount of adsorption of dye molecules. It is observed that despite the lower τe (∼2.8 ms) and Rk values of the ZnO cage based device, the performance of the device is superior as compared to its counterparts. The injection of high flux of photo-induced electrons into the ZnO cage as compared to the device with ZnO NRs overwhelms the efficiency parameters of the device. Additionally, it is established from steady state PL analysis of the photoanodes that the excited state electronic interactions amongst N719 dye molecules and ZnO cages are stronger as compared to ZnO NRs and ZnO PNPs (Fig. S13, see ESI†). This confirms the faster and an efficient injection of photoinduced electrons from dye molecules to the ZnO cages relative to its counterparts. Moreover, a faster migration of photoinduced electrons through the 1-D ZnO NR building blocks enriches efficient charge transfer to the external circuit. A similar explanation is validated for the ZnO PNP based device (b), in which adsorption of dye is observed to be the highest and probed to be lesser electron interception compared to device (a) with ZnO cages. However, due to a retarded diffusion of electrolyte and higher population of trap sites, the performance of the device is low as compared to device (a). Lower diffusion of electrolyte in the case of ZnO PNP based device is expected due to the agglomerated structure of ZnO PNPs. The agglomerated structure of ZnO PNPs decreases the probability of inter-particle pore formation in the photoanode, which is also reflected in the lower value of FF (∼40%) of device (b).
 Fig. 14  (A) Nyquist plots for the photovoltaic devices (a) ZnO cage [red line], (b) ZnO PNP [black line] and (c) ZnO NR [blue line] in the dark at an open-circuit voltage and in the frequency range from 0.1 Hz to 100 kHz. (B) Bode phase plots for all the respective devices. 
Conclusions
We have developed a simple, green hydrothermal synthetic protocol for fabricating high quality ZnO superstructures of extensive technological importance utilizing a naturally abundant bio-template “alginic acid”. The reaction is investigated in detail by varying synthetic conditions in order to understand the interactions between the organic template and the inorganic material. It is found that optimum concentration of negatively charged alginate ions and NH4OH in the reaction system are the key factors for formation of these exotic cage-like mesoporous superstructures. A plausible growth mechanism is proposed for the 1-D ZnO NR assembled ZnO superstructures and their photovoltaic properties are evaluated. A comparative study on photovoltaic performance parameters of the fabricated dye sensitized solar cells, i.e. based on the ZnO cage, ZnO PNPs and ZnO NRs, are carried out. An appreciated value of power conversion efficiency (PCE, η) is furnished by the ZnO cage based devices (η ≈ 4.26%) which is ∼60% and ∼35% improvement over the ZnO NR (η ≈ 1.67%) and ZnO PNP (η ≈ 2.75%) based devices. It is concluded that enhanced photovoltaic performance of ZnO cage based devices is mainly due to the higher flux of photoinduced electrons, enhanced light scattering, probability of facile diffusion of electrolyte and efficient charge separation through nanosized 1-D ZnO NR conduits.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, India and the Department of Science and Technology, India for the financial support through project no. CSIR/01(2704)/12/EMR-II and DST/TSP/2009/23 respectively. The infrastructure and instrumentation help from IIT Guwahati and CIF, IIT Guwahati, Institute of Advanced Study in Science and Technology (IASST), Guwahati is hereby acknowledged.
References
Y. Liu, J. Goebl and Y. Yin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2610 RSC .
H. C. Zeng, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7511 RSC .
W. Shi, S. Song and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5714 RSC .
T.-D. Nguyen, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9455 RSC .
C. N. R. Rao, H. S. S. Ramakrishna Matte, R. Voggu and A. Govindaraj, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 5089 RSC .
Z. Chen, Z. Jiao, D. Pan, Z. Li, M. Wu, C.-H. Shek, C. M. L. Wu and J. K. L. Lai, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 3833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, T. Fan and D. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-B. Yao, H.-Y. Fang, X.-H. Wang and S.-H. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3764 RSC .
S. Sotiropoulou, Y. Sierra-Sastre, S. S. Mark and C. A. Batt, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 821 CrossRef CAS .
R. N. McMillan, C. D. Paavola, J. Howard, S. L. Chan, N. J. Zaluzec and J. D. Trent, Nat. Mater., 2002, 1, 247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, X. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yang, L. Qi and J. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1543 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, T. Kunitake and A. Nakao, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 4401 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yin, Q. Lu, Z. Yu, J. Wang, H. Pang and F. Gao, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 40 CAS .
S. R. Hall, H. Bolger and S. Mann, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2784 RSC .
Y.-H. Tseng, H.-Y. Lin, M.-H. Liu, Y.-F. Chen and C.-Y. Mou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18053 CAS .
F. Waltz, G. Wißmann, J. Lippke, A. M. Schneider, H.-C. Schwarz, A. Feldhoff, S. Eiden and P. Behrens, Cryst. Growth Des., 2012, 12, 3066 CAS .
A.-J. Wang, Q.-C. Liao, J.-J. Feng, P.-P. Zhang, A.-Q. Li and J.-J. Wang, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 256 RSC .
A.-W. Xu, Y. Ma and H. Cölfen, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 415 RSC .
G. Begum, S. V. Manorama, S. Singh and R. K. Rana, Chem. – Eur. J., 2008, 14, 6421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Anta, E. Guillen and R. Tena-Zaera, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 11413 CAS .
N. Linares, A. M. Silvestre-Albero, E. Serrano, J. Sil-vestre-Albero and J. García-Martínez, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7681 RSC .
Q. Zhang, E. Uchaker, S. L. Candelaria and G. Cao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3127 RSC .
J. Wang, Z. Chen, Y. Liu, C.-H. Shek, C. M. L. Wu and J. K. L. Lai, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 128, 254 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xu and L. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 818 CAS .
E. Guillen, L. M. Peter and J. A. Anta, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 22622 CAS .
N. S. Ramgir, I. S. Mulla and V. K. Pillai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 3995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Zeng, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 649 RSC .
F. Chen, F. Cao, H. Li and Z. Bian, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 3494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Z. Chen, C.-H. Shek, C. M. L. Wu and J. K. L. Lai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9776 CAS .
R. Huang, Y. Liu, Z. Chen, D. Pan, Z. Li, M. Wu, C.-H. Shek, C. M. L. Wu and J. K. L. Lai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 3949 CAS .
G. Li, J. Lan and G. Li, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 1705 RSC .
B. Liu and H. C. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 16744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-J. Feng, Q.-C. Liao, A.-J. Wang and J.-R. Chen, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 4202 RSC .
P. Hu, N. Han, X. Zhang, M. Yao, Y. Cao, A. Zuo, G. Yang and F. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 14277 RSC .
B. Liu and H. C. Zeng, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5824 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mo, J. C. Yu, L. Zhang and S.-K. A. Li, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 756 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Chetia, M. S. Ansari and M. Qureshi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13266 CAS .
M. Huang, Y. Yan, W. Feng, S. Weng, Z. Zheng, X. Fu and P. Liu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2014, 14, 2179 CAS .
A. Mclaren, T. Valdes-Solis, G. Li and S. C. Tsang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yu, W. Fu, C. Yu, H. Yang, R. Wei, M. Li, S. Liu, Y. Sui, Z. Liu, M. Yuan and G. Zou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 17521 CAS .
Z. Wang, X. F. Qian, J. Yin and Z. K. Zhu, J. Solid State Chem., 2004, 177, 2144 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Sun, X. Chen, Z. X. Deng and Y. D. Li, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2002, 78, 99 CrossRef CAS .
K. Govender, D. S. Boyle, P. B. Kenway and P. O’Brien, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 2575 RSC .
H. Zeng, G. Duan, Y. Li, S. Yang, X. Xu and W. Cai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 561 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Wu, G. G. Siu, C. L. Fu and H. C. Ong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 2285 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kongkanand, K. Tvrdy, K. Takechi, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-M. Cheng, K.-Y. Huang, K.-M. Lee, P. Yu, S.-C. Lin, J.-H. Huang, C.-G. Wu and J. Tang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 13539 RSC .
D. Barpuzary and M. Qureshi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11673 CAS .
T. R. Chetia, D. Barpuzary and M. Qureshi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 9625 RSC .
M. Qureshi, T. R. Chetia, M. S. Ansari and S. S. Soni, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4291 CAS .
R. Plass, S. Pelet, J. Krueger, M. Grätzel and U. Bach, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7578 CrossRef CAS .
D. Barpuzary, A. Banik, A. N. Panda and M. Qureshi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 3892 CAS .
S. Phadke, A. D. Pasquier and D. P. Birnie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 18342 CAS .
R. Kern, R. Sastrawan, J. Ferber, R. Stangl and J. Lu-ther, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 4213 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tian, E. Uchaker, Q. Zhang and G. Cao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 4466 CAS .
D. Barpuzary, A. S. Patra, J. V. Vaghasiya, B. G. Solanki, S. S. Soni and M. Qureshi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 12629 CAS .
W. Peng, L. Han and Z. Wang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 8483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: PXRD patterns of all the products obtained under different reaction conditions along with the tables of calculated crystallite sizes, low magnification FESEM images, TEM analysis of ZnO NRs and ZnO nanoparticles obtained from ZnO PNPs, steady state PL spectra of all the un-sensitized as well as the dye sensitized photoanodes and a table representing the current scenario of ZnO based N719 dye sensitized solar cells and their relevant performance parameters along with present results in our manuscript are discussed. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cp07687kThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The chemical structure of sodium alginate in water.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Powder X-ray diffraction patterns of the products synthesized under different reaction conditions showing intensity variation of the peaks for (100), (0002) and (101) crystal planes of ZnO, in the presence of (a) both ALG and NH4OH (reaction 1) (b) only NH4OH (reaction 2) (c) only ALG after calcination and (d) before calcination (reaction 3). (B) Plot of the (100)/(0002) intensity ratio obtained from the spectra (a), (b) and (c) of Fig. 1(A)vs. all the ZnO nanostructures synthesized under three reaction conditions namely (1), (2) and (3). Insets to Fig. 1(B) show FESEM images of (a) ZnO cages, (b) ZnO nanorods (NRs) and (c) ZnO porous nanoparticles (PNPs).	 

 	Fig. 3  FESEM images (A–E) of as-synthesized cage like ZnO superstructures at different magnifications. Image (F) shows a broken ZnO superstructure.	 

 	Fig. 4  TEM images (A) and (B) showing a multi-cage and a single cage ZnO superstructure respectively. High resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image of the ZnO superstructure (trace C) and the inset to it shows the related SAED pattern. Trace (D) represents Inverse fast Fourier transform (IFFT) of atomic planes for the specified part of trace (C) with the corresponding FFT in the inset.	 

 	Fig. 5  FESEM features of the as-prepared products with different amounts of NH4OH: (A) 0.0 mL, (B) 0.5 mL, (C) 0.8 mL i.e., at the precipitate disappearing point, (D) 1 mL, (E) 1.5 mL and (F) 2 mL. Insets show the corresponding higher magnification FESEM images for better clarity.	 

 	Scheme 1  Effect of ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH) on morphology variation of ZnO.	 

 	Fig. 6  FESEM images of the as-synthesized products with different amounts of ALG: (A) 0.0 wt%, (B) 0.05 wt%, (C) 0.1 wt% and (D) 0.2 wt%. Insets show the corresponding higher magnification FESEM images for better clarity.	 

 	Fig. 7  FESEM topographies of the as-obtained products at various times i.e., after: (A) 40 minutes, (B) 60 minutes, (C) 90 minutes and (D) 120 minutes. Insets show the corresponding higher magnification FESEM images for better clarity.	 

 	Scheme 2  Schematic representation of step-by-step evolution process of ZnO cage formation in the reaction.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) UV-visible absorption profiles for all the ZnO heterostructures (ZnO PNPs, ZnO NRs and ZnO cages). Inset to it shows the corresponding Tauc plots. (B) Room temperature steady state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of all the ZnO heterostructures. Inset to it shows the corresponding electronic transitions of the peaks indicated in the spectra with green arrows.	 

 	Fig. 9  Time resolved photoluminescence spectra of ZnO cages recorded at an excitation wavelength of 355 nm before and after calcination, showing a sharp decline in the average lifetimes of the calcined samples.	 

Before calcination	0.99	2.9	21.6	190.7	9.9	18.3	71.8	185.6
After calcination	1.05	2.8	12.5	61.9	44.7	33.9	21.4	46.8
	(1)

 	Fig. 10  (A) Nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms and (B) Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) pore size distribution plots of the as-synthesized ZnO PNPs, ZnO cages and ZnO NRs.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) UV-vis diffused reflectance absorption spectra of all fabricated photoanodes sensitized with N719 dye. (B) Diffused reflectance spectra of ZnO cage, ZnO NR and ZnO PNP based films of comparable thickness deposited on the FTO substrates.	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) Current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the photovoltaic devices (a) ZnO cage [red line], (b) ZnO PNP [black line] and (c) ZnO NR [blue line] (B) IPCE plots for the respective devices employing I−/I3− as the redox couple. Inset shows advantages of ZnO cages in terms of light scattering and electron transport in solar cell devices.	 

(a) ZnO cage	11.8 (±0.7)	720 (±7)	50 (±3)	4.26
(b) ZnO PNPs	9.8 (±0.8)	702 (±8)	40 (±4)	2.75
(c) ZnO NRs	4.8 (±0.7)	690 (±6)	50 (±5)	1.67

 	Fig. 13  Cross-sectional (A & B) and top view (C & D) FESEM images of the as-fabricated ZnO cage based photoanode.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 14  (A) Nyquist plots for the photovoltaic devices (a) ZnO cage [red line], (b) ZnO PNP [black line] and (c) ZnO NR [blue line] in the dark at an open-circuit voltage and in the frequency range from 0.1 Hz to 100 kHz. (B) Bode phase plots for all the respective devices.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: PXRD patterns of all the products obtained under different reaction conditions along with the tables of calculated crystallite sizes, low magnification FESEM images, TEM analysis of ZnO NRs and ZnO nanoparticles obtained from ZnO PNPs, steady state PL spectra of all the un-sensitized as well as the dye sensitized photoanodes and a table representing the current scenario of ZnO based N719 dye sensitized solar cells and their relevant performance parameters along with present results in our manuscript are discussed. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cp07687k

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
