Recent progress in the morphology of bulk heterojunction photovoltaics  - Soft Matter (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1SM06147J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1SM06147J
(Review Article)
Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 11065-11077Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsRecent progress in the morphology of bulk heterojunction photovoltaics

        
          
            Michael A. 
            Brady
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Gregory M. 
            Su
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Michael L. 
            Chabinyc
          
        
      *
      Materials Department, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106-5050, USA. E-mail: mchabinyc@engineering.ucsb.edu
Received 
      18th June 2011
    , Accepted 1st September 2011First published on 6th October 2011AbstractA review of current research in the characterization of the morphology of semiconducting polymer:fullerene bulk heterojunctions (BHJs) is presented. BHJs are complex blends of polymers and fullerenes with nanostructures that are highly dependent on materials, processing conditions, and post-treatments to films. Recent work on the study of the morphology of BHJs is surveyed. Emphasis is placed on emerging work on BHJs of poly(3-hexylthiophene), P3HT, and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester, PCBM, along with BHJs of donor–acceptor polymers that have high power conversion efficiency.
1. Introduction
There has been an explosion of interest in the development of high efficiency organic photovoltaics (OPVs). Lab-scale OPVs with solar power conversion efficiencies (PCE) of ∼8% have been demonstrated,1,2 but many challenges remain to achieve efficiencies higher than 10% in lab-cells and also in large-scale modules necessary for widespread adoption. The active layers in most high performance OPVs are blends of two materials with a complex nanoscale morphology that is still difficult to control. Many excellent reviews on the chemistry,3 morphology,4–7 and device operation5,8–13 of OPVs have been written. We focus here on recent work in the area of fundamental characterization of the morphology of polymer-based bulk heterojunction (BHJ) layers, particularly focused on P3HT:PCBM, the most widely studied system, and BHJs formed from polymers with donor–acceptor structures (Table 1). The donor–acceptor polymers are of great interest because they form the highest performance BHJs due to their lower optical gaps relative to P3HT.
Table 1 Structures of common semiconducting polymers used in polymer:fullerene bulk heterojunctions




Structures
Acronym








                  P3HT, R = C6H15






                  PCPDTBT, X = C, R = CH2C(C2H5)C4H9, PSBTBT, X = Si, R = CH2C(C2H5)C4H9



                  Si-PDTBT, X = Si, R = C12H25, C-PDTBT, X = C, R = C12H25






                  APFO-3, X = C, R1 = R2 = C8H17, PCDTBT, R1 = C(C8H17)2






                  PTB1, R1 = C12H25, R2 = OC8H17






                  PTPD1, R1 = alky1, R2 = OCH2C(C2H5)C4H9






                  PBTTT, R = n-alky1




A BHJ is a multi-component blend where an electron donating and accepting material meet with high interfacial area (Fig. 1). The domains in the BHJ form a bicontinuous network that allows photogenerated charge to be extracted by the electrodes.11 While these domains may be shown as pure phases, there is evidence that polymer-based BHJs do not necessarily comprise pure domains of both components.14–22 There are statements in the literature that the ordered structure in Fig. 1b is the most desirable,13 but such structures have only recently been achieved experimentally at sub-100 nm dimensions.23
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of (a) a conventional BHJ and (b) an ordered BHJ with structured transport pathways to the electrodes. In both devices, the polymer-fullerene mixture is sandwiched between a cathode, typically Al, and a hole-injection layer (HIJ), such as poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) that is deposited on the transparent anode, typically indium tin oxide (ITO). The length scale of phase separation in known efficient BHJs is ∼20 nm. 
To best understand the needs for morphological characterization of BHJs, it is important to consider their mechanism of operation.13 First, light is absorbed by the electron donor (or acceptor), creating an excited state that may diffuse in the BHJ.9 The energy of the excited state of the donor (and or acceptor) is then either lost due to radiative/non-radiative processes (∼100 ps to ∼1 ns) or can be used to drive electron-hole pair formation. In most cases, direct generation of an electron-hole pair is inefficient due to the relatively high exciton binding energy (∼0.4 eV), which is the stabilization of the neutral excited state relative to a separated electron and hole in the same material. At a heterojunction, if the difference in hole and electron energies in the two materials is smaller than the energy of the excited state, then separated charges may form (Fig. 2a). The excitation may travel only ∼10 nm in its lifetime, and thus the interface of the donor and acceptor must be in close proximity for charge generation. The interface for charge generation may be a molecular pair or a boundary between domains. The separated electron and hole may then drift and diffuse through transport pathways to the electrodes where they can be extracted to generate power.
 Fig. 2  (a) Energy levels in a BHJ photovoltaic. The incident photon must have an energy larger than the difference in the HOMO and the LUMO of the donor and acceptor, respectively, to form free carriers. (b) Typical current–voltage (J–V) characteristic for a P3HT:PCBM photovoltaic device showing the short circuit current (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), and maximum power point (Pmax). The solid line is the response under simulated AM 1.5 illumination, and the dashed line is the characteristic in the dark. 
The electronic properties of the blend set an upper bound for the PCE (Fig. 2b).12 The solar flux requires absorption of light towards the near infrared (absorption from ∼350 nm to ∼1000 nm is needed), which sets the limit of the short circuit current, Jsc. The open circuit voltage, Voc, is limited by the offset in the “transport” levels of the holes and electrons, approximately the HOMO level of the donor and the LUMO of the acceptor. Experimentally, the HOMO and LUMO energies are measured either electrochemically or by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy. In many cases, the LUMO value is estimated by simple addition of the optical gap to the HOMO value leading to a substantial uncertainty in the transport energy.24,25 The fill factor (FF) is determined by the ratio of the maximum power point to the product of the Jsc and the Voc.
The morphology of a BHJ influences the optoelectronic characteristics in distinct ways, and information about multiple length scales is needed to understand their operation. The Jsc depends on both the generation of an electron–hole pair and the extraction of these charges. The amount of photogenerated charge is set in part by the interfacial area between the donor and acceptor and is mostly a bulk property. The Voc is a function of the molecular electronic levels, their interactions with the electrodes, and the dark diode characteristics.26,27 The transport levels of the donor and acceptor set the maximum possible Voc, however, depending on the nature of the electrode-molecule interactions, the Voc can be smaller. For example, if a cathode with a higher workfunction than the LUMO of the fullerene is used, the Voc may be dominated by the metal rather than the molecule.26,28 Thus, Voc is a property of both interfaces and the bulk. The FF is set by the ability of charges to be efficiently extracted from the device as a function of bias and can be understood by consideration of the transit time of the photogenerated carriers, the trap density and the lifetime of the charge separated pair. In the simplest model, as the bias approaches Voc, the drift time for extraction of charges increases, allowing more time for recombination and thereby leading to a reduction in current.29 The FF is the most difficult parameter to control because it is impacted by the phase separation, molecular ordering, and recombination mechanisms in a BHJ.9
2. Materials design and molecular order
Semiconducting polymers
The highest efficiency OPVs comprise donor polymers having rod-like backbones with solubilizing sidechains (Table 1).3 The sidechains are usually linear or branched alkyl groups attached either to an sp2 or sp3 hybridized carbon in the backbone. The bond angle determines if the sidechains naturally splay out from the plane of the conjugated backbone or if they have the ability to stay within the plane or to rotate outward as demanded by packing constraints. The highest crystallinity polymers, so far, tend to have sidechains attached to sp2 centers.30 The lack of Bragg diffraction by X-rays of some materials does not imply that the polymer chains in a BHJ film are isotropic; polarized optical spectroscopies can show a chain alignment even without strong Bragg scattering.31
The mobility of charge carriers in organic semiconductors is influenced by molecular ordering.8,32 Charge carrier mobility can be measured in diodes using space charge limited current or time of flight measurements and in thin film transistors (TFTs).32 All organic semiconductors have relatively broad electronic densities of states (DOS) with tail states leading to carrier concentration dependent mobilities due to the different occupancy of the DOS.33 The charge densities in diodes (PVs) are relatively small compared to those in TFTs, leading to lower apparent carrier mobilities (e.g. 10−4 to 10−3vs. 0.01 to 0.1 cm2 V−1s−1) due simply to the difference in the occupancy of the DOS for the same material. Interestingly, there are examples of polymers with amorphous structures that have higher charge carrier mobility than semicrystalline polymers at the charge carrier densities observed in photovoltaics.34
Molecular ordering in thin films of semiconducting polymers is most commonly studied using X-ray30 or electron diffraction.35 Grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) with 2-D detection can provide information on molecular ordering and the texture, that is the orientation, of the ordered domains.30 Ordered domains in thin films of semiconducting polymers tend to be highly textured with the chain axis along the substrate and the pi-face of the conjugated units either edge-on or plane-on to the substrate or a nearly bimodal distribution of both textures (Fig. 3). The molecular weight and regioregularity (RR) of the polymer have been shown to have a strong effect on molecular ordering, with lower MW leading to higher crystallinity and lower regioregularity leading to less order.36–38
 Fig. 3  GIWAXS data from P3HT and P3HT:PCBM films annealed at 160 °C for 24 h. Neat (a) and blend (b) films of lower-RR and those of higher-RR (c and d). (e) The characteristic packing distance is affected by RR. The bimodal collection of edge-on (f) and face-on (g) crystallite orientations is evident in these films by the changes in the orientation of the (010) peak at ∼1.7 Å−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
It is also important to realize that the “crystallinity” of even highly ordered semiconducting polymer is poor relative to molecular species, and the ordering is better described as semicrystalline with both amorphous and ordered domains.30,39 In the case of P3HT, the percent crystallinity may only be ∼10–20%; there are few estimates for other polymers, many of which are more poorly ordered.40 For many polymers the crystal structure is unknown, making quantitative assessment of the total crystallinity by scattering from thin films difficult, but relative changes are more easily obtained.41 In cases where either few orders of diffraction are observed or the peaks are broadened with diffraction order, it is better to consider the scattering as a correlation length rather than a “crystallite size”. Models considering the nature of the disorder as paracrystalline have been applied to interpret the observed scattering data.39,42 These imperfections in ordering are part of the cause of tails in the electronic states in BHJs. For example, in a detailed study of a highly crystalline polymer PBTTT, disorder in the π–π spacing of the backbones is calculated to lead to an exponential band tail of ∼0.01 to 0.1 eV, depending on the level of paracrystallinity.42 These tails will reduce the Voc, impede efficient charge transport, and increase recombination losses.43–45
In addition to the intermolecular interactions of the backbones,46 there is growing evidence that the structure of sidechains is as important of a design consideration for BHJs. These observations are important as most morphological understanding has been developed based on one materials system, P3HT:PCBM. In a series of PTB-based polymers, it was found that using branched side chains attached at benzodithiophene units increased the π–π stacking distance and decreased the device PCE as compared to the case when linear chains were used. A positive correlation was found between the strength of π–π interactions (stronger for smaller stacking distance) and the FF.47 Similar effects were demonstrated for PTPDs, where longer, less bulky side chains increased the planarization and closer packing of the polymer backbones, leading to spectral shifts to lower energy.48 In a study of copolymers of dithiophene and thienopyrazine, bulky side chains slightly blue-shifted the polymer's absorption edge, but greatly improved its solubility allowing for 3-D order.49 Further studies of polymers with identical backbones, but different sidechains will likely provide a pathway for improvement of the control of phase separation in BHJs.

Fullerenes

It is surprising after the intense study of BHJs that relatively less emphasis has been placed on molecular scale ordering of the fullerenes than the polymer. While there are many possible fullerenes that can be chosen to form BHJs,50–52[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester, PCBM, is most commonly used due to its success with most polymers.11 The only reported bulk crystal structures of PCBM incorporate solvent molecules and do not match peaks from transmission electron microscopy (TEM).53,54 For amorphous films of PCBM, a broad scattering ring is observed, resulting from the average correlation distance of PCBM molecules. However, upon annealing, PCBM films undergo cold crystallization (presumably at its glass transition temperature, Tg), forming a textured polycrystalline sample.55Selected-area electron diffraction analysis has been performed on films of P3HT:PCBM, suggesting that PCBM crystallizes in the face-centered cubic structure at elevated temperatures.56 In other work, a distorted cubic structure was assigned from selected area electron diffraction images.54 Diffraction rings corresponding to highly disordered aggregates, or “nanocrystals” with very few coherent diffraction planes, are observed from PCBM in BHJ films. The C70 analog to PCBM, PC71BM, is used in most BHJs with high performance donor–acceptor polymers, but there is limited information available about its packing structure. Due to the molecular disorder of fullerenes in BHJs, most recent work has focused on aggregate size, evolution of agglomeration of these aggregates, and diffusion using small angle scattering methods (both X-ray and neutron) in P3HT:PCBM21,57,58 and in PSBTBT:PCBM59 BHJs.
3. 
        Phase separation in fullerene-semiconducting polymer blends
Phase behavior
While most BHJs are formed by spin casting under non-equilibrium conditions, knowledge of the inherent phase behavior is helpful in understanding how the blend ratio of polymer to fullerene and other parameters may impact the final morphology. The creation of a phase diagram allows one to predict and control the resulting blend morphology through processing steps. Such a map is realized through the determination of the thermal transitions of the polymer:fullerene blend as a function of composition. It is also important to understand as much as possible about the nature of the equilibrium state in BHJs to determine their long-term morphological stability.
Thermal analysis, particularly differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), has been used to map out the phase diagram for blends of polymers and fullerenes. In most of these initial studies bulk samples were examined with the assumption that the thin film behavior will be similar to that in the bulk. Eutectic behavior was observed for blends of P3HT, poly(3-butylthiophene), poly(3-dodecylthiophene) and PCBM (Fig. 4).60 The eutectic temperature, Te, increased with decreasing sidechain length on the polythiophene following their melting temperatures, Tm. The similar eutectic behavior suggests the microstructure may be dominated by the common backbone architectures, not by the side chain interactions.60 In other work, the thermal transitions of a given blend composition of P3HT:PCBM were found to vary for various solvents,61 highlighting the highly process-specific nature of the phase behavior. The increase in as-cast phase segregation within the blends as the solvent boiling point increased was attributed to enhanced crystallinity in one or both components due to the lack of liquid–liquid phase separation in the melt. It is likely that the P3HT crystallization dominates this dual crystallization behavior, but further evidence of PCBM crystallization in blends is needed. Dynamic mechanical thermal analysis (DMTA) provided qualitatively similar results to DSC studies for P3HT:PCBM. At PCBM loadings greater than 70 wt. %, phase separation was observed. The Tg of the blend increased until this point, meaning that PCBM is an anti-plasticizer for the polymer.62 General agreement was found by DSC studies that reveal decreases in Tm and TC and an increase in Tg with the addition of PCBM to the blend, suggesting that P3HT crystallinity decreases with PCBM content, in agreement with WAXS experiments.61 In recent work on dynamics of crystallization in P3HT:PCBM thin films, PCBM acts as a plasticizer for P3HT.63 Clearly, more work is needed on the dynamics of crystallization in P3HT and importantly in donor–acceptor systems.
 Fig. 4  
            DSC thermograms (a, left) and the resulting temperature-composition phase diagram (a, right). Binary eutectic phase behavior is observed. (b) Transmission optical micrographs of blend ratios at temperatures similar to (a). PCBM crystallites are observed over a limited blend ratio range. P3HT crystallite melting is inferred by the color change from red to yellow. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2008 John Wiley and Sons. 
It is important to note that there are significant differences in phase diagrams and transition temperatures reported across studies. The general behavior predicts that PCBM fills the amorphous regions of P3HT until saturated and further PCBM addition results in phase separation due primarily to P3HT crystallinity. However, it is expected that the solidification process will be quite different for spun cast (relevant to actual devices) and drop cast films, as well as for films that are deposited from different solvents. Consideration of film thickness is critical when interpreting data in these studies of phase behavior and crystallization; a thick, drop cast film is likely to be in a different, kinetically trapped state than that of a spun cast film, and as the film thickness decreases, interfacial interactions become increasingly relevant. Nevertheless, a recent study on thick (∼25 μm) drop cast films claims that the effects of slow solvent evaporation is similar in both thick and thin (∼150 nm) films, and corresponding small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) experiments suggest diffusion of PCBM into the amorphous P3HT phase upon annealing.21 The constant phase separation length scale during thermal annealing is in disagreement to many studies performed on BHJ thin films, possibly suggesting that differences in solvent content and corresponding morphological evolution between thin and thick films do in fact exist. Due to the combined kinetic and thermodynamic information contained in the diagrams in these studies, a new phase diagram should, in principle, be generated for every type of casting condition. These issues make it difficult to predict general phase separation behavior in polymer:fullerene blends, and it is critical to note while analyzing these studies that unlike traditional, equilibrium phase diagrams, the maps discussed in these reports describe the phase behavior of kinetically trapped systems based on the non-equilibrium nature of spin casting. Further examination of different materials systems and the impact of particular processing conditions will aid in unraveling what can be considered as typical.
Domain size in BHJs
Charge generation and extraction in BHJs depend on the nature of the molecular interfaces between the two components and their domain sizes. The distance between phase-separated domains in efficient BHJs is sub-100 nm, which is accessible mainly with transmission electron microscopy (TEM) methods64 or also by scanning transmission X-ray microscopy (STXM).65 These methods generate a 2-D projection of a 3-D object, neglecting any information in the direction of the depth of the sample. While such data is incomplete, it does provide significant detail about the behavior of efficient BHJs. These direct space methods are also complemented by small angle scattering experiments using neutrons and X-rays that can probe length scales of ∼1 to 100 nm.66

TEM data has provided significant insight into the behavior of BHJs by providing information about the relative domain sizes of polymer- and fullerene-rich regions. There is general agreement between photophysical studies that provide estimates of the exciton diffusion length and the domain sizes observed in TEM images in efficient BHJs.67,68 Small domains (∼20 nm) are typically believed to allow efficient charge generation due to the ability of an exciton to reach an interface. There have recently been suggestions that this correlation is imperfect, in particular when comparing models for charge extraction with observations of morphology.15 Thus, while basic TEM data provides reasonable insight into the function of BHJs, there is much detail that remains to be determined.
Organic materials can be difficult to visualize viaTEM because the density contrast among components is relatively weak. To improve the ability to specify the molecular nature of the observed features, energy-filtered TEM (EFTEM) can be used to gain contrast through electron energy loss spectral signatures due to specific chemical functionalities.58,69 Through these spectral signatures, which are distinct for the polymer and fullerene components, one can gain significant contrast between the two components by collecting an image at a specific energy that highlights one material and draws little intensity from the other. Recent work has employed this technique, in a low-dose mode to avoid damage-induced morphological changes, for the P3HT:PCBM system, enabling the imaging of either only the P3HT-rich regions or only the PCBM-rich regions. The well-connected network of P3HT fibrils were mapped out in the film (Fig. 5), and it was found that these fibrils have a higher aspect ratio in blends with PCBM relative to neat polymer films, with the π–π stacking direction parallel to the fibril long axis.69 The length scales of the P3HT and PCBM domains obtained from energy-filtered TEM are supported by GISAXS measurements in a recent study where these two techniques were used to probe the miscibility of P3HT in PCBM and the characteristic length scale of phase separation in the blend. This miscibility suppresses fullerene crystallization, suggesting that the final morphology is driven by P3HT crystallization.58 These results agree qualitatively with earlier TEM work,68 but provide a more quantitative, absolute determination of the morphology.
 Fig. 5  
EFTEM of P3HT:PCBM is shown. (a) Energy electron loss spectra (EELS) show different low-loss features for P3HT and PCBM. (b) Zero-loss image, with only elastically scattered electrons, is shown. (c) 19 eV-loss image, showing bright P3HT fibrils. (d) 30 eV-loss image, showing bright PCBM regions. (e) A map of P3HT fibrils, allowing for statistical counting of P3HT fibrillar widths (f). Clearly, EFTEM allows for direct imaging of single components in a blend of organic materials with similar electron scattering power. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
Soft X-ray microscopy has recently been explored because of the ability to probe chemical contrast at small length scales due to the short wavelength of X-rays. STXM has the ability to tune the energy of the incident source, increasing the contrast among components based on differences in their absorption spectra near the carbon edge (∼285 eV). Different detection modes allow simultaneous imaging of the bulk and surface regions of a polymer blend thin film, with a depth resolution of only a few nm.70STXM has been employed to measure compositional variations in the lateral direction within a BHJ thin film of P3HT and PCBM. By measuring the local absorption spectrum (through knowledge of the transmitted intensity) and fitting this spectrum with a superposition of pure P3HT and PCBM spectra found from NEXAFS, the composition of the blend surrounding PCBM crystallites was mapped.17
Small angle scattering can provide information about the domain structure in BHJs due to the ability to non-destructively probe the global, bulk domain structure of blends, given its components have sufficiently different electron densities. Several reports have focused on the use of grazing incidence SAXS (GISAXS) to characterize domain coarsening during thermal processing. Simultaneous use of GISAXS and GIWAXS suggests that PCBM aggregates are larger than P3HT crystallites after annealing.71GISAXS studies of P3HT:PCBM thin films show that both P3HT crystallites and PCBM aggregates exist in the blend film, with PCBM aggregates disrupting the correlation length of P3HT in the alkyl stacking direction, while improving order in the π–π direction (as determined by GIWAXS).71 An optimum intercalating network is suggested to occur when P3HT crystallites and PCBM aggregates are comparable in size and density.72 Both casting solvent and thermal treatment have been shown to affect the lateral domain structure with a structural length scale of separation between P3HT and PCBM becoming more defined after annealing for aromatic solvents.57
Due to differences in the morphological behavior of donor–acceptor systems, such as the lack of improvement in PCE with thermal annealing, it is important to understand the factors controlling domain structure in these materials. In contrast to P3HT:PCBM, BHJs with polymers having PTB backbones show aggregate structure (on the order of ∼10 nm) of the polymer and fullerene, suggesting that PCBM must be well incorporated into the polymer, through intercalation into its weakly crystalline regions, leaving a much more finely mixed domain structure (Fig. 6).47
 Fig. 6  
GISAXS traces for BHJ blends with P3HT, PTB3, and PTB6 that show a distinct domain structure at ∼10 nm length scales for P3HT:PCBM, but no such structure for the others. The inset depicts the differences in domain structure schematically for each case. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons. 
To improve the interpretation of small angle scattering data, resonant soft X-ray scattering (RSoXS) can examine the purity of domains in a transmission geometry.73 By selecting an incident energy such that the contrast factor between the two components is maximized, and because the scattered intensity scales with this contrast factor, increases in scattering intensity signify increases in phase purity of domains at a given length scale. RSoXS is an emerging method and has only recently been demonstrated for all-polymer,74P3HT:PCBM,73 and PTB:PCBM BHJs.75
Miscibility and purity of domains
While domain size is a critical feature of BHJs, the purity of the observed domains is equally important to understand charge generation and electronic trap concentrations. Recent effort has focused on understanding the miscibility of fullerenes in semiconducting polymers and its molecular origin. There is general agreement that PCBM is incorporated into the amorphous regions of P3HT, leaving a ternary blend of pure P3HT and PCBM regions and impure amorphous regions.14–20 Similar behavior has also been observed in donor–acceptor polymers such as PSBTBT59 and PTB.75 It is an open question whether this ternary morphology is beneficial or if BHJs with pure phases would have improved operation.22
The evolution of the microstructure in BHJs is complex to study directly due to the 3-D nanoscale morphology. To improve understanding of the timescale for fundamental processes such as diffusion in solid films, model bilayers have been examined,76 most recently for P3HT:PCBM. The creation of a bilayer from subsequent spin-casting of the fullerene after the polymer, even in orthogonal solvents, results in an already mixed state, allowed by the solvent-induced P3HT swelling that provides enough free volume for fullerene infiltration.16 Starting instead with pure bilayers, through float casting, the temperature-dependent interdiffusion of P3HT and PCBM shows that mixing occurs extremely rapidly (within seconds) at typical device annealing temperatures (150 °C).18P3HT and PCBM are shown to be highly miscible, with increasing PCBM incorporation occurring at elevated temperatures (Fig. 7). While the exact mixing composition as a function of temperature varies slightly among studies, it is likely due to differences in film ageing and the probing technique; dynamic secondary ion mass spectrometry (DSIMS) provided interdiffusion concentration profiles of bilayer films, while STXM effectively measured the demixing process where the PCBM depletion regions surrounding PCBM crystals evolved in composition with time, representing a possibly different mechanism of PCBM diffusion. Interestingly, the STXM method revealed a Fickian diffusion process, while DSIMS depicted a non-Fickian process.77 Nonetheless, it is seen that the solubility of PCBM in P3HT is significant at quite low temperatures (as low as 50 °C), suggesting that impure amorphous phases are formed for all temperatures above the Tg of P3HT.18 Through measurements such as GIWAXS, it has been demonstrated that PCBM is incorporated into the polymer through its amorphous regions.14,17,18 This observation, combined with the mixing experiments, depict a morphology that is composed of a ternary system, involving pure P3HT crystals, pure PCBM aggregates, and impure amorphous regions of a coexisting composition. These results also suggest that the phase separation process must be controlled by P3HT crystallization, as opposed to an intrinsic immiscibility of the two components.
 Fig. 7  Cross-section SEM images of a P3HT/d-PCBM bilayer annealed for 5 min at (a) 70 °C, (b) 110 °C, and (c) 150 °C, and corresponding dynamic secondary ion mass spectrometry (DSIMS) profiles (d), display the rapid intermixing of polymer and fullerene at typical device annealing temperatures. The incorporation of PCBM into P3HT increases with annealing temperature. The scale bar represents 200 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2011 John Wiley and Sons. 
The miscibility of fullerene in the polymer has been suggested to be the origin of the blend ratios required to achieve optimal performance in some BHJs. For PBTTT, a polymer of reduced side chain density as compared to P3HT, a bimolecular crystal is formed in blends with PC71BM due to the intercalation of the fullerene into the polymer's crystal structure.78 The incorporation of PC71BM into the lattice causes an expansion in the side chain stacking direction, and this bimolecular crystal is stable up to loadings of approximately one fullerene to one monomer (Fig. 8). For higher loadings, scattering from amorphous PC71BM signifies the formation of PCBM-rich regions once the crystal can no longer host any more fullerene; this process sets the optimal blend ratio of 1:4 PBTTT:PC71BM for higher PCE. Molecular mixing was observed for other polymers; the critical parameters determining whether intercalation occurs or not are the geometry of the intercalating molecule and the space created by separation of the sidechains along the backbone of the polymer (Fig. 8). It is speculated that this molecular feature leads to the need for higher fullerene incorporation to form efficient BHJs with many donor–acceptor polymers, which tend to have lower side chain densities than P3HT. These specific interactions have been suggested to be a possible origin for increases in hole mobility in PPV systems and also potentially for optimal fullerene blend ratios in terthiophenes.78 Interestingly, because low band-gap polymers usually require spectral coverage in the higher energy regime (below ∼550 nm), the increased fullerene content is actually beneficial in improving absorption in the blend.
 Fig. 8  
            XRD patterns indicate that side-chain separation is a critical parameter for fullerene intercalation in BHJ blends with (a) pTT, (b) PQT, (c) P3HT, (d) MDMO-PPV, and (e) BisOC10-PPV. Intercalation occurs for pTT, PQT, and MDMO-PPV. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2009 John Wiley and Sons. 
Processing conditions
The majority of BHJs are formed by spin-casting where the initial phase separated morphology is determined by a complex combination of solvent removal and solidification of two species.4 Post-deposition processing, such as thermal or solvent annealing, allows the as-cast film to reorganize into a morphology with high power conversion efficiency. These treatments essentially allow for molecular mobility in polymer and fullerene molecules and lead to improved molecular ordering or changes in domain sizes. The morphology in the as-cast film has a substantial bearing on the achievable structure after post-processing. The phase-separated morphology is far from an equilibrium state in both the as-cast and treated films.
The impact of processing conditions on P3HT:PCBM blends has been widely examined, particularly thermal annealing because of its ability to increase PCE.68,79–81 It appears that the overall observation involves improved ordering for both components and an increase in phase purity due to demixing within the domains. P3HT crystallites exhibit increased order following annealing, with a small increase of the layer spacing in the alkyl stacking direction. The texture of the ordered domains changes, and the crystallite correlation length increases.55,82 While some suggest that P3HT crystallization during heating allows for enhanced diffusion of PCBM,83 others argue that PCBM nanodomains agglomerate first during annealing, then crystallize.56 The latter observation may be manifested in the longer timescales required for PCBM aggregation compared to those for P3HT.83 It has also been suggested that the high-aspect-ratio P3HT crystals that form hinder PCBM diffusion and large-scale crystallization, leaving only aggregated nanocrystalline fullerene domains.68 An in situTEM study during thermal annealing supports this crystallization-induced demixing picture, as coarsening is seen to be caused by agglomeration of PCBM-rich nanodomains, not from phase separation from P3HT-rich domains, that then crystallize to form pure PCBM crystallites.56 This coarsening was also illustrated in a small angle neutron scattering (SANS) study, where thermal annealing drove the well-dispersed PCBM structure to a coarsened one.84 This study predicted a three-phase system, consisting of pure P3HT and PCBM coarsened regions and a mixed P3HT:PCBM phase with the concentration of PCBM equal to its solubility in the polymer, in agreement with other recent mixing studies. Both of these studies, however, ignore the role of P3HT crystallization in PCBM coarsening. It is conceivable that if P3HT crystallizes first upon annealing, the PCBM may have nowhere to go other than between the crystallites, leaving large regions of PCBM that appear to be coarsened. Spectroscopic ellipsometry (SE) measurements have elucidated a complex microstructural evolution during thermal processing, including evaporation of residual solvent above the blend Tg, volume relaxation of the non-equilibrium glass, and phase separation of P3HT and PCBM that is preceded by crystallization of each component.85
Molecular reorientation of components in a BHJ can also occur if exposed to the vapor of a good solvent, or if drying occurs at a relatively slow rate after deposition. In a similar effect to thermal annealing, degree of crystallinity and domain size should depend roughly on the time in which molecules are in a mobile state. In the slow drying of a P3HT:PCBM film, when the solvent volume fraction dips below a critical value such that the Tg of P3HT surpasses that of the film temperature, then fast crystallization of P3HT takes place via heterogeneous nucleation.86 For the P3HT:PCBM system, thermal and solvent annealing, where the latter involves soaking the blend film in the vapor of an evaporating solvent in a rather uncontrolled environment, lead to similar morphologies as characterized by SE.83 Both processing treatments enhance molecular mobility in the BHJ, allowing for rearrangement and crystallization of P3HT.
Although thermal annealing is an effective processing technique in improving the morphology and performance of P3HT:PCBM devices, such processing has not proved advantageous in BHJs with many donor–acceptor polymers.87 It has been suggested that the increased backbone rigidity of these polymers prevents improvements in conjugation length following thermal annealing, in agreement with the lack of significant spectral changes.118 Due to the low solubility of some donor–acceptor polymers, it is also possible that they are already aggregated in solution or have higher transition temperatures preventing further structural ordering upon annealing at commonly used temperatures (∼150 °C).88 Further experiments are needed to confirm the structural basis for a lack of device improvement upon annealing.
The morphology of the as-cast BHJ film clearly has a strong influence on the ability of post-processing methods to achieve morphologies that lead to higher PCE. Aggregation in solution is common for many materials due to either their low solubility or also by addition of poor solvents. There have been several examples of enhancements in the performance of poly(alkylthiophene):PCBM BHJs by forming aggregated polymer whiskers or nanofibers in solution prior to casting films.89 Similar results were obtained with low-bandgap polymer, Si-PDTBT, in which solutions were aged by cooling for fixed times after dissolution.90 A greater fraction of chains in the aggregated state were observed for aged solutions of marginal solvent quality, leading to improved crystallinity in thin films, shown by the enhanced alkyl and π–π stacking features in GIWAXS. A similar study employed another high boiling point co-solvent additive, nitrobenzene, in small amounts in addition to chlorobenzene that improved P3HT aggregation and tripled the PCE.6
Many “additives”, that is low concentrations of co-solvents, have been shown to influence the morphology of BHJs and neat polymer films.87,91 The additive is typically a higher boiling point, or lower vapor pressure, solvent than the majority component solvent and is chosen such that the components of the BHJ have different solvation with respect to the additive and solvent. Although the additive is added at low concentration, as the solvent evaporates, it becomes the “majority” solvent and helps to control phase separation of the blend by differential solvation or by impacting aggregation of the polymer or fullerene. Additives are used extensively in donor–acceptor polymers where processing steps common to P3HT:PCBM have not been successful at improving PCE. A GIWAXS study of PCPDTBT:PC71BM showed that the use of both octanedithiol and diiodooctane additives result in preferential orientation of two polymorphs of the polymer with respect to the substrate, increased correlation length, and increased relative crystallinity in blend thin films, and that these improvements closely matched changes in the device performance (Fig. 9).41 The diiodooctane additive was seen to have similar improvements in ordering and performance in BHJ blends containing TPD-based polymers.48 The alpha-omega alkyl additives are good solvents for fullerenes, but poor solvents for the polymer; the addition of these reagents appears to increase the domain sizes of both components, providing a simple rationale for the increased ordering of the polymer.92 In some cases, simple addition of very high vapor pressure solvents such as chloronapthalene have proved effective in improving molecular order, although the mechanism may be different than the alkyl additives.93 In both cases, the main challenge is to prevent either phase separation in the as-cast film that is too coarse, i.e. large aggregates of fullerene, or an active layer that is overly well-mixed where continuous transport pathways are not formed. This domain coarsening is highly dependent on the choice of casting solvent and any retained solvent in the blend even after annealing may allow growth of PCBM aggregates.94 Recent work suggests that the active layer has a high affinity for solvent, in the local environment, making even minor concentrations of solvent during heat treatment critical for thermal stability.94
 Fig. 9  GIWAXS sector plots (with out-of-plane scattering at 0°, in-plane scattering at ±90°) for PCPDTBT:PC70BM BHJ films that are (a) as cast from chlorobenzene, and processed with (b) diiodooctane and (c) octanedithiol. Polymer crystallite polymorphs evolve in orientation, and their crystalline quality increases during additive processing. Reprinted with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2011 John Wiley and Sons. 
Depth profiling of BHJ films
In addition to the length scale of phase separation in BHJs, knowledge of the vertical concentration profile is desirable. The open circuit voltage, Voc, in BHJs is determined, in part, by the electronic levels of the materials in the blend and the electrodes of the device. The development of design rules for interfacial interactions that control the vertical profile is significant as the choice of substrate chemistry is not arbitrary, based on the need for efficient injection and extraction of charge. Enrichment of donor or acceptor at specific electrodes may affect charge carrier extraction. If an excess of the hole (electron) carrying component is near the electron (hole) extracting electrode, then the inefficiency in electron (hole) extraction will lead to space charge build-up in the device, limiting the short circuit current. Extraction barriers are known to lead to so-called “S-shaped” J–V characteristics that are frequently observed in BHJ cells.95
A variety of complementary methods have been used to analyze the vertical compositional profile in BHJs; near edge X-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS) spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) are surface-sensitive methods while DSIMS, SE, and X-ray and neutron reflectivity (NR) can profile the complete film thickness.19,96,97Resonant soft X-ray reflectivity (RSoXR) allows one to characterize the intermixing and roughening at buried organic–organic interfaces.98–100DSIMS has a limited depth resolution of ∼10 nm; while reflectivity methods have higher resolution they require models to fit the data which are not necessarily unique solutions. NEXAFS provides high sensitivity within ∼2–3 nanometres of the surface of an organic film. Even with such resolution, it is also important to understand the impact of the depth of any observed interfacial segregation on finished devices. For example, metal atoms evaporated onto organic layers will typically diffuse several nanometres into the film.101 This process is highly dependent on the reactivity of the metal and also on the organic material. Thus, it is possible that if only a very thin layer is formed a metallic electrode will actually still be in electrical contact with a different species than one on the surface. Analysis of such layers, post-deposition, is particularly challenging, but possible by removal of the electrode.14
The vertical profile of BHJs with P3HT:PCBM has been extensively studied, but there are quantitative differences between even similar studies. Some studies have shown an undesirable gradient when P3HT:PCBM is cast on PEDOT:PSS with excess PCBM near the PEDOT:PSS interface, while others suggest a favorable gradient with PCBM at the BHJ–air interface. An NR study showed that there are enrichments of PCBM at the substrate-film interface and P3HT at the film-–air interface.19,102 Unlike the other vertical profiling studies, one group19 suggests not only a PCBM enrichment at the buried interface, but also one near the film–air interface; ignoring thermodynamic surface energy effects, they declare this vertical segregation to be due to better solvation of the fullerene at the substrate and a convective force driving fullerene to the top of the film, where dielectric ordering selects a P3HT-rich surface layer. Other work reveals an ∼85% P3HT surface layer and an ∼75% PCBM bottom layer following the casting process and a suppression of the surface enrichment following thermal processing at typical temperatures.96Neutron reflectivity studies show that as cast P3HT:PCBM films have a depletion of PCBM near the air interface and an excess near the substrate.96 However, after thermal annealing, the concentration of PCBM at the surface is similar to that of the bulk. The compositional segregation in P3HT:PCBM can be affected through variation of the surface energy, γ, of the substrate.97 On a low-γ substrate, a poly(thienothiophene):Nafion blend, the substrate-film interface is enriched instead with P3HT, while on a high-γ substrate such as SiO2, the same interfacial segregation as on PEDOT:PSS is observed with even more enriched composition. For all substrates, P3HT is enriched at the film-air interface, likely due to the large entropic costs associated with P3HT's limited configurational freedom near the substrate and its hydrophobic sidechains that minimize the free energy of the exposed surface.
It is apparent that there are discrepancies in the literature regarding the vertical profiling in P3HT:PCBM systems and the significance of its impact on device performance. A recent study utilized a simple delamination and transfer technique that allows for direct control of the interface, active layer-cathode or active layer-anode, where a P3HT-rich layer resides.103 Results show little change in device performance regardless of where the P3HT-rich layer lies and agree with a recent study of BHJs cast from different solvents.57 However, it was found that a continuous layer of PCBM deposited above the anode severely limits performance, whereas a continuous layer of P3HT below the cathode has little effect. This suggests that PCBM can block hole transport much better than P3HT can block electron transport.103 Whether this observation depends on the ability of fullerene to diffuse into polymer regions is unclear at this point.
There have been less studies of the vertical profile in donor–acceptor polymer BHJs. APFO-3:PCBM blends form an alternating multilayer morphology with a PCBM-enriched layer at the substrate interface and an APFO-3-enriched layer at the top surface.104 It was found that surface-directed phase separation, driven by differences in surface energy between the two components, leads to formation of composition waves with a film-air interface enrichment of the polymer. This segregation raises the question whether strictly equilibrium conditions would lead to bilayer formation instead of the kinetically hindered structure formed during fast solvent evaporation in spin-casting. Interestingly, a recent neutron scattering study of PCDTBT:PCBM showed an enrichment in the concentration of fullerene at the top surface, unlike the structure observed by most for P3HT:PCBM.88 Clearly further study is needed to determine the mechanism and generality of the vertical structure in BHJs and importantly its impact on optoelectronic performance through detailed device studies.
Beyond the concentration profile, the domain sizes and molecular ordering may vary as a function of depth in BHJs. Grazing-incidence X-ray scattering techniques enable manipulation of the scattering probe's electric field intensity as a function of depth in thin films, thus providing a means to study vertical profiles of domain size and molecular ordering.105 Recently, both GIWAXS and GISAXS were employed in the study of molecular weight effects on structure in neat thin films of a donor–acceptor copolymer Si-PDTBT.38 For low molecular weights, the film is disordered throughout its depth; however, as confirmed by tuning the incidence angle, high molecular weight films exhibit pronounced π–π stacking near the substrate as compared to the bulk. NEXAFS confirmed these crystallites to be in the edge-on orientation at the film-substrate interface through observation of alkyl side chain enrichment nearest the bottom of the film. This pronounced orientation of crystallites was suggested to be the origin of the high molecular weight polymer's large field-effect transistor mobility, compared to that of the low molecular weight polymer.38
Three dimensional ordering
There has been substantial effort recently to examine the full 3-D morphology of BHJs in the hopes of developing better models to understand how carriers can be extracted.15,106,107 Electron tomography reconstructs the 3-D structure of a thin film from a series of 2-D TEM projections that are formed over a range of sample tilt angles. This technique simply requires sufficient contrast among components to distinguish them in TEM and improves the signal-to-noise ratio by incorporating statistics over many different tilt angles.64 Electron tomography studies have been conducted on a variety of BHJs to examine the percolation connectivity and 3-D morphology. For P3HT:PCBM, this technique has provided insight into the morphological evolution occurring during thermal and solvent annealing processes.108 Network formation is observed in the connectivity of P3HT nanorods, for both thermal and solvent annealed blends, with an enrichment of this network near the hole-collecting cathode (Fig. 10). In contrast to vertical profiling studies discussed above, these results indicate enrichments of P3HT near the film-substrate interface and PCBM near the air-film interface. Because the extent of stratification of P3HT networks is dependent on film thickness and independent of substrate surface energy, the authors dismiss the role energetics play on vertical gradients and propose that the stratification is caused by the kinetic aspects of film formation during spin casting.108 In other work on P3HT:PCBM using EFTEM, although filamentary structure of P3HT domains could be observed for P3HT:PCBM BHJs, no preferential segregation was found.109 As for other techniques, it is difficult at this point to say whether this apparent discrepancy is due to processing conditions of the BHJ or if it is due to differences in contrast between the two TEM methodologies.
 Fig. 10  Distribution of crystalline P3HT nanorods through the thickness of thermally annealed P3HT:PCBM active layers. (a) and (b) are original slices taken from the reconstructed volume of the film with (a) located near the bottom of the film and (b) close to the top. The slice dimensions are 1700 nm × 1700 nm. Images (c) and (d) are the same reconstructed volumes with the P3HT nanorods colored in yellow. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
4. Outlook
Substantial progress has been made in the understanding of the morphological behavior of BHJs of semiconducting polymers and fullerenes. These studies have revealed the important roles of solvents, crystallization, and substrate interactions on phase separation and their connection to optoelectronic performance. The vast array of new semiconducting polymers and fullerenes being synthesized with novel chemical structures, however, makes the generalization of the results of morphological studies quite difficult.3 Indeed, substantial differences have been noted between the morphological behavior of P3HT and polymers with donor–acceptor structures in BHJs. One important area of research to help clarify these differences is development of theoretical models to rationalize morphological data. While there are well-understood methods to predict the morphology in coil-coil polymer blends, there is significantly less known on polymer–small molecule blends. Multi-scale modeling of the phase behavior of BHJs is in its infancy, but is growing in importance.110,111
Morphological models must be connected with spectroscopic and optoelectronic measurements. For example, it is difficult to interpret the origin of ultrafast spectra of charge carrier generation without knowledge of the phase purity of the domains in BHJs.9Transport in disordered materials is complex and in many cases may only be modeled numerically.12 Recent efforts at forming simple models of phase-separated structures have begun to attempt to identify the interplay between transport and domain sizes.15,107 Local scanning probe methods are being developed to interrogate the behavior at the length scales of the phase separation in efficient cells (e.g. domain size of ∼10–20 nm with thickness of ∼100 nm).112 If model phase separated structures can be formed through better control of morphology, local probe methods will likely be of great utility in the development of morphological models.
One of the greatest difficulties in developing models for the electronic properties of BHJs is the nature of disordered domains that lead to broad electronic densities of states.113,114 It is important to realize that the electronic trap density due to this disorder is ∼1017 cm−3 (∼1 to 10 ppm), and it has a strong influence on recombination and transport.29,115 Morphological data is correlated to the electronic structure, charge generation and extraction, but key features of the electronic structures are not readily probed. In most cases, the only recourse is measurement of device characteristics in combination with insights from morphological and spectroscopic data.12,44,115
From a practical standpoint, printed solar cells will be processed differently with substantially different materials than most laboratory test cells made on glass substrates.116 There is a pressing need to study more complex samples such as those on flexible substrates to determine how features such as surface roughness influence the morphology of BHJs.116 In many cases, printing processes, such as blade or slot coating, provide greater control over drying conditions and temperature control and are providing new insight into the evolution of the morphology of BHJs.86,117
5. Acknowledgements
We thank the Center for Energy Efficient Materials, an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences (DE-SC0001009) and the NSF SOLAR program for partial support of this work (CHE-1035292). GMS acknowledges support from an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship. MAB acknowledges graduate research fellowship support from the California Nanosystems Institute and the NSF.
Notes and references
Y. Liang, Z. Xu, J. Xia, S.-T. Tsai, Y. Wu, G. Li, C. Ray and L. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E135 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Chen, J. Hou, S. Zhang, Y. Liang, G. Yang, Y. Yang, L. Yu, Y. Wu and G. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 649 CrossRef CAS .
P.-L. T. Boudreault, A. Najari and M. Leclerc, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 456 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peet, M. L. Senatore, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1521 CrossRef CAS .
S. Günes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324 CrossRef .
A. J. Moulé and K. Meerholz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3028 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Ruderer and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 5482 RSC .
C. J. Brabec, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and J. Nelson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1185 RSC .
T. M. Clarke and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6736 CrossRef CAS .
J.-L. Brédas, J. E. Norton, J. Cornil and V. Coropceanu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1691 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dennler, M. C. Scharber and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1323 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. M. Blom, V. D. Mihailetchi, L. J. A. Koster and D. E. Markov, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1551 CrossRef CAS .

          S. R. Scully and M. D. McGehee, in Flexible Electronics: Materials and Applications, ed. W. S. Wong and A. Salleo, Springer, New York, 1st edn,  2009 Search PubMed .
D. A. Chen, A. Nakahara, D. G. Wei, D. Nordlund and T. P. Russell, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 561 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maturová, S. S.v. Bavel, M. M. Wienk, R. A. J. Janssen and M. Kemerink, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3032 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Lee, P. E. Schwenn, A. R. G. Smith, H. Cavaye, P. E. Shaw, M. James, K. B. Krueger, I. R. Gentle, P. Meredith and P. L. Burn, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 766 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Collins, E. Gann, L. Guignard, X. He, C. R. McNeill and H. Ade, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3160 Search PubMed .
N. D. Treat, M. A. Brady, G. Smith, M. F. Toney, E. J. Kramer, C. J. Hawker and M. L. Chabinyc, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 82 Search PubMed .
J. W. Kiel, B. J. Kirby, C. F. Majkrzak, B. B. Maranville and M. E. Mackay, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 641 RSC .
R. C. Nieuwendaal, C. R. Snyder, R. J. Kline, E. K. Lin, D. L. VanderHart and D. M. DeLongchamp, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2930 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Parnell, A. J. Cadby, O. O. Mykhaylyk, A. D. F. Dunbar, P. E. Hopkinson, A. M. Donald and R. A. L. Jones, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 6503 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yin and M. Dadmun, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4756 CrossRef CAS .
X. He, F. Gao, G. Tu, D. G. Hasko, S. Hüttner, N. C. Greenham, U. Steiner, R. H. Friend and W. T. S. Huck, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 139 CrossRef CAS .
T. Johansson, W. Mammo, M. Svensson, M. R. Andersson and O. Inganäs, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 1316 RSC .
Z.-L. Guan, J. B. Kim, H. Wang, C. Jaye, D. A. Fischer, Y.-L. Loo and A. Kahn, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 1779 CrossRef CAS .
M. O. Reese, M. S. White, G. Rumbles, D. S. Ginley and S. E. Shaheen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 053307 CrossRef .
K. Vandewal, K. Tvingstedt, A. Gadisa, O. Inganäs and J. V. Manca, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 904 CrossRef CAS .
V. D. Mihailetchi, L. J. A. Koster and P. W. M. Blom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 970 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Street, M. Schoendorf, A. Roy and J. H. Lee, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 205307 CrossRef .
M. L. Chabinyc, Polym. Rev., 2008, 48, 463 Search PubMed .
M. C. Gurau, D. M. Delongchamp, B. M. Vogel, E. K. Lin, D. A. Fischer, S. Sambasivan and L. J. Richter, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 834 CrossRef CAS .
V. Coropceanu, J. Cornil, D. A.d. S. Filho, Y. Olivier, R. Silbey and J.-L. Brédas, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 926 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tanase, E. J. Meijer, P. W. M. Blom and D. M. de Leeuw, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 216601 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Fong, A. Papadimitratos and G. G. Malliaras, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 172116 CrossRef .
N. Kayunkid, S. Uttiya and M. Brinkmann, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 4961 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Kline, M. D. McGehee, E. N. Kadnikova, J. Liu, J. M. J. Frechet and M. F. Toney, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 3312 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, S. Cook, S. M. Tuladhar, S. A. Choulis, J. Nelson, J. R. Durrant, D. D. C. Bradley, M. Giles, I. McCulloch, C.-S. Ha and M. Ree, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 197 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Tong, S. Cho, J. T. Rogers, K. Schmidt, B. B. Y. Hsu, D. Moses, R. C. Coffin, E. J. Kramer, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3959 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Prosa, J. Moulton, A. J. Heeger and M. J. Winokur, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 4000 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim and C. D. Frisbie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17726 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Rogers, K. Schmidt, M. F. Toney, E. J. Kramer and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2284 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rivnay, R. Noriega, J. E. Northrup, R. J. Kline, M. F. Toney and A. Salleo, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater.
Phys., 2011, 83, 121306(R) .
G. Garcia-Belmonte and J. Bisquert, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 113301 CrossRef .
R. A. Street, K. W. Song, J. E. Northrup and S. Cowan, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 165207 CrossRef .
T. Kirchartz, B. E. Pieters, J. Kirkpatrick, U. Rau and J. Nelson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 115209 CrossRef .
H.-Y. Chen, J. Hou, A. E. Hayden, H. Yang, K. N. Houk and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 371 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Szarko, J. C. Guo, Y. Y. Liang, B. Lee, B. S. Rolczynski, J. Strzalka, T. Xu, S. Loser, T. J. Marks, L. P. Yu and L. X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5468 CrossRef CAS .
C. Piliego, T. W. Holcombe, J. D. Douglas, C. H. Woo, P. M. Beaujuge and J. M. J. Frechet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7595 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Zoombelt, M. A. M. Leenen, M. Fonrodona, Y. Nicolas, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Polymer, 2009, 50, 4564 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Troshin, H. Hoppe, J. Renz, M. Egginger, J. Y. Mayorova, A. E. Goryachev, A. S. Peregudov, R. N. Lyubovskaya, G. Gobsch, N. S. Sariciftci and V. F. Razumov, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 779 CrossRef CAS .
A. Varotto, N. D. Treat, J. Jo, C. G. Shuttle, N. A. Batara, F. G. Brunetti, J. H. Seo, M. L. Chabinyc, C. J. Hawker, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5166 CrossRef CAS .
F. B. Kooistra, J. Knol, F. Kastenberg, L. M. Popescu, W. J. H. Verhees, J. M. Kroon and J. C. Hummelen, Org. Lett., 2007, 9, 551 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, J. K. J.v. Duren, M. T. Rispens, J. C. Hummelen, R. A. J. Janssen, M. A. J. Michels and J. Loos, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 802 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, J. Nelson, T. Zhang, S. Cook, J. R. Durrant, H. Kim, J. Park, M. Shin, S. Nam, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch, C.-S. Ha and D. D. C. Bradley, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2557 CrossRef CAS .
E. Verploegen, R. Mondal, C. J. Bettinger, S. Sok, M. F. Toney and Z. A. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3519 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Beal, A. Stavrinadis, J. H. Warner, J. M. Smith, H. E. Assender and A. A. R. Watt, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 2343 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Ruderer, S. Guo, R. Meier, H.-Y. Chiang, V. Körstgens, J. Wiedersich, J. Perlich, S. V. Roth and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Adv. Func. Mater., 2011, 21, 3382 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Kozub, K. Vakhshouri, L. M. Orme, C. Wang, A. Hexemer and E. D. Gomez, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 5722 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lu, B. Akgun and T. P. Russell, Adv. Ener. Mater., 2011 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201100128 .
C. Müller, T. A. M. Ferenczi, M. Campoy-Quiles, J. M. Frost, D. D. C. Bradley, P. Smith, N. Stingelin-Stutzmann and J. Nelson, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3510 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, A. Swinnen, G. Van Assche, J. Manca, D. Vanderzande and B. Van Mele, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 1587 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Hopkinson, P. A. Staniec, A. J. Pearson, A. D. F. Dunbar, T. Wang, A. J. Ryan, R. A. L. Jones, D. G. Lidzey and A. M. Donald, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 2908 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lilliu, T. Agostinelli, E. Pires, M. Hampton, J. Nelson and J. E. Macdonald, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 2725 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. van Bavel and J. Loos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3217 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ade and H. Stoll, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 281 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Als-Nielsen and D. McMorrow, Elements of modern X-ray physics, 2nd edn, Wiley, New York,  2011 Search PubMed .
H. Hoppe, M. Niggemann, C. Winder, J. Kraut, R. Hiesgen, A. Hinsch, D. Meissner and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 1005 CrossRef CAS .
X. N. Yang, J. Loos, S. C. Veenstra, W. J. H. Verhees, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon, M. A. J. Michels and R. A. J. Janssen, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 579 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Drummy, R. J. Davis, D. L. Moore, M. Durstock, R. A. Vaia and J. W. P. Hsu, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 907 CrossRef CAS .
B. Watts and C. R. McNeill, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 1706 CrossRef CAS .
M.-Y. Chiu, U.-S. Jeng, C.-H. Su, K. S. Liang and K.-H. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2573 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Chiu, U.-S. Jeng, M.-S. Su and K.-H. Wei, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 428 CrossRef CAS .
S. Swaraj, C. Wang, T. Araki, G. Mitchell, L. Liu, S. Gaynor, B. Deshmukh, H. Yan, C. R. McNeill and H. Ade, Eur. Phys. J. Spec. Top., 2009, 167, 121 Search PubMed .
C. Wang, A. Hexemer, J. Nasiatka, E. R. Chan, A. T. Young, H. A. Padmore, W. F. Schlotter, J. Lüning, S. Swaraj, B. Watts, E. Gann, H. Yan and H. Ade, IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., 2010, 14, 012016 Search PubMed .
W. Chen, T. Xu, F. He, W. Wang, C. Wang, J. Strzalka, Y. Liu, J. Wen, D. J. Miller, J. Chen, K. Hong, L. Yu and S. B. Darling, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3707 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, D. Godovsky, O. Inganäs, J. C. Hummelen, R. A. J. Janssen, M. Svensson and M. R. Andersson, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1367 CrossRef CAS .
B. Watts, W. J. Belcher, L. Thomsen, H. Ade and P. C. Dastoor, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 8392 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Mayer, M. F. Toney, S. R. Scully, J. Rivnay, C. J. Brabec, M. Scharber, M. Koppe, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1173 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Nguyen, H. Hoppe, T. Erb, S. Günes, G. Gobsch and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1071 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. S. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864 CAS .
T. Erb, U. Zhokhavets, G. Gobsch, S. Raleva, B. Stühn, P. Schilinsky, C. Waldauf and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1193 CrossRef CAS .
E. D. Gomez, K. P. Barteau, H. Wang, M. F. Toney and Y.-L. Loo, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 436 RSC .
M. Campoy-Quiles, T. Ferenczi, T. Agostinelli, P. G. Etchegoin, Y. Kim, T. D. Anthopoulos, P. N. Stavrinou, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 158 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Kiel, A. P. R. Eberle and M. E. Mackay, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 168701 CrossRef .
T. Wang, A. J. Pearson, D. G. Lidzey and R. A. L. Jones, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1383 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, A. D. F. Dunbar, P. A. Staniec, A. J. Pearson, P. E. Hopkinson, J. E. MacDonald, S. Lilliu, C. Pizzey, N. J. Terrill, A. M. Donald, A. J. Ryan, R. A. L. Jones and D. G. Lidzey, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 4128 RSC .
J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Staniec, A. J. Parnell, A. D. F. Dunbar, H. Yi, A. J. Pearson, T. Wang, P. E. Hopkinson, C. Kinane, R. M. Dalgliesh, A. M. Donald, A. J. Ryan, A. Iraqi, R. A. L. Jones and D. G. Lidzey, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 499 Search PubMed .
H. Xin, F. S. Kim and S. A. Jenekhe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5424 CrossRef CAS .
Y. D. Park, J. K. Park, J. H. Seo, J. D. Yuen, W. H. Lee, K. Cho and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 63 Search PubMed .
F. L. Zhang, K. G. Jespersen, C. Bjorstrom, M. Svensson, M. R. Andersson, V. Sundström, K. Magnusson, E. Moons, A. Yartsev and O. Inganäs, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 667 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Lee, W. L. Ma, C. J. Brabec, J. Yuen, J. S. Moon, J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3619 CrossRef CAS .
C. V. Hoven, X.-D. Dang, R. C. Coffin, J. Peet, T.-Q. Nguyen and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E63 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chang, H. W. A. Lademann, J.-B. Bonekamp, K. Meerholz and A. J. Moulé, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1779 CrossRef CAS .
B. T.d. Villers, C. J. Tassone, S. H. Tolbert and B. J. Schwartz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18978 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Parnell, A. D. F. Dunbar, A. J. Pearson, P. A. Staniec, A. J. C. Dennison, H. Hamamatsu, M. W. A. Skoda, D. G. Lidzey and R. A. L. Jones, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2444 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Germack, C. K. Chan, R. J. Kline, D. A. Fischer, D. J. Gundlach, M. F. Toney, L. J. Richter and D. M. DeLongchamp, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 3828 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Yan, S. Swaraj, C. Wang, I. Hwang, N. C. Greenham, C. Groves, H. Ade and C. R. McNeill, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 4329 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, A. Garcia, H. P. Yan, K. E. Sohn, A. Hexemer, T.-Q. Nguyen, G. C. Bazan, E. J. Kramer and H. Ade, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12538 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, T. Araki and H. Ade, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 214109 CrossRef .
W. R. Salaneck and J.-L. Brédas, Adv. Mater., 1996, 8, 48 CAS .
J. W. Kiel, M. E. Mackay, B. J. Kirby, B. B. Maranville and C. F. Majkrzak, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 133, 074902 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, E. D. Gomez, J. Kim, Z. Guan, C. Jaye, D. A. Fischer, A. Kahn and Y.-L. Loo, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2020 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Björström, A. Bernasik, J. Rysz, A. Budkowski, S. Nilsson, M. Svensson, M. R. Andersson, K. O. Magnusson and E. Moons, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2005, 17, L529 CrossRef .
B. J. Factor, T. P. Russell and M. F. Toney, Macromolecules, 1993, 26, 2847 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Oosterhout, M. M. Wienk, S. S. van Bavel, R. Thiedmann, L. J. A. Koster, J. Gilot, J. Loos, V. Schmidt and R. A. J. Janssen, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 818 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maturová, S. S.v. Bavel, M. M. Wienk, R. A. J. Janssen and M. Kemerink, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 261 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. van Bavel, E. Sourty, G. de With and J. Loos, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 507 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Herzing, L. J. Richter and I. M. Anderson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 17501 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nelson, J. J. Kwiatkowski, J. Kirkpatrick and J. M. Frost, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1768 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Huang, R. Faller, K. Do and A. J. Moulé, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2010, 6, 526 CrossRef CAS .
C. Groves, O. G. Reid and D. S. Ginger, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 612 CrossRef CAS .
A. Salleo, R. J. Kline, D. M. Delongchamp and M. L. Chabinyc, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3812 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Tsoi, S. J. Spencer, L. Yang, A. M. Ballantyne, P. G. Nicholson, A. Turnbull, A. G. Shard, C. E. Murphy, D. D. C. Bradley, J. Nelson and J.-S. Kim, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 2944 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Shuttle, R. Hamilton, B. C. O'Regan, J. Nelson and J. Durrant, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 16448 CrossRef CAS .
M. Helgesen, R. Sondergaard and F. C. Krebs, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 36 RSC .
M. Sanyal, B. Schmidt-Hansberg, M. F. G. Klein, C. Munuera, A. Vorobiev, A. Colsmann, P. Scharfer, U. Lemmer, W. Schabel, H. Dosch and E. Barrena, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 3795 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, Y. Liang, J. Szarko, B. Lee, H. J. Son, B. S. Rolczynski, L. Yu and L. X. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 742 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:



	
                  P3HT, R = C6H15


	
                  PCPDTBT, X = C, R = CH2C(C2H5)C4H9, PSBTBT, X = Si, R = CH2C(C2H5)C4H9

                  Si-PDTBT, X = Si, R = C12H25, C-PDTBT, X = C, R = C12H25


	
                  APFO-3, X = C, R1 = R2 = C8H17, PCDTBT, R1 = C(C8H17)2


	
                  PTB1, R1 = C12H25, R2 = OC8H17


	
                  PTPD1, R1 = alky1, R2 = OCH2C(C2H5)C4H9


	
                  PBTTT, R = n-alky1

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of (a) a conventional BHJ and (b) an ordered BHJ with structured transport pathways to the electrodes. In both devices, the polymer-fullerene mixture is sandwiched between a cathode, typically Al, and a hole-injection layer (HIJ), such as poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) that is deposited on the transparent anode, typically indium tin oxide (ITO). The length scale of phase separation in known efficient BHJs is ∼20 nm.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Energy levels in a BHJ photovoltaic. The incident photon must have an energy larger than the difference in the HOMO and the LUMO of the donor and acceptor, respectively, to form free carriers. (b) Typical current–voltage (J–V) characteristic for a P3HT:PCBM photovoltaic device showing the short circuit current (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), and maximum power point (Pmax). The solid line is the response under simulated AM 1.5 illumination, and the dashed line is the characteristic in the dark.	 

 	Fig. 3  GIWAXS data from P3HT and P3HT:PCBM films annealed at 160 °C for 24 h. Neat (a) and blend (b) films of lower-RR and those of higher-RR (c and d). (e) The characteristic packing distance is affected by RR. The bimodal collection of edge-on (f) and face-on (g) crystallite orientations is evident in these films by the changes in the orientation of the (010) peak at ∼1.7 Å−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  
            DSC thermograms (a, left) and the resulting temperature-composition phase diagram (a, right). Binary eutectic phase behavior is observed. (b) Transmission optical micrographs of blend ratios at temperatures similar to (a). PCBM crystallites are observed over a limited blend ratio range. P3HT crystallite melting is inferred by the color change from red to yellow. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2008 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 5  
EFTEM of P3HT:PCBM is shown. (a) Energy electron loss spectra (EELS) show different low-loss features for P3HT and PCBM. (b) Zero-loss image, with only elastically scattered electrons, is shown. (c) 19 eV-loss image, showing bright P3HT fibrils. (d) 30 eV-loss image, showing bright PCBM regions. (e) A map of P3HT fibrils, allowing for statistical counting of P3HT fibrillar widths (f). Clearly, EFTEM allows for direct imaging of single components in a blend of organic materials with similar electron scattering power. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  
GISAXS traces for BHJ blends with P3HT, PTB3, and PTB6 that show a distinct domain structure at ∼10 nm length scales for P3HT:PCBM, but no such structure for the others. The inset depicts the differences in domain structure schematically for each case. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 7  Cross-section SEM images of a P3HT/d-PCBM bilayer annealed for 5 min at (a) 70 °C, (b) 110 °C, and (c) 150 °C, and corresponding dynamic secondary ion mass spectrometry (DSIMS) profiles (d), display the rapid intermixing of polymer and fullerene at typical device annealing temperatures. The incorporation of PCBM into P3HT increases with annealing temperature. The scale bar represents 200 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2011 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 8  
            XRD patterns indicate that side-chain separation is a critical parameter for fullerene intercalation in BHJ blends with (a) pTT, (b) PQT, (c) P3HT, (d) MDMO-PPV, and (e) BisOC10-PPV. Intercalation occurs for pTT, PQT, and MDMO-PPV. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2009 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 9  GIWAXS sector plots (with out-of-plane scattering at 0°, in-plane scattering at ±90°) for PCPDTBT:PC70BM BHJ films that are (a) as cast from chlorobenzene, and processed with (b) diiodooctane and (c) octanedithiol. Polymer crystallite polymorphs evolve in orientation, and their crystalline quality increases during additive processing. Reprinted with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2011 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 10  Distribution of crystalline P3HT nanorods through the thickness of thermally annealed P3HT:PCBM active layers. (a) and (b) are original slices taken from the reconstructed volume of the film with (a) located near the bottom of the film and (b) close to the top. The slice dimensions are 1700 nm × 1700 nm. Images (c) and (d) are the same reconstructed volumes with the P3HT nanorods colored in yellow. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
