High open circuit voltages in pin-type perovskite solar cells through strontium addition   - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8SE00509E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8SE00509E
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 550-563High open circuit voltages in pin-type perovskite solar cells through strontium addition†

        
          
            Pietro 
            Caprioglio
          
        
      ad, 
      
        
          
            Fengshuo 
            Zu
          
        
      be, 
      
        
          
            Christian M. 
            Wolff
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            José A. 
            Márquez Prieto
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Martin 
            Stolterfoht
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Pascal 
            Becker
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Norbert 
            Koch
          
        
      be, 
      
        
          
            Thomas 
            Unold
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Bernd 
            Rech
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Steve 
            Albrecht
          
        
      *df and 

        
          
            Dieter 
            Neher
          
        
      *a
aUniversity of Potsdam, Institut für Physik und Astronomie, Potsdam, Germany. E-mail: neher@uni-potsdam.de
bHumboldt-Universität, Institut für Physik, Berlin, Germany
cHelmholtz-Zentrum Berlin, Institute for Silicon Photovoltaics, Berlin, Germany
dHelmholtz-Zentrum Berlin, Young Investigator Group Perovskite Tandem Solar Cells, Berlin, Germany. E-mail: steve.albrecht@helmholtz-berlin.de
eHelmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie GmbH, Berlin, Germany
fTechnical University Berlin, Faculty IV – Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, 10587 Berlin, Germany
Received 
      19th October 2018
    , Accepted 7th January 2019First published on 9th January 2019AbstractThe incorporation of even small amounts of strontium (Sr) into lead-base hybrid quadruple cation perovskite solar cells results in a systematic increase of the open circuit voltage (Voc) in pin-type perovskite solar cells. We demonstrate via absolute and transient photoluminescence (PL) experiments how the incorporation of Sr significantly reduces the non-radiative recombination losses in the neat perovskite layer. We show that Sr segregates at the perovskite surface, where it induces important changes of morphology and energetics. Notably, the Sr-enriched surface exhibits a wider band gap and a more n-type character, accompanied with significantly stronger surface band bending. As a result, we observe a significant increase of the quasi-Fermi level splitting in the neat perovskite by reduced surface recombination and more importantly, a strong reduction of losses attributed to non-radiative recombination at the interface to the C60 electron-transporting layer. The resulting solar cells exhibited a Voc of 1.18 V, which could be further improved to nearly 1.23 V through addition of a thin polymer interlayer, reducing the non-radiative voltage loss to only 110 meV. Our work shows that simply adding a small amount of Sr to the precursor solutions induces a beneficial surface modification in the perovskite, without requiring any post treatment, resulting in high efficiency solar cells with power conversion efficiency (PCE) up to 20.3%. Our results demonstrate very high Voc values and efficiencies in Sr-containing quadruple cation perovskite pin-type solar cells and highlight the imperative importance of addressing and minimizing the recombination losses at the interface between perovskite and charge transporting layer.
Introduction
Organic–inorganic halide perovskites are considered one of the most promising materials for photovoltaic applications due to their rather easy and low-cost fabrication, as well as outstanding optoelectronic properties. Notably, these semiconductors combine a high absorption coefficient with panchromatic absorption of light1 and a long carrier diffusion length,2,3 allowing efficient photon absorption and charge extraction for a typical active layer thickness of only 500 nm. Another peculiarity of hybrid perovskites is that defects create mostly shallow energy levels, allowing high open circuit voltage (Voc) and long carrier lifetime.4 Moreover, perovskite materials can be obtained from in-nature abundant precursors, which potentially reduce further the costs of future large scale production. Despite the fact that the first full solid state perovskite solar cell was reported only in 2012, with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 9.7%,5 this technology has experienced a tremendous improvement,6–8 currently reaching a record PCE of 22.7%.9 Regardless of the state of the art of perovskite solar cells and their astonishing performances, the metrics fill factor (FF) and Voc are currently still limiting their PCE. Thus, in order to achieve higher efficiencies the limiting agents of these parameters need to be understood and minimized.10,11 It has been realized that non-radiative recombination at or across the interface between the perovskite absorber and the adjacent charge-transporting layer (CTL) constitutes the major recombination loss.12,13 Recent studies have also shown how generally all common type of transport layer cause severe energy losses and substantially dominates the non-radiative recombination in the devices.14 To overcome this problematic, several approaches such as surface treatment or passivation, interlayers and compositional engineering have been applied to boost the Voc of these devices.8,15–17 However, most of these approaches require a multistep deposition process, where either the existing perovskite layer is altered through a post-deposition treatment or an additional thin layer is deposited on top. Both approaches are not suitable when aiming at fast production schemes. Alternatively, attempts have been made to increase the performance of perovskite devices by adding suitable components to the perovskite precursor solution.18–20 Such additives were shown to enrich at grain-boundaries or at the perovskite surface, paving the way for suppressing unwanted non-radiative recombination while avoiding a multistep preparation scheme [e.g. TOPO,17 and some other small and large molecules]. One recent example of this strategy is the addition of SrI2 to the precursor solution of hybrid and inorganic perovskites. It has been shown that Sr2+ partially substitute Pb2+ in the perovskite lattice,21,22 owing to the nearly almost identical ionic radii of both ions (Sr2+ = 132 pm, Pb2+ = 133 pm).22 Recent results suggested, however, that Sr segregates preferentially at the surface of solution-processed perovskites films, going along with specific changes of the photovoltaic parameters.
For example the addition of 1–2% SrI2 to the MAPbI3 precursor solution increased the PCE of an pin-type device from 12% to nearly 15%, mainly through an increase in Jsc and the FF, while the Voc was actually reduced.23 The overall improvement in device efficiency was attributed to an increased carrier lifetime in combination with surface passivation, resulting in an improved charge extraction. More recently Lau et al. reported Sr2+ insertion into a CsPbI3 perovskite.24 Here, addition of Sr at a concentration of 2% improved all photovoltaic parameters of a nip-type solar cell, resulting in a stabilized PCE of nearly 11%. Based on an improved PL lifetime and predominant Sr surface aggregation, the authors concluded that Sr mainly acts as a surface passivating agent. Furthermore, also in Cl-containing perovskite the presence of Sr has shown positive effects on the performance of actual devices.25,26 On the other hand, a more recent paper demonstrated a significant reduction of all photovoltaic parameters of nip-type devices when adding Sr to a MAPI precursor solution.27
Here, we apply this approach to efficient pin-type devices comprising a solution-processed quadruple cation perovskite28 sandwiched between the hole-transporting polymer PTAA and a C60 electron-transporting layer. These pin-type cells attracted considerable attention as they require only ultrathin undoped charge transport layers (e.g. 8 nm PTAA, 30 nm C60)11 and moderate annealing temperatures. However, the efficiency of such devices was shown to be largely limited by the perovskite/C60 interface, limiting the Voc to values of about 1.11 V for a perovskite with a band gap of around 1.62 eV bandgap, if no further treatments are applied.29 We find that addition of Sr leads to a large reduction of non-radiative recombination loss in the device, with an increase of the Voc by 70 mV, up to a remarkable value of 1.18 V. A combination of methods, including transient and absolute photoluminescence (PL), second ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and photoelectron spectroscopy (PES) is applied to arrive at a comprehensive picture of the morphology and surface energetics of the neat perovskite layers, with and without Sr. Our study confirms that Sr segregates mostly at the perovskite surface, where it widens the band gap and induces a stronger n-type surface band bending. We demonstrate that these modifications limit the accessibility of the surface to photogenerated holes, thereby enhancing the quasi-Fermi level splitting and reducing interface-mediated non-radiative recombination with C60 in the Sr-containing perovskite samples.
Device structure and materials
We employed solar cells with a simple “inverted” configuration where light enters through the hole-extracting contact (denoted here as pin geometry),30 as shown in Fig. 1a. Acknowledging that, currently, best performing perovskite solar cells utilize a combination of inorganic and organic transport layers in a regular structure (nip), in this work we focus exclusively on undoped, fully organic transport layers. Inverted solar cells have reduced hysteresis, low processing temperatures and recently gained strong interest in perovskite based multijunction devices.31 Here, a very thin layer (<10 nm) of the transparent and semiconducting polymer poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA) serves as the hole-transporting material. On top of the hole contact, around 400 nm thickness of active material is deposited by spin-coating utilizing a solution of different quadruple cation perovskite compositions as shown in Fig. 1b.32,33 To analyse the effect of Sr addition, the Pb is partially replaced by Sr varying from 0% to 5%, see below. As an electron transporting layer, 30 nm of C60 is deposited on top of the perovskite through thermal evaporation, followed by the top contact constituted by 8 nm of bathocuproine (BCP) and 100 nm of copper (Cu). It has been shown before that C60 does not form an ideal electron selective contact in combination with MAPbI3, and that it mediates significant non-radiative recombination.10
 Fig. 1  (a) Solar cell device structure representing the layer stack utilized here, (b) ABX3 perovskite cubic structure with the different species implemented in this study. The figure indicates how the Sr2+ can take the place of Pb2+ into the perovskite lattice. 
Our group has recently shown that this device design can yield high efficiencies even with undoped charge transporting layers.11 For this work, the starting perovskite composition is a quadruple cation perovskite based on the mixture of lead iodide (PbI2) and lead bromide (PbBr2) with four cation salts, namely methylammonium bromide (MABr), formamidinium iodide (FAI), cesium iodide (CsI) and rubidium iodide (RbI), as previously reported by Saliba et al.28 Here, the abovementioned compounds in the composition (MA0.17FA0.83)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3, were dissolved in dimethylformamide (DMF) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) in a ratio of 4:1 to which a solution of CsI and RbI, again in a DMF:DMSO (4:1) solvent mixture, was added in order to obtain a final molar composition of (Rb0.05(Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95)0.95)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3. Finally, a small amount of SrI2 dissolved in DMF:DMSO (4:1) was added in different quantities to yield a Sr/Pb ratio of 0%, 0.05%, 0.1%, 0.3%, 0.5%, 1%, 2%, 5% with the goal to study the effect of the Sr insertion from fairly small to considerably high quantities.
Results and discussions
Optoelectronic properties
Regardless the presence of Sr, our devices do not show any evidence of hysteresis effect during J–V scans (Fig. S1A, ESI†). Importantly, already a small quantity of Sr (0.05%) affects the photovoltaic performance, especially the Voc, which increases from 1.10 V to 1.12 V. The rather low Voc of the Sr-free device is most likely caused by the poor selectivity of C60 as an electron-extracting contact, as mentioned above. Further increasing the Sr/Pb ratio to 2% in various steps, a consistent increase of Voc from 1.12 V to 1.18 V is found, see Fig. 2b, highlighting an exceptional Voc increase of 70 mV compared to the reference cell. A Voc of 1.18 V, for a perovskite absorber with a band gap of 1.6 eV in a pin-type solar cell architecture is only enabled by a strong minimization of the energy losses. The resulting cells show a power conversion efficiency of 20.3% for the record device, well exceeding the value of any other Sr containing perovskite reported so far.23–26 Higher Sr concentrations (Fig. S1B and S1D, ESI†) did not improve the Voc further, while causing a significant drop of the FF and Jsc. We attribute this to the significant changes of the surface morphology when increasing the amount of Sr as discussed below. For this reason, we refer to a 2% Sr addition as the optimized amount and use this concentration for further comparisons. Adding Sr until 2% does not compromise the Jsc, which varies in a non-systematic way around an average value of 22 ± 0.5 mA cm−2 (Table 1), but we consistently observe a higher Jsc for the device with 2% Sr. A conclusive interpretation for this phenomenon is not clear, but we note that the higher Jsc of the 2% Sr device is also reflected in the slightly larger external quantum efficiency (EQEPV) (Fig. S2A ESI†). On the other hand, increasing the Sr concentration causes a continuous decease of the FF. Notably, an opposite effect has been reported when Sr was added to MAPbI3 in a solution-processed pin-type device, as described above.23 Here, the addition of Sr to led to a marked increase in Jsc and FF, assigned to improved charge extraction while the Voc decreased by 50 meV.23 We cannot resolve this discrepancy but we note that our devices differ from those employed in ref. 32 substantially (the choice of the perovskite and all charge-transporting layers as well as a different way of perovskite layer preparation). Following our previous studies,10 we tried to further enhance the Voc by adding a thin (less than 5 nm) insulating polystyrene (PS) layer at the interface between perovskite and C60. The resulting solar cell shows an extraordinarily high Voc of nearly 1.23 V due to the significantly reduced interface recombination. This result highlights the Voc potential of well optimized electron selective contact. However, as reported in Fig. S1C, ESI,† the inclusion of the ultra-thin insulating PS interlayer lead to a significant reduction of the FF by probably limiting the extraction of electrons from the perovskite layer. For a better comparison, a box chart representing all parameters for the most important type of devices analysed in this work is presented in Fig. S1D, ESI.† As our work is mostly concerned with the suppression of interfacial recombination though mixed solution processing, we will not consider this approach further in the work.
 Fig. 2  (a) J–V characteristics in reverse scan (0.1 V s−1 with voltage step of 0.02 V) under simulated AM 1.5G illumination calibrated to 100 mW cm−2 of the best devices for the two cases 0% Sr and 2% Sr. (b) Averaged Voc values at 100 mW cm−2 illumination as a function of Sr content based on 10 cells for each Sr concentration. 
Table 1 Averaged J–V parameters for devices with different Sr concentrations including the standard errors based on a statistics of 10 cells for each Sr concentration. Values are taken from J–V scans with scan rate of 0.1 V s−1 and voltage step of 0.02 V. The Jsc values calculated from the integrated EQEPV spectrum (Fig. S2A) match within a 5% deviation with the Jsc measured in J–V scans. As shown in Fig. S1 ESI forward and reverse scan gives identical values showing the absence of hysteresis effect. The record parameters are reported in brackets




Sr [%]

V
oc [V]

J
sc [mA cm−2]
FF [%]
PCE [%]




0
1.108 ± 0.007 (1.121)
22.0 ± 0.6 (22.9)
76.0 ± 0.8 (77.6)
19.2 ± 0.3 (19.4)


0.05
1.127 ± 0.005 (1.133)
21.4 ± 0.5 (22.2)
73.0 ± 2.0 (75.8)
18.4 ± 0.6 (18.9)


0.1
1.145 ± 0.002 (1.150)
22.0 ± 0.2 (22.2)
73.2 ± 0.5 (74.0)
18.8 ± 0.1 (19.1)


0.3
1.150 ± 0.003 (1.153)
21.4 ± 0.3 (21.7)
71.0 ± 1.0 (72.6)
18.2 ± 0.4 (18.7)


0.5
1.166 ± 0.004 (1.169)
21.9 ± 0.1 (22.0)
70.9 ± 0.2 (71.1)
18.3 ± 0.6 (18.7)


1
1.170 ± 0.003 (1.174)
21.4 ± 0.4 (22.9)
71.0 ± 1.0 (72.5)
18.8 ± 0.4 (19.2)


2
1.175 ± 0.004 (1.180)
22.6 ± 0.4 (23.2)
70.0 ± 2.0 (74.0)
19.7 ± 0.7 (20.3)


5
1.168 ± 0.006 (1.178)
15.0 ± 0.5 (16.3)
64.8 ± 2.0 (66.8)
12.3 ± 0.6 (13.1)




The position and shape of the onset of the EQEPV (Fig. S2C, ESI†) remain almost unaltered within sample reproducibility on Sr addition in the range up to 2%. A widening of the band gap, which might be assumed as a cause of the Voc increase after composition modification,28,34,35 is not found here. This is also supported by absorption measurements (Fig. S2B, ESI†) which show no shift in the absorption onset when changing the composition from 0% Sr to 2% Sr. Overall, the data suggest that the addition of SrI2 to the perovskite precursor solution has no appreciable effect on the bulk energy gap, consistent with what was reported previously,19,23 meaning that the observed increase in Voc must be related to reduced recombination at grain boundaries or interfaces.
Time-resolved and steady-state photoluminescence
Time resolved photoluminescence lifetime (TRPL) measurements were applied to investigate the effect of Sr addition on the charge carrier recombination in the bare perovskite material. The TRPL traces for neat perovskite films on glass substrates containing different amounts of Sr, shown in Fig. 3a, are in accordance with a double exponential decay model:36 (1)
 Fig. 3  (a) Time resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) traces of neat perovskite layers for the different Sr concentrations measured in inert atmosphere with a fluence of ∼30 nJ cm−2 at a wavelength of 470 nm, normalized to the initial transient peak. (b) Calculated effective lifetimes from fitting of the TRPL traces according to eqn (1) and (2). 
In eqn (1), the parameters A and B are the relative amplitudes for the fast and slow lifetimes, τfast and τslow, respectively.
Commonly, the initial fast decay (below 20 ns) is associated to the capture of charges by trap states and recombination at grain boundaries or at the surface.37 An increase of the fast photoluminescence lifetime, indicated by the first initial decay in Fig. 3a, point out that the addition of Sr either reduces the concentration of such traps acting as a passivating agent, or limits the accessibility of these traps to photogenerated free carriers. At the same time, TRPL traces also show an improvement of the slow (longer than 50 ns) photoluminescence lifetime, suggesting that non-radiative recombination, commonly associated with the slow decay and most likely due to processes happening at the surface,38 is considerably attenuated. An effective (amplitude averaged) photoluminescence lifetime τeff was then calculated according to the following equation:39 (2)
The effective lifetimes are plotted in Fig. 3b for the different compositions. With the addition of 2% Sr an extraordinarily long PL lifetime of almost 1 μs is measured. The positive effect of Sr addition on the PL lifetime found here is qualitatively in agreement with the enhancement of carrier lifetime after insertion of Sr in MAPbI3 as deduced from transient microwave conductivity experiments23 or with the increase of the PL lifetime in perovskites of different compositions.24,25 Given the fact that the addition of Sr increases both PL lifetime and Voc, but it has basically no effect on the shape and amplitude of the EQE or absorption spectrum, we propose that Sr mainly reduces the strength of non-radiative recombination. In order to quantify this reduction of energy losses in the bare absorber, we measured the quasi-Fermi level splitting (QFLS) by means of the absolute PL intensity measurements. Here, we make use of Würfel's generalized Planck's law40 describing the non-thermal emission of a semiconductor: (3)Here, h is Planck's constant, c is the speed of light, E is the photon energy, ΔEF the QFLS, a(E) is the spectral absorptivity, and k is the Boltzmann constant. Approximating the Bose–Einstein distribution with a Boltzmann distribution (E − ΔEF ≫ kT) and assuming the absorptivity a(E) = 1 for energies above the band gap, the PL intensity IPL can be expressed as function of E where the QFLS, ΔEF, can be extrapolated from a fit of ln(IPL/E2) above the band gap:39 (4)

Fig. 4b shows the QFLS maps calculated from the PL intensity mapping using eqn (4) for two samples of neat perovskite with 0% and 2% Sr. In Fig. 4a the histograms for the corresponding QFLS distributions are reported. In the case of 2% Sr a high QFLS of ΔEF = 1.194 ± 0.001 eV (FWHM = 2.3 meV) was extrapolated from absolute PL mapping, whereas in the case of 0% Sr the quasi Fermi levels splitting was only ΔEF = 1.167 ± 0.002 eV (FWHM = 5 meV), indicating that the losses correlated to non-radiative recombination are considerably lower and the maximum achievable Voc higher when Sr is incorporated. This finding is consistent with the observed increase of the PL lifetimes. Also, the QFLS distribution of the Sr-containing device is significantly narrower, indicating that the Sr-addition also reduces the spatial inhomogeneity of recombination pathways across the perovskite film.
 Fig. 4  (a) Histogram of the quasi-Fermi level splitting (QFLS) extrapolated from the PL maps (5 mm2) of a neat perovskite layer with 0% and 2% Sr represented in (b). The maps represent the QFLS distribution of the bare perovskite film of an area of 5 × 5 mm2 in a range from 1.14 eV to 1.2 eV. The standard deviation of the histograms is considered as the error of the given absolute value. 
Electroluminescence efficiency
A simple method to investigate radiative and non-radiative recombination in a full device is to measure the external electroluminescence efficiency (EQEEL) by applying a forward bias to the solar cell in the dark operating it as a light-emitting diode (LED). Fig. 5 displays EQEEL for the 0% and the 2% samples for a range of applied voltages around the Voc and the corresponding injected dark currents.
 Fig. 5  The external electroluminescence efficiency EQEEL (right y-axis) and the injected dark current (left y-axis) for complete solar cells without (0% Sr) and with 2% of Sr as a function of the applied voltages. Dashed lines and circles indicate the applied voltage, where the dark injected current is equal to the Jsc under simulated AM1.5G illumination. 
When Sr is added, the EL efficiency is increased by more than one order of magnitude, reaching a remarkably high EQEEL value of 2.5 × 10−3 for injection currents approaching Jsc under illumination, denoting stronger emissive behaviour and reduction of non-radiative recombination also in the complete device structure. A luminescence efficiency of 0.25% is among the best values reported in literature so far.10,41 EQEEL values are taken for an injected current density equal to Jsc (being a good approximation of the generation current JG), meaning that the so-determined EQEEL is a good measure for the radiative recombination efficiency at Voc under 1 sun illumination and, therefore, relevant for the calculation of the radiative and non-radiative losses presented here. Following the approach from Rau42 and applied to perovskite materials by Tress et al.,43 we calculated exceptionally low non-radiative losses of  at T = 300 K when Sr is present. The radiative Voc limit for this cell is , where the dark radiative current Jrad,0 was calculated from the convolution of the EQEPV spectrum and blackbody radiation (eqn (S2), ESI†) at 300 K (Fig. S3, ESI†), and JG is set equal to Jsc. Combining these values results in a predicted Voc = Voc,rad − ΔVoc,non-rad = 1.337 − 0.161 = 1.176 V, which is very close to the measured averaged Voc for 2% Sr cells. The perovskite without Sr shows higher non-radiative voltage loss ΔVoc,non-rad = 0.232 eV with an almost identical radiative limit Voc,rad = 1.338 eV, leading to a predicted Voc = 1.338 − 0.232 = 1.106 V, again in very good agreement with the measured averaged Voc for 0% Sr cells. The non-radiative voltage losses ΔVoc,non-rad of the two samples differ by 70 mV, matching exactly the Voc enhancement measured by J–V scans. The small difference of only 15 meV found between the QFLS and the Voc for the Sr containing sample indicates that the energy losses due to the implementation of the charge transporting layer are successfully minimized.
Morphology characterisation
As noted above, previous work showed that Sr segregates at the perovskite surface.23,24Fig. 6 shows the elemental distributions of several elements of our perovskite samples on ITO/glass as measured by secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS), utilizing O as primary ion source. According to Fig. 6a the elements comprising the perovskite, such as Cs, Pb, and Rb, are homogeneously distributed when Sr is not present. On the other hand, the SIMS in Fig. 6b clearly proves a significant enrichment of Sr at the surface and interface to ITO, with the Sr concentration being considerably lower in the bulk. In both measurements the signal of the negatively charged ions is low due to limitations of the sputtering yield; however those species have been detected with Cs ions as primary ion source and they have also shown homogeneous distribution (Fig. S4d, ESI†). To exclude the possibility of lateral inhomogeneities, we analysed different spots of ca. 250 × 250 μm2 on the surface and from samples of different batches. In all measurements (Fig. S4a–S4c, ESI†), Sr traces show the same inhomogeneous distribution with a significant enrichment at the surface/interface. Following this picture, when the Sr is added to the precursor solution and the film is formed after spin coating, Sr clearly segregates the surface/interface, whereas the bulk remains almost unaltered. Additional XPS measurements (Fig. S5A, ESI†) show Sr on the sample surface with the rise of the characteristic Sr 3p peaks, in accordance to the SIMS results. A more detailed XPS surface composition analysis (Fig. S5B, ESI†) quantitatively shows that the relative atomic Sr concentration compared Pb is 10 times higher than what should be predicted by stoichiometry, in good agreement with the findings by Perez Del Rey et al.23 Detailed analysis of the core-level spectra results in the Sr/Pb molar ratio of 0.21 and the Sr/I molar ratio of 0.07, which are both much higher than the expected stoichiometry. This finding is in good agreement with SIMS traces and it confirms a Sr enriched region at the surface. Moreover, we can exclude a coverage of the surface with non-reacted SrI2, since the I concentration found at the surface, and consequently its ratio with Sr, should be consistently higher than what found here. The I/Pb molar ratio, for the sample with Sr, is higher than sample without Sr, which can be possibly ascribed to the fact that Sr can partially replace Pb, leading to a decrease of Pb/I ratio at the surface in the perovskite lattice compared to what predicted by stoichiometry for a full Pb perovskite.
 Fig. 6  Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) profiles for a specified group of elements as a function of depth for a neat perovskite layer on ITO/glass substrates (a) with no Sr added and (b) with 2% Sr. Note that in both figures a thickness equal to zero represent the top surface of the perovskite layer, while the rise of the indium signal (highlighted with a black dotted line) indicates that the perovskite layer is almost completely sputtered off and that the ITO substrate becomes exposed. The initial indium signal for the Sr containing Sr might originate from pin holes or non-uniform coverage and therefore being detected at the beginning of the scan. This agrees with the smeared profile of the signals in the Sr containing sample as an indication of a rougher surface as confirmed in SEM images in Fig. S6Ad.† 
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) confirms a notable change of the surface when Sr is added to the perovskite, as represented in Fig. S6A, ESI.† Upon Sr addition the surface starts to be characterized by leaf-like bright areas. These brighter islands appear to be characterized by different work function after imaging them through energy sensitive SEM in-lens detector. We notice that these features can be resolved exclusively through this in-lens detector and not with an Everhart–Thornley lateral detector, being more topographical sensitive. This excludes the possibility of having a non-conductive material covering the surface, otherwise appearing evidently with area of different brightness due to strong charging effect in both detectors. A comparison between the two different imaging techniques on the same surface spot is presented in Fig. S6B, ESI.† Features of similar size and shape have been reported previously on the surface of Sr-containing CsPbI2Br perovskite processed from solution.24 The cross section (Fig. S6A(d), ESI†) shows that grains propagate from the top to the bottom even in the presence of the additional features present on top of the layer. The results indicate that the top surface of the Sr-containing perovskite contains a material of a different composition spread across the surface area increasing the roughness. A series of images representing the surface after addition of Sr at different concentrations (Fig. S6C and S6D, ESI†) show that the density of these islands on the surface is directly correlated with the concentration of Sr added. In fact, the surface of 5% Sr perovskite is almost entirely covered with these features, while the paddlestones-type surface topography of the underlying perovskite is barely visible. Given the fact that solar cells made with the 5% perovskite absorber exhibit significantly lower FF and Jsc we conclude that these features can potentially have larger bandgap/lower electron conductivity than the underlying Pb-containing perovskite. On the other hand, X-ray diffraction patterns (XRD) (Fig. S6E†) of a series of sample containing 0%, 2% and 5% Sr show no significant shifts of the reflections assigned to the lead-halide perovskite phase, indicating no major changes in the unit cell volume. However, a new reflection at ∼11.6° appears in the Sr containing samples suggesting the presence of a new phase, most probably containing Sr. Importantly, the intensity of the perovskite reflections decrease with increasing Sr concentration, potentially indicating that this new phase segregates at the surface of the film and attenuates the X-ray signals coming from the underlying perovskite phase. The broadening of the perovskite peaks suggests a reduction in crystal domain size or an increase in microstrain due to a decrease in compositional uniformity upon Sr addition.
Electronic structure characterisation
The results above provide evidence that adding Sr to a quadruple cation perovskite has a significant effect on the perovskite surface, whereas the bulk properties seem to remain fairly unaltered, asking for a detailed investigation of the electronic structure of the perovskite surface with and without Sr. Photoemission and inverse photoemission spectroscopy (PES and IPES) experiments were performed for solar cell related multilayer stacks comprising ITO, the hole-transporting PTAA, and the active perovskite, to retrieve information on surface work function (WF), ionization energy (IE), electron affinity (EA), as well as position of the valence band maximum (VBM) and the conduction band minimum (CBM) with respect to the Fermi level (EF).
As shown in Fig. 7a and c, the valence band and VBM, when Sr is incorporated, are shifted to higher binding energy while the conduction band and CBM move closer to EF [Fig. 7a and d]. VBM and CBM were evaluated by linear extrapolation of the valence and the conduction band onsets towards the background on a linear intensity scale, respectively, as shown in Fig. 7a. For the 0% Sr-perovskite we extrapolated the VBM to be at 1.42 eV and the CBM at 0.31 eV relative to the Fermi level, giving a band gap of 1.73 eV. This value is comparable with the optical band gap of 1.63 eV reported for this type of quadruple cation perovskite.28 We note that an overestimation of the band gap (from UPS and IPES) compared to the optical gap can be due to the linear extrapolation,44,45 and our results are consistent with examples reported in literature.44–47 A lower band gap would be expected if the extrapolation was based on logarithmic plots, but due to the uncertainty of cross-section effects and rather large experimental broadening in IPES we refrain from such procedures here. Most importantly, we observe a strong effect on the electronic structure when Sr is incorporated. In particular, the CBM for 2% Sr perovskite locates at the Fermi level, indicating a strongly n-type surface. Concomitantly, the VBM is shifted towards higher binding energy, i.e., 1.92 eV (relative to EF). From these measurements, we deduce that the Sr-enriched perovskite surface features a ca. 190 meV wider band gap compared to the surface of Sr-free perovskite, which is consistent with the smaller electronegativity of Sr compared to Pb. An increased band gap was predicted by DFT calculations for Pb2+ being completely replaced by Sr2+ in MAPbI3.22 Since our samples have a different composition, a quantitative comparison of our results and theory is precluded.
 Fig. 7  (a) UPS and IPES spectra for 0% Sr and 2% Sr containing perovskites with magnified valence and conduction band regions near EF. The binding energy scale is referenced to EF, set to zero. (b) Energy levels with respect to EF for 0% and 2% Sr perovskites obtained from UPS and IPES spectra. From this picture, we observe a strong n-type character of the perovskite surface, as well as a larger band gap for the case of 2% Sr. Wide range (c) valence and (d) conduction band regions. 
The observation that the surface of the two perovskites appear strongly n-type in photoemission measurements does not readily imply that the bulk is also strongly n-doped. As the presence of surface states at semiconductor surfaces, which induces surface band bending in electronic equilibrium, is more the rule than the exception,48 we need to attend to this issue. In fact, for the prototypical methylammonium lead iodide perovskite the presence of, seemingly ubiquitous, Pb0 surface states has been evidenced.49,50 These donor-type surface states donate electrons to the region close to the surface, leaving behind an accumulation of immobile positive charges at the surface. This gives rise to a surface space charge region with a downward band bending from the (intrinsic) bulk towards the surface in electronic equilibrium (i.e., in dark), termed surface band bending. Even if the density of these Pb0-related surface states can often not be directly measured by PES experiments (due to limited sensitivity of the method), their presence is yet manifested by surface downward band bending.51 Since it is likely that Pb0-related surface states also occur at the surface of our perovskites under study, in the following we provide evidence that while the bulk of our samples does not exhibit pronounced n-type character, the surface does due to surface band bending.
The observation of a strongly n-type surface of the Sr-containing sample raises the question whether the addition of Sr introduces n-doping also in the perovskite bulk. Unfortunately, ultraviolet (UV) photoemission is not suited to address this issue due to the short inelastic electron escape depth. On the other hand, the pronounced concurrent increase in PL lifetime and absolute PL yield upon Sr addition as reported above excludes the presence of a high density of doping-induced background charges in the Sr-containing sample, similar to what has been reported by Bolink and coworkers on Sr-doped MAPbI3.23 To support this claim, we simulated the TRPL decay and PL efficiency of the neat perovskite for varying doping concentration, using realistic parameters for the recombination coefficients (Fig. S7A, ESI†). According to these simulations, if the increase in PL efficiency is due to doping, we would expect a concurrent reduction of the PL lifetime, confirming previous studies.52,53 The pronounced increase of both PL decay times and PL efficiencies, therefore rules out extensive bulk doping in the presence of Sr. An effective lifetime of nearly 1 μs combined with a large QFLS suggests a doping density of less than 1015 cm3, meaning that the perovskite bulk is nearly intrinsic.
The low doping density in the bulk combined with the strongly n-type surface suggests significant surface band bending to occur. To provide experimental evidence for this effect, surface photovoltage (SPV) measurements were performed on neat perovskite layers with and without Sr being present. This technique determines the shift of the surface electrostatic potential between measurements done in dark and under light illumination, e.g., through Kelvin Probe or UPS (indicated by parallel shifts of work function and valence band). Under illumination, photogenerated carriers are created due to band-to-band (or trap-to-band) transition. These carriers will redistribute under the influence of the space charge field, thereby compensating the local excess of positive charges at the surface. As a result, upon increasing the illumination intensity the level of surface band banding will gradually decrease until flat band condition is reached, as schematically represented in Fig. 8a. SPV is a common method to measure the degree of surface band bending of semiconductors,54–56 including halide perovskites.57–59 For example, surface band bending in perovskite has been proven with the same methodology used in our study for bare MAPbIxCl3−x films. There, the effects of an n-type surface with downward band bending was clearly demonstrated50 and attributed to the presence of donor levels at the perovskite surface, likely consisting of reduced lead (Pb0).
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic representation of the SPV effect of 0% and 2% Sr samples. Dotted lines represent the effect of white light illumination on the vacuum level (VL), conduction band minimum (CBM) and valence band maximum (VBM) in the surface-near region. At sufficiently high illumination conditions, the space charge region is completely screened by photogenerated charges and flat band conditions are established. The positions of the relevant energy levels are depicted with respect to the EF of the substrate (independent on illumination), and plotted as function of bulk-to-surface distance for different illumination conditions. The bulk and surface energetics in dark are represented by solid lines. Surface energy levels are obtained from measurements of the work function (WF) and the valance band onsets in the dark, while the bulk values are obtained from the corresponding measurements under illumination, assuming that flat-band conditions are established as reported in Zu et al.50 (b) Corresponding WF and VBM values from UPS, measured without and with simultaneous white light illumination for 0% and 2% Sr samples. Both samples display very similar VL and VBM positions under illumination, indicating nearly identical bulk energy levels for 0% and 2% Sr, while surface band bending is significantly more pronounced in the Sr-containing sample due to a much larger SPV effect as indicated with pink arrows. 
The effect of white light illumination on the WF and VBM is summarized in Fig. 8b (see Fig. S8 ESI† for the corresponding UPS spectra). In the case of 0% Sr, the WF increases from 4.17 eV in dark to 4.93 eV under illumination (light intensity sufficient to saturate the shift, i.e., the establishment of flat band conditions), accompanied with the VBM shifting from 1.51 eV to 1.00 eV binding energy. VBM and WF do not shift perfectly in parallel, most likely due to surface inhomogeneities, which affect SPV the VBM and WF in SPV experiments differently, but cannot be differentiated in the area-averaging photoemission experiment. A much stronger SPV effect was observed for 2% Sr samples where the WF shifted from 4.00 eV in dark to 4.89 eV under illumination, and the VBM from 1.87 eV to 1.03 eV, respectively. We note that the SPV was reversible for multiple illumination/dark cycles, thus photochemical reactions and degradation can be excluded. Additionally, in this measurements we notice a reduction in work function due to Sr addition, in agreement with the effects previously reported in literature.23 A change of sample work function can have manifold reasons, e.g., due to formation of dipoles at the surface,44 a change in stoichiometry,60,61 or it can be indeed associated with a more n-type surface.62 In conclusion, SPV reveals a much larger degree of surface band bending of the Sr containing perovskite, resulting in a stronger SPV effect compared to the 0% Sr sample, see magenta coloured arrows in Fig. 8a and b. At the same time, both perovskites exhibit very similar values of the WF and VBM under illumination, demonstrating that the bulk energy levels (notably the position of EF in the gap) is almost independent of the Sr content.
Discussion
Before proposing a model to explain the beneficial effect of adding Sr to a quadruple cation perovskite, we first summarize the key findings from our studies (Table 2). From SIMS and XPS, we find a strong enrichment in Sr at the surface denoted in a Sr/Pb ratio of 0.21 being much higher than the expected 0.02 from a homogeneous Sr addition assumption. In TRPL, we find that Sr addition strongly suppresses the initial fast PL decay, indicating reduced trapping, but also prolongs the long-term decay attributed to non-radiative recombination. In accordance with this, we observe a ca. 30 meV increase in the quasi-Fermi level splitting in the neat perovskite under 1 sun equivalent illumination conditions if 2% Sr is added. In the complete device, Sr suppresses non-radiative recombination, strongly enhancing the electroluminescence efficiency 25-fold and reducing the non-radiative voltage loss from 230 to 160 meV. On the other hand, very similar results of the absorption, EQEPV, and XRD measurements suggest an only minor effect of Sr addition on the perovskite bulk properties. This is consistent with the outcome of the SPV experiments where upon illumination bands flatten at the same position. Meanwhile, the more pronounced shift of the workfunction indicates stronger band bending in the Sr-containing samples. In combination, these properties must be the cause of the significant enhancement of Voc by 70 mV.
Table 2 Summary of the most relevant photovoltaic and optoelectronic properties determined for 0% Sr and 2% Sr containing perovskite films and/or solar cells. The insertion of Sr results in a consistent improvement of all parameters




Sr [%]
Sr/Pb surface ratio

τ
eff [ns]
ΔEF [eV]
EQEEL [%]
ΔVoc,non-rad [eV]
WF shift under illum. [eV]
VBM shift under illum. [eV]

V
oc [V]




0
0
180
1.16
0.01
0.23
0.76
0.51
1.11


2
0.21
980
1.19
0.25
0.16
0.89
0.84
1.18




In Fig. 9 we schematically represent two perovskite samples, without and with Sr, combining findings from all previous studies as a summarizing figure. We propose that this specific energetic landscape is responsible for a considerable reduction of surface recombination as indicated in Fig. 9. Notably, a strong n-type character of the surface goes along with a nearly complete occupation of the electron traps already in the dark, reducing the probability that photo-generated electrons become trapped by these states, fully consistent with the almost complete absence of an initial fast PL decay in the Sr-containing layer. More important, the stronger surface band bending, as measured in SPV when Sr is added, repels holes from the surface, with the benefit of limiting the probability of a captured electron in a surface state to recombine with a hole. The most well-known example of this phenomena is the so-called “back-surface field”63 which is an established approach for suppressing surface recombination in inorganic semiconductors. In addition, the accessibility of the surface for electrons and/or holes may be reduced by the wider band gap of the Sr-containing surface perovskite region, similar to what has been proposed recently for a compositionally engineered perovskite/HTL interface.16 The Sr induced surface modification and the formation of the islands on the top surface may also act as a passivating agent, reducing the number of interfacial states responsible for trap-assisted recombination. Even though these three effects cannot be disentangled based on the presented set of experiments, they all may act in combination together to reduce non-radiative losses in actual devices by suppressing interface recombination with C60, as proposed in Fig. 9.
 Fig. 9  Schematic representation of the two perovskite samples with and without Sr addition with respective recombination schemes. From a combination of morphological studies, PES and SPV experiments it is possible to draw a picture where Sr segregates at the perovskite surface inducing a wider band gap and a more pronounced n-type character. On the other hand, optical measurements and SPV suggests that the bulk shows very similar characteristics for both samples. The energy levels in the bulk and at the surface for the 0% Sr and the 2% Sr cases, respectively, are based on values from UPS and IPES (Fig. 7, 8, S7a and S7b†), taking into account the surface band bending found from SPV measurements, all with respect to the EF of the substrate. In the sample without Sr the recombination of charges can happen at the surface or across the interface with C60. The Sr enriched surface repels holes from the surface reducing the non-radiative recombination at or across the interface and improve the selectivity of the contact with C60. The lack of trap states in the scheme of the 2% Sr sample illustrates surface passivation or that these traps are permanently occupied. 
In order to prove the beneficial effect of Sr in reducing non-radiative recombination at the perovskite/C60 surface, absolute PL efficiencies were measured for perovskite films on glass, without and with 2% Sr, additionally covered with a 30 nm thick layer of C60 (see Fig. S10, ESI† for the results). As expected, the measurements reveal a substantial decrease of the PL efficiency in the presence of C60 for both samples. However, when Sr is present the decrease in PL attributed to the presence of C60 is strongly reduced. This confirms our proposal that Sr addition improves the device performance by reducing the strength of the non-radiative recombination specifically at the surface of the absorber and at the interface with C60. However, the modification of the interface morphology and energetics upon Sr addition might induce an extra barrier for extraction of electrons or holes, as extensively discussed for Fig. S9, ESI,† which may be a main cause for the systematic decrease in FF.
Conclusions
In summary, we show that the addition of a small amount of SrI2 to the precursor solution of a hybrid quadruple cation perovskite induces are remarkable increase of the Voc without the need of any post-deposition treatment or interlayer deposition. The attained Voc of 1.18 V is among the highest of pin-type perovskite solar cells with a C60 electron-transporting layer for the given bandgap of 1.62 eV. We note that during revision of this manuscript, a publication has appeared reporting a Voc of up to 1.21 V for a similar pin-type perovskite architecture, utilizing a 2-step composition engineering to alter the energetics of the perovskite surface,64 not required here. Transient and absolute PL measurements in combination with PES suggests that the addition of Sr causes a drastic reduction of non-radiative recombination at the interface between the perovskite and the C60 electron-transporting layer. We assign this improvement to a preferential n-doping of the perovskite surface and to the concurrent formation of a space-charge region which, combined with a locally larger band gap at the surface, reduces the access of photogenerated holes to the perovskite surfaces, similarly to the well-known back-field effect in inorganic semiconductor. Adding a thin layer of an insulating polymer on top of the Sr-enriched perovskite surface improved the Voc further to nearly 1.23 V, corresponding to a non-radiative voltage loss of only 110 meV. With that, our work not only demonstrates very high Voc values and efficiencies in Sr-containing quadruple cation perovskite pin devices, but also highlights the importance of addressing and minimizing the losses located at the interface with the transport layers in working solar cells.
Materials and methods
Device preparation
Patterned indium-doped tin oxide (ITO, Lumtec, 15 ohm sq−1) was washed with acetone, Hellmanex III, DI-water and isopropanol. After microwave plasma treatment (3 min at 200 W) poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA, Sigma-Aldrich, Mn = 7000–10000, PDI = 2–2.2) in a concentration of 1.5 mg mL−1 was spin-coated at 6000 rpm for 30 seconds and immediately annealed for 10 minutes at 100 °C. The perovskite layer was formed by spin coating a DMF:DMSO solution (4:1 volume) at 4500 rpm for 35 seconds. After 10 seconds of spin coating, 500 mL of diethyl ether (antisolvent) was dripped on top of the spinning substrate. After spin coating samples were annealed at 100 °C for 1 h. Afterwards, samples were transferred to an evaporation chamber and C60 (30 nm), BCP (8 nm) and copper (100 nm) were deposited under vacuum (p = 10−7 mbar). The active area was 6 mm2 defined as the overlap of ITO and the top electrode.
Current density–voltage characteristics and EQEPV

J–V curves were measured under N2 on a Keithley 2400 system in a 2-wire configuration with a scan speed of 0.1 V s−1 and voltage step of 0.02 V. One sun illumination at approximately 100 mW cm−2 of AM1.5G irradiation was provided by a Oriel class ABA sun simulator. The real illumination intensity was monitored during the measurement using a Si photodiode and the exact illumination intensity was used for efficiency calculations. The sun simulator was calibrated with a KG5 filtered silicon solar cell (certified by Fraunhofer ISE). The AM1.5G short-circuit current of devices matched the integrated product of the EQE spectrum within 5–10% error. The latter was recorded using a home build set-up utilizing a Philips Projection Lamp (Type7724 12 V 100 W) in front of a monochromator (Oriel Cornerstone 74100) and the light was mechanically chopped at 70 Hz. The photo-generated current was measured using a lock-in-amplifier (EG&G Princeton Applied Research Model 5302, integration times 300 ms) and evaluated after calibrating the lamp spectrum with an UV-enhanced Si photodetector (calibrated at Newport).
Photoluminescence and electroluminescence
Time resolved PL data was acquired with a TCSPC system (Berger & Lahr) after excitation with a pulse-picked and frequency-doubled output from a mode-locked Ti:sapphire oscillator (Coherent Chameleon) with nominal pulse durations ∼100 fs and fluence of ∼30 nJ cm−2 at a wavelength of 470 nm.
Hyperspectral Absolute Photoluminescence Imaging was performed by excitation with two 450 nm LEDs equipped with diffuser lenses. The intensity of the LEDs was adjusted to ∼1 sun by illuminating a contacted perovskite solar cell (short circuit) and matching the current density to the short circuit current measured in the JV sun simulator (the measured short circuit current density of the solar cell under this illumination was 22.2 mA cm−2). The photoluminescence image detection was performed with a CCD camera (Allied Vision) coupled with a liquid crystal tuneable filter. The system was calibrated to absolute photon numbers in two steps in a similar way to the process described by Delamarre et al.65 For this purpose an IR laser diode and a spectrally calibrated halogen lamp was coupled to an integrating sphere. The pixel resolution of the images corresponds to about 10 μm in diameter. Sets of images from 650 nm to 1100 nm with 5 nm step size were recorded. All absolute PL measurements were performed on films with the same thicknesses as used in the operational solar cells.
The EL spectra were acquired using an Andor SR393i-B spectrometer equipped with a silicon detector DU420A-BR-DD (iDus). The response of this setup was measured with a calibrated lamp (Oriel 63355). The cells were kept under forward bias with a Keithley 2400 at an applied current Jinj ≈ Jsc, stabilized for 20 seconds before recording a spectrum. Absolute EL was measured with a calibrated Si photodetector (Newport) attached to a Keithley 485 pAmeter. The photodetector was placed directly in front of the device pixel, then a forward bias was applied with a Keithley 2400 source-meter and the resulting photon flux was calculated considering the EL spectrum of the solar cell and the spectral response of the Si photodiode. Injected current and photodetector response were monitored with a home written LabVIEW routine varying the voltage and stabilising for 20 seconds after every voltage step (dV typically 0.02 V).
Morphological characterization
SIMS measurements were performed using a Cameca IMS4f instrument, using O2+ and Cs+ as primary sputtering ions within an energy range of 5–15 keV. The scanned area on the sample surface was 250 × 250 μm2.
SEM images were acquired with a Zeiss Ultra Plus SEM. Images has been acquired through the use of Secondary Electron in-lens detector.
The structural characterization was performed with a PANalytical X'Pert MPD Pro X-ray diffractometer in Bragg–Brentano configuration using a Cu K-α radiation source (λ = 0.15406 nm) with a step size of 0.013°. The measurements were performed in N2 atmosphere.
Photoemission and inverse photoemission spectroscopy measurements
Photoemission experiments were performed at an UHV system consisting of sample preparation and analysis chambers (both at base pressure of 1 × 10−10 mbar), as well as a load-lock (base pressure of 1 × 10−6 mbar). All the samples were transferred to the UHV chamber using a transfer rod under rough vacuum (1 × 10−3 mbar). UPS was performed using helium discharge lamp (21.22 eV) with a filter to reduce the photo flux and to block visible light from the source to hit the sample. XPS was performed using Al Kα radiation (1486.7 eV) generated from a twin anode X-ray source. All spectra were recorded at room temperature and normal emission using a hemispherical SPECS Phoibos 100 analyzer. All perovskite layers were deposited on a ITO/PTAA stack in order to be as much close as possible to real device conditions. The resolution and energy calibration of the PES and IPES were determined by measuring the Fermi edge of a clean Au (111) single crystal. The overall energy resolution was 140 meV and 1.2 eV for UPS and XPS, respectively. The IPES measurements were performed in the isochromat mode using a low-energy electron gun with a BaO cathode and a band pass filter of 9.5 eV (SrF2 + NaCl). All presented PES and IPES spectra are given in binding energy (BE) referenced to the Fermi level. The overall energy resolution for IPES was 0.74 eV. The UPS spectra of thin films under consecutive on–off illumination circles were conducted using a white halogen lamp at 150 mW cm−2 (daylight rendering spectrum). The same experimental conditions and setup presented in the work of Zu et al.50 has been used for our set of measurements. C60 molecules were purchased from Novaled, and were used as received and thermally evaporated from resistively heated quartz crucibles. The nominal deposited thickness was monitored by a quartz crystal microbalance.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Acknowledgements
S. A. acknowledges funding from the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF), within the project “Materialforschung für die Energiewende” (grant no. 03SF0540), and the German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy (BMWi) through the “PersiST” project (grant no. 0324037C). Additional funding came from HyPerCells (a Joint Graduate School of the Potsdam University and the HZB) and the German Research Foundation (DFG) within the collaborative research center 951 “Hybrid Inorganic/Organic Systems for Opto-Electronics (HIOS)”. We thank RTG Mikroanalyse GmbH, Schwarzschildstraße 1, 12489 Berlin for performing the SIMS measurements. The authors thank Sebastián Caicedo-Dávila and Dr Ulrich Hörmann for fruitful discussions.
Notes and references
G. Hodes, Science, 2013, 342, 317–318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063903 CrossRef .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-P. Correa-Baena, A. Abate, M. Saliba, W. Tress, T. Jesper Jacobsson, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 710–727 RSC .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bi, C. Yi, J. Luo, J.-D. Décoppet, F. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, X. Li, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16142 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Yang, B.-W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim, J. H. Noh and S. Il Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 1376–1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Wolff, F. Zu, A. Paulke, L. P. Toro, N. Koch and D. Neher, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700159 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Stolterfoht, C. M. Wolff, Y. Amir, A. Paulke, L. Perdigón-Toro, P. Caprioglio and D. Neher, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1530–1539 RSC .
W. Tress, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602358 CrossRef .
M. Stolterfoht, C. M. Wolff, J. A. Márquez, S. Zhang, C. J. Hages, D. Rothhardt, S. Albrecht, P. L. Burn, P. Meredith, T. Unold and D. Neher, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 847 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Stolterfoht, P. Caprioglio, C. M. Wolff, J. A. Márquez, J. Nordmann, S. Zhang, D. Rothhart, U. Hörmann, A. Redinger, L. Kegelmann, S. Albrecht, T. Kirchartz, M. Saliba, T. Unold and D. Neher,  2018, arXiv:1810.01333.
G. Huang, C. Wang, H. Zhang, S. Xu, Q. Xu and Y. Cui, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2449–2455 RSC .
K. T. Cho, S. Paek, G. Grancini, C. Roldán-Carmona, P. Gao, Y. Lee and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 621–627 RSC .
I. L. Braly, D. W. Dequilettes, L. M. Pazos-Outón, S. Burke, M. E. Ziffer, D. S. Ginger and H. W. Hillhouse, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 355–361 CrossRef CAS .
M. Abdi-Jalebi, Z. Andaji-Garmaroudi, S. Cacovich, C. Stavrakas, B. Philippe, J. M. Richter, M. Alsari, E. P. Booker, E. M. Hutter, A. J. Pearson, S. Lilliu, T. J. Savenije, H. Rensmo, G. Divitini, C. Ducati, R. H. Friend and S. D. Stranks, Nature, 2018, 555, 497–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Klug, A. Osherov, A. A. Haghighirad, S. D. Stranks, P. R. Brown, S. Bai, J. T.-W. Wang, X. Dang, V. Bulovi, H. J. Snaith and A. M. Belcher, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 236, 236–246 RSC .
A. D. Jodlowski, C. Roldán-Carmona, G. Grancini, M. Salado, M. Ralaiarisoa, S. Ahmad, N. Koch, L. Camacho, G. De Miguel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 972–979 CrossRef CAS .
J. Navas, A. Sánchez-Coronilla, J. Jesús Gallardo, N. Cruz Hernández, J. Carlos Piñero, R. Alcántara, C. Fernández-Lorenzo, D. M. De los Santos, T. Aguilar and J. Martín-Calleja, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6216–6229 RSC .
T. J. Jacobsson, M. Pazoki, A. Hagfeldt and T. Edvinsson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 25673–25683 CrossRef CAS .
D. Perez-del-Rey, D. Forgacs, E. M. Hutter, T. J. Savenije, D. Nordlund, P. Schulz, J. J. Berry, M. Sessolo and H. J. Bolink, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9839–9845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. J. Lau, M. Zhang, X. Deng, J. Zheng, J. Bing, Q. Ma, J. Kim, L. Hu, M. A. Green, S. Huang and A. Ho-Baillie, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2319–2325 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, H. Wang, S. T. Williams, D. Xiong, W. Zhang, C. C. Chueh, W. Chen and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606608 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Shai, L. Zuo, P. Sun, P. Liao, W. Huang, E.-P. Yao, H. Li, S. Liu, Y. Shen, Y. Yang and M. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 213–222 CrossRef CAS .
M.-C. Wu, W.-C. Chen, S.-H. Chan and W.-F. Su, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 429, 9–15 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. Saliba, T. Buonassisi, M. Grätzel, A. Abate, W. Tress and A. Hagfeldt, Science, 2017, 358, 739–744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, Y. Shao, Q. Dong, Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2359–2365 RSC .
M. Jošt, E. Köhnen, A. B. Morales-Vilches, B. Lipovšek, K. Jäger, B. Macco, A. Al-Ashouri, J. Krč, L. Korte, B. Rech, R. Schlatmann, M. Topič, B. Stannowski and S. Albrecht, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3511–3523 RSC .
Q. Wang, Q. Dong, T. Li, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6734–6739 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Calió, S. Kazim, M. Grätzel and S. Ahmad, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14522–14545 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J.-Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 RSC .
D. P. Mcmeekin, G. Sadoughi, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Hörantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte, B. Rech, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 351, 151–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cho, S.-H. Jeong, M.-H. Park, Y.-H. Kim, C. Wolf, C.-L. Lee, J. Hyuck Heo, A. Sadhanala, N. Myoung, S. Yoo, S. Hyuk Im, R. H. Friend and T.-W. Lee, Science, 2015, 350, 1222–1255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, M. Yang, D. T. Moore, Y. Yan, E. M. Miller, K. Zhu and M. C. Beard, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 16207 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Unold and L. Gütay, in Advanced Characterization Techniques for Thin Film Solar Cells, ed. D. Abou-Ras, T. Kirchartz and U. Rau, Wiley-VCH,  2011, pp. 151–175 Search PubMed .
P. Würfel, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1982, 15, 3967–3985 CrossRef .
D. Bi, W. Tress, M. I. Dar, P. Gao, J. Luo, C. Renevier, K. Schenk, A. Abate, F. Giordano, J.-P. Correa Baena, J.-D. Decoppet, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, 1501170 CrossRef PubMed .
U. Rau, Phys. Rev. B, 2007, 76, 085303 CrossRef .
W. Tress, N. Marinova, O. Inganäs, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Graetzel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1–6 Search PubMed .
S. Olthof, APL Mater., 2016, 4, 091502 CrossRef .
P. Schulz, E. Edri, S. Kirmayer, G. Hodes, D. Cahen and A. Kahn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1377 RSC .
E. M. Miller, Y. Zhao, C. C. Mercado, S. K. Saha, J. M. Luther, K. Zhu, V. Stevanović, C. L. Perkins and J. van de Lagemaat, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 22122–22130 RSC .
M. F. Lo, Z. Q. Guan, T. W. Ng, C. Y. Chan and C. S. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1213–1218 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang and J. T. Yates, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 5520–5551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Conings, L. Baeten, C. De Dobbelaere, J. D'Haen, J. Manca and H. G. Boyen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2041–2046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. S. Zu, P. Amsalem, I. Salzmann, R. Bin Wang, M. Ralaiarisoa, S. Kowarik, S. Duhm and N. Koch, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700139 CrossRef .

          F. Zu, P. Amsalem, M. Ralaiarisoa, T. Schultz, R. Schlesinger and N. Koch, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces,  2017, 9, 41546–41552 Search PubMed.
J. F. L. Salas, S. J. Heise, M. Richter, V. Gerliz, M. S. Hammer, J. Ohland and I. Hammer-Riedel, Thin Solid Films, 2017, 633, 40–44 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. L. Salas, M. Richter, J. Parisi and S. J. Heise, J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 122, 203103 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang and J. T. Yates, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 5520–5551 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liqiang, S. Xiaojun, S. Jing, C. Weimin, X. Zili, D. Yaoguo and F. Honggang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 79, 133–151 CrossRef .
L. Kronik and Y. Shapira, Surf. Interface Anal., 2001, 31, 954–965 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Harwell, T. K. Baikie, I. D. Baikie, J. L. Payne, C. Ni, J. T. S. Irvine, G. A. Turnbull and I. D. W. Samuel, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 19738–19745 RSC .
L. Barnea-Nehoshtan, S. Kirmayer, E. Edri, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2408–2413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          W. Zhang, S. Pathak, N. Sakai, T. Stergiopoulos, P. K. Nayak, N. K. Noel, A. A. Haghighirad, V. M. Burlakov, D. W. Dequilettes, A. Sadhanala, W. Li, L. Wang, D. S. Ginger, R. H. Friend and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun.,  2015, 6, 10030 Search PubMed.
T. G. Kim, S. W. Seo, H. Kwon, J. Hahn and J. W. Kim, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 24342–24348 RSC .
H. Xie, X. Liu, L. Lyu, D. Niu, Q. Wang, J. Huang and Y. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 215–220 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Y. Shao, H. Xie, L. Lyu, X. Liu, Y. Gao and J. Huang, Appl.
Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 163508 CrossRef .
A. Cuevas and D. Yan, IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, 2013, 3, 916–923 Search PubMed .
D. Luo, W. Yang, Z. Wang, A. Sadhanala, Q. Hu, R. Su, R. Shivanna, G. F. Trindade, J. F. Watts, Z. Xu, T. Liu, K. Chen, F. Ye, P. Wu, L. Zhao, J. Wu, Y. Tu, Y. Zhang, X. Yang, W. Zhang, R. H. Friend, Q. Gong, H. J. Snaith and R. Zhu, Science, 2018, 360, 1442–1446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Delamarre, L. Lombez and J.-F. Guillemoles, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 131108 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8se00509eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Solar cell device structure representing the layer stack utilized here, (b) ABX3 perovskite cubic structure with the different species implemented in this study. The figure indicates how the Sr2+ can take the place of Pb2+ into the perovskite lattice.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) J–V characteristics in reverse scan (0.1 V s−1 with voltage step of 0.02 V) under simulated AM 1.5G illumination calibrated to 100 mW cm−2 of the best devices for the two cases 0% Sr and 2% Sr. (b) Averaged Voc values at 100 mW cm−2 illumination as a function of Sr content based on 10 cells for each Sr concentration.	 

0	1.108 ± 0.007 (1.121)	22.0 ± 0.6 (22.9)	76.0 ± 0.8 (77.6)	19.2 ± 0.3 (19.4)
0.05	1.127 ± 0.005 (1.133)	21.4 ± 0.5 (22.2)	73.0 ± 2.0 (75.8)	18.4 ± 0.6 (18.9)
0.1	1.145 ± 0.002 (1.150)	22.0 ± 0.2 (22.2)	73.2 ± 0.5 (74.0)	18.8 ± 0.1 (19.1)
0.3	1.150 ± 0.003 (1.153)	21.4 ± 0.3 (21.7)	71.0 ± 1.0 (72.6)	18.2 ± 0.4 (18.7)
0.5	1.166 ± 0.004 (1.169)	21.9 ± 0.1 (22.0)	70.9 ± 0.2 (71.1)	18.3 ± 0.6 (18.7)
1	1.170 ± 0.003 (1.174)	21.4 ± 0.4 (22.9)	71.0 ± 1.0 (72.5)	18.8 ± 0.4 (19.2)
2	1.175 ± 0.004 (1.180)	22.6 ± 0.4 (23.2)	70.0 ± 2.0 (74.0)	19.7 ± 0.7 (20.3)
5	1.168 ± 0.006 (1.178)	15.0 ± 0.5 (16.3)	64.8 ± 2.0 (66.8)	12.3 ± 0.6 (13.1)
	(1)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Time resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) traces of neat perovskite layers for the different Sr concentrations measured in inert atmosphere with a fluence of ∼30 nJ cm−2 at a wavelength of 470 nm, normalized to the initial transient peak. (b) Calculated effective lifetimes from fitting of the TRPL traces according to eqn (1) and (2).	 
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Histogram of the quasi-Fermi level splitting (QFLS) extrapolated from the PL maps (5 mm2) of a neat perovskite layer with 0% and 2% Sr represented in (b). The maps represent the QFLS distribution of the bare perovskite film of an area of 5 × 5 mm2 in a range from 1.14 eV to 1.2 eV. The standard deviation of the histograms is considered as the error of the given absolute value.	 

 	Fig. 5  The external electroluminescence efficiency EQEEL (right y-axis) and the injected dark current (left y-axis) for complete solar cells without (0% Sr) and with 2% of Sr as a function of the applied voltages. Dashed lines and circles indicate the applied voltage, where the dark injected current is equal to the Jsc under simulated AM1.5G illumination.	 

 	Fig. 6  Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) profiles for a specified group of elements as a function of depth for a neat perovskite layer on ITO/glass substrates (a) with no Sr added and (b) with 2% Sr. Note that in both figures a thickness equal to zero represent the top surface of the perovskite layer, while the rise of the indium signal (highlighted with a black dotted line) indicates that the perovskite layer is almost completely sputtered off and that the ITO substrate becomes exposed. The initial indium signal for the Sr containing Sr might originate from pin holes or non-uniform coverage and therefore being detected at the beginning of the scan. This agrees with the smeared profile of the signals in the Sr containing sample as an indication of a rougher surface as confirmed in SEM images in Fig. S6Ad.†	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) UPS and IPES spectra for 0% Sr and 2% Sr containing perovskites with magnified valence and conduction band regions near EF. The binding energy scale is referenced to EF, set to zero. (b) Energy levels with respect to EF for 0% and 2% Sr perovskites obtained from UPS and IPES spectra. From this picture, we observe a strong n-type character of the perovskite surface, as well as a larger band gap for the case of 2% Sr. Wide range (c) valence and (d) conduction band regions.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic representation of the SPV effect of 0% and 2% Sr samples. Dotted lines represent the effect of white light illumination on the vacuum level (VL), conduction band minimum (CBM) and valence band maximum (VBM) in the surface-near region. At sufficiently high illumination conditions, the space charge region is completely screened by photogenerated charges and flat band conditions are established. The positions of the relevant energy levels are depicted with respect to the EF of the substrate (independent on illumination), and plotted as function of bulk-to-surface distance for different illumination conditions. The bulk and surface energetics in dark are represented by solid lines. Surface energy levels are obtained from measurements of the work function (WF) and the valance band onsets in the dark, while the bulk values are obtained from the corresponding measurements under illumination, assuming that flat-band conditions are established as reported in Zu et al.50 (b) Corresponding WF and VBM values from UPS, measured without and with simultaneous white light illumination for 0% and 2% Sr samples. Both samples display very similar VL and VBM positions under illumination, indicating nearly identical bulk energy levels for 0% and 2% Sr, while surface band bending is significantly more pronounced in the Sr-containing sample due to a much larger SPV effect as indicated with pink arrows.	 

0	0	180	1.16	0.01	0.23	0.76	0.51	1.11
2	0.21	980	1.19	0.25	0.16	0.89	0.84	1.18

 	Fig. 9  Schematic representation of the two perovskite samples with and without Sr addition with respective recombination schemes. From a combination of morphological studies, PES and SPV experiments it is possible to draw a picture where Sr segregates at the perovskite surface inducing a wider band gap and a more pronounced n-type character. On the other hand, optical measurements and SPV suggests that the bulk shows very similar characteristics for both samples. The energy levels in the bulk and at the surface for the 0% Sr and the 2% Sr cases, respectively, are based on values from UPS and IPES (Fig. 7, 8, S7a and S7b†), taking into account the surface band bending found from SPV measurements, all with respect to the EF of the substrate. In the sample without Sr the recombination of charges can happen at the surface or across the interface with C60. The Sr enriched surface repels holes from the surface reducing the non-radiative recombination at or across the interface and improve the selectivity of the contact with C60. The lack of trap states in the scheme of the 2% Sr sample illustrates surface passivation or that these traps are permanently occupied.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8se00509e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
