Impact of various dopant elements on the properties of kesterite compounds for solar cell applications: a status review  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9SE00040B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9SE00040B
(Review Article)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 1365-1383Impact of various dopant elements on the properties of kesterite compounds for solar cell applications: a status review

        
          
            Dattatray S. 
            Dhawale
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Adnan 
            Ali
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Abhishek C. 
            Lokhande
          
          
        
      b
aQatar Environment and Energy Institute (QEERI), Hamad Bin Khalifa University (HBKU), Qatar Foundation, P.O. Box 34110, Doha, Qatar. E-mail: dattatraydhawale@gmail.com;  Fax: +974 44541528
bOptoelectronic Convergence Research Center, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Chonnam National University, Gwangju 500-757, South Korea
Received 
      21st January 2019
    , Accepted 1st April 2019First published on 2nd April 2019AbstractEarth-abundant and nontoxic kesterite compounds, such as Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS), Cu2ZnSnSe4 (CZTSe), and Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTSSe), have made tremendous progress, becoming a hot topic in optoelectronic materials research on power generation through solar energy capture. These compounds can be considered possible alternatives to conventional, toxic, and expensive absorber layers, such as crystalline silicon (c-Si), Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGS), and CdTe. The p-type semiconductor kesterites (CZTS, CZTSe CZTSSe) are the most promising light absorbers for solar cell applications, reaching record efficiencies of up to 12.7% owing to their unique optical properties. These properties include a variable band gap energy ranging from 1.0 eV (Cu2ZnSnSe4) to 1.5 eV (Cu2ZnSnS4) and a large optical absorption coefficient of 104 cm−1, which make kesterite a feasible option for photovoltaic technologies scalable to terawatt levels. Furthermore, as kesterite absorbers do not contain any rare metals or toxic materials, one can expect their application to low-cost solar cells in the near future. This review aims to present an overview of the most recent research activity on state-of-the-art kesterite-based absorbers, including a brief introduction to kesterite compounds, deposition methods, and improved device performance through doping with alkali, germanium, and other metal elements either during kesterite synthesis or after growth as a post-deposition treatment. As the key component for improving the power conversion efficiency of the kesterite absorber, doping with alkali, germanium, and other metal elements has attracted much interest and is vital for delivering promising efficiencies. Furthermore, current knowledge on doping, its impact on structural, optical, and electrical properties, and the solar cell performance of kesterite compounds are summarized. Finally, important achievements in this field to date and further directions for improving the solar cell efficiency of kesterite-based absorbers have been summarized.Dattatray S. DhawaleDattatray S. Dhawale has worked as a Scientist at the Qatar Environment and Energy Research Institute (QEERI) since June 2016. Before moving to QEERI, he served as a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia from 2013 to 2016, where he worked on photo- and electro-catalytic water splitting for solar fuel production. Prior to joining KAUST, he worked as a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the University of Queensland (UQ), Australia, from 2011 to 2013 and as a Research Associate at the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Japan, from 2010 to 2011, after successfully completing a few months research at Hanyang University Seoul, South Korea. He obtained his PhD in solid-state physics from the Shivaji University, Kolhapur, India in 2010. His research interests encompass the development of novel and efficient nanomaterials for solar energy, energy storage, photocatalysis, and gas sensor technology.Adnan AliDr Adnan has worked as a post-doctorate researcher at QEERI, Qatar, since 2014. He has published more than 30 research articles in reputable journals and attended and presented at renowned international conferences, including MRS, ICAE, and ISES (Solar World Congress). He has five patents on materials synthesis and fabrication processes. He is conducting research on novel transparent and conductive thin film fabrication, nanomaterials synthesis for energy applications, and membrane fabrication for water desalination. Currently, he is working on the synthesis of Pb-free perovskite materials for energy harvesting. He has a multidisciplinary background, including experience in 2D materials synthesis, processing, and applications in electronic devices. He obtained his PhD in mechatronics engineering from Jeju National University, South Korea, in 2014 and a Masters degree in mechanical engineering (applied energy systems) from Jeju National University, South Korea, in 2010. His BS degree is in metallurgy and materials science engineering from the GIK Institute of Engineering Sciences and Technology, Pakistan, in 2007.Abhishek C. LokhandeDr Abhishek C. Lokhande obtained his PhD in Materials Science and Engineering from Chonnam National University, South Korea, in 2019. Prior to that, he obtained Bachelors and Masters degrees in mechanical engineering from Shivaji University, Kolhapur, India. His research interests includes the synthesis, characterization, and development of novel efficient nanomaterials/thin film metal chalcogenides for thin film solar cells, gas sensors, and energy storage/energy conversion systems.
1. Introduction
The increasing global crises regarding energy shortages/fossil fuel depletion and carbon dioxide emissions are the two major challenges of the 21st century.1 These require researchers to develop clean, cheap, safe, and sustainable renewable energy technologies to provide long-term solutions to environmental problems for the development of human society. Presently, the total global power requirement is about 15 TW, with worldwide energy demand estimated to be 30 TW by 2050 and 45 TW by 2100, along with a predicted global temperature increase of 5 °C.2,3 To meet these demands, renewable energy resources are expected to play a critical role. Of available potential renewable energy resources, energy harvesting using solar photovoltaics (PV), which can directly transform sunlight into usable electricity, has attracted significant attention and is on the forefront among available resources.4–6 In 2014, 38.7 GW of PV was installed globally, which increased to 42.8 GW in 2015.7 The commercially available and technologically most important solar cell modules developed to date are based on silicon (Si), which has more than 80% PV share market8 and a record efficiency of 26.7% for crystalline silicon (c-Si).9 However, constructing highly efficient Si solar modules requires perfect single crystals, which contributes to an expensive manufacturing cost, especially regarding the cost of silicon wafers. In contrast, CIGS solar cell-based PV technology, comprising chalcogenide thin films, has achieved a 22.9% power conversion efficiency.10–14 However, such PV technology uses either rare elements, such as gallium, indium, and tellurium, or toxic elements, such as cadmium, which can result in costly and unsafe solar cells. Therefore, to compete with costly c-Si, CIGS, and toxic CdTe based solar cells, and harvest solar light effectively for the commercial production of high-performance PV technology, the fabrication of low-cost solar cell absorbers with high power conversion efficiencies is essential. As a replacement for expensive CIGS and CdTe, cheap and earth-abundant binary compounds, such as Fe2S, FeS2,15,16 Cu2SnS3,17,18 and Cu2O,19,20 have been proposed for solar cells application. However, the record efficiency of these compounds is below 10%, which is not satisfactory for practical usage.
In recent years, attention has turned toward earth-abundant kesterite (CZTS, CZTSe, and mixed chalcogenide CZTSSe) solar cells as low-cost and non-toxic PV technology, and is considered a possible replacement for expensive and conventional absorber layers, such as c-Si, CIGS, and CdTe solar cells.21–23 The p-type conductive CZTS or CZTSSe absorbers are similar materials to well-established GIGS solar cells.24–27 Therefore, a large amount of CIGS knowledge and experience is expected to be directly transferable to CZTSSe technology, which contains earth-abundant constituents, such as zinc and tin, rather than the rare and expensive gallium and indium in CIGS, making their potential commercialization cheaper and faster. Furthermore, the optical properties of CZTSSe, such as a band gap range of 1–1.5 eV, absorption coefficients greater than 104 cm−1,28,29 and excellent theoretical conversion efficiencies of up to 31%,30 suggest the possibility of large-area solar cell fabrication without significant module prices.31,32 Therefore, we can expect cheap thin-film solar cells (TFSC) in the near future. In comparison to first-generation solar cells (Si solar cells), second-generation TFSCs have advantages of low cost, easy processing methods, and better performance under diffused light conditions. Furthermore, the required absorber layer thickness in TFSCs to absorb all incident sunlight (1–2 μm) is much lower than that of Si solar cells (100–200 μm). Therefore, TFSCs have been effectively applied to photovoltaic technology.
Recently, several strategies have been developed to synthesize CZTS, CZTSe, and CZTSSe absorbers, including both vacuum33–35 and non-vacuum24,36–40 techniques, resulting in promising solar cell performance. Since the first report of CZTS (kesterite-type crystal structure) solar cells with a power conversion efficiency of 0.66%41,42 in thermally evaporated devices in 1996, materials growth optimization and hydrazine-processed CZTSSe solar cells have resulted in significant improvements and yielded a world-record light-to-electricity conversion efficiency of 12.7% using a CdS/In2S3 emitter.32 However, hazardous hydrazine has a toxic and explosive nature that might prevent its use in industrial applications, with more classical deposition methods required. As an alternative to highly toxic hydrazine, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) is a solvent of choice for synthesizing CZTS absorber with a maximum efficiency of 11.2%.43–47 However, the record efficiencies of 12.7% reported by Mitzi and coworkers in 2014 for CZTSSe using the hydrazine approach32 and 13.80% reported by the KIER group in 2016 for a small-area (0.181 cm2) CZTSSe device prepared using a sputtering method48 are much lower than those of their CIGS (22.9%),13 c-Si (26.7%),9 and CdTe (21%)49 solar cell counterparts. The key limitation to the high efficiency of kesterite solar cells remains a deficit in the open circuit voltage, often expressed as VOC-deficit, which is often linked to structural disorder, which manifests as band tails and deep trap states, to limit device performance. Important strategies to reduce the high VOC-deficit of the kesterite absorber layer include the post-deposition or doping of alkali and other related metals, such as Na, K, Cs, Rb, Li, Mg, Ge, Sb, and Ag.50–66 This can aid crystallization and decrease elemental disorder, resulting in an improved PCE.
An enhanced VOC and fill factor has been observed in Na-doped CZTSe owing to an increase in the hole density and shift in the acceptor level close to the conduction band.67 Furthermore, Na incorporation into CZTSSe absorber significantly modified its electronic properties, with the possibility of tuning the doping levels and gradients to maximize the collection of photogenerated carriers in thin film CZTSSe solar cells.68 Repins et al. showed that a NaF layer is needed in addition to Na from the glass substrate to improve the photovoltaic parameters without affecting grain growth.69 Na doping lowers the thermal activation energy and pulls the Fermi level towards the valence band, resulting in a build-up of potential (VOC) in the structure.70 Furthermore, Na doping enhances the carrier concentration and grain size. Other alkali metals, such as Li, Rb, and K, have shown effective performance in CZTS TFSCs.58 Li-doping reduces deep defects and improves the VOC,61 Rb-doping improves the grain size and increases VOC, and K-doping suppresses Sn loss and enhances the JSC.53 Therefore, alkalis and other metals can help promote grain growth and increase the hole concentration, grain boundaries, and defect passivation, thereby enhancing the PCE of CZTSSe solar cells.
From this perspective, this review aims to describe current progress in state-of-the-art kesterite thin-film solar cells from the perspective of material properties and synthetic procedures (vacuum and non-vacuum). We have also reviewed changes in the electrical, optical, and structural properties of kesterite compounds after doping/post-deposition treatment with various light and heavy alkalis, and other metals, and the corresponding improvements in solar cell performance. Furthermore, key issues associated with kesterite thin-film solar cells have been identified, and potential solutions and future directions provided. By increasing the power conversion efficiency above 15% and maintaining a low processing cost using a non-hazardous synthesis approach, kesterite compounds could make promising solar cell absorbers for practical applications, not only by converting intermittent renewable solar energy, but also triggering PV power systems in the near future.
2. Architecture of kesterite solar cell devices
CZTS solar cells consist of stacked thin-film layers deposited on conductive substrates using the substrate/absorber/buffer/widow concept, as shown in Fig. 1. The main component of the solar cell is CZTS, a semiconductor material with a suitable bandgap, that harvests and converts solar light directly into usable electricity. Generally, CZTS absorbers are grown on metallic molybdenum (Mo) grown on soda lime glass substrates, which serve as a good back contact and exhibit high temperature stability, good adhesion to the CZTS absorber layer, and resistance to alloy formation with copper (Cu).71 Other conducting substrates, such as fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) or indium-doped tin oxide (ITO) can be used. The thickness of the p-type absorber CZTS layer is in the range of 1–1.5 μm. The absorber layer is deposited either by physical or chemical deposition to obtain maximum light absorption. The deposited absorber layer is annealed under a sulfur and selenium atmosphere to improve the crystallinity. KCN etching is then performed on the sulfurized/selenized absorber compound to remove any formed secondary phase (CuxS). Two n-type semiconductors comprising a chemical bath-deposited CdS layer (50 nm) followed by a sputter-deposited intrinsic i-ZnO layer (80–100 nm) are obtained on the CZTS layer. As a possible substitute for CdS, a more eco-friendly ZnS buffer layer can be applied. The thickness of the CdS layer is kept at a minimum (40–60 nm) to decrease series resistance (RS) in the device. For electrical front contact purposes, a layer of a transparent conductive oxide (TCO), such as Al–ZnO (AZO) or ITO, is deposited. The TCO should exhibit high transmittance and high electrical conductivity. Finally, for charge extraction, ohmic Ni/Al contacts are deposited on the TCO. Usually, metal electrodes exhibiting a higher metallic work function than the semiconductor (Φm > Φs) are used.
 Fig. 1  Typical device architecture of kesterite solar cells. 
3. Overview and defect formation in kesterite compounds
Kesterites are sulfide and/or selenide compounds with formulas Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS), Cu2ZnSnSe4 (CZTSe), and Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTSSe). The first report on thermally evaporated functional CZTS solar cells by Katagiri et al. achieved a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 0.66%.41,42 However, in recent years, Se has been incorporated into CZTS to form a CZTSSe alloy with a suitable band gap of 1.13, which is a potential candidate for large-area thin-film solar cells and has provided a record PCE of 12.7%.32 The crystal structure of CZTS belongs to the I2–II–IV–VI4 quaternary material system, which can be achieved from II–VI semiconductors72 by satisfying the octet rule with the total charge remaining neutral. For example, kesterite CZTS is notionally derived from chalcopyrite CuInS2 (CIS2) by substituting two In atoms for one Zn and one Sn atom, which is further derived from sphalerite ZnS, as shown in Fig. 2a. As shown in Fig. 2b, the basic crystal structure of kesterite compounds is debated.73 The oxidation states of Cu (red), Sn (blue), Zn (green), and S and/or Se (yellow) atoms are 1+, 4+, 2+ and 2−, respectively, in stoichiometric Cu2ZnSn(Sx, Se1−x)4 compounds.74 To fabricate functional high-efficiency solar cell devices based on Cu2ZnSn(Sx, Se1−x)4 compounds, non-stoichiometric Cu-poor (Cu/(Zn + Sn) < 2) and Zn-rich (Zn/Sn > 1) films that still maintain the kesterite structure are required.
 Fig. 2  (a) Illustration of quaternary materials system from binary semiconductors and (b) kesterite unit cell with Cu (red), Zn (green), Sn (blue), and S/Se (yellow). Reprinted ref. 74 with copyright permission from ACS publication. 
3.1 Defect formation in kesterite absorbers
The optical properties of CZTS/Se compounds depends upon the amount of chalcogen incorporated. Furthermore, chalcogens have a very specific role in regulating the band gap of the compound. Sulfur incorporation widens the bandgap, while selenium incorporation narrows the bandgap. Therefore, the optical properties of the compound can be varied through precise control of the sulfur/selenium ratio. The optical properties are also enhanced by annealing treatments due to the improved crystallinity. However, internal structural defects and secondary phase formation are also prominent. Elemental losses (SnS, SnS2, SnSe, SnSe2) significantly alter the composition of the compound, which in turn affects the optical, microstructural, and electrical properties.75 Therefore, close control of annealing conditions (temperature and time) is important to maintain the optical and structural properties of the compound. In addition to the optical and structural properties of the CZTS compound, other factors, such as composition, crystal structure, and defects, are important. To employ CZTS compounds in TFSCs, the composition needs to be Cu poor and Zn rich. A Cu-rich composition imparts higher electrical conductivity to the CZTS compound, resulting in shunt losses that eventually lead to reduced solar cell performance. Therefore, precise composition control is very important. Furthermore, intrinsic defects in the compound can lead to charge trapping and recombination losses. Possible defect formations in CZTS are shown in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  Possible defect formations in kesterite compounds. 
The intrinsic structural defects are important because they significantly affect the solar cell performance. Kesterite CZTS is a p-type semiconductor with major copper vacancies (Vcu) and CuZn antisite defects. The origin of these defects depends upon the preparative growth conditions and compositional inhomogeneities. These defects are present in shallow or deep positions in the band gap (between the valence and conduction bands) and their concentration is dependent on the formation energy. The CuZn antisite defect is located at approximately 0.10 eV above the valence band maximum (VBM), whereas the Vcu is located 0.02 eV above the VBM. The latter generates a deep donor level in the band gap, causing a significant reduction in the band gap energy, which explains why CZTS must be Cu-poor and Zn-rich. The Vcu passivates the detrimental Cu2Se phase and the other deep level phase, which act as charge recombination centers to improve the solar cell efficiency. As the intrinsic structural defects significantly affect the optical and electrical properties of CZTS, defect passivation is an important aspect for consideration in further research on improving solar cell performance.
4. Deposition techniques for kesterite absorbers
Different vacuum and non-vacuum-based synthesis routes have been used to prepare kesterite absorber materials, as shown in Fig. 4. Vacuum techniques, including sputtering, coevaporation, and pulsed laser deposition (PLD), and non-vacuum techniques, including hydrazine-based methods, electrodeposition, inkjet printing, and hot injection, have been used to synthesize high-quality kesterite solar cell absorbers, as discussed below.
 Fig. 4  Various kesterite deposition techniques. 
4.1 Vacuum techniques
Techniques based on vacuum technology, such as sputtering,76,77 coevaporation,78,79 and pulsed laser deposition (PLD),80,81 are commonly used to synthesize CZTSSe thin films. Sputtering is a well-developed and commonly used technique for the deposition of CZTSSe thin films.76,77 In this method, Cu, Zn, and Sn metal films are sputtered at or near room temperature and reacted in a S and/or Se environment at high temperature, resulting in 10.4% efficiency. Clean and uniform deposition processes with high throughput of the absorber can be easily achieved using the sputtering technique. In thermal coevaporation, highly polycrystalline CZTSe thin films are directly evaporated on the Mo substrate, yielding 11.6%.78,79 Single-phase CZTSe films were formed through selenization for 30 min at temperatures in the range of 480–540 °C to achieve a high-quality device. PLD is regarded as a high-precision vacuum technique that allows detailed control of CZTS film formation, wherein high-power laser (Nd:YAG laser) pulses are focused onto a solid state target (CZTS) placed in a vacuum chamber.80,81
4.2 Non-vacuum techniques
Non-vacuum-based techniques, such as hydrazine-based,32,82 electrodeposition,38,83 inkjet printing,84,85 and hot-injection methods,39,86 have been developed. As these processes are low-cost, high-output techniques, non-vacuum-based deposition methods are being discovered as substitutes to costly vacuum-based processing techniques. As shown in Fig. 5, the current record efficiency of 12.7% for CZTSSe was achieved with a solution approach using hydrazine as solvent32,82 by optimizing the degree of In diffusion into the CdS/CZTSSe films. However, hydrazine is unsafe and hard to recycle.32 More recently, an inkjet printing technique has been used to deposit a CZTS precursor ink to demonstrate its ability to achieve good quality thin film layers, which supports the potential use of this technique for roll-to-roll solar module fabrication.84,85 Inkjet printing is a promising route for thin film deposition owing to its low material wastage and potential for high-throughput production. Lin et al.84 deposited a CZTSSe thin film absorber using inkjet printing and studied the influence of sodium on device performance. Furthermore, Colina et al.85 attempted to optimize the parameters, achieving an efficiency of 6.55% for inkjet-printed CZTSSe solar cells. The hot-injection method involves the synthesis of CZTSSe nanocrystal-based ink and has yielded outstanding PV performances beyond 9% PCE,39,86–88 which is comparable to those produced using vacuum-based techniques. Table 1 shows the deposition techniques employed and recorded power conversion efficiencies of above 10% for kesterite solar cells.
 Fig. 5  (a) Top view and (b) cross-sectional view SEM images of a sister CZTSSe film; (c) J–V characteristics of a device with record 12.6% efficiency using an antireflection coating (ARC). Reprinted from ref. 24 with copyright permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) J–V characteristics of a best-performing double-emitter solar cell with 12.7% efficiency obtained by in-house measurement. Reprinted from ref. 32 with copyright permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Table 1 Deposition techniques and record PCEs above 10% of kesterite solar cells




Deposition technique
Absorber–buffer configuration
PCE%
Reference




Hydrazine + selenization
CZTSSe–CdS
12.6

24



Hydrazine + selenization
CZTSSe–/In2S3/CdS
12.7

32



Sputtering
CZTSSe
13.8

48



Co-evaporation
CZTSe
11.6

78





4.3 Present drawbacks of kesterite-based solar cells
Various factors affect the performance of kesterite-based thin-film solar cells. These factors include the kesterite microstructural, compositional, structural, optical, and electrical properties. These factors are interrelated and, as such, any small change in a single property can cause major changes in the overall compound properties. Controlling the kesterite composition is vital. Ideally, for efficient performance, the composition should be copper-poor and zinc-rich. If the composition is copper-rich, the compound conductivity is increased, resulting in an increased shunt loss. The microstructure of the CZTS compound should be smooth and compact. If the microstructure is porous, it enhances the probability of charge recombination at the grain boundaries, eventually resulting in reduced solar-cell performance. The existence of a multi-element system and the smaller single-phase region is responsible for the formation of secondary phases in the CZTS compound. Therefore, the formation of a single-phase CZTS compound is difficult. In addition to the narrow phase stability region, CZTS compounds exhibit an additional drawback of lower thermal stability. Above some specific temperature (400 °C), CZTS becomes unstable due to forming binary (SnS, SnS2, CuS, Cu2S) and ternary (Cu2SnS3, Cu3SnS4 and Cu4SnS4) secondary phases. These secondary phases hamper the morphological, structural, and electrical properties. The secondary phases either increase or decrease the carrier concentration, which affects the electrical properties and, therefore, the performance of CZTS solar cells. The deleterious effect of secondary phases is also demonstrated by the formation of deep and shallow structural defects, resulting in charge recombination losses. Therefore, the performance of CZTS-based solar cells is strongly influenced by secondary phases. Furthermore, back contact interface problems are also important. The formation of a MoS2 layer at the absorber/back contact interface restricts the charge carriers, resulting in increased series resistance in the solar cell device. Therefore, controlling the MoS2 layer at the absorber/back contact interface is important. Furthermore, the performance of the kesterite CZTS compound is influenced by electrically activated defects, such as voltage deficit (VOC deficit). This VOC deficit is caused by interface recombination and/or band tailing due to electrostatic fluctuations, which eventually results in a lower minority carrier lifetime. Therefore, the aforementioned factors clearly influence the performance of CZTS solar cells. Simultaneous control of these factors is challenging and considered a drawback of CZTS-based solar cells that is deserving of further research to achieve performance comparable to Si and CIGS solar cells. An important future research strategy for overcoming these drawbacks is to focus on understanding the phase stability, the relationship between processing parameters and device performance, and the formation of single-phase compounds. Another possible strategy to overcome these drawbacks is element doping into kesterite compounds. Various elements (Ge, Sb, Ag) including alkali elements (Li, Na, and K) can be doped into kesterite compounds. These elements enhance the optical, electrical, structural, and morphological properties of CZTS compounds. Furthermore, using optimal amounts of dopant elements and combinations of various dopant elements in kesterite compounds can be used to enhance the electrical/microstructural and defect passivation properties to obtain improved solar cell performance.
5. Overview of alkali doping in kesterite compounds
Na-doping into absorber compounds has resulted in beneficial and harmful effects on the solar electrical performance. For example, Na-doping into chalcopyrite Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGSe) improved the solar cell performance, while Na-doping into CdTe-based thin film solar cells resulted in deteriorated performance.89 The reduced performance of CdTe solar cells was attributed to the disrupted morphological structure of the absorber compound and changes in the properties of the transparent conducting oxide (TCO). Therefore, Na-doping in CdTe-based thin film solar cells was concluded to have a negative impact and should be avoided. However, in the case of CZTS-based solar cells, Na-doping enhanced the electrical conductivity and grain size, and provided solar cell performance similar to that of CuInSe2 films.90–93 Therefore, Na-doping in CZTS-based thin film solar cells has received significant research attention. Multiple strategies for sodium incorporation into absorber compounds, such as Na diffusion from the glass substrate and employing Na-based precursors, have been adopted.94–96 Usually, Mo-deposited soda lime glass (SLG) substrate is used as the back contact in thin-film solar cells. During the sulfurization process (500–600 °C), Na from the SLG becomes mobile and diffuses into the absorber compound through the Mo layer. The exact mechanism of Na diffusion in CZTS remains unclear. However, based on literature reports of Na-doped CIGS solar cells, it was concluded that Na diffusion from the SLG proceeded through Na+ ions, along with the counter diffusion of positively charged ions to maintain charge balance,97 as shown in Fig. 6. The mechanism responsible for diffusion was a H+/Na+ ion-exchange process.98,99 The Na+ ion source was Na2O present in the glass, while the H+ ion source was the Mo layer incorporated during air exposure. As the annealing treatment proceeded, Na from the SLG diffused through the Mo layer via oxygenated grain boundaries. Notably, other elements (Si, Ca, Mg, K, Al, Fe, S) present in the SLG can also diffuse along with Na, which may or may not collectively positively impact the absorber properties. Therefore, several reports have reported inconsistent results regarding the positive impact of Na doping.80–83,100–103 Although SLG has low cost, exhibits higher thermal stability, and is widely employed as a Na source, it still has some limitations. It remains unclear how the amount of Na doping can be controlled and reproduced. Furthermore, the Mo layer over SLG also affects the Na diffusion process. The Mo oxidation state and its physical properties are known to regulate the diffusion process.89 Therefore, Mo properties should also be considered in studies focusing on Na doping through diffusion from SLG.
 Fig. 6  Schematic representation of the model, explaining Na diffusion from SLG. Prior to absorber growth, the Mo boundaries are oxidized and the layer stores H+ ions. During absorber growth, Na+ ion diffusion from the glass into the CIGS is countered by H+ diffusion into the glass substrate. Reprinted from ref. 89 with copyright permission from Elsevier. 
Another strategy for incorporating Na diffusion into absorber compounds involves simply placing an SLG substrate over the absorber (CZTS) film during the annealing treatment. In the study conducted by Yang et al.104 for Na doping in CZTS, a similar strategy was adopted. Na successfully diffused in the CZTS from the top SLG and as well as from the bottom Mo/SLG substrate. Such a simple and cost-effective strategy can be employed for an efficient Na doping. Another effective strategy is to employ MoNa as a back contact layer. This approach was first tested by Granath et al.105 for CIGS solar cells in which the Na was ion-implanted into the Mo layer. This resulted in effective diffusion of Na into the absorber layer. A similar approach can be employed in CZTS solar cells. The Na concentration in the MoNa layer is important for realizing incremental effects. Studies based on Na concentrations varying from 2 to 15 at% in MoNa were conducted, with 10 at% Na found to be optimal. Furthermore, the results of Blösch et al.106,107 indicated that Na diffuses through the internal intermediate grain boundaries between MoNa layers and, therefore, that the MoNa microstructure plays a key role in influencing the diffusion process. Employing multiple stack layers of MoNa can enhance the diffusion process into the absorber compound. Therefore, the approach of Na diffusion from Mo/SLG or MoNa layers into the absorber compound is effective, but still suffers from diffusion concentration control problems.
Another strategy through which alkali metal (Na or K) can be incorporated into the absorber compound is achieved by employing Na/K compound-based precursors.108–111 Usually, during absorber layer growth, elemental Na, Na2S, Na2S, NaBr, NaCl, NaI, NaF, KF, and KCl have been used. The precise control of alkaline precursors is important. When employing NaF precursor in CIGS solar cells, a thickness of 10 nm was found to be optimal. Below a thickness of 10 nm, the fabricated solar cell had a low VOC, while above a thickness of 20 nm, the cell performance degraded due to peeling of the absorber layer during CdS deposition. Furthermore, according to reported studies,112,113 alkaline metal diffusion is influenced by processing conditions (annealing temperature and time). Therefore, a stable precursor source must be used to efficiently control diffusion. Despite the improvements realized by alkali doping in thin-film solar cells, the fundamental mechanism responsible for improved effects is uncertain. Therefore, further detailed studies are required to uncover the underlying chemistry.
6. Impact of alkali doping on CZTS properties
Clearly, alkali metal doping into CZTS had a significant impact on the electrical, optical, structural, and microstructural properties. In work conducted by Laghfour et al.,114 the impact of Na content on the structural and optical properties of sol–gel-processed CZTS films was performed. NaCl was used as the Na source in CZTS solution and using contents of 0%, 10%, 20%, and 30% (NaCl/CZTS molar ratio). The film was then sulfurized at 500 °C for 1 h to obtain the desired crystallinity. As shown in the XRD spectra in Fig. 7, the prominent (112) plane peak was observed in all cases, except for the film prepared using a Na concentration of 10%, which exhibited a higher peak intensity indicating enhanced crystallinity. For higher Na concentrations above 10%, the intensity was reduced, indicating reduced film crystallinity due to detrimental effects emerging from higher Na concentrations. Therefore, the optimum concentration of Na dopant in the CZTS film was concluded to enhance the film crystallinity. Furthermore, the optical bandgap was reduced from 1.45 eV for undoped CZTS film to 1.34 eV for Na-doped (30%) CZTS film. The decrease in bandgap with increasing Na concentration was attributed to Na-induced defects present in the CZTS crystal structure. Therefore, Na doping into the CZTS thin film at optimum concentration enhanced the crystallinity and reduced the bandgap, which was beneficial for realizing high-efficiency solar cells.
 Fig. 7  XRD patterns of thin-film CZTS doped with Na (10%, 20%, and 30%). Undoped CZTS is used as reference. Reprinted from ref. 114 with copyright permission from Elsevier. 
In addition to structural and optical properties, Na doping also influenced the microstructure of the CZTS film. The effect of varying Na concentration on the microstructural properties of CZTS film was studied by Sun et al.115 In the study, Cu, Zn, and Sn precursors were sputter-deposited on stainless steel substrate followed by sputtering with a NaF layer. Different NaF layer thicknesses of 0, 10, and 20 nm were used, and their effect on the microstructure and solar cell performance was evaluated. As shown in the FESEM images in Fig. 8, the undoped CZTS film exhibited a non-uniform and smaller grain-sized morphology. For films deposited with NaF, significant changes in the microstructure were observed. The film deposited with 10 nm-thick NaF exhibited a relatively smooth, compact, and large grain-sized morphology. However, for the film deposited with a higher NaF thickness (20 nm), the morphology deteriorated, with the grain-sized decreasing and the morphology becoming porous, resulting in larger grain boundaries (higher charge recombination). A similarly reduced grain size was observed with excess Na doping, as reported by Wen et al.116 The fabricated solar cell with 10 nm-thick Na-doped CZTS film exhibited an improved efficiency of 4.10% compared with 3.07% for that using the undoped film. Meanwhile, 20 nm-thick Na-doped CZTS film showed a reduced efficiency of 2.78% owing to microstructure deterioration originating from the higher Na doping. Therefore, optimum Na doping clearly enhanced the microstructure regarding improved grain size, enhanced film compactness, and smooth texture. Furthermore, Na forms a desirable ‘spike-like’ structure at grain boundaries, which effectively repels holes and attracts electrons to promote efficient charge transfer. Several studies have reported that Na doping increases the carrier concentration suitable for enhancing the efficiency. However, increased carrier concentration beyond a certain limit reduces the mobility, which affects solar cell performance. Therefore, effectively controlling the carrier concentration through regulated Na concentration is vital. Therefore, Na doping in CZTS is beneficial for improving the optical, structural, electrical, and microstructural properties.
 Fig. 8  FESEM images of CZTS films with (a) 0 nm NaF, (b) 10 nm NaF, and (c) 20 nm NaF on a stainless steel substrate. Reprinted from ref. 115 with copyright permission from Elsevier. 
Formation of the MoS2 layer at the absorber/MoSLG interface during sulfurization is inherent and difficult to control. A MoS2 layer of up to 100–150 nm is acceptable because it forms an ohmic contact. However, if the MoS2 layer thickness increases above 150 nm, it introduces series resistance in the solar cell and reduces efficiency. Therefore, controlling the thickness of the MoS2 layer is important. As a possible strategy to reduce the MoS2 layer thickness, Yang et al.117 annealed the Mo/SLG substrate under a N2 atmosphere in the temperature range of 180–550 °C for 10 min. This resulted in the diffusion of Na from SLG into the Mo layer and the formation of molybdenum oxide due to the presence of compounds such as SiO2, Na2O, CaO, and Al2O3 in SLG as rich oxygen sources. The diffused Na and formed molybdenum oxide suppressed the MoS2 layer and reduced the defect density in the absorber compound. X-ray diffraction was conducted to analyze the formation of MoS2117 due to the reaction between Mo and S (produced by sulfurization), as shown in Fig. 9. The MoS2 intensity was found to have an inverse relation with the Mo annealing temperature. Therefore, Na doping also proved to be beneficial for controlling MoS2 layer formation and defect passivation, reflecting its diverse role in CZTS compounds.
 Fig. 9  XRD patterns of annealed Mo back-contact samples after sulfurization at 570 °C for 30 min. The MoS2 (101) peak intensity decreased as the Mo annealing temperature increased. Reprinted from ref. 117 with copyright permission from Wiley Online Library and Progress in Photovoltaics. 
Similar to Na doping, K doping has had positive effects on CZTS thin-film solar cells due to enhancing carrier collection and passivating recombination at the front interface. Various reports have shown the impact of K doping on CZTS film in terms of enhanced grain size, improved film crystallinity, increased carrier concentration, and suppressed secondary phases.21,53 However, as literature on K doping in CZTS is very limited, the exact role of K in enhancing solar cell performance remains quite unclear. In a recent study conducted by Li et al.,56 the effect of K doping in CZTSSe solar cells was investigated. CZTSSe films were prepared using the sol–gel technique, and K doping was accomplished by simply mixing KCl solution into the absorber precursor solution, followed by annealing in selenium atmosphere at 560 °C for 10 min. The K concentration was varied from 0–1.5 mol% to evaluate its effect on the CZTSSe properties and the corresponding solar cell performance. Fig. 10 shows FESEM images of the CZTSSe film obtained from varying the K concentration. Undoped CZTSSe film exhibited a smooth and large grain-sized morphology with sizes in the range of 0.5–2 μm, while K-doped CZTSSe films exhibited faceted and smaller grain-sized morphologies (0.5–1 μm). The difference in grain size was attributed to the reaction kinetics of the alkali-Se compound during annealing. Furthermore, the bilayer structure of the film (top layer of larger grains and bottom layer of sparsely packed smaller grains), as seen in the cross-sectional images, was attributed to the carbon residue from the solvent.
 Fig. 10  Plan-view SEM images of CZTSSe thin films with (a) 0, (c) 0.5, (e) 1.0, and (g) 1.5 mol% K doping and cross-section images of CZTSSe devices with (b) 0, (d) 0.5, (f) 1.0, and (h) 1.5 mol% K doping. All thin films and devices were taken at 560 °C for 30 min. Reprinted from ref. 56 with copyright permission from ACS Publications. 
7. Impact of Ge doping/alloying on kesterite films
The enhanced open circuit voltage (VOC) and improved charge collection and transport properties achieved by fine-tuning the Ga/[Ga + In] ratio resulted in a maximum attainable efficiency of 21.7% for CIGSe TFSC.118 The partial replacement of In with Ga reduced the unit cell size, which widened the bandgap and eventually resulted in an enhanced VOC. Such a similar approach of cationic incorporation was adopted in CZTS/Se solar cells to improve the power conversion efficiency. In particular, Ge element alloying in CZTS/Se was found to be beneficial because it effectively replaced cationic tin (Sn) and reduced recombination losses.62 Multivalent Sn undergoes oxidation from Sn2+ to Sn4+ state, which reduces the device stability/performance.119,120 In contrast, the Ge4+ state is more stable for restoring solar cell performance, and Ge has a similar crustal abundance to that of Sn. Furthermore, Ge-doped CZTSe exhibits a smaller interaction parameter (5.6 mV per atom) than pristine CZTSSe (5.6 mV per atom) suitable for forming a stable alloy compound.63 Therefore, Ge doping into CZTS/Se-based solar cells has proven to be a judicious choice in terms of incurred cost, compatibility, and improved performance.
Ge doping improves the solar cell performance by enhancing the optical and microstructural properties of the compound. The bandgap can be varied (1.2–2.5 eV) by adjusting the Ge/[Ge + Sn] compositional ratio.121 When Ge is doped into CZTS/Se compounds, the Ge-4s atoms displace Sn-5s atoms, which leads to increased s–s and s–p orbital repulsion between Ge–S and Sn–S. The repulsion of Ge–S bonding was higher than that of Sn–S bonding, which increased the conduction band to a higher energy state from the Fermi level, eventually resulting in the compound having an increased band gap. Therefore, close control of the bandgap through optimizing the Ge/[Ge + Sn] compositional ratio was vital. Lokhande et al.122 reported a reduction in the bandgap of Ge-doped CZTS/Se film from 1.25–1.01 eV by reducing Ge/[Ge + Sn] compositional ratio from 0.132 to 0.078 (Fig. 11). A similarly reduced bandgap with decreasing Ge/[Ge + Sn] compositional ratio has been observed in several reports.119,121 Notably, Ge loss during annealing treatment was significant due to the vapor pressure of Ge being relatively low. Therefore, fluctuations in the composition of Ge-doped CZTS/Se films were induced, which might affect their power conversion efficiency.122 Therefore, various reports have suggested using GeS2 or GeSe2 pellets during annealing treatment to compensate for Ge loss.63,64
 Fig. 11  Schematic representation of band gap variation with varying Ge content in CZTGeSSe. Reprinted from ref. 122 with copyright permission from Elsevier. 
The morphology is another factor that is directly influenced by Ge doping. Several reports have concluded that Ge doping improves the morphology of CZTS/Se films by producing a highly crystalline and compact morphology.62,118–120,123 Ge doping favors liquid-phase assisted growth. During annealing treatment (500–550 °C), the GeS/Se2 liquid phase was highly dominant in the CZTS/Se film. This liquid phase served as a flux for high-density atomic transport, resulting in the formation of a large grain-sized morphology with a smooth texture (Fig. 12).64,122 Furthermore, in the study conducted by Saucedo et al.,124 it was concluded that Ge formed Ge-oxide nano-inclusions in the CZTSe film, which promoted large grain formation suitable for fabricating high-efficiency thin film solar cells. Therefore, the Ge doping approach has proved beneficial in CZTS/Se films.
 Fig. 12  Cross-sectional image of solar cell devices consisting of a SLG/Mo/MoSe2/CZTSSe(Ge-x)/In2S3/ZnO/ITO structure: (a) CZTSSe and (b) CZTSSe(Ge-3) device structures are depicted. Reprinted from ref. 62 with copyright permission from ACS Publications. 
As mentioned earlier, the cationic Ge/[Ge + Sn] compositional ratio is vital. A lower Ge/[Ge + Sn] compositional ratio may not sufficiently impart the positive effects, while a higher Ge/[Ge + Sn] compositional ratio may have detrimental effects on the film. Therefore, an optimum Ge/[Ge + Sn] compositional ratio is necessary to realize the doping effect. A Ge/[Ge + Sn] compositional ratio of between 0.4 and 0.1 has been suggested to deliver superior performance in terms of enhanced properties and improved solar cell power conversion efficiencies.63,118,120,122 Some of the reported efficiencies along with the Ge/[Ge + Sn] compositional ratios are shown in Table 2.
Table 2 Reported power conversion efficiencies and corresponding Ge/[Ge + Sn] compositional ratios




Ge/[Ge + Sn]
PCE (%)
Reference




0.3
9.4

120



0.2
11

123



0.2
12.3

63



0.1
6.09

62



0.124
3.82

122



0.05
2

125





Various chemical and physical techniques have been employed to fabricate Ge-doped CZTS/Se solar cells.63,118,120,122,124,125 Chemical technique-based nanoparticle and spray-deposition methods have obtained efficiencies of up to 9.4%120 and 11%,123 respectively, while physical techniques such as pulsed laser deposition (PLD), sputtering, and co-evaporation have also been employed. Saucedo et al. introduced a superficial 10 nm-thick Ge layer over CZTSe film through co-evaporation and obtained a power conversion efficiency of 10.1%.124 The highest obtained efficiency was 12.3%, along with a JSC of 32.2 mA cm−2 and VOC of 0.527 V, using Ge-doped CZTSe films using a co-evaporation method,63 which was quite close to the record reported CZTSe solar cell efficiency (12.6%). In most reported studies, the improved performance of the Ge-doped kesterite solar cells was mainly attributed to the enhanced VOC originating from the large grain-sized morphology formed. The literature shows that a large grain-sized morphology accompanied with smooth texture resulted in reduced charged-recombination losses and improved charge-separation capabilities. Furthermore, the enlarged grain size significantly improved the carrier diffusion length and charge lifetime, which were beneficial for delivering improved power conversion efficiencies.
8. Impact of alkali and other metal dopants on device performance
Electronic and optical properties can be tuned by impurities in Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS). By tuning the electronic and optical properties, the efficiency of the photovoltaic device may decrease. To investigate the effect of foreign dopants when pairing atoms and lattices, the phonon dispersion susceptibility can be used as a criterion.127 Sarswat et al. used a bath containing ions of interest (Cu2+, Zn2+, Sn2+, and Sb2+) to grow thin antimony-doped CZTS films electrochemically on a fluorinated tin oxide (FTO). A Gamry Instruments reference 600 potentiostat operated by virtual front panel software with a three-electrode cell has been used to perform co-electrodeposition. A 50 mL electrolyte solution containing copper sulfate pentahydrate, tin chloride, zinc sulfate, and antimony trichloride has been used to synthesize a zinc–copper–tin–antimony alloy. Potassium sodium tartrate has been used as a complexing or chelating agent to keep the electrode potentials of different metal ions similar to each other for controlling the preferential electroplating. The potential used for conducting electrodeposition was −1.6 V and the time was limited to 160–180 s to obtain a 1–1.5 μm thick as-deposited film. Electrodeposited films were cured in a tube furnace at 550 °C for 2 h under an evaporated sulfur environment for sulfurization. Ag and Fe-doped CZTS films were deposited using the same procedure. Experiments were also conducted with CZTS films without Sb doping.126 Atomic force microscopy (AFM) analysis, as shown in Fig. 13, confirmed that the grain boundaries of Sb-doped CZTS film were more conductive than those of CZTS thin films. Sb-doping has also improved the uniformity and size of CZTS grain boundaries.126
 Fig. 13  Atomic force micrographs of doped and undoped CZTS samples: (a, b) topographic maps of (a) doped and (b) undoped CZTS samples; (c) electrostatic charge map of Sb-doped CZTS thin film; (d, e) low-magnification topographic map of (d) doped and (e) undoped CZTS samples; (f, g) current map of (f) doped and (g) undoped CZTS samples; (h, i) current map overlaid with topography for (h) doped and (i) undoped CZTS samples. Reprinted from ref. 126 with copyright permission from Elsevier. 
Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTSSe) thin film absorbers were fabricated by Lin et al. in 2015, using a four-step solution process, as shown in Fig. 14. The group used precursors ZnS, SnS, and Cu3SnS4. The fabricated absorber film has been applied to thin-film solar cells. In this work, the resulting morphologies of CZTSSe thin films influenced by the ligand-exchange process was studied. Film cracking was avoided by combining ligand-exchanged and non-ligand-exchanged processes, which occurred due to ligand exchange with each sequential spun coat layers. More homogeneous films were found to form when using a two-step annealing process. Accordingly, a large grain and fine nanoparticle grain layered structured CZTSSe film was obtained. The layered structure was probably formed due to the presence of a high carbon content, which was near to the back contact and resulted from the diffusion of Cu and Zn out of the bottom layer to the surface. Accordingly, an increase in efficiency from 1.2% to 3.0% was obtained. This was attributed to the adoption of this two-step process. Furthermore, temperature-dependent I–V analysis showed that the dominant loss mechanism of the solar cells was due to the strong CZTSSe and CdS buffer interface recombination.128
 Fig. 14  Schematic diagram showing the preparation process for CZTSSe thin films. Reprinted from ref. 128 with copyright permission from Elsevier. 
Observations confirmed that cracks were present in the resulting CZTSSe thin films, which were prepared by ligand exchange with (NH4)2S to obtain spin-coated CZTS precursor layers. When ligand-exchange and non-ligand-exchange processes were combined, a crack-free CZTSSe thin film absorber was achieved. By annealing the precursor films in a Se-containing environment, a double-layered structure was formed with a homogeneous large grain layer at the top and a fine grain layer at the bottom. The formation of a layered structure was important because it favors the existence of a high carbon content in the fine grains.69,129,130 These fine grains containing carbon serve as growth points for nanoparticles and are highly rich in Sn. Using CZTSSe fabricated by ligand-exchange as an absorber in a solar cell has been reported to show no efficiency. This was due to the formation of cracks in the film. In contrast, CZTSSe films formed by the combination of ligand-exchange and non-ligand-exchange showed 1% efficiency. When the two-step deposition and annealing processes for the CZTSSe absorber layer were further optimized, the solar cell efficiency was increased to 3% (Tables 3 and 4).
Table 3 Detailed preparation parameters of CZTSSe samples with different deposition procedures. Reprinted from ref. 128 with copyright permission from Elsevier




Sample
Precursors
No. of layers
Annealing conditions
Ligand-exchange with 0.04 M (NH4)2S MeOH solution for around 30 s


Time (min)

T (°C)
Atmosphere




A
0.67 mmol CTS, 1.37 mmol ZnS, and 0.45 mmol SnS
4
25
580
Ar–Se
All four layers


B
5
First four spin-coated layers


C
4
First spin-coated layer


D
0.67 mmol CTS, 1.45 mmol ZnS, and 0.65 mmol SnS
3
5
Only for the first two spin-coated layers


2
25
Only for the last spin-coated layer




Table 4 Device characteristics of the best solar cells from samples A, B, C, and D. Reprinted from ref. 128 with copyright permission from Elsevier




Sample
Illuminated
Dark



V
OC (mV)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)

η (%)

J
oo (mA cm−2)

R
S (Ω cm2)

R
shunt (Ω cm2)




A
8.1
0.9
25.0
0.0
1.46
2.67
2


B
212.4
13.8
34.2
1.0
0.36
2.30
109


C
198.6
16.8
34.9
1.2
0.61
1.28
30


D
306.5
27.5
35.0
3.0
0.22
2.25
449




Studies reported by different groups have shown that, to achieve CZTSSe solar cells with high efficiency, the absorbing layer should have improved grain crystallinity, inhibited secondary-phase formation, controlled defect generation, adequate Na content, and band gap grading.131 In 2016, Yang et al. used SeS2 as a potential chalcogenide source material for controlling the S and Se contents in CZTSSe absorbers. The group studied the effects of different contents on the absorbing layer.34 Using an appropriate SeS2/Se weight ratio, band gap grading was realized within the depletion region. Accordingly, an increase in the VOC value was achieved through bandgap grading in the depletion region, affording a record VOC deficit of 0.576 V. Furthermore, the JSC was enhanced. Yang et al. achieved 12.3% efficiency for the CZTSSe solar cell by introducing chalcogenization source material SeS2 during the annealing process, as shown in Fig. 15.34
 Fig. 15  Device characteristics of CZTSSe solar cells: (a) current density–voltage curves under a simulated AM 1.5 G spectrum and illumination of 100 mW cm−2 (1 sun) produced by a solar simulator; (b) EQEs at a bias of 0 V and calculated band gaps (inset). Reprinted from ref. 34 with copyright permission from Elsevier. 
For the large-scale deposition of various metal oxides, sulfides, and chalcogenides, a non-vacuum and cost-effective method electrostatic spray-assisted vapor deposition (ESAVD) was developed by Altamura et al. Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 (CZTSSe) absorber was deposited by ESVAD. To enhance the photovoltaic efficiency, various alkali metals, including Na, Li and Rb, were introduced into CZTSSe. Photovoltaic cell Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/iZnO/Al:ZnO/Ni/Al was fabricated and the PCE was measured. Li-, Na-, and Rb-incorporation were found to increase the PCE of CZTS devices to 5.5%. A further efficiency enhancement to 6.3% was obtained by adding thiourea, which improved the quality of the absorber/buffer interface.132 A statistical study showed that incorporating Li, Rb, and Na helped increase the grain size of the absorber and prevent secondary phase formation, which is harmful for PV performance.133 To incorporate the alkali elements experimentally, the CZTS precursors were exposed to dopants in solution. This was performed before selenization annealing. Before HCl + thiourea treatment of the CZTSSe absorber, the efficiencies were reported to be 4.8%, 5.7%, and 5.5% for Li-, Rb-, and Na-incorporation, respectively.132,134 After HCl + thiourea treatment, Altamura et al. observed that the PCE had increased to 6.0%, 6.2%, and 6.35% for Li, Na, and Rb, respectively, as shown in Fig. 16.
 Fig. 16  
J–V characteristics of best-performing Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/TCO/Ni/Al solar cells for samples with alkali elements (A = Li, B = Rb, and C = Na) after thiourea treatment. Reprinted from ref. 132 with copyright permission from Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. 
Jiang et al. obtained a maximum efficiency of 6.9% for the solar cell shown in Fig. 17, which was based on the electrodeposited Cu2ZnSnS4-based thin film. In this absorber layer, a Cd-free In2S3 buffer layer was applied using rapid post-heat treatment. Owing to post-heating of the In2S3/Cu2ZnSnS4 stack, the acceptor density of the Cu2ZnSnS4 layer close to the In2S3/Cu2ZnSnS4 hetero-interface was shown to increase. Furthermore, a redshift from 1.47 to 1.40 eV was noted for Cu2ZnSnS4 and attributed to In diffusion.135
 Fig. 17  (a) Scanning capacitance microscopy (SCM) measurements and (b) J–V curve for the device with energy diagram (inset). Reprinted from ref. 135 with copyright permission from ACS Publications. 
Owing to the external quantum efficiency response of the solar cell being extended to the long wavelength region, the solar cell based on the post-heated In2S3/Cu2ZnSnS4 stack reached an appreciably large JSC current density of more than 20 mA cm−2. The energy difference between the conduction band minimum of In2S3 and that of Cu2ZnSnS4 at the In2S3/Cu2ZnSnS4 hetero-interface was determined to be a slightly positive value of 0.11 eV, indicating the formation of a “notch-type” conduction band offset for efficient suppression of the interface recombination.136 As In2S3 was more transparent than CdS, the EQE response in the short wavelength spectrum was enhanced. At the hetero-interface of In2S3–Cu2ZnSnS4, a marked increase in acceptor concentration was observed, which was attributed to the replacement of Sn by In in the Cu2ZnSnS4 layer. The authors reported that further optimization of In2S3 into the Cu2ZnSnS4 to fabricate a heterojunction In2S3–Cu2ZnSnS4 played an important role in overcoming the currently saturated efficiencies of the standard pure sulfide Cu2ZnSnS4-based solar cell.137,138
Different groups have reported that the CZTS/CZTSSe solar cell efficiency increases due to doping with alkaline metals. Recently, Tong et al. broke the record for solar cell efficiency with sodium doping by doping CZTS with potassium, as shown in Fig. 18. The authors showed that K incorporation into CZTS enhanced the (112) orientation, increased the grain size, and reduced second phase ZnS. After K-doping, the JSC had increased and VOC decreased, which indicated a decrease in the Rs, as shown in Fig. 19. Accordingly, an increased solar cell efficiency was obtained.21,53 Tong et al. applied a different K concentration to fabricate CZTS thin films using a facile solution method, as shown in Fig. 19. Using this method, the preferred (112) orientation and crystallinity of CZTS films obtained were enhanced and the second ZnS phase was markedly reduced.53,139,140 These results for doping alkaline elements into the absorber layer opens up an important and promising route for preparing CZTS thin film solar cells with high conversion efficiency.
 Fig. 18  (a) Surface images of CZTS thin films with different K-doping concentrations; (b) cross-sections of CZTS thin-film solar cells with different K-doping concentrations (Mo glass/CZTS/CdS/ZnO/ITO). Reprinted from ref. 53 with copyright permission from AIP publisher. 
 Fig. 19  (a) J–V characteristics and (b) EQE curves of solar cells with different K-doped CZTS thin films. Open-circuit voltage (VOC), short circuit current density (JSC), efficiency (g), fill factor (FF), and series resistance (Rs) are given. Reprinted from ref. 53 with copyright permission from AIP publisher. 
In the present approach, dopants are added to the active layer to use the best active materials to enhance the solar cell conversion efficiency. For CuInSe2-based solar cells, dopants such as Sb have shown better effects on the active layer quality141–150 and, in turn, have increased the conversion efficiency.141–144 Zhang et al. have used calculation methods to determine the effects of Sb when doped in Cu2ZnSnS4 using a combinatory method in which the formation energy and charge transition level are coupled to achieve the optimal investigation, as shown in Fig. 20. Point defects, namely antisites and intersites, created by Sb doping have been studied and explained.65 When the Sb concentration is low, the formation energy at Tin (Sn) sites was observed to be lowest (Cu-poor), which introduced deep defect levels above the valence band with a maximum of 1.1 eV. The introduction of this type of defect is harmful to an improved performance. In contrast, when the Sb concentration was increased to a certain point, the valence band value dropped to 0.5 eV, which aided photocurrent enhancement.
 Fig. 20  Calculated absorption coefficients for Sb-doped CZTS (solid lines) and CZTS (dashed lines) with two Sb atoms in a 64-atom supercell. Red and black lines represent absorption coefficients perpendicular (xx) and parallel (zz) to the c-axis. Reprinted from ref. 65 with copyright permission from Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The sulfurization of sputtered CZTS has been shown to have a significant impact on material quality. Owing to sulfurization at 600 °C, the carrier lifetime increased. The outward diffusion of Mo has been shown to form a rich Mo-based CZTS film. The interfacial layers formed are MoSx and Mo-rich CZTS. The sulfurization temperature is among the main parameters for controlling the composition at the interface. Device performance was strongly linked to Mo outward diffusion. Heat treatment at 600 °C resulted in a significant decrease in series resistance and enhancement in shunt resistance. This was mainly due to a decrease in recombination points at the active/ETM/ETL interfaces. CZTS-Mo heat-treated at 600 °C improved the efficiency five-fold compared with that treated at 500 °C. A CZTS layer of ∼550 nm grown by sputtering gave an η value of ∼4.2%.151 Sulfurization has proven useful for CZTS film owing to charge transfer between the layers, such as CZTS and Mo, being improved. This was caused by a decrease in series reduction. As shown in Fig. 21, a decrease in the impurity concentration at the junction led to increased shunt resistance and a reduced chance of recombination, which helped increase the efficiency five-fold compared to the sulfurized CZTS layer device treated at 500 °C.152–154
 Fig. 21  Cross-sectional SEM images of solar cell devices AZO/i-ZnO/CdS/CZTS/Mo/glass: (a, b) CZTS layers (550 nm) sulfurized at (a) 500 °C and (b) 600 °C; (c, d) CZTS layers (650 nm) sulfurized at (c) 500 °C and (d) 600 °C. Respective cross-sections of the MoSx interface layer (IL) obtained using focused ion beam milling (FIB) for each of the images in (a–d), as highlighted by the red box shown to the right, to determine the IL thickness. Reprinted from ref. 154 with copyright permission from Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. 
Saha et al. have studied the effect of CZTS thickness on efficiency after mixing with Ag. Changes in the parameters such as VOC, FF, JSC, and efficiency with increasing thickness of the absorber layer, ACZTS, are shown in Fig. 22, which showed that VOC and ACZTS thickness were directly proportionality. Owing to the logarithmic dependence, VOC changed monotonically from 50–300 nm and then stayed constant in the range 300–550 nm. However, the increase in thickness from 550 nm upwards resulted in strong recombination and decreased VOC.66
 Fig. 22  Variation of (a) open circuit (VOC), (b) short circuit current density (JSC), (c) fill factor (FF), and (d) efficiency (h) with increasing ACZTS thickness. Reprinted from ref. 66 with copyright permission from Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. 
For the solar cell consisting of CdS/ACZTS/CZTS (n/p/p+), the optimal ACZTS thickness was 550 nm, which achieved an efficiency of 17.59% with a back contact of ITO, as shown in Fig. 23.
 Fig. 23  (a) EQE and (b) J–V characteristics of optimized cell with 550 nm ACZTS. Reprinted from ref. 66 with copyright permission from Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. 
Kim et al.63 demonstrated the effect of Ge doping on CZTSSe solar cell performance, achieving a PCE of up to 12.3%, a VOC-deficit of 0.583 V, and a FF of 0.73 for the CZTGeSe device, as shown in Fig. 24. The improved VOC-deficit was mainly due to the reduced band tailing obtained by controlling the Ge/(Sn + Se) ratio. Reduced carrier recombination at the absorber/buffer interface and/or in the SCR resulted in an improved FF.
 Fig. 24  
J–V characterization of CZTGSe thin film solar cell with 12.3% efficiency. Reprinted from ref. 63 with copyright permission from IOP Publishing. 
9. Conclusions and outlook
In this review, we have summarized the current state-of-the-art in kesterite technology and summarized the impact of alkali and other metal dopants on crystal structure, optical, electrical, and microstructural properties, and solar cell performance. As shown throughout, alkali and other metal dopants significantly affect the basic electrical and optical properties of kesterite thin-film-based solar cells. Doping with alkali and other metals can passivate lattice defects without changing the kesterite structure, and can reduce the diode quality factor and reverse the saturation current to improve device performance. Kesterite devices showed increased open circuit potentials (VOC), fill factor (FF) values, and short-circuit current densities (JSC) through post-deposition of alkali and related metals, with some properties that were strongly dependent on the type of alkali metal species. The maximum efficiency improvement in kesterite solar cells was obtained for Na-doped CZTSSe absorber. Preparative procedures for alkali and other metal doping in kesterite and a brief description of characterization were also presented. Among alkali metals, Na seems to be the most promising dopant for kesterite-based absorbers owing to the resulting optoelectronic properties. The improvements in VOC and PCE after doping with metals such as Ge, Sb, and Ag, helps to promote grain growth, increase the hole concentration, grain boundaries, and defect passivation, and, therefore, broaden the surface bandgap and lower the valence band maximum of the kesterite surface to enhance the PCE of CZTSSe solar cells. For Ge-doped CZTSSe, the device conversion efficiency reached up to 12.3% with a VOC deficit of 527 mV. Furthermore, the most important factor to be considered is the concentration of the dopant element in the parent compound. A very high dopant concentration can have detrimental effects on the structural, optical, and electrical properties of the compound, resulting in poor device efficiency. A very low dopant concentration is also undesirable because the positive effects of the dopant cannot be imparted. Therefore, controlling the optimum dopant concentration is important. Table 5 shows the PCEs of reported kesterite solar cells with alkali and other metal dopants. Various dopant elements contribute differently to improving the solar cell performance. Na and Ag doping increases the carrier concentration, thereby improving the current density (JSC) in the solar cells. Ge doping enhances the microstructure and widens the bandgap, eventually resulting in an improved voltage (VOC) in the solar cells. Therefore, if a systematic combination of these dopant elements is utilized in kesterite compounds, the synergistic effects of these dopants might further improve the solar cell performance.
Table 5 PEC and associated parameters of kesterite solar cells with alkali and other metal dopants




Doped kesterite solar cell
PCE%

V
OC (mV)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
Ref.




K
3.11
508
10.78
57

50



Ag (550 nm)
17.59
940
24.65
75.64

66



Mo (550 nm)
1.4
459
9.1
32.9

151



Mo (650 nm)
0.9
383
7.8
31.4

151



Ge
12.3
527
32.3
72.7

60



Se
12.6
513
35.2
69.8

22



Na
6.4
431
34.6
42.8

81



Li
6
380
28.5
51

56



Rb
6.35
360
35.2
49.9

56





Despite the remarkable PCE performance achieved by kesterite solar cells, they remain at too early a stage of development to make an impact similar to those of c-Si and CIGS technology in commercialization. Therefore, much effort should be devoted to the continued development, and significant challenges must be addressed. Firstly, the development of cost-effective and stable technologies is needed to prepare kesterite devices with high PCEs. Secondly, research should focus on achieving efficient PCEs for practical applications. Thirdly, further effort should be devoted to achieving in-depth insight into the doping structure–PCE relationship and the dynamics of charge carriers, which are important for rationalizing the design of future PV technology. Finally, strategies for improving the crystal quality to avoid secondary phase formation during synthesis should be explored to obtained increased VOC values. From the above assessment, we predict that the combination of alkali and other metals could be a subject of interest to improve the VOC deficit and PCE performance of kesterite solar cells. This unprecedented and unparalleled progress will generate new avenues for exploring and developing novel dopant elements for efficient kesterite solar cells.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Notes and references
S. Pacala and R. Socolow, Science, 2004, 305, 968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          http://www.bbc.com/specialfeatures/horizonsbusiness/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/Energy1.pdf, accessed  January 2019.
P. M. Cox, R. A. Betts, C. D. Jones, S. A. Spall and I. J. Totterdell, Nature, 2000, 408, 184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Oh, H.-C. Yuan and H. M. Branz, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Sariciftci, L. Smilowitz, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Science, 1992, 258, 1474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef .

          https://cleantechnica.com/2015/02/17/japanese-domestic-solar-shipments-increase-10/, accessed Decemeber 2018.

2008 Solar Technologies Market Report, US Department of Energy, NREL Report no. TP-6A2-46025, DOE/GO-102010-2867,  2010, pp. 1–131, https://www1.eere.energy.gov/solar/pdfs/46025.pdf Search PubMed.
K. Yoshikawa, H. Kawasaki, W. Yoshida, T. Irie, K. Konishi, K. Nakano, T. Uto, D. Adachi, M. Kanematsu, H. Uzu and K. Yamamoto, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17032 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, Y. Hishikawa, E. D. Dunlop, D. H. Levi, J. Hohl-Ebinger, M. Yoshita and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2019, 27, 3–12 Search PubMed .
P. Jackson, R. Wuerz, D. Hariskos, E. Lotter, W. Witte and M. Powalla, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2016, 10, 583–586 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jackson, D. Hariskos, R. Wuerz, O. Kiowski, A. Bauer, T. M. Friedlmeier and M. Powalla, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2015, 9, 28–31 CrossRef CAS .
Solar Frontier Achieves World Record Thin-Film Solar Cell Efficiency of 22.9%, http://www.solar-frontier.com/eng/news/2017/1220_press.html.
First Solar Hits Record 22.1% Conversion Efficiency for CdTe Solar Cell, YlEDUvvP, https://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/first-solar-hits-record-22-1-conversion-efficiency-for-cdte-solar-cell#gs.
A. Ennaoui and H. Tributsch, Sol. Cells, 1984, 13, 197–200 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ennaoui, S. Fiechter, C. Pettenkofer, N. Alonso-Vante, K. Büker, M. Bronold, C. Höpfner and H. Tributsch, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1993, 29, 289–370 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Lokhande, K. V. Gurav, E. Jo, C. D. Lokhande and J. H. Kim, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 656, 295–310 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Lokhande, R. B. V. Chalapathy, M. He, E. Jo, M. Gang, S. A. Pawar, C. D. Lokhande and J. H. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 153, 84–107 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tadatsugu, N. Yuki and M. Toshihiro, Appl. Phys. Express, 2015, 8, 022301 CrossRef .
B. P. Rai, Sol. Cells, 1988, 25, 265–272 CrossRef CAS .
M. Johnson, S. V. Baryshev, E. Thimsen, M. Manno, X. Zhang, I. V. Veryovkin, C. Leighton and E. S. Aydil, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1931–1938 RSC .
A. Polizzotti, I. L. Repins, R. Noufi, S.-H. Wei and D. B. Mitzi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3171–3182 RSC .
M. T. Winkler, W. Wang, O. Gunawan, H. J. Hovel, T. K. Todorov and D. B. Mitzi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1029–1036 RSC .
W. Wang, M. T. Winkler, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen, T. K. Todorov, Y. Zhu and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301465 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, X. Kang, L. Huang, S. Wei and D. Pan, J. Power Sources, 2016, 313, 15–20 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, H. Wang, M. Luo, J. Tang, C. Chen, W. Liu, F. Liu, Y. Sun, J. Han and Y. Zhang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 149, 242–249 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Todorov, J. Tang, S. Bag, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen, Y. Zhu and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 34–38 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Li, V. Chawla and B. M. Clemens, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 720–723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Ford, Q. Guo, R. Agrawal and H. W. Hillhouse, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2626–2629 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, S. M. Szczepaniak, N. J. Carter, C. A. Handwerker and R. Agrawal, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2114–2120 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, H. Hiroi, T. K. Todorov, O. Gunawan, M. Kuwahara, T. Gokmen, D. Nair, M. Hopstaken, B. Shin, Y. S. Lee, W. Wang, H. Sugimoto and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7427–7431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, O. Gunawan, T. Todorov, B. Shin, S. J. Chey, N. A. Bojarczuk, D. Mitzi and S. Guha, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 143508 CrossRef .
K.-J. Yang, D.-H. Son, S.-J. Sung, J.-H. Sim, Y.-I. Kim, S.-N. Park, D.-H. Jeon, J. Kim, D.-K. Hwang, C.-W. Jeon, D. Nam, H. Cheong, J.-K. Kang and D.-H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10151–10158 RSC .
M. G. Gang, S. W. Shin, C. W. Hong, K. V. Gurav, J. Gwak, J. H. Yun, J. Y. Lee and J. H. Kim, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 700–711 RSC .
F. Q. Zeng, Y. Q. Lai, Z. L. Han, B. K. Ng, Z. A. Zhang, H. L. Zhang, L. X. Jiang and F. Y. Liu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 6562–6570 RSC .
W. Yang, H.-S. Duan, B. Bob, H. Zhou, B. Lei, C.-H. Chung, S.-H. Li, W. W. Hou and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6323–6329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Seo, J.-O. Jeon, J. W. Seo, Y. Y. Yu, J.-h. Jeong, D.-K. Lee, H. Kim, M. J. Ko, H. J. Son, H.
W. Jang and J. Y. Kim, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 439–444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qu, G. Zoppi and N. S. Beattie, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2016, 24, 836–845 CAS .
C. K. Miskin, W.-C. Yang, C. J. Hages, N. J. Carter, C. S. Joglekar, E. A. Stach and R. Agrawal, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2015, 23, 654–659 CAS .

          N. S. H. Katagiri, S. Hando, S. Hoshino, J. Ohashi and T. Yokota, in Technical Digest of the 9th International PVSEC—Miyazaki, Japan,  1996, pp. 745–746 Search PubMed .
H. Katagiri, N. Sasaguchi, S. Hando, S. Hoshino, J. Ohashi and T. Yokota, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1997, 49, 407–414 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Haass, M. Diethelm, M. Werner, B. Bissig, Y. E. Romanyuk and A. N. Tiwari, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500712 CrossRef .
H. Xin, J. K. Katahara, I. L. Braly and H. W. Hillhouse, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301823 CrossRef .

          M. Osborne, ZSW produces tin and zinc ink printing process with 10.3% thin-film conversion efficiencies, 2014, accessed December 2018, http:www.pv-tech.orgnewszsw Search PubMed.
C.-J. Hsu, H.-S. Duan, W. Yang, H. Zhou and Y. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301287 CrossRef .
S.-H. Wu, C.-W. Chang, H.-J. Chen, C.-F. Shih, Y.-Y. Wang, C.-C. Li and S.-W. Chan, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2017, 25, 58–66 CAS .
Reported at PVSEC-36 by a research team led at DGIST in South Korea. A 0.181 cm2 solar cell was certified at 13.80% by KIER.
First Solar Press Release, First Solar builds the highest efficiency thin film PV cell on record, 5 August 2014.
G. Rey, F. Babbe, T. P. Weiss, H. Elanzeery, M. Melchiorre, N. Valle, B. E. Adib and S. Siebentritt, Thin Solid Films, 2017, 633, 162–165 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gershon, B. Shin, N. Bojarczuk, M. Hopstaken, D. B. Mitzi and S. Guha, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1400849 CrossRef .
X. Liu, Y. Feng, H. Cui, F. Liu, X. Hao, G. Conibeer, D. B. Mitzi and M. Green, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2016, 24, 879–898 Search PubMed .
Z. Tong, C. Yan, Z. Su, F. Zeng, J. Yang, Y. Li, L. Jiang, Y. Lai and F. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 223903 CrossRef .
Y.-T. Hsieh, Q. Han, C. Jiang, T.-B. Song, H. Chen, L. Meng, H. Zhou and Y. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502386 CrossRef .
S. G. Haass, M. Diethelm, C. Andres, Y. E. Romanyuk and A. N. Tiwari, Thin Solid Films, 2017, 633, 131–134 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, Z. Su, J. M. R. Tan, S. Y. Chiam, H. L. Seng, S. Magdassi and L. H. Wong, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4273–4281 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Haass, C. Andres, R. Figi, C. Schreiner, M. Bürki, A. N. Tiwari and Y. E. Romanyuk, AIP Adv., 2018, 8, 015133 CrossRef .
A. Mule, B. Vermang, M. Sylvester, G. Brammertz, S. Ranjbar, T. Schnabel, N. Gampa, M. Meuris and J. Poortmans, Thin Solid Films, 2017, 633, 156–161 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Haass, C. Andres, R. Figi, C. Schreiner, M. Bürki, Y. E. Romanyuk and A. N. Tiwari, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701760 CrossRef .
R. Caballero, S. G. Haass, C. Andres, L. Arques, F. Oliva, V. Izquierdo-Roca and Y. E. Romanyuk, Front. Chem., 2018, 6 CAS .
H. Xin, S. M. Vorpahl, A. D. Collord, I. L. Braly, A. R. Uhl, B. W. Krueger, D. S. Ginger and H. W. Hillhouse, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 23859–23866 RSC .
D. B. Khadka, S. Kim and J. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 4251–4258 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, K. Kang Min, T. Hitoshi, S. Hajime and N. Shigeru, Appl. Phys. Express, 2016, 9, 102301 CrossRef .
S. Kim, K. M. Kim, H. Tampo, H. Shibata, K. Matsubara and S. Niki, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 144, 488–492 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, M. Han, Z. Zeng and Y. Duan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6606–6612 RSC .
U. Saha and M. K. Alam, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 4905–4913 RSC .
J. V. Li, D. Kuciauskas, M. R. Young and I. L. Repins, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 163905 CrossRef .
C. M. Sutter-Fella, J. A. Stückelberger, H. Hagendorfer, F. La Mattina, L. Kranz, S. Nishiwaki, A. R. Uhl, Y. E. Romanyuk and A. N. Tiwari, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1420–1425 CrossRef CAS .
I. Repins, C. Beall, N. Vora, C. DeHart, D. Kuciauskas, P. Dippo, B. To, J. Mann, W.-C. Hsu, A. Goodrich and R. Noufi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 101, 154–159 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nagaoka, H. Miyake, T. Taniyama, K. Kakimoto, Y. Nose, M. A. Scarpulla and K. Yoshino, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 152101 CrossRef .
Y.-P. Lin, T.-E. Hsieh, Y.-C. Chen and K.-P. Huang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 162, 55–61 CrossRef CAS .
H. Richard, G. Talia, G. Oki, A. Priscilla, B. Douglas, L. Yun Seog, G. Tayfun, S. Kasra, C. Evgueni and K. Andrew, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2017, 32, 033004 CrossRef .
A. Lafond, L. Choubrac, C. Guillot-Deudon, P. Deniard and S. Jobic, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 2012, 638, 2571–2577 CrossRef CAS .
G. Altamura and J. Vidal, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3540–3563 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pejjai, V. R. Minnam Reddy, S. Gedi and C. Park, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2018, 60, 19–52 CrossRef CAS .
S. Oueslati, G. Brammertz, M. Buffière, H. ElAnzeery, O. Touayar, C. Köble, J. Bekaert, M. Meuris and J. Poortmans, Thin Solid Films, 2015, 582, 224–228 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhuk, A. Kushwaha, T. K. S. Wong, S. Masudy-Panah, A. Smirnov and G. K. Dalapati, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 171, 239–252 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Lee, T. Gershon, O. Gunawan, T. K. Todorov, T. Gokmen, Y. Virgus and S. Guha, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401372 CrossRef .
F.-I. Lai, J.-F. Yang, Y.-L. Wei and S.-Y. Kuo, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 795–802 RSC .
A. Cazzaniga, A. Crovetto, C. Yan, K. Sun, X. Hao, J. Ramis Estelrich, S. Canulescu, E. Stamate, N. Pryds, O. Hansen and J. Schou, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 166, 91–99 CrossRef CAS .
R. Adhi Wibowo, E. Soo Lee, B. Munir and K. Ho Kim, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2007, 204, 3373–3379 CrossRef .
S. Abdelhaleem, A. E. Hassanien, R. Ahmad, M. Schuster, A. H. Ashour, M. Distaso, W. Peukert and P. J. Wellmann, J. Electron. Mater., 2018, 47, 7085–7092 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, F. Zeng, N. Song, L. Jiang, Z. Han, Z. Su, C. Yan, X. Wen, X. Hao and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 14376–14383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lin, V. E. Madhavan, J. Kavalakkatt, V. Hinrichs, I. Lauermann, M. C. Lux-Steiner, A. Ennaoui and R. Klenk, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 180, 373–380 CrossRef CAS .
M. Colina, E. Bailo, B. Medina-Rodríguez, R. Kondrotas, Y. Sánchez-González, D. Sylla, M. Placidi, M. Blanes, F. Ramos, A. Cirera, A. Pérez Rodríguez and E. Saucedo, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 735, 2462–2470 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Williams, M. A. Smeaton, N. D. Trejo, L. F. Francis and E. S. Aydil, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 1676–1683 CrossRef CAS .
A. Redinger, D. M. Berg, P. J. Dale and S. Siebentritt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3320–3323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Q. Guo, Y. Cao, J. V. Caspar, W. E. Farneth, A. S. Ionkin, L. K. Johnson, M. Lu, I. Malajovich, D. Radu, K. R. Choudhury, H. D. Rosenfeld and W. Wu, A simple solution-based route to high-efficiency CZTSSe thin-film solar cells, 38th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference,  2012, pp. 002993–002996 Search PubMed .
P. M. P. Salomé, H. Rodriguez-Alvarez and S. Sadewasser, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 143, 9–20 CrossRef .

          M. Bodegård, L. Stolt and J. Hedström, The Influence of Sodium on the Grain Structure of CuInSe2 Films for Photovoltaic Applications, 12th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference,  1994, pp. 1743–1746 Search PubMed .
F. Hergert, S. Jost, R. Hock, M. Purwins and J. Palm, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515, 5843–5847 CrossRef CAS .
J. Eid, H. Liang, I. Gereige, S. Lee and J. V. Duren, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2015, 23, 269–280 CAS .
V. Izquierdo-Roca, R. Caballero, X. Fontané, C. A. Kaufmann, J. Álvarez-García, L. Calvo-Barrio, E. Saucedo, A. Pérez-Rodríguez, J. R. Morante and H. W. Schock, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519, 7300–7303 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-R. Lin, V. Tunuguntla, S.-Y. Wei, W.-C. Chen, D. Wong, C.-H. Lai, L.-K. Liu, L.-C. Chen and K.-H. Chen, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 438–445 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xie, S. López-Marino, T. Olar, Y. Sánchez, M. Neuschitzer, F. Oliva, S. Giraldo, V. Izquierdo-Roca, I. Lauermann, A. Pérez-Rodríguez and E. Saucedo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5017–5024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. López-Marino, Y. Sánchez, M. Espíndola-Rodríguez, X. Alcobé, H. Xie, M. Neuschitzer, I. Becerril, S. Giraldo, M. Dimitrievska, M. Placidi, L. Fourdrinier, V. Izquierdo-Roca, A. Pérez-Rodríguez and E. Saucedo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1895–1907 RSC .
N. Janke, O. Grassmé and R. Weißmann, Glass Sci. Technol., 2000, 73, 143–155 CAS .

          G. Hanna, S. Schleussner, G. Bilger, H.-W. Schock, U. Rau and J. Werner, Proceedings of 3rd World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion,  2003, vol. 1, pp. 368–371 Search PubMed .
M. Bodegård, K. Granath, L. Stolt and A. Rockett, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1999, 58, 199–208 CrossRef .
P. M. P. Salomé, A. Hultqvist, V. Fjällström, M. Edoff, B. Aitken, K. Vaidyanathan, K. Zhang, K. Fuller and C. K. Williams, IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, 2013, 3, 852–858 Search PubMed .
D. Rudmann, A. F. da Cunha, M. Kaelin, F. Kurdesau, H. Zogg, A. N. Tiwari and G. Bilger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 1129–1131 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lammer, R. Kniese and M. Powalla, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 451–452, 175–178 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Rudmann, M. Kaelin, F. Haug, F. Kurdesau, H. Zogg and A. N. Tiwari, Proceedings of 3rd World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion,  2003, vol. 1, pp. 376–379 Search PubMed .
Y. Yang, X. Kang, L. Huang, S. Wei and D. Pan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 22797–22802 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Granath, L. Stolt, M. Bodegård, A. Rockett and D. J. Schroeder, The 14th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference, Barcelona, Spain,  1997, p. 1278 Search PubMed .
P. Blösch, S. Nishiwaki, A. Chirilă, L. Kranz, C. Fella, F. Pianezzi, C. Adelhelm, E. Franzke, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, Thin Solid Films, 2013, 535, 214–219 CrossRef .
P. Blösch, S. Nishiwaki, L. Kranz, C. M. Fella, F. Pianezzi, T. Jäger, C. Adelhelm, E. Franzke, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 124, 10–16 CrossRef .
D. Rudmann, G. Bilger, M. Kaelin, F. J. Haug, H. Zogg and A. N. Tiwari, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 431–432, 37–40 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Tsai, C.-H. Tsai, C.-H. Chang, J.-M. Ting and R.-R. Wang, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 519, 1712–1716 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Shin, D. H. Shin, J. H. Kim and B. T. Ahn, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2011, 11, S59–S64 CrossRef .
T. Nakada, H. Ohbo, M. Fukuda and A. Kunioka, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1997, 49, 261–267 CrossRef CAS .
L. de la Cueva, Y. Sánchez, L. Calvo-Barrio, F. Oliva, V. Izquierdo-Roca, S. Khelifi, T. Bertram, J. M. Merino, M. León and R. Caballero, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 186, 115–123 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. Hlaing Oo, J. L. Johnson, A. Bhatia, E. A. Lund, M. M. Nowell and M. A. Scarpulla, J. Electron. Mater., 2011, 40, 2214 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Laghfour, S. Aazou, M. Taibi, G. Schmerber, A. Ulyashin, A. Dinia, A. Slaoui, M. Abd-Lefdil and Z. Sekkat, Superlattices Microstruct., 2018, 120, 747–752 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sun, F. Liu, C. Yan, F. Zhou, J. Huang, Y. Shen, R. Liu and X. Hao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 157, 565–571 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wen, Y. Li, J. Yan and C. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2015, 140, 16–19 CrossRef CAS .
K.-J. Yang, J.-H. Sim, B. Jeon, D.-H. Son, D.-H. Kim, S.-J. Sung, D.-K. Hwang, S. Song, D. B. Khadka, J. Kim and J.-K. Kang, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2015, 23, 862–873 CAS .
Q. Guo, G. M. Ford, W.-C. Yang, C. J. Hages, H. W. Hillhouse and R. Agrawal, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 105, 132–136 CrossRef CAS .
M. Singh, T. R. Rana and J. Kim, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 675, 370–376 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Hages, S. Levcenco, C. K. Miskin, J. H. Alsmeier, D. Abou-Ras, R. G. Wilks, M. Bär, T. Unold and R. Agrawal, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2015, 23, 376–384 CAS .
J. Chen, W. Li, C. Yan, S. Huang and X. Hao, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 621, 154–161 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Lokhande, R. B. V. Chalapathy, J. S. Jang, P. T. Babar, M. G. Gang, C. D. Lokhande and J. H. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 161, 355–367 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Collord and H. W. Hillhouse, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2067–2073 CrossRef CAS .
S. Giraldo, M. Neuschitzer, T. Thersleff, S. López-Marino, Y. Sánchez, H. Xie, M. Colina, M. Placidi, P. Pistor, V. Izquierdo-Roca, K. Leifer, A. Pérez-Rodríguez and E. Saucedo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501070 CrossRef .
J. Li, H. Shen, H. Shang, Y. Li and W. Wu, Mater. Lett., 2017, 190, 188–190 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Sarswat and M. L. Free, J. Mater. Sci., 2015, 50, 1613–1623 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Fernandes, P. M. P. Salomé and A. F. da Cunha, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, 7600–7606 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lin, J. Kavalakkatt, A. Ennaoui and M. C. Lux-Steiner, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 132, 221–229 CrossRef CAS .
S. Björn-Arvid, M. Björn, C. Sonja, U. Thomas, K. Reiner, S. Susan and S. Hans-Werner, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2011, 19, 93–96 Search PubMed .
X. Lin, A. Steigert, M. C. Lux-Steiner and A. Ennaoui, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 9798–9800 RSC .
Y. Kee-Jeong, S. Jun-Hyoung, S. Dae-Ho, K. Dae-Hwan, K. G. Yeong, J. William, S. Soomin, K. JunHo, N. Dahyun, C. Hyeonsik and K. Jin-Kyu, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2015, 23, 1771–1784 Search PubMed .
G. Altamura, M. Wang and K.-L. Choy, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 22109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Collord, H. Xin and H. W. Hillhouse, IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, 2015, 5, 288–298 Search PubMed .
K. Granath, M. Bodegård and L. Stolt, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 60, 279–293 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jiang, C. Ozaki, O. Gunawan, T. Harada, Z. Tang, T. Minemoto, Y. Nose and S. Ikeda, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3283–3291 CrossRef CAS .
O. Gunawan, W. Septina, T. Harada, Y. Nose and S. Ikeda, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 16086–16092 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Jiang, C. Ozaki, T. Harada, Z. Tang, T. Minemoto, Y. Nose and S. Ikeda, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3283–3291 CrossRef CAS .
V. G. Rajeshmon, N. Poornima, C. Sudha Kartha and K. P. Vijayakumar, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 553, 239–244 CrossRef CAS .
H. Du, F. Yan, M. Young, B. To, C.-S. Jiang, P. Dippo, D. Kuciauskas, Z. Chi, E. A. Lund, C. Hancock, W. M. Hlaing Oo, M. A. Scarpulla and G. Teeter, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 115, 173502 CrossRef .
J. Philip, H. Dimitrios, W. Roland, W. Wiltraud and P. Michael, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2014, 8, 219–222 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, L. Wu, R. Yue, Z. Yan, H. Zhan and Y. Xiang, Thin Solid Films, 2013, 527, 137–140 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yuan, D. B. Mitzi, O. Gunawan, A. J. Kellock, S. J. Chey and V. R. Deline, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 519, 852–856 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yuan, D. B. Mitzi, W. Liu, A. J. Kellock, S. J. Chey and V. R. Deline, Chem. Mater., 2009, 22, 285–287 CrossRef .
Y. Akaki, H. Komaki, H. Yokoyama, K. Yoshino, K. Maeda and T. Ikari, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2003, 64, 1863–1867 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nakakoba, Y. Yatsushiro, T. Mise, T. Kobayashi and T. Nakada, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 51, 10NC24 CrossRef .
Y. Akaki, H. Matsuo and K. Yoshino, Phys. Status Solidi C, 2006, 3, 2597–2600 CrossRef CAS .
B.-H. Tseng, G.-W. Chang and G.-L. Gu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1996, 92, 227–231 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chirilă, P. Reinhard, F. Pianezzi, P. Bloesch, A. R. Uhl, C. Fella, L. Kranz, D. Keller, C. Gretener and H. Hagendorfer, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 1107 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-H. Wei, S. Zhang and A. Zunger, J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 85, 7214–7218 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kronik, D. Cahen and H. W. Schock, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 31–36 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Dalapati, S. Zhuk, S. Masudy-Panah, A. Kushwaha, H. L. Seng, V. Chellappan, V. Suresh, Z. Su, S. K. Batabyal and C. C. Tan, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1350 CrossRef PubMed .
R. B. V. Chalapathy, G. S. Jung and B. T. Ahn, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 3216–3221 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hironori, J. Kazuo, Y. Satoru, K. Tsuyoshi, M. Win Shwe, F. Tatsuo, I. Tadashi and M. Tomoyoshi, Appl. Phys. Express, 2008, 1, 041201 CrossRef .
G. K. Dalapati, S. Zhuk, S. Masudy-Panah, A. Kushwaha, H. L. Seng, V. Chellappan, V. Suresh, Z. Su, S. K. Batabyal, C. C. Tan, A. Guchhait, L. H. Wong, T. K. S. Wong and S. Tripathy, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1350 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Dattatray S. Dhawale	Dattatray S. Dhawale has worked as a Scientist at the Qatar Environment and Energy Research Institute (QEERI) since June 2016. Before moving to QEERI, he served as a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia from 2013 to 2016, where he worked on photo- and electro-catalytic water splitting for solar fuel production. Prior to joining KAUST, he worked as a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the University of Queensland (UQ), Australia, from 2011 to 2013 and as a Research Associate at the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Japan, from 2010 to 2011, after successfully completing a few months research at Hanyang University Seoul, South Korea. He obtained his PhD in solid-state physics from the Shivaji University, Kolhapur, India in 2010. His research interests encompass the development of novel and efficient nanomaterials for solar energy, energy storage, photocatalysis, and gas sensor technology.
Adnan Ali	Dr Adnan has worked as a post-doctorate researcher at QEERI, Qatar, since 2014. He has published more than 30 research articles in reputable journals and attended and presented at renowned international conferences, including MRS, ICAE, and ISES (Solar World Congress). He has five patents on materials synthesis and fabrication processes. He is conducting research on novel transparent and conductive thin film fabrication, nanomaterials synthesis for energy applications, and membrane fabrication for water desalination. Currently, he is working on the synthesis of Pb-free perovskite materials for energy harvesting. He has a multidisciplinary background, including experience in 2D materials synthesis, processing, and applications in electronic devices. He obtained his PhD in mechatronics engineering from Jeju National University, South Korea, in 2014 and a Masters degree in mechanical engineering (applied energy systems) from Jeju National University, South Korea, in 2010. His BS degree is in metallurgy and materials science engineering from the GIK Institute of Engineering Sciences and Technology, Pakistan, in 2007.
Abhishek C. Lokhande	Dr Abhishek C. Lokhande obtained his PhD in Materials Science and Engineering from Chonnam National University, South Korea, in 2019. Prior to that, he obtained Bachelors and Masters degrees in mechanical engineering from Shivaji University, Kolhapur, India. His research interests includes the synthesis, characterization, and development of novel efficient nanomaterials/thin film metal chalcogenides for thin film solar cells, gas sensors, and energy storage/energy conversion systems.

 	Fig. 1  Typical device architecture of kesterite solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Illustration of quaternary materials system from binary semiconductors and (b) kesterite unit cell with Cu (red), Zn (green), Sn (blue), and S/Se (yellow). Reprinted ref. 74 with copyright permission from ACS publication.	 

 	Fig. 3  Possible defect formations in kesterite compounds.	 

 	Fig. 4  Various kesterite deposition techniques.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Top view and (b) cross-sectional view SEM images of a sister CZTSSe film; (c) J–V characteristics of a device with record 12.6% efficiency using an antireflection coating (ARC). Reprinted from ref. 24 with copyright permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) J–V characteristics of a best-performing double-emitter solar cell with 12.7% efficiency obtained by in-house measurement. Reprinted from ref. 32 with copyright permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

Hydrazine + selenization	CZTSSe–CdS	12.6	
24

Hydrazine + selenization	CZTSSe–/In2S3/CdS	12.7	
32

Sputtering	CZTSSe	13.8	
48

Co-evaporation	CZTSe	11.6	
78


 	Fig. 6  Schematic representation of the model, explaining Na diffusion from SLG. Prior to absorber growth, the Mo boundaries are oxidized and the layer stores H+ ions. During absorber growth, Na+ ion diffusion from the glass into the CIGS is countered by H+ diffusion into the glass substrate. Reprinted from ref. 89 with copyright permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  XRD patterns of thin-film CZTS doped with Na (10%, 20%, and 30%). Undoped CZTS is used as reference. Reprinted from ref. 114 with copyright permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  FESEM images of CZTS films with (a) 0 nm NaF, (b) 10 nm NaF, and (c) 20 nm NaF on a stainless steel substrate. Reprinted from ref. 115 with copyright permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  XRD patterns of annealed Mo back-contact samples after sulfurization at 570 °C for 30 min. The MoS2 (101) peak intensity decreased as the Mo annealing temperature increased. Reprinted from ref. 117 with copyright permission from Wiley Online Library and Progress in Photovoltaics.	 

 	Fig. 10  Plan-view SEM images of CZTSSe thin films with (a) 0, (c) 0.5, (e) 1.0, and (g) 1.5 mol% K doping and cross-section images of CZTSSe devices with (b) 0, (d) 0.5, (f) 1.0, and (h) 1.5 mol% K doping. All thin films and devices were taken at 560 °C for 30 min. Reprinted from ref. 56 with copyright permission from ACS Publications.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic representation of band gap variation with varying Ge content in CZTGeSSe. Reprinted from ref. 122 with copyright permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  Cross-sectional image of solar cell devices consisting of a SLG/Mo/MoSe2/CZTSSe(Ge-x)/In2S3/ZnO/ITO structure: (a) CZTSSe and (b) CZTSSe(Ge-3) device structures are depicted. Reprinted from ref. 62 with copyright permission from ACS Publications.	 

0.3	9.4	
120

0.2	11	
123

0.2	12.3	
63

0.1	6.09	
62

0.124	3.82	
122

0.05	2	
125


 	Fig. 13  Atomic force micrographs of doped and undoped CZTS samples: (a, b) topographic maps of (a) doped and (b) undoped CZTS samples; (c) electrostatic charge map of Sb-doped CZTS thin film; (d, e) low-magnification topographic map of (d) doped and (e) undoped CZTS samples; (f, g) current map of (f) doped and (g) undoped CZTS samples; (h, i) current map overlaid with topography for (h) doped and (i) undoped CZTS samples. Reprinted from ref. 126 with copyright permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic diagram showing the preparation process for CZTSSe thin films. Reprinted from ref. 128 with copyright permission from Elsevier.	 


A	0.67 mmol CTS, 1.37 mmol ZnS, and 0.45 mmol SnS	4	25	580	Ar–Se	All four layers
B	5	First four spin-coated layers
C	4	First spin-coated layer
D	0.67 mmol CTS, 1.45 mmol ZnS, and 0.65 mmol SnS	3	5	Only for the first two spin-coated layers
2	25	Only for the last spin-coated layer


A	8.1	0.9	25.0	0.0	1.46	2.67	2
B	212.4	13.8	34.2	1.0	0.36	2.30	109
C	198.6	16.8	34.9	1.2	0.61	1.28	30
D	306.5	27.5	35.0	3.0	0.22	2.25	449

 	Fig. 15  Device characteristics of CZTSSe solar cells: (a) current density–voltage curves under a simulated AM 1.5 G spectrum and illumination of 100 mW cm−2 (1 sun) produced by a solar simulator; (b) EQEs at a bias of 0 V and calculated band gaps (inset). Reprinted from ref. 34 with copyright permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 16  
J–V characteristics of best-performing Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/TCO/Ni/Al solar cells for samples with alkali elements (A = Li, B = Rb, and C = Na) after thiourea treatment. Reprinted from ref. 132 with copyright permission from Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Scanning capacitance microscopy (SCM) measurements and (b) J–V curve for the device with energy diagram (inset). Reprinted from ref. 135 with copyright permission from ACS Publications.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Surface images of CZTS thin films with different K-doping concentrations; (b) cross-sections of CZTS thin-film solar cells with different K-doping concentrations (Mo glass/CZTS/CdS/ZnO/ITO). Reprinted from ref. 53 with copyright permission from AIP publisher.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) J–V characteristics and (b) EQE curves of solar cells with different K-doped CZTS thin films. Open-circuit voltage (VOC), short circuit current density (JSC), efficiency (g), fill factor (FF), and series resistance (Rs) are given. Reprinted from ref. 53 with copyright permission from AIP publisher.	 

 	Fig. 20  Calculated absorption coefficients for Sb-doped CZTS (solid lines) and CZTS (dashed lines) with two Sb atoms in a 64-atom supercell. Red and black lines represent absorption coefficients perpendicular (xx) and parallel (zz) to the c-axis. Reprinted from ref. 65 with copyright permission from Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 21  Cross-sectional SEM images of solar cell devices AZO/i-ZnO/CdS/CZTS/Mo/glass: (a, b) CZTS layers (550 nm) sulfurized at (a) 500 °C and (b) 600 °C; (c, d) CZTS layers (650 nm) sulfurized at (c) 500 °C and (d) 600 °C. Respective cross-sections of the MoSx interface layer (IL) obtained using focused ion beam milling (FIB) for each of the images in (a–d), as highlighted by the red box shown to the right, to determine the IL thickness. Reprinted from ref. 154 with copyright permission from Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.	 

 	Fig. 22  Variation of (a) open circuit (VOC), (b) short circuit current density (JSC), (c) fill factor (FF), and (d) efficiency (h) with increasing ACZTS thickness. Reprinted from ref. 66 with copyright permission from Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) EQE and (b) J–V characteristics of optimized cell with 550 nm ACZTS. Reprinted from ref. 66 with copyright permission from Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.	 

 	Fig. 24  
J–V characterization of CZTGSe thin film solar cell with 12.3% efficiency. Reprinted from ref. 63 with copyright permission from IOP Publishing.	 

K	3.11	508	10.78	57	
50

Ag (550 nm)	17.59	940	24.65	75.64	
66

Mo (550 nm)	1.4	459	9.1	32.9	
151

Mo (650 nm)	0.9	383	7.8	31.4	
151

Ge	12.3	527	32.3	72.7	
60

Se	12.6	513	35.2	69.8	
22

Na	6.4	431	34.6	42.8	
81

Li	6	380	28.5	51	
56

Rb	6.35	360	35.2	49.9	
56


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
