Inorganic/organic hybrid solar cells: optimal carrier transport in vertically aligned silicon nanowire arrays   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4NR00733F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4NR00733F
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6092-6101Inorganic/organic hybrid solar cells: optimal carrier transport in vertically aligned silicon nanowire arrays†

        
          
            Keisuke 
            Sato
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Mrinal 
            Dutta
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Naoki 
            Fukata
          
        
      *a
aWorld Premier International Research Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics, National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0044, Japan. E-mail: satok@mail.dendai.ac.jp; FUKATA.Naoki@nims.go.jp
bDepartment of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Tokyo Denki University, 5 Senju-Asahi-cho, Adachi-ku, Tokyo 120-8551, Japan
Received 
      10th February 2014
    , Accepted 25th March 2014First published on 1st April 2014AbstractInorganic/organic hybrid radial heterojunction solar cells that combine vertically-aligned n-type silicon nanowires (SiNWs) with poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene-sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) have great potential for replacing commercial Si solar cells. The chief advantage of such solar cells is that they exhibit higher absorbance for a given thickness than commercial Si solar cells, due to incident light-trapping within the NW arrays, thus enabling lower-cost solar cell production. We report herein on the effects of NW length, annealing and surface electrode on the device performance of SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid radial heterojunction solar cells. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the obtained SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid solar cells can be optimized by tuning the thickness of the surface electrode, and the etching conditions during NW formation and post-annealing. The PCE of 9.3% is obtained by forming efficient transport pathways for photogenerated charge carriers to electrodes. Our approach is a significant contribution to design of high-performance and low-cost inorganic/organic hybrid heterojunction solar cells.
Introduction
Most recently, solar cells using one-dimensional architecture, such as silicon (Si) wires1,2 and Si nanowires (SiNWs),3–7 have raised hope for the realization of highly efficient solar cell modules. The main advantage of SiNWs is that they show greater light absorption (minimal reflectivity) due to incident light-trapping within the NW arrays. In short, nanostructured Si solar cells lead to higher absorbance per unit thickness than achieved by commercial Si solar cells,8–10 significantly reducing the quantity of Si materials needed for cell fabrication.11,12 Other important advantages are that they permit the enlargement of radial p–n junction areas to improve carrier separation12 and to provide efficient transport pathways for photogenerated charge carriers to electrodes.13,14 In the design of such SiNW solar cells, the formation of vertically aligned SiNWs is of crucial importance. The vertically aligned SiNWs can assist with light-trapping and suppress photon reflections on the surface, thus simultaneously improving both light absorption and carrier generation.15,16 The formation of metal-free SiNWs is also necessary for the production of highly efficient solar cells. We fabricated SiNWs by catalytic chemical vapour deposition (CVD) with vapour–liquid–solid (VLS) growth.17 Using this particular growth technique, the electrically active level derived from a metal (e.g., gold) used as catalyst has been found to be transferred onto the NW sidewall surfaces and into the NW volume due to metal diffusion from the NW tip during the growth process.18 When metal-contaminated SiNWs were used as the active layer in solar cells, this metal contamination proved detrimental to cell performance, causing a dramatic drop in power conversion efficiency (PCE). This is due to the trapping of most of the photogenerated charge carriers in the metal-related electronic levels, leading to carrier transport losses. This problem can be solved by employing a top-down approach, such as a solution-based etching process.19–21 Metal-assisted chemical etching,19,21 which is a simple and low-cost technique, has several advantages. For instance, it can enable not only easy and complete removal of the metal by post-treatment immersion in a solution, but also control of the morphology, including the diameter, length, and orientation of SiNWs relative to the substrate, allowing the fabrication of metal-free and vertically aligned SiNWs. A matter of key importance in the development of solar cells is how the p–n junction is formed. In SiNW solar cells, the p–n junction is normally formed by a thermal diffusion process using an n-type dopant, employing a furnace at 845–850 °C for p-type NWs22,23 or by deposition of a p-type polycrystalline Si sheath using low-pressure CVD at 450 °C and subsequent rapid thermal annealing at 1000 °C for n-type NWs.4 As a step toward the practical use of SiNW solar cells, there has been significant interest in forming p–n junctions using low-temperature processes, since commercial Si solar cells, as typified by heterojunction with intrinsic thin-layer (HIT) solar cells, have been developed at process temperatures below 200 °C.24
Hybrid solar cells with radial heterojunctions that combine an organic with an inorganic material not only require low-temperature fabrication due to the low thermostability of the organic material and solution-based processes (e.g., coating and printing techniques) but also can realize lower manufacturing costs by utilizing inexpensive and abundant organic materials, in contrast to expensive p–n junctions consisting of only Si.16,25 In addition, this cell might be useful for applications where low weight, mechanical flexibility and disposability are important.26,27 Making inorganic/organic hybrid solar cells commercially viable would help cut the market cost of PV and improve the adoption rate of solar cells.
Herein, we describe our creation of inorganic/organic hybrid radial heterojunction solar cells that combine an organic material with metal-free and vertically aligned n-type SiNWs. We selected poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene-sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS), also known as Clevios PH1000, manufactured by Heraeus (Leverkusen, Germany), as the organic material (i.e., p-type-like conjugated conducting polymer), since it is not only transparent and highly conductive (<1000 S cm−1)28,29 but also can act as a hole transport layer that effectively delivers holes generated in n-type materials. The chief advantage of this polymer is that it is stable in the atmosphere, unlike other p-type conjugated polymers (e.g., poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT)30 and polythieno[3,4-b]thiophene and benzodithiophene (PTB7)31), enabling cell fabrication without the use of a glove box. Intriguingly, the PCE of the obtained SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid radial heterojunction solar cells is intimately related to the transport efficiency of the photogenerated charge carriers to electrodes rather than NW length-dependent absorbance of light. According to our data, hybrid solar cells with shorter NW lengths of 0.57 μm can attain a PCE of 5.95%, exceeding those with an NW length of less than or more than 0.57 μm, although light absorption by short NWs is weaker than by long NWs. Additionally, the role of the surface electrode in hybrid solar cells also have potent influence over cell performance. Our major finding is that the annealing of as-prepared hybrid solar cells can dramatically enhance the PCE, succeeding in raising the PCE to 9.3% when annealed at 200 °C, the same fabrication temperature used for commercial Si solar cells.
Experimental
Materials
The n-type Si (111) wafers with a resistivity of 1–50 Ω cm were purchased from Ferrotec Silicon Co. Acetone, ethanol, sulfuric acid (H2SO4), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), hydrofluoric (HF) acid and concentrated nitric acid (HNO3) were purchased from Wako Pure Chemical Industries Co. Silver nitrate (AgNO3), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and Zonyl fluorosurfactant were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. PEDOT:PSS was purchased from Heraeus. Silver and aluminum targets were purchased from Kojundo Chemical Laboratory Co. All chemicals were used without further purification.
Synthesis of vertically aligned n-type SiNW arrays
The vertically aligned n-type SiNW arrays used as absorbers in this study were produced by the following procedure. The n-type Si wafers sized 15 × 15 mm were used as the starting substrates. The Si wafers were consecutively cleaned with acetone, ethanol and deionized water for 10 min each. As the final part of cleaning, they were cleaned with piranha solution consisting of H2SO4 and H2O2 solution (4:1, v/v) for 50 min, followed by dilute HF acid for 2 min to remove any native oxide and allow the wafer surface to become hydrophobic. Following the cleaning step, the vertically-aligned n-type SiNW arrays were produced on the Si wafers by metal-assisted chemical etching in an etchant consisting of 4.6 M HF acid and 0.02 M AgNO3.19,21 To vary the NW length, the etching time was set to 1, 3 and 12 min, resulting in NW lengths of 0.2, 0.57 and 2.1 μm, respectively (Fig. S1, ESI†). Following NW fabrication, the wafer with vertically aligned SiNW arrays was rinsed with deionized water and was cleaned with concentrated HNO3 solution for 30 min. The HNO3 cleaning step is critical, because it completely removes any residue of the silver catalyst in the interstices between each NW and/or the silver dendrite layer formed on top of the NW arrays after etching. Using this process, metal-free SiNW arrays were formed. As the final stage of the process, the wafers with vertically aligned NW arrays were rinsed with deionized water and dried under a stream of nitrogen gas.
Fabrication of SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid radial heterojunction solar cells
Fabrication of SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid radial heterojunction solar cells was performed using the following procedure. The wafer with vertically aligned SiNW arrays was cleaned with piranha solution for 50 min, followed by dilute HF acid for 2 min. The HF acid process, in particular, is the most critical, since it completely removes any native oxides on the NW surface and on the back side of the wafer. Using this process, any defects on the NW surface were passivated with hydrogen (Fig. S2, ESI†). Immediately after the cleaning treatment, highly conductive PEDOT:PSS mixed with 5 wt% DMSO and 0.1 wt% Zonyl fluorosurfactant was spin-coated onto the NW surface at 7500 rpm for 120 s in air to form hybrid solar cells consisting of SiNW/PEDOT:PSS core/shell radial heterojunctions for all the NW lengths, followed by annealing at 140 °C for 30 min in an ambient atmosphere to remove any residual water inside the PEDOT:PSS. DMSO and Zonyl fluorosurfactant act as secondary dopants to increase electrical conductivity28 and to achieve good adhesion between PEDOT:PSS and Si due to improved wettability of PEDOT:PSS,28 respectively. To achieve the hybrid solar cells with an active area of 25 mm2, ohmic contacts were formed for the front and rear electrodes (Fig. S3, ESI†). A silver finger-grid electrode was deposited on the surface of the PEDOT:PSS by DC sputtering through a shadow mask, while a 100 nm thick aluminum electrode was deposited by DC sputtering onto the back side of the wafer after HF acid cleaning. The width of each finger of the silver grid electrode was 100 μm, and the spacing between fingers was 500 μm. The thickness of the silver finger-grid electrode was varied within a range of 15–200 nm to investigate the electrical conductivity and light blocking effect of the surface electrode in hybrid solar cells. Finally, the fabricated solar cells were annealed at 150–250 °C in a nitrogen atmosphere for 30 min. This annealing process dramatically improves the cell performance. If the annealing was not performed, our best cell performance could not be obtained. For comparison, a planar Si/PEDOT:PSS hybrid heterojunction solar cell was also fabricated using the same procedure. The detailed fabrication process of the planar type hybrid solar cell is described in the ESI.†
Characterization
For characterization of the morphology of SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid structures with different lengths, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images were acquired using a Hitachi SU-8000 scanning electron microscope operating at an accelerating voltage of 5 kV and using a JEOL JEM-2100F scanning transmission electron microscope operating at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV, respectively. The samples for HRTEM observation were prepared by dropping the dispersion solution of the individual NW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid structure onto a copper microgrid mesh. Reflectance and optical absorption measurements of SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid structures with different lengths and planar Si/PEDOT:PSS hybrid structure and transmittance measurement of silver films with different thicknesses deposited on the quartz substrate were performed using a JASCO V-570 UV/vis/NIR spectrophotometer at room temperature. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured with a Bunkoukeiki BQE-100F at room temperature to investigate the spectral response of solar cells consisting of hybrid structures before and after annealing. The irradiation intensity of the lamp was calibrated with a single-crystalline silicon photodiode (S1337-1010BQ) provided by Hamamatsu Photonics. The cell performance and current density–voltage characteristics of hybrid solar cells before and after annealing were measured at room temperature using a Keithley 2400 source meter in the condition of 1 sun air mass (AM) 1.5G 100 mW cm−2 illumination, which was calibrated using a single-crystalline silicon solar cell (BS-500) provided by Sharp. To investigate the electrical conductivity (σ) of the silver electrode, resistivity (ρ) measurements were performed by using a standard four-point probe with a resistivity processor NPS Model Σ-5 at room temperature for the silver film with different thicknesses deposited on the quartz substrate. The electrical conductivity was determined by using the relation σ = 1/ρ.
Results and discussion
Effect of NW length in SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid radial heterojunction solar cells
Firstly, we investigated the effect of NW length in order to fabricate efficient SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid solar cells. For characterization of the morphology of SiNW arrays with different lengths before and after PEDOT:PSS coating, 5° tilted cross-sectional view SEM analysis was employed, as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†) and 1, respectively. The individual NW arrays were uniformly formed for the lengths shorter than 0.57 μm (Fig. S1a and b, ESI†). In the NW arrays after PEDOT:PSS coating, i.e., NW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid structures, the coverage of the PEDOT:PSS layer strongly depends on the length and configuration of the NWs. The individual NW arrays with lengths shorter than 0.57 μm can be fully coated with the PEDOT:PSS layer (Fig. 1a). Such overall coverage of individual NWs was also confirmed by plain-view HRTEM, as shown in Fig. 1c, d and S4 (ESI†). The HRTEM micrograph clearly indicates the presence of the lattice fringes due to single-crystalline Si and the amorphous phase due to organic PEDOT:PSS (Fig. 1c, d and S4, ESI†). It was difficult to distinguish the organic PEDOT:PSS layer on the surface of the SiNW, because of the overlapping of the support membrane on the microgrid mesh. In order to avoid this situation, we selected a region where the support membrane is cracked, as shown in Fig. 1d and S4 (ESI†). This HRTEM micrograph shows that the SiNW was coated with the organic PEDOT:PSS layer. The lattice fringes of single-crystalline Si correspond to (111) planes of cubic crystalline Si with an appropriate lattice spacing of 0.31 nm (ref. 32 and 33) (Fig. 1d and S4, ESI†). From the above HRTEM results, it is clarified that the hybrid structures with 0.57 μm individual NWs prepared in this study are composed of a single-crystalline Si/amorphous organic PEDOT:PSS core/shell radial heterojunction. The thickness of the organic shell layer is about 10–30 nm (Fig. 1d and S4, ESI†). On the other hand, as the NW length is increased from 0.57 to 2.1 μm, the most NWs tend to aggregate at the top portion and form bundles (Fig. S1c, ESI†). The formation of bunched NW arrays is caused by the van der Waals force and attractive capillary force upon pulling the vertically aligned NW arrays out of the etching solution and/or during their drying process.34 As a result, the PEDOT:PSS layer covers bunched NWs rather than individual NWs, due to shrinkage of the space between each NW (Fig. 1b). This implies that it may be difficult to fully cover the individual SiNWs with PEDOT:PSS for hybrid structures with longer NW lengths.
 Fig. 1  5° tilted cross-sectional view SEM images of SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid structures with length of (a) 0.57 μm and (b) 2.1 μm. (c) Plain-view HRTEM image of 0.57 μm individual SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid structure. (d) Highly magnified HRTEM image of (c). 
Next, to demonstrate the light-trapping capability of SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid structures with different lengths, reflectance and optical absorption analyses were conducted at room temperature, as shown in Fig. 2. For the purpose of comparison, the same experiments were also done for a planar Si/PEDOT:PSS hybrid structure. The NW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid structures and planar structures exhibit a strong reflectance of more than 25% and 60%, respectively, in the wavelength range above 1100 nm corresponding to the optical bandgap of Si (Fig. 2a). However, their reflectance becomes dramatically weak at below 1000 nm. It is particularly worth noting that the NW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid structures can provide lower reflectance than planar structures with values below 52% over a wide spectrum of 250–1000 nm (Fig. 2a). The reduced reflectance of NW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid structures closely depends on the NW length. In the hybrid structure consisting of shorter NW lengths measuring less than 0.57 μm, the reflectance can be suppressed to below 16% over a wide spectrum of 250–1000 nm (Fig. 2a). This suppression is far more effective in a hybrid structure with longer NWs of 2.1 μm length, resulting in a reflectance of below 8% (Fig. 2a). Thus, the hybrid structure with longer NW arrays can extend the broadband anti-reflection effect due to enhanced light-trapping (i.e., increasing the path length of the incoming light) in NW arrays. These light-trapping properties of a hybrid structure with NW arrays can lead to stronger optical absorption, over a wide spectrum ranging from 250–1000 nm, than a planar structure (Fig. 2b), enabling higher absorbance for a thickness thinner than the planar structure. The absorbance capacity demonstrates an upward trend on increasing the NW length in the hybrid structure. The absorbed fractions, which are estimated by transmission (T) and reflectance (R) data obtained from UV/vis/NIR measurement,35,36 are more than 83% for a hybrid structure with the NW length less than 0.57 μm, and 91% for a NW length of 2.1 μm over a wide spectrum range between 250 and 1000 nm. Thus, the hybrid structure with NW arrays can allow the higher absorbed fractions than a planar structure with values more than 48%.
 Fig. 2  (a) Reflectance and (b) optical absorption spectra of a planar Si/PEDOT:PSS hybrid structure and SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid structures with different lengths. 
To further investigate the spectral response of hybrid solar cells consisting of SiNW/PEDOT:PSS core/shell radial heterojunctions of different lengths, EQE analyses were performed at room temperature, as shown in Fig. 3a. The EQE spectra were also compared to those of the planar Si/PEDOT:PSS hybrid heterojunction solar cell. The planar Si/PEDOT:PSS hybrid solar cell possessed an EQE of approx. 40% over a wide spectrum of 300–900 nm (Fig. 3a). The EQE can be further enhanced by using the hybrid structure with NW arrays as absorbers in solar cells. In our NW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid solar cells, the EQE strongly depends on the length and configuration of the NWs rather than the light-trapping property. In fact, the hybrid solar cells with shorter NW lengths of below 0.57 μm were able to transform absorbed photons into current efficiently over a wide spectrum of 300–1000 nm (Fig. 3a). The 0.57 μm NW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid solar cell showed the highest EQE, with a value within 40–60% over a wide spectrum of 400–1000 nm (Fig. 3a), although it exhibited weaker light-trapping properties than arrays with NW lengths exceeding 0.57 μm. In contrast, the EQE of the 2.1 μm NW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid solar cell was reduced by up to 2–6% over a wide spectrum of 300–1000 nm (Fig. 3a), despite it possessing the strongest light-trapping properties of all the hybrid solar cells. The drastic drop in EQE over the entire wavelength range on increasing the NW length is attributable to the decrease in carrier collection efficiency caused by the enhancement of carrier recombination during the transport to electrodes, due to the increased transportation distance. The other reason is the morphology of the long NW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid structure. The hybrid structure with longer NW lengths of 2.1 μm consists of bunched NW/PEDOT:PSS composites rather than individual NW/PEDOT:PSS composites, as identified by SEM analysis (Fig. 1b). Thus, the bundle structures reduce the p–n junction areas, resulting in a decrease in the separation of photogenerated charge carriers at the p–n junction that leads to degradation of EQE.
 Fig. 3  (a) EQE spectra of the planar Si/PEDOT:PSS hybrid heterojunction solar cell and SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid radial heterojunction solar cells with different lengths. (b) Current density–voltage characteristics of the planar Si/PEDOT:PSS hybrid heterojunction solar cell and SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid radial heterojunction solar cells with different lengths under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G illumination. (c) Variation of PCE as a function of NW length. 
To clarify the effect of NW length on the photovoltaic performances of the obtained SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid radial heterojunction solar cells, current density–voltage characteristics were measured under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G illumination, as shown in Fig. 3b. Moreover, the variation of PCE as a function of NW length is shown in Fig. 3c. The photovoltaic performances are also compared to that of a planar Si/PEDOT:PSS hybrid heterojunction solar cell. The cell performances of NW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid solar cells reflect their EQE results. The device parameters, such as a short circuit current density (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF) and PCE, can be improved for the NW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid solar cells with shorter NW lengths up to 0.57 μm, compared to the planar Si/PEDOT:PSS hybrid solar cell, which showed a Jsc of 19.86 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.3 V, a FF of 0.28 and a PCE of 1.72% (Fig. 3b and c). Specifically, the 0.57 μm NW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid solar cell with the highest EQE exhibited good performance, attaining a Jsc of 26.04 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.41 V, a FF of 0.56 and a PCE of 5.95% (Fig. 3b and c). Among these device parameters, the increase in the Jsc is closely related to the enhanced EQE. That is, the 0.57 μm NW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid solar cell achieved the high Jsc by efficiently transforming absorbed photons into current over a wide spectrum of 400–1000 nm, owing to the realization of the highest EQE. Regarding the increase in the Voc, it may be related to the increase in shunt resistance (Rsh). The 0.57 μm NW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid solar cell has a high Rsh of 1.3 × 102 Ω cm2, compared to the planar Si/PEDOT:PSS hybrid solar cell, which showed a Rsh of 1.9 × 101 Ω cm2. The increase in the Rsh enables the high shutting power losses in hybrid solar cells, causing the enhancement in the Voc. The increase in the minority carrier lifetime can be considered as the other reason for high Voc. The hybrid solar cells with shorter NW lengths diminish the probability of carrier recombination due to the reduced transportation distance, resulting in the increase in the minority carrier lifetime. Due to the increase of both Rsh and minority carrier lifetime, the 0.57 μm NW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid solar cell attained the high Voc. Interestingly, by using the shorter NW lengths of 0.57 μm, the FF can be further improved compared to the increase in the Jsc and Voc. The enhancement in the FF mainly arises from the decrease in series resistance (Rs), resulting in the reduction in Rs to 1.15 Ω cm2 of the 0.57 μm NW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid solar cell from the value of the planar Si/PEDOT:PSS hybrid solar cell of 3.5 Ω cm2. Because of the improvements of the Jsc, Voc and FF, the 0.57 μm NW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid solar cell accomplished the high PCE (Fig. 3c). This high PCE comes from very good carrier collection at the electrodes due to effective carrier transportation in the NW, because the shorter NW lengths can provide the reduced transportation distance to the electrode, as identified by EQE analysis (Fig. 3a). As the NW length in the hybrid solar cells is increased from 0.57 to 2.1 μm, the cell performance declines, showing a Jsc of 0.86 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.25 V, a FF of 0.41 and a PCE of 8.9 × 10−2% (Fig. 3b and c). This trend is consistent with the variation in EQE (Fig. 3a). The depression of cell performance is caused by less carrier separation due to the reduction in p–n junction areas resulting from the bunched NW configurations and also inefficient carrier collection due to the enhancement of the carrier recombination during transport to electrodes, as identified by EQE analysis (Fig. 3a). The abovementioned results clearly suggest that it is important to optimize the NW length to be able to fabricate efficient hybrid solar cells. Consequently, we demonstrate in this section that the optimal NW length is 0.57 μm. This shorter NW length enables not only the effective collection of photogenerated charge carriers separated at the p–n junction via the electrodes but also the suppression of carrier recombination, because the carriers can be collected at the electrodes via a short transportation distance.
Effect of annealing of SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid radial heterojunction solar cells
In this section, we investigate the effect of annealing of SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid solar cells in order to further improve the PCE. The morphology of SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid structures with different lengths after annealing at 200 °C was characterized by 5° tilted cross-sectional view SEM, as shown in Fig. S5 (ESI†). No visible changes of morphology of the NW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid structures were observed after annealing at 200 °C for all the NW lengths (Fig. S5a and b, ESI†). Hence, the ratio of the individual NWs coated with a PEDOT:PSS layer is reduced with increasing the NW length from 0.57 to 2.1 μm, similar to that of hybrid structures without annealing. In particular, the conditions of the PEDOT:PSS layer on individual NWs by annealing at 200 °C were confirmed by plain-view HRTEM, as shown in Fig. S5c and d (ESI†). The HRTEM micrograph of hybrid structures consisting of 0.57 μm individual NWs clearly indicates the presence of the amorphous layer due to the organic PEDOT:PSS shell for the whole length of NWs (Fig. S5c and d, ESI†), enabling the uniform PEDOT:PSS coating even after annealing at 200 °C. The thickness of the PEDOT:PSS shell layer is ∼30 nm (Fig. S5d, ESI†), which is almost the same as that of hybrid structures without annealing (Fig. 1d and S4, ESI†).
Next, to elucidate the light-trapping capability of SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid structures with different lengths after annealing at 200 °C, reflectance and optical absorption analyses were conducted at room temperature, as shown in Fig. S6 (ESI†). For the purpose of comparison, the same experiments were also done for the annealed planar Si/PEDOT:PSS hybrid structure. The reflectance and optical absorption properties of NW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid structures with different lengths are preserved after annealing, indicating that the annealing has absolutely no impact on the light-trapping properties of a hybrid structure with NW arrays (Fig. S6a and b, ESI†). Hence, the annealed hybrid structure consisting of NWs of lengths of less than 0.57 μm possesses optimal properties, with reflectance below 17% and an absorbed fraction exceeding 82%, which were estimated by transmission (T) and reflectance (R) data obtained from UV/vis/NIR measurement,35,36 over a wide spectrum of 250–1000 nm (Fig. S6a and b, ESI†). In contrast, the reflectance and optical absorption properties of the planar structure after annealing are almost the same as those of the planar structure without annealing, showing reflectance below 49% and an absorbed fraction exceeding 51% over a wide spectrum range between 250 and 1000 nm (Fig. S6a and b, ESI†).
To further investigate the spectral response of SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid radial heterojunction solar cells with different lengths after annealing at 200 °C, EQE analyses were performed at room temperature, as shown in Fig. 4a. The EQE spectra were also compared to those of the annealed planar Si/PEDOT:PSS hybrid heterojunction solar cell. The annealed planar solar cell had an EQE of approx. 47% over a wide spectrum of 300–900 nm (Fig. 4a), which is slightly higher than that of the planar solar cell without annealing. Interestingly, the EQE for NW lengths below 0.57 μm can be dramatically enhanced by annealing. The highest EQE was maintained for the 0.57 μm NW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid solar cell even after annealing at 200 °C, similar to that of the hybrid solar cell without annealing. In fact, the annealed 0.57 μm NW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid solar cell attained the highest EQE with a value within 42–82% over a wide spectrum of 400–1000 nm (Fig. 4a). The increase in EQE due to annealing is most likely due to the decreased contact resistance caused by better adhesion between the front electrode and the active layer, i.e., the SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid structures, and/or between the rear electrode and the back side of the Si wafer. The decreased contact resistance is also caused by the formation and improvement of the ohmic contacts between each electrode and active layer/wafer. The quality of the ohmic contact, which is determined by the nature of the interface with the silver and/or aluminum electrodes, strongly influences the carrier collection efficiency at the electrodes.25 If a nonohmic contact is formed on the active layer and/or the back side of the wafer, it causes high contact resistance, which can deteriorate the EQE and device performance. Although there are various methods to make the ohmic contact, for instance, the formation of a highly doped Si layer used for commercial Si solar cells,34,37 we could improve the ohmic contact by annealing. The current–voltage characteristics between silver electrodes on the surface of the PEDOT:PSS layer and between aluminum electrodes on the back side of the Si wafer after annealing are shown in Fig. S3a and b (ESI†), respectively. The front and rear electrodes maintained the ohmic contacts even after annealing. As expected, the annealing led to the decrease in contact resistance due to the improvement of the ohmic contacts for both electrodes, resulting in the reduction in contact resistance from 39.4 to 37.6 Ω for the front (silver) electrode and from 689.6 to 355.9 Ω for the rear (aluminum) electrode on increasing the annealing temperature from 25 (before annealing) to 200 °C. The lowering of contact resistance by annealing is caused by the increase in electrical conductivity of each electrode, showing the enhancement in electrical conductivity from 4.0 × 105 to 4.6 × 105 S cm−1 for the front electrode with a thickness of 100 nm (Fig. S7a, ESI†) and from 2.15 × 104 to 2.23 × 104 S cm−1 for the rear electrode with a thickness of 100 nm (Fig. S8, ESI†) on increasing the annealing temperature from 25 (before annealing) to 200 °C. Additionally, annealing also enhances the electrical conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS layer,28 similar to the other p-type conjugated polymer (e.g., P3HT).38 These benefits of annealing also seem to apply to hybrid solar cells with longer NW lengths of 2.1 μm, resulting in a slight increase in EQE. The 2.1 μm NW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid solar cell showed an improved EQE to 4–22% over a wide spectrum of 300–1000 nm (Fig. 4a), compared to before annealing.
 Fig. 4  (a) EQE spectra of the planar Si/PEDOT:PSS hybrid heterojunction solar cell and SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid radial heterojunction solar cells with different lengths after annealing at 200 °C. (b) Current density–voltage characteristics of the planar Si/PEDOT:PSS hybrid heterojunction solar cell and SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid radial heterojunction solar cells with different lengths after annealing at 200 °C under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G illumination. (c) Variation of PCE as a function of NW length for various annealing temperatures. 
The photovoltaic performances of the obtained SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid radial heterojunction solar cells with different lengths after annealing at 200 °C were measured under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G illumination, as shown in Fig. 4b. The photovoltaic performances are also compared to that of a planar Si/PEDOT:PSS hybrid heterojunction solar cell. The cell performances of NW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid solar cells after annealing also reflect their EQE results. Most importantly, the cell performance of the hybrid solar cells with NW lengths of less than 0.57 μm can be further enhanced by annealing at 200 °C. Specifically, the 0.57 μm NW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid solar cell showed the best performance, with a Jsc of 30.65 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.465 V, a FF of 0.65 and a PCE of 9.3%, due to more effective carrier transport between active layer and electrodes as a result of annealing (Fig. 4b). On the other hand, hybrid solar cells with a longer NW length of 2.1 μm exhibit significantly worse performance, even after annealing at 200 °C, with a Jsc of 1.33 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.33 V, a FF of 0.41 and a PCE of 1.8 × 10−1% (Fig. 4b). This trend is consistent with the variation in EQE (Fig. 4a). The depression of cell performance is due to the less carrier separation related to bunched NW configurations and also the inefficient carrier collection with carrier recombination during transport to electrodes, similar to the case of hybrid solar cells with longer NW lengths of 2.1 μm before annealing. The variation of PCE as a function of NW length and annealing temperature is shown in Fig. 4c. PCE increased on increasing the NW length from 0.2 to 0.57 μm and also by increasing the annealing temperature from 25 (before annealing) to 200 °C. The highest PCE of 9.3% is realized for the 0.57 μm NW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid solar cell after annealing at 200 °C. A further increase in annealing temperature to 250 °C causes an undesirable decrease in PCE. To investigate the causes of degradation of the device performance by annealing at 250 °C, the thermal stability (structural transformation by a thermal process) of the PEDOT:PSS layer was characterized by thermogravimetry-differential thermal analysis (TG-DTA) (Fig. S9, ESI†), since it possesses poor thermal stability compared to silicon. The PEDOT:PSS layer exhibits a negligible weight loss in the temperature range from 150–200 °C. However, at temperatures above 200 °C, decomposition of the PEDOT:PSS layer occurs very fast, due to the appearance of an exothermic peak around 230 °C. Decomposition results in increased weight loss of the PEDOT:PSS layer at 250 °C, causing less carrier separation due to the reduced p–n junction areas. Therefore, the dramatic decrease in PCE for the hybrid solar cells after annealing at 250 °C is most likely due to a degradation effect of the PEDOT:PSS layer. The abovementioned results clearly suggest that it is also important to optimize the annealing process in addition to the NW length to be able to fabricate more efficient hybrid solar cells. Therefore, we indicate that the best conditions for the optimal NW length and the effective annealing temperature are 0.57 μm and 200 °C, respectively, as specified in this section. The annealing process can allow the effective carrier transport and collection from active layer to electrodes. These features resulted in the decrease in contact resistance between active layer and electrode due to the improvement of the ohmic contact by annealing at 200 °C.
Effect of surface electrode in SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid radial heterojunction solar cells
Finally, we investigated the electrical conductivity and light blocking effect of the surface electrode consisting of silver in SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid solar cells. The electrical conductivity of the silver electrode as a function of film thickness is shown in Fig. S10a (ESI†). The electrical conductivity of the silver electrode strongly depends on the film thickness. A thick silver electrode of 200 nm possessed a high electrical conductivity of 7.3 × 105 S cm−1, compared to a thin silver electrode of 15 nm, which shows the value of 1.6 × 105 S cm−1 (Fig. S10a, ESI†).
Next, to demonstrate the light blocking effect of silver electrodes with different film thicknesses, transmittance analysis was conducted at room temperature, as shown in Fig. S10b (ESI†). The variation in film thickness exhibited different tendencies for the transmittance in the broad range from near-ultraviolet to near-infrared. A 15 nm thick silver electrode showed a broad optical transmission in the broad wavelength range. However, the influence of film thickness on transmittance was distinctly observed in the wavelength range, showing the sharp optical transmission in the wavelength range shorter than 500 nm for the film thickness above 50 nm. A maximum value of the transmittance was obtained at 322 nm for all the film thicknesses. The maximum value varied with film thickness, resulting in the attenuation of transmittance from 77 to 2.1% for an increase in film thickness from 15 to 200 nm (Fig. S10b, ESI†). Thus, in the NW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid solar cells prepared in this study, the surface electrode adopted the finger-grid configuration to suppress light shielding to the active layer due to the silver electrode.
To investigate the effect of film thickness of the silver finger-grid electrode on the photovoltaic performances of the SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid solar cells, the current density–voltage characteristics of hybrid solar cells with a 15 nm thick and a 100 nm thick finger-grid electrode were measured under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G illumination, as shown in Fig. 5a. All the hybrid solar cells were fabricated by using the SiNW arrays with a length of 0.57 μm, because this NW length showed a good photovoltaic performance, compared to a NW length of less than or more than 0.57 μm, as described in the preceding section. The PCEs of their corresponding hybrid solar cells are shown in Fig. 5c. The hybrid solar cell with a 200 nm thick finger-grid electrode was not prepared, because the film thickness showed a remarkably low transmittance. The hybrid solar cell with a 15 nm thick finger-grid electrode resulted in a cell performance, which has a Jsc of 27.6 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.36 V, a FF of 0.3 and a PCE of 3.0% (Fig. 5a and c). As identified by electrical conductivity and transmittance analyses (Fig. S10a and b, ESI†), the thin finger-grid electrode provides scarce electrical conductivity, although it allows high optical transmission for the active layer underneath the electrode. Such a feature of the thin finger-grid electrode not only shuts off supply of photogenerated charge carriers from the active layer to the silver electrode but also leads to worsening of carrier transportation in the electrode. Therefore, the poor performance of the hybrid solar cell with a thin finger-grid electrode is caused by inefficient carrier collection due to the less electrical conductivity of the electrode. The cell performance can be dramatically improved for the hybrid solar cells with a thick finger-grid electrode (Fig. 5a and c). In fact, the hybrid solar cell with a 100 nm thick finger-grid electrode could attain a PCE of 5.95% with a Jsc of 26.04 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.41 V and a FF of 0.56 (Fig. 5a and c). Intriguingly, the difference of film thickness on cell performance also exhibits entirely different tendencies for annealing behaviour. The current density–voltage characteristics of the 200 °C annealed hybrid solar cell with a 15 nm thick and a 100 nm thick finger-grid electrode and the variation of PCE of their corresponding hybrid solar cells as a function of annealing temperature are also shown in Fig. 5b and c, respectively. The hybrid solar cell with a thin finger-grid electrode resulted in the deterioration of cell performance on increasing the annealing temperature from 150 to 250 °C (Fig. 5c). The hybrid solar cell after annealing above 200 °C did not truly work as a photovoltaic cell, showing a Jsc of 0.13 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.22 V, a FF of 0.37 and a PCE of 1.0 × 10−2% (Fig. 5b and c). This performance is caused by variation of the electrical conductivity of the silver electrode after annealing rather than its transmittance. The electrical conductivity and transmittance of annealed silver electrodes with different film thicknesses are shown in Fig. S7a–d (ESI†). The electrical conductivity of the 15 nm thick electrode was lowered drastically from 1.6 × 105 to 0.37 S cm−1 (3.6 × 103 S cm−1 at 150 °C) on increasing the annealing temperature from 25 (before annealing) to 250 °C (Fig. S7a, ESI†), although the transmittance in a wide wavelength range of 500–2000 nm demonstrated an upward trend with annealing temperature (a maximum value of the transmittance at 322 nm was not changed) (Fig. S7b–d, ESI†). The lowering of electrical conductivity by annealing produces the inhibition of carrier collection at the surface electrode due to the increase in Rs of the hybrid solar cell, resulting in the enhancement in Rs from 5.5 to 40.4 Ω cm2 (10 Ω cm2 at 150 °C) on increasing the annealing temperature from 25 (before annealing) to 250 °C. Therefore, the significantly worse performance of the annealed hybrid solar cell with a thin finger-grid electrode is most likely due to the decrease in carrier collection efficiency due to the performance deterioration of the surface electrode. In contrast, the cell performance of the hybrid solar cell with a 100 nm thick finger-grid electrode can be further improved on increasing the annealing temperature from 150 to 200 °C, attaining the best performance, with a Jsc of 30.65 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.465 V, a FF of 0.65 and a PCE of 9.3% (Fig. 5b and c). Based on the above results, we suggest that the silver finger-grid electrode with a thickness of 100 nm is more effective as the surface electrode in hybrid solar cells. The knowledge obtained in this section is that the optimal film thickness of 100 nm can introduce the effective carrier collection due to the high electrical conductivity of the silver electrode without extreme light blocking.
 Fig. 5  Current density–voltage characteristics of SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid radial heterojunction solar cells with a 15 nm thick and a 100 nm thick silver finger-grid electrode (a) before and (b) after annealing at 200 °C under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G illumination. (c) Variation of PCE as a function of annealing temperature for various film thicknesses. All the hybrid solar cells were fabricated by using the SiNW arrays with a length of 0.57 μm. 
Based on the above-described three effects, that is the NW length, annealing and surface electrode, we conclude that these parameters have crucial roles in the development of efficient inorganic/organic hybrid solar cells.
Conclusion
We designed inorganic/organic hybrid radial heterojunction solar cells combining PEDOT:PSS with vertically aligned n-type SiNWs. The PCE of the obtained NW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid solar cells can be spectacularly improved by optimizing the thickness of the surface electrode, the NW length and subjecting them to annealing. These optimizations can provide not only suppressed carrier recombination due to the reduced transportation distance of carriers in NWs but also improved carrier transport efficiency between the active layer/wafer and the electrodes, leading to enhanced carrier collection efficiency at the electrodes. Optimization of the thickness of the surface electrode, the NW length and the annealing temperature indicates that a hybrid solar cell consisting of NW arrays with a length of 0.57 μm and 100 nm thick silver finger-grid electrode, annealed at 200 °C, achieves the best cell performance with a PCE of 9.3%, despite the weaker light-trapping capability than that observed in arrays with longer nanowires. Our approach is a significant contribution to design of higher-performance and lower-cost inorganic/organic hybrid heterojunction solar cells.
Acknowledgements
This work was partly supported by a Funding Program for Next Generation World-Leading Researchers (NEXT Program) in Japan.
Notes and references
S. W. Boettcher, J. M. Spurgeon, M. C. Putnam, E. L. Warren, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. D. Kelzenberg, J. R. Maiolo, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, Science, 2010, 327, 185–187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Kelzenberg, S. W. Boettcher, J. A. Petykiewicz, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. C. Putnam, E. L. Warren, J. M. Spurgeon, R. M. Briggs, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 239–244 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tian, X. Zheng, T. J. Kempa, Y. Fang, N. Yu, G. Yu, J. Huang and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2007, 449, 885–889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. C. Garnett and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9224–9225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Tian, T. J. Kempa and C. M. Lieber, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 16–24 RSC .
S. Brittman, H. Gao, E. C. Garnett and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5189–5195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lu, C. Wang, W. Yue and L. Chen, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3631–3634 RSC .
C.-Y. Liu, Z. C. Holman and U. R. Kortshagen, Nano Lett., 2008, 9, 449–452 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Herrmann, S. Niesar, C. Scharsich, A. Köhler, M. Stutzmann and E. Riedle, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18220–18233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2012, 20, 12–20 Search PubMed .
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2007, 315, 798–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-J. Syu, S.-C. Shiu and C.-F. Lin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 98, 267–272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xu and Q. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2700–2720 CAS .
W. Lu, Q. Chen, B. Wang and L. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 023112 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-F. Huang, S. Chattopadhyay, Y.-J. Jen, C.-Y. Peng, T. A. Liu, Y.-K. Hsu, C.-L. Pan, H.-C. Lo, C.-H. Hsu, Y.-H. Chang, C.-S. Lee, K.-H. Chen and L.-C. Chen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 770–774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Sivakov, G. Andra, A. Gawlik, A. Berger, J. Plentz, F. Falk and S. H. Christiansen, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1549–1554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Fukata, M. Mitome, T. Sekiguchi, Y. Bando, M. Kirkham, J.-I. Hong, Z. L. Wang and R. L. Snyder, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8887–8895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sato, A. Castaldini, N. Fukata and A. Cavallini, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3012–3017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Peng, J. Hu, Y. Yan, Y. Wu, H. Fang, Y. Xu, S.-T. Lee and J. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 387–394 CrossRef CAS .
W. K. Choi, T. H. Liew, M. K. Dawood, H. I. Smith, C. V. Thompson and M. H. Hong, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3799–3802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Huang, N. Geyer, P. Werner, J. Boor and U. Gösele, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 285–308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, R. Jia, C. Chen, Z. Xing, W. Ding, Y. Meng, D. Wu, X. Liu and T. Ye, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 151116 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Oh, H.-C. Yuan and H. M. Branz, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 743–748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Mishima, M. Taguchi, H. Sakata and E. Maruyama, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 18–21 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wright and A. Uddin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 107, 87–111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Krebs, T. D. Nielsen, J. Fyenbo, M. Wadstrom and M. S. Pedersen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 512–525 CAS .
Y. Zhou, C. Fuentes-Hernandez, J. Shim, J. Meyer, A. J. Giordano, H. Li, P. Winget, T. Papadopoulos, H. Cheunn, J. Kim, M. Fenoll, A. Dindar, W. Haske, E. Najafabadi, T. M. Khan, H. Sojoudi, S. Barlow, S. Graham, J.-L. Brédas, S. R. Marder, A. Kahn and B. Kippelen, Science, 2012, 336, 327–332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Vosgueritchian, D. J. Lipomi and Z. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 421–428 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Lipomi, J. A. Lee, M. Vosgueritchian, B. C.-K. Tee, J. A. Bolander and Z. Bao, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 373–382 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, B. Sun, T. Song, X. Zhu and S. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2084–2090 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, Z. Xu, J. Xia, S.-T. Tsai, Y. Wu, G. Li, C. Ray and L. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E135–E138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-L. Zhang, K.-Q. Peng, X. Fan, J.-S. Jie, R.-Q. Zhang, S.-T. Lee and N.-B. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4444–4450 CAS .
C.-H. Chiu, C.-W. Huang, J.-Y. Chen, Y.-T. Huang, J.-C. Hu, L.-T. Chen, C.-L. Hsin and W.-W. Wu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5086–5092 RSC .
L. He, C. Jiang, H. Wang, D. Lai, Y. H. Tan, C. S. Tan and Rusli, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 103104 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Tsakalakos, J. Balch, J. Fronheiser, M.-Y. Shih, S. F. LeBoeuf, M. Pietrzykowski, P. J. Codella, B. A. Korevaar, O. Sulima, J. Rand, A. Davuluru and U. Rapol, J. Nanophotonics, 2007, 1, 013552 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Adachi, M. P. Anantram and K. S. Karim, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4093–4098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jeong, E.
C. Garnett, S. Wang, Z. Yu, S. Fan, M. L. Brongersma, M. D. McGehee and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2971–2976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Y. Liu, Z. C. Holman and U. R. Kortshagen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2157–2164 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4nr00733fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  5° tilted cross-sectional view SEM images of SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid structures with length of (a) 0.57 μm and (b) 2.1 μm. (c) Plain-view HRTEM image of 0.57 μm individual SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid structure. (d) Highly magnified HRTEM image of (c).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Reflectance and (b) optical absorption spectra of a planar Si/PEDOT:PSS hybrid structure and SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid structures with different lengths.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) EQE spectra of the planar Si/PEDOT:PSS hybrid heterojunction solar cell and SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid radial heterojunction solar cells with different lengths. (b) Current density–voltage characteristics of the planar Si/PEDOT:PSS hybrid heterojunction solar cell and SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid radial heterojunction solar cells with different lengths under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G illumination. (c) Variation of PCE as a function of NW length.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) EQE spectra of the planar Si/PEDOT:PSS hybrid heterojunction solar cell and SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid radial heterojunction solar cells with different lengths after annealing at 200 °C. (b) Current density–voltage characteristics of the planar Si/PEDOT:PSS hybrid heterojunction solar cell and SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid radial heterojunction solar cells with different lengths after annealing at 200 °C under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G illumination. (c) Variation of PCE as a function of NW length for various annealing temperatures.	 

 	Fig. 5  Current density–voltage characteristics of SiNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid radial heterojunction solar cells with a 15 nm thick and a 100 nm thick silver finger-grid electrode (a) before and (b) after annealing at 200 °C under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G illumination. (c) Variation of PCE as a function of annealing temperature for various film thicknesses. All the hybrid solar cells were fabricated by using the SiNW arrays with a length of 0.57 μm.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4nr00733f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
