Forthcoming perspectives of photoelectrochromic devices: a critical review  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6EE01514J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6EE01514J
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2682-2719Forthcoming perspectives of photoelectrochromic devices: a critical review

        
          
            Alessandro 
            Cannavale
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Pierluigi 
            Cossari
          
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Giles E. 
            Eperon
          
          
        
      de, 
      
        
          
            Silvia 
            Colella
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Francesco 
            Fiorito
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Giuseppe 
            Gigli
          
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Henry J. 
            Snaith
          
          
        
      e and 

        
          
            Andrea 
            Listorti
          
          
        
      bc
aDipartimento di Scienze dell'Ingegneria Civile e dell'Architettura, Politecnico di Bari, via Orabona 4, Bari, Italy. E-mail: alessandro.cannavale@poliba.it
bIstituto di Nanotecnologia, CNR-Nanotec, 16, 73100 Lecce, Italy
cUniversità del Salento, Dipartimento di Matematica e Fisica “Ennio De Giorgi”, via Arnesano, 73100 Lecce, Italy
dDepartment of Chemistry, University of Washington, Box 351700, Seattle, WA 98195-1700, USA
eDepartment of Physics, University of Oxford, Parks Road, OX1 3PU, Oxford, UK
fUniversity of New South Wales, Faculty of Built Environment, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia
Received 
      26th May 2016
    , Accepted 11th July 2016First published on 11th July 2016AbstractRe-thinking our relationship with energy resources and environmental equilibrium, towards anthropogenic sustainability, calls for innovative and energetically wise technologies. Smart devices adjusting their optical behaviour depending on the environmental conditions will allow remarkable energy savings. To this end, photoelectrochromic devices (PECDs) have captured, in the last two decades, the interest of many research groups and industrial players worldwide. These devices encompass a dual behavior, being able to generate energy and, concomitantly, deliver a smart optical response. For this reason, they are the ideal skins of future buildings, capable of modulating their behavior in response to changing external stimuli, like sunlight irradiance. PECDs have a wide range of applications, from solar shading in architectural glazing to rear view mirrors in automotives, or avionics. This review article explores the different design concepts standing at the basis of the devices that have appeared so far, shedding light on future perspectives. This work takes into account R&D issues and processing constraints as well as the potential exploitation of emerging solid-state materials promising important technological progress.
Alessandro Cannavale
Alessandro Cannavale is an assistant professor at Politecnico di Bari. He obtained his PhD, in 2011, with a dissertation on smart nanotechnologies for transparent building envelopes. He has been working, as a postdoc, in the Energy Platform of Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia from 2011 to 2014 and at “Dipartimento di matematica e fisica” of Università del Salento, since 2015. His research interests include design, fabrication and characterization of multifunctional chromogenic devices, thin film deposition by means of PVD techniques and the assessment of the energy and comfort impacts deriving from building integration of innovative nanodevices. He is an associated researcher at CNR-Nanotec.
Pierluigi Cossari
Pierluigi Cossari is a post-doctoral researcher at the Università del Salento, and an associated researcher at CNR-Nanotec (Lecce). After obtaining his degree in Chemistry and Pharmaceutical Technology from Sapienza University of Rome, he spent two years at the Institute of Nanostructured Materials CNR to conduct research activity on polymer and nanocomposite materials. He earned his PhD in Nanobiotechnology from the University of Genoa jointly with Marburg University working on the synthesis and spectroscopic characterization of semiconducting polymers and carbon nanotube–polymer nanocomposites (2010–2013). His current research focuses on the synthesis, thin film processing and electrochemical characterization of solid-state polymer electrolytes for electrochromic and photoelectrochromic devices.
Giles E. Eperon
Giles Eperon received his PhD in Physics from the University of Oxford in 2015. He is currently working as a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Washington, in the department of Chemistry. Prior to his PhD studies he worked as a research scientist at Sharp Laboratories of Europe Ltd. (2010–2012). His research is focused on understanding and controlling the properties of novel photovoltaic and optoelectronic materials, with a current emphasis on halide perovskites. He has particular interests in building-integrated photovoltaics and in material design to create the optimum photovoltaic material.
Giuseppe Gigli
Giuseppe Gigli is Professor in Physics at the Mathematics and Physics Department of University of Salento. He is Director of the CNR Institute of Nanotechnology, where he is also coordinator of the Molecular Nanotechnology group. GG has been member of the European Laboratory of Nonlinear Spectroscopy (LENS) Scientific Board, Coordinator of the National Energy Platform of IIT and member of the Administration Board of the High Tech District (DHITECH) in Lecce. His research activities involve: Organic Optoelectronics and Polaritonics, Molecular Nanotechnology. GG is co-founder of two research Spin-off, Mediteknology and BF2, aiming at the developing of nanosystems for Health.
Henry J. Snaith
Henry Snaith undertook his PhD at the University of Cambridge, working on organic photovoltaics, then post-doc at the EPFL, in Switzerland, working on dye-sensitized solar cells. Since 2007 he has been based in the Clarendon Laboratory of Oxford University, where he is a professor of physics and leads a research group developing new materials and structures for photovoltaic and understanding and controlling the physical processes occurring at semiconductor heterojunctions. His research is currently focussed on advancing metal halide perovskites for photovoltaic and optoelectronic applications. He has received a number of early carer research awards including the Institute of Physics Patterson Medal and Prize (2012) the Materials Research Society Outstanding Young Investigator Award (2014) and the EU-40 materials Prize 2016. In addition he was named one of “Natures Ten” people who mattered most in 2013, for his pioneering work on perovskite solar cells, assessed by Thomson Reuters as being the world's 2nd “most influential scientific mind” in 2016, based on number of highly cited publications, and he was elected as a fellow of the Royal Society in 2015. In December 2010 he founded Oxford PV Ltd. which is commercialising the perovskite solar technology transferred from his University Laboratory.
Andrea Listorti
Andrea Listorti is a researcher at the Dipartimento di matematica e fisica of Università del Salento and an associated researcher at CNR-Nanotec of Lecce. Previously he worked at the Italian Institute of Technology of Lecce, the Imperial College of London and CNR-ISOF of Bologna. Currently his research activity focuses on the optoelectronic exploitation of halide perovskites. Since 2006 he published 40+ papers on molecular photophysics, solar fuels and optoelectronic devices.

Broader context
The development of technologies allowing a reduction of the anthropogenic impact on planet resources and, concomitantly, improving people lifestyle is among the key scopes of applied research. The built environment accounts for more than 40% of the primary energy used in Europe and is responsible for 36% of its green-house gases outcome. This strong impact is mainly due to heating, cooling and lighting in residential and commercial buildings. If the thermo-physical performances of building envelopes could be dynamic, this impact could be greatly reduced. A photoelectrochromic device (PECD) is an ideal candidate for the task, since it is able to self-power a smart optical response allowing, if used as a window, variable energy throughputs. A PECD is a multifunctional object in which different components are brought together, to combine their properties in a resulting, innovative fashion. In particular, a first function consists in converting electromagnetic radiation into electrical energy (PV function) and a second one in varying the chromatic characteristics of the device itself, following an electric stimulus (EC function). In some cases, namely photovoltachromic devices (PVCDs), a surplus of electric energy can be generated, adding an extra feature to this class of multifunctional devices. The device being a complex combination of players, its evolution is based on the development of all the components and it can be accelerated by a breakthrough in one of the related fields. In the last few years such advancements have been witnessed, thus progress of PECDs is expected and is worth considering the development of their features and architectures and the interesting forthcoming perspectives.

1. Introduction
Planet biosphere alteration, along with the progressive depletion of non-renewable energy sources, calls for innovative and non-polluting technologies devoted to energy management.1 The impact of human activities on the environment is, in fact, so strong that an ecologist, Eugene F. Stoermer, and successively a Nobel laureate for chemistry, Paul Crutzen, advise to re-name our epoch the “Anthropocene”.2 Among many indicators of the unsustainability of our interaction with the ecosystem is the rising of the atmosphere temperature, likely connected to anthropogenic activities. 2015 witnessed an unenviable record in this frame, as the global average surface temperature was the warmest on record reaching the symbolic and significant milestone of 1 °C above the pre-industrial era.3 The urge for a worldwide cooperative and conscientious utilization of natural resources brought to Paris, in December 2015, representatives of 196 countries, to agree upon worldwide responses to the current situation. The epochal event underlined the common consensus around the necessity of adopting a series of measurements aiming at reducing the risks and impacts of anthropogenic activities on a delicate planet equilibrium.4 These policies along with a technological maturation of relating technologies5 promote renewables as key players in the energy market share. The world total renewable energy investment in 2015 was the highest figure ever, of $328.9 bn, up 4% from 2014's $315.9 bn and beating the previous record, set in 2011 by 3%.6 This has contributed to a severe reduction of PV plant costs,7 and a recent report underlines how solar PV is already cheaper than grid electricity in 42 of the 50 largest US cities.8 In this epochal conundrum it is worth considering that the built environment accounts for more than 40% of the primary energy used in Europe and is responsible for 36% of green-house gases, according to the European Commission.9 This huge amount of energy consumption is mainly due to heating, cooling and lighting in residential and commercial buildings. Windows and glazed facades account for a significant fraction of heat gain or loss in a building, depending upon its geographic location and season. Most deployed glazing is non-responsive and relies on shuttering and blinds or sunscreens to modulate thermal gains and losses. If the thermo-physical performances of building envelopes could be dynamic, then much greater thermal efficiency could be achieved throughout varying climates. Therefore, the development of novel technologies allowing variable energy throughputs is strongly recommended.10–12 Smart windows, or switchable glazings, belong to the emerging category of products changing their light transmittance in response to an external stimulus.13 EC windows are recognized as a suitable technology, because they do not impede visibility like other conventional blinding systems, providing, at the same time, glare control and thermal/visual comfort management.12 For their potential impact on energy supply and saving, smart windows are expected to become important architectural components of future buildings.14–16 However, the technologies which have appeared so far suffer from several defects, such as: limited transmittance modulation, defects in homogeneity of coloration, dark spots and pinholes, uneven coloration due to the inhomogeneous distribution of the electric field applied, peripheral leakage for inefficient sealing, and, in some cases, a limited lifetime (6000 cycles per 5 years).17 If these problems can be solved, EC windows will offer unmitigated transparent views and a fine level of dynamic illumination control. To this end, an accurate strategy is required to maximize the advantages of devices, capable of reducing lighting energy use (up to 24%) and of reducing cooling demand as due to their non-responsive nature, user decision could partially limit their effectiveness. Photoelectrochromic devices (PECDs)18 ensure intrinsic advantages over earlier smart window designs, not requiring an external power source to change the transmittance. A self-powered photoelectrochromic window uses, in fact, the incident sunlight to modulate the optical behavior in a smart fashion. In the first seminal report by Bechinger et al.18 the architecture of PECDs was a combination of dye-sensitized cells (DSSCs)19 and EC layers. Since that first pivotal work, many different PECD architectures have been conceived, denoting strong interest around this new class of smart devices. Despite the important progress PECDs slowly approach a real market entry. This delay is undoubtedly connected to the partially deceiving expectations of PV building integration (BIPV). If, on one side, the planning of multifunctional building skins, capable of fulfilling various technical and legal demands, is a sort of “holy grail” for architects, house owners and glass companies, several factors like the cost efficiency ratio, psychological and technical aspects still act as limiting factors interfering with BIPVs' large diffusion. For instance, dye-solar cells, promising components of BIPV devices, despite a very simple manufacturing process, a low amount of active material per area (1 g m−2 sensitizer, 15 g m−2 of TiO2 and less than 30 ml m−2 for the electrolyte), and focused intensive research, are witnessing a not easy technology transfer from a fundamental research stage, in contrast to earlier expectations.20 Moreover, not all of the currently available PV technologies would be suitable to meet the multiple requirements of BIPVs.21 In fact, the main candidates are basically devices showing high transparency: DSSCs,19 a-Si cells,22 organic PVs23 and, more recently, solid-state heterojunction solar cells.24–26 Among them, neither DSCs nor OPVs have managed to gain, so far, the predicted increase in market share. Therefore, no significant advances have occurred in PECDs recently. In the last few years, however, new players and conditions have emerged with the potential to change this tendency. The already mentioned attention paid to energy related issues and the increasing investments in renewable energy are in fact increasing the market opportunity for BIPVs. This technology represents now about a 1 percent share of total PV installations worldwide,8 with a positive tendency for growth. In addition, novel material exploitation is leading to a renaissance of solution processable PVs and this review wants to underline how these events could bring new life to BIPVs and, more specifically, PECDs. Moreover, the reduction of purchase costs of EC glazings,10 which are still quite high with respect to standard low emittance glass, would further help the diffusion of this energy-saving technology. In the roadmap towards the design and fabrication of full solid-state PECDs, the chance to achieve single-substrate devices overcomes sealing problems and enhances the versatility of their building integration issues, inside insulated glazing units.
This review provides a critical overview of the scientific results obtained so far for PECDs, giving a critical analysis of previously reported research lines, but also some perspectives on future device developments. The aspects regarding materials, processing issues and device fabrication are thoroughly discussed. A specific paragraph is dedicated to the identification of current trends in the design of novel solid-state electrolyte formulations and about new efficient and highly transparent PV materials,27,28 compatible with building integration.
2. Constituents of PECDs
A PECD is a multifunctional object in which different components are brought together to combine their properties in a resulting innovative fashion. In particular, the first function consists in converting electromagnetic radiation into electrical energy (PV function) and the second one in varying the chromatic characteristics of the device itself, following an electric stimulus (EC function). The two functionalities require proper “gluing” agents, thus a complete device requires also an electrolyte, a transparent and conductive substrate and circuitry, Fig. 1. The device being a complex combination of players, its evolution is based on the development of all the components and it can be accelerated by a breakthrough in one related field. As a consequence of this positive combination, certain limitations associated with one or more components could be minimized by suitable device designs. We review, in this section, PECD constituents and their fundamental properties to better understand the development of device architectures and forthcoming perspectives.
 Fig. 1  Photoelectrochromic device constituents. 
2.1 Power supply
Specific requirements have to be ideally comprised in the power supply component of a PECD. With diverse importance, and depending on the targeted application, those properties are: transparency (semi), color tunability, flexibility, robustness, easy processing, contained component costs and environmental compatibility. Different photovoltaic units have been and could be used for this scope, as their properties comprise most or some of the required ones. Among them are sensitized solar cells (DSSCs),19 organic solar cells (OPVs),23 silicon cells22 and solid-state heterojunction solar cells.24–26

2.1.1 Sensitized solar cells. 
In its first conception, a PECD exploited the PV effect of sensitized solar cells to power an EC layer acting also as a counter electrode of the resulting electrochemical cell.18 Noticeably, the DSSC is the ideal inspiring photovoltaic device aiming at PECDs; it contains, in fact, most of its components, see in Fig. 2 a schematic reproduction of a DSSC.29
 Fig. 2  Schematic of a dye-sensitized solar cell. 
Starting from this design, Bechinger and co-workers introduced an EC layer (WO3) replacing the platinum counter electrode (the working principle of the EC layer is discussed in Section 2.2), thus the load developed by the TiO2/dye interface promotes the coloration of WO3. Noticeably, this device offers dual applications, since the generated electrons can either be transported out of the device as a power source or be charged within the device as an energy saving device. The most important characteristics of DSSCs in view of the exploitation as a power supply of a PECD are: transparency or semitransparency in the visible spectral region (i), color tunability (ii), robustness (iii), easy processing (iv), contained component costs (v) and environmental compatibility (vi).
(i) Films made of oxide nanoparticles provide a simple and powerful means to achieve efficient harvesting of sunlight by the adsorbed dye monolayer, as this mesoporous matrix largely increases the surface area.30 Conversely a reduction of the thickness increases device transparency, and considering the most important function of the power supply of a PECD being to power the EC layer such a scope can be reached by very thin photoanodes. Depending on the area and on the efficiency of the EC layer currents as low as a few mA (1–2 mA) could be sufficient. Such small currents could be obtained, also thanks to the recent advancement of DSSCs, with photoanodes absorbing less than 30% in the region of the maximum dye absorption of the light over almost the whole solar spectrum.31–33
(ii) Color tunability is one of the prominent properties of DSSCs, in fact the pigment responsible for light harvesting could be easily changed and with it the color of the device,34 different combinations of pigments could also be used and thus complex coloring achieved. In Fig. 3 are reported a few examples of differently colored semitransparent DSSCs and building integrated cells.
 Fig. 3  Application fields for colorful, highly transparent and decorative DSSCs. 
(iii) Sensitized solar cells are among the solar converting technologies alternative to silicon, those showing the most promising results in terms of device stability.35 Noticeably, with the aim of integrating such devices in buildings, besides the initial electrical characteristics of the device in terms of energy production, reliability of the facade throughout the lifetime of the device is mandatory. DSSCs have not yet passed the standard stability test for silicon panels: light soaking at 80 °C for 1000 h36 although devices stored at room temperature have already shown impressive stability under continuous illumination of 12000 h37 and 8000 h at 2.5 Sun.38 Additionally, an amazing long-term stability of 25000 h at 55 °C under 0.8 Sun illumination has been achieved.39
(iv) In the last 20 years important advancements have led to key progress in the manufacturing of sensitized cells. Printing/coating techniques are now extensively used in almost all of the manufacturing processes. The versatility of printing technologies and their intrinsic ability to outperform other techniques in large-area deposition boost (DSSCs) technology up to commercialization levels, as such devices can be fabricated by adopting all of the main printing techniques on both rigid and flexible substrates. This allows an easy tuning of cell/module characteristics to the desired application.40 An important example of technology scaling is constituted by G24 Power, one of the world leaders in DSSC manufacturing. This company, thanks to the use of R2R processing, has the capability of manufacturing more than 500000 linear meters of DSSC modules per year (http://gcell.com).
(v) Recent lifetime cycle assessment (LCA) for sensitized solar modules showed that this technology compares favorably with other PV technologies regarding the embedded energy of the PV module even for a far from optimum laboratory fabrication procedure.41–43 The embedded energy value for laboratory cell production is much less than the average value calculated for crystalline silicon technologies and it is of the same order of magnitude as thin film technologies. Depending on the module efficiencies very low energy payback times between 1.5 and 1 year can be achieved, well in line with the ones of polycrystalline silicon (1.5 year).
(vi) Environmental, health and safety considerations of dye-sensitized titanium dioxide solar cells indicate that some precautions are necessary to mitigate hazards that could result in worker exposure. Metal alkoxides, which could be found as solid powders or dispersed in alcohol solutions, require certain precautions in storage and handling, if titanium dioxide is fabricated on-site at the manufacturing plant. Toxicological information about the ruthenium-based dye and its environmental compatibility is not available, but the dye is used in very small quantities and occupational exposure should not be an issue.43 The electrolytes currently used contain fairly common organic solvents (acetonitrile, propionitrile, and methoxy-propionitrile) that are flammable, volatile, and toxic. A potential concern, especially foreseeing building integration is represented by liquid corrosive electrolytes that in the case of rupture or linkages could pollute the building environment. This has been probably one of the most important historic limitations to the diffusion of sensitized solar cells, and the strong effort toward solid electrolytes is the logical consequence of such issues.


2.1.2 Organic solar cells. 
An alternative power supply for PECDs is represented by organic photovoltaic devices (OPVs). Such solar cells have recently reached power conversion efficiencies of above 10%.44,45 Typical OPVs consist of a mixture of a polymer (or an organic small molecule) donor and a C60 derivative acceptor as the photoactive layer, Fig. 4.46,47
 Fig. 4  Scheme of a bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) organic device. 
Semiconducting polymers and devices are ideally suitable power sources for PECDs since they couple (i) semitransparency (ii) tunability of the color (iii) solution processability and (iv) potentially flexible architectures. Deposition of organics by screen-printing, doctor blading, inkjet printing, and spray deposition is possible because these materials can be made soluble. These techniques are a fundamental requirement towards the high-throughput roll-to-roll processing that will drive down the cost of polymer-based PVs. Additionally, they all take place at low temperature, which allows devices to be fabricated on plastic substrates for flexible devices. Lightweight and flexibility are qualities that offer a plethora of diverse uses of these devices, as well as an easier accessibility to building integration. The fundamental weakness embedded in OPVs lies in their stability, a problem not yet fully solved that importantly impacts the device scalability.


2.1.3 Hybrid perovskite solar cells. 
In the last couple of years, a new and very promising PV family of materials for semitransparent solar cells has emerged. These materials are the metal halide perovskites. These are low-cost, solution-processable semiconductors that form in the ABX3 perovskite crystal structure, where A = Cs, NH2CH2NH3 (formamidinium, FA) or CH3NH3 (methylammonium, MA), B = Sn, Pb, and X = I, Br, or Cl. Changing the components of the material affords bandgap tunability. The most studied versions of this material are MAPbI3 and FAPbI3, with bandgaps of ∼1.57 eV and ∼1.48 eV respectively.48 Opaque PV devices based on these materials have risen from 3.8% power conversion efficiency (PCE) to a certified 20.1% in a couple of years, making this the fastest-growing photovoltaic technology yet.49,50 Clearly such a promising technology would be ideal for incorporation into a semi-transparent device. As well as for building-integrated applications, semi-transparent perovskite solar cells have attracted a lot of attention for their potential use in tandem architectures; the tunable bandgap of the perovskite material is well-suited to form a top cell with a silicon solar cell, as a way to ‘piggyback’ into the tough photovoltaic market.51 Typically, a perovskite device consists of a bulk layer of the perovskite sandwiched between electron and hole selective contacts, themselves in contact with the anode and cathode, respectively. In order to make a semitransparent solar cell, all layers of the device must be as transparent as possible. The metric which must be optimised is the efficiency of the device as a function of transparency – and especially for aesthetic purposes, we note that it is the average visible transparency, between 370 nm and 740 nm, which must be considered here. The perovskite is normally thick enough to absorb all light, rendering it opaque; this must be made semi-transparent somehow. Typically, the top electrode is a thick metal, which must be replaced effectively by a highly transparent conducting material. Additionally, there can be significant optical losses in the selective materials and the rear transparent conductor; these should also be minimised. There have been two main routes pursued to making the perovskite material itself semi-transparent, the key difference being the importance placed on aesthetics. The easiest way to make a semiconductor film transparent is to make it thinner; when the thickness is less than the absorption depth, some light will be allowed through. However, due to the nature of the density of states in a direct gap semiconductor, which increases monotonically from the band edge, the absorption of a thin semiconducting film will not have a spectrally flat transmission, it will increase from the bandgap. For a material with a bandgap of ∼1.57 eV, for example, it will appear brown-tinted – not especially attractive. One possible solution could foresee the blending of perovskite with an additional chromophore, being a polymer or an organic molecule, to intelligently tailor the resulting colour.308,309 For a building-integrated photovoltaic window, while some architects may wish to use colourful designs and tinted panels, there is most demand for a neutral-coloured semi-transparent photovoltaic, that is, it appears as only a neutral-colour tinting of the window. The neutral coloured approach was first explored. By leveraging particular combinations of solvents, annealing temperature and thickness, Eperon et al. showed that it was possible to control the morphology of the perovskite layer to the extent that it formed discontinuous ‘islands’ of the perovskite, see Fig. 5.27 These were small enough to be invisible to the naked eye and thick enough to absorb all light; the combination of fully absorbing and transparent areas provided an attractive neutral-tinted film. In the initial instance, the MAPbI3 perovskite was used with thin gold electrodes, realising PCEs of 3.5% with 30% AVT to 8% with 10% full device AVT. The controllable morphology enabled a wide range of transparencies and efficiencies to be reached. Recently, subsequent work has replaced the microstructured MAPbI3 with the more efficient FAPbI3 and employed a more transparent Ni mesh contact (see later), to reach superior PCEs of over 5% for 30% AVT, with excellent angular dependence.52 More recently, this approach has been adapted by Aharon et al., who used a templating grid to control the morphology of the perovskite films to provide a more regular structured film, achieving a PCE of 5% at 20% AVT.28 The downside of this approach is that the large contact area between the hole and electron transporters, between the islands, reduces the open-circuit voltage that can be attained by the devices. In order to increase efficiencies in this architecture, a clever approach to prevent these shunt-resistor pathways will be necessary.
 Fig. 5  Neutral-colour semitransparent perovskite solar cells. (a) Photograph of microstructured semitransparent perovskite layers; (b) scanning electron micrograph of a microstructured semitransparent perovskite device; (c) current–voltage characteristics for the best FA-based microstructured semitransparent perovskite device reported, with a Ni mesh electrode; (d) perovskite grid patterning. Reprinted with permission from ref. 27, 28 and 52. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society, Copyright (2015) John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The brown-tinted approach of making a thin continuous perovskite film is simple to achieve and has thus been reported much more often, with the initial report of this strategy by Roldan-Carmina et al. using dual-source evaporated MAPbI3 perovskite films of 100 nm with thin gold electrodes to achieve PCEs of over 6% for an AVT of 30%.53 Subsequently, perovskite solution-processing methods have been employed in a variety of ways and a detailed strategy to optimise thin film production has been detailed by Quiroz et al.54
Most research effort on perovskite solar cells since these initial reports has focussed on making more transparent contacting electrodes. Initial work, following work form the organic photovoltaic community, used solution-processed silver nanowires to achieve good transparencies suitable for incorporation into either semitransparent perovskite cells or 4-terminal tandem architectures.51,54–56 The best of these achieve ∼9% PCE for ∼28% PCE.55 However, further work showed that these contacts were unstable – the silver would react with the halide in the perovskite causing rapid degradation, especially in the presence of moisture. A solution was developed by Chang and co-workers, who used atomic layer deposition to deposit an alumina buffer layer, resulting in excellent air stability and little drop in performance.56 This is, in our opinion, one of the most promising approaches – they achieve 10% PCE for 25% AVT. Another technique known from the organic photovoltaic community is a dielectric–metal–dielectric electrode, applied to perovskites by Cheng and co-workers to achieve ∼9% PCE with ∼30% AVT.57,58 A final option for using structured metallic electrodes is to use a nickel mesh, laminated onto the cell with a PEDOT:PSS/adhesive composite, which has been used in both thick perovskite devices and the semitransparent microstructured devices discussed above.52,59 An obvious route to explore would be to sputter a known TCO such as ITO, IZO, or ZnO:Al onto the top surface of the perovskite cell. These are stable and transparent materials. However, sputtering these is quite a violent technique and it appears to damage the perovskite devices beneath. A way around this is to use a buffer layer underneath the sputtered ITO to protect the cell. This has been achieved using a layer of MoO3 by several groups, focussing on tandem applications.60–62 Other options for transparent contacts, investigated in perovskite devices, include carbon nanotubes,63 though the conductivity is too low to allow really efficient devices, or graphene. Graphene, the immensely popular single-layered carbon structure, is extremely transparent and conductive, so if a robust production method can be realised this could be an extremely promising option. The first report of this as a top electrode, by Yan and co-workers, showed an impressive 12% PCE with 70% transmission at 700 nm.64 These carbon-based materials have the added advantage of being flexible, so could be employed in a roll-to-roll production line, for example.
In order to boost the efficiency even higher, it will be necessary to reduce the parasitic losses in the hole and electron selective contacts. This is certainly an overlooked but important area; the typical hole transporters spiro-OMeTAD and PEDOT:PSS are fairly absorptive. So far only one effective method has been employed by Jen and co-workers; using copper thiocyanate and a thin silver electrode to achieve impressive 10% PCE/25% AVT combination. Further efforts in reducing other losses in the cell will be crucial to developing the highest performing semitransparent devices. Considering non brown-tinted devices, aside from the morphological control, one way of making more attractive coloured films is by changing the perovskite bandgap by tuning the halide content.48,66 Furthermore, optical interference and transmittance effects can be employed; optical microcavities and photonic crystals have been used to make various coloured devices, that may be of interest for colourful tinted windows, see Fig. 6.65,67 Clearly, for a photovoltaic window in a building, operation must be guaranteed for a long time, preferably >25 years. It is known that the perovskite materials are susceptible to moisture and even oxygen under certain conditions, so stability testing is of the utmost importance.68,69 We direct the reader to a recent review on perovskite stability.70 In short, with adequate atmospheric barriers, in our opinion there appears to be no fundamental barrier to long-term operation of perovskite devices, though certainly more stringent testing is required. The future of the field may lie in more thermally stable analogues of the MA-based materials commonly employed; larger organic cations or inorganic cations should provide much superior stability.71,72
 Fig. 6  Thin perovskite semitransparent solar cells. (a) With a thin gold electrode; (b) scanning electron micrograph cross-section of a device with a silver nanowire electrode; (c) photograph of perovskite cells of different thicknesses with graphene electrodes; (d) photographs of cells using an optical cavity electrode to produce attractive coloration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 53, 55, 64 and 65. Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright (2015) John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.1.4 Silicon PVs. 
The use of silicon technology for PVs is still the dominant solution on the market. It provides stable and robust modules, reaching efficiencies of around 15% for multi-crystalline materials and up to 20% for mono-crystalline alternatives. For meeting the criteria of semi-transparency required by PECD applications, due to the intrinsic rigidity and color of silicon, modules need to be arranged in arrays of cells which allow light to pass through. To achieve this architecture, glass–glass encapsulation solutions need to be employed, carefully pondering the distance between the cells. Alternatives to silicon cell arrays have been explored to achieve semi-transparency, clearly losing PV efficiency. The use of a thin amorphous silicon layer has been proposed by Shizukuishi et al. employing a parallel-type EC device with the structure glass|ITO|a-Si|Cr2O3|Cr2O3·V2O5|WO3|Au,73 whereas Deb et al. developed a device employing a wide-band-gap a-Si1−xCx|H n–i–p PV cell as a semi-transparent power source and an LiyWO3|LiAlF4|V2O5 EC device.74 See Section 2.5.


2.2 Electrochromic (EC) materials. 
According to Roger J. Mortimer's definition, EC materials are chemical species that can be electrochemically switched between different colors.75 The color change is between a bleached state and a colored state, or between two colored states. Most applications10 require high contrast ratio, coloration efficiency, cycle life and write–erase efficiency, as well as specific response times.76,77 See Appendix – Section 4. Following this classification, we identified the major classes of EC materials, adopting the same sorting approach. Electrochromism is considered a “green”, or “benign” nanotechnology,5,78,79 it could be based on cheap and abundant, non-toxic raw materials aiming at low-cost manufacturing; additionally, robust and reliable performances17 would be required for mass production, niche applications14 and energetically efficient building integration.11 The complexity of issues regarding the exploitation of EC devices does not allow facile identification of an ideal – organic or inorganic – material for the given purposes. In each case, critical considerations will take into account several aspects, such as cost, efficiency, production speed, even on flexible substrates, environmental impact, low power consumption, as well as the availability of multiple color states.
EC behavior has been observed in a plethora of materials. A complete discussion of such material properties and characteristics cannot be given here but only a general overview of the main classes: from the widely explored transition metal oxides (TMOs), to conjugated polymers (CP) passing by small molecules (SM). This discussion could be a useful tool aiming at rationalizing the wide extent of approaches exploited to date in designing EC materials.


2.2.1 Transition metal oxides. 
The majority of studies concerning TMOs with EC properties are mainly based on tungsten and nickel.13,80 Thus their preparation parameters, stoichiometry, deposition parameters and composition have been thoroughly studied. EC oxides are typically subdivided into two main kinds: cathodic and anodic.81 The former color under ion insertion, whereas the latter undergo optical transition upon ion extraction. A previous review of these materials is contained in the Handbook of inorganic EC materials.82 The most known cathodic films are made of tungsten oxide (WO3); it has been prepared by means of a wide range of techniques: mainly physical vapor deposition (PVD), chemical vapor deposition (CVD), electrophoretic deposition and chemical depositions, such as electrochemical and solution processing.83–88 Also titanium, niobium, tantalum and molybdenum oxides are cathodic EC materials. Molybdenum oxide89,90 shows analogous properties to WO3. Several studies have appeared dealing with this cathodic EC material, prepared by evaporation, CVD, wet chemical techniques and electrodeposition. Another inorganic EC oxide is titanium oxide,91–95 whose EC properties have been explored for films made by PVC, CVD, spray pyrolysis, doctor blading, wet chemical techniques and anodization. Niobium oxide96 has also shown EC performances in chemically prepared films. Anodic EC oxides are mainly nickel oxide80,97 – prepared by thermal evaporation, CVD, sputtering and other techniques – typically complementary to WO3 in the first applications of smart windows. Another relevant, but expensive anodic EC material is iridium oxide,98 made by PVD, mainly. Also vanadium oxide, which is recognized as an intermediate EC oxide, has been prepared by PVD and chemical techniques. Typical anodic inorganic EC oxides are based on: nickel,80,97,99,100 manganese,101 iron, cobalt,102 rhodium and iridium,98,103 exhibiting analogous features. Vanadium is considered a hybrid EC material.104–108
EC devices109,110 containing TMOs consist typically of a multilayered battery-like architecture.111 Differently from photochromic materials,112,113 whose coloration relies on UV solar irradiation thus not suitable for architectural glazings and automotive applications,13 the optical modulation associated with EC materials ensues from their specific behavior. An EC device generally contains: substrates, transparent conductive oxides, an ion conductor electrolyte and one or two EC materials. The latter, in the form of films, conduct either ions and electrons thus ought to be considered “mixed conductors”.83 Optical absorption varies when electrons move into the EC material from the transparent conductive oxide (TCO) and simultaneously, charge balancing ions enter from the electrolyte (intercalation process). Typically, an EC device contains two complementary materials (anodic and cathodic, respectively) which both color under application of an external voltage, shuttling ions across the electrolyte, or ion conducting materials, interposed between two electrodes,13 see Fig. 7. Such ions are usually small cationic species (preferably H+ or Li+), contained in a liquid, gel or solid electrolyte. The selection of ions involved in the intercalation/deintercalation process strongly influences the process kinetics.114 Insertion and extraction of ions in EC materials can be simplified with these elementary reactions, regarding cathodic and anodic materials:[WO3 + H+ + e−]bleached ↔ [HWO3]coloredand[Ni(OH)2]bleached ↔ [NiOOH + H+ + e−]colored
 Fig. 7  (a) Generic five-layer EC device design. Arrows indicate the movement of ions in an applied electric field. (b) Periodic system of the elements (excepting lanthanides and actinides). The differently shaded boxes indicate transition metals with oxides capable of displaying clear cathodic and anodic electrochromism.13 Reprinted with permission from ref. 13. Copyright (2014) Elsevier B.V. 
A general consensus has been reached, in the scientific world,115–118 about the mechanism of optical absorption for the most used cathode material: WO3. First of all, the coloration reaction should only be partial in order to be reversible with the colored compound written in the form HxWO3 so that x < 0.5.119,120 WO3 tends to form substoichiometric phases with octahedral arrangement. Some of the WO6 octahedra are not corner sharing but edge sharing.83 As a direct consequence, a three dimensional network of tunnels ensues from the spatial arrangement of this building blocks. Such tunnels act as effective conduits for small ions. The deposition parameters, like pressure or substrate temperature influence the structural properties of films obtained, with effects on the EC properties of films. As demonstrated by Berggren for sputtered WO3, lithium intercalation, even to a wide extent, leads to a broad asymmetric peak around an energy of 1.3 eV.120,121 Further, understanding the theoretical basis of WO3 optical properties requires the investigation of its peculiar electron band structure, compatible with its octahedral packing;103,122,123 the latter is responsible for a splitting of metal d levels into eg and tg. Such levels are separated from oxygen 2p bonds and give rise to the energy gap. In pure WO3, the 2p levels are full and the d ones empty. For this reason, under these conditions, it is a transparent wide gap semiconductor.85,115 Filling of d bands, even partially, due to electron diffusion inside the material, leads to several shades of coloration. Ion intercalation and electron insertion cause a localization of electrons on tungsten sites, and W6+ sites are reduced, becoming W5+. This transfer of electrons between close tungsten sites is possible upon gaining enough energy due to the absorption of a photon. More transitions have been observed between more sites: W4+ and W6+, W4+ and W5+.83
The EC performances of devices are usually limited by the kinetics of charge transport, stability and the ion transport properties of the electrolyte as well as the specific properties of EC materials. Zheng et al. have shown that nanostructuring of WO3 can enhance its EC performances by increasing the surface to volume ratio, altering surface energies and originating quantum confinement effects, influencing charge transport, the electronic band structure and the optical properties.124 It is well known that voltage biasing generates three kinds of electrochemical reaction in transition metal oxides, taking place on their surface or inside them.125 The first one takes place at the interface between the electrolyte and the EC oxide. A thin Helmoltz layer of absorbed ions arises on its surface. By applying a voltage, a second layer of ions with opposite charge will constitute the so called outer Helmoltz layer.126 Electrons inject into the oxide reaching the interface of the metal oxide. The adsorption of solvated cations renders the surface neutral. The second electrochemical reaction causes ions to enter the bulk surface of the oxide. The reverse process, activated by opportunely changing the bias, is a diffusion controlled deintercalation process. Nanostructuring the metal oxide127 dramatically enhances the diffusion kinetics. Three-dimensional networks of transition metal oxides provide a modification of the electrolyte–oxide interface and this could be obtained by means of mesoporous oxide layers. Recently, inorganic EC materials have been produced in the form of nanoparticles, nanorods and nanowires, with a high surface-to-volume ratio and nanodimensional features. Nanostructured EC materials show serious improvements in the major figures of merit: kinetics and coloration efficiency. Porous oxides allow deep electrolyte penetration, increased reaction sites available, shortening of the ion diffusion length and agile movement of cations across the interface.


2.2.2 EC small molecules. 
Rosseinsky et al.128 have reported EC uses of the Prussian Blue (PB) pigment,129,130 with a ferric ferrocyanide chromic center forming a highly insoluble colloid with strong absorbance in the range between 650 nm and 720 nm. EC systems containing PB preferably adopted chloride-containing electrolytes, like KCl, where K+ is a balancing cation.131 A very low voltage, applied to the conductive substrate, activates an electron transfer at the PB film between 0.6 V and 0.2 V vs. Ag(AgCl), turning it into Everett's salt state.132 Such a reversible process can be inverted depending on the applied potential. Deposition of the PB film thickness influenced the required potential and the absorption range, as a consequence.130 PB has been successfully adopted in the design of solid-state EC devices.133 Starting from the consideration that Prussian blue films can be switched to green and colorless redox states, as first reported by Neff,134 Mortimer reported an interesting polychromicity (including a purple color state) of PB films by involving an outer layer of the ion-exchange polymer Nafion to a PB film as well as a methyl viologen dication (colorless)/radical cation (purple) system, incorporated by ion-exchange into the Nafion.75,135
Similar approaches have also been explored, among metal metallohexacyanates: ruthenium purple, vanadium hexacyanoferrate, nickel hexacyanoferrate, copper hexacyanoferrate, palladium hexacyanoferrate and gallium hexacyanoferrate.136
Beverina et al. have reviewed the family of violenes, i.e. the general structural principle for compounds having the capacity of reversible two-stage electron transfer.137 Monk and coworkers have produced a huge work about EC materials based on bipyridilium species, commonly named viologens,138 due to their intense violet color, or also paraquat. Viologens (Fig. 8) have a relevance among Weitz type violene compounds because of their remarkable electrochemical features.139
 Fig. 8  Photographs of an ethyl viologen EC device in (a) the bleached and (b) colored state. Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. 
Recently, Palenzuela et al. have reported flexible EC devices containing ethyl viologen, with indium tin oxide – polyethylene electrodes, coated with reduced graphene oxide films electrodeposited from graphene oxide aqueous solutions, with very interesting results, see Fig. 9.140 Transition-metal complexes contain metal ions and ligands and show highly customizable chromogenic activity due to rich electronic transitions: metal-localized transitions, ligand-localized transitions and those resulting from interactions of metal and ligands.141 These transitions are altered or eliminated upon reduction or oxidation of their metal center, resulting in a chromogenic behavior. For solid-state ECs, metal coordination complexes represent a very interesting perspective. In detail, polypyridyl ligands have shown the tendency to form stable complexes with several transition metals, with good EC properties, as in the case of bipyridyl complexes. Thin films can in fact host polypyridyl complexes by oxidative or reductive polymerization.142 Another class of metal coordination complexes is represented by metallophthalocyanines.143
 Fig. 9  For (a) poly(heterocycles), (b) band diagrams of bipolarons and polarons showing the localized gap states and their occupancy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 137. Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.2.3 Conjugated EC polymers. 
EC conjugated polymers are considered promising candidates worldwide for a variety of optical devices such as displays, sensors, e-paper and “smart” windows,144 due to their easy processability, rapid switching time and high optical contrast.145 The electrochromism observed in this class of materials is generally associated with changes in the π-electronic character upon electrochemically reversible insertion and extraction of ions through the polymer film.146
These polymers, insulating in their neutral states, undergo a change in the band structure when electrochemically or chemically doped (p or n for oxidation or reduction). As a consequence, lower intraband transitions are created and charge carriers are formed (polarons and bipolarons), giving rise to increased conductivity and optical modulation. The main optical absorption band in reduced neutral-colored conjugated polymers is due to a π–π* transition through the bandgap, involving UV/VIS radiation, see Fig. 9. When doped by oxidation or reduction, polaronic and bipolaronic transitions produce absorption bands at lower energy levels. CP films having energy gaps higher than 3 eV appear colorless whereas if the energy gap is lower (roughly 1.5 eV) they are colored (Fig. 10).137 Some EC polymers can still appear colorless, even in a doped form. This is the case for highly transparent sky-blue oxidized states.
 Fig. 10  (a) Repeat unit structures and photographs of spray-cast polymer films in the neutral colored, and oxidized transmissive states. (b) Normalized absorption spectra of neutral spray-cast polymer films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 147. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society. 
The wide body of results on EC conjugated polymers can be briefly discussed here. They are mainly electrochromes switching between an absorptive colored state and a near-colorless state. They can color by cathodic and anodic mechanisms, like other electrochromes, (see Fig. 11).147 Cathodic conjugated polymers are absorptive in the visible region (reduced state) and become colorless upon oxidation; anodic ones are colorless when neutral, and become absorptive in the visible region, upon oxidation. Polymers absorbing at high energy (yellow) are those based on 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT),66,148 thiophenes and 3,4-propylenedioxythiophene (ProDOT) combined with pyrenes and naphthalenes149 or poly(3,4-propylenedioxythiophene) PProDOT150 substituted at the 1,3-position with t-butyl groups. A copolymerization of a ProDOT unit with a phenylene unit allowed the transition between a highly transmissive oxidized state and a yellow neutral state. Similar efforts have been required for orange-to-transmissive coloring.151 Xu et al.,152 synthesized blue (ProDOT-MePro) and red (ProDOP-Et2) color changeable EC monomers, and EC polymer films were formed by electropolymerization. 3,4-Propylenedioxypyrrole (ProDOP) exhibiting a 2.2 eV bandgap has been reported with a brown intermediate state.153 This was obtained by employing a solution-processable thiophene homopolymer (poly{3,4-di(2-ethylhexyloxy)thiophene}) and EC polymer-orange (ECP-orange).146 Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxypyrrole) (PEDOP) has also shown a red-to-transmissive switching behavior and a wide bandgap of about 2.0 eV.145 On the other hand, ECP-Red has been demonstrated to be a suitable solution-processable red polymer, derived from ECP-orange random incorporation of small dimethoxythiophene units.146
 Fig. 11  (a) Transmittance spectra of the complementary RGBY device and a photograph of the device in the colored state and the bleached state (b). Reprinted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society. 
An effective switching between a blue state and a highly transmissive state has been observed in neutral films of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) PEDOT (bandgap 1.6 eV), obtained in situ by oxidative polymerization of EDOT to form an insoluble film. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate PEDOT:PSS, i.e. a water processable dispersion with the polyelectrolyte PSS has also been demonstrated to be a successful conjugated EC polymer.154,155
A polymer of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxyselenophene) (PEDOS) has been reported for its switching between a dark blue neutral state and a transmissive oxidized state. EDOS is more electron-rich than thiophene, showing a lower bandgap and lower oxidation potential than EDOT.156 These interesting properties, also including a high conductivity, a lower band gap, rigidity, multicolor electrochromism, and rapid redox switching, allow the use of these materials in a variety of electronic applications, for example PEDOS-CG, obtained on substitution with a hexyl chain, has achieved a visible contrast as high as 89% in 0.75 s.157 Green to transmissive switching EC polymers have been obtained in electrochemically polymerized bis EDOT–(benzothiadiazole)BTD polymers, switching from a green neutral state to a light blue oxidized state. It has been reported that a convenient tuning of absorbing peaks can be obtained by changing the ratio between ProDOT (donor) and BTD heterocycles (acceptor).158,159 More difficulties have been found in the attempt to develop a single material switching from a transmissive state to a full absorbing state (across the visible region). To this aim chromophore mixing has been exploited, starting from effective green-to-transmissive (copolymers of BTD with varying amounts of ProDOT were overlaid with a magenta polymer, see Fig. 11).160,161
The first example of a black-to-transmissive electrochrome resulted from a copolymerization of a bis(ProDOT)–BTD trimer and a ProDOT monomer (ECP-Black1). Another approach foresaw the use of two EDOT monomers, bridged by a naphthalenediimide unit, allowing a switching between a highly transmissive and a dark blue bleached state.162
Anodic electrochromes with a large bandgap have also been reported. Nevertheless, it has been observed that it is quite complicated to finely design and control the color states of multicolored conductive polymers, so as to precisely predict the absorption spectra.163 Several systems switch between two or more colored states without any fully transmissive condition.164,165 The idea of creating a set of redox states in different positions of the polymer backbone involves one of the most thoroughly investigated EC polymers:polyaniline (PANI).166 This polymer has been considered a promising EC material due to its conduction mechanism, unique optical properties and its high environmental stability. Its electrical and chromic properties do not only depend on its oxidation states, but also on its protonation state.145,167 Oxidation states of PANI are described by different neutral forms, leucoemeraldine base (LB) form (fully reduced), emeraldine base (EB) form (half oxidized), pernigraline base (PB) form (fully oxidized). The doping process by means of the protonation of the imine group basic sites along the polymer backbone results in the emeraldine salt (ES) form, responsible for the strong increment of the conducting properties. Since each oxidation state has its own color, ranging from transparent yellow to green to dark blue, PANI films are named polyelectrochromic. Furthermore, the color of PANI films can be reversibly switched at relatively low voltages (−0.2 V to 1.0 V). A yellow-toned color can be obtained with the LS (−0.2 V to 0.0 V), a partial oxidation to the ES form leads to a green color at about 0.4 V, a second oxidation process, between 0.6 V and 0.9V, leads to the blue/violet pernigraniline form.168 Recently, nanocomposite materials based on PANI and CNTs were effectively adopted as EC materials with enhanced optical contrast. For example, Xiong et al. synthesized PANI–SWNT nanocomposites via copolymerization of aniline with SWCNT–PPD (para-phenylenediamine) in aqueous solutions containing poly(styrene sulfonate) (PSS).169 The enhancement of electron transport in the EC layer greatly improves its redox reactivity, especially when PANI is switched to its low conductive states, as evidenced by the significantly reduced charge-transfer resistances (see Fig. 12).
 Fig. 12  (a) Scheme reporting polyaniline (PANI)-grafted SWCNTs. (b) SEM image reporting their uniform dispersion within the PANI/PSS matrix. Reprinted with permission from ref. 169. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society. 
Multicolored EC polymers have also been reported as a result of a copolymerization process, under oxidative conditions. Then, 100% BiEDOT polymers showed blue spectral properties, whereas BiEDOT–NMeCz appeared yellow. Intermediate ratios offered a range of customizable shades.170
An alternative strategy consisted in systems having a conjugated backbone with a set of spectral changes and chromophores attached on it, providing further chromic responses. Yiğit et al. appended azobenzene, coumarine and fluorescent derivatives onto terthiophene scaffolds.171 Du Bois et al. have illustrated polymer systems with a combination of donor and acceptor units in order to generate multicolor EC polymers due to the availability of multiple redox states.172 For instance, poly(bisEDOT pyridine) shows a red neutral state, an oxidized blue-purple state and a reduced blue state. The basicity of the pyridine unit allows protonation of the neutral polymer, leading to a corresponding navy blue state.145,173 Polymers could suffer from stability issues, thus degradation under ultraviolet irradiation was investigated by Jensen et al. showing that photochemically stable EC devices with convincing operational lifetimes can be constructed with a relatively simple process.174


2.2.4 Near-infrared (NIR) EC materials. 
NIR EC materials have also been reported, but they are especially useful for optical attenuators, in communication wavelengths. Such EC materials can include transition metal oxides and transition metal complexes and show high stability and reversibility. Even better NIR EC features have been reported for organic materials showing up-scaling advantages and cheaper production as well as high color contrast.175
Aromatic quinones,177 aromatic imides, anthraquinone imides178 and poly(triarylanine)s179 have been reported. Apart from considerable visible electrochromism, PEDOT also showed chromogenic properties in the NIR region, mainly attributed to a bipolaron charge carrier, see Fig. 13.176
 Fig. 13  Spectro electrochemistry of PEDOT at different oxidation states with inset pictures of the variation in the blue color at different oxidation levels. Reprinted with permission from ref. 176. Copyright (2004) WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
PEDOT is one of the most advanced EC conjugated polymers; as clearly noticeable in Fig. 13, an increase of the applied voltage results in a decrease of the absorption band in the visible region, with a concurrent increase of another band, peaking at 900 nm, which depends on the optical band of the polaron charge carrier.


2.2.5 Plasmonic chromogenic materials. 
Typical EC materials do not allow “dual-band” features, i.e. independent control over the visible and near infrared regions of the solar spectrum. The coloration mechanism of conventional ECs is ruled by Faradaic processes and, for this reason, they show slow kinetics as well as a limited cycle life. Plasmonic electrochromism, especially investigated by D. Milliron and her research group, aims at enabling faster switching times, longer durability and enhanced spectral selectivity, new concepts for EC devices could derive from the use of plasmonic TCO nanocrystals, operating under a capacitive mechanism. Electrochemical injection of electrons into plasmonic TCO nanocrystal films induces a shift in the plasmon frequency, giving rise to the new functionality of selective optical modulation in the NIR region of the solar spectrum. If these nanocrystals are combined with other EC materials, advanced “dual-band” EC electrodes can be achieved.183 According to specifically customized localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR), adsorption and reflection of light could be tuned, by suitably integrating plasmonic colloidal nanocrystals into heterogeneous nanocomposite electrolytes. EC behavior due to the plasmonic effect has been observed in chalcogenide nanocrystals (like CdSe)184 and highly doped metal oxide semiconductors (Sb:SnO2; ATO)127 and doped metal oxides, like Sn-doped In2O3 (ITO) and Al-doped ZnO (AZO).185 The latter ones are especially useful for NIR-selective plasmonic electrochromism. A composite EC material containing NIR-selective plasmonic nanocrystals of ITO embedded in a matrix of niobium oxide, with visible switching capability was demonstrated by Llordes in 2013: a potential-dependent spectrally-selective optical device showing three-way operating modes.186 Visible light was absorbed by NbOx at lower voltages via polaron transitions. At higher voltages ITO nanocrystals were depleted of free electrons and the film was highly transparent; at intermediate voltages, the capacitive charging of ITO nanocrystals was activated, increasing the free electron concentration and the exploitation of LSPR in the NIR region, since the spectral response was dominated by the concentration of free electrons in the nanocrystals.
The above-mentioned achievements demonstrate how electrochromism, through the exploitation of a large number of innovative materials, has greatly advanced over the past few years, providing widespread applications in light-regulation and displays. Smart windows have indeed a special appeal from the economic and environmental points of view. In a recent, interesting review, Yang and his coworkers discussed the versatility of EC materials in terms of integration in multifunctional devices.180 They considered how pseudocapacitors and batteries are generally associated with faradaic reactions at the electrode surface and bulk, respectively, through which charges are stored. When a faradaic reaction occurs with charge transfer, some electrode materials will reversibly change color. This phenomenon is well known as electrochromism. But the EC process happens when the charge injects or ejects, and this demonstrates that EC devices can be integrated with charge storage devices. The optimal combination of materials in devices is at the basis of the integration in multifunctional devices. Clear research trends are visible, currently, towards the integration of EC materials with devices devoted to energy storage but also photovoltaic generation or other fields, like diagnostics181 or displays.182 The development of nanomaterials with enhanced performances and their integration in multifunctional devices represent a clearly visible “path” for future evolutions in the chromogenic field: one of the potential strategies towards their effective exploitation in everyday life.


2.3 Electrolytes for chromogenic device applications. 
The electrolyte is one of the main components in a chromogenic device, being responsible, most of the time, for connecting the power supply to the EC system. Similarly to electrolytes in batteries and other electrochemical systems (fuel cells, supercapacitors, DSSCs, etc.), these conductive ion media separate the cathode and anode terminals providing ion flow between the electrodes while preventing electronic charge transfer (short circuit). Today's commercial applications of common lithium-ion batteries as well as EC devices employ electrolytes in liquid form, lithium salts in flammable liquids such as organic aprotic solvents, requiring a separator to physically isolate the electrode materials to avoid thereby short circuits and ensure safe operation. Despite semi-ideal ion conductive properties, numerous attempts were made to replace liquid solvent-based electrolytes with safer quasi-solid and solid forms. In addition to a reduced reactivity and flammability, solid-state electrolytes, acting simultaneously as binders and separators, facilitate the electrical contact between the cathode and anode components. In the meantime, these systems offer the chance to be processed in thin solid films conferring higher mechanical strength, superior long-term durability, and improved thermal and electrochemical stability. However, a reduced ion conductivity if compared to liquid systems (>1 mS cm−1) remains the major limit that needs to be addressed for the successful realization of competitive solid-state devices.187 Therefore, the design of ideal electrolytes for effective systems passes from a proper consideration of both their chemico-physical properties and the specific device architectural and functional characteristics. Numerous original studies and critical reviews have been reported in the literature dealing with novel and efficient electrolytes for electrochemical applications, for the most part in the field of lithium-ion batteries and fuel cells. Generally, the different types of electrolytes are classified into four major categories: liquid, ceramic, solid inorganic and polymer electrolytes.188–191
The latter ones represent the ideal candidates for developing advanced electrochemical systems especially for chromogenic devices and lithium-ion batteries,190–192 offering undisputed advantages of being easily processable in thin films and acting simultaneously as separators and binders. Furthermore, they possess a reduced reactivity, due to a very low content of flammable organic liquid solvents, and an overall stability in terms of long-term durability, tolerance to shock, vibration and mechanical deformation. For these substantial reasons, a wide range of polymer electrolytes has been accurately designed for a facile integration in chromogenic devices. To this aim some key requirements should be fulfilled. In addition to their inherent structural and functional properties including high ionic conductivity, good mechanical strength, and chemical, thermal and electrochemical stability, they must have a high optical transparency withstanding no light scattering effects, long-term stability against solar UV radiation, compatibility with the anodic and cathodic layers and a negligible environmental impact. Finally, employing inexpensive polymers would be beneficial for their large-scale development and potential commercialization.13,193 Polymer electrolytes are generally referred to as any macromolecular or supramolecular nano-aggregate system characterized by a significant ionic conductivity (above 10−7 S cm−1), and they can be classified into different types: solid polymers, gel polymers, plasticized polymers, ionic rubber polymers and ion conducting polyelectrolytes.192 Apart from polyelectrolytes, most of them are complexes of polyethylene oxide (PEO) containing lithium salts. This host polymer is an optimal solvating agent for a wide range of metal salts with a major affinity for hard cations, i.e. Li+.194,195 However, practically useful ionic conductivity values (of approximately 10−4 S cm−1) are achieved only for temperatures of around 60–80 °C when the polymer is in an amorphous state. This condition determines an increase of the polymer free volume with higher mobility of the polymer chains in the amorphous region and consequent fast ion transport. As a result, different approaches have been adopted to obtain an amorphous degree of the polymer–Li+ salt complex at room temperature.196 One of the most effective strategies consists in adding liquid plasticizers, such as aprotic organic solvents (e.g. dimethyl sulfoxide) or low molecular weight polyethylene glycols (PEG), which has led to the development of plasticized electrolytes suitable for several electrochemical devices, including ECDs and PECDs.197,198 In addition to PEO-based polymer electrolytes, various co-polymer matrices containing polar elements (i.e. oxygen or nitrogen) along the chains, for example poly(propylene oxide) (PPO), poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), polyacrylonitrile (PAN) and poly(ethylene imine) (PEI), have been effectively employed to prepare suitable gel and plasticized polymer electrolytes. Recently, poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) copolymers, particularly poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) (PVDF–HFP) and poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-trifluoroethylene) (PVDF–TrFE), have been used as efficient plasticized electrolyte layers in quasi-solid EC and PEC devices.199,200 Unlike PVDF, its copolymers turn out to be more suitable for practical applications due to a better solvating power for lithium salts and increased ion transport properties associated with the amorphous HFP or TrFE phase. Nguyen et al. reported a high performance EC device fabricated by using polyaniline dodecylbenzene sulfonic acid (PANI-DBSA) as an anodic material, poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene) poly(4-styrene sulfonic acid) PEDOT:PSS as an ion storage medium and PVDF-TrFE plasticized with PEG (8000 Mw) as an electrolyte layer, demonstrating the high ionic conductivity of these electrolyte systems in a solid state configuration.201 Along with PVDF, PMMA has recently gained great interest for ECD and PECD applications due to its high transparency, excellent environmental stability, low-cost and high impact resistance.202–204 Efficient PMMA-based polymer electrolytes are typically prepared in gel form by dissolving them in plasticizing solvents, such as propylene carbonate (PC), ethylene carbonate (EC) and γ-butyrolactone (γ-BL), with LiClO4 lithium salt.
However, better ion-transporting properties of gel and plasticized polymer electrolytes187,205 were gained at the expense of an overall reduction of their structural and mechanical properties. Conventional liquid or gel electrolytes, usually adopted for the fabrication of chromogenic devices, suffer from numerous drawbacks, such as a low stability, and a tendency to leak and evaporate,206 that strongly compromise the EC response as well as the long-term durability of the devices limiting their use in large-scale application.207 With this aim, a very promising approach has been the introduction of ionic liquids (ILs) embedded into polymers followed by their functionalization with oxide nanopowders.196,208 ILs, liquid molten salts at ambient temperature, generally constituted of quaternary ammonium cations, such as imidazolium, pyridinium, pyrrolidinium, pyperidinium, and inorganic or organic counteranions including tetrafluoroborate (BF4), hexafluorophosphate (PF6), bis(trifluoromethanesulphonyl)imide (TFSI), are characterized by low volatility, negligible vapor pressure, non-flammability and exceptional chemico-physical properties with a wide electrochemical window (up to 5 V to 6 V).208 These main features render them very attractive for application in chromogenic smart windows. Numerous examples of functional EC devices using quasi-solid ILs and IL polymer-based electrolytes have been reported in the literature showing higher performance and superior long-term stability than those exploiting conventional gel polymer electrolytes.205,209 Recently, other interesting strategies have been adopted to improve the ion conducting properties of these electrolyte systems. Polymeric ionic liquids (PILs), constituted of ionic species covalently bonded with a polymer backbone (combining both the properties of ionic liquids with those of polyelectrolytes), were effectively prepared, exhibiting fast ion transport.210 Furthermore, Zhou and co-workers showed the possibility of using a low content of ILs (1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetra-fluoroborate [BMIM]BF4−) in the polymer electrolyte composition based on cross-linked poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) (PVDF-co-HFP) nanofibrous mats, rendering these systems cheaper and more sustainable.211
In addition to IL polymer electrolytes, another efficient approach adopted was to increase the overall stability of semi-solid electrolyte systems by introducing nanoparticles into the polymer matrix. Scrosati's group developed, for the first time, nanocomposite polymer electrolytes with both low-temperature conductive properties and excellent mechanical stability, demonstrating that nanoparticle ceramic fillers (TiO2, Al2O3) added to a mixture of PEO–LiClO4, acting as a solid plasticizer for PEO, kinetically inhibit crystallization upon annealing from the amorphous state above 60 °C.196 These nanocomposite electrolyte systems, used primarily for lithium batteries, were recently adopted in solid-state EC devices. Pehlivan et al. reported that the functionalization of polymer electrolytes based on PEI–lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulphonyl) (LiTFSI) by the addition of 6% SiO2 nanoparticles (diameter 7 nm) by weight improved the structural stability as well as increasing the ion conductivity of the electrolyte layer and thereby enhanced the EC performance in terms of both switching time and cyclability.212,213 The salt concentration also played an important role in determining the ion conduction of these PEI:LiTFSI:SiO2 electrolytes showing a maximum value at a molar ratio of 100 (see Fig. 14).
 Fig. 14  (a) Ionic conductivity as a function of inverse temperature for PEI:LiTFSI:SiO2 electrolytes at different molar ratios, n. Symbols indicate data points, and the straight lines are fits to the Arrhenius equation. (b) Salt concentration versus molar conductivity for PEI:LiTFSI:SiO2 electrolytes at the shown temperatures. Molar ratios, n, are shown at the top. Symbols indicate data points, which are joined by straight lines for convenience. Reprinted with permission from ref. 213. Copyright (2013) Elsevier Science Ltd. 
In contrast to fumed silica nanoparticles, adding transparent conducting electrical nanoparticles of In2O3:Sn (ITO) (diameter 13 nm) into PEI–LiTFSI has the effect of absorbing near-infrared (NIR) light so that solar energy transmittance (Tsol) was strongly diminished while luminous transmittance (Tlum) was almost unaffected, without having a substantial effect on the ion conduction.214
Natural polymers such as natural gelatins, and agar gels, commonly used in pharmaceutical, food and cosmetic products, were also adopted as host matrices for the development of efficient gel polymer electrolytes with good chemico-physical properties, offering especially the advantages of being cheaper, eco-friendly and biodegradable.215–218 Another interesting class of polymer electrolytes employed in EC devices is polyelectrolytes, Nafion and its derivatives,219–221 usually used in fuel cells and in other electrochemical applications requiring an ion conducting polymer. Nafion's chemical structure consists of a perfluorinated backbone, conferring both mechanical and chemical stability, and perfluoroether side chains end-capped with sulfonic acid groups that are responsible for its exceptional proton-conduction properties.222 Furthermore, this polymer exhibits good optical properties and it is easily processable in transparent and homogeneous membranes. Recently, Kattouf et al. have focused their research activity on the enhancement of the electrode–polymer interface reporting a fast switching Nafion-based sandwich-type EC device, by blending Nafion with a highly porous sol–gel WO3 matrix.221 Tetralayer polyelectrolytes fabricated via layer by layer (LBL) assembly using linear poly(ethylene imine) (LPEI), poly(acrylic acid) (PAA), poly(ethyleneoxide) (PEO) have also been explored by Hammond’s and Lee’s groups demonstrating the possibility to prepare flexible solid-state electrolyte systems for functional transmissive and reflective type EC devices.223
Recent trends in the fabrication of effective solid-state chromogenic devices are motivated by the need to overcome the complicated and very expensive manufacturing processes associated with the assembly of a typical multilayer (5-layers) structure, in which a gel or quasi-solid electrolyte is interposed between two conductive glass substrates, typically clamped or stuck by using a few drops of the liquid electrolyte.207 These sealing procedures confer a strong functional and structural instability to the device since the leakage and evaporation of the solvent-based electrolytes can induce a lack of adherence between the two parts, determining irregular kinetics and a non-homogenous EC response as well as a remarkable negative impact on the long-term durability. Furthermore, a high-speed roll to roll (R2R) manufacturing process, typically employed for coatings of solid and dry polymer electrolytes, is incompatible for sticky and adhesive gel or semi-solid polymers. To overcome this problem the gel electrolyte layer could be UV-cured conferring a full solid-state configuration more suitable for slot-die coating. The effectiveness of this approach was demonstrated by Jensen et al. with the development of a flexible full solid-state EC polymer device by using a photo-curable acrylate-based electrolyte and a silver grid electrode deposited respectively by slot-dye coating and flexographic printing (see Fig. 15).224
 Fig. 15  (a) Problems associated with roll to roll coating of a gel/semisolid electrolyte. The electrolyte solution is deposited through a slot die coating head, but due to adhesiveness it will stick to the drums and the foil during stretching and rewinding as marked by “!!!” (the electrolyte is shown as yellow for visualization). (b) Successive deposition of layers continuously in one direction (steps from A to F). The key step is photo-crosslinking of the electrolyte solution (step D). (c) UV-curing of the electrolyte. The drum is mounted with foil and the UV-curing chamber is seen at the bottom of the picture. (d) The UV-curing chamber seen from below. The lamp is placed between two gas inlets (black plastic tubing) that supply inert gas thereby reducing the oxygen concentration in the chamber. Reprinted with permission from ref. 224. Copyright (2014) John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Other effective approaches have been proposed to address the issues associated with liquid or semi-solid electrolytes. The fabrication of a simplified “single layer” chromogenic device by combining the electrolyte with the chromogenic polymer in a single layer and with the electrode layer represent effective strategies to avoid electrolyte leakage with a reduction of material waste and deposition steps. Cossari et al. demonstrated a monolithic system with a simplified architecture (substrate/ITO/WO3/Nafion/ITO) in which a suitable Nafion film (8 μm thick) tightly shares its interfaces with a WO3 layer and a highly transparent and conductive RF-sputtered ITO film.225 Percec et al. reported a single-layer all solid-state EC device architecture consisting of a film of a poly(epichlorohydrin-co-ethylene oxide) [poly(ECH-co-EO)] electrolyte with pendent carbazole groups, assembled between two transparent electrodes.226 Various chromophore groups can also be grafted to different polymer backbones, for example [poly(ECH-co-EO)], poly(vinyl butyral) (PVB), Na neutralized poly(ethylene-co-methacrylic acid) or Surlyn®, tailoring thus the EC device properties. A different approach for a single layer EC film consisted in the synthesis by in situ oxidative or electrochemical polymerization of the conjugated polymers within the electrolyte matrix, forming a semi-interpenetrating solid network. Chevrot's group reported single layer EC films based on conducting polythiophenes synthesized by oxidative polymerization inside a cross-linked poly(ethylene glycol dimethacrylate)/poly(ethylene glycol methacrylate), maintaining well separated the electrolyte and chromogenic components thus avoiding short circuits.227 Sotzing's group reported recently a similar strategy for the development of a single layer chromogenic film by photopolymerization of an acrylate functionalized low molecular weight poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) in the presence of a photoinitiator, a lithium salt, a plasticizer (propylene carbonate), and a monomer.228 The best performance was obtained by using a biphenylmethyloxymethyl-3,4-propylenedioxythiophene (BPMOM-ProDOT) conducting polymer EC device, prepared by in situ UV curing followed by electrochemical polymerization of the electroactive monomer into the solid matrix (poly(ethylene glycol)diacrylate) (PEG-DA), having a photopic contrast of 47% for a quasi-large area device (105 cm2). Further advancements in terms of long-term stability (10000 cycles) and optical modulation (48%) have been achieved by combining a ProDOT polymer modified with an acrylate group (ProDOT-Ac) with a cross-linkable polymer matrix (poly(ethylene glycol)diacrylate) (PEG-DA) allowing simultaneously UV cross-linking of both the active layers and the gel electrolyte with the advantage of immobilizing the unreacted monomers preventing thus any degradative reaction in the electrode layer.229

2.4 Transparent conductive substrates
In the standard design of PECDs, the substrate is constituted by a transparent electrode working as an anode, extracting charge carriers from the absorbing layer. This layer is usually a glass support covered by a very thin TCO film. Noticeably this component represents the largest device cost. On the Gigawatt scale, glass covered with fluorine-doped tin oxide costs US$ 8–12 m−2, whereas uncoated glass costs US$ 5 m−2. The glass–glass recipient of a PECD would therefore cost at least US$ 13 m−2.230 Low-cost devices could be built from cheap plastic sheets to save glass costs, although stability issues are associated with the use of such substrates, which have significantly higher water vapour transport rates and thus allow moisture to ingress into the PECD. Researchers have yet to produce a plastic sheet that is cheaper than glass while also having an adequate water vapour transport rate. Furthermore, sputtered TCOs on plastics are more expensive, less transparent and more resistive than when deposited on glass, which provides lower performance levels. Generally speaking, TCOs suffer from significant limitations such as the cost of the fabrication process, scarcity (especially concerning indium based TCOs like In2O3:Sn (ITO)) and brittleness, even though they are very well adapted for some applications. On this front in the last few years numerous scientific investigations have been devoted to exploring a variety of other materials for the fabrication of thin layers exhibiting a good compromise between optical transparency and electrical conductivity: carbon nanotube networks (CNTs), graphene thin films, conducting polymers, metallic grids and metal nanowire networks.231 When selecting an appropriate material for an application it is crucial to consider the costs associated with the raw materials and production methods used to fabricate the electrode, and whether high-temperature or vacuum processes are required for, or incompatible with, device production and the specific needs of the application.232 From these considerations the most realistic current candidates, as alternative TCOs, are graphene thin films and silver nanowire networks.233,234
In particular, the advent of graphene represents a significant advancement in this field, especially since the CVD approach has been used to synthesize single or few-layer graphene films. Interesting reviews, on this pivotal topic, were recently provided by Higgins et al.235 and by Jo et al.236 Gomez De Arco et al. reported continuous, highly flexible, and transparent graphene films produced by CVD as transparent conductive electrodes in organic solar cells.237 The efficiency of organic solar cells with a graphene electrode was 1.18%, which is close to that of organic solar cells with an ITO electrode (∼1.27%). In 2011, Wang et al. used a layer-by-layer transfer method to fabricate multilayer CVD graphene films with less defects and lower sheet resistance.238 The organic solar cells with the electrode of four layers graphene have an improved PCE of up to 2.5%, which is 83.3% of the PCE of ITO-based devices. For a hybrid solar cell, Wu et al. demonstrated the use of graphene as a transparent conductive electrode with the structure of graphene/organic/silicon, which has a PCE of 10%.239 TCO-free solar cells have also been fabricated with perovskites (CH3NH3PbI3), by using a graphene transparent anode and organic carrier transport materials. By adding a few nanometer-thick MoO3 layer, wettability and work function of the graphene electrode are enhanced to enable a 17.1% power conversion efficiency, which is the highest efficiency for TCO-free solar cells.240
2.5 Architectural evolution of PECDs

2.5.1 General considerations and sorting criteria. 
PECDs represent an intriguing class of “smart” devices,241 sensing even small changes in environmental parameters, such as irradiation, generating consequently a perceivable response. Given these premises, PECDs inspire optimistic expectations to design “intelligent” building envelopes, or “skins”, able to manage, in a smart fashion, the complex energy flow that passes through them. PECDs are also interesting due to their wide range of applications, ranging from architectural windows to information displays, energy conversion, sensors, energy storage, automotives and avionics. Dynamic tintable “smart windows” would have beneficial effects on building-integrated architectural glazings in terms of energy consumption attenuation and reduction of cooling loads or the demand for electric lighting.10,15,242 According to Pichot et al. in the summer season, from 10% to 15% of peak electric energy consumption in the USA is due to cooling of buildings with air conditioning systems, with an approximated cost of 10 billion dollars per year.243 The large number of reports dealing with PECDs and their complex architectures does not facilitate their systematic classification. Elsewhere,244 a criterion based on the mutual disposition of the light-sensitive layer and the chromogenic one was adopted. With this approach, PECDs were subdivided into three main groups: devices in which light sensitive and the chromogenic layers were separated; those in which they were successfully combined and those in which the active area of the light-sensitive layer was non symmetric to the EC layer. Other suitable sorting methods could be adopted, taking into account other peculiar aspects of PECDs. As it will be clarified in the following paragraphs, devices appearing so far in this field differ according to: the EC materials adopted, the PV technology exploited, the layout (disposition of the various layers), the mutual disposition of EC and PV layers and the device operation mode with respect to the presence of an external circuit (i.e. coloration under short-circuit or open-circuit conditions). Eventually, other effective sorting criteria could be based on the electrolyte adopted (liquid, gel or solid-state) or on the independent manageability of the device main features (photovoltaic conversion and optical transition). Noticeably, from these remarks, those devices that do not allow the exploitation of both functionalities in a unique device could not be considered PECDs.
We adopt here a simple chronological criterion to review the multiplicity of PECD designs. We rely on the fact that this criterion can be useful to identify clear trends in the design of devices and in the choice of materials, over a period of almost twenty years. For instance, it will be possible to recognize the heavy influence of the PV technology adopted. We hope that this critical review could be a useful tool for those who might need to get a clear idea of the current trends in the field of multifunctional smart window design and suitable characterization methods. In fact, PECDs generally undergo complete electro-optical experimental characterization, aiming at identifying the main figures of merit typically used in the field of PV cells as well as in the field of EC devices.


2.5.2 The appearance of the first “separated” PECDs – (1996–2000). 
In their seminal letter to Nature, Bechinger et al. described the first PECD that, unlike conventional photochromic films, embedded a PV film separated from the electrochrome.18 The device contained a ruthenium sensitized nanocrystalline titanium dioxide photoelectrode and a tungsten oxide layer deposited by thermal evaporation on the counter electrode (Fig. 16).245 The former, acting as a light-absorber, produced an open circuit voltage of 0.6–0.9 V, which was a sufficient driving force to move electrons into the WO3 film, under short-circuit conditions, attracting lithium ions in its octahedral structure and thus activating the redox reaction at the basis of the reversible coloration process.
 Fig. 16  PECD with TiO2 and WO3 on separate surfaces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 245. Copyright (2001) Elsevier Science Ltd. 
They also reported pictures of a 25 cm2 device showing an open circuit memory of 24 h and a complete coloration after 100 s, when exposed to chopped white light (75 mW cm−2).
Brian Gregg highlighted the similarity between DSSC and PECDs, maximizing the cell photovoltage by lowering the iodine content within the electrolyte.246 He also adopted a more transparent dye, in order to reduce the overall device absorbance and gave interesting clues about the possibility of tuning the optical properties of devices by selecting suitable dyes. In 1998, Li et al. proposed a similar “separated” architecture for PECDs, adopting polyaniline (PANI) as an anodic EC material, showing fast but weak modulation of the transmitted light intensity (5.1% average change of visible light under white light illumination).247 The short-circuit current (0.37 mA cm−2) and the open-circuit voltage (0.416 V) allowed a decoloration of the PANI layer due to the PV conversion activated on the dye-sensitized photoelectrode. In fact, when the device was short-circuited, electrons moved from titanium dioxide to PANI via the external circuit and the chromogenic film was reduced (and bleached), passing from a colored emeraldine salt state to a decolored leucoemeraldine salt state. Reduction took place in 2 or 3 s because it was driven by the internal electric field, whereas the oxidation, which is a diffusion-controlled process, took place in about 35 s.
Based on the same design Pichot et al. reported the first demonstration of a solid-state PEC window deposited on flexible polymer substrates (ITO-coated polyester), adopting a low temperature deposition process of titanium dioxide colloidal films.243 Sotomayor et al. reported supramolecular assemblies based on modified transparent nanostructured titanium dioxide (anatase) membranes. These assemblies consisted of covalently linked titanium dioxide nanocrystals, a ruthenium complex and a viologen component. It was then possible to figure out the direction of light-induced electron transfer within the heterosupramolecular assembly. Exposure of these membranes to light determined the blue coloration, whereas the application of a negative potential caused a prolonged persistence of coloration. This design approach was an interesting attempt to design a multifunctional photoelectrode for DSSCs, by adding an EC feature to the light-harvesting properties of ruthenium-sensitized TiO2 nanostructured films.248


2.5.3 “Combined” architectures and novel materials for PECDs – (2001–2008). 
An important architectural turning point was disclosed by Hauch et al. with a new PECD showing several architectural novelties: the photoactive (TiO2) layer was deposited directly onto the EC layer (WO3), thus sharing the same electrode (Fig. 17).245
 Fig. 17  Coloration in open circuit (upper part) and bleaching in short circuit (lower part) of the new photoelectrochromic device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 245. Copyright (2001) Elsevier Science Ltd. 
They reported the activation of the coloration mechanism under open-circuit conditions (under 1 Sun illumination), consisting in a measured change of 1 in the optical density, with time kinetics of about 2 min (for colouring and bleaching). This device represented an evolution of the previous design as the bleaching process was accelerated by a platinum catalyst, independent of the coloration process. The thin catalyst layer was deposited on the counter electrode. This was the first demonstration of a “combined” PECD architecture, with reference to the mutual disposition of the EC and light-absorbing layers. At open circuit, and under illumination, electrons were injected into the titanium dioxide and from there, they attracted lithium ions and caused coloration. Under short-circuit conditions, electrons were transferred from the WO3 layer to the platinum electrode, causing the regeneration of I− ions inside the electrolyte. A concomitant lithium deintercalation from WO3 took place, determining bleaching of the device.
In 2002 Hauch et al. compared three different design configurations for PECDs. The WO3 layer was deposited, respectively, beneath and upon the titanium dioxide layer or, in a further design approach, on the counter electrode.249 For the given preparation method adopted for titanium dioxide and WO3, which was the sol–gel method, the best performing architecture was TCO/WO3/TiO2/electrolyte/Pt/TCO, showing a modulation of 46.2% and quite fast kinetics (3 min for coloring and bleaching). Another interesting comparison was undertaken by Liao et al. foreseeing PEDOT as a cathodic EC material. The conducting polymer was electropolymerized onto ITO coated glasses.250 Then, an aqueous suspension containing titanium dioxide nanoparticles was spin-coated onto PEDOT and dried in air (combined architecture). In a second device configuration (separated architecture), PEDOT was deposited on the counter electrode (Fig. 18). An optical modulation of 20–22% was achieved (630 nm) and a coloration efficiency as high as 280 cm2 C−1.
 Fig. 18  Schematic PECD cell configurations of (a) the irreversible, composite type and (b) the reversible, separated type. Reprinted with permission from ref. 250. Copyright (2005) J. New Mater. Electrochem. Syst. 
Krasovec et al. reported a solid-state device based on the “combined architecture”, using a solid lithium ion conductor, based on organically modified silane containing an iodine/iodide redox couple. The coloring process was activated under open-circuit conditions and illumination.251 After light excitation of dye molecules, electrons were injected into WO3 (800 nm) via the titanium dioxide layer (100 nm). Both of the layers were deposited by spin-coating. At the same time, lithium ions were intercalated into WO3 and I− was oxidized to I3−. Bleaching took place under short-circuit conditions. Electrons were transferred from the WO3 to platinum electrode, causing the regeneration of I− ions in the electrolyte medium. The system demonstrated high stability (after 50 days) and an optical modulation of 60% in the visible range (under 1 Sun) irradiation. Coloration and bleaching times were observed to be 15 minutes. Georg et al. reported important advancements in the same architectural paradigm: they designed a solid-state electrolyte, which enhanced the open-circuit memory of the coloured device (100 h), even though it was at the expense of fast kinetics because full coloration was observed only after 15 min.252 Further, it was the first time that a PV characteristic curve was reported for PECDs, thus envisaging the possibility to exploit these devices not only for their responsive transmittance modulation, but also for energy generation via PV conversion, though their conversion efficiency was quite low (η = 0.054%). De Filpo et al. reported a diverse approach, demonstrating the possibility to exploit the photoelectrochromic properties of methylene blue (MB) in a flexible device, fabricated on polyethylene substrates (PETs).253 The active MB molecules were bonded to titanium dioxide nanospheres. The device could bleach when illuminated as a consequence of the reaction between the triplet state of the MB molecules and the electron donor triethylamine molecules. Transmittance passed from roughly 0.0% to 57% in 20 s.
Nokki et al. demonstrated another attempt to combine EC and PV properties in a unique PECD architectural design.254 Their approach consisted in a double sensitization of titanium dioxide with a ruthenium-based dye for light harvesting and with a viologen exploited for its EC properties. A transmittance modulation of 23% (at 675 nm) was observed in devices containing 6 μm thick titanium dioxide photoelectrodes and a PV efficiency of 1.1% in devices embodying 3 μm thick photoelectrodes. In the same year, Lanzo et al. reported preliminary results on trifunctional devices based on nematic emulsions, hosting electrochromic and photochromic guest molecules.255
In 2008, Hsu et al. fabricated a PECD using an EC polymer thin film, poly(3,3-diethyl-3,4-dihydro-2H-thieno-[3,4-b][1,4]dioxepine) (PProDot-Et2), and a dye-sensitized titanium dioxide. This device was capable of producing electric energy (like a DSSC) and of undergoing color modulation because of the electron transfer reaction at the interface between PProDot-Et2 and the electrolyte.256 See Section 3.1 for more details.


2.5.4 Photovoltachromic devices and the “multifunctional” approach – (2009–2015). 
In 2009, Wu et al. introduced the first ever photovoltachromic devices (PVCDs), i.e. solar cells combining the photovoltaic properties of dye-sensitized cells and the photoelectrochromic properties of the initial Bechinger's separated architecture (Fig. 19).257 A patterned WO3/Pt counter electrode allowed the design of a frame-type layout. With this device, under short-circuit conditions under light irradiation, the PVCD showed very fast coloration (4 s), and fair PV characteristics (η = 0.50%). A fast bleaching time was also demonstrated (about 40 s), due to the presence of the Pt catalyst. PVCDs could be bleached under illumination by simply opening the circuit. A control of transmittance modulation, even under short-circuit conditions under light irradiation was demonstrated, by adopting resistors in series, showing different values of resistance (from 2.5 Ω to 800 Ω).
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematics of a PVCC. (b) Photograph of PVCC in the colored state. (c) Transmittance spectra of PVCC in the as-prepared and the colored states. (d) Evolution of cell bleaching at a wavelength of 788 nm for open- and short-circuited PECC and PVCC in the dark. Reprinted with permission from ref. 257. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society. 
Leftheriotis et al. reported PECDs in the so-called “combined” Hauch’s architecture, with a specific optimization of the single materials employed in the fabrication of devices. A high quality WO3 film (400 nm) deposited on fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) substrates by e-beam evaporation was used as a cathodic EC material, onto which 300 nm thick dye-sensitized nanostructured titanium dioxide was deposited. Finally, a highly transparent electrodeposited Pt layer was deposited on the counter electrode.258 The PECD showed a coloration time of 12 min under sunlight irradiation and transmittance modulation expressed by a contrast ratio of 3.6:1. They also discussed some of the general properties of PECDs: the coloration kinetics did not depend on the device surface area, but only on the internal electric field generated by the PV unit. Therefore, coloration times observed in laboratory cells could also be applicable to large-area windows. Moreover, they observed that, with appropriate combination of layers and materials, various colors could be obtained during coloration.
In 2010, De Filpo et al. in a short communication, described a single glass self-supplied PECD, that, in spite of its all-solid solid nature, showed very fast kinetics (coloration in 8 s and bleaching in 30 s).259 Such relevant and, somewhat surprising results were explained as an effect of the incorporation of single-wall nanotubes (SWNTs) bearing carboxyl groups (COOH−) in the titanium dioxide and tungsten oxide films, increasing the uniformity of layers, their electrical conductivity and electron transfer through the films.
An innovative design for PVCDs was proposed by some of us in 2010,260 using specifically designed counter electrodes, showing a C-shaped platinum frame bound by a square WO3 region: the two areas were electrically separated, in order to make possible distinct operations on the two available external circuitries (Fig. 20). This unconventional counter electrode design allowed a twofold outcome: smart control of optical transmittance modulation and, at the same time, a dramatic increase of photovoltaic efficiency with respect to previous PECDs reported in the literature (η = 6.55%).
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic representation of the photovoltachromic cells realized in ref. 260: (1) electric separation on the counterelectrode; (2) platinum catalyzer; (3) tungsten oxide layer; (4) TCO; (5) glass substrate; (6) sealant; (7) titanium dioxide and dye absorbed; circuitry: red: photovoltaic; blue: photoelectrochromic. (b) Pictures of the bleached device and the colored device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 260. Copyright (2011) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
These devices also underwent a thorough electrochemical investigation,261 which provided interesting insights into the device operating modes, eventually showing that full coloration did not affect – negatively – the PV performances of the device, when operating in full photovoltachromic mode (Fig. 21).
 Fig. 21  Schematic configuration of PVCD. (a) Fundamental configuration: dye-sensitized solar cell and photoelectrochromic cell open-circuit; (b) dye-sensitized solar cell configuration; (c) photoelectrochromic cell configuration; and (d) photovoltachromic cell configuration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 260. Copyright (2013) John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Jiao et al. reported a PECD composed of dye-sensitized nanocrystalline titanium dioxide with PB deposited on the counter electrode: under illumination the PB bleached and it could be recolored by applying an appropriate external voltage (Fig. 22).262 The bleaching time (at 1 Sun) was 6.2 s and the coloration time was as low as 0.6 s for a corresponding transmittance modulation of 70% at 780 nm.
 Fig. 22  Schematics and photographs of a PECD with a 1.5 cm2 active area. The duration for electrodeposition of PB films is 300 s. (a) Schematic of the short circuit cell under illumination for bleaching. (b) Bleached cell achieved by illumination of 100 mW cm−2 for 1 min in short circuit configuration. (c) Schematic of the cell under an external voltage for coloring. (d) Photograph of the cell in the colored state after applying a 2 V bias at the PB electrode for 30 s. Reprinted with permission from ref. 262. Copyright (2011) Elsevier B.V. 
Another demonstration of the successful “decoupling” of PV and electronic elements in a suitably designed frame-type layout was reported by Leftheriotis et al. in 2012, with a “partly covered” device containing opaque (5 μm) titanium dioxide instead of highly transparent photoelectrodes with lower efficiencies. Then, only a fraction of the tungsten oxide area was covered. Such devices showed high transparency in the visible region and a coloration time of 3 min, with a contrast ratio of 10.2:1. Various titanium dioxide to WO3 area ratios were reported, ranging from 0.23 to 0.48, showing that the speed of coloration decreased, accordingly, without affecting the final degree of coloration.
A completely different approach to conveniently combine a PV and an EC device was demonstrated by Huang et al. with their multifunctional device including stripes of a semi-transparent silicon film solar cells and an ethyl-viologen-based EC solution, sandwiched between the solar cells and a secondary non-conductive substrate (Fig. 23).263
 Fig. 23  Working principle of a solution type PV–EC device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 263. Copyright (2011) Elsevier B.V. 
When sunlight entered the device, the silicon-based cells generated electron–hole pairs. The photo-potential difference between the anode and cathode induced a redox reaction in the EC solution, due to the creation of an ionic current. Thus, coloration took place (ΔT 70% at 590 nm) with a coloration time of 200 s. When sunlight declined, the device could easily restore its transparency due to its self-bleaching properties.
Yang et al. proposed a PECD showing a poly(3,4-(2,2-dimethyl-propylenedioxy)thiophene) (PProDOT-Me2) EC film integrated in a DSSC (Fig. 24). In this case, the thin catalyst layer of platinum (Pt) was deposited – on the counter electrode – beneath the EC layer, allowing the attainment of fast response times (1 s in coloration and 4 s in bleaching) and an optical contrast of 38%.264
 Fig. 24  Schematic diagram of the functions of a PECD in equilibrium state under illumination; (a) open-circuit and (b) short-circuit states. (c) SEM image (front view) of a PProDOT-Me2 film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 264. Copyright (2011) Elsevier B.V. 
This fact was clearly demonstrated showing the highly porous structure of PProDOT-Me2, containing nanofibers with diameters of approximately 30–50 nm. As a consequence, the electrolyte could easily pass across the EC film and reach the Pt layer below, which could exert its beneficial catalytic function. The device was cathodically colored under short-circuit conditions, under illumination, when electrons reached (and reduced) the PProDOT-Me2 film, flowing through the external circuit. Once the transient EC phenomenon was complete, the dye molecules kept on generating electrons in the titanium dioxide photoanode. The PV performances were also measured (VOC = 0.66 V; JSC = 2.92 mA cm−2; η = 1.12%).
Huang et al. demonstrated the structure of a solid-type PV and EC device consisting of planarly distributed semi-transparent stripes of thin film solar cells with exposed anode layers in between.265 A PB film was electrochemically deposited and a LiClO4/PMMA/PC electrolyte was then deposited on the full area of the device. The electronic current generated by silicon thin film solar cell was transformed into an ionic current in the electrolyte layer, migrating transversely along the electrodes of the solar cell, in order to maintain charge neutrality in the EC system. Modulations of 55% at 690 nm were measured. Such an impressive anodic coloration occurred in 30 s.
Recently, we proposed a comb-like pattern for a bi-functional counter electrode, consisting of two physically separated series of stripes made of tungsten oxide and Pt layers, respectively, resulting from the combination of physical vapor deposition and lithography-based microfabrication processes.266 Under illumination, the generated photovoltage drove electrons into the EC stripes (PEC circuit), promoting lithium intercalation with very fast coloration (2 s) and bleaching (5 s) times. The PV circuit enabled a fair solar energy conversion efficiency, especially depending on the dye adopted and on the WO3/Pt area ratio. An orange organic dye and an N719 commercial dye were then compared. Devices embodying these sensitizers showed similar results but the optical performances were better in those containing the organic dye, especially for building integration purposes.
Xie et al. assembled a self-powered smart window by integrating a WO3·H2O film synthesized via a solution process and the photo-absorbing layers of a DSSC, deposited by screen-printing.267 They demonstrated two types of devices: a double-pole double-throw switch allowed the control of reversible changes of colour under light irradiation (Fig. 25). With a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2, a switching time of 30 s was observed at a wavelength of 670 nm, giving an optical modulation of 26%. They also investigated the energy storage properties of possible further architectures.
 Fig. 25  Pictures of a DSSC driven EC smart window under illumination of sunlight: circuits of (a) the independent device (type I) and (b) the assembled device (type II). Reprinted with permission from ref. 267. Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
One more energy harvesting EC window was conceived as a profitable fusion of an organic EC device and a solar cell in a separated PECD architecture. It contained an electropolymerized poly(3,4-alkylenedioxythiophene) (PProDOT-Et2) film and a sensitized TiO2 electrode, a robust combination contributing to high cyclic stability.268 Highly transparent electrolytes, based on a cobalt redox couple, were preferred to typical iodine/iodide, adopted in similar devices. A conversion efficiency of 4.5% (1 Sun – AM 1.5) and a change in transmittance of 34% (with 1 s switching time) upon applying the potential were demonstrated.
Malara et al. renewed the typical dual architecture of PECDs (separated/combined configurations), splitting the patterned counter electrode of previous PVCDs into two distinct counter electrodes, physically overlapped: a central one covered by a very thin Pt layer acting as a catalyzer for the PV circuit, and a second WO3 EC electrode. The photoanode was a film of titanium dioxide nanorods (1 cm2) sensitized by a transparent organic dye. The two distinct circuitries allowed three possible device operations: PV, PEC, PVC. The best PV performances (2.75%) were achieved in devices with the smallest size of communication windows.269
Spray coating and slot-die coating were the techniques used by Jensen et al. who fabricated flexible EC devices based on conjugated electroactive polymers: poly((2,2-bis(2-ethylhexyloxymethyl)-propylene-1,3-dioxy)-3,4-thiophene-2,5-diyl) and poly(N-octadecyl-(propylene-1,3-dioxy)-3,4-pyrrole-2,5-diyl).270 They demonstrated the feasibility, but also the high contrast ratio and relatively fast response times achieved by means of a combination of EC polymers with cured and adhesive electrolytes (Fig. 27). Transmittance modulations of 44% with switch times of 5 s were observed and a bias of +2 V/−2 V with a very low current (<100 μA cm−2), pairing well with the electric output of the printed polymer PV module. A net-energy positive device was demonstrated by Dyer et al. producing electricity and capable of modulating incoming light and heat. The EC and PV components share common transparent conducting polymer electrodes.204 The approach has foreseen solution processing of the materials at room temperature thus promising for the manufacturing of possible large-area roll-to-roll devices. Device operation between colored and bleached states was achieved by connecting appropriate PV and EC electrodes. The different electrodes were suitably laminated in the vertical integration of solution processed polymeric materials. Highly transparent PV films were based on high band gap organic polymers. The EC polymers were PProDOT–(CH2OEtHx)2, referred to as ECP-magenta, and PProDOPN–C18H37, referred to as MCCP. ECP-magenta switched from a highly transparent state to a highly absorptive magenta state upon reduction, while MCCP only provided charge balance within the device, with minimal color changes. (See also Sections 2.1 and 3.1 for more details on this device.)
Yang et al. fabricated a PVCD using a solvent-free PEG–titanium hybrid polymer electrolyte, to fill a device with a frame-like WO3/Pt counter electrode and a N719-sensitized titanium dioxide nanoparticle photoelectrode (Fig. 26).271 A transmittance modulation of 50% (788 nm) with corresponding low switching times was observed (coloration, 6 s; bleaching, 17 s) in these very stable devices, successfully exposed to 91 day durability tests. It was an interesting approach towards solvent-free polymer electrodes for PVCDs.
 Fig. 26  Schematic of the PVCC with a solvent-free PEG–Ti hybrid electrolyte. Reprinted with permission from ref. 271. Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 27  (a) Axonometric view of a photovoltachromic device. Two external circuits connect the photoanode to the electrochromic electrode (A) and the gold cathode to the secondary electrode of the electrochromic device (B). Pictures of the device under bleached (b) and colored conditions (c) are shown on the right hand side. (d) Current–voltage characteristics for the solar cell layers of PVCC devices made with two different transparencies. Devices were measured under simulated 100 mW cm 2 AM1.5 illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 198. Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Recently some of us proposed a semi-transparent perovskite PV film with a solid polymer electrolyte-based EC device to achieve a solid PVCD, fabricated by depositing the photovoltaic and EC layers onto separated glass sheets. The top glass had both sides coated with TCOs, working as separated electrodes. On the other hand, the bottom glass has only one conductive layer, with e-beam deposited WO3 on top. A solid polymer electrolyte, based on polyethylene oxide plasticized by means of PEG, acted as an effective electrolyte for the EC part of the device as well as a suitable “glue” to laminate the two glass substrates (Fig. 27).198 The PV layer showed high transmittance, due to the customized dewetting of the perovskite islands, allowing the formation of discrete micron-sized islands. A PV conversion efficiency of 5.5% and an optical modulation of 26% were observed in these devices. The optical modulation in the EC circuit was activated profiting from the high energy output produced by the planar heterojunction photovoltaic film. In this way, a self-activated tinting could be enabled according to the available irradiation, with the additional possibility of delivering external power, depending on the external circuitry connections.
A self-powered smart window has also recently been developed by Wu et al., in which an EC device containing two complementary inorganic materials (anodic NiO and cathodic WO3) was activated by a multiple InGaN/GaN quantum well solar cell. At 1 Sun, the maximum transmittance during coloration and bleaching were, respectively, 10.8% and 77.39%, with coloration and bleaching times of 8 s and 5 s.272

3. Future perspectives and conclusion
3.1 The path towards solid-state electrolytes
The primary function of electrolyte systems in PECDs based on DSSCs as a power supply is to allow internal electric charge transport in order to balance any external electron flow and provide fast ion conduction for the EC active layer. Therefore, in addition to a lithium salt, the electrolyte contains a redox couple for internal charge transfer reaction of the dye sensitizers. Most of them are in liquid form, and typically consist of redox couple I−/I3−, the LiI salt and additives dissolved in organic solvents.245,249,250,256,258,260,262,264,273–276 A nitrogen-containing heterocyclic compound, such as 4-tert-butylpyridine (4-TBP), is the most common additive used to improve both the VOC and power conversion efficiencies (PCEs), thus determining an overall enhancement of the PECD performance. As for liquid solvents, cyclic carbonates such as propylene carbonate (PC) and ethylene carbonate (EC), or a mixture of PC with an aprotic solvent such as acetonitrile (ACN) (4:1 by volume) are mostly used due to their high dielectric constants that ensure high salt dissociation and additive dissolution.
In the case of PECDs based on conducting polymer materials as EC layers, optical modulation and coloration/bleaching kinetics were found to be strongly influenced by the electron transfer reaction at the electrolyte (couple redox)/conducting polymer interface. Hsu et al.256 reported a separated-type PECD fabricated by interposing an electrolyte of 0.1 M redox couples and 0.1 M LiClO4 in high boiling point 3-methoxypropionitrile (MPN) between a PProDot-Et2 EC film and the organic photosensitive dye, a FL dye1–TiO2 photoactive layer.256 They found that in the presence of the redox couple, the electron transfer reaction at the electrolyte/PProDot-Et2 conducting polymer interface determined the electrochromism of the PECD. The rate constants of the electron transfer (k0) for different redox couples at the PProDot-Et2 film, obtained by using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), were correlated with the coloration depth of the thin film. Since I−/I3− and Br−/Br3− couples possess the highest and the lowest k0 value, respectively, the PECD was investigated using these two redox couples under constant light illumination of 50 mW cm−2.The I−/I3− couple provided a higher short circuit current density (JSC) when acting as a dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC), thus the switching response upon coloration (a few seconds) was much faster than that of the PECD using the Br−/Br3− couple (about 2 min). In contrast, the PECD using Br−/Br3− exhibited a larger transmittance attenuation of ca. 33.7%, in comparison to that obtained using I−/I3− (14.1%).
Some of us investigated the effect of the electrolyte composition on both the photoelectrochromic and PV performances of the above referred devices by systematically tuning the iodide content in the electrolyte while keeping the lithium iodide concentration constant (0.7 M) (see Table 1).260 The best result was obtained by filling the cell with an iodine concentration of 0.005 M (EL5): a coloration efficiency of 61.10 cm2 C−1 at a wavelength of 780 nm and, at the same time, a photovoltaic conversion efficiency of 6.55% has been reported. In fact, by adding 0.5 M TBP to an EL3 electrolyte solution, the EL5 based device showed, as expected, a significant increment of both the open circuit voltage (0.74 V) and the fill factor (0.72), since this additive gives rise to a negative shift of the TiO2 conduction band (reduces the recombination rate between the injected electrons in TiO2, and I3−) thus generating an increase of the cell photovoltage (Fig. 28).
Table 1 Effects of electrolyte composition on the photoelectrochromic response kinetics




Electrolyte
[I2]/M
[LiI]/M
Additives/M
Redox potential/V

t
c/s

t
b/s

t
c/s

t
b/s


PECC
PECC
PVCC
PVCC




EL1
0.05
0.7
—
0.321
>60
≫60
15
>60


EL2
0.025
0.7
—
0.312
40
≫60
10
60


EL3
0.005
0.7
—
0.292
15
>60
6
15


EL4
0.0025
0.7
—
0.283
30
>60
20
25


EL5
0.005
0.7
4-TBP/0.5
0.292
8
>60
5
10


EL6
0.005
0.7
4-TBP/0.5, GNDT/0.1
0.292
9
>60
7
15




 Fig. 28  (a) Coloration efficiency vs. wavelength of PVCCs filled with different electrolytes. (b) J–V characteristics of PVCCs filled with different electrolytes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 260. Copyright (2011) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Nowadays, the realization of solid-state PECDs represents an emerging challenge towards multifunctional systems with benefits in terms of reduced cost, environmental impact and safety. One of the main obstacles to the fabrication of more desirable solid systems lies in the replacement of conventional liquid electrolytes with solid-state ones. Numerous attempts have been made so far to prepare effective solid electrolytes to satisfy the specific architectural configuration of the device and the functional requirements of both the EC and PV components. Pichot et al.243 reported a flexible PECD constituted of a cross-linked polymer electrolyte, a ruthenium dye-sensitized TiO2 electrode and a 500 nm thick WO3 EC counter electrode, adopting a separated PECD configuration where the electrolyte was interposed between the EC active layer and the DSSC. More in detail, this gel polymer electrolyte was prepared by dissolving 0.5 M of LiI in poly(ethylene glycol-400) di-methacrylate (PEG-DMA) and azobisisobutyronitrile (AIBN) exhibiting good optical, ion conductive as well as adhesive properties. Recently, Hechavarria et al. described a quasi-solid state PECD with a separated type architecture fabricated by interposing a hybrid electrolyte system, based on a solvent free PEG–titanium composite electrolyte, between the photoanode, a ruthenium 535 dye (N3)-sensitized TiO2 sol–gel deposited on an ITO substrate (DSSC), and an electrochemically deposited WO3 thin film on conductive ITO coated glass as an EC electrode.277 The polymer electrolyte was prepared by the sol–gel method using viscous polyethylene glycol (PEG, MW 600) and titanium isopropoxide as precursors in an acidic medium (conc. HCl). A lithium salt (LiI) was finally added to PEG and the PEG–Ti hybrid system at a lithium salt content of n = 8, i.e. ether–oxygen to lithium [EO]:[Li+] molar ratio of 8:1. The resulting highly transparent and fast ion conductive composite electrolyte led to a remarkable improvement of the coloration kinetics and an overall increase of the PEC stability. EIS analyses of PECDs under illumination in open circuit (before coloring) and after illumination at rest potential (after coloring) showed that the presence of a titanium complex in polymer electrolytes reduced the charge transfer resistance and increased the charge storage capacity of the cells, as illustrated in the Nyquist plots of Fig. 29.
 Fig. 29  (a) Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) of PEC cells under white lamp illumination and open circuit conditions. The equivalent circuit of the curves suggests contributions due to electrolyte resistance (Rb), charge transfer resistance at the WO3/electrolyte interface (R1), and charge accumulation at both the WO3/electrolyte (CPE1) and TiO2/electrolyte (C) interfaces. (b) EIS analysis of PEC cells after illumination under short circuit conditions. The diffusive Warburg component appears at high frequency during the de-intercalation of lithium ions in WO3 films with a larger value constant for the devices based on composite electrolyte. Inset: Representative electrical circuits. Reprinted with permission from ref. 277. Copyright (2012) Elsevier B.V. 
This improvement came from the oxidation of iodides and the reduction of titanium ions inside the composite polymer electrolytes that increased the lithium ion's mobility under the applied electrical field. A PVDF copolymer based-gel electrolyte containing succinonitrile (SN), LiClO4 salt and the Br−/Br3− redox couple dissolved in propylene carbonate (PC) was also adopted in quasi solid-state PECDs with a separated type configuration, Fig. 30.200 Briefly, the device architecture can be represented as FTO/TiO2–FLdye1/gel electrolyte/PProDOT-Et2/ITO, where the gel electrolyte was sandwiched between the DSSC and the chromogenic (semiconducting polymer) active layer (EC cell). In this case, Wu et al. investigated the influence of the gel polymer electrolyte crystallinity on the ion conduction properties and device performances by blending PVDF–HFP with different concentrations of SN. In detail, the electrolytes were composed of 0.5 M tetrabutylammonium bromide (TBABr) and 0.1 M LiClO4 in PC with 5 wt% PVDF–HFP (electrolyte P) or in SN (electrolyte S). To prepare composite electrolytes, PxSy, electrolytes P and S were mixed in a volume ratio of x:y (7:1, 6:2, 5:3). By adding SN to the PVDF–HFP/PC electrolyte, the nucleus size of PVDF–HFP in the composite was reduced, suppressing the crystallinity of the polymer electrolytes. The inhibition of crystal growth was ascribed to a reduction of the effective space available for the primary nucleation in the composite resulting in an increment of ionic conductivity, diffusion coefficient and a consequent fast switching rate of the PECDs. A bleaching time larger than 100 s was reported for the PECDs fabricated with electrolytes based on SN or PVDF–HFP alone, while the devices using the gel electrolytes obtained by blending SN with PVDF–HFP/PC showed a shorter bleaching rate. After measuring the conductivity and the diffusion coefficient, the optimal condition for the gel electrolyte was found to be P6S2, which was also confirmed by a bleaching time of less than 30 s (20–35 s) and a coloring time of 3 s. Moreover, the corresponding PECD also exhibited a photocurrent density (JSC) of 0.164 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 0.48 and a VOC of 0.75 V, which was sufficient to drive a high coloration efficiency material, such as PProDOT-Et2.
 Fig. 30  (a) Transient transmittance responses at 590 nm for PECDs using gel electrolytes P and S; (b) transient transmittance responses at 590 nm of PECDs fabricated with composite electrolytes P7S1, P6S2, and P5S3.200 Reprinted with permission from ref. 200. Copyright (2012) Elsevier B.V. 
De Filpo et al. described an all solid-state PECD with a combined structure where the dye sensitized/TiO2 and the chromogenic layer (layer of WO3 nanoparticles), both doped with single wall carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) bearing COOH groups, were deposited on the same electrode.259 In this case, a solid electrolyte PEDOT film was adopted to replace the conventional liquid or jellified electrolytes. Acting either as mixed ion or as electronic conductors, this conducting polymer allowed both proton intercalation into the WO3 layer and an easier repopulation of the dye HOMO level by electron transfer from the ITO electrode. As a matter of fact, such a conductive polymer layer played the role of an electrical contact between the dye–TiO2 (functionalized with SWNTs) layer and the ITO counter electrode, promoting the electron transfer from the TCO to the dye and at the same time, conferring a solid-state PECD configuration since no fluid or jellified electrolytic solutions were used. Krasovec et al. demonstrated, for the first time, a quasi-large area PECD with a size of 5 × 5 cm2 and 10 × 10 cm2.251,278–280 In this case, a combined architecture was proposed by interposing a solid electrolyte based on organic modified silane (ormolyte) with a redox couple between a highly porous, nanostructured ruthenium dye/TiO2 WO3 layer (photoelectrochromic electrode) and a Pt/counterelectrode (TCO) layer. They investigated the influence of both ormolytes and ormolytes/cationic surfactants (additives) on the PECD performance. To prepare these hybrid (organic–inorganic) electrolyte systems,251,281 equimolar amounts of 3-isocyanatopropyltriethoxysilane and O,O-bis(2-aminopropylpolyethyleneglycol) (ME ≈ 4000 g mol−1) were reacted to form a precursor composed of poly(propylene)oxide bis-endcapped with triethoxysilane groups. LiI salt (0.5 M) and I2 (5 mM) were added to the precursor/ethanol mixture and finally the gelation process (hydrolysis/condensation reactions) was catalyzed by acetic acid (AcOH). As for ormolyte/cationic surfactant based solid electrolytes, dodecyl acid (cationic surfactant) was added to ormosil in a mass ratio (surfactant/ormosil) of 1:3 to prove its effect on the stability and performance of devices. By comparing these ormolyte-based electrolytes, the addition of the cationic surfactant to the ormolyte led to a better penetration of the electrolyte into the pores of the WO3/TiO2 layers and suppressed the shrinkage of the electrolyte resulting in a better stability of the cells (Fig. 31). Furthermore, the presence of larger cations (additive) in the electrolyte increased VOC (under 1 Sun illumination), due to the reduced amount of cations adsorbed onto the TiO2 surface with a less significant shift of the semiconductor band edges, and thus limiting loss reactions in the PEC devices. As a result, deeper coloration (higher charged inserted into the WO3 layer) and a longer memory effect were achieved for the PECD with the ormolyte/surfactant electrolyte. The best of the large area devices showed optical modulation varying from 62% (bleached state) to about 1.8% (colored state), with a stability up to 50 days and bleaching and coloring times of about 15 minutes.
 Fig. 31  Samples of photoelectrochromic devices (10 × 10 cm2) with a solid electrolyte (ormolyte/cationic surfactant) in the bleached state (left, short circuit) and coloured by illumination equivalent to 1 Sun (right, open circuit).252 Reprinted with permission from ref. 252. Copyright (2005) Elsevier B.V. 
In our recent report, we proposed a solid state perovskite-based PECD in which a polymer electrolyte constituted of high molecular weight PEO, LiI and PEG was used as a glue to laminate two layered glasses (EC and PV active layers) and complete the EC cell. The PEO:PEG:LiI electrolyte was prepared with an ether–oxygen to lithium [EO]:[Li+] molar ratio of 4:1, whereas the PEO:PEG weight ratio was fixed as 40:60.198
Cyclic voltammetry (CV) and chronoamperometric analysis (CA) after 300 cycles and 10000 cycles, respectively, demonstrated a good electrochemical reversibility, stability and long-term durability of these plasticized polymer electrolytes. Before and after 104 charge/discharge cycles of the EC device, the ionic conductivity of the electrolytes showed a decrease from the initial value of 1.25 × 10−5 S cm−1 to a final value of 1.40 × 10−6 S cm−1 and at the same time, the injected charge density decreased from 2.4 mC cm−2 to 1.2 mC cm−2. As a result, the reduction of charge absorption induced a consequent decrease of the transparency modulation. This performance decay (after 104 cycles) was correlated with the lower ionic conductivity of the electrolyte and the sheet resistance increase of the ITO electrodes in contact with acidic electrolytes (see Fig. 32).
 Fig. 32  Cyclic voltammogram of the EC component of the PVCC showing 300 consecutive cycles. Comparison between charge and discharge curves obtained in the as prepared EC device and in the same device after 104 cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 198. Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Xie et al.267 reported a self-powered smart window designed with an integrated EC device and a DSSC device for energy saving and energy storage applications. In this integrated device, two different electrolytes were effectively used. A gel polymer electrolyte based on polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) with concentrated H2SO4 (1 M) for the EC device and a liquid electrolyte consisting of 1,2-dymethyl-3-propylimidazolinium iodide (DMPII) (1 M), lithium iodide (LiI) (0.1 M), I2 (0.12 M) and 4-TBP (0.5 M) in methoxypropionitrile for the DSSC device.
Similarly, as already discussed Jensen et al. utilized polymer solar cells (OPVs) to drive EC display devices.270 In this case, EC polymers and a PMMA based quasi-solid electrolyte (PMMA/ionic liquid electrolyte system) were used for the fabrication of a fully printable and laminated device on flexible substrates. A suitable processing of the ion gel electrolyte, prepared by radical polymerization of vinyl monomer, methyl methacrylate (MMA), in ionic liquid, 1-ethyl-2-methyl-imidazolium-bis(triflouromethane sulfonyl)imide (EMIM-TFSI), in the presence of a small amount of cross linker, gave highly transparent, flexible and free-standing films. In addition, given its good adhesive properties it was also used as a sealant in a mixture with a binder to complete the EC device thus avoiding the use of double-sided adhesive or toxic linear epoxy resin. Further advancement of all-polymeric PECDs was reported by Dyer et al. see Fig. 33.204
 Fig. 33  Concept and structure of a solar-powered electrochromic device. (a) Schematic cross section structure of the EC/PV laminated vertical stack. (b) Schematic of device layer components (numbering corresponds to electrodes in (a)). (c) Photograph and schematic of the EC/PV self-powering concept showing connections required to cause bleaching (top) or coloring (bottom) of the ECD under illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 204. Copyright (2014) WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
To assemble a fully integrated EC/PV device (see in Section 2.1 for further details), an ion conducting gel polymer electrolyte, consisting of PMMA (8 wt%) and lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI) (0.5 M) in propylene carbonate (PC), was deposited between two separated EC layers (ECP magenta and MCCP) and eventually laminated and sealed.
In addition to polymer electrolytes, thin solid films of inorganic metal oxide have been effectively used as solid electrolytes for the realization of all inorganic solid-state PECDs with a multilayer tandem structure where the silicon solar cell is separated and is parallel with the EC cell.
Gao et al. and Deb et al. reported a monolithic PECD architecture in which the EC active layers are deposited on top of the photovoltaic layer.74,282 In detail, such an integrated structure was constituted of a wide band gap a-Si1−xCx/H n–i–p PV cell as a semitransparent power source and a LiyWO3/LiAlF4/V2O5 EC device as an optical-transmittance modulator. In this configuration, a thin inorganic ion conductor film (1000 nm thickness) of lithium aluminum fluoride (LiAlF4) was deposited by thermal evaporation on the chromogenic layer of WO3 starting from a mixture of lithium fluoride (LiF) and aluminum fluoride (AlF3) powder. Finally, the device was sealed to prevent the hygroscopic-lithiated Li1.2V2O5 (ion storage medium) layer from absorbing water vapor from the air. Compared with polymer electrolytes, inorganic solid-state Li-ion conductors exhibited many advantages such as superior electrochemical, mechanical and thermal stability, the absence of leakage, and material safety. Therefore, replacing the quasi-solid electrolyte (gel or plasticized polymer electrolytes) with an inorganic solid-state ion conductor could represent a relevant option for the development and manufacturing of large area PECDs with a high reliability degree as well as environmental stability. In this context, some interesting examples of all-inorganic chromogenic devices were reported in the literature, where tantalum pentoxide (Ta2O5)283,284 and more recently, lithium phosphorus oxynitride (LiPON)285 thin films were effectively prepared by physical vapor deposition as high performance solid ion-conductors for ECD integration in a multilayer architecture.

3.1.1 Summarizing tables. 
A summary of the most important PECD figures of merit, discussed within this review and in particular in Sections 2.5 and 3.1, is reported in Table 2.
Table 2 A summary of PECDs (1996–2014) on the basis of the main constituents and their characteristic figures of merit




References
Constituents
Performances


Light harvesting systems (thickness)
EC material (thickness)
Electrolyte composition
ΔT (%) or contrast ratio (CR)
CE (cm2 C−1) or PhCE (cm2 min−1 W−1)
Coloration time (s, min)
Bleaching time (s, min)
Stability (time or operating cycles)
Photovoltaic conversion efficiency (%)




Poly(ethylene glycol-400) di-methacrylate (PEG-DMA); azobisisobutyronitrile (AIBN); ethyl viologen diperchlorate ([EV(ClO4)2]); triethylamine (TEA); dipentaerythritol pentaacrylate (UV photopolymerizable monomer) (DPHA); tertbutylpyridine (TBP); 1-hexyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide (HMII); 3-methoxypropionitrile (MPN); γ-butyrolactone (GBL); heptylviologen (HV(BF4)2); tetrabutylammonium tetrafluoroborate (TBABF4); 0.05M N,N′,N,N′-tetramethyl-p-phenylenediamine (TMPD); cobalt(III/II) tris(2,2′-bipyridine) ([Co(bpy)3]3+/2+); methyl methacrylate (MMA); 1-ethyl-2-methyl-imidazolium-bis(triflouromethane sulfonyl)imide (EMIM-TFSI); ethylene glycol dimethylacrylate (EGDMA); benzoyl peroxide (BPO); bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl) imide (LiTFSI); 1,2-dimethyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide (DMPII); cis-diisothiocyanato-bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid) ruthenium(II) (N3); di-tetrabutylammonium cis-bis(isothiocyanato)bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato)ruthenium(II) N719; ((E)-2-cyano-3-(5-(9,9-diethyl-7-(naphthalen-1-yl(phenyl)amino)-9H-fluoren-2-yl)thiophen-2-yl)acrylic acid) (FL dye 1); cis-bis(isothiocyanate)bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylate)ruthenium(II) (RhB) cis-bis(isothiocyanato)(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato)(4,4′-di-nonyl-2′-bipyridyl)ruthenium(II) Z-907; methylene blue (MB); poly(3,3-diethyl-3,4-dihydro-2H-thieno-[3,4-b][1,4]dioxepine) (PProDOT-Et2); poly(3,4-(2,2-dimethylpropylenedioxy)thiophene) (PProDOT-Me2); poly((2,2-bis(2-ethylhexyloxymethyl)-propylene-1,3-dioxy)-3,4-thiophene-2,5-diyl) (ECP Magenta); poly(N-octadecyl-(propylene-1,3-dioxy)-3,4-pyrrole-2,5-diyl) (MCCP).




C. Bechinger et al.18 (1996)
Ruthenium dye sensitized TiO2 (4 micron)
WO3 (500 nm)
Liquid 0.1 M LiI, 0.01 M 4-TBP in PC
17 (788 nm)
—
50 s
250 s
—
—


Y. Li et al.247 (1998)
N3 dye sensitized TiO2 film (1–3 μm)
PANI films (1 μm/140 nm)
Liquid 0.5 M LiI, 0.04 M I2 in PC:AC (4:1, v/v)
5.1
—
34 s
2–3 s
—
—


F. Pichot et al.243 (1998)
N3 dye sensitized TiO2 film (600 nm)
WO3 (500 nm)
Quasi-solid state 900 mg PEGDMA, 1 mol% AIBN, 0.5 M LiI
50 (>700 nm)
—
10 min
—
—
—


A. Hauch et al.245 (2001)
N3 dye sensitized TiO2 film (3 μm)
WO3 (1 μm/240 nm)
Liquid 0.5 M LiI, 0.005 M I2 in PC
41 (620 nm)
—
3 min
3 min
—
—


S. Deb et al.74 (2001)
a-Si1−xCx/H PV cell
WO3 (120 nm)
Solid state LiAlF4
≈28 (670 nm)
—
5 min
—
—
—


A. Hauch et al.249 (2002)
N3 dye sensitized TiO2 film (150 nm)
WO3 (600 nm)
Liquid 0.5 M LiI, 0.005 M I2 in PC
46.2
—
12 min
10 min
—
—


J. Y. Liao et al.250 (2005)
N3 dye sensitized TiO2 film
PEDOT thin film
Liquid 0.1 M LiI, 0.1 M LiClO4 in PC
22 (630 nm)
280
70–80 s
70–80 s
—
—


U. Krasovec et al.251 (2004)
N3 dye sensitized TiO2 film (100 nm)
WO3 (800 nm)
Quasi-solid state Ormolyte/cationic surfactant 0.5 M LiI, 0.005 M I2
60.4
—
15 min
15 min
50 days
—


A. Georg et al.252 (2006)
N3 dye sensitized TiO2 film (150 nm)
WO3 (600 nm)
Quasi-solid state Ormolyte/cationic surfactant 0.5 M LiI, 0.005 M I2
60.4
—
15 min
15 min
—
0.054


G. De Filpo et al.253 (2006)
TiO2–PO4–MB (400 nm)
MB
Quasi-solid state 0.05 M [EV(ClO4)2], 0.2 M TEA, 0.5 M LiClO4, 5 wt% DPHA, Nafion membrane
56
—
0.6 s
20 s
—
—


H. Santa-Nokki et al.254 (2007)
N-719 dye sensitized TiO2 (6 μm)
Bis(2-phosphonoethyl)-4,4′-pyridinium dichloride (Viologen)
Liquid 0.5 M LiI and 0.05 M I2 in PC for ECD; 0.1 M LiI, 0.05 M I2, 0.3 M TBP, 0.5M HMII in MPN for DSSC
22.8 (630 nm)
—
—
—
—
1.1


C. Hsu et al.256 (2008)
FL1–dye sensitized TiO2 film
PProDOT-Et2
Liquid 0.1 M redox couples (I−/I3− and Br−/Br3−), 0.1 M LiClO4 in MPN
14.1–33.7 (620 nm)
—
3–1823 s
3–207
—
0.10–0.65


J. Wu et al.257 (2009)
N-719 dye sensitized TiO2 film (3 micron)
WO3 (800 nm)
Liquid 0.5 M LiI, 0.005 mM I2 in PC
45 (788 nm)
—
4 s
60 s
200 cycles
0.50


G. Leftheriotis et al.258 (2010)
RhB sensitized TiO2 films (300nm)
WO3 400 nm
Liquid 0.5 M LiI, in PC
CR 3.6:1
PhCE 1.50 (850 nm)
10 min
12 min
100 cycles
—


G. De Filpo et al.259 (2010)
Ruthenium dye sensitized TiO2: SWNTs films (500nm)
SWNT–WO3 NP films (0.005:1) (500 nm)
Solid state PEDOT HTL
54 (800 nm)
—
8 s
30 s
100 cycles
—


A. Cannavale et al.260 (2011)
N-719 dye sensitized TiO2 film
WO3 300 nm
Liquid 0.7 M LiI, 0.03 M I2, 4-TBP in ACN
55 (600 nm)
61.10 (780 nm)
5–20 s
10–60 s
100 cycles
6.55


Z. Jiao et al.262 (2012)
Z-907 dye sensitized TiO2 film (4 micron)
PB 452 nm
Liquid 0.5 M LiI, 0.01 M 4-TBP in GBL
70 (780 nm)
103.40 (780 nm)
0.60 s
6.2 s
1000 cycles
—


G. Leftheriotis et al.286 (2012)
N3 dye senzitized TiO2 film (5micron)
WO3 e-beam evaporation (400 nm)
Liquid 0.5 M LiI, 0.0025 M I2 in PC
CR 10.2:1
—
3 min
—
2 months
—


L. Huang et al.263 (2012)
Amorphous silicon (a-Si:H) thin film solar cell (TFSC) (400 nm)
Heptylviologen (HV(BF4)2)
Liquid 0.05 M HV(BF4)2, 0.1 M TBABF4, 0.05 M TMPD in PC
70 (590 nm)
—
200 s
160 min
—
5.55


S. Yang et al.264 (2012)
N3–4TBA dye sensitized TiO2 film (1 micron)
PProDOT-Me2 (200 nm)
Liquid 0.1 M LiI, 0.001 M I2 in PC
38 (637 nm)
—
1 s
4 s
1500 cycles
1.12


L. Hechavarria et al.277 (2012)
N3 dye sensitized TIO2 film (160 nm)
WO3 (250 nm)
Quasi-solid state LiI in PEG–Ti hybrid system [EO]:[Li+] molar ratio 8:1
40 (n.a)
—
9 s
3.2 s
—
—


L. Huang et al.265 (2012)
a-Si:H/μc-Si:H thin film solar cell (TFSC)
Prussian blue (PB) (200 nm)
Quasi-solid state PMMA, 0.1 M LiClO4 in PC
55 (690 nm)
—
30 s
15 s
—
9.44


A.Cannavale et al.266 (2014)
Dye sensitized (o D(–π–A)2 structure) (DYE 1) TiO2 film (5 micron)
WO3 (300 nm)
Liquid 0.7 M LiI, 0.03 M I2, 0.3 M 4-TBP in ACN
32 (650 nm)
PhCE 17 (650 nm)
2 s
5 s
—
1.92


Z. Xie et al.267 (2014)
N-719 dye sensitized TiO2 films
WO3·2H2O films (500 nm)
H2SO4–PVA gel electrolyte (ECD); DMPII (1.0 M), LiI (0.1 M), I2 (0.12 M) and 4-TBP (0.5 M) in MPN (DSSC)
31 (670 nm)
61.60
30 s
—
—
1.27


E. Amasawa et al.268 (2014)
Triphenylamine (TPA)-based organic dyes sensitizrd TIO2 (5 micron)
PProDOT-Me2
Liquid ([Co(bpy)3]3+/2+), 0.1 M LiClO4, 0.2 M TBP in ACN
34 (620 nm)
—
1 s
1 s
5000 cycles
4.50


F. Malara et al.269 (2014)
N-719 dye sensitized TiO2 nanorods films (5 micron)
WO3 (300 nm)
Liquid 0.7 M LiI, 0.005 M I2, 0.5 M 4-TBP in dried ACN
40 (650 nm)
—


—
—
2.75


J. Jensen et al.270 (2012)
Organic polymer solar cells (OPV)
ECP magenta MCCP
Solid state 0.02 mol MMA, 0.02 mol EMIM-TFSI, 2 mol% EGDMA, 0.5 mol% BPO, ACN
58 (550 nm)
—
<5 s
—
90 cycles (4 months)
2.00


A. Dyer et al.204 (2014)
Organic polymer solar cell (OPV)
ECP magenta MCCP
Quasi-solid state 8 wt% PMMA, 0.5 M LiTFSI in PC
20 (550 nm)
—
—
—
—
0.55


M. Yang et al.271 (2014)
N-719 dye sensitized TiO2 films
WO3
Liquid PEG–Ti, LiI, I2, DMPII
50 (788 nm)
—
6 s
8 s
200 cycles 91 days
0.28


A. Cannavale et al.198 (2015)
Perovskite solar cell
WO3 (300 nm)
Quasi-solid state LiI in PEO ([EO]:[Li+] molar ratio 4:1); PEO:PEG weight ratio 40:60
22–30 (600 nm)
114–289
15–20 s
—
300 cycles
3.7–5.5


C. Wu et al.272 (2015)
InGaN/GaN multiple quantum well (MQW) solar cell
NiO; WO3 (500 nm; 300 nm)
Liquid
58.2
67.20
8 s
5 s
—
—





3.2 Main issues for architectural exploitation
Adaptive facade technologies, and therefore PECDs used as a smart glazing, can contribute to the complex challenge of reducing buildings' energy demand and, thus, their environmental footprint. Nevertheless, users' interaction and control strategies should be carefully assessed due to the high impact of such devices on energy consumption.287 A survey conducted among experts in the field assessed the potential performance of EC devices for building integration.288,289 Spectral response in terms of both solar and visible control, cyclic lifetime, overall lifetime, and switching time were among the considered indexes.
The survey concluded that a smart window should be able to switch its Visible Light Transmittance (VLT) from 50–70% in the bleached state to less than 10–20% in the colored one.288 However experiments involving human subjects have demonstrated that the minimum acceptable glazing VLT is in the range of 25–38%, depending on sky conditions.290 Most of the PEC devices so far developed show transmittance values in the coloured state in the range between 10% and 30%, if wavelengths in the visible bandwidths are considered,200,243,245,254,256–258,260,262,266,270,272,274,291–293 demonstrating thus good potential for building integration.
The VLT dynamic gradient can greatly contribute to increased indoor visual comfort. Piccolo and Simone294 demonstrated that in sun-oriented windows (south for the northern hemisphere) an overall VLT dynamic range of 54% reduces the glare probability, without compromising daylight availability. However, in west and east oriented windows very low transmissions in the coloured state (i.e. lower than 7%) are necessary to control solar radiation with lower angles. PECD technology has demonstrated to be mature under this viewpoint as several prototypes show light transmittance modulations higher than 50% in the visible bandwidths.251,253,259,260,262,263,265,272,278,293,295 Furthermore, some devices reached very low transmittances, compatible with their use in west and east oriented rooms.249,251,253,278,292 Some of us showed that integration of PVCDs in windows could significantly improve control of solar radiation.274 We predicted, in fact, an increase of the Useful Daylight Illuminance (UDI – i.e. the percentage of time in which indoor daylight illuminance is within the comfort band) of up to about 72% as an average value in a standard office room. An additional reported benefit was the reduction of intolerable glare to less than 12% of occupied hours.274
Visual comfort and glare are not the only factors influencing users' attitude towards switchable technologies. Zinzi carried out an experimental study involving 30 human subjects in order to understand the users' acceptance of EC windows.296 The author found that more than 85% of users do not perceive any significant alteration of both the indoor and outdoor environment due to the colouring of the window. In contrast, 40% of them perceive the visual obstruction of external blinds as bothering. The automatic control of the colour gradient is preferred by only 37% of users. This poses a significant problem in the development of colour-changing technologies, as manual override should be a major feature. As discussed by Bechinger18 and Gregg,246 pioneers of PECD technology, as the coloration process requires the presence of an electric field between the two electrodes, each state (either transparent or coloured) can be manually stored or changed. Therefore, even if the major property of PECDs is the automatic control of their transparency, this feature can be overridden when desired. As an example, Hauch et al. proposed to change the device transmittance during illumination in a continuous manner, using an adjustable external resistance.245 Similarly, Su proposed to manually control a solid-state PECD by changing the resistance in an external circuit.297 Georg et al. explained the kinetics of a newly developed PEC window.252 The device was able to colour or bleach if illuminated, by adjusting the electrolyte. Alternatively, under dark conditions the device was still able to act as a traditional EC cell, changing its transparency with the application of an external voltage.
Climate-adaptable technologies applied to building envelopes could have a positive impact on the reduction of building energy consumption. A study carried out by Tavares et al. demonstrated that switchable windows can be preferred to traditional technologies (like Double Glass Units) if cooling needs of sun-oriented (south, west and east) facades are considered.11 However previous studies demonstrated that strategies for determining the transition between bleached and coloured states have to be carefully assessed, due to their impact on total building energy demand.298 While, on one side, a dark state positively influences the cooling energy demand, on the other side, it could negatively affect lighting and heating consumption.299 Favoino et al. carried out an analysis of the visual and thermal properties of an ideal adaptive façade.300,301 Climate and Window-to-Wall Ratio (WWR) were the major variables considered. They discovered that in temperate climates (considering Rome as a reference city) a larger modulation range of the VLT and solar transmittance (i.e. Solar Heat Gain Coefficient – SHGC) would result in a significant reduction of building energy demand. Moreover ideal adaptive glazing technologies should be able to modify their spectral selectivity according to the external environmental conditions.300 In particular, while in the cooling season a fixed ratio of 2.41 between the VLT and SHGC is able to achieve the best results, in the mid-season a higher variability is required (1–2.41).
Llordes et al. suggested that such a feature can be ideally achieved by smart devices differentiating the transmittance modulation in visible and IR bandwidths.186 Some of the developed PECDs experience this property, being able to show differences in VLT and SHGC gradients. Devices fabricated by Krasovec et al. were demonstrated to have a VLT/SHGC ratio variable between about 1.5 (in the bleached state) and 2–2.3 (in the coloured one).251,278At the same time, some of us reported similar results with VLT/SHGC variable between 1.3 and 1.7.274
Durability is another major concern for adaptive and switchable façade technologies from the building industry’s perspective.17 An initial assessment performed on EC windows defined an ideal cyclic lifetime higher than 104–106 cycles and an overall lifetime of 5–20 years.288 The latter has not already been tested in PECDs, even if several studies have concentrated on the durability assessment under a lifetime viewpoint. Krasovec et al.251 performed tests on PEC cells at 7 days and 50 days after being assembled, finding a stable optical modulation at 50 days. However, for longer periods, some PECDs were prone to failure due to the onset of degradation on either the DSSC or the EC side of the device.258,276,292 In particular, an experimental test performed on a partly-covered PEC device showed a sudden drop of the light transmittance in the bleached state after 70 days of testing. Moreover the device tended to assume the maximum coloration if left at open circuit.276
While the time duration of PECDs seems to be currently an issue in adopting existing technologies, the number of cycles seems to be already compatible with building integration. Several experiments have been carried out to assess the degradation of PECDs after 102–2 × 102 cycles,257–260,271 finding no significant reduction of optical performance. Other studies have concentrated on experiments on a larger number of cycles, typically between 103 and 5 × 103262,264,268 very close to the minimum recommended values for building applications.288 PECDs have demonstrated to retain a good stability at the end of the experiments, only showing, in one case, an increase of bleaching time of 1 s,264 and in a second case a degradation of 3% of the power conversion efficiency.268
Regarding coloration and bleaching time, one of the expectations of smart windows is to obtain fast switching times.289 This has been demonstrated to be a key feature in a field study, in which only 23% of occupants perceived a switching time of 12 minutes to be quick enough to modulate incoming solar radiation.296 It has to be noted that most of the devices so far developed show fast coloration and bleaching, allowing a coloration shift in less than 60 s.198,253,254,257,259,260,262,264–268,270–272,277 Only in a handful of cases a switching time higher than 10 minutes has been recorded.243,251,258,263 It is worth noting that, even if for the technology adopted in these last cases there is still room for improvement, the coloration time is independent of the area of the device.251 Therefore switching time should not be a pivotal issue when PECDs will be scaled up to large-area windows.
3.3 Towards solid-state multifunctional devices
Apart from the advantages derived from the use of PECDs and PVCDs in buildings, as a dynamic tintable and energetically active portion of transparent building envelopes, this review paper underlines the influence of the constituting technologies reported in Section 1 (power supply, EC materials, electrolytes and conductive substrates) on their design principles. The evolution of devices through time (Section 2) has clearly proved that, as soon as a significant breakthrough in each of those pivotal components is available, a new step towards the improvement of PECDs can be made, influencing the evolution of device architectures as well as their potential R&D spin-offs.
In the last few years, increased interest in PECDs has been observed, worldwide, in several research groups, probably due to the renewed interest in environmental concerns and in “greening” existing technologies. Especially in the last four years, a diversification of PECD power supply systems has been proposed, in conjunction with the progressive reduction in the use of DSSCs. This trend, as reported in Section 2.1, was favored by the spread of novel, robust and solid-state PV devices, deposited on single substrates, with enhanced transparency.
For example, the employment of standard silicon-based technology for PECDs (and PVCDs, of course) in the frame of the building envelope is limited by several technical constraints. Apart from the reduction of daylight penetration through glazings, embedding opaque silicon cells, another disadvantage of this technology is known to be the loss of performance because of high temperatures and shading, caused by the surrounding buildings, their chimneys, or other kinds of obstacles, like trees. In fact, even one single partly shaded c-Si module would lead to a significant loss of power, not only in that particular module, but in all the others connected in series within the same circuit, with a resulting reduced power output. As a direct consequence, the availability of highly transparent and efficient power supply systems would dramatically affect the future evolution of PECDs: as already observed, neutral-colored and efficient perovskite-based planar heterojunction PV layers could be more compatible with BIPV issues. In comparison with conventional solar devices, perovskite modules are potentially the most environmentally sustainable PV. Recently Gong et al. performed a life cycle assessment (LCA) for two types of solution-processed perovskite solar modules, TiO2 and ZnO2 modules, to shed light on the environmental performance of this promising class of PVs.302 They developed comprehensive life cycle inventories (LCIs), energy and materials inventories, for all components employed in the modules.
Based on the LCI results, life cycle impact assessment was conducted for 16 midpoint common life cycle impact indicators, three endpoint indicators following the Eco-indicator 99 methodology, and two sustainable indicators: the energy payback time (EPBT) and the CO2 emission factor.
Comparing the results of Eco-indicator 99 and the EPBT among existing PV technologies (eight PV modules), perovskite solar modules showed the shortest EPBT (0.266 year for TiO2 module and 0.192 year for ZnO2 module) with a very low environmental impact for the perovskite based ZnO module. Regarding TiO2 modules, the major contributors to environmental impacts came from the use of gold, ITO glass, and organic solvents, as well as energy intensive thermal evaporation.
Although perovskite solar modules exhibited relatively large CO2 emission factors for both types of modules, these factors are less stable and comparatively sensitive to fluctuations according to the evaluation of the sustainable indicators considering the uncertainties of the major input parameters (lifetime and performance ratio). As a result, the development of perovskite PV modules having a larger performance ratio and a longer lifetime will lead to a far lower CO2 emission factor in the future. Regarding the EC component, the development of new EC materials utilizing low temperature conditions, for instance, is crucial in the path towards the exploitation of conductive plastic substrates, for portable or cheap and environmental-friendly systems. Also conjugated EC polymers could play a pivotal role among EC materials viable for PECDs, once their main limitations, reported by Ho et al. will be overcome (high costs, lower stability, limited lifetime). In fact, not all of the EC materials or electrolytes could be practically exploited for real applications.244 Building integration of these materials would severely push the limits of stability of sealing agents, electrolytes (leakage and solvent evaporation) and EC materials themselves.
Moreover, each process involved in the fabrication of PECDs should be compatible with large-area industrial production technologies (like roll-to roll, screen printing or PVD), since the early design steps. A relevant aspect is indeed represented by the use of cheap and abundant materials, rather than rare (and, sometimes, toxic) ones, in view of cost-effective and environmental-friendly devices. On the other hand, the effect of conductive layers and of the underlying substrates on the cost and environmental impacts of PECDs evokes the necessity for a new design philosophy, taking into account the chance to achieve single-substrate, solid-state devices. Such a possibility would please especially manufacturers of glass facades, since maintenance and integration of devices would be facilitated.
The elevated product cost as well as the lack of standardization in the technology still remain critical aspects, limiting industrial exploitation. As reported by the US Department of Energy,303 to ensure wide market penetration of dynamic glass, the 2025 target should be to achieve less than 65 € m−2 extra cost, allowing a payback time of 10–12 years for residential buildings and 21–22 years for commercial ones.
Meanwhile, for existing buildings, it will be necessary to develop a suitable thin film technology to retrofit existing windows, instead of replacing the entire window, as well as employing internal self-powering systems without incorporating electrical wiring (remote control via Wi-Fi).
To date, smart glasses cover a small market size with a delay in market development and penetration.
In the end, BIPVs have encountered several obstacles to their industrial exploitation. Unexpectedly, these barriers were not only due to technological and economic aspects, but also to merely aesthetic and psychological constraints, thus limiting the use of available technologies, even if effective and non-expensive. Research advancements discussed in this review, regarding all PECD components, could promote the technology maturity of PECDs aiming at large scale utilization in future buildings.
Appendix – glossary of performance parameters of PECDs
Contrast ratio – CR
For electrochromes (studied singly or within devices) involving a color change, the CR is a parameter measuring the intensity change between the bleached and colored states, or between two colored states. It refers to a specific wavelength, generally coincident with the maximum absorbance, in the colored form.
For materials (devices) working in transmission mode, the contrast ratio is expressed by:  where Tb is the transmittance in the bleached form, and Tc is the transmittance in the colored state. Alternatively, color changes could be expressed in the form of a transmittance (or absorbance) modulation: ΔT% (or ΔA).
Response time – τ
This is the time required to activate the transition between two distinct color states, or between the fully colored and the fully bleached states. It expresses the time required for the achievement of the maximum color variation or even an arbitrary fraction of it,304 at a specific wavelength.
Cycle life
This is the experimental measurement of electrochrome durability. Maximizing the number of cycles of an EC system is of course the aim of fabrication processes. According to Mortimer et al., a working minimum of about 105 cycles is advisable.
Change of optical density – ΔOD
The change of the optical density, ΔOD, which is proportional to the amount of created color centers, can be expressed by the equation:  where Tb and Tc are the transmittances before and after coloration, respectively.305
Coloration efficiency – CE, or ηEC
Coloration efficiency is defined as the change in optical density per unit of inserted charge. To calculate the EC coloration efficiency, the optical modulation, expressed by the contrast ratio, is related to the amount of injected charge per unit sample area (cm2 C−1). The calculation of the coloration efficiency is generally related to the wavelength of maximum absorbance, since it is spectrally dependent.  A high coloration efficiency gives a large optical modulation at small charge insertion/extraction. It is taken to be positive when the absorption goes up under ion intercalation (cathodic electrochromism), and negative when the absorption goes down under ion intercalation (anodic electrochromism).
Photocoloration efficiency – PhCE, or ηPC
PhCE is the equivalent of coloration efficiency (CE = ΔΟD/Q) used for electrochromics, but it is more suitable for the operation conditions of photoelectrochromics. In fact, in an EC device, the charge density Q is provided by the external circuit, applying a bias, and it is easily measured. In a PECD, the charge is provided by the solar cell and it is difficult to quantify, especially for devices coloring under open circuit conditions. For this reason, the consideration of the exposure energy, given by the power density and the exposure time, is advisable for devices involving PV conversion processes.  where I is the light intensity incident normal to the device (W m−2) and t is the exposure time (min).306
Open-circuit memory
This represents the residual open circuit memory of EC devices, after coloration. It is considered an asset since electrical power must be drawn only to effect changes in the optical properties and maintaining the colored condition does not require the expenditure of additional energy.307 For applications of EC devices, small drifts of optical transmittance within hours should be ideally observed.
References
N. Armaroli and V. Balzani, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3193 Search PubMed .
W. Steffen, J. Grinevald, P. Crutzen and J. McNeill, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2011, 369, 842–867 CrossRef PubMed .
W. M. O. (WMO), Press Release N13, 2015.
United Nations, 2015, 21930, 32.
N. Armaroli and V. Balzani, Chemistry, 2015, 22, 32–57 CrossRef PubMed .

          J. Macdonald, Clean energy defies fossil fuel price crash to attract record $ 329BN global investment in 2015, 2016.
Apricum, http://www.apricum-group.com/dubai-shatters-records-cost-solar-earths-largest-solar-power-plant/, 2016.

PwC financing the future of energy: The opportunity for the Gulf's financial services sector, Cambridge University,  2015 Search PubMed .
European Commision, http://https://ec.europa.eu/energy/en/topics/energy-efficiency/buildings, 2016.
A. Piccolo and F. Simone, J. Build. Eng., 2015, 3, 94–103 CrossRef .
P. F. Tavares, A. R. Gaspar, A. G. Martins and F. Frontini, Energy Policy, 2014, 67, 68–81 CrossRef .
L. Pérez-Lombard, J. Ortiz and C. Pout, Energy Build., 2008, 40, 394–398 CrossRef .
C. G. Granqvist, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 564, 1–38 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lee, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2002, 71, 465–491 CrossRef CAS .
N. L. Sbar, L. Podbelski, H. M. Yang and B. Pease, Int. J. Sustainable Built Environ., 2012, 1, 125–139 CrossRef .
A. Seeboth, J. Schneider and A. Patzak, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 60, 263–277 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Lampert, A. Agrawal, C. Baertlien and J. Nagai, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1999, 56, 449–463 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bechinger, S. Ferrere, A. Zaban, J. Sprague and B. A. Gregg, Nature, 1996, 383, 608–610 CrossRef CAS .
B. O’Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–739 CrossRef .
A. Hinsch, W. Veurman, H. Brandt, R. Loayza Aguirre, K. Bialecka and K. Flarup Jensen, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2012, 20, 698–710 CrossRef CAS .
P. Heinstein, C. Ballif and L. E. Perret-Aebi, Green, 2013, 3, 125–156 CrossRef .
APS News, American Phys. Soc., 2009, 18, 1.
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CAS .
I. Chung, B. Lee, J. He, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2012, 485, 486–489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 Search PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, V. M. Burlakov, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 591–598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Aharon, M. Layani, B.-E. Cohen, E. Shukrun, S. Magdassi and L. Etgar, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500118 CrossRef .
A. Listorti, B. O. Regan and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Mater., 2011, 3381–3399 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6841–6851 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Gao, Y. Wang, D. Shi, J. Zhang, M. Wang, X. Jing, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10720–10728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ahmad, E. Guillén, L. Kavan, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3439 CAS .
S. Mathew, A. Yella, P. Gao, R. Humphry-Baker, B. F. E. Curchod, N. Ashari-Astani, I. Tavernelli, U. Rothlisberger, N. Khaja and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 242–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Asghar, K. Miettunen, J. Halme, P. Vahermaa, M. Toivola, K. Aitola and P. Lund, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 418–426 CAS .
International, Electrotechnical and Commission, IEC 61646, Thin-film terrestrial photovoltaic (PV) modules – Design qualification and type approval, 2008.
M. Gratzel, Chem. Lett., 2005, 34, 8–13 CrossRef .
A. Hinsch, J. M. Kroon, R. Kern, I. Uhlendorf, J. Holzbock, A. Meyer and J. Ferber, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2001, 9, 425–438 CrossRef CAS .
R. Harikisun and H. Desilvestro, Sol. Energy, 2011, 85, 1179–1188 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mariani, L. Vesce and A. Di Carlo, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2015, 30, 104003 CrossRef .
M. L. Parisi, A. Sinicropi and R. Basosi, Int. J. Heat Technol., 2011, 29, 161–169 Search PubMed .

          M. L. Parisi and R. Basosi, in Energy Security and Development SE – 12, ed. B. S. Reddy and S. Ulgiati, Springer India,  2015, pp. 195–210 Search PubMed .

          B. Bowerman and V. Fthenakis, Eh & S Analysis of Dye-Sensitized Photovoltaic Solar Cell Production,  2001 Search PubMed.
J. You, L. Dou, K. Yoshimura, T. Kato, K. Ohya, T. Moriarty, K. Emery, C.-C. Chen, J. Gao, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1446–1455 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. He, B. Xiao, F. Liu, H. Wu, Y. Yang, S. Xiao, C. Wang, T. P. Russell and Y. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 174–179 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 15–26 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Clarke and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6736–6767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982 CAS .

          T. Miyasaka, A. Kojima and K. Teshima, Lead halide perovskites as quantum dot sensitizers for mesoscopic TiO2 photovoltaic
cells,  2007, p. 3376 Search PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Il Seok, Science, 2015, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Bailie, M. G. Christoforo, J. P. Mailoa, A. R. Bowring, E. L. Unger, W. H. Nguyen, J. Burschka, N. Pellet, J. Z. Lee, M. Grätzel, R. Noufi, T. Buonassisi, A. Salleo and M. D. McGehee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 956–963 CAS .
G. E. Eperon, D. Bryant, J. Troughton, S. D. Stranks, M. B. Johnston, T. Watson, D. A. Worsley and H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 129–135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Roldan, O. Malinkiewicz, R. Betancur, G. Longo, C. Momblona, F. Jaramillo, L. Camacho and H. J. Bolink, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2968–2973 Search PubMed .
C. O. Ramírez Quiroz, I. Levchuk, C. Bronnbauer, M. Salvador, K. Forberich, T. Huemueller, Y. Hou, P. Schweizer, E. Spiecker and C. J. Brabec, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 24071–24081 Search PubMed .
F. Guo, H. Azimi, Y. Hou, T. Przybilla, M. Hu, C. Bronnbauer, S. Langner, E. Spiecker, K. Forberich and C. J. Brabec, Nanoscale, 2014, 7, 1642–1649 RSC .
C. Chang, K. Lee, W.-K. Huang, H.-Y. Siao and Y. Chang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 242–251 Search PubMed .
E. Della Gaspera, Y. Peng, Q. Hou, L. Spiccia, U. Bach, J. J. Jasieniak and Y.-B. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 249–257 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Yang, Q. Chen, Y.-T. Hsieh, T.-B. Song, N. De Marco, H. Zhou and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2015, 7714–7721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bryant, P. Greenwood, J. Troughton, M. Wijdekop, M. Carnie, M. Davies, K. Wojciechowski, H. J. Snaith, T. Watson and D. Worsley, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7499–7504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kranz, A. Abate, T. Feurer, F. Fu, E. Avancini, J. Löckinger, P. Reinhard, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel, S. Buecheler, A. N. Tiwari, J. Loeckinger, P. Reinhard, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2676–2681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Werner, G. Dubuis, A. Walter, P. Löper, S.-J. Moon, S. Nicolay, M. Morales-Masis, S. De Wolf, B. Niesen and C. Ballif, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 141, 407–413 CrossRef CAS .
S. Albrecht, M. Saliba, J. P. Correa Baena, F. Lang, L. Kegelmann, M. Mews, L. Steier, A. Abate, J. Rappich, L. Korte, R. Schlatmann, N. Mohammad K., A. Hagfeldt, M. Grätzel and B. Rech, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 81–88 Search PubMed .
Z. Li, S. A. Kulkarni, P. P. Boix, E. Shi, A. Cao, K. Fu and S. K. Batabyal, ACS Nano, 2014, 6797–6804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. You, Z. Liu, Q. Tai, S. Liu and F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 3632–3638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-T. Lee, M. Fukuda, S. Joglekar and J. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 4, 1166–1169 Search PubMed .

          B. Bowerman and V. Fthenakis, Eh & S Analysis of Dye-Sensitized Photovoltaic Solar Cell Production,  2001 Search PubMed.
W. Zhang, M. Anaya, G. Lozano, M. E. Calvo, M. B. Johnston, H. Miguez and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2015, 1698–1702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Aristidou, I. Sanchez-Molina, T. Chotchuangchutchaval, M. Brown, L. Martinez, T. Rath and S. A. Haque, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8208–8212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, B. D. Siempelkamp, D. Liu and T. L. Kelly, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1955–1963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, N. K. Noel, S. N. Habisreutinger, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 1500963 CrossRef .
G. E. Eperon, G. M. Paterno’, R. J. Sutton, A. Zampetti, A. A. Haghighirad, F. Cacialli, H. J. Snaith, G. M. Paternò, R. J. Sutton, A. Zampetti, A. A. Haghighirad, F. Cacialli and H. J. Snaith, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19688–19695 CAS .
J.-W. Lee, D.-H. Kim, H.-S. Kim, S.-W. Seo, S. M. Cho and N.-G. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 1501310 CrossRef .
M. Shizukuishi, I. Shimizu and E. Inoue, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1981, 20, 2359–2363 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Deb, S.-H. Lee, C. Edwin Tracy, J. Roland Pitts, B. A. Gregg and H. M. Branz, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 2125–2130 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Mortimer, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1997, 26, 147 RSC .

Electrochromic Materials and Devices, ed. R. J. Mortimer, P. M. S. Monk and D. R. Rosseinsky, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2013, pp. 623–626 Search PubMed .
S. Papaefthimiou, G. Leftheriotis, P. Yianoulis, T. J. Hyde, P. C. Eames, Y. Fang, P.-Y. Pennarun and P. Jannasch, Energy Build., 2006, 38, 1455–1467 CrossRef .
C. G. Granqvist, A. Azens, P. Heszler, L. B. Kish and L. Österlund, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 355–365 CrossRef CAS .

          G. B. Smith, Proc. SPIE 8104, Nanostructured Thin Films IV,  2011, vol. 8104, pp. 810402–810414 Search PubMed .
G. A. Niklasson and C. G. Granqvist, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 127–156 RSC .
C. G. Granqvist, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 99, 1–13 CrossRef CAS .

          C. G. Granqvist, Handbook of Inorganic Electrochromic Materials,  1995 Search PubMed .

          C. G. Granqvist, in Nanotechnology for the Energy Challenge, ed. J. Garcia-Martinez, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2009, pp. 435–454 Search PubMed .

          C. G. Granqvist, Handbook of inorganic electrochromic materials, Elsevier Science B.V., Amsterdam,  1995, pp. 29–53 Search PubMed .

          C. G. Granqvist, Handbook of inorganic electrochromic materials, Elsevier Science B.V., Amsterdam,  1995, pp. 55–63 Search PubMed .

          C. G. Granqvist, in Nanotechnology, ed. C. G. B. T.-H. of I. E. M. Granqvist, Elsevier Science B.V., Amsterdam,  1995, pp. 65–77 Search PubMed .

          C. G. Granqvist, Handbook of inorganic electrochromic materials, Elsevier Science B.V., Amsterdam,  1995, pp. 79–110 Search PubMed .

          C. G. Granqvist, Handbook of inorganic electrochromic materials, Elsevier Science B.V., Amsterdam,  1995, pp. 111–137 Search PubMed .

          C. G. Granqvist, Handbook of inorganic electrochromic materials, Elsevier Science B.V., Amsterdam,  1995, pp. 209–224 Search PubMed .

          C. G. Granqvist, Handbook of inorganic electrochromic materials, Elsevier Science B.V., Amsterdam,  1995, pp. 225–236 Search PubMed .

          C. G. Granqvist, Handbook of inorganic electrochromic materials, Elsevier Science B.V., Amsterdam,  1995, pp. 265–275 Search PubMed .
D. Fattakhova, L. Kavan and P. Krtil, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2001, 5, 196–204 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Wang, S.-Y. Lin and Y.-C. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2008, 69, 451–455 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Wang and S. Y. Lin, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2006, 10, 255–259 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nang Dinh, N. Minh Quyen, D. N. Chung, M. Zikova and V.-V. Truong, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 618–623 CrossRef CAS .

          C. G. Granqvist, Handbook of inorganic electrochromic materials, Elsevier Science B.V., Amsterdam,  1995, pp. 391–399 Search PubMed .

          C. G. Granqvist, Handbook of inorganic electrochromic materials, Elsevier Science B.V., Amsterdam,  1995, pp. 339–377 Search PubMed .

          C. G. Granqvist, Handbook of inorganic electrochromic materials, Elsevier Science B.V., Amsterdam,  1995, pp. 237–264 Search PubMed .
S.-H. Lin, F.-R. Chen and J.-J. Kai, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 254, 3357–3363 CrossRef CAS .
E. Avendaño, L. Berggren, G. A. Niklasson, C. G. Granqvist and A. Azens, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 496, 30–36 CrossRef .

          C. G. Granqvist, Handbook of inorganic electrochromic materials, Elsevier Science B.V., Amsterdam,  1995, pp. 277–283 Search PubMed .

          C. G. Granqvist, Handbook of inorganic electrochromic materials, Elsevier Science B.V., Amsterdam,  1995, pp. 379–389 Search PubMed .
G. A. Niklasson, L. Berggren, A. Jonsson, R. Ahuja, N. V. Skorodumova, J. Backholm and M. Strømme, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 385–394 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ramana, O. Hussain, B. Srinivasulu Naidu, C. Julien and M. Balkanski, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 1998, 52, 32–39 CrossRef .
M. A. Kaid, Egypt. J. Solids, 2006, 29, 273–291 Search PubMed .
M. Benmoussa, Thin Solid Films, 1995, 265, 22–28 CrossRef CAS .
N. Özer, Thin Solid Films, 1997, 305, 80–87 CrossRef .
D. W. Murphy, P. A. Christian, F. J. DiSalvo and J. V. Waszczak, Inorg. Chem., 1979, 18, 2800–2803 CrossRef CAS .

          C.-G. Granqvist, Electrochromic Materials and Devices, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2013, pp. 1–40 Search PubMed .
C. G. Granqvist, S. Green, G. A. Niklasson, N. R. Mlyuka, S. von Kræmer and P. Georén, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 3046–3053 CrossRef CAS .
M. Armand and J.-M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. He and J. Yao, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 4547 RSC .
C. Bechinger, M. S. Burdis and J.-G. Zhang, Solid State Commun., 1997, 101, 753–756 CrossRef CAS .
D. Dini, F. Decker and E. Masetti, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1996, 26, 647–653 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Deb, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 245–258 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, D. K. Benson, C. E. Tracy, S. K. Deb, A. W. Czanderna and C. Bechinger, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 2022–2026 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ozkan, S.-H. Lee, C. E. Tracy, J. R. Pitts and S. K. Deb, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 79, 439–448 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, H. M. Cheong, C. E. Tracy, A. Mascarenhas, R. Pitts, G. Jorgensen and S. K. Deb, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 3415–3419 CrossRef CAS .
A. Azens and C. Granqvist, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2003, 7, 64–68 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Niklasson, L. Berggren and A. L. Larsson, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 84, 315–328 CrossRef CAS .
L. Berggren, A. Azens and G. A. Niklasson, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 90, 1860 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sato, N. Kawamura and H. Tokumaru, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 254, 7676–7678 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gazzinelli and O. F. Schirmer, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1977, 10, L145 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zheng, J. Z. Ou, M. S. Strano, R. B. Kaner, A. Mitchell and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2175–2196 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Runnerstrom, A. Llordés, S. D. Lounis and D. J. Milliron, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10555 RSC .

          S. Xiong, P. S. Lee and X. Lu, Electrochromic Materials and Devices, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2013, pp. 249–288 Search PubMed .

          A. Llordes, E. L. Runnerstrom, S. D. Lounis and D. J. Milliron, Electrochromic Materials and Devices, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2013, pp. 363–398 Search PubMed .
D. Rosseinsky and R. J. Mortimer, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 783–793 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Mortimer and D. R. Rosseinsky, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1983, 151, 133–147 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kellawi and D. R. Rosseinsky, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1982, 131, 373–376 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Rosseinsky, L. Glasser and H. D. B. Jenkins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 10472–10477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. M. S. Monk, R. J. Mortimer and D. R. Rosseinsky, Electrochromism and Electrochromic Devices,  2007 Search PubMed .
L. Su, H. Wang and Z. Lu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 1998, 56, 266–270 CrossRef CAS .
V. D. Neff, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1978, 125, 886 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Mortimer and C. P. Warren, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1999, 460, 263–266 CrossRef CAS .

          D. R. Rosseinsky and R. J. Mortimer, Electrochromic Materials and Devices, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2013, pp. 41–56 Search PubMed .
L. Beverina, G. A. Pagani and M. Sassi, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 5413–5430 RSC .

          P. M. S. Monk, D. R. Rosseinsky and R. J. Mortimer, Electrochromic Materials and Devices, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2013, pp. 57–90 Search PubMed .

          K.-C. Ho, C.-W. Hu and T. S. Varley, Electrochromic Materials and Devices, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2013, pp. 91–112 Search PubMed .
J. Palenzuela, A. Viñuales, I. Odriozola, G. Cabañero, H. J. Grande and V. Ruiz, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 14562–14567 CAS .

          Y.-W. Zhong, Electrochromic Materials and Devices, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2013, pp. 185–210 Search PubMed .
P. Denisevich, H. D. Abruna, C. R. Leidner, T. J. Meyer and R. W. Murray, Inorg. Chem., 1982, 21, 2153–2161 CrossRef CAS .
F. Demir, Z. Bıyıklıoğlu and A. Koca, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, G1–G6 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Argun, P. H. Aubert, B. C. Thompson, I. Schwendeman, C. L. Gaupp, J. Hwang, N. J. Pinto, D. B. Tanner, A. G. MacDiarmid and J. R. Reynolds, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4401–4412 CrossRef CAS .

          A. L. Dyer, A. M. Österholm, D. E. Shen, K. E. Johnson and J. R. Reynolds, Electrochromic Materials and Devices, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2013, pp. 113–184 Search PubMed .
A. L. Dyer, M. R. Craig, J. E. Babiarz, K. Kiyak and J. R. Reynolds, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 4460–4467 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Dyer, E. J. Thompson and J. R. Reynolds, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1787–1795 CAS .
C. Xu, J. Zhao, J. Yu and C. Cui, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 96, 82–89 CrossRef CAS .
M. İçli-Özkut, Z. Öztaş, F. Algi and A. Cihaner, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 1505–1511 CrossRef .
T. Dey, M. A. Invernale, Y. Ding, Z. Buyukmumcu and G. A. Sotzing, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 2415–2417 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Amb, J. A. Kerszulis, E. J. Thompson, A. L. Dyer and J. R. Reynolds, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 812–814 RSC .
C. Xu, L. Liu, S. E. Legenski, D. Ning and M. Taya, J. Mater. Res., 2004, 19, 2072–2080 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zong and J. R. Reynolds, J. Org. Chem., 2001, 66, 6873–6882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Elschner and W. Lövenich, MRS Bull., 2011, 36, 794–798 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jonas and L. Schrader, Synth. Met., 1991, 41, 831–836 CrossRef CAS .
A. Patra, M. Bendikov and S. Chand, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1465–1474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, A. Patra, Y. Sheynin and M. Bendikov, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1707–1711 CrossRef CAS .
A. Durmus, G. E. Gunbas, P. Camurlu and L. Toppare, Chem. Commun., 2007, 3246–3248 RSC .
J. A. Kerszulis, K. E. Johnson, M. Kuepfert, D. Khoshabo, A. L. Dyer and J. R. Reynolds, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 3211–3218 RSC .
E. Unur, P. M. Beaujuge, S. Ellinger, J.-H. Jung and J. R. Reynolds, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5145 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shin, Y. Kim, T. Bhuvana, J. Lee, X. Yang, C. Park and E. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 185–191 CAS .
P. M. Beaujuge, S. Ellinger and J. R. Reynolds, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 795–799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chevrot, E. Ngbilo, K. Kham and S. Sadki, Synth. Met., 1996, 81, 201–204 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Yen and G.-S. Liou, Polym. Chem., 2012, 3, 255–264 RSC .
H.-J. Yen and G.-S. Liou, Polym. J., 2015, 1–22 Search PubMed .
A. G. Macdiarmid and A. J. Epstein, MRS Online Proc. Libr. Arch., 1989, 173, 317–332 CrossRef .
L. Zhao, L. Zhao, Y. Xu, T. Qiu, L. Zhi and G. Shi, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 55, 491–497 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Somani and S. Radhakrishnan, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2003, 77, 117–133 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xiong, J. Wei, P. Jia, L. Yang, J. Ma and X. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 782–788 CAS .
C. L. Gaupp and J. R. Reynolds, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 6305–6315 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yiğit, Y. A. Udum, M. Güllü and L. Toppare, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2014, 712, 215–222 CrossRef .
C. J. DuBois, K. A. Abboud and J. R. Reynolds, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 8550–8557 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Estrada, D. Y. Liu, D. H. Salazar, A. L. Dyer and J. R. Reynolds, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 8211–8220 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jensen, M. V. Madsen and F. C. Krebs, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 4826–4835 RSC .

          B. Yao, J. Zhang and X. Wan, Electrochromic Materials and Devices, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2013, pp. 211–240 Search PubMed .
G. Sonmez, H. B. Sonmez, C. K. F. Shen and F. Wudl, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1905–1908 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Rak, T. H. Jozefiak and L. L. Miller, J. Org. Chem., 1990, 55, 4794–4801 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chen, J. Zhang, H. Jiang and X. Wan, Chem. – Asian J., 2013, 8, 1497–1503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Choi, S. J. Yoo, Y.-E. Sung and R. Zentel, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5823–5825 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, P. Sun and W. Mai, Mater. Today, 2015 DOI:10.1016/j.mattod.2015.11.007 .
V. De Matteis, A. Cannavale, L. Blasi, A. Quarta and G. Gigli, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 225, 474–480 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Mortimer, A. L. Dyer and J. R. Reynolds, Displays, 2006, 27, 2–18 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, G. K. Ong, Y. Wang, G. LeBlanc, T. E. Williams, T. M. Mattox, B. A. Helms and D. J. Milliron, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5574–5579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Garcia, R. Buonsanti, E. L. Runnerstrom, R. J. Mendelsberg, A. Llordes, A. Anders, T. J. Richardson and D. J. Milliron, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4415–4420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Garcia, R. Buonsanti, A. Llordes, E. L. Runnerstrom, A. Bergerud and D. J. Milliron, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2013, 1, 215–220 CrossRef .
A. Llordés, G. Garcia, J. Gazquez and D. J. Milliron, Nature, 2013, 500, 323–327 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, W. D. Richards, S. P. Ong, L. J. Miara, J. C. Kim, Y. Mo and G. Ceder, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1026–1031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Vlad, N. Singh, C. Galande and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 1402115 CrossRef .
N. A. Choudhury, S. Sampath and A. K. Shukla, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 55–67 CAS .
V. K. Thakur, G. Ding, J. Ma, P. S. Lee and X. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4071–4096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kalhoff, G. G. Eshetu, D. Bresser and S. Passerini, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2154–2175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Di Noto, S. Lavina, G. A. Giffin, E. Negro and B. Scrosati, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 57, 4–13 CrossRef CAS .

          C. G. Granqvist, Handbook of inorganic electrochromic materials, Elsevier Science B.V., Amsterdam,  1995, pp. 289–310 Search PubMed .
M. B. Armand, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 1986, 16, 245–261 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Ionescu-Vasii, Y. Abu-Lebdeh and M. B. Armand, Solid State Ionics, 2005, 176, 2769–2775 CrossRef CAS .
F. Croce, G. B. Appetecchi, L. Persi and B. Scrosati, Nature, 1998, 394, 456–458 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Barbosa, L. C. Rodrigues, M. M. Silva, M. J. Smith, A. J. Parola, F. Pina and C. Pinheiro, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 1495–1502 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cannavale, G. E. Eperon, P. Cossari, A. Abate, H. J. Snaith and G. Gigli, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1578–1584 CAS .
C. A. Nguyen, S. Xiong, J. Ma, X. Lu and P. S. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 8006–8010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Wu, C.-Y. Hsu, K.-C. Huang, P.-C. Nien, J.-T. Lin and K.-C. Ho, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 99, 148–153 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Nguyen, S. Xiong, J. Ma, X. Lu and P. S. Lee, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 13319–13326 RSC .
J. Reiter, O. Krejza and M. Sedlaříková, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 249–255 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. T. Ganesh, R. Ravi and B. Deb, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 140, 17–24 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Dyer, R. H. Bulloch, Y. Zhou, B. Kippelen, J. R. Reynolds and F. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4895–4900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kavanagh, K. J. Fraser, R. Byrne and D. Diamond, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 55–62 CAS .
B. Scrosati, J. Hassoun and Y.-K. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3287–3295 CAS .
J. Jensen, M. Hösel, A. L. Dyer and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2073–2090 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Ye, J. Rick and B.-J. Hwang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2719–2743 CAS .
A. Brazier, G. Appetecchi, S. Passerini, A. Surcavuk, B. Orel, F. Donsanti and F. Decker, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 4792–4797 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Shaplov, D. O. Ponkratov, P.-H. Aubert, E. I. Lozinskaya, C. Plesse, F. Vidal and Y. S. Vygodskii, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 3191–3193 RSC .
R. Zhou, W. Liu, J. Kong, D. Zhou, G. Ding, Y. W. Leong, P. K. Pallathadka and X. Lu, Polymer, 2014, 55, 1520–1526 CrossRef CAS .
İ. Bayrak Pehlivan, C. G. Granqvist, R. Marsal, P. Georén and G. A. Niklasson, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 98, 465–471 CrossRef .
İ. Bayrak Pehlivan, C. G. Granqvist and G. A. Niklasson, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 119, 164–168 CrossRef .
İ. B. Pehlivan, R. Marsal, E. Pehlivan, E. L. Runnerstrom, D. J. Milliron, C. G. Granqvist and G. A. Niklasson, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 126, 241–247 CrossRef .
R. D. Alves, L. C. Rodrigues, J. R. Andrade, M. Fernandes, J. V Pinto, L. Pereira, A. Pawlicka, R. Martins, E. Fortunato, V. de Zea Bermudez and M. M. Silva, Electroanalysis, 2013, 25, 1483–1490 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Silva, P. C. Barbosa, L. C. Rodrigues, A. Gonçalves, C. Costa and E. Fortunato, Opt. Mater., 2010, 32, 719–722 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Vieira, C. O. Avellaneda and A. Pawlicka, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 53, 1404–1408 CrossRef CAS .
C. O. Avellaneda, D. F. Vieira, A. Al-Kahlout, S. Heusing, E. R. Leite, A. Pawlicka and M. A. Aegerter, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 228–233 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pennisi and F. Simone, Appl. Phys. A, 1993, 57, 13–17 CrossRef .
A. Pennisi and F. Simone, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1995, 39, 333–340 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kattouf, Y. Ein-Eli, A. Siegmann and G. L. Frey, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 151 RSC .
K. A. Mauritz and R. B. Moore, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4535–4585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Nguyen, A. A. Argun, P. T. Hammond, X. Lu and P. S. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2142–2149 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jensen and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7231–7234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Cossari, A. Cannavale, S. Gambino and G. Gigli, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 155, 411–420 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kali, T. K. Georgiou, B. Iván and C. S. Patrickios, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2009, 47, 4289–4301 CrossRef CAS .
F. Tran-Van, L. Beouch, F. Vidal, P. Yammine, D. Teyssié and C. Chevrot, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 4336–4343 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar, M. T. Otley, F. A. Alamar, Y. Zhu, B. G. Arden and G. A. Sotzing, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 2510 RSC .
M. T. Otley, F. A. Alamer, Y. Zhu, A. Singhaviranon, X. Zhang, M. Li, A. Kumar and G. A Sotzing, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 1734–1739 CAS .
B. E. Hardin, H. J. Snaith and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 162–169 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 11–14 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. M. Emmott, A. Urbina and J. Nelson, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 97, 14–21 CrossRef CAS .
G. Jo, M. Choe, S. Lee, W. Park, Y. H. Kahng and T. Lee, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 112001 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Langley, G. Giusti, C. Mayousse, C. Celle, D. Bellet and J.-P. Simonato, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 452001 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Higgins, P. Zamani, A. Yu and Z. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 357–390 Search PubMed .
G. Jo, M. Choe, S. Lee, W. Park, Y. H. Kahng and T. Lee, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 112001 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Gomez De Arco, Y. Zhang, C. W. Schlenker, K. Ryu, M. E. Thompson and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2865–2873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, S. W. Tong, X. F. Xu, B. Özyilmaz and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1475 CrossRef .
Y. Wu, X. Zhang, J. Jie, C. Xie, X. Zhang, B. Sun, Y. Wang and P. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 11968–11976 CAS .
H. Sung, N. Ahn, M. S. Jang, J.-K. Lee, H. Yoon, N.-G. Park and M. Choi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 1501873 Search PubMed .
C. M. Lampert, Mater. Today, 2004, 7, 28–35 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Mardaljevic, R. K. Waskett and B. Painter, Electrochromic Materials and Devices, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2013, pp. 571–592 Search PubMed .
F. Pichot, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 4324 CrossRef CAS .

          K.-C. Ho, H.-W. Chen and C.-Y. Hsu, Electrochromic Materials and Devices, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2013, pp. 593–622 Search PubMed .
A. Hauch, A. Georg, S. Baumgärtner, U. Opara Krašovec and B. Orel, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 2131–2136 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Gregg, Endeavour, 1997, 21, 52–55 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. Hagen and D. Haarer, Synth. Met., 1998, 94, 273–277 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sotomayor, G. Will and D. Fitzmaurice, J. Mater. Chem., 2000, 10, 685–692 RSC .
A. Hauch, A. Georg, U. O. Krašovec and B. Orel, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, H159 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Liao and K. C. Ho, J. New Mater. Electrochem. Syst., 2005, 8, 37–47 CAS .
U. O. Krašovec, A. Georg, A. Georg, V. Wittwer, J. Luther and M. Topič, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 84, 369–380 CrossRef .
A. Georg and U. Opara Krašovec, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 502, 246–251 CrossRef CAS .
G. De Filpo, F. P. Nicoletta and G. Chidichimo, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 4662–4666 CrossRef CAS .
H. Santa-Nokki, J. Kallioinen and J. Korppi-Tommola, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2007, 6, 63–66 CAS .
J. Lanzo, M. De Benedittis, B. C. De Simone, D. Imbardelli, P. Formoso, S. Manfredi and G. Chidichimo, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 1412 RSC .
C. Y. Hsu, K. M. Lee, J. H. Huang, K. R. Justin Thomas, J. T. Lin and K. C. Ho, J. Power Sources, 2008, 185, 1505–1508 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Wu, M. D. Hsieh, W. P. Liao, W. T. Wu and J. S. Chen, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2297–2303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Leftheriotis, G. Syrrokostas and P. Yianoulis, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 2304–2313 CrossRef CAS .
G. De Filpo, S. Mormile, F. P. Nicoletta and G. Chidichimo, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 4365–4369 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cannavale, M. Manca, F. Malara, L. De Marco, R. Cingolani and G. Gigli, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2567 CAS .
F. Malara, A. Cannavale and G. Gigli, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2015, 23, 290–301 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jiao, J. L. Song, X. W. Sun, X. W. Liu, J. M. Wang, L. Ke and H. V. Demir, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 98, 154–160 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Huang, C. W. Hu, H. C. Liu, C. Y. Hsu, C. H. Chen and K. C. Ho, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 99, 154–159 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, J. Zheng, M. Li and C. Xu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 97, 186–190 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Huang, C. P. Kung, C. W. Hu, C. Y. Peng and H. C. Liu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 107, 390–395 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cannavale, M. Manca, L. De Marco, R. Grisorio, S. Carallo, G. P. Suranna and G. Gigli, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2415–2422 CAS .
Z. Xie, X. Jin, G. Chen, J. Xu, D. Chen and G. Shen, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 608–610 RSC .
E. Amasawa, N. Sasagawa, M. Kimura and M. Taya, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1–9 Search PubMed .
F. Malara, A. Cannavale, S. Carallo and G. Gigli, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9290–9297 CAS .
J. Jensen, H. F. Dam, J. R. Reynolds, A. L. Dyer and F. C. Krebs, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2012, 50, 536–545 CrossRef CAS .
M.-C. Yang, H.-W. Cho and J.-J. Wu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9541 RSC .
C.-C. Wu, J.-C. Liou and C.-C. Diao, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 2–5 RSC .
Y. Li, Synth. Met., 1998, 94, 273–277 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cannavale, F. Fiorito, D. Resta and G. Gigli, Energy Build., 2013, 65, 137–145 CrossRef .
D. A. R. Barkhouse, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen, T. K. Todorov and D. B. Mitzi, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2012, 20, 6–11 CrossRef CAS .
G. Leftheriotis, G. Syrrokostas and P. Yianoulis, Solid State Ionics, 2013, 231, 30–36 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hechavarría, N. Mendoza, M. E. Rincón, J. Campos and H. Hu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 100, 27–32 CrossRef .
U. O. Krašovec, M. Topič, A. Georg, A. Georg and G. Dražič, J. Sol–Gel Sci. Technol., 2005, 36, 45–52 CrossRef .
A. Georg, A. Georg, W. Graf and V. Wittwer, Vacuum, 2008, 82, 730–735 CrossRef CAS .
A. Georg, A. Georg, U. O. Krašovec and V. Wittwer, J. New Mater. Electrochem. Syst., 2005, 8, 327–338 Search PubMed .
B. E. Stathatos, P. Lianos, U. Lavrencic-stangar and B. Orel, Adv. Mater., 2002, 354–357 CrossRef .
W. Gao, P. Liu, R. S. Crandall, S. Lee, D. K. Benson and H. M. Branz, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2000, 269, 1140–1144 CrossRef .
T. Niwa and O. Takai, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 1722–1727 CrossRef CAS .
A. Subrahmanyam, C. Suresh Kumar and K. Muthu Karuppasamy, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 62–66 CrossRef CAS .
S. Oukassi, C. Giroud-Garampon, C. Dubarry, C. Ducros and R. Salot, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 145, 2–7 CrossRef .
G. Leftheriotis, G. Syrrokostas and P. Yianoulis, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 96, 86–92 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jonsson and A. Roos, Sol. Energy, 2010, 84, 1–9 CrossRef .

          C. M. Lampert, Failure and Degradation Modes in Selected Solar Materials: A Review,  1989 Search PubMed .
R. Baetens, B. P. Jelle and A. Gustavsen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 87–105 CrossRef CAS .
P. Boyce, N. Eklund, S. Mangum, C. Saalfield and L. Tang, Light. Res. Technol., 1995, 27, 145–152 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, H. Shen, W. Chen, H. Wang, Y. J. Deng and D. H. Wang, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2008, 53, 3173–3177 CAS .
G. Leftheriotis, G. Syrrokostas and P. Yianoulis, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 96, 86–92 CrossRef CAS .

          J. C. Chou, P. H. Shih, S. Y. Yang, I. Circuits and S. Systems, 2012 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, ISCAS 2012, Seoul,  2012, pp. 1387–1390 Search PubMed .
A. Piccolo and F. Simone, Build. Environ., 2009, 44, 1171–1180 CrossRef .
M. Chen, S. Yang, J. Zheng and C. Xu, Acta Chim. Sin., 2013, 71, 713–716 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zinzi, Build. Environ., 2006, 41, 1262–1273 CrossRef .
L. Su, Proc. SPIE, 2001, 4108, 97,  DOI:10.1117/12.416936 .
M. N. Assimakopoulos, A. Tsangrassoulis, M. Santamouris and G. Guarracino, Build. Environ., 2007, 42, 2829–2834 CrossRef .
N. DeForest, A. Shehabi, J. O'Donnell, G. Garcia, J. Greenblatt, E. S. Lee, S. Selkowitz and D. J. Milliron, Build. Environ., 2015, 89, 107–117 CrossRef .
F. Favoino, M. Overend and Q. Jin, Appl. Energy, 2015, 156, 1–15 CrossRef .

          F. Favoino, Q. Jin and M. Overend, in 6th International Conference on Sustainability in Energy and Buildings, SEB 2014, ed. R. J. Howlett, Elsevier Ltd,  2014, vol. 62, pp. 289–298 Search PubMed .
J. Gong, S. Darling and F. You, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1953–1968 CAS .

          M. Casini, Second Intl. Conf. Adv. Civil, Struct. Environ. Eng. ACSEE,  2014 Search PubMed .
J. J. Wu, M. D. Hsieh, W. P. Liao, W. T. Wu and J. S. Chen, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2297–2303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bechinger, M. S. Burdis and J.-G. Zhang, Solid State Commun., 1997, 101, 753–756 CrossRef CAS .
G. Leftheriotis, G. Syrrokostas and P. Yianoulis, Photocoloration efficiency and stability of photoelectrochromic devices, Solid State Ionics, 2013, 231, 30–36 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Granqvist, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2005, 25, 2907–2912 CrossRef CAS .
S. Masi, S. Colella, A. Listorti, V. Roiati, A. Liscio, V. Palermo, A. Rizzo and G. Gigli, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 7725 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Masi, A. Rizzo, F. Aiello, F. Balzano, G. Uccello-Barretta, A. Listorti, G. Gigli and S. Colella, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 18956–18963 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Alessandro Cannavale
	Alessandro Cannavale is an assistant professor at Politecnico di Bari. He obtained his PhD, in 2011, with a dissertation on smart nanotechnologies for transparent building envelopes. He has been working, as a postdoc, in the Energy Platform of Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia from 2011 to 2014 and at “Dipartimento di matematica e fisica” of Università del Salento, since 2015. His research interests include design, fabrication and characterization of multifunctional chromogenic devices, thin film deposition by means of PVD techniques and the assessment of the energy and comfort impacts deriving from building integration of innovative nanodevices. He is an associated researcher at CNR-Nanotec.

Pierluigi Cossari
	Pierluigi Cossari is a post-doctoral researcher at the Università del Salento, and an associated researcher at CNR-Nanotec (Lecce). After obtaining his degree in Chemistry and Pharmaceutical Technology from Sapienza University of Rome, he spent two years at the Institute of Nanostructured Materials CNR to conduct research activity on polymer and nanocomposite materials. He earned his PhD in Nanobiotechnology from the University of Genoa jointly with Marburg University working on the synthesis and spectroscopic characterization of semiconducting polymers and carbon nanotube–polymer nanocomposites (2010–2013). His current research focuses on the synthesis, thin film processing and electrochemical characterization of solid-state polymer electrolytes for electrochromic and photoelectrochromic devices.

Giles E. Eperon
	Giles Eperon received his PhD in Physics from the University of Oxford in 2015. He is currently working as a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Washington, in the department of Chemistry. Prior to his PhD studies he worked as a research scientist at Sharp Laboratories of Europe Ltd. (2010–2012). His research is focused on understanding and controlling the properties of novel photovoltaic and optoelectronic materials, with a current emphasis on halide perovskites. He has particular interests in building-integrated photovoltaics and in material design to create the optimum photovoltaic material.

Giuseppe Gigli
	Giuseppe Gigli is Professor in Physics at the Mathematics and Physics Department of University of Salento. He is Director of the CNR Institute of Nanotechnology, where he is also coordinator of the Molecular Nanotechnology group. GG has been member of the European Laboratory of Nonlinear Spectroscopy (LENS) Scientific Board, Coordinator of the National Energy Platform of IIT and member of the Administration Board of the High Tech District (DHITECH) in Lecce. His research activities involve: Organic Optoelectronics and Polaritonics, Molecular Nanotechnology. GG is co-founder of two research Spin-off, Mediteknology and BF2, aiming at the developing of nanosystems for Health.

Henry J. Snaith
	Henry Snaith undertook his PhD at the University of Cambridge, working on organic photovoltaics, then post-doc at the EPFL, in Switzerland, working on dye-sensitized solar cells. Since 2007 he has been based in the Clarendon Laboratory of Oxford University, where he is a professor of physics and leads a research group developing new materials and structures for photovoltaic and understanding and controlling the physical processes occurring at semiconductor heterojunctions. His research is currently focussed on advancing metal halide perovskites for photovoltaic and optoelectronic applications. He has received a number of early carer research awards including the Institute of Physics Patterson Medal and Prize (2012) the Materials Research Society Outstanding Young Investigator Award (2014) and the EU-40 materials Prize 2016. In addition he was named one of “Natures Ten” people who mattered most in 2013, for his pioneering work on perovskite solar cells, assessed by Thomson Reuters as being the world's 2nd “most influential scientific mind” in 2016, based on number of highly cited publications, and he was elected as a fellow of the Royal Society in 2015. In December 2010 he founded Oxford PV Ltd. which is commercialising the perovskite solar technology transferred from his University Laboratory.

Andrea Listorti
	Andrea Listorti is a researcher at the Dipartimento di matematica e fisica of Università del Salento and an associated researcher at CNR-Nanotec of Lecce. Previously he worked at the Italian Institute of Technology of Lecce, the Imperial College of London and CNR-ISOF of Bologna. Currently his research activity focuses on the optoelectronic exploitation of halide perovskites. Since 2006 he published 40+ papers on molecular photophysics, solar fuels and optoelectronic devices.

Broader context
The development of technologies allowing a reduction of the anthropogenic impact on planet resources and, concomitantly, improving people lifestyle is among the key scopes of applied research. The built environment accounts for more than 40% of the primary energy used in Europe and is responsible for 36% of its green-house gases outcome. This strong impact is mainly due to heating, cooling and lighting in residential and commercial buildings. If the thermo-physical performances of building envelopes could be dynamic, this impact could be greatly reduced. A photoelectrochromic device (PECD) is an ideal candidate for the task, since it is able to self-power a smart optical response allowing, if used as a window, variable energy throughputs. A PECD is a multifunctional object in which different components are brought together, to combine their properties in a resulting, innovative fashion. In particular, a first function consists in converting electromagnetic radiation into electrical energy (PV function) and a second one in varying the chromatic characteristics of the device itself, following an electric stimulus (EC function). In some cases, namely photovoltachromic devices (PVCDs), a surplus of electric energy can be generated, adding an extra feature to this class of multifunctional devices. The device being a complex combination of players, its evolution is based on the development of all the components and it can be accelerated by a breakthrough in one of the related fields. In the last few years such advancements have been witnessed, thus progress of PECDs is expected and is worth considering the development of their features and architectures and the interesting forthcoming perspectives.


 	Fig. 1  Photoelectrochromic device constituents.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of a dye-sensitized solar cell.	 

 	Fig. 3  Application fields for colorful, highly transparent and decorative DSSCs.	 

 	Fig. 4  Scheme of a bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) organic device.	 

 	Fig. 5  Neutral-colour semitransparent perovskite solar cells. (a) Photograph of microstructured semitransparent perovskite layers; (b) scanning electron micrograph of a microstructured semitransparent perovskite device; (c) current–voltage characteristics for the best FA-based microstructured semitransparent perovskite device reported, with a Ni mesh electrode; (d) perovskite grid patterning. Reprinted with permission from ref. 27, 28 and 52. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society, Copyright (2015) John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  Thin perovskite semitransparent solar cells. (a) With a thin gold electrode; (b) scanning electron micrograph cross-section of a device with a silver nanowire electrode; (c) photograph of perovskite cells of different thicknesses with graphene electrodes; (d) photographs of cells using an optical cavity electrode to produce attractive coloration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 53, 55, 64 and 65. Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright (2015) John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
[WO3 + H+ + e−]bleached ↔ [HWO3]colored
[Ni(OH)2]bleached ↔ [NiOOH + H+ + e−]colored

 	Fig. 7  (a) Generic five-layer EC device design. Arrows indicate the movement of ions in an applied electric field. (b) Periodic system of the elements (excepting lanthanides and actinides). The differently shaded boxes indicate transition metals with oxides capable of displaying clear cathodic and anodic electrochromism.13 Reprinted with permission from ref. 13. Copyright (2014) Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 8  Photographs of an ethyl viologen EC device in (a) the bleached and (b) colored state. Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  For (a) poly(heterocycles), (b) band diagrams of bipolarons and polarons showing the localized gap states and their occupancy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 137. Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Repeat unit structures and photographs of spray-cast polymer films in the neutral colored, and oxidized transmissive states. (b) Normalized absorption spectra of neutral spray-cast polymer films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 147. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Transmittance spectra of the complementary RGBY device and a photograph of the device in the colored state and the bleached state (b). Reprinted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Scheme reporting polyaniline (PANI)-grafted SWCNTs. (b) SEM image reporting their uniform dispersion within the PANI/PSS matrix. Reprinted with permission from ref. 169. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Spectro electrochemistry of PEDOT at different oxidation states with inset pictures of the variation in the blue color at different oxidation levels. Reprinted with permission from ref. 176. Copyright (2004) WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Ionic conductivity as a function of inverse temperature for PEI:LiTFSI:SiO2 electrolytes at different molar ratios, n. Symbols indicate data points, and the straight lines are fits to the Arrhenius equation. (b) Salt concentration versus molar conductivity for PEI:LiTFSI:SiO2 electrolytes at the shown temperatures. Molar ratios, n, are shown at the top. Symbols indicate data points, which are joined by straight lines for convenience. Reprinted with permission from ref. 213. Copyright (2013) Elsevier Science Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Problems associated with roll to roll coating of a gel/semisolid electrolyte. The electrolyte solution is deposited through a slot die coating head, but due to adhesiveness it will stick to the drums and the foil during stretching and rewinding as marked by “!!!” (the electrolyte is shown as yellow for visualization). (b) Successive deposition of layers continuously in one direction (steps from A to F). The key step is photo-crosslinking of the electrolyte solution (step D). (c) UV-curing of the electrolyte. The drum is mounted with foil and the UV-curing chamber is seen at the bottom of the picture. (d) The UV-curing chamber seen from below. The lamp is placed between two gas inlets (black plastic tubing) that supply inert gas thereby reducing the oxygen concentration in the chamber. Reprinted with permission from ref. 224. Copyright (2014) John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 16  PECD with TiO2 and WO3 on separate surfaces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 245. Copyright (2001) Elsevier Science Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 17  Coloration in open circuit (upper part) and bleaching in short circuit (lower part) of the new photoelectrochromic device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 245. Copyright (2001) Elsevier Science Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic PECD cell configurations of (a) the irreversible, composite type and (b) the reversible, separated type. Reprinted with permission from ref. 250. Copyright (2005) J. New Mater. Electrochem. Syst.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematics of a PVCC. (b) Photograph of PVCC in the colored state. (c) Transmittance spectra of PVCC in the as-prepared and the colored states. (d) Evolution of cell bleaching at a wavelength of 788 nm for open- and short-circuited PECC and PVCC in the dark. Reprinted with permission from ref. 257. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic representation of the photovoltachromic cells realized in ref. 260: (1) electric separation on the counterelectrode; (2) platinum catalyzer; (3) tungsten oxide layer; (4) TCO; (5) glass substrate; (6) sealant; (7) titanium dioxide and dye absorbed; circuitry: red: photovoltaic; blue: photoelectrochromic. (b) Pictures of the bleached device and the colored device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 260. Copyright (2011) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 21  Schematic configuration of PVCD. (a) Fundamental configuration: dye-sensitized solar cell and photoelectrochromic cell open-circuit; (b) dye-sensitized solar cell configuration; (c) photoelectrochromic cell configuration; and (d) photovoltachromic cell configuration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 260. Copyright (2013) John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematics and photographs of a PECD with a 1.5 cm2 active area. The duration for electrodeposition of PB films is 300 s. (a) Schematic of the short circuit cell under illumination for bleaching. (b) Bleached cell achieved by illumination of 100 mW cm−2 for 1 min in short circuit configuration. (c) Schematic of the cell under an external voltage for coloring. (d) Photograph of the cell in the colored state after applying a 2 V bias at the PB electrode for 30 s. Reprinted with permission from ref. 262. Copyright (2011) Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 23  Working principle of a solution type PV–EC device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 263. Copyright (2011) Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 24  Schematic diagram of the functions of a PECD in equilibrium state under illumination; (a) open-circuit and (b) short-circuit states. (c) SEM image (front view) of a PProDOT-Me2 film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 264. Copyright (2011) Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 25  Pictures of a DSSC driven EC smart window under illumination of sunlight: circuits of (a) the independent device (type I) and (b) the assembled device (type II). Reprinted with permission from ref. 267. Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 26  Schematic of the PVCC with a solvent-free PEG–Ti hybrid electrolyte. Reprinted with permission from ref. 271. Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Axonometric view of a photovoltachromic device. Two external circuits connect the photoanode to the electrochromic electrode (A) and the gold cathode to the secondary electrode of the electrochromic device (B). Pictures of the device under bleached (b) and colored conditions (c) are shown on the right hand side. (d) Current–voltage characteristics for the solar cell layers of PVCC devices made with two different transparencies. Devices were measured under simulated 100 mW cm 2 AM1.5 illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 198. Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


EL1	0.05	0.7	—	0.321	>60	≫60	15	>60
EL2	0.025	0.7	—	0.312	40	≫60	10	60
EL3	0.005	0.7	—	0.292	15	>60	6	15
EL4	0.0025	0.7	—	0.283	30	>60	20	25
EL5	0.005	0.7	4-TBP/0.5	0.292	8	>60	5	10
EL6	0.005	0.7	4-TBP/0.5, GNDT/0.1	0.292	9	>60	7	15

 	Fig. 28  (a) Coloration efficiency vs. wavelength of PVCCs filled with different electrolytes. (b) J–V characteristics of PVCCs filled with different electrolytes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 260. Copyright (2011) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) of PEC cells under white lamp illumination and open circuit conditions. The equivalent circuit of the curves suggests contributions due to electrolyte resistance (Rb), charge transfer resistance at the WO3/electrolyte interface (R1), and charge accumulation at both the WO3/electrolyte (CPE1) and TiO2/electrolyte (C) interfaces. (b) EIS analysis of PEC cells after illumination under short circuit conditions. The diffusive Warburg component appears at high frequency during the de-intercalation of lithium ions in WO3 films with a larger value constant for the devices based on composite electrolyte. Inset: Representative electrical circuits. Reprinted with permission from ref. 277. Copyright (2012) Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Transient transmittance responses at 590 nm for PECDs using gel electrolytes P and S; (b) transient transmittance responses at 590 nm of PECDs fabricated with composite electrolytes P7S1, P6S2, and P5S3.200 Reprinted with permission from ref. 200. Copyright (2012) Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 31  Samples of photoelectrochromic devices (10 × 10 cm2) with a solid electrolyte (ormolyte/cationic surfactant) in the bleached state (left, short circuit) and coloured by illumination equivalent to 1 Sun (right, open circuit).252 Reprinted with permission from ref. 252. Copyright (2005) Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 32  Cyclic voltammogram of the EC component of the PVCC showing 300 consecutive cycles. Comparison between charge and discharge curves obtained in the as prepared EC device and in the same device after 104 cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 198. Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 33  Concept and structure of a solar-powered electrochromic device. (a) Schematic cross section structure of the EC/PV laminated vertical stack. (b) Schematic of device layer components (numbering corresponds to electrodes in (a)). (c) Photograph and schematic of the EC/PV self-powering concept showing connections required to cause bleaching (top) or coloring (bottom) of the ECD under illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 204. Copyright (2014) WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 



C. Bechinger et al.18 (1996)	Ruthenium dye sensitized TiO2 (4 micron)	WO3 (500 nm)	Liquid 0.1 M LiI, 0.01 M 4-TBP in PC	17 (788 nm)	—	50 s	250 s	—	—
Y. Li et al.247 (1998)	N3 dye sensitized TiO2 film (1–3 μm)	PANI films (1 μm/140 nm)	Liquid 0.5 M LiI, 0.04 M I2 in PC:AC (4:1, v/v)	5.1	—	34 s	2–3 s	—	—
F. Pichot et al.243 (1998)	N3 dye sensitized TiO2 film (600 nm)	WO3 (500 nm)	Quasi-solid state 900 mg PEGDMA, 1 mol% AIBN, 0.5 M LiI	50 (>700 nm)	—	10 min	—	—	—
A. Hauch et al.245 (2001)	N3 dye sensitized TiO2 film (3 μm)	WO3 (1 μm/240 nm)	Liquid 0.5 M LiI, 0.005 M I2 in PC	41 (620 nm)	—	3 min	3 min	—	—
S. Deb et al.74 (2001)	a-Si1−xCx/H PV cell	WO3 (120 nm)	Solid state LiAlF4	≈28 (670 nm)	—	5 min	—	—	—
A. Hauch et al.249 (2002)	N3 dye sensitized TiO2 film (150 nm)	WO3 (600 nm)	Liquid 0.5 M LiI, 0.005 M I2 in PC	46.2	—	12 min	10 min	—	—
J. Y. Liao et al.250 (2005)	N3 dye sensitized TiO2 film	PEDOT thin film	Liquid 0.1 M LiI, 0.1 M LiClO4 in PC	22 (630 nm)	280	70–80 s	70–80 s	—	—
U. Krasovec et al.251 (2004)	N3 dye sensitized TiO2 film (100 nm)	WO3 (800 nm)	Quasi-solid state Ormolyte/cationic surfactant 0.5 M LiI, 0.005 M I2	60.4	—	15 min	15 min	50 days	—
A. Georg et al.252 (2006)	N3 dye sensitized TiO2 film (150 nm)	WO3 (600 nm)	Quasi-solid state Ormolyte/cationic surfactant 0.5 M LiI, 0.005 M I2	60.4	—	15 min	15 min	—	0.054
G. De Filpo et al.253 (2006)	TiO2–PO4–MB (400 nm)	MB	Quasi-solid state 0.05 M [EV(ClO4)2], 0.2 M TEA, 0.5 M LiClO4, 5 wt% DPHA, Nafion membrane	56	—	0.6 s	20 s	—	—
H. Santa-Nokki et al.254 (2007)	N-719 dye sensitized TiO2 (6 μm)	Bis(2-phosphonoethyl)-4,4′-pyridinium dichloride (Viologen)	Liquid 0.5 M LiI and 0.05 M I2 in PC for ECD; 0.1 M LiI, 0.05 M I2, 0.3 M TBP, 0.5M HMII in MPN for DSSC	22.8 (630 nm)	—	—	—	—	1.1
C. Hsu et al.256 (2008)	FL1–dye sensitized TiO2 film	PProDOT-Et2	Liquid 0.1 M redox couples (I−/I3− and Br−/Br3−), 0.1 M LiClO4 in MPN	14.1–33.7 (620 nm)	—	3–1823 s	3–207	—	0.10–0.65
J. Wu et al.257 (2009)	N-719 dye sensitized TiO2 film (3 micron)	WO3 (800 nm)	Liquid 0.5 M LiI, 0.005 mM I2 in PC	45 (788 nm)	—	4 s	60 s	200 cycles	0.50
G. Leftheriotis et al.258 (2010)	RhB sensitized TiO2 films (300nm)	WO3 400 nm	Liquid 0.5 M LiI, in PC	CR 3.6:1	PhCE 1.50 (850 nm)	10 min	12 min	100 cycles	—
G. De Filpo et al.259 (2010)	Ruthenium dye sensitized TiO2: SWNTs films (500nm)	SWNT–WO3 NP films (0.005:1) (500 nm)	Solid state PEDOT HTL	54 (800 nm)	—	8 s	30 s	100 cycles	—
A. Cannavale et al.260 (2011)	N-719 dye sensitized TiO2 film	WO3 300 nm	Liquid 0.7 M LiI, 0.03 M I2, 4-TBP in ACN	55 (600 nm)	61.10 (780 nm)	5–20 s	10–60 s	100 cycles	6.55
Z. Jiao et al.262 (2012)	Z-907 dye sensitized TiO2 film (4 micron)	PB 452 nm	Liquid 0.5 M LiI, 0.01 M 4-TBP in GBL	70 (780 nm)	103.40 (780 nm)	0.60 s	6.2 s	1000 cycles	—
G. Leftheriotis et al.286 (2012)	N3 dye senzitized TiO2 film (5micron)	WO3 e-beam evaporation (400 nm)	Liquid 0.5 M LiI, 0.0025 M I2 in PC	CR 10.2:1	—	3 min	—	2 months	—
L. Huang et al.263 (2012)	Amorphous silicon (a-Si:H) thin film solar cell (TFSC) (400 nm)	Heptylviologen (HV(BF4)2)	Liquid 0.05 M HV(BF4)2, 0.1 M TBABF4, 0.05 M TMPD in PC	70 (590 nm)	—	200 s	160 min	—	5.55
S. Yang et al.264 (2012)	N3–4TBA dye sensitized TiO2 film (1 micron)	PProDOT-Me2 (200 nm)	Liquid 0.1 M LiI, 0.001 M I2 in PC	38 (637 nm)	—	1 s	4 s	1500 cycles	1.12
L. Hechavarria et al.277 (2012)	N3 dye sensitized TIO2 film (160 nm)	WO3 (250 nm)	Quasi-solid state LiI in PEG–Ti hybrid system [EO]:[Li+] molar ratio 8:1	40 (n.a)	—	9 s	3.2 s	—	—
L. Huang et al.265 (2012)	a-Si:H/μc-Si:H thin film solar cell (TFSC)	Prussian blue (PB) (200 nm)	Quasi-solid state PMMA, 0.1 M LiClO4 in PC	55 (690 nm)	—	30 s	15 s	—	9.44
A.Cannavale et al.266 (2014)	Dye sensitized (o D(–π–A)2 structure) (DYE 1) TiO2 film (5 micron)	WO3 (300 nm)	Liquid 0.7 M LiI, 0.03 M I2, 0.3 M 4-TBP in ACN	32 (650 nm)	PhCE 17 (650 nm)	2 s	5 s	—	1.92
Z. Xie et al.267 (2014)	N-719 dye sensitized TiO2 films	WO3·2H2O films (500 nm)	H2SO4–PVA gel electrolyte (ECD); DMPII (1.0 M), LiI (0.1 M), I2 (0.12 M) and 4-TBP (0.5 M) in MPN (DSSC)	31 (670 nm)	61.60	30 s	—	—	1.27
E. Amasawa et al.268 (2014)	Triphenylamine (TPA)-based organic dyes sensitizrd TIO2 (5 micron)	PProDOT-Me2	Liquid ([Co(bpy)3]3+/2+), 0.1 M LiClO4, 0.2 M TBP in ACN	34 (620 nm)	—	1 s	1 s	5000 cycles	4.50
F. Malara et al.269 (2014)	N-719 dye sensitized TiO2 nanorods films (5 micron)	WO3 (300 nm)	Liquid 0.7 M LiI, 0.005 M I2, 0.5 M 4-TBP in dried ACN	40 (650 nm)	—	
	—	—	2.75
J. Jensen et al.270 (2012)	Organic polymer solar cells (OPV)	ECP magenta MCCP	Solid state 0.02 mol MMA, 0.02 mol EMIM-TFSI, 2 mol% EGDMA, 0.5 mol% BPO, ACN	58 (550 nm)	—	<5 s	—	90 cycles (4 months)	2.00
A. Dyer et al.204 (2014)	Organic polymer solar cell (OPV)	ECP magenta MCCP	Quasi-solid state 8 wt% PMMA, 0.5 M LiTFSI in PC	20 (550 nm)	—	—	—	—	0.55
M. Yang et al.271 (2014)	N-719 dye sensitized TiO2 films	WO3	Liquid PEG–Ti, LiI, I2, DMPII	50 (788 nm)	—	6 s	8 s	200 cycles 91 days	0.28
A. Cannavale et al.198 (2015)	Perovskite solar cell	WO3 (300 nm)	Quasi-solid state LiI in PEO ([EO]:[Li+] molar ratio 4:1); PEO:PEG weight ratio 40:60	22–30 (600 nm)	114–289	15–20 s	—	300 cycles	3.7–5.5
C. Wu et al.272 (2015)	InGaN/GaN multiple quantum well (MQW) solar cell	NiO; WO3 (500 nm; 300 nm)	Liquid	58.2	67.20	8 s	5 s	—	—

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
