Monolithic perovskite/silicon-homojunction tandem solar cell with over 22% efficiency   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7EE02288C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7EE02288C
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2472-2479Monolithic perovskite/silicon-homojunction tandem solar cell with over 22% efficiency†

        
          
            YiLiang 
            Wu
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Di 
            Yan
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            Peng
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            The 
            Duong
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yimao 
            Wan
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Sieu Pheng 
            Phang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Heping 
            Shen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Nandi 
            Wu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chog 
            Barugkin
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xiao 
            Fu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Sachin 
            Surve
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Dale 
            Grant
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Daniel 
            Walter
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Thomas P. 
            White
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kylie R. 
            Catchpole
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Klaus J. 
            Weber
          
        
      *
      Research School of Engineering, The Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia. E-mail: yiliang.wu@anu.edu.au; klaus.weber@anu.edu.au
Received 
      11th August 2017
    , Accepted 13th October 2017First published on 13th October 2017AbstractCrystalline silicon (c-Si) solar cells featuring a high-temperature processed homojunction have dominated the photovoltaic industry for decades, with a global market share of around 93%. Integrating commercially available crystalline silicon solar cells with high-efficiency perovskite solar cells is a viable pathway to increase the power conversion efficiency, and hence achieve low levelized electricity costs for the photovoltaic systems. However, the fabrication process for this type of cell is challenging due to the many, and often conflicting, material processing requirements and limitations. Here, we present an innovative design for a monolithic perovskite/silicon tandem solar cell, featuring a mesoscopic perovskite top subcell and a high-temperature tolerant homojunction c-Si bottom subcell. The improved temperature tolerance of the c-Si bottom cell permits significantly increased flexibility in the design and fabrication of the perovskite cell. We demonstrate an efficiency of 22.5% (steady-state) and a Voc of 1.75 V on a 1 cm2 cell. The method developed in this work opens up new possibilities in designing, fabricating and commercialising low-cost high-efficiency perovskite/c-Si tandem solar cells.

Broader context
Solar photovoltaic technology based on crystalline silicon (c-Si) has dramatically reduced in cost in the last several years, to the point where the cost of solar electricity now rivals that from coal power plants in several locations around the world. Increasing the power conversion efficiency is the most promising method to further reduce the cost. Since the efficiency of c-Si cells is approaching their theoretical limit, alternative approaches are required to enable step changes in efficiency. The rapid development of perovskite cells provides an opportunity to fabricate highly efficient perovskite/c-Si tandem cells on the other hand, with an efficiency substantially greater than that possible with c-Si. Here we report a specially designed homojunction c-Si solar cell architecture which provides a wide window for the perovskite processing temperature up to 400 °C, while allowing passivation on both sides of the c-Si substrate. With a modified vacuum flash assisted perovskite deposition method, we demonstrate a 1 cm2 monolithic perovskite/c-Si tandem cell with 22.5% stabilized efficiency, which is the highest efficiency reported to date with a homojunction c-Si substrate. The unique design presented in this work opens up a new approach for achieving highly efficient monolithic perovskite/c-Si tandem devices.

Introduction
Hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have achieved over 22% power conversion efficiency (PCE) in less than ten years,1 and have displayed the fastest growth in PCE of any photovoltaic technology in history. The perovskite material features a unique combination of properties which make it highly suited as a solar cell absorber, including high absorption coefficient, low exciton binding energy, bipolar charge transport and long carrier diffusion length.2–5 Importantly, the bandgap of this type of material is tuneable over a wide range through variation of its composition,6,7 which makes it ideal for perovskite/crystalline silicon (c-Si) tandem solar cells. In this particular cell structure, the high band gap perovskite top cell absorbs most of the UV and visible region photons, while the infrared photons are transmitted through perovskite layer and absorbed by the bottom c-Si substrate. Such a design can lead to a much higher theoretical PCE of ∼40%,8 than the Shockley–Queisser limit of 33% for single junction solar cells,9 at a potentially low cost.
There have been several recent reports of perovskite/c-Si tandem solar cells. To date, the highest reported PCEs are 26.4%10 and 23.6%11 for 4-terminal and 2-terminal designs, respectively. For 2-terminal tandems, most of the work has focused on using silicon heterojunction (SHJ) solar cells for the bottom sub-cell.11–13 The current world efficiency record for a single junction SHJ cell is 26.6%,14 slightly higher than the 25.7% achieved for a homojunction cell.15 However, SHJ cells have limited temperature tolerance, mainly due to low thermal stability of surface passivation by intrinsic amorphous silicon, restricting the subsequent processing temperatures to less than 200 °C. In monolithic tandem devices, this substantially limits the process flexibility of the perovskite top cell. For example, the commonly used compact and mesoporous TiOx layers that form the electron transport layer – used in the current record efficiency perovskite solar cells1,16 – typically require annealing temperatures of 400 °C or higher. In contrast, with a homojunction c-Si cell, processing temperatures of 400 °C are feasible. The ability to employ higher process temperatures could also allow the use of inorganic perovskites that require higher formation temperatures. Generally, a higher formation temperature corresponds to a device with greater thermal stability which has been one of the main concerns for perovskite materials.17–19
Only a few papers have so far reported on the fabrication of monolithic perovskite/silicon tandems featuring homojunction c-Si cells. Recently, Werner and co-workers reported using zinc tin oxide as a new intermediate recombination layer between the perovskite and diffused silicon sub-cells, resulting in a 17% efficiency.20 However, the front surface of the c-Si cell used in their work lacked passivation. Because of the existence of dangling bonds at the silicon surface, surface recombination will significantly reduce the open circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF) of the bottom c-Si cell,21 high values for both of which are essential for the realization of high-efficiency tandem photovoltaic devices.
In this work, as shown in Fig. 1, we develop a monolithic tandem using a mesoscopic perovskite top-cell and a homojunction c-Si bottom cell with passivated front and rear surfaces and rear side texturing. With this design, we have achieved 22.3% and 22.8% PCE with slow reverse and forward IV scans (50 mV s−1), and 22.5% PCE at steady state following over 1200 seconds illumination. This is the highest reported efficiency for a monolithic perovskite/c-Si tandem cell to date featuring a homojunction.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the perovskite/c-Si monolithic tandem solar cell (not to scale), (b) cross section SEM image of the tandem device at the intersection between silicon passivated area and metal contact opening, (c) SEM image of the rear side texture, (d) J–V curve of the champion tandem device scanned in both reverse and forward directions (e) steady-state PCE of the champion cell measured by tracking the current at a fixed bias voltage of 1.4 V (Vmpp) (f) total absorbance (1 − R, where R is the reflectance depicted by orange line), EQE of the perovskite top cell (purple line), and EQE of the c-Si bottom cell (red line). The grey and white areas on the top of the graph represent the reflection loss (front surface and escape), and parasitic absorption. 
Results and discussion

Fig. 1a shows the structure of the monolithic tandem cell. In this design, a boron diffused p+ region at the front of the c-Si cell forms the homojunction. The c-Si front and rear surfaces are passivated with Al2O3/SiNx and SiNx films respectively. Current transport between the c-Si and perovskite subcells occurs via an array of metal contacts which collect the current from the c-Si subcell. The current then spreads out laterally in the indium tin oxide (ITO) recombination layer and travels through the TiOx layer of the perovskite cell. The front side of the c-Si substrate is polished to ensure the quality of the spincoated films of the perovskite subcell. A specially tuned SiNx film for the front side is used to better match the refractive index (RI) of the c-Si wafer and suppress the reflection loss of the bottom cell. The rear side of the c-Si cell is textured and coated with low RI SiNx to enhance the light trapping capability. An array of Cr/Pd/Ag metal stacks is used for the contact openings to minimize the contact resistance between ITO and boron emitter, and the same metal stack is also used for the rear side contact openings. The ITO film, which serves as the intermediate recombination layer and also to spread current between the metal contact array and top subcell, is deposited by sputtering.
The top perovskite subcell features high temperature (400 °C) processed compact and mesoporous TiOx, a PCBM/PMMA passivating layer,22 a modified vacuum flash assisted quadruple cation perovskite film (Cs0.07Rb0.03FA0.765MA0.135PbI2.55Br0.45) and Spiro-OMeTAD. The front transparent contact is formed by evaporating a thin MoOx film followed by deposition of sputtered indium zinc oxide (IZO). The MoOx film prevents sputter damage of the spiro-OMeTAD layer. A layer of Ag/Al metal stack and a Au grid are used for rear and front contacts respectively. The cross section image of top structure and the image of the rear texture can be seen in Fig. 1b and c respectively. The cell is finished with a textured silicone foil to minimize reflection losses.
Optical design
For monolithic tandem solar cells, careful optical design is vital in order to minimise optical losses and achieve high conversion efficiency. Instead of evaporating a layer of anti-reflection (AR) coating on the front side of the cell, the reflection loss can be efficiently suppressed by a textured silicone foil (in our case, the foil features an inverted pyramid texture) which acts as a broadband antireflection coating.23 In Fig. S1 (ESI†), the reflectance was measured for the monolithic device with and without the AR foil. The integrated difference in current loss between these two curves is ∼4.6 mA cm−2. Since two subcells (perovskite and c-Si) are connected in series, it is critical to match the currents in the two subcells. In the absence of any optical losses, the optimum value of the band gap for the perovskite top cell would be 1.75 eV.24 However, in our cell, light travels through the spiro-OMeTAD before being absorbed by the perovskite layer. The large parasitic absorption at short wavelengths in the spiro-OMeTAD reduces absorption in the perovskite and necessitates a shift to a lower perovskite band gap.25 In our design the thickness of the spiro-OMeTAD layer was reduced as much as possible (to 100 nm) to suppress the absorption loss. Based on optical modelling, the optimal perovskite band gap was determined to be 1.6–1.65 eV to maintain good current matching. The band gap of the quadruple perovskite films used for the top cell is ∼1.62 eV, determined using absorption and photoluminescence (PL) spectrum measurements, as illustrated in Fig. S2 (ESI†).
The front SiNx layer is important for the c-Si subcell for both passivation and to reduce optical losses. For typical homojunction c-Si solar cells, SiNx with a refractive index (RI) of approximately 2 on a textured surface is widely used,26 due to a good balance of low broadband reflection and absorption losses. With a higher RI SiNx, the film becomes more absorptive, especially at shorter wavelengths,27 which substantially reduces the short circuit current of the cell. However, in a tandem configuration, short wavelength photons are mainly absorbed by the top cell. Depending on the band gap and the thickness of the top perovskite layer, only photons above ∼650 nm will be transmitted through the top cell. In this wavelength range, the increase in absorption of the higher RI SiNx is small, while the higher RI is better matched to that of the c-Si substrate and can help to reduce reflection losses at the c-Si surface. The optical modelling results (with an optimised thickness of SiNx film) using the ray tracing tool from PVLighthouse28 are illustrated in Fig. 2a. With optimised silicon-rich nitride (RI ∼ 2.9), the reflection in the infrared region (>800 nm) is largely suppressed and hence the current density of the silicon cell is increased. For the rear textured side, the low silicon fraction nitride was used to enhance the infrared reflection due to its low refractive index. The detailed simulated result of absorption losses in each layer can be found in Fig. 2b and Table S1 (ESI†).
 Fig. 2  Simulated optical performance of the monolithic tandem structure used. (a) Front escaped and absorbed light in c-Si bulk with SiNx film of high or low refractive index and optimised thickness (50 nm for SiNx of 2.9 and 100 nm for SiNx of 1.9); (b) breakdown of absorption losses with optimised optical design. 
To balance the light absorption between perovskite and silicon, the refractive index and absorption coefficient of each layer in the device structure was firstly measured and fitted. This data was then used in an optical model that combines ray tracing in the thick silicon cell with transfer matrix calculations for all other layers28 in order to both optimise and balance the currents in the two subcells. This was done by varying the thickness of each layer including the perovskite film itself, which provides a direct mechanism to enable the balancing of the currents. To reduce the thickness of the perovskite film as demanded by the modelling results, the perovskite precursor was diluted to achieve a relative thin film, compared with our previous reported opaque quadruple cation perovskite solar cell.30
c-Si subcell design
To ensure that holes can be extracted from the boron emitter, contact must be made but with small opening fraction (∼1%) to achieve both adequate current extraction and effective surface passivation by the Al2O3/SiNx stack. We initially sputtered ITO directly on the localised openings to form the localised contacts, but found that the contact resistivity between ITO and boron emitter is too high (25 mΩ cm2 as deposited, ∼400 mΩ cm2 post annealing) to ensure an acceptable contact resistance for an acceptable contact fraction. Therefore, a metal stack (Cr/Pd/Ag) was used as an intermediate contact between the boron emitter and ITO layer. This is a compromise as the metal introduces a small amount of additional reflection. Further, in our present design, the current has to spread out from the metal contacts throughout the ITO layer; therefore, a sufficiently low sheet resistance ITO is essential for a good FF. The rear side of the cell is passivated with a layer of SiNx, and the same metal stack was used as an intermediate contact between the n+ layer and Ag/Al rear side contact.
The c-Si sub cell performance is shown in Fig. 3a. To minimize series resistance loss in these measurements, a silver grid was evaporated on the ITO layer. Without annealing, the PCE of the c-Si cell can achieve 14.3%. The low current density is attributed to its planar surface and high RI nitride which is optimized for the presence of perovskite top cell. The sub-cell was then annealed to simulate the annealing conditions of the compact and mesoporous TiOx. We found that air annealing is detrimental to the FF of the silicon cell as shown in Table S2 (ESI†). The Suns-Voc31,32 fitting result from measurements using a flash tester as well as transmission line method (TLM) measurements33 on test structures indicate that the decreased FF results from increased series resistance due to the increased contact resistance at various interfaces as can be seen in Fig. S3 (ESI†). The annealing conditions were then optimised to fulfil the requirements of both perovskite and silicon subcells as well as the intermediate point contacts. As shown in Fig. 3b, with air annealing followed by forming gas (FG) annealing at 400 °C, the overall contact resistivity could be maintained at an acceptably low level.
 Fig. 3  (a) J–V curve of the planar c-silicon bottom cell prior and post annealing. (b) Contact resistivity of the c-silicon cell before and after air/forming gas annealing on various interfaces of the localized contact using TLM method. 
With the relatively low contact resistance achieved with a Cr/Pd/Ag metal stack and FG annealing, device simulation using Quokka35 indicates that the 0.2% contact openings (30 μm diameter dots, 600 μm pitch) for both front and rear are sufficient to obtain a relatively good FF (>0.75) to match the perovskite subcell. Furthermore, 0.2% contact openings have a minor impact on the shading loss of the silicon subcell (0.035 mA cm−1); a further reduction will not be significantly beneficial for either Jsc or Voc, but will have a major impact on the series resistance and hence decrease the FF.
Modified vacuum flash assisted perovskite
The anti-solvent crystallisation procedure using chlorobenzene has been successfully used for the fabrication of small area (∼0.1–0.3 cm2) perovskite cells.34 However, the transfer of this technique to 1 cm2 or larger perovskite devices has been found to be problematic, as it is difficult to obtain uniform and pin-hole-free films. This appears to be caused by the relatively slow spread of the chlorobenzene over the substrate during spinning, resulting in slow crystallisation of the film in areas further away from the centre. Li et al. recently introduced a vacuum-flash method to obtain uniform perovskite (FA0.81MA0.15PbI2.51Br0.45) films over a large area.29
To obtain high-quality quadruple cation perovskite (Cs0.07Rb0.03FA0.765MA0.135PbI2.55Br0.45) films with good uniformity and low pinhole density, a modified vacuum flash method with 2 stages of vacuuming was developed to obtain more consistent cell results. It starts with a quick exposure to a vacuum environment (0.1 Torr), during which the film darkened slightly to a transparent orange colour after 10 s, similar to the description in the previous report.29 The second stage is in a relatively lower vacuum (1 Torr), during which the film progressively darkens until a transparent dark chocolate colour appears after 30 s. Processes is done inside the glovebox with nitrogen purged at all the time to avoid excessive amount of DMF/DMSO in the atmosphere during spin coating. The substrate is not heated during either stage; crystallisation occurs at room temperature. As can be seen in Fig. 4, with the modified vacuum flash method, the 1 cm2 cells show greatly improved average efficiency and reduced variability. Further statistics on the photovoltaic parameters can be found in Fig. S3 (ESI†).
 Fig. 4  (a) J–V measurements of the 1 cm2 perovskite solar cell fabricated with different crystallization methods (2 step vacuum, 1 step vacuum and chlorobenzene anti-solvent method). (b) Statistical distribution of the PCE for perovskite cells (1 cm2) with different crystallization methods. All devices were tested with a 50 mV s−1 reverse scan. 
The 1 cm2 opaque device has a lower FF compared with the tandem device, which is partially attributed to a non-optimised rear side contact design. The size of the substrate is 2.5 × 2.5 cm. The electrons collected by the FTO glass have to travel a longer distance to be collected by the contact (located at the edge of the substrate), and therefore the sheet resistance of FTO layer will contribute to the raised of series resistance of the device.
Outlook
The monolithic design presented in this work can be further improved with several approaches. The current density in this work suffered significantly, especially in the blue region, from strong absorption and high reflection losses associated with the spiro-OMeTAD. Hence, a major improvement could be achieved by replacing the spiro-OMeTAD layer with a low-loss, high refractive index inorganic hole transport layer such as NiOx.25 Our optical modelling results suggest that the use of NiOx could boost the current density beyond 19 mA cm−2 while enabling the use of a perovskite with higher band gap (∼1.73 eV). A higher Voc output (>1.3 V) from perovskite subcell could then be expected as over 1.2 V has already been achieved with a lower band gap perovskite (1.62 eV).16
In our current design, the c-Si subcell is far from optimized. Currently the Voc of the Si subcell is around 0.62 V, which is much lower than the potential Voc of an optimised homojunction design. Device simulation using Quokka35 shows the Voc is significantly limited by the bulk lifetime of the Si wafer. Given the bulk lifetime (0.5–1 ms) of the current silicon wafers, Voc could be boosted to 0.64 V simply by reducing the thickness of the silicon wafer from 350 μm to 270 μm without a significant light absorption (and hence current) loss. Further, replacing the full area diffusion with a localized diffusion could further improve the quality of surface passivation and consequently push the Voc over 0.67 V, and it may obviate the need for the metal vias for future designs. The simulation results for current and optimized designs are shown in Fig. S5 (ESI†). With these modifications, a high overall Voc (1.97 V) would be expected for the monolithic device.
Based on our device results shown above, the FF is the major efficiency limitation. The use of a localized diffusion could significantly reduce the contact resistivity and improve the FF of the c-Si bottom cell. However, for the perovskite top cell, the reason for the low FF is still unknown and requires further research. With a more reasonable FF (0.78), the power conversion efficiency for the tandem cell could be further boosted to exceed 29%, well beyond the current record for single junction c-Si cells.
Conclusions
We have demonstrated a new homojunction c-Si cell architecture suitable for perovskite-silicon tandems. This structure allows high temperature processed compact and mesoporous TiOx layers to be used for the perovskite cell while allowing passivation layers on both sides of the c-Si subcell, thus maintaining a high Voc for the c-Si subcell. We carefully studied and optimised the optical and passivating properties of these passivation layers. A modified vacuum flash technique was introduced for the deposition of large area, quadruple cation perovskite films with good yield and high efficiency. These innovations enabled the realisation of a 22.5% efficient monolithic tandem device. We identify key areas for further performance improvement that provide a path for the realisation of cell efficiencies beyond 29%.
Experimental
Device fabrication
Fabrication of the c-Si cell starts with a 5-Ohm cm n-type FZ wafer, chemically polished on both sides. It goes through a 1050 °C dry oxidation first to grow a thick SiO2 on both sides of the wafer. Then we use photolithography to define the active region (1 cm2, boron emitter) at the front side of the wafer and put the wafer in buffered HF solution to etch off the oxide layer. Wafers are then transferred to the Tempress furnace for boron diffusion at 930 °C, with 25 min deposition and 20 min oxidation. This is followed by removal of the rear-side oxide, texturing, then back-to-back POCl3 diffusion at 780 °C for 30 min. Next we remove the front side borosilicate glass and rear side phosphosilicate glass using a HF dip. Front side passivation is carried out with plasma-assisted atomic layer deposition Al2O3 (20 nm)36 followed by Plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) SiNx, (RI ∼ 2.9, 50 nm thick). The textured rear side is then passivated with standard PECVD SiNx (RI ∼ 1.9, 70 nm thick). Photolithography is used to define the contact opening for both sides of the wafer, followed by a reactive ion etch (RIE). A buffered HF dip is then used to remove the passivation layers in the contact regions. The Cr/Pd/Ag metal stack was thermally evaporated on both sides of the wafer, then lifted off with acetone in an ultrasonic bath. The rear side Ag (100 nm)/Al (800 nm) contact capping layer was evaporated through a shadow mask onto the active region only (1 cm2). Finally the 40 nm ITO layer was sputter coated on the front side.
For the top perovskite cell, all the process is finished in the glovebox with nitrogen filled environment. We first spin coat a compact In-TiOx layer (4000 rpm, 15 s)37 onto the finished bottom cell, followed by annealing at 400 °C in air for 15 min; in forming gas for 15 min; finishing with a ramping down to 300 °C in foaming gas. Next we spin-coat a layer of mesoporous TiOx and repeat the annealing sequence. The PCBM/PMMA passivating layer22 is then spun on at 4000 rpm with a ramp of 4000 rpm s−1 for 10 s, followed by a 100 °C anneal for 10 min. Then, the quadruple cation perovskite film (Cs0.07Rb0.03FA0.765MA0.135PbI2.55Br0.45) was deposited by a two-step spin coating program; first at 2000 rpm with a ramp of 200 rpm s−1 for 10 s; and then at 6000 rpm with a ramp of 6000 rpm s−1 for 20 s. The substrate is then transferred into the vacuum flash jig and pumped down for 10 s to 0.1 Torr. We then raise the pressure to 1 Torr for another 30 s before slowly release the pressure to ambient.
The Spiro-OMeTAD hole transport layer (100 nm) was deposited via spin coating at 4000 rpm with a ramp of 4000 rpm s−1 for 20 s. A thin layer (10 nm) of MoOx was thermally evaporated to protect the Spiro-OMeTAD from sputtering damage during IZO deposition.10 The front transparent contact was then fabricated by sputtering 40 nm of IZO on the MoOx using 30 W RF power and Ar pressure of 1.5 mTorr for 60 minutes. The entire cell is then deposited with gold (120 nm) bus bars and grids by e-beam thermal evaporation through shadow masks. The front side of the cell is finalized with a layer of textured silicone foil.12
The Cs0.07Rb0.03FA0.765MA0.135PbI2.55Br0.45 quadruple cation perovskite precursor solution contains 1.2 M lead iodine (PbI2, 99%, Sigma Aldrich), 1.1 M formamidinium (FAI, Greatcell Solar), 0.2 M lead bromide (PbBr2, 99.999%, Sigma Aldrich), 0.2 M methylamine bromide (MABr, Greatcell Solar), 0.091 M caesium iodide (CsI, 99.999%, Sigma Aldrich), and 0.039 M Rubidium iodide (RbI, 99.9%, Sigma Aldrich) in 1.2 mL anhydrous DMF:DMSO (4:1, v/v, Sigma Aldrich).
Spiro-OMeTAD precursor solution was prepared by dissolving 72.5 mg Spiro-OMeTAD (Lumtec), 28.5 μL 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP, 96%, Sigma Aldrich) and 17.5 μL of lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI, 99.95%, Sigma Aldrich) solution (520 mg mL−1 in acetonitrile) in 1 mL chlorobenzene (Sigma, 99.8%). Note that after spin-coating the Spiro-OMeTAD solution, the substrates are placed in a dry box (relative humidity <1%) for 12 hours at room temperature to ensure sufficient oxidation of the Spiro-OMeTAD film prior to MoOx/IZO/Au layer deposition.
Measurements
The series resistance for bottom silicon cell prior and post annealing is measured using the FCT-450 Sinton light I–V flash tester which is supplemented with the Suns-Voc analysis that precisely indicates the source of power loss.
For TLM measurements, the resistance between the pads was measured using a Keithley 2400 source meter. For the contact resistivity on the boron emitter and phosphorus diffusion, a 1 Ω cm n-type control wafer was used, with same diffusion steps for cell fabrication. For the contact resistivity on ITO layer, the ITO was sputtered on the glass substrate with 30 W of RF power with Ar pressure of 1.5 mTorr for 120 minutes (∼60 nm). The metallization was performed by thermal evaporation of a Cr/Pd/Ag stack and Ag on diffused surface and ITO layer respectively to replicate the real cell conditions.
All devices were tested under 1 sun conditions (100 mW cm−2, AM 1.5G, 25 °C) in a solar simulator system (model #SS150 from Photo Emission Tech Inc) equipped with a potentiostat source Autolab PGSTAT302N. The light intensity was calibrated using a certified Fraunhofer CalLab reference cell. All cells’ J–V curves were tested at a 50 mV s−1 scan rate in a custom-built temperature controlled and nitrogen filled measurement jig with an aperture mask. Note that reverse scan is from Voc to Jsc (forward bias → short circuit, 1.8 V → −0.2 V), and forward scan is from Jsc to Voc (short circuit → forward bias, −0.2 V → 1.8 V). No preconditioning protocol has been used before the characterization.
The EQE spectra of our silicon sub-cells were measured in a temperature controlled and nitrogen filled jig with a Protoflex QE1400 system together with a lock-in amplifier in AC mode (270 Hz). The cell was firstly biased with a blue LED chip (peak emission at 450 nm) housed with short pass filter (ThorLabs FES0500) to provide sufficient current for perovskite subcell. To mitigate against artefacts that might caused by the relatively small shunt resistance in the tandem device, a battery power supply and a current meter were then connected in series with the cell and the lock-in-amplifier. A forward bias voltage was then applied and adjusted until negligible current (±10 nA) was recorded.38 The cell was them ready for EQE measurement. The EQE response was calibrated using a certified Fraunhofer CalLab reference cell.
Due to the significant difficulty of measuring the QE response of the tandem cell and also the hysteresis effect of the perovskite subcell,23,39,40 the EQE spectra of our perovskite sub-cells were measured with a dummy perovskite cell in a temperature controlled, nitrogen filled and dark environment with a modified Protoflex QE1400 system in DC mode using a tungsten light source, two Keithley 2425 sourcemeters, and a reference cell. The dummy perovskite cell was fabricated on a highly conductive silicon wafer coated with ITO and Al on the front and rear surfaces respectively, to simulate the cell morphology while avoiding the complexity of a series connected bottom cell. The perovskite top cell was then deposited on top of the silicon substrate using identical processes as for the fabrication of the monolithic tandem cells. The IV curve of this device under one sun condition can be found in Fig. S6 (ESI†).
A PerkinElmer Lambda 1050 UV/Vis/NIR spectrophotometer together with an integrated sphere was used to investigate the reflectance and transmittance of samples.
The steady state photoluminescence spectra (PLS) were captured using a Horiba JobinYvon Fluorolog FL3-22 system equipped with a 532 nm excitation diode-pumped solid state laser, and a photomultiplier tube (PMT) detector having a detection range from 400–1000 nm.
Author contribution
Y. L. W. conceived and designed the overall experiments. Y. L. W., D. Y., J. P., T. D., S. P. P., N. W. and S. S. are involved in tandem device fabrication. Y. L. W. and D. G. contributed to optical modelling. Y. W. optimized the high RI SiNx recipe for PECVD deposition. C. B. and X. F. conducted PLS measurement. Y. L. W., Y. W., D. W., T. P. W., K. R. C. and K. J. W. contributed to the device design and results analysis. The manuscript was mainly written and revised by Y. L. W. and K. J. W. All authors contributed to the discussion of the results and commented on the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Australian Government through the Australian Renewable Energy Agency (ARENA) and the Australian Research Council. Responsibility for the views, information or advice expressed herein is not accepted by the Australian Government. The work was partly conducted at the ACT node of the Australian National Fabrication Facility (ANFF), and the ANU node of the Australian Microscopy and Microanalysis Facility (AMMRF).
References
W. S. Yang, B.-W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim, J. H. Noh and S. Il Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 1376–1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wehrenfennig, M. Liu, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 81513 CrossRef .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Ponseca, T. J. Savenije, M. Abdellah, K. Zheng, A. Yartsev, T. Pascher, T. Harlang, P. Chabera, T. Pullerits, A. Stepanov, J.-P. Wolf and V. Sundström, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5189–5192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Gratzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982 CAS .
A. De Vos, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1980, 13, 839–846 CrossRef .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
T. Duong, Y. Wu, H. Shen, J. Peng, X. Fu, D. Jacobs, E. Wang, T. C. Kho, K. C. Fong, M. Stocks, E. Franklin, A. Blakers, N. Zin, K. McIntosh, W. Li, Y. Cheng, T. P. White, K. Weber and K. Catchpole, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700228 CrossRef .
K. A. Bush, A. F. Palmstrom, Z. (Jason) Yu, M. Boccard, R. Cheacharoen, J. P. Mailoa, D. P. McMeekin, R. L. Z. Hoye, C. D. Bailie, T. Leijtens, I. M. Peters, M. C. Minichetti, N. Rolston, R. Prasanna, S. Sofia, D. Harwood, W. Ma, F. Moghadam, H. J. Snaith, T. Buonassisi, Z. C. Holman, S. F. Bent and M. D. McGehee, Nature Energy, 2017, 2, 17009 CrossRef CAS .
S. Albrecht, M. Saliba, J. P. Correa Baena, F. Lang, L. Kegelmann, M. Mews, L. Steier, A. Abate, J. Rappich, L. Korte, R. Schlatmann, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt, M. Grätzel and B. Rech, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 81–88 CAS .
J. Werner, L. Barraud, A. Walter, M. Bräuninger, F. Sahli, D. Sacchetto, N. Tétreault, B. Paviet-Salomon, S.-J. Moon, C. Allebé, M. Despeisse, S. Nicolay, S. De Wolf, B. Niesen and C. Ballif, ACS energy Lett., 2016, 1, 474–480 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yoshikawa, H. Kawasaki, W. Yoshida, T. Irie, K. Konishi, K. Nakano, T. Uto, D. Adachi, M. Kanematsu, H. Uzu and K. Yamamoto, Nature Energy, 2017, 2, 17032 CrossRef CAS .
A. Richter, J. Benick, F. Feldmann, A. Fell, M. Hermle and S. W. Glunz, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 173, 96–105 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Swarnkar, A. R. Marshall, E. M. Sanehira, B. D. Chernomordik, D. T. Moore, J. A. Christians, T. Chakrabarti and J. M. Luther, Science, 2016, 354, 92–95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Beal, D. J. Slotcavage, T. Leijtens, A. R. Bowring, R. A. Belisle, W. H. Nguyen, G. Burkhard, E. T. Hoke and M. D. McGehee, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 746–751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, N. K. Noel, S. N. Habisreutinger, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500963 CrossRef .
J. Werner, A. Walter, E. Rucavado, S.-J. Moon, D. Sacchetto, M. Rienaecker, R. Peibst, R. Brendel, X. Niquille, S. De Wolf, P. Löper, M. Morales-Masis, S. Nicolay, B. Niesen and C. Ballif, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 233902 CrossRef .
A. G. Aberle, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2000, 8, 473–487 CAS .
J. Peng, Y. Wu, Y. Wang, D. Jacobs, H. Shen, X. Fu, Y. Wan, T. Duong, N. Wu, C. Barugkin, H. Nguyen, D. Zhong, J. Li, T. Lu, Y. Liu, M. N. Lockrey, K. Weber, K. Catchpole and T. White, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1792–1800 CAS .
M. Meusel, C. Baur, G. Letay, A. W. Bett, W. Warta and E. Fernandez, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2003, 11, 499–514 CAS .
Z. (Jason) Yu, M. Leilaeioun and Z. Holman, Nature Energy, 2016, 1, 16137 CrossRef .
D. T. Grant, K. R. Catchpole, K. J. Weber and T. P. White, Opt. Express, 2016, 24, A1454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Duttagupta, F. Ma, B. Hoex, T. Mueller and A. G. Aberle, Energy Procedia, 2012, 15, 78–83 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wan, K. R. McIntosh and A. F. Thomson, AIP Adv., 2013, 3, 203113 Search PubMed .

          P. V. Lighthouse: Module Ray Tracer, http://https://www.pvlighthouse.com.au, accessed 21 January 2017.
X. Li, D. Bi, C. Yi, J.-D. Décoppet, J. Luo, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 353, 58–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Duong, H. K. Mulmudi, H. Shen, Y. Wu, C. Barugkin, Y. O. Mayon, H. T. Nguyen, D. Macdonald, J. Peng, M. Lockrey, W. Li, Y.-B. Cheng, T. P. White, K. Weber and K. Catchpole, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 330–340 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pysch, A. Mette and S. W. Glunz, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 1698–1706 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sinton and A. Cuevas, Eur. Photovoltaic Sol. Energy Conf., Proc. Int. Conf., 16th, 2000, 1–4 Search PubMed .
H. H. Berger, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1972, 119, 507 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xiao, F. Huang, W. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, Y. Zhu, J. Etheridge, A. Gray-Weale, U. Bach, Y. B. Cheng and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2014, 53, 9898–9903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fell, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2013, 60, 733–738 CrossRef .
W. Liang, K. J. Weber, D. Suh, S. P. Phang, J. Yu, A. K. McAuley and B. R. Legg, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2013, 3, 678–683 CrossRef .
J. Peng, T. Duong, X. Zhou, H. Shen, Y. Wu, H. K. Mulmudi, Y. Wan, D. Zhong, J. Li, T. Tsuzuki, K. J. Weber, K. R. Catchpole and T. P. White, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 7, 1601768 CrossRef .
J. Burdick and T. Glatfelter, Sol. Cells, 1986, 18, 301–314 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, H. Shen, D. Walter, D. Jacobs, T. Duong, J. Peng, L. Jiang, Y.-B. Cheng and K. Weber, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6807–6813 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tress, N. Marinova, T. Moehl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 995–1004 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ee02288cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Broader context
Solar photovoltaic technology based on crystalline silicon (c-Si) has dramatically reduced in cost in the last several years, to the point where the cost of solar electricity now rivals that from coal power plants in several locations around the world. Increasing the power conversion efficiency is the most promising method to further reduce the cost. Since the efficiency of c-Si cells is approaching their theoretical limit, alternative approaches are required to enable step changes in efficiency. The rapid development of perovskite cells provides an opportunity to fabricate highly efficient perovskite/c-Si tandem cells on the other hand, with an efficiency substantially greater than that possible with c-Si. Here we report a specially designed homojunction c-Si solar cell architecture which provides a wide window for the perovskite processing temperature up to 400 °C, while allowing passivation on both sides of the c-Si substrate. With a modified vacuum flash assisted perovskite deposition method, we demonstrate a 1 cm2 monolithic perovskite/c-Si tandem cell with 22.5% stabilized efficiency, which is the highest efficiency reported to date with a homojunction c-Si substrate. The unique design presented in this work opens up a new approach for achieving highly efficient monolithic perovskite/c-Si tandem devices.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the perovskite/c-Si monolithic tandem solar cell (not to scale), (b) cross section SEM image of the tandem device at the intersection between silicon passivated area and metal contact opening, (c) SEM image of the rear side texture, (d) J–V curve of the champion tandem device scanned in both reverse and forward directions (e) steady-state PCE of the champion cell measured by tracking the current at a fixed bias voltage of 1.4 V (Vmpp) (f) total absorbance (1 − R, where R is the reflectance depicted by orange line), EQE of the perovskite top cell (purple line), and EQE of the c-Si bottom cell (red line). The grey and white areas on the top of the graph represent the reflection loss (front surface and escape), and parasitic absorption.	 

 	Fig. 2  Simulated optical performance of the monolithic tandem structure used. (a) Front escaped and absorbed light in c-Si bulk with SiNx film of high or low refractive index and optimised thickness (50 nm for SiNx of 2.9 and 100 nm for SiNx of 1.9); (b) breakdown of absorption losses with optimised optical design.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) J–V curve of the planar c-silicon bottom cell prior and post annealing. (b) Contact resistivity of the c-silicon cell before and after air/forming gas annealing on various interfaces of the localized contact using TLM method.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) J–V measurements of the 1 cm2 perovskite solar cell fabricated with different crystallization methods (2 step vacuum, 1 step vacuum and chlorobenzene anti-solvent method). (b) Statistical distribution of the PCE for perovskite cells (1 cm2) with different crystallization methods. All devices were tested with a 50 mV s−1 reverse scan.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ee02288c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
