Electrophoretic separation and deposition of metal–graphene nanocomposites and their application as electrodes in solar cells   - RSC Advances (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6RA12825D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6RA12825D
(Paper)
RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 64097-64109Electrophoretic separation and deposition of metal–graphene nanocomposites and their application as electrodes in solar cells†
Lorcan J. Brennana, 
Praveen K. Suroliac, 
Lorenzo Rovellic, 
Alexander Loudona, 
Samuel P. Torsneya, 
Sarah Rochea, 
K. Ravindranathan Thampic and 
Yurii K. Gun'ko*ab
aSchool of Chemistry, CRANN Institute, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland. E-mail: igounko@tcd.ie
bITMO University, 197101 Saint Petersburg, Russia
cSchool of Chemical & Bioprocess Engineering, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland
Received 
17th May 2016
, Accepted 26th June 2016First published on 28th June 2016AbstractGraphene oxide (GO) is a 2D material which offers great promise in many applications, owing primarily to the reactive surface which enables an easy surface functionalization and solution processing of the resulting materials. Herein we demonstrate that graphene oxide (GO) can be used as a supporting template for the production of new graphene–metal nanoparticle composites. Our synthetic strategy allowed for nanoparticle deposition (Pt and Au) onto the surface of the 2 dimensional carbon nano-substrate without stabilising ligands. Moreover we have shown that the composite materials can be further processed using electrophoretic deposition (EPD). The deposition of the materials onto conducting glass substrates (namely fluorine doped tin oxide) via EPD, allows for the formation of high quality, stable electrodes. These electrodes demonstrated a tuneable electrochemical response towards the reduction of the tri-iodide ion, when studied electrochemically. These electrodes were then tested as potential counter electrodes (CEs) in dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and displayed very promising results, increasing the efficiency by 47.5%, when compared to a conventional Pt electrode.
Introduction
Two dimensional (2D) materials have received great interest in recent years as components in electrochemical devices, such as solar cells, batteries and super-capacitors. The success of such 2D materials (graphene, WS2, MoS2, etc.) can be attributed to the increased understanding of the materials properties and the development of methods for producing high quality 2D layers in high yields. Graphene is the name given to a flat monolayer of sp2 hybridized carbon atoms tightly packed into a two-dimensional (2-D) honeycomb crystal lattice. Theoretical and experimental studies of graphene have demonstrated that graphene and graphene based materials may possess superior mechanical and electrical properties.1 More recently, graphene has been used as a novel and promising platform for the preparation of graphene-based noble metal nanostructures.2–5
The recent development in large scale graphene production and the emergent understanding of its remarkable electronic, optical, thermal and mechanical properties has led to the incorporation of this monoatomic carbon layer as an electrode material for Dye Sensitized Solar Cells (DSSCs).6–10 Graphene polymer composites,7,10,11 hybrids of graphene and CNTs12,13 and graphene–metal composites14–16 have all been shown to display promising catalytic activity for the reduction of the tri-iodide ion in DSSCs and corresponding high efficiencies have been demonstrated.
Graphene oxide (GO) is one such 2D material which offers great promise in many applications, owing primarily to the surface functionality which enables an easy surface functionalization and solution processing of the resulting materials. Herein we demonstrate that graphene oxide (GO) can also be used as a supporting template for the production of new graphene–metal nanoparticle composites. Our synthetic strategy allowed for nanoparticle deposition (Pt and Au) onto the surface of the 2 dimensional carbon nanosubstrate without stabilising ligands. Moreover we have shown that the composite materials can be further processed using electrophoretic deposition (EPD). The deposition of the materials onto conducting glass substrates (namely fluorine doped tin oxide) via EPD, allows for the formation of high quality, stable electrodes. These electrodes demonstrated a tuneable electrochemical response towards the reduction of the tri-iodide ion, when studied electrochemically. These electrodes were then tested as potential counter electrode (CEs) in dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and displayed very promising results, increasing the efficiency by 47.5%, when compared to a conventional Pt electrode.
DSSCs have been of great interest to many researchers and industries.17–22 DSSC technology enables the generation of electrical current by the absorption of a photon by a dye molecule. This absorption leads to the excitement and injection of an electron into the conduction band of an n-type semiconductor, such as nanoporous titanium dioxide, TiO2 (photoanode). The dye is then regenerated by an electrolyte containing a redox couple such as I−/I3−. The oxidized species of this redox couple is reduced at the counter electrode. The counter electrode (CE) of the DSSC is generally composed of a thin layer of Pt (1–3 nm) deposited onto FTO/ITO conducting glass substrates.23 The role of the counter electrode is to regenerate the oxidised species in the electrolyte, which in turn regenerates the oxidised dye, anchored to the oxide charge collection layer.22 The utilisation of Pt as a counter electrode material is due to its high electrocatalytic activity and ability to reduce the iodide redox couple with relative ease, allowing for fast electron transfer across the electrode. The role of Pt nanoclusters24 and nanoparticles (of various shapes) on the counter electrodes in DSSCs is also well documented. For example, platinum nanocubes (PtNCs) were deposited onto a fluorine-doped tin oxide glass using the electrochemical deposition method and utilized as a counter electrode (CE) for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). The DSSCs with the PtNC CE showed an efficiency which was 0.3% higher than the cell using the conventional Pt film CE.25 In another work platinized electrodes were prepared by two-step constant current electrodeposition of Pt clusters on ITO-coated polyethylene naphthalate substrates for use as counter electrodes in DSSCs. Again the efficiency of DSSCs with Pt nanoclusters based CE was only 0.3% higher than the efficiency of DSSCs with a simple platinized electrode.26 Finally, DSSCs assembled using a CE with deposited Pt nanoflowers exhibited the power conversion efficiency which was 0.42% higher than one of DSSC with just sputtered Pt electrode.27
Carbon based materials and in particular carbon nanomaterials (graphene and carbon nanotubes) have received huge attention as replacement materials for a wide range of DSSC components.28 For example, graphene has been employed effectively as a replacement for ITO/FTO transparent conducting substrates29,30 and also as a component for improving the photo induced charge transport in the working electrode (WE).31 In addition, graphene has been shown to increase the efficiency of ionic liquid based electrolytes.32,33
One of the promising uses of carbon nanomaterials in the area of DSSCs has been the development of carbon based counter electrodes (CEs). These materials have received great interest as a replacement for Pt due to their catalytic activity for I3− reduction, electronic conductivity, low cost, availability and the potential option to develop optically transparent CEs.34 The use of carbon nanomaterials also opens the possibility of using various plastic substrates such as polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and polyethylene naphthalate (PEN) in cell design and assembly, as high temperature treatment of carbon is often not required.35 The variety of carbon nanostructures also allows for tuning of important features such as electrode thickness, transparency, surface area, porosity and abundance of defect rich planes which all play an important role in the reduction of I3−.
A large amount of work has focused on the use of SWCNTs,36 MWCNTs,37 nanohorns,38 and metallic composites39 of these materials as effective catalytic materials for DSSC applications. The advantage of using these materials lies in the fact that they show promising electrical conductivity and an extremely large and tunable surface area. The addition of these nanostructures also allows for the control and use of defect-rich edge plane materials which facilitate the electron kinetics associated with the reduction of I3−.40 Metallic nanotube composites have also been shown to have extremely promising potential for CE applications in DSSCs. For example, taking advantage of the high surface area of MWCNTs and the catalytic properties of both Pt and MWCNTs has led to the development of MWCNT/Pt composite materials for DSSCs by Ho et al.41 Pt nanoparticles dispersed on MWCNTs were shown to have enhanced efficiency when compared to thermally evaporated platinum CEs. Unfortunately, the large cost associated with the production and processing of CNTs will most likely limit their incorporation into consumer devises. Similarly, high efficiencies have also been observed for composites of graphene and Pt nanoparticles.15,42,43
Graphene oxide (GO) is a modified form of graphene produced through chemical modification of graphite. The conversion of graphite to graphene oxide results in the functionalisation of the graphene oxide sheet with carboxyl, epoxide and alcohol moieties.44,45 There are several advantages in using this material when compared to graphene, however there are also some noteable disadvantages which must be considered. The remarkable properties of graphene are attributed to the delocalised π–π network that arises from orbitals that lie perpendicular to the plane of the graphene sheet.46 In order to achieve an efficient functionalization of graphene it is necessary to disrupt this π–π network in order to introduce functional groups onto the surface of the sheet. It is these functional groups that allow for chemistry to be performed on the 2D support but at the cost of losing some of the remarkable properties usually associated with pristine graphene sheets. When introducing chemical functionality onto pristine graphene the conjugated network must be disrupted and in doing so many of the attributes of graphene are lost. It is possible to reduce graphene oxide back to graphene using harsh reducing agents such as hydrazine,47,48 however these methods have been shown to introduce a level of nitrogen doping into the lattice and thus the π–π network is never fully restored.49 Using GO does afford some advantages which aid processing and further functionalisation of the material. Functionality on the surface enables to GO to be dispersed readily in water and many solvents.50 The functional groups also allow for GO sheets to be coupled to polymers1,51 and used as a support material for a wide range of nano-particles.52,53 The use of reduced graphene oxide as a counter electrode in DSSCs has also been well documented in the literature to date. Cruz et al. have reported rGO showing efficiency values which are 72% of a standard Pt electrode.54 The same trend have been observed by Khoa et al. who demonstrate that thermally reduced graphene oxide produces efficiency values 50% of that obtained for a standard Pt electrode.55 Similar values have also been reported by Bajpai and co-workers who report a 50% decrease in device efficiency when employing thermally reduced GO as a CE in DSSCs when compared to a conventional Pt system.16
In this manuscript we report an easy scalable synthesis of metal nanoparticle–graphene composites without using any stabilising ligands for the nanoparticles. In our work graphene oxide (GO) was used as a template for the deposition of platinum and gold nanoparticles. It was found that platinum and gold nanoparticles could be successfully deposited, with a small size distribution and in high concentration onto the surface of GO. These composite nanomaterials responded very well to an applied electric field that enabled us to easily separate the metal nanoparticle–graphene hybrid material and unfunctionalised graphene oxide using the electrophoretic deposition (EPD) technique. The lack of ligands also allowed the particle surface to be available for electron transfer reactions, which were not impeded by surface ligands. These composite materials have then been tested electrochemically and as potential CEs in DSSCs, potentially offering new routes towards fabrication of low cost energy materials and corresponding devices.
Results and discussion
Initially, graphene oxide (GO) was prepared from graphite using the well documented Hummers method (Fig. 1).56 The surface functionality44,45 of the GO allows deposition of either platinum or gold nanoparticles in a 1 step reduction using sodium borohydride in the presence of gold or platinum salts, yielding reduced-graphene oxide (rGO) with a high content of metal nanoparticles (NPs) on the surface. The oxidation of graphite to graphene oxide (GO) via the Hummer's method causes disruption in the extended π–π network and introduces oxygen containing functional groups onto the surface of the graphite. These oxygen containing functional groups are believed to be composed of hydroxyl, carboxylic acid and epoxide moieties, as proposed by Lerf and Klinowski.45 Raman spectroscopy can be employed effectively to characterise graphene oxide samples. The Raman spectra recorded for graphite and GO using a 633 nm excitation source are shown in Fig. 2. Changes observed in the Raman spectra of GO are due to the disruption of the delocalised π–π network that extends across the graphene oxide layer.
 Fig. 1  Schematic presentation of graphene–metal nanoparticles composite synthesis. 
 Fig. 2  Raman spectra recorded for graphite and graphene oxide using a 633 nm excitation source. 
The prominent change in spectral response of GO can be attributed to the extensive breakdown of the delocalised π–π network during the oxidation process. The D band in the Raman spectra of GO is seen to broaden and increase in intensity, thus confirming the increased extent of disorder in the material caused by epoxide, hydroxyl and carboxyl functionality. The G band of GO also broadens and blue shifts by ∼10 cm−1. The broadening of the G band can be explained by the increased level of disorder in the material. The shift in G band position can be attributed to the amorphization of graphite. The literature points to some possible explanations of this trend, which include a merging of the G band of GO with that of the 2D band.57 Another explanation offered is that the isolation of carbon–carbon double bonds in GO causes resonance at a higher frequency.58
Raman mapping was also employed for characterising GO. Fig. 3 displays a Raman map which was recorded for the G band of a single GO flake deposited on a Si/SiO2 (300 nm) substrate. Raman mapping is a very useful technique for generating detailed images which are based upon the Raman spectrum of a sample. Each pixel in the image represents an individual Raman spectrum. The Raman spectra for the maps below were recorded with a 514 nm excitation source, at 100% laser power, with 10 accumulations for each scan and each scan recorded for 10 seconds. The maximum intensities for the D band and G band were extracted from the spectra and used to generate the false colour images shown in Fig. 3. As can be seen for the Raman mapping experiments the greatest Raman intensity is located within the centre of the GO flake. The Raman intensity is observed gradually decreasing towards the flake edges. This indicates that the centre of the flake contains a greater concentration of carbon–carbon double bonds, as these bonds are known to have high Raman intensities.59 The mapping experiments would also suggest that the flake edges contain high defect concentrations, caused by the oxidations process, which is represented by the decrease in Raman intensity observed in this region of the GO flake.
 Fig. 3  Left: Raman mapping of GO, G band intensity and right: corresponding Raman spectra recorded for spots (a, b and c) on the Raman mapping. 
Raman spectra have been recorded for all of the materials under investigation (GO, rGO, PtrGO and AurGO) and a rigorous evaluation of the obtained spectra is provided in the ESI (Fig. SI1 and 2†).
The reduction of GO with NaBH4 is known to partially restore the π-bonding of the lattice and significantly increase the conductivity of the material. This process can be observed by monitoring the shift in the peak absorption band of GO.60 As aromaticity is restored, the peak absorption band is shifted to the red and the band located at ∼ 300 nm, which is associated with CO bonds, is removed from the spectrum. The inset in Fig. 4 compares the absorption characteristics of GO and rGO, which was prepared via reduction with NaBH4. The peak absorption band for rGO is observed to shift from 230 nm to 241 nm and the band at 300 nm is no longer present. This indicates that the hydride reduction allows for the removal of functional groups and increases the in plane aromaticity of the material.
 Fig. 4  UV-vis spectra recorded for AurGO and PtrGO. The inset compares the absorption features of GO and rGO. 
The spectral features observed in the UV-vis spectra recorded for both AurGO and PtrGO showed the characteristic absorbance associated with these metallic nanoparticles. A large plasmon band was observed at 540 nm for the AurGO composite. This band is indicative of the plasmon resonance of the Au NPs anchored onto the surface of the GO sheet. The absorption band at ∼300 nm is due to the GO absorption. This band is shifted significantly to the red when compared to the unmodified GO. This shift in GO absorbance is known to be associated with the restoration of the π–π lattice of the GO. This is likely due to the reduction with NaBH4, which is known to offer significant reduction of GO.60 The spectrum of the PtrGO composite is dominated by the absorbance of the Pt NPs into the UV region of the spectrum. The strong Pt absorption in the UV is seen to dominate the absorption of the GO in this region and masks the spectral features associated with GO.
TEM imaging provides comprehensive evidence for the successful synthesis of GO coated with Pt and Au nanoparticles. Samples for TEM analysis were prepared from an aqueous dispersion of Pt and Au functionalised GO, drop-cast onto lacy carbon grids. TEM analysis showed a large concentration of monolayer GO flakes coated with a high concentration of uniformly distributed platinum and gold nanoparticles. Flake sizes ranged from 200 nm to large GO domains, several microns in size. The TEM images in Fig. 5a and b show GO, while multilayered GO coated with Au NPs are displayed in Fig. 5c and d. TEM images of Pt nanoparticles deposited onto GO are presented in Fig. 6. Images in Fig. 6a–c show Pt NPs deposited onto multilayered GO, while image in the Fig. 6d displays Pt nanoparticles onto multilayer GO in the interlayer spacing's.
 Fig. 5  TEM images of (a/b) graphene oxide, (c/d) AurGO deposited on lacy carbon grids. 
 Fig. 6  TEM images of PtrGO deposited on lacy carbon grids. 
Electrodes were fabricated on FTO glass substrates using electrophoretic deposition (EPD) of the materials from suspensions in NMP (Fig. 7). This method proved to be one of the most successful for producing electrodes. The electrode thickness was easily controlled with variation of the deposition time. Deposition through EPD was also advantageous as it allowed for GO and metal functionalised GO to be separated under the influence of the electric field. GO migrated and deposited on the positive electrode while AurGO and PtrGO deposited on the negative electrode. Hence, when depositing AurGO and PtrGO, material in solution which was not coated with metal NPs would be deposited on the opposite electrode. This was extremely advantageous as it insured that the electrodes only contained the material of interest and were not a blend of metal functionalised GO and unmodified GO. We have calculated a metal loading of ∼23 wt% on the surface of rGO.61 Over the course of three EPD rounds the calculated mass of metal contained in the CE was ∼0.103 mg.
 Fig. 7  Photographic images of PtrGO deposited by EPD (a) single depositon (b) double deposition (c) triple deposition. 
The electrochemical activity of PtrGO electrodes towards the reduction of tri-iodide was examined using cyclic voltammetry (CV). PtrGO, AurGO and GO electrodes were fabricated on pre-cleaned FTO glass substrates (13 Ω □−1) using EPD, as described above. Cyclic voltammogram were recorded between ∼−0.2 to 1.3 V (depending on the material) at varying scan rates. A standard 3 electrode electrochemical cell was employed using an FTO counter electrode and the fabricated composite electrodes on FTO substrates as the working electrodes. A saturated calomel reference electrode was used for all scans. The electrolyte consisted of 0.1 M tetraethylammonium tetrafluoroborate (supporting electrolyte) and 10 μM 1-propyl 3-methyl imidazolium iodide (PMII) in acetonitrile. The cyclic voltammogram of the I−/I3− redox couple consists of two redox peaks attributed to the two following reactions (eqn (1) and (2)) occurring at the working electrode surface.62 
I3− + 2e− ↔ 3I−
(1) 
3I2 + 2e− ↔ 2I3−
(2)
The first redox wave (1), which is located at lower potential, holds most interest for studying electron transfer mechanisms in DSSCs, as it corresponds to the oxidation (anodic peak) and reduction (cathodic peak) of the I3− ion.
It can be seen in Fig. 8A below that the Pt electrode catalyses both reaction (1) (lower potential) and reaction (2) (higher potential) registering a high current response in the anodic and cathodic sweep. Analysis of the redox activity of the I−/I3− system was examined on both platinum (Fig. 8A), PtrGO (Fig. 8B) and AurGO (Fig. SI4†) electrodes. The effect of a double deposition of PtrGO through EPD was also examined (Fig. 9), as it was reasoned that increasing the amount of the material on the electrode surface would increase the electrochemical capability.
 Fig. 8  CVs recorded for (A) Pt electrode (B) single deposition of PtrGO (C) stability test on a single deposition PtrGO electrode (200 mV s−1; 55 scans) (D) Tafel polarization curves of counter electrodes in dummy cell configuration using the commercial Dyesol Ltd. EL-100 electrolyte. 
 Fig. 9  Left: Comparative CVs recorded for Pt and PtrGO electrodes at 200 mV s−1 vs. SCE, and right: a plot of V1/2 vs. maximum current response for reaction A, cathodic sweep (Imaxc). 
Through varying the scan rates a change in the position of the anodic and cathodic peak positions was observed for Pt and PtrGO. This indicates the quasi reversible nature of the redox couple. For a reversible couple, no change in peak position would be expected with varying scan rates. Analysis of the peak separation, ΔEp (ΔEp = Ipa − Ipc) through various scan rates, shows an increase in the ΔEp with increasing scan rate value, also evidence for the quasi reversible nature of this reaction.
It is clear that both the Pt electrode and both the PtrGO electrodes (single and double deposition) register high activity towards the reduction and oxidation of the iodide/tri-iodide redox couple. As a control, the catalytic activity of a GO electrode prepared through EPD was also examined (Fig. SI4†). It can clearly be observed that the GO does not support the reduction or oxidation of the redox couple, even when the potential window is expanded considerably. This indicates that the presence of Pt NPs on the surface of GO drastically increases the catalytic ability of the material towards I−/I3− reduction and oxidation. Comparison of the CVs recorded for the Pt and PtrGO electrodes reveals that the Pt electrode displays a sharper response for all oxidation and reduction peaks; this indicates a faster and more facile electron transfer mechanism from the bulk metal film to the active species in the electrolyte. The PtrGO electrodes demonstrate a more sluggish response, as indicated by the broadened oxidation and reduction peaks.
The stability test (Fig. 8C) showed that the PtrGO, deposited by EPD, can form a stable electrode, which can effectively oxidise and reduce the couple over multiple scanning cycles. The CV presented was recorded over 55 scanning cycles (at 200 mV s−1) and show no observable change in the magnitude or position of the peak oxidation and reduction currents.
Tafel polarization curves of the electrode materials were also obtained (Fig. 8D). The Tafel analysis can be used to examine the electrochemical activity of the electrode materials towards the I−/I3− couple. The Tafel analysis was carried out by fabricating “dummy cells” from the electrode materials. A “dummy cell” consists of 2 electrodes, fabricated from the same material, sandwiched together, with an electrolyte in the space between the electrodes. Application of a voltage across the cell yields a current response, which is related to the catalytic capability of the material under investigation. A plot of the log of the current density versus the applied potential yields a Tafel curve. The exchange current density (Jo) at the electrode–electrolyte interface can be estimated from the slope of the anodic or cathodic branch of the Tafel curve. The larger the slope, the larger the exchange current density at the interface. From the Tafel plots it can be seen that the slopes of the anodic and cathodic branches of the polarization curves are in the order: PtrGO > Pt > AurGO > GO > FTO. This indicates that the exchange current density at the PtrGO electrode is higher than that of the Pt electrode. This increased Jo is attributed to the increased surface area of the nano structured PtrGO electrode, afforded by the Pt nanoparticles on the surface of GO. The presence of the Pt nanoparticles allows for the tri-iodide reduction to occur on an increased amount of reaction sites, hence an increase in the exchange current density is observed.
As a means of directly comparing the catalytic ability of the electrode materials, it is useful to compare the CVs obtained for the electrodes, under identical conditions (i.e. the same scan rate and electrolyte concentration, with careful consideration taken to the electrode area). Fig. 9 below highlights the CVs obtained for Pt and PtrGO electrodes at a scan rate of 200 mV s−1. It can be seen that the Pt electrode registers a high current response for I3− reduction (Imaxred) at a potential of ∼0 V, against the SCE. The single deposition of PtrGO exhibits a slightly reduced value for Imaxred, but still shows high catalytic activity towards this reaction. Deposition of a second layer of PtrGO onto the first layer can be used to further increase the catalytic response of the electrode and produce a higher Imaxred value than that obtained for the Pt electrode. It is believed that the high surface area afforded by the Pt NPs on the GO creates a larger number of reaction sites, when compared to the bulk metal film and can result in an increased current response for the tri-iodide reduction, at appropriate PtrGO loadings.
A noticeable shift in the Imaxred potential can be observed between the Pt and PtrGo electrodes. This shift in peak position (0 V to −0.12 V) would be expected to result in a slight drop in the device Voc, however if the current response for this reduction is increased (as can be seen for the double deposition) the effect of this shift in peak position may be somewhat limited.
The inset in Fig. 9 shows the CV response recorded for a single deposition GO electrode. As can be seen the electrode shows a negligible response towards I−/I3− oxidation and reduction. The peak to peak separation potential (Epp) for a redox pair is inversely correlated with the rate constant of a redox reaction. The Epp values recorded for Pt and PtrGO for reaction A are 0.51 V and 0.78 V respectively (at 200 mV s−1). This indicates that the reduction rate constant of the Pt electrode is faster in comparison to the PtrGO electrode.
From analysis of the electrochemical investigations it appears that there are noticeable advantages and disadvantages to employing the PtrGO electrode as a potential CE in DSSCs. The PtrGO electrode can be used to achieve a higher current response for the tri-iodide reduction and this response can be tailored by choosing appropriate material loadings on the electrode, through EPD. The increased current response which can be obtained would be expected to lead to a corresponding increase in the current response for a fully assembled DSSC. The increased current response and also the increased exchange current density (Tafel polarization curves) can be attributed to the large surface area available for reduction and oxidation reactions, due to the presence of Pt nanoparticles. CVs of PtrGO show larger peak separation values and less sharp oxidation and reduction peaks, when compared to Pt. This indicates a more sluggish electron transfer reaction across the interface, the shift of the I3− cathodic peak to a more negative potential will also be expected to decrease device Voc.
The maximum current response for the reduction of I3− (reaction A; cathodic sweep) (Imaxred) was monitored and plotted as a function of the square root of the scan rate (V1/2) in order to gain an insight into the process occurring at the electrode surface. Fig. 9 shows the linear relationship observed between V1/2 and Imaxc which suggests that the redox reactions occurring on the electrode surface are controlled by ionic diffusion of the redox active species in the electrolyte and may also be related to the migration of the iodide ions out of the porous electrode surface.63
DSSCs were fabricated following the procedure outlined in the experimental section. All cells were tested at a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 and with an area of 0.2 cm2 which was defined by a mask. The results obtained from solar I–V analysis are presented in Table 1. J–V curves recorded for DSSCs are shown in Fig. 10 below. J–V curves obtained for cells with varying CE deposition cycles are available in the ESI.†
Table 1 Photovoltaic parameters obtained for DSSCs using graphene various CE materials (Voc – open-circuit voltage; Jsc – short-circuit current density, FF – fill factor and η – efficiency)




CE material
Jsc (mA cm−2)
Voc (V)
FF
η (%)




Pt
12.4
0.72
0.45
4.00


GO
7 × 10−4
0.69
0.20
0.09


AurGO (1 deposition)
7.2
0.65
0.25
1.17


AurGo (2 depositions)
7.6
0.66
0.33
1.65


AurGO (3 depositions)
13.2
0.64
0.36
3.04


PtrGO (1 deposition)
8.6
0.70
0.26
1.55


PtrGO (2 depositions)
10.3
0.70
0.26
1.87


PtrGO (3 depositions)
14.1
0.70
0.60
5.90




 Fig. 10  J–V curves recorded for DSSCS comparing the various CEs. 
As can be seen from the results presented in Table 1 the standard DSSC utilising a conventional thermally evaporated Pt CE registered an overall efficiency on 4% when illuminated. The effect of using GO as a CE material was also examined and the results proved to be very poor, with an efficiency of 0.09%. The deposition of metallic nanoparticles onto the surface of the GO resulted in the formation of a catalytically active material towards I3− reduction. CEs fabricated from AurGO through EPD showed a maximum efficiency of 3.04% (Fig. SI5†). The same cells fabricated using PtrGO showed a dramatic increase in efficiency when compared to Pt. Using PtrGO as a CE material it was possible to increase DSSC efficiency by 47.5%, from 4% (Pt) to 5.90% (PtrGO; triple deposition). This large increase in efficiency is attributed to the nano-structured nature of the CE, when compared to the metallic Pt film. The results for the PtrGO CEs agree well with the finding from our electrochemical studies. As the number of depositions of PtrGO increases, we observe a large increase in the photocurrent response (from 8.55 mA cm−2 to 14.05 mA cm−2). This effect was also observed in CV studies whereby a large increase in cathodic current was observed with increasing deposition number. The shift in the cathodic peak in the CVs to a higher overpotential can also be observed from the results obtained through I–V analysis. The Voc of the Pt CE shows a slightly higher voltage (0.72 V) when compared to that obtained for the PtrGO electrode (0.70 V), however this slight drop in voltage seems to be largely negligible when considering the overall efficiency increase (Fig. 10).
DSSCs built using the AurGO electrode showed promising results (Fig. SI5†). As expected the cells did not perform as well as Pt. This is due to the large overpotential for tri-iodide reduction which can be observed in the CVs of this material (−1.5 V vs. SCE for tri-iodide reduction) (Fig. SI4†). Once again it was observed that increasing the materials loading on the electrode through multiple EPD cycles proved to be an effective method of increasing the efficiency of the cells built using this CE. Jsc values increased from 7.2 mA cm−2 to 13.2 mA cm−2 after 3 EPD cycles, resulting in an increase in efficiency form 1.17% to 3.04%.
To gain a better insight into the effect of Pt- and Au-composites of rGO material on the kinetics of the charge transfer reaction at the counter electrode under working conditions, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) of the DSSCs with and without the composite counter electrodes was carried out under illumination. As shown in Fig. 11, the Nyquist plot of the DSSCs with the composite PtrGO counter electrode clearly features three distinct semicircles and is very similar to the Nyquist plot obtained for the Pt-control DSSCs, fabricated using a conventional Pt counter electrode. The first semicircle at higher frequencies is attributed to the interface between the electrolyte and the counter electrode, while the second semicircle at intermediate frequencies is related to the electrolyte/working electrode interface and the third semicircle at low frequencies is associated to the impedance of the liquid electrolyte.64 A non-linear fit of the obtained spectra shows that the charge transfer resistance at the counter electrode is as little as 9.3 Ω for the PtrGO DSSC, which is lower than the value obtained with the control sample (13.0 Ω). This clearly indicates that the PtrGO composite counter-electrode presented in this work is at least as effective at catalysing the reduction of the tri-iodide ion as the control Pt counter-electrode.
 Fig. 11  Impedance spectra measured under 1 Sun illumination of DSSCs with metal–rGO composite counter electrode materials and control DSSCs with Pt and GO counter-electrode, respectively. (a) Nyquist plots, (b) Bode phase plots. The inset of (a) shows a magnification of the low impedance region of the Nyquist diagrams. 
The AurGO DSSC shows a much higher charge transfer resistance at the counter electrode, around 480 Ω, while the kinetics for the charge transfer at the counter electrode of the GO-control DSSC (GO counter-electrode) are extremely slow, resulting in the two semicircles associated to the kinetics of the working electrode and the counter electrode to merge into one single semicircle. Similarly, the two peaks visible in the Bode phase plots of the Pt-control, Au- and PtrGO composite DSSCs merge into one single peak in the Bode plot of the GO-control DSSC (Fig. 11). For this reason, it is not possible to use EIS to measure the charge transfer resistance at the counter-electrode for the GO control DSSC. Nonetheless, the characteristic frequency of the semicircle obtained in the Nyquist plot (37.6 Hz) confirms the very slow kinetics at the GO based counter-electrode in the control DSSC. As a comparison, the characteristic frequencies for the high frequency semicircle for the PtrGO composite DSSCs are more than one order of magnitude higher (479 Hz). This can be also verified by visual inspection of the Bode phase plots: it can be seen that the high frequency shoulder visible around 104 Hz for the PtrGO composite counter-electrode (and the Pt-control DSSC) is shifted to lower frequencies (around 103 Hz) for the AurGO composite counter-electrode, while the only one peak located at even lower frequencies (around 102 Hz) is visible for the GO-control DSSC. This further indicates that the formation of graphene metal composites leads to dramatically improved charge transfer kinetics at the counter electrode, particularly in the case of the PtrGO DSSCs.
The equivalent circuits used to fit the experimental data are shown in Fig. 12. For the Pt-control, AurGO and PtrGO composite DSSCs, for which three arcs are observed in the Nyquist plot, an equivalent circuit comprising three time constants was used: one at high frequency associated to the counter electrode, a central one corresponding to recombination at the working electrode, and the last one at low frequencies representing the diffusion process in the electrolyte. This is the classic model used to describe a DSSC under 1 Sun illumination or under a bias potential close to the open circuit voltage. On the other hand, for the GO-control DSSC one only semicircle is visible in the Nyquist plot: clearly, the two semicircles corresponding to the counter electrode and the working electrode are merged, while the contribution from the diffusion in the electrolyte cannot be seen. As a consequence, a simplified Randles circuit – comprising one only time constant – is the most appropriate model to fit the data for this cell. The constant phase element CPE was used instead of the capacitance to describe the counter electrode and working electrode to account for inhomogeneity of the respective surfaces. The element Zd accounts for Warburg diffusion of the redox species in the electrolyte, while the element Rs indicates series resistance of the FTO substrate. The complex type of fitting was used with ZView, using the Calc-Modulus type of weighting.
 Fig. 12  The equivalent circuits used to fit the experimental data for the Pt–control, Au– and Pt–rGO composite DSSCs (bottom) and for the GO-control DSSC (top). 
Experimental
Starting materials
All chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich unless stated otherwise. Fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) glass (2.3 mm; 13 Ω □−1) was also purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Graphite was purchased from Alfa Aser and used as received. TiO2 (P25) was purchased from Degussa and used as received. All electrodes for use in electrochemical investigations were purchased from IL Cambria Scientific Ltd. The screen printing holder was supplied by A.W.T world Trade Inc. while the screen printing mesh was supplied by Serigraf Ltd.
Graphene oxide synthesis
Graphene oxide (GO) was prepared from bulk graphite via the Hummers method,56 1 g of graphite, 0.5 g of sodium nitrate and 23 mL of sulphuric acid (H2SO4) was added to a 500 mL round bottomed flask and stirred at 4 °C for 15 minutes. 3 g of potassium permanganate (KMnO4) was added slowly with vigorous stirring. Once all the KMnO4 was added the ice bath was removed and the suspension heated to 35 °C for 30 minutes. This afforded a murky brownish grey solution. Following this, 46 mL of water was added and the suspension was set to stir for 15 minutes. The solution was then treated with 1.4 mL of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) in order to reduce residual permanganate and manganese dioxide to the colourless, soluble manganese sulphate. The product was washed up to 10 times with a 10% aqueous solution of hydrochloric acid (HCl) followed by copious amounts of water. The resulting GO was suspended in H2O at a concentration of 1 mg mL−1 and filtered under vacuum onto an omnipore 200 nm membrane and washed with 1 L of H2O. The production of GO was confirmed with FT-IR, Raman and UV-vis spectroscopies, along with TEM analysis.
Synthesis of graphene oxide, platinum nanocomposites (PtrGO)
GO (20 mg) was dissolved in H2O (20 mL) and ultra-sonicated for 1 hour in order to ensure maximum dispersion of GO and hence largest viable surface area. After ultra-sonication the aqueous GO suspension was added to a round bottomed flask and set to stir at room temperature for 30 min. 90 μL of an 8% aqueous solution of H2PtCl6·6H2O (24 × 10−4 mol) was added to the suspension and left to stir for another 30 minutes. The solution was reduced with 10 mL of an aqueous solution of NaBH4 (20 μM) which was added drop wise to the reaction vessel. The solution was left to stir for 1 hour. Following this the composite was washed several times with water through a high speed centrifugation at 3000 RPM for 10 minutes.
Synthesis of graphene oxide, gold nanocomposites (AurGO)
The synthetic procedure for the AurGO composite followed that of the PtrGO composite, using molar equivalents of HAuCl4·3H2O instead of H2PtCl6·6H2O.
Electrodes and device fabrication
Solutions of GO, AurGO and PtrGO were prepared in NMP at a concentration of 0.1 mg mL−1 for electrophoretic deposition. Samples were ultra-sonicated in NMP for 1 hour to allow for a homogeneous dispersion of the material into solution. Two blank FTO electrodes were immersed into a solution of NMP with the desired material. Deposition was carried out by applying a DC voltage of 250 V across both of the electrodes for 15 minutes. Following deposition, the electrodes were dried in atmosphere and heat treated at 200 °C for 1 hour. TiO2 electrodes were prepared on FTO coated glass substrates. Glass substrates were cleaned in a detergent solution with ultra-sonication for 15 minutes followed by sonication in ethanol (10 min) and acetone (10 min). A bulk TiO2 layer was applied to the FTO coated glass from a 40 mM aqueous hydrolysed TiCl4 solution. FTO glass plates were submerged in the hydrolysed TiCl4 solution at 70 °C for 30 minutes. Once removed, the glass was washed with water and alcohol. In order to form the mesoporous electrode TiO2 paste was applied to FTO coated substrates using the screen printing method. TiO2 pastes were fabricated according to the previously published procedure.65 Electrodes were produced with several coatings of the prefabricated paste onto FTO substrates until a thickness of 12–13 μm was achieved. Following this, 2 layers of light scattering TiO2 (150–200 nm particle size) (Dyesol WERO-2) were deposited. TiO2 working electrodes were treated to a sintering profile which consisted of a drying period at 125 °C for 6 minutes, ramping to 350 °C and holding for 15 minutes, ramping to 450 °C and holding for 15 minutes and finally sintering at 500 °C for 15 minutes. A ramping rate of 8 °C min−1 was used for all ramping steps. Once cooled the electrodes were immersed into a 40 mM aqueous TiCl4 solution and heated to 70 °C for 30 minutes. Upon removal from the bath, electrodes were cleaned with water and alcohol and treated to a second sintering step at 500 °C for 30 minutes.
TiO2 electrodes were soaked in a 0.3 mM solution of RuLL′ (NCS)2 (L = 2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid) (L′ = 4,4′-dinonyl-2,2′-bipyridine) dye in a 1:1 ratio of tert-butanol and acetonitrile for a period of 16 hours. The process allows for the adsorption of a monolayer of the light harvesting dye onto the mesoporous electrode. Upon removal from the dye solution, the electrodes were washed with ethanol in order to remove any unadsorbed dye molecules from the surface. Once dry, a surlyn sealant (25 μm) was placed around the active area of the electrode and the CE was placed on top. The device was sealed using a hot press heated to 130 °C. At this temperature the surlyn seal melts and once cooled acts as a sealant between both electrodes. The electrolyte was introduced into the chamber between both electrodes under vacuum. 25 μL of electrolyte was placed over a 1 mm2 hole drilled into the back of the counter electrode and when placed under vacuum the electrolyte was driven into the cell. The hole in the CE was sealed using a small portion of surlyn and a piece of glass.
The organic electrolyte used in this work is based upon the following formulation. 0.6 M 1-butyl-3-methyl imidazolium iodide, 0.03 M iodine, 0.10 M guandinium thiocyanate and 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine in a solvent mixture of acetonitrile and valeronitrile (85:15 vol. ratio).
Characterisation of materials and testing of DSSCs
Transmission electron microscopy images were recorded using a Jeol 2100 TEM at an operating voltage of 200 keV. X-ray diffraction was performed using Siemens-500 X-ray diffractometer. All electrochemical investigations were carried out using an Autolab III potentiostat controlled through NOVA 1.10 software. UV-vis absorption spectra were recorded using an Agilent technologies, Cary 60 UV-vis scanning spectrometer. All samples were examined in a 1 cm quartz cell using an appropriate solvent. The DC power supply used for electrophoretic deposition was a TTi PLH250 DC power supply. Fourier transform infra-red spectroscopy was carried out with a Perkin Elmer Spectrum One NTS with ATR Sampling Accessory. Solar I–V measurements were performed using a digital source meter (Keithley 2400) and a full spectrum solar simulator (Newport 96000), fitted with a xenon arc discharge lamp which operated at 150 W, and was equipped with an air mass (AM) 0 and 1.5 D filter. The solar simulator was calibrated with a silicon-based reference cell before testing. All cells were tested at 1 sun (1000 W m−2) unless otherwise stated. The testing area of the cells was 0.2 cm−2 (unless otherwise stated) and was defined by a mask.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) studies were performed with a computer-controlled Gamry Series G 300 potentiostat. The frequency range was 0.1 Hz to 200 kHz and the magnitude of the alternative signal was 10 mV. All impedance measurements were carried out under a bias illumination of 100 mW cm−2 at Voc (global AM 1.5, 1 Sun) from a Newport 91195A-1000 solar simulator and Newport 69920 Arc Lamp Power Supply, equipped with a Newport 81088A Air Mass Filter. The spectra were recorded 10 minutes after starting illumination, in order for the temperature of the DSSC to stabilize. The obtained spectra were fitted with ZView software (v2.8d, Scribner Associate, Inc.) in terms of appropriate equivalent circuits. The characteristic frequency is calculated in the Nyquist diagram as the reciprocal of the product of the resistance and the capacitance for a given RC circuit. It represents the reciprocal of the electron lifetime for the corresponding electrochemical process (e.g. electron transfer kinetics at the counter-electrode). For an ideal RC circuit, the characteristic frequency corresponds to −Im(Z) = Re(Z) = R/2, that is, the point at the top of the semi-circle in the Nyquist diagram.
Conclusions
In conclusion, this work has resulted in the development of new materials and methodologies for the production of new CEs for DSSCs. New synthetic methods for PtrGO and AurGO composites were successfully elaborated in this work, and crucially we have shown that metallic NPs can be deposited onto 2D substrates without the need for stabilising ligands. It is believed that the lack of such stabilising ligands on the surface of the metallic nanoparticles increases the catalytic potential of these systems, as the particle surface is free to interact with redox species in solution.
In addition electrophoretic deposition (EPD) has been developed as a method to separate the electro-catalytically active metal NPs-graphene from the starting material and rGO and also deposit it in a highly controlled manner. The electrophoretic approach allowed for fine control over the material deposition and hence the catalytic ability of the electrodes. Electrochemical investigations revealed that PtrGO deposited on FTO could potentially be a suitable replacement for metallic Pt films in DSSC. AurGO did not perform as well in electrochemical studies.
DSSCs fabricated using these new CE materials performed well. It was found that AurGO CEs could reach 76% of the efficiency of the conventional Pt based CE. Results obtained with PtrGO were even more promising. After 3 EPD cycles, PtrGO CEs reached as efficiency of 5.90%, 47.5% greater than that of the thermally evaporated Pt electrode. We believe that this increase in efficiency is attributed to the nanostructured nature of the CE, which offers an extremely high surface area. Hence, there are more available reaction sites for the reduction of the tri-iodide ion in solution. This results in an increase in the current response of the cells, as can be seen in J–V measurements and through cyclic voltammograms. EIS has also been employed to show that the PtrGO composite CE shows a lower charge transfer resistance (9.3 Ω) when compared to a conventional Pt electrode (13.0 Ω). These studies showed that the PtrGO composite counter-electrode is at least as effective at catalysing the reduction of the tri-iodide ion as the control Pt counter-electrode. Thus the enhanced efficiencies that we observe in our fully assembled DSSCs can be explained by the lower charge transfer resistance obtained for the PtrGO electrode as well as the higher reduction peak currents shown by the cyclic voltammetry studies. However, the EIS of the AurGO CE demonstrated a much higher charge transfer resistance at the counter electrode, around 480 Ω. The kinetic for the charge transfer at the counter electrode of the DSSC with GO counter-electrode were extremely slow, resulting in the two semicircles associated to the kinetics of the working electrode and the counter electrode to merge into one single semicircle.
In overall, these results demonstrate that by utilising a nanostructured GO–metal nanoparticle composite electrode it is possible to achieve much higher efficiencies when compared to conventional approaches. We also believe that similar synthetic and processing strategies can be used to produce and purify many of others metal nanoparticle–graphene composite materials, opening new exciting opportunities in this highly topical and important area.
AcknowledgementsThis work was supported by the Science Foundation Ireland (SFI 12/IA/1300 and Amber project), the Ministry of Education and Science of the Russian Federation (Grant no. 14.B25.31.0002).
ReferencesS. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, G. H. B. Dommett, K. M. Kohlhaas, E. J. Zimney, E. A. Stach, R. D. Piner, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2006, 442, 282–286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Huang, X. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .X. Huang, Z. Yin, S. Wu, X. Qi, Q. He, Q. Zhang, Q. Yan, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 1876–1902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Tan, X. Huang and H. Zhang, Mater. Today, 2013, 16, 29–36 CrossRef CAS .M. Liu, R. Zhang and W. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 5117–5160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Choi, H. Kim, S. Hwang, Y. Han and M. Jeon, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7548–7551 RSC .W. Hong, Y. Xu, G. Lu, C. Li and G. Shi, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1555–1558 CrossRef CAS .J. D. Roy-Mayhew, D. J. Bozym, C. Punckt and I. A. Aksay, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6203–6211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Wang and Y. H. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8182–8188 CAS .G. Wang, S. Zhuo and W. Xing, Mater. Lett., 2012, 69, 27–29 CrossRef CAS .S. E. Bourdo and T. Viswanathan, Carbon, 2005, 43, 2983–2988 CrossRef CAS .T. Battumur, S. H. Mujawar, Q. T. Truong, S. B. Ambade, D. S. Lee, W. Lee, S.-H. Han and S.-H. Lee, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2012, 12(1), e49–e53 CrossRef .G. Zhu, L. Pan, T. Lu, T. Xu and Z. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 14869–14875 RSC .F. Gong, H. Wang and Z.-S. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 17676–17682 RSC .M.-Y. Yen, C.-C. Teng, M.-C. Hsiao, P.-I. Liu, W.-P. Chuang, C.-C. M. Ma, C.-K. Hsieh, M.-C. Tsai and C.-H. Tsai, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12880–12888 RSC .R. Bajpai, S. Roy, P. Kumar, P. Bajpai, N. Kulshrestha, J. Rafiee, N. Koratkar and D. S. Misra, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3884–3889 CAS .B. Oregan and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef CAS .M. Gratzel, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6841–6851 CrossRef PubMed .M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Kay, I. Rodicio, R. Humphrybaker, E. Muller, P. Liska, N. Vlachopoulos and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 6382–6390 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Kroon, N. J. Bakker, H. J. P. Smit, P. Liska, K. R. Thampi, P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Gratzel, A. Hinsch, S. Hore, U. Wurfel, R. Sastrawan, J. R. Durrant, E. Palomares, H. Pettersson, T. Gruszecki, J. Walter, K. Skupien and G. E. Tulloch, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2007, 15, 1–18 CAS .M. Gratzel, C. R. Chim., 2006, 9, 578–583 CrossRef .M. Gratzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. O'Regan and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .H. Bonnemann, G. Khelashvili, S. Behrens, A. Hinsch, K. Skupien and E. Dinjus, J. Cluster Sci., 2007, 18, 141–155 CrossRef .Y. H. Wei, M. C. Tsai, C. C. M. Ma, H. C. Wu, F. G. Tseng, C. H. Tsai and C. K. Hsieh, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2015, 10, 467 CrossRef PubMed .N. Q. Fu, X. R. Xiao, X. W. Zhou, J. B. Zhang and Y. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 2850–2857 CAS .T. L. Hsieh, H. W. Chen, C. W. Kung, C. C. Wang, R. Vittal and K. C. Ho, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5550–5559 RSC .L. J. Brennan, M. T. Byrne, M. Bari and Y. K. Gun'ko, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 472–485 CrossRef CAS .X. Wang, L. Zhi and K. Mullen, Nano Lett., 2007, 8, 323–327 CrossRef PubMed .G. Eda, G. Fanchini and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 270–274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. Yang, J. Zhai, D. Wang, Y. Chen and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 887–894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .I. Ahmad, U. Khan and Y. K. Gun'ko, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16990–16996 RSC .L. J. Brennan, S. T. Barwich, A. Satti, A. Faure and Y. K. Gun'ko, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 8379–8384 CAS .X. Wang, L. Zhi and K. Müllen, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 323–327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. N. Murakami, S. Ito, Q. Wang, M. K. Nazeeruddin, T. Bessho, I. Cesar, P. Liska, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Comte and P. Péchy, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A2255–A2261 CrossRef CAS .K. Suzuki, M. Yamaguchi, M. Kumagai and S. Yanagida, Chem. Lett., 2003, 32, 28–29 CrossRef CAS .E. Ramasamy, W. J. Lee, D. Y. Lee and J. S. Song, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1087–1089 CrossRef CAS .R. D. Costa, S. Feihl, A. Kahnt, S. Gambhir, D. L. Officer, G. G. Wallace, M. I. Lucio, M. A. Herrero, E. Vázquez and Z. Syrgiannis, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6513–6518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Xiao, J. Wu, G. Yue, J. Lin, M. Huang and Z. Lan, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 8545–8550 CrossRef CAS .W. J. Lee, E. Ramasamy, D. Y. Lee and J. S. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 1145–1149 CAS .A. B. Bourlinos, V. Georgakilas, R. Zboril, T. A. Steriotis and A. K. Stubos, Small, 2009, 5, 1841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. Bajpai, S. Roy, P. Kumar, P. Bajpai, N. Kulshrestha, J. Rafiee, N. Koratkar and D. Misra, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3884–3889 CAS .Z. Gao, L. Wang, X. Liu, P. Guo, W. Zhao, D. Wu, F. Xu and K. Jiang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 32096–32102 RSC .D. R. Dreyer, S. Park, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 228–240 RSC .A. Lerf, H. He, M. Forster and J. Klinowski, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 4477–4482 CrossRef CAS .A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Park, J. An, J. R. Potts, A. Velamakanni, S. Murali and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2011, 49, 3019–3023 CrossRef CAS .S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner, K. A. Kohlhaas, A. Kleinhammes, Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1558–1565 CrossRef CAS .S. Park, Y. Hu, J. O. Hwang, E.-S. Lee, L. B. Casabianca, W. Cai, J. R. Potts, H.-W. Ha, S. Chen and J. Oh, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 638 CrossRef PubMed .J. I. Paredes, S. Villar-Rodil, A. Martínez-Alonso and J. M. D. Tascón, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 10560–10564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Satti, P. Larpent and Y. Gun'ko, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3376–3381 CrossRef CAS .X. Zhou, X. Huang, X. Qi, S. Wu, C. Xue, F. Y. C. Boey, Q. Yan, P. Chen and H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 10842–10846 CAS .I. V. Lightcap, T. H. Kosel and P. V. Kamat, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 577–583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. Cruz, D. A. Pacheco Tanaka and A. Mendes, Sol. Energy, 2012, 86, 716–724 CrossRef CAS .N. T. Khoa, D. V. Thuan, S. W. Kim, S. Park, T. V. Tam, W. M. Choi, S. Cho, E. J. Kim and S. H. Hahn, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 1535–1541 RSC .W. S. Hummers Jr and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef .K. N. Kudin, B. Ozbas, H. C. Schniepp, R. K. Prud'homme, I. A. Aksay and R. Car, Nano Lett., 2007, 8, 36–41 CrossRef PubMed .A. C. Ferrari and J. Robertson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 61, 14095–14107 CrossRef CAS .A. C. Ferrari, J. C. Meyer, V. Scardaci, C. Casiraghi, M. Lazzeri, F. Mauri, S. Piscanec, D. Jiang, K. S. Novoselov, S. Roth and A. K. Geim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 187401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. J. Shin, K. K. Kim, A. Benayad, S. M. Yoon, H. K. Park, I. S. Jung, M. H. Jin, H. K. Jeong, J. M. Kim and J. Y. Choi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1987–1992 CrossRef CAS .J. Muñoz, M. Riba-Moliner, L. J. Brennan, Y. K. Gun’ko, F. Céspedes, A. González-Campo and M. Baeza, Microchim. Acta, 2016, 1–11,  DOI:10.1007/s00604-016-1783-x .G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1819–1826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Saito, W. Kubo, T. Kitamura, Y. Wada and S. Yanagida, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 164, 153–157 CrossRef CAS .F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, G. Garcia-Belmonte, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 87, 117–131 CrossRef CAS .S. Ito, P. Chen, P. Comte, M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. Liska, P. Péchy and M. Grätzel, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2007, 15, 603–612 CAS .
Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ra12825dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic presentation of graphene–metal nanoparticles composite synthesis.	 

 	Fig. 2  Raman spectra recorded for graphite and graphene oxide using a 633 nm excitation source.	 

 	Fig. 3  Left: Raman mapping of GO, G band intensity and right: corresponding Raman spectra recorded for spots (a, b and c) on the Raman mapping.	 

 	Fig. 4  UV-vis spectra recorded for AurGO and PtrGO. The inset compares the absorption features of GO and rGO.	 

 	Fig. 5  TEM images of (a/b) graphene oxide, (c/d) AurGO deposited on lacy carbon grids.	 

 	Fig. 6  TEM images of PtrGO deposited on lacy carbon grids.	 

 	Fig. 7  Photographic images of PtrGO deposited by EPD (a) single depositon (b) double deposition (c) triple deposition.	 

I3− + 2e− ↔ 3I−
	(1)

3I2 + 2e− ↔ 2I3−
	(2)

 	Fig. 8  CVs recorded for (A) Pt electrode (B) single deposition of PtrGO (C) stability test on a single deposition PtrGO electrode (200 mV s−1; 55 scans) (D) Tafel polarization curves of counter electrodes in dummy cell configuration using the commercial Dyesol Ltd. EL-100 electrolyte.	 

 	Fig. 9  Left: Comparative CVs recorded for Pt and PtrGO electrodes at 200 mV s−1 vs. SCE, and right: a plot of V1/2 vs. maximum current response for reaction A, cathodic sweep (Imaxc).	 

Pt	12.4	0.72	0.45	4.00
GO	7 × 10−4	0.69	0.20	0.09
AurGO (1 deposition)	7.2	0.65	0.25	1.17
AurGo (2 depositions)	7.6	0.66	0.33	1.65
AurGO (3 depositions)	13.2	0.64	0.36	3.04
PtrGO (1 deposition)	8.6	0.70	0.26	1.55
PtrGO (2 depositions)	10.3	0.70	0.26	1.87
PtrGO (3 depositions)	14.1	0.70	0.60	5.90

 	Fig. 10  J–V curves recorded for DSSCS comparing the various CEs.	 

 	Fig. 11  Impedance spectra measured under 1 Sun illumination of DSSCs with metal–rGO composite counter electrode materials and control DSSCs with Pt and GO counter-electrode, respectively. (a) Nyquist plots, (b) Bode phase plots. The inset of (a) shows a magnification of the low impedance region of the Nyquist diagrams.	 

 	Fig. 12  The equivalent circuits used to fit the experimental data for the Pt–control, Au– and Pt–rGO composite DSSCs (bottom) and for the GO-control DSSC (top).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ra12825d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
