Hole transporting materials for mesoscopic perovskite solar cells – towards a rational design?  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA01258F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA01258F
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16446-16466Hole transporting materials for mesoscopic perovskite solar cells – towards a rational design?

        
          
            Anurag 
            Krishna†
a and 

        
          
            Andrew C. 
            Grimsdale
          
          
        
      *b
aDivision of Physics and Applied Physics, School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 21 Nanyang Link, Singapore 637371
bSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798. E-mail: acgrimsdale@ntu.edu.sg
Received 
      10th February 2017
    , Accepted 14th June 2017First published on 15th June 2017AbstractOrganic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have become one of the most exciting fields in the search for renewable energy sources with the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs having increased in only a few years from less than 5% to certified values of over 22%. To obtain high efficiencies in PSCs hole transporting materials (HTMs) are needed, and the HTM used in the best devices is so expensive as to make them potentially uncompetitive. In this review we give an overview of the types of HTMs that have been developed and discuss some of the strategies that have been used in designing HTMs for efficient PSCs, including the apparent effects of functional groups in and structures of organic HTMs on device parameters such as the PCE, fill factor (FF), open circuit voltage (Voc), and the stability of the resulting PSCs. We suggest some tentative design principles that might enable the rational design of a cost-effective HTM for efficient PSCs.Anurag KrishnaAnurag Krishna is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Laboratoire de Réactivité et Chimie des Solides (LRCS), CNRS UMR7314, Amiens, France. He was born in India, and received his B.E. in Polymer Science and Chemical Technology from Delhi College of Engineering at the University of Delhi in 2012. He completed his Ph.D. in 2016 at Nanyang Technological University (NTU) for work on hole transporting materials for perovskite solar cells under the supervision of Associate Professors Andrew Grimsdale and Cesare Soci. Currently, his research focuses on novel organic semiconductors for organic/hybrid opto-electronics application.Andrew C. GrimsdaleAndrew Grimsdale was born in Waiouru, New Zealand in 1963 and graduated from the University of Auckland, receiving his PhD in Chemistry in 1990 for work on natural products synthesis. After undertaking postdoctoral research work into optically and electrically active organic materials in Swansea, Cambridge, Mainz, and Melbourne he joined the School of Materials Science (MSE), NTU in 2006, receiving tenure in 2012. The author of over 140 publications, his research is into the synthesis of active materials for organic electronic applications including energy conversion and storage.
1. Introduction
Metal–organic halide perovskites have become one of the hottest topics in materials science in the last few years due to their potential as active materials in photovoltaic cells, light emitting diodes and other organic electronic devices.1 In particular the remarkable advances in solar cells using lead alkylamine halide perovskites (RA)PbX3, with power conversion efficiency (PCE) improving from less than 5% to over 20% in just a few years has attracted considerable attention given the urgent need to develop sustainable energy sources to reduce the demand for fossil fuels and so alleviate the problems of climate change due to increases in carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. While the easy fabrication of these perovskites from cheap precursors and their excellent efficiencies have generated great excitement inside and outside the scientific community, and prospects for commercialisation are currently thought to be good,2 several problems still have to be overcome before this can occur. Some are intrinsic to the materials themselves, for example their toxicity due to the lead content,3 and their instability, whether towards degradation by atmospheric moisture,4 or for the iodides towards degradation due to formation of iodine during operation (which may be unavoidable).5 The issues of toxicity and degradation by water may be amenable to solution by chemists by the production of efficient encapsulating materials, while that of degradation by formation of iodine may not be so easily soluble by materials chemists. Other problems, however, offer clear opportunities for materials chemists to resolve them. One such, which is the subject of this review, is the need to use hole transport materials (HTMs) in order to obtain high device efficiencies. The HTM currently used to make the best devices, spiro-OMeTAD, which will be discussed in more detail below, is extremely expensive, and has mediocre hole carrier mobility. As a result devices using it are not very stable due to the need to use hygroscopic dopants to improve the charge carrier mobility and device performance. The need for better HTMs is obvious, yet while many HTMs for PSCs have been made and tested, their development generally seems to follow a pattern of trial and error. HTMs have been reviewed several times recently,6 most comprehensively by Nazeeruddin et al.,7 and by Grätzel, Ahmad et al.,8 but, although the design principles behind some materials have been explained by their creators (including us), to the best of our knowledge no general concepts for the rational design of a high performance cost-effective HTM have yet been put forward. Our aim in this review is to attempt to discern from the available data some possible design concepts which might enable the rational design of such a material, which should be the goal of materials chemists. Our aim is not just to enlighten our colleagues already working in this area (to whom most of what we discuss is already well known), but also to explain to a general audience, especially those potentially interested at getting into the field, how we may go about tackling the problem. But first we need to discuss the devices themselves, as it is the devices which set the parameters which need to be designed into the target molecules. Again those already in this field will be aware of this, so the following is intended as an aide memoire to them and as a brief introduction to the devices for non-specialists to help them understand what the parameters are to be taken into account during design.
2. Perovskite-based solar cells
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) can be thought of as the most recent version of dye-sensitised solar cells (DSSCs) which were first introduced a quarter of a century ago by O'Regan and Grätzel.9 As shown in Fig. 1, the original DSSC (sometimes called a Grätzel cell in honour of one of its inventors) used a liquid electrolyte containing a redox couple to regenerate the oxidised dye molecules produced after photoexcitation of dyes adsorped onto a mesoporous titanium dioxide photoanode and electron transfer from the dye to the photoanode.6a,10 Because the liquid electrolyte – originally iodine/iodide was used but this was later replaced by cobalt(II)/cobalt(III) species – can efficiently penetrate into the mesoporous anode and so come into interfacial contact with the dye molecules, regeneration tends to be fast and efficient. Efficiencies of up to 13% have been produced from such cells in the laboratory,11 and up to 10% has been reported for prototype modules.12 However, the need for efficient encapsulation to prevent leakage of the corrosive electrolyte, and issues of device stability have been identified as major obstacles to the commercialization of DSSCs.13
 Fig. 1  Schematic views of the components and operating principles of a liquid electrolyte dye-sensitized solar cell. 
To overcome these problems, attention has increasingly been shifted towards solid state dye sensitized solar cells (ssDSSC) in which the liquid electrolyte is replaced by a solid hole transporting material (HTM). The device architecture and operating principle of a ssDSSC are shown in Fig. 2. The first ssDSSC was reported in 1998 by Bach and co-workers but showed a PCE of only 0.74%.14 This device used an organic HTM 2,2,7,7-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) which was to become the standard HTM in solid state devices as it generally produced the highest efficiencies. Significant improvements have since occurred by changing dyes, modifying the TiO2 and developing new dopants for spiro-OMeTAD, and the highest efficiency to date for a ssDSSC (7.2%) was reported by the Grätzel group in 2011.15 The lower efficiencies from the solid-state devices are due to the more viscous nature of solid as opposed to liquid electrolytes slowing ion transport and to the difficulty in getting efficient infiltration of the mesoporous anode by the HTM, especially for bulky molecules such as spiro-OMeTAD.
 Fig. 2  (a) Device architecture of ss-DSSC; (b) operating principle of ss-DSSC. 
Perovskite solar cells are essentially solid-state DSSCs in which the organic or organometallic dyes have been replaced by perovskites, in particular organic–inorganic lead halide perovskites. Perovskites refer to a class of materials that have the general chemical formula ABX3, where A and B are a cation and a dication of very different sizes and X is an anion. In organic–inorganic halide perovskites the cation is an alkylammonium cation. If the alkyl group is small as in methylammonium (CH3NH3, MA) or formadinium (CH2(NH2)2, FA) then the resulting perovskite has a 3-dimensional structure as shown in Fig. 3a.16 If a larger alkylamine is used then the resulting perovskite has a 2-dimensional structure in which individual layers of metal halide octahedra are separated by alkyl chains, while mixtures of variously sized amines produce so-called mixed dimensionality perovskites, in which groups of 2 or more layers of metal–halide octahedra are interspersed with alkyl chains.1a There are recent reviews to which the reader is referred of the optoelectronic properties of metal halide perovskites, including their optical absorption and emission, and charge transport properties and their correlation with the perovskite structure17 and of the effects of defects in the perovskites upon their solar cell performance.18 The most commonly used simple perovskites for photovoltaic applications are the 3-dimensional methylammonium lead bromide or iodide, but materials with mixed amines (MA and FA) and/or mixed halides containing different amounts of Br and I have been developed, as such mixed systems have tuneable bandgaps and have been found to produce higher efficiencies in solar cells. All metal perovskites such as CsPbX3, and 2-D and mixed dimensionality perovskites have also been used but generally show lower efficiencies in devices than the hybrid 3-D perovskites though their stability is reported to be higher. Enormous research efforts have been dedicated in a relatively short time to the development of PSCs, through development of new device architectures, application of different n-type nanostructures, chemically tuning the perovskite composition, and developing new deposition techniques for high-quality perovskite films. Discussion of the tuning of the properties of the perovskites and the optimization of devices by such methods lies outside the scope of this review and the reader is referred elsewhere for reviews of such matters.1,19
 Fig. 3  (a) Crystal structure of cubic perovskite with general chemical formula ABX3. (b) Device architecture of mesoscopic PSCs. (c) Schematic representation of charge-transfer processes in PSCs. 
Organolead halide perovskites were first used as sensitizers in liquid-based DSSCs by Miyasaka and co-workers in 2009.20 PCEs of 3.1% and 3.8% were obtained using CH3NH3PbBr3 and CH3NH3PbI3 respectively as light absorbers, in combination with a standard iodine-based liquid electrolyte. In 2011, Park et al. further improved the performance of the liquid-based CH3NH3PbI3 solar cell to 6.5% by modifying the surface of TiO2 and the method used for deposition of the perovskite.21 Unfortunately, the perovskites dissolve in these liquid electrolytes and so such devices degraded rapidly. In 2012, a major breakthrough was made when the Grätzel22 and Snaith23 groups independently reported the first solid-state perovskite solar cells (PSCs) using CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3PbI3−xClx as light absorbers deposited onto a mesoporous TiO2 layer and spiro-OMeTAD as HTM, leading to PCEs of 9.7% and 7.6%, respectively. Since then the growth in efficiencies has been unprecedentedly rapid so that by 2016 a PCE of 22.1% had been certified by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory.24
The device architecture for which the highest efficiencies have been reported and which seems from our study of the literature to be the most commonly used is the mesoscopic perovskite solar cell (PSC) which is analogous to that of ss-DSSCs, as shown in Fig. 3b. The fabrication procedure for such PSCs is as follows. First, a compact TiO2 blocking layer is coated on a FTO substrate. Then a mesoporous layer of TiO2 is subsequently deposited on top of the compact TiO2 blocking layer to act as an electron accepting and transporting layer. After that perovskite film is spin-coated on the mesoporous TiO2 layer, followed by the deposition (from vapour or solution) of a thin HTM layer. Lastly, a metal electrode, such as gold (Au) or silver (Ag) is deposited by thermal evaporation on top of the HTM. The charge-transfer processes involved in PSCs are shown in Fig. 3c.25 Under illumination (1), the perovskite is excited and electrons are injected into conduction band of TiO2 (2), the holes generated in the perovskite are transferred to the HTM (3). These charges are then collected at the anode and cathode of the solar cell. But, undesirable charge-transfer processes such as recombination of the charges and back charge-transfer processes at TiO2/perovskite/HTM interface (shown in red in Fig. 3c) also occur. The HTM layer plays a critical role in preventing these undesirable charge transfer processes. Apart from extracting holes from the perovskite and transporting them to the cathode, the HTM also helps to prevent the recombination losses at the TiO2/perovskite/HTM interface which leads to improvement in the performance of the device. As a result research into HTMs has been one of the major themes in the development of PSCs. Other architectures from which the best efficiencies to date are generally significantly lower than for the best mesoscopic cells, are the planar (P) or inverse planar (IP) structure in which the mesoporous TiO2 layer is omitted and the perovskite is deposited as a planar layer upon either an electron accepting layer or, in the inverted configuration, upon a hole accepting layer. Both these architectures also require HTMs for high efficiencies, and in the IP case an electron transporting layer deposited on top of the perovskite as well. It is probable that different HTMs may give the best results for each different device architecture. Our own experience has been in optimising HTMs for mesoscopic cells, which, as already mentioned are those which have shown the very highest efficiencies and so this review will concentrate on optimisation of HTMs for such cells. Although we will note some examples of HTMs used for the other architectures, unless otherwise stated, all device data described below is from mesoscopic cells.
3. Hole transporting materials for perovskite solar cells
HTMs play an important role in the regeneration of the oxidized state light absorbers and transportation of the holes to the counter-electrode in PSCs. An HTM for PSCs should primarily meet the following requirements:
(1) A HOMO energy level slightly higher (ideally no more than 0.3 eV higher) than the valence band energy (VBE) of the perovskite (−5.42 eV for MAPbI3) for efficient hole transfer. A lower HOMO should result in a higher open circuit voltage Voc as this is determined primarily by the energy difference between the Fermi level of the electron accepting layer and the HOMO of the HTM, so HOMO energy levels in the −5.2 to −5.3 eV range are desirable.
(2) HTMs must have reasonable charge carrier mobility (ideally >10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1) in order to produce rapid hole transport toward the back contact metal electrode. A low mobility may be overcome by addition of dopants such as lithium or cobalt salts, usually combined with a pyridine derivative, but as already mentioned these are hygroscopic and deleterious to device stability.
(3) Good thermal, photochemical, air- and moisture-stability are required.
(4) HTMs ideally should be solution processable from solvents which will not attack the perovskite layer, i.e. organic solvents. High solubility in organic solvents is needed for low cost solution processes such as inkjet printing and spin coating.
(5) HTMs should have excellent film forming ability, be able to fill pores in the perovskite layer, and form a strong and close attachment to the perovskite to enhance charge transfer. The HTM should also have a low tendency towards crystallization so that it can easily form a smooth thin layer at the interfaces, in favour of the charge transfer. An amorphous phase with a glass transition temperature of above 100 °C is usually considered desirable since phase transitions during device operation (solar cells sitting in direct sunlight can get quite hot) may reduce efficiency and lead to device breakdown. A disadvantage of suppressing crystallization of course is that crystalline materials tend to have higher charge carrier mobilities than non-crystalline (amorphous) ones. As is so often the case in materials science, one needs to find a balance, as optimizing one property results in making another worse, with it being difficult if not impossible to optimize all properties simultaneously.
(6) HTMs should have low-cost and be environment-friendly. They should be easy to synthesize, possess low toxicity and be easily and economically recyclable.
Since from the perspective of incident light, the HTM sits underneath the perovskite, next to a non-transparent metal electrode it is unlikely to receive many photons in those parts of the spectrum in which the perovskite is a strong absorber, so its absorption spectrum needs to be complementary to that of the perovskite if it is to make a contribution to the photocurrent. Thus strong absorption in the visible is not necessary for a good HTM.
HTMs can be divided into inorganic and organic materials, while organic HTMs can be further subdivided into small molecule and polymeric hole-conductors.26 Following on from ss-DSSC experience spiro-OMeTAD has long been the benchmark HTM against which other materials have been compared. In trying to select the best HTM for PSCs, one has first to consider which of a variety of possible objectives one is seeking to achieve – the highest possible power efficiency, the longest lifetime, or the most cost effective production of power. The first objective is the one which attracts the most attention, as it has an obvious importance for both academic and industrial researchers, and the aim of maximising efficiency is tied up with the important scientific goal of solving fundamental questions concerning the nature of charge transport within materials and across interfaces. The second objective also has obvious importance for putative commercial applications, and is also intimately connected to important scientific questions concerning the way materials react with the environment and how their performance changes with time, and how this correlates with changes within the material both in the bulk and at the surface – questions which lie at the very heart of materials science. However from a commercial point of view it is the cost per unit power and the device lifetime which are the key criteria as for just about any normal (i.e. non-military) application, the value of the power generated during the lifetime of the device must at least match its cost or it will make no sense for the customer to buy the device.
The HTM currently used to make the best devices, spiro-OMeTAD, which will be discussed in more detail below, is extremely expensive. In Singapore, where we work, its cost is over S$1000 per gram (this is about 18 times the current cost of gold), so that to prepare a layer of 150–250 nm thick would cost at least S$150–250 per square meter, which at current electricity prices in Singapore means such a device would require about 4–7 years operation with 15% average efficiency to recover the cost of the HTM alone. In fact the HTM would be the most costly component of the device. When one sees the results of such simple calculations the need for more cost-effective HTMs becomes obvious.
In this review we do not intend to list or discuss all HTMs that have been reported – these have been listed in other recent reviews6–8 – but to focus those which show best performance and/or which offer possible clues to the design of good HTMs. A major problem in assessing the literature is that different HTMs have been tested on different perovskites. Different perovskites and even different samples of the same perovskite can show markedly different performance in devices. It has thus become a fairly standard practice when reporting a new HTM to report results from devices using it and compare them with devices using spiro-OMeTAD and the same perovskite for direct comparison. When we discuss device data below, if the perovskite is not identified, it is methylammonium lead triiodide (MAPbI3).
3.1 Inorganic and organometallic HTMs
The development in inorganic and organometallic HTMs has been rather slow compared to other classes of HTMs, and only a limited number of inorganic materials have been tested. These have been copper salts CuI (PCE = 6%),27 Cu2O (8.93%),28 and CuSCN which produces a PCE of 12.4% with MAPbI3,29 and 18.0% with a mixed ion salt [(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15],30 NiO (11.6%),31 and NiO doped with magnesium and lithium oxides (16.2%).32 These HTMs are relatively inexpensive and stable under ambient conditions, the copper salts do not require doping to achieve good hole mobilities, and the devices show good stability.
As CuSCN can be processed from organic solution, and shows efficiencies almost equal to, and better device stability than the best devices using organic HTMs it is currently the most promising inorganic HTM. The other materials while inexpensive, must be deposited by more expensive methods such as sputtering, and have shown significantly inferior performance as compared to the best organic HTMs. The extra fabrication costs are likely to cancel out any advantages in price of materials, but their good stability might still make them attractive to industry. One aspect that seems not to have been studied for these HTMs to date is the optimisation of the interface between them and the perovskite. As they are crystalline materials, issues of lattice matching and minimisation of charge scattering would arise and need to be taken account of in designing or selecting a good material. One possible solution will be to test metal complexes as many of these are solution processable and possess decent charge transport properties. So far to the best of our knowledge, only metal phthalocyanines have been tested as HTMs with the highest PCE of 15.33% being obtained from copper phthalocyanine (Fig. 4).33 Given the huge range of complexes known, further investigations into other classes of organometallic molecules seem warranted. One other issue with inorganic materials is safety – many transition metals have issues of toxicity and/or carcinogenicity associated with them, and some of them have potentially even more serious health issues than those associated with lead.
 Fig. 4  Structure of copper phthalocyanine. 
3.2 Polymeric organic HTMs
Conjugated polymers have been extensively developed as active materials for electronic devices such as organic light emitting devices (OLEDs),34 organic photovoltaic devices (OPVs),35 and field-effect transistors (FETs).36 In addition conjugated polymers have been developed purely as charge transporting materials, e.g. as HTMs for OLEDs.26 Polymers with high hole mobilities (>10 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the best materials) and good film forming abilities have been obtained and used to make high efficiency devices. They are thus obvious candidates for testing as HTMs in PSCs. One potential problem with polymers is that of batch to batch reproducibility, as different samples of the sample polymer may show quite different average molar masses and molar mass ranges, which can affect some of their properties. Another is they may not be able to fill in pores efficiently. This is especially true for rigid-rod like polymers – a category that many conjugated polymers fall into. It should also be noted that in OPVs polymers have mainly been studied as electron donating materials, and apart from having suitable orbital levels, the main criterion for being a good OPV donor material is high light absorptivity in the visible region of the spectrum, which is probably irrelevant in a PSC for the reason given above, and the best OPV donors have HOMO energy levels above −5.2 eV, due to the need to combine a suitably high LUMO to optimise electron transfer to the electron donor (usually a fullerene) with a small bandgap, so that the best OPV donor polymers are not optimally designed as HTMs for PSCs.
To date the highest reported efficiency in PSCs for a polymeric HTM comes from the work of Seok and co-workers who reported that a poly(triarylamine) PTAA (Fig. 5) doped with a lithium salt (LiTFSI) and 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) produced a PCE of 20.1% with a mixed perovskite [(FAPbI3)1−x(MAPbBr3)x].37 The device showed a high open circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.06 V despite the high HOMO level (−5.1 eV) of PTAA, coupled with excellent values of 0.77 for Fill Factor (FF) and 24.3 mA cm−2 for the short circuit current density (Jsc). However, the additives resulted in faster degradation of the device. An efficiency of 10.1% has been reported by the groups of Grätzel and Nazeeruddin, for doped PTAA deposited from chlorobenzene on MAPbI3, while an oligomeric PTAA derivative S197 (Mn = 3368 g mol−1, n ∼ 8) produced 12.0% efficiency using the same solvent and dopants.38 The higher PCE for the oligomeric material was due to a higher Jsc (17.6 vs. 15.2 mA cm−2) as the Voc (0.963 vs. 0.953 V) and FF (0.70 vs. 0.69) values were almost identical. It was suggested that the better ability of S197 to infiltrate and make contact with the perovskite produced this higher current, despite the oligomer having a lower charge carrier mobility than the high molar mass (Mn = 17500 g mol−1) polymer (5.1 × 10−4vs. 4 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1). This illustrates the point mentioned above about the possible inability of conjugated polymers to fill in pores in the perovskite layer being a disadvantage compared with small molecule HTMs. When the PTAA was deposited from toluene instead of chlorobenzene it showed better performance with a higher PCE of 11.5% due to a higher Voc (1.025 V), and Jsc (16.2 mA cm−2), while the FF was unchanged. This reflects the better film quality from use of a better solvent – S197 is too poorly soluble in toluene for a direct comparison to be made, which also illustrates the inherent problems in directly comparing HTMs which may have to be processed using different conditions, e.g. from different solvents, for optimal performance. Recently a modified triarylamine polymer V873 has been reported by Getauatis, Saliba and co-workers to produce a PCE of 12.3% without additives, and that the resulting devices showed good stability. Under the same conditions undoped PTAA produced only 10.72% PCE with lower Jsc (17.92 vs. 19.23 mA cm−2) and FF (0.54 vs. 0.61) though with a slight higher Voc (1.105 vs. 1.055 V) despite V873 having a slightly lower HOMO energy level (−5.21 vs. −5.16 eV).39 This last point illustrates that a HOMO energy level in an HTM does not always lead to a higher Voc as the energy levels are not the only factors involved in determining the latter. The triarylamine unit seen in these polymers is a well-known hole accepting unit widely used in both molecular and polymeric HTMs and will be seen in many of the better performing small molecule HTMs discussed later.
 Fig. 5  Polymeric HTMs for PSCs. 
The next highest PCE reported using a polymeric HTM is 18% reported by Im and co-workers from an inverted planar (IP) device using the polythiophene PEDOT doped with poly(stryrenesulfonate) PSS.40 In this device an electron transporting layer of the fullerene PCBM was used. This device achieved its high efficiency due to its remarkable FF of 0.81, coupled with a good Voc (1.03 V) and Jsc (20.6 mA cm−2). Other polymers which have produced respectable PCEs in IP devices have been polyphenylene (PPP, 15.8%), polythiophene (PT 14.7%) and a carbazole-biphenyl copolymer PPN (12.8%), films of which were deposited by electropolymerisation.41 The PPP and PT devices showed similar FF and Jsc values with the higher Voc for the former (which in this case did correspond to the relative HOMO energies) producing the higher efficiency, while the PPN device showed a lower FF and Jsc. These materials are ill-defined and doped due to their formation by electropolymerization making determination of structure–property relationships problematic, but the monomers in PT and PPN are similar to units that appear in many high performing small molecule HTMs that will be discussed below. In the planar (P) type PSCs, a PCE of 13.6% has been obtained by Li et al., using undoped P3HT with a mixed halide perovskite MAPbI3−xClx.42 The Voc was only 0.98 V and the FF a modest 0.57 but a high Jsc of 24.3 mA cm−2 was obtained. By contrast undoped P3HT in a mesoscopic PSC produced a PCE of only 9.2% (Voc 0.92 V, Jsc 17.7 mA cm−2, FF 0.56) rising to 12.4% (Voc 0.94 V, Jsc 19.1 mA cm−2, FF 0.66) upon doping with LiTFSI and 2,6-di-tert-butylpyridine.43
When one looks at the other conjugated polymers that have been used as HTMs, they fall into two types: (a) materials which have been chosen as they had previously shown promise as donors in OPVs, and (b) materials which have been specifically designed as hole-transporting materials, usually by incorporation of hole-transporting units such as TAA.
Of the first type only two polymers are reported to produce PCEs of above 10%. Undoped PTB7-Th, which has a high charge carrier mobility (0.015 cm2 V−1 s−1), and has been used to make some very high efficiency OPVs, has been used by Lee and co-workers, as HTM with MAPbI3 in an IP device which showed 11.0% efficiency with a high Voc (1.03 V) and FF (0.71) but only a moderate Jsc (15.1 mA cm−2).44 A reference device using doped spiro-OMeTAD as HTM showed a higher PCE of 12.2% due to a higher Jsc of 18.18 mA cm−2, despite having marginally lower Voc (1.00 V) and FF (0.67) values. Undoped PDPP3T, which has a higher charge carrier mobility (0.04 cm2 V−1 s−1) and a lower HOMO energy (−5.3 vs. −5.2 eV) than PTB7-Th, has been used by Qiao et al., as HTM in a mesoscopic device to produce a PCE of 12.34%, which matched the efficiency of a device using doped spiro-OMeTAD made as a reference cell (12.32%).45 The PDPP3T cell showed a higher Voc (0.98 vs. 0.88 V) but slightly lower FF (0.612 vs. 0.622) and Jsc (20.5 vs. 22.5 mA cm−2). It was suggested that the lower Jsc might be due to a shorter charge carrier lifetime in the polymer (19.9 vs. 33.6 ns) The PDPP3T cell also showed much greater stability than the spiro-OMeTAD cell with considerably slower degradation in performance over a period of 172 hours (8 days) in humid air, which it was suggested might be due to the avoidance of hygroscopic dopants and the need to process the spiro-OMeTAD in air rather than a glovebox.
Of the second type of polymeric HTM, the highest efficiency of 14.1% was obtained by Park and co-workers, using the copolymer TTB-TTQ with a mixed halide perovskite MAPbI3−xClx.46 This copolymer is a donor–acceptor copolymer specifically designed to combine a suitable HOMO level (−5.21 eV) with high solubility and an amorphous nature. To achieve this efficiency the polymer was doped with LiTFSi and tert-butylpyridine, which increased the Voc from 0.94 to 0.97 V, the Jsc from 11.8 to 23.9 mA cm−2 and the FF from 0.55 to 0.61 compared with undoped polymer for which an efficiency of only 6.2% was obtained. By comparison spiro-OMeTAD with same dopants produced a lower Jsc (20.3 mA cm−2) and FF (0.58), resulting in a lower PCE of 11.5%. They showed that the dopants raised the HOMO of the polymer to −5.11 eV, and caused a red-shift in the polymer's absorbance due to increased chain aggregation, which was also shown by the presence of fibrils in the doped film's morphology. This aggregation could then explain the increase in hole mobility from 1.0 × 10−4 to 3.3 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. Such aggregation probably also explains the increase in mobility seen for other doped polymers and small molecules, which have not all been so intensively studied. The incorporation of TAA units is an obvious way to improve the hole transporting abilities of a conjugated polymer and two such copolymers which have shown promise in PSCs are the fluorene copolymers PFB and TFB reported by Yang and co-workers.47 The larger amine group in TFB compared to PFB lowers its HOMO from −5.1 to −5.3 eV, and increases its charge carrier mobility from 3 × 10−4 to 1 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1. As a result when tested as HTMs (doped with LiTFSi and TBP) with MAPbI3 made by a one-step process, TFB showed higher Voc (0.96 vs. 0.91 V), Jsc (17.5 vs. 13.8 cm2 V−1 s−1), FF (0.65 vs. 0.64) and PCE (10.92 vs. 8.03%) values than PFB. The device parameters for spiro-OMeTAD using same dopants and perovskite (0.93 V, 16.7 mA cm−2, 0.63 and 9.78%), were slightly inferior to those for TFB but when tested as HTMs for the same perovskite made by a two-step process TFB produced marginally lower efficiency (11.72 vs. 12.16%) than did spiro-OMeTAD. Reasons for this were not discussed, and in the absence of further data it is best to describe the performance of the two HTMs as comparable.
Two triarylamine-based copolymers PF8-TAA and PIF8-TAA, have been found by Seok and co-workers to give high Voc values of 1.36 and 1.40 V when used as undoped HTMs for MAPbBr3.48 MAPbBr3 has a deeper HOMO level than MAPbI3 which leads to a larger band gap and so less light absorption at longer wavelengths. As a result only moderate PCEs of 6.1% and 6.7% were obtained, which are none-the-less the highest values reported for this perovskite, and were better than the value of 5.9% obtained using PTAA. With MAPbI3, the efficiencies using these HTMs were 4.6 and 9.1% as against 16.2% for PTAA. This serves as a reminder that different HTMs may be optimal for different perovskites, so that comparing HTMs can be complicated.
Except for PTAA none of these polymeric HTMs have been able to produce efficiencies to match the highest efficiencies seen from devices using spiro-OMeTAD, but this may be due to their not having been tested using optimised perovskites, as in direct matches with unoptimised perovskites, several of them have matched its performance. A further problem with polymeric HTMs is that with the exception of P3HT, whose synthesis has been the subject of considerable optimisation by industry, their synthesis is often costly, due to being multi-step and low yielding, and suffers from batch-to-batch inconsistency. Therefore, more focus has been given to small molecule organic HTMs, which are often simpler in design, and can be easier to synthesize and purify than polymeric HTMs. Still two design features that can be drawn from the best polymeric HTMs which as will be shown below appear also true for small molecule HTMs, are that they all contain triarylamine and/or thiophene units. Both of these units are capable of transporting holes, and both contain heteroatoms (N and S respectively) which may be capable of interacting with lead and/or halide atoms, so as to help keep the HTM layer in close contact with the perovskite, thus providing an interface conducive to effective charge transport.
3.3 Small molecule organic HTMs
As compared to the inorganic and polymeric HTMs, much more work has been done on small molecule organic HTMs. Organic small molecule HTMs share with polymers the advantages of solution processability, and structural variety, but are usually easier to purify, show much less batch-to-batch variability, and have better defined structure–property relationships. As we shall see, in the design of small molecule hole conductors, as in polymers, triarylamine (TAA) and/or thiophene moieties seem to be desirable units to incorporate into efficient HTMs. The nitrogen atom in TAA moieties acts as a doping site, which can be stabilized through conjugation with neighbouring phenyl rings. The intermolecular distance increases due to the non-planar conformation of the TAA which makes many molecules based on TAAs amorphous,26 and so suitable as HTMs in PSCs, though the amorphous nature of these molecules also reduces their charge carrier mobility. To improve the charge carrier mobility of small molecule HTMs as with polymers additives such as lithium salts, cobalt salts, and 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) are often used, though as already mentioned these tend to reduce the stability of the HTMs and devices containing them. The development of new dopants is also an important part of research into HTMs for PSCs, but lies outside the scope of this review.

3.3.1 Spiro-OMeTAD and related molecules. 
As has already been mentioned above spiro-OMeTAD (Fig. 6) is the default HTM for ss-DSSCs and PSCs as it has generally produced the highest efficiencies in devices.8 As can be seen from its structure it contains 4 triphenylamine groups which can act as hole accepting and transporting units, substituted with methoxy groups which serve simultaneously to help solubility, modify its energy levels, and may help bind it to the perovskite due to interactions between the oxygen atoms and the lead iodide octahedra. The structure consists of two 2,7-bis(diphenylamino)fluorene units, which are structurally similar to the monomer units of PPN discussed above, linked by a spiro-carbon atom so that they are orthogonal to each other. The 4 charge transporting TPA units are thus found roughly at the vertices of a tetrahedron, and in the solid state charge hopping between TPA units on adjacent molecules is possible providing a mechanism for charge transport. The bifluorene core imparts a high thermal and chemical stability, and the Tg is above 100 °C. The best device results using spiro-OMeTAD have been obtained at EPFL in Lausanne using a mixed cation, mixed halide perovskite [(FAPbI3)x(MAPbBr3)1−x] with doping by LiTFSi, a cobalt salt and TBP.49 The device had a high Voc of 1.16 V, which combined with an excellent Jsc of 24.6 mA cm−2 and FF of 0.75 produced a record efficiency of 20.8%. With MAPbI3 the best efficiency reported using spiro-OMeTAD is only 15.2% due to a lower Voc (1.00 V) and Jsc (20.4 mA cm−2).50 Doping of spiro-OMeTAD with CuSCN or CuI has recently been found to dramatically enhance efficiency and improve stability in planar (P) cells using MAPbI3−xClx.51 Efficiencies of 18.02% and 16.67% were obtained using CuSCN and CuI respectively with a Voc of 1.06 V, Jsc of 22.01 and 21.52 mA cm−2 and FF values of 0.77 and 0.73. This combination of efficient organic and inorganic HTMs looks promising as a way to enhance both efficiency and stability.
 Fig. 6  Spiro-OMeTAD and related molecules. 
As has already been mentioned, apart from its low charge carrier mobility (variously reported as 1.55 × 10−5,52 5.31 × 10−5,49 1.2 × 10−4,53 and 2.0 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 (ref. 54)) the main problem with spiro-OMeTAD is its high cost which is due to its relatively long and low yielding synthesis, and above all to its requiring extensive and expensive purification. In addition to efforts made to find alternatives which are more cost effective, and which preferentially do not require doping, some efforts have been made to explore the effects of the various components of this molecule in order to determine the sorts of structure–property relationship needed to obtain a rational design of an effective HTM.
Seok and co-workers have prepared and tested the compounds pm-spiro-OMeTAD and po-spiroOMeTAD in order to investigate the effects of the position of the methoxy groups upon the performance.50 Moving the methoxy from the para- to the meta-position has a major electronic effect resulting in a drop of the HOMO energy level from −5.22 eV to −5.31 eV, while moving it to the ortho-position has a marked steric effect as the phenyl ring bearing it has to twist out of plane, which causes a drop in LUMO energy and thus in bandgap. All 3 materials showed similar Voc (1.00–1.02 V) and Jsc (20.4–21.2 mA cm−2) values but very different FF values. The pm-isomer had a low FF of 0.65 and so showed a lower PCE of only 13.9%, whereas the po-isomer had a FF of 0.78 and an efficiency of 16.7%, which was higher than standard all-para spiro-OMeTAD. The very good FF for the po-isomer was attributed to its lower LUMO blocking electron transport through it to the metal electrode. It has been reported that other asymmetric spiro-OMeTAD derivatives are less prone to crystallisation than the symmetric all-para isomer and that this increases the lifetime of ss-DSSCs using them,55 so the lifetimes of PSCs using the po- and pm-isomers might be enhanced, although this has not been confirmed experimentally. Another example of steric effects affecting efficiency is seen in the spiro-HTMs CW3–CW5, made by Guo and co-workers, which contain three TAA groups with the third orthogonal to the other two.54 The efficiencies for CW3 (10.94%) and CW5 (10.76%) were both inferior to that obtained using spiro-OMeTAD (14.32%) due respectively to poor surface coverage and to reduced current due to lower intermolecular hopping due to the bulk of the molecule. By contrast CW4 which had better surface coverage than CW3, but is less bulky than CW5, produced an efficiency of 16.6% with slightly better Voc (1.05 vs. 1.02 V) and Jsc (21.75 vs. 19.35 mA cm−2) values than spiro-OMeTAD.
Rather unexpectedly, it has recently been reported that methoxy groups may not be necessary for obtaining high device efficiencies. Huang et al. synthesised the derivatives spiro-E, spiro-N, and spiro-S with respectively ethyl, dimethylamino and thiomethyl groups in place of methoxy groups, and tested them in IP devices.52 The dimethylamino groups in spiro-N raised its HOMO above that of spiro-OMeTAD, resulting in a lower Voc of 0.96 V, while the ethyl and thiomethyl groups in spiro-E and spiro-S produced slightly lower HOMOs, resulting in voltages of 1.06 and 1.07 V respectively. Spiro-N was more hydrophilic than spiro-OMeTAD while spiro-S and spiro-E were more hydrophobic, resulting in bigger grains sizes and better quality perovskite films. All the new derivatives produced markedly better FFs (0.75–0.80) than spiro-OMeTAD (0.65), and spiro-E and spiro-S produced slightly higher currents as well so that they showed efficiencies of 15.75% and 15.92%, as against 11.55% for spiro-OMeTAD and 11.92% for spiro-N. It would be interesting to see how these derivatives perform in mesoscopic cells, where the HTM is deposited on the perovskite rather than vice versa, but these results do suggest methoxy groups might not be needed for their binding effects as well as their electronic effects.
As the two units in spiro-OMeTAD are not electronically coupled to each other, it has been found that one can be replaced by another group as in CW3–5. A variation on this theme has been the development by Nazeeruddin and co-workers of the molecule FDT.56 This molecule shows very similar device performance to spiro-OMeTAD with a best efficiency of 20.2% with the mixed perovskite [(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15]. The voltage (1.15 V) and current (22.7 mA cm−2) are slightly lower than for the best spiro-OMeTAD device described above, but the FF is slightly higher (0.76). Most importantly the synthesis cost is estimated to be about one fifth of that of spiro-OMeTAD, and FDT can be processed from toluene rather than chlorobenzene. Simulations suggest that the bithiophene can help interaction between the perovskite surface and the HTM – possibly through a S–I interaction, though this has not been confirmed experimentally as far as we know. This interaction may also help explain why thiophene and furan based materials (vide infra) show good performance as HTMs. Since the bithiophene appears to play no other role, an interesting idea would be to attach TPA units onto it to attempt to boost the charge transporting capacity. Recently a more complicated spiro-compound DDOF has been reported by Nazeeruddin and co-workers.57 This combines the two diphenylaminofluorene units of spiro-OMeTAD as the charge-transporting units, with the bithiophene unit of FDT to enhance binding to the perovskite, and was made in only 3 steps from commercially available materials. It shows a higher Tg than spiro-OMeTAD (157 °C) but slightly lower conductivity. When tested as HTM with a mixed perovskite [(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15] using LiTFSi, TBP and a cobalt salt as dopants it showed a slightly lower Jsc (22.37 vs. 22.44 mA cm−2) and Voc (1.101 vs. 1.115 V) than reference devices using similarly doped spiro-OMeTAD but a better FF (0.79 vs. 0.75) and efficiency (19.4% vs. 18.8%). Without the cobalt co-dopant the efficiency of the DDOF devices dropped only marginally to 18.3% whereas the reference devices dropped to 16.0% due to much greater losses in voltage (83 vs. 27 meV) and current in the latter. The DDOF devices also showed better stability over time.
Spirobifluorene is not the only thermally and chemically stable organic framework to which multiple hole-transporting TPA units can be attached. Son and co-workers have produced HTMs tetra-TPA and tri-TPA (Fig. 7) based on a [2,2]-paracyclophane core.58 The tetra-substituted material when doped with LiTFSi and TBP showed a very good efficiency of 17.9% in a planar PSC. DFT calculation suggested the bulky 3-dimensional structure with multidimensional arrangement of the TPA units is beneficial for hole transport. This is supported by the inferior performance shown by the molecule Di-TPA which corresponds to one half of the tetra-TPA molecule. This molecule produced lower Voc (1.03 vs. 1.05 V), Jsc (20.4–20.5 vs. 21.8–22.0 mA cm−2), and FF (0.716–0.733 vs. 0.777–0.78) values which resulted in a lower PCE of 15.3%. The trisubstituted molecule tri-TPA showed intermediate behaviour with a PCE of 16.3%. The efficiencies for tri-TPA and tetra-TPA are comparable with the best results for spiro-OMeTAD with MAPbI3 in mesoscopic cells and their device parameters were superior to those obtained using spiro-OMeTAD (1.01 V, 20.5 mA cm−2, 0.73–0.76, 15.4%) in the same configuration, which is attributed to their having better charge transport. These results show that, as suggested by DFT calculations, the number and orientation of the TPA units affects the performance, as these factors help determine the charge carrier mobility. In addition the cyclophane units should enable efficient intermolecular packing to occur, and the starting material is reportedly not expensive so the material should be cheaper to make than spiro-OMeTAD.
 Fig. 7  Organic HTMs based on paracyclophane, triptycene and bimesitylene. 
In another attempt to obtain structure–property relationships in 3-D HTMs, our group have investigated the effects of the nature of the triarylamine substituents in the triptycene-based materials T101–T103.59 T101 contains three TPA units which are electronically isolated from each other, and produced only a modest efficiency of 8.42% when doped with LiTFSi, a cobalt salt and TBP, due mainly to its low Jsc of 13.5 mA cm−2. When we extended the conjugation in the hole-transporting units in T102 and T103 we obtained efficiencies of 12.24 and 12.38% which were very similar to the efficiency of 12.87% we obtained using spiro-OMeTAD doped in the same way. The Voc using T102 and T103 were slightly higher than using spiro-OMeTAD (1.03 and 0.985 vs. 0.976 V) which is in accord with their slightly lower HOMO levels (−5.35 and −5.33 vs. −5.22 eV) but their Jsc values were lower (17.2 and 20.3 vs. 20.8 mA cm−2) suggesting less efficient charge transport – though in the case of T103 the difference is very slight. The low current in T102 was partially compensated for by its good FF of 0.691 (cf. 0.634 for spiro-OMeTAD), while a low FF of 0.619 was obtained for T103. These FF values we were able to explain, from the results of impedance spectroscopy, as being due to the lower transport resistance of T102 than T103 or spiro-OMeTAD (whose resistances were almost identical), and to a higher amount of recombination in the T103 device than in that with spiro-OMeTAD. These materials showed good thermal and chemical stability and according to our cost analysis are considerably cheaper to make and purify then spiro-OMeTAD. From our results and those of Son and co-workers discussed above, we would suggest that in 3-D HTMs, maximising the number of triarylamine units around the chosen core and using charge transporting units with more extended π-systems are likely to prove beneficial. It would be interesting, for example, to see what attaching the sidechains from T103 to a spirobifluorene core, or attaching more sidechains to T103 would achieve. However the effect of more extended sidechains may depend upon the core, as the opposite trend to that seen in our triptycene-based HTMs was seen by Sun, Chow and co-workers in HTMs P1–P3 containing a twisted bimesitylene core, with the same sidechains.60 When doped with LiTFSi and TBP, P1 showed similar performance (1.01 V, 18.89 mA cm−2, FF 0.64, 12.11% efficiency) to spiro-OMeTAD (0.92 V, 20.73 mA cm−2, 0.66, 12.89%), but as the sidechains were extended in P2 and P3 the voltage dropped to 0.98 and 0.89 V, which is consistent with the HOMO values rising from −5.24 to −5.17 and −5.13 eV, but there was also a dramatic drop in current (17.31 and 7.64 mA cm−2) and FF (0.57 and 0.34) leading to efficiencies of only 9.70% for P2 and a miserable 2.30 for P3. The hole carrier mobilities of P1 and P2 (9.0 × 10−4 and 6.3 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) were comparable with that if spiro-OMeTAD (4.8 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) but that of P3 was two orders of magnitude lower (2.1 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1). From AFM they also concluded there was more aggregation in films of P2 and P3 than in P1 or spiro-OMeTAD, presumably due to greater π–π interactions between the more extended arms, which they suggested was the cause of the low PCEs. Since greater π–π interactions between molecules normally increase charge mobility, as intermolecular charge hopping becomes easier, it is not clear why they seem to have a deleterious effect in this case, but it might be due to disruption of charge percolation pathways due to the specific geometrical relationships between the arms in P2 and P3 – i.e. the arms on adjacent molecules may form dimers which are not well connected to each other. This suggests that the geometry of the molecule and of molecular assemblies as well as the nature of the core and arms must be considered when designing an HTM, and simulations of charge transport in possible solid state arrangements may be a useful predictive tool, which we have started to use in our own research. The stability of devices using P1 was found to be better than for the reference cells using spiro-OMeTAD.


3.3.2 Thiophene and furan-based HTMs. 
Since thiophene units are found in many of the best performing HTMs so far discussed it should not come as a surprise to discover that thiophene-based molecules have been developed as HTMs. The potential of such HTMs was demonstrated by our group with the synthesis of the simple compound H101 (Fig. 8).61 Undoped this produced a promising PCE of 10.6%, which upon doping with a cobalt salt rose to over 13%, with the best devices matching the value of 13.7% obtained using from reference cells using spiro-OMeTAD doped with the same salt. The voltage values rose upon doping H101 from 0.97 to 1.05 V matching the value seen with spiro-OMeTAD (as the HOMO of H101 is −5.16 eV compared to −5.22 for spiro-OMeTAD, one expects it to produce a lower Voc) and the FF rose from 0.57 to 0.65 (cf. 0.69 for spiro-OMeTAD). The Jsc showed only slight enhancement from 18.9 to 19.1 mA cm−2 (cf. 18.8 mA cm−2). The devices showed similar stability with time to the reference devices. Thus the new material closely matched spiro-OMeTAD in performance while being much cheaper to make. A disadvantage of H101, however is that the intermediate dibromothiophene, from which the HTM is obtained by a Suzuki coupling, is unstable, which means one has to be careful in performing the synthesis to keep the yield high and avoid impurities being formed. Petrus et al. developed EDOT-OMeTPA, a simple modification of this structure, which can be made by a condensation of a thiophene dialdehyde with an amino-TPA.62 This route avoids use of palladium catalysts, which are expensive and can leave residues which might be deleterious to device performance (this has not been shown to be so for HTMs in PSCs, but is plausible). They found that their material showed comparable performance to H101 with efficiencies of 11.0% and 10.9% and almost identical device parameters, though in their hands spiro-OMeTAD produced 11.9% efficiency, and they saw no change in the Voc for H101 upon doping. This synthetic method could easily be applied to other structures, e.g. to make a spiro-OMeTAD analogue from a spirobifluorene tetraldehyde, and is worth further exploration. Another possible problem with H101 is it has a Tg of only 75 °C, whereas a value above 100 °C has been suggested as optimal.8 To overcome this problem our group designed the molecules H111 and H112.63 The design concept was that the higher density of TPA units should boost their charge transport ability and the larger molecules should have higher Tgs. As expected the Tg values for H111 (100 °C) and H112 (120 °C) were higher than for H101. Their HOMO levels were determined to be slightly lower than that of spiro-OMeTAD with the value for H112 (−5.29 eV) being slightly higher than for H111 (−5.31 eV) due its more extended conjugated backbone. As a result the devices using them as HTMs had slightly higher Voc (1.07 V) than the reference devices using spiro-OMeTAD (1.05 V). All the HTMs were doped with LiTFSi, TBP and a cobalt salt. Their Jsc values were also fractionally higher than the reference cells (19.66–19.7 vs. 19.5 mA cm−2) while the FF values were all between 0.69 and 0.71. As a result both the new HTMs produced higher PCEs than the reference devices (average 14.0%, best cell 14.4%) with H111 (average 14.9%, best cell 15.4%) slightly outperforming H112 (average 14.7%, best cell 15.2%). The devices using the new HTMs showed similar resistance values to the reference cells which is consistent with the almost identical FF values, but the devices with H11 and H112 showed slightly better stability than the reference cells, suggesting that these materials are at least as good as spiro-OMeTAD but much cheaper to make. To investigate the effects of geometry, our group prepared the cruciform molecule KTM3 which is isomeric to H112, but with a more globular shape.64 Compared to H112, this has a much lower Tg of 65 °C, which can be explained by its shape reducing the efficiency of the molecular packing, but the HOMO energy is the same at −5.29 eV. When doped with a cobalt salt the devices using KTM3 showed a higher Voc of 1.08 V than the reference device using similarly doped spiro-OMeTAD (1.06 V), but a lower Jsc (13.0 vs. 17.2 mA cm−2). This was compensated for by a remarkably high FF of 0.783 (cf. 0.625 for the reference cell) so that the overall efficiencies of the KTM3 (11.0%) and reference (11.4%) cells were similar.
 Fig. 8  Thiophene and furan-based HTMs. 
The spiro-molecule spiro-CPDT, which is analogous to spiro-OMeTAD, but containing bithiophene instead of fluorene units has been made by Grätzel, and co-workers.65 The effect of replacing the benzene rings by more electron-rich thiophenes is that its HOMO is 40 meV higher than that of spiro-OMeTAD and it has a much red-shifted absorption due to its significantly lower bandgap (1.43 eV cf. 2.99 eV). It also showed a Tg of 150 °C, which is higher than spiro-OMeTAD. When used as an HTM with MAPbI3 it produced a respectable PCE of 13.4% without dopants, with higher voltage (0.971 vs. 0.835 V), current (19.3 vs. 17.6 mA cm−2) and FF (0.72 vs. 0.49) values than undoped spiro-OMeTAD. Whereas the device parameters for spiro-OMeTAD all significantly improved (best PCE 15%) upon doping with TBP and lithium and cobalt salts, the current and efficiency for CPDT decreased with doping. The efficiency for undoped CPDT almost matches that for doped spiro-OMeTAD, so this material is clearly a promising alternative HTM, provided that that the device stability, which was not reported, is also good. Another spiro-material PST1, which contains two H101-like units orthogonal to each other, has been reported by the same groups.66 This has a HOMO energy 40 meV lower than that of spiro-CPDT, but a higher bandgap of 2.75 eV, and a higher Tg of 175 °C. When tested as HTM with MAPbI3 with doping by LiTFSi, TBP and a cobalt salt it outperformed similarly doped spiro-OMeTAD with an efficiency of 13.44% against 12.16% due to a higher voltage (1.024 vs. 0.910 V) and FF (0.73 vs. 0.70), though with a slightly inferior Jsc (17.63 vs. 18.6 mA cm−2). As was seen for DDOF above, the device efficiency decreased only slightly (to 12.74%) with omission of the cobalt dopant as the loss of 87 mV in voltage was partially compensated for by an increase in current density to 19.21 mA cm−2. By contrast spiro-OMeTAD showed a much greater loss in efficiency to 9.57% as it had a greater loss in voltage and a more modest increase in current density.
The Grätzel and Nazeeruddin groups have also prepared two HTMs PEH1 and PEH2 based on a dithienosilole core.67 Such silicon-bridged bithiophene units have been previously used in polymer donors for highly efficient solar cells,35 and polymers for high mobility transistors,36 which materials are often reported to show good thermal and photochemical stability. Though these materials showed inferior efficiency (11.7% and 13.5% vs. 15.2%) to spiro-OMeTAD (with doping by LiFTSi, TBP and a cobalt salt in all cases), the stability of devices using PEH2 was found to be much greater than for devices containing spiro-OMeTAD. This correlated with it having much greater thermal stability, including a much higher Tg (>250 °C). By contrast PEH1 appears to be crystalline at room temperature and the devices using it degraded rapidly. This shows that HTMs with good thermal stability can enhance the stability of PSCs. In a remarkable example of research crossing over from OPVs into HTMs for PSCs, Son et al., have reported that the molecule 2F developed by them as a small molecule donor in OPVs, also works well as a HTM in PSCs.68 An efficiency of 14.45% was obtained (Voc 0.99 V, Jsc 20.1 mA cm−2, FF 0.74) using undoped 2F. By contrast the corresponding molecule 0F without fluorines produced only 8.95% efficiency with all device parameters being inferior (0.94 V, 17.4 mA cm−2, FF 0.57). This can be explained by the much higher charge carrier mobility of 2F compared with 0F (0.176 vs. 3.68 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1). The fluorinated 2F also performed better in OPVs than 0F. The ability of 2F to produce high current and efficiency without dopants again illustrates how high mobility is a desirable property in a HTM. No device stability or lifetime data was provided but the absence of dopants should enhance the lifetime of devices using 2F.
While many thiophene-based HTMs have been made and evaluated, to date only one furan-based HTM has been investigated. Furan-based polymers and oligomers have been the focus of much investigation as materials for transistors,36 since the smaller size of the heteroatom in furan compared to thiophene allows for better packing and thus better charge transport. In addition furans are obtainable from biomass and are biodegradable so making furan-based materials potentially environmentally more friendly than their thiophene analogues. We thus designed and synthesised the furan-based HTM F101.69 This material showed a HOMO energy level 10 meV higher than spiro-OMeTAD by cyclic voltammetry, but in devices F101 doped with LiTFSi, TBP and a cobalt salt, produced a higher Voc (1.10 vs. 1.05 V) than identically doped spiro-OMeTAD. Combined with a higher Jsc (19.63 vs. 18.41 mA cm−2) this lead to a slightly higher PCE of 13.1% (average 13.0%) compared to 13.0% (average 12.4%) for spiro-OMeTAD devices, despite an inferior FF (0.608 vs. 0.672). This suggests that it would be worth investigating the furan analogues of many of the well-performing thiophene-based HTMs discussed above. Simulations were performed of charge transport in possible crystals of F101 and spiro-OMeTAD which suggested that the charge carrier mobility should be an order of magnitude higher in the former, and indeed a higher current in devices was obtained, but direct measurements of the charge carrier mobility of F101 and spiro-OMeTAD in transistors showed the two materials had similar hole mobilities with spiro-OMeTAD showing a slightly higher value.70 Whether this discrepancy between theory and experiment is due to limitations in the simulation process or to the quality of the films of the HTMs in the transistor is not clear. We believe that such simulations are a useful tool but should be used with caution.


3.3.3 Dendrimer-like and star-type HTMs. 
Charge transporting materials with hyperbranched or dendritic structures are well-known,26 but so far have been little explored as HTMs for PSCs. Getautis, Nazeeruddin and co-workers have reported the molecule V886 (Fig. 9), which has a first generation dendrimer-like structure with a Tg of 141 °C.71 This when doped with LiTFSi, TBP and a cobalt salt produced an excellent PCE of 16.91%, due to high Voc (1.09), Jsc (21.4 mA cm−2) and FF (0.73) values. A series of structurally similar molecules SGT404-SGT411 have been made and tested by the groups of Lee and Kim.72 when doped with LiTFSi, TBP and a cobalt salt they all showed efficiencies above 10%, with the highest efficiencies of 14.8% and 13.9% being obtained using SGT-405 and SGT-407 respectively. SGT showed the higher voltage (1.02 vs. 0.99 V) and FF (0.713 vs. 0.698), but a marginally lower current density (20.3 vs. 20.6 mA cm−2). All of these materials are amorphous and do not have high charge carrier mobilities, despite their high density of hole-accepting trisubstituted nitrogen groups, thus their need to be doped. Shi et al. have recently reported two new molecules BF-002 and BF-003 containing benzofuran cores with dendron-like sidechains.73 When doped with LiTFSi, TBP and a cobalt salt they produced device efficiencies of 14.2% and 14.07%, which were comparable to the value of 15.04% obtained using similarly doped spiro-OMeTAD. Cells using the benzofuran materials showed higher voltages (1.01 and 1.03 V for BF002 and BF003 respectively) than the cells using spiro-OMeTAD (0.99 V) but lower current densities (21.56 and 21.22 vs. 23.22 mA cm−2) and slightly lower fill factors (0.65 and 0.64 vs. 0.66).
 Fig. 9  Dendrimer-like HTMs. 
Star-shaped molecules have some structural similarity to dendrimers but are less branched. Ko and co-workers have made and tested two triazine-based star-shaped HTMs (Fig. 10).74 As was seen for the triptycene-based materials T102 and T103 above, triazine-Th-OMeTPA containing thiophenes in the arms showed better device parameters (0.92 V, 20.74 mA cm−2, FF 0.66, 12.51%) than triazine-Ph-OMeTPA with a benzene linker (0.93, 19.14 mA cm−2, 0.61, 10.90%) when doped with LiTFSi, TBP and a cobalt salt. Reference cells with similarly doped spiro-OMeTAD produced 13.45% efficiency mainly due to a higher current of 21.37 mA cm−2, as the voltage (0.94 V) and FF (0.67) values were not significantly different.
 Fig. 10  Star-shaped HTMs. 
Another set of star-shaped HTMs based on a triazatruxene core have been developed by Ahmad, Nazeeruddin and co-workers.75 In their first report75a undoped HMDI and HPDI with MAPbI3 were found to give efficiencies of only 8.62 and 9.83%, compared with 12.93% for undoped spiro-OMeTAD. Doping with LiTFSi raised the efficiency for HPDI to 10.82% but the performance was still inferior to spiro-OMeTAD. In their subsequent work,75b using the mixed ion perovskite [(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15] and doping with LiTFSi, TBP and a cobalt salt, HMDI (renamed KMR122 in this paper) showed only 9% efficiency, but KMR131 produced a very impressive efficiency of 18.3%, which was slightly better than that seen for spiro-OMeTAD (17.9%), due to a higher voltage (1.145 vs. 1.087 V), which correlated with the lower HOMO of KMR131 (−5.26 vs. −5.22 eV), and higher FF (0.77 vs. 0.74) though the current was lower (20.7 vs. 22.3 mA cm−2). KMR133 was slightly inferior to KMR131 for which an efficiency of 16.8% was obtained with all device parameters being slightly lower than for KMR131, but KMR145 produced only 11.9% efficiency, due to a low voltage of 0.96 V attributable to its high HOMO of −5.06 eV, coupled with low current and FF values. These results show that triazatruxenes are a very promising class of HTMs.


3.3.4 HTMs based on graphene subunits and other polycylic aromatic hydrocarbons. 
The triazatruxene cores in the HTMs just discussed are polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). Many PAHs can be thought of as graphene subunits, (the larger PAHs are sometimes called nanographenes) and such PAHs often have good charge transporting properties, so there have been some reports of HTMs based upon such PAHs.
A sulfur-substituted nanographene (TSHBC, Fig. 11) has been used by Zheng and coworkers as HTM without doping and found to produce an efficiency of 12.8% (0.95 V, 20.56 mA cm−2, FF 0.6579).76 The efficiency increased slightly to 14.0% (0.97 V, 21.91 mA cm−2, FF 0.66) when graphene sheets were added to improve the charge transport in the HTM. Substituting the thiophenyl groups with tert-butyl groups (TSHBC-tBu) dropped the efficiency down slightly to 12.15% (0.92 V, 20.57 mA cm−2, FF 0.64), while trifluoromethyl groups (TSHBC-CF3) caused a major drop in efficiency to 6.13% (0.95 V, 15.57 mA cm−2, FF 0.4631). Infrared spectra of the HTM on top of the perovskite revealed a weakening and blue-shifting of a C–S stretching band at 700 cm−1 and the formation of a new band at 432 cm−1 which was assigned to a Pb–S stretch, suggesting direct bonding of the HTM to the perovskite surface. Since formation of a direct Pb–S bond would require displacement of a halide from the surface of the lead halide octahedra this may indicate bonding to a defect or some local displacement of halides at the surface. More studies into the modes of interaction between HTMs and perovskites is needed to more fully understand the nature of the HTM-perovskite interface and so help in designing better HTMs. Due to the hydrophobicity of these HTMs, devices using them showed better stability in 45% humidity than reference devices using spiro-OMeTAD.
 Fig. 11  HTMs based on PAHs and heteroacenes. 
A much smaller graphene subunit which has been used as core for HTMs is pyrene. The pyrene-based HTMs Py-A, Py-B, and Py-C bearing respectively 1, 3, and 4 diphenylamine units have been made by Seok and co-workers.77 When tested as HTMs with doping by LiTFSi, TBP and a cobalt salt, Py-A with only 1 hole-transporting group showed very poor performance (Voc 0.89 V, Jsc 10.8 mA cm−2, FF 0.346, 3.3% efficiency) but Py-B (0.95 V, 20.4 mA cm−2, 0.637, 12.3%) and Py-C (0.89 V, 20.2 mA cm−2, 0.694, 12.4%) showed comparable performance to similarly doped spiro-OMeTAD (1.01 V, 21.0 mA cm−2, 0.595, 12.7%). This suggests that a higher number of amine hole-accepting units is likely to give better results. This is also suggested by the performance of the HTMs Azl-1-3 reported by Nishimura et al. with an azulene core.78 (Azulene is a PAH which is not a graphene subunit.) The HTM Azl-1 with 4 hole-accepting substituents when doped with LiTFSi, TBP and a cobalt salt showed better performance (1.08 V, 21.7 mA cm−2, 0.71, 16.5%) than similarly doped spiro-OMeTAD (0.96 V, 21.0 mA cm−2, 0.68, 13.6%). It was proposed from time-resolved microwave conductivity (TRMC) measurements that this is due to the 2-D extended structure of Azl-1 which is flatter than the quasi-spherical spiro-OMeTAD, enabling the former to better collect charges from the perovskite surface due to better coverage. That a high density of hole-accepting substituents is not sufficient to achieve high efficiency is illustrated by the modest device performance (0.88 V, 16.8 mA cm−2, 0.704, 10.4%) of lithium doped DFTAB which contains 4 diphenylamine units around a single benzene ring.79
Acenes such as pentacene are well known as semiconducting materials with high charge carrier mobilities.36 Unsubstituted pentacene has low solubility and so is not a very suitable material for testing as an HTM but the soluble TIPS-pentacene has been found to be a promising HTM in PSCs.80 This material, unlike most other HTMs shows better device performance when undoped (0.913 V, 20.84 mA cm−2, 0.60, 11.51%) than when doped with LiTFSi and TBP (0.92 V, 16.51 mA cm−2, 0.54, 8.2%).
Recently a D–π–A material centred on a heteroacene π-system (D–π–A 1), whose structure with its triarylamine donor and dicyanovinylene acceptor unit looks like that of a typical dye for DSSCs, has been reported by Hagfeldt and co-workers.81 When used as HTM with the mixed ion perovskite [(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15] the highest efficiency of 16.9% (Voc 1.05 V, Jsc 22.2 mA cm−2, FF 0.69) was obtained for a sample doped with LiTFSi and TBP and deposited from 1,1′,2,2′-tetrachloroethane. Adding a cobalt co-dopant raised the current slightly to 22.4 mA cm−2, but a lower FF of 0.69 reduced the overall efficiency to 16.2%. Reference cells using spiro-OMeTAD doped with lithium and cobalt attained 18.2% efficiency due to a higher voltage (1.13 V) and current (22.9 mA cm−2). While the complexity of this structure and its synthesis makes it problematical as an alternative to spiro-OMeTAD, simpler structures containing such heteroacenes are worth investigating.
As an example of this, excellent device performance has recently been reported by Seok and co-workers using the indoloindole-based molecule IDIF with the mixed perovskite [(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15].82 When doped with LiTFSi and TBP IDIF showed better average device performance (Voc 1.06 V, Jsc 23.2 mA cm−2, FF 0.73, 17.8% efficiency) than similarly doped spiro-OMeTAD (1.01 V, 23.1 mA cm−2, 0.713, 16.8%) with the best IDIF device showing an efficiency of 19% (1.045 V, 23.55 mA cm−2, 0.77). The IDIF devices also showed greater stability than the ones using spiro-OMeTAD, which was attributed to the more crystalline IDIF forming a more effective barrier towards moisture.


3.3.5 Other organic HTMs. 
TPA units (and related units such as carbazoles) constitute the charge transporting units in the majority of the polymers and small molecules described above. Two molecules containing TPA units linked by vinylene groups Z33 and Z34 and a similar molecule Z35 containing terminal carbazole units (Fig. 12), have been reported by Zhang, Grätzel, and co-workers and have been found to give good device performance with MAPbI3 without the use of dopants.83 The methoxy groups in Z34 raise its HOMO level compared to Z33 from −5.34 to −5.14 eV, and it produces a lower Voc of 1.053 V compared with 1.087 V for Z33. Z35 has a lower HOMO of −5.42 eV but produces a voltage of only 0.983 V due to the poor driving force for hole injection from the perovskite whose HOMO is at −5.42 eV. Z34 also shows better Jsc (21.27 mA cm−2) and FF (0.69) values than Z33 (20.456 mA cm−2, 0.66) or Z35 (18.020 mA cm−2, 0.58). The average PCE from Z34 is 15.9% (16.1% for best device) which is the highest PCE seen for an undoped small molecule HTM, and almost matched the values of 16.6% obtained from reference cells using doped spiro-OMeTAD. The efficiency from Z33 of 15.2% is also excellent for an undoped material, while that of Z35 (10.8%), while better than for most undoped materials, was markedly inferior. For all three HTMs doping with LiTFSi and TBP produced marked drops in efficiency (4.4%, 6.7% and 7.7% for Z33, Z34 and Z35 respectively) with voltages, currents and FFs all decreasing, which may be due to the dopants being deleterious to film morphology as shown by electron microscopy studies. Due to the lack of doping these devices also showed very good stability. During aging tests exposure to air led to slight improvements in the PCE for Z33 and Z34-based devices due to doping by oxygen, whereas for Z35 and spiro-OMeTAD-based devices exposure to oxygen caused a drop in the PCE.
 Fig. 12  Other organic small molecule HTMs. 

N,N,N′,N′-Tetraphenylbenzidine (TPB) is the dimer of TPA and constitutes the charge transporting unit in spiro-OMeTAD and its derivatives. Two TPB derivatives substituted via a double bond with EDOT (TPBS) and carbazole (TPBC) units have been reported by Xiao, Meng and co-workers.84 These also produce better results when used without dopants. TPBC shows better device performance (Voc 0.942 V, Jsc 19.32 mA cm−2, FF 0.72, 13.10% efficiency) than TPBS in all parameters (0.932 V, 15.75 mA cm−2, 0.70, 10.29%), and its devices were almost as efficient as reference cells using spiro-OMeTAD doped with LiTFSi and TBP (0.921 V, 20.03 mA cm−2, FF 0.72, 13.28%). Upon doping there was decrease in all device parameters for both TPBS and TPBC with efficiencies of only 5.48% and 8.06% being obtained. The Meng group have also reported the similar molecules apv-T and apv-EC containing single TPA units and reported their performance as undoped HTMs.85 They showed slightly poorer performance than their TPB-based analogues with the carbazole-containing derivative (apv-EC) again showing better performance (Voc 0.932 V, Jsc 18.4 mA cm−2, FF 0.70, 12.0% efficiency) than the corresponding thiophene-containing molecule (apv-T) (Voc 0.932 V, 15.4 mA cm−2, FF 0.63, 9.0% efficiency). The HOMO energy levels of TPBS (−5.30 eV) and apv-T (−5.31) are almost identical, whereas that of TPBC (−5.33 eV) is 50 meV lower than that of apv-EC (−5.28 eV), which is reflected in the obtained Voc values. The hole mobilities of apv-T and apv-EC (5.66 × 10−4 and 7.23 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 respectively) are slightly higher than for the TPB analogues TPBS and TPBC (3.87 × 10−4 and 4.04 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 respectively), but their Tgs are much lower (28.5 °C and 75.3 °C vs. 104 °C and 105 °C). Impedance spectroscopy results show that apv-T has a much higher series resistance than apv-EC or spiro-OMeTAD, which helps explain its poorer performance – a similar difference in series resistance would also explain the poorer performance of TPBT than TPBC but this has not been experimentally demonstrated. Stability tests showed that devices using these materials were considerably more stable than reference devices using spiro-OMeTAD. Given the greater simplicity and likely lower cost of apv-EC and its comparable performance to TPBC, it is a promising material for obtaining cost-effective PSCs.
As mentioned above silole-based materials are reported to be quite stable in OPVs, and this has been also shown to be true in PSCs for silathiophene-based HTMs. Our group have prepared a silafluorene-based material S101.53 This material has a lower HOMO (−5.32 eV) the silathiophene-based HTMs discussed above, due to containing less electron-rich benzene rings in place of thiophenes. Its HOMO is also lower than that of spiro-OMeTAD, but when S101 doped with LiTFSi, TBP and a cobalt salt was tested in PSCs, it showed a lower Voc than similarly doped spiro-OMeTAD (0.92 vs. 0.975 V), due to poorer charge extraction. Combined with a slightly lower Jsc (18.9 vs. 19.7 mA cm−2) this produced a lower efficiency of 11% compared to the spiro-OMeTAD devices (12.3%) despite a marginally higher FF (0.65 vs. 0.642). Its Tg was only 45 °C which is also unfavourable. The silafluorene unit thus looks less promising than the silathiophene unit for making high efficiency HTMs, though further modification of S101 to raise its Tg and enhance its performance might well be possible.
Carli et al. have reported a simple HTM H1 similar in structure to our H101, S101 and F101 materials but with a 1,3,4-oxadiazole unit as the core.86 This, at first sight, is an unexpected choice of unit to incorporate into an HTM as oxadiazoles are usually used to make hole-blocking/electron transporting material, due to their low HOMO energy levels. The HOMO level of H1 is −5.46 eV, which is below that of MAPbI3 (−5.44 eV), so it is not suitable for use as an HTM for that perovskite, but it is suitable for use with MAPbBr3 which has a much lower HOMO (−5.9 eV). It has a Tg of 85 °C which is higher than for H101 or S101. When tested as HTM with MAPbBr3, it showed comparable efficiency to spiro-OMeTAD but with much less hysteresis in the J–V scans. Thus while spiro-OMeTAD produced a constant Voc of 1.49 V and Jsc of 5.80 mA cm−2 in both forward and reverse scans, its FF was much higher on the forward than on the reverse scan (0.70 vs. 0.58) leading to PCEs of 6.12 and 5.07% for the two scans. By contrast H1 showed 5.80% on both scans with a constant Jsc of 5.5 mA cm−2, but with a slightly higher Voc (1.43 vs. 1.41 V) and lower FF (0.72 vs. 0.73) on reverse scan. This material thus looks very promising as an HTM for the bromo-perovskite.
Finally there is one recent report of a biomaterial – DNA – being used as an HTM for IP configured PSCs by Nazeeruddin and co-workers.87 The DNA (obtained from the fishing industry) was complexed with hexadecyltrimethyl ammonium chloride (CTMA), a surfactant. With the fullerene PCBM as a an electron transport layer, devices with MAPbI3 produced a Voc of 1.04 V, a Jsc of 20.85 mA cm−2, and a FF of 0.7315 resulting in a good efficiency of 15.86%. The device reportedly also shows good stability, retaining 85% of original efficiency after 50 days in air. Given the widespread availability of DNA, and its biodegradability, this might be considered a green HTM (assuming the fishery is sustainable).

4. Conclusions – is a rational design possible yet?
Now that we have discussed the best performing HTMs so far reported, the question we need to ask is can we use the data to rationally design a new HTM for achieving high efficiency and high stability at low cost? To which the answer remains not quite. Some possible structure–property relationships can discerned which enable plausible suggestions for future designs to be made but these would have to be tested by synthesis of more materials to be sure these are genuine relationships and not just coincidences.
For inorganic materials we suspect what is needed is not so much the design of new materials, as the selection of materials with appropriate electronic and other properties from the wide variety of well-characterised inorganic compounds and organometallic complexes to be found in the literature.
For polymers, making materials containing a high mole fraction of thiophenes and/or triarylamine (TAA) units appears the most promising approach. Substitution of the TAA units may allow tailoring of electronic levels and/or solubility to optimise efficiency, but no clear design rules are available now – a process of trial and error would appear to remain necessary.
For small molecule HTMs, there is scope for rational design. While spiro-OMeTAD appears still to be the material to outperform, as it has been used in the most efficient devices, this is because it has been the first HTM to be used with the new mixed cation-mixed anion perovskites which currently have produced the highest performance. As the readers will have seen, quite a few other materials when tested against spiro-OMeTAD with other perovskites have matched or exceeded its performance, and if used with the same mixed perovskites could reasonably be expected to show better results. From the limited data available we would mark out EDOT-OMeTPA developed by Petrus et al.,62 as being the most cost-effective HTM yet reported. The Schiff base chemistry used by them needs to be investigated further as a route to efficient HTMs.
We believe the following areas need investigation to assist in arriving at accurate structure–property relationships and thus enabling rational design.
(1) HTMs which have shown good performance when compared against spiro-OMeTAD using MAPbI3 should be tested as HTMs with mixed ion perovskites. This will help determine if and how results from HTMs tested with one perovskite can be used to estimate likely performance with another perovskite. Currently we are too often in the unhappy position of trying to compare apples with oranges.
(2) More investigations into how HTMs interact with the perovskite surface and how this affects charge extraction and recombination. In particular do the heteroatoms in triarylamines, thiophenes and furans assist in binding the HTMs to the surface and in improving electrical properties?
(3) Improved simulation methods are needed for modelling charge transport in amorphous or semicrystalline materials.
(4) The effects of palladium or other catalyst residues on device performance should be studied – most synthetic routes to HTMs use such catalysts, and so most HTMs contain such residues, whose effects are unknown.
Based on the data available we believe the following design recommendations can tentatively be put forward:
(1) Di- and triarylamine groups should be used as the hole accepting units.
(2) The number and orientation of these amine groups affects the properties – more amine groups are better and they should be arranged around the molecular core so as to have wide spacing between them to allow close intermolecular packing which will permit facile charge hopping between molecules, and allow formation of extended percolation pathways in the solid films. While extended cores such as spiro-bifluorene, triptycene or paracyclophane can help in formation of such networks, simple 1-D molecules will also do this provided they can stack efficiently. Modelling may help in predicting this.
(3) Thiophene units are useful to tune electronic properties, and to help charge transport. They may also help bind the HTM to the perovskite. Replacing thiophenes with furans should be investigated further.
(4) All things being equal simpler structures are likely to be more cost effective.
(5) As catalyst residues may prove to be deleterious to performance, the use of new metal-free routes such as the Schiff-base chemistry of Petrus et al., should be investigated more thoroughly.
We would like to suggest the following structures (Fig. 13) as examples of materials whose synthesis may well prove rewarding in obtaining good device performance, and the study of which would help to determine the validity of our suggested principles above. The three spirobifluorene derivatives for example might help establish the effects of sidechains on HTM properties. The longer sidechains should help improve solubility (and perhaps make purification simpler and cheaper than it is for spiro-OMeTAD), and might enhance charge hopping. One can also imagine combining these sidegroups with other cores such as adamantane or tetraphenylmethane. The two furans are furan analogues of two very high performing thiophene-based HTMs and so would help in evaluating the effects of substituting furans for thiophenes. We offer these merely as examples of how various existing design ideas might be combined.
 Fig. 13  Some proposed new HTM structures. 
While much work remains to be done in developing PSCs, organic chemists have made significant contributions by designing and synthesising new materials. While firm design rules remain to be definitely established the outlines of such rules may be beginning to appear from the fog of data. There is still much scope for synthetic chemists to practice their art.
PSCs are a very new technology, but their continuing advance, while likely to slow down from the breakneck recent pace, shows no sign of stopping. As always, a three way collaboration between synthetic chemists, physicists who study the optoelectronic properties of condensed matter, and device engineers remains the most efficient way to develop an emerging technology such as PSCs. In this review we have tried to show what the chemists have contributed, to suggest what might have been learned about structure–property relationships, and to suggest some new ideas to build on these lessons to advance the field.
Acknowledgements
We thank our colleague Associate Professor Lam Yeng Ming for talking the time to read our manuscript and providing valuable comments on it.
References

  (a) B. Saparov and D. B. Mitzi, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 4558–4596 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 655–689 RSC .

  (a) R. F. Service, Science, 2016, 354, 1214–1215 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) N.-G. Park, M. Grätzel, T. Miyasaka and K. Emery, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16152 CrossRef CAS .
A. Babayigit, A. Ethirajan, M. Muller and B. Conings, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 247–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, J. Y. Seo and N.-G. Park, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2528–2540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, Y. Jiang, E. J. Juarez-Perez, L. K. Ono and Y. Qi, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16195 CrossRef .

  (a) Z. Yu, F. Li and L. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 760–775 RSC ; 
  (b) C. H. Teh, R. Daik, E. L. Lim, C. C. Yap, M. A. Ibrahim, N. A. Ludin, K. Sopiana and M. A. Mat Teridi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15788–15822 RSC ; 
  (c) P. Agarwala and D. Kabra, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1348–1373 RSC .
S. Ameen, M. A. Rub, S. A. Kosa, K. A. Alamry, M. S. Akhtar, H.-S. Shin, H.-K. Seo, A. M. Asiri and M. K. Nazeeruddin, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 10–27 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Calio, S. Kazim, M. Grätzel and S. Ahmad, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14522–15545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mathew, A. Yella, P. Gao, R. Humphry-Baker, F. E. Curchod Basile, N. Ashari-Astani, I. Tavernelli, U. Rothlisberger, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 242–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ahmad, E. Guillen, L. Kavan, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3439–3466 CAS .
A. Yella, H. W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W. G. Diau, C. Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629–634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Bach, D. Lupo, P. Comte, J. E. Moser, F. Weissortel, J. Salbeck, H. Sretizer and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1998, 395, 583–585 CrossRef CAS .
J. Burschka, A. Dualeh, F. Kessler, E. Baranoff, N. L. Cevey-Ha, C. Yi, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18042–18045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. A. Bretschneider, J. Weickert, J. A. Dorman and L. Schmidt-Mende, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 040701 CrossRef .
J. S. Manser, J. A. Christians and P. V. Kamat, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 12956–13008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Ball and A. Petrozza, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16149 CrossRef CAS .
T. Salim, S. Sun, Y. Abe, A. Krishna, A. C. Grimsdale and Y. M. Lam, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8943–8969 CAS .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Im, C.-R. Lee, J.-W. Lee, S.-W. Park and N.-G. Park, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4088–4093 RSC .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 Search PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
NREL.
A. Marchioro, J. Teuscher, D. Friedrich, M. Kunst, R. van de Krol, T. Moehl, M. Gratzel and J.-E. Moser, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 250–255 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shirota and H. Kageyama, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 953–1010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Christians, R. C. M. Fung and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 758–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Nejand, V. Ahmadi, S. Gharibzadeh and H. M. Shahverdi, ChemSusChem, 2016, 6, 302–313 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Qin, S. Tanaka, S. Ito, N. Tetreault, K. Manabe, H. Nishino, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3834 CAS .
M. Jung, Y. C. Kim, N. M. Jeon, W. S. Yang, J. Seo, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2592–2596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-C. Wang, P.-S. Shen, M.-H. Li, S. Chen, M.-W. Lin, P. Chen and T.-F. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 11851–11858 CAS .
W. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Yue, W. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Chen, E. Bi, I. Ashraful, M. Grätzel and L. Han, Science, 2015, 944–948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ke, D. Zhao, C. R. Grice, A. J. Cimaroli, G. Fang and Y. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23888–23894 CAS .
A. C. Grimsdale, K. Leok Chan, R. E. Martin, P. G. Jokisz and A. B. Holmes, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 897–1091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Cheng, S.-H. Yang and C.-S. Hsu, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5868–5923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Arias, J. D. MacKenzie, I. McCulloch, J. Rivnay and A. Salleo, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 3–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Qin, N. Tetreault, I. Dar, P. Gao, K. L. McCall, S. R. Rutter, S. D. Ogier, N. D. Forrest, J. S. Bissett, M. J. Simms, A. J. Page, R. Fisher, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1400980 CrossRef .
T. Matsui, I. Petrikyte, T. Malinauskas, K. Domanski, M. Daskieviciene, M. Steponaitis, P. Gratia, W. Tress, J.-P. Correa-Baena, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt, M. Grätzel, M. K. Nazeeruddin, V. Getautis and M. Saliba, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2567–2571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, H. J. Han, D. Kim, T. K. Ahn and S. H. Im, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1602–1608 CAS .
W. Yan, Y. Li, Y. Li, S. Ye, Z. Liu, S. Wang, Z. Bian and C. Huang, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 428–437 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lu, Y. Ma, B. Gu, W. Tian and L. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16445–16452 CAS .
Y. Guo, C. Liu, K. Inoue, K. Harano, H. Tanaka and E. Nakamura, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13827–13830 CAS .
J. Kim, G. Kim, T. K. Kim, S. Kwon, H. Back, J. Lee, S. H. Lee, H. Kang and K. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17291–17296 CAS .
A. Dubey, N. Adhikari, S. Venkatesan, S. Gu, D. Khatiwada, Q. Wang, L. Mohammad, M. Kumar and Q. Qiao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 145, 193–199 CrossRef CAS .
G.-W. Kim, J. Kim, G.-Y. Lee, G. Kang, J. Lee and T. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500471 CrossRef .
Z. Zhu, Y. Bai, H. K. H. Lee, C. Mu, T. Zhang, L. Zhang, J. Wang, H. Yan, S. K. So and S. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7357–7365 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ryu, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. Chan Kim, W. S. Yang, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2614–2618 CAS .
D. Bi, W. Tress, M. I. Dar, P. Gao, J. Luo, C. Renevier, K. Schenk, A. Abate, F. Giordano, J.-P. Correa Baena, J.-D. Decoppet, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, 1–7 Search PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, H. G. Lee, Y. C. Kim, J. Seo, J. H. Noh, J. Lee and S. I. Seok, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7837–7840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, Z.-K. Wang, Y.-G. Yang, Y. Hu, S.-L. Feng, J.-M. Wang, X.-Y. Gao and L.-S. Liao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601156 CrossRef .
Z. Hu, W. Fu, L. Yan, J. Miao, H. Yu, Y. He, O. Goto, H. Meng, H. Chen and W. Huang, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 5007–5012 RSC .
A. Krishna, D. Sabba, J. Yin, A. Bruno, L. J. Antila, C. Soci, S. Mhaisalkar and A. C. Grimsdale, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8750–8754 CAS .
M.-H. Li, C.-W. Hsu, P.-S. Shen, H.-M. Cheng, Y. Chi, P. Chen and T.-F. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15518–15521 RSC .
T. Malinauskas, D. Tomkute-Luksiene, R. Sens, M. Daskieviciene, R. Send, H. Wonneberger, V. Jankauskas, I. Bruder and V. Getautis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 11107–11116 CAS .
M. Saliba, S. Orlandi, T. Matsui, S. Aghazada, M. Cavazzini, J.-P. Correa-Baena, P. Gao, R. Scopelliti, E. Mosconi, K.-H. Dahmen, F. De Angelis, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt, G. Pozzi, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15017 CrossRef CAS .
K. Rakstys, S. Paek, M. Sohail, P. Gao, K. T. Cho, P. Gratia, Y. Lee, K. H. Dahmen and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18259–18264 CAS .

  (a) S. Park, J. H. Heo, C. H. Cheon, H. Kim, S. H. Im and H. J. Son, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24215–24220 RSC ; 
  (b) S. Park, J. H. Heo, J. H. Yun, T. S. Jung, K. Kwak, M. J. Ko, C. H. Cheon, J. Y. Kim, S. H. Im and H. J. Son, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 5517–5522 RSC .
A. Krishna, D. Sabba, H. Li, J. Yin, P. P. Boix, C. Soci, S. G. Mhaisalkar and A. C. Grimsdale, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 2702–2709 RSC .
Y.-D. Lin, B.-Y. Ke, K.-M. Lee, S. H. Chang, K.-H. Wang, S.-H. Huang, C.-G. Wu, P.-T. Chou, S. Jhulki, J. N. Moorthy, Y. J. Chang, K.-L. Liau, H.-C. Chung, C.-Y. Liu, S.-S. Sun and T. J. Chow, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 274–279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, K. Fu, A. Hagfeldt, M. Grätzel, S. G. Mhaisalkar and A. C. Grimsdale, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4085–4088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Petrus, T. Bein, T. J. Dingemans and P. Docampo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12159–12162 CAS .
H. Li, K. Fu, P. P. Boix, L. H. Wong, A. Hagfeldt, M. Grätzel, S. G. Mhaisalkar and A. C. Grimsdale, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 3420–3425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Krishnamoorthy, K. Fu, P. P. Boix, H. Li, T. M. Koh, W. L. Leong, S. Powar, A. C. Grimsdale, M. Grätzel, N. Mathews and S. G. Mhaisalkar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6305–6309 CAS .
M. Franckevicius, A. Mishra, F. Kreuzer, J. Luo, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 613–618 RSC .
P. Ganesan, K. Fu, P. Gao, I. Raabe, K. Schenk, R. Scopelliti, J. Luo, L. H. Wong, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1986–1991 CAS .
A. Abate, S. Paek, F. Giordano, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. Saliba, P. Gao, T. Matsui, J. Ko, S. M. Zakeeruddin, K. H. Dahmen, A. Hagfeldt, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2946–2953 CAS .
J. H. Yun, S. Park, J. H. Heo, H.-S. Lee, S. Yoon, J. Kang, S. H. Im, H. Kim, W. Lee, B. S. Kim, M. J. Ko, D. S. Chung and H. J. Son, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 6649–6661 RSC .
A. Krishna, D. Sabba, J. Yin, A. Bruno, P. P. Boix, Y. Gao, H. A. Dewi, G. G. Gurzadyan, C. Soci, S. G. Mhaisalkar and A. C. Grimsdale, Chem.–Eur. J., 2015, 21, 15113–15117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Krishna, in Hole transporting materials for methylammonium lead halide (CH3NH3PbX3) perovskite solar cells, Vol. Ph. D., Nanyang Technological University, Singapore,  2017 Search PubMed .
P. Gratia, A. Magomedov, T. Malinauskas, M. Daskeviciene, A. Abate, S. Ahmad, M. Grätzel, V. Getautis and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11409–11413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S. D. Sung, M. S. Kang, I. T. Choi, H. M. Kim, H. Kim, M. Hong, H. K. Kim and W. I. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 14161–14163 RSC ; 
  (b) M. S. Kang, S. D. Sung, I. T. Choi, H. Kim, M. Hong, J. Kim, W. I. Lee and H. K. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 22213–22217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, K. Hou, Y. Wang, K. Wang, H. Ren, M. Pang, F. Chen and S. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5415–5422 CAS .
K. Do, H. Choi, K. Lim, H. Jo, J. W. Cho, M. K. Nazeeruddin and J. Ko, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10971–10974 RSC .

  (a) F. J. Ramos, K. Rakstys, S. Kazim, M. Grätzel, M. K. Nazeeruddin and S. Ahmad, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 53426–53432 RSC ; 
  (b) K. Rakstys, A. Abate, M. I. Dar, P. Gao, V. Jankauskas, G. Jacopin, E. Kamarauskas, S. Kazim, S. Ahmad, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 16172–16178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cao, Y.-M. Liu, X. Jing, J. Yin, J. Li, B. Xu, Y.-Z. Tan and N. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10914–10917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. Lee, J. H. Noh, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. I. Seok, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 19087–19090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Nishimura, N. Ishida, A. Shimazaki, A. Wakamiya, A. Saeki, L. T. Scott and Y. Murata, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15656–15659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, D. Bryant, J. Troughton, M. Kirkus, M. Neophytou, X. Miao, J. R. Durrant and I. McCulloch, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2515–2518 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kazim, F. J. Ramos, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. Ahmad, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1816–1823 CAS .
D. Bi, A. Mishra, P. Gao, M. Franckevicius, C. Steck, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. Bäuerle, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 433–438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Cho, N. J. Jeon, O. K. Kwon, D. W. Kim, E. H. Jung, J. H. Noh, J. Seo, S. I. Seok and S. Y. Park, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 734–741 RSC .
F. Zhang, X. Liu, C. Yi, D. Bi, J. Luo, S. Wang, X. Li, Y. Xiao, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2578–2585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Song, S. Lv, X. Liu, X. Li, S. Wang, H. Wei, D. Li, Y. Xiao and Q. Meng, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 15239–15242 RSC .
S. Lv, Y. Song, J. Xiao, L. Zhu, J. Shi, H. Wei, Y. Xu, J. Dong, X. Xu, S. Wang, Y. Xiao, Y. Luo, D. Li, X. Li and Q. Meng, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 182, 733–741 CrossRef CAS .
S. Carli, J. P. C. Baena, G. Marianetti, N. Marchetti, M. Lessi, A. Abate, S. Caramoni, M. Grätzel, F. Bellina, C. A. Bignozzi and A. Hagfeldt, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 657–661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. b. M. Yusoff, J. Kim, J. Jang and M. K. Nazeeruddin, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 1736–1742 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Current address: Laboratoire de Réactivité et Chimie des Solides (LRCS), CNRS UMR7314, Université de Picardie Jules Verne, Amiens, France.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Anurag Krishna	Anurag Krishna is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Laboratoire de Réactivité et Chimie des Solides (LRCS), CNRS UMR7314, Amiens, France. He was born in India, and received his B.E. in Polymer Science and Chemical Technology from Delhi College of Engineering at the University of Delhi in 2012. He completed his Ph.D. in 2016 at Nanyang Technological University (NTU) for work on hole transporting materials for perovskite solar cells under the supervision of Associate Professors Andrew Grimsdale and Cesare Soci. Currently, his research focuses on novel organic semiconductors for organic/hybrid opto-electronics application.
Andrew C. Grimsdale	Andrew Grimsdale was born in Waiouru, New Zealand in 1963 and graduated from the University of Auckland, receiving his PhD in Chemistry in 1990 for work on natural products synthesis. After undertaking postdoctoral research work into optically and electrically active organic materials in Swansea, Cambridge, Mainz, and Melbourne he joined the School of Materials Science (MSE), NTU in 2006, receiving tenure in 2012. The author of over 140 publications, his research is into the synthesis of active materials for organic electronic applications including energy conversion and storage.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic views of the components and operating principles of a liquid electrolyte dye-sensitized solar cell.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Device architecture of ss-DSSC; (b) operating principle of ss-DSSC.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Crystal structure of cubic perovskite with general chemical formula ABX3. (b) Device architecture of mesoscopic PSCs. (c) Schematic representation of charge-transfer processes in PSCs.	 

 	Fig. 4  Structure of copper phthalocyanine.	 

 	Fig. 5  Polymeric HTMs for PSCs.	 

 	Fig. 6  Spiro-OMeTAD and related molecules.	 

 	Fig. 7  Organic HTMs based on paracyclophane, triptycene and bimesitylene.	 

 	Fig. 8  Thiophene and furan-based HTMs.	 

 	Fig. 9  Dendrimer-like HTMs.	 

 	Fig. 10  Star-shaped HTMs.	 

 	Fig. 11  HTMs based on PAHs and heteroacenes.	 

 	Fig. 12  Other organic small molecule HTMs.	 

 	Fig. 13  Some proposed new HTM structures.	 
Footnote
† Current address: Laboratoire de Réactivité et Chimie des Solides (LRCS), CNRS UMR7314, Université de Picardie Jules Verne, Amiens, France.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
