Flexible fiber/wire-shaped solar cells in progress: properties, materials, and designs  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TA03731J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TA03731J
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20435-20458Flexible fiber/wire-shaped solar cells in progress: properties, materials, and designs

        
          
            Ming 
            Peng
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Dechun 
            Zou
          
          
        
      *ab
aBeijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Key Laboratory of Polymer Chemistry and Physics of Ministry of Education, Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. E-mail: dczou@pku.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-10-6275-9799;   Tel: +86-10-6275-9799
bBeijing Engineering Research Center for Active Matrix Display, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
Received 
      22nd May 2015
    , Accepted 18th August 2015First published on 19th August 2015AbstractFlexible fiber/wire-shaped solar cells are a kind of photovoltaic cell fabricated on wire-like substrates. Fiber-type devices, including inorganic, organic, dye-sensitized and perovskite solar cells, have made great progress in recent years. In particular, the energy conversion efficiency of fiber dye-sensitized solar cells has increased from <0.5% to >9%. In this review, we have provided very detailed insights into the development of various fiber/wire-shaped solar cells, conventional materials, and innovative designs. Particularly, we focused on the properties of fiber dye-sensitized solar cells, innovations for solar energy harvesting, and the integrated power systems for electrochemical energy conversion and storage. Although recent studies only provided the initial ideas, flexible fiber/wire-shaped solar cells facilitated the breakthrough for novel solar architecture and portable/wearable electronics or e-textiles of the future.Ming PengMing Peng received his B.S. degree in 2011 from Wuhan University, Wuhan, China. He is a Ph.D. candidate of Zou Lab in the Department of Polymer Science and Engineering, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering at Peking University. His main research interest is synthesis of optoelectronic nanomaterials and design of novel fiber based solar cells and batteries.Dechun ZouDr Dechun Zou received his doctoral degree from the Kyushu University, Japan, in 1990. He joined Mitsubishi Petrochemicals, Japan as a research scientist from 1990 to 1993, Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology as a visiting researcher from 1994 to 1995, Casio Computer Co., Ltd. as a research contractor in 1996, and CREST, JST (Tsutsui Project) as a research contractor in 1997. He was an associate professor at Kyushu University from 1998 to 2001. Since 2001, he has been a professor at the College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, China. His research interests include organic light-emitting diodes, photovoltaics, flexible energy conversion/storage devices and related device physics. He was one of the recipients of the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars. At present, he is the chief scientist of the National Key Basic Scientific Research Program on fiber-shaped solar cells in China.
1 Introduction
Energy and environmental issues are two of the most prominent problems in modern society. For sustainable development, scalable and clean energy conversion via solar cells has attracted both academic and industrial attention focusing on the photoelectric effect. The past years have witnessed the expanding market of photovoltaic cells based on Si, CdTe and CIGS (Cu(In,Ga) (S,Se)2), as well as the rapid development of new generations of photovoltaics, such as CZTS (Cu2ZnSn(SSe)4), organic solar cells, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), and perovskite solar cells.1,2 In particular, the report by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory indicated that the solar cell types and optimal research-cell efficiencies have been continuously refreshed in the past 40 years.3 The most significant feature of typical solar cells is a planar shape with dimensional extension. Thus, the development of one- or three-dimensional (1D or 3D) photovoltaic cells will break through the limitations of conventional thinking and generate a new concept for solar energy conversion. This vision could also create opportunities for materials science/structure design that would be interesting as technical innovations and beneficial for special energy applications.
With the rapid development of traditional industry and the increasing demand of modern electronics, integrated optoelectronic products are taking the form of small, portable, lightweight and smart merchandise. In recent years, wearable/portable electronics, such as Google glasses, iWatches, and smart phones, have gradually become part of human lives. To deepen the wearable concept and meet future individual needs, incorporating flexible optoelectronic devices (e.g., sensors, logic circuits, antenna, lighting elements, and power systems) into clothing, backpacks, and other belongings will become an important trend for the next generation of smart products, namely “electronic textiles” or “e-textiles”.4,5 The fundamental functional units for e-textiles remain to be developed. In particular, flexible power sources with efficient energy conversion and storage can automatically generate electricity and contribute to self-driven energy systems,6–8 which are very promising candidates for portable/wearable electronics that can further enrich e-textiles.9–11 Among the energy technology innovations, flexible fiber/wire-shaped energy devices, including solar cells, batteries, supercapacitors, light-emitting diodes, and field-effect transistors, have boomed in recent years and are attracting increasing attention.12–18 Flexible fiber/wire-shaped energy devices fabricated on fiber- or wire-type conductive substrates are suitable units for contexture because of their special linear shape and may play a role in practical e-textiles, such as wearable solar power sources and self-powered smart systems. In particular, fiber/wire-shaped solar cells demonstrate solar-to-electric conversion but comprise special photovoltaic architecture fabricated on fiber substrates, which endow the devices with special properties and allow innovations.
Since 2010, several reviews have scanned the basic principle and conventional device structures of fiber-like solar cells.12–14 However, the coverage and concept have been spreading because of the rapid expansion of this emerging research field in the last three years. To clarify these developments, the development of flexible fiber/wire-shaped solar cells, including inorganic, organic, dye-sensitized, and perovskite photovoltaic fibers, are presented. Focus was given to the properties, materials, and designs of fiber-shaped dye-sensitized solar cells (FDSCs), because they are the most developed type and could guide the development of other types. The shortcomings of recent research and future development were also summarized on the basis of the status quo. In the present review, a very detailed insight into the development of fiber solar cells is provided in Part 2, covering research motivation, conventional materials, structure designs, and future perspectives. Properties of fiber solar cells associated with structure design are discussed in Part 3. Attention is paid to the materials explorations of FDSCs in Part 4; and solar devices with special energy harvesting design are provided in Part 5 to broaden the fiber based innovations. In Part 6, cases where fiber solar cells have been integrated into hybrid systems are highlighted for energy management. Given the rapid development, works until March 2015 were summarized, and a fast development momentum for this highly growing field may exist in the future.
2 Development of fiber-shaped solar cells
The preliminary concepts of fiber-/wire-shaped solar cells have been appearing in some patents since the 1980s, in which silicon layers formed p–n or p–i–n junctions on conducting fiber substrates to obtain low-cost and flexible devices.19 The real progress in this field started at the beginning of the 21st century, when new types of fiber solar cells and structure designs experienced a boom along with rapid development in the photovoltaic field.13,19–28 The past records of fiber solar cells are presented in Fig. 1, and the continuing development of fiber inorganic, organic, dye-sensitized, perovskite solar cells is summarized from Part 1.1 to 1.4, respectively.
 Fig. 1  Past records of fiber solar cells.13,19–28 
2.1 Fiber inorganic solar cells
Silicon solar cells, based on the highly naturally abundant element, have experienced a long research history. The excellent reliability and acceptable cost make them mainstream products in the photovoltaic market. Silicon technology based on vapor deposition could be adapted to different substrates, and it is a good choice to construct solar cells and detectors on flexible fibers. Early explorations since 2006 have claimed flexible fiber-type poly-Si solar cells on glass fiber22 and carbon fiber,29 but the device performance was very low. In 2013, Badding et al.30 fabricated flexible coaxial silicon fiber pores with a p–i–n photodiode junction (Fig. 2) through high-pressure chemical vapor deposition. Flexible silicon fibers with length of up to 10 m were deposed, which demonstrated a potential for scalable preparations. The low light absorption of the active layers resulted in an overall conversion efficiency of 0.5%. Later on, Gibson et al.31 reported silica sheath fibers by using bulk glass draw techniques with low purity p-type silicon polycrystalline as the starting material. The silica that formed in the silicon core was etched from one side and deposed with a-i-Si and a-n-Si layers via PECVD to form a p–i–n junction. The silicon-core glass fiber achieved efficiencies of up to 3.6%, leaving room for improvements over the presented prototype. Except for Si fibers, Chen et al.27 prepared flexible fiber-shaped CuInSe2 (CIS) solar cells by ordinal electro-deposition of the CuInSe2 layer, chemical bath deposition (CBD) of CdS, and RF magnetron sputtering of ZnO and ITO layers on the Mo wire (Fig. 3a). The single-wire solar cell achieved energy conversion efficiencies of up to 2.3% and exhibited excellent long-term stability (stored at 60 °C for 0–600 h) (Fig. 3b).
 Fig. 2  (a) Differential interference contrast optical micrograph of a representative 15 μm diameter Si p–i–n junction; (b) flexible silicon fiber solar cell of ∼1 m long based on p–i–n junction.30 Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission, Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
 Fig. 3  (a) Fabrication of Mo/CIS/CdS/ZnO/ITO single-wire flexible solar cells; (b) the time-dependent change in the conversion efficiency of the single-wire solar cell stored at 60 °C for 0–600 h. Insert is a photo of the single-wire device.27 Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission, Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. 
Mature preparation based on silicon industry, scalable technology via vapor deposition, and reliable stability of all-solid devices are the advantages of inorganic fiber solar cells, which are the key points for wearable electronics. However, a long period of efficiency improvement occurred, which remains an important issue in future development. Significant improvement and great chances for applications are available considering the performance of traditional inorganic photovoltaic cells and the solid foundations of the silicon industry.
2.2 Fiber organic solar cells
In traditional planar organic photovoltaics, efficient charge transport and optimal optical absorption was usually not possible. To break through this contradiction, Carroll and co-workers23,32 demonstrated fiber organic solar cells based on waveguide optical geometries in 2007 (Fig. 4). The device with an optical fiber structure fiber/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/LiF/Al achieved an efficiency of 1.1%.32,33 But the optical fibers are relatively expensive and less flexible for weaving. Flexible polyimide-coated silica fibers and polypropylene fibers were demonstrated as possible alternative substrates for organic photovoltaic fibers via evaporation or solution processes.34,35 Driven by the goal of efficient light absorption in wide incident angles and more freedom of physical appearance, non-planar cylindrical devices with tube and glass rod substrates were also created, with efficiencies from 0.6% to 1.4%.36,37 Equivalent circuit model analysis found that the aspect ratios to obtain the optimum overall optical confinement and optimal power conversion performance were between 1 and 5.38 To eliminate usage of transparent oxide semiconductors, Gaudiana et al.39 reported efficient flexible organic photovoltaic fibers with efficiencies of up to 3.9% in 2009. In their design, two twisted functional fibers, one comprising a conducting polymer and fullerene derivative and the other coated with a silver film, were wrapped together and encased. In further attempts to replace the metal counter electrode, a carbon nanotube (CNT) fiber was used to twist the fiber anode with TiO2/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS layers, and the photovoltaic wires achieved efficiencies of up to 1.8%, which were maintained by ∼85% after bending (bending radii of ∼5 mm) for 1000 cycles.40,41 Cao and co-workers42,43 demonstrated that CNT films, CNT yarns (Fig. 5a and b), and single-layer graphene as counter electrodes can contribute 2.3–2.5% efficiency. The devices show stable behavior during bending and moderate stability under inertia gas for 20 days (Fig. 5c and d). In particular, involving carbon based film as the second electrode could avoid thin layers penetrating during twisting, maintain good interface contact to the inner layer and provide satisfying light transparency. In further attempts, flexible, lightweight, easily-processable organic photovoltaic textiles (Fig. 6) with reasonable photovoltaic performance were developed, which provide a promising avenue toward wearable electronics.44,45 Light harvesting, oscillator strength, and low charge mobility limitations are hindrances toward efficient organic solar fibers, but cost-competitive and large-scale fabrication of traditional organic solar platforms are claimed to be possible.46 Moreover, 17% efficiency can be achieved using theoretical calculations in a reflective tandem architecture.47
 Fig. 4  Organic fiber solar cell based on optical fiber (a) and its light harvesting path (b).32 Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission, rights managed by AIP Publishing LLC (2007). 
 Fig. 5  (a) Organic fiber solar cell with CNT films as the counter electrode (bent to nearly 90 degrees). (b) Organic fiber solar cell based on CNT yarns. (c) J–V curves of CNT film based organic fiber solar cell in straight form (0 degree) and bent at 45 and 90 degrees, respectively, showing stable behavior during bending. (d) J–V curves of the CNT yarn based organic fiber solar cell in its original state and after storage in inertia gas for 20 days.42 Reproduced from ref. 42 with permission. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 6  (a) Concept of a stitchable organic photovoltaic textile. (b) Photographs of the textile-based OPV integrated with clothing.45 Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission. Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. 
Organic photovoltaics provide material basis for flexible and stable fiber solar cells, which simulates wide research motivation for wearable solar power sources. Though the solution process would be very convenient in film preparation, dip-coating rather than conventional spin-coating is used to deposit the active layers for fiber/wire type organic solar cells. The difficulties in preparing long-range, uniform, and controllable thin films and forming efficient interface junctions on a curved surface is a real technical challenge for highly efficient organic fiber devices. Further research would see the incorporation of novel organic/polymer photovoltaic materials, improved functional interfaces and advanced optical structures.
2.3 Fiber dye-sensitized solar cells (FDSCs)
The tentative idea of FDSCs took shape at the beginning of the 21st century, which took advantage of the simple, air-tolerant, and robust DSSC preparation48 and extended the typical sandwich device to a lower dimensional structure.20,21 In 2008, Zou et al. reported flexible wire-like DSSCs based on double twisted metal fibers (Fig. 7a).24 This design featured a linear shape, and was transparent conductive oxide (TCO)-free and easy to fabricate, attracting wide attention.49 Later on, singly twisted FDSCs were developed, where the counter electrode (Pt wire) was wound around the fiber photoanode (Fig. 7b) were prepared, and the device with capillary package achieved efficiency up to 7%.25,50 The above success led to follow-up FDSC explorations toward higher efficiency, cheaper materials, larger device size, better stability, concentrated designs and energy management, which included: (1) selection of commercial, inexpensive, lightweight fiber substrates for improved surface area and light harvesting; (2) synthesis of nano materials and interface engineering for efficient fiber photoanodes; (3) development of cost-effective and highly active catalysts for counter electrodes; (4) low volatile electrolyte for improved device stability; (5) novel designs of fiber electrodes for 3D solar cells and concentrated devices; (6) integrated fiber energy system for multi-step energy conversion and storage.
 Fig. 7  (a) Flexible wire-like dye-sensitized solar cell based on twisted metal electrodes.24 Reproduced with permission from ref. 24. Copyright © 2008 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Schematic of singly twisted FDSCs where the counter electrode (Pt wire) is wound around the fiber photoanode, with working mechanism.25 Reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Ultra-long FDSC of more than 30 cm (with aspect ratio of 310) displays Isc of 11.4 mA under natural light conditions (13:50 on October 16, 2013); (d) flexible fabric of flexible FDSCs on the cloth substrate.56 Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
All this trial and error has contributed to the continuous FDSC performance improvement, from <0.5% to >9% over the years.51,52 For example, well-designed device conformation, film preparation and interface engineering on fiber photoanodes improved the amount of dye-adsorption, enhanced light collection, better electron injection, and inhibited charge recombination, thereby achieving 7.2% to 8.6% efficiency.53–55 Ultra-long FDSCs of more than 30 cm were fabricated with efficiencies of up to 4% (aspect ratio of 310), which are the longest single FDSCs with the highest power output and could be applied to solar fabrics (Fig. 7c and d).56,57 For price considerations, replacing a Pt-based counter electrode with cost-effective materials with high specific area is a sustainable method, achieving efficiencies of 7.2% to 8.5%.58,59 To take a further step toward lightweight and inexpensive power sources, non-metal wire substrates have been applied to either or both electrodes.60–63 In particular, all-carbon based FDSCs60 and quantum dot (QD) sensitized fiber solar cells64 with moderate device performance were developed, and more breakthroughs are on the way. Typical volatile liquid electrolytes may prevent device stability in the long run, whereas gel and solid electrolytes can reasonably supply the solutions for stable FDSCs.65–67 FDSC exploration was also expanded to innovations concerning light collection for high power output. Given the symmetric columnar structure, fiber photoanodes endowed FDSCs with capacities such as 3D light harvesting and less-independent incident light angles, which contributed to a flexible multi-fiber solar device of 9.1% efficiency52 and concentrating modules with significantly improved power output.25,68 Except for solar-to-electrical generation, highly performing FDSCs can be integrated with other fiber shaped energy conversion devices, such as supercapacitor, battery and nanogenerator, for hybrid energy systems,26,69,70 thereby providing more flexible energy management.
From the point of view of energy conversion efficiency, the performance of FDSCs is very close to traditional planar DSSCs. The development of FDSCs could represent the directions of all fiber solar cells, namely (1) new materials and interface engineering for continuously improved performance; (2) efficient fiber electrodes for structure designs; (3) advanced solar energy systems based on fiber photovoltaics. All the attempts and progress will push the fiber photovoltaics to a higher level, and create opportunities for practical solar power for portable/wearable electronics.
2.4 Fiber perovskite solar cells
The new photovoltaic generation of perovskite solar cells71 has attracted worldwide attention, and their efficiency has been improved to >20% in the past five years.3 Solid state, high performance and easy solution processing are the notable features of perovskite solar cells, which make them suitable candidates for efficient, flexible, lightweight, and liquid-free photovoltaic fibers. Peng's group28 demonstrated perovskite fiber solar cells (Fig. 8) by winding an aligned multi-walled carbon nanotube sheet onto a TiO2-modified steel wire (SS) and incorporating a perovskite layer between them via a one-step solution process. The coaxial fiber devices achieved an efficiency of 3.3% and the photovoltaic parameters (Voc, Jsc, and FF) remained almost constant under different incident light angles. No damage was observed on the sheet electrode and the energy efficiencies remained at 95% after bending for 50 cycles. With a two-step solution process, the corresponding perovskite fiber solar cells based on a ZnO array achieved 3.8% efficiency.72
 Fig. 8  (a) Structure and (b) energy level diagram of flexible perovskite fiber solar cells based on a carbon nanotube sheet.28 Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission. Copyright © 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Although the efficiency is only comparable with fiber inorganic and organic solar cells at present, the device performance is rather promising in initial trials. The above trials further confirm the openness of the fiber system to new photovoltaic types. Due to the excellent performance of perovskite solar cells, fiber perovskite solar cells have a great chance of catching up via further modification, and they might achieve equal or even higher efficiency than FDSCs. For practical applications, more research is needed to explore repeatable and scalable technology. But the perovskite layer is sensitive to moisture and hole transport material spiro-OMeTAD [2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxy phenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene], suffering from de-doping in air, so the stability and lifetime of the fiber device need further improvement. Another drawback is the toxic elements; environmentally friendly alternatives are welcome. From this point of view, opportunities are there for novel photovoltaic types as well as fiber photovoltaics. In the ideal situation, reliable packages could help with the stability and pollution leakage problem at the same time. But some systemic work remains to be done before the scheme is acceptable.
As summarized in Table 1, fiber/wire-shaped solar cells, including inorganic, organic, dye sensitized, and perovskite, have made significant advancements. Fiber devices with length ≤5 cm were reported in most of recent literatures. For high power output and weaving process, ultra-long, efficient and flexible fiber solar cells remain one of the most tempting challenges in this field. Compared with other fiber solar cells, FDSCs have achieved superior efficiency and larger device size. Moreover, FDSCs are easy and scalable to fabricate, as well as less sensitive to environmental factors. These advantages make them an attractive topic in materials studies and show rapid progress.
Table 1 Photovoltaic parameters of typical fiber inorganic, organic, dye-sensitized and perovskite solar cells




Structure
Feature

L (cm)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF

η (%)
Ref.




CF/p-poly Si/n-poly Si/Ag
Hairlike single fiber
4
1.7
0.14
0.246
0.04

29



Capillary fiber/p-Si/i-Si/n-Si/Ti–Au
Coaxial silicon fiber with p–i–n junction
1
2
0.22
0.55
0.5

30



Al–Pt/p-Si/i-Si/n-Si/ITO
Silicon-core single fiber
<1
16.6
0.3
0.52
3.6

31



Mo/CuInSe2/CdS/ZnO/ITO
Non-Si flexible fiber
4
13.0
0.34
0.522
2.31

27



Optical fiber/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/LiF/Al
Waveguide light-collection
∼1.4
∼7.0
—
—
1.1

32



SS/TiOx/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/LiF/Ag/SS
ITO-free; twisted fibers; 5–30 cm
—
11.9
0.607
0.538
3.87

39



Ti/TiO2/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/CNT fiber
Flexible and stable
—
9.06
0.52
0.38
1.78

40



SS/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/CNT yarn
CNT yarn; stable
—
8.49
>0.56
—
2.3

42



SS/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/graphene
Single-layer graphene sheets
—
8.14
0.570
0.545
2.53

43



Ti/TiO2/N719/I−-I3−/Pt
TiO2 colloids; 3D light-harvesting
4.8
12.28
0.728
0.786
7.02

25



Ti/TMCA-TiO2/N719/I−-I3−/Pt
Micron-core array; multilayer structure
5–7
16.04
0.702
0.717
8.07

54



Ti/TiO2/N719/I−-I3−/graphene-Pt
Graphene/Pt composite fiber
—
—
0.744
0.63
8.45

58



Ti/TiO2/N719/I−-I3−/TiN/carbon fiber
Helical photoanode; non-Pt
—
19.35
0.64
0.58
7.20

59



Ti/TiO2 nanotube/N719/I−-I3−/Pt
Flexible; ordered TiO2 nanotube arrays
—
15.9
0.673
0.80
8.6

55



(Ti/TiO2/N719)6/I−-I3−/Pt
Multi-fiber anodes
1.7
18.6
0.66
0.74
9.1

52



Ti/bilayer-TiO2/N719/I−-I3−/Pt
Facile synthesis
5
—
—
—
Avg. 7.2

53



Longest single device; highest power output
9.0
12.58
0.683
0.712
6.12

56



31.5
8.09
0.716
0.692
4.01

56



CNT yarn/TiO2/N719/I−-I3−/CNT yarn-Pt
Flexible; all carbon device
—
19.8
0.54
0.319
3.4

73



Optical fiber/ITO/TiO2 NW/N719/I−-I3−/Pt
Waveguide; cylindrical electrode
2–3
18.50
∼0.6
—
6

74



Ti/TiO2/N719/T−-T2/CNT fiber
Flexible; non-I2 electrolyte
—
15.49
0.683
0.69
7.33

75



SS/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/CNT
Flexible coaxial perovskite solar fiber
<4
10.2
0.664
0.487
3.3

28



SS/ZnO/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/CNT
ZnO nano-obelisk array; mild conditions
<5
∼12
∼0.65
—
3.8

72





3 Properties of fiber solar cells
Evolved from the sandwich-type structure, the three dimensional structure endows fiber solar devices with special features in light harvesting and charge transport, which further affects characterizations and applications. In principle, fiber solar cells with column symmetry should share similar properties. Since extensive studies of FDSCs have been well developed, we present the properties of fiber solar cells with FDSCs as a typical representative. In addition, compared with solid fiber solar cells, the liquid-based interfaces could relate to the high performance of FDSCs. Thus, we discuss the properties of fiber solar cells with a focus on FDSCs in this part.
3.1 From planar structure to fiber style
FDSCs differ from typical and inverted DSSCs in composition, shape, flexibility, light collection, electron injection, and electrodes (Table 2). With Ti/TiO2/dye/electrolyte/Pt composition, FDSCs do not need TCO-based substrates, which are important in the total traditional DSSC cost. Different from the traditional planar flat appearance, FDSC devices are in the form of wires, fibers, rods, or tubes, and flexible devices can be achieved by increasing the length/diameter ratio together with soft packages. These FSDC properties indicate a promising role in portable/wearable applications, which can be woven into flexible textiles. Since the utilization of high-melting-point fibers rather than polymer conductive substrates (e.g., ITO/PET, ITO/PEN),76,77 no temperature limitation exists during functional fiber preparation. Furthermore, given the symmetric cylindrical structure, FDSCs can harvest solar radiation in 3D space, giving more freedom than front or back illumination (Fig. 9a–d).25 Experiments of various fiber solar cells have shown constant performance with different incident light angles.24,28,42 Therefore, a simple diffusing plate under FDSC can improve light harvesting for higher power output via diffuse reflection illumination (Fig. 9e). For example, power output could be greatly enhanced for fiber solar cells in conjunction with conventional rough substrates (e.g. foam board and white paper) and mirrors via light scattering and reflection.50,56,78 Nonetheless, reduced incident light in inverted DSSCs and FDSCs by electrolyte absorbance was observed compared with the light path of the front illuminated style. Reducing electrolyte thickness can lead to better solar energy harvesting. Under illumination, the photoelectrons from the excited dyes were injected into the conductive band of the semiconductor layer and further collected through the current collector. The direction of electron injection in FDSCs and inverted DSSCs is along the incident direction, which is opposite to that of typical DSSCs. Furthermore, unlike DSSC and inverted DSSC cases, no explicit area/size ratio for the two electrodes is required, and they can be twisted together, packaged in parallel or film covered single fibers, providing much freedom and convenience for structural design and material innovations. For fiber devices, the contact between the electrolyte and the sealing material is at two ends, and is smaller than that of the planar devices, which could reduce the leakage rate. All these differences can essentially reflect the structure evolution from DSSCs to inverted DSSCs and further to FDSCs. And similar phenomena could exist in other types of fiber solar cells.
Table 2 Comparison of typical DSSCs, inverted DSSCs, and FDSCs




Type
DSSCs
Inverted DSSCs
FDSCs




Diagram











Composition
TCO/TiO2/dye/electrolyte/Pt/TCO
Ti/TiO2/dye/electrolyte/Pt/TCO
Ti/TiO2/dye/electrolyte/Pt


Shape
Flat
Flat
Wire/fiber/rod/tube


Flexibility
TCO substrate; area/thickness ratio
Flexible substrate; area/thickness ratio
Soft package; length/diameter ratio


Light collection
Front illuminated; TCO → TiO2/dye
Back illuminated; TCO/Pt → electrolyte → TiO2/dye
3D light harvesting; tube → electrolyte → TiO2/dye


Electron injection
Dye → TiO2 → TCO
Dye → TiO2 → Ti
Dye → TiO2 → Ti


Electrodes
Anode/cathode = 1/1; face-to-face
Anode/cathode = 1/1; face-to-face
No explicit ratio; twisted, in apparel or single fiber




 Fig. 9  (a) 3D light-collecting schematic of the fiber-shaped solar cell (Cell A); (b) 3D light-collecting schematic of the traditional plate solar cell (Cell C); (c) the angle dependences of the normalized short-circuit currents of the Cell A and those of the composite Cell A; (d) the angle dependences of the normalized short-circuit currents of the plate Cell C. (e) Schematic of the diffuse reflection illumination mode.25 Reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
For flexible and wearable energy devices, the cohesion and adhesion of active layers would be crucial factors during textile manufacturing and weaving operations, as well as in maintaining device performance. Therefore, a bulk fiber electrode with good conductivity and catalytic performance, like Pt wire, would be a good choice for the counter electrode. The dye-sensitized semiconductor oxides of the photoanode can form cracks upon deformation. Experiments have shown that damage induced by tensile deformation influences the device efficiency more than local damage, which indicates the practicability of preparing solar textiles from fiber devices, if the tension is well controlled.79 Typically, a thinner layer with good adhesion is preferable to prevent deep cracks, whereas a thicker functional layer is preferable for higher efficiency.50,53,80 A balance between flexibility and efficiency need further consideration of practical factors.
3.2 Characterization of fiber solar cells
For typical sandwich-type solar cells, the illumination area is the apparent active area or masked geometrical area (Fig. 10a). However, for fiber solar cells, only part of the photoanode is illuminated and the surface area of the curved fiber is not the reasonable illumination area. According to the projection relation, the cross sectional area of the fiber photoanode is the position for direct solar energy harvesting (Fig. 10b). Thus, in most recent works,50,73,81 the project area was used for efficiency calculation. The illumination area (A) is calculated as:A = d × lwhere d and l are the average diameter and effective (or masked) length of the fiber photoanode, respectively.
 Fig. 10  (a) The illumination area of typical sandwich-type solar cells is the apparent active area or masked geometrical area; (b) according to the projection relation, the cross sectional area of the fiber photoanode is the position for direct solar energy harvesting. 
The short-circuit current density (Jsc) and the solar energy conversion efficiency (η) are calculated by:Jsc = Isc/A and η = Jsc × Voc × FF × 100%,where Isc, Voc, and FF are the short-circuit current, open-circuit voltage, and fill factor, respectively.
A photoanode with a smaller fiber diameter would lead to higher efficiency due to a smaller active area under the same length,82 which indicates fiber substrates of the micro/nanoscale might contribute to efficient devices. Notably, the size measurement (length and average diameter) error in short devices is larger than that in larger devices. Thus, the device size should be considered in terms of measurement accuracy, as well as preparation difficulty, during efficiency comparison. For practical application and a more reasonable comparison with conventional DSSCs, the cross sectional area of the capillary tube is recommended to represent the cross section of the incident light.52,82 Reducing tube thickness and increasing its effective partial filling would benefit high-performance devices. Additionally, the testing environment should be emphasized because of the 3D light harvesting property. Given the discrepancy of different voltage scanning directions, the average of the forward and backward tests is recommended as the final result for FDSCs.56
Current literature has dealt with the flexibility of fiber solar cells, but there is no uniform parameter as standard. The aspect ratio (the ratio of length and diameter), photovoltaic performance under various bending conditions (e.g. bending angles, bending radius, bending cycles), and morphology after bending cycle(s), were typical experimental evidences used for discussion.
3.3 Reasons for excellence of liquid-based FDSCs
To achieve efficient fiber solar devices, the key points are uniform functional layers and effective interface contact for efficient light collection, photoelectron generation, and charge transport. These points might be easier for traditional flat substrates, in which efficient solar cells have been fabricated. However, fiber substrates, which exhibit a cylindrical surface and some uneven positions formed in the drawing process, may cause coating defects, layer fractures, and film perforation. These factors may exert significant adverse effects on thin film devices, such as invalid p–n junction, series charge recombination, or even short circuit. These problems become more pronounced in longer devices, and that is the reason why we emphasize device size in energy conversion efficiency comparisons. Fortunately, a semiconductor oxide layer of more than 10 microns was enough to fill these grievances and cover the whole substrate in FDSC. Additionally, light collection can be weakened when the active layer is covered by a hole transport layer and/or outer metal current collector, which may limit photoelectron generation. Liquid electrolyte and twisted electrodes can mitigate this effect to a certain degree. Moreover, considering the interface contact, charge transfer at the solid–liquid heterojunction (photoanode/electrolyte interface) might be more efficient than that at the solid–solid heterojunction. These are the possible reasons why FDSCs are currently more efficient than most other fiber solar cells. However, the possibility that real efficient solid–solid heterojunctions could be discovered as evidence of technology development cannot be ruled out. In fact, higher current density short-circuit current (Jsc) or/and open-circuit voltage (Voc) can be expected in other solar cell types, even with lower fill factor (FF) than liquid-based FDSCs. We are quite optimistic that highly efficient solid fiber solar cells will be introduced in the near future.
4 Materials for FDSCs
4.1 Substrates
The substrate, which provides support to the whole device, is an important part of FDSCs. Mechanical strength, conductivity and specific surface area comprise the basic factors for fiber substrates. For flexible fiber devices, the aspect ratio of fiber electrodes determines FDSC flexibility. Therefore, flexible fiber substrates with smaller diameter and larger length would be ideal candidates for practical applications. Another challenge is that the weight and cost of fiber substrate should be as low as possible, and this is indeed a consideration for wearable applications. Conductive metal fibers, carbon-based fibers, polymer fibers, and optical fibers have been applied to FDSCs.

4.1.1 Metal wires. 
Metal fibers are the most commonly used substrate for FDSCs owing to their good conductivity, mechanical strength, long-range flexibility, and high-temperature tolerance. Various metal wires57,82–84 including titanium, stainless steel, wolfram, aluminum, nickel, and zinc, have been utilized to collect photocurrent in the photoanode, as well as to support the whole device. Although it started with a stainless steel wire,24 most of the reported FDSCs and the most efficient FDSCs (7% to 9% efficiency) are fabricated with Ti-based photoanodes.52–55 The annealing process of titanium wires can decrease the work function and increase the Fermi level, contributing to a lower Schottky barrier.57 However, W oxides formed during annealing lead to lower recombination resistance at the photoanode/electrolyte interface and results in a lower open circuit voltage; the insulating Al2O3 and NiO layers, which could prevent the photoelectrons from being injected into the substrate (Fig. 11), lead to poor efficiency.82,83 However, the above observations cannot exclude cheap metal substrate application for DSSCs because the low-temperature-based process can avoid metal oxidation. However, active metals exposed to electrolyte may cause galvanic-battery reactions along with metal corrosion and oxidized species consumption, which eventually result in a non-functional device.85 Therefore, covering the metal substrates via a dense titanium oxide layer is a possible solution.57 Moreover, cheap and light fiber substrates with a titanium-coated layer may also replace high-purity titanium wire.
 Fig. 11  (a) EIS measurements for the FDSSCs based on W and Ti wires with TiO2 photoanodes. The W based FDSCs showed a drastic decrease in the internal resistance, which means a larger recombination rate in the photoelectrode, which might be due to the high-level conduction band mismatch between the TiO2 working electrode and the WO3 layer. (b) Energy state diagram for different metal wire-based FDSC featuring the operation principle, and the dashed line shows that the photoelectrons cannot transfer from the TiO2 nanoarray to the NiO film.83 Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission. Copyright © 2014, Rights Managed by Nature Publishing Group. 
Furthermore, metal wires support the active catalytic components as counter electrodes in parallel with the photoanode.69,86,87 Given the good conductivity, studying the electrochemical catalytic performance of new materials may be beneficial regardless of the impact of resistance.


4.1.2 Carbon-based fibers. 
Carbon-based fibers are attractive candidates as electrodes for energy devices because of their salient flexibility, low density, high specific surface area, moderate conductivity, anti-corrosion property, and high strength.49,88,89 Carbon fibers composed of micron-sized single fibers are commercial products and are utilized in FDSCs since 2011.90 With even higher specific surface area, carbon nanotube (CNT) fibers based on a nanosized monofilament were also applied in fiber solar cells by Peng's91 and Cao's92 groups. Core–sheath CNT/reduced graphene oxide (RGO) nanoribbon, CNT/RGO composite, and RGO fibers93 (Fig. 12a) benefit from the convenience of physical and/or chemical modifications, which bring more concepts for materials science and device designs.
 Fig. 12  (a) FDSCs based on CNT and RGO fibers.93 Reproduced from ref. 93 with permission. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of configuration of the CF/TiO2 NR array-based tube-shaped DSSC.94 Reproduced from ref. 94 with permission. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society. (c) Flexible single-wire DSSCs by wrapping a carbon nanotube film around Ti wire-supported TiO2 tube arrays as the transparent electrode.92 Reproduced from ref. 92 with permission. Copyright © 2011, American Chemical Society. (d) All-carbon-based FDSC with highly flexible aligned carbon nanotube fibers as a catalytic counter electrode and current photoanode collector.105 Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Carbon-based fibers , such as nanoparticles, nanorods (NRs), nanotubes, and nanowires (NW), can be used as supporters for a dye-sensitized TiO2 layer.60,94,95 Wang et al. first demonstrated a CF/TiO2 NR array-based FDSC (Fig. 12b) with efficiency of 0.76%; a bunched-NR based device achieved a higher efficiency of 1.28% because of the higher Jsc, attributed to the larger surface area.94 A FDSC with a CF/TiO2 NW photoanode obtained an impressive conversion efficiency of 2.48%.95 The carbon fiber bundle diameter directly affects the device performance originating from the electrode conductivity, the loading amount of dye-sensitized nano-TiO2, and apparent device area.60 Semiconductive CNT fibers were directly sensitized as the photoanode, and the device packaged in the typical sandwich format achieved a power conversion efficiency of 2.2%.91 Nonetheless, these FDSCs are usually not self-standing, and additional substrate is required to support the device, which can be a problem for a carbon-based fiber photoanode. Moreover, obtaining the an accurate active area is not easy due to the dispersed state in the electrolyte, and the apparent area in the dry state is used for the efficiency calculation. However, these problems could be avoided when these fibers were used in the counter electrode.
Commercial carbon fibers consisting of single fibers were used as a counter electrode or current collector in some innovative works, with efficiencies of 3.0% to 7.2%.59,90,96,97 A bunch of carbon fibers showed limited catalytic activity toward I3−/I− redox couple, with 2.7% efficiency.25 The structural defects on the nanotubes formed main catalytic sites for redox reactions by directly utilizing CNT fiber as the counter electrode, and 3.4% efficiency was reported.98 The device performance showed some yarn diameter dependence because of the combination of active sites, conductivity, and electrode contact. With a similar device structure, Peng et al. reported a device efficiency of up to 4.6% with CNT fiber99 and 3.8% with graphene fibers.58 CNTs can be rolled or twisted into fibers, since they are usually grown as a thin film on a planar substrate. To take advantage of the CNT thin films for device design, Cao et al.92 reported a single-wire DSSC (1.6%) by wrapping a carbon nanotube film around the fiber photoanode (Fig. 12c). An efficiency of 2.6% was achieved with the assistance of an Ag wire to overcome the CNT sheet resistance. Through film thickness optimization, a similar coaxial structure offers a high energy conversion efficiency of 4.1% and stability during deformation.100 These “CNT-enriched fiber solar cells” are attracting increasing attention given their attractive structures, moderate performance, and light weight.101–104
A bigger challenge to the single carbon-based electrode is the all-carbon based FDSCs reported by several groups, which employed carbon-based fibers as substrates of both electrodes (Fig. 12d), thereby achieving 1.9% to 3.4% efficiency.60,62,73,95,105 Even with a non-liquid electrolyte, the all-carbon-based photovoltaic fiber photoconversion efficiency of 2.6% was achieved with all-carbon-based photovoltaic fibers, which is independent of incident illumination and cell shape or position.61,106 Despite the low efficiency, these works may provide a promising avenue toward lightweight and flexible solar cells.
The above results indicate that carbon-based fibers are promising materials for efficient FDSCs. However, the carbon-based fiber alone is not enough for efficient charge exchange at the cathode/electrolyte interface, which resulted in a relatively low Jsc and FF. Thus, catalysts should be employed to avoid this restriction. In most cases, carbon-based fibers were used as the supporting substrate because of their limited catalytic property but high specific surface area for additional chemical modifications. Various kinds of catalytic materials are discussed in Part 4.3.


4.1.3 Polymer fibers. 
Polymer fibers are flexible, lightweight, low-cost and commercially available materials, but not naturally conductive. The first challenge in practical electrochemical cell application is preparing conductive fiber substrates. Zou et al.4 prepared flexible conductive threads on insulating thread substrates via dip-coating conductive PEDOT:PSS dispersion. The conductive threads showed good resistance to the solvents and achieved 4–5% efficiency as the counter electrode in FDSCs (Fig. 13). Fan et al.107 reported Ni-deposited polymer materials as photoanode substrates for ZnO-based DSSCs, such as polybutylene terephthalate, polypropylene, polyethylene terephthalate, polyamide, and bio-mimetic veins. Lightweight DSSCs in the shape of wires, nets, and veins were fabricated via a wet process.
 Fig. 13  (a) Morphology of the conductive thread based on insulating thread substrates and PEDOT:PSS dispersion. (b) J–V curves of the fiber-shaped solar cells using conductive thread electrodes soaked in water, acetonitrile, and electrolyte, which corresponds to efficiencies of 4–5%.108 Reproduced from ref. 107 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Polymer fibers are raw materials for cloths, hats, and adornments. Polymer fiber-based energy devices may play a role in wearable electronics, which is one of the most important motivations for research. Nevertheless, more effort should be made toward better device performance and practical module design.


4.1.4 Optical fibers. 
In 2009, Ferenets et al. designed a fiber solar device with optical fiber/ZnO:Al/TiO2/N719/electrolyte/C, but its light harvesting was very much hampered by the outermost carbon catalytic layer.109 In the same year, Wang et al.63 developed a hybrid photoanode with optical fiber/ITO/ZnO NW arrays for 3D DSSCs (Fig. 14). The internal light reflection along the fiber expanded the opportunities for solar energy conversion, and the waveguide was extracted to the ITO/ZnO/dye interface because of its higher refractive index. These FDSCs achieved an efficiency of 3.3%, and a corresponding efficiency enhancement factor (EEF) of 4.3 has been achieved by converting the 2D DSSC to the 3D DSSC. Additionally, by integrating optical fiber/ITO/TiO2 NW hybrid fiber electrodes with the cylindrical counter electrode, an impressive efficiency of up to 6% has been demonstrated with an EEF up to 9.74
 Fig. 14  (a) A 3D DSSC was constructed based on ZnO NWs vertically grown on an optical fiber. The internal light reflection along the fiber was guided to the photoanode. (b) J–V curves of a DSSC under one full-sun illumination oriented (1) normal to the fiber axis (NA, 2D) and (2) parallel to the fiber axis (PA, 3D). A corresponding EEF of 4.3 has been achieved by converting the 2D DSSC to the 3D DSSC. The inset shows a plot of EEF and the corresponding energy conversion efficiencies for eight 3D DSSCs.63 Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission. Copyright © 2009 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Given the special light harvesting characteristic via modified optical fibers, the direction of light reflected to the sensitized layer and photoelectron guided to the current-collecting electrode is similar to the case of traditional planar DSSCs. Thus, ITO is involved as the transparent conductive layer on the fiber substrate. Moreover, the counter electrode can contribute to additional light reflection for solar energy harvesting especially in closed structures. Theoretical investigations have shown that DSSCs wrapped around an optical fiber can achieve as promising performance as standard geometry.110–112 Some flexible or concentrating devices based on 3D solar cells may be expected in the future.
As previously mentioned, DSSCs can be assembled on various fiber substrates with quite high performance. With flexible FDSCs, a photovoltaic braid can be woven as a network of single-fiber devices.56 DSSCs with a TCO-free flexible mesh substrate can also be treated as an extension to fiber-based photovoltaic devices,113–120 which are woven first and then applied as a device. Both approaches, which are similar in appearance, can play a role in future wearable electronics, but sealing small tubes with two ends is significantly simpler than flat plates.121 Thus, apart from directly weaving the device, FDSCs with “down to the wire”49 technology can provide opportunities for 3D devices, light-harvesting designs, and integrating innovations.

4.2 Semiconductor materials for photoanodes
TiO2 nanoparticles with high specific surface area and good dye adsorption have been a basic material for porous fiber photoanode in early trials. TiO2 nanoparticle suspensions are a good candidate for dip-coating fiber substrates, with device efficiencies of up to 7%.25,50 Considering the colloid preparation, in situ preparation of TiO2 nanostructures on substrates is more convenient for device fabrications.
Electrons are more mobile by several orders of magnitude in 1D nanomaterials than in traditional nanoparticles, which could contribute to efficient FDSCs. Electrochemical anodizing of Ti wire substrates can lead to Ti-supported TiO2 nanotube arrays, and the corresponding FDSCs achieved an efficiency of up to 7%.80,122 Electrolysis can be performed in large-scale preparation, and this process allows the fabrication of totally flexible devices. Surface treatment of TiO2 nanotube arrays in niobium isopropoxide solution can weaken the electron recombination process and improve Voc and FF.123 Transferring TiO2 nanotubes to ordered hierarchical nanoparticles with NH4F solution may result in an efficiency of 8.6% as demonstrated in a flexible FDSC with 30% improvement from the untreated group (Fig. 15).55 Zhou et al.124 synthesized a TiO2 nanowire array on Ti wire via Na2Ti2O5·3H2O NW transformation in acid. For FDSCs, a high efficiency of 5.4% was achieved because of the high Jsc. To simplify the preparation process, direct treatment of the Na2Ti3O2 network with TiCl4 solution simultaneously exchanged Na+ and formed a hierarchical structure.125 Moreover, rutile TiO2 NW or NR arrays were prepared on fiber substrates, but lower efficiency was achieved partly because of the suboptimal crystalline structure.94,95 After in situ preparations, an interstice between the Ti substrate and the oxidized layer is commonly observed. TiCl4 post-treatment is advantageous in reducing the aforementioned defects and to the photoanode/electrolyte interface.80,126
 Fig. 15  TiO2 with different nanostructures for FDSCs: SEM images of a smooth TiO2 nanotube array (a and b) and a hierarchical TiO2 nanotube array (c and d).55 Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
For better adhesion between the porous layer and the substrate, Zou et al.53 reported facial synthesis via direct sintering of titanium tetraisopropoxide on titanium wire. FDSCs based on the compact layer exhibited an efficiency of 5.3%, and the high FFs indicated good charge transport caused by the massive structure. To increase dye adsorption, the TiO2 nanoparticle layer was dip-coated, and the FDSCs based on the bilayer structure achieved an average efficiency of 7.2%. Compared with the device based on a single nanoparticle layer, a longer electron lifetime was obtained as a result of the reduced interface charge recombination. With the TiO2 bilayer, 9 cm long flexible FDSC achieved an efficiency of 6.1% under AM 1.5 illumination and 11.4% with the assistance of a piece of white paper, and 80% efficiency was maintained after bending 180 times (Fig. 16).56 Furthermore, for FDSCs, SnO2–TiO2 bilayer and trilayer structures were constructed via thermal calcination.127 The Jsc enhancement derived by the SnO2–TiO2 junction and the recombination shielding effect of the compact TiO2 film synergistically contributed to the high efficiency of 5.7%.127 Additionally, a TiO2 micron-cone array via electrochemical reactions was used as the frame and electron transfer channel in fiber photoanodes. The TiO2 multilayer structure composed of compact, light scattering, and porous layers was introduced into the fiber photoanode (Fig. 17), and the fiber devices attained photoelectric conversion efficiencies of 7.6% to 8.1%.54 The high performance implied the importance of designing multifunctional photoanodes. A nanoporous TiO2 network as the inner layer contributed to better connection of the nanoparticle layer and Ti substrate, thus improving the electron transport rate and prolonging the electron lifetime.126 Aerosol spray pyrolysis was used for TiO2–ZnO-based FDSCs, and computational fluid dynamic simulation could exhibit the flow field near the fiber substrate.128
 Fig. 16  (a) J–V curves of the flexible FDSC (length: 9.0 cm; photoanode diameter: 280 μm). The device was tested with a normal black background (normal model) and with a sheet of A4 white paper as a diffuse plate (diffuse model). Inset: Ti supported TiO2 bilayer structure. (b) Trend of photovoltaic parameters (Voc, FF, Jsc, and η) during the bending–recovery cycles; the bending radius is approximately 3.0 cm.56 Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 17  SEM images of the novel photoanode components (a) schematic of the whole photoanode, (b) Ti wire treated with an acid mixture, (c)Ti/TiO2 micron-cone array, (d) light scattering layer, (e) porous layer, (f) cross section of the electrode; (b′), (c′), (d′), (e′), and (f′) are the enlarged figures of (b), (c), (d), (e), and (f), respectively.54 Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission. Copyright © 2014 Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
Recently, N3 and N719 are the most widely used dyes for FDSCs. To avoid the use of rare metal Ru, CdS and CdSe quantum dots (QDs) co-sensitized TiO2 nanotubes for fiber solar cells showed efficiencies of up to 3.2% by optimizing the CdSe deposition time and the length of the nanotube.64 A novel fiber solar cell with CdSe NW-grafted Ti wire achieved an efficiency of 2.9% in the S2−/S22− electrolyte.129 The 1D solar cell on carbon fibers with vertical ZnO NWs and CdS QDs effectively absorbed visible light and converted it to electric energy.130 Okoli and co-workers131 coated QD-incorporated TiO2 on CNT microyarn and intertwined it with a carbon nanotube microyarn. This carbon-based fiber solar cell achieved an efficiency of 5.9% with long-term stability. Additionally, CdS, CdSe, and N719 were incorporated in the fiber photoanode (Fig. 18) to realize both multiple exciton generation effects and multiple electron transmission paths. An efficiency of up to 6.4% was achieved, which may have resulted from the special anode design.78 Thus, novel sensitizers may offer access for further development. Based on QD solar cells, these fiber devices do not contain any rare metal or volatile electrolyte, making them cheap candidates for applications. However, the toxic metal Cd is a drawback in this approach.
 Fig. 18  The wire-shaped CdS, CdSe, and N719 co-sensitized solar cell are prepared by using a platinized CNY as the counter electrode, and a braid of 7-twisted carbon nanotube yarns with hybrid coating as the working electrode. Details are shown in SEM images and sketch maps.78 Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission. Copyright © 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Photoanodes demonstrate great potential for further development because of their multiple functions of light harvesting, photo-electron generation, and charge transport. New structures, materials, and synthesis routes for fiber photoanodes are still necessary, where more improvement could be expected.
4.3 Catalytic materials for counter electrodes (cathodes)
Pt is widely used as a counter electrode for DSSCs because of its good conductivity and good catalytic performance. Pt wire is the most common counter electrode for efficient FDSCs, reaching an efficiency of >8%.54,55 For cost considerations, the amount of Pt should be minimized. Decorating conductive fibers with Pt using various techniques, such as magnetron sputtering, electrolytic deposition, chemical reduction, and thermal pyrolysis, produced good results.58,90,97,98 Pt-decorated carbon fibers have exhibited improved conductivity and catalytic activity toward the I3−/I− redox couple than the bare carbon fiber substrate, resulting in an FDSC efficiency of 5.8%.90 FDSC based on Pt-CNT yarn achieved an efficiency of 3.7%, and annealing further improved the efficiency to 4.8% because of the enhanced charge transfer across the Pt/CNT interfaces.98 Superparamagnetic Fe3O4 and Ni nanoparticles were incorporated into CNT fibers for FDSCs, and they can stably attach to a magnet. The device efficiency of 6.0% was improved to 8.0% with Pt deposition.132 Graphene/Pt composite fibers for FDSCs (Fig. 19a) contributed to an energy conversion efficiency of 8.5%.58
 Fig. 19  FDSCs based on various catalytic materials. FDSCs with (a) spirally-wound graphene/Pt composite fiber as the counter electrode.58 Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission. Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Parallel fiber electrodes and the commercial fountain pen ink as a catalyst on the counter electrode.133 Reproduced from ref. 133 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) TiN nanoplate-functionalized CFs were twisted with the TiO2 nanotube array-coated Ti thread for FDSCs.59 Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) FDSCs based on CoNi2S4 nanoribbon- and NR-modified carbon fibers.134 Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission. Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. 
To avoid rare-earth metal Pt, carbon-based materials, conductive polymers, and inorganic nanocomplexes were used for efficient FDSCs. In the early attempts, commercial pen ink based on well-dispersed carbon nanoparticles was proved to be a good catalytic material for I3−/I−- and T2/T−-based electrolytes. Ink-coated SS wires and carbon fibers in parallel with the photoanodes were applied in FDSCs (Fig. 19b), and the optimal efficiency of 6.2% was achieved.133 Nitrogen-doped graphene was also demonstrated as an efficient metal-free electro-catalyst for the I3−/I− redox couple.86 Its pyridinic and quaternary nitrogen states in particular provided active sites for promoting I3− reduction. For FDSCs, the nitrogen-doped graphene catalyst prepared under 900 °C achieved an energy conversion efficiency of 5.4%, comparable with the Pt-based device under similar conditions. Further study indicated that the conductive polymer PEDOT:PSS composite-coated carbon fiber electrode showed a catalytic performance and long-term stability that were superior to those of the Pt-decorated carbon fiber.96 As the coating time (layer thickness) increased, the improved conductivity and catalytic performance of the fiber electrode realized a device efficiency of up to 5.6%. Polyaniline via in situ electrochemical polymerization displayed an almost equivalent catalytic activity to SS sputtered with Pt, probably because of its porous nature and larger surface area. With this counter electrode, FDSCs achieved an efficiency of 5.4%.69 Inorganic components are also good candidates for the fiber counter electrode. Porous, single crystalline titanium nitride (TiN) nanoplates were grown on carbon fibers via TiO2 transfer.59 Contrary to the typical design, the catalytic fiber was surrounded by a helical photoanode (Fig. 19c), and an efficiency of 7.2% was achieved in the FDSC with a high Jsc of 19.35 mA cm−2. The intrinsic electrochemical properties, electrical conductivity of the TiN nanoplates, and their specific nanostructure (e.g. active sites, large macro-pores, tight fusion connectivity, and vertically aligned configuration) may function jointly for the photovoltaic performance. CoNiS2 nanoribbon and NR on carbon fibers with good catalytic activity to I3−/I− redox couple were applied to FDSCs (Fig. 19d). The former achieved higher efficiency (7.0%) than the latter (4.1%). The distinct morphologies and exposed crystal facet are responsible for the significant distinction in performance.134
Given that the functional electrode provides the current cycle, the counter electrode is of equal importance in the photoanode. Given the relatively simple electrochemical process, this fiber electrode is a good platform for traditional and new material studies. In response to the reduction reaction, a catalyst is necessary to reduce the over-potential and charge transport resistance. Since the size of counter electrode is relatively independent with fiber photoanode in FDSCs, non-Pt counter electrodes can reasonably “win” over Pt electrode by providing a larger amount and/or higher specific surface area, not taking into account the catalytic activity. Lighter weight, tighter connection, and smaller diameter are preferable for portable/wearable applications. Thus, materials with excellent catalytic activity, high specific surface area, long-term electrochemical stability, good adhesion, low cost, and easy preparation can play remarkable roles for efficient FDSCs.
4.4 Electrolyte

4.4.1 Liquid electrolyte. 
Liquid electrolyte based on the I3−/I− redox couple is the most used electrolyte for efficient FDSCs. The effects of I2 concentration on the device performance are caused by two contradictory factors: light harvesting and charge transportation. Optimized I2 concentration would balance these factors. Higher I2 concentration indicates guaranteed charge transfer at the counter electrode but more serious incident light loss. For concentrating systems, solar energy is excessive, and higher I2 concentration is preferable for enhanced charge transfer at the counter electrode.68 When the electrolyte in FDSCs is refreshed,135 the increased Voc is mainly ascribed to the electron recombination resistance at the photoanode/electrolyte interface, in which Li+ was proved to play an important role. The desorption of sensitizers and the increase in series resistance during the dynamic process result in decreased Jsc and η.
Non-iodine electrolyte thiolate/disulfide (T2/T−) couple redox shows negligible absorption in the visible region, which would benefit light harvesting in FDSCs. Determining suitable catalytic materials for the redox couple is important toward the fabrication of an efficient device. Zou et al.133 reported that pen ink/carbon fiber electrodes possess good catalytic activity toward T2/T− and contribute to achieving a solar conversion efficiency of 4.0%, which is higher than that of Pt-based devices (3.3%). Peng et al.75 reported a CNT counter electrode for a flexible device with an efficiency of 7.3%. Compared with a core–sheath CNT/RGONR, CNT/RGO composite, and RGO fibers, the CNT fiber displays a higher catalytic activity toward the thiolate/disulfide couple redox and superior device performance.93
Conventional liquid-based electrolytes have contributed to the most efficient FDSCs, but leakage and volatilization of the organic solution are potential long-term problems. Additional sealing is used to resolve this drawback in FDSC archetypes.136 In this case, volatile solvents would be avoided in electrolytes in future photovoltaic applications. However, the liquid electrolyte can guarantee moderate charge transport and light transparency, which are important in the development of highly efficient FDSCs. These characteristics are suitable supporting conditions for electrode material and interface studies.


4.4.2 Gel electrolyte. 
The gel electrolyte, which is easy to prepare and coat, may be more advantageous for practical applications. The polymer-based network can provide a passageway for the charge transport between two fiber electrodes, and the device performance has been gradually enhanced in recent studies. Zou and Wu's group first reported a poly(ethylene glycol) gel containing a I3−/I− redox couple for quasi-solid FDSCs, and an efficiency of up to 1.5% was achieved for the TNT-based device.65 Kang et al.137 prepared porous polyimide films as separators for FDSC using the phase inversion technique. Additionally, they prepared a series of porous polymer electrolyte membranes of PVdF-HFP with various P123 contents. The photovoltaic fibers exhibited the optimal performance of 1.0%, and they were woven into mesh-like modules.138 Although reported as a solid,106,139,140 treating the PVdF-HFP/3-MePRN/TBP composite as a gel may be more advantageous. The improved efficiency of 6.4% (7.4% with a mirror) and high Voc up to 0.8 V indicate the interface corporation of the fiber anode with the electrolyte. Ionic salts possess good conductivity and low vapor pressure, and they can also avoid solvents. Peng et al. claimed an efficiency of 2.6% with eutectic melts of ionic salts, and the devices showed a higher thermal stability and lifetime than liquid based FDSCs (Fig. 20).67,141
 Fig. 20  (a) η/η0 values at 30 °C and 100 °C. FDSCs were repeatedly heated to 100 °C and then cooled down to 30 °C. η and η0 correspond to the energy conversion efficiencies of the as-fabricated FDSC and the one after heating treatment. (b) Comparison of the operation stability of FDSCs based on liquid electrolyte and eutectic melts. η and η0 correspond to the energy conversion efficiencies of the as-fabricated FDSCs and the one in the following time during use. The devices were kept in the dark at a temperature range of (25 ± 5) °C and humidity range of (40 ± 30)%.141 Reproduced from ref. 141 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Thus, FDSCs based on gel electrolytes have achieved some progress, while further improvements may be performed. Recent gels derived from the traditional DSSCs can suffer from serious light absorption for FDSCs, which is responsible for the low Jsc and η. Exploring “more transparent” gels with good charge transport may be a solution.


4.4.3 Solid electrolyte. 
Solid electrolyte for FDSCs involves stable, solvent-free, and transparent film with good charge transport. Suitable hole-transport materials can avoid liquid linkage and provide long-term stability. But alternative materials for this case are very limited and preparing this functional layer is quite challenging.
In 2008, Zou et al. first applied CuI as the solid electrolyte for flexible FDSC, but the efficiency was only 0.06%.66 The defects in the CuI layer on the curved surface probably affected the carrier mobility and limited the photovoltaic performance. The TNT-based photoanode contributed to the higher efficiency of 0.21%, and the remarkably improved carrier-transfer is the possible reason.65 Additionally, flexible solid FDSCs with an efficiency of 1.38% were fabricated by employing the annealed Ti substrate and polymer-templated photoanode. The passivation layer formed on the substrate reduced the Schottky barrier at the anode interface. The micron holes increased the filling of the CuI electrolyte, which resulted in improved electron lifetime.57
The solid FDSC presents a possible approach toward “dry” photovoltaic fiber as well as inorganic, organic, and perovskite fiber solar cells. Given the aforementioned severe requirements, limited choices of materials are available. Even the famous hole transport material spiro-OMeTAD was not reported for solid FDSCs, probably because of the difficulty in preparing a uniform film of this material on a curved surface and its long-term stability in air. Novel hole transport layers may be the key point for efficient solid FDSCs.

5 3D solar devices with light-harvesting designs
FDSCs can harvest solar energy from spatial sources because of the symmetrical structure of the fiber photoanodes. Special optical designs may be drawn on two levels: the individual fiber electrode and the fiber device itself. Light-harvesting designs were involved in power output maximization of a single device, as well as taking advantage of the active materials and fiber solar cell properties.
In a typical FDSC architecture, a Pt counter electrode twisted around the photoanode can hinder the incident light to the photoanode and the shading effect of the electrolyte. Turning the two fibers around can avoid the problem and minimize the amount of Pt. Liu et al.142 reported a mini 3D solar device (Fig. 21a) utilizing a spiral-shaped Ti/TiO2/N719 photoanode around the counter electrode with an energy conversion efficiency of 4.1%. Under natural sunlight, the modules with a tree-like structure exhibited an efficiency of up to 4.9% with 3D light utilization.143 Moreover, DNA-like DSSCs with a symmetrical double-helix fiber photoanode and cathode were investigated (Fig. 21b).144,145 With a spiral wire photoanode, a novel stretchable photovoltaic device was fabricated on elastic conductive rubber fibers twisted with CNT fiber (Fig. 21c). The photovoltaic devices achieved an energy conversion efficiency of 7.1%, and the efficiency was well maintained under bending and stretching, which are important in portable electronic devices and facilities.146 For 3D DSSC design, mesh-based photoanodes have also been applied to TCO-free cylinders with an efficiency of 5.5%.147,148 These devices can capture light effectively from any direction to the device center. However, excess liquid electrolyte filled between the electrodes in the sealing tube.149 To reduce the amount of electrolyte, Hayase et al.150,151 designed coil-type TCO-less cylindrical DSSCs based on a metal wire-supported TiO2 porous layer with an efficiency of 3.9% to 4.7%. A glass mesh was employed to avoid a potential short-circuit between the two packing electrodes. The TiOx layer formed on the wire, and the wire diameter affected the overall device performance. Considering the difficulty in preparing spiral dye-sensitized photoanodes and fixing electrodes, the above 3D architectures have attracted relatively less attention. However, opportunities are open for highly efficient and practical designs. Jia et al.52 fabricated a flexible 3D solar device (Fig. 21d) with multi-working electrodes and one counter fiber electrode, which further extended the 3D light-harvesting property of a single fiber photoanode. The energy conversion efficiency increased gradually from 2.8% to 6.6% as the number of photoanodes increased from 1 to 6. Interface modification with a Nb2O5 energy barrier refreshed the efficiency to 9.1%, which was retained at about 93% under bending with different angles (1.7 cm long device bent at 30°, 90° and 180°).
 Fig. 21  Typical structures of 3D FDSCs. (a) DSSCs utilizing spiral-shaped fiber photoanode around the counter electrode.143 Reproduced from ref. 143 with permission. Copyright © 2009 Elsevier Ltd. (b) Symmetrical double-helix fiber electrodes for DNA-like DSSC.144 Reproduced from ref. 144 with permission. Copyright © 2009 Published by Elsevier B.V. (c) Stretchable photovoltaic device based on spiral wire photoanode and elastic rubber fibers twisted with CNT fibers.146 Reproduced from ref. 146 with permission. Copyright © 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Flexible 3D solar device with multi-working electrodes and one counter fiber electrode.52 Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission. Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. 
With efficient fiber electrodes, TCO-free, flexible, and bifacial DSSCs (Fig. 21a) were constructed with an efficiency of up to 2.4% (1.5 cm2), which is quite different from that of a traditional sandwich-type flat-cell structure.152 Similar solar devices were realized based on dye-sensitized ZnO arrays153 and a multi-color solar textile was fabricated with metal-free organic dyes.154 A flexible polymer solar cell textile with a similar light-harvesting function was also developed. Ti/TNT mesh, which was coated with P3HT:PCBM and PEDOT:PSS layers, was applied to transparent CNT sheets on both sides. The solid, lightweight, and flexible device exhibited an energy conversion efficiency of 1.1%.155
Given the 3D light-collection property of fiber devices, the power output of FDSCs can be remarkably larger via catoptric and concentrated light. In 2011, Zou and co-workers25 reported concentrating designs of FDSCs in conjunction with microgrooves (Fig. 22b), including V-shaped, semi-ellipse, semicircle, and parabolic light condensers. In the parabolic groove, the converged light was theoretically perpendicular to the FDSC and significantly increased the output power fivefold. A similar result was confirmed by Jia et al.125 To overcome the absorption of the electrolyte, red-shifting the incident light is a possible solution, but solar energy is lost during the luminescence. Luminescent solar concentrators can down-shift and concentrate light at the same time and could play a role in fiber solar designs. Integrating FDSCs and luminescent solar concentrators via grooves (Fig. 23), semi-transparent and colorful waveguide solar devices were achieved, which may be used as solar windows.68,156 The effects of concentrator selection, device design, iodine concentration, illumination area, angle of inclination, and light intensity were analyzed. Maximum output power achieved an enhancement factor of 5.7 via efficient light collection over a large area.
 Fig. 22  (a) Cross section (up) and sketch (down) of the flexible bifacial DSSC.152 Reproduced from ref. 152 with permission. Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) FDSCs in conjunction with microgrooves.25 Reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 23  (a) The scheme of waveguide solar devices integrating FDSCs and luminescent solar concentrators via grooves.68 Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Waveguide devices with nearly 90° tilted angle achieved Isc of 4.5 mA under natural light illumination (14:11–14:17 on September 11th, 2013).156 Reproduced from ref. 156 with permission. Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. 
6 Fiber hybrid energy systems for flexible electronics
Solar energy is widely distributed and environmentally friendly, but the weather and night can break its continuous supply. For flexible energy management, combining solar energy conversion with electrical power storage is a reliable approach. The power fibers are lightweight, flexible, and scalable, and they can be easily integrated into electronic textiles. Integrated fiber-shaped energy devices can serve as a solar-powered system for portable microelectronics, which significantly improved the original scope of photovoltaic cells and resulted in extensive opportunities for interdisciplinary research.
Considering the wire shape, integration of fiber solar cells with fiber shaped supercapacitors (FSCs) has attracted much attention.157 In 2011, Wang and co-workers26 considered the integration of multiple energy harvesters and a storage device along a single fiber. In their design, a nanogenerator, DSSC, and a supercapacitor were built on a flexible PMMA fiber coated with a thin Au film (Fig. 24a). However, these devices were characterized separately, and the incorporation of multi-energy conversion approaches was not presented. Zou et al.69 developed an integrated power fiber with an overall efficiency of 2.1% that incorporated FDSCs and FSCs (Fig. 24b). The polyaniline-coated SS wires acted as the counter electrode of FDSCs (5.4%) and symmetrical electrodes of faradic supercapacitors (19 mF cm−2). Peng et al.70 applied CNT fiber for FDSC (2.2%) and double-layer supercapacitors (0.6 mF cm−2), and the integrated system exhibited an overall efficiency of 1.5%. These trials successfully used the catalytic and electrochemical properties of multi-functional materials, and attempts toward gel/solid single integrated power fibers are promising. Ti wire-supported titania nanotubes and aligned CNT sheets are two electrodes for both FDSCs and supercapacitors.158,159 These bi-functional devices achieved a maximal solar energy conversion efficiency of 6.58% and a specific length capacitance of 85.03 mF cm−1, respectively.158 With a solid electrolyte, the photoelectric conversion and energy storage efficiencies have reached 2.73% and 75.7%, respectively.159 The overall device efficiency was maintained by 88% after 1000 bending cycles and by 90% after 1000 hours. With similar design, organic fiber solar cells have also been utilized to the integrated system (Fig. 24c).160 The organic solar cell based on P3HT:PCBM and PEDOT:PSS layers achieved an efficiency of 1.0% and an asymmetrical supercapacitor energy storage efficiency of 65.6%. The all solid-state and self-powered fiber showed an entire solar-electrical conversion efficiency of 0.82%.
 Fig. 24  (a) Fiber-based multi-energy device composed of a nanogenerator, solar cell, and supercapacitor. ZnO NWs were grown on the Au-coated flexible plastic wire and Cu mesh with conductive graphene as electrodes.26 Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission. Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Integrated power fiber consisting of an FDSC and FSC.69 Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) All solid-state, coaxial, and integrated fiber devices based on organic fiber solar cell and supercapacitor.160 Reproduced from ref. 160 with permission. Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Self-powered, elastic energy fiber with 3D solar cell in its sheath and CNT double-layer supercapacitor in the core.161 Reproduced from ref. 161 with permission. Copyright © 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) The 3D hybrid cell with an optical FDSC, which harvests solar energy, and a piezoelectric nanogenerator shell, which harvests mechanical energy.162 Reproduced from ref. 162 with permission. Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In addition to the above linear localized power fibers, coaxially integrated power fibers were also designed for multi-step energy conversion. A coaxial energy fiber integrating a 3D solar cell in its sheath and a CNT double-layer supercapacitor in the core was developed (Fig. 24d).161 This energy fiber exhibited a total efficiency of energy conversion and storage of 1.83%. The coaxial structure and aligned nanostructure at the interface of the electrode enabled the device to be robust to bending and stretching. These characteristics facilitate the practical application of these devices on wearable electronics.
Although characterized with high power output, FSCs with low energy density would become saturated after solar-charging for only several minutes. Thus, a fiber rechargeable battery may be more suitable for long-term energy storage. Zou et al. developed a flexible fiber-shaped zinc bromide battery with a capacity of up to 19 mA h mL−1 and an energy efficiency of 69%. This battery exhibited good cycle stability, linear capacity, and linear energy density. The design included flexible conductive electrodes without additional fragmenting coating layers. This characteristic enhanced the device flexibility and allowed the fiber battery to be easily integrated into the cloth for wearable electronics. Solar-charging the fiber battery with flexible fiber-based solar modules resulted in an overall efficiency of 3.4% for the hybrid energy system.56
Fiber solar cells have been integrated to other hybrid energy systems. Wang et al.162 demonstrated an optical fiber-based coaxially structured 3D compact hybrid cell (Fig. 24e), in which the DSSC core harvested solar energy, while the piezoelectric nanogenerator shell harvested mechanical energy. The flexible device can work simultaneously or independently, and the output of the hybrid cell (∼7.65 μA current and 3.3 V voltage) is strong enough to power nanodevices or even personal electronics.
Still, recent hybrid energy systems are in the preliminary stage. More concept than design art is expected, especially device scale, performance, repeatability, and cost, et al. As the evolution of device physics, multi-functional energy devices are on the way.
7 Summary and perspectives
Various fiber/wire-shaped solar cells have achieved great progress in recent years. Especially, the energy conversion efficiency of FDSCs has remarkably and rapidly increased from <0.5% to >9%. Moreover, ultra-long, flexible, stable, and lightweight devices have been reported as potential flexible/wearable power sources. However, these notable features were realized in different systems. For example, high efficiencies appeared without long-term stability and large size. Lightweight and stable devices were reported with relatively low efficiency or power output. Future explorations should be aimed at optimizing the device parameters and features synergistically.
Despite promising device performance, the liquid electrolyte is a potential drawback for FDSCs. Opportunities are open for quasi-solid and solid FDSCs, as well as other inorganic, organic and hybrid photovoltaic fibers. We believe that perovskite solar cells, which can be constructed via a solution process, can be a suitable candidate for efficient solid photovoltaic fibers. Further material science, interface engineering and structural designs can promote perovskite solar fibers to higher levels, such as efficient perovskite solar wires in tens of centimeters, self-standing devices with harmless/protective packages, and solar textiles for wearable power sources. Beyond materials science and fiber architectures, other considerations, such as technical solutions to controllable electrode disposition and efficient manufacture/integration, may be considered for actual solar textiles, which were discussed by Krebs et al.163 But the particularity of fiber solar cells might bring a new concept to the technical field.
The properties of fiber devices have been gradually recognized and utilized to optical designs for high power output. Replacement of rare-metal materials is another concern in previous studies, and satisfying results have been achieved. Novel materials and micro/nanostructure construction are the keys for these breakthroughs, and the foundation for further innovations has been established. The structure of fiber devices has also been extensively developed to flexible or even elastic 3D solar devices and integrated energy systems. Although previous studies only provided the initial ideas, they facilitated the breakthrough for novel solar architecture and portable/wearable electronics of the future.
We are optimistic that new materials, preparation technology, and interface engineering can make a difference in the future, and photovoltaic fiber will find its role as a solar technology. Further studies on fiber innovation may also result in higher efficiency, longer lifetime, harmless devices, practical solar modules, and solar-driven electronics, among others.
Acknowledgements
This study is jointly supported by Ministry of Science and Technology of China (No. 2011CB933300), National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 91333107; No. 51573004) and the fund from Shenzhen City (No. CXZZ20120618162051603).
References
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2015, 23, 1–9 Search PubMed .
T. K. Todorov, J. Tang, S. Bag, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen, Y. Zhu and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 34–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          http://www.nrel.gov/ncpv/images/efficiency_chart.jpg
        .
R. F. Service, Science, 2003, 301, 909–911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Köhler, Mater. Des., 2013, 51, 51–60 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, X. Lu, B. Liu, D. Chen, Y. Tong and G. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4763–4782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Z. Wu, S. Yuan and X. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2101–2122 CAS .
X. Cai, M. Peng, X. Yu, Y. P. Fu and D. C. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 1184–1200 RSC .
K. Jost, G. Dion and Y. Gogotsi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10776–10787 CAS .
M. B. Schubert and J. H. Werner, Mater. Today, 2006, 9, 42–50 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, L. Lin and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 436–462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Zou, Z. B. Lv, X. Cai and S. C. Hou, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 273–281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Zou, D. Wang, Z. Z. Chu, Z. B. Lv and X. Fan, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 1169–1178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, L. B. Qiu, Z. B. Yang and H. S. Peng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5031–5041 RSC .
T. Könyves-Toth, A. Gassmann and H. von Seggern, Materials, 2014, 7, 5254–5267 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Pan, Z. Zhang, W. Weng, H. Lin, Z. Yang and H. Peng, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 276–284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, K. Jiang and G. Shen, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 265–272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yu, Q. Qian, L. Wei, W. Jiang, K. Goh, J. Wei, J. Zhang and Y. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 647–662 RSC .
DE3209548-A, JP60042876-A, EP745276-A and JP8018080-A.
US2005211294-A1, JP2005216861-A and CN200610114454.7.
B. Baps, M. Eber-Koyuncu and M. Koyuncu, Key Eng. Mater., 2001, 206–213, 937–940 Search PubMed .

          H. Kuraseko, T. Nakamura, S. Toda, H. Koaizawa, H. Jia and M. Kondo, Conference Record of the 2006 IEEE 4th World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion,  2006, vol. 2, pp. 1380–1383 Search PubMed .
J. Liu, M. A. G. Namboothiry and D. L. Carroll, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 63501 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Fan, Z. Z. Chu, F. Z. Wang, C. Zhang, L. Chen, Y. W. Tang and D. C. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 592–595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Fu, Z. B. Lv, S. C. Hou, H. W. Wu, D. Wang, C. Zhang, Z. Z. Chu, X. Cai, X. Fan, Z. L. Wang and D. C. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3379–3383 CAS .
J. Bae, Y. J. Park, M. Lee, S. N. Cha, Y. J. Choi, C. S. Lee, J. M. Kim and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3446–3449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, L. Song, Q. Tian, X. Kuang, J. Hu, J. Liu, J. Yang and Z. Chen, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 769–776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Qiu, J. Deng, X. Lu, Z. Yang and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10425–10428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          W. Xu, S. Choi and M. G. Allen, 2010 IEEE 23rd International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS),  2010, pp. 1187–1190 Search PubMed .
R. He, T. D. Day, M. Krishnamurthi, J. R. Sparks, P. J. Sazio, V. Gopalan and J. V. Badding, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1461–1467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. A. Martinsen, B. K. Smeltzer, M. Nord, T. Hawkins, J. Ballato and U. J. Gibson, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, M. A. G. Namboothiry and D. L. Carroll, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 133515 CrossRef PubMed .

          S. Chuangchote, T. Sagawa and S. Yoshikawa, 9th Eco-Energy and Materials Science and Engineering Symposium,  2011, vol. 9 Search PubMed .
B. O'Connor, K. P. Pipe and M. Shtein, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 193306 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Bedeloglu, A. Demir, Y. Bozkurt and N. S. Sariciftci, Text. Res. J., 2009, 80, 1065–1074 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, E. D. Peterson, H. Huang, M. Wang, D. Xue, W. Nie, W. Zhou and D. L. Carroll, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 243505 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Hur, K. Im, U. J. Kim, T.-H. Kim, J.-J. Park, S. Hwang and N. Park, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 53, 05HB01 CrossRef .
Y. Li, M. J. Wang, H. H. Huang, W. Y. Nie, Q. Li, E. D. Peterson, R. Coffin, G. J. Fang and D. L. Carroll, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 085206 CrossRef .
M. R. Lee, R. D. Eckert, K. Forberich, G. Dennler, C. J. Brabec and R. A. Gaudiana, Science, 2009, 324, 232–235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Z. Yang, Z. Wu, G. Guan, S. Pan, Y. Zhang, H. Li, J. Deng, B. Sun and H. Peng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301750 Search PubMed .
T. Chen, L. Qiu, H. Li and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23655–23658 RSC .
D. Liu, M. Zhao, Y. Li, Z. Bian, L. Zhang, Y. Shang, X. Xia, S. Zhang, D. Yun, Z. Liu, A. Cao and C. Huang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 11027–11034 CAS .
D. Liu, Y. Li, S. Zhao, A. Cao, C. Zhang, Z. Liu, Z. Bian, Z. Liu and C. Huang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 13720–13727 RSC .
Z. Zhang, X. Li, G. Guan, S. Pan, Z. Zhu, D. Ren and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11571–11574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lee, Y. Lee, J. Park and D. Choi, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 88–93 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, W. Nie, J. Liu, A. Partridge and D. L. Carroll, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2010, 16, 1827–1837 CrossRef CAS .
B. O'Connor, D. Nothern, K. P. Pipe and M. Shtein, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, A432–A443 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Research Highlights, 
          Nat. Mater.,  2008, 7, 169, http://www.nature.com/nmat/journal/v7/n3/full/nmat2139.html Search PubMed.
Z. Lv, Y. Fu, S. Hou, D. Wang, H. Wu, C. Zhang, Z. Chu and D. Zou, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 10076–10083 RSC .

          H. Peng, Fiber-Shaped Energy Harvesting and Storage Devices, Springer,  2015 Search PubMed .
J. Liang, G. Zhang, W. Sun and P. Dong, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 501–509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Fu, M. Peng, Z. B. Lv, X. Cai, S. C. Hou, H. W. Wu, X. Yu, H. Kafafy and D. C. Zou, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 537–544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, M. Peng, W. Song, H. Wang and D. Zou, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 341–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, G. Zhang, Y. Yang and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19841–19847 CAS .
M. Peng, K. Yan, H. Hu, D. Shen, W. Song and D. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 2157–2165 RSC .
D. Wang, S. C. Hou, H. W. Wu, C. Zhang, Z. Z. Chu and D. C. Zou, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6383–6388 RSC .
Z. Yang, H. Sun, T. Chen, L. Qiu, Y. Luo and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7545–7548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, H. Dai, Y. Zhou, Y. Hu, T. Yu, J. Liu and Z. Zou, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 14321–14324 RSC .
X. Cai, S. Hou, H. Wu, Z. Lv, Y. Fu, D. Wang, C. Zhang, H. Kafafy, Z. Chu and D. Zou, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 125–130 RSC .
M. J. Uddin, B. Davies, T. J. Dickens and O. I. Okoli, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 115, 166–171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. J. Cai, T. Chen and H. S. Peng, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14856–14860 RSC .
B. Weintraub, Y. G. Wei and Z. L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 8981–8985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Q. Huang, Q. X. Zhang, X. M. Huang, X. Z. Guo, M. H. Deng, D. M. Li, Y. H. Luo, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda and Q. B. Meng, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 375201 CrossRef PubMed .
J. F. Yu, D. Wang, Y. N. Huang, X. Fan, X. Tang, C. Gao, J. L. Li, D. C. Zou and K. Wu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2011, 6, 94 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Fan, Z. Z. Chu, L. Chen, C. Zhang, F. Z. Wang, Y. W. Tang, J. L. Sun and D. C. Zou, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 113510 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Hao, L. Houpu, Y. Xiao, Y. Zhibin, D. Jue, Q. Longbin and P. Huisheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 345–349 Search PubMed .
M. Peng, S. C. Hou, H. W. Wu, Q. Y. Yang, X. Cai, X. Yu, K. Yan, H. W. Hu, F. R. Zhu and D. C. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 926–932 CAS .
Y. P. Fu, H. W. Wu, S. Y. Ye, X. Cai, X. Yu, S. C. Hou, H. Kafafy and D. C. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 805–812 CAS .
T. Chen, L. Qiu, Z. Yang, Z. Cai, J. Ren, H. Li, H. Lin, X. Sun and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11977–11980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gao, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2448–2463 CAS .
S. He, L. Qiu, X. Fang, G. Guan, P. Chen, Z. Zhang and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9406–9410 CAS .
J. Velten, Z. Kuanyshbekova, Ö. Göktepe, F. Göktepe and A. Zakhidov, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 203902 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Guo, C. Xu, G. Zhu, C. Pan, C. Lin and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 176–182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pan, Z. Yang, H. Li, L. Qiu, H. Sun and H. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10622–10625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Weerasinghe, F. Z. Huang and Y. B. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 174–189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Brown, F. De Rossi, F. Di Giacomo, G. Mincuzzi, V. Zardetto, A. Reale and A. Di Carlo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10788–10817 CAS .
J. Yan, M. J. Uddin, T. J. Dickens, D. E. Daramola and O. I. Okoli, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 1, 1400075 Search PubMed .
J. Ramier, C. J. G. Plummer, Y. Leterrier, J. A. E. Månson, B. Eckert and R. Gaudiana, Renewable Energy, 2008, 33, 314–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lv, J. Yu, H. Wu, J. Shang, D. Wang, S. Hou, Y. Fu, K. Wu and D. Zou, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1248–1253 RSC .
Z. Y. Liu and M. Misra, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2196–2200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Fu, Z. B. Lv, H. W. Wu, S. C. Hou, X. Cai, D. Wang and D. C. Zou, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 102, 212–219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chu, L. Y. Li, J. Su, F. F. Tu, N. S. Liu and Y. H. Gao, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4420 Search PubMed .
L. Chu, J. Su, W. Ahmad, N. Liu, L. Li and Y. Gao, Mater. Res. Bull., 2015, 66, 244–248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, C. F. Pan, Y. Liu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 259–272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hou, X. Cai, H. Wu, X. Yu, M. Peng, K. Yan and D. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3356 CAS .
S. Q. Huang, H. C. Sun, X. M. Huang, Q. X. Zhang, D. M. Li, Y. H. Luo and Q. B. Meng, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2012, 7, 222 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Cai, S. Hou, X. Yu, H. Wu, M. Peng and D. Zou, Polym. Bull., 2014, 8, 69–83 Search PubMed .
X. Yu, Y. P. Fu, X. Cai, H. Kafafy, H. W. Wu, M. Peng, S. C. Hou, Z. B. Lv, S. Y. Ye and D. C. Zou, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 1242–1248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Hou, X. Cai, Y. P. Fu, Z. B. Lv, D. Wang, H. W. Wu, C. Zhang, Z. Z. Chu and D. C. Zou, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13776–13779 RSC .
T. Chen, S. T. Wang, Z. B. Yang, Q. Y. Feng, X. M. Sun, L. Li, Z. S. Wang and H. S. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1815–1819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, C. Y. Ji, Z. Q. Bian, R. H. Liu, X. Y. Xia, D. Q. Yun, L. H. Zhang, C. H. Huang and A. Y. Cao, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3383–3387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pan, Z. Yang, P. Chen, X. Fang, G. Guan, Z. Zhang, J. Deng and H. Peng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16419–16425 CAS .
W. Guo, C. Xu, X. Wang, S. Wang, C. Pan, C. Lin and Z. L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4437–4441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cai, H. W. Wu, S. C. Hou, M. Peng, X. Yu and D. C. Zou, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 474–482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hou, X. Cai, H. Wu, Z. Lv, D. Wang, Y. Fu and D. Zou, J. Power Sources, 2012, 215, 164–169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mingxuan and C. Xiaoli, J. Power Sources, 2013, 223, 74–78 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhang, C. Ji, Z. Bian, P. Yu, L. Zhang, D. Liu, E. Shi, Y. Shang, H. Peng, Q. Cheng, D. Wang, C. Huang and A. Cao, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7191–7198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, L. Qiu, H. G. Kia, Z. Yang and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4623–4628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, X. You, Z. Yang, J. Deng and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12422–12425 CAS .
J. Yan, M. J. Uddin, T. J. Dickens and O. I. Okoli, Sol. Energy, 2013, 96, 239–252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Luo, X. Li, J. X. Zhang, C. R. Liao and X. J. Li, J. Nanomater., 2014, 580256 Search PubMed .
M. J. Uddin, T. J. Dickens, J. Yan, D. O. Olawale, O. I. Okoli, F. Cesano and Asme, Proc. ASME Conf. Smart Mater., Adapt. Struct. Intell. Syst., 2013, 1, 879–884 Search PubMed .
G. Sun, X. Wang and P. Chen, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 215–226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, L. B. Qiu, Z. B. Cai, F. Gong, Z. B. Yang, Z. S. Wang and H. S. Peng, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2568–2572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Uddin, T. Dickens, J. Yan, R. Chirayath, D. O. Olawale and O. I. Okoli, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 108, 65–69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Feng, S. H. Tao, X. Y. Zhang, J. Li, Z. H. Liu and X. Fan, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 3509–3511 RSC .
S. C. Hou, Z. B. Lv, H. W. Wu, X. Cai, Z. Z. Chu, Yiliguma and D. C. Zou, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6549–6552 RSC .
M. Toivola, M. Ferenets, P. Lund and A. Harlin, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2799–2802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gagliardi and A. D. Carlo, Opt. Quantum Electron., 2012, 44, 141–147 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gagliardi, M. A. D. Maur and A. D. Carlo, IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 2011, 46, 1214–1221 CrossRef .
A. Gagliardi, M. A. D. Maur, D. Gentilini and A. D. Carlo, J. Comput. Electron., 2011, 10, 424–436 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, F. Wang, Z. Chu, L. Chen, C. Zhang and D. Zou, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 073501 CrossRef PubMed .
S. K. Balasingam, M. G. Kang and Y. Jun, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 11457–11475 RSC .
H. Dai, Y. Zhou, L. Chen, B. L. Guo, A. D. Li, J. G. Liu, T. Yu and Z. G. Zou, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5102–5108 RSC .
H. Dai, Y. Zhou, Q. Liu, Z. D. Li, C. X. Bao, T. Yu and Z. G. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5454–5460 RSC .
K. Fan, R. J. Li, J. N. Chen, W. Y. Shi and T. Y. Peng, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2013, 5, 1596–1626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. He, J. Qiu, F. Zhuge, X. Li, J. H. Lee, Y. D. Kim, H. K. Kim and Y. H. Hwang, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 225602 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, Q. Zhao, H. Dong, Q. Ma, W. Wang, D. Xu and D. Yu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13203–13212 RSC .
M. J. Yun, S. I. Cha, S. H. Seo and D. Y. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5322 CAS .
Z. Tachan, S. Ruhle and A. Zaban, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 317–322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Q. Huang, X. Z. Guo, X. M. Huang, Q. X. Zhang, H. C. Sun, D. M. Li, Y. H. Luo and Q. B. Meng, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 315402 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liang, J. Yang, G. Zhang and W. Sun, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 37, 80–83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, Y. Zhou, H. Dai, Z. D. Li, T. Yu, J. G. Liu and Z. G. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11790–11794 CAS .
J. Liang, G. Zhang, J. Yin and Y. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 272, 719–729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tao, G. J. Fang, W. J. Ke, W. Zeng and J. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 245, 59–65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Peng, X. Cai, Y. Fu, X. Yu, S. Liu, B. Deng, K. Hany and D. Zou, J. Power Sources, 2014, 247, 249–255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, M. Wen, X. Fan, J. Du, Z. Liu and C. Tao, Colloids Surf., A, 2013, 428, 32–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Zhang, E. Z. Shi, C. Y. Ji, Z. Li, P. X. Li, Y. Y. Shang, Y. B. Li, J. Q. Wei, K. L. Wang, H. W. Zhu, D. H. Wu and A. Y. Cao, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4954–4959 RSC .
H. N. Chen, L. Q. Zhu, H. C. Liu and W. P. Li, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 075402 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Uddin, D. E. Daramola, E. Velasquez, T. J. Dickens, J. Yan, E. Hammel, F. Cesano and O. I. Okoli, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2014, 8, 898–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, Z. Yang, X. Chen, L. Qiu, X. You, P. Chen and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8276–8280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cai, Z. Lv, H. Wu, S. Hou and D. Zou, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9639–9644 RSC .
L. Chen, Y. Zhou, H. Dai, T. Yu, J. Liu and Z. Zou, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 697–703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lv, H. Wu, X. Cai, Y. Fu, D. Wang, Z. Chu and D. Zou, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2012, 104597 Search PubMed .
Beijing Science Video: Flexible Fiber Solar Cells 2013, http://www.bjscivid.org/html/2013/guonei_0517/15545.html.
J. H. Kim, H. S. Jung, Y. S. Chi and T. J. Kang, Sol. Energy, 2012, 86, 2606–2612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kim, Y. S. Chi and T. J. Kang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 229, 84–94 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. S. Lim, N. Yantara, X. Liu, D. Sabba, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Uddin, B. Davies, T. J. Dickens and O. I. Okoli, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 115, 166–171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Z. Yang, L. Qiu, X. Fang, H. Sun, P. Chen, S. Pan and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3841–3846 CAS .
Y. Liu, M. Li, H. Wang, J. M. Zheng, H. M. Xu, Q. H. Ye and H. Shen, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2010, 43, 205103 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, H. Wang, H. Shen and W. Chen, Appl. Energy, 2010, 87, 436–441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Yang, H. Wang, H. Shen, M. Li and J. Yan, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2010, 10, 119–123 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, H. Yang and H. Xu, Mater. Lett., 2010, 64, 164–166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Deng, X. Sun, H. Li and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2643–2647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, H. Yang and L. Lu, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 108, 064510 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Usagawa, S. S. Pandey, Y. Ogomi, S. Noguchi, Y. Yamaguchi and S. Hayase, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2013, 21, 517–524 CAS .
W. Zeng, M. J. Wang, Y. Li, J. W. Wan, H. H. Huang, H. Tao, D. L. Carroll, X. Z. Zhao, D. C. Zou and G. J. Fang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 261, 75–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kapil, J. Ohara, Y. Ogomi, S. S. Pandey, T. L. Ma and S. Hayase, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 22959–22963 RSC .
G. Kapil, S. S. Pandey, Y. Ogomi, T. Ma and S. Hayase, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 3399–3405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Fu, Z. B. Lv, S. C. Hou, H. W. Wu, D. Wang, C. Zhang and D. C. Zou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 37–41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, Q. Zhao, H. Li, H. W. Wu, D. C. Zou and D. P. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2775–2782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chae, S. J. Kim, J. H. Kim and E. Kim, Dyes Pigm., 2015, 113, 378–389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Pan, Z. B. Yang, P. N. Chen, J. Deng, H. P. Li and H. S. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 6110–6114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Peng, X. Yu, X. Cai, Q. Yang, H. Hu, K. Yan, H. Wang, B. Dong, F. Zhu and D. Zou, Nano Energy, 2014, 10, 117–124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, Z. Yang and H. Peng, ChemPhysChem, 2013, 14, 1777–1782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, X. You, J. Deng, X. Chen, Z. Yang, P. Chen, X. Fang and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 6664–6668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, H. Sun, Z. Yang, G. Guan, Z. Zhang, L. Qiu and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1897–1902 CAS .
Z. Zhang, X. Chen, P. Chen, G. Guan, L. Qiu, H. Lin, Z. Yang, W. Bai, Y. Luo and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 466–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Deng, H. Sun, J. Ren, S. Pan and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7038–7042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Pan, W. Guo, L. Dong, G. Zhu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3356–3361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Krebs and M. Hosel, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 966–969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:
Ming Peng	Ming Peng received his B.S. degree in 2011 from Wuhan University, Wuhan, China. He is a Ph.D. candidate of Zou Lab in the Department of Polymer Science and Engineering, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering at Peking University. His main research interest is synthesis of optoelectronic nanomaterials and design of novel fiber based solar cells and batteries.
Dechun Zou	Dr Dechun Zou received his doctoral degree from the Kyushu University, Japan, in 1990. He joined Mitsubishi Petrochemicals, Japan as a research scientist from 1990 to 1993, Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology as a visiting researcher from 1994 to 1995, Casio Computer Co., Ltd. as a research contractor in 1996, and CREST, JST (Tsutsui Project) as a research contractor in 1997. He was an associate professor at Kyushu University from 1998 to 2001. Since 2001, he has been a professor at the College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, China. His research interests include organic light-emitting diodes, photovoltaics, flexible energy conversion/storage devices and related device physics. He was one of the recipients of the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars. At present, he is the chief scientist of the National Key Basic Scientific Research Program on fiber-shaped solar cells in China.

 	Fig. 1  Past records of fiber solar cells.13,19–28	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Differential interference contrast optical micrograph of a representative 15 μm diameter Si p–i–n junction; (b) flexible silicon fiber solar cell of ∼1 m long based on p–i–n junction.30 Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission, Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Fabrication of Mo/CIS/CdS/ZnO/ITO single-wire flexible solar cells; (b) the time-dependent change in the conversion efficiency of the single-wire solar cell stored at 60 °C for 0–600 h. Insert is a photo of the single-wire device.27 Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission, Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 4  Organic fiber solar cell based on optical fiber (a) and its light harvesting path (b).32 Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission, rights managed by AIP Publishing LLC (2007).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Organic fiber solar cell with CNT films as the counter electrode (bent to nearly 90 degrees). (b) Organic fiber solar cell based on CNT yarns. (c) J–V curves of CNT film based organic fiber solar cell in straight form (0 degree) and bent at 45 and 90 degrees, respectively, showing stable behavior during bending. (d) J–V curves of the CNT yarn based organic fiber solar cell in its original state and after storage in inertia gas for 20 days.42 Reproduced from ref. 42 with permission. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Concept of a stitchable organic photovoltaic textile. (b) Photographs of the textile-based OPV integrated with clothing.45 Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission. Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Flexible wire-like dye-sensitized solar cell based on twisted metal electrodes.24 Reproduced with permission from ref. 24. Copyright © 2008 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Schematic of singly twisted FDSCs where the counter electrode (Pt wire) is wound around the fiber photoanode, with working mechanism.25 Reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Ultra-long FDSC of more than 30 cm (with aspect ratio of 310) displays Isc of 11.4 mA under natural light conditions (13:50 on October 16, 2013); (d) flexible fabric of flexible FDSCs on the cloth substrate.56 Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Structure and (b) energy level diagram of flexible perovskite fiber solar cells based on a carbon nanotube sheet.28 Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission. Copyright © 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

CF/p-poly Si/n-poly Si/Ag	Hairlike single fiber	4	1.7	0.14	0.246	0.04	
29

Capillary fiber/p-Si/i-Si/n-Si/Ti–Au	Coaxial silicon fiber with p–i–n junction	1	2	0.22	0.55	0.5	
30

Al–Pt/p-Si/i-Si/n-Si/ITO	Silicon-core single fiber	<1	16.6	0.3	0.52	3.6	
31

Mo/CuInSe2/CdS/ZnO/ITO	Non-Si flexible fiber	4	13.0	0.34	0.522	2.31	
27

Optical fiber/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/LiF/Al	Waveguide light-collection	∼1.4	∼7.0	—	—	1.1	
32

SS/TiOx/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/LiF/Ag/SS	ITO-free; twisted fibers; 5–30 cm	—	11.9	0.607	0.538	3.87	
39

Ti/TiO2/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/CNT fiber	Flexible and stable	—	9.06	0.52	0.38	1.78	
40

SS/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/CNT yarn	CNT yarn; stable	—	8.49	>0.56	—	2.3	
42

SS/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/graphene	Single-layer graphene sheets	—	8.14	0.570	0.545	2.53	
43

Ti/TiO2/N719/I−-I3−/Pt	TiO2 colloids; 3D light-harvesting	4.8	12.28	0.728	0.786	7.02	
25

Ti/TMCA-TiO2/N719/I−-I3−/Pt	Micron-core array; multilayer structure	5–7	16.04	0.702	0.717	8.07	
54

Ti/TiO2/N719/I−-I3−/graphene-Pt	Graphene/Pt composite fiber	—	—	0.744	0.63	8.45	
58

Ti/TiO2/N719/I−-I3−/TiN/carbon fiber	Helical photoanode; non-Pt	—	19.35	0.64	0.58	7.20	
59

Ti/TiO2 nanotube/N719/I−-I3−/Pt	Flexible; ordered TiO2 nanotube arrays	—	15.9	0.673	0.80	8.6	
55

(Ti/TiO2/N719)6/I−-I3−/Pt	Multi-fiber anodes	1.7	18.6	0.66	0.74	9.1	
52

Ti/bilayer-TiO2/N719/I−-I3−/Pt	Facile synthesis	5	—	—	—	Avg. 7.2	
53

Longest single device; highest power output	9.0	12.58	0.683	0.712	6.12	
56

31.5	8.09	0.716	0.692	4.01	
56

CNT yarn/TiO2/N719/I−-I3−/CNT yarn-Pt	Flexible; all carbon device	—	19.8	0.54	0.319	3.4	
73

Optical fiber/ITO/TiO2 NW/N719/I−-I3−/Pt	Waveguide; cylindrical electrode	2–3	18.50	∼0.6	—	6	
74

Ti/TiO2/N719/T−-T2/CNT fiber	Flexible; non-I2 electrolyte	—	15.49	0.683	0.69	7.33	
75

SS/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/CNT	Flexible coaxial perovskite solar fiber	<4	10.2	0.664	0.487	3.3	
28

SS/ZnO/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/CNT	ZnO nano-obelisk array; mild conditions	<5	∼12	∼0.65	—	3.8	
72


Diagram	

	

	


Composition	TCO/TiO2/dye/electrolyte/Pt/TCO	Ti/TiO2/dye/electrolyte/Pt/TCO	Ti/TiO2/dye/electrolyte/Pt
Shape	Flat	Flat	Wire/fiber/rod/tube
Flexibility	TCO substrate; area/thickness ratio	Flexible substrate; area/thickness ratio	Soft package; length/diameter ratio
Light collection	Front illuminated; TCO → TiO2/dye	Back illuminated; TCO/Pt → electrolyte → TiO2/dye	3D light harvesting; tube → electrolyte → TiO2/dye
Electron injection	Dye → TiO2 → TCO	Dye → TiO2 → Ti	Dye → TiO2 → Ti
Electrodes	Anode/cathode = 1/1; face-to-face	Anode/cathode = 1/1; face-to-face	No explicit ratio; twisted, in apparel or single fiber

 	Fig. 9  (a) 3D light-collecting schematic of the fiber-shaped solar cell (Cell A); (b) 3D light-collecting schematic of the traditional plate solar cell (Cell C); (c) the angle dependences of the normalized short-circuit currents of the Cell A and those of the composite Cell A; (d) the angle dependences of the normalized short-circuit currents of the plate Cell C. (e) Schematic of the diffuse reflection illumination mode.25 Reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
A = d × l

 	Fig. 10  (a) The illumination area of typical sandwich-type solar cells is the apparent active area or masked geometrical area; (b) according to the projection relation, the cross sectional area of the fiber photoanode is the position for direct solar energy harvesting.	 
Jsc = Isc/A and η = Jsc × Voc × FF × 100%,

 	Fig. 11  (a) EIS measurements for the FDSSCs based on W and Ti wires with TiO2 photoanodes. The W based FDSCs showed a drastic decrease in the internal resistance, which means a larger recombination rate in the photoelectrode, which might be due to the high-level conduction band mismatch between the TiO2 working electrode and the WO3 layer. (b) Energy state diagram for different metal wire-based FDSC featuring the operation principle, and the dashed line shows that the photoelectrons cannot transfer from the TiO2 nanoarray to the NiO film.83 Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission. Copyright © 2014, Rights Managed by Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) FDSCs based on CNT and RGO fibers.93 Reproduced from ref. 93 with permission. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of configuration of the CF/TiO2 NR array-based tube-shaped DSSC.94 Reproduced from ref. 94 with permission. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society. (c) Flexible single-wire DSSCs by wrapping a carbon nanotube film around Ti wire-supported TiO2 tube arrays as the transparent electrode.92 Reproduced from ref. 92 with permission. Copyright © 2011, American Chemical Society. (d) All-carbon-based FDSC with highly flexible aligned carbon nanotube fibers as a catalytic counter electrode and current photoanode collector.105 Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Morphology of the conductive thread based on insulating thread substrates and PEDOT:PSS dispersion. (b) J–V curves of the fiber-shaped solar cells using conductive thread electrodes soaked in water, acetonitrile, and electrolyte, which corresponds to efficiencies of 4–5%.108 Reproduced from ref. 107 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) A 3D DSSC was constructed based on ZnO NWs vertically grown on an optical fiber. The internal light reflection along the fiber was guided to the photoanode. (b) J–V curves of a DSSC under one full-sun illumination oriented (1) normal to the fiber axis (NA, 2D) and (2) parallel to the fiber axis (PA, 3D). A corresponding EEF of 4.3 has been achieved by converting the 2D DSSC to the 3D DSSC. The inset shows a plot of EEF and the corresponding energy conversion efficiencies for eight 3D DSSCs.63 Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission. Copyright © 2009 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 15  TiO2 with different nanostructures for FDSCs: SEM images of a smooth TiO2 nanotube array (a and b) and a hierarchical TiO2 nanotube array (c and d).55 Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) J–V curves of the flexible FDSC (length: 9.0 cm; photoanode diameter: 280 μm). The device was tested with a normal black background (normal model) and with a sheet of A4 white paper as a diffuse plate (diffuse model). Inset: Ti supported TiO2 bilayer structure. (b) Trend of photovoltaic parameters (Voc, FF, Jsc, and η) during the bending–recovery cycles; the bending radius is approximately 3.0 cm.56 Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  SEM images of the novel photoanode components (a) schematic of the whole photoanode, (b) Ti wire treated with an acid mixture, (c)Ti/TiO2 micron-cone array, (d) light scattering layer, (e) porous layer, (f) cross section of the electrode; (b′), (c′), (d′), (e′), and (f′) are the enlarged figures of (b), (c), (d), (e), and (f), respectively.54 Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission. Copyright © 2014 Published by Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 18  The wire-shaped CdS, CdSe, and N719 co-sensitized solar cell are prepared by using a platinized CNY as the counter electrode, and a braid of 7-twisted carbon nanotube yarns with hybrid coating as the working electrode. Details are shown in SEM images and sketch maps.78 Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission. Copyright © 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 19  FDSCs based on various catalytic materials. FDSCs with (a) spirally-wound graphene/Pt composite fiber as the counter electrode.58 Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission. Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Parallel fiber electrodes and the commercial fountain pen ink as a catalyst on the counter electrode.133 Reproduced from ref. 133 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) TiN nanoplate-functionalized CFs were twisted with the TiO2 nanotube array-coated Ti thread for FDSCs.59 Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) FDSCs based on CoNi2S4 nanoribbon- and NR-modified carbon fibers.134 Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission. Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) η/η0 values at 30 °C and 100 °C. FDSCs were repeatedly heated to 100 °C and then cooled down to 30 °C. η and η0 correspond to the energy conversion efficiencies of the as-fabricated FDSC and the one after heating treatment. (b) Comparison of the operation stability of FDSCs based on liquid electrolyte and eutectic melts. η and η0 correspond to the energy conversion efficiencies of the as-fabricated FDSCs and the one in the following time during use. The devices were kept in the dark at a temperature range of (25 ± 5) °C and humidity range of (40 ± 30)%.141 Reproduced from ref. 141 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 21  Typical structures of 3D FDSCs. (a) DSSCs utilizing spiral-shaped fiber photoanode around the counter electrode.143 Reproduced from ref. 143 with permission. Copyright © 2009 Elsevier Ltd. (b) Symmetrical double-helix fiber electrodes for DNA-like DSSC.144 Reproduced from ref. 144 with permission. Copyright © 2009 Published by Elsevier B.V. (c) Stretchable photovoltaic device based on spiral wire photoanode and elastic rubber fibers twisted with CNT fibers.146 Reproduced from ref. 146 with permission. Copyright © 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Flexible 3D solar device with multi-working electrodes and one counter fiber electrode.52 Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission. Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Cross section (up) and sketch (down) of the flexible bifacial DSSC.152 Reproduced from ref. 152 with permission. Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) FDSCs in conjunction with microgrooves.25 Reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) The scheme of waveguide solar devices integrating FDSCs and luminescent solar concentrators via grooves.68 Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Waveguide devices with nearly 90° tilted angle achieved Isc of 4.5 mA under natural light illumination (14:11–14:17 on September 11th, 2013).156 Reproduced from ref. 156 with permission. Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Fiber-based multi-energy device composed of a nanogenerator, solar cell, and supercapacitor. ZnO NWs were grown on the Au-coated flexible plastic wire and Cu mesh with conductive graphene as electrodes.26 Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission. Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Integrated power fiber consisting of an FDSC and FSC.69 Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) All solid-state, coaxial, and integrated fiber devices based on organic fiber solar cell and supercapacitor.160 Reproduced from ref. 160 with permission. Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Self-powered, elastic energy fiber with 3D solar cell in its sheath and CNT double-layer supercapacitor in the core.161 Reproduced from ref. 161 with permission. Copyright © 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) The 3D hybrid cell with an optical FDSC, which harvests solar energy, and a piezoelectric nanogenerator shell, which harvests mechanical energy.162 Reproduced from ref. 162 with permission. Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
