Investigation of the plasmonic effect in air-processed PbS/CdS core–shell quantum dot based solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA04680K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA04680K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13071-13080Investigation of the plasmonic effect in air-processed PbS/CdS core–shell quantum dot based solar cells†

        
          
            Belete Atomsa 
            Gonfa
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mee Rahn 
            Kim
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Peng 
            Zheng
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Scott 
            Cushing
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Qiquan 
            Qiao
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Nianqiang 
            Wu
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            My Ali 
            El Khakani
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Dongling 
            Ma
          
        
      *a
aInstitut National de la Recherche Scientifique (INRS), Centre-Énergie, Matériaux et Télécommunications, 1650 Boulevard Lionel-Boulet, Varennes, QC, Canada J3X 1S2. E-mail: ma@emt.inrs.ca;  Fax: +1-450-929-8102;   Tel: +1-514-228-6920
bDepartment of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV 26506-6106, USA. E-mail: nick.wu@mail.wvu.edu;  Fax: +1-304-293-6689;   Tel: +1-304-293-3326
cDepartment of Electrical Engineering, Center for Advanced Photovoltaics, South Dakota State University, Brookings, South Dakota 57007, USA
Received 
      4th June 2016
    , Accepted 26th July 2016First published on 27th July 2016AbstractIntegrating appropriate plasmonic nanostructures into colloidal quantum dot (QD) based solar cells is an attractive strategy for improving their power conversion efficiency (PCE). Such manipulation allows enhanced photon absorption by QDs and, therefore, more charge carrier generation. In this work, we report the investigation of plasmon enhanced bulk heterojunction solar cells involving Au nanostars incorporated into a near infrared PbS/CdS core–shell QD film spin coated onto TiO2 nanorod arrays. The rationale behind choosing the Au nanostars is based on their balance of light scattering and strong near field, which allows coupling to the surrounding QD film, as supported by finite-difference time-domain calculations. The effect of the density and location of the Au nanostars in the QD film on device performance was studied in detail and optimal parameters were identified. Following such parameter optimization, a PCE of 4.16% has been achieved, which was about 16% higher than that (PCE: 3.59%) of the control device without Au nanostars. This increase in the PCE was found to be mainly due to the increase in short circuit current (Jsc) (about 26% in this case), suggesting that the presence of Au nanostars enhances the charge carrier generation via improving photon absorption. This was further confirmed by the enhancement of the photoresponse as evidenced by the increase of external quantum efficiency mainly in the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) spectral region of the Au nanostars. Theoretical calculations were first carried out to simulate back reflection, absorption, and extinction as well as the local electric field distribution around the Au nanostar embedded in the QD film. These primary calculations then served as a basis for theoretically assessing the contributions from scattering and near field to absorption enhancement as a function of the location of the Au nanostar within the QD film by taking into consideration five simultaneously occurring processes in the solar cell. Correlating the experimental and calculation results clearly suggests that enhanced Jsc and PCE of the solar cells involving the Au nanostars are due to enhancement of absorption via both the near field and scattering effects, with the former being the dominant factor.
1. Introduction
Colloidal quantum dot (QD) based solar cells have recently attracted considerable research interest due to their low cost solution processability and great potential to achieve high power conversion efficiency (PCE).1 Even though large progress has been made since the demonstration of the first QD based solar cell in 1998 with a PCE of about 0.08% under white light illumination,2 the PCE of QD based solar cells still needs further improvement. Various strategies have been extensively explored and implemented in the past several years, leading to significant improvement in the PCE of colloidal QD based solar cells. To date, a record PCE of ∼9% has been achieved.3–5 Very recently, the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) has revealed a record PCE of 11.3%.6 These high efficiencies were achieved by p–n heterojunction solar cells involving PbS QDs, and ZnO or TiO2 photoelectrodes. In addition to the p–n heterojunction QD solar cells, liquid heterojunction QD solar cells have also achieved record PCE values.7–9 These prominent recent advances have been made mainly by engineering device architecture, and by improving charge carrier transport and extraction in the QD film through improving surface passivation of the QDs and decreasing the inter-dot distance.10 In particular, the concept of bulk heterojunction solar cells allows the use of a relatively thick layer of QDs to maximize light absorption without decreasing charge carrier collection. Since efficient photogeneration of charge carriers and efficient charge transport and collection are required for the ultimate high performance of solar cells, it is important to enhance all these processes simultaneously without compromising each other. The efficient realization of these processes largely depends on the thickness and quality of QD films.
In bulk heterojunction solar cells, the thickness of QD films that can be used is quite limited. It is because the depletion width of the QD film is in general limited and furthermore, the overall thickness of the active QD layer should be less than the sum of the depletion width and charge diffusion length in the QD film, which is about 250 nm in the case of PbS QDs.11 This compromises light absorption and hence the amount of photogenerated charge carriers. Although the use of a thick QD film enables absorption of more photons, it compromises charge carrier collection. Such a trade-off between charge carrier generation and charge carrier collection leads to the limitation of the PCE. This issue, however, may be alleviated by using plasmonic nanoparticles, which can enhance the absorption of light by a thin QD film.12
Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) is the oscillation of free electrons on the surface of a metal in response to an applied electromagnetic field. Localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) is SPR confined in metal nanoparticles with sizes less than or comparable to the exciting wavelength. LSPR mode depends on the size and shape of metal nanoparticles as well as the refractive index or dielectric constant of the medium around them. For some noble metals like Au, the LSPR occurs in the visible range.13 LSPR significantly enhances the electric field around the nanoparticles and photon absorption in the medium around them in close proximity, for example, QD films.14,15 The plasmonic nanoparticles in solar cells can also act as light scattering centers, increasing the optical path length in the active absorbing medium of solar cells, which will result in an enhanced photoresponse and increased PCE.16 Plasmonic nanoparticles can also increase the absorption of light and exciton generation as well as exciton dissociation of QDs via local electric field enhancement and the interaction between plasmons and photogenerated excitons.17 In addition to offering a new opportunity to overcome the aforementioned limit, the implementation of plasmonics in solar cells could also be an effective way to address one of the present challenges in solar cell technology, which is decreasing semiconductor material cost through using thinner films, while without sacrificing solar cell performance. This strategy may also allow designing of devices that take advantage of hot carriers.18 On the other hand, it has to be realized that the introduction of plasmonic nanoparticles may have negative effects on solar cell performance since they may behave as charge carrier recombination centers as well. It has been reported that photo-generated charge carrier recombination occurs at the metal–semiconductor interface.12 This could be due to the formation of rectifying or Schottky barrier contact at the interface, which results in the leakage or tunneling of photogenerated electrons from the semiconductor into the metal nanoparticles owing to the high work function nature of plasmonic nanoparticles.19
Therefore, to fulfil the high potential of plasmonic nanoparticles in solar cell applications, rational designing, realization and systematic investigation of plasmon enhanced solar cells are required. Even though plasmonic nanoparticles have been studied in different types of solar cells,17,20–22 their investigation in QD based solar cells remains rare.10 It was recently demonstrated that plasmonic nanoparticles can be integrated into PbS QD based heterojunction solar cells to enhance photovoltaic device performance.23,24 However, plasmonic enhancement in near infrared (NIR) core–shell QD based solar cells has not been yet reported. Following the demonstration of the use of PbS/CdS core–shell QDs in solar cells with enhanced performance and easier processability in ambient air in our recent studies25,26 and another study recently published,27 it is highly interesting to explore the use of plasmonic nanoparticles in our PbS/CdS core–shell QD solar cells.
In this work, plasmon enhanced bulk heterojunction solar cells involving Au nanostars, PbS/CdS core–shell QDs and TiO2 nanorod arrays are investigated. The optimal incorporation of Au nanostars enhanced the PCE and short circuit current (Jsc) of the devices due to the enhancement of photon absorption, as supported by external quantum efficiency (EQE) and optical absorption measurements, and theoretical calculations as well. Furthermore, it was found that the effect of the Au nanostars on the device performance depends on the density and location of the Au nanostars in the QD film.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Chemicals and materials
Titanium(IV) butoxide (reagent grade, 97%), concentrated HCl (ACS reagent, ca. 37%), Pb(OAc)2·3H2O (≥99.99%), oleic acid (OA) (≥99% (GC)), 1-octadecene (ODE) (technical grade, 90%), bis(trimethylsilyl) sulfide (synthesis grade), trioctylphosphine (technical grade, 90%), methanol (anhydrous, 99.8%), CdO (≥99.99% trace metals basis), octane (puriss. p.a., ≥99.0% (GC)), decane (anhydrous, ≥99%), 3-mercaptopropionic acid (≥99%), MoO3 powder (ACS reagent, ≥99.5%), HAuCl4·xH2O (99.999% trace metals basis), trisodium citrate (meets USP testing specifications), polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) (average molecular weight = 10000 g mol−1), and N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) (anhydrous, 99.8%) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich and used as received without any purification. Fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) glass substrates (TEC 15, R = 12–14 Ω sq−1) were purchased from MTI corporation. Hexane (certified ACS) and toluene (certified ACS) were purchased from Fisher Scientific Company.
2.2. Synthesis of nanostructures
TiO2 nanorod arrays and PbS/CdS core–shell QDs used to fabricate solar cell devices in this work were synthesized in similar ways to those reported in our previous work.26 TiO2 nanorod arrays were grown via a hydrothermal technique.28 In the process, a FTO glass substrate was placed in a 23 mL Teflon cup and 12 mL of precursor solution, which was prepared by dissolving 1 mL of titanium(IV) butoxide in a mixture of 20 mL of pure water and 20 mL of concentrated HCl (ca. 37%), was added. The Teflon cup was then sealed tightly inside a stainless steel autoclave and heated at 150 °C for 3 hours to obtain TiO2 nanorods on the FTO substrate. The autoclave was then cooled and the TiO2 nanorod arrays were washed with dilute HCl solution and pure water. The nanorods were finally dried under airflow and at 80 °C in an oven.
PbS/CdS core–shell QDs were synthesised via cation exchange from PbS QDs,29,30 which had been synthesized via a hot injection technique.31,32 The PbS QDs were synthesized by mixing 760 mg of Pb(OAc)2·3H2O, 2.4 mL of OA and 15 mL of ODE in a three neck round bottom flask followed by heating to 150 °C for 1 h while stirring and purging with N2 flow. The content was then cooled to 130 °C under vacuum and the N2 flow was restored. Then, 2 mL of bis (trimethylsilyl) sulfide in trioctylphosphine (1:10 volume ratio) was quickly injected into the Pb precursor solution and cooled abruptly down to 100 °C, at which temperature the reaction was run for 5 minutes. The reaction was stopped by quickly cooling the flask via dipping in cold water. The QDs were then dispersed in toluene, kept at 4 °C for two days and purified using methanol. The purified PbS QDs were dispersed in toluene ready for synthesis of PbS/CdS core–shell QDs. For the synthesis of PbS/CdS core–shell QDs, the Cd precursor was first prepared by heating a mixture of CdO (25 mg), OA (24 mL) and ODE (40 mL) to 255 °C under N2 flow for 20 min while stirring followed by cooling to 155 °C under vacuum for 15 min and the N2 flux was restored. In a separate round bottom flask, 150 mL of PbS QD solution in toluene (∼350 mg PbS) was bubbled with N2 for 30 min and heated rapidly to 90 °C. The Cd/OA mixture was injected while stirring and the reaction was carried out at 90 °C and stopped by quenching in cold water. The PbS/CdS core–shell QDs were then purified 3 times using alcohol and dissolved in a mixture of octane and decane (3:1 volume ratio) for solar cell fabrication.
Au nanostars were synthesized via chemical reduction by a modified procedure from ref. 33–35. In this procedure, Au seed solution was first prepared and used as the precursor for the synthesis of the Au nanostars. First, 1.058 mL of 104 mM HAuCl4 aqueous solution was diluted by adding 125 mL of water into a three neck round bottom flask and heated to boiling while stirring. This was followed by injection of a separate solution prepared by dissolving 0.32 g trisodium citrate in 32 mL water. The solution mixture was kept boiling for 15 min and then cooled to room temperature. After the addition of 3.2 g of PVP, the solution was continuously stirred overnight at room temperature, which resulted in Au seed formation. The PVP coated Au seed solution was then centrifuged and re-dispersed in ethanol with concentration adjusted to about 4 mM based on absorption measurements. The Au nanostars were prepared from the Au seed solution. Accordingly, 0.1 mL of HAuCl4 solution in DMF (104 mM) was mixed with 30 mL PVP solution in DMF (10 mM) in a three neck round bottom flask. Then 0.1 mL of PVP coated Au seed solution (about 4 mM) was added rapidly and stirred for 3 hours at room temperature. Finally, the Au nanostars were sedimented by centrifugation and redispersed in anhydrous ethanol.
2.3. Fabrication of solar cells
Solar cell devices were fabricated via layer-by-layer spin coating of PbS/CdS core–shell QDs on TiO2 nanorod array films followed by ligand exchange in ambient air. Each layer of QDs was spin coated by dispensing 200 μL of the QD suspension on a 1 inch by 1 inch FTO/TiO2 nanorod array substrate and rotating it at 2500 rpm for 20 seconds. The ligand exchange was carried out three times for each layer of QDs by treating it with 10% v/v solution of 3-mercaptopropionic acid in methanol for 1 min followed by washing with methanol and hexane. For devices involving Au nanostars, they were deposited on a QD film, which was formed following 2, 3 or 4 spin coating cycles, by spin coating different concentrations of Au nanostars in ethanol at 1000 rpm for 1 min. Then the QD spin coating and ligand exchange processes were continued until the desired final number of layers of QDs was reached. An about 20 nm thick MoO3 hole extraction layer was deposited on the QD film by thermal evaporation. It was then followed by thermal evaporation of an about 40 nm thick Au back electrode through a shadow mask of 4 by 4 circular arrays with a circular aperture of 4 mm in diameter, resulting in a photoactive area of about 0.13 cm2. The pressure in the vacuum chamber was set at <10−6 mbar.
2.4. Characterization
A JEOL JSM-6300F scanning electron microscope (SEM) and a JEOL 2100F transmission electron microscope (TEM) were used to study the morphology of Au nanostars, core–shell QDs and TiO2 nanorods, and to characterize the device structure. A Philips X'pert diffractometer with a Cu-Kα radiation source was used to acquire the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the TiO2 nanorod arrays. A Cary 5000 spectrophotometer (Varian) including an integrating sphere accessory was used for the acquisition of extinction and absorption spectra. The extinction spectrum in solution was taken using a standard sample holder. The absorption spectra of films were obtained using an integrating sphere by measuring transmitted, scattered and reflected photons. A Fluorolog®-3 system (Horiba Jobin Yvon) was used to record the photoluminescence (PL) emission spectrum of QDs with an excitation wavelength of 670 nm. The concentration of the Au nanostars was determined by neutron activation analysis using a SLOWPOKE nuclear reactor. Solar cell devices were characterized by performing current density–voltage (J–V) measurements using an Agilent B2901A instrument in the dark and under AM 1.5G simulated sunlight calibrated to a power density of 100 mW cm−2, which was provided by an Oriel Sol3A Class AAA Solar Simulator (Oriel Instruments, Newport Corporation). EQE measurements of the solar cell devices were carried out using an Oriel® IQE-200™ quantum efficiency measurement system.
2.5. Finite-difference time-domain simulations
Optiwave finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations were used to calculate the extinction, absorption, near-field, and scattering of an Au nanostar. A gold nanostar with five tips in each of two orthogonal planes was modelled. The refractive index of Au was taken from the data of Palik.36 The simulation cell was created with a grid size resolution of 1 nm. For the simulation of the electric field distribution around the Au nanostar in the QD film, a broad-band, linearly polarized Gaussian modulated continuous wave centered at 980 nm (close to the first excitonic absorption peak of the QD film) was used as the input light source.
3. Results and discussion
Based on our previous work26 TiO2 nanorod arrays of optimum length hydrothermally grown on a clean FTO substrate (about 450 nm) and similar PbS/CdS core–shell QDs are used in this work for fabrication and investigation of the bulk heterojunction solar cell devices. The SEM images of the rutile TiO2 nanorod arrays are shown in Fig. S1.† The PbS/CdS core–shell QDs used herein have an average PbS core diameter of about 3.0 nm and a CdS shell thickness of about 0.1 nm. They were synthesized via the cation exchange reaction of PbS QDs (∼3.2 nm in diameter) with Cd2+ ions. The average CdS shell thickness was obtained by subtracting the average PbS core radius from the average radius of the parent PbS QDs, which were both determined from the position of their first excitonic absorption peaks.26,37 As reported in our previous work, the size of PbS QDs estimated from their optical spectra was quite consistent with that from TEM observations.29,30 The visible-NIR extinction and PL emission spectra of the PbS/CdS core–shell QDs as well as their TEM image are shown in Fig. S2.†
TEM images of Au nanostars used for fabricating plasmonic bulk heterojunction solar cells are shown in Fig. 1a. The Au nanostars have an average core diameter of about 27.5 nm and tip length of 13.6 nm. The distribution of the core diameter and tip length of the Au nanostars is shown in Fig. 1b and c, respectively. The extinction spectrum of the Au nanostars dispersed in ethanol is shown in Fig. 1d. The resonance pattern was composed of a peak centered at ∼710 nm and a shoulder at ∼560 nm, in line with literature reports for similar plasmonic nanostructures.33,35,38 The shoulder at ∼560 nm was assigned to the transverse mode of the Au core, whereas the strong resonance peak arose from the formation of tips. A diluted Au nanostar solution in ethanol with an absorbance of about 3.0 at the peak of the resonance band of the Au nanostars (∼710 nm) was found to have a concentration of 171 ppm, with an uncertainty of ±5% according to the neutron activation analysis. Such concentration characterization information was used later on during the device fabrication process.
 Fig. 1  (a) TEM image, (b) size distribution of the core (diameter) and (c) tip (length) of Au nanostars, and (d) extinction spectrum of Au nanostars in ethanol. 
The structure of the bulk heterojunction solar cell devices investigated herein is schematically illustrated in Fig. 2. Basically the solar cell device consisted of the Au nanostars embedded in the PbS/CdS core–shell QD film, which was deposited onto hydrothermally grown TiO2 nanorod arrays via layer-by-layer spin coating and a ligand exchange technique. The QDs partially infiltrated into the gaps of the TiO2 nanorod arrays, thus forming the bulk heterojunction as previously reported by our group.26 The Au nanostars were introduced into the PbS/CdS core–shell QD film at different locations by spin coating their ethanol solution onto the QD film prepared following different spin coating cycles. The devices were completed by thermal evaporation of a hole extraction layer of MoO3 and an Au back electrode. Fig. 3a shows the cross-sectional SEM image of the bulk heterojunction device involving Au nanostars. The TiO2 nanorod length was ∼450 nm and the QDs seemed to infiltrate into the gaps between the TiO2 nanorods and the QD film thickness above the nanorods was ∼300 nm, which was deposited via 6 spin coating cycles of the QDs and ligand exchange following each cycle. Fig. 3b is a SEM image showing the distribution of Au nanostars on the QD film deposited by 3 cycles of the spin coating process. In this specific case, the Au nanostar concentration of 6.84 mg mL−1 was used for the spin coating process. The Au nanostars can be clearly identified from the background QD film and they seemed to be more or less sparsely distributed over the QD film with a few aggregations observed.
 Fig. 2  Device structure of plasmonic bulk heterojunction solar cells. 
 Fig. 3  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of the solar cell device involving PbS/CdS core–shell QDs, TiO2 nanorod arrays and Au nanostars, and (b) top view SEM image of Au nanostars spin coated on the QD film before depositing the next cycle of QDs. 
In order to study the effect of the density of the Au nanostars and their location in the QD film on device performance, different concentrations of Au nanostars were used for deposition onto the QD film of different thicknesses. The highest AM 1.5G PCE of about 4.16% was achieved by spin coating the Au nanostar ethanol solution at a concentration of 6.84 mg mL−1 on a PbS/CdS core–shell QD film (thickness: ∼170 nm) fabricated by 3 cycles of the spin coating process, with 3 more QD spin coating cycles done after Au nanostar deposition. This represented an increase of about 16% compared to that (PCE: 3.59%) of the control device without Au nanostars. The J–V characteristics of these two devices in the dark and under AM 1.5G illumination are shown in Fig. 4. It can be clearly seen that the enhancement in the PCE after the incorporation of the Au nanostars was mainly due to the increase in Jsc (about 26% in this case) suggesting that the presence of Au nanostars enhanced charge carrier generation via improving photon absorption. This Jsc value (21.3 mA cm−2) is in a similar range to that reported in the literature for plasmonic solar cells involving PbS QDs.23 The enhancement in photon absorption could be in general attributed to the combined effects of both the increased effective optical path length in the QD film due to enhanced scattering with the presence of Au nanostars and improved exciton generation in the QDs in the proximity of the Au nanostars due to the local electric field enhancement. However, the introduction of the Au nanostars simultaneously resulted in a slight decrease of open circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF) by about 6.3% and 2.4% respectively, which is considered to be due to the introduction of charge carrier recombination centers by the Au nanostars.39 This shows that the increase in Jsc due to the incorporation of the Au nanostars overcomes the decrease in Voc and FF, resulting in the overall increase in PCE.
 Fig. 4  
J–V curves of bulk heterojunction solar cells (a) with and (b) without Au nanostars. 
In order to better understand plasmonic contribution to device performance, EQE of devices with and without the Au nanostars was measured. As shown in Fig. 5a, EQE enhancement took place over the most spectral range measured, from 380 nm to 1200 nm. This is in agreement with the observed increase in Jsc. Indeed such enhancement in the photoresponse over a broad spectral range from ultraviolet to NIR was also observed by others.40 Meanwhile, the absorption of QD films with and without Au nanostars was also measured. The absorption spectra of the PbS/CdS core–shell QD films (without Au nanostars and with an optimum quantity of Au nanostars at the optimum location in the QD film (Fig. 5b)) correspond to the EQE spectra of the devices extending into the NIR part of the solar spectrum reaching up to 1200 nm. The enhancement in absorption (Fig. 5c) was obtained via normalizing the absorption spectrum of the QD film without Au nanostars by that of the QD film with the Au nanostars. The spectrum of the absorption enhancement overlapped very well with the extinction spectrum of the Au nanostar film on a glass substrate with just a slight red shift, which must be due to the high refractive index of the QD film24,35,41 surrounding the Au nanostars. This clearly shows that the observed enhancement in absorption is because of the presence of the Au nanostars. The considerable overlap of the wavelengths over which EQE and absorption enhancement occurred suggests that the increased photoresponse is closely related to the enhancement of absorption in the photoactive layer due to the incorporation of the Au nanostars into the QD film. The correlation can be seen more clearly in Fig. 5c, where we plot the LSPR of Au nanostars, and the absorption enhancement and EQE enhancement together for comparison. The absorption enhancement is defined as the ratio of the absorption of the QD film with the Au nanostars to that of the QD film without Au nanostars, whereas the EQE enhancement is defined as the ratio of the EQE of the device with the Au nanostars to that of the device without Au nanostars. The enhancement of absorption and EQE was also observed at longer wavelengths (>1000 nm), attributed to the presence of Au nanostar agglomerates inside the QD layer.
 Fig. 5  (a) EQE spectra of devices with and without Au nanostars, (b) absorption spectra of the PbS/CdS core–shell QD film with and without Au nanostars and (c) comparison of absorption enhancement and EQE enhancement along with the extinction spectrum of the Au nanostar film. The absorption enhancement is experimentally measured to be 16.6% by taking the ratio of the integration of the extinction curve with and without Au nanostars in (b). 
The improved photoconversion of the QD film at the plasmon resonance peak could come from two contributions. First, the scattered light from the Au nanostars is back-reflected through the QD film, providing a second chance for absorption. Second, the near-field of the Au nanostar (Fig. 6c) can non-radiatively couple to the interband transition dipole moment of the QD, transferring energy from the plasmon to the QD to excite carriers by plasmon-induced resonant energy transfer (PIRET).42 When light is incident on the Au nanostar, it has a probability of being scattered or absorbed as shown in Fig. 6c. If the light is absorbed, the energy will then either be transferred to the QD through the near field or be converted into heat in the metal nanoparticle. Given the large dipole moment of both the plasmon and QD, the past literature suggests that the near-field coupling should be strong.43–45
 Fig. 6  (a) Calculated back reflection, absorption, and extinction spectra of the Au nanostar; (b) calculated electromagnetic field distribution surrounding an Au nanostar under an excitation wavelength of 980 nm, the intensity was scaled as (E/E0)0.5 for better visualization; (c) schematic representation of light being absorbed by the PbS QD film while the Au nanostar location was varied across the entire QD film, which resulted in the calculated absorption (d) in a solar field. The total absorption enhancement of the QD film with the Au nanostar can be decomposed into absorption (Abs) before the star, absorption from reflection (refl), absorption from PIRET, and absorption after the star. 
To determine whether the increase in photoconversion was coming from the plasmon's scattering or near-field, the absorption enhancement versus Au nanostar position within the QD film was calculated. Light absorption in the QD/Au nanostar composite can occur through five stages as shown in Fig. 6c. (1) As light travels through the QD film before the Au nanostar, it is absorbed exponentially according to the QD's wavelength dependent absorption coefficient. (2) At the Au nanostar layer, the light is then reflected by the Au nanostar with a wavelength-dependent probability given in Fig. 6a. This light re-travels through the QD film before the Au nanostar and is absorbed according to the QD's absorption coefficient times the distance. (3) Light not scattered has a probability to be absorbed by the Au nanostar, after which it is either converted to heat within the metal or (4) excites carriers in the QD through the strong near field it generates (Fig. 6b). (5) The light not absorbed or scattered by the Au nanostar passes through the remaining QD film, again being absorbed with a probability of the QD absorption coefficient times the remaining film thickness. Based on these five processes, it is seen that whether the plasmon enhances photoconversion in the QD film depends on the metal nanoparticle's scattering to absorption ratio, the QD film's absorption coefficient and thickness for re-absorbing scattered light, and the QD's dipole moment and plasmon's near field. To estimate these contributions in the fabricated QD films, the QD's absorption coefficient was taken from Fig. 5 and an estimated thickness of 300 nm, the plasmon's absorption and scattering efficiency from Fig. 6a, and a near-field coupling efficiency of 80% based on the strong QD-plasmon dipole–dipole coupling routinely measured in the literature.44–46
The results are shown in Fig. 6d and show that despite the plasmon's strong scattering probability, the low QD absorption coefficient at the plasmon's scattering peak and thin QD layer thickness prevent back-scattering from being the dominant enhancement route. This is true even when the Au nanostar is placed at the back of the QD layer to ensure a maximum probability of re-absorption for scattered light. Instead, enhancement of photoconversion through the plasmon's near field dominates, giving an estimated enhancement of 10.5% when the photoconversion enhancement is integrated over the AM 1.5G solar spectrum, similar to the experimental enhancement of 16.6%. The discrepancy occurs because the loading in Fig. 6d is only taken as one Au nanostar for a 100 nm by 100 nm square, and the calculations do not account for the effect of favorable charge creation by the plasmon near the charge extraction layers as discussed in the following section. The calculation results presented in Fig. 6 prove that for thin films the plasmon's near field is more helpful than the light trapping process. This is because the plasmon has a larger dipole moment per volume than the QD. Absorption in the QD scales as its dipole moment, but dipole–dipole coupling between the plasmon and QD goes as the product of their dipole moments.42 The larger dipole moment of the plasmon therefore not only allows more light to be captured per unit volume, but it can also lead to more efficient excitation of carriers in the QD than light absorption in the QD alone, as reflected in the measured and calculated photoconversion enhancement.
It should be noted that in the above calculations different possible absorption enhancements were simulated by assuming the presence of a single nanostar. Other performance affecting factors, such as charge recombination due to the presence of Au nanostars and different densities of Au nanostars that can also be important, are not taken into consideration. In the following part, we present the experimental investigation of the effect of different densities and locations of the Au nanostars in the QD film on device performance in detail. The adjustment of the density was realized by tuning the Au nanostar concentration during the deposition process. It was found that the PCE and Jsc of the solar cell devices reached the maximum at the optimum density of the Au nanostars in the QD film (6.84 mg mL−1 of Au spin coated). However, Voc decreased monotonically with the increase in the density of the Au nanostars. The FF fluctuated at the beginning when the concentration of the Au nanostars was increased and then decreased monotonically as the concentration of the Au nanostars was further increased. The trends are plotted in Fig. 7a. To understand these results, it is worthwhile to mention that in real cases, the introduction of the plasmonic nanoparticles into the QD film can indeed result in two antagonistic effects with respect to the device performance. As mentioned above, in this work the beneficial effect arises from improved light absorption mainly via near field enhancement, directly leading to increased charge carrier generation, mostly relevant to the value of Jsc. However, when there are too many plasmonic nanoparticles, a high fraction of light will be absorbed by them, rather than by the QDs.47 In addition, the number of nearby QDs may be too low to significantly benefit from the positive plasmonic effects. Therefore, in the latter case, charge carrier generation may be even decreased. This reasonably explains why Jsc, which is most directly related to charge carrier generation, showed an initial increase and then a decrease with increasing Au nanostar concentration in the current work. The unwanted effects may also include the introduction of charge carrier recombination centers, which negatively affects the device performance,16,23 as evidenced by some lower Voc and FF values as compared to the control device without any Au nanostars. To put it in a straightforward manner, the higher the density of the Au nanostars, the more the recombination sites introduced. The observed variation of the overall PCE with the concentration of Au nanostars was essentially the result of the interplay of all these factors. As the negative effect can outweigh at relatively high Au nanostar density, the concentration optimization is important in realizing plasmon-enhanced solar cells.
 Fig. 7  Dependence of the performance parameters of solar cell devices on (a) the concentration of Au nanostars and (b) their location in the QD film. 
The location of Au nanostars represents another important factor in real cases. As shown in Fig. 7b, all the parameters, PCE, Jsc, Voc, and FF, reached maximum at an optimum location of the Au nanostars, deposited after 3 cycles of spin coating of QDs. When the Au nanostars are too close to the QD–TiO2 junction (e.g., deposited after 2 deposition cycles of QDs), they may shadow the QD film behind resulting in reduced absorption. This resulted in a slight decrease in the PCE. The decrease in the PCE was higher when the Au nanostars were too close to the back electrode (e.g., deposited after 4 deposition cycles of QDs). In this case, the charge carrier extraction was less efficient as the photogeneration of charge carriers due to field enhanced absorption occurred far from the QD–TiO2 junction resulting in more recombination events, which decreased not only the Jsc, but also the Voc and FF. In this scenario, the negative effect overrode and the beneficial contribution from the plasmonic nanostars could not be well reflected.
4. Conclusions
Ambient air processed plasmonic bulk heterojunction solar cell devices involving TiO2 nanorod arrays, NIR absorbing PbS/CdS core–shell QDs and Au nanostars with broad plasmon resonances from the visible to NIR ranges have been investigated in this work. After optimizing the devices with respect to the density of Au nanostars in the QD film and their vertical location in the QD film, a PCE as high as 4.16% has been achieved. The positive contribution of the Au nanostars to the performance of the devices was evident, reflected from the increase in Jsc of the devices as well as from the enhanced photoresponse over a broad spectral range based on EQE measurements. The considerable overlap of absorption and EQE enhancement with the Au nanostar extinction spectrum strongly suggests that the beneficial effect arises from enhanced optical absorption of the QD film with the incorporation of the Au nanostars. It is inferred from theoretical calculation results that the absorption enhancement is due to both near field enhancement and scattering; however the near-field interactions are seen to dominate because the thin QD film cannot re-absorb all reflected photons. This work demonstrates the importance of integrating plasmonic nanostructures into QD based solar cells in improving device performance and paves a way for further investigation of plasmon enhanced, QD based solar cells. It is clear that in order to benefit from the plasmon effects, multiple parameters, such as the concentration and location of plasmonic nanostructures, need to be carefully optimized. In addition, it can be envisioned that there is ample room for further improvement by the optimization of materials and devices on various aspects. This includes, but is not limited to, the introduction of a seed layer for the growth of TiO2 nanorod arrays for improving the TiO2/FTO interface and surface modification of the Au nanostars with the purpose of minimizing charge carrier recombination.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada, Canadian Solar Inc. and OLA Display Corp. in the context of the NSERC-Strategic grant is greatly appreciated. The authors also acknowledge the financial support from the FRQNT (Le Fonds de Recherche du Québec-Nature et Technologies) through its strategic network “Le Centre québécois sur les matériaux fonctionnels” and “Plasma-Québec”. N. Wu is grateful to the support by the National Science Foundation (NSF) (CBET-1233795). Q. Qiao acknowledges the support from the US-Pakistan Joint Science and Technology program and SDSU EE PhD program.
Notes and references
I. J. Kramer and E. H. Sargent, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 863–882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zaban, O. I. Micic, B. A. Gregg and A. J. Nozik, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 3153–3156 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Carey, L. Levina, R. Comin, O. Voznyy and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3325–3330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Labelle, S. M. Thon, S. Masala, M. M. Adachi, H. P. Dong, M. Farahani, A. H. Ip, A. Fratalocchi and E. H. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1101–1108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. M. Chuang, P. R. Brown, V. Bulovic and M. G. Bawendi, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 796–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          NREL, Research Cell Efficiency Records, http://www.nrel.gov/ncpv/images/efficiency_chart.jpg, accessed June 04 2016 Search PubMed.
J. Du, Z. Du, J.-S. Hu, Z. Pan, Q. Shen, J. Sun, D. Long, H. Dong, L. Sun, X. Zhong and L.-J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4201–4209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhao, Z. Pan, I. Mora-Seró, E. Cánovas, H. Wang, Y. Song, X. Gong, J. Wang, M. Bonn, J. Bisquert and X. Zhong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5602–5609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ren, J. Wang, Z. Pan, K. Zhao, H. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Zhao, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert and X. Zhong, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 8398–8405 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Kim and D. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 85–99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lan, S. Masala and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 233–240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green and S. Pillai, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 130–132 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Willets and R. P. Van Duyne, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2007, 58, 267–297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. R. Catchpole and A. Polman, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 191113 CrossRef .
Y. Nishijima, K. Ueno, Y. Yokota, K. Murakoshi and H. Misawa, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2031–2036 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Wu, F. C. Chen, Y. S. Hsiao, F. C. Chien, P. L. Chen, C. H. Kuo, M. H. Huang and C. S. Hsu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 959–967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Takeda, T. Motohiro, D. Konig, P. Aliberti, Y. Feng, S. Shrestha and G. Conibeer, Appl. Phys. Express, 2010, 3, 104301 CrossRef .

          K. W. Böer, Introduction to Space Charge Effects in Semiconductors, Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, New York,  2010 Search PubMed .
M. D. Brown, T. Suteewong, R. S. S. Kumar, V. D'Innocenzo, A. Petrozza, M. M. Lee, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 438–445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Q. Gan, F. J. Bartoli and Z. H. Kafafi, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2385–2396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Y. Mahmoud, J. M. Zhang, D. L. Ma, R. Izquierdo and V. V. Truong, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 3102–3107 CrossRef CAS .
D. Paz-Soldan, A. Lee, S. M. Thon, M. M. Adachi, H. Dong, P. Maraghechi, M. Yuan, A. J. Labelle, S. Hoogland, K. Liu, E. Kumacheva and E. H. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1502–1508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kawawaki, H. Wang, T. Kubo, K. Saito, J. Nakazaki, H. Segawa and T. Tatsuma, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4165–4172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Gonfa, H. Zhao, J. T. Li, J. X. Qiu, M. Saidani, S. Q. Zhang, R. Izquierdo, N. Q. Wu, M. A. El Khakani and D. Ma, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 124, 67–74 CrossRef .
B. A. Gonfa, M. R. Kim, N. Delegan, A. C. Tavares, R. Izquierdo, N. Wu, M. A. El Khakani and D. Ma, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 10039–10049 RSC .
S. Jiao, J. Wang, Q. Shen, Y. Li and X. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7214–7221 CAS .
B. Liu and E. S. Aydil, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3985–3990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhao, M. Chaker and D. Ma, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17483–17491 RSC .
H. Zhao, M. Chaker, N. Q. Wu and D. Ma, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8898–8904 RSC .
M. A. Hines and G. D. Scholes, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1844–1849 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, H. Zhao, D. Riabinina, M. Chaker and D. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 10153–10159 CAS .
M. Li, J. M. Zhang, S. Suri, L. J. Sooter, D. L. Ma and N. Q. Wu, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 2837–2842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Frens, Nature, 1973, 241, 20–22 CAS .
P. S. Kumar, I. Pastoriza-Santos, B. Rodriguez-Gonzalez, F. J. Garcia de Abajo and L. M. Liz-Marzan, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 015606 CrossRef PubMed .

          E. D. Palik, Handbook of Optical Constants of Solids, Academic Press, Orlando,  1985 Search PubMed .
I. Moreels, K. Lambert, D. Smeets, D. De Muynck, T. Nollet, J. C. Martins, F. Vanhaecke, A. Vantomme, C. Delerue, G. Allan and Z. Hens, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3023–3030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, S. K. Cushing, J. M. Zhang, J. Lankford, Z. P. Aguilar, D. Ma and N. Q. Wu, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 115501 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Elbohy, M. R. Kim, A. Dubey, K. M. Reza, D. Ma, J. Zai, X. Qian and Q. Qiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 545–551 CAS .
J. Wu, S. C. Mangham, V. R. Reddy, M. O. Manasreh and B. D. Weaver, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 102, 44–49 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Adachi, A. J. Labelle, S. M. Thon, X. Lan, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2928 Search PubMed .
J. Li, S. K. Cushing, F. Meng, T. R. Senty, A. D. Bristow and N. Wu, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 601–607 CrossRef CAS .
A. De Luca, M. P. Grzelczak, I. Pastoriza-Santos, L. M. Liz-Marzán, M. La Deda, M. Striccoli and G. Strangi, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5823–5829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. E. Gómez, K. C. Vernon, P. Mulvaney and T. J. Davis, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 073108 CrossRef .
S. T. Kochuveedu, T. Son, Y. Lee, M. Lee, D. Kim and D. H. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4735 Search PubMed .
D. Nepal, L. F. Drummy, S. Biswas, K. Park and R. A. Vaia, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9064–9074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Pala, J. White, E. Barnard, J. Liu and M. L. Brongersma, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3504–3509 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: SEM images of TiO2 nanorod arrays, absorption and PL emission spectra, and TEM image of PbS/CdS core–shell QDs. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta04680kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) TEM image, (b) size distribution of the core (diameter) and (c) tip (length) of Au nanostars, and (d) extinction spectrum of Au nanostars in ethanol.	 

 	Fig. 2  Device structure of plasmonic bulk heterojunction solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of the solar cell device involving PbS/CdS core–shell QDs, TiO2 nanorod arrays and Au nanostars, and (b) top view SEM image of Au nanostars spin coated on the QD film before depositing the next cycle of QDs.	 

 	Fig. 4  
J–V curves of bulk heterojunction solar cells (a) with and (b) without Au nanostars.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) EQE spectra of devices with and without Au nanostars, (b) absorption spectra of the PbS/CdS core–shell QD film with and without Au nanostars and (c) comparison of absorption enhancement and EQE enhancement along with the extinction spectrum of the Au nanostar film. The absorption enhancement is experimentally measured to be 16.6% by taking the ratio of the integration of the extinction curve with and without Au nanostars in (b).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Calculated back reflection, absorption, and extinction spectra of the Au nanostar; (b) calculated electromagnetic field distribution surrounding an Au nanostar under an excitation wavelength of 980 nm, the intensity was scaled as (E/E0)0.5 for better visualization; (c) schematic representation of light being absorbed by the PbS QD film while the Au nanostar location was varied across the entire QD film, which resulted in the calculated absorption (d) in a solar field. The total absorption enhancement of the QD film with the Au nanostar can be decomposed into absorption (Abs) before the star, absorption from reflection (refl), absorption from PIRET, and absorption after the star.	 

 	Fig. 7  Dependence of the performance parameters of solar cell devices on (a) the concentration of Au nanostars and (b) their location in the QD film.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: SEM images of TiO2 nanorod arrays, absorption and PL emission spectra, and TEM image of PbS/CdS core–shell QDs. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta04680k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
