Translating local binding energy to a device effective one   - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9SE01095E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9SE01095E
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 760-771Translating local binding energy to a device effective one†

        
          
            Dan 
            Liraz
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Pei 
            Cheng
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Yang
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Nir 
            Tessler
          
        
      *a
aMicroelectronic & Nanoelectronic Centers, Electrical Engineering Department, Technion Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. E-mail: nir@technion.ac.il
bDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
Received 
      13th November 2019
    , Accepted 15th November 2019First published on 15th November 2019AbstractOne of the puzzles in the field of organic photovoltaic cells (OPVs) is the high exciton dissociation (charge generation) efficiency even though simple Coulomb based arguments would predict a binding energy of 150–500 meV that would suppress such dissociation. Not knowing which mechanism drives such high dissociation efficiency prevents researchers from establishing clear design rules. The common approach to solve this puzzle is to assume that the binding energy must be lower due to delocalization, disorder or entropy considerations. However, using these theories to quantitatively reproduce the dissociation is challenging. Here, considering entropy and disorder, a new approach is suggested using exciton dissociation efficiency as the parameter to weigh the effect of the energetic disorder. The effective entropy–disorder (EED) model predicts the device-equivalent charge generation efficiency, and provides a consistent new definition for the effective binding energy (Eb,eff). For the first time, it is possible to directly compare a model with experimental results of a non-fullerene acceptor organic solar cell. Such comparison reveals that high dissociation efficiency does not require Eb,eff lower than 100 meV and that high dissociation efficiency is driven by a combined effect of the energy landscape and a mobility that is significantly higher than the steady state one.
Introduction
Bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells have been gaining momentum with the introduction of nonfullerene acceptors (NFAs).1–4 The power conversion efficiency (PCE) has been rising steadily with the PCE of current champion devices being around 16% (ref. 5 and 6) for single junction devices and more than 17% for tandem structures,7 and a new evaluation of the efficiency limit still places it at about 20% for single junction devices.8 PCE losses may occur due to open circuit voltage (Voc) loss or short circuit current (Jsc) loss where Voc loss through radiative recombination is inevitable. The Holy Grail is to avoid any other losses such that the internal quantum efficiency (IQE – extracted photoelectrons to absorbed photons) would be almost 100%, as is indeed the case with some of the state-of-the-art devices.
Current losses may appear in several steps on the way of converting photon flux to an electric current. Absorption creates excitons that may decay while diffusing towards the donor/acceptor (D/A) interface. After a charge is transferred to the other side of the interface, the charge transfer exciton state (CT exciton state) may decay before dissociating into a polaron pair. Lastly, polarons may recombine before being collected by the respective contacts. The IQE is a product of exciton to CT, CT dissociation, polaron transport and collection efficiencies.9 For highly efficient devices, each of these steps should be close to 100% efficient. Thus, one of the key factors in achieving a high-efficiency cell is the exciton dissociation (i.e. charge generation) efficiency, which has been pointed out as being too high for NFA devices if the binding energy was calculated using Coulomb attraction between two point charges.10 Regarding the CT exciton state, it has been confirmed by several methods that a CT exciton state is a nearest-neighbor pair.11,12 This emphasizes the difficulty in dissociating the CT state without significant losses associated with geminate recombination. There have been several suggestions of mechanisms lowering the effective binding energy of excitons such as delocalization and dipole effect,13–15 disorder,15–19 and entropy.19–22 Examining the literature, we find that it is common to describe the binding energy as the internal energy difference between the bound state and the state where two separate charges reside on two molecules distanced enough to neglect any interaction between them.23 This definition is most natural for one CT exciton in a 1D system.20 It has also been shown that the Coulomb binding or internal energy difference is unchanged when considering 3D systems.15 However, for 3D systems there are many more than one path the CT state may dissociate through and one must take thermodynamics considerations into account,20 assuming that the energy required to dissociate the excitons to free charges is the quantity of interest.
Moreover, the relation between the observable used to deduce the effective (macro) binding energy of a cell and the (micro-local) binding energy of an isolated pair is hardly discussed. Namely, it is difficult to use previous relevant studies19 to quantitatively predict/analyze the cell's charge generation efficiency. We find that this is especially important in the presence of disorder and we look into the effect of entropy and disorder on the free-charge generation efficiency with the effective binding energy being determined by it (and not vice versa). To explain the transformation from an ensemble of pairs to effective dissociation efficiency and to a single effective binding energy, we present histograms of the binding energies and of the dissociation distance. We also employ them to justify the use of a bi-layer model to predict the performance of the BHJ.
Having established the effective entropy–disorder (EED) model that relates to measured efficiency, we use the model system of a polymer:NFA device, the PTB7-Th:ITIC BHJ, to show a correlation between the theoretical predictions and the temperature dependent properties of the cell. By self-consistently analyzing the device data and the model's results we confirm that entropy and disorder indeed play a major role in the exciton dissociation. Lastly, we discuss several approaches of defining binding energy for a macroscopic system and reveal the fact that for realistic, disordered devices, the microscopic, well-defined binding energy does not correlate directly with the macroscopic effective binding energy.
To make our work better accessible, we include below, as part of the introduction, a brief review of the concepts that are directly used here.
Why it is correct to use thermodynamics and why we must
In this work, first we discuss defining the local binding energy using thermodynamics and later we translate it to a macro, device-equivalent binding energy. Defining CT exciton binding energy as the internal energy difference between the bound state and nonbound state does not capture entirely the physics of the system. Specifically, it does not describe the average thermal energy required to dissociate excitons. In a real case of an operating device, excitons are being formed continuously in the volume of the device, and they diffuse to the interface and create CT states. Focusing on one nearest neighbor pair of molecular sites along the interface, a CT state would be created in this position, it would dissociate or recombine and later a new CT state would be created there and so forth. Although all these CT states start dissociating from the same position and there is only one way to describe them, in a 3D system, the resulting free polarons have many optional positions to dissociate to, so there are plenty of ways to describe this situation. This reflects in a lower probability of the CT state staying at its initial position or a higher probability for dissociation. It is common to consider only the Coulomb potential (i.e. the internal energy difference) which acts to keep the electron–hole pair of the CT state stick together. However, to understand the local CT state dissociation, we must take into account both effects through the use of thermodynamics. In our discussion we neglect possible contributions from lattice (molecular) relaxations.23
Some of the thermodynamic results we shall use require thermal equilibrium. An operational OPV device is not at equilibrium as it is excited by a photon flux. However, the system under consideration is the CT state itself. Since we are not interested here in the possible contribution from hot-CT dissociation we may proceed with the assumption that the CT state is fully relaxed in the molecular sites before it dissociates. We refer to the situation as a quasi-equilibrium state, because while the whole system may be out of equilibrium, the CT state is locally relaxed.
Free energy, entropy, partition function, and disorder
It is well known that to reach (quasi) equilibrium a system would evolve so as to minimize its potential energy. However, in realistic systems, there are constraints; the system may be forced to maintain constant volume (isochoric) or pressure (isobaric) or temperature (isothermal). In this situation, the minimization is of a thermodynamic potential. For an isothermal and isobaric process, Gibbs free energy is a suitable thermodynamic potential, defined as G = U − TS + PV(1)where U is the internal energy, S is the entropy, P is pressure and V is volume.
For isothermal processes, the Helmholtz free energy F is minimized at equilibrium. F = U − TS(2)
For systems having constant pressure and volume, as in our case, there is no difference between minimizing F or G. In the following the Gibbs free energy is the one of interest but for energy minimization purposes, F is used.
Entropy is a macroscopic property that depends on the number of configurations or microstates available to the system. Entropy is defined as (3)where X is a macroscopic property, Ω(X = α) is the number of microscopic configurations where X equals α, i is the index of a microstate (configuration) with X = α, and pi is the probability of the microstate i being occupied given that the macrostate is α. In the context of exciton dissociation or charge pairs, X may be the distance between the charges in the pair where X = α includes all pairs' configurations where the charges are separated by distance α (r = α) and pi is the probability of a specific pair configuration, with separation r = α, being found (occupied).
To find pi we recall that microstate i is associated with internal energy εi. For a system like the one we are interested in (canonical ensemble) the probability of a state carrying internal energy εi follows the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution: (4)where Z is called the partition function and serves as a normalization factor of the probability, which makes sure that all probabilities sum to one. In case all microstates (pairs' configurations of distance r = α) are characterized by the same energy (εi = ε), eqn (3) can be presented as . However, we will use the more general form of eqn (3). A useful relation describing the Helmholtz free energy is F = U − TS = −kbTln(Z)(5)

Disordered heterojunction. 
To calculate the contribution of the microstates (charge pair configurations) to the entropy (eqn (3) and (4)) we need to assign energy to each configuration. For an organic heterojunction, the most natural choice would be the difference between the electron energy at the acceptor site and the hole energy at the donor site. This would be the difference between the acceptor's LUMO (lowest unoccupied molecular orbital) and the donor's HOMO (highest occupied molecular orbital) plus the Coulomb interaction. For ordered materials the LUMO–HOMO difference would be constant between all microstates and for any r. For disordered materials there would be fluctuations in these values. It is common to describe such electronic disorder as a Gaussian distribution characterized by a mean value (E0) and a standard deviation (σ). In this case, the energy difference between the electron on the acceptor site and the hole on the donor site would also have a Gaussian distribution. This difference, between the charge pair energies, will have a fluctuation (δ) having a standard deviation of , where σa and σd are the standard deviations of the acceptor and donor levels, respectively. With ‘i’ being the index used for counting the possible pair configurations (microstates), we may write the energy as the sum of Coulomb potential and the energy introduced by the disorder:19 (6)where we disregarded the constant E0 which is just an energy offset. For the ordered case δ = 0 and all microstates, of constant r, have the same energy, leading to pi,ordered(r) = 1/Ω(r) and Sordered = kbln(Ω(r)).
For the disordered case, the partition function is (7)which defines the Helmholtz free energy, F, according to eqn (5).
It is worth mentioning that using eqn (4) and (7) and the entropy definition in eqn (3) one can derive (8)

Eqn (8) shows that, for the disordered case, the entropy is temperature dependent. This is an important result as it implies that for a disordered system, the entropy would have a larger impact on the temperature dependence of the apparent dissociation efficiency or effective binding energy.

Exciton dissociation as a process rate – Onsager–Braun and Eyring–Polanyi equations
Lars Onsager analyzed exciton dissociation using a diffusion, Brownian motion differential equation with the effect of Coulomb interaction and external field.24,25 In his model, the CT pair has one opportunity to dissociate, and failure leads to decay. Braun used Onsager's work10 but in his treatment, the CT pair has a finite lifetime. This gives the CT pair the ability to make several dissociation attempts before it decays. To deduce relevant parameters, the Onsager–Braun model assumes a detailed balance between the CT dissociation and the Langevin process of bimolecular recombination.
The basic idea behind the Onsager–Braun model is that CT dissociation is an energy activated process, as suggested by the Arrhenius equation. However, the Arrhenius equation is empirical26 and it may serve to solve a case when the entropy and enthalpy are constant during the reaction. The general term that one should use is the Eyring–Polanyi equation which is part of transition state theory (Fig. 1). Transition state theory assumes equilibrium between reactants and the transition state such that the overall forward reaction rate is governed by ΔGts instead of the internal energy difference dictated by Arrhenius.
 Fig. 1  Elementary reaction profile. 
As Fig. 1 shows, the local binding energy is the added free Gibbs energy required to reach the peak of the potential. Integrating the Eyring–Polanyi equation, where ΔGts serves as the binding energy, with the Onsager–Braun model which predicts dissociation efficiency as a result of two competitive reactions, CT dissociation and CT decay, the dissociation efficiency can be expressed as (9)where ked is the dissociation rate, kdecay is the CT state decay rate, κcd is proportional to the squared overlap integral of the initial and final states, Eb is the CT state binding energy, kb is the Boltzmann constant, T is temperature and τCT is the CT lifetime.
Applying the thermodynamic concepts to an organic heterojunction
The charge pairs as microstates
The more paths/options the exciton can dissociate through, the higher will be the probability of dissociation (dissociation efficiency). When the exciton transforms from nearest neighbor charges (exciton) to charges distanced from each other (charge pair) we say that it transferred from the initial microstate to a target microstate. In the context of CT exciton dissociation, it is common to group the microstates into a macrostate according to the distance (r) between the hole on the donor and the electron on the acceptor.19,20 For example, Fig. 2a illustrates a heterojunction where one charge is static near the interface and all the microstates (charge pair configurations), that have charge separation ‘r’, are the combination of the static site and the hemisphere on the right-hand side of the junction. In such a case, Ω(r) (see eqn (3)) is the number of sites on the right-hand side of the junction that touch the sphere (see Fig. 2a). This calculation results in Ω(r)αr2 (ref. 20) as would be expected from the area of a spherical sector.
 Fig. 2  Illustration of the counting of pair configurations available for charge pairs with separation distance r. Consider that each rectangle is one site as in a molecule or a conjugated element where the particle is delocalized. (a) The left side of the charge-pair is static, and the counterpart charge can be hosted on any of the sites in the yellow hemisphere. (b) The left side of the charge-pair is mobile and hence can be in any site along a line perpendicular to the interface. Site i (on the left) forms an r-separated pair configuration with all sites within hemisphere i (on the right). Ω would be a summation over all i contributions. (c) A similar counting as in (b) but, to avoid the assumption of a symmetric junction, the counting is done by fixing the point at which the line that connects the pair crosses the interface. Again, each site located in the right hemisphere i forms an r-separated pair configuration with site/s in the left hemisphere i. The r-long lines demonstrate some of the possible r-separated pair configurations. Here too, Ω is a summation over all i contributions. 
The Ω(r) significance lies in finding ΔGts by using eqn (5)–(7) to calculate the elementary reaction profile (Fig. 1) where the charge separation r is taken as the reaction coordinate. To account for both charges being able to depart from the interface, an iterative method was suggested19 where the sphere center is allowed to move along a line perpendicular to the donor–acceptor interface (see Fig. 2b). The total count of available configurations, Ω(r), is now a result of summation over all contributions of centers along this axis. This method leads to a result, which is close to the number of states enclosed in a hemisphere, in this case Ω(r)αr3 (Fig. 2b).19
Having the center of the sphere within one side of the junction carries a hidden assumption that the junction is symmetric in terms of packing and mobility. We propose a third approach of counting configurations. First, we choose a static point ‘j’ on the interface. This point can be considered as the place where the CT state was originally formed as a nearest-neighbor pair. We count all pairs that are connected by an r-long line crossing the interface at point ‘j’ (see Fig. 2c). Later we show that the CT state dissociates close to the interface; thus it is logical to assume that point ‘j’ is almost static during the dissociation process. The advantage of this counting method is that it allows the use of two different packings on either side of the junction.
In the ESI,† we describe in detail our method of calculating Ω(r). For all examined geometries we got the phenomenological behavior of Ω(r) = ar3. However, ‘a’ is geometry (morphology) dependent and may vary by up to a factor of 3, thus affecting the quantitative results of the calculation.
There is also another subtle point that is especially important in the context of disorder. Unlike previous studies,19,20 which used Ω(r) only as an upper bound of summation, for a given environment we first generated a 3D lattice of a disordered heterojunction and performed all calculations with the aid of this lattice (similar to the approach taken by Monte-Carlo simulations). This accounts for the built-in correlation associated with the fact that each site may be part of several r-distinguished pair-configurations. In the following we use a 3D geometry which is cubic with a lattice constant of 1 nm.
From the energy landscape of a single charge pair to the dissociation efficiency of a complete device
Knowing how to derive the local binding energy using thermodynamics, we are ready to translate it to device equivalent binding energy. In the following, we consider that for a disordered film there is a built-in spatial distribution (dispersion) of the density of states.27,28 Namely, the local environment surrounding a given CT exciton depends on the specific position of this CT within the macroscopic device. As a result, at different positions within the device the binding energy, as well as the dissociation efficiency, could be different. To demonstrate this, we will examine the free energy change experienced by CT excitons generated in different environments. As mentioned above, each environment is created by generating a 3D lattice of sites' energies. Using eqn (5), the Helmholtz free energy (F) as a function of charge separation (r) is (10)where we have added the subscript j to denote a specific environment (or a given draw of state energy distribution) along the donor/acceptor interface. In Fig. 2c ‘j’ would refer to the crossing point that is used for evaluating Ω(r). The change in free energy, ΔFj(r) or ΔGj(r) which are the same in our system, is calculated relative to the initially generated CT exciton (at minimum r, which is the nearest-neighbor distance). As was discussed in the context of Fig. 1, the maximum of this change in free energy is the local/microscopic binding energy of the CT exciton in environment j.

Fig. 3 demonstrates the extraction procedure of three binding energies from three ΔGj(r) graphs. ΔGts,j (ΔGj(r) maximum value) is the CT local binding energy Eb,j, and the r position of this maximum is the maximum separation length before the CT dissociates spontaneously (we term this “dissociation distance”). The ΔGj(r) graph was produced by subtracting the initial Helmholtz free energy Fj(r = 1) from r separated CT exciton Helmholtz free energy Fj(r) (inset of Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  ΔGj as a function of CT's charge separation for three different CT environments, all for a junction disorder standard deviation (σcp) of 50 meV at 300 K. The edge of the arrows represents the binding energy of each CT (in the j environment) and their crossing with the x-axis denotes the maximum separation lengths before the CTs dissociate. The inset shows the Fj of the three environments. 
As for different environments (draw of state energies) both the local binding energy and local dissociation distance vary, and one needs to examine a large number of environments to reproduce the full device. The challenge would be in finding the most suitable method to represent the properties of the complete device. To illustrate the dispersion in the local properties, Fig. 4 shows the statistical analysis of such environments in terms of binding energy distribution and dissociation distance distribution for several junction energy disorder parameter (σcp) values (cp stands for charge pair). We applied the EED model on a cubic geometry with a lattice constant of 1 nm and assumed ε = 3.3. Fig. 4a and b show the normalized distribution of the binding energies assuming T = 200 K and T = 300 K, respectively. Fig. 4c and d show the normalized distribution of the dissociation distance assuming T = 200 K and T = 300 K, respectively. The symbols denote the results of the analysis and the solid lines are Gaussian fits to the data points.
 Fig. 4  (a and b) The normalized distributions of the local binding energy (Eb,j) at 200 K and at 300 K, respectively. (c and d) The normalized distributions of the dissociation distance at 200 K and at 300 K, respectively. Symbols are the simulation results and solid lines are Gaussian fits. Blue, cyan, green, grey, red, and magenta lines are simulation results for junction disorder standard deviations (σcp) of 0 meV, 20 meV, 40 meV, 60 meV, 80 meV, and 100 meV, respectively. 

Fig. 4 shows that as the junction disorder parameter (σcp) increases, the distributions of both the binding energy and dissociation distance shift towards zero and broaden. Comparing the results for the two temperatures we note that both the binding energy and dissociation distance tend to be larger at lower temperature and that the differences between the results for the two temperatures almost disappear for high σcp values. The most probable dissociation distance is below 6 nm (see also ref. 12) and at room temperature the entire distribution of dissociation distance (Fig. 4d) lies below 10 nm. The latter suggests that although we are treating a bi-layer architecture the results would be applicable to BHJ devices, most of which have above 10 nm fine structure. To place the values in a broader context we note that in the absence of the effects considered here (entropy and disorder) the dissociation distance is taken as the point where the Coulomb binding energy equals the thermal energy q2/4πεεormax = kbT. For a typical organic device (ε ≈ 3.3) at room temperature, the dissociation distance is about 17 nm.
The fact that disorder reduces the microscopic binding energy, as well as the dissociation distance, is well known.12,15,19,21,29 However, translating the spatial variation across the sample to device measured properties, as effective dissociation efficiency or effective binding energy, is not obvious. Previous studies averaged the ΔG curves (as those in Fig. 3) to obtain the average potential from which a macroscopic binding energy was derived. Such approach shows that, with the introduction of disorder,19 the resulting binding energy reduces towards zero (see Fig. 8Sm in the ESI†). The next step was to conclude, qualitatively, the high dissociation efficiency from the reduced effective binding energy. However, this approach fails to give a quantitative reproduction of the measured curves. In addition, it is not clear how to account for the exciton lifetime and the charge hopping rate (mobility) or how to use the results to evaluate the effective exciton dissociation (charge generation) efficiency.
We take a different approach and suggest doing the opposite, i.e., use the local exciton dissociation efficiency to derive the effective (device equivalent) exciton dissociation efficiency and deduce the effective binding energy from it. While this may seem a minor difference, it results in a very different effective medium which is now similar to the approach taken by Monte-Carlo simulations (a detailed quantitative comparison of the different approaches is provided in the ESI†).30–33 Our approach is inspired by the understanding that when one is interested in a device effective quantity one should average over the property that is being measured, and by far the most commonly used property is the current. The light induced current is a linear summation of contributions of dissociated CT excitons. The probability of each CT dissociating and contributing to the current is its local dissociation efficiency. Thus, the arithmetic mean over the local dissociation efficiency is proportional to the light induced current. Consequently, we define the effective dissociation efficiency as averaged local dissociation efficiency. The implementation of our new approach is straightforward once the local binding energies (Eb,j) have been found. Using eqn (9) we may write the device related effective dissociation efficiency as the sum-average of the local (microscopic) dissociation efficiency: (11)
Once the device equivalent dissociation efficiency (ηcd,eff) is obtained, the most reasonable definition for the effective binding energy (Eb,eff) is obtained by using ηcd,eff and eqn (9): (12)
The above equations indicate that ηcd,eff and Eb,eff are temperature, disorder, and kdecay/κcd (or κcdτCT) dependent. To illustrate the above we applied eqn (11) to simulated samples having different junction disorder parameter (σcp) values and for a range of temperatures. For this calculation we used κcd of 3.65 × 109 s−1 which is a result of a classical estimation using Onsager–Braun theory10 and assumed that the active layer mobility is 10−4 cm2 s−1 V−1.34,35 We note that 10−4 cm2 s−1 V−1 is the steady state mobility and that there are arguments for using a higher “non-relaxed” mobility value. We return to this point in the Experimental analysis section. For the CT lifetime (τCT) we used 10 ns as it is within the reasonable range for organic devices.36 The resulting dissociation efficiency (ηcd,eff) as a function of inverse temperature (1000/T) is shown in Fig. 5a. The top curve (dashed grey) is for σcp = 110 meV and the bottom one (dashed black) is for the ordered case σcp = 0 meV. All the other curves have σcp in between, as depicted by the legend. As would be expected, an increase in the junction disorder parameter (σcp) results in enhanced dissociation efficiency. The unique feature of our approach is that the dissociation is now quantified and it reveals that the temperature dependence (i.e. its functional form) changes significantly as a function of disorder.
 Fig. 5  (a) Simulated device equivalent CT exciton dissociation efficiency as a function of inverse temperature (1000/T) and for a range of junction disorder parameters (σcp). (b) The deduced effective binding energy, eqn (12), as a function of inverse temperature (1000/T) and for a range of junction disorder parameters (σcp). Note that in (a) the higher disorder is the top curve and in (b) it is the lowest (see the legend). 
Once the device equivalent dissociation efficiency (ηcd,eff) is obtained (Fig. 5a), eqn (12) can be applied to obtain the resulting effective binding energy (Eb,eff). Fig. 5b shows that at low disorder the effective binding energy reduces with temperature and the slope is −T. In the presence of disorder, the contribution of the entropy changes, becoming temperature dependent, and at high disorder the slope of Eb,eff changes its sign. Within the framework of the current paper, an increase in effective binding energy with temperature is a clear sign of disorder.
As seen in Fig. 5b the new effective binding energy definition does not converge to zero and seems more realistic than in previous studies.19 Further discussion about ηcd,eff and Eb,eff dependencies on CT lifetime and mobility is provided in the ESI.†
Experimental analysis of the NFA OPV device
To test the validity of the model suggested above we compared it to measurements performed on a non-fullerene acceptor (NFA) device composed of PTB7-Th:ITIC (see Fig. 6a for the chemical structures). To set the scene we show in Fig. 6a the J–V curve of the device under one sun illumination with the left inset presenting the quantum efficiency spectral response under low light intensity. Also shown is the energy level diagram for the two materials separately. Due to the limited accuracy and the difference between the two methods used to derive the energy levels we slightly rounded the reported value.37,38 The extracted cell's parameters are open circuit voltage Voc = 0.82 V, short circuit current Jsc = 13 mA cm−2, fill factor FF = 60%, and power conversion efficiency PCE = 6.5%. The spectral dependence of the external quantum efficiency (EQE – left inset in Fig. 6a) predicts that in the ideal case, the open circuit voltage dictated only by radiative recombination is Voc_rad = 1.0 V (ΔVoc,nrad = 0.18 V).
 Fig. 6  (a) Current density–voltage curve under one sun illumination for the PTB7-Th:ITIC BHJ device. The left inset shows the wavelength dependent external quantum efficiency measured under very low light intensity as well as the energy level diagram of PTB7-Th and ITIC. The right inset shows the chemical structure of the PTB7-Th donor polymer and of the ITIC acceptor molecule. (b) Measured dark current–voltage curves for a range of temperatures. (c) Measured open circuit voltage (Voc) as a function of excitation light intensity, for a range of temperatures. The inset shows the open circuit voltage, at 1 sun, as a function of temperature. The dashed line is an extrapolation to find the effective bandgap (1.47 eV). (d) Extracted ideality factor values from the dark current (filled red squares) and from the open circuit voltage (purple squares). Lines are only a guide to the eye. (e) Internal quantum efficiency (IQE) as a function of excitation intensity and for a range of temperatures. The applied bias was 0.5 V. (f) IQE as a function of inverse temperature and for a range of applied biases. The excitation intensity was 1 mW cm−2. 
To be able to correlate the device performance with the model's predictions we repeated the J–V measurements over a wide range of light intensities and temperatures. Although we were primarily interested in the charge generation (exciton dissociation) process we first looked into the recombination process (Fig. 6b and c). To find the type of recombination process taking place in the PTB7-Th:ITIC NFA OPV we obtained both the dark J–V (Fig. 6b) and the open circuit voltage versus light intensity (Fig. 6c) for a range of temperatures. Fig. 6d shows the extracted ideality factors which are all above 1.4, indicating a significant contribution of trap assisted recombination.
The data that are more directly related to the exciton dissociation process are shown in Fig. 6e and f. Fig. 6e and f show the internal quantum efficiency (IQE), measured using a white light emitting diode (LED), as a function of light intensity and temperature, respectively. To translate the EQE measured under white light to IQE, we normalized the values such that at room temperature and at zero bias they will coincide with the peaks of the IQE spectrum, measured under the same conditions. The IQE spectrum was derived using the measured EQE spectrum and the reflectance spectrum of the cell (see ESI Fig. 12S†). In Fig. 6e, the applied bias was 0.5 V and the different curves are for different substrate temperatures. We chose 0.5 V to minimize the internal field and at the same time to ensure that the bias is below Voc even at high temperatures (see Fig. 6c). The concept of intensity dependent measurement39–41 is that at low light intensity the recombination losses are minimized and the plateau region is where recombination between light-generated charges is negligible. Thus, this low intensity IQE most likely represents the effective dissociation efficiency and it may serve to compare measurement and theory. According to Fig. 6e, the intensity of 1 mW cm−2 is in the low intensity range and hence can be used to examine the charge generation, or exciton dissociation, efficiency.
In principle, the light intensity dependence can be used to identify signatures of trap-filling of the trap-assisted recombination and of the bi-molecular recombination.39–41 In our case, examining the higher intensity range, one cannot identify any signature of trap-filling for the trap-assisted recombination. Since Fig. 6d clearly shows that trap-assisted recombination is rather dominant, we are left to conclude that the traps are already full at low light intensity or rather are already full under dark conditions.40

Fig. 6f shows the temperature dependence of the IQE measured at 1 mW cm−2 and for a range of applied biases. We note that towards room temperature the IQE increase tends to saturate and that as a function of bias it saturates towards −1 V. At room temperature, the relative increase of the IQE between +0.5 V and −1 V is ∼30%. This 30% difference could be either due to field dependent charge generation10 or recombination with the dark charges40,42 that are injected under forward bias. The results discussed above are clearly for the recombination with the dark charges through trap-assisted recombination,40 and we return to this point in the following subsection.
Comparison with the theoretical predictions
Having collected the information regarding the PTB7-Th:ITIC BHJ OPV device we move to comparing it with that from the EED model developed in this paper. When doing so, one has to remember the limited scope of the model and specifically that it does not account for the potential effect of the electric field on the exciton dissociation.10 Neither does it account for the recombination that may be induced through the injection of dark charges under forward bias.40
With the above limitations in mind we chose to fit the curve closest to Voc, i.e. at +0.5 V, and rely on the fact that theory (Fig. 5) predicts that not only does the absolute value of the efficiency change with disorder but also that its temperature dependence (functional form) is significantly dependent on the junction disorder (σcp). Assuming that the mobility relevant for the charge dissociation is the steady state one, Fig. 5 was already calculated using parameters suitable for the measured device (μ = 10−4 cm2 s−1 V−1, τCT = 10 ns).34–36,43Fig. 7a shows the measured internal quantum efficiency (symbols) overlaid on the calculated dissociation efficiency curves. The best fit is found for a junction disorder of σcp = 90 meV with the discrepancy being mainly at room temperature. Using the same material parameters (μ = 10−4 cm2 s−1 V−1, τCT = 10 ns) we can use eqn (12) to deduce the effective binding energy that corresponds to the measured dissociation efficiency, and the resulting values are shown in Fig. 7b. The deduced effective binding energies indeed have a slope that is indicative of disorder and the room temperature value corresponding to the measured data is Eb,eff = 90 meV.
 Fig. 7  (a and b) For the simulated device we used μ = 10−4 cm2 s−1 V−1 and τCT = 10 ns: (a) square red symbols are the measured results for PTB7-Th:ITIC device IQE as a function of 1000/T. Other lines are the simulation results for ηcd,eff as a function of 1000/T for different disorder magnitudes. (b) Calculated Eb,eff for both measured and simulated results using eqn (12). (c and d) For the simulated device we used μ = 10−2 cm2 s−1 V−1 and τCT = 10 ns: (c) square red symbols are the measured results for PTB7-Th:ITIC device IQE as a function of 1000/T. Other lines are the simulation results for ηcd,eff as a function of 1000/T for different disorder magnitudes. (d) Calculated Eb,eff for both measured and simulated results using eqn (12). 
By overlapping the measured IQE with the predicted effective dissociation efficiency we found that the best fit is with a junction disorder  of about 90 meV (Fig. 7a). This disorder magnitude is in accordance with previous studies on this materials system. According to ref. 34 the disorder of ITIC mixed with PTB7-Th is about σa = 70 meV and ref. 44 shows that the disorder of PBT7-Th is about σd = 70 meV when mixed with fullerenes (i.e. σcp ≅ 100 meV). The fact that overlapping the model and experiment yields the film's disorder suggests that the model captures at least part of the physics.
However, we note that the functional form of the predicted curves does not reproduce the saturation in dissociation efficiency at high temperatures. Moreover, one should keep in mind that our analysis of Fig. 6d and e indicated that trap assisted recombination contributes an intensity-independent loss. Namely, the actual dissociation efficiency should be higher than the measured low-intensity IQE. Also, in the model we made use of Onsager–Braun theory, and to derive the value for the escape rate (κcd) we used the steady state mobility of 10−4 cm2 s−1 V−1. However, Onsager–Braun theory did not consider the presence of disorder. One could argue that the mobility to be used should thus be the one that would have existed if the material was energetically ordered (i.e. a few orders of magnitude higher). A different argument would lead to a similar conclusion. Fig. 4d shows that the charges can be considered separated at distances below 6 nm. By moving only a few nm the charges do not get “trapped” by the low density of low energy sites and their motion is represented by the instantaneous mobility.45 To check if this could be the source of the discrepancies, we used the disorder of σa = σd = 70 meV and theories on charge transport in disordered media to deduce that in the ordered case the mobility would be 1–2 orders of magnitude higher.46,47 We took the limit of 2 orders and repeated the procedure, of matching the model to the experiment, for the parameter set μτCT = 10−10 cm2 V−1 or μ = 10−2 cm2 s−1 V−1, and τCT = 10 ns. Fig. 7c shows the best fit of the functional form between the model's CT separation efficiency and the measured EQE, and Fig. 7d shows the effective binding energy deduced from the data in Fig. 7c, utilizing eqn (12). Using this higher mobility, the quality of the fit improves as it holds well also at room temperature. Namely, the results presented in Fig. 7c confirm that it is the instantaneous or “disorder-free” mobility that should be used in the Onsager–Braun expression.45 In fact, only the use of the “disorder-free” mobility is consistent with our use of temperature independent mobility47 to deduce κcd in the Onsager–Braun formalism.
The deduced junction disorder (σcp = 90 meV, σa = σd = 65 meV) is unchanged. However, the absolute values in Fig. 7c are higher than those in Fig. 7a. The absolute values, for the +0.5 V bias, indicate that at room temperature the CT separation efficiency is close to 100% implying that the charge generation efficiency, at room temperature, is almost bias independent. The deduction requires the measured bias dependence of the IQE at room temperature to be largely a result of the trap-assisted recombination where the traps are mainly filled by dark injection. A similar conclusion was drawn from the discussion of Fig. 6d and e above.
The field independent exciton dissociation is in agreement with the observation of field independent charge generation in time-delayed collection field (TDCF) measurements of the same materials system.48 To further support the above conclusion, we performed a device simulation using the Sentaurus platform (by Synopsis). For the simulation parameters and fitting procedure see the ESI.†Fig. 8 shows the simulation's fits to measured data as well as the result when traps are neglected. The excellent fit between measured and simulated results supports the notion that the bias dependent QE is due to trap assisted recombination through traps that are mostly filled already in the dark (at room temperature). Namely, the EED model, the detailed experimental analysis, and the device model are self-consistent.
 Fig. 8  Measured and simulated J–V curves under 10−2 sun (a) and 1 sun (b) illumination. Symbols indicate the measured data. The green line is the best fit achieved using CpPT = 8 ns for the trap assisted (SRH) recombination with the work function of ZnO being 0.22 eV below the LUMO. The red line represents bimolecular recombination only (10−12 cm3 s−1). See the text for other parameters used. 
Discussion
We found that the experimentally measured internal quantum efficiency and the deduced binding energy can be reproduced applying the theory presented above. To reach this point we started by modifying existing theories19,21 to come up with a model that is device-compatible. Formally, we sought to include the spatial dispersion of the density of states27 to produce a device-equivalent effective medium. Within the EED model we examined the local energy landscape surrounding the CT exciton and represented this local environment by its CT dissociation efficiency and not by its local binding energy. Translating into the device level was then straightforward with the arithmetic mean of the local efficiencies found throughout the device. We then used the Onsager–Braun expression to define a new binding energy which we termed the device-equivalent effective binding energy. It describes the apparent energy required to dissociate CT-excitons within the non-homogeneous device. We consider this approach to be our most important contribution as it allows direct comparison with relevant device characteristics, an attribute that was reserved for dynamic Monte-Carlo simulations.15,21 As the issue of binding energy is important we present in the ESI† a detailed analysis and comparison of three approaches of defining effective binding energy, in the context of entropy and disorder (Fig. 7S†). Using device-equivalent binding energy somewhat complements the discussion of what the actual binding energy is15 and the importance of dimensionality20 in determining its value.
As the dimensionality of the problem is important,20 we decided to perform our calculations by actually generating a 3D lattice that represents the local environment and guides the calculation of the available sites to dissociate through (Ω(r)). The discussion in the ESI† also compares using a 3D lattice and not using it (Fig. 8S†). However, we still use here a bi-layer morphology that could only be considered as a reasonable approximation to the full BHJ morphology.21 The sensitivity to fine morphological details is also addressed in the ESI (Fig. 1S to 6S†). For example, Fig. 6S† shows that if only the first interface layers are forced to be ordered, the binding energy distribution significantly narrows with respect to Fig. 4.
To test if our implementation of the EED model is good enough to describe and analyze working devices, we compared its prediction to results obtained through detailed NFA device analysis. As the EED model deals only with charge generation we expanded the theoretical scope and included a semiconductor device model. The self-consistency between the EED model, the experiments, and the device simulations indicates that our implementation of the EED model is good enough to explain device data like the one reported here. Fig. 7a and b, and c and d were calculated for two values of μτCT. To complete the picture, Fig. 9S† shows the dissociation efficiency as a function of μτCT or κcdτCT. From such results we can infer that the quality of the fit improves significantly already at μτCT = 10−9. The good fit (Fig. 7) suggests that that entropy and disorder govern the exciton dissociation in the PTB7-Th:ITIC BHJ OPV device.
Conclusions
We presented a new EED model and an intuitive definition for CT binding energy that is relevant to operating BHJ OPVs. This definition maintains a distinction from the activation energy of the charge generation10,15 and results in Eb,eff of slightly above 100 meV, which is in agreement with a recent report49 probing this quantity in an NFA OPV. Performing direct comparison with relevant experimental data allows us to conclude that entropy and disorder are not only an optional explanation but rather that they dominate the CT exciton dissociation in the measured device.
We found that a bulk disorder of only σ = 70 meV is sufficient to dissociate the excitons. Avoiding a disorder of about 70 meV in a BHJ structure is very difficult and our work may help in explaining why high charge generation efficiency is so common for NFA devices, even though a low energy offset between the donor and acceptor materials is maintained. We note that σ = 70 meV is a low enough disorder value that by itself is not supposed to preclude steady state mobilities as high as 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 (assuming a disorder-free mobility of 1 cm2 V−1 s−1).
Our device analysis (ESI Fig. 14S and 15S†) suggests that on the device side one should make use of blocking layers50 that allow for electrostatic band bending that would increase the built-in potential under light excitation.51,52 However, this is outside the scope of this paper.
Experimental
Device fabrication
Organic solar cells were fabricated with the following structure: ITO/zinc oxide (ZnO)/active layer/molybdenum trioxide (MoO3)/silver (Ag). The ITO glass was pre-cleaned in an ultrasonic bath of acetone and isopropanol, and treated in an ultraviolet-ozone chamber (Jelight Company, USA) for 15 min. A thin layer (30 nm) of ZnO sol–gel was spin-coated onto the ITO glass and baked at 200 °C for 60 min. A mixture of PTB7-Th (One-Materials Inc)/ITIC (Solarmer Inc) was dissolved in DCB (Sigma-Aldrich Inc) solvent (D:A = 1:1.5, 15 mg mL−1 in total) with stirring overnight (80 °C). Then, the blended solution was spin-coated on the ZnO layer to form a photosensitive layer. The thickness of the active layer was ≈100 nm. A MoO3 (≈10 nm) and Ag layer (≈100 nm) was then evaporated onto the surface of the photosensitive layer under vacuum (≈10−5 Pa) to form the back electrode. The active area of the device was 0.1 cm2.
Measurement procedure
Current–voltage characteristics were measured with a Keithley 2612 source meter. Spectrally resolved external quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured in the following way. Light from a tungsten halogen lamp (Oriel, 250 W QTH) was dispersed through a monochromator (Oriel, CS130). The light intensity was monitored using reference silicon and germanium photodetectors. Light from the monochromator (1.5 μW cm−2 at 600 nm) was chopped at 120 Hz and the signal was read using a lock-in amplifier (EG&G 7265). Power dependent quantum efficiency was measured using white light emitting diode metrics, whose intensity was controlled by varying the bias current. Appropriate optical density (OD) filters were used to extend the intensity range (∼5 order) from ultra-low to more than one sun light intensity. Care was taken to ensure that the light spot falls within the pixel to avoid any potential edge effects. The temperature was controlled using low temperature micro-probes and a K-20 controller (MMR Technologies Inc). IQE was deduced by reflection measurements in the range of 400–1000 nm (Agilent Cary 5000) with a theta/2 theta configuration at an angle of 6 degree.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Israel Science Foundation (grant no. 488/16) and the Adelis Foundation for renewable energy research within the framework of the Grand Technion Energy Program (GTEP). D. L. and N. T. acknowledge support by the Technion Ollendorff Minerva Center. Y. Y. acknowledges the Air Force Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR) (FA2386-18-1-4094) for financial support. Dan Liraz developed the EED model and measured the temperature and light dependent properties of the solar cells. Pei Cheng fabricated the devices and performed basic analysis of the cells. Nir Tessler performed the device model simulations. Yang Yang and Nir Tessler directed the research. All authors contributed to the manuscript.
Notes and references
P. Cheng, G. Li, X. Zhan and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 131–142 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, S. Li, H. Yao, S. Zhang, Y. Zhang, B. Yang and J. Hou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7148–7151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Che, Y. Li, Y. Qu and S. R. Forrest, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 422–427 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, W. Liu, M. Shi, J. Mai, T.-K. Lau, J. Wan, X. Lu, C.-Z. Li and H. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 604–610 RSC .
J. Hou, O. Inganäs, R. H. Friend and F. Gao, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 119 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, Y. Wu, Y. Tang, M.-A. Pan, W. Ma, H. Fu, C. Zhan and J. Yao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 1901728 CrossRef .
L. Meng, Y. Zhang, X. Wan, C. Li, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Ke, Z. Xiao, L. Ding, R. Xia, H.-L. Yip, Y. Cao and Y. Chen, Science, 2018, 361, 1094 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. J. Janssen and J. Nelson, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1847–1858 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liraz, H. Shekhar, L. Tzabari and N. Tessler, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 23271–23279 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Braun, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 80, 4157–4161 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Matheson, S. J. Pearson, A. Ruseckas and I. D. W. Samuel, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 4166–4171 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gélinas, A. Rao, A. Kumar, S. L. Smith, A. W. Chin, J. Clark, T. S. van der Poll, G. C. Bazan and R. H. Friend, Science, 2014, 343, 512 CrossRef PubMed .
V. I. Arkhipov, P. Heremans and H. Bässler, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 4605–4607 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bernardo, D. Cheyns, B. Verreet, R. D. Schaller, B. P. Rand and N. C. Giebink, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3245 CrossRef CAS .
S. Athanasopoulos, F. Schauer, V. Nádaždy, M. Weiß, F.-J. Kahle, U. Scherf, H. Bässler and A. Köhler, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900814 CrossRef .
T. Vehoff, B. Baumeier, A. Troisi and D. Andrienko, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11702–11708 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Blakesley and D. Neher, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 075210 CrossRef .
J. D. Zimmerman, X. Xiao, C. K. Renshaw, S. Wang, V. V. Diev, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4366–4371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Hood and I. Kassal, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 4495–4500 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Gregg, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 3013–3015 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kawashima, M. Fujii and K. Yamashita, J. Photochem.
Photobiol., A, 2019, 382, 111875 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Clarke and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6736–6767 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Bredas, J. Cornil and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 1996, 8, 447 CrossRef CAS .
L. Onsager, J. Chem. Phys., 1934, 2, 599–615 CrossRef CAS .
L. Onsager, Phys. Rev., 1938, 54, 554–557 CrossRef CAS .

          K. A. Connors, Chemical kinetics: the study of reaction rates in solution, John Wiley & Sons,  1990 Search PubMed .
N. Rappaport, Y. Preezant and N. Tessler, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 235323 CrossRef .
N. Rappaport, O. Solomesch and N. Tessler, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 99, 064507 CrossRef .
A. Devižis, J. De Jonghe-Risse, R. Hany, F. Nüesch, S. Jenatsch, V. Gulbinas and J.-E. Moser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8192–8198 CrossRef PubMed .
H. van Eersel, R. A. J. Janssen and M. Kemerink, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2700–2708 CrossRef CAS .
C. Groves, R. A. Marsh and N. C. Greenham, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 114903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wojcik, P. Michalak and M. Tachiya, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2012, 33, 795–802 CrossRef CAS .
S. Athanasopoulos, S. Tscheuschner, H. Bässler and A. Köhler, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 2093–2098 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yi, B. Gautam, I. Constantinou, Y. Cheng, Z. Peng, E. Klump, X. Ba, C. H. Y. Ho, C. Dong, S. R. Marder, J. R. Reynolds, S.-W. Tsang, H. Ade and F. So, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802702 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, B. Lin, Z. Ke, J. Chen, W. Li, M. Zhang and W. Ma, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 609–617 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shoaee, M. Stolterfoht and D. Neher, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703355 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, L. Ye, W. Zhao, D. Liu, H. Yao and J. Hou, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 4653–4659 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, J. Wang, Z.-G. Zhang, H. Bai, Y. Li, D. Zhu and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1170–1174 CrossRef CAS .
N. Rappaport, O. Solomesch and N. Tessler, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 033714 CrossRef .
L. Tzabari, J. Wang, Y.-J. Lee, J. W. P. Hsu and N. Tessler, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 10146–10155 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tzabari, J. Wang, Y.-J. Lee, J. W. P. Hsu and N. Tessler, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 27681–27689 CrossRef CAS .
U. Würfel and M. Unmüssig, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800229 CrossRef .
X. Song, N. Gasparini and D. Baran, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1700358 CrossRef .
B. Ebenhoch, S. A. J. Thomson, K. Genevičius, G. Juška and I. D. W. Samuel, Org. Electron., 2015, 22, 62–68 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Vithanage, A. Devižis, V. Abramavičius, Y. Infahsaeng, D. Abramavičius, R. C. I. MacKenzie, P. E. Keivanidis, A. Yartsev, D. Hertel, J. Nelson, V. Sundström and V. Gulbinas, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2334 CrossRef .
W. F. Pasveer, J. Cottaar, C. Tanase, R. Coehoorn, P. A. Bobbert, P. W. M. Blom, D. M. de Leeuw and M. A. J. Michels, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 206601 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tessler, Y. Preezant, N. Rappaport and Y. Roichman, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2741–2761 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Baran, Private Communication,  2019.
Y. Dong, H. Cha, J. Zhang, E. Pastor, P. S. Tuladhar, I. McCulloch, J. R. Durrant and A. A. Bakulin, J. Chem. Phys., 2019, 150, 104704 CrossRef .

          W. Peter, Physics of Solar Cells, Wiley,  2005 Search PubMed .
O. Magen and N. Tessler, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 120, 194502 CrossRef .
N. Tessler, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 118, 215501 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9se01095eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
G = U − TS + PV	(1)
F = U − TS	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
F = U − TS = −kbTln(Z)	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)

 	Fig. 1  Elementary reaction profile.	 
	(9)

 	Fig. 2  Illustration of the counting of pair configurations available for charge pairs with separation distance r. Consider that each rectangle is one site as in a molecule or a conjugated element where the particle is delocalized. (a) The left side of the charge-pair is static, and the counterpart charge can be hosted on any of the sites in the yellow hemisphere. (b) The left side of the charge-pair is mobile and hence can be in any site along a line perpendicular to the interface. Site i (on the left) forms an r-separated pair configuration with all sites within hemisphere i (on the right). Ω would be a summation over all i contributions. (c) A similar counting as in (b) but, to avoid the assumption of a symmetric junction, the counting is done by fixing the point at which the line that connects the pair crosses the interface. Again, each site located in the right hemisphere i forms an r-separated pair configuration with site/s in the left hemisphere i. The r-long lines demonstrate some of the possible r-separated pair configurations. Here too, Ω is a summation over all i contributions.	 
	(10)

 	Fig. 3  ΔGj as a function of CT's charge separation for three different CT environments, all for a junction disorder standard deviation (σcp) of 50 meV at 300 K. The edge of the arrows represents the binding energy of each CT (in the j environment) and their crossing with the x-axis denotes the maximum separation lengths before the CTs dissociate. The inset shows the Fj of the three environments.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a and b) The normalized distributions of the local binding energy (Eb,j) at 200 K and at 300 K, respectively. (c and d) The normalized distributions of the dissociation distance at 200 K and at 300 K, respectively. Symbols are the simulation results and solid lines are Gaussian fits. Blue, cyan, green, grey, red, and magenta lines are simulation results for junction disorder standard deviations (σcp) of 0 meV, 20 meV, 40 meV, 60 meV, 80 meV, and 100 meV, respectively.	 
	(11)
	(12)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Simulated device equivalent CT exciton dissociation efficiency as a function of inverse temperature (1000/T) and for a range of junction disorder parameters (σcp). (b) The deduced effective binding energy, eqn (12), as a function of inverse temperature (1000/T) and for a range of junction disorder parameters (σcp). Note that in (a) the higher disorder is the top curve and in (b) it is the lowest (see the legend).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Current density–voltage curve under one sun illumination for the PTB7-Th:ITIC BHJ device. The left inset shows the wavelength dependent external quantum efficiency measured under very low light intensity as well as the energy level diagram of PTB7-Th and ITIC. The right inset shows the chemical structure of the PTB7-Th donor polymer and of the ITIC acceptor molecule. (b) Measured dark current–voltage curves for a range of temperatures. (c) Measured open circuit voltage (Voc) as a function of excitation light intensity, for a range of temperatures. The inset shows the open circuit voltage, at 1 sun, as a function of temperature. The dashed line is an extrapolation to find the effective bandgap (1.47 eV). (d) Extracted ideality factor values from the dark current (filled red squares) and from the open circuit voltage (purple squares). Lines are only a guide to the eye. (e) Internal quantum efficiency (IQE) as a function of excitation intensity and for a range of temperatures. The applied bias was 0.5 V. (f) IQE as a function of inverse temperature and for a range of applied biases. The excitation intensity was 1 mW cm−2.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a and b) For the simulated device we used μ = 10−4 cm2 s−1 V−1 and τCT = 10 ns: (a) square red symbols are the measured results for PTB7-Th:ITIC device IQE as a function of 1000/T. Other lines are the simulation results for ηcd,eff as a function of 1000/T for different disorder magnitudes. (b) Calculated Eb,eff for both measured and simulated results using eqn (12). (c and d) For the simulated device we used μ = 10−2 cm2 s−1 V−1 and τCT = 10 ns: (c) square red symbols are the measured results for PTB7-Th:ITIC device IQE as a function of 1000/T. Other lines are the simulation results for ηcd,eff as a function of 1000/T for different disorder magnitudes. (d) Calculated Eb,eff for both measured and simulated results using eqn (12).	 

 	Fig. 8  Measured and simulated J–V curves under 10−2 sun (a) and 1 sun (b) illumination. Symbols indicate the measured data. The green line is the best fit achieved using CpPT = 8 ns for the trap assisted (SRH) recombination with the work function of ZnO being 0.22 eV below the LUMO. The red line represents bimolecular recombination only (10−12 cm3 s−1). See the text for other parameters used.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9se01095e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
