An inverted polymer photovoltaic cell with increased air stability obtained by employing novel hole/electron collecting layers  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B815523B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B815523B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1643-1647Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsAn inverted polymer photovoltaic cell with increased air stability obtained by employing novel hole/electron collecting layers

        
          
            Chen-Yan 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ten-Chin 
            Wen
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Tsung-Hsun 
            Lee
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Tzung-Fang 
            Guo
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Jung-Chun-Andrew 
            Huang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Ying-Chang 
            Lin
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Yao-Jane 
            Hsu
          
        
      d
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Advanced Optoelectronic Technology Center, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, 70101, Taiwan. E-mail: tcwen@mail.ncku.edu.tw
bInstitute of Electro-Optical Science and Engineering, Advanced Optoelectronic Technology Center, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, 70101, Taiwan. E-mail: guotf@mail.ncku.edu.tw
cDepartment of Physics, Advanced Optoelectronic Technology Center, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, 70101, Taiwan
dNational Synchrotron Radiation Research Center, Hsinchu, 30076, Taiwan
Received 
      5th September 2008
    , Accepted 9th December 2008First published on 3rd February 2009AbstractIn this work, an inverted device was fabricated using titania (TiO2) as the electron collecting layer (ECL) and sulfonated poly(diphenylamine) (SPDPA) as the hole collecting layer (HCL). Smooth TiO2 film with good electron collecting ability was easily formed using the spin-coating process. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) was 3.91%, the same as that of a conventional device. This inverted device is ascertained to maintain 2.82% PCE after 400 h of air-storage. Because of the appropriate work functions of ECL and HCL, the interfaces at the active layer have the ohmic contacts those approach the ideal value of open circuit voltage. SPDPA helps improve the interfacial dipole effect between the active layer and the metal, as verified by in-situ ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopic data.
Introduction
In the past decade, renewable energy sources such as solar cells, fuel cells, and wind energy have received increasing attention due to the depletion of fossil fuels. Among these alternative technologies, polymer bulk-heterojunction photovoltaic (PV) cells, which have a low cost and are easy to fabricate, have become an attractive research target. Devices based on poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and fullerene derivatives, [6,6]-phenyl C61butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM), have improved the conversion efficiency (PCE) to 4–5% via the annealing process,1,2 which demonstrates that an interpenetrated network of the donor–acceptor blend can be formed for effective exciton dissociation. Furthermore, devices based on low-bandgap conjugated polymers were reported to attain an average 5.5% efficiency due to their wide absorption range.3,4PolymerPV cells have commercial potential because they are cost-effective.
In a conventional device, low work function metals are utilized to reduce transporting obstructions at the interface. However, these metals have a high reactivity into the oxidized state.5 Consequently, these devices have poor life-times due to oxidation/degradation of these metals when exposed to air. A highly efficient inverted device needs to avoid any highly reactive materials. The PCE of inverted PV cells depends on effective exciton dissociation and fluent carrier transporting into the collecting electrode. Thus, it is important to find the appropriate energy level of the collecting electrode to match the active layer. ITO is unsuitable as an electron collecting electrode due to the large barrier height between it and the active layer. To overcome the barrier height, some researches proposed electron collecting layers (ECL), such as titanium oxide (TiOx)6,7 or zinc oxide (ZnO),8 that took advantage of suitable lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) positions and high environmental stability. Recently, PCE of around 4% for inverted PV cells was reported using cesium carbonate (Cs2CO3) as ECL and vanadium oxide (V2O5) as the hole collecting layer (HCL).9 However, the easy deliquesce of Cs2CO3 may be unfavorable for long-term storage and work. High work function metals such as gold (Au) and silver (Ag) usually act as hole collecting electrodes in PV cells. Unfortunately, there is still a surplus barrier height originating from the dipole effect (vacuum level alignment) between a metal and organic semiconductor film, which obstructs carrier transporting through the interface.10,11 The dipole effect can be mitigated by inserting a heavily doped material at this interface, such as poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS). The challenge of using PEDOT:PSS as HCL in an inverted device is that PEDOT:PSS is an aqueous dispersion and it is difficult to coat it onto an organic active layer due to its hydrophobic property. Co-solvent6 and adhesive9 methods were used to improve interfacial compatibility of PEDOT:PSS. However, the conformation of PEDOT:PSS using these methods was different and consequently its work function and conductivity were changed.12 The change would affect the application of PEDOT:PSS to electronic devices.
In this work, we employ an HCL, sulfonated poly(diphenylamine) (SPDPA) with environmental stability,13 and an ECL, titania (TiO2), to construct inverted PV cells. The single component and a good solubility in polar solvent of SPDPA lead to no variation of film properties. TiO2 film with good electron collecting ability is easily fabricated by spin-coating the precursor pretitanium(IV) isopropoxide (Ti(OC3H7)4). A device produced with our proposed HCL and ECL is expected to be air-stable. The inverted PV cell without sealing maintained a PCE of about 2.82% after 400 h of storage testing in air (the initial PCE was about 3.81%).
Experimental
The TiO2 film, used as the ECL, was prepared using a facile sol–gel procedure. Ti(OC3H7)4 (Aldrich, 99.999%), used as a precursor, was directly spin-coated onto an ITO substrate (received from RITEK Corp., 15 Ω/square) without any further treatment. Before coating with Ti(OC3H7)4, the ITO was cleaned by an ultrasonic treatment in detergent, deionized water, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol, sequentially. Then, the ITO was treated in a UV/O3 photoreactor to eliminate contaminants on the surface and to avoid side reactions. The spin-coating process was conducted in a nitrogen-filled glove box. The two-step coating procedure (step 1. 1000 rpm for 5 s and step 2. 4500 rpm for 60 s) formed a dense film on the ITO substrate. Ti(OC3H7)4 then underwent hydrolysis and was converted into TiOx in air for at least 1 h. The TiOx film underwent thermal annealing at 450 °C for half an hour to transform into TiO2. The film thickness was measured to be 80 nm using a Tencor Alpha-Step 500 Surface profiler. The novel hole injection/collecting layer, SPDPA, was applied in polymer light emitting diodes13 and PV cells.14 Details of the preparation procedure and characterization can be found in a previous work.13
P3HT with 2 wt% (purchased from Rieke metal) and PCBM with 2 wt% (purchased from Nano-c) were mixed in 1,2-dichlorobenzene. The blend was stirred for 24 h at room temperature in a glove box. The active layer was spin-coated at 600 rpm for 60 s and then slowly dried in a covered glass Petri dish. The active film thickness was about 200 nm ±10 nm. SPDPA was dissolved in ethanol with 1 wt%. 10 nm of SPDPA was spin-coated onto the active layer as the top-contact hole collecting layer. The hole collecting electrodes, consisting of Au (30 nm)/Ag (100 nm) or only Ag (100 nm), were applied by vacuum evaporation at a pressure of ∼10−6 torr. The active area of the device was 0.08 cm2. The conventional PV cells were also fabricated for comparative purpose. In this case, the commercial PEDOT:PSS (Baytron-P AI 4083) was used as the HCL. The current density-voltage (J-V) characteristics of the devices were measured with a Keithley 2400 source-measure unit using an Oriel 91160A 300W Solar Simulator (AM 1.5 G 100 mW cm−2 irradiation) in a nitrogen-filled glove box. The illumination intensity was calibrated using a standard Si photodiode detector with a KG-5 color filter (Hamamastsu, S1133).15 The devices were exposed in air without sealing in the storage test. They were illuminated by the Solar Simulator in a glove box to ensure the accurate light source intensity.

Atomic force microscopy (AFM) was performed using a NanoScope IIIa (Digital Instruments Inc.) for observation of TiO2 surface topography. The characteristics of TiO2 were studied using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements with a VG CLAM4 surface analysis system, equipped with Al Kα radiation (1486.6 eV) at the National Synchrotron Radiation Research Center, Taiwan. The XPS measurements were conducted below 8 × 10−10 Torr base pressure with an energy step of 0.025 eV. The interfacial properties of the polymer/metal contact were studied using ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS). They were also studied using a VG CLAM4 surface analysis system equipped with a non-monochromatic He(I) UV source (21.2 eV). In order to protect the polymeric films from contamination, all observations were made using the in-situ method. The Au capping layers were deposited on identical P3HT:PCBM or P3HT:PCBM/SPDPA film by an EFM3 (Omicron) electron beam deposition system in an ultra-high vacuum preparation chamber (P ∼ 8 × 10−10 Torr) connected with a UPS analysis chamber. The Au deposition rate was around 0.1 Å/s as calibrated by a quartz monitor. The work functions (Φ) of the films were defined by Φ = hν − △E, where hv is the photon energy (21.2 eV) and △E is determined from the distance of the binding energy between the secondary electron emission cutoff edge and the HOMO edge. The absorption spectrum was analyzed using a UV-visible spectrometer from GBC Scientific Equipment, Australia (model GBC Cintra 10e). The bandgap of TiO2 film was calculated according to λ = 1240/Eg.
Results
In this study, TiO2 film on ITO, prepared using a facile sol–gel procedure, was employed as the ECL. An adequate work function of ECL is important to prevent the appearance of a Schottky contact between the active layer and the collecting electrode, which reduces the open circuit voltage (Voc). The UPS spectrum of our prepared TiO2 film is shown in Fig. 1(a). The inset shows the secondary cutoff region for determining its work function (close to the molecular energy level of the conduction band for N-type semiconductors). The conduction band of TiO2 is located at 3.9 eV, which improves the work function of ITO as an electron collecting electrode. Fig. 1 (b) shows the UV-vis spectrum of TiO2 film. The onset of the absorption spectrum of the TiO2 film appears at about 390 nm (3.2 eV), which matches the intrinsic bandgap of the anatase phase. The valance band was calculated to be about 7.1 eV. It is important to have a smooth ECL because a rough ITO surface frequently causes PV cell defects, such as pinholes, that lead to current leakage. The inset shows the morphology of the TiO2 film coated on ITO as obtained using atomic force microscopy (AFM). TiO2 has a homogeneous and smooth surface observed due to low root mean square roughness (rms ∼ 0.97 nm) compared to a bare ITO surface (rms ∼ 2.66 nm). The characteristics of this TiO2 layer were investigated. The conversion of Ti(OC3H7)4 into TiO2 was also analyzed using XPS spectra. The examination method of the conversion ratio was used as the previous report.16 Based on the ratio of the O(1S) (Ti–O–Ti) peak at 530.4 eV and the O(1S) (Ti–O–X, X = C,H) contribution at 531.9 eV, the conversion of this film was estimated to be 83.4%.
 Fig. 1  The characteristics of TiO2 film coated on an ITO substrate. (a) UPS spectrum used to determine the conduction band of the TiO2 film. (b) UV-visible absorption spectrum of TiO2 film. Inset figure shows the surface morphology obtained using tapping mode atomic force microscopy. 
From the UPS spectra, there is no interfacial barrier height between TiO2 and PCBM (LUMO = 4.3 eV). Inverted PV cells were fabricated and compared with conventional devices. Fig. 2 shows the J-V curves of a conventional device with an ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Ca/Al structure and the inverted devices. The inverted devices with/without TiO2 as ECL were fabricated with the following structure: ITO/TiO2/P3HT:PCBM/SPDPA/Au/Ag. SPDPA has been confirmed to be a good HCL.13 The conventional device shows standard performance with Jsc = 9.43 mA/cm2, Voc = 0.60 V, PCE = 3.74%, and fill factor (FF) = 0.66. The inverted device without TiO2 shows bad performance with Jsc = 0.74 mA/cm2, Voc = 0.08 V, FF = 0.25, and PCE = 0.02%, originating from pinholes due to a rough ITO surface and the incompatible energy levels between ITO and PCBM. The inverted device with the modification TiO2 shows great performance with Jsc = 10.46 mA/cm2, Voc = 0.58 V, FF = 0.64, and PCE = 3.91%. It had the same Voc as the conventional device, suggesting the presence of an ohmic contact between the active layer and the collecting electrode.17 This is explained by the energy levels, as shown in the inset. The inverted device modified by TiOx film without thermal annealing need to be exposed to UV irradiation for several minutes to demonstrate the enhanced device performance. Similar lag effects were reported in previous studies,7,18 where they were attributed to the low electron mobility of TiOx. After thermal annealing, this lag can be diminished due to the improvement of electron mobility of the TiO2.
 Fig. 2  The current density-voltage characteristics of conventional cells (□) and those of inverted cells with the TiO2 modification layer (▲) and without TiO2 (♦) under AM 1.5 G (100 mW/cm2) illumination. The inset figure shows the energy levels of inverted cells in this work. 
As shown in Fig. 3, the inverted devices with/without SPDPA and deposited with various metals as contacts were fabricated to clarify the role of SPDPA. After introducing SPDPA, Voc of the device based on Au/Ag increased from 0.22 V to 0.58 V. With pure Ag, the device showed a similar improvement (Voc changed from 0.12 V to 0.56 V). The Voc magnitude is the same as the difference of molecular energy between HOMO of the donor and LUMO of the acceptor when both interfaces form an ohmic contact. The device without SPDPA had an inadequate Voc magnitude, which can be attributed to the barrier height between Au and P3HT. Thus, the barrier height between the hole collecting electrode and the active layer is reduced by introducing SPDPA. The decrease in the interfacial barrier height leads to improved Jsc and FF. The device with SPDPA based on pure Ag (PCE = 3.44%) is inferior to that based on Au/Ag (PCE = 3.91%) because this interface still has some barrier height (the work functions of SPDPA and Ag are 5.25 eV and 4.6 eV, respectively). Therefore, SPDPA/Au as the hole collecting electrode is a good choice. According to the above outcomes of Voc, there are two kinds of contact between organic film and the metal. One is the ohmic contact in the interface between P3HT:PCBM/SPDPA and Au. The other is the Sckottky contact in the interface between P3HT:PCBM and Au. The latter is not expected from the view of the energy level position. It can be explained by the interfacial dipole barrier which aligns with the vacuum level position. The interfacial dipole barrier results from charge transfer, the pillow effect, or chemical interaction.10,11
 Fig. 3  The current density-voltage characteristics of inverted cells using Au (△) and Ag (○) as cathodes without SPDPA and those using Au (▲) and Ag (●) with SPDPA modified under AM 1.5 G (100 mW/cm2) illumination. 
The photoemission studies of interfaces between Au and organic film were carried out to observe the energy level alignment. Fig. 4(a) and (b) show the UPS spectra of P3HT:PCBM and P3HT:PCBM/SPDPA with various thicknesses of Au. A higher binding energy of the secondary cutoff edge indicates a lower work function (ionization potential). In the case of P3HT:PCBM, the cutoff edge progressively shifted towards a high binding energy position after 4 Ǻ of Au was deposited, which indicated that the HOMO of P3HT:PCBM decreased to 0.3 eV. When Au was deposited onto P3HT:PCBM, the energy levels were bent by the charge redistribution due to charge transfer at the interface that achieved electrical equilibrium by aligning Fermi levels of both P3HT:PCBM and inert Au.10 This leads to a built-in potential within several diffusion layers. Eventually, an excess interfacial dipole barrier was created between P3HT:PCBM and Au, limiting Voc and device performance. When thicker Au was deposited onto P3HT:PCBM, the UPS spectra progressively showed bulk Au behavior (shifting towards low binding energy). The UPS spectra of P3HT:PCBM/SPDPA films showed different characteristics. The work function without Au deposition was calculated to be 5.25 eV, which was attributed to the work function of the SPDPA feature.12 Before 4 Ǻ of Au was deposited, the work function of SPDPA maintained the same energy level, indicating no interfacial dipole effect. The heavily doped amino groups in SPDPA by its own sulfonic acid should theoretically shift the Fermi level of SPDPA close to that of Au and give SPDPA metallic behaviour, resulting in ohmic contact between SPDPA and Au. Our UPS data might have a weakness around the interface between P3HT:PCBM and SPDPA. However, Voc data showed that the barrier height was reduced. Several reports19,20 corroborated our presumption. SPDPA effectively facilitates hole transport/collection between P3HT:PCBM and Au. Thus, the inverted PV cells with SPDPA had the superior performance.
 Fig. 4  The normalized secondary cutoff region of UPS spectra of (a) P3HT:PCBM and (b) P3HT:PCBM/SPDPA after the deposition of various thicknesses of Au. 
TiO2 and SPDPA were chosen for ECL and HCL, respectively, because they are air-stable. The air-stability of an inverted device is expected to be improved because the active layer is well encapsulated without any reactive metals. Fig. 5 shows the decays of the device parameters, including Jsc, Voc, FF, and PCE from the storage test without any package. Initially, the inverted device had superior performance with Jsc = 10.26 mA/cm2, Voc = 0.6 V, FF = 0.63, and PCE = 3.81%. After 400 h of air-storage, the inverted device still had a high PCE of 2.82%. Jsc and Voc just slightly decayed (Jsc from 10.26 mA/cm2 to 9.34 mA/cm2; Voc from 0.6 V to 0.57 V). It is supposed that hole and electron collecting electrodes provide suitable contact for maintaining Voc. The PCE decay mainly originated from the drop of FF value, which is related to the efficiency of exciton dissociation and carrier transporting ability. Thus, the decay was considered to be a degradation of the active layer on the charge transporting property due to the penetration of oxygen/water into the active layer.21 Nevertheless, the TiO2 and SPDPA layers sandwiched the active layer to moderate oxygen/water penetration. In addition, TiO2 has the scavenging effect due to its photocatalytic activity and intrinsic oxygen deficiency22–24 and it has strong absorption in the ultraviolet region so it may protect the active layer from radiation damage. On the contrary, all parameters of the conventional device were inferior during air-storage tests. The lifetime of a conventional device rapidly declined due to the oxidization of Ca and its poor protection of the active layer. TiO2 and SPDPA help improve air-stability of inverted polymerPV cells.
 Fig. 5  Device parameters as a function of storage time for a conventional device (□) and an inverted device (▲): (a) power conversion efficiency (PCE), (b) open circuit voltage (Voc), (c) short circuit current density (Jsc), and (d) fill factor (FF). 
Conclusion
The air-stability of inverted devices was improved by employing novel HCL/ECL to maintain a PCE of 2.82% after 400 h of air-storage. The TiO2 layer provides an appropriate work function to form an ideal contact with the active layer and a smooth surface over ITO to avoid pinholes. The interfacial dipole effect between the metal and organic film can be improved by modifying SPDPA, being corroborated by data of Voc and UPS spectra. TiO2 and SPDPA make polymerPV cells fit for commercial products. In addition, the UPS studies show that SPDPA may be widely applied in organic semiconductor devices such as organic thin-film transistors to improve the barrier height, especially in the interface of metal deposited on organic film.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the National Science Council of Taiwan under grants NSC-96-2221-E-006-059, NSC-95-2221-E006-409-MY3, and NSC-96-2113-M- 006-009-MY3, and by the Asian Office of Aerospace Research and Development (AOARD-08-4076).
References
W. L. Ma, C. Y. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. S. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864 CAS .
J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Ballantyne, L. Chen, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley, Y. Astuti, A. Maurano, C. G. Shuttle, J. R. Durrant, M. Heeney, W. Duffy and I. McCulloch, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 4544 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. de Jong, L. J. van Ijzendoom and M. J. A. de Voigt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 2255 CrossRef CAS .
C. Waldauf, M. Morana, P. Denk, P. Schilinsky, K. Coakley, S. A. Choulis and C. J. Brabec, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 233517 CrossRef .
R. Steim, S. A. Choulis, P. Schilinsky and C. J. Brabec, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 093303 CrossRef .
M. S. White, D. C. Olson, S. E. Shaheen, N. Kopidakis and D. S. Ginley, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 143517 CrossRef .
H. H. Liao, L. M. Chen, Z. Xu, G. Li and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 173303 CrossRef .
H. Ishii, K. Sugiyama, E. Ito and K. Seki, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 605 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kahn, N. Koch and W. Gao, J. Polym. Sci. B., 2003, 41, 2529 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, P. F. Miller, J. S. Wilson, A. J. de Mello, J. C. de Mello and D. D. C. Bradley, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 290 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Li, T. C. Wen, T. F. Guo and S. S. Hou, Polymer, 2008, 49, 957 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Li, T. C. Wen and T. F. Guo, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4478 RSC .
V. Shrotriya, G. Li, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2016 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. van Hal, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon, W. J. H. Verhees, L. H. Slooff, W. J. H. van Gennip, P. Jonkheijm and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 118 CrossRef CAS .
V. D. Mihailetchi, P. W. M. Blom, J. C. Hummeien and M. T. Rispens, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 94, 6849 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gilot, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 143512 CrossRef .
H. Peisert, M. Knupfer, F. Zhang, A. Petr, L. Dunsch and J. Fink, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 3930 CrossRef CAS .
H. Peisert, A. Petr, L. Dunsch, T. Chassé and M. Knupfer, ChemPhysChem, 2007, 8, 386 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. A. Abdou, F. P. Orifino, Y. Son and S. Holdcroft, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 4518 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Linsebigler, G. Lu and J. T. Yates, Jr., Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735 CrossRef CAS .

          V. E. Henrich, P. A. Cox, The surface Science of Metal Oxides, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1994 Search PubMed .

          C. Noguera, Physics and chemistry of oxide surfaces, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1996 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The characteristics of TiO2 film coated on an ITO substrate. (a) UPS spectrum used to determine the conduction band of the TiO2 film. (b) UV-visible absorption spectrum of TiO2 film. Inset figure shows the surface morphology obtained using tapping mode atomic force microscopy.	 

 	Fig. 2  The current density-voltage characteristics of conventional cells (□) and those of inverted cells with the TiO2 modification layer (▲) and without TiO2 (♦) under AM 1.5 G (100 mW/cm2) illumination. The inset figure shows the energy levels of inverted cells in this work.	 

 	Fig. 3  The current density-voltage characteristics of inverted cells using Au (△) and Ag (○) as cathodes without SPDPA and those using Au (▲) and Ag (●) with SPDPA modified under AM 1.5 G (100 mW/cm2) illumination.	 

 	Fig. 4  The normalized secondary cutoff region of UPS spectra of (a) P3HT:PCBM and (b) P3HT:PCBM/SPDPA after the deposition of various thicknesses of Au.	 

 	Fig. 5  Device parameters as a function of storage time for a conventional device (□) and an inverted device (▲): (a) power conversion efficiency (PCE), (b) open circuit voltage (Voc), (c) short circuit current density (Jsc), and (d) fill factor (FF).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
